--- Sayfa 1 ---
3
G
1
Anti-Globalization: Why?
lobalization first became a buzzword. Davos and the New York
Times columnist Thomas Friedman celebrated its virtues, its
inevitability. But then came the anti-globalizers. Globalization
then became a more conventional four-letter word. The Ruckus Society
and the French sociologist Pierre Bourdieu proclaimed its vices, its
vincibility.
As this dialectic has unfolded, it is tempting to think that there is a
primeval curse on the phenomenon. After all, if you care to count, glo-
balization is in fact a thirteen-letter word. It has become by now a phe-
nomenon that is doomed to unending controversy, the focal point of
always hostile passions and sometimes violent protests. It is surely a de-
fining issue as we move further into the new century. The reasons this
has happened cry out for comprehension. Without such understanding,
and then informed refutation of the fears and follies that animate the
anti-globalizers, we cannot adequately defend the globalization that many
of us seek to sustain, even deepen.1
What is the globalization that is in contention? Globalization can
mean many things. Here, however, I plan to focus exclusively on eco-
nomic globalization; indeed, that is what I shall mean when I simply say
“globalization” throughout this book. Economic globalization consti-
tutes integration of national economies into the international economy
through trade, direct foreign investment (by corporations and multina-
tionals), short-term capital flows, international flows of workers and
humanity generally, and flows of technology: phenomena defined and
treated more fully below.
Economic globalization is the favored target of many of the critics
of globalization. It is distinct from other aspects of globalization, such

--- Sayfa 2 ---
4 K
COPING WITH ANTI-GLOBALIZATION
as cultural globalization (which is affected, as I shall discuss in Chapter
9, by economic globalization) and communications (which is among
the factors that cause the deepening of economic globalization).
Why are the critics of globalization agitated? What bothers them?
There are two main groups that need to be distinguished, and I shall
develop this distinction and build systematically on it below. First, there
is a multitude of hard-core protesters who have deep-seated antipathy
to globalization. They come from different intellectual and ideological
directions and do not all share the same ideas and sentiments. But many
buy into a linked trilogy of discontents that take the form successively of
an ethos composed of an anti-capitalist, anti-globalization, and acute
anti-corporation mind-set.2 These views are interlinked because global-
ization is seen as the extension of capitalism throughout the world,
whereas multinational corporations are seen as the B-52s of capitalism
and its global reach.3 Beyond understanding where their discontents come
from, as I do presently, there is little that one can do to enter into a dia-
logue with them.
Second, however, there are the critics of globalization whose dis-
contents are well within the parameters of mainstream dissent and dis-
course. In their essence, these discontents translate into the arguments
that economic globalization is the cause of several social ills today, such
as poverty in poor countries and deterioration of the environment world-
wide. These critiques, which amount in my view to a gigantic non sequi-
tur, are of a very different order from the hard-core criticisms, which
reflect implacable hostility to globalization. The former are susceptible
to, indeed invite, reasoned engagement. These critiques need an extended
and careful response. I provide that in several chapters in Part II by dem-
onstrating that, in fact, the various social causes that we all embrace,
such as advancement of gender equality and reduction of poverty, are
advanced, not set back, by globalization.
Am I leaving the prince out of Hamlet by not giving center stage to
the critiques of international institutions such as the World Bank (which
concerns itself with development), the International Monetary Fund (deal-
ing with stabilization of economies in the grip of financial crises), the
World Trade Organization (which oversees the world trading system and
its progressive liberalization), bilateral aid agencies such as the U.S.
Agency for International Development, and trade treaties such as the
North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)? These institutions have
often been targeted at their annual meetings by demonstrators who ob-
ject to their “conditionalities” for assistance or their ambition to liberal-
ize trade, depending on the institution being attacked.

--- Sayfa 3 ---
Anti-Globalization: Why? k
5
But these demonstrations are mainly a clever guerrilla tactic, as I
argue later: with thousands of newspaper and television reporters present,
violence and ingenuity in street theater make a splash around the world.
The specific critiques are what need to be addressed, rather than sweep-
ing condemnations. These I do take seriously and examine fully at dif-
ferent places in the book as they relate to areas of concern, such as in
Chapter 7, when I consider the complaint of some women’s groups
that International Monetary Fund (IMF) conditionalities have harmed
women.
I also consider, in appropriate places throughout the book, the charge
that globalization is a result of the iron fist of conditionality (i.e., pre-
conditions for getting aid or trade opportunities) wielded by bilateral
and multilateral aid agencies. Whether the conditionalities are effective
and binding (as the critics believe) or are loose and often evaded (as I
argue) and whether trade liberalization is “forced” by these institutions
(as is alleged) or is often embraced by nations because they believe it is
good for them to abandon costly protectionism (as I contend) are mat-
ters that I deal with, particularly in Chapters 16 and 18.
As for the charges of hypocrisy, double standards, and unfair trade
that are passionately leveled today at these international institutions and
also at the rich nations—in particular, that they maintain protection for
themselves while they force others into free trade—these charges have
been made by reputable non-governmental organizations (NGOs) such
as Oxfam and by the World Bank in its occasionally desperate get-them-
off-our-backs mode. But, as I have written extensively elsewhere with
documentation and only sketch in this book, these beliefs and allega-
tions are often little more than rubbish.4
In particular, the average industrial protection in the poor coun-
tries is still significantly higher than in the rich countries; the chart in
Chapter 16 shows this clearly. That chapter also considers the reasons,
which have nothing to do with hypocrisy, why protection in the rich
countries has not been reduced more on labor-intensive industrial prod-
ucts. In agriculture, there are extensive tariffs in the importing poor coun-
tries as well. Moreover, significant subsidies, often through heavily
subsidized inputs such as water and electricity, can be found in agricul-
ture even in poor countries such as India and Mexico.
Besides, only an ignoramus would coach the poor countries to talk
of “unfair trade,” for this is the code phrase used by the protectionists in
rich countries to cut off imports from the poor countries by alleging
that they obtain their competitiveness in ways that amount to unfair
competition and unfair trade. Trade experts of all political persuasions
have spent decades exposing the cynical use of this phrase and decrying

--- Sayfa 4 ---
6 K
COPING WITH ANTI-GLOBALIZATION
its usage, but then in come the know-nothings, who persuade the un-
suspecting poor countries to embrace it.5 When it comes to the two sets
of nations, poor and rich, battling it out as to who is the worse unfair
trader, do not be surprised when the poor nations find themselves at a
disadvantage.
If all this were of no relevance, I would grin and bear it. Regrettably,
many of the leaders in the poor countries have now come to believe that
the trading system is unfair and hypocritical, and therefore they can fo-
cus on others’ protectionism and forget about their own. That their
protectionism, currently at average levels higher than in the rich coun-
tries, can only hurt their own prosperity and therefore the war against
poverty will be demonstrated in Chapter 5. Causing harm to the poor
countries cannot have been the intention of Oxfam, yet the road to hell
is paved with good intentions. Oxfam knows a little, but not enough,
about trade policy, I am afraid, and I have been moved to remark, not
just in this instance, that mission creep, even by non-creeps, is often not
a good idea.6 Their overreach subtracts from the great good that they
have done when they concentrate on what they do best.
So much then for conditionalities, double standards, unfair trade,
and hypocrisy. Let me turn instead to the central tasks that I have set out
to explore in this book: the sources of anti-globalization sentiments, the
concerns that globalization lacks a human face, the reality that it does
have one, and the governance that must accompany globalization once
one recognizes that it is generally a benign force for social agendas.
Exaggerating the Perils of Globalization
At the outset, it is necessary to recognize that the perils of globalization
happen to be exaggerated because of what I like to call the fallacies of
aggregation.
Different Aspects of Globalization
Recall that globalization, even in its economic aspects, has many dimen-
sions. It embraces trade and long-term direct foreign investment by
multinationals as well as flows of short-term portfolio capital whose
rapidity and size have caused havoc in places ranging from Bangkok to
Buenos Aires. But it also should include now-sizeable migrations, legal
and often illegal, across borders. And it extends to the diffusion and trans-
fer of technology (such as AIDS-fighting drugs) among producing and

--- Sayfa 5 ---
Anti-Globalization: Why? k
7
consuming nations. Such economic globalization, in turn, is distinct from
globalization, say, on dimensions such as increased international acces-
sibility of print and other media (e.g., Internet access to newspapers and
magazines, and the reach of CNN and the BBC today) or growing en-
rollments of foreign students.
Yet the popular discourse on globalization has tended to blur the
lines between these different dimensions and to speak of globalization
and its merits and demerits as if it were a homogeneous, undifferenti-
ated phenomenon. Indeed, recent years have seen many polls on attitudes
toward “globalization,” some of which I discuss below, and practically all
of them are marred by a failure to specify which aspect of even eco-
nomic globalization they are polling the respondent about. So we have
no way of finding out what exactly the respondent has in mind when
she says that globalization is good for herself or for the poor or for her
country.
In fact, the rot goes even deeper. In particular, in the many debates
that I have had with Ralph Nader and other opponents of freer trade
before, during, and after the 1999 ministerial meeting of the World Trade
Organization in Seattle (which broke up in mayhem as a result of vio-
lent demonstrations by anti-globalization groups), the critics have in-
variably strayed into the financial crisis that devastated East Asia in the
latter half of the 1990s. They argue as if the case for freer trade had been
exposed as illusory by this financial crisis. But openness to trade had
been at the heart of the East Asian “miracle,” whereas imprudent and
hasty freeing of financial flows was at the heart of the brutal interrup-
tion of this miracle. To throw beneficial trade out of the window be-
cause financial flows have caused a crisis is surely illogical.7
The case for free trade and the argument for free capital flows have
important parallels. But the differences are yet more pointed. The free-
ing of capital flows in haste, without putting in place monitoring and
regulatory mechanisms and banking reforms, amounts to a rash, gung-
ho financial capitalism. It can put nation-states at serious risk of experi-
encing massive, panic-fed outflows of short-term capital funds, which
would drive their economies into a tailspin.
The freeing of trade can hardly do this. If I exchange some of my
toothpaste for one of your toothbrushes, we will both have whiter teeth,
and the risk that we will have our teeth knocked out by this exchange is
negligible. By contrast, the proper analogy for capital flows is playing
with fire. When Tarzan sets a fire to roast his kill, he feeds himself and
has little to fear: a forest fire is hard to set off. But when he returns to
England as the long-lost Earl of Greystoke, he can carelessly and easily
set his ancestral home on fire.

--- Sayfa 6 ---
8 K
COPING WITH ANTI-GLOBALIZATION
Yet, manifest as this asymmetry is to any but the most ideological
economists, it is a common affliction even among highly educated mem-
bers of the public such as Ralph Nader. Indeed, they assume that if one
is for free trade, one must be for free direct investment, for free capital
flows, for free immigration, for free love, for free everything else! I must
confess that while the case for free trade suffers from this fallacy, making
our business of defending the merits of free trade more precarious, I
myself have profited from it. Thus, when I wrote in 1998 of this asym-
metry between free trade and free capital flows in the magazine Foreign
Affairs, right after the East Asian financial crisis had broken out, alerting
all to it, that turned out to be newsworthy. That I—widely complimented
or condemned, depending on your viewpoint, as the “world’s foremost
free trader”—had “admitted” that unfettered capital flows could be dan-
gerous was considered to be a heresy worthy of the greatest attention.
While a few others, such as my new (Columbia) colleague Joseph Stiglitz
and my old (MIT) student Paul Krugman, had also registered their reser-
vations in their own way, I was the one who became the poster boy for
many who were fearful of “globalization.” And yet, in all truth, I had thought
that I was saying the obvious; I had in fact never thought otherwise!
The North-South Divide: An Ironic Reversal
The debate on globalization is overlaid and overwhelmed by yet another
fallacy that asserts that the disillusionment with globalization, typified
by the street theater and the campus protests, is worldwide and reflects a
majoritarian discontent. But this belief is not true.
In fact, anti-globalization sentiments are more prevalent in the rich
countries of the North, while pluralities of policy makers and the public
in the poor countries of the South see globalization instead as a positive
force. This was the finding of the World Economic Forum’s extensive
poll on global public opinion on globalization, carried out by the Cana-
dian polling firm Environics International, with twenty-five thousand
urban respondents in twenty-five countries, and presented at the WEF’s
annual meeting in New York in early 2002.8
I call this an ironic reversal since the situation was exactly the other
way around in the 1950s and 1960s. At that time the rich countries were
busy liberalizing their trade, investments, and capital flows. They saw
international integration as the magic bullet that would bring them pros-
perity, and it did produce the golden age of rising tides that lifted all
boats until the OPEC-led explosion of oil prices unsettled the world

--- Sayfa 7 ---
Anti-Globalization: Why? k
9
economy beginning in the mid-1970s. But the poor countries were fear-
ful of international integration.
Raúl Prebisch, the Argentinian economist, talked then of the dan-
gers to the “periphery” from the “center” in international interactions.
The sociologist Fernando Henrique Cardoso of Brazil invented the
dependencia thesis, arguing that the poor countries would be relegated
to a dependent status in the international economy. The Chilean soci-
ologist Osvaldo Sunkel used the striking phrase “integration into the
international economy leads to disintegration of the national economy.”
President Kwame Nkrumah of Ghana, whom the CIA helped dislodge,
wrote of “neo-colonialism”: the embrace by the former colonial powers
of innocent-looking instruments such as aid that would intentionally
create a crypto-colonialism.
I characterized these fearful attitudes at the time as “malign impact”
and “malign intent” paradigms, contrasting with the economist’s con-
ventional thinking that international integration would benefit all, rich
and poor, and was therefore a “benign impact” phenomenon (which
need not have benign intentions motivating it), whereas aid and other
assistance were “benign intent” policies (which of course might none-
theless have unintended malign outcomes).9
Many poor countries that bought into these fearful ideas and turned
away from using international trade and investment flows as opportu-
nities to be seized turned out to have made the wrong choice. Their fail-
ures, and the example of the success of the countries of the Far East that
used international opportunities to great advantage instead, have proven
salutary. The result has been a turn by the South toward more globaliza-
tion. The sociologist Cardoso, who had warned of dependencia, became
President Cardoso of Brazil, seeking to take Brazil into more, not less,
globalization. The WEF poll on globalization was simply recording this
swing of sentiment.10
By contrast, the fearful “malign impact” ideas have come to haunt
several groups, among them the labor unions, in the rich nations. And
this reversal, this contrast with the poor countries, is exactly what the
WEF poll was picking up. The rich tapestry of reasons why this has hap-
pened is of both interest and concern, and I will address it shortly.
But before doing that, it is worth also noting that recent polls show
a waning, rather than an enhancement, of the acute anti-globalization
of the 1990s. The WEF poll found also that the positive views of global-
ization (as an omnibus and ill-defined phenomenon) had become more
positive in North America and Europe, even while they remained lower
than those in the countries of the South, big pluralities of whose resi-
dents continued to express high expectations of globalization. This is

--- Sayfa 8 ---
10 K
COPING WITH ANTI-GLOBALIZATION
also the finding from polls conducted by the Center on Policy Attitudes
of the University of Maryland: “Overall, Americans tend to see global-
ization as somewhat more positive than negative and appear to be grow-
ing familiar with the concept and more positive about it. A large majority
favors moving with the process of globalization and only a small minor-
ity favors resisting it.”11 The most recent poll by the Pew Global Atti-
tudes Project, under the guidance of President Clinton’s secretary of state,
Madeleine Albright, of thirty-eight thousand people interviewed in forty-
four countries found that “majorities in every nation surveyed say grow-
ing business and trade ties are at least somewhat good for their country
and for themselves” and that while social and economic discontent can
be found everywhere, “yet for the most part they are not inclined to
blame such troubles on growing interconnectedness.”12
But it may be too optimistic to go by these polls, as they may also
reflect changed circumstances in national economic performance. Good
times dampen anti-globalization attitudes, while bad times deepen them.
The WEF poll is revealing on this: the lowest pluralities in favor of glo-
balization among the poorer nations are in Indonesia, Turkey, and Ar-
gentina, where economies have been through turmoil. And so the task
of understanding the anti-globalization sentiments, and responding to
them if globalization is to be successfully maintained and managed, re-
mains pressing.
Globalization Today: Different from Yesterday
If globalization’s perils tend to be exaggerated in the ways I just dis-
cussed, they are also understated by many who say, “Well, we have al-
ways had globalization, and it is no big deal.” True, rapid integration of
the world economy occurred in the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries. We can go back to the end of the nineteenth century, for in-
stance, and find that trade, capital flows, and migrations were no less
then than they are today. If multinationals bother you, then just think of
the great East India Company, which virtually paved the way for the
British conquest of India, and the Dutch East Indies Company, which
dominated Indonesia. Trade grew rapidly along with European outward
expansion, as did settlements in the new areas opened up by exploration
and conquest. Capital flowed profusely, financing the building of rail-
ways in Africa and the extraction of minerals worldwide. Many histori-
ans have noticed that the years spanning the two world wars were an
interruption of the upward trends in the expansion of world trade and
investment, and that it is possible to interpret the postwar liberalization

--- Sayfa 9 ---
Anti-Globalization: Why? k
11
of trade and investment flows as leading to a resumption of the trends
set into motion prior to World War I. But all this misses the fact that
there are fundamental differences that give globalization today a special,
and at times sharp, edge.
First, the earlier integration of the world economy was driven more
by technological developments in transportation and communications
than by policy changes. It’s true that British prime minister Robert Peel
repealed the Corn Laws in 1846, bringing free trade unilaterally to En-
gland in the first dramatic move away from mercantilism. We also know
that in various ways many European nations, notably France, followed
suit with some trade liberalizations of their own, though historians have
not yet decided whether their actions were induced by the example of
Britain’s success with free trade, as expressly predicted by Peel.
But none of these policy changes did as much to integrate the world
economy in the latter half of the century as did emerging technological
revolutions in transportation by railways and in the oceans. Technologi-
cal advances in these sectors rapidly reduced costs of transport and com-
munication continually through the nineteenth century. Martin Wolf,
the Financial Times columnist, has observed: “The first transatlantic tele-
graph was laid in 1866. By the turn of the century, the entire world was
connected by telegraph, and communication times fell from months to
minutes.”13
Of course, the rate of technological change in moving goods and
services and knowledge cheaply and rapidly across nations has contin-
ued unabated, even accelerating according to some observers. Thus, Wolf
writes: “The cost of a three-minute telephone call from New York to
London in current prices dropped from about $250 in 1930 to a few
cents today. In more recent years, the number of voice paths across the
Atlantic has skyrocketed from 100,000 in 1986 to more than 2 million
today. The number of Internet hosts has risen from 5,000 in 1986 to
more than 30 million now.”14
But today’s most dramatic change is in the degree to which govern-
ments have intervened to reduce obstacles to the flow of trade and in-
vestments worldwide. The story of globalization today must be written
in two inks: one colored by technical change and the other by state ac-
tion. In fact, even the early postwar hostility toward global integration
in many of the poor countries has, as already remarked upon, yielded
steadily to the progressive embrace of globalization. But this fact forces
upon our attention a disturbing observation: governments that can accel-
erate globalization can also reverse it. Herein lies a vulnerability that can-
not be dismissed complacently. The earlier globalization, in the end, was
interrupted for almost a half century with rising trade barriers epitomized

--- Sayfa 10 ---
12 K
COPING WITH ANTI-GLOBALIZATION
by the infamous 1934 Smoot-Hawley Tariff of the United States and
declining trade flows and investments after World War I through to the
Great Crash of 1929 and World War II.
Second, the new information technologies have created a landscape
where movements of services and capital are faster by several orders of
magnitude. The rapidity with which huge amounts of funds moved out
of East Asia within less than a week in 1998, the precipitous outflows
from Mexico in November 1994, and many other instances of substan-
tial and rapid-fire outflows of capital have created immense manage-
ment problems that elude the grasp of countries that face difficult
developmental weaknesses and challenges but want to embrace finan-
cial globalization or are forced to do so. Financial panics, crashes, and
manias are nothing new, as the renowned economist Charles Kin-
dleberger has reminded us; but their magnitudes and the speed at which
they arrive are indeed qualitatively a different, and potentially more dan-
gerous, phenomenon.
Third, the sense of vulnerability, or economic insecurity, is arguably
greater today than in earlier periods because the growing integration of
nations worldwide into the international economy has intensified com-
petitive pressures from actual and potential rivals elsewhere. In Adam
Smith’s time, over two centuries ago, orange producers in the tropics
had little worry about competition from Glasgow even though oranges
could be grown in glass houses: the cost difference would be so high that
the tropical farmers felt secure behind a solid buffer of competitive advan-
tage. England’s producers of manufactures also enjoyed easy dominance
in many cases because England was ahead of all on industrialization.
But today, in most commodities and activities, technology matters and
has diffused greatly, both because many have access to similar pools of
knowledge and because multinationals can take scarce knowledge al-
most everywhere if they choose, as they often do, and they do produce
globally. The buffer has therefore shrunk dramatically in most activities,
and international competition is fierce and feared.
The inevitable effect has been to prompt firms everywhere to worry
about “fair trade.” Each looks over his foreign rival’s shoulder to see if
any difference in domestic policy or institutions gives this competitor an
“unfair” advantage. The result has been a growing demand for ironing out
any such differences, including in labor and environmental standards, as
firms seek “level playing fields,” ignoring the fact that it is differences,
whether of climate and skills or of domestic institutions and policies
reflecting local conditions, that lead to beneficial trade among nations.
While these demands, familiar in the rich countries for the most
part, have transformed the debate on globalization, and their many rami-

--- Sayfa 11 ---
Anti-Globalization: Why? k
13
fications will be subjected to critical examination at different places in
this book (especially in Chapters 10 and 11), the other important impli-
cation of intensified world competition is that it has exposed producers
in the poor countries to increased risks as a result of shifting to world
markets in search of greater prosperity. Thus farmers who shift from
traditional staples to cash crops because of higher returns at current
prices face the prospect that this shift will lead them into ruination if
rivals elsewhere with lower prices suddenly move into the market: a phe-
nomenon that is more likely in a world with many potential suppliers
with small margins of difference in competitiveness. Since few farmers
in the poor countries are likely to take these downside possibilities into
account, sudden misery is a possibility that has at times resulted from
the shift to global markets. The absence of institutional support to handle
these downsides (an issue analyzed, with sad examples of devastation
following the shift to market crops and solutions to this problem, in
Chapter 16) has become a major source of worry.
Finally, fears that globalization intensifies interdependence among
nation-states and increasingly constrains their ability to provide for the
welfare of their citizens have a salience that did not quite obtain in the
earlier period. The growth of the welfare state in the twentieth century—
even though we had elements of it starting earlier, as with social secu-
rity, whose origins go back to Bismarck in Germany—has created a
mind-set, an ethos, where the state is expected to be responsible for the
welfare of its citizens. The novel fear today is that globalization places
limits on the freedom to discharge this critical responsibility.
And so the complacent view that there is nothing new about global-
ization is simply wrong. We do need to look at the phenomenon closely,
seeking to analyze and address the fears that are novel and indeed ap-
pear to be plausible at first blush.
A Trilogy of Discontents
Anti-Capitalism
As the twentieth century ended, capitalism seemed to have vanquished
its rivals. Francis Fukuyama’s triumphalism in his celebrated work The
End of History and The Last Man (1990) was like a primeval scream of joy
by a warrior with a foot astride his fallen prey.15 It was not just the collapse
of communism in Europe and China’s decisive turn away from it. As the
energetic anti-globalization NGO Fifty Years Is Enough laments, even the
Swedish model (with its enhanced Social Democratic commitment to the

--- Sayfa 12 ---
14 K
COPING WITH ANTI-GLOBALIZATION
welfare state, backed by a markedly progressive and redistributive tax
system) had lost its appeal. The much-advertised model of “alternative
development” in the Indian state of Kerala, with its major emphasis on
education and health and only minor attention to growth, had also run
into difficulties, much as President Julius Nyerere’s celebrated socialist
experiment in Tanzania had run the country’s economy into the ground.
This vanishing of different possibilities has led to what I have called the
tyranny of the missing alternative, provoking a sense of anguished anti-
capitalist reactions from both the old and the young.
The old among the disenchanted are few, and so they perhaps matter
less than the young, who are many. They are among the anti-capitalists
of the postwar years, ranging from socialists to revolutionaries. The com-
munists and Marxists are captive to a nostalgia for their vanished dreams.
When the World Economic Forum met in Davos, Switzerland, in
February 2001, there was an anti-Davos meeting in Brazil at the same
time.16 The rhetoric in Brazil was one of revolution. I recall George Soros,
who properly considers himself to be a progressive financier, going into
a debate from Davos on the video monitor with some of the anti-Davos
participants. I recall his frustration, indeed astonishment, when he real-
ized that he was seen as the enemy, not a friend, much as U.S. Democrats
were chagrined that Ralph Nader thought during the last presidential
election that they were no different from the Republicans.
Soros, who had not previously interacted with these groups, just did
not get it: as far as these anti-capitalist revolutionaries are concerned,
anyone who is into stocks and bonds should be put in stocks and bonds.
Indeed, these groups, who were memorializing Che Guevara and listen-
ing to Ben Bella, were the exact antitheses of the Arthur Koestlers of the
world, who wrote of the god that failed. They were working from a script
about the god that died but will come again, much like born-again Chris-
tians. They only had to keep the faith.
But we who favor globalization must also confront the young. And
if you have watched the streets of Seattle, Washington, Prague, Montreal,
and Genoa, where the anti-globalizers have congregated with increasing
militancy, or if you see their impassioned protests on the campuses, as I
have watched the Anti-Sweatshop Coalition’s activities at my own uni-
versity (Columbia), there can be no doubt that we have here a phenom-
enon that is truly important in the public space and also more potent:
the nostalgia of the fading generation cannot compete with the passions
of the rising generation.
So how is the discontent of the young to be explained? Of course, a
rare few among them share their predecessors’ revolutionary bent. Con-

--- Sayfa 13 ---
Anti-Globalization: Why? k
15
sider Global Exchange, an NGO that describes itself as a “human rights
group”—this is the in term, much as “socialism” was three decades ago,
and its moral resonance immediately gets you onto higher ground and
gives you a free pass with the media and the public. It professes radical
politics and gets endorsement from the great linguist and activist Noam
Chomsky, among other left intellectuals. Its pronouncements on the
World Trade Organization are dramatic and drastic: “the WTO only
serves the interests of multinational corporations” and “the WTO is kill-
ing people.”17
But Global Exchange and its radical chic are really a fringe phenom-
enon. There are several explanations, other than strong socialist convic-
tions, of what animates the young in particular. Each may explain part of
the reality, while collectively they provide a more complete explanation.
1.
Far too many among the young see capitalism as a system that
cannot address meaningfully questions of social justice. To my genera-
tion, and that of the British left-leaning intellectuals such as George Ber-
nard Shaw that preceded it, the Soviet model was a beguiling alternative.
Indeed, my much-translated 1966 book The Economics of Underdevel-
oped Countries contains a distinct nod toward the Soviet Union: “The
imagination of many . . . nations has been fired, perhaps most of all, by
the remarkable way in which the Soviet Union has raised itself to the
status of a Great Power by its own bootstraps and in a short span of
time.”18 How appalling a misjudgment this view of the Soviet alternative
seems today, and how commonplace it was then!
That capitalism may be viewed instead as a system that can para-
doxically destroy privilege and open up economic opportunity to the
many is a thought that is still uncommon. I often wonder, for example,
how many of the young skeptics of capitalism are aware that socialist
planning in countries such as India, by replacing markets systemwide
with bureaucratically determined rations of goods and services, wors-
ened rather than improved unequal access because socialism meant
queues that the well-connected and the well-endowed could jump,
whereas markets allowed a larger number to make it to the check-out
counter. I have always been astonished at the number of well-meaning
socialists, whose aspirations I admire, who continue to fall for the erro-
neous view that controls and direct allocations are an appropriate an-
swer to inequality.
2.
But the anti-capitalist sentiments are particularly virulent among
the young who arrive at their social awakening on campuses in fields
other than economics. English, comparative literature, and sociology are
fertile breeding grounds.

--- Sayfa 14 ---
16 K
COPING WITH ANTI-GLOBALIZATION
Thus, deconstructionism, espoused by the French philosopher
Jacques Derrida, has left the typical student of literature without anchor
because of its advocacy of what amounts to an endless horizon of mean-
ings. Terry Eagleton, the sympathetic chronicler of modern literary
theory, has written: “Derrida is clearly out to do more than develop new
techniques of reading: deconstruction is for him an ultimately political
practice, an attempt to dismantle the logic by which a particular system
of thought, and behind that a whole system of political structures and
social institutions, maintains its force.”19
True, Derrida’s technique will deconstruct any political ideology,
including Marxism. Typically, however, it is focused on deconstructing
and devaluing capitalism rather than Marxism, often with nihilistic over-
tones, which creates the paradox that many now turn to anarchy not
from Bakunin but from Derrida.
The near-nihilist influence of the deconstructionism of Derrida in
feeding anti-capitalism has been matched by the equally profound in-
fluence of Michel Foucault: these have amounted to a double whammy,
courtesy of Paris. Foucault’s emphasis on discourses as instruments of
power and dominance has also led to what is often described as an “anti-
rational” approach that challenges the legitimacy of academic disciplines,
including economics, and their ability to get at the “truth.” There is little
doubt that the language of power, and the focus on it, feeds in turn the
notion, discussed later, that corporations will dominate and exploit the
workers under the liberal rules that define capitalism, and by extension,
globalization.20
The heavy influence of Marxist texts on students of literature, on
the other hand, has been beautifully captured by V. S. Naipaul in his
compelling portrait in Beyond Belief of the Pakistani guerrilla Shabaz,
who went from studying literature in England to starting a revolution in
Baluchistan that failed:
There were close Pakistani friends at the university. Many of them were do-
ing English literature, like Shabaz; it was one of the lighter courses, possibly
the lightest, and at this time it was very political and restricted. It was encour-
aging Marxism and revolution rather than wide reading. So Shabaz and his
Pakistani friends in their Marxist study group read the standard (and short)
revolutionary texts, Frantz Fanon, Che Guevara. And while they read certain
approved Russian writers, they didn’t read or get to know about the Turgenev
novels, Fathers and Sons (1862) and Virgin Soil (1877), which dealt with con-
ditions not unlike those in feudal Pakistan, but questioned the simplicities of
revolution.21
Feeding the anti-globalization movement are also the post-colonial
(poco) theorists, who, following Edward Said’s pathbreaking writings,

--- Sayfa 15 ---
Anti-Globalization: Why? k
17
have a profound suspicion of Western scholarship as an objective source
of interpretation and conceptualization of the colonial societies that were
part of the global polity that European expansion created. That suspi-
cion breeds hostility both to Western disciplines such as economics and
to the threat that they see from them to the cultures of the communities
and nations that have succeeded the colonial rule.
Thus the post-colonial theorists become natural allies of the
deconstructionists, the diverse post-modernists (pomos), the Foucault
cultists, and the Marxists, in their anti-globalization sentiments in the
literature departments. The cauldron draws its boiling waters from many
spigots.
As for sociology, many of its students are influenced equally by the
new literary theory and the old Marxism. They stand in contempt of
economic argumentation that would refute their rejectionist beliefs about
capitalism by asserting that economics is about value whereas sociology
is about values. But they are wrong today on both counts.
Economists will retort that as citizens they choose ends, but as econo-
mists they choose the (best) means. Moreover, accused of indulging the
profit motive, they respond with the Cambridge economist Sir Dennis
Robertson that economics is addressed heroically to showing how “man’s
basest instincts,” not his noblest, can be harnessed through appropriate
institutional design to produce public good. Adam Smith would surely
have died an unsung hero if he had peddled the pedestrian argument
that altruism led to public good.
The presumption that sociology is a better guide to virtue than eco-
nomics is also misplaced. Certainly its related discipline, social anthro-
pology, has traditionally leaned toward preserving cultures, whereas
economics in our hands is a tool for change.22 When I studied in En-
gland I was fascinated by social anthropology and deeply buried in the
writings of the legendary A. R. Radcliffe-Brown and many others, but I
still wound up preferring economics for my vocation. What other choice
could really have been made by a young student from a country afflicted
by economic misery? Indeed, if reducing poverty by using economic
analysis to accelerate growth and therewith pull people up into gainful
employment and dignified sustenance is not a compelling moral im-
perative, what is?
But I should add that many of these students are also susceptible to
the bitingly critical view of economics as an apologia for capitalism that
was brilliantly propounded by Rosa Luxemburg in her classic essay “What
Is Economics?”—the first chapter of a proposed ten-chapter work, only
six chapters of which were found in her apartment after her murder. She
had argued that “the new science of economics,” which had reached the

--- Sayfa 16 ---
18 K
COPING WITH ANTI-GLOBALIZATION
status of an academic discipline in Germany, was tantamount to an at-
tempted legitimation of the “anarchy of capitalist production” and was
essentially “one of the most important ideological weapons of the bour-
geoisie as it struggles with the medieval state and for a modern capitalist
state.” The “invisible hand,” with its rationalization of markets, had a
hidden agenda, hence it lacked plausibility. This analysis attracts many.
3.
But I also think that an altogether new factor on the scene that
propels the young into anti-capitalist attitudes comes from a different,
technological source in a rather curious fashion. This is the dissonance
that now exists between empathy for others elsewhere for their misery
and the inadequate intellectual grasp of what can be done to ameliorate
that distress. The resulting tension spills over into unhappiness with the
capitalist system (in varying forms) within which they live and hence
anger at it for its apparent callousness.
Today, thanks to television, we have what I call the paradox of inver-
sion of the philosopher David Hume’s concentric circles of reducing
loyalty and empathy. Each of us feels diminishing empathy as we go from
our nuclear family to the extended family, to our local community, to
our state or county (say, Lancashire or Louisiana), to our nation, to our
geographical region (say, Europe or the Americas), and then to the world.
This idea of concentric circles of empathy can be traced back to the Sto-
ics’ doctrine of oikeiosis—that human affection radiates outward from
oneself, diminishing as distance grows from oneself and increasing as
proximity increases to oneself. In the same vein, Hume famously argued
that “it is not contrary to reason to prefer the destruction of the whole
world to the scratching of my finger” and that “sympathy with persons
remote from us is much fainter than with persons near and contiguous.”23
Similarly, his contemporary Adam Smith wrote in 1760 in The Theory
of Moral Sentiments, which is as celebrated among moral philosophers
as The Wealth of Nations is among economists:
Let us suppose that the great empire of China, with all its myriads of inhab-
itants, was suddenly swallowed up by an earthquake and let us consider how
a man of humanity in Europe, who had no sort of connexion with that part
of the world, would be affected upon receiving intelligence of this dreadful
calamity. He would, I imagine, first of all express very strongly his sorrow for
the misfortune of that unhappy people, he would make many melancholy
reflections upon the precariousness of human life and the vanity of all the
labors of man which could thus be annihilated in a moment. He would too,
perhaps, if he was a man of speculation, enter into many reasonings con-
cerning the effects which this disaster might produce upon the commerce of
Europe and the trade and business of the world in general. And when all this
fine philosophy was over, when all these humane sentiments had been once
fairly expressed, he would pursue his business or pleasure, take his repose or

--- Sayfa 17 ---
Anti-Globalization: Why? k
19
his diversion, with the same ease and tranquility as if no such accident had
occurred.
The most frivolous disaster which could befall himself would occasion a
more real disturbance. If he was to lose his little finger to-morrow, he would
not sleep to-night; but, provided he never saw them, he would snore with the
most profound security over the ruin of a hundred million of his brethren.
The destruction of that immense multitude seems plainly an object less in-
teresting to him than this paltry misfortune of his own. To prevent, therefore,
this paltry misfortune to himself would a man of humanity be willing to
sacrifice the lives of a hundred million of his brethren, provided he had never
seen them?24
What the Internet and CNN have done is to take Hume’s outermost
circle and turn it into the innermost. No longer can we snore while the
other half of humanity suffers plague and pestilence and the continuing
misery of extreme poverty. Television has disturbed our sleep, perhaps
short of a fitful fever but certainly arousing our finest instincts.25 Indeed,
this is what the Stoics, chiefly Hierocles, having observed the concentric
circles of vanishing empathy, had urged by way of morality: that “it is the
task of a well tempered man, in his proper treatment of each group, to
draw circles together somehow towards the centre, and to keep zealously
transferring those from the enclosing circles into the enclosed ones.”26
At the same time, the technology of the Internet and CNN, as Rob-
ert Putnam has told us, has accelerated our move to “bowling alone,”
gluing us to our TV sets and shifting us steadily out of civic participa-
tion, so that the innermost circle has become the outermost one.
So the young see and are anguished by the poverty and the civil wars
and the famines in remote areas of the world but often have no intellec-
tual training to cope with their anguish and follow it through rationally
in terms of appropriate action. Thus, as I watched the kids dressed as
turtles at Seattle, during the riotous 1999 WTO ministerial meeting, pro-
testing against the WTO and the Appellate Body’s decision in the shrimp-
turtle case (discussed in Chapter 11), I wondered how many knew that
the environmentalists had really won that decision, not lost it. The abil-
ity to unilaterally impose requirements on foreign shrimpers on the high
oceans to use turtle-excluding devices (nets with narrow necks), failing
which imports of shrimp would be disallowed, was upheld, not denied.
When I asked, of course, no one knew the facts, and so they did not
really understand what they were protesting. When I mischievously asked
some if they had read Roald Dahl’s famous story “The Boy Who Talked
with Animals,” about a boy who freed a giant turtle and sailed away on it
into the far ocean, they shook their turtle heads.27 It has become fash-
ionable to assert that the demonstrating youth know much about the
policies they protest; but that is only a sentiment of solidarity with little

--- Sayfa 18 ---
20 K
COPING WITH ANTI-GLOBALIZATION
basis in fact. True, there are several serious NGOs with real knowledge
and serious policy critiques, such as the World Wildlife Fund, and I shall
presently consider their phenomenal growth and the opportunity they
present for making economic and social well-being a shared success be-
tween the agents of economic globalization and the civil society—the
two great phenomena as we enter the twenty-first century. But they are
not the tumultuous many who are agitating in the streets.
4.
Overlaying the entire scene, of course, is the general presumption
that defines many recent assertions by intellectuals that somehow the
proponents of capitalism, and of its recent manifestations in regard to
economic reforms such as the moves to privatization and to market lib-
eralization (including trade liberalization), are engaged, as Edward Said
claims, in a “dominant discourse [whose goal] is to fashion the merciless
logic of corporate profit-making and political power into a normal state
of affairs.” Following Pierre Bourdieu, Said endorses the view that
“Clinton-Blair neoliberalism, which built on the conservative disman-
tling of the great social achievements in health, education, labor and
security of the welfare state during the Thatcher-Reagan period, has con-
structed a paradoxical doxa, a symbolic counterrevolution.”28 In Bourdieu’s
own words, this is “conservative but presents itself as progressive; it seeks
the restoration of the past order in some of its most archaic aspects (es-
pecially as regards economic relations), yet it passes off regressions, re-
versals, surrenders, as forward-looking reforms or revolutions leading
to a whole new age of abundance and liberty).”29
But, frankly, this view stands reality on its head. Of course, we have
known since Orwell that words do matter, and the smart duelists in the
controversies over public policy will often seize the high ground by ap-
propriating to themselves and their own causes, before their adversaries
do, beguiling words such as progressive. Thus, believe it or not, protec-
tionists in trade have been known to ask for “tariff reform”; today, they
ask for “fair trade,” which no one can deny except for the informed few
who see that it is used to justify unfair trade practices. Phrases such as
“corporate profit making” and “trickle-down” do the same for the friends
of Bourdieu, creating and fostering a pejorative perception of the market-
using policy changes that they reject.
It is therefore not surprising that today’s critics turn to the same
linguistic weapons as the anti-capitalist forces of yesterday. But let us
ask: is it “conservative” or “radical” to seek to correct, in light of decades
of experience and in the teeth of entrenched forces, the mistakes and the
excesses of past policies, no matter how well motivated? In fact, as re-
formers know only too well, it takes courage and élan to challenge or-

--- Sayfa 19 ---
Anti-Globalization: Why? k
21
thodoxies, especially those that are conventionally associated with “pro-
gressive” forces.
As for the policies themselves, the fierce binary contrast drawn by
Bourdieu is an abstraction that misses the central issues today. The de-
bate is really not about conservative counterrevolution and the enlight-
ened past order. It is rather about shifting the center of gravity in public
action more toward the use of markets and less toward dirigisme. It is
not about “whether markets”; it is about where the “limits to markets”
must be drawn. This is a question that, as will be discussed, provokes
spirited complaints from the recent communitarians who wish the lim-
its to markets to be drawn more tightly.
The present-day turn toward reforms in the developing countries is
also prompted by excessive and knee-jerk dirigisme. As I often say, the
problem with many of these countries was that Adam Smith’s invisible
hand was nowhere to be seen. Their turn to economic reforms is to be
attributed not to the rise of “conservatism” but to a pragmatic reaction
of many to the failure of what a number of us once considered to be
“progressive” policies that would lift us out of poverty, illiteracy, and
many other ills. As John Kenneth Galbraith once said about Milton Fried-
man—and here I take only the witticism and not sides—“Milton’s mis-
fortune is that his policies have been tried.”
Anti-Globalization
Anti-capitalism has turned into anti-globalization among left-wing stu-
dents for reasons that are easy to see. After all, Lenin wrote extensively
about imperialism and its essential links to capitalism, and present-day
writers such as Immanuel Wallerstein have seen the growing integration
of the world economy in related ways as the organic extension of na-
tional capitalism.30
Lenin’s views on imperialism provide an insight into a principal rea-
son why anti-globalization is seen by those on the left so readily as fol-
lowing from anti-capitalism. In his famous work Imperialism: The Highest
Stage of Capitalism, Lenin stated that the distinctive characteristics of
capitalism in the form of monopolies, oligarchy, and the exploitation of
the weak by the strong nations compel us to define it as “parasitic, de-
caying capitalism.”31 Nikolai Bukharin, for whose work Imperialism and
the World Economy Lenin wrote a preface, considered that imperialism
with its attendant globalization of the world economy is little more than
capitalism’s “[attempt] to tame the working class and to subdue social
contradictions by decreasing the steam pressure through the aid of a

--- Sayfa 20 ---
22 K
COPING WITH ANTI-GLOBALIZATION
colonial valve”; that “having eliminated [through monopolies] compe-
tition within the state, [capitalism has] let loose all the devils of a world
scuffle.”32
The notion that globalization is merely an external attenuation of
the internal struggles that doom capitalism, and that globalization is
also in essence capitalist exploitation of the weak nations, provides not
only an inherent link between capitalism and globalization but also makes
globalization an instrument for the exploitation of the weak nations.
And this certainly has resonance again among the idealist young on the
left. Capitalism seeks globalization to benefit itself but harms others
abroad. The Lenin-Bukharin argument then leads, as certainly as a heat-
seeking missile reaching its target, to anti-capitalist sentiments.
Anti-Corporation Attitudes
But central to that perspective is the notion, of course, that it is the “mo-
nopolies” (for that is indeed how the multinationals are often described
even today in much of the anti-globalization literature) that are at the
heart of the problem: they do not benefit the people abroad; they exploit
them instead. Indeed, this notion of globalization as an exploitative force
that delays the doomsday for capitalism at home and harms those abroad
has captured some of the more militant among the naive youth today.
The anti-corporation attitudes come to many others who are not
aficionados of left-wing literature, also from the obvious sense that
multinationals are the principal agents and beneficiaries of capitalism
and of globalization.33 Yet others find it plausible that multinationals
must necessarily be bad in a global economy because global integration
without globally shared regulations must surely amount to an advanta-
geous playing field for multinationals. These corporations would then
be able to seek profits by searching for the most likely locations to ex-
ploit workers and nations, thereby putting intolerable pressure on their
home states to abandon their gains in social legislation. This is what is
known as a race to the bottom. Indeed, this view is so credible that even
a shrewd and perceptive intellectual such as Alan Wolfe, who sees through
cant better than most, has recently written disapprovingly and casually
of the “policies of increasingly rapacious global corporations.”34
These anti-corporation arguments are not supported by the facts;
Chapter 12 shows why. But many believe them. And they zero in with a
“gotcha” mentality, seizing on every venal misdeed of a multinational
they can find, seeking to validate through these specific examples their
general anti-corporation biases. This surely accounts for the return of

--- Sayfa 21 ---
Anti-Globalization: Why? k
23
Ralph Nader, the great scourge of manifest misdeeds by corporations. It
has also magically transformed Julia Roberts, whose triumph in Pretty
Woman reflected chiefly her marvelous good looks, into an acclaimed
actress in Erin Brockovich and introduced the gifted actor Russell Crowe
to celebrity on the screen in The Insider, both movies where a David
takes on the Goliath in shape of a truly venal corporation.
The anti-corporation militancy that is on the rise among the young
anti-globalizers is also strategic. We have witnessed the brilliant way in
which the anti-globalizers managed to use the meetings of the interna-
tional agencies such as the World Bank, the IMF, and particularly the
WTO (originally the GATT), the pride of progressive architectural design
regarding the management of the world economy and the permanent
legacy of legendary men of vision, to protest and to profess their anti-
globalization sentiments. After all, these meetings were where the world’s
media gathered. What better place to create mayhem and get attention
from the vast multitude of reporters looking for a story? So while the old
guerrillas struck where you least expected them, these new guerrillas have
struck where you most expected them: at these meetings.
The same strategic sense has been displayed in going after the cor-
porations as well. Nike and Gap, two fine multinationals, now have a
permanent set of critics, with newsletters and websites worldwide. With
Nike and Gap having overseas operations in numerous locations, it is
not possible to avoid lapses altogether from whatever is defined as good
behavior: the host governments often force the hiring of domestic man-
agers who are regrettably part of cultures that are not as egalitarian and
mindful of the dignity of others working below them as the West would
like them to be. When lapses occur, these firms become obvious targets
in a propaganda war that is stacked against them. Naomi Klein, the Ca-
nadian writer, admits frankly that, faced with the amorphous but over-
whelming phenomenon of globalization, the only way to get at it is to
latch on to something concrete and targetable.35
The same strategic thought recurs in the writings of other anti-
capitalist activists. Thus the Nicaragua Solidarity Network of Greater
New York reported that in Brazil “[o]n Mar. 8 [2001], International
Women’s Day, women linked to landless rural worker movements in Rio
Grande do Sul state gathered in front of a McDonald’s restaurant in
Porto Alegre, the state capital, to protest. . . . Nina Tonin, a member of
the National Board of Directors of the Movement of Landless Rural
Workers (MST), said the group chose McDonald’s because it is ‘a symbol
of the intervention politics of the big monopolies operating in Brazil.’”36
So they go after the corporations that spread and constitute the
globalization that is reprehensible. We then also see teenagers carrying

--- Sayfa 22 ---
24 K
COPING WITH ANTI-GLOBALIZATION
placards outside Staples, the office products chain that has succeeded
immensely throughout the United States, and demonstrating in front of
Starbucks while their more militant adult friends threw stones through
the coffee chain’s windows in Seattle. I talk with them at every opportu-
nity; I find enthusiasm, even idealism, but never any ability to engage
concretely on the issues they take a stand on. But then the Kleins of the
anti-globalization movement are not fazed; it is all strategic, it is in a
good cause.
Indeed, it is hard to understand the deep and unyielding hostility to
multinational corporations, manifest on the streets and on campuses,
except by analogy to earlier times. Perhaps the classic parallel is with the
stigma attached to usury in medieval times: interest and moneylenders
then, as profits and corporations now, invited implacable hostility. The
exaction of interest was forbidden by ecclesiastical and civil laws, its prac-
tice turned into a crime. Even as trade and globalization increased with
mercantile expansion and laws began to change (with occasional re-
lapses), usury remained beyond the pale, contrary to conventional and
persistent norms.
By 37 Henry VIII, cap. ix, the old laws against usury are, indeed, abolished,
and a rate of ten percent is indirectly legalized by the fixing of severe penal-
ties for any rate higher; but the practice is condemned, and classed with cor-
rupt bargains. . . . In 1552, however, by 6 Edward VI, cap. xx, the act of Henry
VIII is annulled . . . and severe penalties are enacted against any usury what-
ever, “forasmuch as Usurie is by the word of God utterly prohibited, as a vyce
most odious and detestable . . .” In 1570, by 13 Elizabeth, cap. viii, 6 Edward VI
is annulled and 37 Henry VIII re-enacted, but “forasmuch as all Usurie, being
forbidden by the Law of God is synne and detestable . . .” It is expressly pro-
vided that all offenders shall “also be punished and corrected according to
the ecclesiastical laws heretofore made against usury.”37
Other Ideological and Intellectual Sources of
Anti-Globalization
While the sources of anti-globalization rooted in anti-capitalism in the
diverse ways set out so far are dominant in the current discourse, there
are others, not quite so influential, that cannot be ignored.
The Right
In this variegated landscape, complementing those who lean on the left
are forces on the right. Thus for every Ralph Nader there is a Pat

--- Sayfa 23 ---
Anti-Globalization: Why? k
25
Buchanan. But the Buchanans are instead knee-deep in xenophobia and
crude assertions of national identity and sovereignty. These beliefs lead
directly to proposals to isolate America from commerce by building tar-
iff walls. Thus in the 1990s Buchanan called for tariffs against the Japa-
nese, asking for a 10 percent tariff on every Japanese import, and has
argued recently against letting Chinese imports freely into the United
States.38 Interestingly, the right-wing extremists in India’s ruling Bharatiya
Janata Party are also fanatically for self-reliance in trade and incoming
foreign investment.
The anti-globalization sentiments on the right extend easily to anti-
immigration attitudes, whereas the left’s fascination with anti-globalization
rarely extends to a fortress mentality on immigration. While some lib-
eral environmental groups slide into anti-immigration rhetoric when
they argue that immigration adds to environmental problems, the gen-
eral posture of the liberal anti-globalization groups is one of benign
neglect. Surprisingly, however, there are a rare few progressive segments
of the anti-globalization movement that are for free immigration. The
anthropologist David Graeber has drawn attention to the Italian group
Ya Basta!, whose platform includes guaranteed free movement of people
across borders: an objective that has simply no political salience or so-
cial resonance, to be brutally frank.
Communitarianism and Limits to Markets
The “liberal international economic order,” as the spread of capitalism
and markets worldwide is sometimes described, has also been challenged
by political philosophers of influence, these coming from the Anglo-
Saxon campuses rather than from the banks of the Seine. Thus, com-
munitarians in the United States such as Michael Sandel of Harvard and
Michael Walzer of Princeton’s Institute for Advanced Study have tried
to define limits on the use of markets.
To illustrate, Sandel has objected to the use of global-efficiency-
enhancing international trade in permits for carbon dioxide emissions
among members of the Kyoto treaty on global warming. With such trade,
Brazil would be able to reduce its emissions but effectively sell the re-
duction achieved as a tradable permit to the United States, which would
then credit it as a contribution toward the fulfillment of its own target
of emission reductions, thus reducing by the traded amount the emis-
sion reduction it had to achieve. This trade would mean that a country
where the real cost of reducing carbon dioxide emissions is higher would
be able to buy the tradable permits from one where the real cost was

--- Sayfa 24 ---
26 K
COPING WITH ANTI-GLOBALIZATION
lower: the world cost of reducing emissions would obviously fall with
such trade. But Sandel once argued in a New York Times op-ed article
why it was “immoral” to buy the rights to pollute: we expect everyone in
a community to make a shared effort toward such goals.39 A good ex-
ample would be that our community would be offended if the rich boys
could buy their way out of fighting a war (though one must admit that
the substitution of a professional army for conscription is precisely a
case where that communitarian sense has given way to the notion of
efficiency). Sandel himself produces the example of parking spaces for
handicapped people. The community would be offended if the rich could
buy permits to use such spaces. But here again, the rich can always park
their BMWs in these spaces and pay the fines if caught. To my knowl-
edge, no one threatens that the luxury cars illegally parked in these spaces
will be destroyed and the violators will be incarcerated, thus raising the
effective price paid for such spaces by the rich to levels that really do
amount to prohibition. In short, while communitarian principles do
intrude frequently to place limits on markets, and hence on the prin-
ciple of efficiency that markets help to implement, the communitarian
spirit itself is subject to limits in practice.
It is likely that the extent of communitarian limits on markets will
erode with capitalism taking hold. This is what Marx had in mind as he
observed what he called the “commodification” process—what econo-
mists call increased commercialization. Thus, the balance between al-
truism, love, duty, and the other virtues, on one hand, and pursuit of
self-interest, on the other hand, may shift away from those virtues as
capitalism progresses. For instance, love may become sex, with rever-
ence and mystique yielding to gratification. It is hard to see this in one’s
own culture, but during O. J. Simpson’s trial I was struck by the fact that
when newspapers described how he had been looking through the win-
dow as Nicole made love to her boyfriend, they all said that she and her
friend had had dinner, come home, had coffee, and then “had sex.” Mind
you, none said they had “made love.” So making love was reduced to
having sex, the way they had dinner and then coffee. And, just as you
might remark that the coffee was an espresso, the reports added that the
sex was oral!
But the communitarians surely exaggerate the commodification that
markets wreak. There is movement the other way too, and often it comes
about because of the rapid pace of technical change, which has acceler-
ated both the pace of economic globalization and that of globalized civil
society. The cloning debate shows how societies will seek to place limits
on what will be left to markets.

--- Sayfa 25 ---
Anti-Globalization: Why? k
27
In the world as we know it, therefore, both communitarian and lib-
eral principles coexist in varying forms. The important question is not
whether we should have one or the other but whether capitalism and
globalization are such an inexorable force that they propel society into a
headlong rush away from traditional communitarian values and ways.
The evidence for such an alarmist conclusion is not compelling.
Anti-Americanism
Yet another source of anti-globalization sentiments is the resentment
that comes from the rise of the United States to a military and economic
hegemony so unprecedented that the French call America, with which
they have a notorious love-hate relationship, a hyperpower, as if being
called a superpower is no longer the highest accolade.
Since this hegemony is exercised in the global context, the resent-
ment of the United States follows worldwide. The loss of the Soviet Union
as a countervailing superpower is mourned, even as the collapse of the
scourge of communism is celebrated. The anti-Americanism that Ameri-
can power and its exercise—no matter how benign and invited—creates
is then an important source of anti-globalization sentiment. Throwing
sand into the gears of globalization is seen as a way to spit on American
hegemony, if not to limit the exercise of it in the political, cultural, and
economic domains.
So we then face a motley crew, a mélange of anti-globalizers animated
by different ideas and passions and yet appearing to be an undifferenti-
ated mass. Nonetheless, those of us who favor globalization cannot re-
treat from the task of meeting their concerns head-on. In the end, despite
the chaotic nature of the anti-globalization movement, we can impose
some commonalities and order before we offer a response. That is just
what I propose now to do.