--- Sayfa 2 ---
An Imprint Of Stephen A. Dafoe
PO Box 5063
Hinton, Alberta
Canada - T7V 1X3
www.templarbooks.com
Layout Copyright © 2005 by Stephen A. Dafoe
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized in
any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including
photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval
system, without permission in writing from the publisher.
Library and Archives Canada Cataloguing in Publication
Castells, F. de P. (Francis de Paula)
Arithmetic of Freemasonry / F. de P. Castells.
First ed. published: Leeds: Whitehead & Miller, 1914.
ISBN 0-9731536-4-4
1. Freemasonry--Symbolism.  2. Symbolism of numbers.  I. Title.
HS395.C33 2005
     366'.1
C2005-904003-3
                           Printed In Canada

Books

--- Sayfa 4 ---
espite the title of this booklet, the reader should not get the
impression that they are about to read a dry account of
“Arithmetic,” one of the Seven Liberal Arts and Sciences.
D
While it does deal with the subject of Metrology, or the science of
measurements, W. Brother Castells' book, “Arithmetic of
Freemasonry” is a deeply esoteric work, dealing with a wide range of
topic matter from how ancient civilizations developed systems of
counting to the Kabalah and its connection to our Masonic Art.
The author of this booklet, originally delivered the work you are
about to read, as a lecture to the “Leeds Association of Installed
Masters.” That lecture was delivered in 1914, nearly a century ago,
but the material herein contained has seldom been covered since
that time.
Sadly few Masonic books of this present era cover the esoteric
topic matter of W. Bro. Castells' brief lecture on Masonic Metrology.
Today Masonic authors, as scarce as we are, tend to focus on topic
matters that require little thought and certainly no further back-
ground study.
For the Masonic student, who wishes to expand his knowledge of
one of the Seven Liberal Arts and Sciences in an esoteric and spiri-
tual direction, I am proud to offer this work, expanded with illustra-
tions to illustrate the knowledge imparted by our departed, but not
forgotten Brother, the Reverend F. de P. Castells.
Stephen Dafoe
th
June 24 , 2005

--- Sayfa 5 ---
By F. de P. Castells
he leading ideas of this lecture first came to my mind when
engaged in preparing a lecture on the Hebrew names for
G.A.O.T.U. which I gave to the Bible Study Guide, organized
T
by myself at Bexley Heath, Kent. Soon afterwards I developed those
ideas and embodied them in a lecture on “The Hebrew Words of the
Masonic Ritual,” which I delivered at the Lodge of Instruction
carried on in connection with the North Kent Lodge, 2499. And last
year, having joined the Lullingstone Lodge, 1837, Dartford, when
invited to give a lecture there, I undertook to deal exclusively with
the Numbers of the Ritual. Before coming to Leeds, the lecture was
given to the Mid-Kent Masters' Lodge, 3173, Chatham, and that gave
me a further opportunity of testing my opinions before giving them
out as I do here.

--- Sayfa 6 ---
By F. de P. Castells
rithmetic is one of the “Seven Liberal Arts and Sciences” on
which the Craft has been founded; it has been a potent factor
in the development of the human mind, and may help us to
A
understand some of the principles which underlie our Masonic
Ritual.
Going back to primitive times, we find that there are two
principle methods of counting: (1) By threes, and (2) by fives. The
former leads us to the mysterious nine, and to the other sacred
numbers of the ancient mysteries. The latter accounts for the ideal
system of counting at the present time  the Decimal system.
The evolution of the Zero or Cipher: how it originated. Its
powerful aid: it imports infinity into the calculations of the human
mind.
The reasons for the adoption of the numbers 3  5  7 as elements of
our symbolism, explained: 3 and 5 were adopted because Nature
itself suggested them of mystic power. The number 7 is par
excellence the Masonic number; its meaning is found by observing
that it combines 3 and 4, thus 3 + 4 = 7. A review of the ceremonies
and of the other matter contained in our Masonic Ritual will show
that our ancient Brethren did not choose and of their symbolic
numbers arbitrarily or at random.
Some reflections on the hidden mystery of the summum
numerorum, i.e., the composite 15. Its internal harmonies
expounded and illustrated by the magic square and otherwise.
The place assigned to this number 15, in the Masonic Ritual, an
interpretation of the allegories –
(a) The 30 F.C.'s of the traditional history.
(b) The three figures 5  5  5 on the Tracing Board of the M.M.,
which are found to express an idea embodied in various ancient
symbols, all of which agree with our story about the 30 F.C.'s
The sacred seal of the G.G.O.T.U. arithmetically explained.
The cabalistic significance of the Hebrew letter-numeral YOD
=X.

--- Sayfa 7 ---
Some considerations on the Divine Name JAH in its relation to
the preceding facts.
Didactic characters of the three elements 3  5  7 according to the
actual statement of the Ritual.
Some remarks on the Metrology of the Craft.
Measures mentioned in the course of the ceremonies
(a) The inch; (b) the foot; (c) the handbreadth; (d) the cubit; (e) the
cable's length.
The symbolism of the cable according to its construction.
The dimensions of our last resting place; 3 feet wide, 6 feet long, 5
feet deep or more. (see appendix one.)

--- Sayfa 9 ---
By F. de P. Castells
hat we familiarly call Arithmetic has been, historically,
one of the most potent factors in the development of the
Whuman mind; and as it is one of the Liberal Arts and
Sciences on which Freemasonry has been founded, the stuffy of it
should help us to understand some of the ideas underlying the Ritual
of the Craft. The Architect, the Geometrician, and every Mason,
whether operative or free and speculative, are absolutely dependent
on the Science of Numbers.
Long ago Pythagoras made his whole system of philosophy rest
on the conception of numbers as regulating the relations of all
things; and on this account he may be regarded as the philosopher of
numbers. Philolaus, the earliest exponent of his teaching, put it in a
nutshell, thus: “Number is the principle order, the principle on
which the cosmos, or ordered world exists.” When 500 years ago,
King Henry VI made inquiry concerning Freemasonry, he was told
this: “It is the knowledge of nature and the power of its various
operations, particularly the skill of reckoning, of weights and mea-
sures, or constructing dwellings and buildings of all kinds, and the
truer meaner of forming all things for the use of man.” And when he
asked: “What do Masons conceal and hide?” his informer mentioned
among other things: “The way of obtaining the faculty of ABRAC,”
which is, it seems, just the sort of Arithmetic of which I am to speak to
you in this lecture.  Having regard to these facts we are justified, I
think, in expecting that any numbers, quantities, and measurements
mentioned in the Ritual must have a hidden significance. And,
indeed, I am of the opinion that in the Ritual there is nothing arbi-
trary, superfluous or meaningless.
I am not aware that anyone has attempted to explain how the Art
of Counting was evolved; but having travelled extensively and gained
some knowledge of the ways of primitive races, I may venture to give
you some of my own thoughts on the subject. At the dawn of civiliza-
tion there seem to have been tribes counting “by threes” and tribes
counting “by fives.” The trinal system must have been based on the
intuitional conception which men had by nature of things and

--- Sayfa 10 ---
persons placed in three relative positions thus: --
I  – Thou –  He.
This –  That –  The other.
One  – Two –  Three.
But the quinary system was based on the five fingers of the hand,
whence the name of digits still given to any integer under 10, a word
which in Latin means “fingers.” As an illustration of the two systems
let me take you on a journey Westwards, to the West Indies, and then
afterwards to the mainland, Central America. The Caribbean people
who dwell around the Bay of Honduras have only three indigenous
words wherewith to express numerical values, viz., Aba, Biama,
Urua,  meaning 1  2  3. At present they count as we do, because they
have learned the other numerals from the French missionaries who
Christianized them; but when Columbus discovered the West Indies
those three words, Aba, Biama, Urua were all the numerals they had.
Then, if we quit the shores of the Bay of Honduras and travel inland
into the interior of Central America  we shall find that all the aborigi-
nal tribes in that region follow the other system of counting, using
their fingers and their toes in the operation, their name for 20 being
Hu-winak, which means “one man,” because that number is the sum
total of the fingers and toes on the human body.
The crude system of the ancient Caribs may appear to us hope-
lessly inadequate for any practical man of the present time; but of
course the Caribs had ways of extending their calculations beyond
three, saying for instance “twice two” for four; “tow and three” for
five; “twice three” for six;  “three times three” for nine; and if they
had learned the use of markers for this high number, they would be
able to count up to at least “three times nine,,” which yields 27, a sort
of grand and Omnific number. It was through this method of count-
ing among primitive men that when in course of time someone was
able to devise a system of expressing numbers as figures, each of the
nine digits came to be expressed by a separate character as is the case
in our Arithmetic at the present day: 1  2  3  4  5  6  7 -8 -9.
The Greek imagination pictured Nine Goddesses, the Muses,
who were said to be the daughters of Zeus and Mnemosune, that is,
“God and the Memory,” each of them presiding over one of their
“Nine Liberal Arts.” And in the Ancient Scottish Rite we find a Ninth
Degree, in which the brethren are styled “Elected Knights of Nine.”
Here, incidentally, I may call you attention to a curious property of
“the Mysterious Nine,” which is that, whenever we add together the
figures by which we express any of its multiples we always get either

--- Sayfa 11 ---
another nine or some lesser products resolvable to the same number.
For example:  2 X 9 = 18; add 1 + 8 and you get 9; 4 X 9 = 36; add 3 + 6
= 9; 11 X 9 = ; 99; 12 X 9 = 108; and so on.
The tribes that counted by threes and those that counted by fives
developed their genius independently of each other; but we should
not imagine that there ever was any race of men completely detached
from the rest of the world or that owed nothing to the other races.
There always was more or less inter-tribal commerce, and by that
means men must have learned much from one another. For
instance, in the barter of produce or merchandise, the Caribs, who
always counted by threes, must have observed how easy it was to
express the idea of five by showing “one hand” with extended fingers;
ten by showing “both hands”; fifteen by presenting “two hands and
one foot”; twenty by calling out “one man.” And having gone so far,
they would see how easy it was to express forty by saying “two men,”
and sixty by saying “three men.” May we not assume that it was in
this way that the ancient Babylonians in Central Asia came to adopt
their own sexagesimal system, using the number 60 (or “three times
twenty”) in the same way as we use the 100? Then, too, by the
exchange of produce, many must have found that, however dissimi-
lar the two methods of counting may have appeared, they could
easily be harmonized. Imagine for a moment, two groups of men
engaged in arranging what they have brought for barter; one group
count “two hands” and lay down ten articles  eggs, melons, tubers,
fowls, or as the case might be; but the other group counting by threes,
lay down the wares they offer in piles of three, and then, for every
complete tale of “three times three,” another article is “thrown in.”
This extra something is placed either in front or by the side of the
piles; and while to one party it helps to show at a glance the quantity
of the goods involved in the transaction, to the other party it is an
indispensable item for it turns the tale of nine into a full decade,
completing the “two hands,” 9 + 1 = 10. It must have been in this way,
through the intercourse of tribe and tribe, that the highly useful
decimal marker came to be adopted; and then at length, somewhere,
somehow, the use of this marker would also suggest the cipher of our
arithmetical notation, the invention of which was needed for a great
achievement, for, although the cipher when it stands by itself is but
an empty symbol, when conjoined with any of the nine digits, may
mean ten, hundreds, thousands of millions. The wonderful cipher or
zero (however it may have originated) has led men to a great advance
in the art of calculation. We may still call it nought, but it would be
more appropriate to call it all, seeing that it imports infinity into our
arithmetical operations.  Our way of expressing the idea of TEN is

--- Sayfa 12 ---
10, that is, a unit plus the decimal marker; and this unit signifies that
on reaching ten we have begun a new series, v. gr. 9 + 1. to the deci-
mal marker we have given the form of a circle, and this is quite
fitting, too, for the circle is the emblem of eternity and infinity. I have
illustrated the potentiality of the nine numerals when brought into
combination with this circle in another of my diagrams, which shows
the triple trine within the all-encircling orb. (See Appendix two.)
What I have said thus far, explains the rise of two of our symbolic
numbers, 3 and 5. But now, what about the number 7? This is a
distinctively Masonic numeral, the mystic significance of which goes
far deeper than that of the other two. It is a combination of 4 and 3,
the square and the triangle, as we may see in the Ceremony of
Raising by the steps which the candidate takes when advancing to
the East, the first four describing a square in the c… of the L…, and
the next three bringing him up to the Pedestal on which is the
Volume of the Sacred Law. Beneath the ground so squared there is a
yawning grave; but the candidate is a living being and his steps are
emblematic at once of human life and of the four quarters of the
globe. And as the last three steps indicate a triangle, which is symbol-
ical of the G.A.O.T.U.. the two numbers 4 and 3, when conjoined or
combined, suggest the thought of “God” brought into relations with
his creatures and dominating human life.” I might enlarge on this,
but it would lead me beyond the limits of our subject.
Having explained the origin of the three symbolic numbers 3  5 7,
we may now make a rapid review of the Ritual and see the function
which each of them is made to discharge; and in this we ought to
begin with the first, that is, number 3, which is recurring constantly
in connection with (I.) our organization, (II.) the appointment of the
Lodge, (III.) the traditional history, and (IV.) the actual mysteries or
secret ritual acts.
In our organization:
Our Order stands on three grand principles, which are “Broth-
erly Love, Relief and Truth.”
There are three degrees, each degree with its respective signs,
tokens and word.
There are three principal, and three assistant, officers, the three
principal ones occupying three different quarters of the globe, E., S.
and W.
The distinguishing characteristics of a good freemason are three:
Virtue, Honor and Mercy.
There are three main lines of duty: to God, to our neighbor, and

--- Sayfa 13 ---
to ourselves; three sacred dictates: of truth, honor, and of virtue;
three foremost excellences of character: secrecy, fidelity and obedi-
ence; three lowest staves in the mystic ladder, which are said to be
emblematic of the three graces, Faith, Hope and Charity; also there
are :the three most celebrated orders of architecture, the Ionic, the
Doric, and the Corinthian.”
In the appointment of the Lodge:
There are three sets of tools for each degree, that is, a different set
of three tools for each one of the three classes of workmen.
There are three Masonic reasons why the Lodge should be
situated East and West.
The interior of a Freemason's Lodge is composed of Ornaments
Furniture and Jewels”; the Ornaments are three in number, viz. the
Mosaic Pavement, the Blazing Star, and the Indented or Tessellated
Border; the Furniture, too, comprises three articles, which are the
Volume of the Sacred Law, the Square and the Compasses; while the
Jewels are six, three moveable and three immovable.
Similarly the Master Mason's Lodge is said to be distinguished
by three Ornaments; the Porch, the Dormer and the Square
Pavement.
The emblems of mortality are three: the coffin, the skull and the
cross-bones.
There are (we are told) three pillars supporting the Lodge:
Wisdom, Strength and Beauty: there are also three greater lights and
three lesser ones.
In the traditional history:
The first Lodge is said to have been consecrated with three grand
offerings.
The chapiters of the pillars, B. and J., are described as enriched
with three varieties of ornamentation, viz., network, lily work and
pomegranates; and these are said to symbolize Unity, Peace and
Plenty.
The Entered Apprentices employed in King Solomon's Temple
received a weekly allowance of Corn, Wine and Oil, which may be
said to answer to what the present day laborer still regards as three
necessities of life: Bread, Beer and Butter.
At the time of the great Conspiracy there were but three men who
possessed the secrets of the Master Mason.
There were “three Grand Masters who bore sway at the building

--- Sayfa 14 ---
of the first Temple of Jerusalem.”
The secrets of the Master could only be imparted with the con-
sent and by the joint action of three.
The trusty Fellowcrafts divided themselves into three
Companies or Lodges.
Our Master, H.A., was slain with three blows, struck by three
different men, on three parts of the head, with three different tools,
at three points of exit of King Solomon's Temple, situated on the S.,
N. and E. sides.
In the mysteries:
The Lodge opens and closes with three knocks and every candi-
date gains admission by three knocks, given differently at each
Degree.
In every Degree the candidate who seeks the privileges corre-
sponding to it by a three-fold plea: (I) by the help of God, being free
and of good report; or (2) by the help of God and the assistance of the
square and the benefit of the password; or (3) by the help of God, the
united aid of the square and compasses, as well as the benefit of the
password.
On opening the Lodge the W.M. prays for three things: Order,
Peace and Harmony.
Every Initiate is made to strike the right sh… of the J. and S.W.'s
with three knocks; he is made to advance to the pedestal by three
steps; he has to answer three searching questions of the W.M.; he is
told of the three dangers; the three reasons for soliciting his charity;
the three aspects of his character, which are, “as a citizen of the
world, and individual, and a Freemason.”; also of the threefold way
of dividing the 24 hours of the day, viz., some for “prayer to Almighty
God,” some for “labor and refreshment,” and some for “serving a
friend or brother.”
In the Second Degree the sign is of a threefold nature.
In order to raise the candidate to the sublime degree of a Master
Mason, three methods are tried; only the third can succeed.
In closing the Fellowcraft Lodge, the dismissal formula, recited
by the J.W. alone, is of a threefold nature.
In the ordinary way of closing the Lodge, according to ancient
custom, all the Brethren present unite in a threefold sign of F.F.F.
The Master Mason, when raised, is asked to make his Solemn
Obligation binding for as long as he shall live by sealing it with his
lips three times on the Volume of the Sacred Law.
We frequently have a threefold perambulation of the Lodge.

--- Sayfa 15 ---
The sign of g… and d… in Scotland, Ireland and the U.S.A. is
given with a threefold movement of the hands accompanied with the
threefold exclamation of “O.L. my G., etc.”
This list does not exhaust all the references to the symbolic 3
occurring in the Ritual, but it should suffice to show the important
part that number plays in it.
We may now pass on to consider the next number, 5.
Three rule a Lodge, but five hold it, which means that there
cannot be a lodge with less than five members.
The Fellowcraft's of the traditional history form themselves into
three Companies, that is three Lodges of five members.
When the Entered Apprentice comes into a Fellowcraft Lodge, in
order to be “passed,” he is taught to advance to the East by five steps.
We acknowledge five Orders of Architecture.
The Blazing Star is one of five points.
There are five secret words, viz., those distinctive of the three
degrees and the two passwords.
There are five points of fellowship for us all, and these are said to
correspond in number to the five signs of the Third Degree.
The grave of our Grand Master was five or more feet deep.
The chapiters on the pillars at the porchway or entrance of King
Solomon's Temple were five cubits high.
And now as regards the number 7:
Seven is the number by which the Lodge is made perfect.
In every properly constituted Lodge there are seven officers, that
is, including the Tyler and Outer Guard.
The first Tracing Board exhibits “seven stars, which have an
allusion to as many regular made masons.”
In the ceremony of Raising, the method of advancing is by seven
steps.
We are told that King Solomon's Temple was “seven years and
upwards in building.”
The height of B. and J. was 17 ½ cubits, which equals 7 + 7 +3 ½,
or the two pillars conjointly 35 cubits, which equals 5 times 7.
The qualifications required from the would-be Master Mason
are given thus: (1) Just, (2) Upright, (3) Free, (4) Men, (5) of Mature
Age, (6) Sound Judgment, and (7) Strict Morals.
The qualification of “Mature Age” is explained as meaning “the
full age of 21 years,” which equals 3 times 7.
Finally there are “seven Liberal Arts and Sciences” on which
Freemasonry has been founded, viz., Grammar, rhetoric, Logic,

--- Sayfa 16 ---
Arithmetic, Geometry, Music and Astronomy.”
But now, after this rapid survey of the Ritual, we shall find that
these symbolic numbers, 3  5  7, important as they appear, are but
fractions of what may be called the summum numerorum, thus 3 + 5
+ 7 = 15. I hope to throw some new light on the mystic significance of
this number; but first of all, I beg leave to call your attention to its
internal harmonies. It has been said that “there is divinity in odd
numbers”; and the number 15 is remarkable in many ways:
It combines the first two of our symbolic numbers, for 3 x 5 = 15;
and strangely enough the two numbers 3 and 5 joined together
represent thirty-five, which equals 5 x 7, the other two symbolic
numbers. Moreover, if we multiply the three numbers 3 x 5 x 7, the
result is 105, their L.C.M., which also equals 7 x 15, and is practically
the same number 15, with the nought inserted between the figures.
Chronologically, a period of fifteen days is that which is enclosed
within three Sabbaths. Many of the ancient nations held their great
th
Festivals on the 15 day of a month; and as they usually followed the
lunar year, the moon must at that time Have been full.
In Greece, the Ceremonies of Initiation into the Eleusinian
th
Mysteries (both in the Autumn and in the Spring) began on the 15
day of the month, and lasted nine days. (Note these nine days, which
equal “three times three.”)
In Music the number 15 represents two complete scales, that is,
the notes comprised between three C's.
As 5 stands for “one hand,” fifteen equals “three hands”; and
there is somewhere a Chapter which has for its distinctive Badge a
Triangle within which we see two hands stretched out from the sides
and grasping each other, while a third hand descending from the
apex holds up both of them. Although the interpretation of this
symbol belongs to the Royal Arch, we may all read a beautiful
thought into it, that of fraternal union on earth, maintained under
the protection of the Most High.
In the trinal system of primitive man, the numbers 6 and 9,
which are the first trine doubled and trebled, were considered round
numbers, and adding them together we get 6 + 9 = 15.
Then, too, the number 15 combines the two leading terms of the
decimal system, 10 + 5; which reminds us of the fact that the decimal
system, now acknowledged to be the most perfect system of
Arithmetic, is but the early method of counting by fives, that is to say,
by the fingers of the hand. There really is nothing new under the sun.
But suppose we take the first five digits as representing a pro-
gressive arithmetical series, and that we add them up, 1+2+3+4+5,

--- Sayfa 17 ---
again the total will be 15. and if we add up all the
nine digits in the same way, we then bring the total
to 45, which equals 3 times 15, and is half the
number of the square 45 + 45 = 90. This I have
illustrated by a diagram (right) which has a pile of
bricks arranged in that same progressive order.
Look for a moment at this magic
square. In it, the nine digits are arranged in
three rows, “three times three,: and
however the figures may be added up,
vertically, horizontally, or diagonally, the
sum of every three is always the same, viz.,
15. The key to the various operations
possible is to be found in the symbols from
which we obtain the Masonic Alphabet. #
X No other arrangements of the numbers
will ever yield and other such harmony.
Please observe that the central column consists of  the symbolic 3  5
7; the first at the bottom, 5 in the centre, 7 above; 5 stands between 1
and 9, the unit which is the root of all number and 9 the highest digit;
these two together complete the decade.
My object in calling your attention to these facts is to show that
the use of the number 15 in our Masonic symbolism is not arbitrary.
It is the best our ancient could have chosen to convey the idea of
fullness or completeness. Let us see, therefore, how it is that the
number comes into the Ritual.
I have said before that we open and close the Lodge with three
knocks; but it would be equally correct to say that we open and close
with 15 knocks, because the knocks prescribed by the Ritual are
struck successively by the Worshipful Master, The Senior and Junior
Wardens, and by both the Inner and Outer Guards, five officers in all
and 5 times 3 make 15.
Then we know how the candidate advances to the place of light
by stages which are measured by a fixed number of steps: The
Entered Apprentice takes 3; the Fellowcraft 5; the Master Mason 7.
Add up all these and you have 15 as the total. This advancing order in
the steps of each degree is foreshadowed by the Entered Apprentice
at his initiation, for in his case the steps are of varying length, the
second of a little longer than the first, and the third a little longer
than the second, as expressed by the numerical proportion of 3  5  7.
In the explanation of the Second Tracing Board we read that our
ancient brethren “passed up the winding staircase, consisting of 3-5-
7 or more steps”; and these correspond with the steps taken by our

--- Sayfa 18 ---
candidates. And it should be observed that the phrase “or more
steps” does not imply any uncertainty as to the height of the stair-
case; it is merely a necessary reservation, the margin allowed for the
requirement of the higher degrees.
In the traditional history of the Third Degree we hear of a con-
spiracy organized by “15 Fellowcrafts.” They were “of that superior
class appointed to preside over the rest,” which means the order now
denominated Master Masons. Out of the fifteen, twelve recanted but
three proved to be “of a determined and atrocious character,” and
were responsible for a great tragedy. As against these rebellious
Fellowcrafts, there are mentioned another 15, who went to search for
our Master, Hiram Abif; and we read that when these fifteen “trusty
Fellowcrafts” were commissioned by King Solomon for their work,
they divided themselves into three Companies, which means of
course three Fellowcraft Lodges of five members each. One
Company sought and found not; one Company made the discovery;
and the third Company brought the evildoers to judgment. What
then are we to think of the 30 Fellowcrafts? In my opinion they are
emblematic of the struggle which is ever going on in the world
between antagonistic forces with which every human being is more
or less acquainted; the evil being ever envious of the good; the
ambitious seeking to achieve success by deceit and rapacity, and in
extreme cases by the most heinous crimes; the selfish and greedy
thwarting and defeating the very ideals they profess to admire; all
this in the hope of obtaining wealth, position or power. And
Freemasonry steps in and counsels to substitute virtue, industry and
perseverance for dishonesty, covetousness and violence, and to aim
at the happiness of the fraternity. We may see the counterpart of this
in the two intersected triangles shown on the Second Degree Tracing
Board; one of the triangles is black and the other
white, and the two are united by the letter G.
inscribed in the common centre. I believe
that the tragedy in the forefront of the
Volume of the Sacred Law  Cain
slaying his brother Abel  was intended
to illustrate the same conception of
life which is inculcated by
Freemasonry. And the Chinese have
from time immemorial represented
the struggle which is ever going on; by
the symbol they call Yin Yang, to be seen
in one of the diagrams used to illustrate this
lecture (right).

--- Sayfa 19 ---
In the Tracing Board of the Master
Mason there is another memorial of
the death of our Master Hiram Abif;
it takes the form of three fives
arranged triangularly thus.
They suggest an equilateral
triangle, each 5 representing one
side; but we know that histori-
cally they correspond to the three
methods tried for the purpose of
bringing back to life the Ideal
Man, our Master, Hiram Abif. The
Junior Warden was the first to
endeavor it, trying the g. of the E.A.,
which proved a slip; then the Senior
Warden tried the G. of the F.C.,
which also proved ineffective; and
then the W.M. applied the third
method, which was successful. The
three fives therefore are the three
hands with fifteen fingers in all. There
has been confusion over this, and some
Rituals have been put forth that give
the Fellowcrafts of the traditional
history as twelve in number instead of
fifteen. It seems to have arisen from
certain distinctions being overlooked of
forgotten. Let us remember that while
the tradition mentions two Companies of
15 Fellowcrafts, in each case, they are
divided into 12 + 3; because one three of
the rebellious Fellowcrafts are held
responsible for the murder of our Master, and likewise his restora-
tion to life is attributed to the action of three of the trusty
Fellowcrafts. Three hands struck the fatal blows and three hands
were exerted in raising the dead body; on this account both death
and life may be expressed by three fives, or three hands.
In closing the Fellowcraft Lodge, the Wardens report the discov-
ery of “ a sacred symbol” said to be situated “in the centre of the
building.” And this may be explained by what we read elsewhere:
“When our ancient brethren were in the Middle Chamber of the
Temple, their attention was peculiarly drawn to certain Hebrew
characters, which are here depicted by a letter G., denoting God, the

--- Sayfa 20 ---
G.G.O.T.U., to whom we all must submit and whom we ought
humbly to adore.” According to this, the cryptic G. is but our modern
substitute for the Hebrew Characters depicted in the same Tracing
Board just over the door at the top of the staircase,         . These
characters are now commonly read Jehovah; but the name was
always considered too sacred to be pronounced by human lips; and
the Jews themselves in order not to write it have frequently
expressed it with only the initial    , the letter Yod. In speaking of this,
however it is necessary to bear in mind that the characters of the
Hebrew alphabet were numbers as well as letters, that is, they could
be made to stand alternatively for a quantity or a sound. Here are the
first ten of them, with their corresponding numerical value: –
We see then, that the letter Yod   , the initial of the name Jehovah,
when used numerically, represented the number 10, a fact which has
afforded ground for much speculation. As previously shown, the
Yod, standing for 10, may be regarded as emblematic of the perfect
system of arithmetic. Some Jewish Rabbis (known as “The
Cabalists”) pointed out that the Divine name in Hebrew consists of
four letters (hence called the TETRAGRAMMATON or Four
Lettered Name”), and by taking 1-2-3-4 as a series they reached a
total of ten, which agreed with the face value of the initial. In this the
Cabalists came in touch with Pythagoras and his “Holy Quaternion”
in Greek Tetaktys), for Pythagoras held that Four  the first square
number  was the potential decade, and it stood for the cosmic
elements “fire, air, earth and water.” Sometimes the four Hebrew
letters were arranged thus: -

--- Sayfa 21 ---
When combined the numerical value of the ten characters gave a
total of 72, which the Jews regarded as an important symbolic
number. (See Appendix three.) .) And sometimes in seeking to
abbreviate the incommunicable Name of God they doubled or
trebled the initial Yod, thus: –
In each of these cases the result is a distinct triangle, but you may
see that while the first is pointing down, the second is pointing up;
and numerically, while the two Yods equal 20, the three equal 30.
There is one more way of abbreviating the Ineffable Name, one
which did not originate with the Cabalists, but is found in actual use
in the Psalms, and may therefore be regarded as authorized by the
Volume of the Sacred Law; I mean that which consists in writing the
first two letters of the Name,      . (See Psalm lxviii. 4). Read phoneti-
cally they spell Yah or Jah; but arithmetically they should represent
the number 15, that is 10 + 5. The Jews used to express the numbers
from ten to twenty by writing 10 + 1, 10 + 2, 10 + 3, 10 + 4, etc.; but
when they came to 15, they found that the two characters required
were associated with the ineffable Name of God, and so they varied
the order, writing, instead of 10 + 5, 9 + 6.
We have seen that in our Masonic symbolism, the number 15 has
been made to embody the idea of fullness or totality; and now if we
look again into the Ritual we may find a further illustration of this
idea. For, in the explanation of the second Tracing Board, the
Worshipful Master refers to the practical significance of the sym-
bolic numbers 3  5  7, and reminds us that a Lodge is ruled by 3, held
or organized by 5, and made perfect by 7. In this way those symbolic
numbers suggest three leading ideas, viz., Government,
Organization, and Perfect Development. And as the number 15 is
reached by combining the three numbers, 3 + 5 + 7 = 15, we may
regard this sum as comprehending all those ideas, and as being a
fitting emblem of the Grand Ideal of Freemasonry. (See Appendix
four.) In the Ancient Scottish Rite the members of the Tenth Degree
are called “Illustrious Knights of Fifteen” as having attained to the

--- Sayfa 22 ---
fullness of this ideal.
I have undertaken to say something of the Metrology of the Craft,
and I proceed to do so because it is a subject that stands closely allied
with our arithmetic, but time compels me to be brief. The length
measures mentioned in the Ritual are five: the two modern ones, the
inch and the foot; the two ancient ones, the handbreadth and the
cubit; and one which is very ancient although not a familiar one, viz.,
the cable's length.
The word INCH comes from the Latin uncia,  meaning “one
twelfth part” of anything; and in this connection it indicates a twelfth
part of a man's FOOT, which was early adopted as a length measure,
being of course standardized everywhere. But in the Ritual, the 24-
inch gauge is used as emblematic of time. When the Worshipful
Master gives the Entered Apprentice his tools, he says that the 24-
inch gauge represents the 24 hours of the day, and it may be used in
two ways: to graduate his task and to divide each passing day so as to
allow of his attending to everything: (i) his devotions, (2) his regular
employment, and (3) the discharge of his social obligations.
As the fingers of the hand have played an important part in the
development of the art of counting, so, too, they supplied the basis
for the art of mensuration all over the East; all  the high metrical
values consisting of so many palms or handbreadths, which like the
foot, had to be standardized. In the explanation of the second
Tracing Board we learn that the outer rim of the twin pillars of the
porchway of king Solomon's Temple was “a HANDBREADTH in
st
thickness.” This statement agrees with the 1 Book of Kings (vi. 15).
Elsewhere (Jeremiah lii. 21) we read that it was “four fingers” thick;
and so I shall point out that in this there is no real contradiction,
because the “handbreadth” of the Ritual is to be understood as being,
not the breadth of the open or extended hand, but that of the back of
a clenched hand, in which only four fingers are seen.
Theoretically, the CUBIT was the length of the forearm from the
elbow to the tip of the middle finger; but unfortunately as each
nation adopted a different standard, we find a great deal of variety of
cubits; indeed, some nations had two or three sorts of cubits accord-
ing to the objects that had to be measured. This may explain the
confusion and the controversy that there has been as to the actual
length of the cubit employed in designing King Solomon's Temple.
In Egypt, there were two different cubits, the short, which was one of
six, and the royal, which was one of seven palms of handbreadths. In
Babylonia there were three measurements known by that name: one
of three palms, used in measuring fine decorative work and gold
ornaments; one of four palms, which was used ordinarily for all

--- Sayfa 23 ---
masonry work; and one of five palms, which was used in measuring
land-spaces. By the recovery of two scales of linear measurements
engraved on the statues of Gudea, nearly 5,000 years old, we have
found that these three cubits equaled 10.8, 14.4 and 18.0 inches
respectively. Some archeologists argue that both King Solomon's
Temple and in the Tabernacle, all three cubits of ancient Babylonia
were used. On this calculation the thickness of the pillars would be
equivalent to 3.6 inches of our present-day measure, although even
now we cannot be quite certain.
Finally about the CABLE'S LENGTH. When this expression is
now used by sailors, they mean to indicate a distance of about one
hundred fathoms, or the tenth part of a nautical mile. But as used in
the Ritual, “at least a cable's length from the shore,” it means a
distance equal to the length of a coil of cable, which has always been
understood to be 120 fathoms, that is to say, 720 feet. The idea is
that, being buried in the sands at the bottom of the sea at that dis-
tance from low-water mark, as a minimum, the remains of a traitor
might be considered to be definitely consigned to everlasting dis-
grace, and therefore as having absolutely perished, “ no trace or
remembrance: being any longer conceivable. This cable's length
must not be confused with “the length of my cable tow” mentioned in
another part of the Ritual, this latter being a figure of speech
intended to convey the idea of one's ability to execute an acknowl-
edged obligation, the power to fulfill one's own  responsibilities in
life. The introduction of the “cable” into the ceremonies may appear
strange, but, apart from other considerations, if we only bear in mind
the way the cable has been manufactured from time immemorial, we
shall recognize that it is a very suitable emblem for the threefold cord
which is not easily broken, of brotherly love, relief and truth. In a
book compiled nearly one hundred years ago there is a description of
it: “Every cable, of whatsoever thickness it be, is composed of three
strands; every strand of three ropes; and every rope of three twists;
the twist is made of more or less threads according as the cable is to
be thicker or thinner.”
The Ritual anticipates that after this life every Master Mason
shall be “decently interred”; but the penalty of our Obligation in the
Third Degree involves the very opposite of that idea. I shall therefore
close this lecture with a few words on the dimensions of the grave of
our Master Hiram Abif, and their significance. I have spoken of
fathoms, saying that a “cable's length” equals 120 fathoms; but the
fathom is not named in the Ritual. It may be defined as “the measure
of a man's embrace,” fixed for all practical purposes at six feet; and
therefore, although not expressly named, it is the length of the grave

--- Sayfa 24 ---
which the trusty Fellowcrafts of our traditional history are said to
have prepared. It was “from the centre 3 feet East and 3 feet West.”
(See Appendix One.) This is an unusual form of expression, but we
may account for it by observing that the navel is regarded as lying in
the centre. Remember where the Master Mason rests his squared
hand when he stands to order. The navel is our link with the past; and
inasmuch as by being buried the body returns to the bosom of our
common Mother, the old link is very properly viewed as the central
point in the grave. The width of the grave “between North and South”
was 3 feet. These dimensions are still the ordinary minimum dimen-
sions of an adult's grave at the present time; but in the ritual they are
given for a practical purpose, being emblematic. As the area was one
of 18 square feet, 6 x 3 = 18 (nine to the East and nine to the West);
and as the depth was a minimum of 5 feet, the total capacity of the
grave was of 90 cubic feet, which is the number by which we define
the Square  “ an angle of 90 degrees.” The cubic measurement of the
grave, therefore, is but another way of representing the Square. By
being laid under the sod, back to the bosom of Mother Earth, we
come into the closest possible fellowship, one with another, and the
depth of 5 feet harmonizes with our five points of fellowship. In
assigning such dimensions to the grave of our Master, Hiram Abif,
therefore, the Ritual may be said to bring our symbolism into the
reign of death; and we, by endorsing and adopting its provisions, are
testifying to the fact that the bond which unites Master Masons in
this life is not broken when we are let down into the tomb of trans-
gression. Having ordered our life according to the Square, we take
that Sign with us into the grave and we may rest assured that when
we finally rise from the last resting place, the same old sign will
procure our admission into the Grand Lodge above where the
world's great Architect lives and reigns forever.

--- Sayfa 25 ---
rom the ritual referred to by the author we find the following
in reference to the grave of referred to in the Tracing Board:
F
“Our Grand Master, Hiram Abif, was ordered to be interred
as near the sanctum sanctorum as the Israelitish laws
would permit, in a grave from the center three feet east,
three feet west, three feet between north and south, and five
feet or more perpendicular.”
The following illustration is provided to add further light to the
author's comments on the size of the grave.
Metrological Symbolism of the Grave

--- Sayfa 26 ---
have spoken of what I observed among the Aborigines of Central
America. In the South Sea Islands I discovered other facts which
corroborate my views on the subject. In several of the Malay-
I
Polynesian languages the words used for ten are modified forms of
some terms alluding to an action in which both hands are shown.
Thus, for instance, the word sangpoo, “ten” in Tagalog (Philippine
Islands) is a contraction of sangpolan, which means “the whole”; and
turo in the Pampango dialect means “the breadth of two hands.” Still
it was long ages after men had learned to count by tens that the
decimal system in its complete form as we have it now was evolved.
What is really wonderful about this system is not its having a set of
figures, from 1 to 9, but the fact that the figures are employed in such
a way that by the aid of the zero, their value changes according to
position. Take for example, 333 = 300, 30, 3.
When primitive men wanted to make a record of their count,
they would cut notches on a stick, and on reaching ten they would cut
a cross like the Roman X; or if they had been marking the units by
lines on any surface, after nine of these they would run another line
across them to indicate the completeness of a decade.
Our numerical figures are commonly said to be Arabic, because
they were introduced into Europe by the Arabs; but those people did
not invent them; indeed, in the time of Caliph Walid, A.D. 705-715,
they had as yet no signs of numeration. The Arabs obtained them
form India, where they had been in use for one thousand years before
the Hegira, as is evidenced by the Nana Ghat inscriptions, which
date from about 300 B.C. Presumably this method was suggested by
the use of an abacus or counting-board, having an upper row of nine
balls and a space beneath with one or more balls to indicate the tens,
the hundreds and the thousands. The system in vogue in Ancient
Egypt implies the existence of some such mechanical aid; for in the
hieroglyphic inscriptions we find that the digits are expressed by
plain strokes, nine being written thus, ||| ||| ||| (“three times three”
once more), ten by a sort of inverted u, thus    , which is repeated as
required up to 90, and the hundreds by another character.
Further Thoughts on the Evolution of Counting

--- Sayfa 27 ---
As to the origin of the zero it has always puzzled investigators,
but I am able to throw some light on it. Every authority I have
consulted derives the word zero from the Arabic sifr, “empty,”
through the Latin zephirus.  The Arabic sifr has indeed so come to us
in the form of Cipher; but I venture to say that the zero is a distinct
word derived from the Hebrew oser, osarah, which means “ten.” The
initial letter ain in the modern Hebrew script takes this form, AIN
GOES HERE, but in ancient times, as we may see in the Moabite
inscriptions of about 900 B.C., it took the form of a ring, whence the
name ain, still given to the letter, which means, “an eye.”

--- Sayfa 28 ---
ome of the Rabbis have taught that there are 72 angels or
principalities who are the bearers of the “preeminent Name,”
the Shem Ha-Meforash, which was arranged as shown below.
S
These 72 angels are supposed to be alluded to in Exodus xiv.
19,20,21, three verses which in Hebrew consist of seventy-two letters
each.
Exodus 14: 19  21
19And the angel of God, which went before the camp of Israel,
removed and went behind them; and the pillar of the cloud went
from before their face, and stood behind them:
20And it came between the camp of the Egyptians and the camp of
Israel; and it was a cloud and darkness to them, but it gave light by
night to these: so that the one came not near the other all the night.
21And Moses stretched out his hand over the sea; and the LORD
caused the sea to go back by a strong east wind all that night, and
made the sea dry land, and the waters were divided.
Some Thoughts on the Shem Ha-Meforash

--- Sayfa 29 ---
n the measurements of King
Solomon's Temple we
constantly find multiples of
I
the number 15. Here are some
conspicuous instances: -
The common interior height
of the Holy Place up to the centre
of the attic was 30 cubits, that is,
twice 15.
The breadth of the porchway
or entrance was also 30 cubits.
The circumference of the
Molten Sea was 30 cubits.
The joint interior length of the Holy Place and the Sanctum
Sanctorum was 60 cubits, which is four times 15.
The exterior width of the facade was 60 cubits.
The total exterior length of the Sanctuary, including the Porch,
was 90 cubits, six times 15.
The total exterior height of the Porch, including the Middle
Chamber and the Third Chamber, was 120 cubits, which equals eight
times 15. (This is one-third of 360, the number of degrees into which
we divide the circle, being equal to 4 x 90, 12 x 30, 24 x 15.)
Between the Women's Court and the Court of Israel there were
fifteen steps, and we are told that the worshippers used to sing the
fifteen “Songs of Degrees” (Psalms cxx – cxxxiv.) while ascending
those steps.
Above all we should remember the 3-storied Chambers built for
the Priests upon whom devolved the care of King Solomon's Temple.
The tradition embodied in the Books of the Kings does not tell us how
many there were; but Ezekiel gives us the number as 30; and we
know that they were built on the three sides North, South and West.
This number agrees with our tradition as to the 15 trusty and 15
rebellious Fellowcrafts; also with the fact that when Samuel gave a
The Metrology of Solomon’s Temple

--- Sayfa 30 ---
st
Sacrificial Feast, he had 30 men to partake of it. Compare 1 Samuel
st
st
ix., 22; 1 Kings vi., 5-8; 1 Chronicles ix, 26; Ezekiel xli., 6.
st
1 Samuel 9: 22
22 Then Samuel brought Saul and his servant into the hall and seated
them at the head of those who were invited about thirty in number.
23 Samuel said to the cook, "Bring the piece of meat I gave you, the
one I told you to lay aside."
st
1 Kings 6: 5-8
5 Against the walls of the main hall and inner sanctuary he built a
structure around the building, in which there were side rooms.
6 The lowest floor was five cubits wide, the middle floor six cubits
and the third floor seven. He made offset ledges around the outside
of the temple so that nothing would be inserted into the temple
walls.
7 In building the temple, only blocks dressed at the quarry were
used, and no hammer, chisel or any other iron tool was heard at the
temple site while it was being built.
8 The entrance to the lowest floor was on the south side of the
temple; a stairway led up to the middle level and from there to the
9
third.  So he built the temple and completed it, roofing it with
10
beams and cedar planks.  And he built the side rooms all along the
temple. The height of each was five cubits, and they were attached
to the temple by beams of cedar.
st
1 Chronicles 9: 26
26 But the four principal gatekeepers, who were Levites, were
entrusted with the responsibility for the rooms and treasuries in the
house of God.
Ezekiel 41:6
6 The side rooms were on three levels, one above another, thirty on
each level. There were ledges all around the wall of the temple to
serve as supports for the side rooms, so that the supports were not
inserted into the wall of the temple.