--- Sayfa 1 ---
V I E W F R O M P R A C T I C E
Artificial intelligence and the fifth phase of political risk
management: An application to regulatory expropriation
Thomas A. Hemphill1
|
Keith J. Kelley2
1David M. French Distinguished Professor of
Strategy, Innovation and Public Policy, School
of Management, University of Michigan-Flint,
Flint, Michigan
2Associate Professor of International Business,
School of Management, University of
Michigan-Flint, Flint, Michigan
Correspondence
Thomas A. Hemphill, David M. French
Distinguished Professor of Strategy,
Innovation and Public Policy, School of
Management, University of Michigan-Flint,
2118 Riverfront Center, 303 East Kearsley
Street, Flint, MI 48502-1950.
Email: thomashe@umich.edu
Abstract
Using the context of regulatory expropriation, this article extends political risk man-
agement
theories,
forecasting
methodologies
(employing
artificial
intelligence,
machine learning, and data analytics), and human intelligence evaluation tools useful
for multinational enterprise executives in their planning and decision-making respon-
sibilities. The article identifies three key areas where artificial intelligence will specifi-
cally assist managers in analyzing and mitigating risks: (a) earlier identification of risks,
(b) precision in risk assessment, and (c) identification of unknown unknown risk corre-
lations. These three categories also represent how artificial intelligence and its appli-
cation to political risk assessment will evolve in the fifth phase of political risk
management, and why it is of particular relevance to risks such as regulatory expro-
priation. Using the example of an oil exploration joint venture between Russian TNK
and BP, and reflecting political and public policy indicators of regulatory expropria-
tion, this political risk management framework and its hypothetical development are
illustrated.
K E Y W O R D S
artificial intelligence, foreign direct investment, human intelligence, political risk management,
regulatory expropriation
1
|
INTRODUCTION
The term “expropriation” is defined as “the taking by a government of
privately owned assets, such as real estate, factories, farms, mines, or
oil refineries” (Schaffer, Agusti, Dhooge, & Earle, 2012, p. 24). “In
cases of direct expropriation, there is an open, deliberate and
unequivocal intent, as reflected in a formal law or decree or physical
act, to deprive the owner of his or her property through the transfer
of title or outright seizure” (United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, 2012, p. 7). Such government action may have a devas-
tating financial impact on multinational enterprises (MNEs) when this
“taking” results in a loss of invested capital without adequate com-
pensation (Nikiema, 2013).
For example, in Venezuela, the late President Hugo Chavez was a
fierce advocate of state control of strategic sectors, and beginning in
2007, he nationalized steel mills, agribusinesses, and the oil industry
(Wyss, 2017). In April 2017, the Venezuelan Judicial Authority seized
General Motors (GM) manufacturing facilities, and the company was
forced to write off the plant and recognize a $100 million charge
against profits (Oxford Analytica, 2018). While unfortunate for MNEs
such as GM, after nearly two decades of rhetoric and nationalist initia-
tives from the Venezuelan government, such potential outcomes
would certainly be predictable by international managers using even
the most basic of political risk assessment tools. However, while some
political risk leading to direct expropriation is easier to identify and
account for, other risks that are subtle with indirect outcomes are
more challenging to forecast.
As global markets, rules, and regulations have emerged, the risk
of direct expropriation has conceivably lessened, or possibly evolved
more recently into a specific subset of expropriation: “creeping”
expropriation, or “regulatory” expropriation (Newcombe, 2007). Creep-
ing expropriation is “the incremental encroachment on one or more of
DOI: 10.1002/tie.22222
Thunderbird Int. Bus. Rev. 2021;63:585–595.
wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/tie
© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.
585

--- Sayfa 2 ---
the ownership rights of a foreign investor that eventually destroys
(or nearly destroys) the value of his or her investment or deprives him
or her of control over the investment” (United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, 2012, p. 11). Such creeping expropriation
occurs when a host government imposes regulations that gradually limit
the exercise of private ownership rights by the foreign-owned business
(Schaffer et al., 2012). This regulatory expropriation, a subcategory of
indirect expropriation1 (Escarcena, 2014; Isakof, 2013), may subject for-
eign direct investment (FDI) to such things as: discriminatory taxes,
domestic government controls over management of the foreign-owned
firm, price controls, mandatory employment of nationals, cancellation
of government-issued business licenses, and restrictions on currency
convertibility (Schaffer et al., 2012), among others. While Rice and
Zegart (2018a, p.132) believe that “expropriating leaders are far less
common than they used to be,” it does not mean that this expropriation
is not being undertaken utilizing more subtle regulatory actions.
As MNE interest in emerging markets has dramatically increased
in the 21st century, host countries have learned, “that more value can
be extracted from foreign enterprises through the more subtle instru-
ment of regulatory control rather than outright seizures,” says George
Chifor (Henisz & Zeiner, 2010, p. 90). Today's MNE, operating under
the global rules established by the World Trade Organization, is more
likely to encounter regulatory expropriation that is subtle, indirect,
incremental, and thus more challenging to identify and manage effec-
tively than direct expropriation, a blunt, direct, and obvious action
perpetrated by national governments against foreign-owned compa-
nies in the 20th century. Consequently, as the current environment
brings forth a new era of political risk, it has also delivered an increas-
ingly sophisticated technology to help with a new phase of risk
assessment: artificial intelligence (AI).
Regulations that result in the de facto expropriation of property
deny an owner the ability to use or sell property, or otherwise dramat-
ically limit its use, therefore reducing its market value (OECD, 2018).
An example of regulatory expropriation occurred in 2010, when the
Arctic joint venture between Russian TNK2 and BP came under severe
Russian government regulatory pressure after the joint venture devel-
oped conflicts with national state-owned oil and gas giant Gazprom
over issues concerning pipeline access and development strategy
(Schaffer et al., 2012). In this case, Russian government regulators
insisted on a northerly route for the pipeline to pass other, smaller gas
fields that would otherwise be uneconomical to develop, and made
clear that Gazprom, and not the TNK-BP joint venture, would decide
when to build that pipeline (Kramer, 2010). In addition, the Russian
government later revoked other foreign MNE oil permits, citing envi-
ronmental regulatory concerns (Schaffer et al., 2012).
While regulatory expropriation is a recognized political risk by
MNEs and their stakeholders, the challenge for MNE executives is
recognizing when this government activity is actually occurring in a
host country—and if it is applied to all foreign MNEs or focused on
certain MNEs. For MNEs, regulatory expropriation affects several
aspects of FDI and executive decision-making and it needs recogni-
tion as an important ingredient of political risk assessment factored
into entry and exit of markets, and timing and mode of entry or exit.
In addition to state-of-the-art developments in the human intelligence
aspects of political risk assessment, in this paper we formally intro-
duce data analytics, machine learning, and AI, as integral to the next
phase in the evolution of political risk management.
Political risk management has largely undergone four phases of
incremental evolution (Jarvis, 2008; Jarvis & Griffiths, 2007) and, at
the start of the 21st century, there is potentially a departure from the
fourth phase. Here, despite sophisticated analytical tools and systems,
uncertainty may still be so hard to envision it cannot be reasonably
incorporated into probabilistic predictions and used in models
(Makridakis, Hogarth, & Gaba, 2009)—built with the cognitive limita-
tions of the humans governing them. Political risk management will
see an evolution toward AI where machines at first need human input
for crafting predictions, then make decisions on their own in the near
future, and eventually will not suffer from the limitations of human
intelligence in trying to incorporate uncertainty.
According to Rice and Zegart (2018a, p.132) “21st century
political risk is essentially the probability that a political action will
significantly affect their business—whether positively or negatively.
“They go beyond the usual locales—nation's capitals, military bar-
racks, and political party headquarters—as such political activities
are “almost anywhere—inside homes, on the streets, and in the
cloud, in chat rooms, dorm rooms, and bathrooms; in neighborhood
bars and summit sidebars (Rice & Zegart, 2018b, p. 7).” This is
where Rice and Zegart's broader concept of “political action” is
integral to effective political risk analysis. By tapping into these
“private” sources of real-time opinion, that is, “human intelligence”
acquiring, allows corporate social scientists to offer their nuanced
analysis of a possible competitive edge needed to effectively man-
age the possible impact of these global political actors in a complex
business environment.
Following this brief introduction to expropriation and regulatory
expropriation, this article will first, review the state of the field of polit-
ical risk analysis and management—with a focus on expropriation. Sec-
ond,
we
extend
political
risk
management
theories,
forecasting
methodologies, and evaluation tools to incorporate the vexing problem
of regulatory expropriation into a new strategic political risk framework
employing data analytics, machine learning, and AI, all useful for MNE
managers. Third, taking this proposed political risk management frame-
work, we explore its hypothetical development using the above-
mentioned venture between Russian TNK and BP reflecting political
and public policy indicators of regulatory expropriation. Finally, we dis-
cuss the importance of this fifth phase of political risk management,
and how it will provide heretofore unavailable benefits for MNE exec-
utives who need to assess nuanced threats and opportunities in the
global political economy.
2
|
POLITICAL RISK ANALYSIS AND
MANAGEMENT: STATE OF THE FIELD
Today, most businesses recognize that political actions and decisions
have major implications for commercial operations in the global
586
HEMPHILL AND KELLEY

--- Sayfa 3 ---
environment (Fagersten, 2015). For example, Oxford Analytica (2018)
in a recent survey on managing global business political risk, reported
60% of business respondents reporting that political risk levels had
increased since 2017, 75% avoided investing in a country because of
political risk concerns, and 68% expressed country specific political
risk concerns. Overall, 35% of respondents replied that they suffered
political risk-related losses in recent years, with 43% reporting such
losses exceeding $100 million (Oxford Analytica, 2018).
Political risk, as confronted by MNEs, is similar to “macroeco-
nomic risks” and “policy risks” identified under Ghoshal's (1987) risk
typology framework. It can be defined as “the risk of strategic, finan-
cial, or personal loss for a firm because of such nonmarket factors as
macroeconomic and social policies (fiscal, monetary, trade, investment
industrial, income, labor, and developmental), or events related to
political instability (terrorism, riots, coups, civil war, and insurrection)”
(Kennedy, 1988, p. 27). Also, as Bremmer and Keat (2010, p. 21) point
out, “[U]nlike financial, economic, or environmental risks, political risks
are usually generated by individuals, people with particular and identi-
fiable sets of motivations and limitations.” While the field of political
risk management has traditionally focused on analyzing uncertainties
in emerging economies, recent political events in the global political
economy have broadened its scope to include the developed econo-
mies and established liberal democracies (Campisi, 2016).
For the purposes of political risk management, political risk can be
further bifurcated into macrolevel political risk and microlevel political
risk. Macropolitical risk analysis evaluates nonproject specific risks that
affect all levels of stakeholders in a country (Alon & McKee, 1999).
Such macropolitical risks include regulatory changes, endemic corrup-
tion, government leadership turnover, and national credit defaults.
Micropolitical risk analysis evaluates project-specific risks affecting a
business endeavor (Alon, Gurumoorthy, Mitchell, & Steen, 2006). Such
micropolitical risks may include business project-specific government
reviews, the selection of questionable, host country business partners,
and the potential for expropriation or nationalization of a project or
assets. “Historically, some of the business world's best political risk
analysis has come from multinational enterprises, like Royal Dutch
Shell and American International Group (AIG), that have entire depart-
ments dedicated to the subject” (Bremmer, 2005, p. 52).
From the vantage point of understanding its modern evolution,
political risk analysis has gone through four distinct phases (Jarvis, 2008;
Jarvis & Griffiths, 2007) (see Figure 1 for detailed descriptions). The first
three phases of political risk analysis are indicative of late 20th century
development in the field. The fourth phase, however, reflects a critical
(for MNE executives) 21st century approach to political risk analysis
designed to link institutional and contextual characteristics to the proba-
bility of risk events, and thereby warn decision-makers (in NGOs and
international aid agencies) of impending humanitarian crises (Jarvis &
Griffiths, 2007). This fourth phase methodological approach is readily
transferable to MNEs, that are also vulnerable to such impending
macroenvironmental events affecting their operations and influencing
managerial responses in these locales.
While “Phase 4” is largely where the field remains today, the early
warning systems (EWSs) are made increasingly sophisticated though
advances in technology and data availability. Business Intelligence
(BI) tools have proven vital to decision makers in support of EWSs
across a wide range of industries and applications (e.g., insurance, real
estate, macroeconomic (Wu, Chen, & Olson, 2014). Limitations in data
availability still remain a major issue when trying to accurately assess
political risk; however, perhaps a greater obstacle standing in the way
of moving to the next “phase” of analysis is knowing what data to
analyze—that is, “the knowing what to look for” is a greater issue than
the “not being able to find it” one.
Phase One
•
•
The first phase focused on normal political activity in efficient markets.
Phase Two
•
This phase simplified the roles of both business and political/public policy activity, but also failed to
undersand their complex interactions.
•
The second phase shifted focus from specific governmental policies to the political system and its
vulnerability to environmental stresses and shocks.
Phase Three
•
The assumption was that certain political systems are more prone to some types of risks than others.
•
Phase Four
•
The third phase aimed less at broad theoretical correlations and more towards microanalyses that
emphasized context and the use of qualitative techniques.
This phase has increased the use of qualitative methodologies, such as interviewing and scenario
development, and relied on methods over theory.
•This approach can be seen in quantitative "early warning systems" being developed by NGOs.
The fourth phase "involves the construction of data sets that allow political risk analysts to carefully
examine the relationship between political and economic institutions, as well as the interface between
domestic norms , actors, institutions, and external influences" (Jarvis and Griffiths, 2007: 18).
FIGURE 1
The four phases of political risk analysis (Jarvis, 2008; Jarvis & Griffiths, 2007) [Color figure can be viewed at
wileyonlinelibrary.com]
HEMPHILL AND KELLEY
587

--- Sayfa 4 ---
Rice and Zegart (2018b) view three megatrends transforming the
political risk landscape over the last 30 years: first, dramatic changes
in geopolitics since the end of the Cold War, second, supply chain
innovations, and third, the information technology revolution (Rice &
Zegart, 2018b). Furthermore, Rice and Zegart (2018b) identify a politi-
cal risk management framework that requires four core competencies
to be effective and, at each step in this political risk management
framework, they identify three guiding questions that organizational
members can ask to address the most important issues):
• Understanding risks (What is my organization's political risk appe-
tite? Is there a shared understanding of our risk appetite? How can
we reduce blind spots?)
• Analyzing risks (How can we get good information about the politi-
cal risks we face? How can we ensure rigorous analysis? How can
we integrate political risk analysis into business decisions?)
• Mitigating risks (How can we reduce exposure to the political risks
we have identified?
Do we have a good system and team in place for timely warning
and action? How can we limit the damage when something bad
happens?)
• Responding to crises (Are we capitalizing on near misses? Are we
reacting effectively to crises? Are we developing mechanisms for
continuous learning?)
Yet, while many researchers use financial crises (e.g., currency, sover-
eign debt, equity) to bring attention to deficiencies in risk manage-
ment models (Jorion, 2009), others introduce new indicators for
EWSs (Castell & Dacuy, 2009; Krstevska, 2012), thus highlighting the
incremental nature of improvements in the field of risk management.
Furthermore, examining the development of EWSs applied to one
field may also lead to innovations in other fields. For instance, on
January 9, 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) first reported
a flu-like outbreak and pneumonia symptoms in China's Wuhan prov-
ince, with the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
reporting it days earlier on January sixth (Niiler, 2020). However, as
Niiler (2020) reported online in Wired, BlueDot, a Toronto-based
health monitoring platform founded in 2014 that uses AI-driven algo-
rithms, “had beaten them both to the punch, sending word of the out-
break to its customers on December 31.” In this article, BlueDot's
founder Kamran Khan highlights the fact that when there is an out-
break, speed matters, and Chinese officials are “tight-lipped” and “do
not have a good track record of sharing information” (Niiler, 2020).
While there are still challenges, this company and example highlight
the fact that governments may not provide information at all, or in a
timely fashion, and that AI-driven algorithms can often discover
trends and make predictions faster.
Many attempts at forecasting risk focus on models where “uncer-
tainty can be reasonably incorporated into probabilistic predictions”
(Makridakis, Hogarth and Gaba, 2009, p. 795) and not ones where the
uncertainty is so hard to envision it cannot be modeled (Makridakis
et al., 2009). BlueDot's founder stated, “We can pick up news of pos-
sible outbreaks, little murmurs or forums or blogs of indications of
some kind of unusual events going on” (Niiler, 2020). As fears of the
spreading virus increased, so did the international response that cau-
sed three major U.S. airlines to cancel flights to the Chinese mainland,
sending stocks tumbling, and the issuance of a travel ban suspending
entry for anyone who has recently traveled to China (Chokshi, 2020).
So, while the impact of the pandemic on business is felt nearly imme-
diately, such events are also political in nature and the consequences
of various governmental responses will be felt in the coming years.
This draws attention to the possibility that AI-driven algorithms may
be designed with one purpose in mind (e.g., community health risk
monitoring), but have several applications (e.g., political and financial
risk management). In this example, the concerns and utility of such
predictions are also discussed in terms of reliability of using social
media information for data mining—without human oversight or a
healthy skepticism of what predictions and patterns emerge. Fine tun-
ing analytics in concert with human oversight is still necessary for big
decisions.
The fifth phase of political risk analysis, building on a combination
of data analytics, AI, and human intelligence, will be able to combine
complex qualitative models and scenarios with real-time big data from
various social media platforms. Rice and Zegart's (2018a, 2018b) polit-
ical risk management framework is specifically relevant to this “Fifth
Phase of Political Risk Analysis” for two competencies: analyzing risks
and mitigating risks. The analyzing risks competency is based on a rig-
orous foundation of cloud computing, data analytics and enhanced AI
technology. The mitigating risks competency is based on a compli-
mentary foundation of “human intelligence,” steeped in the knowl-
edge and insights provided by political scientists, political economists,
sociologists, and country-specific analysts. This fifth phase of political
risk analysis will be the next generation of strategic political risk man-
agement, and a valuable mechanism for uncovering the risks of regula-
tory expropriation for MNEs in the 21st century.
3
|
STRATEGIC POLITICAL RISK
MANAGEMENT: DATA ANALYTICS,
MACHINE LEARNING, AND AI
The “Fifth Phase of Political Risk Analysis” is predicated on develop-
ments in “machine learning.” According to Fagella (2019):
Machine learning is the science of getting computers
to learn and act like humans do, and improve their
learning over time in autonomous fashion, by feeding
them data and information in the form of observations
and real-world interactions.
Machine learning involves statistical predictions based on unan-
ticipated correlations to solve problems. Recent advances in machine
learning have transformed how we can utilize dynamic, probabilistic
models to predict instead of utilizing rule-based, static logic. The out-
put of machine learning (“the prediction”) is “a key component of
intelligence, the prediction accuracy improves by learning, and the
588
HEMPHILL AND KELLEY

--- Sayfa 5 ---
high prediction accuracy often enables machines to perform tasks
that, until now, were associated with human intelligence, such as
object identification (Agrawal, Gans, & Goldfarb, 2018, p. 38).” Thus,
at this level of prediction accuracy, one can refer to it as “AI.” AI is a
system that makes autonomous decisions. According to Webb (2019),
p. 13): “The tasks AI performs duplicate or mimic acts of human intelli-
gence, like recognizing sounds and objects, solving problems, under-
standing language, and using strategy to meet goals.”
There are three phases in the evolution of AI systems (Webb,
2019). First, there is artificial narrow intelligence (ANI). The ANI sys-
tems, which have proliferated over the last decade, are presently
capable of performing a singular task at the same level or better than
humans (Webb, 2019). Second, there are artificial general intelligence
(AGI) systems which will perform broader cognitive tasks, for example,
reason, solve problems, think in abstraction, and make choices, as
these systems are designed to think like humans (Webb, 2019). The
AGI systems are considered “near future,” that is, implementable
within the next 10–20 years. Third, are artificial superintelligence (ASI)
systems. According to Webb (2019), p. 144): “ASI systems range from
being slightly more capable at performing human cognitive tasks than
we are to AIs that are literally trillions of times generally smarter
than humans in every way.” The ASI systems are considered “distant
future,” that is, implementable beyond the next two decades. For the
purpose of developing the next phase of political risk management,
AGI systems will be our focus for applications to impending regulatory
expropriation.
There are four categories for understanding the conditions under
which prediction machines succeed or falter (Agrawal et al., 2018, see
pp. 59–65). The first category is known knowns, where there is an
abundance of rich data allowing for good predictions. The second cat-
egory is known unknowns, where there is little data, so predictions are
difficult. The third category, unknown unknowns, include those events
not captured by past experiences or what is present in the data but
are nonetheless possible, so prediction is also difficult. The fourth cat-
egory, unknown knowns, is when an association that appears to be
strong in the past is the result of some unknown or unobserved factor
that changes over time and makes predictions that were believed to
be reliable, nevertheless unreliable. Today, the known known is where
the
current
generation
of
machine
intelligence
is
successfully
employed, and results in ANI systems that have the potential to assist
in effective political risk management—in this case, predicting regula-
tory expropriation.
However, the next two decades should see a rise in AGI use and
capability in political risk management, at first requiring greater levels
of human oversight and intelligence and then, gradually as the
machine learning becomes more reliable and accurate, human intelli-
gence will not only be less important to the process, but may actually
interfere with it. While known unknowns and limited data make
machine learning difficult now, AGI systems may be capable of finding
alternative sources of data or using the absence of data as informa-
tion. These transitions in the development and use of AI are not unlike
efforts to bridge the gap between applied and theoretical physics.
Indeed, with physics “the unknown unknowns will reveal themselves
to those who study hard, who can see obscure connections, indulge in
lateral thinking and who might even just get lucky and find some ser-
endipity!” (Whitehead, 2016, p. 21), which sounds just like what AGI
systems may eventually do. Similarly to unknown knowns in scientific
fields, new discoveries may also cause us to reevaluate that which we
thought we knew.
The fifth phase of political risk management will be predicated on
AI developments in cognitive analytics. Cognitive analytics “applies
intelligent technologies to bring all of these data sources within reach
of
analytics
processes
for
decision-making
and
BI
(Expert
System, 2016).” The three components that make up cognitive analyt-
ics consist of data management, natural language processing, and digi-
tal analytics and delivery (see Figure 2). Data management is “an
administrative process that includes acquiring, validating, storing,
protecting, and processing required data to ensure the accessibility,
reliability, and timeliness of the data for its users” (Galletto, 2016),
and is utilized along with the mining of untapped data sources, which
will drive predictive and prescriptive insights. The use of “cloud com-
puting” is integral to effective data management. Natural language
processing is “a branch of AI that deals with the interaction between
computers and humans using the natural language (Garbade, 2018).”
By relying on machine learning, natural language processing will “read,
decipher, understand, and make sense of the human languages in a
manner that is valuable (Garbade, 2018).” Data analytics and delivery
involves the use of cloud technologies and process automation that
enables on-demand customized analytics and real-time collaboration
to support key business decisions (Intel, 2015).
The McKinsey Global Institute, in its discussion paper addressing
how companies will decide on how to optimize for AI, argue that
(Bughin, Seohg, Manyika, & Chui, 2018, p. 46):
The productivity dividend of AI probably will not mate-
rialize immediately—its impact is likely to build up at an
accelerated pace over time, and therefore the benefits
of initial investment may not be visible in the short
term. Patience and long-term strategic thinking will be
required.
The preceding statement aptly describes the later stage of ANI devel-
opment. That is, involving a specific, bounded parameter of analytic
Cognitive
Analytics
Data
Management
Natural
Language
Processing
Digital
Analytics
and Delivery
FIGURE 2
Components of cognitive analytics [Color figure can
be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
HEMPHILL AND KELLEY
589

--- Sayfa 6 ---
capability, and the fifth phase of political risk analysis. Over the last
5 years, there have been a few examples of private companies who
have been pathfinders in combining AI, data analytics, and global polit-
ical risk analysis. For example, Predata, founded in 2015 (Nanalyze,
2019), uses machine language algorithms to curate anonymized online
metadata, applies machine learning algorithms to the collected data
over time and across various countries, and then take predictive sig-
nals to quantify identified potential geopolitical risks (Predata, 2020).
The Predata approach focuses on patterns of behavior, as they repli-
cate more reliably than in the data itself (Predata, 2020). Moreover,
Predata's (2020) focus offers geopolitical risk insights through a
dashboard view.
Another technology startup, GeoQuant has developed high-fre-
quency, AI-driven political risk intelligence measures that analyze and
forecast political risks to MNEs in real time (GeoQuant, 2017).
GeoQuant developed the world's first benchmark measures for geo-
political risk using both structured and unstructured data (Nanalyze,
2019). GeoQuant's structured data is acquired from 250 variables
(many of them political factors previously thought unmeasurable)
drawn from the company's proprietary, fundamental model of political
risk (based on measuring 22 fundamentals of politics, drawn from
political science/political economy literature) and credible, country-
level databases maintained by multilateral institutions, NGOs, govern-
ments, and social scientists, with historical data going back to 2009
(GeoQuant, 2017; Nanalyze, 2019).
While the above-mentioned data analytics and enhanced AI tech-
nology are critical to the development of the “Fifth Phase of Political
Risk Management,” the human intelligence aspect will be of similar
importance in developing accurate geopolitical risk models, and to accu-
rately dicern subtle changes in areas difficult to monitor and measure,
for example, country-based, regulatory expropriation trends. As can be
seen in Figure 3, the Observe (“Decide what objects to capture
content—and capture content.”), Orient (“What does the content
mean?”), Decide (“What should we do about it?”), and Act (“Implement
the decision.”) Decision Process, developed by John Boyd, is directly
applicable to the AI decision-making process (Carone, 2019). As Carone
(2019, p. 12) notes, the “Orient” stage in this process is what AI and
machine learning cannot do well and requires a knowledgeable human
being
to
analyze
complex
meaning.
Therefore,
state-of-the-art
approaches to human intelligence, political risk management techniques,
and approaches will need to be integrated into these new disruptive
technologies.
4
|
THE FIFTH PHASE OF POLITICAL RISK
MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK
In the fifth phase of the political risk management framework, involv-
ing data analytics, machine learning, and ANI, combined with
enhanced human intelligence, an improved modeling of the regulatory
expropriation phenomenon, will become available for MNE business
decision-making (see Figure 4). Regulatory expropriation is subtle,
indirect, and incremental, and thus more challenging to identify and
be managed by the MNE effectively.
The fifth phase will be an evolutionary phase where ANI systems,
which rely almost entirely on human intelligence for algorithm pro-
gramming, development, and oversight, transition to AGI systems
where the relationship with human intelligence is more complemen-
tary. Naturally, as machine learning is applied to more cognitive rea-
soning and decision-making, similar to human intelligence, political
risk management models and other AI-assisted decision-making will
likely require a great deal more high-level human intelligence interac-
tion. For instance, this might at first resemble a promising researcher
both collaborating with, and having his or her work checked by, a
more seasoned and experienced researcher.
This collaborative process yields two beneficial outcomes despite
its seeming redundancy. First, having humans check and oversee the
decisions and outcomes of the AGI systems will foster a belief and
assurance of their reliability as a foundation for more automated sys-
tem (AS) decision-making. Second, the AGI systems are likely to, both
initially and as they become more sophisticated, produce unexpected
results that cause further evolutions and developmental break-
throughs in the AGI programs and the risk management models they
support. Eventually, as the AGI becomes more refined and reliable,
complementing human intelligence will increasingly become unneces-
sary. Building on models of contemporary political risk management,
we will illustrate how to apply techniques that use ANI systems and
human intelligence in a complementary fashion, building dynamic
capabilities (not static ones), that will eventually be considered AGI-
level technology.
4.1
|
TNK-BP
The TNK-BP joint venture could be thought of as the perfect reason
for a joint venture or a perfect storm of challenges waiting to happen.
TNK (Tyumen Oil) was controlled by the AAR (Alfa Group, Access
Industries, and Renova) consortium, which is, respectively, owned by
three Russian oligarchs (Mikhail Friedman, Len Blavatnik, and Victor
Vekselberg), whereas BP was a western firm and the world's third-
largest oil company, when the roughly $7 billion merger was
announced in 2003 (Kyj & Kyj, 2010). At the time, BP was seeking to
expand its assets and options internationally and this occurred during
Observe
Orient
Decide
Act
FIGURE 3
Observe-orient-decide-act decision process [Color
figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
590
HEMPHILL AND KELLEY

--- Sayfa 7 ---
a period of consolidation in the oil industry. TNK, on the other hand,
hoped to benefit from the technical expertise of BP allowing for fur-
ther expansion of fields and gains in efficiencies that would likely
emerge (Kyj & Kyj, 2010). Tyumen also had shared oil field rights with
Sidanko, another Russian company and project in which BP had pur-
chased a 10% stake (Kyj & Kyj, 2010). Ironically, BP may have seen
this as an opportunity to reduce political risk by partnering with two
Russian companies, but may have missed the fact the Tyumen had
been sued by a Canadian company for failing to meet its obligations in
another JV (Feils & Sabac, 2000).
While in theory the JV was set to be an equal partnership, both
TNK and BP having 50% ownership and each appointing five mem-
bers to the board of directors, each may have had divergent needs
and goals (Kyj & Kyj, 2010). Of course, BP wanted to gain access to
Russian oil fields and had longer-term development aspirations that
required more investment and slower returns and was even willing to
assume some of the liabilities of TNK companies associated with envi-
ronmental remediation from previous issues, but TNK had a shorter-
term profit horizon (Kyj & Kyj, 2010) and goals for the venture. Ironi-
cally, BP's own environmental issues with the Macondo (Prospect),
Gulf of Mexico oil spill in 2010, required roughly $30 billion cash for
settlements and pushed TNK-BP to buy BP assets in Venezuela and
Vietnam, for market expansion (BP/TNK-BP, 2010). This at a time
when TNK was accusing BP of running the JV as a subsidiary and
where TNK-BP, found its venture facing increasing pressure from the
Russian government. TNK-BP had come under investigation and
inspections from a Russian environmental agency, for issues related to
past infractions of other companies, demands for back taxes, and the
sudden withdrawal of visas for BP technical experts under the guise
that they were compensated unfairly compared to nationals (Kyj &
Kyj, 2010)—the beginnings of regulatory expropriation.
For example, the earlier mentioned regulatory expropriation activ-
ities against the joint venture between Russian TNK and BP, which
came under Russian government regulatory pressure when regulators
insisted on a northerly route to pass and smaller gas fields that would
otherwise be uneconomical to develop, made clear that Gazprom, and
not the BP-Gazprom joint venture, would decide when to build that
pipeline (Kramer, 2010). In essence, the Russian government wanted
greater control over the venture, more of the profits, and with respect
to the pipeline, unnecessary infrastructural development. In addition,
the Russian government later revoked other foreign MNE oil permits,
citing environmental regulatory concerns (Schaffer et al., 2012). Under
the “Fifth Phase of the Political Risk Management Framework,” there
would be two integrated, complementary approaches to gauging polit-
ical risk analysis pertaining to MNE regulatory expropriation in this
proposed Russian gas pipeline development project.
The Russian regulators insistence on a northerly route for the
TNK-BP joint venture is an example of a “direct” data point (the “miti-
gating risks competency” aspects)—found in preliminary government
statements
and
formal
correspondence
to
the
companies,
for
example—which will be evaluated directly by human intelligence, and
not as reliant on ANI for political risk assessment. However, the revo-
cation of other foreign MNE oil permits would not necessarily be as
“direct,” since these decisions would be based on broad “environmen-
tal concerns.” These “indirect” data points—the “analyzing risks com-
petency” aspects—would require a comprehensive assessment of
what these environmental concerns were and whether an oil/gas
MNE's building permit was in violation of these “environmental con-
cerns.” Further, the revocation of visas and demands for back taxes
would be more direct data points, but bad press of the intent of BP in
the TNK-BP venture (perhaps in press from the oligarchs running
TNK) and issues surrounding past environmental infractions in oil
fields before the TNK-BP venture would be indirect.
Such an “analyzing risks competency” assessment may require an
extensive review of government environmental regulations, compari-
sons among permits granted, an evaluation of previous permits that
were pulled by the Russian government, formal assessments of writ-
ten decisions made by the Russian government, and so forth. An ANI
system will be able to perform this evaluation utilizing cognitive ana-
lytics
(specifically
natural
language
processing
technology)
and
through increased exposure to data points and machine learning expe-
rience, therefore learning to recognize patterns of relevant social and
Four
Phases One -
•
Phase  Five
•
•
In phases one through four, increasingly sophisticated political risk management models are
developed and gradually incomporate more complex data sets, as well as, algorithms for collecting
and processing the raw data into meaningful information. While ANI systems are employed in the
later phases as part of this proess, the cognitive analytics remain largely governed by humans.
The fifth phase focuses on the interactions among data analytics, machine learning, and artificial
narrow intelligence (ANI)  applied to relationships between political and economic institutions, and
the interactions between and among domestic actors influencing political and social policy.
Through this evolutionary process of machine learning, in concert with the support of human
intelligence, ANI technology will offer a sophisticated quanitative "early warning system." It
eventually will give way to AGI systems with increased cognitive analytical capability, reliability, an
autonomous decision-making, diminishing the role of human intelligence in 10-20 years.
FIGURE 4
The fifth phase of the political risk management framework [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
HEMPHILL AND KELLEY
591

--- Sayfa 8 ---
political movements, public policy discussions and judicial decision
indicators that would help build models for increasing predictive prob-
abilities for specific regulatory expropriation outcomes. This, in turn,
will assist the human intelligence specialist to further identify what
these probability outcomes mean, and adjust these predicative proba-
bilities, by further refining these knowledge inputs to be included in
policy options for MNE executive decision-making. Eventually, per-
haps in 10–20 years, AGI technologies will be able to connect and cre-
ate patterns that precede the direct and indirect data points that more
easily captured and processed by ANI and human intelligence cur-
rently, but as part of an enhanced EWI system that exceeds the
current limitations of ANI and human intelligence.
This political risk management process could begin by exploring
several aspects affiliated with such incidences of regulatory expro-
priation and follow similar suggestions common to the risk assess-
ment process (as discussed by Rice and Zegart (2018b)). Key
elements such as determining what value exists in a company, what
could affect its ability to be created, and the likelihood of such
events happening are all important steppingstones for incorporating
AI into political risk management. In the case of BP investing in the
Kovykta natural gas field in Siberia (Kramer, 2010), executives would
have known that the value of the acquisition is determined by their
ability to produce the bulk of the natural gas that existed there—
and efficiently transport it to China for sale. So, effective risk man-
agement teams would have assessed that value and then examined
aspects that could disrupt their ability to extract that value. In this
case, energy politics came into play where Russia wanted more con-
trol, a greater share of the profits, and tried to also force, by means
of developing an indirect pipeline route, BP to invest in accessing
other less profitable oil fields (Kramer, 2010), essentially altering the
value proposition.
This outcome is truly the departure point for evolutionary
machine learning. Indeed, there are several things that could have
occurred and did occur that led to this outcome; but ANI technol-
ogy will need to be developed with human intelligence to address
“why” they occurred before it approximates AGI and can be auton-
omously deployed in political risk management. For example, BP's
initial investment occurred in the mid-1990s and they started to
confront project development obstacles during the late 1990s and
early 2000s (Kramer, 2010). A machine might have trouble making
connections that seem readily apparent to human intelligence in
relation to the energy politics that would later occur to generate
this regulatory expropriation. A human with even a cursory under-
standing of this period of time could suggest that this period of
transition between the former Soviet Union and Russia, especially
where Boris Yeltsin was later regarded as selling large state-owned
companies to insiders in what was called the “loans for shares”
scheme to gain monies needed to win reelection in 1996. Naturally,
this might have served as a pretext for political attacks targeting
businesses, especially foreign ones, for having robbed the country
of its resources and serve as justification for a renegotiation of
terms—a perfect sort of energy politics for a newly-elected Vladimir
Putin.
5
|
DISCUSSION AND IMPLICATIONS
Rice and Zegart's (2018b) identification of “risk appetite” as part of
understanding political risk management is consequential for man-
agers and of particular relevance to the fifth phase in this field. Ulti-
mately, there are three key areas where AI will assist managers in
analyzing and mitigating risks: (a) earlier identification of risks,
(b) precision in risk assessment, and (c) identification of unknown
unknown risk correlations. These three categories also represent how
AI and its application to political risk assessment will evolve in the fifth
phase and why it is of particular relevance to risks such as regulatory
expropriation.
Earlier Identification of Risks will provide managers more time,
more information, and more options to consider. ANI requires a great
deal more human input and is the state of the field early in the fifth
phase. Many broad macroeconomic and policy risks, and their ante-
cedents, have already been identified by managers within MNEs.
These known knowns are incrementally adjusted with human input
into risk assessment models and where the human–machine interac-
tion continuously develop and refine algorithms to enhance EWSs.
For instance, there are many known antecedents to macrolevel fiscal
or monetary policy change, and risk issues with income and labor are
often tied to civil war and insurrection directly. These correlations can
be programmed into algorithms by humans and automated by
machines that assist managers in identifying risks earlier with each
iteration. However, in seeking less incremental, and instead more rev-
olutionary breakthroughs, humans will begin exploring unknown
knowns—they know there is likely some unobserved factor at work.
Thus, they ask machines to look for unknown patterns and indirect
correlations that come before what they know to be correlated. Man-
agers that seek the advantages of earlier identification of risk will be
the catalysts, pushing the use of AI to find unknown relationships that
can provide an edge, rather than accepting its status quo application.
Naturally, the “push” for innovations will come from companies and
industries that stand to benefit the most from earlier identification of
risks and, therefore, the evolution may not be uniform across indus-
tries or businesses. Environmental issues are always a concern for oil
companies and partnerships for market expansion a necessary evil,
ANI systems as they progress toward AGI would have perhaps not
missed the previous environmental issues the TNK had and the cur-
rent legal issues they faced. Both would have been considered impor-
tant to humans for political risk, but somehow escaped or did not
garner sufficient attention as possible indirect issues that would
emerge later.
Precision in Risk Assessment is a critical component to understand-
ing risk appetite and the decision to internalize or externalize—this is
tied to macrolevel and microlevel political risk—the majority of this
effort and associated resources and costs. Macropolitical risks, includ-
ing regulatory changes (e.g., monetary and fiscal policies), national
credit defaults, corruption in government, and leadership turnover
(Alon & McKee, 1999), have broader contemporary understanding
(i.e., well-developed risk assessment models) and applicability for gov-
ernments, NGOs, and across industries. Consequently, there is likely
592
HEMPHILL AND KELLEY

--- Sayfa 9 ---
to be greater demand, and a quicker transition from ANI systems
requiring human interaction, to AGI systems where human input gives
way to automated discovery and decision-making with human over-
sight (see Figure 5). Since these types of macropolitical risk have
broader applicability, the need to internalize this work is also dimin-
ished. Micropolitical risks, on the other hand, have project-specific
risks affecting certain business endeavors (Alon et al., 2006). As busi-
nesses may have concerns that require precise political risk assess-
ment related to the endeavor, perhaps even proprietary, the evolution
of AGI systems to assist firm-specific needs will occur more slowly.
What is of consequence with TNK-BP is whether this particular ven-
ture was subject to more or less political risk in relationship to TNK
and the Russian oligarchs than perhaps other ventures might have
been, either due to prior issues or the political weight of the actors.
Perhaps, the areas in which the venture sought to benefit or even the
industry itself was more subject to risk, certainly the volatility of
Russia was known to many MNEs at the time, but AGI systems may
allow more precision by industries or even ventures that have particu-
lar partners and target areas for development of projects.
This may also require an internalization of such activities and
while such companies as AIG and Royal Dutch Shell may have some
of the world's best political risk assessment through their own dedi-
cated departments (Bremmer, 2005), others do not. Accordingly, busi-
nesses that seek the precise political risk assessment that may be
afforded by innovations in AI, must decide whether to develop or
enhance their own departments internally, or try to balance the pro-
tection of proprietary information with the desire to externalize this
activity. The externalization process may warrant some additional
legal concerns and perhaps a highly dedicated client server from any
consulting firm that is hired. Naturally, as the application and use of
ANI systems for greater and greater types of analysis, machine learn-
ing will accelerate until AGI systems are available for both macro and
microlevel risk analysis.
Identification of unknown unknown risk correlations is the eventu-
ality of ANI sophistication in the precision analysis that leads to the
development and deployment of AGI systems. In this latter stage of
the fifth phase of political risk assessment, humans will no longer
interact with machines in an effort to direct them to search for
information, rather the machines will begin to search for patterns
and causal correlations that humans do not know that they do not
know. At this point, humans will serve largely in a supervisory role,
where automating minor decisions may be routine, but major deci-
sions and analysis will still be in human hands. With the acceleration
of breakthroughs in AI, this point where AGI systems start leaning
away from the limitations of humans, and toward the capabilities of
ASI, may be brief or prolonged. The length of this transitional phase
will likely be determined by the pace of technological innovation
and moderated by a host of business, societal, and ethical concerns.
This is where analysis of things such as regulatory expropriation,
that is very subtle and difficult for humans to predict, may be well
supported.
The TNK-BP joint venture would have benefitted from enhanced
political risk management models that incorporated ANI, machine
learning, and data analytics. First, coupled with human intelligence,
ANI systems might be developed to look for political trends in media
or other outlets that would suggest the risk of regulatory expropria-
tion was rising, of direct benefit to BP executives and influencing fur-
ther decisions regarding investment or disinvestment. Of course, this
would be in the early stages where the data would more likely
resemble known knowns and the programming would rely more
heavily on human assumptions and intelligence. Second, as the tech-
nology evolves and machine learning is improved, ANI systems could
give way to AGI ones where unknown unknowns and known
unknowns, things we as humans do not know that we do not know—
and things we thought we knew but really did not, make ultra-
sophisticated political risk models for EWS's the norm (of even
greater value for improving BP managerial decision-making). Stated
another way, the initial assumptions and connections a human might
make about why regulatory expropriation has occurred years later
could be completely wrong or more readily identified by factors only
identifiable to AI systems. The AGI systems could have been moni-
toring press and political changes and also capturing ambitions of
interested parties in the TNK-BP venture that are all seemingly
unrelated to how humans perceive and anticipate risks but captured
by AGI systems. Thus, allowing for probabilities of outcomes that
could incorporate what-if scenarios for things, such as the Macondo
Project oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico, and how this might lead to
changes in assets sold and sought by parties, as well as how this
affects strategic direction.
Finally, the “Fifth Phase of Political Risk Management” will pro-
vide the next level of analytic insights for MNE management. The
powerful tools inherent in ANI (and later AGI) utilizing state-of-the art
machine learning and enhanced data analytics, complemented by the
next generation of political risk management frameworks, approaches
and concepts applied to human intelligence, will offer MNEs the
opportunity to seriously address the heretofore challenging issue of
AGI
Systems
ANI
Systems
Autonomous AI
Human-Machine
Reliance in AI
Macro-Level
System Transition
Micro-Level
System Transition
FIGURE 5
The transition from human–machine reliant artificial
narrow intelligence (ANI) to autonomous AGI in political risk
assessment: macrolevel and microlevel systems evolution compared
HEMPHILL AND KELLEY
593

--- Sayfa 10 ---
being confronted by national governments (such as with the Russian
government) with regulatory expropriation (as in the case of TNK-BP).
In the case of AGI, the use of high-level human intelligence (involving
subject matter experts) will further enhance the nuances found in the
social, political, and economic trends impacting the political risk man-
agement models. This earlier recognition of these often subtle, incre-
mental changes in their operating environments at an earlier stage,
offers MNE executives a wider array of strategic options to embrace,
thus helping them to mitigate the negative impacts on their compa-
nies. For example, it is essential for executives to consider a wider
array of political actors who express opinions on issues relevant to
MNEs, and who transmit these opinions on their personal electronic
devices in “real time.”
However, it should be recognized that while the development
of AGI technologies may take 10–20 years and be incremental, the
timeline in development of AI technologies can be described as long
periods of incremental development coupled with a few giant leaps
forward (Lee, 2018). While some companies may choose to be at
the forefront of applying AI in their political risk management,
investments in such technology could be rendered obsolete by dis-
ruptive innovations and breakthroughs. Yet such organizational
investments will, from a benefit–cost perspective, more likely result
in critical dividends for MNEs over the longer term. In conclusion,
given the increasingly nationalistic operating environment for MNEs,
the use of “stealthy” approaches—such as regulatory expropriation—
to reducing business opportunities for non-domestic competitors
will become more prolific, and therefore the need for more powerful
political risk analysis tools and approaches of greater MNE strategic
importance.
ORCID
Thomas A. Hemphill
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8325-5479
ENDNOTES
1 “Indirect expropriation involves total or near-total deprivation of an
investment but without a formal transfer of title or outright seizure”
(United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, 2012, p. 7).
2 The TNK-BP was an integrated oil company with oil exploration one of
the joint venture's activities. TNK was controlled by three Russian
oligarchs who owned a financial entity called AAR, which contributed
50% of TNK to the TNK-BP joint venture. (The authors wish to acknowl-
edge a reviewer who provided them with this information.)
REFERENCES
Agrawal, A., Gans, J., & Goldfarb, A. (2018). Prediction machines: The simple
economics of artificial intelligence. Boston, MA: Harvard Business
Review Press.
Alon, I., Gurumoorthy, R., Mitchell, M. C., & Steen, T. (2006). Managing
micro-political risk: A cross-sectional study. Thunderbird International
Business Review, 48(5), 623–642.
Alon, I., & McKee, D. L. (1999). Towards a macro-environmental model of
international franchising. Multinational Business Review, 7(1), 76–82.
BP/TNK-BP. (2010). FT.Com. Retrieved from http://libproxy.umflint.edu/
login?url=https://www-proquest-com.libproxy.umflint.edu/trade-
journals/bp-tnk/docview/759013994/se-2?accountid=14584
Bremmer, I. (2005). Managing risk in an unstable world. Harvard Business
Review, 83(6), 51–60.
Bremmer, I., & Keat, P. (2010). The fat tail: The power of political knowledge
for strategic investing. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Bughin, J., Seohg, J., Manyika, J., & Chui, M. (2018). Notes from the AI
frontier: Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy. September,
Discussion Paper, McKinsey Global Institute. Retrieved from https://
www.mckinsey.com//media/McKinsey/FeaturedInsights/
ArtificialIntelligence/
NotesfromthefrontierModelingtheimpactofAIontheworldeconomy/
MGI-Notes-from-the-AI-frontier-Modeling-the-impact-of-AI-on-the-
world-economy-September-2018.ashx
Campisi, J. M. (2016). Reconsidering political risk in developed economies.
Journal of Political Risk, 4(8) Retrieved from https://www.jpolrisk.com/
re-considering-political-risk-analysis-in-developed-economies/
Carone, T. E. (2019). Future automation: Changes to lives and to businesses.
Singapore: World Scientific.
Castell, M. R. F., & Dacuy, L. B. (2009). Exploring the use of exchange mar-
ket pressure and RMU deviation indicator for early warning system
(EWS) in the ASEAN+3 region. DLSU Business and Economics Review,
18(2), 1–30.
Chokshi, N. (2020). 3 major U.S. airlines suspend China flights over coro-
navirus. The New York Times, January 31. Retrieved from https://www.
nytimes.com/2020/01/31/business/china-flights-suspended.html
Escarcena, S. L. (2014). Indirect expropriation in international law. Chelten-
ham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing Limited.
Expert System. (2016). What is cognitive analytics?. Retrieved from
https://expertsystem.com/what-is-cognitive-analytics
Fagella, D. (2019). What is machine learning? Emerj: The AI: Research and
Advisory
Company.
Retrieved
from
https://emerj.com/ai-glossary-
terms/what-is-machine-learning/
Fagersten, B. (2015). Political risk and the commercial sector: Aligning the-
ory and practice. Risk Management, 17(1), 23–39.
Feils, D. J., & Sabac, F. M. (2000). The impact of political risk on the foreign
direct investment decision: A capital budgeting analysis. The Engineer-
ing Economist, 45(2), 129–143.
Galletto, M. (2016). What is data management? NG Data, March 31.
Retrieved from https://www.ngdata.com/what-is-data-management/
Garbade, M. (2018). A simple introduction to natural language processing.
Medium October 15. Retrieved from https://becominghuman.ai/a-
simple-introduction-to-natural-language-processing-ea66a1747b32
GeoQuant. (2017). Political risk done right: A GeoQuant white paper.
Retrieved from https://GeoQuant.com/GeoQuantWhitePaper.pdf
Ghoshal, S. (1987). Global strategy: An organizing framework. Strategic
Management Journal, 8(5), 425–440.
Henisz, W. J., & Zeiner, B. A. (2010). The hidden risks in emerging markets.
Harvard Business Review, 88(4), 88–95.
Intel. (2015). Big data in the cloud: Converging technologies. Intel IT Cen-
ter, Retrieved from http://blic/us/en/documents/product-briefs/big-
data-cloud-technologies-brief.pdf
Isakof, P. D. (2013). Defining the scope of indirect expropriation for inter-
national investment. Global Business Law Review, 3(2), 189–209.
Jarvis, D. S. L. (2008). Conceptualizing, analysing and measuring political
risk: The evolution of theory and method. Lee Kuan Yew School of
Public Policy, National University of Singapore, Research Paper
No.
LKYSPP08-004,
Retrieved
from
http://ssrn.com/abstract=
1162541
Jarvis, D. S. L., & Griffiths, M. (2007). Learning to fly: The evolution of
political risk analysis. Global Society, 21(1), 5–21.
Jorion, P. (2009). Risk management lessons from the credit crisis. European
Financial Management, 15(5), 923–933.
Kennedy, C. (1988). Political risk management: A portfolio planning model.
Business Horizons, 31(6), 26–33.
Kramer, A. E. (2010). BP's natural gas joint venture in Russia is in bank-
ruptcy. The New York Times, June 3, B5.
594
HEMPHILL AND KELLEY

--- Sayfa 11 ---
Krstevska, A. (2012). Early warning systems: Testing in practice. IUP Jour-
nal of Financial Risk Management, 9(2), 7–22.
Kyj, M. J., & Kyj, L. S. (2010). A relational framework for analyzing ventures
in cognitive environments: Illustrations from the TNK-BP experience.
Journal of East-West Business, 16(4), 340–360. https://doi.org/10.
1080/10669868.2010.534021
Lee, K. F. (2018). AI superpowers: China, Silicon Valley, and the new world
order. New York, NY: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing.
Makridakis, S., Hogarth, R. M., & Gaba, A. (2009). Forecasting and uncer-
tainty in the economic and business world. International Journal of
Forecasting, 25(4), 794–812.
Nanalyze.
(2019).
Alternative
data
for
predicting
geopolitical
risk.
Retrieved
from
https://www.nanalyze.com/2019/07/alternative-
data-geopolitical-risk/
Newcombe, A. P. (2007). The boundaries of regulatory expropriation in
international law. Transnational Dispute Management, 4 Retrieved from
https://www.transnational-disputemanagement.com/journal-browse-
issues-toc.asp?key=19
Niiler, E. (2020). An AI epidemiologist sent the first warnings of the Wuhan
virus. Wired, January 25. Retrieved from https://www.wired.com/
story/ai-epidemiologist-wuhan-public-health-warnings/
Nikiema, S. H. (2013). Compensation for expropriation. Manitoba, Canada:
International Institute for Sustainable Development.
OECD. (2018). Policy framework for investment: Expropriation laws and
review processes. Retrieved from https://www.oecd.org/investment/
toolkit/policyareas/investmentpolicy/
expropriationlawsandreviewprocesses.htm
Oxford Analytica. (2018). How are leading companies managing today's
political risks? 2018 survey and report (produced for Willis towers Wat-
son). Oxford, England: Oxford Analytica.
Predata.
(2020).
Products.
Retrieved
from
https://predata.com/our-
company/
Rice, C., & Zegart, A. (2018a). Managing 21st century political risk. Harvard
Business Review, 96(3), 130–138.
Rice, C., & Zegart, A. B. (2018b). Political risk: How businesses and organizations
can anticipate global insecurity. New York, NY: Hachette Book Group.
Schaffer, R., Agusti, F., Dhooge, L. J., & Earle, B. (2012). International busi-
ness law and its environment (8th ed.). South-Western Cengage Learn-
ing: Mason, OH.
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD).
(2012). Expropriation: A sequel. UNCTAD Series on Issues in Interna-
tional Investment Agreements II, July, New York and Geneva.
Webb, A. (2019). The big nine: How the tech titans and their thinking
machines could warp humanity. New York, NY: Public Affairs.
Whitehead, J. C. (2016). Plasma–catalysis: The known knowns, the known
unknowns and the unknown unknowns. Journal of Physics D: Applied
Physics, 49(24), 1–24.
Wu, D. D., Chen, S. H., & Olson, D. L. (2014). Business intelligence in risk
management: Some recent progresses. Information Sciences, 256, 1–7.
Wyss, J. (2017). Venezuelan government controls more than 500 busi-
nesses—And most are losing money. Miami Herald, March 14.
Retrieved
from
https://www.miamiherald.com/news/nation-world/
world/americas/venezuela/article138402248.html
AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES
Dr. Thomas A. Hemphill, (thomashe@umich.edu), a professor of
Strategy, Innovation and Public Policy in the School of Manage-
ment, University of Michigan-Flint, received his PhD in Business
Administration, with a primary field in Strategic Management and
Public Policy and a Secondary Field in Technology and Innovation
Policy, from The George Washington University. Dr Hemphill
teaches in the areas of nonmarket strategy, innovation manage-
ment, strategic management, and international business. His
research interests are in the areas of innovation management and
policy, corporate governance, business ethics, and international
business and political economy. His academic research has been
published in Science and Public Policy, Technology Analysis & Strate-
gic Management, Journal of Responsible Innovation, International
Journal of Innovation Management, Journal of Business Ethics, Busi-
ness and Society Review, International Business Review, Manage-
ment International Review, and Thunderbird International Business
Review, among others, and his research presented at the Academy
of Management and Academy of International Business annual
conferences.
Dr. Keith J. Kelley (keithkel@umich.edu) is an associate professor
of International Business in the School of Management, University
of Michigan-Flint. He received his PhD from Florida International
University in Miami, FL and has lived in, worked, and done
research on Latin America for more than 20 years. His research
focuses on the implications and management of non-traditional
performance outcomes and contemporary challenges in global
strategy such as corporate reputation, digitalization, and artificial
intelligence. Dr Kelley's publications can be found in the Journal of
Business Research, Multinational Business Review, Corporate Reputa-
tion Review, the International Journal of Emerging Markets, and the
Journal of Global Responsibility.
How to cite this article: Hemphill, T. A., & Kelley, K. J. (2021).
Artificial intelligence and the fifth phase of political risk
management: An application to regulatory expropriation.
Thunderbird International Business Review, 63(5), 585–595.
https://doi.org/10.1002/tie.22222
HEMPHILL AND KELLEY
595