--- Sayfa 1 ---
gameth1, August 4, 2001 - latest version
Classical, Modern and
New Game Theory

by

Manfred J. Holler*

Abstract: This paper is a brief history of game theory with its main theme being
the nature of the decision makers assumed in the various stages of its historical
development. It demonstrates that changes in the "image of man" nourished the
developments of what many believe to be progress in game theory. The first
stage, classical game theory, is defined by John von Neumann's and Oskar
Morgenstern's pioneering book "Game Theory and Economic Behavior" which
introduced the concept of individual rational players and focuses on conflicting
interests. The second stage, modern game theory, is defined by the Nash player
who is not only rational but, at least implicitly, assumes that all players are
rational to such a degree that players can coordinate their strategies so that a
Nash equilibrium prevails. The third stage, new game theory, is defined by the
Harsanyi player who is rational but knows very little about the other players,
e.g., their payoff functions or the way they form beliefs about other players'
payoff functions or beliefs. The Harsanyi player either plays a highly
sophisticated epistemic game on the forming of beliefs or rests content with
himself by imitating the observed successful behavior of other agents.

* Institute of SocioEconomics, University of Hamburg, Von-Melle-Park 5, D-20146 Hamburg, Germany,
 Fax: +49 40 428 38 6329, holler@hermes1.econ.uni-hamburg.de. The author would like to thank Heidrun
Hoppe, Ines Lindner and Matthew Braham for helpful comments.

--- Sayfa 2 ---
2
1. Introduction

Is there progress in game theory? Do we know more today in this field than the
scholars in the decade after John von Neumann and Oskar Morgenstern published
their pioneering Game Theory and Economic Behavior in 1944. Or, did we only
experience a change in style and language over the last fifty years?1 The
hypothesis of the following brief history of game theory is that the various stages
of development are the result of different assumptions bout the nature of the
decision makers underlying the alternative game theoretical approaches. The
following text will not give a historical overview which aims for completeness.2
Rather, it will trace the changes in  the "image of man" implicit in the
development of game theory and demonstrate some of consequences that follow.

We will distinguish three major stages in the development of game theory.
The first one, classical game theory, is defined by John von Neumann's and
Oskar Morgenstern's book. It introduced axioms for the concept of the individual
rational player. Such a player makes consistent decisions in the face of certain
and uncertain alternatives. But, such a player does not necessarily assume that
other players also act rationally. In contrast,  modern game theory is defined by
the Nash player who is not only rational but assumes that all players are rational
to such a degree that they can coordinate their strategies so that a Nash
equilibrium prevails. The more recent, third stage in the development of game
theory, new game theory, is defined by the Harsanyi player. This player is

1In the categories of Paul Feyerabend, game theory is an art and thus follows its dynamic pattern:
"There is no progress in art, but there are different styles and each style is perfect in itself and follows
its own law. Art is the production of styles and art history is the history of their sequence"
(Feyerabend, 1984, p.29).
2For example, we will not discuss whether John von Neumann or Emile Borel should get the credit for
having introduced the minimax  theorem: in any case, it was von Neumann who demonstrated its general
validity (see Rives, 1975). Nor will we discuss the work of Ernst Zermelo, Denes König and Laszlo
Kalmar on the finiteness and determinedness of  the chess game. This work preceded the book of von
Neumann and Morgenstern (1944), however, it focuses on analyzing of properties of  chess and does
not ask the question which characterizes modern game theory: how should a player behave to achieve a
good result? (See Schwalbe and Walker, 2001.)

--- Sayfa 3 ---
3
rational but knows very little about the other players, e.g., their payoff functions
or the way they form beliefs about other players' payoff functions or beliefs. This
limitation initiated two complementary strings of research: the more traditional
one, based on a rational choice model, is characterized by the analysis of
interactive gedankenexperiments about forming beliefs  (i.e., epistemic games),
while the second string follows an evolutionary approach where the agents rest
content with themselves by imitating the observed successful behavior of other
agents. The latter can be interpreted as the "rational conclusion" of the
constrained cognitive capacity of the decision maker, on the one hand, and the
complexity of the decision situation, on the other, or seen as the consequence
suggested by the results of empirical research which challenge the rational
choice model and its teleological background (see Frohn et al., 2001).

The discussion of these three stages forms the core of this paper. While
much of the material is elementary and accessible to the non-specialist, the paper
does contain some interpretive points that should be of interest to the advanced
student of game theory.

2.   Classical Game Theory and the Autonomously Rational Player

Game theorists consider the axiomatization of the utility function in the case of
uncertainty a major contribution in von Neumann and Morgenstern (1944). It
paved the ground for the modeling of  rational decision-making when a decision-
maker is faced by lotteries. Thereafter a utility function, ui(.), which satisfies the
expected utility hypothesis, i.e.

(1)    ui([A,p;B,1-p]) = pui(A) + (1-p)ui(B)

is called a von Neumann-Morgenstern utility function. In (1), A and B are events
(or alternatives), p is the probability that event A occurs while 1-p is the

--- Sayfa 4 ---
4
probability of B occuring. Thus [A,p;B,1-p] is a lottery (or prospect). It is a
notational convention to write  [A,p;B,1-p] = A if p = 1 and [A,p;B,1-p] = B if p =
0. Of course, [A,p;X,1-p] = A for every alternative X if p = 1.

The probabilities p can be related to a model of relative frequencies and
are, in this sense, objective and thus represent risk; or they can be subjective (i.e.
expectations or beliefs) and thus represent uncertainty. The classical distinction
between  risk and uncertainty going back to Frank Knight (1921) appears,
however, to be somewhat outdated today. For it does not seem to really matter in
the end whether we believe in the objectivity of relative frequencies as an
outcome of a random mechanism, or whether we derive our expectations from
introspection and gedankenexperiments. One way or the other, they are all based
on beliefs which reflect uncertainty and thus are subjective. If we follow this view
and define rational behavior under uncertainty as maximizing expected utility in
terms with (1), then our approach is Bayesian.

The utility values which the function ui(.) assigns to events (such as
money, cars, or strawberries) are called payoffs. Because of (1) we do not have
to distinguish between payoff and expected payoffs: if player i is indifferent
between the lottery [A,p;B,1-p] and the sure event C  then  ui([A,p;B,1-p]) = ui(C),
i.e.,  the payoffs are identical. If ui(.) satisfies (1) then it is well defined as utility
function of individual i up to a linear order-preserving transformation. That is, if
vi(.) = aiui(.) + bi and ai > 0 then ui(.) and vi(.) represent identical utility
functions: thus ui(.) defines not a function but a family of functions and
interpersonal comparison of utility is excluded because ai and bi are not
determined.

The utility function of individual i can be linear, concave or convex in
money - which coincides with risk neutrality, risk aversion, and risk affinity in so
far as money defines the events of a lottery - or ui(.) can be related with money in
a less rigid way without violating (1).  There is, however, ample empirical
evidence that individual behavior does normally not follow a pattern which is

--- Sayfa 5 ---
5
consistent with (1).3 There are  also strong intuitive arguments which challenge
the adequacy of individual axioms which underlie the theory expressed in (1)
such as the so-called Allais paradox. Later Nobel Laureate Maurice Allais
(1953, p 527) demonstrated the proposed inconsistency of the axioms of the von
Neumann Morgenstern utility theory by means of the following example:

(1) People are asked whether they prefer alternative A or alternative B
where
Alternative A: 100 millions for sure

Alternative B:
a chance of
to win
millions
a chance of
to win
millions
a chance of
to win nothing
0 1
500
0 89
100
0 01
.
.
.
R
S|
T
|

(2) People are asked whether they prefer alternative C or alternative D
where

Alternative C:
a chance of
to win
millions
a chance of
to win nothing
0 11
100
0 89
.
.
R
ST

Alternative D:
a chance of
to win
millions
a chance of
to win nothing
0 1
500
0 9
.
.
R
ST

The money values are probably in "old" French francs. The expected values of A,
B, C, and D are (measured in millions) 100, 139, 11 and 50, respectively.

Allais argues that for a large number of people, especially for those who
are averse against taking risk, one observes that they prefer A to B and D to C.
However,  von Neumann Morgenstern utility theory suggests that if A is
preferred B then C is preferred to D. In order to see this, we write these

3See the seminal paper of Kahneman and Tversky (1979) for a prominent critique of the von Neumann
Morgenstern utility function and Machina (1987) for a summary review of the discussion.

--- Sayfa 6 ---
6
preference relations in terms of the von Neumann Morgenstern utility function
of an agent i:

"A preferred to B" implies:  ui(100) > 0.1ui(500) + 0.89ui(100) +
0.01ui(0)

"C preferred to D" implies: 0.11ui(100) + 0.89 ui(0) > 0.1ui(500) +
0.9ui(0)

Both inequalities can be reduced to 0.11ui(100)  > 0.1ui(500) + 0.01ui(0). Thus
"A preferred to B" implies "C preferred to D". Consequently, "D preferred to C" is
inconsistent with "A preferred to B" and corresponding behavior violates the
expected utility hypothesis (1).

There are, however, also strong arguments in favor of (1) and the
underlying axioms formalized in von Neumann and Morgenstern (1944). Firstly,
there is empirical evidence that people tend to correct their behavior if they are
aware that it deviates from (1) or one of its implications. Secondly, the
generalization of alternative approaches to decision-making under uncertainty
(such as the prospect theory of Kahneman and Tversky (1979) and the similarity
approach of Rubinstein (1988)) are also criticized on the basis of contradicting
empirical results and implausibility of underlying assumptions. Moreover, the
alternative approaches tend to be more complicated than the theory behind (1)
and therefore more difficult to apply to real life decision-making and textbook
analysis. This is perhaps the main reason why game theorists stick to the von
Neumann-Morgenstern utility function when it comes to decision-making under
uncertainty. The maximization of such a utility function defines the rational
player in game situations, i.e. if the outcome of a choice depends on the action
of at least two agents and the agents, in principle, put themselves into the shoes

--- Sayfa 7 ---
7
of the other agents when they make their decisions because they know of the
interdependence of decisions.

There are however many ways to specify this knowledge and thus the
image which a player has of the other player(s). Von Neumann and Morgenstern
(1944) assumed that a player i does not expect that player j is necessarily
rational: j's behavior may violate the theory embedded in (1) and its implications.
In their theory of games, they propose that players should act rational even under
the assumption that other players are irrational, i.e. inconsistent with (1): "... the
rules of rational behavior must provide definitely for the possibility of irrational
conduct on the part of others. ... In whatever way we formulate the guiding
principles and the objective justification of 'rational behavior,' provisios will have
to be made for every possible conduct of 'the others'" (p. 32). To characterize this
proposition we will speak of autonomously rational players in the theory of von
Neumann and Morgenstern.

2.1 The Minimax Theorem

It may come somewhat of a surprise, but von Neumann and Morgenstern's theory
provides convincing results only if we have a situation in which there is pure
conflict of interest  between two players and the decision situation can be
modeled as a zero-sum game. For example, if we assume that the payoff (bi-
)matrix in Figure 1 is specified by the payoff values a = -α, b = -β , c = -γ , and d
= -δ, then it describes a zero-sum (two -by-two) game where player 1 has the pure
strategies s11 and s12 and player 2 has the pure strategies s21 and s22.

Figure 1: Generalized two-by-two game

s21
s22

--- Sayfa 8 ---
8

s11

(a,α)

(b,β)

s12

(c,γ)

(d,δ)

In principle, the definition of utility functions given in (1) does not allow for
interpersonal comparison of utility as implied by the zero-sum property.
However, if there is pure conflict of interest between two players then the
assumption that a utility gain to player 1 is a utility loss to player 2, and vice
versa, seems appropriate. Note that, if the payoff values of the two players in each
cell add to the same constant value, then the game is equivalent to a zero-sum
game and can, without loss of information, be transformed into such a game.

Given a zero-sum game, von Neumann and Morgenstern (1944) suggest
that each player will choose his maximin strategy. Thus player 1 looks for the
minimum payoff in each line and then earmarks the strategy which is related to
the highest payoff of these (two) minima while player 2 does likewise for his
payoffs in each column. If the earmarked value of player 1 and the earmarked
value of player 2 add up to zero, then the corresponding strategy pair
characterizes the solution and the related payoff pair describes the outcome.

If the earmarked values do not add up to zero, then player i (i = 1, 2) will
randomize on his strategies such that the expected value is independent of
whether the other player chooses his first or second strategy or any mixture of
these strategies. For instance, if player 1 chooses his first strategy with
probability p and player 2 chooses his first strategy with probability q, then p and
q are determined by the two equalities:

pa + (1-p)c = pb + (1-p)d and qα + (1-q)β = qγ + (1-q)δ

--- Sayfa 9 ---
9

Solving these equalities, we get

(2)

p° =
d
c
a
b
c
d
−
−
−
+
   and  q° =
δ
β
α
β
γ
δ
−
−
−
+

It is easy to show that the (expected) payoff player 1 is equal to the negative of
the payoff of player 2 if they choose their corresponding first strategies with
probabilities p° and q°. This is the essence of the so-called minimax theorem of
von Neumann and Morgenstern which says that, given a two-person zero-sum
game, there is always a pair of strategies, either in pure or mixed strategies, such
that the maximin payoff  equals the minimax payoff of player 1. Note that in two-
person zero-sum games the maximin payoff of player 2 with respect to his own
payoff values is identical to the minimax value with respect to the payoffs of
player 1. (Because the payoffs of player 2 are the negative values of the payoffs
of player 1, it is sufficient to specify the payoffs of player 1 only.)

2.2 Limitations of Classical Game Theory

Baumol (1972, p. 575) summarizes the classical view on game theory which
derives from the minimax theorem: "In game theory, at least in the zero-sum,
two-person case, there is a major element of predictability in the behavior of the
second player. He is out to do everything he can to oppose the first player. If he
knows any way to reduce the first player's payoff, he can be counted upon to
employ it." However, the minimax theorem loses its power if the players'
interests do not contain pure conflict and the zero-sum modeling becomes
inappropriate. This is particularly the case if strategic coordination problems
become eminent. For instance, let's assume that a > 0, α > 0, d > 0, δ > 0, and all

--- Sayfa 10 ---
10
other payoffs in Figure 1 are zero. Then the matrix in Figure 1 represents a
variable-sum game and the minimax theorem does not, in general, apply
anymore. Assume further, player 1 and 2 have to choose their strategies
simultaneously - or in such a way such that they cannot see what the other player
has chosen. Then a player has to solve the problem of how to coordinate his
strategy with the strategy of the other player in order to gain positive payoffs. The
fact that the theory of von Neumann and Morgenstern says little about
coordination problems, in particular, and variable-sum games, in general, concurs
with the problem that the guiding hand of self-interest becomes weak in strategic
situations if there is no pure conflict of interest and players have difficulties to
form expectations about the behavior of their fellow players.

It is not surprising that the textbook representation of game theory of the
1950s and still in the early 1960s focused on the two-person zero-sum game and
problems of how to calculate the maximin solution if players have more than two
pure strategies (see, e.g.,  Allen, 1960). An exception is the ingenious book by
Luce and Raiffa (1957) which is still a great source of inspiration for game
theorists.

The assumption of a pure conflict of interest seems also questionable if
there are more than two players. If we try to formulate a zero-sum game for three
players then the problem becomes rather obvious. Moreover, in the case of more
than two players there is a potential for coalitions. Von Neumann and
Morgenstern (1944)  developed the concept of the characteristic function in
order to express the value of a coalition. They also suggested a solution concept
for the case of more than two players which may take care of coalition
formation: they simply called this concept solution.4 However, neither does its
application give an answer which coalition will form nor does it determine the
payoffs which the individual players get in the course of the game.

4It is identical with the concept of stable s ets of modern game theory (see Owen, 1995, pp. 243-249).

--- Sayfa 11 ---
11

It is fair to mention that even more than fifty years later the existing
theories of coalition formation provide answers to these two problems only if the
coalition games are rather specific and the competing theories generally provide
divergent answers. However,  for the case of variable-sum games and games with
more than two players (if they do not form coalitions) a very promising solution
concept has been suggested: the Nash equilibrium and its refinements.

3. Nash Equilibrium and Modern Game Theory

In his doctoral dissertation, John Nash (1951) proved that for finite game - a
game with a finite number of pure strategies assigned to each member of a finite
set N of n players  - an equilibrium s* exists. s* is a strategy vector s* = (s1*,
...,si*, ..., sn*), where s1* is the strategy of player, si* is the strategy i, and sn* is
the strategy of player n, such that  ui(s1*, ...,si*, ..., sn*) ###  ui(s1*, ...,si, ...,
sn*) for all (pure or mixed) strategies si which player i can choose and for all
players i in N. Thus, if player i chooses si* then he cannot achieve a higher payoff
by choosing an alternative strategy si, given that the other players choose their
strategies in accordance with vector s*. We say that the strategies in s* are
mutually best replies to each other and, consequently, s* is a Nash equilibrium.

If mutually best replies are the result of decisionmaking then, obviously,
the Nash equilibrium assumes that players are rational and that they expect the
other players be also rational. This assumption is quite different from the
autonomously rational player which characterizes the theory of von Neumann and
Morgenstern. In fact, the underlying assumption is more general and even
stronger: "...an equilibrium strategy describes a player's plan of action as well as
those considerations which support the optimality of this plan" (Rubinstein,
2000, p.77). One of the considerations is that the other players are rational -
another is that the other players choose the (equilibrium) strategies such that the
chosen strategy is a best reply.

--- Sayfa 12 ---
12

3.1 Dominant Strategies and Refinements

It is straightforward that Nash equilibrium and maximin solution proposed by von
Neumann and Morgenstern are identical for zero-sum games. If we assume c > a
> d > b and  β > α > δ > γ  in Figure 1, then the matrix represents a variable-sum
game and the strategy pair (s12,s22) is a Nash equilibrium of this game. In fact,
because of the assumed preference relation the matrix describes a specification
of the famous prisoners' dilemma game as both players have a dominant strategy
and the Nash equilibrium is inefficient inasmuch as it is payoff dominated by the
result of playing strategies s11and s21- however, these strategies are strictly
dominated by the equilibrium strategies and rational players will not choose them
if the game is played only once and independent of any other decision situation. It
is therefore sufficient to rely on dominant strategies to obtain the strategy
choices (s12,s22) for rational decisionmakers.

It is obvious that the Nash equilibrium is identical with the equilibrium in
strictly dominating strategies if the latter exists. However, let us look at the
matrix in Figure 2 which is characterized by the weakly dominating strategies s12
and s22. The game has two Nash equilibria: the strategy pairs (s11,s21) and
(s12,s22). The latter, however, is not very convincing because it contains weakly
dominated strategies. A player cannot do worse by choosing his first instead of
his second strategy.

Figure 2: Nash equilibrium in weakly dominated strategies

s21
s22

s11

(1,1)

(0,0)

--- Sayfa 13 ---
13

s12

(0,0)

(0,0)

We can get rid of the Nash equilibrium (s12,s22) if we apply Reinhard Selten's
concept of trembling-hand perfectness.5 In order to test whether the equilibrium
(s12,s22) is trembling-hand perfect, we assume that player 1 considers the
possibility that with a small probability ε the hand of player 2 may tremble and 2
selects strategy s21 instead of s22. Then player 1's expected value of strategy
s11 is higher than of s12 and he will be very hesitant to choose the latter although
it is a Nash equilibrium strategy. In the end, both players will choose their first
strategies with probabilities 1 and do the right thing for the wrong reason.

3. 2 The Multiplicity of Nash Equilibria

It seems that Selten's trembling-hand perfectness is a rather powerful concept
although a trembling-hand is rather peculiar in a game of complete information
when players are rational (i.e. both players know the game matrix as it is printed
in Figure 2). Trembling-hand perfectness is not, however, very helpful for
discriminating among the three Nash equilibria in the game of Figure 3: the
strategies pairs (s11,s22) and (s12,s21) and the pair of mixed strategies given by
p* = q* = 1/2. The equality p* = q* is due to the symmetry of the game. If
players choose these mixed strategies none of them can reach a higher payoff by
choosing a different strategy, i.e., p* and q* are mutually best replies. The
corresponding payoffs of the equilibrium (p*, q*) are 1.5 for each player  -
therefore the mixed strategy equilibrium is inefficient because both players are
better off by choosing their first strategies.

5Reinhard Selten (1975) introduced this concept as a refinement of the Nash equilibrium.

--- Sayfa 14 ---
14
Figure 3: Chicken game

s21
s22

s11

(2,2)

(1,3)

s12

(3,1)

(0,0)

How we should discriminate among the three Nash equilibria of this game and
how players can coordinate their choices so as to achieve one of them, is not
obvious at all. For example, both equilibria in pure strategies are trembling-hand
perfect. Of course, if player 1's hand trembles and he mixes his pure strategy by
another probability than p* then player 2 has a best reply which is a pure strategy.
By this standard, the mixed strategy Nash equilibrium does not appear to be a
likely candidate for describing the result of the game. Moreover, this equilibrium
is payoff-dominated by the strategy pair (s11,s21) which gives a value of 2 to
each player. However, (s11,s21) is not a Nash equilibrium.

The nicety of the mixed strategy equilibrium is its symmetry; in contrast,
the two pure strategy equilibria of the game in Figure 3 discriminate against one
of the players. The symmetry seems advantageous if players have to coordinate
their strategies without knowing the other player's strategy.

Obviously, it is not sufficient to assume that players are rational and
maximize their utility as defined by a function which satisfies (1) to guarantee
that a Nash equilibrium actually occurs. If there are more than one Nash
equilibrium then we have to make rather strong assumptions so that the players
can coordinate their strategies on a Nash equilibrium.6 It is not sufficient to
assume that player 1 assumes that player 2 is rational, and vice versa. Under this

6Tan and da Costa Werlang (1988) have analyzed these assumptions on an axiomatic basis.

--- Sayfa 15 ---
15
assumption, the strategy pair (s11,s21) and a payoff of 0 to each of the two
players - as outcomes of coordination failure - cannot be excluded. With a shot
of irony Mailath (1998, p.1351) concluded that "the consistency in Nash
equilibrium seems to require that players know what the other players are doing."
The discussion of the epistemic conditions for Nash equilibria below will
demonstrate that this statement does not fall far from the truth.

It is not easy to see how players should manage to coordinate on one of
the efficient pure strategy equilibria of the chicken game in Figure 3, even if they
can communicate before they choose their strategies, given that this game is
played only once. Aumann (1985) contains a nice example of 50-person game
with non-cooperative coalition formation which demonstrates that pre-play
communication does not help to select a favourable equilibrium outcome: "Three
million dollars are to be divi ded. Each of the players 1 through 49 can form a
two-person coalition with player 50, which must split 59:1 (in favor of 50),
yielding the 'small' partner $50,000. The only other coalition that can get
anything consists of all the players 1 through 49, which must split evenly,
yielding each player about $61,000." What will happen if player 50 calls player 1
and asks him to join with him and get a share of $50,000? Will player 1 reject
this offer trying to round up the fellow players 2 to 49 in order to form an
alternative coalition, S, and get the higher share of  $61,000? The latter only
makes  sense if player 1 can be sure that none of his fellow players will be
phoned by player 50 to get lured into a coalition with him.

Player 1 must have very strong opinions about his fellow players and this
must hold for each individual player in the group of players 1 to 49 so that player
1's beliefs are justified. If one of them does not trust the integrity of every single
player to reject the offer of player 50 then coalition S is not feasible. In this
game situation, we can expect that there will be more players who do not trust the
others than those who do - in fact, it might be hard to find a single player who will
resist a proposition made by player 50. If players can converse with each other

--- Sayfa 16 ---
16
and make tentative, however, non-binding agreements before decisions have to be
made, it could well be that more than one gets "fooled" into the belief that
coalition S will form, but not every potential member of S will be a "fool" and
believe in the forming of this coalition. Of course, whether a player is a fool
depends what other players believe and do.

3.3 Unprofitability of Mixed Strategy Equilibria

Not only is the multiplicity of Nash equilibria a drawback of this concept if we
want to derive principles of individual choice from it - or perhaps even try to
make use of it for forecasting  or proposing rational decisions. If we assume that
the payoffs in Figure 1 (above) satisfy one of the following two orderings

A.1
a > c, a > b, d > b, d > c
          β > α, β > δ, γ > α, γ > δ

Α.2     b > a, b > d, c > a, c > d
           α > β, α > γ, δ > β, δ > γ

then both the Nash equilibrium and the maximin solution are in mixed strategies.
The maximin solution is defined by p° and q° as in (2) above while the Nash
equilibrium strategies are

(3)

p* =
δ
γ
α
β
γ
δ
−
−
−
+

q* =
d
b
a
b
c
d
−
−
−+

Note that the Nash equilibrium strategy of player 1, p*, is exclusively determined
by the payoffs of player 2 and the Nash equilibrium strategy of player 2, q*, is

--- Sayfa 17 ---
17
exclusively determined by the payoffs of player 2. Consequently, if there are
changes in the payoffs of player 1 but A.1 or A.2 still apply,7 then the equilibrium
behavior of player 2 is affected while p* remains unaffected. This rather
paradoxical result has produced a series of applications, however, some are of
rather dubious empirical value. (See Frey and Holler, 1998, and a review of
related results therein.) Moreover, it is easy to show that the payoffs in the Nash
equilibrium (p*, q*) and the maximin solution (p°, q°) are identical (Holler,
1990). It is therefore not "profitable" to play the Nash equilibrium strategy, and
thus rely on the rather specific rationality of the other player required by the
Nash equilibrium, because a player can assure himself the identical value by
choosing maximin, irrespective of the strategy choice of the other player. In
terms of Harsanyi (1977, p. 104-107) we can state the "unprofitability of Nash
equilibrium" in two -by-two games if both Nash equilibrium and maximin solution
are in mixed strategies.

In case of unprofitable mixed-strategy equilibria, Harsanyi (1977, p. 125)
strongly suggests that players choose maximin strategies instead of trying to
reach an equilibrium. As Aumann (1985, p. 668) concludes from studying an
unprofitable mixed strategy equilibrium: "Under these circumstances, it is hard to
see why the players would use their equilibrium strategies."

Perhaps an answer to this question could be found in an evolutionary
context: Andreozzi (2001) shows for a dynamic replicator model (see section 5
below) of the game in Figure 1 for which payoffs are constrained by assumption
A.2 that the averages of strategy choices concur with p* and q*.  He also shows
that maximin strategies and Nash equilibrium strategies can co-exist in a dynamic
model.

3.4 Incomplete Information and Mixed Strategy Equilibrium

7There are weaker conditions such that the Nash equilibrium is mixed and the maximin solution might be
in pure strategies.

--- Sayfa 18 ---
18

Another answer to the Aumann's question "why the players would use their
equilibrium strategies" can be found in Harsanyi (1973). Harsanyi proposes a
model under which both players' actual behavior seems to coincide with the
strategies of the mixed-strategy equilibrium.8 The model assumes that players
derive payoffs which are subject to small random fluctuations: each player knows
his true payoff values, but player i is only informed of the mean of player j's
payoffs. As a consequence, both players will in fact use only pure strategies in
the equilibrium.

The reasoning behind this result is as follows: Suppose that players 1 and 2
know the payoffs in Figure 1 only approximately and ordering A.2 applies. This
defines a game G*. Given the random fluctuation in payoffs,  players will be
close to being indifferent between their two pure strategies in G* if they assume
that the other player will play his first strategy with a probability p* or q*,
respectively. At some times their first strategies give them more utility, while at
other times the second strategy is more profitable. In the perturbed G*  the
equilibrium strategies of both players are: "Always use your pure strategy
yielding a higher  - even if only slightly higher - payoff; but if both of your pure
strategies yield the same payoff then you may use either of them" (Harsanyi,
1992, p.58). Note that these strategies do not contain any randomization.
Moreover, if the probability distributions of the random fluctuations are
continuous then the probability that the two pure strategies of a player yield the
same payoff is zero and the possible indifference of the players can be ignored.

Given the pure-strategy equilibrium of the G*, the random fluctuations in
the payoffs will make, on the one hand,  strategy s11 with a probability slightly
greater than p* more profitable to player 1 than his second strategy, s12.9 On the

8See also Harsanyi (1992) for an introductory discussion.
9Recall that (p*, q*) represents the mixed strategy equilibrium of the game in Figure 1 in accordance
with (3), here specified by payoffs corresponding to A.2.

--- Sayfa 19 ---
19
other hand, s12 will be more profitable with a probability slightly smaller than (1-
p*). Consequently, player 1 will choose s11 with a probability slightly larger than
p* and s12 with probability slightly smaller than (1- p*). Likewise player 2 will
choose s21 with a probability slightly smaller than q* and s22 with probability
slightly larger than (1- q*).

If the amplitudes of the random fluctuations are small, the probabilities p*
and q* are good estimates for the expected equilibrium behavior: if the
amplitudes of the fluctuations go to zero, the probabilities for choosing s11 and
s21 will converge to p* and q*, respectively. However, in the equilibrium of G*,
both players will play pure strategies and the equilibrium will be strict: deviations
would inflict utility losses depending on the degree of fluctuation. If the game is
repeated and payoffs obteined are randomly distributed in each round, outside
observers can interpret the relative frequencies for the alternative pure strategies
as players playing mixed strategies.

The random fluctuations on the payoffs represent the incomplete
information of the players with respect to the other player's payoffs, i.e. his or
her identity as a player. If players do not know their own strategy sets or the
strategy sets of the other players, then this also implies incomplete information:
again the identity of at least one player is not determined. This also means that
from the perspective of at least one player the rules of the game are not well
defined since the rules of a game determine the strategy sets available for the
various player. However, incomplete information about the rules of the game can
be seen as higher order of incomplete information and "different players may
have different beliefs about the game that is played" (Vilks, 2001, p. 89). If,
however, the identity of the players is undetermined, the game situation is also
undetermined and cannot be analyzed in terms of game theory proper. This was
the state of the art before Harsanyi (1967/68) demonstrated how to describe a
game of incomplete information in terms of a game of imperfect information
and then find a solution to the latter.

--- Sayfa 20 ---
20

A game is characterized by perfect information if a player knows all the
decisions made by him and other players before he has to make a choice. (This is
the case if all information sets have only one element.) Cases of imperfect
information prevail if a player forgets how he has decided earlier in the game or
if he cannot see the choices of the other players which are simultaneous, at least
in strategic time. Now, Harsanyi's idea was that, if player 1 does not know the
payoffs of player 2,  let us assume that "nature" decides the payoffs of player 2,
i.e. what type of player he is. However, we further assume that player 1 cannot
see the move of nature which makes it an imperfect information game.

If player 1 is a Bayesian decision maker and has some prior information
about the possible types of player 2, he will assign probabilities p1,...,pm if there
are, in his view, m possible types of player 2. If he has no specific information
about the probabilities of the various types of player 2, but still distinguishes m
possible types, player 1 may well apply the principle of insufficient reason and
assign p = 1/m to each of the m types of player 2.
If the probabilities are
given - or, in a continuous model, the density function over the type interval -
then player 1's equilibrium decision coincides with maximizing the expected
utility under the assumption that each type of player 2 chooses an equilibrium
strategy.

Correspondingly, a mixed strategy of player i can be interpreted as a
conjecture which expresses the player j's uncertainty about the player i's strategy
choices while player i will, in fact, choose a pure strategy. Thus, the pair of
equilibrium strategies (p*, q*) above represents a pair of consistent conjectures
such that any pair of pure strategies concurs with them - while the selected pure
strategies are in general not best replies to each other.

4. The Forming of Beliefs

--- Sayfa 21 ---
21
Not surprisingly,  mixed strategy equilibria have been interpreted as the belief
held by all other players concerning a player's action (e.g., Aumann, 1987). The
uncertainties implied by the mixed-strategy equilibrium have been viewed as an
expression of the lack of certainty which characterizes the underlying strategic
situation rather than the result of intentional plans and strategy choices of
rational players. Given the beliefs incorporated in a mixed strategy equilibrium,
all actions with strictly positive probabilities are optimal and a player is "free too
choose" any pure or mixed strategy - and regret after the decisions of the other
players have been disclosed that he has chosen the "wrong" strategy.

Strategic uncertainty, as in mixed strategy equilibrium or in cases of a
multiplicity of equilibria, are however but one instance where players, explicitly
or implicitly, form beliefs. A second instance, as we have seen, is given if the
information of a player is incomplete.  Strategy-related or payoff-related
uncertainties are of first-order and players have to form expectations - i.e.,
beliefs - about the facts which create these uncertainties, in order to make
"adequate" decisions. Whether a decision is adequate, however, will depend on the
decision and thus on the beliefs of the other players and the beliefs which they
hold on the beliefs of the other players. The uncertainty about beliefs can be
modeled in a similar fashion to uncertainty about payoffs, etc. by introducing
additional types of players. If players are uncertain about what beliefs other
players hold about other players,  the game is characterized by second-order
uncertainty - which is, in this case, the result of first-order uncertainty.

4. 1 Beliefs and Solution Concepts

As we have seen, second-order uncertainty can also be the result of strategic
uncertainty which is the result of the players' mutually interdependent reciprocal

--- Sayfa 22 ---
22
expectations about each other's behavior.10 Solution concepts such as Nash
equilibrium, trembling-hand perfect equilibrium or maximin are tools to reduce
this interdependency and to get around the problem of discussing beliefs. In cases
of zero-sum games, the prisoners' dilemma or the game in Figure 2 these tools
work quite successfully. However, the trembling-hand perfect Nash equilibrium,
applied to eliminate the Nash equilibrium in weakly dominated strategies in
Figure 2, makes rather strong assumptions on the beliefs of the players.
Moreover, these beliefs are inconsistent with the outcome which proposes that
the weakly dominant strategies are played with certainty. It is the assumed
"trembling of the hand" which creates the uncertainty in a game of complete
information which allows the application of the Bayesian principle (i.e., the
maximization of expected utility) which sorts out weakly dominated strategies to
be considered as outcomes of the game, even if they are rationalizable as Nash
equilibrium strategies.

In the standard case, Bayesian decisionmaking is applied more directly to
games of incomplete information, when the beliefs related to the incompleteness
are transformed by the move of "nature" into probabilities à la Harsanyi
(1967/68) so that the expected utility calculation (1) applies. This calculation,
combined with a game structure, defines a Bayesian equilibrium which consists
of mutually best replies of strategies for all type of players,11 qualified by the
probability estimates that a specific type prevails. Bayesian decision makers are
assumed to revise their beliefs by conditioning on new information. However,
there are hardly any constraints on these probability estimates. A possible
restriction is given by the assumption of common priors which assumes that the
probability estimates derive from empirical observations or abstract reasoning
which are common for all players.

10The Nash equilibrium is "based on the idea that a rational theory should not be a self-destroying
prophecy which creates an incentive (not) to deviate for those who believe in it" (Selten, 1987, p.79).
11Note that a type of player can be "justified" by incomplete information on strategy sets, payoffs or
beliefs.

--- Sayfa 23 ---
23

Alternative restrictions define the sequential equilibrium as introduced by
Kreps and Wilson (1982a). In the case of a two-person game, it is a combination
of a pair of strategies which are mutually best replies and a pair of consistent
beliefs that reflect each player's probability assessment over the nodes in each
information set. This reflects what players believe what has happened in the
course of the game so far. Beliefs are consistent if they are consistent with the
equilibrium strategies and satisfy Bayes' rule whenever it applies. Consequently,
"starting with every information set, the player whose turn it is to move is using a
strategy that is optimal for the remainder of the game against the hypothesized
future moves of its opponent (given by the strategies) and the assessment of past
moves by other players and by 'nature' " (Kreps and Wilson, 1982b, p. 257). This
is also required for information sets that will not be reached if players follow the
prescription of the equilibrium strategies.

On the one hand, sequential equilibria are subgame perfect,12  while, on the
other, the set of trembling-hand perfect equilibria form a subset of sequential
equilibria. The difference is in the assumption about the information and beliefs
of the players. Obviously, the beliefs in the trembling-hand perfect equilibria are
more restrictive than in sequential equilibria.

4. 2 Epistemic Analysis

The refinements of the Nash equilibrium are characterized by more or less
informal assumptions about how players form and revise their beliefs. Interactive

12Given a game Γ in extensive form (described by a game tree). A Nash equilibrium pair (σ, µ) is
subgame perfect if, wherever Γ decomposes (at a node X), the corresponding restrictions of  σ and  µ are
an equilibrium pair for the "remaining" subgame ΓX (Owen, 1995, p.169). In games of perfect information,
subgame perfectness implies that in each decision node the corresponding player chooses a partial
strategy (which is part of his subgame perfect strategy) such that it is a best reply to the decisions of
the other players and his own decisions that follow. If the game is finite, subgame perfect equilibria are
determined by backward induction. (See, e.g., the centipede game in Figure 5 below.)

--- Sayfa 24 ---
24
epistemology13 is the formal analysis which helps to clarify the assumptions
about the beliefs and reasoning of  players that are implicit in the various solution
concepts, i.e.,  what players know and believe about the facts of the game
(players, strategies and payoffs) and each other's knowledge and beliefs.
Interactive epistemology is about rigorously and explicitly formulating
assumptions about the knowledge, the beliefs, and the rationality of the players
and thus directly tackles the core issue of game theory: the formation of
expectations when decisions are interdependent. On the one hand, it generalizes
the idea of a solution concept and, on the other hand,  it substitutes, when it
seems appropriate, the choice of a specific solution concept, and thus can
possibly add new insight about the strategic contents of game situations -
particularly for games of incomplete information and for repeated games in
which the history may serve to signal the intentions of the players in future
rounds.14 From this perspective, solution concepts such as Nash equilibrium and
its refinement are just shorthand concepts of the strategic interaction and the
related belief formation of a game situation.

Applying interactive epistemology, a state of a game comprises a profile
of strategies, which encode each player's potential to act,  and epistemic types
which summarize each player's dispositions to hold conditional beliefs about the
other players' strategies and types. The latter are expressed by means of
conditional probabilities which satisfy Bayes' rule whenever it applies. Thus the
players dispositions to hold beliefs is described by a conditional probability
system.  Higher-order beliefs, i.e., beliefs about beliefs, beliefs about be beliefs
about beliefs, and so on,  are a constituent element and reflect corresponding
levels of uncertainty. An epistemic type is, in analogy to the modeling of
incomplete information on strategy sets or payoffs, a complete and explicit

13See Aumann (1999a,b), Battigalli and Siniscalchi (1999), and Battigalli and Bonanno (1999) for this
concept.
14To illustrate the latter: what does it mean if the first player does not choose "down" at the initial
"history" of the centipede game? For the centipede game, see Figure 5 below.

--- Sayfa 25 ---
25
description of an agent's conditional beliefs of arbitrary order. Thus we can
model the incomplete information on belief systems by sets of epistemic types -
or, equivalently, by hierarchies of conditional beliefs.

In addition to the constraints through applying Bayes' rule, a conditional
probability systems is assumed to satisfy the notion of common certainty of
opponent's rationality. Although the intuition behind this concept is self-
explanatory, however, its formal elaboration is beyond the scope of this paper.
Instead I will illustrate major features of the concepts of epistemic analysis by
means of an example borrowed from Battigalli and Siniscalchi (1999). Figure 4
illustrates a signalling game. The set of payoff-relevant types of players 1 and 2
are given by Θ1 = {θ11,θ12} and  Θ2 = {θ2}, respectively. Since  Θ2 is a
singleton there is no payoff-related uncertainty about player 2. However, it is
player 1's private information whether he is of type θ11 or θ12 . This models the
incomplete information of player 2 with respect to the payoffs of player 1 by the
imperfect information of whether "nature" has chosen θ11 or θ12. The set of
pairs of types is  Θ1 × Θ2 = {(θ11,θ2), (θ12,θ2)} = {θ',θ"} where × is the
Cartesian product. Player 2's belief about the opponent's payoff-relevant type will
be specified within an epistemic model.

Figure 4: Signalling Game

The set of (final) outcomes is {(L), (R,u), (R,d)} × {θ',θ"}. H = {φ, (R)} is the set
of partial histories where φ represents the empty history (nothing has been
observed) and (R) expresses the intermediate outcome "player 2 observed that
player 1 had chosen R"  For each type θi and each partial history  h (which is an
element of H), the Cartesian product {h} × {θi}× Θi corresponds to an
information set for player i in Figure 4. For example, I = {((R), θ2,
θ11), ((R), θ2, θ12)} describes the information set of payer 2.

--- Sayfa 26 ---
26

In principle, we are interested in players' conditional beliefs for each
commonly observed partial history h. In the game of Figure 4, however, only the
belief of player 2 in information set I is relevant - which is conditional to the
partial history h = (R). Note that formally it is assumed that players have beliefs
about their own strategies and payoffs, however, it seems appropriate to focus on
the players' beliefs about their opponents.

A rational player i is assumed to be certain of his strategy and type and
that he makes a best response in terms of beliefs about the other players.
Moreover, in a dynamic model he might change his beliefs about the other
players simply because he deviated from his own plan.

 Battigalli and Siniscalchi (1999) constructed an epistemic model of the
game in Figure 4. We will not reproduce this model here because this would
necessitate to introduce a series of definitions and a quite voluminous formal
apparatus. Instead we will give some intuitive interpretations of the model. First
assume x > 1. If player 2 observes a partial history (R) then he should "believe"
that player 1 is of payoff-type θ12 and choose u. This necessitates that (i) player
1 is of type θ12 , (ii)  he "believes" that player 2 is rational and (iii) he "believes"
that player 2 believes that he (player 1) is rational and "believes" in the rationality
of player 2. Of course, this hierarchy of beliefs can be further expanded and
formalized as common certainty of opponent's rationality. Only if player 2
assumes that his beliefs are consistent with the beliefs of player 1, including his
belief that player 1 is rational,  he can interpret the partial history (R) as a signal
that player 1 is a θ12 payoff-type and will choose strategy u.

It is interesting to see that player 1 has no incentive to mislead player 2 in
forming his beliefs. In case that player 1 is of type θ11, and player 2 chooses u,
both players are worse off. In this case, player 1 is even worse off than if he
chooses strategy L.

Common certainty of an opponent's rationality refines our prediction
about the behavior of player 1. This holds in every partial history of the game

--- Sayfa 27 ---
27
described by set H.  Battigalli and Siniscalchi point out that the underlying
argument has the flavor of forward induction. Let us assume player 2's initial
belief (in partial history φ) was that player 1 is of type θ11. Then he predicts that
player 1 will select strategy L. If faced with partial history (R) and thus a
deviation from his original prediction, player 2 attempts to find an explanation
for this result that is consistent with the assumption that player 1 is rational. This
implies that player 2 assigns a conditional probability of 1 to payoff-type θ12,
and results in his decision to pick strategy u. Given common certainty of
opponent's rationality, player 1 anticipates that player 2 will choose u if he picks
R so that R is optimal for partial history φ - i.e., at the beginning of the game.

 If x < 0, however, then rationality and common certainty of an opponent's
rationality lead to inconsistency. If player 1 is rational and is certain that player 2
is rational and certain about player 1's rationality in φ and (R), the player 1 should
expect player 2 to choose d, and he should therefore choose L. Then, however,
player 2 cannot be certain about player 2's rationality because the latter should
pick L instead of R if he expects that player 2 chooses d.

4. 3 Rationalizable Strategies

Forward induction implies that a player seeks explanations of his opponent's
observed behavior under the assumption that the latter is rational. Standard
solution concepts can restrict the alternative explanations of a player and thus
lead to outcomes that are, at least empirically, descriptively questionable. For
instance, this applies to the subgame perfect equilibrium of the centipede game
in Figure 5 which suggests that the first player chooses "down" (D) at his first
more. However, if player 2 gets a chance to make a decision then this clearly
indicates that player 1 does not follow the recipe of subgame perfectness. Now,
player 2 could think that this is because player 1 does not understand the game or
is not able to apply the backward induction principle, which subgame

--- Sayfa 28 ---
28
perfectness prescribes for finite games; or that player 1 wants to signal that he
does not intend to follow the logic of subgame perfectness and thereby aim for a
payoff larger than 1. Obviously, player 1 cannot hope for the payoff n if player 2
is payoff maximizing, since player 2 does not expect that he will have a chance to
gain n+1while player 1 will receive 0 "with certainty" if the second player's last
decision node is reached. Note that this is the round which backward induction
considers first. Player 1 will reason player 2 will choose "down" in period n+1,
and therefore choose "down" in round n if this period is ever reached. By the
same reasoning, however, player 2 will choose "down" in round n-1, if he ever has
a choice.

Now following the decision tree backwards from round n+1 to round 1, we
see that the reasoning of rounds n+1 and n then applies to rounds 1 and 2.
Consequently, backward induction and subgame perfectness prescribe that player
1 chooses "down" in the first period. Thus, if player 2 has the possibility to make
a decision in round 2 he concludes that player 1 does not follow the backward
induction principle or is a different type then assumed by the game tree - or
player 1 assumes that player 2 is a different type. Then player 2 finds himself in a
guessing game to which we apply the epistemic model.

Figure 5: The Centipede Game

The epistemic model amounts to looking for an epistemic type that rationalizes
the opponents' actions. Because it is based on infinite hierarchies of conditional
probabilities, it is not, therefore, very restrictive;  in fact, it does not exclude any
conceivable type of beliefs. It generalizes the idea of rationalizable strategies
which was simultaneously introduced by Bernheim (1984) and Pearce (1984).  In
short, a strategy is rationalizable if it is a best reply to a strategy which is
rationalizable. Obviously, the mutually best-reply strategies of a Nash
equilibrium are rationalizable. However, rationalizable strategies are not

--- Sayfa 29 ---
29
necessarily equilibrium strategies as is straightforward from the example given in
Figure 6 (which is borrowed from Bernheim (1984)).

Figure 6: Rationalizable strategies

b1
b2
b3
b4
a1
(0,7)
(2,5)
(7,0)
(0,1)
a2
(5,2)
(3,3)
(5,2)
(0,1)
a3
(7,0)
(2,5)
(0,7)
(0,1)
a4
(0,0)
(0,-2)
(0,0)
(10,-1)

In the game of Figure 6, {a1,a2,a3,a4} and {b1,b2,b3,b4} are the sets of pure
strategies of players 1 and 2, respectively. Note that strategy b4 is never a best
reply to any of the a-strategies of player 1. It is not, therefore, in the set of
rationalizable strategies. However, we have to then see that a4 is not
rationalizable because it is not a best reply to any of the strategies in set
{b1,b2,b3}. The strategies in the sets {a1,a2,a3} and {b1,b2,b3} are
rationalizable. The pair (a2, b2) is a Nash equilibrium and the corresponding
strategies thus are mutually best replies. The remaining strategies in the sets {a1,
a3} and {b1, b3} form a cycle of best replies: a1 is a best reply to b3 and  b3 is
best reply to a3 and a3 is a best to b1, while b1 is a best reply to a1, the latter
relation closes the cycle.

The set of rationalizable strategies in a game with complete information is
obtained by an iterative deletion procedure as applied above. In two -person games
the outcome coincides with the result of iterated strict dominance.
Rationalizability selects the strategies which are consistent with common
certainty of rationality (Tan and da Costa Werlang, 1988). It is straightforward

--- Sayfa 30 ---
30
from the above example that beliefs can be consistent with strategies which are
not mutually best replies, but are rationalizable.

4. 4 Epistemic Conditions for Nash Equilibrium

Aumann and Brandenburger (1995) discuss sufficient epistemic conditions for
Nash equilibria. They show that, contrary a wide-spread belief in the game
theoretical literature, common knowledge is not a necessary condition for Nash
equilibrium. They prove the following theorem (Theorem A) for the 2-Player
case: "Suppose that the game being played ..., the rationality of the players, and
their conjectures are mutually known. Then the conjectures constitute a Nash
equilibrium" (p.1162). - This is an interesting result, but the question is, do
conjectures constitute a Nash equilibrium as stated in Theorem A? If we follow
Aumann and Brandenburger and define a mixed strategy of a player as his or her
conjecture which expresses the player's uncertainty about the other player's
choices in the form of a probability distribution on the pure strategies of the
other player, then it could be misleading to speak of a Nash equilibrium if the
conjectures are consistent as the selected pure strategies are in general not
mutually best replies to each other. The fact that player i's pure strategy concurs
with i's conjecture of player j and is consistent j's conjecture, does not imply that
the conditions for a Nash equilibrium are satisfied by the pure strategies chosen.
There is a price if we assume that players do not randomize in a mixed strategy
equilibrium but merely choose pure strategies which are consistent with their
own conjectures about the choices of other players.

Aumann and Brandenburger point out that Theorem A does not call for
common knowledge, which requires that all know, all know that all know, and so
on ad infinitum. It is sufficient to know the other player's conjecture and his
disposition to rationality to make a rational choice. Player i's choice of strategy x
is rational if the conjecture of player j assigns a positive probability to x and x is

--- Sayfa 31 ---
31
optimal against i's conjecture (about j's strategy decision) and i's payoff function.
Of course, i's conjecture depends on his knowledge of j's  payoff function and j's
disposition to rationality.

The formation of conjectures becomes more problematic if there are
more then two players involved: players i and j can form different conjectures
with respect to player k. Aumann and Brandenburger assume that players have
common priors so that differences between conjectures are exclusively due to
differences in their information. They prove Theorem B: "In an n-Player game,
suppose that the players have common prior, that their payoff functions and their
rationality are mutually known, and their conjectures are commonly known. Then
for each player j, all other players i agree on the same conjecture σj about j; and
the resulting profile (σ1 ,...,σn ) of mixed actions is a Nash equilibrium."

Interestingly, here the Nash equilibrium refers to mixed actions (where
actions are pure strategies) which, of course, are assumed to concur with the
conjectures. Does this mean that all players i assume that player j mixes his pure
strategies in accordance with σj? The answer is not obvious from Aumann and
Brandenburger, however, they point out that the Nash equilibrium in accordance
with Theorem B merely needs common knowledge of the players' conjectures,
not of the game or of the players' rationality. They also argue that the results in
Theorem A and B are "tight" in the sense that none of the underlying conditions
can be left out, or even significantly weakened. Nevertheless, as Polak (1999)
shows, there is a possible trade-off between these conditions. Polak
demonstrates that if we assume common knowledge of payoffs (i.e. complete
information) then the common knowledge of rationality is implicit and we do not
need to assume common priors to assure a Nash equilibrium in case of more than
two players (see Theorem B).
.
5.  Experimental Research and  Evolutionary Game Theory

--- Sayfa 32 ---
32
We have seen that the formal apparatus of epistemic games is substantial, even
for a rather simple game as in Figure 4.  Modeling of infinite hierarchies of
conditional probabilities is, in particular,  "costly". Consequently, we can expect
that the analysis of game situations will continue to make use of the Nash
equilibrium and its refinements and other less sophisticated solution concepts.
We have seen that these concepts do not always make sense and sometimes they
describe outcomes that are far off what common sense predicts - and thus
perhaps not very helpful to describe human behavior. They have, however,
immensely helped us to increase our understanding of social interaction as, for
instance, in the fields of industrial organization and of the emergence of norms.15
Moreover, there is work which elaborates the epistemic conditions of solution
concepts (see Aumann, 1995, and Aumann and Brandenburger, 1995) and thus
may help to choose adequate solution concepts or to interpret the results of
applying them adequately.

5. 1 Ultimatum Game and Fairness

Applying solution concepts concurs with our need to reduce complexity and to
apply recipes in real-life decision situations. The implications of the interactive
epistemology concept seem too demanding for real-world decision makers and
even the application of less demanding solution concepts is often constrained by
the human capacity for problem solving - the knowledge of appropriate skills and
their applications and the ability to adequately interpret the results. In many
cases, people neither analyze infinite hierarchies of beliefs nor choose that what
the solution concepts prescribe. For instance, there has been a series tests of the
so-called ultimatum game. The game is as follows: Players 1 and 2 are "invited"
to share $100 subject that they agree how to divide this amount: if they do not

15See Aumann (1985) for this argument.

--- Sayfa 33 ---
33
agree they get nothing. Player 1 is first to make a proposition how to share the
money. Player 2's decision to accept or to reject this proposition concludes the
game. (There is no second round or possibility of renegotiation, etc.).

The nicety of this game is that subgame perfectness describes a
straightforward unique outcome: Player 1 will demand almost all of the money,
and player 2 will accept a share which is as close to zero as the divisibility of the
money allows. There is however ample empirical evidence that real-life decision-
makers do not accept the crumbs assigned to them by this equilibrium if they are
in the position of player 2. Experiments show that they ask for about one quarter
of the money and reject the proposition of player if it offers less than this
share.16

One explanation for this result is that the money does not represent the
preferences such that the players' payoffs in the game are identical with money.
Weibull (2000) maintains that experimental researchers have first of all to test
for the players' payoff functions before they can claim that their experiments
analyze the sharing of a fixed cake and test for subgame perfect outcomes. What
if player 2's payoffs not only depend on his own share but also on the share of the
other player or the distribution of the cake - and apply concepts of fairness to
evaluate the outcome?

Now, if players apply notions of fairness to the ultimatum game then, of
course, the subgame perfect equilibrium is an unlikely outcome even if payoffs
are linear in money. Note that in this case we have two alternatives of modeling
fairness: either as an argument of the payoff function, as implied by Weibull's
proposal, or as the application of a solution concept which is different from
subgame perfectness. It is well known that we can formulate strategy pairs such
that any sharing proposition can be the outcome of a Nash equilibrium - which is,
however, generally not subgame perfect  (see, e.g., Rubinstein, 1982).

16See, e.g.,  Güth and Tietz  (1990),  Binmore et al. (1991), Güth et al. (1996), and Bolle (1990) for
experimental results which falsify the subgame perfectness hypothesis.

--- Sayfa 34 ---
34

Since Nash equilibrium strategies are rationalizable there should be an
epistemic model implying a belief system which supports any specific sharing
proposition. Alternatively, the application of a fairness norm can select a specific
Nash equilibrium. This concurs with Binmore's (widely discussed) view that
morality is merely a means of coordination: "Just as it is actually within our
power to move a bishop like a knight when playing Chess, so we can steal,
defraud, break promises, tell lies, jump lines, talk too much, or eat peas with our
knives when playing a morality game. But rational folk choose not to cheat for
much the same reason that they obey traffic signals" (1998, p.6). The problem
here is that morality is not well defined, e.g., there are almost as many different
notions of fairness as there are applications and it is not obvious how a society
can refer to one of them to coordinate on a Nash equilibrium in a voluntary (and
not exogenously enforceable) way.

5.2 Evolution and Descriptive Theory

Binmore suggests that we leave it to social evolution to develop consistent rules
of fairness which can be applied to solve the coordination problems of a society.
If it does not, and  if there are competing societies which are more successful in
solving the coordination problem, then the society is likely to "die out". Here,
"dying out" could simply mean that the society chooses different rules and thus
becomes a society different from the former one. However, history shows that,
invaded by a competing society (i.e. a mutant), societies also literally vanish
without transforming into another one.

On a personal level, evolution is synonymous with learning rather than
genetic selection: applying new behavioral concepts, new ways of thinking and
forms of social interaction. This can be result of deep insights or intensive
observation of repeating phenomena, scientific studies, or simply imitating other
individuals who are generally more successful - instead of calculating best

--- Sayfa 35 ---
35
replies. In this case, "players need know only what was successful, not why it was
successful" (Mailath, 1998, p. 1355).  Successful behavior thus becomes more
prevalent not only because, for instance, market competition selects against
"unprofitable" behavior, but also because agents imitate successful behavior.
However, imitating successful behavior is not always a successful pattern of
behavior: a market might be large enough for two suppliers but overcrowded if
there are three.17

In a recent paper, Selten and Ostmann (2001) introduce the concept of an
imitation equilibrium. The underlying model consists of a normal form game G
and a reference structure R. The latter assigns a set R(i) of players to each player
i of game G which contains those players "who are sufficiently similar to be
imitated if they are more successful" (p. 113). A second constituent element of
the model is the strategy of explorative deviations of those players who have
profits after imitation which are at least as high as the highest in their reference
groups. Then, an imitation equilibrium is characterized by a strategy vector
which (a) contains no opportunities of profitable imitations and (b) and is stable
against exploratory deviations. Of course, an imitation equilibrium depends (a) on
the reference structure - whether it is universal such that the reference set of a
player is always the set of all other players, or constrained to subsets - and (b) on
the available strategies of exploratory deviations: a global imitation equilibrium
requires stability against any exploratory deviation.

Contrary to genetic evolution, the selection mechanism ("market") in
social evolution is, at least to some extent, subject to the players' discretion and
therefore possibly under the influence of successful social groups or individuals
who are then able "to define the rules of the game". Moreover, social evolution
does not necessarily follow the dynamic patterns of genetic evolution studied in

17Sherman and Willett (1967) contains a market model, which can be modeled as volunteer's dilemma
(see Diekmann, 1985),  in which the threat of potential entry and overcrowding, resulting in losses,
discourages entry if suppliers choose their maximin strategy.

--- Sayfa 36 ---
36
biology: learning can be fast, especially when it is in the form of imitation, and
communication can allow for almost immediate changes on a large scale.

In situations where we lack sufficient observations, learning has to refer to
descriptive theories of game behavior if the decision situation is characterized by
strategic interaction. Experimental studies deliver building blocks for such a
theory: "Typically, such descriptive theories formalize ideas on limited
rationality decision-making. Satisficing and the adaptation of aspiration levels
rather than optimization play an important role" (Selten, 1987, pp. 84f.).

5. 3 An Evolutionary Game

Accordingly, evolutionary game theory takes an equilibrium as the outcome of
adaptation (or learning) and selection rather than as the result of strategic
reasoning by rational agent. This idea has been formalized by two sets of solution
concepts: static equilibrium concepts, the evolutionary stable strategies (ESS)
and its variants, which are closely related to the Nash equilibrium, and a set of
dynamic concepts which examine the stability of the evolutionary process
(asymptotic stability or Liapunov stability). In the latter case, the dynamics of the
process is often described by the standard replicator equation which says that the
growth of state variable xit (in time t) is defined by the difference between its
fitness, f(i,xt), and the average fitness of the population, f(xt,xt) where xt is a
vector which has the elements xit  with i = 1,...,n. Here, xit can be the share of a
social group in a population, or the share of a strategy (or a mode of behavior)
picked by a set of players. In the latter case, fitness can be identified by payoffs.

The formal expression of the replicator function is:

(R)
       dxit/dt = xit [f(i,xt) - f(xt,xt)]

--- Sayfa 37 ---
37
A state is a rest point if the state variables xit, i = 1, ....,n, do not change, i.e., if
dxit/dt = 0  holds for all derivatives with respect to time t. A rest point is
Liapunov stable if the dynamic process does not take states which are close to
the rest point far away in case that the system is destabilized by a external shock.
A rest point is asymptotically stable if any  dynamically process which starts
sufficiently close to the rest point converges to this rest point. The specification
of closeness decides whether the dynamic model is globally or only locally
asymptotically stable. If the basin of attraction covers the full domain of each
state variable, then the dynamic system is globally stable.
Figure 6: Rest Points and Liapunov Stability
                        Player 2

L
R
                           Player 1
T
(1,1)
(1,0)

B
(1,1)
(0,0)

We can illustrate some of these concepts by means of the game in Figure 6.18
First, we can observe that the game has two obvious Nash equilibria in pure
strategies, however, any mixed strategy on T and B is part of a Nash equilibrium if
player 2 picks L. But all Nash equilibria of this game are weak. To prepare for the
evolutionary interpretation of the game, we assume that p is the share of strategy
T in the population of player 1: either we assume that population 1 consists of  p
players of type 1 who pick T and (1-p) players of this type who pick B, or we
think of  type 1 players who randomize on picking T and B with probabilities p
and (1-p). Correspondingly, q represents the probability (or share) of L in
population 2.

We now describe the possible development of pt and qt by means of
replicator functions of the type in (R). We get:

18The game is in Samuelson and Zhang (1992); we follow its use and interpretation in Mailath (1998).

--- Sayfa 38 ---
38

(R1)               dpt/dt = pt (1-pt)(1- qt)    and

(R2)
dqt/dt = qt (1- qt)

These two differential equations indicate that the system has a rest point for qt =
1; irrespective of pt, i.e., the composition or behavior of population 1. If qt = 1
both (R1) and (R2) are zero, i.e., nothing will change as long as there is no
external shock such that an agent chooses a different strategy. Moreover, the
system will not be destabilized if there is an external shock so that pt changes as
long qt = 1. However, what happens if "suddenly" some members of population 2
choose R instead of L such that qt < 1. (Of course, this change in behavior is not
"rational" because the R strategy is strictly dominated by L.) As a consequence we
expect from (R2) that the qt will grow  till qt = 1is achieved and, again, all
members of population 2 pick L. Moreover, we expect from (R1) that pt , the
share of members of population 1 who pick T, will increase till either qt = 1 or pt
= 1 or both conditions are satisfied. If pt is far away from pt = 1 while qt is close
to qt =  1, since the shock which lead to qt  <1 was small, then we expect that qt =
1 is reached before pt = 1and there will be a new rest point (pt',1) close the
combination (pt,1) which characterized the earlier rest point (with t' > t). Thus the
rest points of the dynamic system described by (R1) and (R2) are Liapunov
stable. However, they are not asymptotically stable because the derivatives in
(R1) and (R2) are nonnegative and external shocks will always lead to an increase
of pt  until pt =1 is reached. As a consequence, an earlier rest point can never be
reached after a perturbation which affected qt. The exception seems to be with
state pt =1 and qt = 1. A shock in qt , which implies that parts of the population 2
play R, induces a growth of  qt till qt = 1 is reached while  pt ( = 1) will not
change. However, if there is (only) a perturbation in pt such  pt  < 1 and  qt = 1,

--- Sayfa 39 ---
39
then it follows from the replicator functions that no forces exist that bring pt
back to pt = 1. Thus, the state pt =1 and qt = 1 is not asymptotically stable.

5.4 Evolutionary Solution Concepts

For the analysis of an evolutionary game the dynamics is often of interest in
order to see whether the game describes a stable environment: Liapunov stable or
even asymptotically stable. If not, the social or political controller (e.g.,
government) might consider to modify the game, possibly by changing the
payoffs. Evolutionary game also offers static concepts, like ESS, to analyze
stability problems, which are inherently dynamic, without explicitly analyzing
dynamics. A (monomorphic) population is evolutionary stable if it satisfies the
following condition (ESS) if a "mutant strategy" m invades the established
population described by strategy s.

(ESS)
There is a ε° such that for every ε < ε° :

(1-ε)f(s,s) + εf(s,m) > (1-ε)f(m,s) + εf(m,m)

Note that the left-hand side of this inequality represents the expected fitness of
the "established strategy" s, where f(s,s) is the fitness of s when meeting a
strategy of the same kind and f(s,m) is the fitness of s when meeting a mutant
strategy. The right-hand side represents the expected fitness of the mutant m
where f(m,s) and f(m,m) express the fitness of m when m meets s and  m,
respectively.

The value of ε° can be very small, in any case, the inequality condition has
to hold for all ε < ε°. Thus, if we find a very small ε°, so that entry of m is only
"marginal", and the inequality condition in ESS holds, then the population s is
evolutionary stable. ESS implies that

(i)  f(s,s) ≥ f(m,s) and

--- Sayfa 40 ---
40

(ii) if f(s,s) = f(m,s) then  f(s,m) > f(m,m)
It is straightforward from (i) that ESS implies a Nash equilibrium where m
represents the possible deviation. It is also straightforward that there are Nash
equilibria which do not satisfy ESS, e.g., if  f(s,s) = f(s,m) = f(m,m) holds for all
and the Nash equilibrium (s,s) is weak.

Static solution concepts to evolution seem especially appropriate when
the dynamics of social evolution is not continuous and the replicator functions
are inappropriate. I have argued above that learning can be fast and
communication can allow for almost immediate changes on a large scale. It
therefore seems appropriate to consider values of ε° which are non-marginal
when we apply ESS to human interaction. For example, Peters (1997) discusses a
modified ESS-concept for the analysis of larger invasions by making ε° an
exogenous parameter. He applies this concept to the emergence of standards
where critical mass effects and threshold values are substantial and
communication and learning are essential.

There is a strong relationship between static solution concepts, such as
ESS and Nash equilibrium,  the stability results of the dynamic analysis captured
by the replicator function.19 For example, if a state xt is asymptotically stable
then it coincides with a Nash equilibrium. If  xt satisfies ESS then it is
asymptotically stable if the continuous replicator dynamics apply. However,
asymptotically stable rest points of the replicator dynamics do not necessarily
satisfy ESS, e.g, if some of the mutants are  considered with zero probabilities,
only.

If a game is asymmetric, like in Figure 6, then a Nash equilibrium is
asymptotically stable if and only if it is strict (which is not the case in the game
of Figure 6) and the dynamics is described by replicator functions. However, if a
game is asymmetric then ESS does not exist. ESS exists for the symmetrized

19Results are summerized, e.g. in Mailath (1998).

--- Sayfa 41 ---
41
game, where players have equal chances to be in the alternative roles which imply
the asymmetry, if a strict Nash equilibrium exists for this game. From this we can
conclude that ESS is a more rigorous concept for testing stability than
asymptotic stability while the latter is more rigorous in this test than the Nash
equilibrium concept. The Nash equilibrium is, however, more rigorous than the
rest point concept. For instance, if only strategy R will be played in the game of
Figure 6, so that qt = 0 then the state pt =1 and qt = 0 is a rest point, but not an
equilibrium.

These results can be directly applied to problem of equilibrium selection
which,  however, is only relevant if one works in this category. We have outlined
a series of  arguments above which do not necessarily support this approach. But
the evolutionary approach does give a nice interpretation of mixed strategy by
means of introducing heteromorphous populations with members who
characterized by different pure strategies. (See the game in Figure 6 above.)
Unfortunately, so far no systematic analysis exists which relates the formation of
beliefs with the evolutionary approach. Are we more successful, i.e., more likely
to survive, if we solve the epistemic game for infinite levels of belief formation?
Or should we simply be more optimistic about the beliefs which other players
have about ourselves?

6. Final Remarks

The hypothesis of the above brief history of game theory is that the various stages
of its development are the result of different assumptions on the nature of the
decision makers, i.e., of the "image of man" underlying the various approaches.
This explains why I did not discuss cooperative game theory which is
characterized by the assumption that the players can make binding (and
enforceable) agreements. As a consequence, the coordination of strategies and

--- Sayfa 42 ---
42
solving conflicts are no problem if player want to solve them. What remains is
the question on what result the players will agree.20

Of course, this brief history has omitted many issues of game theory but
my intention was not to give a complete overview - only to discuss the changes in
"style" and to relate them to changes in the "image of man".

20See, e.g., Owen (1995) for the Nash solution ( pp. 190-197), the core and stable sets (pp. 218-232) and
related solution concepts of cooperative game theory.

--- Sayfa 43 ---
43
References

Allais, M.. (1953). Le comportment de L'homme rational devant le risque:
critique des postulats et axiomes de L'Ecole Americaine. Econometrica, 21,
503-546

Allen, R.G.D. (1960). Mathematical Economics (2nd edition). London:
MacMillan.

Andreozzi, L. (2001). Oscillations in the enforcement of law: An evolutionary
analysis. Homo Oeconomicus, 18, forthcoming.

Aumann, R.J. (1985). On the non-transferable utility value: a comment on the
Roth-Shafer examples. Econometrica, 53, 667-677.

Aumann, R.J. (1987). What is game theory trying to accomplish? In K.J. Arrow
and S. Honkapohja (Eds.), Frontiers of economics (pp. 28-76). Oxford:
Blackwell.

Aumann, R.J. (1999a). Interactive epistemology I: Knowledge. International
Journal of Game Theory, 28, 263-300.

Aumann, R.J. (1999b). Interactive epistemology I: Knowledge. International
Journal of Game Theory, 28, 301-314.

Aumann, R. and Brandenburger, A. (1995). Epistemic conditions for Nash
equilibrium. Econometrica, 63, 1161-1180.

Battigalli, P. (1997). On rationalizability in extensive games. Journal of
Economic Theory, 74, 40-61.

Battigalli, P., and Bonanno, B. (1999). Editors' note. Research in Economics, 53,
113-116.

Battigalli, P., and Siniscalchi, M. (1999). Hierarchies of conditional beliefs and
interactive epistemology in dynamic games. Journal of Economic Theory, 88,
188-230.

Baumol, W. J. (1972). Economic Theory and Operations Analysis (3rd ed.).
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Bernheim, D. (1984). Rationalizable strategic behavior. Econometrica, 52, 1002-
1028.

--- Sayfa 44 ---
44
Binmore, K. (1998), Just Playing: Game Theory and the Social Contract,
Volume II. Cambridge, Mass., and London: MIT Press.

Binmore, K., Morgan, P., Shaked, A., and  Sutton, J. (1991). Do people exploit
their bargaining power? An experimental study. Games and Economic Behavior,
3, 295-322.

Bolle, F. (1990). High reward experiments without high expenditure for the
experimenter? Journal of Economic Psychology, 11, 157-167.

Cho, I.K., and  Kreps, D. (1987). Signalling games and stable equilibria.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 102, 179-221.

Diekmann, A. (1985). Volunteer's dilemma. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 29,
605-610.

Feyerabend, P. (1984). Wissenschaft als Kunst. Frankfurt: Suhrkamp Verlag.

Frey, B.S., and Holler, M.J. (1998). Tax compliance policy reconsidered. Homo
Oeconomicus, 15, 27-44.

Frohn, J., Güth, W., Kliemt, H., and Selten, R. (2001). Editors' introduction to
"Making Choices I". Homo Oeconomicus, 18, 1-17.

Güth, W. and Tietz, R. (1990). Ultimatum bargaining behavior – a survey and
comparison of experimental results. Journal of Economic Psychology, 11, 417-
449.

Güth, W., Huck, S., and Ockenfels, P. (1996). Two level ultimatum bargaining
with incomplete information: an experimental study. Economic Journal, 106,
593-604.

Harsanyi, J.C. (1967/68). Games with incomplete information played by
'Bayesian' players. Management Science, 14, 159-182, 320-334, and 486-502.

Harsanyi, J.C. (1973). Games with randomly distributed payoffs: a new rational
for mixed-strategy equilibrium points. International Journal of Game Theory,
2, 1-23.

Harsanyi, J.C. (1977). Rational behavior and bargaining  in games and social
situations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

--- Sayfa 45 ---
45
Harsanyi, J.C. (1992). In defense of game theory. Rationality and Society, 4, 51-
61.

Holler, M.J. (1990). The unprofitability of mixed strategy equilibria in two-
person games. Economics Letters, 32,  319-323.

Kahneman, D., and Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An analysis of decision
under risk. Econometrica, 47, 263-291.

Knight, F. H. (1921). Risk, uncertainty and profit. Boston: Houghton-Mifflin.

Kreps, D.M., and Wilson, R. (1982a). Sequential equilibrium. Econometrica, 50,
863-894.

Kreps, D.M., and Wilson, R. (1982b). Reputation and imperfect information.
Journal of Economic Theory, 27,  253-279.

Luce, R.D., and Raiffa, H. (1957). Games and decisions: Introduction and
critical survey. New York: Wiley.

Machina, M.J. (1987). Choice under uncertainty: Problems solved and unsolved.
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 1, 121-154.

Mailath, G. J. (1998). Do people play Nash equilibrium? Lessons from
evolutionary game theory. Journal of Economic Literature, 36, 1347-1374.

Morgenstern, O. (1976). Perfect foresight and economic equilibrium. In A.
Schotter (ed.), Selected economic writings of Oskar Morgenstern (pp. 169-
181), New York: New York University Press. (This article originally appeared in
Zeitschrift für Nationalökonomie, 6, Part 3, 1935.)

Nash, J.F. (1951). Non-cooperative games. Annals of Mathematics, 54, 286-
295.

Owen, G. (1995), Game Theory, 3rd edition. New York: Academic Press.

Pearce, D. (1984). Rationalizable strategic behavior and the problem of
perfection. Econometrica, 52, 1029-1050.

Peters, R. (1997). The stability of networks: an evolutionary approach to
standardization. Homo Oeconomicus, 14, 347-355.

Polak, B. (1999). Epistemic conditions for Nash equilibrium, and common
knowledge of rationality. Econometrica, 67, 673-676.

--- Sayfa 46 ---
46
Rives, N.W. (1975). On the history of the mathematical theory of games. History
of Political Economy, 7, 549-565.

Rubinstein, A. (1982). Perfect equilibrium in a bargaining model, Econometrica,
50, 97-111.

Rubinstein, A. (1998). Similarity and decision-making under risk (Is there a
utility theory resolution to the Allais paradox?). Journal of Economic Theory,
46, 145-153.

Rubinstein, A. (2000), Economics and language: Five essays. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Samuelson, L., and Zhang, J. (1992). Evolutionary stability in asymmetric games.
Journal of Economics Theory, 57, 363-391.

Schwalbe, U., and Walker, P. (2001). Zermelo and the early history of game
theory. Games and Economic Behavior, 34, 123-137.

Selten, R. (1975). Reexamination of the perfectness concept for equilibrium
points in extensive games. International Journal of Game Theory, 4, 25-55.

Selten, R. (1987), Comment on "R.J. Aumann,What is game theory trying to
accomplish?" In K.J. Arrow and S. Honkapohja (Eds.), Frontiers of economics
(pp. 77-87). Oxford: Blackwell.

Selten, R., and Ostmann, A. (2001). Imitation equilibrium. Homo Oeconomicus,
18, 111-150.

Sherman, R, and Willett, T.D. (1967). Potential entrants discourage entry.
Journal of Political Economy, 75, 400-403.

Tan, T. C.-C., and da Costa Werlang, S.R. (1988), The Bayesian foundations of
solution concepts of games. Journal of Economic Theory, 45, 370-391.

von Neumann, J.,  and Morgenstern, O. (1944), The theory of games and
economic behavior. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Weibull, J.W. (2000). Testing game theory. Stockholm School of Economics,
SSE/EF1 Working Paper Series in Economics and Finance, No. 382.

Vilks, A. (2001). What is a game? The winner tales it all.  In F. Bolle and M.
Carlberg (eds.), Advances in behavioral economics. Essays in honor of Horst
Todt (pp. 87-96), Heidelberg and New York: Physica-Verlag.