--- Sayfa 2 ---
The
Innermost Secrets
of the
Illuminati
Beckon You
They vowed you would never know. They thought there was no way you
could possibly unmask the sick things they have been hiding. They were
wrong. Now, thanks to the incredible revelations in this amazing book,
you can discover their innermost secrets. You can identify the members
of the Illuminati and unravel their astonishing plan to control and
manipulate. You can crack the Illuminati code.
They Have Their Own Hidden Language
Codex Magica is awesome in its scope and revelations. It contains over
1,000 actual photographs and illustrations. You'll see with your own eyes
the world's leading politicians and celebrities —including America's richest
and most powerful —caught in the act as they perform occult magic. Once
you understand their covert signals and coded picture messages, your
world will never be the same. Destiny will be made manifest. You will
know the truth and everything will become clear.
Texe Marrs is author of over 37 books, including the #1 bestseller
Dark Secrets of the New Age and Circle of Intrigue: The Hidden
Inner Circle of the Global Illuminati Conspiracy. A retired career
U.S. Air Force officer, he has taught at the University of Texas at
Austin and has appeared on radio and TV talk shows across America.

--- Sayfa 3 ---
Last night I saw upon the stair
a little man who wasn't there.
He wasn't there again today.
Oh gee, I wish he'd go away!
—Old Nursery Rhyme

--- Sayfa 4 ---
TABLE OF
Contents
INTRODUCTION: The Occult Script-A Colossal and Monstrous Conspiracy
9
1
Caution!—You Are Now Entering the Forbidden Zone
1 5
2
The Megalomania of the Psychopaths—Why The llluminati Do What They Do 25
3
Concealed Messages—The Importance of Hand Signs to the llluminati
45
4
Hidden Hand of the Men of Jahbuhlun
53
5
For He's a Jolly Good Fellow—Sign of the Devil's Claw
81
By the Men of the Craft
6
Baphles Me!—Horned Beasts, Leaping Goats, Satanic Beards,
97
and Other Messages of Evil
7
"El Diablo" Shows His Horns-The Devil Rides Out!
119
8
Secret Handshakes of the llluminati
145
9
A Show of Hands—llluminists Employ the Grand Hailing Sign and the Sign 177
of Admiration and Astonishment
10
"I Gruesomely Swear That I'm On the Square"—More Revealing Signs
189
of llluminati Cultists
11
"Cross My Heart and Hope to Die"—The Mysterious "X" Factor
205
12 That Ravenous Dark Bird—Sublime Mysteries of the Illuminati's
241
Double-Headed Eagle
1 3 The Riddle of the Great Seal of the United States, and the All-Seeing Eye
265
of the Serpent of Wisdom

--- Sayfa 5 ---
14
"Silence, Slaves, or We'll Cur Your Throat From Ear to Ear!''
285
15
Up to Their Necks in Mischief
295
16
Hand On Heart—Sign of Devotion to the Chiefs
307
17
Triangles Up, Triangles Down, Triangles, Triangles All Around
327
18
Black Magic, Masonic Witchcraft, and Triangle Powers
361
19
Part Devil, Part Angel
393
20
The Merovingian Dynasty, The Priory of Sion, and the Spear of Longinus
405
21
Magical Signs of the Jewish Cabala—The Six-Pointed Star, Babylonian
419
Witchcraft, and the Hollywood Perdition of Jerry Seinfeld and Associates
22
Scorched by the Sun—Solar Signs, Circles, and Serpents
459
23
"I Fell In To A Burning Ring of Fire"—Arnold Schwarzenegger's
483
Masonic Ring, Newt Gingrich's T-Rex Dinosaur, and Other
Mysterious Messages on Rings and Neckties of the Elite
24
OK-Sign of the Divine King
501
2 5
Victory For the Devil—Fabulous Exploits of Sir Winston Churchill
517
and Other Druid Priests and llluminati Servants
26
"Every Man and Woman Is a Star"
537
27
Lightning Fall From Heaven
557
28
Blood Red—Red Stars, Clenched Fists, Hammers and Sickles,
563
and Other Signs and Symbols of Communist Intrigue
Footnotes and References
589
Index
599
More Resources For You
621
About the Author, Texe Marrs
623

--- Sayfa 6 ---
INTRODUCTION
The Occult Script—A Colossal and
Monstrous Conspiracy
But let the Spirit of all lies with works of dazzling magic blind you. Then absolutely
mine, I'll have and bind you.
The Devil, Faust
Play by Goethe (1749-1832)
They're everywhere. Cleverly disguised. On TV, imbedded in magazines,
and lurking in powerful advertising. Sometimes they're subtle or
subliminal, other times direct, provocative, and mind-bending in effect.
Strange symbols, signs, charms, talismans, and handshakes that program and control
our minds.
Henry Makow, astute inventor and essayist, says that they are key components of
the satanic conspiracy that now confronts us with maximum force and evil. "This
satanic conspiracy," Makow warns, "succeeds only because people cannot believe
something so colossal and monstrous actually exists."1
The world is a contest for our souls. The people who are pushing products,
violence, and sex are not operating on a random, 'whatever sells' basis. They have
Masonic symbols in their logos. The top players are following an occult script
designed to enslave us body and soul. They are building a gigantic prison based on
their own mental hell. This is the New World Order; we are the inmates.2
It is, in fact, "satanic indoctrination," Makow emphasizes, and we are all locked
into the prison classroom as this mental poison from hell is piped in to us 24 hours a
day, seven days a week.

--- Sayfa 7 ---
10
CODEX MAGICA
A Psychological Matrix
In this eye-opening book, Codex Magica, you will discover just how accurate and true
are the warnings of Mr. Makow and just a few others. Most people, of course, are so
far gone, their minds so awash with occultism acquired from decades of propaganda
encountered on every side, they cannot any longer decipher reality. The majority are
caught in some form of Psychological Matrix. Tragically, hundreds of millions of
people have, in a manner of speaking, become "Manchurian Candidates." They eat,
breathe, move, and sleep as if in a trance. Immobile, unable to react, afflicted with
amnesia, they are like Pontius Pilate who, when confronted with Jesus Christ
standing right in front of him, the very essence of unmovable Truth, asked Christ the
question. "What is truth?"
Well, here, in Codex Magica, in over 600 incredible pages, is truth. Here you will
see pictures of many of the foremost movers and shakers of human history, ancient
and modern, as they secretly communicate through sign and symbol. Naturally, the
elite do not relish being exposed in their dirty works and evil doing. They and their
dumbed-down minions —I am referring to the overwhelming "see no evil, hear no
evil" masses of people in society—can be expected to quickly jump to the attack and
attempt to deny it all. Through sleight-of-hand, they will do their utmost to divert
your attention. "The pictures are taken out of context," they will protest. "The images
are not what they seem."
"Here, listen to us," they will implore, "it's not what it looks like. Let us explain
it all to you."
"Don't be hasty now in your judgment," they'll cry. "You and I know that
conspiracies don't really exist. Everything is okay, nothing is amiss. It is all just an
accident, nothing to fret about."
"Are You Going to Believe Your Lying Eyes?"
Their weak and idiotic protestations remind us of the famous TV comedian, Groucho
Marx. Groucho enjoyed retelling the story of the time a startled wife came home to
find her adulterous husband in bed with another woman. "It's not what you think," he
assured her. "Are you going to believe what I tell you, or are you going to believe your lying
eyes?"
Thank God we no longer have to believe what they, the Illuminati, and their lying
accomplices in the media and government tell us. We can lay their propaganda aside
and view the actual evidence through the prism of truth with our own eyes. This
book is the result of over two decades of research. I believe it speaks for itself. The
pictures, illustrations, and proofs contained in these pages do, in my opinion,
document a monstrous conspiracy that surrounds and envelops us.
It may well be that some, a few, of the photographs, are not what they appear to
be. We all know that it is possible, for example, that photographers took shots of
certain people as their hands, fingers, arms, and bodies were inadvertently in odd
positions. A picture may be worth a thousand words, as the old Chinese proverb
says, but even pictures can be deceiving.
And so, I leave it all up to you to decide, dear reader. Do these proofs provide

--- Sayfa 8 ---
INTRODUCTION
11
evidence of these peoples' involvement in nefarious, Masonic, occultic, or magical
activity or not? You be the judge.
To help you make a decision, often included in the captions that accompany the
photos and illustrations is commentary that helps one to better analyze the situation
or scene that is pictured. When possible, I present evidence and information
outlining the individual's membership in the Masonic Lodge, the Rosicrucian Order,
or other globalist or occultic groups, secret societies, and organizations. This is done
as an aid to your independent decision-making.
Sometimes, I admit, it is difficult from the picture alone to ascertain whether a
person, or persons, are displaying a Masonic or other sign, or to tell for sure that an
occultic pose or scene is being portrayed. Again, the author does his best to offer up
evidence, such as pages, excerpts, and descriptions of such signs and poses from
official textbooks, dictionaries, and encyclopedias of the Masonic Order or
illustrations and examples by experts and authorities.
In some instances, it is unclear what exactly is transpiring in a photo because the
intent, or motive, of the individual subject cannot be discerned. We cannot read
peoples' minds, and so we must judge based on the photographic evidence. For
example, there is much confusion today over the hand sign of the devil called "El
Diablo" or "Il Carnuto." Many confuse this sign of evil with the sign of the deaf for
"I love you" and with the sign given by many to indicate youthful rebellion, sex, and
rock and roll.
In the section of Codex Magica that pictures a number of people giving this
problematic sign, I therefore explain the difference in types of hand signs and discuss
the ongoing controversy in an attempt to clear up some of the confusion. Readers
may just find the clarifying information presented here revealing, to say the least.
All in all you will view in Codex Magica over 1,000 photos and illustrations
documenting Illuminists, Satanists, and other elitists practicing magic. Even if the
skeptics and naysayers were able to explain away a few of these proofs, the
remainder would be sufficient aplenty to prove the thesis of this book. That, indeed,
a massive conspiratorial network of occult magicians exists today and has existed
throughout human history.
From the perspective of the occult researcher and investigator, the key to
understanding the precarious world we live in is the recognition that a consistent
pattern exists. A criminal is often convicted by an overwhelming preponderance of
circumstantial evidence, even when no direct evidence — like a smoking gun—is
produced. But in our case, in Codex Magica, we do produce a convincing array of
direct evidence, along with many facts that connect the dots, to conclusively prove
the continuing existence of an occult conspiracy. Over 600 pages of photographic
evidence and materials cannot all be wrong.
Exercising Fairness and Good Judgment
I wish to emphasize that I accuse no one pictured herein of being a Satanist or
occultist. Their being pictured here does not mean that individuals are necessarily
members of the Order of the Illuminati or prove anything whatsoever about their
social, political, religious ideology or other beliefs. Nor am I implying, suggesting,

--- Sayfa 9 ---
12
CODEX MAGICA
or stating that the men and women pictured are knowingly involved in any type of
plot, satanic or otherwise.
My friends are fully aware that over the years, I have authored and produced
numerous books, audiotapes, and videos on the subject of mysterious marks,
symbols, signs, and logos, including such bestseller classics as Dark Secrets of the New
Age, Mystery Mark of the New Age, and Circle of Intrigue. As such, the reader should
realize that the information in my books and other works is based solely on my own
opinion. True, I do my level best to judge things accurately and to marshall relevant
facts and data that might bear; but ultimately, the reader or viewer must decide if he
or she concurs with the author's judgements and opinions. As the cliche of a well-
known TV news network so often echoes, "We report, you decide."
Those who have read and evaluated my past works know that I am always
concerned and desirous of presenting accurate information. I invite anyone who
believes the facts and analysis, or even the opinions expressed herein are incorrect or
incomplete to promptly inform me of such. I am more than willing to make
corrections or retractions based on the best evidence.
Deciphering A Mountain of Data
One of the problems inherent in an undertaking so vast as this book is that the subject
matter is so broad and complex. There are literally thousands of secret signs, grips,
and symbols to consider in evaluating photographic evidence. My opponents—the
men of the secret societies and the Illuminists—would agree that this is the case. In
the Royal Arch Mason, an official publication of Freemasonry, Dr. William L.
Cummings commented on how many hundreds of rites, rituals, and degrees
existed.3
Obviously, in each of the hundreds of ceremonies a number of secret handshakes
and signs are taught and practiced. Thus, Cummings remarks, Masons themselves
are in a state of confusion:
It generally comes as a surprise and sometimes as a shock when the Mason who has
never given any attention to the subject learns at least a hundred Masonic and
quasi-Masonic rites and systems have existed and no less than eight hundred so-
called Masonic degrees have been revised.4
Royal Arch Mason editor Ray V. Denshaw wryly comments that a long-time
Mason of reputation may be asked, "How many of the hundreds of degrees have you
received? Have you received the Rite of Memphis of 90 degrees? Or the Rectified
Rite? Or the Swedenborgian Rite?"5
Moreover, Masons affiliated with the Grand Lodge of the Orient in Paris, the
United Lodge in London, or the Grand Masonic Lodge of Israel, may well utilize
signs and handshakes not used, seen, or understood in other orders.
Then, of course,
there is the Order of the Rosicrucians, the Order of the
Trapezoid, The Priory of Sion, The Alta Vendita, the P2 Lodge, the Solar Order of the
Temple, the modern-day Knights Templar, the Vatican's Knights of Malta and
Knights of Columbus, the Order of the Odd Fellows, the Order of Ahepa, the Order

--- Sayfa 10 ---
INTRODUCTION
13
of Skull and Bones, the Bohemian Club, the Pilgrims Society, and a thousand or more
other secret societies and orders, not to mention the many Jewish cabalistic groups,
satanic churches, and witchcraft and druid sects.
Knowledge of Secret Signs Opens Doors
British Satanist Aleister Crowley, a man who fancied himself the "wickedest man on
the planet," was Grand Master of the Ordo Templi Orientis (O.T.O.) and also
founded the mysterious and Luciferian, Order of Astrum Argentinium. He once
ruefully and knowingly intimated that after he had independently learned and
practiced how to do the secret handshakes of a number of other secret societies and
orders throughout Europe, he traveled around from city to city and discovered that
by knowing how to convey the appropriate handshake, he was invited into what is
normally the guarded inner sanctum of almost all the groups. They were persuaded
simply by his handshake that Crowley was eligible to attend their conclaves and be
made privy to their most closely guarded secrets.
The average Mason or member of other secret orders knows little of the signs and
symbols of his own order, let alone that of others. In my work for this book, I have
communicated with a number of ex-Masons, but few were able to identify any but
the most rudimentary of signs and symbols. I did far better with Masonic
encyclopedias and with modern and ancient magical texts and guides.
I Give Credit to...
In addition to the individuals listed in the acknowledgements of the title page, I
would also like to acknowledge the assistance of a few very special friends was
invaluable to me in preparing this book. I'd like, therefore, to give credit to:
•
Lawrence Patterson, publisher of Criminal Politics magazine and one of the
world's leading experts on global finances and investments.
•
Alex Jones, well-known radio personality and top-notch producer of many videos
documenting the rise of the police state.
•
Dr. Cathy Burns, author of the excellent Masonic and Occult Symbols Illustrated, as
well as The Hidden Secrets of the Eastern Star.
•
Dean Grace, author of A Little Guide to the All-Seeing Eye Symbol On Our Dollar Bill.
•
Ralph Epperson, author of Masonry: Conspiracy Against Christianity, The Unseen
Hand, and other fine books.
•
Dr. Gail Riplinger, author of the bestselling classic, New Age Bible Versions.
•
David Meyer, occult researcher and publisher of Last Trumpet newsletter.
•
Michael Hoffman, II, author of the groundbreaking book, Secret Societies and
Psychological Warfare.
•
Fritz Springmeier, author of Bloodlines of the Illuminati and other revealing works.
•
Robert Gaylon Ross, author of Who's Who of the Elite and The Elite Don't Dare Let
Us Tell the People.
I also wish to acknowledge the late Jim Shaw and Jim Keith, Bill Schnoebelen, Tom

--- Sayfa 11 ---
14
CODEX MAGICA
McKenney, Ed Decker, James Spencer, David Bay, Dr. Dennis Cuddy, Reginald
Haupt, Jr., Dr. O.J. Graham, Jeff Rense, Des Griffin, Gary Blevins, Dr. Stanley
Monteith, Jack Chick, Ted Pike, Donn de Grande Pre, Jack Roper, and Juri Lina, all of
whose authoritative research and writings provided me with valuable information as
well as incalculable inspiration.
Hands On Membership Not Required
Illuminati paid provocateurs and other would-be critics might suggest that because
you and I are not Masons or Illuminists, my research in Codex Magica—or your own
independent research—has no authority. In answer, I am happy to respond by noting
that the best of homicide detectives have never been murdered nor participated in
such; few lifeguards have had an incident in which they were drowning and required
assistance; most lawyers have never been sued; most psychiatrists have never been
admitted as a patient to a mental institution; most neurosurgeons have never had
brain surgery; most sports writers have never played pro-football or pro-baseball yet
they report and comment on the same; most prison wardens have never themselves
been locked up as convicts, and no historians have lived in the past centuries of
history about which they amass information and facts and comment about.
It doesn't take a monster to know that human monsters exist or a serial killer to
know that murdering innocent people involves savage and evil acts. And there is
abundant evidence that exists about the Illuminati and secret societies so that we do
not have to join and participate in these repugnant groups to know what they are all
about. Codex Magica proves that.
A Challenge to Critics
I hereby challenge any and all Masons and other members of secret societies to meet
me on neutral ground with neutral observers in a contest, a duel of wits, if you will, to
see who knows more about the subject matter presented in this book. Until such time
as the critic accepts my challenge and is willing to publicly display that he knows as
much or more about secret handshakes and grips, symbols, marks, logos and other
occultic matters, I suggest that the critic shrink back to the shadowy confines of his
Masonic Temple, synagogue, or shrine and refrain from empty, futile criticism.
As for those skeptics and naysayers who get their kicks by pretending to know —
just know! —that these things cannot be true, that "conspiracies" just do not exist and
who maintain that anyone who even dares to mention the existence of any group
called the "Illuminati" just has to be wrong, may I humbly recommend that they
earnestly burn the midnight oil, carefully read this book, and examine the evidence
in a fair-minded and objective manner? Many a friend has written telling the author
that he likewise was once a doubter and skeptic, until, that is, he had heard and
considered all the evidence. In this regard, the Holy Scriptures have a tremendous bit
of advice worthy of consideration:
He that answereth a matter before he heareth it, it is folly and shame unto him.
-Proverbs 18:13

--- Sayfa 12 ---
ONE
Caution!—You Are Now Entering The
Forbidden Zone
Only puny secrets need protection. Big discoveries are protected by public
incredulity.
— Marshall McLuhan
Take Today
What is one to do when, in order to rule men, it is necessary to deceive them?
— Helena Blavatsky
The Secret Doctrine
What you will read and see in this book is forbidden to you.
Discovering these things could be highly dangerous to your health.
Forbidden knowledge is sweet, but also deadly. Many men have
died for revealing far fewer secrets than are found herein.
I am not being overdramatic nor attempting to be sensationalist. This is a
warning: Make very sure that you possess the daring and the courage to proceed
before you go any further.
Lingering in my mind are the names of courageous men who have gone before
you and I and are now dead because they exposed the forbidden knowledge of the
Illumined Ones. Captain William Morgan — abducted, kidnapped and ritually
murdered, his lifeless body dumped in a lake after he published a book unmasking
Masonic secrets. Danny Casolaro—suicided, having his wrists cut and bleeding to
death in a hotel room where he had gone to meet a confidential source; Paul Wilcher,

--- Sayfa 13 ---
16
CODEX MAGICA
found nude, his body stiff as it sat on a toilet in his home, only days after he mailed
his expose manuscript to U.S. Attorney-General Janet Reno; and Wolfgang Amadeus
Mozart, the world-famous classical composer, who paid the ultimate penalty, the
Aqua Toffeta, arsenic poisoning that wracked his body.
Poor Mozart. He, too, had revealed some of the secrets of Freemasonry.
Blackballed by The Order, so frightened were his friends and family that not one
human soul so much as attended his funeral. It is said that Mozart's faithful dog
followed dutifully behind the lonely funeral wagon. The sad and forlorn canine was
the only living creature in sight as the body of the man all of Europe had once toasted
and applauded was taken to its burial site.
So, I ask you, dear friend, once again: Do you dare to discover the secrets many
have been punished for merely knowing, let alone revealing? Are you sure, very
sure, you want to enter the Forbidden Zone?
Immersed In Evil
You see, we are surrounded by evil on every side—quite literally immersed in it—
but the wicked and the deceivers want us to believe that evildoing is exceptional.
From childhood we have been taught that evil and corruption are the province of the
few, that most people are virtuous, honest, and good, that most of our politicians
truly have our interests at heart, that the social system, with the exception of just a
few deviants and criminal types, is basically sound.
With such assurances, most people breathe a deep sigh of relief. "Don't worry, be
happy," said the words of a fun-time novelty song a decade ago. And most of us
appreciate and agree with that sentiment. After all, it's not nice to be negative, to be
a skeptic in the midst of a nation of wannabe happy faces.
Unfortunately, the masses who believe this nonsense have been gulled and are
destined to receive, very soon, a rude shock and an abrupt awakening.
Grand Deception
As Christopher Mark observed recently in an insight-filled article entitled "Grand
Deception: The Theft of America and the World," "The world is completely corrupt
beyond your wildest dreams, and the United States is, perhaps, the most gullible of
all nations."1 Mark goes on to explain:
For now, grasp this: The world you believe exists does not exist. We live in a form
of the Matrix, not unlike the world portrayed in John Carpenter's movie, "They
Live," except that high government officials and international bankers are the elite
who control all you see and hear as did the aliens portrayed in the movie. 2
But, the foolish may object, we have the media to protect us from the corrupt. We
cannot be deceived as long as there is a free press to act as our watchdog.
Ah, but there's the rub. There is no free press! Christopher Mark adds:
The news is a farce. As is the case with the financial institutions, which are

--- Sayfa 14 ---
CAUTION! - YOU ARE ENTERING THE FORBIDDEN ZONE 17
concentrated in the hands of the few, long ago the media was bought and paid
for...What you read and what you see on a daily basis is largely manufactured. You
are being lied to each and every day.3
Thomas Mann, the keen social observer and philosopher, once suggested that
men are erroneously taught to believe that it is forbidden and wrong to expose the
works of darkness, or to reveal the machinations of evildoers, especially evildoers
who, though they act in hellish ways, the deceived world at large so obviously holds
in the highest regard:
That is the secret delight and security of hell, that it is not to be informed on, that it
is protected from speech, that it just is, but cannot be made public in the newspaper,
or be brought by any word to critical knowledge.4
Secret Delight
How interesting the realization that, as Thomas Mann puts it, hell takes "secret delight"
in its ability to keep secrets. Proverbs 9:13-18 seems to have a relation to this. It states:
A foolish woman sitteth in the high place of the city, To call passengers who go right on
their ways: she saith to him, bread eaten in secret is pleasant. But he knoweth not that
the dead are there; and that her guests are in the depths of hell.
Why do the Illuminati value secrecy so highly? Why all the mysterious, encoded
signs, handshakes, symbols, language, and codes? One finds many reasons. For one
thing, the psychopath — these are the kind of people who are Illuminists — seems to
be drawn to the darkness, to mysterious perversions and deep occultism. "Nothing
so arouses the deep mind's attention than the call of the dark, arcane and
mysterious," Paul Huston writes in his book, Mastering Witchcraft.5
Secrecy is deemed essential amongst witchcraft sects, and witchcraft is, in
essence, Illuminism. Huson explains: "Now witchcraft consists of knowledge, and
knowledge brings power. Power shared is power lost. Although we have entered the
Age of Aquarius, along with its attendant freedom and loosening of restrictions, it
will still be very much in your interests as a witch to shroud certain of your doings
in a reasonable veil of secrecy."6
As you will discover in studying the pages of Codex Magica, the Illuminati
certainly do have much to hide. Seeing as how the leaders of this notorious
organization are responsible for hardship, bloodshed and revolutionary terror on a
global scale, if their secrets were found out, there would be hell to pay. If the masses
ever were to wake up from their trance and begin to understand just how horribly
they have been deceived, they would angrily rise enmasse and string up the elite
from the nearest light pole.
The Most Terrible Secret of All
But there's also the matter of the most terrible secret of all, the secret that, if

--- Sayfa 15 ---
18
CODEX MAGICA
discovered, would sound the death knell for the Illuminati and Freemasonry. Manly
P. Hall, 33°, touched on this in his book, Lectures on Ancient Philosophy:
Freemasonry is a fraternity within a Fraternity — an outer organization, concealing
an inner brotherhood of the elect. The invisible society is a secret fraternity
dedicated to a MYSTERIOUS SECRET.7
As Hall alludes, Freemasonry hides its greatest secret even from its membership
at large—only an invisible "inner brotherhood" is entrusted with it.
Robert Guffey, writing in the book, The Conspiracy Reader, reports that the
"cryptocrats," as he calls the elite, consider most Americans to be mere sheep who
must be kept from discovering "the black cauldron of dirty secrets" hidden to them.8
The MYSTERIOUS SECRET of which Manly P. Hall, 33° writes, surely falls into this
category of dirty secrets kept squirreled away in the black cauldron.
The dirtiest secret found inside that black cauldron —THE MYSTERIOUS
SECRET—is this: That the unknown "God" worshipped by the Masons and called by
such hazy, nebulous names as the Great Architect of the Universe and by codenames
such as Abaddon, Mahabone, and Jahbuhlun, is actually none other than Satan, or
Lucifer. That is the greatest of secrets that the Illuminati must shield from view.
The Illuminated (so-called "enlightened") man who knows this darkest of secrets
is taught by his superiors and comes to believe that all who are in on the secret are
somehow more sophisticated, urbane, intelligent, and spiritually astute, than the
uncouth, vulgar, and coarse people who stupidly follow after the God of the Holy
Bible. Stupid people deserve to be deceived, say the Masons and Illuminists. Thus, as
Emile Grillot DeGivry comments, the elite "conceal in order to baffle the vulgar."9
Marie Roberts and Hugh Ormsby-Lennon, in Secret Texts: The Literature of Secret
Societies, note that the rituals, rites, symbols, emblems, and other tools of the secret
societies are "Mysteries that must not be revealed to the profane, lewd, and
unworthy."10 How does it feel, dear reader, to realize that the wicked men of the
Illuminati and of the Lodge and other secret societies consider you, me, and everyone
outside their own special preserve, as "profane, lewd, and unworthy?"
Symbols as Secrets
To maintain their rotten and corrupt body of secrets, the Illuminati leaders and
groups employ symbols. The rites, ceremonies, hand signs, and grips of the Illuminists
are based on the science and art of symbolism.
It is said that symbolism began as recorded in the Bible's book of Genesis when
God put a "mark" or sign on Cain who had slain his brother, Abel. Throughout
human history, marks, signs, pictures, and hieroglyphs came to be used to convey
words, ideas, concepts, and secrets.
"By symbols," wrote Thomas Carlyle in Sartor Resartus, "is man guided and
commanded, made happy made wretched. He everywhere finds himself surrounded
with symbols, recognized as such or not recognized."11
As you'll discover in Codex Magica, the elite use many symbols and signs to hide
and obfuscate their magical work and alchemy. In the Blue Lodge (the first three

--- Sayfa 16 ---
CAUTION!-YOU ARE ENTERING THE FORBIDDEN ZONE
19
degrees), the initiate takes an oath of obligation, pledging:
I will always hail, EVER CONCEAL, AND NEVER REVEAL, any of the arts, parts,
or points of the hidden mysteries of Ancient Free Masonry... 12
The Order of the Eastern Star, the women's Masonic organization, informs its
new members that the Order teaches them of their duties and obligations "by means
of SECRET SIGNS AND PASSWORDS."13 The initiate is further instructed that she
must bind herself "to preserve the most sacred SECRECY respecting the work of the
Order."14
Symbols are more than just pictures. Consider: When you and I, as patriotic
citizens, see the red, white, and blue flag of the U.S.A. waving aloft, many emotions
are aroused in our minds and hearts. Memories sometimes gush forth, feelings of
love of country, home, and family; perhaps deep appreciation for our country's
founders, its Constitution, and for the soldiers and servicemen who have died to
protect and keep us free. All this bound up in just one symbol.
To the Masons and other Illuminists, their occult symbols also embody a deep and
varied set of meanings. Alex Home, in Sources of Masonic Symbolism, distinguishes
between a mere "emblem" and a "symbol." An emblem is something that stands for
something else, he says, while "a symbol has a moral and spiritual meaning."15
That "moral and spiritual meaning" is, of necessity, reserved as secret in nature
by these corrupt cultists, because, if their secrets should be exposed to the light, their
Great Work and Grand Plan would be vulnerable to destruction, as it should be. But
kept secret, the symbols and signs of the Illuminati exert a strong force. Foster Bailey,
33°, in The Spirit of Freemasonry, explains:
A symbol veils or hides a secret, and it is that which veils mysterious forces. These
energies when released can have a potent effect.16
To the man whose entire life is immersed in magical symbols, signs, and codes,
and who has taken a solemn oath to maintain secrecy in fear of disclosure, the world
takes on a supernatural, paranoid quality. Indeed, such men are schizophrenic in
tendency, being torn between their role in the normal everyday world and their
underground existence in the sordid world of their occult fraternity. Illuminists are,
indeed, very dangerous men.
Ancient Origins—Babylonian
Now it is important to understand that almost all the symbols and signs of the elite
are very ancient in origin. Former Scottish Rite Freemasonry Sovereign Grand
Commander Henry C. Clausen, 33°, who was appointed in 1942 by President
Roosevelt to head up the Commission to Investigate the Pearl Harbor Attack, writes
that the footsteps of The Order go deep, and its symbols are thousands of years old.
"They arose in ancient ages," Clausen states, "The signs, symbols, and
inscriptions come to us from across long, drifting centuries and will be found in
ancient Sumerian clay tablet libraries of the cities of Lir, Lagash, and others of the first

--- Sayfa 17 ---
20
CODEX MAGICA
true urban civilization. This, occurred about 600 years before Egypt was
civilized..."17
In other words, Clausen is telling his Masonic readers that their signs and
symbols came from Babylon.
The Holy Bible warns that the Ancient Mystery Religion of wicked Babylon will
bounce back into demonic prevalence in the last days (see Revelation 13, 17, and 18),
and here we have the Sovereign Grand Commander, the international chieftain of the
Masonic Lodge, informing us of the Babylonian origins of the secret symbols and
signs of his Illuminist Order.
When we realize that, for the elite, their symbols are claimed to be infused with
dynamic life—to be real things, active images that make and testify and create, we
begin to comprehend the powerful and explosive meaning with which the Illuminati
endow their signs and symbols.
To them, these are not just geometric shapes, architectural patterns, lines, and
circles. Their signs and symbols both live and possess creative power. They are
archetypes and thoughtforms. In sum, they are real things that perform. One is
reminded, therefore, of the "image of the beast" which, in the last days, is prophesied
to both move about and to speak (Revelation 13).
Pity the Poor, Hoodwinked Mason
It's bad enough that the elite hide their dirty little (and big) secrets behind such
smoke screens as secret hand signs, codes, etc. But what is remarkably obscene is that
they hoodwink their own people.
The highest levels of the Freemasons, for example, have a special word for the
manner in which they seek to deceive and mislead not only the "profane" (you and
me!) but the vast majority of fellow Masons. That word is hoodwink. It is defined as
the effort put forth by the lying men at the top echelons to keep lower-level members
in darkness.
In the Encyclopedia of Freemasonry, editor Dr. Albert Mackey, 33°, a former
Sovereign Grand Commander, claims that secrecy, silence, and deceit—in other
words, hoodwink, is an absolute necessity so that, "the mysteries of our art should be
preserved."18
Helena Blavatsky, co-Mason and founder of Theosophy, was unusually candid
when she once remarked, "What is one to do, when in order to rule men, it is
necessary to deceive them?...For almost invariably the more simple, the more silly,
and the more gross the phenomenon, the more likely it is to succeed."19
Listen to the admission of Albert Pike, former Sovereign Grand Commander who
Masonic historian Manley P. Hall, 33°, magnificently praised as a "Masonic
Prometheus...a king among men by the divine right of merit:"
Masonry, like all the Religions, all the Mysteries, Hermeticism, and Alchemy,
conceals its secrets from all except the Adepts and Sages, or the Elect, and uses false
explanations and misinterpretations of its symbols to mislead those who deserve
only to be misled; to conceal the Truth, which it calls Light, from them, and to draw
them away from it. 20

--- Sayfa 18 ---
CAUTION! - YOU ARE ENTERING THE FORBIDDEN ZONE 21
What impudence! What arrogance!
Pike is letting us in on the deceit. Even if
a man is a Mason, he may not be
adjudged worthy of being promoted as
one of the "Adepts and Sages, or the
Elect." In that case, along with non-
Masons, he is purposely misled by "false
explanations and misinterpretations."
And according to Pike, he deserves to be
misled.
Secret Doctrine Withheld
George Steinmetz, yet another Masonic
author, notes, "There is a SECRET
DOCTRINE in Freemasonry! That secret doctrine is concealed, rather
than revealed by the very lectures which, we (Masons) are told, offer a rational
explanation of the ceremonies of initiation."21
Oh my! So the poor Masons must sit and listen to a bunch of boring lectures, with
superiors rattling on and on about what are described as the "Mysteries," when,
really, it's all just malarkey because the true explanations —the SECRET
DOCTRINE —is concealed to all except the few favored "Adepts."
This is why, when I interview lower-level Masonic friends of mine who are more
than happy to privately confide to me all the "secrets" they have learned, I often find
that almost everything they think they know is pure junk. The hard facts—the really
useful info —is reserved for the Masonic muckety-mucks, though it may be
discovered with diligent investigation by others, too, no matter how much the
Masonic order vainly attempts to conceal and deny.
As Albert Pike relates, "What is most worth knowing in Masonry is never very
openly taught. The symbols are displayed, but they are mute. It is by hints only... that
the initiate is put upon the track of the hidden secret." 22
How does one finally discover the inner secrets of Freemasonry? My own
experience provides the answer. It has taken me many years of meticulous research
and study of the Ancient Mystery Religions of Babylon, Sumeria, Greece, Rome,
China, etc. I have spent many nights reading old textbooks and treatises on medieval
and occult subjects; conducted intensive investigation of the rituals and symbols of
scores of secret societies and orders; and spent years examining the true teachings
and practices of New Ageism, witchcraft and Satanism. Moreover, without study of
the Holy Bible and constant referral back to it, much of the knowledge I have
acquired could not be properly understood.
Masonic expert Lynn F. Perkins alludes to the gigantic amount of extracurricular
research and work needed to uncover the greatest secrets of the Masonic Fraternity.
He writes:
The true wisdom is concealed and hidden, not only from those who do not join the
Masonic Order but also from those who "take" the degrees; and it will remain
Hoodwinked! Pity the poor,
foolish man who becomes a
Freemason! In the very first
degree ritual, that of Entered
Apprentice, a blindfold is put
over his eyes, and a cable-tow
is hung around his neck.
Symbolically, the dumb
candidate is "HOODWINKED."
Little does he know that his
superiors intentionally set out
to deceive the candidate and
they contrive their deceit
through all the ritual degrees
up to and including the 33rd.

--- Sayfa 19 ---
22
CODEX MAGICA
hidden until each Mason seeks revelation and finds the Truth for himself. There are
no interpretations in the Ritual; they have to be sought elsewhere."23
Pike, echoing Steinmetz, Hall, Perkins and all the other high-level Masonic
authorities, goes so far as to mock and disparage lower-level Masons, especially
those who have earned only the first three degrees ("the Blue degrees"). After
acknowledging that the lower-level brethren are "intentionally misled," he goes on
to say that it is not intended that the initiate understand the symbols and deepest
secrets of the Order, but worse, the Masonic Lodge's rituals and lectures are designed
so that the lower-level Masons shall imagine he does understand them! It is only at a
later time, as he has moved up the ladder of degrees, that the purposely dumbed-
down Mason discovers he's been had, that he's been played for a fool. In other
words, he's been hoodwinked!
So, in effect, Masons are lied to, tricked, made fun of, and intentionally led astray,
with only a little knowledge added to their brain reservoirs as they advance up the
chain. Meanwhile, the poor, pitiful souls imagine they are really in on all the super-
duper secrets of the Craft. Their Masonic superiors play them all for suckers.
P.T. Barnum, of Ringling Brothers, Barnum & Bailey Circus fame, surely was
right when he exclaimed, "There's a sucker born every minute." To which yours
truly, author of Codex Magica, might add: "...and a 32nd or 33rd degree Mason is
behind the veil laughing his head off and rolling in the aisle every time a new sucker
is initiated into the 1st degree of Freemasonry."
Shining Light on the Darkness
The Brotherhood of Darkness, as a good friend of mine, Dr. Stanley Monteith, calls
the Illuminati, is quite confident it can easily maintain the highest level of secrecy
regarding the actual meaning and import of its signs and symbols. Its leaders believe
they can even afford to communicate these signals and messages in plain sight, sure
in the knowledge that the trance-like masses are incapable of recognizing the awful,
ongoing masquerade of deception that stares them right in the face.
Martin Short, who authored a book, Inside the Brotherhood, exposing the Masonic
Order inside Great Britain, observed that Masons, believing their secrets to be
oblivious to detection, are known to mutter words of near-contempt as they sing a
little ditty called "The Entered Apprentice's Song." A verse of this melody goes:
The world is in pain, Our secrets to gain.
And still let them wonder and gaze on;
They ne'er can divine, the Word or the Sign
Of a Free and Accepted Mason 24
Oh, we can't, can we? Perhaps it is true that the uninformed "world" at large
cannot divine the Word and Sign of the Mason, but the readers of Codex Magica shall
do exactly that. Let us therefore move forward with eager anticipation as we uncover
in this book many of the most precious and despicable secrets of the elite —things
they never in a million years thought we would discover.

--- Sayfa 20 ---
CAUTION!-YOU ARE ENTERING THE FORBIDDEN ZONE
23
Lives of Quiet Desperation... and Torment
Why have the Illuminists succeeded in their hoodwinking efforts up to now? Is it not
because of the gullibility of the general public? It has been said that, "most men lead
lives of quiet desperation." This is true, and so it is that in their silent morass of
desperation, most seek to dull their senses through alcohol, drugs, sex, and
entertainment. Tormented within, but doing their utmost to keep a smile on their
faces, unable to face the truth, too frightened to even admit to themselves that
anything is awry, most men do not even know who their tormentors really are.
To escape reality, these men shrink from the facts, hoping against hope that all
will turn out satisfactory in the end. The reality that a monstrous conspiracy exists
against them and against their loved ones becomes an enormous burden they simply
cannot bear. Cowards, it seems, die a thousand deaths.
Swedish researcher Juri Lina, whose book, Architects of Deception, is a revealing,
fact-filled expose of the secret society of Freemasonry, warns that the ideology of
"Illuminism," propagated by international Freemasonry and other secret elite
groups, is an overwhelming, hidden danger to all of us. It has already brought the
most violent upheavals and revolutions and is responsible for the "moral and
spiritual degeneration of the individual."25
Yet astonishingly, writes Lina, most men and women are hopelessly oblivious to
the very forces that most affect their lives on a daily and continuing basis. Lina
consequently puts forth this word of caution:
Those who do not examine the different aspects of the conspiracy will remain
incapable of understanding the world...Our rulers want us to believe that a lack of
historical knowledge and ignorance about the secrets of nature constitutes true
knowledge.26
Lina laments the rampant ignorance by the masses who possess little or no
understanding of the vast evil on their very doorstep about to break down the door
and enter therein. Wisely, he contends that the ignorant, while not the inventors of
evil things, nevertheless are accomplices and contributors to evil. "Not being aware
of these facts," he writes, "is in itself an evil because ignorance serves evil."27
"The little Man Who Wasn't There"
Dr. Peter Ruckman, author of many fine books exposing the conspiracy and
defending the Bible, in his newsletter recently penned an article about "The Little
Man Who Wasn't There."28 Ruckman sagely observed that historians, like other
establishment "experts," can scarcely be trusted, for they invariably write a history
they would like to believe. They limit themselves to reporting only that which
comports and agrees with the socially accepted view of history and "truth." If a set of
facts is unpleasant or inconvenient to the officially approved mantra, or version, of
events, reality must suffer. Facts must become non-facts and lies must be converted
into "reliable truths." Ruckman remarks:

--- Sayfa 21 ---
24
CODEX MAGICA
When I was a boy we repeated several little doggerels that turned out to be gems of
wisdom in content. One went: "Last night I saw upon the stair a little man who
wasn't there; he wasn't there again today; oh gee, I wish he'd go away!29
"Some nonexistent spooks," Ruckman adds, "are very persistent."30
In Codex Magica, we shine a bright spotlight on the little man sitting on the stair,
and — voila! — we discover the incontrovertible fact that he is not only there, he is not
a little man at all. He's a giant, dark, wicked, corrupt, conspiring, sly, cunning,
devious, dangerous ogre who fully deserves all the contemptible attention we can
focus on him. He's more than a spook, he's a bloodsucking parasite, a monster who
is sitting on the stair blocking us from entering, a criminal thug lying in wait to
waylay you and me and rob us of our belongings, our health, our very lives.
Without him sitting there detrimentally blocking our path, the world would be a
far better place. Certainly a safer and happier place.
"Two Plus Two Make Four"
Bob Whitaker, a South Carolinian who has done many fine and adventurous things
in his life, teaching college classes, serving as a senior staffer on Capitol Hill, and
writing copy for the Voice of America radio broadcast, points out that anyone today
who simply believes the obvious is ignorantly and unfairly branded an extremist, a
conspiracy-monger, a racist, or worse. Men are not free, Whitaker suggests, to tell the
truth:
In George Orwell's book 1984, it turns out that the whole hideous totalitarianism
that crushed the hero is based on ending one simple, useless-sounding freedom;
"Freedom," it says, "is the freedom to say that two plus two make four."31
How incredible! Whitaker is right on target. Who would have ever thought that
in the once great United States of America would reside almost 300 million souls,
virtually every one of whom today is shaking in his boots, quivering, numb with fear
over what dreadful things might happen if he just once simply put his foot down,
gritted his teeth, and spit out the words:
I see the little man on the stair. He is there!
And two plus two makes four.
And that's all there is to it. Period!
How sad that most men, by their cowardly silence, become secret collaborators,
acquiescing in their own enslavement. What a marvelous and wonderful world this
would be if just a small group of honest and thoughtful, courageous men and women
would view the revealing and provocative photographs, illustrations, and proofs in
Codex Magica and exclaim with all their might in a loud, loud voice to all within
hearing range: "I see it. I no longer will remain bound by the willful ignorance that
binds the multitudes. I will tell others. I will speak out until, someday, maybe soon,
the whole, rotten occult Illuminati establishment comes crashing down!"

--- Sayfa 22 ---
TWO
The Megalomania and Rage of the
Psychopaths—Why the Illuminati Do
What They Do
All of my means are rational, only my ends are insane.
— "Captain Ahab" in Moby Dick
by Herman Melville
W
h
y do the Illuminati do what they do? After many years of research
and investigation into their behavior and conduct, and under-
standing their goals and ambition, I am persuaded these men fit the
definition of psychopathic personalities. They are psychopaths and as such they are
afflicted with the dangerous malady called megalomania.
Here is how Webster's Dictionary defines these words:
Psychopathic personality: 1. An emotionally and behaviorally disordered state
characterized by clear perception of reality except in the individual's social and
moral obligations and often by the pursuit of immediate personal gratification in
criminal acts, drug addiction, or sexual perversion. 2. A person having a
psychopathic personality.
Megalomania: 1. A mania for great or grandiose performance. 2. A delusional
mental disorder that is marked by infantile feelings of personal omnipotence and
grandeur.

--- Sayfa 23 ---
26
CODEX MAGICA
In sum, the psychopath possesses a clear perception of reality —he knows full
well what he's doing —but he refuses to abide by society's morals. Instead, he
pursues personal gratification in such things as criminal acts, drug addiction and
sexual perversion.
Combined with feelings of megalomania, the psychopath has visions of his own
omnipotence—he thinks he is a god —and has delusions of grandeur. Since he is
persuaded he is divine and not bound by the rules that apply to other, less godly
beings, the psychopath is a dangerous person, indeed. Dr. Essi Viding, of the Institute
of Psychiatry at the prestigious King's College in London, England, has done extensive
study of the motivation and behavior of the psychopathic personality. Dr. Viding
cautions that the psychopath "shows a lack of remorse, conscience, and understanding
of the feelings of others."1 Sounds like a psychological description and profile of a lot
of our world's foremost political and corporate leaders today, doesn't it?
Insane, Parasitic, Immoral, and Dangerous
Frustrate the unbridled ambition of the psychopath and he strikes out in a controlled,
yet insane, fit of anger and rage. If the psychopath holds a position of great
responsibility — say, President of the United States or dictator of a technologically
advanced nation, he can do some major damage.
William Krasner, in an article way back in 1946 entitled Neurotica, warned of the
dangers that lie ahead for societies who fall into the grip of the criminal psychopath.
He wrote:
The psychopath is a disruptive, parasitic, immoral influence. Any group, while it
may for various reasons support and even honor the psychopath... in direct propor-
tion to the extent that the psychopath is tolerated, that his attitudes find support in
the culture pattern, to that extent it is an unhealthy society.2
Tragically, America has actually become a dangerous haven for mentally
disordered psychopaths. The Council on Foreign Relations, an Illuminist
organization, whose 3,000 members run almost every facet of our federal
government, especially at the highest official level, is no doubt populated by a
majority of psychopaths.
The Masonic Order in the U.S.A. has some two million initiates who have
voluntarily undergone occultic-laced rituals to be accepted as common brethren. The
ranks of the Masonic Order are loaded, I believe, with dangerous psychopaths. The
United Nations organization, endorsed and funded by our Congress, is a seething
cesspool of unrepentant psychopaths.
Liars and Deceivers
Psychopaths are inveterate liars and deceivers. In fact, they lie on an Orwellian scale.
If confronted with a situation in which veracity and truth are prerequisite, the men
who run America's federal government or who sit as CEOs of this nation's top
financial institutions and corporations, have the psychopathic "talent" of looking the

--- Sayfa 24 ---
THE MEGALOMANIA AND RAGE OF THE PSYCHOPATHS
27
citizenry square in the face and insisting that, "two plus two do not make four."
Being deceivers and practitioners of the Craft (witchcraft), the psychopaths who
lead the inner circle of the Illuminati are more than capable of standing before the
cameras and working magic and occult ritual right before our very eyes, pretending
all the while they are simply acting normal as usual. It has been said that if one really
wants to hide a great secret, he should conceal it in plain sight. Well, this maxim
certainly applies to the disordered, but somehow illogical, behavior of the men of the
Illuminati. It is not rational to do what these men do in public, in plain sight, yet they
do it and expect to get away with it. And they do get away with it! Or at least, they
did, before this book was published revealing their unseemly, scripted, ritual
behavior.
Why all the occultic ritual rigmarole? Why do some of the world's richest and
influential men take the risks they do in working their demonic magical acts in plain
sight, so that they are pictured doing it in major newsmagazines and newspapers, on
television, and in other avenues with huge potential audiences?
Edgar Allen Poe, the famous novelist of dark mood and mysterious suspense,
once wrote a tale, "Perverse of the Imp," in which he suggested that criminals often
have an overwhelming, all consuming desire to publicly confess their devious
crimes. Could it be this is why the Illuminati so flagrantly flaunt their occultic wares?
Is it that they possess a unique taste for deceit and chicanery? Or is the performance
in plain sight accomplished because it is believed to infuse power and mastery into
their sought for aims and goals?
Mockers and Tricksters
Do they simply enjoy mocking and tricking us? Teasing and playing with our minds,
realizing that the vast majority of people in society are willing dupes? It was, after all,
serial killer John Wayne Gacy—certainly a psychopathic personality — who once
bragged, "A clown could get away with murder." Gacy, you see, enjoyed dressing up as
a mischievous and gleeful clown and visiting hospital wards to cheer up young male
patients. He also took great pleasure, in the confines of his home, in torturing and
killing young boys.
All of these are reasons why psychopaths of the Illuminati pose and parade
occultly in front of cameras, exchange ritual handshakes, and otherwise taunt the
public. Remember, according to Webster's, the psychopath is immoral, selfishly
flaunts societal mores, is infantile in personality, is delusional, and has feelings of
grandeur and omnipotence. Men who think they are omnipotent gods must take
extreme delight in putting things over the masses whom they consider inferior and
sub-human.
Twelve Keys to Understanding
Moreover, after long and careful consideration I propose that in addition to these
factors, there are at least twelve other reasons, or factors, why the Illuminati persist
in their seemingly delusional and infantile behavior. Each of the twelve reasons is
represented by one of the key words listed below:

--- Sayfa 25 ---
28
CODEX MAGICA
•
Secrecy
•
Magic
•
Build
•
Power
•
Pride
•
Elitism
•
Signal
•
Wealth
•
Please
•
Invocation
•
Encourage
•
Rebellion
It is important we examine these twelve keys to understanding why the
Illuminati do what they do. We have already covered the topic of the elite's obsession
with Secrecy in Chapter One. In the following sections and pages of this present
chapter, we will look at the remaining 12 keys. We begin with the Illuminati's
employment of Magic to accomplish their ends.
•
MAGIC
Magic is defined in The New Encyclopedia Brittanica as "ritual performance or activity
believed to influence human or natural events through access to an external mystical
force beyond the ordinary human sphere."3 This is an exceptionally accurate
description of what magic is and reveals to us exactly why the Illuminati consider
magic of such extraordinary importance in the accomplishment of their aims.
That magic is an occult activity is also indicated in The New Encyclopedia Brittanica.
So we are not talking here about magicians playing parlor tricks or entertainment
extravaganzas—pulling rabbits out of hats, sawing beautiful girls in half, being
chained in an aquarium full of water and escaping, etc. Instead, as the encyclopedia
so well puts it, magic is ritual performance. It is an occult ritual.
In this occult ritual, the "magician," the Illuminist, believes he can "influence
human or natural events." So in Codex Magica, we see pictured the Illuminati giving
secret signs, sharing concealed grips and handshakes, displaying symbols and
communicating hidden messages. We realize that in performing these magical
works, the Illuminist actually believes he is influencing human behavior or otherwise
causing real events to occur in a particular, planned way or intended manner. Magic
happens! is a popular slogan among witches, occultists, and Illuminists—things
change, reality is transformed. Alchemical transformation occurs. Society is shaped by
occult plan.
However, to accomplish these aims, this shaping of society, the Illuminist, as an
occult practitioner, fully understands that he is accessing, as the encyclopedia
definition explains "an external mystical force beyond the ordinary human sphere."
Now, the Illuminist may imagine that he is merely accessing the "cosmic energy
force" or that he is tapping into a "fourth dimension," or the "ethereal atmosphere."

--- Sayfa 26 ---
THE MEGALOMANIA AND RAGE OF THE PSYCHOPATHS
29
Thus he may well lay claim that his magical work, or activity, is benign—that it is
simply white magic, good magic, the right-handed path as the Satanists and other
occultist call it.
But as we shall see, the highest authorities in the occult world admit that there is
no essential difference between white magic and black magic (the supposedly bad, evil,
left-handed path). Magic is magic.
Who, or what, then, is the Illuminist accessing in his ritual performance of magic?
From my many years of research and investigation into the works and plans of the
Illuminati, witches, Satanists, shamans, masons, and other occultists, I declare
without hesitation that what these men are doing—knowingly in some cases,
unwittingly in others, is calling on, that is invoking devils from an invisible realm
("beyond the ordinary human sphere").
The occult and the Masonic communities can call these evil presences by any
coverup name they wish—the Great White Brotherhood, Shamballa, planetary
entities, the Hierarchy, etc., but, in fact, the working of magic, I am convinced, is
nothing less than the invocation, or inviting, of devils.
This, indeed, is a very dangerous activity; yet the Illuminati has designed its
many rituals, signs, codes, symbols, architecture, art, and other devices so that the
world around us has become a veritable Grand Theater of the Occult. Because of the
Illuminati, the whole world is enchanted, dark with supernaturalism, and the one the
Holy Bible calls the Prince of the Power of the Air, also referred to as Satan and
Lucifer, must be very proud of his human minions.
• BUILD
You will find pictured in Codex Magica a variety of different types of people. There
are the celebrities and the rich and famous, the glitzy or jet-set people who are into
Illuminism, occultism, and witchcraft because it is trendy and fashionable. Among
this group are some who are into the Jewish Cabala —movie and Broadway stars,
singer/entertainers, activists, and so forth. These are often ignorant people who are
used by the Illuminati to extract money, for sex, and as novelties. When the money
runs out, they grow too old for use as sex partners, or the novelty wears out, they are
often cast out or retired and no longer have access to the "Inner Circle" of the Elite.
Then there are the do-gooders — people who support revolution and the
socialistic, globalist, environmentalist, and similar aims of the Illuminati for what
they fancy is the good of society. Sometimes these people sign up for Cabala classes
taught by rabbis; they eagerly join liberal social issue organizations and may also be
involved in the secret societies and orders, though at a lower level. Again, we see
these people are mere dupes.
Finally, we see several strata of Illuminati elite —major politicians and
bureaucrats, including Presidents, Prime Ministers, Chancellors, etc., as well as some
corporate CEOs, financiers, media moguls, and others. These are major players, but
again, they are dupes because there is a secret, invisible, arcane or hidden "Inner
Circle" which works behind the scenes and tells these major players what to do.
This higher level of the Illuminati elite have historically thought of themselves as

--- Sayfa 27 ---
30
CODEX MAGICA
The Builders. There is even a classic Masonic textbook by this very title. The Builders
believe that Jehovah God did Adam and Eve a disservice by driving them out of the
Garden. They rankle at the fact that Nimrod, the King of Babylon, was confounded
in building the Tower of Babel, and they are seized with rage over the destruction of
their Temple in Jerusalem.
Indeed, the Builders are angered that every time they have sought to bring the
world together as One, they have been thwarted by God. All of their chosen disciples,
the Caesars, Charlemagne, Napoleon, Hitler, Stalin, FDR, Mao, saw their grand plan
of conquest go down to resounding defeat. But still, they strive to complete their
assigned mission.
Now it is the New World Order (or Bush's "democracy for all nations") they have
in mind. The United Nations is to be "reformed," that is —strengthened. The few
rogue nations that remain must be dealt with.
The economies of all the nations must be equalized, enterprise extinguished,
constitutions amended or ignored, private property seized or regulated severely,
religions transformed, etc. Those are the goals.
In other words, to build their New World Order, the elite intend to destroy the
existing World Order. The old must go to make way for the new. It is the Hegelian
Dialectical Process that is being used to achieve this prime objective. What is above
must become what is below states the Illuminist law of alchemical transmutations.
J. Robert Oppenheimer, the Soviet spy who oversaw the Manhattan Project, the
building of the first atomic bomb, and was present when the humongous mushroom
cloud rose with its imploding plumes of fire, is said to have exclaimed, "I am became
the destroyer of worlds." Few realized that this is a quote right out of the Hindu
scriptures, the "Bhagavad Gita, and it was supposedly from the Hindu sun god,
Krishna. Oppenheimer, a Jew, appointed to his august scientific position by 33rd
degree Mason, President Franklin D. Roosevelt, was deep into the occult and was a
cabalist magician.
As Michael Hoffman II and a few other keen-minded observers have pointed out,
the A-bomb project, the transmutation of matter into intense forms of energy, was
long an alchemical objective of the Illuminati magicians. Like the Hindu god who
represents them, it is the fondest desire of these wicked, nihilistic men that they
become the destroyer of worlds.4
And then, from the burned out carcass, like the Phoenix rising from the ashes, is
to come the New City of Glory, the Kingdom of the Illuminati, ruled by their god-
man King and His Master, Satan. This is the ultimate, all-consuming, repugnant goal
of The Builders, to undo what God has done, to defile and utterly destroy planet earth
and to rebuild it in their image.
The prophetic Scriptures tell us that this grandiose Plan — the Great Work of the
Illuminati —will never fully come to fruition. The Kingdom shall not become the
province of the rebellious Illuminati and their dark, occult master, Satan. Here is
Almighty God's glorious declaration of how it all shall end:
"And the seventh angel sounded: and there were great voices in heaven, saying, THE
KINGDOMS OF THE WORLD ARE BECOME THE KINGDOMS OF OUR LORD,
AND OF HIS CHRIST, AND HE SHALL REIGN FOREVER AND EVER...

--- Sayfa 28 ---
THE MEGALOMANIA AND RAGE OF THE PSYCHOPATHS
31
And the nations were angry, and thy wrath is come, and the time of the dead, that they
shouldest he judged, and that thou shouldest give reward unto thy servants the
prophets, and to the saints, and them that fear thy name, small and great; and shouldest
destroy them which destroy the earth." - recorded in Revelation 11:15, 18
God's incomparable will and plan shall prevail. His Christ and His people shall
reign triumphant forever, and the evil shall be judged. And what of the Illuminati,
the destroyers of the earth, the ones whom Satan's servant, Oppenheimer, trumpeted
were the "destroyer of worlds?" The Scriptures give testimony to their fate; they too,
shall be judged, so that God "shouldest destroy them which destroy the earth."
•
POWER
The hunger for power motivates the human disciples in the Illuminati structure.
Because they serve Satan, they instinctually know they are also serving the will of his
human hierarchy. They expect to be rewarded for this service to the evil side.
George Bernard Shaw, who maintained an overwhelming hatred for God and for
Christianity, wrote of a "will" incarnated in higher consciousness man (the elite) that
shall "finally mould chaos itself into a race of gods."5 To fancy yourself as in a state of
becoming divine, as so superhuman, special and superior you shall achieve elevation
as one of a "race of gods," is an intoxicating prospect.
"Do As Thou Wilt"
The Bible says of the Antichrist, he "shall do according to his will" (Daniel 11:36).
Aleister Crowley, head of the occultic order, Ordo Templi Orientis, prided himself on
being the "wickedest man on earth." Crowley preached that Satanists had only one
commandment: "Do as thou wilt shall be the whole of the law."
Only gods can do as they will. That translates into awesome power. Changing
reality by the force of one's will is, in fact, the very essence of magic and witchcraft.
F. Aster Barnwell, in his sinister book, The Meaning of Christ For Our Age, equates
superior human will with god-consciousness. Through development and exercise of
will, or magic, says Barnwell, a man may live forever as a god. Illumined by occult
knowledge, the person is able to utilize pent-up psychic energy forces to effect
material reality. Barnwell refers to this psychic energy force by the Hindu term
"Kundalini," or "serpent power."6
A man possessing serpent power is said to operate in a spiritual realm. As such,
he is immune to and beyond any human spectrum of morality. Whatever he wills is
good, based solely on the results and not on any relative moral scale. In essence, the
ends justify the means. In such a relativistic theology, black magic is no lesser in moral
standing than is white magic. Black is white, bad is good, and all things are reversed.
Power is the Ultimate Aphrodisiac
Oh, how thrilling to the egomaniacal Illuminati is the realization that they possess

--- Sayfa 29 ---
32
CODEX MAGICA
and wield such awesome power within the planetary realm. Power is addictive.
Former Secretary of State and Illuminati insider extraordinaire Henry Kissinger once
smiled and confided, "Power is the ultimate aphrodisiac."
To communicate ultra secret, coded, visual messages of an evil and conspiratorial
nature to each other or to the whole group by way of the world's most influential
media, with no fear of being reprimanded or of ever being punished for the crime
must, indeed, be akin to ingesting a mind-altering, soul-satisfying aphrodisiac. These
men lust for power, and conveying secret messages unintelligible to the ignorant
masses must give them great emotional delight. It inspires in them the desire to
accomplish even greater occult aims.
As Shakespeare once wrote, "The world is mine oyster which I, with sword, shall take
and plunder." Yes, the world is their "oyster," and some in the Illuminati hierarchy are
so infused with the carnal ambition and lust to power they even seek to conquer and
reign the starry realm beyond the surly bounds of this planet. It was British
colonialist plotter Cecil Rhodes who once declared, "I would annex the planets if I could."
Somewhat less grand and pretentious in his ambition for power but nevertheless
worth recalling is former House Speaker Newt Gingrich, so full of himself sitting at
the top of the heap in the U.S. Congress that he once told an audience: "My goal is to
shift the entire planet. And I'm doing it!"7
•
PRIDE
A perverse sense of false pride is a major factor that motivates men to be active as
Illuminati operatives and to communicate by secret handshakes, signs, and by other
occult media.
To smugly conceive of oneself as superior in enlightenment, in class status, in
social connections, and in other artificial aspects is common to the elite. The
promotion upward of the initiate degree-by-degree is purposely designed to create
the impression that he is gaining knowledge forbidden to the unenlightened
multitudes outside the order. A system of awards, jewels to be worn, covert
handshakes and cryptic signs shared also reinforces the ideology that the individual
is special and superior.
To Be In On the Joke
To be pictured in a nationally circulated magazine is ego-building enough for the
Illuminist. But to identify with members of an exclusive and powerful secret
organization by purposely giving a secret hand sign in that picture and realize that
only other elite are "in" on the joke, so to speak—that can, indeed, engender a rush
of perverse satisfaction and haughty pride. The attitude is, "Ha! Aren't we pulling
one over on them! What control we have over the masses. What swill they can be
made to swallow!"
Jim Keith, a first-class conspiracy researcher who some believe was murdered by
the elite during what was supposed to have been a minor surgical procedure on his
knee, believed that the perverse satisfaction and exaggerated pride of these men is a

--- Sayfa 30 ---
THE MEGALOMANIA AND RAGE OF THE PSYCHOPATHS
33
natural outgrowth of their keenly observing how much control over others their elite
status confers on them and their associates. This is especially true given the
Illuminati's control and manipulation of nations like the U.S.A., Russia and
Germany, nations with vast technological prowess that fosters the growth of Big
Brother government control. He writes:
Beneath the cloak of the prime conspirators are larger groups of rich peasantry and
landlords dominating a huge mass of poor serfs and less-than-serfs whose labor
and lives are sucked to provide the lifeblood to nourish the upper portions of the
pyramid. This ancient structure is perfectly visible to anyone with the eyes to be
appalled.
It is also obvious that the ruling class cabals and spy organizations which we do
know about are pointed in roughly the same direction: the total control and
"utilization" of the mass of mankind by whatever means it takes. Aside from all the
lofty banter about the "perfecting of mankind," what is desired is the perfecting of
the systems of control.
Control is the shared goal of these numerous conspiring individuals, groups, and
governments, and in that sense they work together, collaborating here, working
individually there, creating an evolving noose of murderous technological expertise
that swiftly tightens around humanity's throat. With this goal in place, with money
and the tools of advanced technology in hand, the overall program of
accomplishment crystallizes. 8
Absolute Power Corrupts Absolutely
Exaggerated, self-absorbed pride becomes especially evil and dangerous when
prideful men acquire power. It was Lord Acton who, in 1886, uttered the well-known
maxim that, "power corrupts, and absolute power corrupts absolutely." Unduly
prideful men are imbued with that unrighteous temperament because they often
have unfettered access to power—power over people, over organizations, over
resources, and over nations. Power to reward or to punish chosen disciples, friends,
or enemies, even power to take life.
The best of historians now admit, for example, that President Franklin D.
Roosevelt and his corrupt, Masonic associates knew in advance of the Japanese attack
on Pearl Harbor that catapulted the United States into war. The Illuminati
wanted world war, and the American airmen, soldiers, and sailors who died on
December 7, 1941 were considered necessary to precipitate the USA's entrance into
World War II.
The U.S. Government also had prior knowledge of both the 1993 Oklahoma City
bombing of the Murrah Federal Building and the 9/11 bombing attacks on the World
Trade Center and Pentagon. The massive loss of life was no obstacle as far as the elite
were concerned. Their cold-blooded agenda is calculated to engender chaos and
destruction in a never-ending, alchemical process of bringing Ordo ab Chao (order out
of chaos). To the elite, murder is business as usual. And so, once again, we discover

--- Sayfa 31 ---
34
CODEX MAGICA
that a moral vacuum is inherent in the minds of these men of perverse
pride.
• ELITISM
Closely linked with their perverse and exaggerated pride is the corrupt reality that
the men of the Illuminati do, indeed, run most things in society. They are the elite,
and, unfortunately, they are afflicted with elitism. They do receive unfair advantage
and exalted status in society. Sadly, the dumbed down masses adore the men and
women of the elite.
Elitism is a sickness, a disease. The men (and women) who are pictured in Codex
Magica giving secret signs and sharing covert hand grips no doubt enjoy a smugly
satisfying sense of perversity in knowing they are deceiving those whom, they are
persuaded, are the ignorant and unknowing multitudes.
The Inner Circle and Their Puppets
The elite of the Illuminati are themselves divided by rank and authority. There is a
hidden inner circle, followed by a several hundred-member core. Next, we have
perhaps three to five thousand in a larger circle of influence, and then finally, another
ten thousand puppets.
The latter group, the puppets, have no real influence on matters of importance.
This group includes celebrities, media representatives, educators, and others who are
only vaguely aware that an elitist global conspiracy exists. They simply know that
they must hew to the "party line." The puppets also realize they must maintain a
strict form of political correctness by promoting globalism and the approved socialist
agenda. They are required to rigorously adhere to the "script" provided and continue
to loyally wear the individual "mask" they have been supplied.
John Swinton, newsman and former editor at The New York Times once shocked
his audience at a luncheon meeting of the press by boldly confessing:
There is no such thing in America as an independent press. You know it and I
know it... The business of the Journalist is to destroy truth; To lie outright; To
pervert; To vilify; To fawn at the feet of mammon, and to sell his county and his
race for his daily bread. You know it and I know it and what folly is this toasting an
independent press?
We are the tools and vassals for rich men behind the scenes. We are the jumping
jacks, they pull the strings and we dance. Our talents, our possibilities and our lives
are all the property of other men. We are intellectual prostitutes.
Swinton appears to have known very well that the careers and activities of his
peers in the media are strictly controlled and regulated by their elite masters. And
this rankled him. But then, after Swinton's comments that day, little was ever heard
again from the man.

--- Sayfa 32 ---
THE MEGALOMANIA AND RAGE OF THE PSYCHOPATHS
35
The Group Mind and the Insectoids
As Michael Hoffman II once sagely noted, the analogy of "insects" often resides in
the true tale of the initiates of secret societies and orders. This is because these men
are themselves deceived by Lucifer, and so they go about deceiving others. Thus
there is a Group Mind resident in all these people, whether an Illuminatus is a
member of the inner circle or is a lowly puppet. It is for reason that Professor Adam
Weishaupt, co-founder of the classical Order of the Illuminati (May 1, 1776), called
his sect the Beenan Order (Order of the Bees).
Jim Keith, in Mind Control and UFOs, also noted this hive mentality. Keith wrote
that in the South American nation of Columbia, there is a German community which,
even today, over 60 years after World War II, uses the swastika as its icon. This group
calls its compound "Hormiga," in honor of the obedient worker ant, yet another form
of Illuminati insectoid.9
Thus, we find the beehive or anthill as apt metaphors for the servants of the
Illuminati. It is fascinating to realize that these people are servile, weak, and crawling
little personalities. They echo in unison the words "Yes, Master" to their superiors, the
potentates of the various secret societies and orders.
The underlings of the Illuminati, in effect, are abject and craven cowards,
groveling in fright and terror before their Illuminist chieftains; yet, they act in public
as though they are superior beings —oh, so special and "hoity toity," as the saying
goes.
Believing in their own inflated self-worth, they consider themselves members of
a higher-level caste while categorizing the masses outside their group as like so many
cattle or sheep—even as "useless eaters."
They Look Down On the Inferior Goyim
Such is the distorted view of the Jewish Illuminati who derogatorily refer to Gentiles
as the goyim (cattle).
The late Dr. Israel Shahak, Professor at Hebrew University in Israel, a man I
respected greatly, was a constant critic of such a deviant, superiority attitude. Shahak
noted that many Zionist Jews are unashamed advocates of human slavery:
The Israelis have resuscitated a book in Spanish by Jews dating from the 14th
century which has been adopted for use as a manual of religious instruction in
Israel's secondary schools. It explains why non-Jews ought to be the slave of Jews
because Jews are the elite of the human race. Because of this they deserve to have
slaves, and these slaves must be non-Jews.10
This outrageous and imperious attitude does not take those of us by surprise who
have studied the Jewish Talmud, the rabbis' holiest book. According to the Talmud,
Gentiles are not even to be considered humans: "The goyim (Gentiles) are not men, but
beasts" (Baba Mezia fol. 1146).
It should be further noted that the Encyclopedia Britannica says, "The Talmud is
still the authoritative and practical guide of the great mass of the Jews." (From the

--- Sayfa 33 ---
36
CODEX MAGICA
9-volume German language translation of The Babylonian Talmud in the Library of
Congress, Washington, D.C.)
Slaves and Beasts
Slaves and beasts! That is what the Zionists of Israel consider those who aren't
Jewish. Now we discover what the elitist, favored sons of the Zionist Illuminati think
of you, me, and the masses. No wonder they kill without conscience through their
instigation of world wars, through initiation of regional conflicts, and through
assassinations and other criminal deeds. The elite plot and carry out heinous terrorist
acts and institute financial crises and cultural upheavals to force the Hegelian
dialectical process along its desired path toward a New Age New World Order.
Deaths are "acceptable losses," the Illuminati reason, and pain and suffering are
necessary for requisite changes to occur in society. In any event, since those outside
The Order are relegated to the lowly categories of "slave and beast," why wring one's
hands or otherwise unduly concern oneself with whether such miscreants as you and
me live or die? The Malthus Principle suggests to the Illuminati that periodically
thinning the global population is a good thing. Evolution, they believe, calls for the
survival of the fittest, and they view themselves as superior and most fit to rule.
Elitism is certainly a disease, a mental disease, and those afflicted with it
experience no guilt whatsoever in performing magical rituals of all kinds to enhance
and accentuate their elite status and signal their superior "knowledge" to their
occultic peers.
• SIGNAL
Scan the pages of this book, Codex Magica, and you immediately discover that the
conspirators of the Illuminati have a deep, dark desire to signal each other. They seem
to be obsessed with flaunting their special ties with each other as well as their
membership in the Brotherhood of the Elite at large.
Could it be that these men —sharers of occult secrets and sharers of crimes —also
share a joint consciousness and recognition of their mission as individual members
of a commonly shared destiny? I believe that is the case.
In Conscious Evolution, Dr. Barry McWaters acknowledges this commonality, this
attempt to unify on the part of the insiders, each of which, he acknowledges, make a
"unique contribution:"
In this way the differentiated parts...come to recognize that our common task is a
Trans-human one, a goal beyond ourselves. 11
McWaters notes that, "Many people have opened themselves to serve as
channels." By their individual acts of performing rituals, including the
communication of signs and symbols which embody intense energies and are
magical in effect, there is expected to arise a "transformed humanity, creating a new
heaven and a new earth to manifest itself."12

--- Sayfa 34 ---
THE MEGALOMANIA AND RAGE OF THE PSYCHOPATHS
37
In effect, the co-conspirators are performing a psychic form of magic. By the
combination in the ethereal world of millions of ritual acts by individuals, it is
believed that a collective transformation of mankind and of earth will take place.
When a critical mass is achieved, a quantum leap in consciousness will spontaneously
occur. The catalytic process of magic on a mass, continuing scale will help push this
process along to completion. Then and only then will the Universal Mind, long a
cherished goal of the elite, be realized.
Meanwhile, the co-conspirators believe they are mass-conditioning humanity and
helping to build archetypes of energy forces in the collective consciousness that tend
to create a binary, dialectical process of chaos that will result in the Hegelian
achievement of equilibrium. This, they are convinced, will catapult the world into a
global-wide Zionist state, ruled by an enlightened dictatorship made up of Masonic
overlords who wisely rule and are beyond good and evil.
In effect, the co-conspirators are persuaded they are each a cell, or molecule,
playing a certain role within a greater organism. Their deceit is to imagine
themselves an energy unit, or snapshot within a holographic universe in which all
things are related and are one: "Further, not only is there one unity, but there are unities
within unities within unities."13 But of course, at the top of their unified pyramid is the
controlling entity with the all-seeing eye. That, indisputably, is Lucifer.
Interesting is the fact that each of the co-conspirators fully recognize what the
others are doing. Each understands the mask he must wear and the signals to be
given. In a Public Broadcasting System (PBS) documentary, the story is recounted of
the day President Harry S. Truman, a 33rd degree Mason, met Hollywood director
and actor Orson Welles (War of the Worlds and Citizen Kane fame). Truman smiled and
said to Welles, "You're the second greatest actor alive today. I'm the first."
• WEALTH
What would compel grown men to act like immature, two-bit stage actors, twisting
and distorting their fingers, hands, and bodies into ridiculous symbolic gestures in
what appears to be a ludicrous campaign to force magical change or to convey secret
messages via the media to fellow conspirators equally brainwashed? Most of these
men are wealthy. Is that a factor? Does wealth confer on a man the unbecoming non-
quality of stupidity? Is the secret coding and sending of messages, by word and by
visual means, a process or activity of stupid, wicked rich men?
Not all wicked and powerful men are wealthy, but many are. Disproportionately
so. Having studied the lives and work of the elite, I can testify that their idle lifestyle
and wealth often becomes an impediment to their moral development and to their
potential exercise of good judgement and common sense. This is especially true of
members of Dynasty family lines —the Bushes, Kennedys, Clintons, Roosevelts,
Bronfmans, Rothschilds, the royal families in Europe, etc.
Idiotic Behavior, Witchcraft and Magic
Wealth and idleness lead to boredom, and boredom to idiotic and aberrant, bizarre

--- Sayfa 35 ---
38
CODEX MAGICA
behavior. But though we may laugh at what seem to be the comedic and unfruitful
attempts of the elite to use coded messages and symbolism in magazines,
newspapers, on TV, and in other media, for them this is no laughing matter. It is
serious business. It is ritual witchcraft, and without it, their lives would revert to the
mundane. Witchcraft and magic having become an essential part of their lives, they
are addicted and must continue. As one famous witch once remarked, "I had no self-
control. My appetite for performing spells and working magic eventually became
insatiable. Satan kept wanting more and more, and I had to provide it."
The scriptures say that the love of money is the root of all evil. Not just of some
evil, but of all evil. The concentration of wealth into fewer and fewer hands translates
into the concentration of evil into fewer and fewer hands. The idle wealthy soon lose
perspective and are out of touch with the serfs and vassals. The slave state, at its
zenith, is run by dullards, silly men who have convinced themselves that a secret
handshake made in front of a camera—or a hand sign flashed by them on a TV news
program — turbo-props their personal progress in the ranks of the elite. They are also
convinced that their use of covert signs, grips, handshakes and symbols helps in their
acquisition of greater satanic powers, leading to greater control by them over the
unknowing peasantry.
Foolish, But Also Dangerous
Tragically, these men, though often foolish and dull, are dangerous to us all. The silly
man who is given control and management over the keepers to the keys to the
nuclear-tipped ICBMs that sit deep inside the earth is, indeed, a dangerous man. So,
too, are men whose banking, financial, and corporate decisions can plunge entire
nations into desperate straits of bankruptcy and ruin.
It is, moreover, no consolation to realize that the stupid and self-indulgent who
populate the highest reaches of the Illuminati ranks are often cunning, sly, devious,
and ethically-challenged.
The imbecile son of a wise king is always less wise than his father, but upon his
father's passing, he nevertheless assumes the throne. How often does history show
that heredity renders a nation a cruel blow when the next generation takes
command? In that instance, the cry of the people invariably rings out: "The King is
dead —oh no! —Well, okay, long live the King."
Rarely do the men at the top echelons of the Illuminati deserve their powerful and
influential positions based on merit. Their reign is based on, first, heredity, and, next,
on cronyism and toadyism. Survival and promotion is not according to survival of
the fittest, but survival of the most wealthy and the most favored.
Sometimes, modern man looks at old newsreel footage of monsters like Lenin,
Stalin, Mao, Hitler, Castro, and Mussolini, and they ask, How could entire nations
have ever believed in such cartoonish, even outlandish, characters? But, remember,
we see these men only in retrospect, and we fancy ourselves as being too smart to
have ever been taken in by such odd personalities.
Someday, an evil one will come who will be so wicked and diabolical he shall
cause the masses everywhere to revere and honor him as a "saint above saints." The
scriptures say virtually the whole world will believe in and follow him. The

--- Sayfa 36 ---
THE MEGALOMANIA AND RAGE OF THE PSYCHOPATHS
39
Illuminati elite surely will give this evil tyrant all their allegiance. They, along with
the duped masses, will fall prey to the Strong Delusion, they will believe the Lie, and
they will be Damned (II Thessalonians 2).
• PLEASE
To please their master, Lucifer, is the highest priority of the Illuminati. Illuminist
Albert Pike, 33°, former Sovereign Grand Commander whose commentary on
Freemasonry's rituals, Morals and Dogma, is the classic learning textbook for all
Masons, issued instructions on July 14, 1889, to the Supreme Councils of the World
identifying the Master whom Masons universally worship and venerate:
That which we must say to the crowd is — we worship a God, but it is the God that
one adores without superstition... To you, Sovereign Grand Inspector Generals, we
say this; that you may repeat it to brothers of the 32nd, 31st, and 30th degrees—The
Masonic religion should be, by all of us initiates of the high degrees, maintained in
the purity of the Luciferian doctrine.14
Pike's embrace of the "Luciferian doctrine" is not surprising. Manly P. Hall, 33°,
considered by Freemasonry as the Lodge's greatest scholar of the 20th century,
taught that the energies of Lucifer were necessary for the successful Masonic warrior.
Meanwhile, John J. Robinson, whose book, Born in Blood, was celebrated by top
Masonic Lodge officials as an accurate history of the Knights Templar and of
Freemasonry, insisted in his later book, A Pilgrims Progress, that Lucifer is not Satan
or the devil. Instead, Robinson insisted that Lucifer is an angel whose guidance and
help can be employed either for good or for evil. Of course, Robinson's writings make
clear that pleasing Lucifer is high-up on the Lodge's list of priorities.
Lucifer the Divine
Eliphas Levi, the cabalist magician whose artist depiction of Baphomet, the
androgynous goat god, is illustrated elsewhere in this book, was more to the point.
He recognized that Satan and Lucifer are, indeed, one and the same. But Levi also
taught that Satan, believe by true Christians to be the enemy of God, is, in fact,
man's helper and benefactor. Indeed Levi praised Satan, or Lucifer, as the "angel
presiding over the light of truth."
"Lucifer is divine and terrestrial," said Levi. "He is the Holy Spirit" and is the
"light-bearer in us. It is our mind."15
Thus, we discover the cabalistic philosophy is not only that Lucifer is divine. He
is integrated into and is one with the mind of the men who make up the Illuminati
elite. Lucifer and these men are of one mind. This brings to pass the prophecies of
Revelation 17 where we are told that the conspiracy of the elite in the endtime shall
be composed of world leaders who will be of "one mind for they will give all of their
power and strength to the Beast."
Unlike Eliphas Levi, most Illuminists are hesitant to identify Satan as their Lord.

--- Sayfa 37 ---
40
CODEX MAGICA
Instead, they point to the Grand Architect of the Universe as their deity, or to a hazy
and nebulous, unnamed "God." We have discovered that most of the Illuminati elite
make the ridiculous claim that they neither worship nor even believe in a being, or
entity, named Satan. Many laugh—at least publicly—at the notion of a real entity
known as the Devil. The Masonic Lodge not only publicly disavows worship of
Satan, but also vainly attempts to cast Lucifer, pseudonym for the Devil, in the mold
of a good angel, ostensibly sent here on earth only to assist man and introduce man
to the "better angels."
The One About Whom Naught May Be Said
In her eye-opening book, The Initiation of the World, occultist Vera Stanley Alder
reinforces this pretense of the elite. She remarks that it is "Deity" without a name that
is admired and worshipped. Furthermore, this mysterious Deity is esoterically
described by her as the "ONE ABOUT WHOM NAUGHT MAY BE SAID." Ironically,
Alder does have a lot to say regarding the "one about whom naught may be said." In fact,
she praises this unnamed god as a being of immense "wonder and magnitude." She
suggests, too, that the One the elite worship may properly be referred to as the
"absolute." Alder also remarks that the entity she recognizes as the divine "One" is
made up of "forces," and he has dominion over certain—again unnamed — greater or
lesser entities.16
Of course, a rose by any other name is still a rose. And no matter how reluctant
or tentative are the magicians of the Illuminati to come right out and identify the One
whom they serve, we who have long studied these maladjusted rulers and their
psychophants need not dodge the issue. Without question, a great many of the
Illuminati know without a doubt whom they serve: Satan, also called Lucifer, the
Devil, the Adversary. Their secret hand signs and grips, their symbols and their
logos, indisputably prove this is so.
• INVOCATION
That demon principalities are invoked in the rendering of Masonic signs and other
magical operations by the elite is a clear indication that these men are involved in
witchcraft. It is not believed that the universe is some neutral machine, operating in
a non-theological, pure, mechanical manner. Rather, there are believed to exist
certain otherworldly spiritual hierarchies, entities that aid the elitist in creating a
powerful effect upon the world. As witchcraft teacher Paul Huston explains:
"There simply exists power to be tapped to do good or to do evil...There exist
certain entities who will aid you in your spells...You may call these entities gods,
spirits, or watchers; or depersonalize them as powers or forces..."17
The Hierarchy
These gods, entities, powers, or forces are said to be hierarchically arranged:

--- Sayfa 38 ---
THE MEGALOMANIA AND RAGE OF THE PSYCHOPATHS
41
"At the top, we have Great entities often known as Watchers, Mighty Ones, or
gods...which can be contacted to bring a certain power to your rituals.
Then there are spirit entities or demons halfway between men and gods in their
constitution...Of course there are many minor, elemental spirits."18
Huston says that talismans, images, and symbols—and hand and body signs and
the positions and prescribed actions of body parts—will "partake of the nature of a
spirit or elemental." In other words, spirits are attracted and supposedly go to work
on behalf of the person who wears or displays the magical talisman, charm, image,
idol, or symbol, or who practices and puts into operation a particular hand sign,
handshake, body movement, or position, or ritual, whether that ritual is simple or
sophisticated.
The more sophisticated and complex rituals and the more detailed, intricate, and
powerful is the design of the talisman, symbol, hand sign, etc., the more likely a
higher level entity—a being higher on the spiritual totem pole or pecking order so to
speak—will be induced to participate in performing the desired magical act. That is,
the greater the force of magic that will be applied. A great Entity, perhaps a prince or
other high-up territorial potentate in the demonic spiritual realm, is naturally
thought to possess the power to force changes in the real world. It is no accident that
in the Bible, the last day, endtimes world ruler and his earthly human companions
are said, to worship the "God of Forces."
Ritual Ceremonies and Demons of Secret Societies
The leaders of the secret societies of the Illuminati would have to be supreme
dullards not to recognize the demonic forces that are invoked in the ceremonial
working of the various ritual degrees. C.W. Leadbetter, a 33rd degree Mason and
occultist who was allied with Annie Besant and her Theosophical Society in the
1920s, is just one of many Masonic leaders who have acknowledged the participation
of devil spirits. For example, Leadbetter says that the ritual for the 30th degree brings
forth an angel who is "a great blue Deva of the First Ray." In the 33rd degree,
Leadbetter relates, two "splendid fellow workers, spirits of gigantic size as compared
to humanity and radiantly white in color are present."19
In fact, Leadbetter said that the ritual for the 33rd degree actually links the
Sovereign Grand Inspector General of Freemasonry with the "Spiritual King of the
World Himself; That Mightiest of Adepts who stands at the head of the Great White
Lodge, in whose strong hands lies the destinies of earth."20
• ENCOURAGE
The frequency of the higher-level elite conveying occultic messages via hand signs,
arm gestures, body postures, and similar means encourages lesser disciples. It
reassures them that they are part of a cohesive and unified whole, members of a
distinctive body of powerful and influential world movers and shakers. It is an

--- Sayfa 39 ---
42
CODEX MAGICA
awesome feeling, no doubt, to find oneself in company with the aspiring and actual
rulers of the planet.
Naturally, for the lesser initiate, seeing the top adepts displaying Masonic,
Rosicrucian, O.T.O., and other signs and symbols in major propaganda and cultural
organs (TV, newspapers, magazines, internet, books, public forums, etc.) also instills
fear and dread. Fear and dread of what the Organization — powerful as evidenced by
its public display of its chief symbols to a profane, ignorant mass audience —might
do to them if they ever should be so bold or so foolish as to damage its assets, reveal
its secrets, or betray it:
There is an inevitability...which is at once its horror and its joy...once an accepted
disciple has definitely undertaken the work in preparation for initiation, there is for
him no turning back. He could not if he would...
He has heard the voice of his Master. Occult obedience gives place to enlightened will.
He can now be trusted to walk and work alone because he is unalterably one with his
group, with the Hierarchy, and finally with Shamballa (hell).21
The Carrot and Stick Approach
Thus, we see in use by the top ranks of the elite the carrot and stick approach. If the
fledgling initiate strays from the fold, or, worse, reveals any of the secrets of the
Brotherhood, he will get the stick of punishment. But if he cooperates, he will be
rewarded. He will find himself in the enviable position of being lauded as a co-
creator of the world aborning.
C. Fred Kleinknecht, 33°, Sovereign Grand Commander of Scottish Rite
Freemasonry, in March, 2002, in The Scottish Rite Journal, boasted of this Creator role.
In an article entitled, "A Brave New World of Heroes," Kleinknecht encourages Masonic
disciples by emphasizing:
One of the great lessons of the Scottish Rite is this: We do not inherit the world, we
create it.
"O brave new world, that has such people in it!" —This line from Shakespeare's The
Tempest seems particularly appropriate...22
In practicing magic by employing secret signs, the sharing of covert handshakes,
the use of power-attracting symbols, the use of hidden codes and other ritual means,
the deceived initiate believes he is helping to build that Brave New World—a
"better" world. Better, that is, for he and his magical associates. He is working as a
member of the Group to alchemically break down and build back up society into a
new order of things. He is, as we shall see, engaging in the rabbinic and cabalistic
practice of Tikkun Olam, the repair and reconstruction of the world.

--- Sayfa 40 ---
THE MEGALOMANIA AND RAGE OF THE PSYCHOPATHS
43
• REBELLION
The illuminated elitist does not regard himself as a man, but as a god. As such, he is,
in fact, a rebel, engaged in rebellion against the one, true God. Collectively, the elite
fancy themselves to be God. How does a mere human being arrive at such an
imagined exalted state of existence?
Vera Stanley Alder, in her celebrated textbook, The Initiation of The World, writes
that once the Illuminist has been raised to become a "unit within a great
brotherhood," he progresses toward fusion and unity with the all-consciousness. In
this state...
Man is no longer worshipping God, asking things of God, trying to become like
God. He knows that he is God...He is.23
They Hate Without A Cause
Here, then, we find an arrogant expression of hubris, pride, and, most of all,
rebellion. Rebellion against God, against His Truth, and against His people. The
Illuminati are revolutionaries. Their revolt has no rational cause. Christ Jesus noted:
"They hate me without a cause." The Illuminist strives for liberty and fulfillment of self-
interest and will apart from God and His Will. That is why this brotherhood of
evildoers are rebels, opposers of good, colluders with any and all forms of apostasy.
The propensity of the Illuminati to engage in rebellion, against God, country, and
even organized civilization itself is evidenced in the inner meaning of their centuries
old rallying cry: "Liberty, Equality, Fraternity," the esoteric meaning of which is
liberty from the dictates of God, equality of all men only in death, and the unity of
evildoers. Truly, the man who has taken vulgar and bloody oaths to defend The
Order and has vowed to protect its secrets against onslaught by would be interlopers
and intruders is not above killing those who oppose his ambitious personal goals or
who stand in the way of the attainment of the objectives of the Order of the Illuminati.
"In Freemasonry It Is Permitted to Kill"
Consider the military trial of the Freemason, Cabrinovic, assassin of the Archduke
Ferdinand of Austria, Hungary, a fateful event that touched off the deadly and fiery
conflict of World War I. Cabrinovic's testimony at his trial provides us a graphic
example of the rebellious spirit of the men of the secret societies and orders.
Asked if he had conspired with other Freemasons to murder the Archduke and
thus set off a saga of anarchy and mayhem throughout Europe, Cabrinovic told the
military court, "Yes, I knew we were all Freemasons, and this strengthened my resolve...
Freemasonry strengthened my intention. In Freemasonry it is permitted to kill."
Ah yes. "In Freemasonry it is permitted to kill," testified the assassin Cabrinovic.
How exquisitely truthful the man was as he sat in the witness chair, being called to
account for his horrific crime.
When we examine the historical record of the world's most despicable mass
murderers and revolutionaries, we find that almost all of them were members of

--- Sayfa 41 ---
44
CODEX MAGICA
Freemasonry and other secret societies of the Illuminati:
Robespierre was a Freemason; Weishaupt was a Freemason; Napoleon was a
Freemason; Lenin was a Freemason; Stalin was a Freemason; Mussolini was a
Freemason; Truman and Roosevelt were Freemasons; Ariel Sharon is a Freemason;
Bill Clinton is a Freemason; Fidel Castro is a Freemason.
Is There No Help For the Widow's Son?
At his trial for conspiracy to commit homicide, satanist rebel Charles Manson was
observed giving a variety of Masonic hand signs, including the Masonic sign of
distress. The same sign was reportedly given by Mormon founder Joseph Smith as he
lay dying on the floor of an Illinois jail on a variety of criminal charges. Lying
bleeding and desperate, Smith's raspy voice could be heard crying out the plaintive,
Masonic wail, calling on Masons to help a brother in dire trouble, "Is there no help for
the widow's son?"
Joseph Smith no doubt could not believe that he, a man who claimed to be God's
Chosen Prophet but who secretly worshipped Lucifer; he, a man of such superior
intellect and endowed with the occult gift of spiritual enlightenment, was about to
meet his Maker, a victim of a vigilante mob who despised him.
Jack Parsons, American rocket scientist, founder of California's Jet Propulsion
Laboratory, and a priest of the O.T.O., was, like Mormon Joseph Smith, a premier
servant of Satan and a rebel against God. He even fancied himself to be the
prophesied antichrist. Parsons wrote this chilling paragraph in his diary:
And thus was I antichrist loosed in the world; and to this am I pledged, that the
work of the beast shall be fulfilled, and the way for the coming of BABALON be
made open and I shall not cease or rest until these things are accomplished. 24
A few years after writing this, Jack Parsons was killed in an explosion in a
laboratory at his home, which also served as a meeting place for other members of
his satanic order. He evidently was not to become the prophesied antichrist, a fact
Parsons now knows only too well, residing as he is in some subterranean cell
somewhere in a place called hell.

--- Sayfa 42 ---
THREE
Concealed Messages—The Importance of
Hand Signs to the Illuminati
And he causeth all, both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to receive a
mark in their right hand, or in their foreheads...
— Revelation 13:16
Raise the right hand...extending the two fingers like a fork...then draw it back
over the right shoulder and with a quick motion dart the extended fingers forward
in a horizontal direction. It alludes to the penalty of gouging out the eyes of a
traitor.
—Second Sign of a Super-Excellent Master Mason
Richardson's Monitor of Freemasonry (p.91)
As we shall see, the llluminati worship deity by many names in many
disguises. One such name and disguise is "Jahbuhlun." In pursuit of
their worship of this false god, Jahbuhlun, they have devised many
rituals in which they employ "hidden" hand signs. In all the 33 degrees of Scottish
Rite Freemasonry and in the rituals of the York Rite, the Order of Skull and Bones,
the Ordo Templi Orientis, the Grand Orient Lodge of France, the Grand Lodge of
Jerusalem, and on and on in almost all the secret societies and orders, handsigns, and
handshakes are prominent.
In Coil's Masonic Encyclopedia we read: "The hand is important in
Freemasonry...for the purpose of giving and receiving modes of recognition."1 In

--- Sayfa 43 ---
46
CODEX MAGICA

--- Sayfa 44 ---
CONCEALED MESSAGES: THE IMPORTANCE OF HAND SIGNS
47
J. C. Coopers's An Illustrated Encyclopedia of Traditional Symbols2, the author notes that
hand signs include the following symbolic meanings:
Hand on Breast—submission and the attitude of a servant or slave
Crossed at wrist (X) — binding or being bound
Hand on neck—sacrifice
Clenched fist—threat, aggression
Raised hand—adoration, worship, horror, amazement
Both hands raised, palm outward—weakness, supplication, acknowledgment,
adoration, admiration
Raised to head—thought, care, intellect, wisdom
Numerical hand signs from a Renaissance text on mathematics. Such usage often combines the
teachings of numerology with the secret messages of hand communications'.
The International Secret Language
Is the occult hand sign, in its many forms and varieties, the international secret
language of the Freemasons and other covert societies? Manfred Adler, in his
German-language book, The Freemasons and The Vatican, says the answer to this
question is, yes.3 He writes that according to the findings of a United States Senate
Committee that investigated the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), "Ninety percent
of the secret news is transmitted via the media, in particular the press, with the aid
of coded texts and pictures."4
Messages in the Media
Others, too, besides Adler, have noted the frequent use of hand signs in the media as
signals of secret society insiders. Juan Maler, Argentine author and Masonic
researcher, explains that the use of the hand sign is for the uninitiated a completely
trivial and inconspicuous gesture. "But for the members of the Secret Societies, the
hand sign is used as a sign of recognition by those who are in a leading position or
who have a mission to fulfill and usually appears with a relevant text."5
Johannes Rothkranz, German authority on Masonic signs, suggests that, "If one
collects the photos of well-known personalities from the daily papers, then one
possesses, in a very short time, a great number of conspicuous and — for those who
understand the signs—also meaningful poses."6
According to Rothkranz, the historic handshake between Helmut Kohl, then the

--- Sayfa 45 ---
48
CODEX MAGICA
Chancellor of West Germany, and Modrow, the head of the Communist East German
regime which sealed the deal for German reunification was clearly a Masonic
handshake. Rothkranz further notes that the historic handshake of the two elitists
was shown at length on European television.7
A Symbol of Power
Why is the use of the hand considered to be so significant as a means of concealed
communications by occultists? The Herder Dictionary of Symbols states that the hand is
"a symbol of activity and power." It notes that finding oneself "in the hands of a ruler
or god means being in that person's power, but also standing under that person's
protection."8 The dictionary goes on to say that the "shaking or offering of the hand
is a sign of friendly openers, devotion or forgiveness." But a closed hand signifies
secrets or keeping silent. Other uses of hand signs are to indicate fear, threats,
devotion, admiration, and argument.
The Herder Dictionary explains, too, that, "In antiquity, covered or veiled hands
were generally customary when one approached high dignitaries." Hands with
palms resting on one's knees express deep concentration and reflection.9
The hand can also be used as a threat to any would-be traitors or betrayer of the
Illuminist cause. In the authoritative Richardson's Monitor of Freemasonry we find an
example of this in the second sign of the Super Excellent Master Mason. The sign
consists of raising the right hand, making the two first fingers like a fork, and
simulating the gouging out of the eyes of a "traitor."
On the Other Hand...
There is a great symbolic difference between the use of the left and right hands. The
right hand is said to be the hand of blessing, a good and positive influence, and those
who use it in the occult world are known as those on the "right-handed path." This is
considered "white magic."
Those on the left-handed path, however, are
practitioners of "black magic." Full-fledged
Satanists are typically of the left-handed path,
though, in reality, it does not matter to the devil
which hand is used!
The left hand is ever considered the sinister
hand. It is associated with words like diabolical,
witchlike, clever, deceptive, sly, cunning, evil,
wrong, backward, and perverse. The evil eye is
said to be the left eye. Some early Christians (for
example, the writer of the apocryphic Gospel of
Nicodemus) taught that of the two thieves
crucified next to Jesus, the one at his left side
An odd, old drawing of a priest with hands in prayer, but
aimed downwards toward Satan!

--- Sayfa 46 ---
CONCEALED MESSAGES: THE IMPORTANCE OF HAND SIGNS
d
49
At Left: Josephine Bonaparte's Palm from Mlle Le Normand's Les Memoires historiques et
secrets de l'lmperatrice Josephine, Paris, 1827.
At Right: The Sabazios Hand. Bronze symbol of the syncretic Jewish mystery cult of Sabazios
in
Asia Minor. Circa First Century, C.E. (Collection of the British Museum)
rejected truth and was consigned to hell.
In heaven, Jesus, of course, is believed to sit at the right hand of God, not the left.
In Ecclesiastes, a book of the Old Testament in the Bible, it is said that, "A wise man's
heart is at his right hand, but a fool's heart is at his left." (Eccles. 10:2)
Witches throughout history have danced in ritual circles to the left, that is,
counterclockwise. Druid priests do likewise as they dance and march around the
holy stone at Tara, Shrine of Mother Earth. To blaspheme God, some Satanists and
witches derive pleasure in giving the sign of the cross with their left hands.
But while witches and deep occultists are aware of the sinister nature and
meaning of the left hand symbolically, one of the foremost Masonic authorities
evidently has a more favorable view. Professor James Curl, author of the reference
book, The Art and Architecture of Freemasonry, writes that, "The left hand is the symbol
of equity."10 In other words the symbol of justice and fairness. Strange, indeed,
unless one elevates the devil to the virtuous level of one who serves justice and brings
equity or equality. But then, why would a Masonic authority think otherwise of the
Lodge's true Grand Master, the Prince of the Power of the Air, aka Lucifer?
An Indicator of Attitude
According to most reference books of the occult, the positioning of the hand on a

--- Sayfa 47 ---
50
CODEX MAGICA
particular part of the body indicates one's mental attitude and inner meaning. A
hand placed on the breast indicates a tender, loyal or sympathetic attitude. Placed on
the neck, the hand denotes sacrifice and penalty, while the joining of hands signifies
mystic marriage and fidelity.
Three or more people linking hands signifies the joining of forces or energy, and
is expressive of a virile fraternity and of solidarity in the face of danger.
The authors of A Dictionary of Symbols note that the hand expresses "ideas of
action, as well as those of power and dominion." They say it is also a sign of royalty.
The Jewish Kabbala (or Cabala) teaches that the left hand is the "hand of
punishment," while the righthand is the "hand of blessing."11
The same reference guide explains that the word "manifestation" derives from
the same root as "manus," the Latin word for hand. "What is manifest can be held in,
or grasped by, the hand."12
The Fingers Can Be Revealing
The position of a specific finger, or fingers, of a hand may also denote great
importance. Sammy Davis, Jr., the black entertainer and member of the infamous
Sinatra "rat pack," confessed in his autobiography, Yes, I can, to being a Satan
worshipper. The talented singer/dancer said that as a Satanist he painted the
fingernail of his left-hand "pinkie" finger ebony black as a sign. "The chicks loved it,"
said Davis, "and found it really a sexual turn-on." Some Islamic imams (teachers)
preach that the hand of Fatima, a revered daughter of Mohammed, represents the
summation of the whole religion of Islam, and that Fatima's index finger points
heavenward to Allah.
A hand with finger pointed to or touching the lip indicates, "Be silent." A finger
touching or pointing to the head signifies "intellect or wisdom."
The pictures and illustrations in this section and the immediately following
sections give evidence of the importance the Illuminati minions give to the use of
hands, either in handshakes and grips, or in various poses. The old phrase, "a show

--- Sayfa 48 ---
CONCEALED MESSAGES: THE IMPORTANCE OF HAND SIGNS
51
of hands" certainly has a multiplications of meanings to the members of secret
societies.
Open to Interpretation?
A word of caution and advice is in order, however. Although I have used the best
reference guides and the best knowledge obtainable from myriad investigative
sources, it is sometimes very difficult to judge and evaluate a particular handshake,
hand sign, pose or grip. For one thing, even though a masonic reference book or
occult textbook may clearly spell out the specifications for a type of grip or sign, the
people who practice it are not always so precise.
I noted in a 20-year career in the U.S. Air Force that while the military manuals
and guidebooks clearly explain how to perform a hand salute, not all in uniform
complied. Some high-ranking officers render a shoddy, confusing, lackadaisical
salute while others give a snappy, precise salute exactly as the textbook prescribes.
One can see a hundred different types of salutes at a typical Air Force Base
exchanged on a given day, each a little bit different in one aspect or the other. And,
of course, if you compare the way the U.S. military salutes with the salute of a British
Sergeant Major, the difference is striking, indeed.
Still, even taking into account the human factor, it is possible to identify many of
the hand signs and poses given and used
by the elite. Check out my selection on the
pages that follow and see if you agree.
Many secret orders and societies display
and use secret handshakes and signs. In
Wales (Great Britain) the Order of the
True Ivorites was established in 1836 and
prospered for many years. Some believe
two lodges of Ivorites still exist today.
Pictured here are some of their secret signs
and handshakes.

--- Sayfa 49 ---
FOUR
Hidden Hand of the Men of Jahbuhlun
Because the higher trinity of man's being must be present before soul-union can
take place...the Omnific Royal Arch Word can only be given in groups of three...
Their right hands are then raised above their heads or they give at low breath the
word: Jah-buh-lun, Je-ho-vah, G-O-D.
—C.C. Zain
Ancient Masonry
The greatest, but the most terrible moment in the life of a Mason...The three
supreme officials of the Lodge, with three separate keys, unlock the wooden box with
the "Secret of Secrets" and give him to read a slip of paper, upon which is written
the name of the "god" whose follower he was...JAH-BUL-ON.
-D.C. Yermak
The Axis of Death
O v e r my many years of exposing the lies and evils of Freemasonry, the
Ordo Templi Orientis, the Rosicrucians, and other treacherous cultic
secret societies, I have been challenged by many Masons. Their typical
complaint is, "How dare you say such things about Masonry! Why, I'll have you
know I am a Christian, and there is nothing in the Lodge or its rituals that would not
be acceptable to my Christian faith."
Of course, it is super-easy, almost like taking candy from a baby, to disabuse the
Masonic whiner and complainer hollering that you or I have slandered the Masons by
denying their order's "Christian attributes." After all, there are scores of points to make
that blow apart the silly notion that the Masonic Lodge or similar groups are even

--- Sayfa 50 ---
54
CODEX MAGICA
vaguely "Christian" in nature. But the easiest way to handle such a complaint is to ask
the Mason if he has reached the Royal Arch Mason ritual level or equivalent (13th
degree in the Scottish Rite). If he answers "yes," then, uh oh, he is in big, big trouble.
What About Jahbuhlun?
I then ask him about the name of his sacred god revealed in the Royal Arch degree
ritual; that is, I ask him about Jahbuhlun. And usually, I can hear either a long
uninterrupted stutter, or else simply a great gasping sound. Generally, that ends the
discussion right there. A Mason definitely does not want to publicly discuss that
name, Jahbuhlun. Anything but that. Bamm! He's gone. And I can understand why.
Ed Decker, a friend of mine, a good Christian who is an ex-Mason and ex-
Mormon, now heads up a Christian ministry aimed at helping men get out of these
cults. In a book that Ed edited, entitled, The Dark Side of Freemasonry, he writes that
while Christians know full well that the sacred name of God is Jesus, the Mason is at
first denied knowledge of the sacred name of their God and then belatedly finds out
that the name of the Mason deity is definitely not Jesus, the name above every other
name (Philippians 2:9-11).
The Lost Name of God
The Blue Lodge Masons, encompassing the first three degrees of Masonry, are
instructed that they are seeking the Lost Word or the Lost Name of God...It isn't until
they reach the level of Royal Arch Masonry (seventh degree, York Rite) that they
discover that the Lost Name of God wasn't lost after all. It's at this level that they
learn the sacred name of Masonry's God.
They find that the sacred name of (the Masonic) God is composed of three names
representing the three identities of God. It is so sacred it takes three Royal Arch
Masons to be able to speak it.. Jahbuhlun. The three Masons grip hands high and low
and chant, "Jah-buh-lun, Jah-buh-lun, Jah-buh-lun, Je-hov-ah." The name Jahbuhlun
has three syllables representing a composite God made up of three subordinate
deities. The Masonic material identifies the three as Yah (or Yahweh), Baal, and
Osiris. Logically, the name should be spelled Yah-Baal-On, but Duncan's Masonic
Ritual and Monitor admits that over the years the spelling has been "corrupted" by
Freemasonry until it reached its current form.1
Decker correctly asserts that, "What these men are doing is worshipping a demon
god so far removed from the real God that this worship must surely defile the
holiness of God and guarantee those who pronounce that name in such a ceremony
a swift ride to Hell..."2
C.C Zain, a Freemason who is part of a group called "The Brotherhood of Light,"
is developer and author of an entire course on Ancient Masonry having to do with
"The Spiritual Significance of Masonic Rituals, Degrees, and Symbols." Zain points
out that the name Jahbuhlun is Masonry's Grand Omnific Word, the name of their
omnipotent deity. He further shows the significance of the fact that the name
Jahbuhlun has nine letters and is made up of three syllables, Jah, buh, lun. In the ritual
for the Royal Arch Degree, since there are three Royal Arch Masons pronouncing the

--- Sayfa 51 ---
HIDDEN HAND OF THE MEN OF JAHBUHLUN
55
name three times each, altogether, says Zain, twenty-seven syllables are pronounced.
This, he explains, represents "the twenty-seven days it takes the moon to pass
through the circle of zodiacal signs."3
Interestingly, in the ritual drama, the three Masons doing the pronouncing of
Jahbuhlun are said to have come from Babylon! So, we have a ritual —the 13th degree
in the Scottish Rite and 7th in the York Rite—in which three "Masters" come from
Babylon (the font of all evils, see Revelation 13, 17, and 18 in the Holy Bible) to instruct
the candidate on how to build the Royal Arch (symbolically, how to rebuild the
Jewish Temple in Jerusalem and thus establish the kingdom of the elite and their
devil god on earth).
The Lost Word Found
Moreover, the three messengers from Babylon inform the candidate that the true
name of God, the name that had been lost for so long, is not Jesus, but is Jahbuhlun.
They conveniently omit mention of the fact that this is, in fact, the name of a
monstrous DEVIL GOD, that the name is an unholy and blasphemous composite of
Jahweh, Baal, and Osiris, or On. (On is a city in Egypt where the worship of the sun
god, Osiris, is alleged to have begun. Somehow, many in Masonry today honor and
revere Osiris under the name of On, the name of his city, curiously spelled Un in the
name: Jahbuhlun.)
No wonder Masonic authority W.L. Wilmshurst, in his highly thought of (by
Masons) The Meaning of Masonry, proclaims this degree so vital to the transformation
of the candidate's life. He even suggests that in attaining this Degree, one "exhibits
the attainment of a new order of life."4
The Royal Arch Degree, Wilmshurst emphasizes, provides "a supremely high
level of thought and instruction" for the Mason attaining it.5
Born Again or Demon-Possessed?
What does Wimshurst mean when he says the adept has attained a "new order of
life?" I believe the candidate receives a counterfeit born again experience, receiving
the very spirit of Lucifer into his bosom as a result of conforming to the requirements
of this degree. In accepting the devil god Jahbuhlun as the sacred name of God the
man rising to this level in Masonry or a similar sect becomes demon possessed, full of
the devil, headed for hell, prepared to do the most wicked and foul deeds possible
for his hidden deity, Baphomet, aka Lucifer, aka Satan, aka Jahbuhlun.
Now, the fatal (ending in spiritual death) sign that is taught for this degree is the
one you will find men giving in the photographs in this chapter. Notably, only
higher-level initiates and adepts will typically be seen giving this evil sign stamping
them as demon-possessed disciples of Satan. I call this sign the Hidden Hand of the
Men of Jahbuhlun.
From Washington to Rothschild
Regrettably, America's first President, George Washington, exhibited this sign, if the

--- Sayfa 52 ---
56
CODEX MAGICA
painter of one of his most famous portraits is to be believed. Subsequent Presidents,
men like Franklin Pierce and Rutherford Hayes, were disciples of Jahbuhlun, as was
President Teddy Roosevelt. We also have communists Karl Marx, Vladimir Lenin,
and Joseph Stalin giving the sign, plus Napoleon, Salomon Rothschild, and many
others whose images and pictures you will find in the ensuing pages, as they perform
this devilish sign.
Wine From A Human Skull
Many other facets and activities pertaining to this degree's ritual stamp it as pure
Luciferian and its holder as a Lucifer worshipper. During the initiation into the
seventh degree Royal Arch Mason (York Rite) or 13th degree (Scottish Rite), the
candidate drinks wine from a human skull. By this monstrous act, he reinforces the
fact that he has taken an oath swearing to "have his skull struck off and his brains
exposed to the scorching rays of a median sun" should he ever divulge Masonic
secrets. He goes on to demand that if he does divulge secrets, may all the sins of the
dead person whose skull he is drinking from be heaped upon his, the candidate's,
head.6
So we see that the Mason's newfound "God," Jahbuhlun (Jah-Baal-On), is a rigid
taskmaster who does not look kindly on traitors and blabbers. It was the Canaanite
god Baal, of course, to whom the backslidden Jews and pagans sacrificed their
children in the fire. You'll recall that the prophet Elijah brought the message of God's
judgement against those who worshipped bloodthirsty Baal, who, in reality, is
merely an idolatrous representation of Satan. Yes, Baal is the devil.
To attempt in vain to combine the name of the true God with that of false gods like
Baal and On is particularly evil and grievous to the true God in heaven. Yet, the
Mason does exactly this with Jahbuhlun and then compounds his grave error by
adopting as one of his chief logos the sign of the double-headed eagle (symbolizing one
body of God, two heads!)
The Triple Tau
Yet another proof of the deviltry of the Jahbuhlun hoax is the symbol of the Triple
Tau, which is the most important symbol of the Royal Arch Degree. Made up of three
interlinking tau symbols (T), these three are said to represent a triad of sacred, Jewish
powers of king, priest, and prophet. In other words, the Mason assumes a trinity of
The Triple Tau is the most significant symbol, or logo, of the Royal
Arch Mason. It represents the Mason who has reached either the
seventh degree of the York Rite or 13th degree of the Scottish Rite as
embodying within the attributes of the Godhead, or Holy Trinity, by
blasphemously declaring himself to be the great I Am That I Am, thus
identifying himself with Satan's promise in the Garden, "ye shall be
as gods."

--- Sayfa 53 ---
HIDDEN HAND OF THE MEN OF JAHBUHLUN
57
Jewish spiritual powers.7 Actually, this trinity of the Jews is in competition with the
true Godhead of the Bible: Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
"I Am that I Am," the Mason Proclaims
Equally blasphemous is that in the lecture on the seventh, or Royal Arch Degree, of
the York Rite, the Mason initiated is asked the question, "Are you a Royal Arch
Mason?" His answer is required to be: "I am that I am."8
In other words, in this degree's ritual the Mason has not only acknowledged that
the devil, in the guise of Jahbuhlun, is his sacred Lord, but he now is declaring that
he, himself, a mere man, is the great I am! In other words, he is saying, "I am God!"
Uncovering the Hidden Hand
Now you see why I entitled this chapter, "The Hidden Hand of the Men of Jahbuhlun."
In the early degrees, the Mason is told that the name of God has been lost. He's even
told that he should use a substitute name for God, MAHABONE. But later, after he's
swallowed whole the rotten fabric of degree ritual after degree ritual, the
bamboozled and propagandized fellow is finally told that the one he is to worship
goes by the name Jahbuhlun and that he is now ready to declare himself, a man, as the
great I AM.
Obviously, the Illuminati's Masonic elite do not want the general public to know
these terrible things. After all, incredibly, Freemasonry's public image is that it is
some kind of "Christian" group. So, the pretense must be maintained and the secrets
buttoned up from the "profane and vulgar" masses (you and me, dear reader).
Therefore, the name of the horrible god whom the
Masons worship must stay hidden.
The name and identity of the hidden god
must be concealed at all costs, and thus an
appropriate hand sign has been devised to
represent this grotesque coverup: the Sign of the
Hidden Hand.
How to Perform the Sign
Figure 34 shown here is taken directly from
Duncan's Masonic Ritual and Monitor (3rd Edition).
It pictures the Royal Arch Mason performing the
magical Sign of the Master of the Second Veil, which
I informally and more informatively call here the
Sign of the Hidden Hand of the Men of Jahbuhlun.
According to Duncan's the candidate presents
this sign when he is approached by three
sojourners from Babylon. Their objective: Rebuild
the Temple of Solomon in Jerusalem and
eventually establish a world empire of the Jews.

--- Sayfa 54 ---
58
CODEX MAGICA
In his teaching course on Ancient Masonry, C.C. Zain of The Brotherhood of Light
explains that the ritual for this degree requires a keen understanding of astrology.
But, its performance is said to be derived from a passage in the scriptures. "The sign
is made," writes Zain, "by thrusting the hand into the bosom and again drawing it
out."9 The official Masonic explanation for this sign—a myth intended to divert the
profane from the truth — is that it refers to the fourth chapter of Exodus in the Holy
Bible: "And the Lord said unto Moses, put now thine hand into thy bosom; and he
put his hand into his bosom; and when he took it out, behold his hand was leprous
as snow."
Leprous, indeed, is the hand of the Mason who vainly seeks to hide and coverup
his fides oath of allegiance to Jahbuhlun, his sacred god. But, believe me, there is no
relationship of the Mason to Moses, a prophet of God who loyally worshipped the
true I AM, the God who reigns for all eternity in heaven.

--- Sayfa 55 ---
HIDDEN HAND OF THE MEN OF JAHBUHLUN
59

--- Sayfa 56 ---
60
CODEX MAGICA
George Washington in a Masonic pose. Around his neck is the emblem of the moon goddess,
feminine complement to the sun god, Osiris, secretly worshipped in occult Freemasonry. This
emblem, combined with the diamond-shaped device just above it, indicates that Washington had
taken the vow of vengence to all enemies of the Order of the Illuminati.

--- Sayfa 57 ---
HIDDEN HAND OF THE MEN OF JAHBUHLUN
M
61
The Marquis de Lafayette of France
presented George Washington with this
Masonic apron which is now preserved in
the library of the Grand Lodge of
Pennsylvania, in Philadelphia. It contains
many occultic symbols, the meaning of
which presumably is reserved for higher-
level Masonic brethren. Many, however, are
outed and explained in this book, to the
chagrin, I am sure, of the Masonic
brotherhood.
Emblem of the exclusivist Order of Cincinnati (also called the Society of
Cincinnati) worn by elite members. The secret society met in private and was
headed by George Washington.
Artwork from a china set which displays symbols important to the
Society of the Cincinnati, a secret order of elitist rich men begun after
the Revolutionary War, headed by George Washington. The symbols
include a strange crowned angel blowing a horn and a phoenix bird with
a torch aflame in its head from which issues a swirling fire, or sun sign.
The Society of the Illuminati was eventually disbanded when public
awareness grew that this small band of conspirators seemed to be
exercising undue control of governments.
Initiates of many occult societies, including Masons and
Rosicrucians, select a mark peculiar to them which they affix to
their signature. This is George Washington's signature. See if
you can find his "mark."

--- Sayfa 58 ---
62
CODEX MAGICA
President George Washington takes the oath of office as the first President of the United States
following the adoption of the U.S. Constitution by the states. The gentleman standing directly behind
him is giving a decidedly diabolical version of a secret society hand sign. (G. Washington: Master
Mason, by Allen E. Roberts, Macoy Publishing & Masonic Supply Co., Inc., Richmond, Virginia, sketch
by Ronald LeHew)
Many paintings and drawings depicting delegates who drafted and approved the Declaration of
Independence show one or more of the delegates secretly identifying his secret society membership
through a hand signal. The name of Jesus is never mentioned in either the Declaration of
Independence or the subsequent United States Constitution. Instead, our nation's founders used
vague, Illuminist coded terms like "Nature's God" or "Providence." Benjamin Franklin, a key leader of
the delegates, was both a Grand Master Mason (Lodge of Nine Sisters, Paris, France) and a
Rosicrucian. Thomas Jefferson, who helped draft the Declaration of Independence, wrote favorably of
the Order of the Illuminati
and its founder, European Jesuit Professor Adam Weishaupt.

--- Sayfa 59 ---
HIDDEN HAND OF THE MEN OF JAHBUHLUN
63
This poster showing America's first President, George Washington, as a Mason, is distributed by the
George Washington Masonic National Memorial Association. It was printed in the Scottish Rite
Journal (August 1992).

--- Sayfa 60 ---
64
CODEX MAGICA

--- Sayfa 61 ---
HIDDEN HAND OF THE MEN OF JAHBUHLUN
65
U.S. Civil War officers displaying the Masonic sign of the brotherhood of Jahbuhlun. Left
is Major Robert Anderson of the Confederate Army and at right is General George
McClellan, Union General of the Army of the Potomac. (Photos from The Florida Mason,
January, 2004, p. 7)
Russian Mikhail Katkov
(1818-1880), occult
publisher of Moscow
Gazette. Katkov brought
Hindu and Theosophy
teachings to Russia. He
also published some
books of Russian mystic,
Helena Blavatsky.

--- Sayfa 62 ---
66
CODEX MAG1CA
Above, John Wilkes Booth (left), a well known stage actor, with his brothers in a production
of Caesar, in 1864, just a year before he assassinated President Abraham Lincoln. Booth and
his elder brother, Edwin, were both members of the Masonic Lodge, but because of John
Wilkes' notoriety, the Freemasons quietly removed his name from their rolls. To this day the
Scottish Rite's membership office maintains that only brother Edwin was a Mason (Photo
from book, American Brutus, by Michael W. Kaufman).
This photograph of Lt. Elisha Hunt Rhodes is
from a 1993 book entitled Freemasons at
Gettysburg, by Sheldon A. Munn. The caption
above the photograph said that Lt. Rhodes was
"A Member and Worshipful Master (the
equivalent of the Lodge president) of Harmony
Lodge #9, Cranston, Rhode Island. He was also
the Grand Master of the Grand Lodge of Rhode
Island in 1892-1893."

--- Sayfa 63 ---
HIDDEN HAND OF THE MEN OF JAHBUHLUN
67
John Jay, chosen by President
George Washington and confirmed
by the newly assembled U.S. Senate
to be the first Chief Justice of the
Supreme Court of the United States.
Both President Franklin Pierce
(above) and President Rutherford
B. Hayes (below) are acknowledged
to have been Masons in the
authoritative book, 10,000 Famous
Freemasons, an official publication
of the Supreme Mother Council,
Scottish Rite Freemasons.
Former Secretary of State Colin Powell holds
hands with PLO leader Yasser Arafat as he
covertly places his right hand in his coat, a sign
to other initiates. Powell is a 33rd degree
Mason and a Council on Foreign Relations
alumnus. The late Arafat was also a member of
the Masonic Lodge.
Rutherford B. Hayes, President of
the United States (1822-1893).

--- Sayfa 64 ---
68
CODEX MAGICA
U.S.A. President Teddy Roosevelt, seen reviewing the troops onboard a Navy ship, is giving the secret
sign of the followers of the god, Jahbuhlun. Was it Teddy who once said, "Speak softly and keep your
hand well hid," or was that, "Speak softly and carry a big stick?"

--- Sayfa 65 ---
HIDDEN HAND OF THE MEN OF JAHBUHLUN
69
Karl Marx, the Jewish radical who inspired Lenin and Trotsky with his Communist theories, was
secretly a High Priest of Satan (see Richard Wurmbrand's book, Marx and Satan). Shown here in
his official portrait, Marx is giving an enigmatic Masonic hand sign (see Richardson's Monitor
of Freemasonry, p. 74).

--- Sayfa 66 ---
70
CODEX MAGICA
Vladimir Lenin, Jewish Mason who led the
Communist overthrow of the Czar in Russia,
gives the hidden sign of the men who worship
the god, Jahbuhlun. Lenin and his cohorts
established the Red Terror, the brutal
massacre of tens of millons.
General Paul Von Hindenburg, the notable World War I
German war hero of the Russian front who won
numerous victories. Later, in the Nazi era, a blimp,
named after the General, The Hindenburg, was
destroyed by flames while attempting to land in New
Jersey (U.S.A.) after a celebrated transatlantic flight.
Many lives were lost.

--- Sayfa 67 ---
HIDDEN HAND OF THE MEN OF JAHBUHLUN
71
Three Red Communist "heros" who conspired to establish a Bolshevik dictatorship in
Russia: Sergei Kirov, Mikhail Levandovsky, and Konstantin Mekhonoshin. These men
saw to the purge, torture, and death of untold thousands before they, in turn, were
wiped out by Stalin. Levandovsky (center) is displaying his Masonic "Jahbuhlun" hand
signal. Mekhonoshin (right) wears the llluminati phyrgian cap.
Four Gulag camp commandants. Note
that all four are giving the secret sign of
Jewish Freemasonry, just as did
Communism's founding father, the
Jewish Mason, Karl Marx.

--- Sayfa 68 ---
72
CODEX MAGICA
Sculptor Auguste Bertholdi was a member of Paris, France's Grand Orient Lodge. It was Bertholdi
(1834-1904) who sculpted the Illuminati's monumental Statue of Liberty which now graces New
York's harbor. The statue is replete with Secret Society coded messages and symbols of a particularly
blasphemous nature. Yet, the vast majority of Americans adore the Statue of Liberty and naively see
in her only virtue and goodness.
In the mid-nineteenth century, French writer Victor Hugo (author of Les
Miserables) cut a huge swath in occult circles. Here we see the mystical
minded Hugo giving a clear hand sign of Masonic Luciferian design. It was
Victor Hugo who wrote the story, "The Man Who Laughs," about a boy
whose face had been horribly shaped into a permanent smile by fiendish
cosmetic butchers. The grotesque tale was the basis for Batman's "Joker"
character. It was alleged that Victor Hugo was not only a Rosicrucian but
was also Grand Master of the occultic order known as the Priory of Sion.

--- Sayfa 69 ---
HIDDEN HAND OF THE MEN OF JAHBUHLUN
73
In this ad for Hitachi Electronics,
Napoleon is using the left-handed path
(dark occultism) of magic. Napoleon
was also reputed to be an llluminatus
and an initiate into the Greater
Mysteries (Areopagite degree). Note
also the sun sign (Maltese) badge.
Now we find yet another indication of Napoleon's
secret society involvement. Wearing red, the color of
Rothschild and blood, Napoleon signifies his left-
hand path orientation. The symbology of the three-
towered church in the background of the painting
(behind the curtain!) signifies the boast that
Napoleon, a political sovereign, is also Lord over the
spiritual realm.
In this famous painting
of Napoleon, the
Emperor is depicted
using his right-hand in
giving the Royal Arch
Mason handsign.

--- Sayfa 70 ---
74
CODEX MAGICA
Irish-American politician and author Ignatius
Donnelly caused a sensation in 1882 with his
book, Atlantis: The Antediluvian World. Donnelly
claimed scientific evidence for the existence of
the fabled Lost Continent of Atlantis, which sunk
under the sea, predecessor of modern
civilization. Donnelly's book even contained a
chart showing the alleged evolution of alphabets
from the time of Atlantis to the eras of the
Mayas, Egyptians, and Hebrews, etc. The
Illuminati elite of today believe they are, indeed,
descended from the god-men and priests who,
alone, escaped the tragic fall of the fabled
Atlantis. More recently, Disney Studios did a
movie, Atlantis, based on the theme, a movie
saturated with esoteric codes and symbols.

--- Sayfa 71 ---
HIDDEN HAND OF THE MEN OF JAHBUHLUN
75
Crown Prince Alexander of Yugoslavia, who now
resides in London, the city where his father, the
late King Peter, fled during the second world war,
is shown on his first trip to Belgrade, Yugoslavia,
in 1991. His Royal Highness, along with his
family, dutifully posed for this photo. Based on
his hand's position, the Crown Prince clearly
wanted his secret society associates and the
Masonic/occultic world to know he was one of
them and that the elite's power has now been
established in the former Soviet-bloc nation.
The fabulously wealthy Salomon Rothschild,
founder and overseer of the Vienna, Austria
branch of the Rothschild clan.

--- Sayfa 72 ---
76
CODEX MAGICA
How deeply was the Vatican and its Black Pope of the
Jesuit Order involved in the 1865 plot to assassinate
President Abraham Lincoln ? Burke McCarty, in an
extraordinary 1924 book, The Suppressed Truth About
the Assassination of Abraham Lincoln, alleges that the
powerful and influential Giacomo Antonelli, Cardinal
and Secretary of the Papal States under Pope Pius IX,
supervised the plot from afar and even hid a murderous
associate of assassin John Wilkes Booth in the Vatican
State, where he had fled, to protect him from execution
by American authorities who sought his extradition. In
the book, researcher McCarty includes this photo of
Cardinal Antonelli without, however, explaining the
obvious secret society hand sign of Antonelli.
Origen (185-254 A.D.) is often called an "early church father."
But, in fact, Origen brought many heresies, including Gnosticism
(Illuminist ideology) into the Church. Origen, a much quoted
scholar, hailed from Alexandria, Egypt, giving us yet another clue
to his heretical philosophies. In this revealing pen and ink
drawing, it appears that Origen's left-hand is demonstrating the
mysterious sign of an ancient secret society.

--- Sayfa 73 ---
HIDDEN HAND OF THE MEN OF JAHBUHLUN
77
This issue of the intriguing publication, Paranoia magazine, included a feature article examining
the tragic life of popular young actor River Phoenix, who died of a drug overdose on Halloween in
1993. The article's writer, Al Hidell, told of Phoenix's upbringing in the sordid sex cult known as
the Children of God, also called "The Family." The cult practiced incest, holy prostitution, and
other wickedness. River Phoenix, who was celebrated for his roles in such movies as Stand By Me
and Running On Empty, evidently could not escape his past. Why he is shown in the photo giving
the sign of Masonry is not mentioned in the magazine, but some authorities say that Children of
God leader David Berg had high-level political and Masonic Lodge connections.

--- Sayfa 74 ---
78
CODEX MAGICA
Lloyd Shearer (right), with actor James Dean in the early
1950s, wrote the famous column, "Walter Scott's
Personality Parade" in Parade magazine.
"War is hell,"said the crusty
and brutish Union General
William Tecumseh Sherman,
shown here displaying the
sign of the Jahbuhlun cult in
this official U.S. Army photo.
Hundreds of civilians were
massacred during Sherman's
fiery march through the
South.
Three regal figures belonging to
a Nubian temple. Each carries
the Egyptian ankh, signifying
rebirth and reincarnation in one
hand. Other symbols are also
seen (Drawing: Book, The Round
Towers of Atlantis, by Henry
O'Brien, Adventures Unlimited
Press, Kempton, IL, 2002)

--- Sayfa 75 ---
HIDDEN HAND OF THE MEN OF JAHBUHLUN
79
A Republican Party convention souvenir depicting President Ronald Reagan. The web site offering
it for sale describes it thusly: "From the 1984 convention, a smiling Ronnie in a Napoleonic
stance." Reagan was given the honorary 33rd degree by Scottish Rite leaders in a private ceremony
conducted in the lame duck President's Oval Office in Washington, D.C., just weeks before his
second and final term ended. The author has a picture of this ceremony in his files.

--- Sayfa 76 ---
FIVE
For He's a Jolly Good Fellow—Sign
of the Devil's Claw by Men of
the Craft
A naughty person, a wicked man, walketh with a froward mouth. He winketh with
his eyes, he speaketh with his feet, he teacheth with his fingers...
-Proverbs 6:12-13
W h i l e the word "craft" can properly be used to describe an art,
science, skill, or process practiced by a profession or occupation, in
the occult world, the word takes on a much darker significance and
is often called, the "Craft." It refers to a devious process practiced by like-minded
fellows who are bent on, and have agreed to follow, the ritualized path prescribed to
effect the magic of the Great Work of alchemical transformation.
The Fellow Craft degree (2°) of Freemasonry is found in both the largest bodies,
the York Rite and the Scottish Rite. According to Coil's Masonic Encyclopedia, the
Order of the Illuminati, formally founded by Adam Weishaupt and Baron Von
Knigge in 1776, divided its rites into three principal classes and the second of the
second class of rites was the Fellow Craft, 2°.1
Reinforcing the authoritative Coil's Masonic Encyclopedia is the work of other
Masonic and occult researchers who report that the Fellow Craft degree was
awarded in the 2° of the Order of the Illuminati. In the book, Witchcraft, Magic, and
The Supernatural, published in Great Britain, we find information about Sir Francis
Dashwood, leader of Britain's 18th century "Hell Fire Club." It is said that
Dashwood, a notorious yet rich Rosicrucian magician, greatly influenced America's
visiting Benjamin Franklin, who frequently sought him out for occultic advice and
information. Indeed, some believe that Dashwood was as important to the Illuminist

--- Sayfa 77 ---
82
CODEX MAGICA
Sir Francis Dashwood, leader of England's 18th
century "Hell Fire Club," practiced the dark side
of magic. The nobility and rich frequented his
group and called on him for rituals and advice.
(From: Witchcraft, Magic and the Supernatural,
London: Octopus Books, 1974, p. 33).
cause on the isle of Great Britain as Adam Weishaupt
was on the European continent.2
The Cunning vs. Those of Lesser Wit
The late Sovereign Grand Commander (Scottish Rite),
Dr. Albert Mackey, 33°, in his classic encyclopedia
reference book, says that the Fellow Craft degree
implies "mutual trust" among the "brethren" of the
Order. But he notes it is in a lower degree. The Masons, in the Middle Ages, he writes,
were divided into two classes, Masters and Fellows:
Those who were of greater skill held a higher position and were designated as
Masters while the masses of the Fraternity, the commonality, as we might say, were
called Fellows. 3
Put another way, Mackey says that those possessing more "cunning" were
graded as Masters, while the Fellows were of "lesser wit."4
But of course, today, most all Masons begin by being initiated into the First Degree
(Entered Apprentice). Then, the new Member is said to be passed into the Second
Degree (Fellow Craft), and next is raised in the Third Degree (Master Mason). These
are the three degrees of what is called the Blue Lodge of Freemasonry.
Why Is It Employed By High level Illuminists?
In this chapter we will reveal a number of high-rank llluminists giving the Sign of
Fellow Craft (2°) Mason. Now since this degree is of lower status, this begs the
question of why such famous, publicly acclaimed men as evangelists Billy Graham
and Pat Robertson, as well as occult leader Annie Besant, Russian President Boris
Yeltsin, and international financier Sir James Rothschild are all displaying the Fellow
Craft sign. The answer is a fascinating one.
Mackey writes that the degree —and thus its primary sign —denotes a "fellow
workman," a commoner. In other words, it represents the masses of common people.
It represents, adds Mackey, the "Stage of manhood" and the maturation of humanity
by progression of man's "reasoning faculties and...intellectual powers."5 In essence,
the Fellow Craft degree represents man progressively brought to a high status of
possessing the supreme wisdom of the serpent. Man as a whole becomes god
through reason. Therefore, the promise of the serpent made to Adam and Eve is
realized: "Ye shall be as gods."

--- Sayfa 78 ---
FOR HE'S A JOLLY GOOD FELLOW
83
Wisdom of the Serpent
Those who display this sign, the Sign of the Fellow Craft, to their fellows in the Craft
(the Illuminist, magical cult) are those chosen and ambitious of instructing the
masses on the wisdom of the serpent. Since religious, or spiritual wisdom, is deemed
essential and of a high order in Satan's kingdom, it is only natural that his human
representatives on earth who are leaders in the religious field show this sign of
recognition. Besant, a Theosophist, also displays the sign as her cult organization is
based on serpentine occult wisdom, the perennial philosophy. Yeltsin was acclaimed
by the press as popular leader of the Russian peoples' revolution, and Rothschild
desires to rule on the throne over all humanity as head of the Illuminati's Inner
Circle.
Also pictured here, in the pages that follow, giving the sign: Jesse and Frank
James, outlaws celebrated as "Robin Hoods" who, it is claimed, showered some of
their stolen wealth on the poor; Anton LaVey, who founded the Church of Satan in
1966 proclaiming it a Temple of Reason for those of wisdom and who sought mass
membership as patronage; Socialist Eugene Debs, who claimed to represent the
common man; and John Wilkes Booth, alleged assassin of President Abraham
Lincoln. Booth was a Freemason and as such, was a fomenter of international
revolutions of the people; Lincoln was not a Mason and sought to quell insurrection
of the masses.
The Sign of a Fellow Craft Mason is made by raising the right hand to the left breast,
with the palm towards the breast and the fingers crooked. Then, draw the hand
smartly across the breast from left to right and let it drop to the side.
In performing the sign, the individual is taking his right hand, making a type of
beastly devil's claw out of it and then raking it across the breast
from left to right. C. F. McQuaig, in The Masonic Report, calls this
the Penal sign. It is made to remind the person giving it of his oath
taken, that if he discloses the secrets of the Order or gives aid and
comfort to its enemies, he should have the right breast torn open
and the heart torn out. In sum, this is a ghastly sign warning of
death to he who dares betray the Order of the Illuminati.
Sign of the Fellow Craft, or Second Degree. Notice the right hand position on
the breast with the fingers crooked in somewhat of a loose "fist." After both
arms are in the position shown the left hand is quickly dropped. Duncan's
Masonic Ritual and Monitor (id. Ed., p. 16) says: "In making the due guard and
sign of the Fellow Craft, or Second Degree, care must be taken to drop the left
arm suddenly and with spirit, as soon as the two motions are accomplished."

--- Sayfa 79 ---
84
CODEX MAGICA
Page from a Rosicrucian manual. In the center is an Egyptian statue of Pharaoh Amenhotep IV
giving the hand and arm sign later adapted by Freemasonry.

--- Sayfa 80 ---
FOR HE'S A JOLLY GOOD FELLOW
85
Enclosure walls of Pyramid
with statue of Pharaoh
Netjerykhet Djoser.
Statue of Cheops,
or Khufu,
thought to be the
builder of the
Great Pyramid of
Giza in Egypt.
(Photo: from The
Riddle of the
Pyramids, by Kurt
Mendelssohn)

--- Sayfa 81 ---
86
CODEX MAGICA
Statue of High Priest Kai,
discovered recently by
archaeologists in Giza, Egypt.
Colorful portrait of Egyptian ruler,
Wep-em-nefret

--- Sayfa 82 ---
FOR HE'S A JOLLY GOOD FELLOW
87

--- Sayfa 83 ---
88
CODEX MAGICA
Illuminati
servant Pat Robertson, founder of CBN and The 700 Club, giving his, by now, notorious
Masonic sign on the cover of Time magazine, February 17, 1986. Robertson went on after this
magazine's publication to become a big star in Republican Party politics. Interestingly, Robertson
was ordained for the ministry at a Norfolk, Virginia, church named, appropriately, the Freemason
Street Baptist Church. In the author's opinion, this cover of Time is clearly a staged event, and both
the publisher and Robertson full well knew what they were doing. Robertson has long been allied
with the Vatican's Sovereign Military Order of the Knights of Malta (SMOM). His father, as a U.S.
Senator from Virginia, was chairman of the Senate Banking and Currency Committee.

--- Sayfa 84 ---
FOR HE'S A JOLLY GOOD FELLOW
89
Annie Besant, a Co-Mason (women's branch) took over the
Theosophy cult at the passing of Colonel Olcott. The logo
of Theosophy is blatantly occultic, combining the crowned
Oroboros serpent with both the Jewish Star of David, or
six-pointed star, and the encircled swastika.
Another photo of
theosophist Annie Besant
giving the sign. Besant, like
her mentors, Colonel Olcott
and Russian mystic Helena
Blavatsky, believed in the
"pure doctrine" of Lucifer,
which they called the
perennial philosophy and
the "Secret Doctrine."

--- Sayfa 85 ---
90
M
CODEX MAGICA

--- Sayfa 86 ---
FOR HE'S A JOLLY GOOD FELLOW
91
Interesting political cartoon in New Jersey's
Star-Ledger newspaper following the 9/11
World Trade Center attack, sent to the
author by a friend. Ever wondered why
"Uncle Sam" wears the satanic goatee beard?
Johannes Kepler (1571-1630), a
German astronomer and
mathematician who taught the
numerological philosophies of
Plato and Pythagoras that were
adopted by the Illuminati. (From
the book, Sacred Architecture, by
A.T. Mann, Element Books, 1993)

--- Sayfa 87 ---
92
CODEX MAGICA
Russian President Boris Yeltsin was known to be a dupe of Jewish Illuminati
interests. Following the
fall of the Iron Curtain, these Illuminati Jews carved up Russia, seizing every asset of value and
leaving the everyday Soviet citizenry in desperate economic straits. Yeltsin, a hopeless drunk, shows
his loyalty to Illuminist interests with his clenched fist masonic pose.

--- Sayfa 88 ---
FOR HE'S A JOLLY GOOD FELLOW
93
England's Sir James de Rothschild, of the fabulously wealthy Rothschild Dynasty, about 1935. The
books he has his clenched right fist on are believed to be mystical cabalistic texts. (Photo: From book
Waddesdon Manor— The Heritage of a Rothschild House, by Michael Hall, photo by John Bigelow
Taylor, Harry N. Abrams, Inc., Publishers, New York, 2002)

--- Sayfa 89 ---
94
CODEX MAGICA
Anton Szandor LaVey, founder of the Church of Satan, from the back cover of his book of
essays, Satan Speaks. LaVey died on October 29, 1997 just days after completing the
manuscript of this book. Satanist rock star Marilyn Manson wrote the foreword. (Satan
Speaks, by Anton LaVey, Venice, CA: Feral House, 1998)

--- Sayfa 90 ---
FOR HE'S A JOLLY GOOD FELLOW
95
A stage/production of the classic, "Caesar," demonstrates the similarity of the Roman Emperor's arm
and hand position to that of the Masons' sign.
Labor leader Eugene V. Debs
ran for president five times on
the Socialist Party ticket. His
best showing was in 1920
when he received almost six
percent of the votes cast.

--- Sayfa 91 ---
SIX
Baphles Me!—Horned Beasts, Leaping
Goats, Satanic Beards, And Other
Messages of Evil
I possess more exalted titles than I have ever been able to count. I am supposed to
know more secret signs, tokens, passwords, grandwords, grips, and so on, than I
could actually learn in a dozen lives. An elephant would break down under the
insignia I am entitled to wear.
— Aleister Crowley, British Satanist
Confessions of a Heretic
Karl Marx was a Satan worshipper...he joined a satanic cult that featured long
unkempt beards. Every picture of Karl Marx depicts such.
— Ralph Epperson
Secret Societies (audiotape 1987)
M a n y believe that Satanism and Luciferian worship are miles apart
from the rituals, practices, and philosophies of the secret societies
and the Order of the Illuminati. In fact, there is no real distinction
between these groups. As Dr. Michael Aquino, hard-core satanist and founder of the
Temple of Set once acknowledged, the satanists merely have a "more precise"
understanding of occult reality.
Aleister Crowley, the late British satanist, who relished calling himself, "the
wickedest man on planet earth," no doubt would have agreed with Aquino. Crowley

--- Sayfa 92 ---
98
CODEX MAGICA
was initiated into a number of different Masonic fraternities, satanic rites, and occult
groups, including the Rite of Memphis, Mexican Scottish Rite 33°, Grand Orient 33°,
and the Rite of Misraim. In 1912 he was honored by fellow Luciferians of the Ordo
Templi Orientis (O.T.O.), being acknowledged for his superior Gnostic knowledge
and giftedness and given the following exalted rank and title:1
Aleister St. Edward Crowley 33°, 90°, 95°, X°
National Grand Master General for Great Britain and Ireland
Mysteria Mystica Maxima
"An Elephant Would Break Down..."
Crowley claimed that from Bucharest, Hungary to Salt Lake City, Utah, he was
showered with honors, titles, degrees and occult paraphernalia. So much was he
recognized that a bemused Crowley wittily remarked, "an elephant would break
down under the insignia I am entitled to wear."2 It was Napoleon who once observed
how easy it is to win men over through flattery simply by bequeathing a title to them
or pinning a medal or token on their chest.
Crowley's wicked philosophies and his ritual experimentation—such as the
"Babalon Working" ritual designed to invoke the coming of Antichrist—greatly
inspired copycats and imitators. Such include L. Ron Hubbard, who reportedly
studied Crowley's works and went on to found the fake religion called Scientology;
Anton LaVey, who founded the Church of Satan and authored The Satanic Bible; and
Alfred Kinsey, notorious sex
researcher whose Kinsey
Institute pandered to kinky
homosexuals and vicious
pedophiles.3
Crowley
often
acted
nutty and bizarre, but he
was so trusted by the British
government that it enthu-
siastically used his services
in
an
Intelligence
unit
during the World War II
conflict against the Nazis.
Crowley's adoption of
the hermaphroditic, horned
goat-god Baphomet as his
own magical name indicates
how powerful is this idol to Illuminists. Crowley certainly knew who Baphomet
represents. In his book, Magic in Theory and Practice, he states:
This serpent, Satan, is not the enemy of man... He is 'The Devil' of the (Egyptian)
Book of Thoth, and his emblem is 'Baphomet,' the Androgyne who is the
hieroglyph of arcane perfection...But moreover his letter is Ayin, the Eye; he is

--- Sayfa 93 ---
BAPHLES ME!
99
Light and his zodiacal image is Capricornus, that leaping goat whose attribute is
liberty.4
No doubt the Inner Circle of the
Illuminati have specific objectives in mind
that are being met by men like Crowley,
LaVey, Hubbbard, and Kinsey. These men
and their followers are used to degrade and
debase humanity, vulgarize religion, and
destroy sane and moral culture. In truth, the
philosophies of these evil men are in accord
with that of the Illuminati. At the core level of
Weishaupt's philosophy was always the
"elevation" of humanity to god-status.
"Do As Thou Wilt..."
The pitch was to inspire men to reject God's
laws and God's religion and strike out in liberty, doing one's own thing. In other
words, live free beyond any bounds of morality or propriety. Lust, free sex, immoral
conduct, rape, pillage, plunder—all are permitted the New Man of Reason. As
Crowley's One Great Commandment put it, "Do As Thou Wilt Shall be the Whole of the
Law."
Now Baphomet, the androgynous horned, half man-woman, half goat god of the
medieval Knights Templars, inculcates this "Do your own thing" philosophy of
Illuminism. He is the very image of the freethinker, the Mason and Illuminist who
raises the "Torch of Liberty" —the fire of hell and light of Lucifer. The Knights
Templar, predecessor to today's Freemasons, revered Baphomet as the deity of
wisdom. Look closely at the reverse side of the U.S. dollar bill and you will find the
horns of Baphomet meticulously designed and imbedded.
-———
In this chapter, you will discover more about Baphomet; about the Green Man;
about Pan, the horned witch god; and about Crowley and his Ordo Templi Orientis
(O.T.O.). Since the days of Alexander the Great, the horned god has been worshipped
by a significant portion of mankind. The Holy Bible records, for example, the
worship of Baal, the horned fire god. Michaelangelo and some other artists,
strangely, created sculptures blasphemously showing Moses, the biblical prophet,
with horns. All of these horned deities and images represent lust, because the horn is
itself a phallic symbol in the occult world.
Of Stars and Goatees
In recent times, Communist revolutionaries adopted the Star, also symbol of
Baphomet (see the star on the Baphomet goat's forehead in this chapter), and some—
Karl Marx, Che Gueverra and others—adopted the huge and straggly beard in honor
of the goatee of Baphomet, the deity whom they secretly worshipped. Revealingly, the
late Anton LaVey, spouting his hellish philosophy in his final book, Satan Speaks, says

--- Sayfa 94 ---
100
CODEX
MAGIC
A
of Baphomet's beard: "The essence of Satanism is...the beard of wisdom on the goat
within the inverted star."5
Many Hollywood celebrities have become involved in the depths of satanism.
Beautiful actresses like Jayne Mansfield and Marilyn Monroe were used as sex tools
by the elite, and men such as singer Sammy Davis, Jr., as well as dozens of rock 'n'
roll entertainers, were used as Illuminist toys, providing fun, games, and
entertainment for the elite. Davis was made an honorary 11° in Dr. Michael Aquino's
Temple of Set cult. Blonde bombshell actress Jayne Mansfield was so enamored of
This postage stamp issued by Russia in 1938 honored
Comunist theoretician, Karl Marx. Marx, a Jewish
Zionist and Mason, was also a Satan worshipper. His
straggly, unkempt beard honored the beard of the
Illuminati diety, Baphomet, and represented "Cosmic
Intelligence and Will."
Anton Szandor LaVey, founder of the
Church of Satan, died on October 29, 1997.
Oddly, Edmund de Rothschild, senior head
of the Rothschild banking dynasty, died the
same day. LaVey said that the beard of
Baphomet was a sign of wisdom.
satanic worship that she had a pink and black Baphomet idol custom-made just for
her. She wore the idol around her neck at a San Francisco Festival in 1966. Hollywood
involvement in satanic darkness continues today, though the names have changed.
According to one respected source, U.S. President George Herbert Walker Bush
(Bush the Senior) once stunned congressional leaders when he made an entrance into
the Oval Office wearing a goat's head mask!6
The He Goat of Prophecy
Significant, indeed, is the biblical passage in Daniel 8:8-22, which symbolically
pictures a great world leader in the last days as a "he goat." This he goat, say the
scriptures, becomes very strong and his power is symbolized by a horn that arises
from his forehead. This strange and evil creature makes war on the host of God and
stamps upon them. Is this not an image of the Beast, Baphomet, worshipped in secret
by the llluminati?

--- Sayfa 95 ---
BAPHLES ME!
101
The Baptism of a Satanic Witch
In the ceremonies of pagan religions, baptisms—counterfeits of the Christian
sacrament—were conducted as rites of initiation. Below is the modern-day account
of one such dark baptism, exactly as it is recorded in the book, The Satanic Witch, by
Anton LaVey, head of the Church of Satan. LaVey has declared that the goal of his
unholy church is to usher in a "New Age." (The person being baptized is LaVey's
daughter, Zeena, and the words are hers.)
My baptism was indeed the reversal of a Christian baptism. Instead of being
dunked into a cold bath by a strange, sexless man to be cleansed of "original sin,"
we celebrated man and nature as they really are.
As I sat wearing the red robe my mother made that morning, I toyed with the
Baphomet amulet dangling around my neck. Imperiously, I surveyed the sea of
black-hooded celebrants. It took me a few years to realize that some of them may
have been more fascinated with the naked woman sprawled on the altar than with
me. The gothic strains of a Hammond organ echoed against the black and red
walls...I delighted in being the focal point of all this activity.
My father, the High Priest, raised his ceremonial sword in benediction. I felt a great
sense of warmth and respect. How many people can honestly say they have this
feeling at any point in their life? "I have something they don't," I thought proudly,
in keeping with the indulgent philosophy of Satanism. Since that night I understood
what it means to be a Satanic Witch, a woman who makes full use of her feminine
wiles. Throughout my life I would replay the words intoned during my baptism:
The many footed walkers give you the strength, the power of red fang and claw, all the
madly dancing demons fill you with the lost knowledge of ancient ones. Small sorceress, the
most natural and true magician, your tiny hands have the power to pull the living heavens
down and from its shards build a monument to your own sweet indulgence... And with
these others in the devil's fane, you will so cause the heads of men to reel and spin, you will
fill them with desire. And so we dedicate your life to love, to passion, to indulgence, and to
Satan and the way of darkness, fane. Hail Zeena! Hail Satan!
A Generation Mesmerized
Recently, countless youth have been brought into Satan's kingdom through movies, TV
cartoons, video games, comic books, and other means. The Harry Potter witchcraft
books have initiated many into the darkest elements of hellishness. Occult fantasy
movies (Star Wars, Jedi, etc.) have erased any conception of absolutes and have
increasingly brought youth into satanic philosophies. The end result is an entire
generation mesmerized, all marching in formation through the haze trance-like into a
21st century existence to be ruled over by Illuminati dignitaries. Never before in history
have so many been trained and indoctrinated to the tenets of Satanic Illuminism. The
hidden entity behind the idol Baphomet must be very proud of his newfound slaves.

--- Sayfa 96 ---
102
CODEX MAGICA

--- Sayfa 97 ---
BAPHLES ME!
103
Replica of Michaelangelo's "Florentine Man," a Green
Man idol sculptured by the famous Italian Renaissance
artist, (from Toscano Design catalog, Holiday, 1999)
Green Man
doorbell knocker,
"Il Vecchio," replica
of an authentic
Tuscany model
(from Toscano
Design catalog,
Holiday, 1999)
In his Songs of Innocence,
English artist and author
William Blake etched,
printed and hand-colored
this illustration for his
poem, "The Shepherd." To
Christians, the Shepherd is
Jesus Christ. But to Blake, as
we see here, the Shepherd is
Lucifer, beard and all, with
serpentine-topped staff.
(1802; Harry Ransom
Center, University of Texas
at Austin)

--- Sayfa 98 ---
104
CODEX MAGICA
Pan, the horned god of the mountains, forest, streams, and valleys, is almost universally
worshipped by witches, as the honor bestowed upon him by the title and cover art of this
recent book indicate. The ivy and holly are his favored vegetation (thus, the ivy-covered
buildings on the campuses of Harvard, Yale, and other elite establishment colleges and the
name, Hollywood). Pan, whose father is Hermes, god of secrecy, is often pictured as the Green
Man, a vegetation-covered deity. The tale of the jolly green giant is a myth begun by his
admirers. Who, really, is Pan? Well, of course, Pan is simply the Devil in a new disguise.

--- Sayfa 99 ---
BAPHLES ME!
105

--- Sayfa 100 ---
106
CODEX MAGICA
The bearded revolutionary rebel is symbolic of Baphomet, who also has a beard. This artist rendition
of notorious Cuban guerilla leader Che Gueverra does bear a remarkable resemblance to Eliphas
Levi's famous drawing of Baphomet, complete with the stars on their respective heads.

--- Sayfa 101 ---
BAPHLES ME!
107
A Baphomet wall plaque and wall sculpture sold by an occult mail order store, along with a "Seal of
Babalon" and the Brotherhood A
A
wall plaque (the Atlantean Brotherhood). Also offered: a
"Sabbatic Goat" amulet, described as satanist Eliphas Levi's "Baphomet God of the Witches."

--- Sayfa 102 ---
108
la
CODEX MAGICA
The Grand Master of
a satanic secret
society in the country
of Greece wears a
goat's head.
The irregular pentagram with an
image of Baphomet filling up the
interior spaces is called the "Goat
of Mendes." It is yet another
representation of Satan.
President George Herbert Walker Bush. We do not know
what the star and longhorn stand for on his cap, nor the
meaning of the sash around his neck. Speculatively,
perhaps it has something to do with a Texas state group or
a Texas (Lone Star State) cattlemen's association, etc.
However, from Australia come two reports that the senior
George Bush once stunned congressional leaders waiting to
see him in his oval office at the White House. The President
entered his office wearing a goat's head mask! (Peter
Sawyer's Inside News, November 1991 and South East
Christian Witness, January 1992, p. 5 and July /August
1989, p. 9)

--- Sayfa 103 ---
BAPHLESME!
109

--- Sayfa 104 ---
110
CODEX MAGICA
The Devil makes an appearance at a black sabbat ritual of his followers. (From an ancient woodcut by
Pierre de Lancre, France, 1913)
Baal and some other gods were pictured as horned
bulls. This is Baal, god of fire receiving an infant as
sacrifice.

--- Sayfa 105 ---
BAPHLES ME!
111
According to this news
account from The
Associated Press (April 1,
1995), the tomb of
Alexander the Great was
found at Siwa, in Egypt.
Adorers of the Greek conqueror,
Alexander the Great, attributed
horns to him. This was thought to
be emblematic of a person's divine
power and spiritual acumen.
Coins bearing Alexander's visage
were struck picturing the Greek
military leader as a bull with
horns and the lit torch in his
head.

--- Sayfa 106 ---
112
CODEX
MAGIC
A
Strangely, many medieval
artists, especially those
clandestinely dabbling in the
occult arts, often portrayed
Moses as a bearded human
figure with horns. (The
Herder Dictionary of
Symbols, Chiron
Publications, Illinois)
The devil has long been conceived in
the popular imagination of the
masses as a creature with horns,
cloved feet and claws, and tail.
Smokey the bull?

--- Sayfa 107 ---
BAPHLESME!
113
This ad for Nokia telephones appears harmless enough. But look closely at the subtle, horned image
of the man's silver belt buckle. Also, he is wearing what appears to be the string cord on his left wrist
characteristic of followers of the occult Cabala (or Kabbalah).

--- Sayfa 108 ---
114
CODEX MAGICA
President Bill Clinton was named "Man of the Year" by Time magazine. The editors stretched the
letter 'M' to make it appear as if Clinton had horns.

--- Sayfa 109 ---
BAPHLES ME!
115
Gannet News Service, one of America's largest daily newspaper chains,
ran this story about the Time cover that made President Clinton look like
the devil. All unintentional, said Gannett. Sure it was!
"That which we must say to the CROWD is
we worship a god, but it is the god that one
adores without superstition. To YOU
Sovereign Grand Inspectors General, we say
this, that you may repeat it to the brethren of
the 32nd, 31st and 30th degrees - the
MASONIC RELIGION should be, by all of us
initiates of the high degrees, maintained in
the purity of the LUCIFERIAN doctrine. If
Lucifer were not god, would Adonay
(Jesus)... calumniate (spread false and
harmful statements about) him?.. YES,
LUCIFER IS GOD..."*
*A.C. De La Rive, La Femme et l'Enfant dans la
Franc-Maconnene Universelle (page 588)
The symbol of the
androgynous beast-god,
Baphomet, turns out to
be remarkably similar to
the symbol worn by the
Sovereign Grand
Commanders of the
Scottish Rite, the world's
largest Freemasonry
group. This is shown on
these two pages of a
popular tract by Chick
Publications. They show
Albert Pike, 33rd degree,
19th century Sovereign
Grand Commander
following the American
Civil War, quoted as
adoring Lucifer. Also
wearing the symbol,
Henry C. Clausen, 33rd
degree, Sovereign Grand
Commander in the 1970s
and 1980s. Clausen wore
the symbol as does the
current Sovereign Grand
Commander, C. Fred
Kleinknecht.

--- Sayfa 110 ---
116
CODEX MAGICA
Highly acclaimed artist Marc Chagall,
a Russian-born Jew, gave us this
painting, entitled Midsummer Nights
Dream, in 1939. Drawing on the
theme of "Beauty and the Beast," the
painting has a horned goat as a
bridegroom, and a wedding couple
being influenced by a red-colored
angel.
Dutch architect Rem Koolhaas is in great
demand. In recent years he's designed a
Guggenheim Museum, public libraries,
Prada stores, an addition for the
Whitney Museum in New York, and
published several bestselling books.
Featured in Newsweek (January 28,
2002, p. 56), Koolhaas apparently is
communicating an esoteric message. The
parallel vertical lines are undeniably
reminiscent of horns. The nude images
on either side of the architect cry out
lust and sex, while the face, arms and
body posture are also meaningful.

--- Sayfa 111 ---
BAPHLES ME!
117
A well-known witchcraft
newspaper carried this
illustration (top) of the
Goddess and her
consort and master, the
Horned God (Lucifer).
The cupid-like angel is
their Son. Below is an
ad offering "magick"
products for the "New
Aeon" (New Age). The
magnetic (e.g. magical)
powers of Lucifer and
his goddess mate are
boastfully shown to
uphold planet earth.

--- Sayfa 112 ---
118
CODEX
MAGIC
A
The demon, Mephistopheles,
shown being conjured up by a
magician in Masonic scholar
and 33rd degree Illuminatus
Manly P. Halls 1928 occult
book classic, Secret Teachings of
All Ages, bears a remarkable
resemblance to Yoda, the wise
ascended master of the Star
Wars saga, Return of the Jedi.
Look closely and you'll see a
painting of Baphomet, the
androgynous goat god, on the
wall at left and also a skeleton's
head at top right.
This is a member of the radical
environmentalist group, Earth
First. He's decked out as Pan, an
ancient, mystical Greek deity
who had a mistress said to be
the "Earth Goddess."

--- Sayfa 113 ---
SEVEN
"El Diablo" Shows His Horns—The Devil
Rides Out!
People that are Christians now, but were Satanists, recognized President Clinton's
signal at his inauguration as a sign of Satan. That seems fairly cut and dried, and it
is. Clinton communicated what he wanted to the people to whom he wanted to
communicate. The whole affair with him flashing the Satanic handsignal took only a
couple of seconds.
Fritz Springmeier
Bloodlines of the Illuminati
It is being flashed everywhere—on TV, in newspapers and magazines, at
sporting events, and even at presidential inaugurations. I'm referring, of
course, to the sign of El Diablo, the horned devil, also known as the sign of
Il Cornuto and as Diabolicus. It began in the modern era with the followers of satanic
cults, the members of the official Church of Satan, and heavy metal rock music bands
and fans flourishing the sign of two separated fingers upward sign. The rock bands
made it popular and trendy, and now it seems almost everyone is doing it.
Three versions of the "El
Diablo," the sign of
Satan, the horned god.
The hand sign at right is
also the deaf's gesture, or
signing, for "I love you," a
fact which has many
people confused.

--- Sayfa 114 ---
120
CODEX MAGICA
I Love You, Devil?
The sign often is confused with the deaf's signing of the phrase, "I love you." While
at first this appears an odd resemblance, we register an "ahh, I get it!" emotion when
we discover that the person who invented, or created, the hand sign system for the
deaf, Helen Keller, was herself an occultist and Theosophist. Did Keller purposely
design the deaf's "I love you" sign to be such a remarkable imitation of the classic
sign of Satan? Was Keller saying, basically, "I love you, Devil?"
Then, we have the confusion of the El Diablo hand sign with the University of
Texas "hook 'em horns" sign. Texas' mascot is the longhorn cow and it is only natural
that the horns sign be employed by the student body, alumnai, and fans of that great
institution.
When Jenna Bush, the daughter of President George W. Bush, gave the horns sign
at the 2004 presidential inauguration, it shocked the world. Most viewers of
international TV did not know that Jenna is a recent graduate of the University of
Texas. However, at that same inaugural gala, the President also was photographed
giving the sign, and so was the other Bush daughter. Not only that, but the First
Lady, Laura, and even the President's mother, Barbara Bush, got into the mix. They,
too, were seen giving the sign. Hmmm.
Partying, Drinking, Rebellion, Or...?
With the rapid rise in popularity of the El Diablo sign among rock fans, many people
seem to be blissfully unaware of the satanic background and dark history of this sign.
To some, giving the sign more likely indicates their eagerness and gusto for fun,
partying, drinking, and youthful rebellion.
Thus it is that I leave it to you, the reader, to decide which of the persons shown
here, in this chapter, in rendering the El Diablo sign, are paying homage to Satan and
which are employing it for some other purpose. I have my own opinion, what's
yours? For example, in the picture shown here you'll discover former President Bill
Clinton, from Arkansas, and Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi giving the sign.
Are they telling us they are Texas Longhorns fans or that they love Satan?
A final word: Even if you and I are willing to overlook the giving of this sign by
many as not intentionally satanic, we cannot dismiss the evidence that many, if not
most, who employ the sign are, in fact, thereby honoring Satan, the rebellious dark
angel. The case here, later in this chapter, of the vampire satanists who stabbed a
victim 66 times and drank his blood undeniably stamps the El Diablo hand sign
given by the murderers as intensely satanic in nature.
Neither can the picture here of the Hindu sect member, the witch, and of Anton
LaVey, High Priest of Satan, giving the sign also be disputed or explained away.
As for the photos of the top-ranked Christian evangelists shown in the pages that
follow, what do you have to say, dear reader? Are these men servants of the One,
True God as revealed in the Holy Bible, or do they cryptically serve His Adversary,
Lucifer? Judging from their hand gestures, what do you say?

--- Sayfa 115 ---
EL DIABLO" SHOWS HIS HORNS-THE DEVIL RIDES OUT
1 2 1
This photograph of President George W. Bush in Time magazine (June 4, 2001) is curious. It shows
Bush presenting the horned devil sign. Also, the simultaneous joint use of the circle is evident.
Nowhere in the article does the author explain why Bush is making this sign or even explain why he
is dressed in what appears to be college robes. Just as curious, the article, including the caption,
mentions the word charm, charmed, or charming a grand total of exactly six times. A charm, of
course, is a magical talisman. The text also includes the eyebrow-raising phrases: "There's something
funny there" and "something funny..." Yes, indeed, there is something funny and strange at work
here.

--- Sayfa 116 ---
122
CODEX MAGICA

--- Sayfa 117 ---
'EL DIABLO" SHOWS HIS HORNS-THE DEVIL RIDES OUT
123
This article in the Cleveland Plain Dealer newspaper followed the international controversy of Bush
and family giving what appeared to be the devil's hand sign.

--- Sayfa 118 ---
124
CODEX MAGICA
Yet another article, this one in Fort Worth's Star-Telegram newspaper. The editors insisted that
the Bushes were only displaying the "Hook 'em Horns" sign common to University of Texas
Longhorns fans. The article points out that in Africa and Europe, the sign is clearly the devil's
own. Doesn't it seem odd to you that even Mother Barbara Bush is giving the sign? And, after all,
neither George nor Laura were ever students at the University of Texas! George was a bonesman
at New England's preppie school, Yale.

--- Sayfa 119 ---
"EL DIABLO" SHOWS HIS HORNS-THE DEVIL RIDES OUT
125

--- Sayfa 120 ---
126
CODEX MAGICA
New York Governor Mario Cuomo.
Knights of Malta magnate J. Peter
Grace once referred to him as "Cuomo
the homo."
Roberta Achtenberg, Jewish lesbian
activist who was a HUD official in
the Clinton Administration, shows
her philosophical leanings at a Gay
Pride Parade in San Francisco.
Marion Berry, Mayor of the nation's
capital, Washington, D.C. Later arrested
for cocaine possession, Mayor Berry once
remarked, "Outside of the killings,
Washington has one of the lowest crime
rates in the country."
Prince William of Britain's
royal family.
Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi.

--- Sayfa 121 ---
"EL DIABLO" SHOWS HIS HORNS - THE DEVIL RIDES OUT 1 2 7
Article in Newsweek
(September 18, 2000).
Do you think these
two young men were
knowledgeable of
what the hand sign
means?
The top two executives of the McDonald's
fast food chain jointly display interesting
hand signs in this photograph in
Newsweek dated February 2004. At left
CEO Charlie Bell with his predecessor, Jim
Cantalupo. Note that Bell (left) extends
the thumb, Cantalupo does not, once
again demonstrating the confusion—or is
it simply the blurring of distinctions—
between the two types of signs. Are both
men giving a diabolical sign—or is
neither?

--- Sayfa 122 ---
128
CODEX MAGICA

--- Sayfa 123 ---
"EL DIABLO" SHOWS HIS HORNS-THE DEVIL RIDES OUT
129
Those who claim that if the thumb is
diplayed, it is not the "El Diablo" Satan
hand sign may just want to take a gander at
the cover of a recently published (2005)
book by Sondra London entitled True
Vampires—Blood-Sucking Killers Past and
Present. Published by Feral House, a book
company originally founded by Anton
LaVey, High Priest of the Church of Satan,
the cover clearly demonstrates that, for
hard-core Satanists, there is no real
difference in meaning whether the sign
includes the thumb or does not.
Manuela Ruda, 2 i, (shown at left in sun glasses
giving the "El Diablo" hand sign), and her
husband, Daniel, 26, a pair of self-proclaimed
vampire satanists from Germany, sacrificed a
victim to Satan. The pair ceremoniously stabbed
the man exactly 66 times with a dagger. Then they
drank his blood. Some might say that Manuela's
hand sign is merely the deaf's "/ love you," but the
couples' grim conduct indicated otherwise. Also
shown: Manuela's head, shaved to reveal an
inverted Christian cross. Manuela also had a
rough-edged, blood red circle tatooed on her scalp.
The two were trained to be Satan worshippers
while visiting Scotland. (From news report and
article in Strange Times magazine, Great Britian)

--- Sayfa 124 ---
130
CODEX MAGICA
An American member of the Aghora sect of Hinduism drinks from the top of a
human skull. Some members of the sect practice cannibalism to gain magical
powers (The Tampa Tribune, June 2, 2003, p. 1).
The illustration from the book
Witches, by Una Woodruff and
Colin Wilson (Crescent Books, New
York, 1988), shows a satanic witch
signaling the "El Diablo."

--- Sayfa 125 ---
"EL DIABLO" SHOWS HIS HORNS-THE DEVIL RIDES OUT
131
High priest of the Church of
Satan, Anton LaVey, was honored
upon his death in this article in
the San Francisco Chronicle. In
the picture, LaVey is giving the "El
Diablo" hand sign while, on the
wall, is the "Baphomet" version
of the satanic pentagram star.
Was it mere coincidence that on
the very day that this wicked
satanist died in California, across
the sea, in England, Illuminati
chief Lord Edmond de Rothschild
also passed away?

--- Sayfa 126 ---
132
CODEX MAGICA
In a video exposing charismatic "prosperity preacher" televangelists, these
four men were among many apparently giving what some people claim is the
universally recognized "El Diablo"—horns of the devil sign.
Heather Whitestone, Miss America (1994)
flashes what is clearly the deaf's "I love
you" sign. Ms. Whitestone, a Christian
believer who is deaf, is definitely not a
satanist or occultist.
Christian Rock?—Is
there such a thing as
Christian rock'n'roll?
This book , authored
by a mother of a
young man who was
a member of a rock
band, was intended
to defend Christian rock music. But perhaps tellingly,
the cover seems to show one person giving the horned
devil sign and a couple more displaying the F...k You!
sign (finger in middle of hand upraised)—all at a
Christian rock concert! Also, lights displayed in three
triangles are in the background. The triangle has three
sides. Three plus three equals nine. The number nine
in occult numerology conceals the number 666, the
number of the beast, since adding the digits
6+6+6=18=9. Whether the cover artist and the author
were aware of these oddities is unknown.

--- Sayfa 127 ---
"EL DIABLO" SHOWS HIS HORNS - THE DEVIL RIDES OUT 1 3 3

--- Sayfa 128 ---
134
CODEX
MAGIC
A
Helen Keller (1880-1968), shown
here at her desk, creator of the deaf
signing system. The brilliant Keller
was a pitiful character in some ways.
Stricken blind and deaf at an early
age, she nevertheless went on to
considerable achievements in life.
But Helen Keller also got involved in
occultic sects like Swedenborgianism
and Theosophy. Did her membership
in these groups inspire Keller to
choose a hand sign for the deaf,
translated as "I love you", which is
today often used interchangeably
with the universal "I love (and/or
worship) Satan" hand sign?
Helen Keller with Alexander Graham Bell.
Keller wrote a book, My Religion, in which
she explained her occult religious views
and her enthusiasm for the teachings of
mystic Emmanuel Swedenborg. Was the
architecture of the deaf signs based on
Keller's aberrant religious views?
These U.S. postal stamps depicting the
deaf's "I love you" sign are shocking, to say
the least. The inventor of the deaf signing
system was herself an occultist and devotee
of Theosophy, the Hindu/occult group
founded by Russian mystic Helena
Blavatsky, author of The Secret Doctrine.

--- Sayfa 129 ---
"EL DIABLO" SHOWS HIS HORNS-THE DEVIL RIDES OUT
1 3 5
Academy Award-winning actor Kevin Spacey, who is acknowledged as a homosexual. The mysterious
painting on the wall directly behind Spacey is of Lucifer, with horns, amidst the flames of hell. The
revealing but quite subtle message below reads: "You've got to send the elevator back down."

--- Sayfa 130 ---
136
CODEX MAGICA
Actress Salma Hayek giving either the deaf's "I love
you" or the horns of the devil sign.

--- Sayfa 131 ---
"EL DIABLO" SHOWS HIS HORNS-THE DEVIL RIDES OUT
137
Handsome actor Pierce
Brosnan of Great
Britain, to left of actor
Greg Kinnear, has a
rather odd look on his
face as he gesticulates
with his left hand.
(People magazine
February 7, 2005)
The comedian duo, Penn & Teller, are vulgar, foul-mouthed and satanic.
The two once performed a revolting skit in Las Vegas in which Teller,
dressed as "Christ Jesus" on a full-size cross, entered the room on a cart.
A midget dressed as an angel performed a simulated sex act on the near-
naked Teller who was pretending to be Jesus. Shocked and offended,
many in the audience abruptly got out of their seats and walked out of
the room.
"This was beyond bad taste," said Rick Neiswanger, who attended
the exhibition but had no idea that Penn & Teller would pull such a
blasphemous stunt.
In the Globe tabloid (February 7,
2005), actor Chad Michael Murry
(movie—A Cinderella Story), lets
readers know what kind of star he is.

--- Sayfa 132 ---
138
CODEX MAGICA
This scotch whiskey ad in Rolling
Stone magazine shows a bizarre
image of a Scottish highlander
rock'n'roller giving a satanic sign.
The circle was placed there by the
person who clipped and sent this
ad to me.

--- Sayfa 133 ---
"EL DIABLO" SHOWS HIS HORNS-THE DEVIL RIDES OUT
1 3 9
Rock band Metallica
Big in the 80s, the band Night Ranger is now
heard on Sirius satellite radio. (Newsweek,
November 29, 2004)
According to the article (USA Today,
February 24, 2003, p. 3A) that
accompanied this photograph, it
depicts a near-capacity crowd of
almost 500 people at the Bowery
Ballroom in Manhattan, New York
City. Fittingly, the enthusiastic
crowd came to hear the band called
Satanicide.

--- Sayfa 134 ---
140
H
CODEX MAGICA
Popular singing group Nickelback gives thanks to their hidden deity for their great success. Two are
giving the "El Diablo" sign, a third (the one with the hat on) has a skull emblazoned on his T-shirt.
(USA Today, June 5, 2002, p. 2A)

--- Sayfa 135 ---
"EL DIABLO" SHOWS HIS HORNS-THE DEVIL RIDES OUT
1 4 1
Full page ad in
USA Today, July
22, 2003 p. 5D

--- Sayfa 136 ---
142
CODEX MAGICA
The Beatles singing group shown at left in a cartoon drawing from their Yellow Submarine album.
John Lennon flashed the "El Diablo" sign. At right, Paul McCartney gives the "OK," or "666," sign
while Lennon again displays the horned devil signal with his left hand. Lennon, who once bragged
the Beatles were more popular than Jesus, was assassinated just outside the Dakota House
condominiums in New York City, where he and wife Yoko Ono lived. It was at the gothic Dakota
House condominium complex that the deeply satanic movie, Rosemary's Baby, was filmed.
The crowd at a boxing
match at Austin
Convention Center,
Austin, Texas. (Photo:
page 1 of Austin
American Statesman
newspaper, August 16,
2003)

--- Sayfa 137 ---
"EL DIABLO" SHOWS HIS HORNS-THE DEVIL RIDES OUT
143
Canadian Ross Rebagliati celebrates
his gold medal, won in the giant
slalom event at the '98 Winter
Olympics. (USA Today, February 9,
1998, p. E1)

--- Sayfa 138 ---
144
CODEX MAGICA
Tour de France champion bicyclist Lance Armstrong gestures heavenward with the index finger of his
left hand while, with his right hand, Armstrong seems to be beckoning to a strange god known in the
Bible as the "Prince of the power of the air."
Lance Armstrong is a resident of Austin, Texas, and it is possible the famous athlete's sign could
just be in honor of the University of Texas at Austin. But if so, why give it in France?
Actress Meryl Streep gives the sign of the Devil
just over the head of "Angels in America"
director, Mike Nichols. In 2004, the HBO series
"Angels in America" was aired. It was possibly
the most evil TV program ever broadcast. The
director and actress were given "Golden Globe"
awards, indicating how hateful Hollywood and
the TV networks have become. The series
depicted angels having sex with homosexuals
and blasphemously mocked God. It praised
communist spies like Ethel Rosenberg. (Photo:
Newsweek, November 17, 2003)

--- Sayfa 139 ---
EIGHT
Secret Handshakes of the Illuminati
T h e secret hand signs of Illuminists are thought to work magic, to evoke
supernatural beings, and, of course, to communicate messages. For
example, the higher degree Mason, Rosicrucian, or other Illuminist can
discern at what ritual level a brother in the Craft is 'at by testing his handshake, or
grip. It is, therefore, an important mode of recognition. The commonly used phrase,
"Get a grip," has Masonic origins.
The handshake, or grip, is a sign of unity, oneness of purpose and allegiance or
devotion to joint cause. It is considered a bond, or seal, of acknowledgment between
Illuminist brethren. The Masonic authorities speak of a "mystic tie" or spiritual union.
Certainly, demon powers do congregate together and enjoy one another's foul
company.
The God of Fidelity
The Illuminist handshake, the clasping or
joining of hands, can have many meanings.
Its simplest is as a symbol of fidelity.
Interestingly, Dr. Cathy Burns, in her
informative expose, Hidden Secrets of the
Eastern Star, notes that even at this basic level,
The instructions issued the candidate of the Entered
Apprentice, or First Degree, of Freemasonry include
these given here. Notice that the candidate is asked,
"How shall I know you to be a Mason?" His answer:
"By certain signs, a token, a word, and the perfect
points of my entrance." Then, when he is asked,
"What are tokens?," he replies, "Certain friendly or
brotherly grips, by which one Mason may know
another in the dark as well as in the light."
(Duncan's Masonic Ritual and Monitor, p. 42)

--- Sayfa 140 ---
146
CODEX MAGICA
the Illuminist is signifying allegiance to a deity other than the Christian God. For
example, Dr. Burns quotes Albert Mackey, 33°, former Sovereign Grand Commander
of the Scottish Rite, who admits:
The right hand has in all ages been deemed an emblem of fidelity, and our ancient
brethren worshipped Deity under the name of Fides or Fidelity, which was
sometimes represented by two right hands joined...
Numa was the first who erected an altar to Fides under which name the Goddess of
Oaths and Honesty was worshipped.1
Burns points out that this reference to the worship of the Roman pagan goddess
is literally repeated by the initiate in the very first degree of the Masonic ritual. Yet
the Holy Bible commands: "Thou shalt have no other gods before Me." (Exodus 20:3)
and goes on to emphatically state: "Make no mention of the names of other gods,
neither let it be heard out of thy mouth." (Exodus 23:23)
In volume 1 of Albert Mackey's Encyclopedia of Freemasonry, a large section is
devoted to a discussion of the hand and hand signs. Mackey states: "In Freemasonry,
the hand as a symbol holds a high place...The same symbol is found in the most
ancient religions and some of their analogies to Masonic symbolism are peculiar."
Mackey revealingly says that the hand is deemed important "as that symbol of
mystical intelligence by which one Mason knows another in the dark as well as in the
light."
He goes on to discuss the use of the hand in such ancient Mystery Religions as
Mithraism and in worship of the Sumerian, Assyrian, and Babylonian gods. He notes
that the tradition of the red seal attached to important documents is a throwback to
the ancient use of the bloody hand as a way of authenticating documents.
Examples of Grips and Handshakes
I have included in this section of Codex Magica drawings of a number of Masonic
handshakes taken from official Masonic publications and from other objective
sources. In addition to Freemasonry, there are scores of Illuminati secret societies and
many have their own unique handgrips and signs. Moreover, the Mormon Church,
the Sufi Muslim Brotherhood, and even the notorious Mafia have their own
identifying handgrips and signs. In the pages that follow in this chapter, you'll see a
large number of well-known persons sharing handgrips and handshakes that clearly
are Masonic and Illuminist.
Subject to Interpretation
It is true that a handshake can be a questionable thing in its interpretation. All of us
have attempted handshakes when greeting old friends and meeting new
acquaintances. Sometimes your hand and theirs do not quite meet and clasp as you
and they intended. It might be the fit of the hands due to the relative difference in
size of each person's hands; or perhaps the distance between the two persons' bodies,

--- Sayfa 141 ---
SECRET HANDSHAKES OF THE ILLUMINATI
147
causing a longer or shorter reach; or some other factor (Maybe the individual is short
or tall, is just not good at shaking hands, etc.)
I have done my best to take all these uncontrollable factors into consideration
here and I include only what I believe to be indisputable Masonic and Illuminist
handshakes, tokens, and grips. Naturally, one must especially consider who is
shaking whose hand — and whether the person is known to be an Illuminist, a Mason,
a Rosicrucian, an O.T.O. adept, or so forth. With these caveats in mind, let us take a
look at the secret handshakes of the Illuminati. But first this brief article by
Christopher Story.
(NOTE: The following article by Englishman Christopher Story was originally
published in the Economic Intelligence Review, (Westminster, England) and was
reprinted in Des Griffin's Midnight Messenger (May/June 2004). It is reprinted here
for the reader's interest.)
Handshake Diplomacy: An Outbreak of the "Grips"
"They are out of the gate, and nothing will stop them." This description, by one of
the sharpest of our informants, with the hectic pace associated with the imposition of
the New Underworld Order, sums up the way the world is being turned upside
down "as we speak." That's why the press is publishing all these "grips." And the
newspaper editors have shown themselves to be only too willing to oblige. A huge
photograph showed Tony Blair, our Fabian revolutionary Prime Minister, shaking
hands with Adrian Nastase, the son of Illie, a leading Communist who "survived"
the fall of Ceausescu. The Romanian Prime Minister is shown doing a five-knuckle
grip (five-point degree), indicating to those whom Lenin called "the interested" that
he's "a member of the club." Masons call their handshakes "grips" —hence the
saying, "Get a grip."
Let's "get a grip" with what's going on here. All of a sudden, newspapers on both
sides of the Atlantic have taken to publishing large photos of our "chosen ones"
indulging in various manifestations of Masonic "grips." There was that Kerry-
Clinton handshake published in The Washington Times in March.
In that instance, Clinton was demonstrating, for those "in the know," just who
was boss, and how high up in the geomasonic stratosphere he is (right at the top).
The "grip" in question was a Ma-Ha-Bone Lion's Paw Grip, which leaves the junior
party in no doubt who's in charge (and in pain as a consequence).
On 26th March, British newspapers carried an enormous picture of Tony Blair's
"grip moment" with Libyan dictator, Muammar Qadhaffi. Before proceeding, it
needs to be said that these close-ups of Qadhaffi's face reveal this man to be
burdened with the most evil physiognomies on record —far nastier than those of
Adolf Hitler and Saddam Hussein combined: in fact Saddam looks quite benevolent
beside this creature.

--- Sayfa 142 ---
148
CODEX MAGICA
For his part, Blair looked extremely uneasy, his eyes watery, and his faced tensed
up after what may have been some unspeakable encounter or other about which the
record is silent (worse case scenario). Beneath the main picture, The Times had taken
the trouble to provide us with three smaller close-ups of the "grip moment"-the
newspaper's management being clearly signed up, in advance, to the significance of
these New Underworld Order handshakes.
Our expert geomasonic handshake analyst writes that "the Blair-Qadhaffi
handshake is a Shibboleth Grip which denotes fellowship and total agreement. The
purpose of these photographs is to tell fellow Masons that these two are 'one.'"
Beneath the photograph was a caption containing the following odd language:
"Clearly he (Blair) has not read Emily Post, the doyenne of 20th Century etiquette.
"The proper handshake,' she wrote, 'is made briefly...and one should look into the
countenance of the person whose hand one takes' (Blair was looking at the camera
instead of course). But more to the point, this gratuitous reference to Emily Post was
intended, our U.S. based expert writes, 'to show compatibility with the USA Scottish
Rite. The palmetto in the background (there was a garish green wallpaper behind the
pair—Ed.) reminds me of the State Flag of South Carolina (Charleston, on the 33rd
parallel is the headquarters of the US Scottish Rite masonry — Ed.), and also relates to
the prominence of the Middle East in all things occult."
On the same day (i.e., the photo research had been done well in advance), The
Independent newspaper carried a double spread entitled: "PLEASED TO MEET YOU:
THE HISTORIC HANDSHAKES THAT SHOOK THE WORLD." It showed the
following geomasonic grips: Gerry Adams and Clinton, 12th December 1995:
Shibboleth; Kim Jong-Il and Kim Dae-Jung (of the two Koreas), 12th December 2000
(Ma-Ha-Bone Grip (master masons); Yasser Arafat and Yitzhak Rabin, with top
Mason Clinton looking on, 13th September 1993: Ma-Ha-Bone Grip (Lion's Paw,
master mason; Pervez Musharraf and Atal Vajpayee, 6th January 2002: Shibboleth
Grip ("friendship"); and most revealing of all Ronald Reagan and Mikhail Gorbachev,
meeting for the first time in Versoix, Switzerland, 9th November 1985. In this picture,
Reagan is shown gripping with the Supreme Master Grip with a pronounced Ma-Ha-
Bone Lion's Paw. Gorbachev attempts the same but Reagan won't allow the same
grip. This shows that Reagan demanded (and kept) the "upper hand."

--- Sayfa 143 ---
SECRET HANDSHAKES OF THE ILLUMINATI
149
As reported in The New York Times, November 25, 1963, New York City's Mayor Wagner welcomes
Ireland's President Eamon de Valera to the "Big Apple." The Irish leader was at New York's Idlewild
Airport on his way to Washington, D.C. for the slain President John F. Kennedy's funeral. Strangely,
the smiling Mayor looks in high spirits, though most of America was in deep mourning.

--- Sayfa 144 ---
150
CODEX MAGICA
J. Robert
Oppenheimer,
scientist who oversaw
development of the
first nuclear bomb in
Project Manhattan,
receives a Masonic
handshake from
President Lyndon B.
Johnson. Johnson
earned only the 3rd
degree of Master
Mason.
Oppenheimer, a
Jewish cabalist, held
the 3 3 rd degree.
Andrew Jackson
("Old Hickory"), the
historical figure in
the painting on the
wall, was also a 33rd
degree Mason.
Oppenheimer lost his
security clearance
when it became clear
to security officials
that he was most likely a Communist espionage agent and certainly was a Communist sympathizer.
Both the Soviet Union and the nation of Israel were given secret plans to the atomic bomb weapon by
Jewish spies burrowed deep inside the United States military science establishments.
Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.),
left, and a fellow legislator in a Masonic
grip. (USA Today, May 19, 2005, p. 6A)
U.S. Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld and
Afghani leader Karzai prominently display their
Masonic grip. (Newsweek, May 12, 2003, p. 32)

--- Sayfa 145 ---
SECRET HANDSHAKES OF THE ILLUMINATI
1 5 1

--- Sayfa 146 ---
152
CODEX MAGICA
This display ad was run in The Jerusalem
Post newspaper in November 1994
Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas with Israeli
Prime Minister Ariel Sharon. Both men are Masons.
Freemason Shimon Peres, who was
educated by Jesuits as a youth in
Poland and was the Prime Minister of
Israel and that nation's Minister of
Foreign Affairs, is being welcomed to
the Council on Foreign Relations,
based in New York's Harold Pratt
House, by its Chairman of the Board,
fellow Illuminist, Peter G. Peterson.
Pat Robertson meets with Red Chinese Premier
Zhu Rongji in 1998. The 700 Club host has
invested millions of dollars in Red China and
supports its policy of forced abortions, all the
time pretending to be "pro-life."

--- Sayfa 147 ---
SECRET HANDSHAKES OF THE ILLUMINATI
1 5 3
The cover of Stephen Knight's expose, The Brotherhood—The Secret World of the
Freemasons. This book caused a sensation and a furor upon its publication because Knight
revealed that the police, judiciary, and government of Great Britain are riddled with
Freemasons who give job preference and show official favoritism to their Masonic cohorts.

--- Sayfa 148 ---
154
CODEX MAGICA
Pope Pius XII greets Cardinal Spellman of New York.
New York's powerful
Cardinal Spellman
shakes hand of Pope
John XXIII, who
succeeded Pope Pius XII.
Boston's Cardinal Bernard Law and Catholic Priest
Paul Shanley exchange greetings. Subsequently,
Shanley, a founding member of NAMBLA, was
exposed as a pedophile criminal and convicted of
molesting young altar boys. Meanwhile, Cardinal
Law, forced by public scorn to leave the United
States, was promoted to a top position inside the
Vatican. At the death of Pope John Paul II in April
2005, Law surfaced once again, being given the high-
visibility role of conducting a mass for the dead
Pontiff that was viewed around the world on TV. This
was the Vatican's way of retorting to those angered
or concerned over priest pedophelia: "Get Lost!"

--- Sayfa 149 ---
SECRET HANDSHAKES OF THE ILLUMINATI
1 5 5

--- Sayfa 150 ---
1 5 6
CODEX MAGICA
American coinage and currency frequently has borne hidden messages and symbols of the llluminati.
This new clipping from USA Today newspaper discusses and pictures the new nickel (5c coin)
released in 2004 to commemorate the Louisiana Purchase of 1803. The coin bears the image of the
Masonic handshake and also the occultic "X."
Masonic handshake imbedded in Greek 500 d. note.

--- Sayfa 151 ---
SECRET HANDSHAKES OF THE ILLUMINATI
1 5 7
This drawing of the ancient Babylonian
god, Nebo, from a dictionary of the Bible,
makes him appear to be instructing
adepts on the finer points of using hand
signs or exchanging mysterious grips. In
fact, Nebo's title was "Interpreter of the
gods," and he was said to be the god of
learning and of letters. The biblical King
Nebuchadnezzar in the book of Daniel
was named after Nebo. This cut is in the
British Museum, London.

--- Sayfa 152 ---
158
CODEX MAGICA
Masonic Handshakes Illustrated in Official lodge Publications
Masonic handshakes and grips from Richardson's Monitor of Free-Masonry.

--- Sayfa 153 ---
SECRET HANDSHAKES OF THE ILLUMINATI
159
More Masonic Handshakes and Grips

--- Sayfa 154 ---
160
CODEX MAGICA
And More Masonic Handshakes

--- Sayfa 155 ---
SECRET HANDSHAKES OF THE ILLUMINATI
1 6 1
Masonic handshakes and grips from Duncan s Masonic Ritual and Monitor, 3d Ed.)
Excerpt from the book,
Mormonism's Temple of
Doom, by William
Schnoebelen and James
Spencer. The two authors
are both ex-Mormons. In
their book, they show the
remarkable parallels
between the secret signs,
grips, and rituals of
Freemasonry and those of
the Mormon (LDS) Church.
Mormonism's founder,
Joseph Smith, was a Mason,
and all Masonic authorities
today acknowledge the
similarity of the two
groups' rituals, symbols,
signs, and doctrines.

--- Sayfa 156 ---
162
CODEX MAGICA
President George W. Bush and FBI Director nominee Robert Mueller exchange grip behind podium.
(Photo: The Washington Post, July 22, 2001)

--- Sayfa 157 ---
SECRET HANDSHAKES OF THE ILLUMINATI
163
In August, 2000, Prime Minister Ehud Barak of
Israel in a clear Masonic hand grip with Jordan's
King Abdullah as they meet in Amman, Jordan.
All Prime Ministers of Israel since the formation
of that nation in 1948 have been initiates of the
Masonic Lodge. All have been recruited into the
Order of the llluminati, also. (Photo: Associated
Press, in Austin American-Statesman, August 17,
2000, p. A3)
European Farm Commissioner Franz Fischler (left) in handshake with German
Agriculture Minister Karl Heinz Funke at a European Community session in
Brussels, Belgium. (Photo: Spotlight newspaper, December 7, 1998)

--- Sayfa 158 ---
164
CODEX MAGICA
Nelson Mandela, political leader
of South Africa, shakes hands
(Masonic) with South African
Communist Party leader Oliver
Tambo. Mandela, lionized by the
Western Press, is a life long
Communist activist and a known
terrorist criminal. Mandela
acquired power at the helm of
the South African government by
arrangement with the heads of
the llluminati s Rockefeller,
Rothschild, and Oppenheimer
dynasties. In exchange, the
llluminati cartel holds exclusive
rights to South Africa's mineral
rich assets of diamonds, gold,
and platinum. (Photo: from the
book, In The Words Of Nelson
Mandela, published by Carol
Publishing Group, York, 1998)
New York Governor George Pataki and New York State Senator Joseph Bruno
meet in December 2003 with Tetsuro Higashi, president of Tokyo Electron Ltd.,
to announce a new $300 million research and development facility. (Newsletter
of State Senator Joseph L. Bruno, December 2003, p. 1)

--- Sayfa 159 ---
SECRET HANDSHAKES OF THE ILLUMINATI
165
Fidel Castro (right) in a Masonic grip with Vatican Secretary of State, Cardinal Angelo Sodano. The
Cuban dictator is a lifelong Freemason and is also a member of the secret order known as the Odd
Fellows. Almost all the Vatican curia are Masons and cabalists and many are also Rosicrucians.
(Photo: The Catholic World Report, January 1997)

--- Sayfa 160 ---
166
CODEX MAGICA
Pope John Paul II in a Masonic grip with a Cardinal at the
Vatican. Notice the pressure on the knuckle.
Israeli Foreign Minister David Levy
(left), in Masonic grip with Red
Chinese counterpart in Beijing,
China in March, 1992 as a bemused
official looks on.
U.S. President Clinton receives Masonic grip from United Nations Secretary-General Kofi
Annan at opening of the UN General Assembly. In this staged photo opportunity, aides
for the two world leaders arranged the national flags so that Nicaragua's Illuminati-
designed flag, which has a (male) triangle, a solar image, and all-seeing eye as its focus
would be most prominently displayed. Kofi Annan is married to a white woman, a
Rothschild heiress.(Photo: USA Today, September 22, 1998, p. 11A)

--- Sayfa 161 ---
SECRET HANDSHAKES OF THE ILLUMINATI
1 6 7
Great Britain's
Duke of Kent, head
of the United
Lodge, the largest
Masonic fraternity
in England, holds
the title, The Most
Worshipful Grand
Master. The Duke
is sharing a
Masonic grip on
visit to Cape Town,
South Africa.
Frenchman Jean-Marie le Pen (member of Paris' Grand Orient Lodge) warmly welcomes Masonic
brother Nick Griffin, leader of the British National Party (BNP). Jean-Marie le Pen, head of a
supposed right-wing populist party in France, is oft criticized in that country's press for what they
say are his anti-Semitic views. In fact, by this hand grip and by other clear Masonic gestures he has
made publicly, it appears that le Pen is a covert Mason, which would make him more akin to Zionism
and its Communist Hegelian philosophy.

--- Sayfa 162 ---
168
CODEX MAGICA
Secretary of State Donald Rumsfeld in the
Bush Administration gives coded handshake
to Saudi Arabia's King Fahd (top) and
Oman's Sultan Qaboos (below). (Time
magazine, October 15, 2001)
Jerry Falwell, Baptist hero, in a Masonic grip
with Skull & Bones alumnus, President George
H. W. Bush, at the White House in 1991. Falwell
claims to be a pro-life advocate but never
complained when Senior Bush nominated
abortion supporters like Judge David Souter to
the U.S. Supreme Court and other federal posts.
Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin (left) a
dwarfish terrorist thug who went on to become
Israel's Prime Minister, shares a Masonic hand
grip with one of the "brethren," Moral Majority
leader preacher Jerry Falwell. Falwell received
the Jabotinsky Award for his devoted efforts to
oppress the Palestinian people while promoting
Jewish racial supremacy. Jabotinsky, the man
whom this award was named after, was a pro-
Communist Socialist/Zionist. Falwell also
received a multimillion dollar executive jet as a
gift from Israel, a nation that receives from five
to ten billion in free foreign aid money each year
from American taxpayers. In effect, Begin and
Israel stole money from the U.S.A. taxpayers and
funneled it to Falwell.

--- Sayfa 163 ---
SECRET HANDSHAKES OF THE ILLUMINATI
1 6 9
President Clinton in a
Masonic grip with Supreme
Court Justice Stephen Breyer.
Breyer, a devout cabalistic
Jew, was nominated by
Clinton to the Supreme
Court. To the right of Breyer
is Justice Ruth Bader
Ginsberg, also a cabalistic
and Talmudic Jew and again
a Clinton appointee. (Photo:
The Cincinnati Post,
October 1, 1994)
Apollo 8 crewman Frank Borman and a top NASA manager in a Masonic hand grip.

--- Sayfa 164 ---
170
CODEX MAGICA
Karl Rove, top White House advisor to
President George W. Bush, sharing a
Masonic connection. (Photo:
Newsweek, February 20, 2005)
French President Jacques Chirac, Masonic
initiate of Paris' Grand Orient Lodge, with
Irish Prime Minister Bertie Ahern (left).
Shimon Peres, former
Prime Minister and leader
of Israel's Labor Party
(left), in Masonic grip with
Morton L. Janklow of the
Council on Foreign
Relations (CFR). (Photo:
CFR Annual Report, 1990)

--- Sayfa 165 ---
SECRET HANDSHAKES OF THE ILLUMINATI
1 7 1
Dr. Foy Valentine (left), President of the
Masonic-founded group, Americans
United for Separation of Church and
State, with the anti-Christian group's
executive director, Barry Lynn. The group
is a leader in working to stop prayer in
schools, remove the Ten Commandments
from public display, and prevent public
displays or mention of Christmas.
Egyptian Ambassador to Israel Mohammed Bassiouny (center) and his wife with Israel Prime
Minister Shimon Peres. As is the practice of the members of both the Grand Lodge of Jerusalem and
the Masonic Lodges of Cairo and Egypt, the left hand is used to conceal the Masonic nature of the
grip. (Photo: The Jerusalem Post and International Edition, November 1, 1997, p. 9)

--- Sayfa 166 ---
172
CODEX MAGICA
President Bill Clinton meets in 1995 with Pope John Paul II. The Pope is extending his left
hand in a Talmudic attempt to conceal the Masonic grip that is about to occur. Dr. Dennis
Cuddy, premier researcher of the global conspiracy and expert on occult symbols, writes:
"Some Christians have wondered why Pope John Paul II seemed to use a hand gesture
when photographed with Gorbachev in 1989 that was similar to the real grip of the
Master Mason (a grip shown in Duncan s
Masonic Ritual and Monitor, 3d edition, 1976)
and Star Trek Spock's 'Vulcan Salute.'" (Dr.
Dennis Cuddy, Now Is the Dawning of the New
Age New World Order, Hearthstone Pub.,
Oklahoma City, OK, 1991, p. 387)
The late Pope John Paul II greets
Archbishop Charles Salatka and
they share the Real Grip of a
Fellow Craft Mason.
Simultaneously, the Pontiff gives
the "cover grip" with his left
hand to conceal the maneuver.

--- Sayfa 167 ---
SECRET HANDSHAKES OF THE ILLUMINATI
1 7 3
Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev and Pope John Paul II combine to present a
Masonic symbol in this staged event for the TV cameras. (Photo: The New York Times,
October 1, 1989)
Pope John Paul II meets with Israel's Chief Rabbi, Yisrael Meir Lau, at the papal retreat
in Rome. As is customary of members of the Grand Lodge of Jerusalem, the rabbi
disguises the Masonic hand grip with his left hand. This is called the "cover grip."
(Duncan's Masonic Ritual and Monitor, 3d Ed., p. 216)

--- Sayfa 168 ---
174
CODEX
MAGIC
A
Neal Wilson, president of the General Conference
of Seventh-day Adventists (left) exchanges an
indisputable (in my opinion) Masonic handshake
with Konstantin Kharchev, the Soviet Union's
Chairman of the Ministry of Religious Affairs. The
occasion was a socialist-sponsored environmental
conclave, called the International Forum for a
Non-nuclear World and the Survival of Humanity,
February 13-15, 1987. The leadership of the
Seventh-day Adventist Church (SDA) is heavily
Masonic. Many SDA officials have cooperated
with pro-Communist, anti-Christian lobby
groups such as Americans United, People For the
American Way, the American Civil Liberties
Union, and the Jewish ADL. These groups veil
their anti-Christian positions with high-sounding
goals like "liberty" and "separation of church and
state." (Photo and article: Ministry magazine,
May/June 1987, p. 7)
Three world-renowned Christian evangelists were present in 1966 at the House of the Temple, the
headquarters of Scottish Rite Freemasonry, in Washington, D.C. The occasion was the elevation of
men newly chosen to the elite 33rd degree. The three were Billy Graham, Norman Vincent Peale, and
Robert Schuller. Statues of the three Masons have been erected in the courtyard of the Crystal
Cathedral in Garden Grove, California.

--- Sayfa 169 ---
SECRET HANDSHAKES OF THE ILLUMINATI
1 7 5
Evangelist Billy Graham shares an indisputably Masonic handshake with fellow 33rd degree Mason,
former President Harry S. Truman. Also, observe Graham's left hand, held in the Masonic position.
According to Coil's Masonic Encyclopedia, Truman was elected Grand Master of all Masons in
Missouri in 1940. A 33rd degree, Truman's Masonic funeral was the first to ever be televised
worldwide.

--- Sayfa 170 ---
176
CODEX MAGICA
The Crystal Cathedral's Reverend Robert Schuller, 33rd degree Mason,
shares a clearly Masonic handshake with former Soviet Communist
Party boss, Mikhail Gorbachev. Gorbachev, an initiate of the Grand
Orient Lodge, Paris, France, spoke at Schuller's church.

--- Sayfa 171 ---
NINE
A Show of Hands—Illuminists Employ
the Grand Hailing Sign and the Sign of
Admiration or Astonishment
It all depends on what is is.
— President Bill Clinton, in answer to a
question by the Special Prosecutor
A rose by any other name is still a rose.
-Old Proverb
In Richardson's Monitor of Freemasonry, an authoritative reference
sourcebook, we are told that in the ritual for the Masonic degree of Most
Excellent Master of the Royal Arch Mason, all present are required to give
a "Sign of Admiration or Astonishment." It is explained that this sign is similar to that
gesture expressed by the illustrious Queen of Sheba on her first viewing the fabulous
edifice of Solomon's Temple.1
In Duncan's Masonic Monitor and Guide the group present for that same degree
ceremony is further told that this sign alludes to "the wonder and admiration of our
ancient brethren who were present to view the interior of that magnificent edifice
(Solomon's Temple) which King Solomon had erected, and was about to dedicate to
the service of the Supreme Being."2
The arms raised with the palms of the hands facing forward is a supplicatory
gesture, meaning passive acceptance, surrender, or an appeal for mercy. Caesar, in

--- Sayfa 172 ---
178
CODEX MAGICA
his Gaelic Wars, noted the use of this sign by Gaelic women, who apparently were
signaling subjection to, or acceptance of, their Roman conquerors.
A single hand raised with palm outward represents a hand to heaven
acknowledging the gifts or help received from extraterrestrial sources. It can also
mean invocation, the calling down of powers or energy from the heavens or from
ethereal sources (hell). Yet another meaning is that the hand with all five fingers
showing, palm outward, indicates that one is giving honor and admiration to the
Underworld Deity. Its essential meaning: "Thank you O Subterranean Lord for your
deceptive wisdom and for your cunning aid in our struggle to overcome our enemies
and to effect the Great Work."
Pharaoh Ramses paying homage to
the god Horus, son of Osiris, the sun
god deity symbolized as the all-
seeing eye in the capstone on the
U.S.A.'s dollar bill. Quite possibly,
the Masons' Sign of Admiration and
Astonishment came from practices of
adherents to the old Mystery
Religions of Babylon and Egypt.
(From book, Other Worlds, Hilary
Evans, Readers Digest Books, 1998)
On all occasions when the Egyptian high priest was called to
officiate, he wore his robe of office, the spotted leopard's skin.
The priest then led the rituals in worship of the "Hidden One,"
the concealed mystery divinity, known esoterically as Saturn,
the sixth planet from the sun. Here we see the priest, attired in
leopard's skin, hands upraised, palms outward, exactly as is
done in various Masonic, Rosicrucian, witchcraft, Thelemic, and
O.T.O. rituals to this day. (Hislop's, The Two Babylons, p. 45)

--- Sayfa 173 ---
A SHOW OF HANDS
179
As we shall see in this chapter of Codex Magica, this sign has been displayed in
public media by Presidents, presidential candidates, Prime Ministers, and many
other VIPs throughout history including the Emperor of France, the Freemason
Napoleon Bonaparte.
Clinton the Devil, President of the U.S.A.
President Bill Clinton was named Time magazine "Man of the Year" in 1993. On the
Time cover making the announcement, President Clinton's head was pictured with
the "M" in the Time masthead of the magazine stretched and appearing to be two
horns on Clinton's head.3 Were the magazine's editors telling us that Clinton is the
devils' man, or was it some strange coincidence?
Even more weird and dramatic, inside that same issue was a photo of Clinton in
his Oval Office holding his hands and arms in the Masonic display of the sign of
admiration. Now, get this: carved on the President's desk in the Oval Offices directly
in front of Clinton is the eagle, in the presidential seal or logo, with its face turned to
the left. But on the carpet just in front of the desk one finds the presidential seal facing
toward the right: Two eagles, each facing in the opposite direction.
This is clearly the double-headed eagle of Freemasonry, a symbol representing
the Serpent, honored as the Sun God in the Mystery Religions with its eagle-like, all-
seeing eye. In other words: Lucifer! Solar God of Bill Clinton and the Illuminati.
Meanwhile, in Clinton's left hand (see page 183 of Codex Magica) is a rose —sign
of the Illuminati's blood covenant and the Rosicrucian Order. You will also find here
a photo of former Yugoslav Serb leader Slobodan Milosevic, likewise holding a rose
in his hand, the right hand. In Satanism the left-handed path is the most magical and
powerful, but more evil. Clinton (left-hand) is still today recognized by the world as
a great leader. Milosevic (right-hand) is in disgrace, in a prison cell, after being felled
by Clinton and his Illuminati cohorts, proving that it's not nice to attempt to
doublecross your Illuminati overlords, Mr. Milosevic!
In this chapter you will find not only Bill Clinton, Slobodan Milosevic, John
Kerry, and others giving enigmatic ritual messages, but, also, we will examine other
signs in which the Illuminati signal with the arms and either or both hands.
The Grand Hailing Sign of Distress
One classic Masonic pose, duplicated by or similar to that employed in many other
Orders, is the Grand Hailing Sign of Distress. Theoretically, this is used in extreme
circumstances in which a Mason or other elitist finds himself in a crisis or in a bind.
In such an emergency he gives the Grand Hailing Sign of Distress, sometimes called
the "High Sign." At that point, brethren who recognize the secret sign of alarm are
expected to come to his rescue. Comically, mass murderer Charles Manson was
observed giving this sign and a number of others during his trial for conspiracy to
commit murder. Reportedly, Manson believed the judge in his case was a 33° Mason
and would rescue him. It was all to no avail.
Likewise, Mormon Church founder Joseph Smith gave this sign while under
siege of a lynch mob at the Nauvoo, Illinois jail where he had been incarcerated.

--- Sayfa 174 ---
180
CODEX MAGICA
Smith knew that the angry mob was comprised mainly of Freemasons because he,
too, had been one of them until he was excommunicated. The Masons didn't take too
kindly to Masonic Brother Smith's stealing their symbols and ceremonies and
incorporating them into his Mormon (LDS) Church rituals.4
As Joseph Smith lay dying on the jailhouse floor, he cried out, "Is there no help
for the Widow's Son?" This is the enigmatic saying taught Masons, stamping Smith
as a follower of the Great Goddess, patroness of the Masonic fraternity. The Bible in
Revelation 27 refers to her as "Mystery, Babylon the Great, Mother of Harlots."
John J. Robinson, author of a celebrated book, Born in Blood defending
Freemasonry and blasting its critics, also referenced the Grand Hailing Sign of
Distress sign taught in the 3° ritual:
After brief ceremonies, the blindfold is removed, and the newly sworn Master
Mason is taught several secrets of that degree. He learns the penal sign, the hand
signal based on the penalty of the Master Mason's oath, which is to pass the hand in
a slashing motion, palm downward and thumb toward the body, across his
stomach. The due-guard of the Master Mason repeats the position of his hands on
the Holy Bible and the compass and square as he takes the oath: with his upper
arms along his sides, forearms out straight, with palms down.
To this point, the ceremony is much like that of the first two degrees, but now is
added a third sign, the Grand Hailing Sign of Distress of the Master Mason, given
with the upper arms parallel to the ground, forearms vertical with hands above the
head, palms forward. For those times when the Master Mason is out of sight of
possible help, or in the dark, he is taught to summon assistance with the word, "O
Lord, my God, is there no help for a Son of the Widow?" a reference to Hiram,
legendary master craftsman at the building of the Temple of Solomon, about whom
the initiate has yet been told nothing, and whom Masons identify with the
metalworker that scripture describes as "a son of a widow of Naphtali."5
Note that Robinson makes mention of the "penal sign, the hand signal based on
the penalty of the Master Mason's oath." In Codex Magica, you will see several
examples of this signal, including a photo of Soviet dictator Joseph Stalin and one of
former House Speaker Newt Gingrich.
In his book Freemasonry, Jack Harris, a former Master Mason who renounced the
Order after converting to Christianity, quotes at length the ritual according to the
State of Maryland's Masonic Manual.6 That manual assures the Mason that at his
death, if his good works are sufficient, "a kind messenger from the Supreme Grand
Master will be sent to translate us to that all perfect, glorious and celestial lodge
above, where the Supreme Architect of the Universe presides."
According to Harris the ritual continues as follows:
All officers and members bow toward the East. The Master raps the lodge down (1
rap). Also explained to the brother in the third degree lecture is what he is to do in
times of peril or danger. He is instructed (if he can be seen) to throw up both arms
over his head and let them fall by three distinct motions. This is the great hailing

--- Sayfa 175 ---
A SHOW OF HANDS
181
sign or sign of distress, and never should be given except in a lodge for instruction,
or if his life is in danger. If a Mason sees this sign, he is to flee to his rescue if there
is more probability of saving the brother's life than of losing his own.
At times when this sign could not be seen, such as in the dark, a spoken signal is
substituted: "O Lord, My God, is there no help for the widow's son?" A Mason hearing
these words would be equally bound to flee to the brother's rescue if there were
more probability of saving his life than losing his own life.7

--- Sayfa 176 ---
182
CODEX MAGICA
Mikhail Gorbachev, Soviet President and
Chairman of the Communist Party, visits the
Council on Foreign Relations (CFR) in New York
City. The presiding head of the organization
proudly shows him a copy of the very first edition
(1921) of Foreign Affairs, the CFR's official
journal which has annotated notes of Vladimir
Lenin written by him personally on the margins
of some pages. Lenin obviously was a servant of
the llluminati, too. Note that the awed
Gorbachev respectfully gives the
Illuminist/Masonic Sign of Admiration and
Astonishment with his right hand, only this time
it is lain on the display case parallel to the
"sacred" document to which his focus and
devotion is directed.

--- Sayfa 177 ---
A SHOW OF HANDS
183
Newly elected President Bill Clinton holds out his arms in the Masonic gesture of
admiration and astonishment. Was it just his joy at becoming President, or was
Clinton paying homage to the entity represented by the combined double-headed eagle
carved on the front of the wood desk and imprinted in the Great Seal logo on the
carpet? (From Time magazine, January 4, 1993, p. 29)
Slobodan Milosevic,
President of Serbia,
holds a rose aloft in his
right hand signifying
he is an initiate of the
Rosicrucian Order.
Milosevic failed to
carry out the wishes of
the Illuminati
to the
letter. Therefore, in
this same issue of
Time, he was called
"The Butcher of The
Balkans" and the "high
priest of ethnic
cleansing." Later,
Milosevic was arrested,
thrown in prison, and
tried by an
international court for
supposed "crimes
against humanity."
(From Time maga/ine,
January 4, 1993, p. 45)

--- Sayfa 178 ---
184
CODEX MAGICA
Satanic, muddle-headed
rock'n'roller Ozzy Osbourne,
who once bit the head off a
bat at a rock concert and
sometimes led altar calls for
the devil, raises his hands at a
White House dinner hosted by
President George W. Bush and
wife, Laura Bush. Osbourne
was so happy to be invited, he
arrived early. Bush, at the
podium, publicly recognized
and applauded Ozzy and told
him how much Bush's mother,
Barbara, enjoyed his albums!
This is Senator John Kerry, arriving in Ohio for a campaign stop while running for President of
the United States in 2004. See how Kerry's hands and arms are extended in salute to the sun, as
its rays burst through the clouds. A sun worshipper? Strange, unless one understands that it is
entirely possible Kerry was giving the Masonic sign of adoration and admiration to the one the
scriptures call the "Prince of the power of the air" (e.g. Satan!). Interestingly, neither the
caption of the Time magazine (March 15, 2004) photo nor the accompanying article gave any
clue or mention at all of why Kerry's arms were outstretched in this position.

--- Sayfa 179 ---
A SHOW OF HANDS
185
In this celebrated painting, The Battle of the Pyramids, by Baron Antoine Jean Gros, Napoleon is
shown presenting the Masonic and Rosicrucian sign of astonishment or admiration at the sight of
the marvelous sight of the pyramids of Giza. From written historical accounts, we know that the
French Emperor did, indeed, experience feelings of amazement and admiration upon viewing the
spectacle of the Egyptian pyramids. This particular sign can be accomplished either with the left or
the right arm extended and the palm facing toward the object of admiration, or astonishment.

--- Sayfa 180 ---
186
CODEX MAGICA
This illustration in Richardson's
Monitor of Freemasonry (1860)
shows the Master Mason giving
the "First Sign, or Due Guard"
with his hands upright "in the
manner of giving the grand
hailing sign of distress."
Compare this with the image
inscribed on the cave stone
above.
This goddess statuette was on display in the
chambers of Alex Sanders, well-known British
warlock (witch) as he led a witchcraft ritual. Witches
worship both the goddess and the horned, male god.
(Photo: Witchcraft, Magic and the Supernatural,
Octopus Books, Hong Kong, 1974)

--- Sayfa 181 ---
A SHOW OF HANDS
187
Instructional material for
educators in the Fort Worth,
Texas, Independent School
District included this
drawing of 13 goddess
worshippers (13 comprise a
witches coven) on a
succession of six circle
platforms paying homage to
the Sun. The illustration
originally came from an
Italian foundation dedicated
to the work of New Age
evolutionist and educator
Maria Montessori.
In the Babylonian religion, as the initiate
entered into the "Mysteries," part of the
ritual was the drinking from the cup of
the Woman (the Goddess). Here, in this
ancient woodcut we find a supplicant
kneeling while raising his hands in
submissive fashion after just drinking
from the cup. The priest (at right)
appears to be administering an oath while
offering an oblation—perhaps a wafer,
piece of bread, or honycomb—with his left
hand. (Kittos' Biblical Cyclopedia;
reprinted in Alexander Hislop's The Two
Babylons, First Edition 1916, American
Edition by Loi/eaux Bros., 1916)

--- Sayfa 182 ---
188
CODEX MAGICA
Former President Bill Clinton gives the Sign of Admiration as he views a painting of the late President
Harry Truman. Both Clinton and Truman were initiates of the Masonic Lodge, and, by giving this
sign, Clinton is acknowledging the Masonic achievements of his predecessor, Harry S. Truman, 33°.
The Clintons were visiting the Harry S. Truman Little White House Museum in Key West, Florida.
(Photo: Florida Keys News Bureau, in Austin American-Statesman, January 23, 2005, p. A2)
A dockside member of
Greenpeace, the radical
environmentalist group,
hails the organization's
sea-going vessel. Almost
all environmentalist
organizations are funded
and run by the Illuminati.
Members are ignorant of
this behind the scenes
influence.

--- Sayfa 183 ---
TEN
"I Gruesomely Swear That I'm On the
Square"—More Revealing Signs of
Illuminati Cultists
A number of hand signs are used by Illuminist to indicate their
allegiance to their Order and to demonstrate their knowledge that to
divulge its secrets shall bring gruesome and swift, perhaps fatal
retribution.
When President Richard M. Nixon resigned the office of the presidency on
August 9,1974, he signaled the Dueguard and Sign of a Royal Arch Mason. As the Nixon
audiotapes since released by the Nixon presidential library clearly show, Nixon and
his "Prussian Guard," White House Chief of Staff Robert Haldemann and top aide
John Erlichman, plotted to thwart the power of the Jewish Illuminati media that
poisons the mind of America. They also conspired to overthrow the elaborate FBI and
intelligence network historically run behind the scenes by the Jewish-led Illuminati
chieftains.
Nixon knew what he was risking. He well knew that John F. Kennedy's murder
was orchestrated by the Jewish Illuminati with the backing of Zionist Vice President
Lyndon B. Johnson and with the connivance of J. Edgar Hoover's Mafia-infiltrated
FBI and the Skull & Bones-run CIA. Nixon had been a close associate of David
Rockefeller and had met privately with the Rothschilds a number of times. Nixon
also had attended the notorious homoerotic occultic rituals of the Bohemian Club
outside San Francisco. Still, as President, he had hoped to mount an offensive against
the elite and dislodge them from their position of awesome power in the United
States.
Instead, it was Nixon and his entourage who were dislodged, falling from grace
and being ousted, even though Nixon's so-called crimes ("Watergate," etc.) were
paltry compared to the colossal criminal treachery of predecessors like Wilson and
Roosevelt, and successors like Clinton and both Bushes.
Captain William Morgan, in the nineteenth century, suffered a worse fate, being
murdered in a Masonic ritual and his disfigured body dumped into a lake. Incensed

--- Sayfa 184 ---
190
CODEX MAGICA
by this outrage, John Quincy Adams, sixth President of the United States, in his
classic exposure of the Masonic murderers (Letters on Freemasonry), minced no bones
in declaring the Freemasons as "Luciferian" and as a grave threat to America.
In this section, we examine a few of penal (penalty) signs and also signs given to
communicate the message, "on the square," a phrase made common in the American
lexicon by its frequent usage by Masons. Along the way, we shall note the Illuminist
involvement of such infamous folks as the Russian mystic and master seducer,
Grigore Rasputin, former U.S.A. President Jimmy "Peanut" Carter, Cuban
strongman Fidel "Odd Fellow" Castro, and Master Mason and Illuminist thug
extraordinaire, Joseph Stalin, the half-Jew who massacred some 50-60 million
innocents while heading up the Illuminati's experimental Bolshevik regime. And
we'll also take a brief look at a hand sign of Illuminist Al Gore, some Confederate
officers into Masonic skullduggery, Timothy McVeigh's rancid "F...you" signal, and
a few other choice hand poses of elite servants.
"Masonry ought forever to be abolished. It is wrong—essentially
wrong—a seed of evil, which can never produce any good."
—John Quincy Adams
John Quincy Adams, sixth President of the United
States, was a determined opponent of the secret
society and fraternity of Freemasonry, the Masonic
Lodge. The question of Freemasonry and the
controversy over its character has long been
debated. But for John Qunicy Adams, writer, poet,
faithful husband, patriot, former Ambassador and
Secretary of State, and President, there was no
question. The teachings and practices of the Lodge,
Adams asserted, are detrimental, noxious, and
unfortunate. John Quincy Adams was persuaded
that the Masonic Lodges were a bane to society,
evil, and Luciferian.
This unusual book, Letters on Freemasonry, first
published in 1833, is finally back in print. Until
now, it was virtually impossible for the general
public to obtain a copy. It is now available for $22
postpaid through Power of Prophecy Ministries,
1708 Patterson Road, Austin, Texas 78733, or call
toll free: 1-800-234-9673.

--- Sayfa 185 ---
"I GRUESOMELY SWEAR THAT I'M ON THE SQUARE"
1 9 1
Former President Jimmy Carter in Havana, Cuba, with communist
dictator Fidel Castro. Castro gives a sign showing he is a member of the
Odd Fellows, a Masonic affliated secret order popular in Cuba.
Meanwhile, Carter presents the Dueguard of the Fellow Craft (2°).
(Photo: USA Today newspaper, May 16, 2002, p. 11A)
Supreme Court Justice nominee Clarence Thomas, appearing
before a U.S. Senate Committee, in 1991, holds his right
hand up to take the Oath. But at the same time, Thomas
places his left hand and arm in such a fashion as to present
the familiar Dueguard of a Fellow Craft sign of Freemasonry.

--- Sayfa 186 ---
1 9 2
CODEX MAGICA
Excerpt (p. 22) of Richardson's Monitor of Freemasonry, illustrating and
describing the sign and due-guard of a Fellow Craft Mason.
An excerpt, page 107, from
the 1826 book
Freemasonry Exposed by
Captain William Morgan,
showing the sign and due-
guard of a Fellow Craft
Mason. Morgan, a Mason
of 30 years standing,
renounced the cultic secret
fraternity and decided to
expose their evildoing.
Shortly after his book was
published, outraged
Masons kidnapped
Morgan, then murdered
him and mutilated his
body in a Masonic death
ritual. The murder caused
a public uproar which
ended in the majority of
the members of the
wicked secret society
across America leaving the
Lodge. Morgan's murder even inspired John Quincy Adams, the sixth President of the United States,
to write and publish his own expose of Freemasonry. In Adam's book, Letters on Freemasonry, the
distinguished former President branded Freemasonry as "Luciferian."

--- Sayfa 187 ---
"I GRUESOMELY SWEAR THAT I'M ON THE SQUARE"
1 9 3
Russian Orthodox priest Grigori Rasputin was not
only an occultic Mason, but also engaged in
Dionysiac sex orgies and rituals. A cult developed
around the hypnotic Rasputin after the monk was
said by the Czarina to have healed her young son
who suffered from a blood disease. Those jealous of
the growing political power of the "Mad Monk
Rasputin" eventually had him assassinated.
Rasputin is shown here giving the left-handed path
version of the penal sign of the Fellow Craft degree
of Freemasons.
Catholic
Cardinal (left)
stands with
Greek Orthodox
prelate on
official visit to
Greece.
The illustration from the book,
Mormonism's Temple of Doom,
by William Schnoebelen and
James Spencer, demonstrates
the parallels between the
Mormon Temple ceremonial
sign and the sign of a Fellow
Craft Mason.

--- Sayfa 188 ---
194
CODEX MAGICA
THE LIGHT OF
KRISHNAMURTI
By Gabriele Blackburn
The Light of Krishnamurti relates
the many-faceted mystical and
spiritual occurrences of J. Krish-
namurti as experienced by Gabriele
Blackburn, a spiritual healer and
clairvoyant. This is the story of the
author's life in relationship to these
events, their extraordinary meaning,
and the profound effect they had on
her. In a simple, direct, factual
manner, she tells how his friendship,
personal interviews, and the under-
standing of his teachings, helped her to
resolve a life crisis, and discover an
insightful way of living. This book
voices the quality of the clear Light of
truth which casts no shadow. It is a
personal testimony to the sacred life
and teachings of Krishnamurti, that
Gold Light of eternity.
An advertisement for a biography of
India's Theosophy guru, Krishnamurti.
Occultist Annie Besant, who took over
as leader of Theosophy after the death
of its founder, once touted
Krishnamurti as the "Christ of the
New Age." Tbe guru's pose here shows
he's "on the square" and honors the
trifold deity of Illuminist sects.
This man, in 1994, participated in the brutal,
genocidal massacre of 3,000 Tutsi tribes people
who sought refuge in a church in Rwanda, Africa.
In this news article (Austin American-Statesman,
April 11, 2004), he says he is repentant and is
rehabilitated. The cultic positioning of his arms
and clenched fist say otherwise.
Rock star Ozzy
Osbourne lets his
Masonic friends know
he's "on the square"
with this hand/arms
pose. (USA Today,
November 29, 2002,
P. 10A)
Jewish actor E. G.
Marshal who
played a
crusading lawyer
on TV's The
Defenders show in
the 1960s and
starred in many
movies, shows
that, masonically,
he's "on the
square."

--- Sayfa 189 ---
"I GRUESOMELY SWEAR THAT I'M ON THE SQUARE"
1 9 5
The 7th degree sign given by
resigning President Nixon, as
illustrated in yet another official
Masonic scourcebook, Richardson's
Monitor of Freemasonry, p. 79.

--- Sayfa 190 ---
196
CODEX MAGICA

--- Sayfa 191 ---
" I GRUESOMELY SWEAR THAT I'M ON THE SQUARE" 1 9 7
Rudolf Steiner, a Hitler contemporary in Germany,
displays the Master's Grip. During the Nazi era,
Steiner became world-famous for his Masonic and
Rosicrucian based teachings. This picture comes from his book, The Way of Initiation—how to Attain
Knowledge of the Higher Worlds, published by Macoy Publishing and Masonic Supply Co., New York
City. Steiner also created the teaching system for the Waldorf schools, very popular today in the U.S.A.
An excerpt from page 36
from Richardson s Monitor
of Freemasonry,
illustrating the strong
Master's Grip, or Lion's
Paw, as practiced in the
third degree of Scottish
Rite Freemasonry.

--- Sayfa 192 ---
198
CODEX MAGICA
Former Vice President Al Gore, who
ran for the presidency on the
Democrat Party ticket in 2000,
appears to be in the process of
making the Master's Grip of the
3rd degree of Freemasonry,
indicating he is, as a minimum, a
Master Mason. (Photo: from
Exodus III, Volume 2, Number 1)
Note: A sign similar to that of the
Master's Grip is that of the Most
Excellent Master as illustrated on
p. 61 of Richardson's Monitor of
Freemasonry.
Page 61 of
Richardson's Monitor
of Freemasonry
illustrating the sign
of the Most Excellent
Master's degree.

--- Sayfa 193 ---
"I GRUESOMELY SWEAR THAT I'M ON THE SQUARE"
199
Mormon (LDS) woman gives a sign in a LDS Church ritual
ceremony. It is exactly the same as that of Freemasonry, as
proven by this excerpt from page 17 of Duncan's Masonic Ritual
and Monitor, illustrating the sign of an Entered Apprentice.
Joseph Smith, founder of the Mormon Church, borrowed many
of his church's signs, grips, symbols, and rituals from the
Masonic Lodge. In fact, Smith was excommunicated by the
Masons for having done so. (Photo of Mormon woman is from
Mormonism, Masonry and Godhood, by Dr. Cathy Burns,
Sharing Publishing, Mt. Carmel, Pennsylvania)

--- Sayfa 194 ---
200
CODEX MAGICA
Michael A. Hoffman II
Secret Societies and Psychological Warfare
Page 66
This photo and accompanying text comes from the book, Secret Societies and
Psychological Warfare, by Michael A. Hoffman, II, a book highly recommended by
the author of Codex Magica.
All the Pyramid's Men
The Confederate officer on the left is First Lt. John Oden, of the Tenth Alabama
Volunteer Infantry who fought at First Manassas, Chancellorsville and Antietam.
where he was seriously wounded. Lying bleeding. Oden used a stick and his own
blood to draw masonic symbols on a paper. Then he called out to the Union
troops on picket duty to take the paper to any Yankee who was a Freemason.
It was carried to a Union Colonel who was a mason, but not of a high enough
degree to comprehend Oden's symbolic message. Another mason, Union Capt.
Perry was summoned and he recognized the drawings and announced that a fellow
mason was in distress. Four Northern masons crept out to the field, placed the
wounded Southerner on a cot and carried him to the field hospital of the 5th New
Hampshire Volunteer Infantry where he was treated. When the Union Army moved
on, Oden was sent to the private home of a physician to recuperate, rather than to
a prisoner of war camp. Lt. Oden survived the War Between the States.
While at first sight, this is a touching story of the brotherhood of Freemasonry,
some of the glow dims when we recall that a non-mason, Christian Confederate
would have been left to bleed to death. Moreover, if cooperation like this existed
between brother masons in the field, one is left to wonder at what degree collusion
between Confederate and Union Freemasons of high office and rank, took place
behind the scenes.

--- Sayfa 195 ---
"I GRUESOMELY SWEAR THAT I'M ON THE SQUARE"
2 0 1
And More Revealing Hand Signs...
This photograph in Time magazine (February 14, 2005) pictures an Islamic mob rallying in Karachi,
Pakistan. The demonstrators were declaring their support for A. Q. Kahn, called the "Father of the
Islamic Nuclear Bomb." What is especially interesting are the many varied hand gestures of the
people in the crowd. Intriguing, to say the least.
Environmental activists,
members of Greenpeace,
show their signs. Several
display the so-called "V"
sign of the Illuminati. The
fellow at top left has his
fist clenched in a
communist mode. The
peace symbol, an upside-
down broken cross inside a
circle, is painted on the
banner behind them.
(Photo: The Toronto Star,
July 23, 1995, p. F1)

--- Sayfa 196 ---
202
CODEX MAGICA
John Meriwether, manager of Wall Street's Long-Term Capital Management hedge
fund, lays his left hand on the table as an unusual, but no doubt planned mode.
(U.S. Mews and World Report, May 3, 1999, p. 45)
Entertainer, Lyle Lovett, who
once was married to actress
Julia Roberts, presents an
odd hand sign. (Texas
Monthly magazine, July
2003, p. 19)
Academy Award winner Meryl Streep,
who has been observed giving the Il
Cornuto horned devil sign, in this picture
in Newsweek (September 26, 1994) looks
to be just sitting and relaxing. Actually,
Ms. Streep displays a cabalistic pose.

--- Sayfa 197 ---
"I GRUESOMELY SWEAR THAT I'M ON THE SQUARE"
2 0 3
Former Vermont Governor, Howard Dean, Chairman of the Democrat Party's National Committee
(DNC), signs with both hands. (Business Week, January 12, 2004, p. 35)
Robert Schuller, pastor of
California's Crystal Cathedral, is a
33rd degree Mason. The hand sign he
is giving is typical for Schuller.

--- Sayfa 198 ---
204
CODEX MAGICA
Timothy McVeigh, put to death by lethal injection after conviction of perpetrating the murder of 168
people in 1995 by blowing up a federal building in Oklahoma City, remained an enigmatic
personality to the end. But this picture of McVeigh in prison shortly before his execution may be
revealing as to the man's character. What at first appears to be just the man's thumb sticking out
may actually be the magical sign called the manofigo (a clenched hand or fist, the thumb jutting
out). In some secret societies and witchcraft sects the thumb thus symbolizes the phallus inserted as
a creative act. In sum, in this posture, McVeigh, realizing it is the final image or one of the last of him
that the outside world—his accusers—will probably see, is saying, "F..k you!" The article
accompanying the picture of McVeigh would seem to buttress this theory. It is titled, "No Regrets, No
Remorse," and says the Oklahoma City bomber is "unrepentant." The angry scowl on Timothy
McVeigh's face is also indicative. (Photo: U.S. News & World Report, April 9, 2001)
At left, the magical manofigo or mano in
fica hand sign. At right is a second version.
Timothy McVeigh's hand sign above is a
third version. The mano in fica is of
oriental origin. It represents a lingam-yoni
(penis-vagina) formed by the thumb
protruding between any of the fingers. To
early Christians, it was called manus
obscenus, the obscene hand.
The vicious
Michael Chertoff,
son of a Jewish
Rabbi, former U.S.
Justice
Department
prosecutor who is
active in the anti-
Christian group,
the ADL, lets the
elite see who he is by giving the vulgar and coarse
manofigo hand sign. Chertoff is President George W.
Bush's Director of Homeland Security. Many believe
Chertoff is an Israeli Mossad asset.

--- Sayfa 199 ---
ELEVEN
"Cross My Heart and Hope to Die"—The
Mysterious "X" factor
An X is an ancient symbol for change or transformation.. .long associated in
medieval and renaissance art with the coming of the Messiah who shall make all
things new.
—Jim Tresner, 33°
Scottish Rite Journal
The Illuminist/Masonic meaning of the X is simply this: It is the sign of Osiris, the
great (Egyptian) sun god...
—Texe Marrs
Dark Majesty
T h e sign, or letter, X, has a long history of use in the Ancient Mystery
Religions, in apostate Judaism, in Freemasonry, and in the occult. The
Illuminati elite use it to this day to symbolize key phenomena and mark
significant events.
The mysterious letter X seems to take on a wide and varied life of its own, with
or without the secret aid of the elite sponsorship. Mark Euston, of the Christian
Intelligence Resource Network, in a letter to the author, detailed some of the many
examples of the use of the letter X. For example, the well-known science fiction TV
show, The X Files. Pornographic movies are rated X and the more sensational movies
in the raw flesh category are touted as XXX, or triple X. Euston noted that we have
the Microsoft Corporation creation of X-box, the movie X-Men, off-brand products
are called "Brand X," and of course, there is the U.S. terrorist prison camp, Camp X-
Ray at Guantanamo, Cuba. Today's youth have been called Generation X, and a lot of

--- Sayfa 200 ---
206
CODEX MAGICA
folks are concerned about a planet, or star, reported to be speeding toward us called
Planet X that has occult significance.
Euston asks about all the usages of X, "Are these just strange coincidences, some
type of mind control trigger, or a subliminal conditioning of some kind?" Good
question.
Another friend, Kathy Creek, wrote and asked if I had noticed the many new
drugs being released by pharmaceutical firms with either a V, Z, or an X in their
name? She mentioned an ad she had seen for Clarinex, an allergy drug that had a
little sun sign used to dot the letter "i" in Clarinex.
John Myers, another astute friend interested in such topics, sent me a lengthy
letter and included an excerpt from author Edward Waite's reference book, A New
Encyclopedia of Freemasonry. Myers wryly observed that, "generally, things that are
bad are X-rated." He mentioned, too, the interesting use of the letter X in the Rx of
drug stores; the use of the four-letter, abbreviated word Xmas to replace Christmas,
and the fact that, in Black's Law Dictionary, it says that the sign or mark of X is
sometimes made as a substitute for a man's signature on legal documents.
And the continued use of the mysterious X abounds. Children at play can be
heard to say, "Cross my heart and hope to die." In the Greek alphabet, the letter Chi
is denoted with the symbol X, and given the numerical designation of 600. The
numeroligists say that triple X, then, would yield the number 666.
Black Muslim leaders obviously see X as a substitute name of great spiritual
significance. Two well-known Black Muslim leaders have been named Malcolm X
and Louis X, names they chose for themselves. The latter, who was born Louis
Eugene Wolcott in 1933 in New York City, changed his name to Louis X after his
conversion to Islam by Black Muslim leader Elijah Muhammed. Today, he is known
as Louis Farrakhan. It is well-known that Farrakhan is a 33° Prince Hall Mason.
X as Symbol for the Sun God
According to Dr. C.J. Koster, head of the Institute for Scripture Research in South
Africa, X was the emblem of the Chaldean (Babylonian) sky god. Koster says that X
was an ancient symbol of the sun deity and that the letter carried with it sexual
connotations. In the old Semitic languages, X represented the cross.1
Freemasonry early-on latched onto this letter exactly because of its paranormal
significance as a sign of Lucifer, the solar (sun) god. The Masonic Lodge also uses X
because of its sexual meanings and its Babylonian origins. Writing in the Scottish Rite
Journal, the official journal of the Mother Supreme Council, 33°, Jim Tresner discussed
the use of X in the ritual ceremony for the 17°, Knight of the East and West.2 Tresner, a
33rd degree Mason, emphasized that the 17th degree ritual is "one of the most
powerful and profound degrees of the Rite."3
"Here," said Tresner, "we encounter raw spiritual energy" and "we begin to
glimpse the spiritual power which is available" to the person who is able to access it.4
X as Symbol of Transformation
Tresner goes on to suggest that the X, representing the Roman numeral 10, also

--- Sayfa 201 ---
"CROSS MY HEART AND HOPE TO DIE"
2 0 7
symbolizes the 10 yuds, or mani-
festations, of the Jewish Cabala's Tree of
Life (the Sephiroth). He notes that the
candidate for this degree wears two
cordons, one black in color, the other
white, which symbolizes the duality of
Masonic doctrine.
"The fact that they cross each other,"
Tresner explains, "suggests the unions of
opposites or equilibrium
(Ordo Ab
Chao)."5
"In crossing," says Tresner, "they
form an X shape." X, he observes, "is an
ancient symbol for transformation."6
"This degree," Tresner concludes,
"provides a spiritual jolt or jump-start in
preparation for the transformation,
refinement, and redefinition to come."7
Tresner chooses his words very
carefully...and very deliberately. But
Christians who have studied the book of
Revelation will intuit and understand
what he is hinting at. I believe he is
telling the Masonic candidates that this
degree, in which the mark of X is
prominent, is to prepare them to wage
war against true Christians, and to exalt
their Man-King as the events prophesied
in
Bible
prophecy
roll
forward.
Naturally, Tresner would probably deny
this meaning, so I leave it to you, dear
reader, to discern.
However, the Masonic author of the authoritative Richardson's Monitor of
Freemasonry, no doubt lets the cat out of the bag, so to speak, by detailing how, during
this ritual ceremony for the Degree of Knight of the East and West, the Sacred Word
is given to the assembled members of the Lodge. That sacred word is a shocker: It is
Abaddon.
Yes, Abaddon is the Sacred Word for the Masonic Knights of East and West. And
the Holy Bible reveals exactly who Abaddon is in Revelation 9:11:
Page 158 from Richardson s Monitor of
Freemasonry, detailing the ritual ceremony of the
Knights of the East and West. In this ritual, the
sacred word Abaddon is expressed. Abaddon is a
synonym for the name of the Devil who leads
millions of demons out of the pit of hell to
torment earth in the last days.
And they had a king over them, which is the angel of the bottomless pit, whose name in
the Hebrew tongue is Abaddon, but in the Creek tongue hath his name Apollyon.
In Richardson's Monitor of Freemasonry it is revealed that, following the
announcement of the sacred word, Abaddon, the Lodge drama for this fateful degree
provides a demonstration "intended to represent the end of the world."8

--- Sayfa 202 ---
208
CODEX MAGICA
How very appropriate. How very telling!
X Symbol in the Masonic Lodge
One thing is for sure: The Masonic Order uses the X
not only for the revelatory 17th degree of Knights of
East and West, but for others as well. In the Royal
Arch's Super-Excellent Master's Degree, the First
Sign given is the crossing of the hands over the
breast/chest. This sign refers to the penalty
assessed if any secrets learned are ever divulged.
Then, in the ritual ceremony for the Select
Master Degree, the Second Sign is made by
crossing the hands and arms just below the neck
and dropping them downward quickly. Again, this
is a reminder of the disclosure penalty, which is to
have the body butchered and quartered.
In the ritual for the Intimate Secretary Degree,
an X pattern is employed. Richardson's Monitor of
Freemasonry reveals what happens in the Lodge:
The brethren now fall, each on his right knee, and they cross their hands and hold
them up so that the thumb of the right hand touches the left temple, and the left
thumb the right temple...9
The X as Tumbling Cross and Sex Symbol
In ancient India, the X symbol was equated with the vajra (jewel-phallus). Probably,
this is yet another reason why the Masonic Lodge adopted this symbol for many of
their ritual activities. Masonry is, in fact, a deviant sex cult.
In her interesting encyclopedia called The Woman's Dictionary of Symbols and
Sacred Objects, Barbara Walker calls the symbol the "Cross Saltire" which means
literally "tumbling cross" or a cross performing a somersault. In
this sense, it is decidedly anti-Christ in nature.
The Church of Scientology, New Age in its beliefs, has as its
logo a traditional cross (vertical) integrated with an X, or Cross
Saltire. This is understandable since Scientology is unquestionably
non-Christian.
X as Sign of Death
Finally, as if to signify the somber, ghastly meaning of the letter X in Freemasonry
ritual, pomp and circumstance, it should be noted that upon his death, when the
departed Mason's body is given a Masonic funeral by the assembled brethren, with
his immediate family in attendance, the X again comes into play. The Monitor of the
Work, Lectures, and Ceremonies of Ancient Craft Masonry for the Grand Lodge of the State

--- Sayfa 203 ---
"CROSS MY HEART AND HOPE TO DIE" 209
of New York in part describes the ritual and scene prescribed for funerals as follows:
The funeral honors are given by extending the hands toward the grave with the
palms up, the brethren repeating in unison:
'To the grave we consign the mortal remains of our deceased brother.'
The arms are then crossed over the breast, the left above the right, the fingers
touching the shoulders...10
You'll find among the photos and illustrations in this section one of horror
novelist Stephen King seeming to emulate exactly this funeral procedure of crossing
the arms (X), the fingers touching the opposite shoulder. Is King, the master of death
literature, in fact taking on the image of death, the grim reaper? Does King believe
that this publicly displayed ritual act by him confers on the famous novelist the "raw
spiritual energy" mentioned by Masonic authority Jim Tresner, 33°?
X—The Egyptian Connection
From what source do the Masons draw for this funeral symbolism of the X? In my
book, Dark Majesty, I explain the Egyptian connection:
In ancient Egypt, the mark of "X" and the symbol of cross-bones in the symbol of
an X was very prominent in religious contexts. You can find the X on the walls of a
number of ancient Egyptians temples and pyramids...It is the sign of Osiris, the
great sun god...
The ancient pharaohs, when they were buried, had the legs crossed in the form of
"X" as a sign of devotion to Osiris.''
Today, as in ancient Egypt, Osiris the sun god is worshipped; now the homage
and veneration comes from the Masons and their fellow Illuminists. These confused
and perverted men mistakenly believe they are illumined (enlightened) by their solar
deity, the Great Architect, Jahbuhlun, or Lucifer.
They have even arranged for Osiris' watchful eye, the all-seeing eye, to be
pictured on each and every U.S.A. one dollar bill. It is the eye in the capstone
surrounded by the rays of the sun announcing to the whole world the coming of a
New Age, a New World Order (Novus Ordo Seclorum).
What a grand surprise these wicked men have in store for them when Jesus
Christ, Lord of Lords, returns. II Thessalonians 2 says that the opposers of Christ—the
leaders of Illuminati and their hordes of rapt followers — shall be utterly destroyed by
the brightness of His coming. Until that great and momentous day, the pitiful men of
the Illuminati shall continue to wallow with each other in the mire and muck. They
will continue communicating the sign of X, the sign of their silly, fanciful god, all the
while cursing the darkness rather than lighting a candle. Men blinded for all eternity
by their rejection of the True Light.

--- Sayfa 204 ---
210
CODEX MAGICA
The arm patch on the military uniform of Pakistan's President, General Pervez
Musharraf, tells a number of tales. Against a black, circle background we find the
familiar crescent moon and star of Islam (actually, pagan origin, being
representative of Diana, the witchcraft "star" and "moon" goddess) as well as the
two crossed swords (in the pagan era, a sign of Mars, god of war). It is doubtful
Musharraf has any idea of the actual meaning of these symbols.
The "X" Team? In Time magazine (July 14, 2003, p.
79), it was reported that Marvel Comics intended to
publish a comic book that featured a resurrected
Princess Diana with superpowers. The title of the
first edition was to be "Di Another Day." The plot
was to have Princess Di and a number of mutant,
resurrected from the dead partners gallivant around
the world performing feats for the good side
fighting evil. Princess Di and her mutant friends
would all bear a logo on their chest of a (circle) sun
sign with a bold red "X" superimposed on it.
Her Majesty, Queen Elizabeth of Great
Britain, has a fortune of some $18
billion—and a crown with an "X" in its
centrum. (Majesty magazine, Volume
25, August, 2004)

--- Sayfa 205 ---
"CROSS MY HEART AND HOPE TO DIE"
2 1 1
Ehud Barak, a Freemason chosen Prime Minister of Israel in 1999, with his wife, Nava. This is a very
staged "X." Also significant is Nava's earring, which has the emblem of the Masonic double-headed
eagle. (Photo: Time magazine, May 31, 1999, p. 64)

--- Sayfa 206 ---
212
CODEX MAGICA
Larry Summers, Secretary of the Treasury in the second term of the Bill Clinton Administration,
signals to his associates in the Illuminati elite the strength of their Order. We see first his crossed "X"
hand position, the left hand path dominant. Then there is the pillar of strength of Jaquin and Boa/
origins, and finally the black and white checkered "tresrleboard" upon which he stands, the science of
polar opposites, the Hegelian dialectic, the high Masonic principle of equilibrium. Summers is
currently President of Harvard University.

--- Sayfa 207 ---
CROSS MY HEART AND HOPE TO DIE
213
Donald E. Graham, chairman and CEO of The Washington Post, in a staged setting in the newsroom.
(Vanity Fair)

--- Sayfa 208 ---
214
CODEX MAGICA

--- Sayfa 209 ---
"CROSS MY HEART AND HOPE TO DIE"
2 1 5
Sometimes, a person wears what they are! These photos of South Africa's political leader Nelson
Mandela (left) and Disney Corp. CEO Michael Eisner (above) paint a story by reference to the design
on each man's neckties. Look close-up and the "X" and other llluminist symbols are clearly seen.
(Vanity Fair, November 1997)

--- Sayfa 210 ---
216
CODEX MAGICA
Noted Japanese architect Yoshio Taniguchi who specializes in buildings and structures housing
museums.

--- Sayfa 211 ---
"CROSS MY HEART AND HOPE TO DIE"
2 1 7
Fortune magazine (December 20, 1999) had this rather unusual photograph
picturing two CompUSA e-commerce subsidiary managers, Michael Laskoff (left) and
Stephen Polly. The caption and article gave no clue as to why the two men are
crossing their legs ("X") nor was there an explanation for the bizarre staging of what
should have been your usual, stock business photo.
James Erwin, vice
chairman of Bank of
America, heads up the
giant financial institution's
Dallas, Texas, operations.
Is the "X" crossing of his
legs just a "good old boy"
gesture or an Illuminist
fraternal sign?

--- Sayfa 212 ---
218
CODEX MAGICA
Allen Ginsberg, in an enigmatic example of the X. With this photo-
published in the obituary column of Newsweek (December 22, 1997)!—
there was no caption, only Ginsberg's laudatory obit. The magazine
touted Ginsberg's "genius" and praised him for his "hymn of
alienation" during his earlier years—a valueless poem titled "Howl." In
fact. Beat poet Allen Ginsberg was a warped, child molester advocate
who boosted NAMBLA, the North American Man Boy Love Association.
He was a reprobate pedophile, but a hero of Satanists, sadists, and
assorted culture freaks, not to mention the Illuminati
elite. In the years
before his death, they rewarded him with a $1 million payment by
Stanford University. In return, the University, a prime center of
Illuminist instruction, got Ginsberg's "papers," which reportedly
included " 300,000 utility bills, newspaper clippings, paper napkins,
concert tickets, and anything else the gay poet chose to save."

--- Sayfa 213 ---
"CROSS MY HEART AND HOPE TO DIE"
2 1 9
Symbols galore adorn feminist Gloria Steinem's apartment decor in New York. She's wearing a
black outfit with belt with a huge, round sun emblem and, naturally, her handsign is "X." Now
70-years-old, Ms. Steinem, like so many other "chosen ones," is not at all what she seems. A
former Playboy Club bunny, Steinem was covertly working for the CIA. She "founded" the radical
agenda MS magazine reportedly with Illuminist funding and traveled widely in India. Her elitist
role: Foster the anti-Christian, culture-destroying Feminist Movement.

--- Sayfa 214 ---
220
CODEX MAGICA
Actress Marlene Dietrich, a tool of the OSS, the
predecessor of the CIA, was a lesbian who privately
snickered because Hollywood portrayed her as a sex
symbol for males.
Charlie Chaplin in 1952 letting the whole world
know just what he is—a devil in human form! This
photo, by famous photographer Richard Avedon,
ran in Time magazine (October 11, 2004), an
Illuminist-shill publication.
Charlie Chaplin spoofs Adolf Hitler as
Adenoid Hynkel in the film classic, The
Great Dictator (1940). The hat he wears
has two "X's" while the double doors in
rite scene have Rosicrucian rosettes on
them. Charlie Chaplin was much more
than simply a spoofing comedy genius.
Born April 16, 1889, in London, England,
to Jewish parents, at age 30 he co-
founded United Artists, a major
Hollywood movie corporation. Strongly
pro-Communist and Zionist, Chaplin had
a penchant for teen-age girls that
sometimes got him in trouble. The
llluminati paid homage to Chaplin by
adopting the actor's "The Tramp" icon for
TV commercials for global technology
giant IBM. (Photo: Time magazine)

--- Sayfa 215 ---
"CROSS MY HEART AND HOPE TO DIE"
2 2 1
Allen Iverson, NBA Basketball star.
Observe his deathhead skull tattoo
and, of course, the "X."
Rock'n'roller Tommy Lee embraces
hip-hop entertainer Sean Combs in
an "X." Lee's sign of the satanic
pentagram tattoo on his left hand
is also evident. (Photo: U.S.A.
Today, June 4, 2001, p. 4D)
Famous horror film actor Boris Karloff,
in the classic cinema, The Mummy, lays
in the mummy's crypt and symbolically
crosses his arms ("X") just as was done
in Egyptian ritual in the days of the
Pharaohs.
Stephen King, whose novels on horror and terror
invariably go to the top of the bestseller's list. The
caption of this photo, published in Newsweek (August
28, 2000, p. 45) reads, "It's good to be King."

--- Sayfa 216 ---
222
CODEX MAGICA
These ancient Egyptian figures demonstrate how prevalent was Osiris' sacred sign, "X."

--- Sayfa 217 ---
"CROSS MY HEART AND HOPE TO DIE" 223
The mummy of Ramescs the Great (1279-1213 B.C.) was found in this cedarwood sarcophagus. This
pharaoh
is thought by Egyptologists to be the ruler who enslaved the Israelites and forced them to
build cities.

--- Sayfa 218 ---
224
CODEX MAGICA
Painting from the Tomb of Rameses I, Valley of the Kings, West Thebes, in Egypt.
The figure at right (Luriferian angel?) has wings crossed in "X" fashion. This is said
to be a secret, coded alphabet used by the clandestine Templars Order. (From Secret
Societies, by Arkon Daraul)

--- Sayfa 219 ---
"CROSS MY HEART AND HOPE TO DIE"
2 2 5
These ancient Egyptian figures demonstrate how prevalent was Osiris' sacred sign, "X."
Bronze figurine of the demon
god Pazuzu, 800-600 B.C.
Pazuzu is still secretly
worshipped today by many.
A real Egyptian
mummy, arms
crossed in honor
of Osiris, divine
Father.
Pre-Aztec figurine, today on display
in Mexico, has arms crossed in "X"
position.

--- Sayfa 220 ---
226
CODEX MAGICA
Rosicrucian
and other mystical orders emphasize the process of alchemy, mystical
union that brings about cleansing and renewal. The goal of Illuminati alchemy is
to realize a New World Order through destruction ("cleansing"). Thus, Ordo Ab
Chao, order out of chaos. In this drawing from Mylius's Philosophia Reformata
(1622) the alchemical process is "Bath," the union of Sol (Sun) and Luna (Moon).
The "X" is the intersection of the two opposites.
Swami Bua, an Indian Hindu
sage who, in 2003, claimed to
be 115 years old. He crosses his
legs in the X-configuration
typical of Hindu gurus and
swamis as they meditate and
practice yoga. Apparently, the
Swami's lifestyle does not a
healthy nation make. According
to statistics overall in India,
the longevity rate is 23 years
less than in North America
(Photo: Transformation
magazine, July-August, 2003)

--- Sayfa 221 ---
"CROSS MY HEART AND HOPE TO DIE''
2 2 7
Kali, merciless goddess of death and destruction, metes out justice and balancing of karma to her
victims. Observe the satanic sign of Kali's left hand and her spinning on her finger of a sun sign. Her
color is blue, same color as the Blue Lodge of Freemasonry (first three degrees). The rose and the
lotus are her flowers, also the same flowers represented throughout the occult world by many other
individuals and groups.

--- Sayfa 222 ---
228
CODEX MAGICA

--- Sayfa 223 ---
"CROSS MY HEART AND HOPE TO DIE"
2 2 9
The papacy often uses the "X," as is demonstrated in the Dagon fish-hat of Pope John Paul II on
the cover of The Pope Speaks journal.

--- Sayfa 224 ---
230
CODEX MAGICA
The X symbol on the robe worn by Pope John Paul II is telling, as is the silver metal torch with its
black flame. Silver is the metallic element of the ancient goddess, which the Pope would recognize in
the form of Mary, Mother of Jesus. The X, of course, represents the Father deity. Not the Father God
of the Old and New Testament, but of Babylon and Egypt.

--- Sayfa 225 ---
"CROSS MY HEART AND HOPE TO DIE"
2 3 1
Georges Darboy, Archbishop of Paris
in 1870. Observe the crossed hands
(X) and the Il Cornuto horned devil
sign given with the left hand as it
holds the prelate's hat. (From the
book, How The Pope Became Infallible,
by August Bernhard Hasler, 1981,
Doubleday & Co., Garden City, New
York)
This image was found under the root of a tree dug
up in Roscommon in Ireland. It is made of brass.
The gilding, however, is now almost worn off. It is
on display at the Museum of Trinity College,
Dublin.
"To this deity in particular they apply themselves
for success when they go out a hunting or fishing,
and for the relief of all such as are indisposed!"—
Miramba. (From the book, The Round Towers of
Atlantis, by Henry O'Brien, published 2002;
originally in 1834; Adventures Unlimited Press,
Kempton, IL 60946)

--- Sayfa 226 ---
232
CODEX MAGICA
Cover of a popular witchcraft publication in the U.S.A., Circle Network News (copyright 1994).
Cernunnos, horned antler god of the forest, is at top with his arms folded ("X"). The sun, sacred to
wiccans is at center.

--- Sayfa 227 ---
"CROSS MY HEART AND HOPE TO DIE"
233
In this photo of the staff of Yale University's Yale Literary Magazine (1941), the
five young men in front are all giving a similar hand over hand ("X") signal. The
photo is significant because one of the students pictured (second from right,
back row) is James Jesus Angleton, perverted Mason who was long-term Deputy
Director of the CIA and was guilty of murder, rape, torture, treason, and
numerous other counts of evildoing. It is also at Yale where the Order of Skull
and Bones and other elitist groups initiate their recruits.
Pirates hoisted the Skull &
Bones (the "Jolly Roger") flags
on their sea vessels.
(Illustrations from book,
Pirates and The Lost Templar
Fleet, 2003)
The seal of Edinburgh
University in Scotland.
Logo of Garrett-
Evangelical Theological
Seminary, a liberal
institution in Illinois.

--- Sayfa 228 ---
234
CODEX MAGICA
The Japanese army occupying the Philippines in World War II issued their own local currency. This 10
peso bill was found by American soldiers on the body of a dead Japanese soldier. The "X" is
apparently the Roman numeral for "ten."
The "Cross of Burgundy"
was two crossed sticks,
in the form of an "X,"
which became the
emblem of the Nazi
Wallonien Waffen SS
Division, a group of
French volunteers, led by
Leon Degrelle, that
fought on the Russian
front against the
Communists.
Its advocates claim the X design of the old confederate flag
(the "stars and bars") is adapted from the ancient and
historic Saint Andrew's cross. This is far from certain. The
Confederacy was secretly supported by Jesuits, Masons, and
Jews (Rothschild interests) all of whom were aware of its
true, occultic origins. Moreover, the degree of the Scottish
Rite of Freemasonry emphasizes the X- shaped cross of Saint
Andrew.

--- Sayfa 229 ---
CROSS MY HEART AND HOPE TO DIE"
235

--- Sayfa 230 ---
236
CODEX MAGICA
Illuminism
in space: NASA patches are loaded
with pagan, occultic, and Masonic meanings,
including the X of Osiris, the Egyptian Sun
God.
An X is formed as America's top four
politicians met at the White House to decide
the fate of the federal budget. Obviously, this
was a staged "photo op" event, but for Vice
President Al Gore and House speaker Newt
Gingrich to reach over the clasped hands of
President Bill Clinton and Senate Majority
Leader Bob Dole was a serious breach of
etiquette. (USA Today, December 21, 1995)

--- Sayfa 231 ---
"CROSS MY HEART AND HOPE TO DIE"
2 3 7
Albert Pike, former Sovereign Grand Commander of the Scottish Rite, in his book, Morals
and Dogma, considered by many Masons to be their "bible" and guide for daily living, has
this illustration of an "X," in the form of a crossed gavel and a measuring stick, or rule.
Pike explains the illustration by suggesting that Force (the brute power of the people)
must be regulated by the elite: "The blind Force of the people is a Force that must be
economized, and also managed... It must be regulated by Intellect."

--- Sayfa 232 ---
238
CODEX MAGICA
80
MORALS AND DOGMA.
hour; and hence, in several African dialects, as names of the Sun,
Airo, Ayero, eer, uiro, ghurrah, and the like. The royal name
rendered Pharaoh, was PHRA, that is, Pai-ra, the Sun.
The legend of the contest between Hor-ra and Set, or Set-nu-bi,
the same as Bar or Bal, is older than that of the strife between
Osiris and Typhon; as old, at least, as the nineteenth dynasty. It
is called in the Book of the Dead, "The day of the battle between
Horus and Set." The later myth connects itself with Phoenicia
and Syria. The body of OSIRIS went ashore at Gebal or Byblos,
sixty miles above Tsur. You will not fail to notice that in the
name of each murderer of Khurum, that of the Evil God Bal is
found.
*
*
*
*
*
*
Har-oeri was the god of TIME, as well as of Life. The Egyptian
legend was that the King of Byblos cut down the tamarisk-tree
containing the body of OSIRIS, and made of it a column for his
palace. Isis, employed in the palace, obtained possession of the
column, took the body out of it, and carried it away. Apuleius
describes her as "a beautiful female, over whose divine neck her
long thick hair hung in graceful ringlets;" and in the procession
female attendants, with ivory combs, seemed to dress and ornament
the royal hair of the goddess. The palm-tree, and the lamp in the
shape of a boat, appeared in the procession. If the symbol we are
speaking of is not a mere modern invention, it is to these things it
alludes.
The identity of the legends is also confirmed by this hieroglyphic
picture, copied from an ancient Egyptian monument, which may
also enlighten you as to the Lion's grip and the Master's gavel.
In his classic Masonic textbook, Morals and Dogma, Scottish Rite legend Albert Pike suggests
that "This hieroglyphic picture, copied from an ancient Egyptian monument, may enlighten you
as to the Lion's grip and the Master's gavel," two standards of the ritual ceremony for the
Master degree. In the picture, the candidate, lying on the floor, is about to be "raised" by the
powerful grip of the Lion's paw. The lion is carrying in his right hand the Ankh, symbol of
reincarnation, or regeneration. The "X" on the man's chest tells us this is Osiris, the Sun God
who was slain but arose from the dead, being pieced back together by his beautiful Queen, Isis.

--- Sayfa 233 ---
"CROSS MY HEART AND HOPE TO DIE"
2 3 9
Beginning on page 801 of Albert Pike's classic textbook, Morals and Dogma, we find an explanation
of the 29th degree, Grand Scottish Knight of St. Andrew.

--- Sayfa 234 ---
240
CODEX MAGICA
Lisa Marie Presley
demonstrates her cabalistic
knowledge in this body
pose in a news magazine,
including the X sign of
Osiris and the legs in
diamond position. This
body position emphasizes
the sex generative energies.
(Time magazine, April S,
2005)

--- Sayfa 235 ---
TWELVE
That Ravenous Dark Bird—Sublime
Mysteries of the llluminati's
Double-Headed Eagle
And he cried mightily with a strong voice, saying, Babylon the great is fallen, is
fallen, and is become the habitation of devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, and a
cage of every unclean and hateful bird.
- Revelation 18:2
The Royal Secret...the Secret of the Universal Equilibrium... shall at length make
real the Holy Empire of true Masonic Brotherhood.
- Albert Pike, 33°
Morals and Dogma
Two heads are better than one, except when they're on the body of only one eagle.
— Texe Marrs
C a n the body of one bird have two heads? Is such a notion insane? I
believe so. Insanity can be described as a demented man's firm belief
that two totally contradictory and opposite things are nevertheless one
and the same. If a man simultaneously embraces two competing, mutually exclusive
ideas or philosophies, he can properly be deemed "out of his mind," or insane. If, for

--- Sayfa 236 ---
242
CODEX MAGICA
example, he is convinced that an apple is a bird or that the color black is actually
white, then he is insane.
But the Illuminati do not agree. Their whole insane doctrine is based on the
supposition that black is white, that good is evil, that two plus two equals five. They
are men of insane minds. And they have developed an equally insane "scientific"
system, designed to reprogram and recreate social material and spiritual reality to fit
their perverted, upside down theology.
Universal Motion: Alchemy and Magic
Their scientific system, actually a form of witchcraft, is based on alchemy and magic.
Its process is one of Universal Motion, designed to purposely foment diabolical chaos
so that order may come out of two dynamic competing forces, Ordo Ah Chao. Their
objective is the Great Work, the changing of man created in God's image into the
image of a serpent-being void of morality and void of righteous, just values. In other
words, the Great Work is designed to create and produce a race of soul-less satanic
creatures.
To effect their Great Work, to transform and transmutate the world and humanity
into the "new soul-less creature," heaven and earth must be destroyed, crushed, and
thoroughly converted into a new paradigm. In essence, heaven and earth are to
become hell. The will of Satan shall be done on Earth as it is in hell. This is the exalted,
"Royal Secret." It is the Illuminati's core doctrine, their cardinal teaching, that out of
bloody, universal chaos will ultimately come equilibrium and the Holy Empire of the
Illuminati, to be ruled by their cabalistic Messiah, or King—actually the Antichrist.
Pike revealed this ultimate objective to subordinate Illuminists on page 861 of his
celebrated textbook, Morals and Dogma:
The Royal Secret, of which you are a Prince, if you are a true adept...is that which
the Sohar (an occultic and cabalistic text) terms The Mystery of the Balance. It is the
Secret of the Universal Equilibrium...Such, my Brother, is the True Word of a
Master Mason; such is the true Royal Secret, which makes possible, and shall at
length make real, the Holy Empire of true Masonic Brotherhood.1
Ruining God's Creation
Ezekiel 28 tells us that, as first created by God, Lucifer was a beautiful creature, one
of the most lovely in Heaven. His body was not of flesh but was made up of actual
gems and jewels. Even more fantastic, musical instruments were incorporated into
his being. A beauty to behold.
But then the deceitful Lucifer rebelled, taking down with him one third of the
angels. He and they apparently became vile creatures, ugly and deformed, appearing
in grotesque forms appropriate to their mental and spiritual deformities.
How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning! how art thou cut down
to the ground, which didst weaken the nations! For thou hast said in thine heart, I will
ascend into heaven, 1 will exalt my throne above the stars of God...I will ascend above

--- Sayfa 237 ---
THAT RAVENOUS DARK BIRD
243
the heights of the clouds; I will be like the most High. Yet thou shalt be brought down to
hell, to the sides of the pit. (Isaiah 14:12-15)
The Bible says that the angry and furious fallen Lucifer now walks to and fro in
the earth like a lion seeking whom he might devour. His aim is to ruin God's creation,
to bastardize and corrupt it, to change it into what he is—a monumentally ugly and
warped creation, totally opposite of what God intended. Man and the world must be
ruined, destroyed, transformed into a barren, non-producing, hideously shaped
wasteland.
Men are to be made feminine; women masculine. Marriage is to be perverted. No
longer between man and woman, it shall be used also to join men with men and
women to women. Abortion —the reckless slaughter of innocents —is to be
applauded. Sex is to become rife with perversion. Children are given over to the
terrible passions of lustful pedophiles. Spiritual values are converted to material
desires. False gods are exalted. False Bibles are invented. Murder and assassination
become religious goals.
The Christian seeks as his life goal to become more and more like Jesus. But man
and the world are progressively becoming more like Satan and his dark angels —
more corrupt and evil every day, in every way. Evolution, oddly, becomes fact,
except that man isn't evolving from apes, he is becoming an ape. He is transferred into
base animal, devoid of God's values, without the mind of Christ, but instead filled
with instincts and ambitions of pride, lust, murder, and envy.
As Above, So Below
This, then, is the end-goal of Illuminism: To destroy earth, debase civilization, end
pure spirituality, induce chaos on earth, and bring order according to Satan's
Illuminati script. Earth is to be hell and hell on earth: As Above, So Below.
This is the meaning of the double-headed Eagle; the androgynous joining of man
and woman; the mixing of the yin and yang; the checkerboard, black and white floors
of the Masonic Lodges; the mirror images of the Rosicrucians; the sulphurous tale of
Beauty and the Beast; the witches parable of the lovely lady vs. the crone on her
broom; the Druid/Satanic/Catholic alternating of black and white priest vestments;
the front and obverse (hidden) sides of the Great Seal of the United States; the
reversing of the cross and the reading of the Lord's Prayer backwards in satanic
worship, ad naseum.
All fields, all things, must be reversed. Negative must be transmuted into
positive. Bad will be good. Black shall be white. The ugly shall be adjudged beautiful
and the beautiful is to be spoiled, scarred, and made repugnant and revolting. God
shall be debased and Satan exalted.
Illuminism, therefore, is a system of dualism (thesis and antithesis) which
cyclically repeats as synthesis results. Then, the conflicting forces of the duality cycle
clash again, with synthesis being achieved once more. Always the synthesis, the
temporary solution or form, is unfrozen, the process of two competing forces re-
ignited, and the cycle is continued.
Chaos begets order, but chaos ensues again, followed by order, and so on. The

--- Sayfa 238 ---
244
CODEX MAGICA
Manly P. Hall, 33o, the 20th Century's most revered Masonic scholar, titled this "The Double-
Headed Eagle, The Supreme Symbol," in his classic book, The Secret Teachings of All Ages.

--- Sayfa 239 ---
THAT RAVENOUS DARK BIRD
245
conflict of opposites leads finally to system equilibrium which is disturbed once
again by renewed conflict, and a new, temporary stage of equilibrium is achieved.
Ever upward, evolving until perfection. So, the Illuminist is a perfectionist ever
changing, seeking more light as he travels down that yellow brick road to tomorrow.
As Bill and Hillary Clinton's favorite song intoned, "Don't stop thinking about
tomorrow."
"Everything must change," was the slogan of the Illuminists who sparked the
French Revolution.2
The Illuminists ruling America give us two political parties, Democrat and
Republican (thesis and antithesis), both of which they control. But the conflict of these
two opposites never leads to a real solution, only to a fluid, sketchy, "synthesis."
Problems are never completely and satisfactorily resolved. The dualistic process is
never ending. We are all citizens of "Neverneverland," and we don't even know it.
The Third Side to Every Issue
Here's how one Illuminist philosopher, satanic priest Anton LaVey, explained it:
There are not always 'two sides to every issue.' That statement is a ridiculous
slogan invoked by vested interests...
In matters of significant concern, there is invariably another alternative: a THIRD
SIDE, a satanic side.
'Two sides of the same coin' is what most major issues are artfully constructed to
be. Subsequently, the populace lives by imperceptible Hobson's choices
masquerading as opposing opinions.
The two uppermost points of the inverted pentagram of Satan represent the
dualistic nature of all things, as all things are naturally perceived. Man has always
been motivated and controlled by whatever dualistic concept is in fashion, and
always will be. Like it or not, it's the way things really are. Shades of gray only
appear between established opposites.3
The Rosicrucian Orders and the Masonic Lodge incessantly teach this duality of
all things in their rituals and lectures. In the book, The Rose Cross and the Goddess,
Masonic advocate, Gareth Knight, speaks of this "dual polarity." In Masonic
symbolism, Knight observes, this duality is expressed by the square and compass.4
One of the highest degree rituals in Scottish Rite Freemasonry is that which
honors the Emperors of the East and West. It is symbolized, among other things, by
the Masonic double-headed eagle. Two heads, one body. Again: duality.
The Universal Serpent Force
Albert Pike, the former Sovereign Grand Commander whose writings are so honored
and venerated that Pike's body has been entombed in the Scottish Rite's international

--- Sayfa 240 ---
246
CODEX MAGICA
headquarters, The House of the Temple, in Washington, DC, taught that out of the
ongoing universal motion of the conflict of opposites, a potent and magical force could
be created or energized, so powerful that "a single man, who could possess himself
of it, and should know how to direct it, could revolutionize and change the face of
the world." In Morals and Dogma, he emphasizes:
This force was known to the ancients. It is a universal agent, whose Supreme law is
equilibrium...it was adored in the secret rites of the Sabbat or the Temple under the
hieroglyphic figure of Baphomet or the hermaphroditic goat of Mendes...
There is a Life-Principle of the world, a universal agent, wherein are two natures
and a double current...It is the body of the Holy Spirit, the Universal Agent, the
Serpent devouring his own tail...Force attracts force...5
The Jewish cabalists speak in mysterious, guarded terms of this same potent
Force. They say it is produced from the uniting of the two triangles, male and female,
in the sex act, releasing the generative energy of creation. The result symbolized is,
of course, the Jewish Star of David, known as the Seal, or symbol, of Solomon or
simply as the Six-Pointed Star. The cabalists say this Star represents the combined
energy of good and evil becoming one Force; it represents the "white Jehovah and the
black Jehovah." It is the epitome of the "As Above, So Below" doctrine. As LaVey put
it, it represents "THE THIRD WAY."
To the Illuminati, nothing is static, everything is deceit; the Force is dynamic,
ever-changing, the quicksand of light that diffuses and reappears only to disappear
again. Dark is Light and Light is Dark and no one can divine a difference. Satan is
therefore God and God is Satan, and the Serpent chases its own tail. Forever.
The Invisible Light
This is all insanity, of course, but to the Illuminist it is Reason. Thus, Francis Adams
Moore, in the Lucis Trust publication, The Beacon, wrote an article entitled '"The
Invisible Sun." In it, Moore speaks of "The Ageless Wisdom":
The Ageless Wisdom teaches that this darkness out of which visible Light came, is
actually the pure Light —the Light that is so brilliant, radiant, and transcendent it
appears as darkness to the form world.6
To Moore, what we perceive as darkness is actually invisible Light. In all creation,
he says, light and darkness are mixed and "their equilibrium is the mystery of
mysteries."7
Once again we see the Illuminists' insane doctrine of duality. The bisexual is
preferred, bad is good, and so on. Duality and synthesis, and more duality and
synthesis, in never-ending incarnations of confusing light and shadow cycles of
unreality blended with reality.
No wonder the Holy Bible says, "A double-minded man is unstable in all his
ways." (James 1:8)

--- Sayfa 241 ---
THAT RAVENOUS DARK BIRD
247
In the beginning the Great Darkness, Diana, divided herself into two equal and
opposite forces, night and day. The night was ruled over by Diana herself as the
moon, the day by her alter ego and brother, Lucifer, the Sun.8
Detail from a Moslem coat-of-
arms shows heraldic eagle
bearing Sufi octagonal
calligraphic motto on its breast.
(From the book, A History of
Secret Societies, by Arkon
Daraul, Citadel Press, Secaucus,
New Jersey, 1961)
The Eagle is the Sun
The Herder Dictionary of Symbols notes that the eagle has
long been a symbol of power, endurance, and
heavenward flight. It also symbolizes the sun (and the
sun god) and spiritual majesty. Coil's Masonic
Encyclopedia says that, "to the pagans, the eagle was an
emblem of Jupiter, and with the Druids it was a symbol
of their supreme god."
The eagle appears in the insignia of many nations,
including ancient Rome, Nazi and modern-day
Germany, Czarist Russia, and the United States of
America. The Rothschilds adopted the double-headed
eagle as the logo of the Rothschild Family Dynasty. The
eagle is also represented in the Great Seal of the U.S.A.
and it is revered as a holy sign by Sufi Moslems.
The Oval Office and The Eagle in the Great Seal
In Tlxe Wall Street Journal, former presidential speechwriter and now political
commentator Peggy Noonan reported on an interview she had with President
George W. Bush in the White House.9 As she sat before him, a friendly Chief
Executive Bush brought up the topic of the eagle symbol so prominently displayed
in the Oval Office.
The President noted the carved American eagle on the front of his antique desk, the
one used by Ronald Reagan, John F. Kennedy, and Bill Clinton. The head of the
eagle, he notes, is turned toward the arrows it holds in its talon. But look here, he
says, at the American eagle in the presidential seal on the rug: The head is turned
away and toward the olive branches he holds in his other talon. "Harry Truman
changed it," he says. "He wanted America looking toward peace."10

--- Sayfa 242 ---
248
CODEX MAGICA
These three pictures reveal a
mystery. Top left is the
President's classic oak desk in
the Oval Office. This desk has
been in place in the White House
since 1887 when it was given as
a gift to President Rutherford B.
Hayes by Great Britain's Queen
Victoria. The middle panel of the
desk, bearing the presidential
seal with the eagle facing to the
right, was added by President
Franklin D. Roosevelt to hide his
use of a wheelchair. Roosevelt
was a 32o Mason. Bottom left is
the presidential seal woven into
the Oval Office's carpet,
displayed in front of the desk.
This is the same presidential seal as is on the desk, except that here the eagle is facing the opposite
direction—to the left. Then finally, above right, we see President George W. Bush and aides holding a
conference in the Oval Office. Bush's carpet is a different, lighter color than that of the Clinton era,
but the presidential seal of the carpet, or rug, continues to show the eagle facing to the left, while the
desk has the bird facing to the right. In combination, this reflects the classic, double-headed (left-
right) eagle of 33o Freemasonry. Notice also that, in Bush's carpet are added a number of brilliant,
radiant sun rays arching out from the seal, indicating the "Illumination" of the Presidency of the
United States. Moreover, at the Bush conference, the positioning of furniture and accessories
(chairs/tables) provides the classic Masonic Lodge ritual arrangement, plus we have overall the
Mason square and compass within a circle design. The red roses in the middle are also symbolic in
that they represent the feminine aspect (vagina) while the eagle represents the masculine aspect
(phallus).

--- Sayfa 243 ---
THAT RAVENOUS DARK BIRD
2 4 9
Interesting stuff by Peggy Noonan. We must remember that President Truman
was a 33rd degree Mason. "Peace" to a Mason means something entirely different
than the same word means to you and me. In fact, to a Mason, peace is defined
according to the Hegelian dialectical process of doublemindedness. Thus, the
Hegelian motto: "Perpetual war for perpetual peace." What Ms. Noonan also failed
to realize is that in turning the two heads of the eagle — one carved on the desk, the
other on the rug—in opposite directions, the Illuminati is reproducing, or mimicking,
the symbol of the double-headed eagle in Freemasonry.
A Ravenous Bird From the East
To the Illuminati, the eagle is a symbol of overriding importance and, in its double-
headed form, the eagle represents the Illuminati's principal Luciferian doctrine of As
Above, So Below. It also represents the Great Work of the Initiation of the World.
How prophetic, then, is the Bible verse found in Isaiah 46:11 which reveals that in
the last days, a "ravenous bird from the East" shall be called forth by God to wreak
havoc and destruction on rebellious mankind and the fallen world.
So when you see the duality principle ("As Above, So Below") represented in the
photos and illustrations in this section, remember: You're observing the great secret
in operation, the perennial teaching of the Hidden God, the God of the Mysteries, the
God who it is said possesses the key to the
invisible world (hell), the God of the Arch, the
God of cunning, lies and deceit, the two-faced
Deity, the Masonic double-headed eagle. In
other words, bluntly stated, you are viewing Satan
in disguise.
Among hard-core occultists deep into
Babylonian and Egyptian lore and magic we
find the worship of the two-headed
Mammon Ra, the God of Prosperity and
Riches. Mammon Ra is actually a powerful
demon, one of the four great princes of
hell. He is especially worshipped with great
pomp by Jewish cabalists hungry and
greedy for wealth and affluence.

--- Sayfa 244 ---
250
CODEX MAGICA
Two golden phoenix serpents face each other inside the Temple Room of the Scottish Rite
headquarters, The House of The Temple, in Washington, D.C. located exactly 13 blocks from the
White House. While the focal point is the black stone altar with its three sun medallions, the two
serpents provide the most grotesque sight. On the rug we read, "The Goal of Initiation," and, indeed,
it is reportedly before this imposing black stone altar that the candidate for the 33rd degree kneels
and drinks wine from a human skull.
The medical profession uses the winged caduceus,
symbol of Mercury, the ancient god of commerce, as a
universal sign, or logo. Medical doctors even take the
Hippocratic Oath, vowing obeisance to Asclepius, the
Greek god of healing. The caduceus design is of two
serpents intertwined around a staff, or pole, facing
each other. Again, this is evidence of llluminist
doctrine of the integration of opposites. The two
serpents are the same as the emblem of Freemasonry-
the double-headed eagle.

--- Sayfa 245 ---
THAT RAVENOUS DARK BIRD
251

--- Sayfa 246 ---
252
CODEX MAGICA
The shadow figure in the
background of this photo
of Egyptian President
Hosni Mubarak faces the
opposite direction.
Appropriate considering
the Masonic principle of
the combining, or
synthesis of opposites.
(Photo: U.S. New & World
Report, March 14, 2005, P.
30)
Sammy Davis, Jr., popular singer and
entertainer, integrated the Illuminist sign,
"As Above, So Below," into his dance
performance. In his autobiography, "Yes, I
Can," Davis confessed to being a past
member of High Priest Anton LaVey's
Church of Satan. In his performances, Davis
often wore a satanic pentagram necklace.
He also painted the fingernail black as a
sign of his devotion to his master, the devil.
One of Sammy Davis, Jr.'s most popular
songs, The Candy Man, reportedly was
secredy in praise of Satan, the Candy Man
who brings his disciples gifts, such as illegal
drugs like heroin and cocaine, and sexual
favors.

--- Sayfa 247 ---
THAT RAVENOUS DARK BIRD
253
This article in Newsweek (July 27, 1998, p. 31) speaks for itself. Under orders from Bolshevik
Communist butcher Vladimir Lenin, the Russian Oar and his entire family were slaughtered. In the
center of this photo, above the windows you will see the golden, double-headed eagle.

--- Sayfa 248 ---
254
CODEX MAGICA
Mirror Image: In 2002, two snipers terrified Washington, D.C. suburbs with deadly and accurate
shooting of innocent citizens. Police Chief Charles Moose, of Montgomery County, Maryland, led
some 1,000 investigators in a 22-day manhunt. The press and media made Chief Moose into a
celebrity and hero, though clearly his police skills were not just inadequate, they had proven to be
vastly incompetent and bungling. Moose turns out to be a puppet of the Jewish ADL and a "Chosen
One" of the Illuminati. This photo in Time (January 6, 2001) unmasks Chief Moose as a stooge of
the elite. It illustrates perfectly the Satanic doctrine, "As Above, So Below." We see Chief Moose, a
black man, shrouded in darkness, his hands giving a Masonic symbol (explained elsewhere in
Codex Magica). They rest on a mirror surface in which the shadow image of the Chief is seen.
Viewed either as is or upside down, we observe the secret sign of the diamond (two triangles
abutted together), indicating the portal of hell, high sign of the conspiracy. It doesn't get much
more revealing than this. Yet, it is doubtful that even a fraction of the readers of Time who saw this
photo had any idea of its esoteric nature.

--- Sayfa 249 ---
THAT RAVENOUS DARK BIRD
255
In this advertisement in Spain's Hola magazine (April 13, 2000), a coin bearing the image of King
Juan Carlos was offered. Juan Carlos is heir to the Bourbon Dynasty. One of his titles is "King of
Jerusalem." The emblem of the double-headed eagle is on the reverse side of the coin.

--- Sayfa 250 ---
256
CODEX MAGICA
In 1917, after the dynasty of Czar Nicholas II fell, the Moscow government of Freemason Alexander
Kerensky issued new currency, including this 250 ruble banknote. At its center is the double-headed
eagle superimposed on the swastika (sun deity). The swastika is arranged as a diamond. Soon
afterwards, the government of Kerensky gave way to the Bolshevik coup of Lenin and Trotsky.
Kerensky fled to Paris, France, where he joined the Grand Orient Lodge. Lenin and Trotsky, also
Masons and satanists, decided these symbols on the ruble banknotes were far too obvious and feared
that the Russian people would discover the Jewish Masonic roots of the Revolution. Therefore, they
ordered the removal of the symbols and created as a replacement for them the familiar hammer and
sickle emblems as the U.S.S.R.'s official seal.
One of the clergy leaders of the
Orthodox Church in Greece
wears a pendent of the
crowned double-headed eagle
as a talisman around his neck.
The cross, meanwhile, is
relegated to the left side of the
satanic talisman.

--- Sayfa 251 ---
THAT RAVENOUS DARK BIRD
2 5 7
The Magical Head of Zohar is a cabalistic
design illustrating the concept of opposites,
the principle of "As Above, So Below." It is
widely used by cabalists and Jewish rabbis as
an instructional device.
Abraxas, the gnostic rooster god, symbolic
of the Sun God. Notice the two serpent legs,
indicating the satanic doctrine of duality.

--- Sayfa 252 ---
258
CODEX MAGICA
In tarot card decks, one of the cards depicts "The
Magician" (also called the Magus or the Juggler), a
young man holding up a wand in his right hand, and
pointing to the earth with his left. On a table before him
are the four elemental symbols, and above his head is the
sign of eternity or infinity. He is the Magus, the god-like
human being integrated on all planes, the will liberated
through gnosis, or knowledge. His gesture refers to the
basic occult principle "That which is above is as that
which is below."
This design illustrates the ultimate blasphemy
for its message is that Satan is deity of the
universe, that he shall be King over all realms,
above and below, and that the reign of he, the
serpent, shall stand for all eternity. The
Scottish Rite textbook, A Bridge to light, by Rex
Hutchens, 33rd degree, outlines the knowledge
and symbols used for the various degrees of
Freemasonry. In this book, Hutchens restates
the principles of Albert Pike's 19th century
classic, Morals and Dogma. According to these
principles, the oroboros serpent shown in this
design (Levi's occult magic of "As Above, So
Below") represents eternity and the Holy Spirit
of the triune godhead. In other words, the
Illuminists are declaring that the serpent,
identified in the scriptures as the devil, is, in
their religion, the divine Holy Spirit! A
blasphemous concept, indeed.
A company called Azure Green puts out a catalog offering "Egyptian Deity Wall
Plaques," including this one, a depiction of the combined gods of Egypt, Horns and
Set. Two entities represented by one body. Once again, we discover the principle of
integration, or synthesis. Horns is the son of the Sun God and is said to be one
with his Father, Osiris. The god Set is the dialectical opposite, or mirror of Horns
and Osiris, but rather than the Sun and its light, he represents the darkness of the
underworld. Set is god of the dead, Horus-Osiris, god of the living.

--- Sayfa 253 ---
THAT RAVENOUS DARK BIRD
259
This cover of a book by W. Bruce
Lincoln about Russia's czars, the
Romanov Dynasty, pictures the
dynasty's fascinating symbol, the
double-headed phoenix serpent. Eye-
opening is the crowned victorious
hero figure with a cape, carrying a
lance, riding a white horse found
within the "heart" of the double-
headed black bird. The symbolical
meaning of this image is
overwhelming, to say the least, in
terms of Bible prophecy.
The idolatrous image of the double-headed
eagle—shown here on the cover of Albert
Pike's classic text, Morals and Dogma—is a
much-treasured symbol of Jewish Masons. It
represents the Babylonian god of money and
forces, Mammon-Ra, as well as the Hegelian
dialectical process practiced by the Jewish
elite. This same symbol is the "Masonic Jewel"
awarded high level Masons initiated into the
33rd degree.

--- Sayfa 254 ---
2 6 0
CODEX MAGICA
A friend of the author sent him this photograph he took while visiting Russia recently. It is the fence
and gate outside a sprawling and luxurious old mansion estate.

--- Sayfa 255 ---
THAT RAVENOUS DARK BIRD
M
2 6 1
For Comrade Mikhail Gorbachev, there is only one deity that should be recognized-the god below, in
the abyss. Here we see Gorby smiling broadly while finding his "mark" for a history photo made with
Bush and Reagan overlooking the New York City harbor. Gorby seems to merely be clowning around,
but his membership in the Grand Orient Lodge in Paris, France and his favorable status by the
llluminati's Inner Circle inform us otherwise. His hands tell a story understood by the wise. (Photo
and article, December 8, 1988)
Commemorative Silver Coin bearing images of Lord Ganesha and Goddess Laksmi
struck in honor of the historic occasion of the first Hindu Diwali ritual ever
conducted in the White House. It happened under President George W. Bush, in 2003.

--- Sayfa 256 ---
262
CODEX MAGICA
Double-headed eagle pendant
owned by the Czarina. The word
"Czar" in Russian means "Caesar.
A horse cloth used in the royal stables of the Russian Czar
(circa 1795) bears the symbols of the double-headed
eagle, a triangle, and diamonds, all llluminist signs.
Russia's President Vladimir Putin (left) meets with the CEO of Lukoil, Russia's biggest oil company.
On the desk between the two men are desk accessories bearing the emblem of the double-headed
eagle. (Photo: Agence France-Presse)

--- Sayfa 257 ---
THAT RAVENOUS DARK BIRD
263
Vladimir Zhirinovsky, flamboyant Russian politician, holds in his hand the double-headed eagle
insignia of the czarist regime, recently revived in the Gorbachev-Yeltsin-Putin era. Zhirinovsky gained
worldwide notoriety in the 1990s for bashing Jews and for his extreme anti-Semitic views. However,
he quieted down and muted his animosity toward the Jews after it came out that Zhirinovsky is
himself a Jew! The setting up of such fake fronts by the Illuminati is a common tactic. It is all part of
the Hegelian dialectical process (Thesis+antithesis=synthesis): i.e. create the problem, then come up
with the pre-planned "solution" favored by
the elite. (Photo and article: The European,
April 17, 1994)
"The Czar is dead. Long live the Czar,"
seems to be the cry today in Russia.
Czar Nicholas and his entire family
were massacred by Lenin and the
Communists. But, in recent times,
Russia, under Gorbachev, Yeltsin, and
Putin, has once again officially
returned the Empire to the key
symbol of the double-headed eagle.
Der Spiegel, a popular German news
magazine, carried this telling
depiction of "Czar Boris" (President
Boris Yeltsin) on its cover, with the
revived official seal on his breast.

--- Sayfa 258 ---
264
CODEX MAGICA
Believe it or not, in front of the Department of
Justice building in Washington, D.C. is a statue
of a confederate general, Albert Pike. Pike
served as Sovereign Grand Commander of
Scottish Rite Freemasonry, Southern
Jurisdiction. Fascinating, isn't it, that black
leaders like Farrahkan and Jesse Jackson aren't
complaining? Usually, they go nuts complaining
about Confederate monuments and statues on
government land. Could their silence be
attributed to the fact that Jackson and
Farrakhan are themselves 3 3rd degree Masons?
In any case, at the foot of Pike's Justice
Department Statue is a Masonic female figure
representing Lady Justice, holding a banner
with the 33rd degree double-headed eagle and
the triangle of Freemasonry.
The androgyne, a combination creature of male and
female, symbolizes the hermaphrodite principle of the
two-faced entity or two-headed eagle. In the Jewish
Cabala, this strange creation of the feminine and
masculine principle is known as "Adam Kadmon,"
both Adam and Eve, a Golem. This conjunction of
opposites is part of the science of alchemy, or
hermeticism, and is especially beloved by occult
magicians. In witchcraft, it is known as the joining of
sun and moon, and sacred sex rituals are common.
Janus, Roman two-faced "God of the Sun," was said to
be the "keeper of the keys" to the invisible spirit world.
Hislop (The Two Babylons) called him "the source and
fountain of all the pagan gods." Is the Masonic double-
headed eagle symbolic of his predecessor, Janus?

--- Sayfa 259 ---
THIRTEEN
The Riddle of the Great Seal of the
United States, and the All-Seeing Eye of
the Illuminati's Serpent of Wisdom
And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called the Devil, and Satan,
which deceiveth the whole world...
-Revelation 12:9
The Great Serpent of the Garden of Eden and the Lord God are identical.
— Helena Blavatsky
The Secret Doctrine
W
h
a
t is the true meaning of the curious, arcane symbols found in the
Great Seal of the United States? Who designed this fantastic two-
sided device, and why is it so prominently featured as art and decor
on our most common item of currency —the U.S. one dollar bill?
Answering the Riddle
The symbols on the Great Seal at first glance seem to be incompatible with the
history, political organization, and religious heritage of our great nation. An
Egyptian pyramid? What has that to do with America? Strange Latin inscriptions? A
bizarre all-seeing eye radiated by the sun's rays? Odd, indeed.
Truly weird, especially, is the fact that there are two sides to the Great Seal. The

--- Sayfa 260 ---
266
CODEX MAGICA
front side pictures a strong, war-ready eagle with a constellation of stars in a cloud
above its head. The reverse, the mystical side, is the one with the pyramid, Latin
inscriptions, all-seeing eye, etc. Why two sides? After all, a seal is like a rubber stamp.
It is used to authenticate documents to prove authenticity and affirm veracity and
genuineness. You don't need a reverse side on a "rubber stamp!"
In fact, both sides of the Great Seal, each with various images, have been around
since the days of the Continental Congress.
In 1776, just hours after the Declaration of Independence was formally adopted,
a committee composed of Benjamin Franklin, Thomas Jefferson, and John Adams
met to design the Great Seal. They invited an artist, Pierre Eugene Du Simitiere, to
join them and a design was approved. But the Continental Congress failed to
approve it. So, in 1782, Congress called on William Barton, an authority on symbols
and heraldry, and Charles Thompson, Secretary of Congress, to help sort out the
process. Finally, out came the current day, two-sided Great Seal.1
Enter Rothschild's Man, Haym Salomon
That, of course, is the official version of events. But some claim that a mysterious man
from Europe, but living in Philadelphia, named Haym Salomon, secretly assisted the
committee of Franklin, Jefferson, and Adams. Haym Salomon, a Jewish banker, just
happened to be the American representative for the Rothschilds of Europe. Salomon,
it is said, bribed a number of American politicians and was able to get about anything
he and his mentors wanted done. In the case of the Great Seal, the Rothschilds
wanted symbols to be pictured in the Great Seal of United States befitting the aims of
the Illuminati.
Though Jewish and Zionist in ambition, the Rothschilds were not worshippers of
the God of the Old and New Testaments of the Bible. They were Sabbatian/Frankist
(Satanic) in theology. They sought (and still today seek) a Jewish Utopia or Kingdom
on planet Earth. This Kingdom would be the New Age successor to ancient Babylon
and Egypt. It would be a powerhouse nation that would, through magic and intellect,
conquer the world. America would be its proxy. America would be its alter ego.
America, then, must be fashioned into a cabalistic, Jewish state. All Hail the New

--- Sayfa 261 ---
THE RIDDLE OF THE GREAT SEAL OF THE UNITED STATES
267
Egypt, Empire of the Ages, child of the Sun God of the ancients! America, the New
Jerusalem, must unite with Old Jerusalem, and the Zionist Illuminati must reign!
Rothschild agent Haym Salomon had millions of dollars of largesse to spread
around in bribes. And so he did. A good portion of the money went to fund the
Continental Congress and its operations. Some went into the Treasury for the
Revolutionary War effort. Some went into politicians' pockets.
Rothschild eventually got the images he had demanded on the Great Seal, though
not without opposition. The design was bitterly opposed by the few who recognized
the Masonic and Illuminist elements.
As for Haym Salomon, few history textbooks mention him. But he is privily called
by Illuminati Jews "The Financier of the American Revolution." Only recently, scattered
bits of propaganda have begun to be floated about him. A few Jewish books speak of
his "grand accomplishments," offering a more cheery and less honest version of his
life and his activities as banker for the American Revolution. The ultimate goal of the
Illuminati is to eventually bring Haym Salomon out of the closet, so to speak.
Someday, his name will be in lights. He'll be immortalized in print, in movies, and
on TV as a great and noble hero, akin to a George Washington or Thomas Jefferson.
Statues will be built to honor him. One already has, in Philadelphia. Mark my words
and mark your calendar for the future and see if what I tell you isn't so.
Now, let us examine the symbols on America's Great Seal and see if we can make
sense of their true, esoteric meaning and purposes. Let us wipe away the gloss and
get down to the base surface to better understand. This is vital because of the future
of the United States —and the destiny of all humanity —is wrapped up, and is
revealed, in this collection of Illuminist symbols and marks.
The Ashlar Stones and The Pyramid
Masonry is a peculiar Egypto-Babylonia-Jewish institution, and so the pyramid itself
hearkens back to the Dynasty of the pharaohs and to the gods and goddesses of
ancient Egypt. The stones which make up the pyramid are also of esoteric
significance. In the Masonic philosophy it is taught that unenlightened man is in a
rude, natural state. Having little or no "light" and without the spiritual illumination
offered by the Mystery Religions he is likened to an imperfect or rough ashlar stone. But
once enlightened and illuminated, he is crafted into a man of education,
sophistication, discipline, and culture. He reaches upward toward spiritual
perfection. He is then a perfect ashlar stone.
In many pagan religions this concept of the Rough vs. Perfect Ashlar was taught.
In Freemasonry, it is heavily emphasized. The pyramid's structure is fitted only with
perfect ashlar stones, it is said, meticulously chosen by "The Builders" who watch for
flaws and reject the rough, or imperfect ashlar.
Likewise, the higher level Masons discover that the pyramid reflects, or parallels,
the New World Order (Novus Ordo Seclorum) they and their Illuminized superiors are
building under the watchful eye of the Great Architect of the Universe, whose secret
and sacred name, the Royal Arch Mason learns, is Jahbuhlun.
The Builders (the Perfect Ashlars), then, are the Illuminati and their minions.
Their building project is the renovation and reconstruction (Perestroika or Tikkun

--- Sayfa 262 ---
268
CODEX MAGICA
Olam) of the whole earth. Of course, in order to build the New Deal of the Ages, they
must first tear down the old. Civilization as we know it today must be razed and
destroyed by dialectic chaos, so that the new order may be ushered in: Ordo Ab Chao
It is when this ambitious goal is achieved that, symbolically, the capstone will be
set in place atop the pyramid. Then he who lies within the living stones shall come
forth to rule. The Phoenix (Satan and his "son") shall rise from the flames of
destruction just as the legendary phoenix bird arose.
The Phoenix, however, is, in reality a cockatrice, a dragon-bird, a flying serpent.
The word "pyramid," incidentally, literally means "amidst the fire." And now you
know the true, occultic meaning of the word.
Peering Into the All-Seeing Eye
Simply put, Freemasons, under the direction of Haym Salomon, Ben Franklin, and
others, designed the Great Seal with its all-seeing eye in the capstone amidst the
radiant sun background. As followers of Egyptianism, it has long been assumed that
the eye is that of Osiris, the Egyptian sun god, and/or of his son, Horus. This is true,
but there is much more.
Osiris, of course, was worshipped as the Sun. Albert Pike, former Sovereign
Grand Commander, wrote: "The sun...is the All-Seeing Eye in our Lodges."2 Pike
goes on to say that, "the Blazing Star (the pentagram deity) has been recognized as
an emblem of Omniscience, or the All-Seeing Eye, which to the Ancients was the
Sun."3
The Illuminati and their subordinates, the Masons, honor the Deity of countless
names. Yes, one of those names is Osiris, with his son Horus. But the Illuminati Deity
is a concealed god who hides his true identity in a multitude of disguises and
subterfuges. He is called "The Sun," the "Central Sun," "Hiram Abiff," the one with
the "Ineffable Name," "Ein Soph," the "Great Architect of the Universe,"
"Abaddon," "Mahabone," and "Jahbuhlun." Ostensibly the Illuminati worship a
pantheon, a multiplicity of gods. But, not so. These are all fronts for the elite worship
of Lucifer. He is their true god, the God of Light. As Albert Pike stated in Morals and
Dogma, "Doubt it not."
Their God is The Serpent
Now, the Bible, in Isaiah 14 and Revelation 12:9, identifies Lucifer as "the great
dragon...that old serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, which deceiveth the whole
world." So, by whatever name you call him, the god of the Illuminati and Masonry
is the Serpent. In fact, in A Bridge to Light, an official textbook of the Supreme Mother
Council, 33°, the highest council of the Scottish Rite, Rex Hutchens, 33°, reveals that
"the body of the Holy Spirit, the universal agent," is none other than "the Serpent
devouring his own tail."4 That is, the Oroboros serpent.
Remember, in all their writings, the most revered of Masonic scholars — Manly P.
Hall, Albert Mackey, Albert Pike, etc.—claim that the Masonic rituals and teachings
come from the "mysteries" of ancient Babylonians, Egyptians, Greeks, Persians and
others. Thus, we glean understanding when we read, in Earth's Earliest Ages, this

--- Sayfa 263 ---
THE RIDDLE OF THE GREAT SEAL OF THE UNITED STATES
269
statement by G. Pember: "There is little doubt that the culmination of the mysteries
was the worship of Satan himself."5
You'll also recall our discussion elsewhere in this book that the Illuminist and
Masonic theology is solidly based on the Jewish Cabala (Kaballah or Quaballah).
Indeed, almost all occult and magical belief systems are founded on the principles
and teachings of the Jewish Cabala. In her most famous book, The Secret Doctrine,
Helena Blavatsky praised Satan as the teacher of humanity.6 He is to be thanked,
Blavatsky says, for setting men on the path to divinity and liberty. It is, she
emphasizes, the Cabala that "unveils the secret." To what secret is she referring?
Listen, as Blavatsky flatly states the core doctrine of the mysteries, of occultism, of
Illuminism:
The Great Serpent of the Garden of Eden and the Lord God are identical.7
Ah, we have here the reality of supreme evil in this core teaching. Paul knew of
this mystery teaching, he wrote of the "Mystery of Iniquity" and said of the ancient
religionists, that they "knew God, but glorified Him not as God," and changed the
Glory of God "into the likeness of creeping things" — that is, serpents (Romans 1:23).
The Devourer of Self
Barbara Walker, researcher of occultism and paganism, writes:
As Lord of Death, Osiris was sometimes identified with the Great Serpent of the
underworld, and sometimes was painted in the same serpentine form, bent around
so his toes touched his head.8
The serpent, or Satan, as we know from the scriptures, is god of the dead. Indeed,
God says, "all they that hate me love death" (Proverbs 8:36). He is Lord alright, but
only of death, of the underworld, and of planet earth for a season (II Thessalonians 2).
He is graphically pictured in the occult world as a serpent biting his own tail; how
appropriate: A devourer of himself! And that is what actually happens when a
person defies God and worships the Adversary. He or she is "biting his own tail" —
tragically and pathetically devouring himself.
The Oroboros
The oroboros, or serpent biting its own tail, is pictured on the cover of Codex Magica.
This book unmasks the Illuminati worship of this detestable creature, a worship of
which virtually every person on earth is dangerously and hopelessly unaware. Since
the Illuminati, Masons, and fellow cabalists have amassed such tremendous political,
financial, social, and technological powers, is it not a frightening thing to realize that
these men are not only religious, their religion is Satanism, and their god is the Devil?
The destructive path, therefore, is the way of the Illuminati. As I have
demonstrated, these wicked agents of the Serpent are psychopaths and present a
clear and present threat and danger to our lives. But the gravest danger is that which

--- Sayfa 264 ---
270
CODEX MAGICA
confronts the souls of billions of unsaved, ignorant human beings. If they fall for the
Lie of the Serpent, they will suffer total destruction and suffer loss for eternity.
In Occult Geometry, A.S. Raleigh examines the symbol of the circle. He writes:
One form of the circle is a serpent with a tail in its mouth...It is the return to
Unity...The true circle symbolizes evolution, the Serpent Circle involution...the
power brings Unity out of diversity...The Serpent Circle is, therefore, ever the symbol of
the destructive.9
Later, in the photos and illustrations presented in this chapter, you will discover
the startling artwork on a Jewish New Year's postcard by Jewish artist Alain Roth
back in 1915. The design shows the Oroboros Serpent (Satan) encircling and
conquering the whole earth. Happy New Year?
As I have proven over and over by a preponderance of documentation, we cannot
separate the murderous goals and activities of the Illuminati from their religious
belief system. Their inspiration, their fanatical zealotry, comes from their teacher,
Satan, who has given them a thorough set of instructions—an Unholy Bible if you
will, in the Jewish Cabala. In this Unholy Bible, the Serpent plays the key role. He is
praised as the "Serpent of Wisdom." The destiny of the Illuminati and the whole
world is said to be in his hands.
We thank God that all who believe in Christ Jesus have no part of this destiny.
Jesus said He has chosen us out of the world. We are pilgrims, aliens on earth, spiritually
residing in heavenly places. The serpent has no power or control whatsoever over us,
and we solidly reject his many works, among which, regrettably, is the symbology of
the Great Seal of the United States.
Advertisement for a
cigarette brand. The
three most
prominent symbols:
(1) All-seeing eye;
(2) The sign of
eternity—resembling
the figure 8 lying on
its side; (3)The
three dots, or
points, indicative of
the unholy trinity.
The Guardian Angel
organization in New
York City has as its
logo an all-seeing eye
in a triangle, and
angel wings. Message:
"We are watching!"

--- Sayfa 265 ---
THE RIDDLE OF THE GREAT SEAL OF THE UNITED STATES
271
Reason (La Raison), an
engraving by Darcis in the
National Museum, Paris,
France, was said to
capture the spirit of the
bloody, Illuminati-
inspired French
Revolution. What we see
is symbolism of the
unholy trinity of Lucifer-
Father (Lion), Mother
(Goddess), and Son (all-
seeing eye).
Art illustration from the
book, Active Meditation,
by Robert Leichtman,
M.D. and Carl Japikse
(Ariel Press). The
hermetic monk holds the
solar disk with cross and
all-seeing eye.

--- Sayfa 266 ---
272
CODEX MAGICA
This bizarre advertisement for cable-TV's The Learning Channel. The tattoos on this man
are real. The all-seeing eye is in what Hindus call the "ajna center," in the midpoint of the
forehead just above the eyebrows.

--- Sayfa 267 ---
THE RIDDLE OF THE GREAT SEAL OF THE UNITED STATES
2 7 3
Sir Walter Raleigh, the impetuous adventurer
and polished courtier, was also a man of consid-
erable literary accomplishments. Much of the
poetry he wrote has been lost, but several im-
pressive prose works survive. The most ambi-
tious and distinguished of these is The History of
the World, written between 1607 and 1614, dur-
ing his years of confinement in the Tower of
London under a death sentence. Although Ra-
leigh's name did not appear on the elaborately
engraved frontispiece to the first edition (above),
there was no secret about the authorship. The
book was immediately banned by King James I.
Raleigh set out to write a universal chronicle
that would parallel the Old Testament chronology
in its initial chapters but bring the story up to his
own times, in which the history of England would
be related to that of the rest of the world. He got
only as far as the fall of Macedonia in 130 B.C.
James's displeasure was caused by Raleigh's
portrayals of Assyrian Queen Semiramis, which
was seen as a tribute to Elizabeth I, and of her
effeminate successor, Ninus, which the king inter-
preted as an unflattering caricature of himself.
Sir Walter Raleigh's distinguished book, The History of
The World (written between 1607 and 1614) had this
illustration as its frontispiece. The book was banned by
England's King James I because it revealed too much,
ostensibly for its portrayals of Babylonian Queen
Semiramis and her effeminate son, Ninus. More likely
is that the artwork shown here revealed far too many
occult secrets, including the androgynous
(male/female) figure holding aloft the globe, the all-
seeing eye, etc.
United Mine Workers Union poster,
1890. The two miners are exchanging a
masonic handshake, being overseen by
the all-seeing eye. Almost all unions in
America and Europe were founded by
Jewish activists deep into Cabala,
Masonry, and other occult secrets.

--- Sayfa 268 ---
274
CODEX MAGICA

--- Sayfa 269 ---
THE RIDDLE OF THE GREAT SEAL OF THE UNITED STATES
2 7 5
Three versions of Oroboros, the circular
serpent biting its own tail.
Above left: This version is from Atlanta
Fugiens, by Michael Maier, 1618.
Above right: This version of Oroboros is from
Dahomey, West Africa.
Left: An early, hand-painted Masonic apron
depicts many occult symbols, including the
serpent Oroboros, the skull and bones,
pentacle stars, the pyramids, the mallet, and
the X.
The Fox-TV network ran 67 episodes of the popular series, Millennium. The Oroboros
serpent was the focal point of advertising for the series though the occult meaning of
the symbol was never fully explained.

--- Sayfa 270 ---
276
CODEX MAGICA

--- Sayfa 271 ---
THE RIDDLE OF THE GREAT SEAL OF THE UNITED STATES
2 7 7
In 1974, heiress Patty Hearst was kidnapped by members of a group calling itself the Symbionese
Liberation Army (SLA). The group took this picture of Hearst, who inexplicably actively participated
in crimes with SLA gang members. Conspiracy researchers subsequently discovered that the SLA was a
secret revolutionary project funded by the FBI. (Photo and article: Newsweek, February 4, 2002)

--- Sayfa 272 ---
278
CODEX MAGICA
Blatant serpent wickedness is rampant in this advertisement for Crown Royal whiskey. We have
the regal scarlet crown, the diamond cuts on the glass, the evil snake shaped in the form of "S"
(Satan?), and the one word question, "Tempted?" The phrase below, "Enjoy our quality
responsibly" sounds like some kind of hellish joke. Crown Royal is manufactured by Seagram &
Sons, the world's largest distillery. Seagram is owned by the Bronfman bloodline dynasty of
Canada, the family of ardent ADL Jewish Zionists. Its senior is currently Edgar Bronfman, who
also just happens to be chairman of the World Jewish Congress.

--- Sayfa 273 ---
THE RIDDLE OF THE GREAT SEAL OF THE UNITED STATES
2 7 9
The dragon is, of course,
a mythical form of
serpent. Indeed, the Holy
Bible in the book of
Revelation describes
Satan as "that old
serpent, the dragon."
Well, for those who wish
to pay homage to the
dragon, The Pyramid
Collection catalog offers
such jewelry items as
this pendant, ring, and
arm band.
The llluminati Serpent: In The Two
Babylons, Hislop writes: "In the
mythology of the primitive world, the
serpent is universally the symbol of the
sun... As the sun was the enlightener of
the world, so the serpent was held to
have been the great enlightener of the
spiritual, by giving mankind knowledge
of good and evil.

--- Sayfa 274 ---
280
CODEX MAGICA
Revealing drawing from a
New Age magical
publication, New Moon
Rising. The yin/yang circle at
top has the backward "S"
and the black is white, white
is black motif; and we
discover the veiled goddess,
in addition to two serpents
facing each other. Again,
this emphasizes the occult
principle of joining, or
integrating of opposites. The
author of Codex Magica
could give about a 60-hour
lecture series devoted
exclusively to the meaning
of all the symbols in this
seductively evil—even
grotesque—piece of occult
art.
The serpent has long been
associated with the Goddess. At
right are depictions of the Greek
Goddess Medusa, whose hair was
a nest of snakes, and the cobra, a
holy Egyptian symbol for the
Goddess religion. (From book,
New Age lies to Women, by
Wanda Marrs)

--- Sayfa 275 ---
THE RIDDLE OF THE GREAT SEAL OF THE UNITED STATES
281
Singer/Entertainer Britney
Spears used this white python
serpent in one of her music
videos. Some in witchcraft
falsely believe the white snake is
the possessor of good magical
powers because of its "pure"
color. The satanist knows
otherwise. Dr. Michael Aquino,
High Priest of the Temple of Set,
once stated on The Oprah
Winfrey TV show that there is
no real difference in good vs.
evil magic. Magic is magic.
(Photo: The Tennessean.
December 19, 2001, p. 3D)
The title page of a book published in Greece exposing the
global plot of the Zionist Masons of the Illuminati. The
authors demonstrate their understanding by the symbolic
use of the evil oroboros serpent encircling the whole world.
The Oroboros, the serpent coiled up in a circle
biting its own tail (also Uroboros), is pictured as a
gnostic rooster combination creature in this
illustration from Horapollo's Selecta Hieroglyphica,
1597. The sun and moon symbolize the conjunction
of opposites, which is the alchemical doctrine of
Illuminism.

--- Sayfa 276 ---
282
CODEX MAGICA
These two ancient Celtic coins from Bohemia (second and first centuries B.C.)
bear the marks of the dragon, or serpent. The first coin has the image of an
oroboros serpent/dragon torqued and prepared to bite its own tail. The second
coin bears the image of a coiled, horned serpent with ears. The coins signify the
adoration and homage paid the serpent as a religious icon of worship-status by
the Mystery Religions. The revival today of the ancient Mystery Religions is
accompanied also by modern-day advances in serpent worship.

--- Sayfa 277 ---
THE RIDDLE OF THE GREAT SEAL OF THE UNITED STATES
2 8 3
This is a Jewish New Year postcard, by artist Alain Roth in 1915. Amazingly
revealing, the postcard image confirms the documentation found in the long
controversial Protocols of the Learned Elders of lion. In the protocols the Jewish
Zionist conspiracy is described as a symbolic serpent encircling the world! As if to
emphasize that this is the correct understanding, the writing in Hebrew at the
bottom of this Jewish New Year postcard is the word "Leviathan." The identity of
Leviathan is revealed in Isaiah 27 as the serpent, or Satan. Have a Happy New Year,
indeed!
An Oroboros serpent associated with the
aionic cycles of life and death. (Cydonia:
The Secret Chronicles of Mars, by David E.
Flynn, 2002)
Fritz Springmeier, one of the world's top
researchers into the global conspiracy, discovered
the Illuminati
symbol of a snake swallowing its
own tail (the Oroboros) being used by Portland,
Oregon's public library system as the logo placed
by the library on its books. (Newsletter Front A
Christian Ministry, October 15, 1993)

--- Sayfa 278 ---
284
CODEX MAGICA
The Illuminati's architectural
concept of the unfinished
pyramid (the capstone yet to
be fused on top) is exactly
captured in this intriguing,
obviously staged ritual
image. This photo, from the
American Bar Association's
(ABA) annual convention in
1999, shows attorney Philip
Anderson (left), president of
the ABA, Janet Reno,
Attorney-General of the
United States, and President
Bill Clinton. Notice that each
of the three stand erect, a
somber and knowing look on
their faces, their bodies
arranged to create a mystical
trinity of unity. Behind them
we find the ABA logo, which
is in the shape of an
unfinished pyramid. (USA
Today newspaper, August 10,
1999, p. 8A)
From The Herder Dictionary of Symbols (Chiron Publications, Illinois), we have two
different representations of the alchemical/mystical concept of "trinity as unity." At
left is a Rosicrucian seal and at right is an illustration from Valentinius's Duodecim
Claves, 1678.

--- Sayfa 279 ---
FOURTEEN
"Silence, Slaves, or We'll Cut Your
Throat From Ear to Ear!"
...binding myself under no less penalty than that of having my throat cut
across...
— Oath of Freemasonry
Entered Apprentice
Degree (1°)
But above all things, my brethren, swear not, neither by heaven, neither by the
earth, neither by any other oath...
— James 5:12
In every ritual degree of Freemasonry and in all the most important
ceremonial rituals and initiations of elite orders, the candidate is required
to take an oath and is warned of the hideous and grotesque penalty that
awaits him if he dares ever to reveal any of the group's innermost secrets.1
For example, in the very first degree oath of Freemasonry, the candidate declares:
...binding myself under no less penalty than that of having my throat cut across,
my tongue torn out by its roots, and my body buried in the rough sands of the sea,
at low-water mark, where the tide ebbs and flows twice in twenty-four hours,
should I ever knowingly violate this my Entered Apprentice obligation.

--- Sayfa 280 ---
286
CODEX MAGICA
Second degree Masons recite the following heinous oath:
...binding myself under no less penalty than that of having my breast torn open,
my heart plucked out, and placed on the highest pinnacle of the temple there to be
devoured by the vultures of the air, should I ever knowingly violate the Fellow
Craft obligation.
The third degree oath proclaims:
...binding myself under no less penalty than that of having my body severed in
two, my bowels taken from thence and burned to ashes, the ashes scattered before
the four winds of heaven, that no more remembrance might be had of so vile and
wicked a wretch as I would be, should I ever, knowingly, violate this my Master
Mason's obligation.
That's not all. In the 4th degree, Mark Master of the York Rite, the candidate
performs a ritual which symbolizes having his "ear smitten off" if he reveals the
order's secrets. And for the 5th degree, Past Master, the hapless candidate agrees as
follows:
...binding myself under no less penalty than (in addition to all my former penalties)
to have my tongue split from tip to root, that I might thereafter be unable to
pronounce the word.
The sixth degree (Most Excellent Master) of the York Rite continues with the
horrific penalties:
...binding myself under no less penalty than to have my breast torn open, and my
heart and vitals taken from thence, and exposed to rot on the dunghill.
It's no wonder that our Lord Jesus Christ, as recorded in the Holy Scriptures,
commanded that His followers take no oaths (Matthew 5:34-37). Christ's brother,
James, put it this way: "But above all things, my brethren, swear not, neither by
heaven, neither by the earth, neither by any other oath" (James 5:12). Let Masons and
other Illuminists who lie claiming to be "Christian" believers try to dance around and
vainly evade this commandment.
The Sign of Silence
Illuminists have a sign to be used to remind associates when it is needful to stonewall
or to shut up about a matter. In the York Rite initiation for the Royal Master's Degree,
this sign, called the Due-guard, "is made by placing the forefinger of the right hand
upon the lips."2 Richardson's Monitor of Freemasonry remarks that this sign "is a
caution to a companion when you wish him to keep silent."3
In the ritual degree ceremony of the Secret Master, the candidate places two
fingers to his lip and is told that the obligation he is taking "enjoins secrecy and to

--- Sayfa 281 ---
"SILENCE, SLAVES, OR WE'LL CUT YOUR THROAT FROM EAR TO EAR!"
2 8 7
Richardson's Monitor of Freemasonry (pp. 142-143) provides these bloody reminders of the horrible
penalties that await the Mason or other elitist who divulges secrets of the Order. "Silence, Slaves" is
certainly the catchword for the submissive servants of Satan's earthly elite corps of leaders.
obey the orders and decrees of the Council of Princes of Jerusalem, under penalties
of all former degrees."4
For the fifth degree (Past Master) the penal dueguard sign is the placement of the
thumb to one's mouth, again indicating the warning to keep silent.
A Softening of Penalties?
Freemasonry and many other secret societies have been under siege in recent years
as the author of Codex Magica and a number of other courageous men have boldly
come forward exposing the frightening, cold and bloody oaths taken by millions of
Masons around the globe. As a consequence, as I understand it, the leadership of the
Lodge and other groups has more recently begun to "soften the edges," so to speak
and to eliminate some of the more egregious and ghastly phrases and words used in
the rituals.
In June 2001, according to The Scottish Rite Journal, C. Fred Kleinknecht, Sovereign
Grand Commander, 33°, the reigning potentate of Freemasonry, presented copies of
the Revised Standard Pike Ritual to his subordinate Sovereign Grand Commanders.5
Kleinknecht explained to his lieutenants that this new guide provides "modified

--- Sayfa 282 ---
288
CODEX MAGICA
versions" of the seventh and twenty-seventh degrees which were originally created
by Albert Pike, their much revered nineteenth century "Illustrious Sovereign Grand
Master."6 One can assume that to appease its critics, further editions of the ritual will
water down the most grievous of the penalties.
Other ways, however, will undoubtedly be found to motivate the membership to
keep the secrets, including banishment from elite status and possibly even the
periodic assassination of disciples who stray and who recklessly disregard the dictate
to retain secrecy.
Still it is of interest that the Masonic elite are embarrassed over being outed for
their hideous oaths. What's more, in the Mormon Church (LDS), the penalty portions
of the Masonic-oriented rituals celebrated in the Temple also have recently been
watered down somewhat.
It sure seems as though the big-wigs of the secret orders are running scared,
doesn't it? How they must despise Christians like Texe Marrs who are forcing these
changes on a reluctant and evil Illuminati corps.
Pagan Origins of the Sign of Silence
The Masonic practice of signs warning of frightening penalties for breaking silence
most definitely is of pagan origins. In Greece, Rome, Babylon, and Egypt, those who
had loose lips often paid with their lives and fortunes, so sacred and guarded were
the secrets of the Mystery Religions.
The Egyptians and Romans even worshipped a god of silence, Harpocrates, a form
of the solar deity. Harpocrates was often pictured sitting on his mother's lap,
suckling at her breast. Later, the Catholic Church adopted similar images in the
veneration of Mary with child. Sometimes Harpocrates was pictured naked or with
horns on his head, symbols of power. He often sat on a Lotus flower. The Lotus is a
sexual symbol of the female vagina.7

--- Sayfa 283 ---
"SILENCE, SLAVES, OR WE'LL CUT YOUR THROAT FROM EAR TO EAR!"
289
In the active days of Benjamin Franklin and our nation's founders, their secret
society counterparts in Great Britain made use of the god Harpocrates. Sir Francis
Dashwood, instrumental in the British operation of the Illuminati, recruited nobility
for his Hell-Fire Club, a secret group based on magic, satanism, and sex. Numerous
harlots—and sometimes newly deflowered virgins—were scandalously used by
Dashwood and his occultic, jolly men. On club premises, the members erected a
statue of Harpocrates, depicting him solemnly holding a finger to his mouth to
remind the frolicking members of the Hell-Fire Club that, "What happens here, stays
here."8
Rome also had the Mystery Goddess Angerona. Her statue showed Angerona as
a beautiful woman holding a finger to her mouth, "the emblem of secrecy and
mystery."9 Angerona watched over the sexual promiscuity goings-on at various
orgies connected with the festivals of the solstices and the changing of the seasons.
The Mystery Religions of the Romans and other peoples especially needed the
utmost secrecy because, during the higher initiations, the unspoken names of the
hidden or unknown god, or gods, was often revealed. As the Christians gained in
numbers and influence, they began to properly understand that these names were
actually synonyms for Satan, Lucifer, the Devil. Great effort was therefore taken by
pagans to obscure or prevent the unmasking of this satanic connection.10
An interesting sidenote: As a child watching TV in the early days (1950s), one of
the most popular programs was a game show hosted by Jewish comedian Groucho
Marx. Groucho had a brother, Harpo Marx, who was also a comedian and starred in
numerous TV programs and in movies. Harpo always played the cherubic character
of a mute young boy, with blond hair in curls. In other words, Harpo was cast in the
image of Harpocrates, god of silence and secrecy, also known as Horus the child.

--- Sayfa 284 ---
290
CODEX MAGICA

--- Sayfa 285 ---
"SILENCE, SLAVES, OR WE'LL CUT YOUR THROAT FROM EAR TO EAR!'
291

--- Sayfa 286 ---
292
CODEX MAGICA
Lawrence Summers, President of Harvard University and former Secretary of the
Treasury under President Bill Clinton. (Photo: Time magazine, May 24, 1999)

--- Sayfa 287 ---
SILENCE, SLAVES, OR WE'LL CUT YOUR THROAT FROM EAR TO EAR!"
2 9 3

--- Sayfa 288 ---
294
CODEX MAGICA
Harpo Marx giving the silence sign, finger
to lips. One of the three Marx Brothers
comedy team—Groucho and Chico were
brothers—Harpo's given name at birth was
Adolph, which he later changed legally to
Arthur. But in his entertainment career, he
played a mute pantomimist and uttered
not a word. His stage name, "Harpo," was
obviously a derivative of the name of
Harpocrates, the ancient Greek god of
silence.
"Silence," a painting by Odilon
Redon (1911), is a portrait of
Harpocrates, the God of
Mystical Silence.

--- Sayfa 289 ---
FIFTEEN
Up to Their Necks in Mischief
When it's your neck up there on the chopping block, you don't want a dull blade.
— Anonymous spectator in
crowd at guillotine
execution, Paris, France, 1789
Y o u ' v e no doubt heard the old saying "up to their necks in mischief,"
haven't you? Well, it is definitely applicable to the Illuminist elite and
their legion of secret society puppets.
Hanging over the fireplace in the famous Green Room at the White House in
Washington, D.C. is an acclaimed oil portrait of Benjamin Franklin, one of our
country's most celebrated "founding fathers." It depicts the famed statesman sitting
studiously, poring over an ancient document which he is holding with his right hand.
His left hand, meanwhile, is at his throat, set with the finger in a V-design, the thumb
pushing upward to his chin. Franklin's neck is a prominent focus of the painting.
Obviously, this is a sign Franklin is communicating.
I have observed this same fascinating sign being performed by many other
elitists, both ancient and modern. However, Old Ben certainly is the epitome of the
occult secret society patriarch. This man's feats as a Mason and Rosicrucian are
legendary. Mackey's Encyclopedia of Freemasonry acknowledges Franklin as "a devoted
Freemason occupying for many years places of official prominence and serving his
(Masonic) Brethren with conspicuous Masonic zeal and aptitude."1
The same Encyclopedia spends a great amount of space listing Franklin's exploits
and positions held as a Freemason, not only in the United States, but in Great Britain
and in France. In 1779, he was elected Worshipful Master of the Lodge of the Nine
Sisters in Paris, and in 1782 he became head of a lodge of the Grand Orient de Paris.
Earlier, Benjamin Franklin had officiated at the Masonic funeral of one of his

--- Sayfa 290 ---
296
CODEX MAGICA
"brothers," the monstrously wicked atheist, Voltaire.2 Voltaire, as historians will
attest, was certainly up to his neck in mischief.
The Neck A Sign of Sacrifice
A number of dictionaries of symbols state that the hand placed on the neck signifies
sacrifice. Now sacrifice can have at least two meanings—one, the continuing threat of
One of the signs for ritual of the Grand Master Elect Degree is a dagger under the chin. (Richardson's
Monitor of Freemasonry, p. 146)

--- Sayfa 291 ---
UP TO THEIR NECKS IN MISCHIEF
297
the penalties to be applied to punish those adepts and initiates who so impertinently
reveal the secrets of the Order; and two, the willingness of the individual performing
the sign to sacrifice himself for the good of the Order, or for the good of the cause or
Great Work of the Illuminati.
The Neck Ritual
The neck, being the bridge to the head and brain (intellect) and the point at which the
jugular vein can be ruptured by a knife or stone thrust, does seem to be an
appropriate place to physically focus this sign. Duncan's Masonic Ritual and Monitor
summarizes the "Penal" code of Freemasonry. That reference book says the various
penal signs are designed so that each "intimates that the stiff neck of the disobedient
shall be cut off from the head of the living..."3
The ritual for the Grand Master Elect Degree, according to Richardson's Monitor of
Freemasonry, has the candidate either placing the point of a knife under the chin, or
alternatively clenching the fingers of the right hand, extending the thumb, placing it
on the abdomen, and moving it upwards to the chin, as if ripping the body open with
a knife.
In the York Rite, the Past Master, or Fifth Degree, the candidate places the thumb
of his right hand (fingers clinched) upon his lips. This, says Duncan's, "alludes to the
penalty of having his tongue split from tip to root."4

--- Sayfa 292 ---
2 9 8
CODEX MAGICA
Benjamin Franklin,
Rosicrucian and Mason,
from an oil portrait
painted by David Martin
in 1766. This famous
painting today hangs
over the fireplace in the
Green Room at the
White House.

--- Sayfa 293 ---
UP TO THEIR NECKS IN MISCHIEF
299
Israeli magician Uri Geller,
whose close friends include
occultic pal U.S. Senator
Claiborne Pell and fellow
cabalist, singer Michael
Jackson. (Photo: U.S. News &
World Report, December S,
1998)
Portrait of Paul Revere, by Copley. The Scottish Rite
reference, 10,000 Famous Freemasons, lists the celebrated
American patriot, made famous by his night-time horse ride
warning citizens the British troops were at hand, as an
initiate of the Masonic Lodge.

--- Sayfa 294 ---
300
CODEX MAGICA
Helena Petrovna Blavatsky, Co-Mason, Russian mystic and Egyptian Hindu devotee, who
founded the occult group, Theosophy. Her classic occult text, The Secret Doctrine, inspired
Adolf Hitler and thousands of others.

--- Sayfa 295 ---
UP TO THEIR NECKS IN MISCHIEF
3 0 1
This unusual photo of "management guru" Peter Drucker in U.S. News & World Report (May 8, 2000,
p. 42) paints Drucker as a contemplative, god-like character who has "sacrificed" for the Illuminati
Order.

--- Sayfa 296 ---
302
CODEX MAGICA
Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard
Shevardnadze (left), protege of
President and Communist Party
Boss Mikhail Gorbachev, was a
favorite of the Illuminati.
Roman Catholic Bishop Selim Sayegh
of Amman, Jordan. (Photo: US.
Catholic, May 2003, p. 31)
James Jesus Angleton, CIA Chief of
Counterintelligence, presents the clenched
fist under chin and throat—sign that a
violent end at the hands of revolutionary
assassins shall come to he who reveals
secrets of the Craft.

--- Sayfa 297 ---
UP TO THEIR NECKS IN MISCHIEF
3 0 3
The Scottish Rite Freemasons, on the cover of the September 2000 issue of their official journal,
recognized "Brother Michael A. Richards" as a "Renaissance Man, Not Kramer." Richards, a Jew, is
the well known comic actor who won raves for his role as "Kramer" in the long-running #1 hit TV
show, Seinfeld. Inside the Masonic Lodge magazine, it was noted that Richards holds the 32nd degree
of Freemasonry and has received the red cap. Richards says he is a keen student of Masonry and its
symbolism and has over 1,000 masonic books in his home in California. Observe Michael Richards'
clearly Masonic handsign, which presents the V and is the "due-guard" sign of initiation in the Order
of Knights Templar which relates to the penalty of the obligation—the oath agreeing that one's head
will be impaled on the highest spire in Christendom as a penalty for revealing secrets. The sign is also
similar to the sign for the "due-guard" of the Past Master, 5th degree in the Scottish Rite.

--- Sayfa 298 ---
304
CODEX MAGICA
U.S. Senator Kay Bailey Hutchinson (R-TX) is highly exalted by the elite as this photo
demonstrates. The strategy of this photo, with the Senator standing between two swords
(symbols of authority) and two encircled sun signs (symbol of the Masonic and Illuminati
Deity of Light) shows great favoritism toward this lady, especially as this bio-sketch and
photo is in a major newsmagazine, Newsweek (June 26, 2000). The caption reads: "Staying
in the spotlight. If Pakistan can elect a woman leader, says Hutchinson, why can't the United
States?" Judging from this staged rite, the regal doors may be about ready to open wider for
Senator Kay Bailey Hutchinson.

--- Sayfa 299 ---
UP TO THEIR NECKS IN MISCHIEF
305
A few signs of the Rosirrucian
Order. Many are similar to those
of Freemasonry and other secret
societies. The penalty sign related
to having one's throat cut is
shown at number X.

--- Sayfa 300 ---
SIXTEEN
Hand On Heart—Sign of Devotion
to the Chiefs
M a s o n r y ' s homage to the heart by the Sign of Hand on Heart can best
be understood by the fact that the leaders of the Masonic Lodge
themselves boast that the rituals of Freemasonry hearken back to
ancient Egyptian religion. The Egyptian Book of the Dead addressed prayers to "My
heart of my mother...My heart of transformations," meaning the source of rebirths.
The Mother Goddess of Egypt was worshipped by various names — Isis, Hathor,
Rhea, etc. She was the one to whom the people "gave their hearts," meaning their
heart-felt devotion and allegiance. As the Goddess of sacrifices, it was deemed
necessary by her admirers that men should sacrifice their "energies" on her behalf.
The Goddess was said to take possession of men's hearts.
Cutting Out Hearts and Eating Them!
In the pyramids of Mexico, Central and South America, the gods were also gods of
sacrifice and, once again, the heart was the centerpiece of devotion. Bloodthirsty
followers, egged on by high priests, cut out the hearts of victims of tribal wars.
On the stone altars of the temples, the priests cut the heart out of the breast of
sacrificial victims while they were still alive! The hearts were eaten, just as they were
in ancient Egypt and as they are in a number of satanic cults in existence today.
Back to Egypt
Freemasonry today freely admits its connection to the religion and rituals of ancient
Egypt and proudly displays Egyptian idols (the Sphinx, etc.) in and around its lodge
facilities and at its international headquarters, the House of the Temple in
Washington, D.C.
Moreover, in the ritual ceremonies of the higher Masonic degrees, the Hindu
pantheon of deities is honored as the true "Holy Trinity."1 In the Hindu religion, the
whole universe is said to be centered in the heart. The Yogi, in meditation, is claimed
to be listening to the heartbeat of the universe, which is the great god Shiva's beating

--- Sayfa 301 ---
308
CODEX MAGICA
heart. This expresses the basic oriental idea that divinity lies in the heart of every
person, but needs to be "realized," or awakened.
Devotion to the Secret Chiefs
Within the Illuminati structure, the initiate is taught in no uncertain terms that he
must devote his whole heart to the "secret chiefs," the top elite who comprise the
Inner Circle. His life must be dedicated to the goals they have set, for they, in turn,
are being directed by the Hierarchy, the spirit beings (Satan and his demons) who
have given them The Plan. In other words, the life of every Illuminist is a divine
temple, and through ritual, magic, and loyal devotion the Great Work of alchemical
transformation is to be accomplished within the individual heart and within the
world at large. Ordo Ab Chao — order must come out of chaos.
A Number of Meanings
As the evidence points out in the illustrations in this section, the "hand on heart" sign
has a number of meanings, depending particularly on the exact placement of the
hand and the positioning of the fingers. As always, the left hand on heart indicates
the sinister occultic path. The thumb extended upward leaving the hand squared in
the "L" position signals fidelity, sincerity and being "on the square." The thumb
upward symbolizes the child-soul, the heart in subjection to higher powers.
The sign of Hand on Heart is practiced and taught in the rituals for many degrees
of Freemasonry. For example:
• In the Degree of Sublime Knights Elected, the candidate is instructed in the sign.
His right hand is extended across the chest to the heart and the thumb is pointed
upward. (Richardson's Monitor of Freemasonry, p. 147)
•
In the Degree of Companion Select, the sign is given with the right hand.
(Richardson's Monitor of Freemasonry, p. 86)
•
In the Degree of Select Master, the initiate is told "The most popular signs in
Masonry are made in this manner: Place the palm of the right hand on the heart,
and pronounce the word SECRESY." (Richardson's Monitor of Freemasonry, p. 80)
•
In the Degree of the Knight of the Pelican and Eagle Sovereign Prince Rose Croix
of Heredom, the lecturer directs the assembled members to "pass to the Black
Room, 18° collars being reversed." Following this instruction, the sign of "right
hand on left breast is given." (18th Degree Secret Initiation Ceremony)
•
In the Degree of Mark Master, the members form and march around the Lodge,
singing a song. The words of the song include the following: "Mark Masters all
appear Before the Chief Overseer... You who have passed the square, For your rewards
prepare, Join heart and hand...Wages to you are due, At your command." (Duncan's
Masonic Ritual and Monitor, p. 161)

--- Sayfa 302 ---
HAND ON HEART
309
Separation of Fingers as Sign is Given
Separating the fingers has its own interpretation, often being the sign of choice for
cabalists who employ the letters of the Hebrew alphabet in their hand on heart
communications. The illustrations of Christopher Columbus and Ignatius Loyola in
this chapter are prime examples. Both of these historical characters were members of
secret cabalistic orders founded by the rabbis of the Jewish Sanhedrin.
Erasing Confusion
The Illuminist/Masonic sign should not be confused with the American custom of
placing one's hand over the heart while reciting the Pledge of Allegiance to the flag
(Citizens of some other nations practice this same tradition). Again, in judging the
Illuminist intent, we look to such factors as time period, the history and affiliations,
who's performing the sign, and other factors. As always in this book, I leave it to you,
the reader, to form your own learned opinion of what you are seeing.
Freemasons strongly deny there are any women in their Order. But in Mac key's Encyclopedia of
Freemasonry we find this picture captioned, "Lady Freemason Mrs. Elizabeth Aldworth." In the text
(page 353), Mackey. 33°, former Sovereign Grand Commander of the Scottish Rite, writes that,
"there are a few instances in which the otherwise unalterable rule of female exclusion has been made
to yield."

--- Sayfa 303 ---
310
CODEX MAGICA
Robespierre, the heartless monster of the French Revolution. Inspirer of the Jacobins sect,
Robespierre caused untold thousands to be sent to the guillotine. Rejecting Jesus, he called for a new
religion based on worship of a nameless "Supreme Being." After relishing so many of his opponents
being sent to their death, one day the tumbrel carriage came also for Robespierre, the Jewish plotter
of terror, who himself lost his head. As his head rolled, the mob laughed and cried out "Do you feel
any pain, your majesty?"

--- Sayfa 304 ---
HAND ON HEART
3 1 1
Was Christopher Columbus a clandestine member of the Knights Templar, or another 15th century
secret society? Much evidence exists confirming exactly that. So, too, does the cabalistic sign he
displays of the left-handed path of the initiate. (Oil painting by Sebastiano del Piombo, 1519)

--- Sayfa 305 ---
312
CODEX MAGICA
A statue of Soviet Communist Party leader Joseph Stalin on the cover of the
book, Stalin's Shadow, by Rosamond Richardson. Photographs of Stalin also
show the tyrannical dictator—half Jew and Jesuit-trained—giving the Royal Arch
Mason hand sign.

--- Sayfa 306 ---
HAND ON HEART
313
Helmut Kohl was the longest-serving Chancellor in the history of post-World War II Germany.
Kohl, a servant of the Illuminati's inner circle, worked to unify Germany and empower the
European Community. He is a Bilderberger, a covert Jewish Mason, and initiate of numerous
secret societies and orders. Here we see the Chancellor strike an Illuminist pose, being the only
person pictured who gives the necessary sign. (Photo: Vanity Fair magazine, November 1997)

--- Sayfa 307 ---
314
CODEX MAGICA
Iran's foreign minister, Kamel Kharrazi. (Newsweek, September 30, 2002)

--- Sayfa 308 ---
HAND ON HEART
315
Pakistan's Prime Minister Mian Mohammed Nawaz. (Time magazine, circa 2001)

--- Sayfa 309 ---
316
CODEX MAGICA
In Palestine, a senior Hamas official Khaled Mashaal welcomes Jordanian and other guests to a
dinner.
Panama's President Guillermo
Endara, installed in office by the
U.S.A. after the American military
deposed Army dictator Manuel
Noriega. (From U.S. News and
World Report, October 25, 1993,
p. 37)

--- Sayfa 310 ---
HAND ON HEART
317

--- Sayfa 311 ---
318
CODEX MAGICA

--- Sayfa 312 ---
HAND ON HEART
319
Robert Fludd (1574-1637), medical doctor and hermeticist of the late English Renaissance, was a
Rosicrucian and practitioner of the magical arts who emphasized the power of visual and imaginative
symbols.

--- Sayfa 313 ---
320
CODEX MAGICA
Michael Servetus who, in 1555, was burned at the
stake by Calvinists for having published a treatise
disagreeing with the doctrine of the Trinity.
Servetus, an enemy of Christ, was an llluminist who
worked to bring in heresies to pollute Christianity.
He has been called "The Father of Unitarianism."
A top official of the Orthodox hierarchy in
Greece gives the initiate sign.
The Pope with Palestinian leader Yassar Arafat, at the
Vatican on September 15, 1982.
Eugene Vintras, a Frenchman who taught
occult spiritual philosophy, wears the upside
down cross on his religious robe and presents
the sigil (hand sign) of his Order. Vintras
gained a large following in the 1830s and
1840s by declaring the coming of a dark Prince,
a god on earth who would rule and reign.

--- Sayfa 314 ---
HAND ON HEART
321
A chief rabbi in
Ottoman Turkey
(from the book,
The Lost Messiah:
In Search of the
Mystical Rabbi
Sabbatai Sevi, by
John Freely
(Woodstock and
New York: The
Overlook Press,
2001)
Aleister Crowley, as a youth, in his occult
regalia. Crowley, whose books were the
basis later for Anton LaVey, founder of the
Church of Satan and Michael Aquino,
founder of the Temple of Set. Crowley also
inspired L. Ron Hubbard, founder of
Scientology.
An elderly man who is chief dervish of the Sufi Moslem sect and a young boy who
is a dervish in training in the early 1900s (from the book, The Lost Messiah: In
Search of the Mystical Rabbi Sabbatai Sevi, by John Freely (Woodstock and New
York: The Overlook Press, 2001)

--- Sayfa 315 ---
322
CODEX MAGICA
MARTIN
Luther, priest who set in motion the Protestant Reformation, is shown in this picture from
Christian News, a periodic Lutheran publication, giving a masonic sign. The same Lutheran
newspaper carries on its masthead (pg. 1) of every edition Luther's seal, of Rosicrucian design. In
fact, Luther was a Rosicrucian. Masonic signs and grips closely parallel those of Rosicrucians
(Christian News, February 18, 2003, p. 1).
In an article on the internet entitled "Calvinism," John Paul Jones quoted Masonic scholar Manly P.
Hall, 33o, as affirming that Protestant reformer Martin Luther was a Rosicrucian initiate. In the
article, Luther's official seal, middle, was depicted, along with the seal (far right) on Martin Luther's
ring. At far left is Luther's seal with author Jones showing how if the petals of the flower are
connected, an occult pentacle results.

--- Sayfa 316 ---
HAND ON HEART
3 2 3
Christopher Walken, actor, seems to be favored by the elite. He is often cast in strange roles as
deranged psychos, mob killers, etc. Interview magazine devoted this entire page in its June 2004
edition, without caption and without comment or explanation. Obviously, the picture speaks for
itself.

--- Sayfa 317 ---
324
CODEX MAGICA
In an article, strangely enough, entitled "Gods and Monsters," Hollywood actor George Clooney is
seen presenting his sigil as he stands outside a theatre presenting the world premier of the film, A
Perfect Storm. (Photo: Elle magazine, November 2000)

--- Sayfa 318 ---
HAND ON HEART
325
Ad for Polo clothing in consumer magazine.

--- Sayfa 319 ---
3 2 6
CODEX MAGICA
Michael A Hoffman II
Secret Societies and Psychological Warfare Page 56
Eating Raoul
.. .and Others
"How would you like to bite
into a part-human bacon
cheeseburger?" asks Michael
Colgan, Ph.D., in the journal
Nutrition A fitness (sic) (vol.
10. no. 1 & 2). In five years
they'll be at a burger stand
near you, predicts the author.
The U.S. Department of
Agriculture's research center
in Beltsville, Md., has been
inserting human genes into
fertilized swine eggs, and a
herd of "hupigs" now resides
at the center. One goal of such
research is to manufacture
"spare parts for humans,"
that is, genetically engineered
organs to replace diseased hu-
man organs; another goal is to
"design" animals for more ef-
ficient meat production.
The USDA creatures re-
portedly suffer from coor-
dination so poor that they
can barely walk. They also
are subject to arthritis and
lung and gut diseases. State
and federal laws severely
restrict access by journalists
and the public, and photo-
graphs of the "hunimals" are
forbidden.
In Michael Hoffman's excellent book exposing the psychological and alchemical
bases of the elite, Secret Societies and Psychological Warfare, the author included
this news clipping about the horrors of inserting human genes into swine and
other animals. The phrase "Eating Raoul." comes from a cult-classic film about
people who enjoy eating human flesh.

--- Sayfa 320 ---
SEVENTEEN
Triangles Up, Triangles Down, Triangles,
Triangles All Around
E v e r y w h e r e one turns today the triangle is seen. On TV, and in art,
architecture, product design, advertising, commercial packaging, and in
religion it is ubiquitous. I am convinced that this simple, yet profound
device, the triangle, somehow has a mystical, mesmerizing effect on men's minds.
The never-ending blizzard of triangle designs we encounter daily is intended to
induce a trance state in those who are bombarded day and night by it.
Back to Babylon
For an answer why the triangle may be the ultimate satanic symbol for Illuminists we
go back in time to uncover its origins. A book on mathematics history called Early
Computations tells us that "A Babylonian tablet dated around 1900 BC to 1600 BC and
called 'Plimpton 322' deals with Pythagorean triplets." This ancient document
detailed an elementary knowledge of triangles and proportions.
The Triangle as Woman's "Holy Door''
Barbara Walker, in her The Woman's Encyclopedia of Myths and Secrets, outlines how
the ancient Mystery Religions greatly honored the triangle as the sign of deity. She
notes that the Hindus, too, borrowed this emblem as their tantric (sexual) female
Triangle of Life. It was known as the Kali Yantra, sign of the female vulva. In Egypt,
the triangle was a hieroglyphic sign for "woman." In ancient Greece, the sexual intent
is clear in that the triangle represented the Holy Door, genitalia of the All-Mother
Demeter, known as "Mother Delta."1
"The triangle was everywhere connected with the female trinity, and a frequent
component of monograms of goddesses," writes Walker.2
It is easily understood, therefore, why the gay homosexual movement adopted
the sign of the pink triangle as its emblem. For male homosexuals particularly, the
goddess image and feminine archetype were powerful motivators dictating

--- Sayfa 321 ---
328
CODEX MAGICA
adaptation of the triangle as symbol of "gay liberation."
To occultists, the triangle pointing upward represents fire and that pointing
downward water. To combine, balance, and unite the two brings dualism, or
equilibrium, which is a goal of Freemasonry and a cardinal tenet of all Illuminist
religious systems.
The Pope's Triceps
The Vatican also got into the triangle act. In some Roman Catholic churches today,
behind the altar we find displayed the all-seeing eye inside a triangle. Meanwhile, the
Pope can often be seen wearing the symbol of the triceps on his vestments or on his
Dagon Fish God hat, which has its own unique triangular design.
The triceps is a Nordic design of three earth diamonds thought to invoke earth
energy powers and spiritual magic. By adding straight lines on its three sides to fill
in the open spaces, we
discover that the Triceps
unexpectedly becomes a
larger
triangle
with
a
concealed Jewish Star of
David (six-pointed star)
within.
The Triangle and Freemasonry
Many erroneously believe that Freemasonry is a Christian religion and may be
misled into thinking that the prominent use of the triangle in its rituals and its
display of icons has a Christian purpose. But in his book, A Bridge to Light, an official
Scottish Rite publication of the Supreme Mother Council, 33°,
Rex Hutchins, 33° explains that the triangle of the Masonic
Lodge represents pagan religions as well and he especially
cites the Hindu trinity of gods, Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva.3
I have mentioned elsewhere that a triangle symbol
containing a letter "Y" inside which divides it internally into
three triangles is called the Eye of the Dragon, or Dragon's Eye.
Since Freemasonry has its all-seeing eye which represents
Satan, the Dragon, again we have a connection.
The Triangle and Astrology
In astrology we find the concept of the grand trine, which is considered very, very
lucky. Joan Quigley, astrologer to movie stars and to President Ronald Reagan and
First Lady Nancy Reagan, says that, "the grand trine is formed by three planets
approximately 120 degrees apart. When you see this sign in the planets when
forecasting their horoscope, you know they are about to hit (figuratively) a "grand
slam home run."4
Quigley illustrates the grand trine in her book, What Does Joan Say?-My Seven

--- Sayfa 322 ---
TRIANGLES UP, TRIANGLES DOWN, TRIANGLES, TRIANGLES ALL AROUND
329
Years As White House Astrologer to Nancy and Ronald Reagan.5 As it turns out, the
astrological symbol for a grand trine is a triangle inside a circle.
This is the same symbol configuration adapted by Alcoholics Anonymous (AA)
founder Bill Wilson to be the official logo of AA. My extensive
research of Bill Wilson's life documents he was an occultist. He
despised Christianity and adopted AA's concept of worship of
an unnamed "Higher Power" to substitute for Jesus. Wilson
came up with the logo for AA from a dream he had in which
he saw the image of the triangle within a circle and knew it was
to become the logo for AA.6
Do the llluminati Secretly Worship the Great Goddess?
It is interesting that in the Jewish Cabala, we again find use of the triangle as a
feminine vulva sign. Of the ten Sephiroth, the third Sephira, or Triad, is deemed of
feminine potency. Formed as a triangle, it represents the "great productive Mother,
who copulates and is united sexually with the Father." In effect, to cabalists she is the
feminine form of "God."7
Just as Masons decry the equality of ordinary women, even denying women the
opportunity to become a Mason in most orders, so do Orthodox Jews who practice
cabalism openly proscribe and limit women's rights. Yet, we see that deeply hidden
and imbedded in their secret doctrine, both Masonry and Cabalistic Judaism revere
and honor the Great Goddess, just as does Roman Catholicism in the form of Mother
Mary.
It may surprise male chauvinists, but the Goddess, the consort of Lucifer, the
woman figure whose sign is the downward pointing triangle, reigns side-by-side
with Jahbuhlun (Satan) over the llluminati and its minions.

--- Sayfa 323 ---
330
CODEX MAGICA
So many priests are now outed as homosexuals and pedophiles, this noted Catholic publication, The
Catholic World Report devoted a special edition to the topic. The editors of this cover of the January,
1997, edition, call the problem a "Rebellion." The smiling Catholic prelate has a pink triangle on the
cross, symbol of his cap (itself triangle-shaped upward) and the Bishop's hands are fixed in the
triangle downward (feminine, delta position).

--- Sayfa 324 ---
TRIANGLES UP, TRIANGLES DOWN, TRIANGLES, TRIANGLES ALL AROUND
331
Homosexual activists have latched onto the pink-
colored triangle as the chosen motif for their
protests and demonstrations. On this page we find
demonstrators holding up placards with the pink
triangle and, at a university, the pink triangle against
a black circle background on the hands of gay
students. Then there is the "Subscribe!" to Frontiers
magazine ad card, featuring a gay man with a
rainbow-colored triangle on his chest. The
newspaper clipping, "Colored Triangle Has Become
Badge of Honor For Gays," comes from the Montreal,
Canada, Gazette newspaper, June 28, 1992.

--- Sayfa 325 ---
332
CODEX MAGICA
Triangle on Bible: At the inauguration of the first President of the United States, April 30, 1789, in
New York City, a Bible was provided by a Masonic lodge nearby and opened to Genesis chapters 49
and 50 where the familiar occult design of a circle inside a triangle just happens to be printed as an
artist's illustration. George Washington pressed his palm to the book as the oath was administered
and then kissed it. A member of the lodge then marked the page for succeeding generations. The year
2005 marked the fifth time the tome has been lent for a presidential inauguration, as another George
celebrated the 216th anniversary of the inaugural Bible.
This official postcard, widely circulated by the
Communist government in Russia following the
Jewish Bolshevik takeover, is entitled "Leaders
of the Proletarian Revolution." The postcard
reveals the Jewishness of these original leaders
of the Communist Party. All six shown,
including Lenin and Trotsky, are Jews! Also
observe the double triangle arrangement of the
placement of the six individuals.

--- Sayfa 326 ---
TRIANGLES UP, TRIANGLES DOWN, TRIANGLES, TRIANGLES ALL AROUND
3 3 3
Triangular structure at gala opening ceremony of 2002 Winter Olympics in Salt Lake City, Utah.
(Photo: Newsweek, February 18, 2002)

--- Sayfa 327 ---
334
CODEX MAGICA

--- Sayfa 328 ---
TRIANGLES UP, TRIANGLES DOWN, TRIANGLES, TRIANGLES ALL AROUND
3 3 5
According to An
Illustrated
Encyclopedia of
Traditional Symbols,
this illustration is
packed with occult
and alchemical
symbols. However, the
triangle is the focal
point. Inside the
triangle (the triangle
with concentric circles
surrounding it) is the
astrological and
generative symbols of
male and female
combined, the
Hermaphrodite. This
is indicative of the
Illuminati's principle
of integration, or
synthesis, of the
dialectical process.

--- Sayfa 329 ---
336
CODEX MAGICA
This is the back cover of the book, Mozart and freemasonry, published by Dorset Press, a firm that
publishes many masonic-related volumes. The triangle symbol is prominent. Within the triangle is
the three-headed serpent, most likely representing the unholy trinity. Also, a smaller symbol, subtle
and tiny, near the head of the serpent, is an image of some type of creature with a lightning bolt out
of its head. Mozart, considered today a great composer and famous even during his lifetime, was
murdered by the Masons in 1791 as penalty for his revealing of the secrets of Freemasonic ritual in
his work entitled, The Magic Flute. Not only was the composer murdered (by poisoning), but the
Masons blackballed his funeral. It is said that even Mozart's closest friends and family members did
not so much as attend his funeral.

--- Sayfa 330 ---
TRIANGLES UP, TRIANGLES DOWN, TRIANGLES, TRIANGLES ALL AROUND
337

--- Sayfa 331 ---
338
CODEX MAGICA

--- Sayfa 332 ---
TRIANGLES UP, TRIANGLES DOWN, TRIANGLES, TRIANGLES ALL AROUND
339
Joe Mansueto,
founder of
Morningstar, the
number one
company rating
mutual funds on
Wall Street.
(Newsweek,
October 10, 1994)
Newsweek magazine (November 5, 2001), in the caption to this picture, describes the man at center
signaling the ascendant triangle hand sign as "Rashid Dostum. A sadistic warlord who once ran the
secret police in a Soviet puppet government in Kabul."

--- Sayfa 333 ---
340
CODEX MAGICA
Marc Andreessen, computer scientist who in 1993 developed a program called Mosaic while working
at the National Center for Supercomputing Applications. Mosaic was the first web browser and made
the internet possible. (Photo: Newsweek, April 21, 2003, p. E6)

--- Sayfa 334 ---
TRIANGLES UP, TRIANGLES DOWN, TRIANGLES, TRIANGLES ALL AROUND
3 4 1
Two media titans confer: Viacom's chairman, Sumner
Redstone (a Jew—Redstone is not his real name), and
Viacom's President Mel Karmazin, also Jewish. Viacom
owns CBS, MTV, Disney, and many other media properties,
all firmly in the Zionist camp editorially and subject-wise.
(Photo: U.S. News & World Report, June 14, 2004, p. 70)
This scene is set at the White House in March, 2001, with
Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon and President George W.
Bush both presenting mirror-image descending (female, delta,
or vulva) triangles. Two triangles joined together constitute a
Jewish Star of David. For added subliminal power, the room
was arranged so that the bust of Lincoln was directly behind
Sharon. The message: In bludgeoning hapless Palestinians and
denying them their own state, Sharon is simply being
Lincolnesque. After all, Lincoln put down the Southern
insurrection, right? (Photo and article: USA Today, March 21,
2001, p. 13A)
Michael Moore, liberal Democratic Party propagandist and
maker of documentaries, no doubt takes pleasure in signaling
the triangle. Moore, a Jew, is agented by the brother of the
Clinton insider many suspect was the mysterious Mossad
espionage agent codenamed "Mega" (Photo: Time, May 13,
2004,p.72)

--- Sayfa 335 ---
3 4 2
CODEX MAGICA
At the Parliament of the World's
Religions in Chicago, a Rockefeller-
funded event, an Episcopal Bishop
(second from left) has fellowship
with an unidentified couple and with
Donald Frew, far right, a warlock
(male witch) who oversees 70 covens.
Note Frew's use of the sign of the
warlock (ascendant) triangle. (Photo:
SCP Newsletter, Winter 2005)
Governor Edwin
Edwards of Louisiana,
just convicted of
taking bribes and pay-
offs, is apparently
appealing to "higher
powers." Notice the
caption in the clipping
just under Edwards'
photograph. (Photo:
Oxford American,
May/June 2001)

--- Sayfa 336 ---
TRIANGLES UP, TRIANGLES DOWN, TRIANGLES, TRIANGLES ALL AROUND
3 4 3
Are these hand signs mere accidents, or do they convey a concealed, occult meaning? Left is
Richard Buy; right is an unidentified man making the "X" with his arms and hands, while Mr.
Buy is presenting the ascendant triangle. The occasion was the House Committee's hearings on
the Enron Corporation's financial failure debacle. Mr. Buy was a high-level Enron financial
officer. Were these hand signs intended to invoke protection or perhaps to influence Illuminist
puppets on the Committee? (Photo: Knight-Ridder, in Austin American-Statesman newspaper,
February 8, 2002, p. Al 3)
This comes from
Newsweek (July 9,
2001) and is a brief
Q & A with black
hip-hop recording
star Caushun who is
communicating a
nonverbal message
with his hands.

--- Sayfa 337 ---
344
CODEX MAGICA
Observe Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld as he displays the ascendant triangle sign. (U.S. News
& Report, November 29, 2004, p. 20)
Billboard in Russia.
Hand position
(triangular) reinforces
the black/white,
yin/yang triangle logo.

--- Sayfa 338 ---
TRIANGLES UP, TRIANGLES DOWN, TRIANGLES, TRIANGLES ALL AROUND
345
This revealing photo of three-star U.S. Air Force General Claudia Kennedy was
run both on the cover of mass circulation Parade magazine and Newsweek
(June 26, 2000, p. 23). Evidently, the elite wanted the message out to their
servants that this photo conveys. Note particularly the General's clearly staged
hand sign, her back against a wall, a purposeful shadow etched behind, her
two feet squarely in place, her standing in the midst of two evergreen
shrubbery bushes, and the seemingly bizarre fact she has her eyes closed! All in
all a very unflattering picture, but one
that conveys much information. At the
time (2000), General Kennedy, an
intelligence operative who was retiring
from the military service, was being
touted as a potential presidential
candidate. Did the llluminati choose other
career options for the lady?
Harvard Law School Professor
Mary Ann Glendon headed a
Vatican delegation at a United
Nations conference in 1998.
(Photo: The Catholic World Report,
July 1998, p. 39)

--- Sayfa 339 ---
3 4 6
CODEX MAGICA
It appears from the position of his hands
that computer chip magnate Andy Grove,
Jewish head of Intel, wants to get across
his "message," doesn't it? (U.S. News &
World Report, March 22, 1999, p. 52)
Cover of ESPN magazine, published by
ESPN Sports channel.
Actress Doris Day has more of a message
to communicate than merely her
innocent usual clean-girl image. Maybe
the well-known Hollywood producer was
right who, when asked about Day,
quipped, "Oh yes, I've known her a long,
long time. Why, I even knew Doris Day
before she became a virgin!"

--- Sayfa 340 ---
TRIANGLES UP, TRIANGLES DOWN, TRIANGLES, TRIANGLES ALL AROUND
3 4 7

--- Sayfa 341 ---
348
CODEX MAGICA
According to "tradition," the next of kin at military funerals are given a flag folded into a triangle
with exactly six stars showing. Few families of victims know that the tradition appears to be of
Masonic origins. (Photo: Newsweek, January 7, 2002, p. 29)

--- Sayfa 342 ---
TRIANGLES UP, TRIANGLES DOWN, TRIANGLES, TRIANGLES ALL AROUND
3 4 9
In 1990 this photo of U.S.S.R.'s KGB Chief Vladimir
Kryuchkov was published in The European
newspaper (December 14-16, 1990, p. 7). The
caption read: "KGB head Vladimir Kryuchkov has
dispelled illusions of the new Mr. Nice Guy'
approach with his chilling attack on separatists."
Kryuchkov's hand sign shows he has approval of
Illuminati superiors for his new "Tough Guy"
approach.
Mohammed El Baradei, head of the United
Nation's International Atomic Energy
Association, the world's nuclear watchdog
agency, signals with his hands that he is in
league with the llluminati elite. (American
Free Press, February 21, 2005, p. 2)

--- Sayfa 343 ---
350
CODEX MAGICA
Meeting with First Lady Nancy
Reagan is Pope John Paul II. At
left—the pontiff displays yet
another masonic sign, that of
Hand on Heart, with thumb
communicating, "I'm on the
square."

--- Sayfa 344 ---
TRIANGLES UP, TRIANGLES DOWN, TRIANGLES, TRIANGLES ALL AROUND
3 5 1
The Pope does it again, with President Ronald Reagan and First Lady Nancy at his side. As an aside—
the skull cap, in many color variations, is worn by Jews and high Catholic clergy alike, though its use
hearkens back to the horrific memory of Jesus crucified on Calvary, Golgotha, "the place of the skull."
(Photo: Book, Pope John Paul II Visits America: A Celebration In Pictures, New York: Crescent Books)

--- Sayfa 345 ---
352
CODEX MAGICA
Former Hewlett-Packard CEO, Carly Fiorina

--- Sayfa 346 ---
TRIANGLES UP, TRIANGLES DOWN, TRIANGLES, TRIANGLES ALL AROUND
353
This cover of one of many Star Wars publications, pictures a character (top, left) from that movie
saga giving what is clearly a combination of two masonic signs. (From an ad collage in a Sci-Fi
magazine)

--- Sayfa 347 ---
354
CODEX MAGICA
Full page consumer ad for Phoenix Wealth Management, an investment firm. For info on the Phoenix
as symbol, see the chapter in Codex Magica, examining the double-headed eagle (p. 341).

--- Sayfa 348 ---
TRIANGLES UP, TRIANGLES DOWN, TRIANGLES, TRIANGLES ALL AROUND
355
Catholic Cardinals and Bishops meet with Orthodox counterparts in Greece. Observe the
hand sign of the Catholic prelate who's third from the left and also the double-headed
eagle logo on the wall behind the group.
Ad in a tabloid for Miss
Cleo, who became somewhat
of a TV icon in the 1990s
hawking her psychic abilities
as a Tarot Card reader. Her
money-making powers
dimmed when the Feds
launched an investigation of
what some reported as a
scam.

--- Sayfa 349 ---
3 5 6
CODEX MAGICA
Human Relations Center
of Santa Barbara
Residential Symposium
Series, 1983
Casa de Maria Retreat Grounds
Santa Barbara, California
• Jean Houston
February 14-18.
1983
• Joseph Campbell
April 6 - 8, 1983
• James Hillman
May 31 - June 2, 1983
A New Age group paid for this ad offering a
symposium to be led by top New Age
occultists Jean Houston, Joseph Campbell,
and James Hillman. Jean Houston was and
is a spiritual guide and mentor for Senator
Hillary Rodham Clinton (D-NY). Joseph
Campbell promoted symbols and masonic
New Age philosophies in a popular series
aired over the Public Broadcasting System
(PBS) network on the Bill Moyers program.
The Stelle Group, a New Age community,
offers to interested persons this
brochure which entices the reader to
maximize the "hidden powers" of his or
her mind by seeking initiation into a
Brotherhood. The founder of Stelle
Group says that spirit beings gave him
his initiation and actually made a sign,
or marking in his body.
ON BECOMING
AN INITIATE
Proven techniques to
help you attain Initiation
into a Brotherhood.

--- Sayfa 350 ---
TRIANGLES UP, TRIANGLES DOWN, TRIANGLES, TRIANGLES ALL AROUND
357
Historic photograph of Russia's last Romanov dynasty czar, Nicholas II, and his family. Though
connected with other Illuminati dynasties, the Romanovs were despised by the Bolshevik
Zionists, Lenin and Trotsky, who in 1917 took over Russia and deposed the czar and set up their
Communist dictatorship. The Zionists, under orders from Lenin, kidnapped, then murdered the
entire family shown here.
House Minority Leader
Richard Gephardt (left) is
known to be both a Mason
and a lap-dog of Illuminati
interests. At right is House
Speaker Dennis Hastert,
giving the sign of the (delta,
vulva) triangle. (Photo and
article: USA Today,
September 17, 2001)

--- Sayfa 351 ---
358
CODEX MAGICA
Actor Martin Short (People magazine, July 14,
1997, p. 148)
Alice Cohn Ginott, a Jewish woman who participated
in satanist Indiana University Professor Alfred
Kinsey's sex studies. Ginott Cohn says she gave an
interview to Kinsey's group. Hopefully, Cohn had no
idea of Kinsey's bisexual proclivities nor of his child
molestation activities. Quite possibly, Cohn doesn't
intentionally sign the feminine triangle, either.
(Photo: USA Today. January 27, 2003)
Right: Picture of Israeli singer, Yosefa, in the
pages of The Jerusalem Report (October 19,
1995). Yosefa's album, "The Desert Speaks,"
was released worldwide by EMI Records.

--- Sayfa 352 ---
TRIANGLES UP, TRIANGLES DOWN, TRIANGLES, TRIANGLES ALL AROUND
3 5 9
Teresa Heinz-Kerry, the fabulously rich heiress of a colonialist fortune, who married two—count
them-two U.S. Senators who were each initiates of the Skull & Bones, John Heinz and John Kerry
(Teresa married Kerry after Heinz was killed in a mysterious airplane crash). Teresa, a Jewess whose
maiden name was Simoes-Ferreira, is a board member of the Illuminati run Carnegie Institute, a
member of the Council on Foreign Relations, and a member of the Brookings Institute. Illuminati
institutions all.

--- Sayfa 353 ---
360
CODEX MAGICA

--- Sayfa 354 ---
EIGHTEEN
Black Magic, Masonic Witchcraft, and
Triangle Powers
Ever wonder why the Masons installed the statue of a woman in stone atop the U.S.
Capitol building in Washington, D.C., and the statue of a woman called "Liberty"
in New York City's harbor? Well, now you know. America, meet your satanic
mistress, Isis.
—Texe Marrs
T h e triangle is of primary importance in all Illuminati realms, whether in
the ritual ceremonies of the Rosicrucians and Masons or the witchcraft,
astrological and black magic practices of other Illuminist followers.
Always the triangle is used.
Among satanists and witches, the double triangle, the Seal
of Solomon, also called the hexagram, is of great interest. This
seal, known as the Magen David of the Jews, is actually
composed of two triangles, superimposed on each other. One
triangle pointed upward represents the flesh or material
matter and the male generative act; the other, pointed
downward, signifies female sexuality and the spiritual plane.
Therefore we have a masculine and a feminine triangle
integrated. This indicates sexual union, the sex act, and the reconciliation of
opposites, yin and yang, or God and Satan. The blasphemous suggestion in the
symbol becomes clear.
Remember: Everywhere in the world of Illuminism, we discover sexual
connotations. Theirs is a sex cult; indeed it is the world's greatest sex cult; yet, the
Illuminati use symbols and signs to mask their sexually perverted messages.

--- Sayfa 355 ---
362
CODEX MAGICA
The Star of David and the Beast's Number, 666
The supremely evil nature of the double triangle, the hexagram, Solomon's Seal, the
Magen David (Shield of David), is proven by the fact that the symbol contains the
hidden number 666, the number of the beast (Revelation 13). Notice that there are six
triangles incorporated on the outside of the hexagram; that it has six out points, and
that six lines are used in constructing the symbol's two triangles. Thus, 6-6-6.
Also, the symbol incorporates six triangles of three sides each. Six times three
equals eighteen (6 X 3 = 18 and 6 + 6 + 6 = 18).
An outstanding study of the six-pointed star was accomplished by Dr. O.J.
Graham in the book, THE Six-Pointed Star.1 Dr. Graham proves that this symbol was
never used by King David of Israel and so the name Star of David is a misnomer. The
symbol was chosen in 1947 for the flag of the fledgling nation of Israel at the
insistence of the Rothschilds. Its usage stems from the medieval period when corrupt
rabbis into cabalistic magic began to use the six-pointed star in their rituals.
Dr. Graham does not mince words in declaring this emblem a tool of Satan,
unworthy of use by the holy people of God.
The Occult Triangle and the Masonic Lodge
Returning back to the single triangle as a common symbol of occult
usage, we note that the Freemasons were able, through the
influence of Grand Master Benjamin Franklin, to have the triangle
became the sun-lit capstone above the pyramid on the obverse
(reverse) side of the Great Seal of the United States.
The design of the 33rd degree jewel worn by the elite Mason is made up of
interlocking triangles.
The Real Grip of a Master Mason, which the Order claims can "resurrect" the
candidate and cause him, in essence, to be "born again" (a counterfeit of the Christian
experience) is formed with fingers separated to form a triangle. In the photos and
illustrations in this section, you will find several real-life examples of this grip.
In Coil's Masonic Encyclopedia we are told of the triangular chain, the legend taught
by Freemasonry that Jewish Freemasons were carried as captives from Jerusalem to
Babylon by Nebuchadnezzar, being bound by triangular chains. The Babylonian
King is said to have been gravely insulting the Jews by doing this because, to the
Jews, the triangle, or delta symbol, was a symbol of their Deity.2
King Solomon and the Triple Triangle
In the 6° of Freemasonry, the Degree of Intimate Secretary, the concept of a triple
triangle is introduced, said to be emblematic of the three Masons who were present
at the opening of the first Lodge of Intimate Secretaries. It is further claimed that King
Solomon was one of those three present.
It is significant that in the first Book of Kings in the Holy Bible, King Solomon
rebelled against God and His commandments and began to worship the god and
goddess of the heathen in his temple. He also required of the High Priests of

--- Sayfa 356 ---
BLACK MAGIC, MASONIC WITCHCRAFT, AND TRIANGLE POWERS
363
Solomon's Temple that they annually render to
him, as tribute, the sum of 666 talents of gold.
Undoubtedly the number 666 is symbolically the
triple triangle, because the holy number of the
Goddess was 666.
In Mackey's Masonic Ritualist, the author,
Sovereign Grand Commander of the Scottish Rite,
Albert Mackey, emphasized the key importance of
the triangle in the rituals of Freemasonry.5 The late
Jim Keith, an exposer of conspiracies and cults,
also discussed the importance of this symbol to
Masonry. He writes, "There is in fact a triad of
three governing officers to be found in almost
every degree."4
In a number of books written by Masons, the
downward pointing triangle is related to Set, the
god of Egypt, and to Bacchus. Both of the deities
are Satan in other guises.
Jim Tresner, 33°, whose academic writings are
often published
in
Masonic
journals
and
publications, notes the use of triangles in the ritual
for the fifteenth degree of the Scottish Rite, Knight
of the East, of the Sword, or of the Eagle. Tresner says that the apron worn for this
degree's ritual in the Lodge is of red velvet, and "on the apron are three triangles, one
inside the other, formed of chains with triangular links." These three triangles, he
explains, "represent the three great limitations on, or enemies of, the human
intellect — tyranny, privilege, superstition."5
In reality, Tresner is subtly alluding to the Masonic Order's long-standing
doctrine of fierce opposition to existing political sovereigns not yet corrupted or
conquered by Illuminism and its hatred of the true Christian Church, which the
Masons teach is "superstition" and is a sectarian belief that cannot be tolerated.
Tresner may object to my characterization, but the evidence of my allegations is
insurmountable, as the rituals themselves prove.
Rosicrucians, Theosophists, and The Triangle
The Rosicrucian Order, too, relies on the triangle as a vehicle to impart and convey
its teachings to rising candidates. For example, Arkon Daraul, in A History of Secret
Societies, describes a ritualistic scene of initiation in a German branch of
Rosicrucianism:
The room of initiation was carpeted in green and on it were a number of objects...
Three candelabra were placed to form a triangle, and nine glasses indicated the
male and female properties...6
Helena Blavatsky's worldwide cult Theosophy and its offspring, The Lucis Trust,

--- Sayfa 357 ---
364
CODEX MAGICA
led for many years by prolific occult writer, Alice Bailey, likewise adopted the
triangle as symbolic of their teachings. In 1937 the Lucis Trust founded a subsidiary
group named Triangles which today encourages people across the globe to network
by forming local three person triangle groups to come together often and meditate.
In this way, said the parent organization in a letter, occult adepts can "help to
illumine world thought...through which the new incoming Aquarian energies can
function, the new ideas spread, and the New World Order emerge."7
According to Bailey, the coming New World Order of the New Age is best
symbolized by a triangle within a circle, with a single dot, or point, within the
triangle. This symbol is said to represent three Centres (in U.S.A., Centers), the point
standing for the ruler of the spirit world, Sanat (an anagram for
"Satan" apparently), the entity who at the appointed time will
emerge to rule the Earth and humanity. The second Centre is Sanat's
"Hierarchy," the many unseen spirits (i.e. devils), and the third
Centre is the human masses.8
At the close of the Age, Bailey assures us, "the three major
Centres will be in complete unified and synchronized activity," controlling all
manifestations of life.9
Aleister Crowley, the late British satanist and Freemason, was also a devotee of
the triangle as symbol. As a high-level officer of the occult group, Order of the
Golden Dawn, Crowley used for one of his emblems the Eye of Horus in the Pyramid
of Fire, radiated by the sun's rays. It was Horus, in the form of a spirit guide named
Aiwass, that allegedly gave Crowley The Book of the Law, a book of
prophecy Crowley claimed he received by automatic writing.10
ABRACADABRA Not Just Childish Fun
Witches and deep occult magicians join Bailey in use of the triangle.
Take the word ABRACADABRA that is repeatedly used in kids TV
cartoons and programs by supposedly mythical creatures like
wizards and witches and fairies. Actually, this word is of ancient
origins. In a poem on occult medicine written by a pagan doctor in ancient Rome
about 250 AD, to ward off fevers and sickness, the physician recommended the word
abracadabra be written down in an inverted triangle like this:

--- Sayfa 358 ---
BLACK MAGIC, MASONIC WITCHCRAFT, AND TRIANGLE POWERS
365
Next, the paper on which the word was written was to be tied round the patient's
neck for nine days and then thrown backwards over the shoulder into a stream
running eastwards. The fever then would shrink to nothing, the patient was told.
The magical word ABRACADABRA comes from worship of the gnostic god,
Abraxas. It literally means: The dead body, or corpse, of Abraxas.
Witches often use the triangle as a protective symbol. They foolishly believe it can
be used as a talisman, especially if the Tetragrammaton, the Hebrew letters for God,
are inserted inside the triangle. The Masons do the same thing essentially in the
Masters Jewel of the 4th degree. The triangle is inscribed on the ring given holders of
the 14th degree also.
The Geometrical God Is a Woman
A closely kept secret of higher level Masons and other Illuminists is that, in addition
to their worship of the Devil by other names, they also worship a female deity, the
Great Goddess. This is made plain by John Yarker, a renowned British Freemason.
Yarker's translation of the French manuscript, Lectures of a Chapter, Senate, and
Council, informs us that the triangle's origins can be found in Egyptian religion, being
the symbol of Isis, the Egyptian goddess:
The triangle, which they called the geometrical God, was the emblem of Isis.11
You'll recall that the symbol "G" is found at the center of the most common of
Freemasonry's symbols, the Masonic square and compass, and that the Mason is told
this letter G represents "God" and "Geometry." This, then, is the "geometrical god"
that, Yarker observes, "was the emblem of Isis."
Ever wonder why the Masons installed the statue of a woman in stone atop the
U.S. Capitol building in Washington, D.C., and the statue of a woman called "Liberty"
in New York City's harbor? Well, now you know. America, meet your satanic mistress:
Isis.

--- Sayfa 359 ---
366
CODEX MAGICA

--- Sayfa 360 ---
BLACK MAGIC MASONIC WITCHCRAFT, AND TRIANGLE POWERS
3 6 7
Pages 800 and 801 from Encyclopedia of Freemasonry by Albert G. Mackey, 33° and Charles T.
MrClenachan, 33°.

--- Sayfa 361 ---
368
CODEX MAGICA
A dark scene inside a Masonic
Temple in Greece. The human
sacrifice lays straddled as a five
point star on the altar.
Superimposed behind are the
descendant (hell) triangle and the
tau symbol of the Royal Arch. The
delta triangle design is feminine and
corresponds to the female's vulva.
Two magical seals based on the Black Book of Honorius. The first is the occult
seal of Great Work. The second is the occult seal of Black Magic. Note in both of
them the opposed position of the triangles and the position of the moon (in the
center of the Black Magic seal).

--- Sayfa 362 ---
BLACK MAGIC, MASONIC WITCHCRAFT, AND TRIANGLE POWERS
3 6 9
Freemasonry's The Royal Arch
Banner reveals two angels
holding their respective wings
in a triangle shape. The cloven
hoofs and goat legs
demonstrate the Luciferian
nature of these angelic
creatures. (From Coil's Masonic
Encyclopedia, revised 1995)
YELLOW
SPRINGS
INSTITUTE
FOR CONTLMPORARY STUDIES
AND THE ARTS
The architectural design for the Yellow Springs Institute for
Contemporary Studies and the Arts in Chester Springs,
Pennsylvania reveals a music amphitheater and a triangle
structure with a circle inside. Meanwhile, the official logo for
the Yellow Springs Institute is a red triangle with a tree inside.

--- Sayfa 363 ---
370
CODEX MAGICA
Only an adept heavily schooled in occult symbology would understand the message being
communicated in this full-page ad for "Virginia Slims" cigarettes. The occult significance of the
lightning bolt, the triangle, the square, the arm and hand signs and positions, even the wide spread
of the model's legs is explained in the pages of Codex Magica. The colors she wears, black, red, blue,
and white also contain significance. Still, given the general deterioration of intellectual thinking in
society and of moral values and Christian knowledge—and the dearth of knowledge of occult
deception—it is entirely possible that neither the fashion designers nor the Advertising Agency are
culpable of intentionally using occult devices. The significance however, remains, and in the author's
opinion, such advertising cannot help but aid the cause of evil forces.

--- Sayfa 364 ---
BLACK MAGIC, MASONIC WITCHCRAFT, AND TRIANGLE POWERS
3 7 1
Display ads like these are common in New Age and
occult publications.

--- Sayfa 365 ---
372
CODEX MAGICA
To interest like-minded people to inquire about the
Rosicrucians, this or a similar ad is placed in some
magazines. Under the heading, "Secrets Entrusted
to A Few," we find an ancient and worn book with
a triangle and cross imprinted on the cover. The
Rosicrucians are actually several different Orders.
This ad is for AMORC, an American-based Order
that is less influential among the elite than
European branches. Perhaps the most famous
initiate of the Rosicrucians was Benjamin Franklin.
Catholic Pope John XXIII was reputed to be a
Rosicrucian as was Martin Luther, the Protestant
Reformer. U.S. Senator Ted Kennedy (DMA) is
today a high-level Rosicrucian.
The design for the
Jewel of Scottish Rite
Masonry's 33rd
degree includes a
system of
interlocking
triangles, circles, the
"X," and the
quadruple Tau
background.
Official logo of conference held by socialists
promoting the political and economic merger
of the United States and the old U.S.S.R.
Speakers at the 1989 conference included
Illuminati U.S. Senator John Heinz (Order of
Skull & Bones), U.S. Senator Bill Bradley, and
Pittsburgh Mayor Sophie Masloff.

--- Sayfa 366 ---
BLACK MAGIC, MASONIC WITCHCRAFT, AND TRIANGLE POWERS
373
Aleister Crowley, British satanist who was a
high level initate of many occult Orders and
Secret Societies, giving the supreme sign of the
horned god. The triangular hat resembles the
style of hat worn by many in the earlier
colonial period in America. The triangle
contains the all-seeing eye and has the radiant
rays of the sun deity shining forth.
This logo of Triangles, a Lucis Trust organization, and the message from Alice Bailey, occultist
founder, was included in World Goodwill newsletter (1997, No. 4). World Goodwill is yet another
global organization, affiliated with the Lucis Trust, but which also networks with scores of other
Illuminist groups, orders, and secret societies. Lucis Trust and World Goodwill teach of the coming of
the Cosmic, New Age Christ, avatar for the Age of Aquarius, who represents the Central Sun, also
called the Solar Logos.

--- Sayfa 367 ---
374
CODEX MAGICA
The New Age group, Energy System Parameters (ESP), has
this as the logo on its letterhead. In this letter announcing its
general membership's annual meeting, the co-Presidents
emphasized ESP's focus on "group energies," "cosmic
reorganization," and the importance of achieving the
"crystalized form of new patterns." The signature line had
the phrase, "In the Service of the One."
The jewel of the 32nd degree, Scottish
Rite, contains four, interlocking Tau
elements and four squares. Symbology-
wise, this arrangement conceives of the
Freemasons and their coming Prince to
be rulers of all four corners of the
globe. (From the back cover of Scottish
Rite Journal, October 1998)

--- Sayfa 368 ---
BLACK MAGIC, MASONIC WITCHCRAFT, AND TRIANGLE POWERS
3 7 5
Eastern religions believe that the use of the Sri Yantra produces unparalleled spiritual power by
evoking (inviting) help from the unseen spirit world. Commonly employed in sexual tantra rituals,
the design of the Sri Yantra meditation device begins with the four "T"s, (Tau) which, interestingly, is
the same as the design of the Mason's 3 2 n d degree jewel. From this base, the Sri Yantra is drawn
from nine (666=6+6+6=18=1 +8=9) triangles, four pointed downward and five pointed upward,
forming 42 (6x7) triangular fragments around a central triangle. Occultists teach there is no other
set of triangles which interlock with such integrational perfection. The diagram of the Sri Yantra is
said to contain, or synthesize, within all the activities and energies in the universe. Made up of black
and white triangle elements, the design bears also the yin/yang, black is white and white is black
principle underlying the Masters Carpet (checkerboard) floor of Masonry and also parallels the "two
heads" doctrine implicit in the great symbol of 33rd degree Freemasonry, the double-headed eagle.
(Drawing from book, Sacred Geometry, by Robert Lawlor, Thames and Hudson, New York and
London, 1989)
Two more versions of the Sri
Yantra. Left: A Sri Yantra found
inside the cover of a rock album.
Right: Sri Yantra from the book,
The Tantric Way, showing the
multiple-triangle design,
representing the generative (sex)
act. In this design the interior,
triangular (male) elements are
"buried" within the Lotus blossom
(female).

--- Sayfa 369 ---
376
CODEX MAGICA
The Sri Yantra pictured as a mystical diagram
of Solomon's Temple, as planned in the
building scheme of the Knights Templar. The
cross and sun rays on top do not represent
Jesus Christ, but point to the Cosmic Christ,
who came in many names in the past and
shall come again with a new name. (From the
book, The Sword and The Grail, by Andrew
Sinclair, New York: Crown Publishers, 1992)
A masonic tracing board with an image of a
coffin, decorated with the "tools'' of the Craft.
The V or square at the bottom of the coffin is
pointed downward to hell and the Lord of the
Underworld. The skull and bones, or death's
head, is thought to guard the doorway to the
Mysteries of initiation. There are three
number fives arranged in a triangle pattern,
thus 555, the triple nickel, symbolizing death
and resurrection. Not coincidentally, the
Washington Monument, in our nation's
capital, is exactly SSS feet high. It was
designed by Masonic overlords and
architecturally is an obelisk, worshipped in
Egypt as Osiris' penis (Baal's shaft).

--- Sayfa 370 ---
BLACK MAGIC, MASONIC WITCHCRAFT, AND TRIANGLE POWERS
3 7 7
The occult spiritual nature of the mission of the United Nations (UN) is seen in the UN's Meditation
Room, inside the UN headquarters in New York City. The austere Meditation Room has a rough, black
granite ashlar altar (masonic origins) and a mural with various occult symbols, including the
serpent, triangle, crescent moon, and square. The Room itself is designed as a pyramid without a
capstone lying down on its side. The UN even has a chaplain of sorts; Sri Chinmoy, a Hindu guru who
leads chants and meditations inside the Meditation Room. Evidently, the Illuminati were not keen on
separating church and state when they founded their world body, the United Nations.

--- Sayfa 371 ---
378
CODEX MAGICA
When captured American
aviator, Navy Lt. Robert O.
Goodman, Jr., 27, was released
by Syrian authorities into the
hands of self-appointed
diplomat Jesse Jackson, the
aviator was given this souvenir
T-shirt from his hometown of
Akron, Ohio. The T-shirt had
triangular designs and
demonic eyes. Perhaps Syria's
President, Hafez Assad, agreed
to deal with Jesse Jackson
because both he and Jackson
are 33rd degree Masons. Later,
Jesse Jackson traveled to
Communist Cuba, where side-
by-side with another Lodge
brother, dictator Fidel Castro,
the black religious and civil
rights leader hollered out to
the Cuban crowd, "Viva Fidel.
Long Live Fidel Castro!"
(Photo and article from
Newsweek, January 9, 1984)

--- Sayfa 372 ---
BLACK MAGIC, MASONIC WITCHCRAFT, AND TRIANGLE POWERS
379
The New Age occult organization, Institute For Planetary Synthesis, employs the triple triangle for its
logo, as this "Order Form" for its teaching products indicates.
Judge Roger Sherman,
one of the signers of the
American Declaration of
Independence, giving
the triangle sign with
his right hand.
(Painting: from book
The Miracle On Main
Street, by F. Tupper
Saussy)

--- Sayfa 373 ---
380
CODEX MAGICA
Duane Ackerman,
CEO of BellSouth
Corporation, holding
his hand in what
subtly appears to be
the masonic triangle.
(USA Today, March
15, 2004, p. B4)
Texas Governor George
W. Bush in 1998 with
Russian presidential
candidate, General
Alexander Lebed
exchange a concealed
handshake as Lebed
displays the enigmatic
double triangle sign of
the Lodge which is
similar to the Real Grip
of a Master Mason
(Duncan's Masonic
Ritual and Monitor, 3rd
Ed., p. 120). General
Lebed, the most popular
political figure in Russia
at the time, never
succeeded in his
ambitious quest to win
the Russian presidency.
His airplane crashed in
mysterious circumstances
in Russia, and he was
killed. (Photo: from
Austin American-
Statesman, March 22,
1998)

--- Sayfa 374 ---
BLACK MAGIC MASONIC WITCHCRAFT, AND TRIANGLE POWERS
381
Comedian Bob Hope, knighted by the Sovereign Military Order of Malta, shows the Masonic square,
known also as the triangle, V, downward delta sign.

--- Sayfa 375 ---
382
CODEX MAGICA

--- Sayfa 376 ---
BLACK MAGIC MASONIC WITCHCRAFT, AND TRIANGLE POWERS
3 8 3
Above: In its May/June 2001 issue, Psychology Today
carried this feature article and interview with
Astronaut Buzz Aldrin. Aldrin and fellow astronaut,
Neil Armstrong, were the first to walk on the Moon,
in 1969. Aldrin, a Freemason, was said to have
conducted a bizarre Masonic ritual on the moon. In
the article in Psychology Today, triangles are
everywhere, including being imbedded in the type of
the heading. Also, see the picture of Aldrin—exactly
three fingers of his left hand are reaching into his
pocket, with the arm displaying a triangle pattern.
According to the book Axis of Death, by D.C. Yermak,
this is similar to a secret Rosicrucian sign indicating
the initate has removed himself from God's control
and given his life over to the devil. Aldrin is confirmed
to be a Mason, but his Rosicrucian involvement is
unknown.
Astronaut Buzz Aldrin, supposedly walking on the
moon in 1969. Many believe the Apollo 11 mission
was a hoax, filmed right here on earth. In this classic,
staged photo, notice Aldrin's left arm in its triangle
position. Did the taxpayers pay billions just so Aldrin
and his masonic brothers could claim the moon for
the Illuminati in a staged esoteric ritual?

--- Sayfa 377 ---
384
CODEX MAGICA
The three super-rich Hunt brothers in a downward triangle arrangement on the cover of The New
York Times magazine, September 18, 1997.

--- Sayfa 378 ---
BLACK MAGIC, MASONIC WITCHCRAFT, AND TRIANGLE POWERS
3 8 5
Fritz Springmeier, author of the bestselling Bloodlines of the Illuminati (available by phone order,
toll free 1-800-234-9673), made this drawing based on an actual ritual conducted by a Satanic sect
known as Ordo Saturnus (Order of Saturn). The planet Saturn is the sixth planet from the sun in
our solar system. Saturn was worshipped in ancient civilizations as a form of Satan, or Lucifer. The
triangle within a circle (symbol also of today's Alcoholics Anonymous) group is on the wall while
the satanic "X" within the circle is on the front of the altar cloth.
Rosicrucians also commend the triangle within the
circle, the very logo of Alcoholics Anonymous. From a
page right out of a Rosicrucian manual, the figure at
left is the "Symbol of Creation," Nehushstan the
serpent, also called Oroboros, the serpent swallowing
its own tail. This symbolizes perpetual movement
(Hegelian dialectic) and the occult conception of the
"Circle of Life," the slogan that Disney's movie, The
Lion King, made famous. The book of Revelation in the
Holy Bible calls Satan "that old serpent" and for good
reason! The triangle inside the serpentine circle
represents the unholy trinity, which the occult teaches
is the spiritual element soon to manifest, already
operating at the very center of the material universe.

--- Sayfa 379 ---
386
CODEX MAGICA
(From the book, Satan Wants You, by Arthur Lyons, The Mysterious Press, New York, 10019)
In this 17th century alchemical
drawing, the Antichrist King
and his unholy trinity (three
crowns over Earth) worship
the transforming fire from
their sun deity, symbolized by
the triangle within a circle.

--- Sayfa 380 ---
BLACK MAGIC, MASONIC WITCHCRAFT, AND TRIANGLE POWERS
3 8 7
In this page right out of the Bulletin of the American Federation of Astrologers (AFA), we find the
corporate seal and its explanation. However, the explanation given is weak at best and seems
geared to please the majority of astrologers who are active in the organization without giving
away any real secrets. Almost any knowledgeable student of the occult can see hidden meanings in
these symbols far beyond the official explanation. Symbols that beg for more esoteric (and
accurate) explanation include the triangle inside the circle, the pentagram star, the torch and
hand, the point within the circle and the stars.

--- Sayfa 381 ---
388
CODEX MAGICA
Hazelden, a company specializing in products related to Alcoholics Anonymous, offers such
items as tie tacs and lapel pins, money clips, necklaces, and key chains. You can even get the
"God's Eye Pendant." The Hazelden catalog glowingly tells potential buyers: "In times of
trouble or joy, this precious pendant keeps our Higher Power's eye on our recovery and
spiritual growth." The same catalog ad says, "This five-thousand-year-old symbol of continual
movement and spirituality... has become a popular icon in the recovery community."

--- Sayfa 382 ---
BLACK MAGIC, MASONIC WITCHCRAFT, AND TRIANGLE POWERS
389
A Rosicrucian
symbol described as "The Eternal
Madonna," in the encyclopedic work, New Age
Bible Interpretation (Old Testament, Volume
III), editor Corinne Heline
A friend sent the author this photograph she
took of one of the student art exhibits on
display at a local high school. Many of the
exhibits were on occult subjects. The meaning
of the triangle within the circle superimposed
over the body of the person, lying in a fetal
position on a surface of red, most likely
symbolizes man's servitude and enslavement
to the Solar Deity, whom Masons call the
Great Architect of the Universe.
Christian medallion
for youth from Hawaii
advertised in Christian
contemporary music
magazine.

--- Sayfa 383 ---
390
CODEX MAGICA
This issue of The Royal
Arch Mason magazine
(Summer 1990)
featured the seal of
the General Grand
Council of Cryptic
Masons International,
which is designed in
the form of a triangle
within a circle.
This cover of The Royal Arch
Mason magazine pays tribute to
their "Most Worshipful Brother
Harry S. Truman." (Truman, a
33rd degree Mason, once told his
brothers in the craft that he
would rather be a Master Mason
than be President of the United
States of America.) The symbol of
the Royal Arch Masons is also seen
at left: The Triple Tau, a sign of the
unholy trinity within a triangle
within a circle, a composite
symbol said to connote triple
power.

--- Sayfa 384 ---
BLACK MAGIC MASONIC WITCHCRAFT, AND TRIANGLE POWERS
3 9 1
As reported in Time (April 15, 2002), this is a financial report sent to Yasser Arafat's Palestine
headquarters bearing the insignia of the rebel group, the Al-Aqsa Martyr's Brigade. If authentic, the
logo, or seal, for the group roughly resembles a triangle within a circle.

--- Sayfa 385 ---
NINETEEN
Part Devil, Part Angel
Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of devils: ye cannot be partakers of
the Lord's table, and of the table of devils.
—I Corinthians 10:21
Always front and center.. .stood Lyndon Johnson, almost handsome then, in his 40s,
leaner than history remembers, narrow-eyed, his hair sleek...alert in a vaguely
dangerous way - an impresario, a genius of nuances, a wolf in his prime.
— Lance Morrow
"Part Devil, Part Angel"
Newsweek magazine
Illuminists can sometimes be engaging, likeable people. The kind of person
you wouldn't mind going to dinner with or hosting at a barbecue. That is,
unless you knew that beneath that happy, party-like veneer and surface
there was a deep interior of consummate evil.
Take Will Rogers, for example, the loveable Oklahoman storyteller. He was
admired by the nation for his rangy, down to earth humor and wit. Who would know
that, along with his fellow Masons, Rogers bowed before satanic altars and drank
wine from human skulls!
There's astronaut Buzz Aldrin who, it is claimed by NASA, once went to the
moon. How many knew that Aldrin carried with him to outer space a Scottish Rite
flag emblazoned with the diabolical image of the double-headed eagle?
And we have the late Pamela Harriman, so popular and likeable her biography
was entitled "Life of the Party." Harriman's husband was Averell Harriman, Patriarch

--- Sayfa 386 ---
394
CODEX MAGICA
of the Order of Skull and Bones. What tales Ms. Harriman could have told us! After
all, she was mistress to a Rothschild and also once used a young, up and coming,
Georgetown University student as her sexual boy toy. His name: William Jefferson
Clinton.
President Lyndon B. Johnson certainly fits into that category —if there is such a
category —of "Part Devil, Part Angel." A Master Mason raised to the third degree in
a Lodge in central Texas, Johnson was the primary mover for the black civil rights
movement. His aggressive endorsement of various civil rights bills helped create a
more equal society. But, why do his biographers call LBJ "cunning" and a "wolf?"
Several books have been published maintaining that then Vice President Lyndon
B. Johnson was one of the plotters and conspirators behind the 1963 assassination of
President John F. Kennedy. Few people believe it. Most have been snookered into
believing the absurd theory that Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone. But in 2003 a book
by a former Texas lawyer, Barr McClellan, again broached the subject of LBJ's
culpability.1
Then, also in 2003, Jeff Rense, in his outstanding internet web site, Rense.com,
published two photos of what is being called "The Most Revealing Wink of the
Twentieth Century." As a public service, the author of Codex Magica is reproducing
the same photos here.
This heart-rending scene aboard Air Force One of Lyndon B. Johnson being sworn in as President of
the United States following the assassination of John F. Kennedy, was published everywhere, in
newspapers, magazines, and books. Look closely at the somber looks on the faces of the persons in
the photograph.

--- Sayfa 387 ---
PART DEVIL, PART ANGEL
395
Here's the photo that was left unpublished and was kept hidden from public view until now.
Congressman Albert Thomas winks back at a quickly-smiling LBJ as he is being sworn in to be the
next President of the United States on Air Force One. The grief-stricken Jackie Kennedy stands next to
him. Meanwhile, a sly smile also creases the face of Ladybird Johnson, LBJ's wife.
LBJ—was he "part devil, part angel?" I don't think so. He was 100% something,
and I'll let you decide just what. Johnson and the others are shown in the following
pages giving what appears to be the Illuminist hand sign of the arm in triangular
position with hand to side of body. The photos here give evidence that this gesture is
not accidental as one might suppose. Several illustrations from authoritative Masonic
reference books provide further documentation that the sign is intentional and
communicates a message.

--- Sayfa 388 ---
396
CODEX MAGICA

--- Sayfa 389 ---
PART DEVIL, PART ANGEL
397
An interesting article showcasing a book about rascally President Lyndon B. Johnson. The headline
says the touted, biographical book "charts Lyndon Johnson s cunning rise." The caption under the
photo of LBJ describes the late President as "The Wolf In His Prime" and lauds him as a "legislative
magician." Above, we are especially interested in the clearly Illuminist pose struck by Johnson: His
left arm in the triangle position with the clenched fist of socialist power. No wonder this article in
Newsweek magazine is entitled, "Part Devil, Part Angel." Incidentally, the Librarian of the House of
the Temple, Scottish Rite, Washington, D.C., reports that Lyndon B. Johnson never got past the
Master Mason (3o) degree. This author believes, however, that Johnson was initiated into other
secret societies and Orders than Freemasonry and, of course, he was a key political mover and shaker
acting on behalf of both Zionist interests and the nation's oil elite.

--- Sayfa 390 ---
398
CODEX MAGICA
David Rockefeller, Sr.,
Illuminati insider,
multibillionaire, and founder
of the Trilateral Commission.
This photo, in the upscale Town
& Country magazine, was
without caption or explanation.
It is obviously staged as it
shows the exaggerated masonic
arm sign. Note that the image
of Rockefeller's torso is not
even centered, even though a
highly professional
photographer took the photo,
and Town and Country
magazine's editors are
thorough and detailed in photo
art selection and placement.
Standing: Winthrop Aldrich,
Chairman, Chase-
Manhattan Bank. Sitting:
Chase's president.

--- Sayfa 391 ---
PART DEVIL, PART ANGEL
399
Just an innocent photo shoot? Don't believe it! This is Congressman Richard Gephardt (D-MO),
House Minority Leader. He's standing on a square, in Masonry signifying rulership of the four
corners of the earth. Both his arms are in the triangular position. His necktie is black and white
checked, as on the floor tile of the Lodge. He is wearing the colors black and white, signifying the
occult equilibrium of good and evil, light and darkness. ("Equilibrium" is the secretive "Lost Word"
of Freemasonry—explained in the 33rd degree as the alchemical synthesis that propels the energies
of the universe.) Behind Gephardt are three steps (there are three degrees in the Blue Lodge.) He is
standing in an open doorway. Behind him in mosaic on the marble floor is the emblem of the all-
seeing eye. The portal beyond, looming above and virtually framing the Congressman, is the arch.
The arch plays a significant role in Freemasonry, and one of the major schools of the Lodge is Royal
Arch Masonry. All in all, a thoroughly Masonic—and meticulously staged and crafted scene.
Gephardt was shown in this photo to be a major player in political affairs and a prime contender
on the national and world scenes. This photo took up the entire page in Time magazine, but there
was no caption or explanation about it. (Photo: Time magazine, September 30, 1996)

--- Sayfa 392 ---
400
CODEX MAGICA
Lucent Technologies CEO Patricia Russo in a USA Today newspaper (December 30, 2001) photo and
article. See how clever the editors were in placing Russo's head so that the red, serpentine, circular
Lucent Technologies (similar to the Oroboros) appears to be an occultic ring or halo (Nimbus).
Banker E.H. Harriman (center) with sons
Roland (left) and Averell (right) in 1907.
Young Averell Harriman is giving the
masonic sign with his left arm. Averell
Harriman went on to become Governor
of New York State, U.S. Ambassador to
Dictator Joseph Stalin's Communist
Russia, and a Patriarch of the Order of
Skull & Bones.

--- Sayfa 393 ---
PART DEVIL, PART ANGEL
4 0 1
Pamela Harriman is doing more here with her body than merely being "Life of the Party," title
of this book. A Churchill heir, Pamela was a mistress of one of the Illuminati
Rothschilds and
later married Governor Averell Harriman, Patriarch of Skull & Bones. Pamela Harriman met and
"mentored" young Bill Clinton when he was just a student at Georgetown University in
Washington, D.C. She introduced the young man to her aging husband and voila! - the political
career of William Jefferson Clinton was on the fast track. Many years later, after Pamela's
husband passed away and President Bill Clinton was in the White House, Clinton appointed
Pamela to the prestigious post of Ambassador to France in Paris.

--- Sayfa 394 ---
402
CODEX MAGICA
Buzz Aldrin, Scottish Rite Mason, was the first astronaut to walk on the moon.
Aldrin also planted a double-headed eagle flag on the soil of the moon's surface,
claiming the moon as territory belonging to the Supreme Mother Lodge of
Freemasonry. Note Aldrin's Masonic arm pose. (Photo: NASA)
Astronaut Edwin "BUZZ" Aldrin, 33°
Mason, presents the Scottish Rite flag
carried to the moon on Apollo 11 in 1969
to Masonic Grand Commander Luther A.
Smith (from the book, Lodge of the
Doubleheaded Eagle, by William L. Fox,
University of Arkansas Press, 1997).

--- Sayfa 395 ---
PART DEVIL, PART ANGEL
4 0 3
Will Rogers (1879-1935), was a famous
storyteller and a Freemason. Here he is in the
pose of Sublime Knights Elected degree.
General Robert E. Lee, commanding officer of the Army of the
Confederacy. (Oil portrait: Washington & Lee University,
Lexington, Virginia)

--- Sayfa 396 ---
404
CODEX MAGICA
Elias Ashmole was made a Freemason in 1646. This illustration is from the picture in the Ashmolean
Museum in Oxford, England. The book is Ashmole's History of the Garter. It chronicled the secret
society of English nobility call the Order of the Garter. The Latin words in the lower corner of the
engraving mean an "honorable distinction."

--- Sayfa 397 ---
TWENTY
The Merovingian Dynasty, The Priory of
Sion, and the Spear of Longinus
T h e Priory of Sion (also the Prieure de Sion) is said to be the "secret society
of societies."1 Baigent, Leigh, and Lincoln, authors of one acclaimed
book, Holy Blood, Holy Grail, write that the brotherhood of the Priory of
Sion has been preserved for two millennia. France's royal Merovingian Dynasty's
bloodline is said to be the protector of the sect, which boasts that it is the actual
bloodline of Jesus. The astonishing claim is that Jesus and Mary Magdalene were
married and had children and from this bloodline shall someday arise a man who
shall become the ruler of planet earth.
The Holy Grail
Tied in with this unscriptural — even blasphemous—legend are the tales of the Holy
Grail and the Spear of Longinus. Some teach that as the blood of Jesus oozed from his
body on the cross, it was collected in the Holy Grail cup. Esoterically that would
make the Holy Grail, if it exists, magical and capable of great miracles.
A variation of this story is that the Holy Grail was the drinking vessel of Jesus at
the Last Supper, which again would translate into the cup being a magical talisman.
The Spear of longinus
The Spear of Longinus is yet another legend connected to the Priory of Sion. It holds
that a Roman Centurion named Longinus was the one who thrust his spear into Jesus'
side at the crucifixion. Some of Jesus' blood is alleged to have fallen on him and
miracles ensued. Thus, again, a magical talisman was created — the Spear of Longinus.
Throughout history wicked tyrants, including Napoleon and Hitler, have sought
possession of the Spear, believing that it is the Spear of Destiny and that whoever
possesses it shall have the power to rule the world.
William Cooper, whose book, Behold a Pale Horse, and his revelations on his
national radio program so angered the elite they put out a contract on his life,

--- Sayfa 398 ---
406
CODEX MAGICA
sometimes mentioned the Spear of Destiny.2 Cooper was murdered by a combined
federal-local police team that ambushed him as he peacefully stopped his pickup at
a stop sign on his way home from a grocery store. In his book, he spoke of how vital
the Spear of Destiny is in the Illuminati scheme of things:
According to members of the intelligence community, when the New World Order
is solidified the relics will be taken out, will be united with the Spear of Destiny, and
will, according to legend, give the world's ruler absolute power... Again, I remind
you that it makes not one iota of difference what you believe. If they (the Illuminati)
believe, you will be affected.3
The Spear As Pentagram and Lightning Bolt
The Spear is a symbol of long-standing repute in the pagan and ancient Mystery
Religions. In the Egyptian religion, it was called the Arrow of Re, or Ra, the Sun God,
who was also called Horus, son of Osiris and his reincarnation, who had the all-
seeing eye. Anton LaVey, in his book Satan Speaks, notes that the Sign of the Spear is
actually the inverted pentagram.4 In turn, the pentagram (the satanic five-pointed
star), according to LaVey represents "Excalibur, the Spear of Destiny, Wotan's spear
point, the lightning bolt that created the protoplasm of life."5
The Rosicrucians and the Sign of An Arrow
Moreover, the Rosicrucian Order seems to be somehow connected with both the
legend of the Spear and the Priory of Sion. D. C. Yermak, writing in The Axis of
Death - Vatican, Masonry, Zionism, Enemies of God, explains that, "The Rosicrucians,
by making their secret sign with the first three fingers of the right hand united, make
the Sign of an Arrow."6
The Rosicrucian's Sign of an Arrow is dark and evil because it is used by the
individual to remove himself from God's Blessing and leave himself purposely
exposed to the arrows of the devil. (In this case, the form, or shape, relates the arrow
to the spear).
Dean Grace, authoritative researcher in symbology and Masonic secrets, believes
that at least some modern-day disciples of this international black lodge, Priory of
Sion, communicate their involvement to other hidden members by giving the Sign of
the Spear Point.7 In this sign, the point of the spear can either be sharply angular or it
can be modified. Often, the fingers are positioned so that the horns and face of
Baphomet are indistinctly seen, as in the inverted pentagram star.
Grace's research also indicates the Priory of Sion is either linked or had
something to do in the development of other, related occult groups such as the Order
of Knights Templar. "The spear point symbol," he says, "is the building block of the
four-spoked, eight-pointed Maltese Cross of the Order of the Knights of Malta."8
How the Sign is Given
A variation of the sharp, angular spear point sign is that displayed in this chapter of

--- Sayfa 399 ---
THE MEROVINGIAN DYNASTY, THE PRIORY OF SION
407
Codex Magica in the photos of ABC News reporter Sam Donaldson and U.S.A. Vice
President Dick Cheney. However, their modified hand and finger positioning is
likely simply a personal eccentricity. As in all cases of secret hand signs, human
variation and personality intervene, so that not all the signs are rendered expertly
and in a crisp, uniform, standardized fashion.
When placed in or near the female vulva area or the male genital area, the spear
point becomes a phallic symbol. In all cases, the sign of the spear point is given so
that the Y, the spear or arrow, is pointing downward, toward the nether regions
where, presumably, Satan and his legions reside. That is, toward the pit of hell.
Title page of Barbara Walker's The Woman's Dictionary of
Symbols and Sacred Objects. Inside, Walker identified the symbol
shown as the Dragon's Eye. She reports that the Dragon's Eye
forms a triple triangle, sacred to the Goddess, and that this
symbol appears often in medieval books of magic, to invoke the
protection of female spirits and entities. In fact, the Dragon's Eye
bears a remarkable resemblence to the Sign of the Spear Point,
and the name Dragon's Eye is approprate, indeed.
Symbol from the back cover
of the fascinating book, The
Talisman of the United
States: The Mysterious
Street Lines of Washington,
D.C., by Charles Westbook,
Ph.D. (1990). The symbol
depicted is a spear point
superimposed by a modified
fleur de lis, a symbol of the
Merovingian royal dynasty.
"Shield of the Trinity,"
in the British Museum,
which turns out to be
an emblem of the Priory
of Sion.
Drawing of the
Rock of Sion and
the Sign of the
Priory of Sion.
(From the book,
Holy Blood, Holy
Grail)

--- Sayfa 400 ---
408
CODEX MAGICA
First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton, wearing a "Mao Tse Tung" peasant outfit and fashion look, clearly
giving the Baphomet/Priory of Sion sign. This cover and feature article in Time (March 1, 1999)
examined Hillary Clinton's possible candidacy for the U.S. Senate from the state of New York in the
upcoming election (2000). In fact, Ms. Clinton ran and won. Was the symbology displayed (Priory of
Sion Sign) predictive of her future successful run?

--- Sayfa 401 ---
THE MEROVINGIAN DYNASTY, THE PRIORY OF SION
4 0 9
Said by political analysts to be one of the most
important addresses of his political career, in
late August 1998, President Bill Clinton went
on national television to give a limited mea
culpa ("I am sorry") for his sexual indiscretions
with the young White House intern, Monica
Lewinsky. Left: A chagrined, frustrated, and
angry Bill Clinton readies himself for the
camera shoot, with the aid of an associate.
Below: Just moments before the TV cameras
roll, Clinton sets his face in a sober, resolute
attitude. With his Baphomet/Priory of Sion
hand sign, he invokes success and blessings
from the ruler and forces of darkness. (Left
photo: Newsweek, August 31, 1998, p.3; Below
photo: The European newspaper, August 24-30,
p.3)

--- Sayfa 402 ---
410
CODEX MAGICA
In yet another Clinton bit of magic, President Bill Clinton gives cabalistic sign (Baphomet/Priory
of Sion spearpoint) while being interviewed in late March 1999, by CBS News anchor Dan
Rather. The USA Today newspaper's editors apparently complied with elitist's request to give
maximum publicity to Clinton's interview and to this particular photo. Subject of this interview
was the U.S. war against Yugoslavia/Serbia, a key Illuminati project to help usher in their New
World Order. Clinton invokes the forces of darkness to assist his speech and enhance his
hypnotic persuasive powers over the American people.

--- Sayfa 403 ---
THE MEROVINGIAN DYNASTY, THE PRIORY OF SION
4 1 1
TV and movie actor Scott Bakula (Quantum Leap; Murphy Brown) (Photo: Parade magazine,
November 25, 2001)

--- Sayfa 404 ---
412
CODEX MAGICA
Vice President Dick Cheney. His wife, Lynn, is a writer of steamy lesbian sex novels. His daughter is an
avowed Lesbian, and Dick? Well... this photograph is rather telling.

--- Sayfa 405 ---
THE MEROVINGIAN DYNASTY, THE PRIORY OF SION
4 1 3

--- Sayfa 406 ---
414
CODEX MAGICA
Tom Pritzker, CEO of
the Hyatt Hotels chain.
(Business Week,
December 20, 2004, p.
40)
President of the
U.S.A. James K.
Polk (1795-1849)
Producer David Gest and
wife, singer Liza Minelli.
Gest, a homosexual, and
Minelli are now separated
and seeking a divorce.
Actor Jack Bolger, who played the Tin Man in the classic alchemical drama,
The Wizard of Oz, with wife, Floe, at home in Beverly Hills.

--- Sayfa 407 ---
THE MEROVINGIAN DYNASTY, THE PRIORY OF SION
4 1 5
Actor Danny Glover, notorious for his Marxist liberal political activism, sends a cabalistic message
through the medium of AARP magazine, also known for its Marxist and Jewish agenda. Glover is
signaling deep occultic spirits to empower his quest.

--- Sayfa 408 ---
416
CODEX MAGICA
Sam Donaldson's face has been a staple for many years on ABC News. But here, in this photo in
Smart Business magazine, it is Donaldson's hands we should pay attention to. This full page shot
of Sam Donaldson had no caption and no explanation. Obviously, it was staged for the sole
benefit of those who know.

--- Sayfa 409 ---
THE MEROVINGIAN DYNASTY, THE PRIORY OF SION
4 1 7
Impresario Donald Trump
demonstrates his knowledge
of the Illuminati's cabalistic
Baphomet/Priory of Sion
hand sign in the ad (left,
above) for his successful TV
series, The Apprentice. Then,
in the glossy mag Private
Clubs, June 2004, read
mostly by wealthy members
of elite country clubs. Trump
is shown three times, once
on the cover and twice
inside, in cabalistic poses.
Analysis: At center, above,
Trump's necktie and hands
create a sexual "diamond in
the lotus" position, with
three triangles. The
magazine cover photo at left
includes the mirror factor,
the message being that there
are two Trumps, the
esoteric, private "Illuminati
Trump," and the outgoing
and extroverted "Public
Trump." Finally, at top,
right, we also are shown a
serious Donald sitting and
giving the required cabalistic
triangle sign with both the
fingers and thumbs of both
hands touching. This is a
common sign of recognition
among Illuminati.

--- Sayfa 410 ---
4 1 8
CODEX MAGICA

--- Sayfa 411 ---
TWENTY-ONE
Magical Signs of the Jewish Cabala—The
Six-Pointed Star, Babylonian Witchcraft,
and the Hollywood Perdition of Jerry
Seinfeld and Associates
He said furthermore unto me, Son of man, seest thou what they do? even the great
abominations that the house of Israel committeth here...
Ezekiel 8:6
Kabbalism is a system of Jewish mysticism and magic and is the foundational
element in modern witchcraft. Virtually all of the great witches and sorcerers of this
century were Kabbalists.
— William J. Schnoebelen, in
The Dark Side of Freemasonry
In the decades of the 70s, 80s, and 90s, the hottest spiritual trend was the
New Age movement. As we move forward through the first decade of the
21st century, the latest cure-all spiritual phenomenon seems to be the
Jewish Cabala (or Kabbalah). The Cabala is not new, of course. It's been around for
centuries. The Cabala is actually ancient magic. It is an exotic blend of devilish,
sometimes fanciful, New Age mystical practices topped by a philosophical bent of
Jewish supremacism. Orthodox Judaism, or phariseeism, is rife with cabalism, and
Jewish rabbis are the Cabala's greatest promoters.

--- Sayfa 412 ---
420
CODEX MAGICA
Celebrities and Cabala
The recent explosion in mainstream interest in cabalism is boosted by the many big-
name celebrities who have recently been hawking cabalism as the miraculous answer
to all of man's problems. An undercover BBC reporter who infiltrated a London
cabala group witnessed singer Madonna and Guy Ritchie chanting mystic spells to
"cleanse" Chernobyl, the site in Ukraine of a nuclear plant disaster in 1986.1 Other
news accounts link entertainers Paris Hilton, Britney Spears, Roseanne Barr, Demi
Moore, Shirley MacLaine, Ashton Kutcher, Sandra Bernhard, Barbra Streisand,
Dianne Keaton, Gwyneth Paltrow, Goldie Hawn, Elizabeth Taylor, Michael Jackson,
Mick Jagger, Uri Gellar, Diane Ladd, Laura Dern and a legion of other "stars" with
practice of cabala.2
Look closely when you see any of these people on TV or pictured in magazines
and you'll often see the characteristic red string wristband they wear. Lately, former
President Bill Clinton's been spotted wearing it—he's a cabalist—and so has Florida's
politician Katherine Harris, who became a famous household icon as Florida's
Republican Secretary of State during the bizarre 2000 election snafu. Republican big-
wig and former House Speaker, Newt Gingrich is reported to be a cabala advocate,
and some say conservative talk show host Rush Limbaugh and his rabbi are also into
the cabala.
Among the most notorious of cabalists are the TV comedy stars of the once #1-
rated "The Jerry Seinfeld Show." The producer of the Seinfeld show was Larry
David, a Jew, all four of the cast were Jews, and cabalistic hand signs, occult
language, and magic rituals were covertly planted in many episodes.
Republican Party
spokesman and former
Speaker of the House Newt
Gingrich, shown here
wearing his Judaism skull
cap, is into New Age
cabalistic magic and is a
paid spokesman for
Zionist interests.

--- Sayfa 413 ---
MAGICAL SIGNS OF THE JEWISH CABALA
421
Jason Alexander, who played the loveable loser "George Costanza" on the show,
posed for TV Guide magazine in a blatantly cabalistic body pose. Plus, his left and
right hands gave the "El Diablo" horned devil sign in an "As Above, So Below"
gesture.
Michael Richards, who portrayed the klutzy "Kramer" in Seinfeld, also seems to
relish giving cabalistic and Masonic hand signs and gestures. Richards was pictured
on the front cover of the Scottish Rite Journal, and inside the publication, he told of
how pleased he is to be a Freemason.3
Star Trek's Leonard Nimoy ("Mr. Spock") is constantly sighted in cabalistic poses.
His famous Vulcan hand sign on the TV series was actually the Hebrew letter, Shin.4
Its display is part and parcel of Jewish religion. So every time viewers observed Mr.
Spock (Nimoy) giving the sign, they were unknowingly being made a participant in
a cabalistic occult ritual.
Sodom, Egypt, and 21st Century Judaism
In one of the most controversial of all the many video documentaries I have
produced, Cauldron of Abbadon, I stated, "From Jerusalem and Israel flow a torrent of
satanic evil and mischief endangering the whole world. "5 Zionist Jews and their cohorts
in the Christian Zionist community were angered over what I said, but they had no
response to the mountain of facts presented in the video proving my point.
It is undeniable that God Himself, in Revelation 11:8, declares that in the last days
just prior to Christ's return, one of the most wicked places on earth will be Jerusalem
and Israel. In Revelation God calls Jerusalem "Sodom and Egypt."
The question is, why? Why is Jerusalem and the nation of Israel spiritually
"Sodom and Egypt?" I believe it is because of the Jewish religion, a religion
diametrically opposed to the Old Testament faith of Moses, Isaac, Jacob, and the
prophets.
From the days of the Jews' captivity in Babylon, to today, the religion of the Jews
has increasingly grown more dark and more wicked. Jesus openly castigated the
Jewish religionists; He called them "blind guides," "fools, hypocrites." He said, "ye
devour widows' houses, and for a pretense make long prayer...ye compass sea and
land to make one proselyte, and when he is made, ye make him twofold more the
child of hell than yourselves" (Matthew 23:14-15).
Children of hell, that's what Jesus called the Jewish religious teachers. That was
almost 2,000 years ago. Well, guess what? The Jewish religionists are even worse
now, in the 21st century. They've had almost 2,000 years more to practice and perfect
their evil religion. Today, those who practice satanic cabalism and believe in the
Talmud are the children of hell a hundred times over.
In Codex Magica we do not have the space to fully report on the almost
unbelievably wicked Talmudic and Cabalistic religion of the Jews. But it is important
to understand that the horrific nature of the Jews' religion lie in its man-made
traditions. In reality, these traditions are satanic in origin. I refer especially to the
Jewish Talmud, the legalistic law traditions of the rabbis, and to the Jewish Cabala (also
Kabbalah or Quaballah), which are the mystical teachings and traditions of the rabbis
and sages.

--- Sayfa 414 ---
422
CODEX MAGICA
If the Jews had stuck to the teachings of the Old Testament, Satan would not have
had such terrible inroads. Indeed, if Moses and the prophets had been heeded, or if
their writings were honored today, the Jews would believe in Jesus Christ as Messiah
and be saved by faith in His promises. Instead, the Jews departed from the prophets,
and over the centuries the rabbis steadily developed a body of man-made literature
(the Talmud and the Cabala) that is supremely wicked and corrupt. Their traditions,
moreover, are antithetical to the Faith and teachings of Moses and the prophets. (I do
not refer, of course, to the Faith of Jews who are Christian believers.)
Worse, it can be remarkably demonstrated that the philosophy and doctrines of
the Jewish Cabala are the very fount and wellspring of virtually every wicked, occult
sect, satanic secret society, and witchcraft cult that has arisen in the past one
thousand years!
The Cabala brings together in one neat package the core of all the Mystery
teachings of the ancients. Indeed, the Holy Bible gives evidence that the Jewish elders
had brought the Mysteries into the Temple and had conducted secret ceremonies in
hidden chambers as far back as the days of the prophet Ezekiel (see Ezekiel 8). God
called these teachings and rituals "abominations."
Regrettably, the abominations are multiplied in the 21st century Jewish religion
in which the Cabala plays a central role.
The Masonic Lodge and The Cabala
Freemasonry has long praised the Cabala, and its top officials have admitted that the
Lodge's rituals and teachings are but the offspring of the Jewish tradition. Albert
Pike, former Sovereign Grand Commander of the Scottish Rite wrote: "One is filled
with admiration, on penetrating into the Sanctuary of the Cabala."6
Just how much Masonry owes to the Cabala is illustrated by study of the Knights
of Kadosh degree (30°). Ed Decker, director of Free the Masons Ministries, reports
that the trappings of this degree ritual are "overtly sinister" and incorporate a "High
level of Kabbalistic symbolism."
When one is surrounded by black curtains, skulls, and a coffin with a shrouded
knight speaking forth from within, it doesn't take a spiritual giant to discern that
this is not a godly organization!7
Confirming Decker's findings, medical doctor James L. Holly, a Christian who
has done great works in exposing Freemasonry, in his outstanding volume, The
Southern Baptist Convention and Freemasonry, shows how the 30° Masonic initiate is led
unawares into a direct spiritual relationship with Satan. In the ritual, Satan is
personified as a mysterious cabalistic mystic.8
Interestingly, Richardson's Monitor of Freemasonry says that, "the Knights of
Kadosh Degree is intimately connected with the ancient Order of Knights Templar,
as it commemorates their old ceremonies of initiation."9 Allegedly, the members of
the Order of Knights Templar worshipped Baphomet, the hideous male/female
Luciferian goat god and conducted blasphemous ceremonies, which included
urinating on a cross and homosexual sodomy.

--- Sayfa 415 ---
MAGICAL SIGNS OF THE JEWISH CAB A LA 423
Freemasonry is Jewish
In 1855, the renowned Rabbi Isaac Wise wrote: "Freemasonry is a Jewish
establishment, whose history, grades, official appointments, passwords, and
explanations are Jewish from beginning to end."10
The Jewish Tribune newspaper, in 1927, in an editorial, stated: "Freemasonry is
based on Judaism. Eliminate the teachings of Judaism from the Masonic ritual and
what is left?"11
Ray Novosel, writing from Australia in 2004, states:
Zionist world leaders, men in influential positions with the various Masonic
organizations everywhere, have worked "hand in glove" for a universal world
revolution, which will bring in the One World Church and a One World
Government. Many Masonic Lodges are exclusively Jewish, as are the controlling

--- Sayfa 416 ---
424
CODEX MAGICA
B'nai B'rith Lodges —the mother of the infamous and very dangerous Anti
Defamation League (ADL).12
Masonry's Jewish
Roots
A popular pro-Freemasonry web site, in an article entitled "Judaism and Freemasonry,"
comments:
Jews were actively involved in the beginnings of Freemasonry in America. There is
evidence they were among those who established Masonry in seven of the original
thirteen states...A Jewish Mason, Moses M. Hays, helped introduce the Scottish Rite
in America...Jews, including Rabbis, continued to be involved in the Masonic
movement in the United States throughout our history. There have been 51 Jewish
American Grand Masters...
There are many common themes and ideals in Masonic and Jewish rituals, symbols,
and words.13
The late Pope John Paul II was a believer
in Jewish Cabala. On March 22, 1984,
the Pope received members of the
infamous B'nai B'rith Freemasonry Lodge
of New York City, made up exclusively of
influential Jews, at the Vatican.
"I am proud to be a Mason" writes Rabbi Seymour Adas,
32o, in this issue of The New Age Magazine (April 1987).
Note: The name of this magazine has since been changed
to The Scottish Rite Journal, to hide the connection of
Masons with the occultic New Age movment. In fact, the
Masonic order is predominantly led by Jews. As its
former Sovereign Grand Commander, Albert Pike, has
revealed, the symbols and rituals of Freemasonry are all
based on the Cabala of the Jews.

--- Sayfa 417 ---
MAGICAL SIGNS OF THE JEWISH CABALA
425
The most honored Masonic leader in the history of Freemasonry was Albert Pike.
Pike maintained that, "every Masonic Lodge is a temple of religion; and its teachings
are instruction in religion."14 Now, Pike also asserted that the true meanings of the
symbols of Freemasonry are found in the occult philosophy of the Jewish Cabala, that
Freemasonry owes all its secrets to the Cabala, and that Freemasonry is a religion
based on the Cabala.15
Demons, Magic, and Mysticism in the Cabala
Here are the eye-opening comments of a number of knowledgeable authorities on the
Jewish Cabala:
The Cabala contains such power and demonic teaching, it is more than enough to
give the ideology and driving force needed to lead the world astray and to keep
such an evil conspiracy alive through the centuries...The Cabala is a teaching
source of the Freemasons as well as for other groups.
— John Torrell, publisher
The Dove
Kabbalah: The sacred books of black magic of Orthodox Judaism which form a large
part of the basis of the western secret societies, from Rosicrucianism to Freemasonry
and the OTO. Kabbalism is itself derived from the sorcery of ancient Babylon
and...Pharaohic Egypt.
— Craig Heimbichner
Blood on the Altar
Kabbalism is a system of Jewish mysticism and magic and is the foundational
element in modern witchcraft. Virtually all of the great witches and sorcerers of this
century were Kabbalists.
— William J. Schnoebelen,
The Dark Side of Freemasonry
The Hebrew Cabala is a series of occultic writings that are as demonic as any
incantation ever uttered in witchcraft. Webster's Dictionary tells us the Cabala
(sometimes spelled Kabbala) is "an occult religious philosophy developed by
certain Jewish rabbis..."
— James Lloyd
The Apocalypse Chronicles
(Vol. VII, No. 1, 2005)

--- Sayfa 418 ---
426
CODEX MAGICA
Sorcery is commonplace in the depraved religious
rituals of cabalistic Judaism. Here a rabbi is seen
carrying a chicken off to be sacrificed in a voodoo/
Santeria-type ritual during the Jewish festival of
Yom Kippur. (Israel, A Photobiography, by Micha
Bar-Am, New York: Simon & Schuster, 1998)
Twisted Satanic Rituals and lies
The rabbinical doctrines and teachings of
Cabalism are based on a curious blending
and mosaic of astrology, numerology,
graphology, color magic, symbology,
alchemy,
pagan
religion,
and
pure
Luciferianism.
There are hand signs and body
gestures, talismanic jewelry and clothing,
hidden codes, and on and on. The end
result is a confusing jumble of "man is
God" theology (but only Jewish man—
Gentiles
are
inferior)
and
magical
formulae, words of power, incantations
and spells. Heads of chickens are cropped
off and blood sprinkled around; "magic
cords" of specific color are worn on the wrist as miracle-working bracelets; magic
water is used to heal; magic symbols are objects of trance-like mediation; and mantra-
like chants are repeated over and over.
The 22 letters of the Hebrew alphabet are touted as religious idols of great
magical powers. Even their shapes are studied and accorded supernatural powers.
Angels, Archangels, grimoires, devas, and elementals are worshipped and feared.
There are "gods" and more "gods" but only a mysterious, hazy supreme deity
behind everything. This supreme deity is a pantheistic god who fills up the whole
universe. In fact, he is the macrocosm, the Universe.
Of course, as in all Illuminist magic, there's the double-minded theology of "As
Above, So Below," the insidious lie that black is white and vice versa; that good and
evil are one, that the shadow and the substance are unitary.
Sex magic holds an important place in Cabalism, and sex ritual is a popular
vocation of students of Cabala.
Margie Martin, in her informed, unpublished manuscript for her upcoming book,
The Molten Image, explains that the Tarot cards of witches and occultists are of Jewish
origin and correspond with the 22 letters of the Hebrew alphabet.
Finally, Cabalism is pure Illuminism because it teaches the secret doctrine that,
ultimately, the higher level adept learns: That the Holy Serpent is the true God; that
all the evil that a person does, through alchemy, is magically transformed into
righteousness; and that, yes, Lucifer is Lord. Satan is the true and only god. That is
the essential doctrine of Cabalism.

--- Sayfa 419 ---
MAGICAL SIGNS OF THE JEWISH CABALA
4 2 7
The Star of David and The Jewish Utopia
The symbol of the Jewish six-pointed star, known as the Seal of Solomon and as the
Magen David, is the preeminent symbol of Cabalism, but other symbols, signs, and
marks also hold the interest of cabalists, including the pentagram or pentacle, the
triangle, the circle, the sun, the obelisk, the yoni, and the diamond. It is believed by
cabalistic rabbis that there are hidden codes and messages in the numbering of
scriptural letters. It is also believed that by working the Cabala, the earth may
someday be renovated, rebuilt, perfected. This, say the rabbis, will result in a perfect
Jewish Kingdom, or Utopia on earth, ruled by a Cabalist Master, a Jewish leader,
naturally.
This belief system of the coming of a Jewish Utopia fits in well with the teachings
of the Illuminati. Lady Queensborough, quoting the Jewish authority Bernard
Lazare, in the classic Occult Theocracy, reported that, "There were Jews behind
Weishaupt, founder of the Order of the Illuminati...Jewish financiers such as Daniel
Itzig, Friedlander, Ceerfbeer, Benjamin and Abraham Goldsmid, Moses Mocatta,
Veitesl Heine Ephram...also Moses Mendelsohn, Naphtali Wessely, Moses
Hersheim..."16
David Ben Gurion, the first Prime Minister of the newly formed nation of Israel,
performs the First Sign of a Select Master Mason. Ben Gurion, a dedicated
Marxist/Leninist, was quoted as saying, "I am in favor of Bolshevism" (American
Spectator, January, 1998). (Photos: Richardson's Monitor of Freemasonry, p.
84; Israel, A Photobiography, by Micha Bar-Am, New York: Simon & Schuster,
1998)

--- Sayfa 420 ---
428
CODEX MAGICA
This illustration from Mackey's Encyclopedia of Masonry dates the founding by Jews of
the Royal Order of the Freemasons in Palestine at Anno Lucis 4037, or 37 AD.
Chart of Masonic emblems showing the many degrees published, distributed by a
Jewish-owned jewelry firm.

--- Sayfa 421 ---
MAGICAL SIGNS OF THE JEWISH CABALA
4 2 9
An old English masonic manual. The words Orbis Miraculum mean
"Magic Mirror."

--- Sayfa 422 ---
430
CODEX MAGICA
Many in the Arab and Islamic world know that Zionism is racism and resent the United
States' blind support of Israeli Zionist aggression. Fanatical Zionism has also led to
Masonic excesses, Talmudic evil, and cabalistic magic by satanic Jews. (Photo: Reuters)

--- Sayfa 423 ---
MAGICAL SIGNS OF THE JEWISH CABALA
431
BLOOD
RITUAL
Philip de Vier
For many years, in Europe and Russia, reports of cabalistic blood ritual sacrifices of young Gentile
girls and boys were commonplace. While many were hype and based on old wives' tales, apparently
at least some accounts proved to be true, as documented in this revealing book.

--- Sayfa 424 ---
MAGICAL SIGNS OF THE JEWISH CABALA
4 3 3
Some say the word and name of "Fox"
has hidden, cabalistic significance.
Numerologically, the letters FOX in
the English alphabet equal the sum of
666. Jesus once called Israel's King
Herod, a murderous scheming man
who embraced magic, "That old fox."
Fox television network is owned by
Rupert Murdock, an ardent Zionist.

--- Sayfa 425 ---
434
CODEX MAGICA
Logo of the Israel international spy agency, the Mossad.
The Mossad has a notorious reputation for
skullduggery, deception, murder, and assassination.
Mossad agents commit many terrorist crimes and the
Jewish-run media conveniently blame them on "Arab
terrorists." Motto of Mossad and its logo is "By
Deception We Conduct War."
Cabala symbol (from book,
Art and Symbols of the Occult,
Destiny Books, Rochester,
Vermont)
ITS
ORIGIN AND
DEVELOPMENT
Francois
Lenormant
This front cover of
book "Chaldean Magic"
highlights the
importance of the Star
of David to occult
ritual and magic.
CHALDEAN
MAGIC

--- Sayfa 426 ---
MAGICAL SIGNS OF THE JEWISH CABALA
435

--- Sayfa 427 ---
436
CODEX MAGICA
The magic of the Cabala calls for many uses of the occultic star. Both the five pointed star and
six-pointed star are used by Jewish magicians who work the Cabala formulas and rituals. An
enduring cabalistic tale is that of the Golem. In medieval times, it was taught that by use of the
magic word and by other means, an inanimate man made of clay or dust could be made to come
alive. A huge and powerful monster, or beast, the Golem would then do the magician's bidding. In
1920, the classic film Der Golem created a stir. Directed by Paul Wegener, Der Golem depicted the
monster variously wearing either the five-pointed star with one point up (white magic) or two
points up (satanic). Also the six pointed Star of David played a part in the film's plot as a Jewish
Rabbi, Rabbi Low, using the secret word "AemAct" brought life and breath into the artificial man.
In Der Golem,
Rabbi Low employs
the magic word and
the pentagram star
to bring life to the
creature.
Der Golem's film
crew used this
drawing as a model.

--- Sayfa 428 ---
MAGICAL SIGNS OF THE JEWISH CABALA
4 3 7

--- Sayfa 429 ---
4 3 8
CODEX MAGICA
This album was
advertised in Christian
Retailing magazine in
February 2002, but me
handsign of the person
seems to be cabalistic.
Horror fiction novelist Stephen King with
his hands in exactly the same, familiar
position as that of Senator Schumer (right
page).
Israel's Prime Minister Ehud Barak (left), U.S.A.
President Bill Clinton (center), and PLO Chief
Yasser Arafat each look down at their hands to
make sure they get their masonic grips done
correctly. Notice overlapping hands by Clinton.
(Photo and article: Austin American-Statesman,
November 3, 1999, p. A2)

--- Sayfa 430 ---
MAGICAL SIGNS OF THE JEWISH CABALA
439
Placing one hand, resembling horns, in the other symbolizes the idea that the person is entrusting
his soul in care to the superior deity (Satan). Thus, he is submissive, playing down his own power
and acknowledging a superior power which controls him. In effect, Senator Charles Schumer (D-NY),
ADL fanatic and avid Jewish Talmudist, greets "in-the-know" readers of Newsweek (December 28,
1998) with a cabalistic sign. The knowing look on Schumer's face is telling, isn't it?

--- Sayfa 431 ---
440
CODEX MAGICA
Albert Nicholas, head of Wall Street's Nicholas
Fund mutual stock firm, in Newsweek. (October
10, 1994, p. 52)
Rabbi Yehuda Getz, Chief Rabbi of all
the holy places in Israel, holds his
hands in the cabalistic pose. Rabbi Getz
claims he knows where the Ark of the
Covenant is hidden beneath the Temple
Mount in Jerusalem.
Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu (right) with Knesset
leader Milo (left). Notice Milo's hand sign. (1 he
Jerusalem Report, August II, 1998, p. 15)
Profiled in the elitist Private Clubs magazine
(May/June 2004), Kumar Malavalli, shown
here apparently displaying the same hand
sign as U.S. Senator Charles Schumer, is said
to be a member of the Silicon Valley Capital
Club. Malavalli, a native of India, has
founded multiple companies and has a
portfolio of a dozen businesses.

--- Sayfa 432 ---
MAGICAL SIGNS OF THE JEWISH CABALA
441
Statesmen and Nobel laureates in Israel for a Shimon Peres Peace Center conference interlink
hands masonically.
A beautifully staged Masonic production with each actor playing his role with adeptness
as all form a symbol. (left- Israeli Prime MinisterYitzhak Rabin; center- President Bill
Clinton; right- PLO Chief Yasser Arafat)

--- Sayfa 433 ---
442
CODEX MAGICA
The finger to the head like these
indicates the elite's approval of the
individual's intellect and fitness for
office or promotion to the next level.
Drawing from an old masonic text.
Campaign rally for Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon (Photo: International Jerusalem Post, February
9,2001)

--- Sayfa 434 ---
MAGICAL SIGNS OF THE JEWISH CABALA
4 4 3
An excerpt from p. 42 of Richardson s Monitor of Freemasonry showing the Due Guard of the Mark
Master in the Lodge. Cabalistic Jews also have similar signs, some using one finger, others using two
fingers to the head as is customarily the case in the Mark Master (4th) degree.
Malcolm X wears a ring of the Black Muslims
while giving the Masonic sign. Both Malcolm
X and Black Muslim leader Louis Farrakhan
were initiated into the 33rd degree of Prince
Hall Freemasonry, an order exclusively made
up of African ethnics.

--- Sayfa 435 ---
444
CODEX MAGICA

--- Sayfa 436 ---
MAGICAL SIGNS OF THE JEWISH CABALA
445

--- Sayfa 437 ---
446
CODEX MAGICA
Edgar Bronfman, Jr., son of billionaire Edgar Bronfman, Sr., head of the World
Jewish Congress, is CEO of Seagram, the giant liquor and entertainment industry
conglomerate. Seagram's logo is subtly placed on the wall and includes a white horse
(shades of Revelation 6?) and other interesting features. (Photo: USA Today,
December 14, 1998)
In Cabala, the Sacred Tree of the
Sephiroth is claimed to represent the
Cosmos, including God (male), his
Shekinah (Anna, the goddess/female),
and the Kingdom of Zion. As shown here,
the Foundation of all things is the male
genitals, or the sex generative process.
(Zolar's Encyclopedia of Ancient and
Forbidden Knowledge, Arco Publishing,
1984)

--- Sayfa 438 ---
MAGICAL SIGNS OF THE JEWISH CABALA
447
Jewish comedian Jerry
Seinfeld strikes a
decidedly cabalistic
pose. It is well-known
in entertainment
circles that Jerry
Seinfeld—indeed, all of
the performers on TV's
popular Seinfeld
sitcom-practice cabala
magic and ritual.
According to Forbes
magazine in 1998, Jerry
Seinfeld made a
whopping total of $225
million on the comedy
circuit. And that's no
joke! (Photo and
article: Austin
American-Statesman,
September 9, 1998, p.
A14)
Rabbi Shmuley Boteach has gained a
measure of fame for his national
columns, his books (Kosher Sex), and
for the fact that he once was a
confidant and spiritual counselor and
advisor to black superstar singer,
Michael Jackson. Here we see Rabbi
Boteach in a pose familiar to
practitioners of Cabala. (Photo and
article: The International Jerusalem
Post, December 28, 2001)

--- Sayfa 439 ---
448
CODEX MAGICA
Ben Stiller, popular Jewish comedian and movie
celebrity, in a cabalistic pose with his hands. His left
hand folded on top over the left indicated Stiller follows
the left-hand (dark) path. On the opposite page, David
Rockefeller gives notice he follows the right-hand path.
San Francisco Mayor Gavin Newsom lets insiders know he's one
of them with this cabalistic hand/arms gesture. Newsom became
the gay community's ultraliberal darling in 2003 by promoting
gay marriages. Time magazine's editors go wild in this article,
mentioning that the mayor is "simply adored," touting his many
achievements, and insisting that publishers give him a "fat cat"
contract to write a book. (Time, April 25, 2005)

--- Sayfa 440 ---
MAGICAL SIGNS OF THE JEWISH CABALA
4 4 9
The glossy magazine Town & Country selected David Rockefeller, Sr., President of Chase Manhattan
Bank and founder of the Trilateral Commission, as "Our Generous American for 1995." This full page
photo, bearing no caption or explanation, was included in the magazine exactly as you see it. Occult
experts and those knowledgeable of masonic and cabalistic signals will recognize the significance of
Rockefeller's pose; also the "X" design cufflinks and the "diamond" designs of necktie.

--- Sayfa 441 ---
450
CODEX MAGICA

--- Sayfa 442 ---
MAGICAL SIGNS OF THE JEWISH CABALA
451
Cabalists and members of
many secret societies use
"sacred geometry" to create
designs and symbols of
magical and occultic power.
This is the cover of one book
on this subject. Hundreds of
books and texts on sacred
geometry have been published
over the centuries, from the
days of Pythagoras.
The Hindu religion also is big on sacred geometry
and cabalistic oriented measurements and
architecture. This is a "plan" for a Hindu temple
based on the diagram of the Perusha, or "Cosmic
Man."The ancient Hindu architectural sutra (rule)
proclaims that, "The whole universe is present in the
Temple in the form of geometric proportion." In the
Hindu practice of Yoga, the participant bends and
twists his or her body parts and limbs into specific
forms symbolic of universal energies (Drawing from
book, Sacred Geometry, by Robert Lawlor, Thames
and Hudsen, London, 1989, p. 92)

--- Sayfa 443 ---
452
CODEX MAGICA

--- Sayfa 444 ---
MAGICAL SIGNS OF THE JEWISH CABALA
4 5 3
Again we discover the comedy team from Seinfeld teaming up to present cabalistic messages. Observe
the V in Michael Richards' ("Kramer") leg and in Julia Louis-Dreyfuss' ("Elaine") arm; the circle that
Richards makes with the fingers of his left hand, the "X" made by the intersecting hands and wrists
of Richard and Louis-Dreyfuss; the descendant triangle sign of Jason Alexander's ("George") hands,
and so on.

--- Sayfa 445 ---
454
CODEX MAGICA
Sign of the Ram: 2004 Vice Presidential candidate, Senator Joseph
Liebennan, a Jew, on the campaign trail. The placement of both hands
downward to create the appearance of the two horns of a ram is a
cabalistic sign often given by members of Middle Eastern Lodges,
especially the Masonic lodges of Israel. It is a sign of high rank and is
said to invoke good fortune on the part of the user. The sign is often
given publicly at the beginning, or commencement of a project to
enhance success.
Promoter Sidney Shlenker, here giving the sign of the
ram, was in the news back in 1992, Shlenker, a Jewish
wheeler-dealer and owner of a professional basketball
team, was co-builder of Memphis, Tennessee's massive
new Great Pyramid of the Americas.
Newly chosen Palestinian leader Mahmoud Abbas,
successor to the late PLO Chief Yasser Arafat, gives the
cabalistic sign with his hands to indicate expectation of
success and to invoke good fortune. It is thus apparent
that Abbas is a servant to the Jewish Illuminati who
only pretends to represent Palestinian interests. (U.S.
News & World Report, January 10, 2005)

--- Sayfa 446 ---
MAGICAL SIGNS OF THE JEWISH CABALA
455
Four Middle Eastern leaders, all brother Masons, met in 1997 in so-called "peace negotiations." From
left to right: Israeli Prime Minister Yitzak Rabin, Jordan's King Hussein, Egyptian President Hosni
Mubarak, and Palestinian Leader Yasser Arafat. Mubarak is giving the cabalistic sign of the ram.
(Photo: Mews From Israel, October 1997)
Israel's Ashkenazi Chief Rabbi Yisrael Lau clearly conveys a cabalistic message to Egyptian
President Hosni Mubarak. In return Mubarak's left hand under his chin presents a
Masonic message. (Photo: The Omega Times, New Zealand, January 1996, p. 7)

--- Sayfa 447 ---
456
CODEX MAGICA
This picture of South African
leader Nelson Mandela took up
an entire page in Modern
Maturity magazine in 2004.
Modern Maturity is distributed
by AARP, which some believe to
be managed and run by a radical
leftist/Zionist faction purporting
to represent seniors. In this
picture, Mandela takes joy in
presenting the double V (shin)
sign of cabalism. Nelson Mandela
became a Mason in 1994. He is a
tool of the Rothschilds and the
Oppenheimers.
Hindu Dance, Hindu Gods: The
positions of Hundu classical dance
(Bharat Natyatn) describe
geometric angular relationships
from the axis of the body's center
of gravity just below the navel.
These positions, while defining
principle angles, are also often
attributed to various deities and
are meant to convey their
characteristic powers. (Drawing
from book, Sacred Geometry, by
Robert Lawlor, Thames and
Hudsen, London,1989, p. 95)

--- Sayfa 448 ---
MAGICAL SIGNS OF THE JEWISH CABALA
4 5 7
The late Arthur Murray was called
"America's Dancing Master," and so he
was. A talented genius on the dance floor,
Murray's real name was Arthur Teichman,
Jewish of course. From the era of the
roaring 20s to today, a number of the fad
dances were based on masonic and Jewish
cabalistic rituals.

--- Sayfa 449 ---
458
CODEX MAGICA
Anne Rice, writer of the
popular "Vampire" series,
giving an occult, cabalistic
sign with her left-hand,
partially concealed yet in
front of all. Various occult
symbols are on Rice's shirt.
The statues of Mary give
evidence of Rice's veneration
of the Virgin in the form of
the eternal pagan goddess.
(Photo: Associated Press in
Austin American-Statesman,
January 31, 2004, p. A2)
Chaim Potok, Hasidic
Jewish writer and
novelist, creates a
headcovering of cabalistic
magic. This sign is also
reminiscent of the fourth
sign in the initiation for
the Select Master's Degree
(see Richardson's Monitor
of Freemasonry, p. 85).
(Photo: Newsweek,
August 5, 2002)
Mr. Spock, a Star Trek character played by actor Leonard Nimoy, became
famous for giving the Vulcan greeting with his right hand. Nimoy, a Jew,
says that the sign is the same gesture given in Jewish Synagogues when the
Rabbi and Elders bring out the Holy of Holies. It is based on the Hebrew
letter "shin." In essence, on the popular TV show, every time Spock gave the
"shin" Vulcan greeting hand sign, he was invoking cabalistic magic.

--- Sayfa 450 ---
TWENTY-TWO
Scorched by the Sun—Solar Signs,
Circles, and Serpents
It is He (God) that sitteth upon the circle of the earth...
- Isaiah 40:22 (written about
1,000 years before Columbus
proved the earth was not flat)
It would not be impossible to prove, with sufficient repetition and psychological
understanding of the people concerned, that a square is, in fact, a circle.
— Joseph Goebbels
Propaganda Minister
Nazi Germany
In the mythology of the primitive world, the serpent is universally the symbol of the
sun...The serpent was universally represented by the sun symbol, the circle or disk.
— Bishop Alexander Hislop
The Two Babylons
T h e sun has ever been at the center of false religion. The Ancient Mystery
Religions venerated the sun, the solar disk, as deity. The Greeks
honored Apollo as the child of the sun. The Romans paid homage to
Mithra the sun god. These pagan philosophies form the basis for the worship of the

--- Sayfa 451 ---
460
CODEX MAGICA
Illuminati and indicate the importance of the sun
as symbol of satanic deity.
Englishman John Yarker, a well-known nine-
teenth century Masonic magician and occultist, in
his Notes on the Scientific and Religious Mysteries of
Antiquity, makes mention of the fact that the High
Priests of the ancient Jews also worshipped the sun
god. He writes:
The Mysteries we know were practiced in a
secret subterranean chamber under the
Temple of Solomon, at Jerusalem, where four
and twenty elders adored the sun, with their
Sun worship in Peru exemplifies the
faces toward the east.'
universal worship of the sun god, or
solar diety.
What Yarker says is true, but as the Scriptures
give evidence, this unholy worship by the Jewish
leaders in secret was an abomination to God. Ezekiel 8 makes this crystal clear. It is
understandable why God would so detest worship of the sun god by the Mystery
Religions and by the apostate Jewish elders. In reality, in worshipping the sun, the
ancients were worshipping Satan. G.H. Pember, in a scholarly work on the Mysteries,
Earth's Earliest Ages, affirms this fact when he states, "There is little doubt that the
culmination of the Mysteries was the worship of Satan himself."2
Now today, the Masons, as did the apostate Jewish elders and priests in the days
of Ezekiel, continue to worship Satan the sun god, also called Lucifer or Baal, by other
names. The name of their great god, Jahbuhlun, which is revealed to Masons in the
higher degrees, is a synonym for the solar deity; two of the three syllables in the
name, buh and lun, mean "Baal" and "On," both of which represent sun and fire
gods. That is why, in the authoritative guide Gods of the Lodge, Reginald Haupt
reports that in the Lodge:
All the movements by the Consecrating Officers of the Masonic Lodge or Chapter
follow the course of the Sun. The Master and the Wardens enter and leave their
chairs as the Sun returns to the East and goes forth therefrom. Most processional
occasions are governed by these principles of what is known as
"circumambulation." This ritual came from the ancient pagan rites of the Egyptians
and from the worship of their Sun God and of the sun itself. 3
The first 15 divisions of the Egyptian Royal Cubit. Each division of the cubit was dedicated to a
divinity, and the first division, on the right, shows the hieroglyph of the sun god Ra, symbol of
divine unity. (From the book, Jesus Christ, Sun of God: Ancient Cosmology and Early Christian
Symbolism, by David Fideler, Quest Books, Wheaton, Illinois)

--- Sayfa 452 ---
SCORCHED BY THE SUN
461
Halos, also known as nimbuses, present the individual
as a saint, a deity, or other holy person. (From the
Herder Dictionary of Symbols, Chiron Publications,
Wilmette, Illinois)
At right: Congressman Tom Delay (R-TX), House
Majority Leader, pictured in Time magazine. Politicians
are sometimes framed with a sun-like halo, called a
"nimbus," over their heads. This gives them the subtle
majestic appearance of being some type of god-man.
In honoring and worshipping the sun in their rituals, Freemasonry and
Illuminism defy God. The Bible's Job displayed great wisdom by uttering these
words concerning God's thoughts concerning worship of the sun and the heavens:
If I beheld the sun when it shined, or the moon walking in brightness; and my heart
hath been secretly enticed... this also was an iniquity to be punished by the judge; for I
should have denied the God who is above. (Job 31:26-28)
The Swastika Represents the Sun
The Nazi swastika is a representation of the sun. But the Nazis simply borrowed this
symbol from the ancient religions, including the Hindus of India, the Shintoists of
Japan, and a number of Native American Indian tribes. Even today, in temples and
shrines throughout Asia, you will find the swastika painted on walls, on totem poles,
and over altars. Until Hitler and the Nazis gave the sign a bad reputation, the Masons
also universally used the sun sign. And today the symbol of the circle, particularly
that of the point within the circle, is a prominent feature of Masonic theology.
The Point Within the Circle
According to Mackey's Masonic Encyclopedia the hidden, true meaning of this symbol,
the point inside the circle, is far different than what the everyday Masonic brother is
told. In reality, its meaning is yet another proof that Masonry is a sex cult. Mackey
says the esoteric explanation is that the point within the circle is the male phallus, or
penis, and the circle is the female yoni, or vagina. Here, says Mackey, is a "symbol of
fecundity, expressed by the male generative principle."4
But, Mackey emphasizes, the sun is still not forgotten in Masonry, for while the

--- Sayfa 453 ---
462
CODEX MAGICA
importance to the Illuminati Masons and yet is so little recognized as significant by
the dumbed-down masses, many Illuminists enjoy a bit of mockery of the masses by
blatantly displaying this symbol. Some believe the Target department store chain
logo—the red circle and point—is one example.
Pat Robertson's Hidden Message
Pat Robertson, Religious Right leader of TVs The 700 Club and founder of the
Christian Coalition, gives us another graphic example. Some years ago, Robertson
had two books ghostwritten for him, one called The New World Order and another
titled The New Millennium. As happens often in elitist circles, the opinions and
material for both books seemed to be decidedly anti-elitist; they even exposed the
global conspiracy and the Illuminati. So, was Pat Robertson really joining the fight
against the evil Illuminati? Not on your life!
The books were for the "stupids," the masses. While reading The New Millennium
the reader ignorant of the uses of symbolism probably ignored the fact that at the top
of every page, a point within a circle could be found. This was Robertson's "hidden
code" to his elite pals that he was still on their side and was just taking the ignorant
masses for a ride.
The Sign of the Mafia, the Illuminati and of Druids
According to Dr. Cathy Burns, in Hidden Secrets of the Eastern Star, the point within
the circle is, "The sign of the infamous Mafia or Cosa Nostra," rather than the "black
hand" as many believe.6
But the real shocker is the importance given this
sign by Adam Weishaupt and the Order of the
Illuminati. Burns explains that because Illuminism
was so determined to keep the true nature of the
Order under wraps, its founder, Weishaupt,
ordered that the actual words "Illuminati" and
"Illuminism" never be used in correspondence.
Instead they were to be replaced by the astrological
symbol for the sun; that is, the circle with a dot in
the middle.7
Burns also gives evidence that the point within
An Arch-Druid from pagan Great
Britain in his ceremonial robes. (From
Wellcome's Ancient Cymric Medicine)

--- Sayfa 454 ---
SCORCHED BY THE SUN
463
the circle was used by the Druids of Britain, whose stone temples were circular with
a single stone erected in the center. They believed this design conferred magical
powers.
Flower Power and Magic Circles
The daisy flower, the marigold, and the sunflower also are indicative of the sun as
deity and so, traditionally, adherents of the Mystery Religions, as well as Hindus,
Zoroastrians, and others, utilize these symbols. Adam Weishaupt, founder in 1776 of
the Order of the Illuminari, encouraged "Flower Power" as a symbol, and it was
taken up by New Age hippies in the '60s.
The symbol of the circle is, for the Illuminari, sort of a pared down, basic sun sign.
That is why the circle is used so frequently and in a score of configurations within
Masonic and other secret society networks. It is also a staple of witchcraft and Satan
worship. Bill Schnoebelen, author of many books unmasking Freemasonry,
witchcraft, and the occult, was himself formerly a Mason as well as a male witch. He
has described the witch's "temple" as follows:
In witchcraft, the "temple" is frequently not a building but rather a sacred "Magic
Circle" laid down on the floor of a room with great ceremony. It is the sacred space
of the Wicca and serves the same function as a temple does to the Mason.8

--- Sayfa 455 ---
464
CODEX MAGICA

--- Sayfa 456 ---
SCORCHED BY THE SUN
465
Gods or Men?—Is there a concerted
plot to flood our consciousness with
images that build world leaders into
Mount Olympian man-gods,
mythological giants on earth? Internet sites
www.freepressinternational.com and www.Rense.com caught on to
this recent trend and published a number of photographs that
seem to confirm this bizarre plot. Free Press International, an
alternative news website, wrote, "These are just a few of the many
photographs mainstream media has been deliberately releasing to
the public showing our world leaders with halos. I'd say with the
shape our world is in right now, they should
have horns instead of halos. Most of these
pictures are coming from Associated Press, and
Reuters." Surely, the scriptures were right on
when they warned that the Devil himself often
comes disguised as an "angel of light." (Note:
Codex Magica has seen these pictures published
in an increasing number of media forums, from
Time and Newsweek to daily papers.)

--- Sayfa 457 ---
466
CODEX MAGICA
Upon his death, Time magazine published this telling photo of Beatle superstar George Harrison
(1943-2001) on the cover of its December 10, 2001 issue. Harrison, wearing black, in a black and
white photo, holds a sunflower, symbol of the Illuminati Sun God. The solar deity is also prominently
worshipped in the Hindu religion, and the Beatles were devoted followers of the Maharishi Mahesh
Yogi and other Indian Hindu gurus. Time's feature story, in fact, reports that George Harrison never
gave up on his gurus, to his dying breath. All the Beatles were drenched in illegal drugs, such as
cocaine, hashish, and heroin. Their album, Sergeant Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band, even had a
cameo photo of British "666" beast satanist priest, Aleister Crowley, on its cover. The latest
information is that the Beatles were an experimental music group sponsored behind the scenes by
British and U.S. intelligence. Their role was intended to use various psyops mechanisms and anti-
Christian messages to arouse turmoil and psychological trauma in society. One of the Beatles most
memorable albums was tided, Magical Mystery Tour. Beatle John Lennon was murdered by a man
many believe to have been a CIA trained "Manchurian
Candidate," and George Harrison was once
assaulted and stabbed by a would-be assassin.

--- Sayfa 458 ---
SCORCHED BY THE SUN
467
Hindu guru Maharishi Mahesh
Yogi and the Beatles. The Hindu
religion, thoroughly wicked and
satanic, is closely related to the
Illuminati's religious doctrines.
"The New Age is dawning. A sun
shines within every person."
That's the philosophy of the
"Taiyo no Kai" (Following The
Sun Association), founded by
Japan's Kaoru Nakamaru.

--- Sayfa 459 ---
468
CODEX MAGICA
Falun Gong is a religious movement in
China. With some 100 million adherents
worldwide, Falun Gong is a spiritual force
to be reckoned with. Its logo is the circle
with the yin/yang and the swastika (a sun
sign) prominently displayed.
The swastika (swirling sun sign) was not invented first by Hitler and the Nazis. It is an old
Freemasonry symbol. One can find swastikas painted and carved on ancient temples in Japan and
India, and on Native American Indian pottery and artifacts. It seems that the forces who gave us this
sign, the swastika, continue to attempt to reintroduce it to the masses. BBC News on-line recently
reported that Hindus want to reclaim the swastika, which their gurus claim has been a Hindu good
luck sign for centuries. "It's the second most sacred symbol in the Hindu tradition," said Hindu
Forum spokesman, Ramesh Kallidai. (BBC News/UK, January 19, 2005)

--- Sayfa 460 ---
SCORCHED BY THE SUN
469
In 2003, when the Coca-Cola Company in Hong Kong ran an ad promotion featuring a robot adorned
with swastikas, Jewish spokesmen balked. A Jewish rabbi, however, admitted, "The Nazi swastika can
easily be confused with Buddhist swastikas that are common in Asia." (Ananova.com news, May 1,
2003)

--- Sayfa 461 ---
4 7 0
CODEX MAGICA
Circular images of goddess
worship and sun adoration
are found in many New Age
and occult publications.
Witches are major promoters of the Goddess revival. Above is
an ad for a witch's periodic newspaper (address deleted).

--- Sayfa 462 ---
SCORCHED BY THE SUN
471
An interesting drawing
of an upscale witch,
complete with lunar
force (moon in window),
pentagram (on chair),
naked goddess holding
the radiating sun in her
left hand, and more.
(From the book, To Ride
a Silver Broomstick: New
Generation Witchcraft,
by Silver Raven Wolf,
Llewellyn Publications,
St. Paul, MN, 1993)
(From the book, To Ride a Silver
Broomstick: New Generation Witchcraft,
by Silver RavenWolf)
Logo for a publisher of many
occult and esoteric books.

--- Sayfa 463 ---
472
CODEX MAGICA
Two circle images used in
magical rites. Left: magic
circle with six-pointed
star (hexagram) and
occult cross. Right: magic
circle from Francis
Barrett's The Magus,
London, 1901. (From The
Herder Dictionary of
Symbols, Chiron
Publications, Wilmette,
IL, 1986)
"Wheel of Fortune" tarot card,
used by witches and seers for
predicting one's future. The
inner circle of the Illuminati
elite are sometimes referred to
as the "Wheel."
Stylized Oroboros
serpent biting its
tail, forming a
circle with its
body. Inside the
circle is the point
of Lucifer.
Logo for the Nicholas Roerich Museum in New York
City. Nicholas Roerich was a Russian mystic and
Freemason who had vast and mysterious influence
over both President Franklin D. Roosevelt and FDR's
Secretary of Agriculture, Henry Wallace. Reportedly,
FDR had the Treasury include the design of the all-
seeing eye and the pyramid on the U.S. one dollar
bill at Roerich's urging.

--- Sayfa 464 ---
SCORCHED BY THE SUN
473
This float honoring the sun (with six rays) was a part of the St. Patrick's Day Festival parade in
Dublin, Ireland. (Photo and article from The Korea Times newspaper, March 19, 2002, p. 14)
Designs on a return
envelope for subscriptions
of Meditation, a New Age
magazine.

--- Sayfa 465 ---
474
CODEX MAGICA
Like many in the New Age and occult worlds, the managers of Book People, a large occult
bookstore in Austin, Texas, claim their works are loving and good. But in this revealing
advertisement in the swirling astronomical spiral mist at right, is clearly seen the letter "S."
As in Satan? Let the discerning reader decide.

--- Sayfa 466 ---
SCORCHED BY THE SUN
475
Prozac can help? Really? So why the design resembling the oroboros serpent? And is it just this
author's imagination, or are the radiant sun rays in the form of number 6s?

--- Sayfa 467 ---
476
CODEX MAGICA
American Hindu guru DaFree John publishes The Dawn Horse newspaper with this unusual logo,
consisting of circles, flames, a white horse, the occultic star and two feet (the disciple on his
knees or prostrate).
Drawing in Circle Network News, well-known
witchcraft newspaper, a focal point for
worshippers of "Father Sun" and solar deities
according to the magazine.
Celtic cross
(sunwheel) and
torch adopted as
the emblem for
the America First
Party, a political
party geared to
the goals of the
white race,
headquartered in
Georgia.

--- Sayfa 468 ---
SCORCHED BY THE SUN
477
Advertisement for the 2004 movie, Alexander, a saga about the Greek conqueror, Alexander The
Great. Accurately portrayed on Alexander's tunic: An image of the great Sun God worshipped under a
variety of names by the ancients.

--- Sayfa 469 ---
478
CODEX MAGICA

--- Sayfa 470 ---
SCORCHED BY THE SUN
4 7 9
Native Americans
worshipping the Sun God,
bearing a totem idol.
(Engraving from Theodore
de Bry's America, 1590)
Mesopotamian worship of the Sun God. (British
Museum. London)
General plan of Cabalistic Jewish magic reveals
a diamond focal point and many concentric
circles. (From Encyclopedia of the Occult)

--- Sayfa 471 ---
480
CODEX MAGICA
A T-shirt offered by a
vendor of gift items
from the Hard Rock
Cafe restaurant chain.
Note the sun symbol.
Hard Rock cafes were
begun by Isaac Tigrett,
a multimillionaire
occultist who also
conceived The Great
American Pyramid, a
sports arena built in
Memphis, Tennessee.
The fairy tale legend of the origin of the peace sign
holds that it first came into use by Vietnam War
protestors. In reality, it has long been used as a sign
of the hatred of Christ and is called "Nero's Cross"

--- Sayfa 472 ---
SCORCHED BY THE SUN
4 8 1
The Greek theater at Epidaurus
(circa 300 B.C.) enclosed a design
of circle and point within. (Photo
from book, The Pattern and the
Prophecy, by James Harrison,
Isaiah Publications, 1994)
Variations of the Yin/Yang.

--- Sayfa 473 ---
TWENTY-THREE
"I Fell In To A Burning Ring of Fire"—
Arnold Schwarzenegger's Masonic Ring,
Newt Gingrich's T-Rex Dinosaur, and
Other Mysterious Messages on Rings
and Neckties of the Elite
One Ring to rule them all...One Ring to find them...One Ring to bring them all
and in the darkness bind them.
- J.R.R. Tolkien
Lord of the Rings
I fell in to a burning ring of fire. I went down, down, down, and the flames went
higher...
— Johnny Cash
Ring of Fire
T h e Illuminati seem to have an unusually passionate, if bizarre,
attachment to jewelry, tie tacks, ties, and items of clothing. The Masons
wear aprons, high hats, black clothing. They wear ties and rings
emblazoned with symbols. And as the individual Mason progresses upwards to the
33rd degree, he is awarded "Jewels" befitting his various earned degrees.
Their ardent attachments to rings —some would call it idolatry—was exemplified

--- Sayfa 474 ---
484
CODEX MAGICA
in an article in a recent issue of The Louisiana Freemason.1 The author, Mason David
Roach, entitled his article, "If You Only Knew What This Ring Means to Me." He
called the symbols engraved on his ring "precious," compared them to holy things
from Scripture, and said the Masonic ring was akin to a "Crown of Purity." His ring
was simply a typical, gold band made with the Masonic square and compass and
letter "G."2
Sexual Idols
Former Mason Bill Schnoebelen, now a Christian, reveals the awful truth about most
of the Masonic rings, tie tacks, and other symbolic items when he writes:
Let's face it, the Masonic tie tacks and rings that so many Masons wear proudly to
their churches on Sunday are sexual idols...The gods, like Baal, of all pagan nations
around Israel were all sexual idols. This is precisely what God does not want in His
Church, and yet all these Masons are flaunting both their idols and their (church)
membership.3
Schnoebelen also mentions a little pin many Masons
wear on the lapel of their jacket or coat shaped like a
hockey stick with two balls attached. It is named "Tubal
Cain." In reality, it represents a man's phallus and
testicles; yet, the pin is worn publicly and proudly by
many perverted Masons.
A Bond Between Chieftains and Warriors
Barbara Walker, editor of The Woman's Dictionary of
Symbols and Sacred Objects, discusses the significance of
the ring in her book. She says that, "Rings were
traditional symbols of the bond between chieftains and
their warriors in Anglo-Saxon England." Moreover...
Among the Celts, a ring given by a woman to a man represented her sexual
availability; putting the finger through the ring was a sign of sexual intercourse.4
The ring, then is a symbol of authority, of bonding, and is a sign of the covenant
made between the inferior and superior members of the Illuminati group.
In ancient religions and cultures, rings were also magical in nature. According to
cabalistic rabbis, King Solomon used a magic ring with a hexagram symbol on it to
enslave the demon Asmodeus into helping him build his famous Temple.
Some members of the Illuminati in France in the late 18th century, about 1780,
founded a new secret order, the Academy of Sublime Masters of the Luminous Ring.
The tenets of the group were Pythagorean, and the fields of geometry and science
were emphasized.5
In today's Illuminati, the philosophy underlying the use of rings, neckties, etc.
"Tubal Cain," the phallus
pin worn by many Masons.
Tubal Cain is the password
of a Master Mason (3°).
(From the book, Masonic
and Occult Symbols
Illustrated, pg. 233, by Dr.
Cathy Burns)

--- Sayfa 475 ---
"I FELL IN TO A BURNING RING OF FIRE"
4 8 5
continues from such traditions. The ring is configured as a circle, implying the
supposed eternal reign of their god, Lucifer. He shall, they declare, wear a crown of
gold. Thus, the metal of gold is favored.
The Mystic Tie of the Masons
The Masonic fraternity teaches the illusory goal that all who are inititated into its
ranks are bonded by the "Mystic Tie" of fellowship. Of course, this is allegory, and
yet the necktie does seem to have a special place in Masonic lore and symbology.
It is believed that both the bowtie and the traditional necktie are of Masonic
symbolic design. The necktie has two triangles descending, a larger and a smaller. It
is tied into a "knot" at the neck, signifying solidarity and unity. The neck itself, as a
part of the human anatomy, represents the virtue of sacrifice. In terms of the secret
order or secret society, it symbolizes sacrifice of the individual to the common good
of the organization. The necktie is also seen as a bridge to two other triangles — those
of the shirt collar. All of the triangles, on the tie and on the shirt collar, have their
point, or spear, downward, toward the realm that is the controlling force of Masonry.
Congressman Lloyd Poggett (D-TX), at center, is sworn in as a voter registrar for the State of Texas.
The elite of the Democrat Party in Doggett's Austin, Texas district are heavily Freemason. Doggett's
necktie has the Masonic "X" symbol, connected to worship of Osiris the Egyptian sun god. At
Doggett's left is the late Congressman Jake Pickle (D-TX), a Mason who for years was Chairman of
the House Committee on Banking and Currency. Pickle refused to allow the U.S. Treasury, which he
oversaw, to remove the Illuminati's pyramid and all-seeing eye symbols from the U.S. dollar bill.

--- Sayfa 476 ---
486
CODEX MAGICA

--- Sayfa 477 ---
"I FELL IN TO A BURNING RING OF FIRE"
4 8 7
According to news reports, Monica
Lewinsky, President Bill Clinton's
White House intern lover, gave
him a special necktie. When he
wore it, she could watch him on
TV and know he was thinking
about her.
Bill Clinton's mother, Virginia, with
his father, before he was born.
Virginia, a Jewess, was deep into the
supernatural magic of the Cabala.
Bill Clinton's father is a dead ringer
for Jack Ruby, the Jewish gangster
and homosexual who assassinated
Lee Harvey Oswald.
The Nature Conservancy, a radical
environmental group, boasted in
its March/April 1998 magazine
that CNN founder Ted Turner,
Presidents Bush and Clinton, and
Vice President Gore often wore
oak-leaf ties to denote their
support for environmental
causes. The oak tree and its leaves
are a staple of druid witchcraft
and are popular as symbols
among nature followers of the
forest horned god Pan.

--- Sayfa 478 ---
488
CODEX MAGICA
President Harry
Truman (left) and
Secretary of State Dean
Acheson, both
Illuminati
initiates,
each wear neckties
imprinted with "sun
god" symbols.
President Gerald Ford, a 33rd degree Mason,
wears a necktie with the "cross of Baphomet"
emblem of the occultic OTO and British
satanist Aleister Crowley. The symbol is also
worn by the Sovereign Grand Commander of
Scottish Rite Freemasonry. Ford was a
member of the Warren Commission that
came up with the preposterous conclusion
that Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone in the
assassination of President John F. Kennedy.
Chief Justice Earl Warren, like Ford and all
the other members of the commission, was a
33rd degree Mason.

--- Sayfa 479 ---
"I FELL IN TO A BURNING RING OF FIRE" 489
House Speaker Newt Gingrich wears a necktie
designed by satan worshipping rock music star,
Jim Morrison of The Doors.
Illuminist signals: Insiders say speaker Newt
Gingrich is a vain man who does not like
being photographed without make-up. Here
he is below pictured in USA Today
newspaper (December 5, 1994, p. SA)
primping for a taping of NBC's "Meet the
Press." This provides greater curiosity about
Time's running as its front cover (see
following page of Codex Magica) a staged
picture of Gingrich in which the speaker is
looking haggard and sweaty, his face red-
flushed, and needing a shave!

--- Sayfa 480 ---
490
CODEX MAGICA

--- Sayfa 481 ---
"I FELL IN TO A BURNING RING OF FIRE"
4 9 1
At left: This cover of Time announcing the selection of House Speaker New Gingrich as Time's "Man of
the Year" reveals many mysteries. First, the issue is dated December 25, 1995/January 1, 1996.
December 25th, Christmas Day, is also the day the ancient Romans and Greeks worshipped the Sun
God. In his photo, Newt Gingrich appears tired and dismayed. He is sweaty. No make-up is used, and
he has a day old growth of stubble on his face and neck. There is also a red coloration or flush on
Newt s face. His head is strategically placed behind the Time logo, communicating the subtle message
that his time in the political limelight is about up. In fact, Gingrich did abruptly resign and leave his
high level post shortly after this issue; some believe his departure was caused by his unseemly
romantic liaison with a female staffer, an affair which prompted the Congressman to divorce his
wife. However, the most significant images you'll find on this cover are hidden on Newt Gingrich's
necktie! Look closely at the inset and what do you see? A dinosaur. The cave age monster is facing
downward toward a flower. The Illuminati's
founder Adam Weishaupt, in the late 18th century,
introduced the concepts of "flower power" and nature worship (shades of the hippy era of the 60s!).
So that might explain the flower. But what about the dinosaur? It seems that Newt (get the name,
Newt ? - isn't a Newt a form of lizard?) is a dinosaur fan. Gingrich once borrowed a Tyrannosaurus
Rex dinosaur bones exhibit from Washington, D.C.'s Smithsonian Museum and kept it on display for
a long time in his House Speaker's office. Newsmagazines often commented that Newt Gingrich was
wry proud of the T-Rex display and constantly asked friends and associates, "Would you like to see my
T4tx!" Now, Webster's dictionary informs us that the root word for "tyrannosaurus" is rvranr, or
tyranny, defined as "A government in which absolute power is vested in a single ruler"—a ruler
unfettered by a constitution! What's more, the short version of the dinosaur's name, T-Rex, would
have a very special meaning for occult illuminati. "T" stands for Tammuz, the Christ figure to come,
whose symbol is the T, or Tau cross. The word "Rex," meanwhile, stands for Man as King. In
Weishaupt's Illuminati system, the highest degree initiate earned the "Rex" degree. Thus, the
symbols on Newt Gingrich's necktie, displayed for all the world to see, but for only Newt and his
Illuminati henchmen to understand, trumpet this message, that: Our llluminati goal is a tyranny,
ruled by a single ruler—the fearful antichrist, beast of prophecy!
The caption reads: "Speaker Newt Gingrich shows off tyrannosaurus rex Osborn in his Capitol office.
It's on loan from the Smithsonian." Observe Gingrich's Masonic handsign also, which is similar to the
sign of a Master Mason. (Photo: Roll Call, May 22, 1995, p. 14)

--- Sayfa 482 ---
492
CODEX MAGICA
When I sent Dr. Cathy Burns, a foremost authority on occult symbols and their meaning, a copy of
speaker Newt Gingrich's Time magazine photo with the T-Rex dinosaur image on Newt's necktie, she
sent me back this flyer advertising a book, The Church of Satan, written by Luciferian High Priest
Michael A. Aquino. As you can see, the flyer has images of two dragon serpents atop satanic
pentagrams facing each other (the occult sign of duality, or "as above, so below"). In fact, the two
serpentine dragons do resemble the T-Rex dinosaur image.
New York Mayor
Wagner kneels and
kisses the ring of
Catholic Cardinal
Spellman as
Reverend McGinly,
president of the
Jesuit-run Fordham
University, looks on
with a sly grin on his
face.

--- Sayfa 483 ---
"I FELL IN TO A BURNING RING OF FIRE"
4 9 3
It seems that California Governor Arnold
Schwarzenegger ("The Terminator") is well-
schooled in the propaganda value of well-placed
props in photographs, such as the U.S. flag, the
State seal, and even a broom! What is most
fascinating, however, is the big, blue sapphire
masonic ring the Governor wears and so readily
shows off. Apparently, the media know what's
what and the photographer always seems to be
glad to picture Arnold's ring up close. Oh, about
the broom: That's not the same one that
Arnold's wife, Kennedy heiress Maria Shriver,
flies around on, is it?
Inset below left: C. W. Leadbeater, homosexual
occultist who was head of late 19th Century
Theosophy after Madame Blavatsky, wore a ring
similar to the one sported about today by
Arnold Schwarzenegger.
(Photo: U.S. News & World Report, January 12, 2004, p. 27)

--- Sayfa 484 ---
4 9 4
CODEX MAGICA
"Ring: forward, photograph!," barked Arnold to the USA Today photographer and editors who
eagerly and obediently complied. (Photo: USA Today, December 22, 2003)
Recently, Bohemian Grove alumnus Arnold
Schwarzenegger met privately with Warren
Buffett (left), America's second richest man
according to Forbes magazine, and Britain's Lord
Jacob Rothschild (right), at the Rothschild
mansion in England. Schwarzenegger evidently
earned the endorsement and support of Jewish
groups the old-fashioned way—he "bribed" them
with millions of dollars!

--- Sayfa 485 ---
"I FELL IN TO A BURNING RING OF FIRE"
4 9 5
Sort of a feminine version of the ring worn
by Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger. Offered
in The Pyramid Collection catalog, 2004.
Also available in The Pyramid Collection catalog,
this "Midnight" cape. The catalog says it is "fit for
a Count—or Countess." The color of the cape is
listed as black and red. "It makes a fiery
statement," says the advertising copy.
Arnold Schwarzenegger, Mr. Universe, giving a very
familiar hand salute. Schwarzenegger once remarked: 'I
admired Hitler because he came from being a little man
with no formal education up to power."

--- Sayfa 486 ---
4 9 6
CODEX MAGICA
A page from the catalog of Macoy, a distributor of Masonic books, pins, rings, jewelry, and supplies.
(2003/2004 Catalog No. HO)

--- Sayfa 487 ---
"I FELL IN TO A BURNING RING OF FIRE"
4 9 7

--- Sayfa 488 ---
498
CODEX MAGICA
This issue of Media Bypass magazine (September, 1996) featured the activities of Charles Hayes, who
was said to be a retired operative of the CIA. According to the magazine, Hayes had been busy in
retirement as a vigilante exposing the financial skullduggery and crookedness of various high-level
politicians and world leaders. On the cover of the magazine we find Mr. Hayes in front of law library
publications and a Great Seal of the U.S. plaque, puffing placidly on a pipe. But what stands out is
the mysterious ring with the devilish face, composed of some type of blackish material, inside a
circle. A few months after this issue was published, Charles Hayes was indicted by a federal grand
jury and arrested. News reports allege that Hayes was guilty of solicitation of murder. Did the
revelations contained in the article in Media Bypass cause the elite to take action to shut him up? Or
was something else up? What is the riddle of the mysterious ring with its curious image?

--- Sayfa 489 ---
"I FELL IN TO A BURNING RING OF FIRE"
499
This mysterious photo of Oscar-winning actress Julia Roberts in Time magazine gives us an
intriguing view of two rings she wears. On her right hand is the blue-stoned rectangular ring,
and on her left hand is a ring with a strange image, indeed one could even say the ring has a
creepy and eerie image. In the accompanying article, the writer acclaims Roberts as "the
reigning queen of Hollywood."

--- Sayfa 490 ---
500
CODEX MAGICA
Without caption, Brill's
Content magazine published
this photo of Russian
President Vladimir Putin.
The black border is unusual
and obviously connotes a
dark and evil significance to
Putin's character. The
necktie Putin wears has
Illuminist meaning. The X of
Osiris is prominent in the
design as is the two
triangles—one pointing up,
the other down—inside a
diamond.
Manly P. Hall, 33o, informs us of the occult
meaning of the Pythagorean Signet Ring in his
classic textbook, The Secret Teachings of All Ages.
Albert Pike, former Sovereign Grand Commander
of the Scottish Rite Masons, wrote in Morals and
Dogma that the pentagram (pentacle, cabalistic
star) on this ring "carries with it the power of
commanding the spirits." Use it, he instructed,
to "bind the demons of the air, the spirits of fire,
the spectres of water, and the ghosts of the
eartlt." Note that the star atop the ring is
encircled by the Oroboros serpent.

--- Sayfa 491 ---
TWENTY-FOUR
OK—Sign of the Divine King
"Annuit Coeptus" - He approves our undertaking.
— Latin inscription atop
the all-seeing eye on
the U.S.A. one dollar bill
W e s t e r n e r s know it as the "okay" (or "OK") sign. It's done with the
fingers and thumb of right or left hands (usually the right). Simply
touch the index finger to the thumb, creating a circle. The other
three fingers then spiral off and there you have it—the well-known symbol for OK.
Universally, this sign means alright, acceptable, good, right-on, you bet!, A-OK,
satisfactory...
But to occultists, the OK sign takes on darker significance. First, we have the circle,
indicating the sun deity and the Mason's never-ending quest for more light. To
Freemasonry, the circle also represents the female genitalia, or yoni. In the Hindu
religion, the OK sign is a revered mudra (sacred gesture) meaning "infinity" or
perfection. It is associated with the female genitalia — thumb and forefinger pressed
together at the tips with the other three fingers extended.
In the practice of tantric yoga (sex rituals), the OK sign is a token of ecstasy,
spiritual and physical. In ancient Sumeria and Persia, charms and amulets have been
discovered of fingers and hands in the modern OK position, joined along with horns
implying fertility. The three fingers extended outward are symbolic of ecstatic union
with the Goddess, the third member of the pagan trinity.
In Satanism, when making this sign the three fingers not used to make the circle
are considered symbolic of the unholy trinity — horned god, goddess, and offspring
(antichrist). Some go so far as to adopt the view that the bent three fingers are shaped
as three number six's, or 666. Thus, we have 666, the sun deity (Lucifer), the goddess

--- Sayfa 492 ---
502
CODEX MAGICA
(Mystery, Babylon the Great, Mother of Harlots), and the beast (antichrist, 666), all in
one unitary hand sign. Oh what a web of evil wicked men can weave around
something seemingly so ordinary and mundane.
In the Illuminist philosophy, the OK sign becomes a sign indicating approval of
the Divine King, their coming Lord of Light, whom we as Christians know as
Antichrist. To them it means, "He approves our undertaking." This meaning is
roughly equivalent to the words in Latin atop the all-seeing eye of Osiris on our U.S.
one dollar bill—Annuit Coeptus.
A Gesture to Avoid?
As we've noted, the gesture made by touching the tips of the thumb and index finger
to form a circle, with the remaining three fingers of the hand fanned out and pointing
out may signify "A-Okay" in the U.S.A., but in other cultures the same gesture will
certainly not meet with approval.
In Brazil, Germany, and Russia, the signal is a supreme insult and vulgar,
indicating a very private body orifice.
In France, the sign portrays the person it is aimed at as being a flunky or a
"zero" — basically a worthless person. When it's placed over the nose it means he or
she is drunk.
In Japan, the same sign is used in commercial transactions to indicate you want
the cashier to give you your change in coins rather than in currency.
In Spain, in Eastern Europe, and in some parts of Latin America, the OK hand
gesture is considered very rude. When then Vice President Nixon visited Brazil in the
50s, a crowd of onlookers became a rampaging mob after Nixon flashed them what
he thought was the A-Okay sign. To them, Nixon was making an obscene gesture.
Nixon's "goodwill" trip suddenly became a "badwill" trip.
And there's more confusion abroad: In Arab countries, making this sign while
shaking the hand symbolizes the giving of the "evil eye," perceived by Arabs as an
event of great dread. It may be interpreted that you are putting a curse on the
individual. Could it be that the Arab interpretation of this sign is exactly what the
Illuminati intend in their performing it?

--- Sayfa 493 ---
OK - SIGN OF THE DIVINE KING
503

--- Sayfa 494 ---
504
CODEX MAGICA
Israeli Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu (Photo:
Associated Press, in Lewiston
Morning Tribune, October
26, 1998, p. 7A)
Robert Rubin, Secretary of the Treasury in the Bill Clinton
Administration. (Photo: Austin American-Statesman
newspaper, May 16, 1999)
Anne Graham Lotz, Billy Graham's daughter, at a YMCA prayer breakfast (Photo: Charlotte, NC
newspaper, April 2, 1999)

--- Sayfa 495 ---
OK-SIGN OF THE DIVINE KING
505
This drawing by an anonymous
artist is very revealing it its
carefully crafted symbology. We
see at top and bottom the
Illuminati's "OK" sign. Then,
mere's the oval-shaped "egg," the
"El Diablo" devil's horns, the two
dialectic birds.
RODDY DOYLE: The more popular
this widely read novelist grows, the
darker and better his books become
Roddy Doyle, popular Irish novelist.
(Newsweek, July 1, 1996, p. 64)
Pat Robertson, Mason, Illuminist, Knight of Malta,
and elite propagandist in the field of religion.

--- Sayfa 496 ---
506
CODEX MAGICA

--- Sayfa 497 ---
OK-SIGN OF THE DIVINE KING
507
President George W. Bush (Time magazine, March 3, 2003, p. 5)
President George Herbert
Walker Bush, has often
been seen giving the
Illuminati's mudra, known
by masses as the "OK."
David Graham, FDA official in the Bush Administration.
(Associated Press, in Austin American-Statesman, December 5,
2004, p. 18)

--- Sayfa 498 ---
508
CODEX MAGICA
Vice President Al Gore (left) and influential Moscow envoy and fellow llluminist, Viktor
Chernomyrdin. Chernomyrdin, a crypto-Jew and Mason, oversaw the redistribution of assets of the
old Communist Soviet State in the hands of Jewish oligarchs. This was a prime llluminati project in
the late 1980s and 1990s. Symbols expert Dr. Cathy Burns, in reviewing this photo, remarked: "Not
only are hand signs important in the occult, but other features in a picture can also have a symbolic
meaning. For instance, notice the book with an eagle on the cover. Could the United States be the
Eagle? The caption just below mentions "getting Russia on board." Notice too, the title of the book.
The Company We Keep. Is this a reference to the United States keeping company with Russia
("getting Russia on board")? (Photo: Newsweek, May 17, 1999, p. 38)

--- Sayfa 499 ---
OK-SIGN OF THE DIVINE KING
509
President George W.
Bush, affectionately
holds his left hand as
France's President
Jacques Chirac gives
the high sign of the
Iluminati
with his
right. (Photo: Insight
magazine, April 13-
26, 2004, p. 41)
The PLO Chief
Yasser Arafat
with his
current-day
successor,
Mahmoud
Abbas. Both
men were
Masons, and
both were tools
of the CIA and
Mossad.

--- Sayfa 500 ---
510
CODEX MAGICA
President Bill Clinton with a double circle sign, to
emphasize his point. The headline reads "Clinton goes on
offensive against Starr...Alleged sex scandal won't make
him resign, President says..." Clinton's hand signal
indicates that his Illuminist superiors had decided to let
him stay in office and not be ousted through impeachment
conviction due to the Lewinsky sex/perjury scandal charges
brought by special prosecutor, Kenneth Starr. (Austin
American-Statesman, February 7, 1998, p. 1)
This cover of one of the
author's bestselling books
illustrates the former First
Lady wearing an "angel pin"
with wings crossed in an
Osirian X. Her right hand is
formed in a circle.

--- Sayfa 501 ---
OK - SIGN OF THE DIVINE KING 511
Rasputin, the "Mad Monk" of Russia who
ingratiated himself with the Czarina and other
nobility. Rasputin was an initiate of a secret order
whose members engaged in naked dances, ecstatic
states, drunkeness, and sexual orgies, which they
claimed to be "holy." Children begotten were said
to be born of the Holy Ghost.

--- Sayfa 502 ---
5 1 2
CODEX MAGICA
Jubilant supporters of Israel's hard-core Shas political party dance for joy after the victory of winning
many disputed seats in that country's Knesset (parliament). (Photo: The Jerusalem Post newspaper,
May 28, 1999, p. 8)
Beatle Paul McCartney, left, gives the llluminati's "Divine King" sign while fellow Beatle John Lennon
lets us know he's a Luciferian.

--- Sayfa 503 ---
OK-SIGN OF THE DIVINE KING
513
In London's Daily Mail newspaper (July 6, 2000, p. 9) was this report of a giant S00 foot high bronze
Buddha
statue, called the Buddha Maitreya, in the Indian holy city of Bodh Gaya. The statue will be
over three times higher than the U.S.A.'s Statue of Liberty. It is being built by British engineers.
Observe the Buddha statues mudra, or left hand sign. Also, the "horns" on the head.

--- Sayfa 504 ---
514
CODEX MAGICA
The caption reads: "Kay Wescott, a lawyer and CPA who works for the Justice Department, attends
meditation classes at the Yoga Institute and Bookshop." Yoga is very popular in the United States,
though most do not understand that the yogic positions of hands and body represent Hindu pagan
religious symbols and doctrines. In this instance, Ms. Wescott sits in the upright position, legs
crossed lotus-style, her hands in the mudra "OK," or circle.

--- Sayfa 505 ---
OK-SIGN OF THE DIVINE KING
515
A Hindu swami and worshipper of the god Shiva at the San Marga Sanctuary in
Hawaii. He is accompanied by a strange paper idol and a brazen cobra idol.
Buddha displaying the left-hand "OK" mudra.
This drawing is from The Herder Dictionary of
Symbols (Chiron Publications, Wilmette,
Illinois, 1986). That reference source explains
it as "an eye in the hand of God signified
God's creative wisdom." Of course, this is not
referring to the Christian God, but to the
ineffable, unknown God called Ain Soph in the
Cabala and as the evil, satanic "God of Forces,"
in the Bible's book of Daniel.
Illustration in The Herder
Dictionary of Symbols
(Chiron Publications,
Wilmette, Illinois, 1986).

--- Sayfa 506 ---
516
CODEX MAGICA

--- Sayfa 507 ---
TWENTY-FIVE
Victory for the Devil—Fabulous Exploits
of Sir Winston Churchill and Other
Druid Priests and Illuminati Servants
A remarkable thing occurred with the hand so lifted, is that its shadow resembles
the head and horns of the Goat of Baphomet..the symbol of black magic.
— The Complete Book of Witchcraft
B r i t a i n ' s legendary World War II Prime Minister, Sir Winston Churchill,
made the "V" sign famous. It was standard for the cigar-smoking,
paunchy politician; he flashed the "V" sign every chance he got, and news
photographers captured hundreds of photographs of Churchill giving the sign. It was
generally thought that in doing so, the pugnacious Churchill was signaling confidence
in eventual victory over the Nazi foe across the channel. So, the sign of two fingers
pointed upward in a "V'shape became universally accepted as a sign for victory.
Sign of the Horned God, Pan
But what the majority of people believe to be conventional wisdom is often wrong.
Such is the case here, too, for this sign, in reality, is of ancient origins. It is, in fact, a
sign of Satan, of malediction, of the horned god, Pan, and worse.
Paranoia magazine, an interesting publication which bills itself as "the conspiracy
reader" had a picture some years back of Churchill displaying the "V." An astute
reader knowledgeable of dark things wrote a letter to the editor in the next issue
commenting on Churchill and his sign. Nigel A. Cornwall of Britain wrote, "The sign
I believe has its origins as a symbol for a pagan horned god."1
Cornwall also suggested that when the sign is given with the palm inside, it is

--- Sayfa 508 ---
518
CODEX MAGICA
recognized as a horribly vulgar and offensive gesture—signifying penetration of
both body orifices.
Done in the typical fashion, this sign literally means intercourse by the devil—to
be violated sexually by the horned god. The thumb holding down the fingers creates
the "vulva," while the two largest fingers pointed up are the horns of the god (Satan).
THE Law of Opposites
In her highly regarded encyclopedia of symbols entitled Masonic and Occult Symbols
Illustrated, Dr. Cathy Burns explores the meaning of the "V" sign. She explains that
the two fingers upward relate to the Masonic and Gnostic Law of Opposites, exactly
as the case for the Masonic Lodge's black and white checkerboard floors. This is the
doctrine of bringing order out of chaos, of reconciling the two opposites, evil and
good, with Satan reigning over both heaven and hell.2 The "V" sign is also a sign of
the Horned God of witchcraft, often called Pan; or Baphomet, the androgynous (male
and female) goat god (again illustrating the Law of Opposites).
The Face in the Shadow
The Complete Book of Witchcraft3 explains further the occult meaning. When the sign is
given to produce a shadow behind, a diabolical image appears that seems to be the
face of the devil. Witches and Magicians—and some Catholic Popes —used this
image to effect emotional responses:
There was a deeply seated belief in the fascination or enchantment of shadows; so
that the witch, or magician, could use them to either produce sickness and death or
to inspire love...The shadow of the (Satanic) priest's fingers raised in blessing was
considered to have evil significance...
A remarkable thing occurred with the hand so lifted, is that its shadow resembles
the head and horns of the Goat of Baphomet...the symbol of black magic.
The use of the 'shadow of blessing' was regarded as the legitimate prerogative of
the Pope, and was most terribly exercised during the Dark Ages and at the time of
the Inquisition.4
Interestingly, other authoritative sources say that the "V" sign (the sign of the
horny goat, or horned god) is practiced even today in satanic covens as a symbol of
Satanic benediction. In times past, it was just the opposite, being a sign of evil, of
malediction, but today the twisted minds of satanic worshippers view evil as
something good and desirable. What is malediction to the holy and righteous, to the
Satanist is a wonderful thing!
A Symbol of Wrath and Destruction
The "V" sign as displayed by the hand is also used by Illuminists in the form of the

--- Sayfa 509 ---
VICTORY FOR THE DEVIL
519
letter V with two straight lines angled to meet at a point facing downward. It becomes
a V device, or chevron, and has been adopted for the uniforms of military troops of
some countries. Resembling a downward pointing triangle with the top line open or
omitted symbolizes fiery destruction and wrath on the object at which it is pointed.
About 12 years ago, a few Satan worshippers arrived secretly in the darkness at
my ministry building and evidently carried out a ritual. For many months we had
received anonymous telephone threats, so were not surprised. On the concrete porch
near our front door, the vandals had scratched a "V" pointing to the entrance, and
there were signs of candle use and the burning of objects. Here we see the fantastic
beliefs by occultists that their rituals create reality. However, in vainly attempting to
harm a true Christian ministry, I am persuaded that the "magic" backfired. When
God is your protector, those who cast Satan's spells end up in deep, deep, trouble.
Triple 6 or 666
As we have previously seen, the Jewish cabala is at the root of most wicked systems
of magic. The cabala (or Kabbalah) is the fount of doctrine for Freemasonry and for
many other secret societies. We can expect, therefore, that the "V" sign is also
emphasized by the rabbinical priests of cabalism. And in fact, we find that the rabbis
teach that the meaning of the Hebrew letter for V (Vau) is "Nail," and nail is a secret
title for Satan. (Its corrupt meaning comes from the nails driven into the hands of
Jesus crucified.) Vau, or V, is the sixth letter in the Hebrew alphabet, and, of course,
the Book of Revelation reveals that the name of the beast, or Antichrist, is coded with
the number of triple 6, or 666.
Churchill A Druid Priest
Where did Winston Churchill learn of the satanic powers of the "V" sign? Few people
are aware that Churchill was a Freemason. Stephen Knight wrote an explosive
expose, The Brotherhood, that rocked the British Isles when it was published some 15
years ago.5 In it, he unmasked many British nobles, police, judges, and politicians
who were Masons. Among them: Winston Churchill, who, Knight documented, was
initiated in 1903 at Lodge No. 3000 of the United Lodge of Great Britain.
However, even fewer people are aware that Churchill was not only a Mason but
a witch druid! Dr. Stanley Monteith, occult and secret society researcher and host of
Radio Liberty out of California, states: "Churchill was an adept of the occult, having
been inducted into the Druids in 1908, and having pledged the occult oaths required
of those who have entered into the world of Freemasonry."6
Monteith's sobering statements are backed up by Miranda J. Green's The World of
the Druids and by John Daniel's Scarlet and the Beast, two excellent resource books.7
Rites of the Druid Witchcraft Sea
The rites and ceremonies of the Druid witchcraft sect—which has chapters both in
Great Britain and in the United States —are remarkably similar to those of
Freemasonry. They hearken back to the Ancient Mystery Religions.

--- Sayfa 510 ---
520
CODEX MAGICA
The Burning Man in the Wicker Cage
Some scholars are convinced that human sacrifice was practiced by the Druids. Julius
Caesar, Roman General who conquered Britain for Imperial Rome, wrote of how
brutal and furiously savage were the people under the influence of the Druid
priesthood. He also described the horror of the rite in which the Druid priests and
people would periodically choose a victim to be confined inside a huge wicker effigy.
The wicker was set ablaze and the human victim consumed by the flames as the
people celebrated and paraded in a circle carrying candles.
Even today, at the ruins of Stonehenge in England, modern-day Druids meet on
festival occasions, wearing the appropriate white garb and carrying out rites and
worship of the ancient gods.
Meanwhile, in Nevada each year, hundreds of thousands attend the incredible
"Burning Man" festival at which the sacrificial ritual of the burning wicker man is
recreated.8
Archbishop of England Also A Druid
Amazingly, the British press recently carried news reports, including pictures, of the
Druid initiation of a man, Rowan Williams, who just happens to be Archbishop of
Canterbury, head of the Church of England. Williams told reporters that he saw no
incompatibility in his duties as a pagan Druid priest and those he has assumed as
Archbishop of the —presumably Christian —Anglican Church of England.
This is yet more evidence of how apostate and corrupt the global "Christian"
establishment is today. While it is true that the true Christian Church, though tiny in
numbers, lives on and is undefeated, the majority of modern-day pastors, ministers,
and churchmen have departed from the Faith and have no concept at all of genuine
Christian doctrine. The spectacle of the top, so-called "Christian" clergyman of the
entire British Commonwealth, Archbishop Williams, being initiated as a wizard in
the Druid witchcraft sect and publicly boasting of it is proof positive that the Devil
and his Illuminati have become the unacknowledged "Masters" who run the
Christian establishment behind-the-scenes. The big name clergy and evangelists
today merely follow the script
laid down for them by their elite
controllers.
Page from Webster's dictionary where
V sign is pictured but never defined or
explained! Such words as
"vulcanism," "vulcanize," and
"vulgar" are defined, however, in
close proximity. Vulcan is the ancient
god of fire and destruction.

--- Sayfa 511 ---
VICTORY FOR THE DEVIL
5 2 1
Sir Winston Churchill, a crypto Jew, a Mason, a Druid witch, and war-time Prime Minister of Great
Britain, flashes his famous "V" sign. Long used to represent a number of occultic tasks, including
Divine Man, sexual license, and fire, Churchill's frequent use spurred the use of the device by an
uninformed populace as a sign of victory.

--- Sayfa 512 ---
522
CODEX MAGICA
Young Winston Churchill arrives
for his Druid initiation ceremony.
Was Churchill taught the true,
occult meaning of the fiery and
destructive "V" hand sign that he
later made so famous it became
used around the world? (Photo:
from the book, The Druids, by
Peter Berresford Ellis)

--- Sayfa 513 ---
VICTORY FOR THE DEVIL
523
In this ancient engraving, Dionysius
the Areopagite, an Athenian "convert"
to Christianity, gives the double "V"
sign-"as above, so below" with left
hand toward hell. Dionysius was a
mystical Christian, a gnostic heretic
who is thought to have been the
author of an occultic treatise entitled
The Mystical Divinity. (From the book,
Mystics and Mysteries of Alexandria,
by Manly P. Hall, 33°)
The Green Man, sign of the druids, is found carved on
wood and in concrete in the architectural details of
buildings, altars, and structures throughout the British
isles. An insightful movie, The Green Man, starring Peter
Finch, touched on the connection of the Green Man, sexual
perversity, and the Devil's demon powers.
This brass plate is decorated with a circle and, inside,
the universal sign of the Masonic Lodge, which is the
square and compass. Within the combined symbol of
square and compass is the "G," representing "God,"
which is, in masonry, also the generative process
(sexual). In this, advanced Masonic view, we have a
man on top of a woman in the act of coitus, or sexual
relations. Both the compass and the square are "V" in
configuration, and when this brass plate is turned
upside down, we find the same, that one symbol, V-
shaped, still surmounts the other "V" symbol.

--- Sayfa 514 ---
524
CODEX MAGICA
This ancient black and white drawing depicts an initiate undergoing trials in order to advance in the
Order. Pointing to his head, on the floor, is the square, shaped as a 90 degree "V."
When General George
Washington visited Boston in
1789, this banner was carried
by a group during a procession
in honor of his visit. The "V" is
the focal point of the emblem,
but the three goat heads
contained within the egg-
shaped device and the bearded
goat head atop it are also
significant in occult teaching.

--- Sayfa 515 ---
VICTORY FOR THE DEVIL
525

--- Sayfa 516 ---
526
CODEX MAGICA

--- Sayfa 517 ---
VICTORY FOR THE DEVIL
527
The occultist who drew the design at right well
understood the esoteric meaning behind the
symbols. First, we see the "V" sign which, in shadow,
becomes the gnarled and ugly, dark image of Satan.
What appears at first to be good (Benediction), when
seen from the hidden perspective of the unseen
becomes Malediction. The diamond and circle at top
indicate the same principle, that black equals, or
shadows, white, and white mirrors black. This is the
Hegelian principle of the synthesis of opposites
(Pictured in the book, Pictorial History of Magic and
the Supernatural, by Maurice Besey)
Michael Jackson, black entertainer accused of
child molestation, presents the "V" to the
crowd as he leaves the courtroom. (USA Today,
April 10, 2005, p. 1A)

--- Sayfa 518 ---
528
CODEX MAGICA
This mural on a wall in Havana reads, "For Life with Fidel." (Photo: The Catholic World Report,
January 1997, p. 24)
Children dressed as peasant
revolutionaries greet Mexico's
President Vicente Fox in celebration
of the Mexican Revolution (Photo:
Associated Press, Austin American-
Statesman, November 21, 2004)
Official stamps from around
the Arab world supported the
Palestine's Intifada uprising in
the late 1980s. In many, the
guerilla fighters are pictured
giving the "V" sign. (Photo:
News From Israel, October
1993, p. 11)

--- Sayfa 519 ---
VICTORY FOR THE DEVIL
529
Yasser Arafat, leader of the Palestinian
Liberation Organization, popularized the
ancient "V" sign among Arab
demonstrators and guerilla fighters. At
right is the symbol worn on arm bands of
some Palestinian fighters.
Stewart Meacham, head of a pro-Communist
group called the New Mobilization Committee, is
pictured in the Communist Guardian newspaper
with this "V" sign on a poster behind him.

--- Sayfa 520 ---
530
CODEX MAGICA
Former President George
Herbert Walker Bush lets
insiders know of the goal
and eventual total victory of
the Zionist llluminati by
blatantly displaying the
cabalistic V sign. The
position of Bush's left arm is
further indication of the
cabalistic nature of the sign.
Inside the pages of the
magazine there was not one
shred of explanation as to
why the Senior Bush was
pictured on the cover giving
this sign, nor was it an
election year. Moreover, the
former President was in
retirement, proving the elite
adage, "once a servant of
the llluminati, always a
servant." (Until death, that
is.)
President Franklin D. Roosevelt
was both a 32nd degree Mason
and a cabalist, crypto Jew. As his
family tree clearly demonstrates,
Roosevelt's ancestors came from
the Netherlands and were of
Jewish blood lineage. Here, fishing
in the Gulf of Mexico off the Texas
coast in 1937, FDR signals the V of
cabalistic occultism, using,
however, his thumb.
Ralph Reed, the young man who came from nowhere to head the
Masonic Knights of Malta/Illuminati project called the "Christian
Coalition. "Today, no longer with the Christian Coalition, Reed is
a high-paid Republican lobbyist in Washington, D.C., and a
member of the exclusive Bilderberger Group.

--- Sayfa 521 ---
VICTORY FOR THE DEVIL
531
Broadway found a bit of success with its vulgar The Vagina Monologues production. Soon, the
raunchy and stupid feminist series was on HBO IV. Its simple plot: women ranting on and on about
their private parts, constantly using what the show's producers called the "V word." In this group
picture, we see a number of the actresses who participated in various episodes of The Vagina
Monologues. Look close at the two at top left, flashing the "V" sign. One of the two starred in the
slutty HBO series, Sex and the City. Incidentally, New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani's wife was a
participant in The Vagina Monologues.
Actress Jane Fonda, an Indian actress, and Eve Ensler,
producer of The Vagina Monologues.

--- Sayfa 522 ---
532
CODEX MAGICA
Neo-Nazi protester in Germany, January 1993. Most of the people who participate in such
demonstrations are trained and paid by Illuminati organizations and government intelligence
agencies to inspire the public to react. This, in turn, enables the government to curtail citizen
liberties and freedoms under the guise of providing "public safety and security."
The group calling itself "GIs and Vets For
Peace" adopted this logo, which utilizes the
"V" sign in its opposites mirrored theme of
the occult. (Pictured in the Communist
newspaper, The Daily World, October 18,
1969).
Clinton Administration political
advisor and speechwriter Sidney
Blumenthal flashes the "V" sign as he
heads to court after being subpoenaed.

--- Sayfa 523 ---
VICTORY FOR THE DEVIL
533
Presidential candidate
Richard Nixon jubilantly
demonstrates the
double "V."
An activist protesting
at an economic Group
of Eight summit in
Genoa, Italy in 2001
casts an interesting
shadow in this photo
published in the The
Austin American-
Statesman. (July 22,
2001, p. A14)

--- Sayfa 524 ---
534
CODEX MAGICA
Joey Fatone of the popular music group, NSYNC, displays the "V" sign.

--- Sayfa 525 ---
VICTORY FOR THE DEVIL
5 3 5
President Bill Clinton flashes a mysterious hand sign to former California Governor Jerry Brown.
Both Clinton and Brown were trained by the Jesuits.

--- Sayfa 526 ---
536
CODEX MAGICA
"Let us get into your head," says this ad for an ABC-TV series called Wonderland. Interestingly, the
show's producers chose the V sign to make their point. In this instance, the man is giving the Due-
guard sign relating to the penalties of divulging the secrets of the Mark Master degree of
Freemasonry.

--- Sayfa 527 ---
TWENTY-SIX
"Every Man and Woman is a Star"
But ye have borne the tabernacle of your Moloch and Chiun your images, the star of
your god, which ye made to yourselves.
— Amos 5:26
Every man and woman is a star.
— Aleister Crowley
The Book of the Law
F e w who are knowledgeable dispute the fact that for satanists, occultists
and other Illuminists, the symbol of the star has vast significance.
Whether five-pointed in shape, six-pointed, or in some other
configuration, the star is a premier symbol of the Devil.
Illuminists and witches claim that the pentagram, a five-pointed star with one
point upward (ascendant) is useful for "White Magic" rituals and spells. The inverted
pentagram (five-pointed star) is widely used by hard-core Satan worshippers. When
the two points are aimed upward (ascendant), it is said to indicate "Black Magic" and
to be the two horns of Satan. No wonder that Aleister Crowley, the infamous, self-
proclaimed "Beast 666" from Great Britain, once stated, "Every man and woman is a
star," which, loosely interpreted, meant, "Every man and woman is a god."1
The Star of Initiation
In the Hindu religion, the pentagram is the "Star of Initiation." It is the caste-mark of

--- Sayfa 528 ---
538
CODEX MAGICA
From left to right: Pentagram, Inverted Pentagram, Hexagram (Star of David) and Star of
Baphomet (Goat of Sabbath)
the Priests of Siva, who dedicate it to the sun god by marking a black round dot
inside the symbol of the star.2
THE Blazing Star
Freemasons, because they venerate the sun and its rays, know the star emblem as the
"Blazing Star." Steve Worrall-Clare, a former Mason, in Freemasonry - The Secret
Language, writes that in the Lodge:
The blazing star points out the glory of the sun. It is central to all Masonic
undertaking, for it enlightens the earth, and by its benign influence dispenses its
blessings to mankind...It is found in the 28th degree and is the symbol of truth. It is
found in the 4th degree as a symbol of light and in the 9th degree it is a symbol of
divine providence. It is sometimes symbolically installed as the letter "G"...It is a
door, an entrance to knowledge...3
Satan, The Goat of the Sabbath
High-sounding words, but deceptive. To gain a more direct perspective, we turn to
Frenchman Eliphas Levi, a nineteenth-century satanist whose works inspired the
writings of Albert Pike, the Sovereign Grand Commander of international
Freemasonry. Levi enthusiastically reports:
The pentagram with two horns in the ascendant represents Satan, or the goat of the
Sabbath. (The horn) downward naturally represents the demon, that is, intellectual
subversion, disorder and folly.4
In Hidden Secrets of the Eastern Star, one of the best guides ever published on the
subject of the satanic star and other symbols of Masonry, Dr. Cathy Burns explains
that the Blazing Star, or pentagram, has many meanings germane to the doctrines of
Illuminism and the occult.5
Esoterically, the star symbolizes man as deity, as the universe embodied. It also
stands for Sirius, the "Dog Star" or planet where Satan dwells. It stands for "Thor,"
the ancient Nordic god, and it stands for Baal, or Bel, the demonic god so often
mentioned in derisive terms in the Old Testament.

--- Sayfa 529 ---
EVERY MAN AND WOMAN IS A STAR
539
This same star god was worshipped in Egypt, and the children of Israel, while
wandering in the desert, fell under his hypnotic powers. They called him Moloch,
Chiun, and Remphan. The prophet Amos castigated the Jewish idolaters for this
unholy sacrilege:
But ye have borne the tabernacle of your Moloch and Chiun your images, the star of
your god, which ye made to yourselves. (Amos 5:20)
A Magical Charm and Talisman
To Illuminists everywhere, the pantacle star, or pentagram, is considered a powerful
charm, a talisman, and an emblem of favor with the Deity of the Underworld. Oh,
how the Communists, founded by Karl Marx, a high priest of Satan, cherished their
red stars!
In degree rituals of Freemasonry, an appropriate "Jewel" is awarded the rising
initiate. It is believed that this Jewel holds magical powers. It can be used to invoke,
or invite, spirits and to work spells. Albert Pike thus advised:
Another Jewel is necessary for you, and in certain undertakings cannot be
dispensed with. It is what is termed the Kabalistic pantacle (pentagram)...This
carries with it the power of commanding the spirits of the elements. It is necessary
for you to know how to use it. 6
In other words, Pike is recommending the star be the vehicle to invoke demon
powers and cause them to do magical work.
Now, before you dismiss Pike's suggestion and imagine he was just some silly,
insane occult nut, let me remind you that so respected is this man by the Illuminati
of today, that a statue of Albert Pike stands in front of the Department of Justice
building, the offices of the U.S. Attorney-General, in Washington, D.C. Displayed on
public land, that statue is carefully tended to by the National Park Service. Moreover,
the body of the much-revered former Sovereign Grand Commander Albert Pike, who
died in 1891, is entombed in the Scottish Rite's House of the Temple, exactly 13 blocks
from the White House.
Technically, there are several different types of occultic stars, each having its own
set of doctrinal characteristics. The enneagram, for example, a nine-pointed star, is
popular as a spiritual talisman in the Bahai faith and Theosophy and in other New
Age occult sects.
The pentagram, from the Greek "pente," meaning five, and "gramma," a letter (thus
the "letter five") is a five-pointed star. A pentalpha is more blatantly satanic. It is the
form of a triple triangle. The pentagram star can also be called the pentacle,
pentalpha, the Star of Isis, the Star of Venus and by other names. Its usage can be
traced back to Babylon and it has often been employed in magical rites and activities.
It is sometimes said that the inverted pentagram, when it has two points
ascendant, connotes evil and two points descendant, or down, indicates good, but
this is not so. Either direction can be evil.

--- Sayfa 530 ---
540
CODEX MAGICA
Israel's Six-Pointed Star
The six-pointed star, known as the Seal of Solomon, as the Magen David of the Jews,
or as the hexagram, is considered by witches and occultists of all stripes as a powerful
tool of witchcraft and magic. With this image, one can cast spells, curse victims, and
otherwise wreak havoc. Or so it is said.
The six-pointed star was especially beloved by the cabalistic rabbis of the
medieval era. The Rothschild Dynasty later adopted this star as a magical device and
was instrumental in persuading (money talks!) the fledgling Zionist entity, Israel, to
adopt the six-pointed star as the national emblem. It is the symbol of the Israel
national flag, even though a more appropriate device undoubtedly would be the
Torah, the Menorah, or some other historic or religious symbol.7
Geometrically and numerically (points, lines, triangles) the six-pointed star
translates into the number 666. Thus, it is very possible that the six-pointed star could
become the Mark of the Beast, the Antichrist, as prophesied in Revelation 13.
The Illuminists, cabalists, and Masons cunningly have also chosen the six-pointed
star as symbol because of its hidden sexual meanings. It is made up of two triangles,
integrated together, one superimposed on the other. The triangle pointing
downward (Delta) represents the female vagina; the triangle pointed upward the
male phallus. Joined, or yoked, the two triangles represent the generative sex act.8
Illuminati Stars Around the World
The Illuminati have cleverly designed architecture and art over the face of the whole
earth to integrate their star talismans into global culture. For example, Texas is called
the "Lone Star State," a choice of the Masons—Sam Houston, James Bowie, David
Crockett, Stephen F. Austin, and others—who wrested political control of the state in
an internecine struggle with Mexican Masonry (Mexican President, General Santa
Anna, was also a Mason). Today, the five-pointed Texas star, actually an Illuminati
icon, is displayed across the state.
The stars on the U.S. flag are of Masonic origination. The music later used for our
national anthem, the Star-Spangled Banner, was composed by a Mason, John Stafford
Smith, a member of Royal Somerset House and Inverness Lodge No. 4, London.
Another Mason, Francis Scott Key, set the words to the music, and it became
recognized as America's national anthem.9
Stars have, since World War II, been prominently painted on U.S.A. military
equipment—on tanks, jeeps, aircraft—and as badges and emblems on the uniforms
of American servicemen.
The Communists in Russia, China, and elsewhere—Illuminists all—adopted the
Red Star as a dominant icon of totalitarian dictatorship and emblazoned it on
everything, from their flags and monuments to works of art and items of clothing.
None of this is by accident. Always remember, the whole planet is a ritual stage
for these mad-men. They have planted evil seeds everywhere one turns. In the
scriptures, Paul and John warn that until Jesus our Lord finally puts a stop to this
insanity, Satan is god of this world (2 Corinthians 4:4). But Christians are not subject
to the demonic powers of this world. Christians are unaffected by spells, rituals and

--- Sayfa 531 ---
EVERY MAN AND WOMAN IS A STAR
5 4 1
magic cast by the servants of Satan. Only Christians—true, Bible-believing, blood-
bought Christians—are immune from Satan's wiles and schemes. The star is one of
those wiles. Its prevalence reminds us of how interlaced and permeated this world is
with satanic artifices.
For whatsoever is born of God overcometh the world: and this is the victory that
overcometh the world, even our faith. Who is he that overcometh the world, but he that
believeth that Jesus is the Son of God?
I John 5:4, 5
The Egyptian supreme goddess wears on her head the diabolical,
inverted pentagram star. Notice that rays of light emanate from the
two "horn" points, creating a "V" effect. See Chapter 25 of Codex
Magica for discussion of the satanic "V." (Illustration "Isis Recording
Her Mysteries." From Histoire de la Magie, by Paul Christian, Paris,
France.)

--- Sayfa 532 ---
542
CODEX MAGICA
The pentagram is an ancient and modern magical, occult symbol of prime importance to Illuminists,
satanists, and members of secret societies. In its upright form (left), the five-pointed star is said to
be an indicator of white magic. In its inverted form (center) the same star becomes the sign of
consummate evil and hellish intentions. In other words, black magic. Above, the pentagram at far
right is simply the same as the star at center turned upside down. In each star, evil is found in the
form of the goat-headed god of darkness, Baphomet. However, in the star in the center, the
Baphomet goat has what appears to be his beard pointed downward, and in the star at right
(reversed image), the supposed beard becomes the torch of fire emanating from the top of the
beast's head.
Dr. (Colonel) Michael Aquino, Ipsissimus and founder of the Temple of Set,
with his wife and High Priestess, Lilith Sinclair. The occultic star is dominant
in this scene of Aquino with all his regalia.

--- Sayfa 533 ---
EVERY MAN AND WOMAN IS A STAR
5 4 3
The media gleefully devoted maximum attention to the killing of a black man in Jasper, Texas by
three white men. The three chained the mutilated victim to the bumper of their pickup truck and
drug him behind until he was dead. The media reported the grotesque murder as a racial crime, a
horrible incident of racial prejudice and hate. In fact, the motive for the murder was satanic, not
racial. John William King, one of the accused white men, had tattoos of a baby Jesus with horns, of
the satanic pentagram, the goat's head, and more. Even King's hair was cut into symbols of evil.
(Austin American-Statesman, February 18, 1999, p. A12)

--- Sayfa 534 ---
544
CODEX MAGICA

--- Sayfa 535 ---
EVERY MAN AND WOMAN IS A STAR
545
When the wife of the author of Codex Magica sent a letter to the United Fascist Union requesting
information for our files about the group's purpose and activites, we received this letter in return.
Notice that two pentagram symbols are prominently displayed as symbolic artwork on the letterhead
of the United Fascist Union, a U.S.A. based group headquartered in Wilmington, Delaware. Also
observable is the fasces (ax and wheat bundled by X insignia). In the signature block of the letter, the
"Director and CEO" of the United Fascist Union has typed the phrases "Viva Nova Roma" (Long live
the New Rome) and "Holy is Babylon!"

--- Sayfa 536 ---
546
CODEX MAGICA
Left: A mysterious example of hermetic and
alchemic teachings. This seven-point star is so
arranged that one point of the star—painted black-
is pointed downward, symbolizing adoration of he
who rules Saturn, the sixth planet from the sun (i.e.
Lucifer). (From Manly Hall's Secret Teachings of All
Ages)
From a recent catalog offering a
multitude of talismans and charms,
were these two products offered for sale.
In this ad (left) in Magical Blend, a New Age magazine, we
see many occultic and pagan symbols, including the 5-
pointed star above the goddess' head. The shell represents
the love goddess Aphrodite who, mythology says, rose out
of the sea (see Revelation 13:1 for a prophecy about the
beast that rises up out of the sea). The goddess figure in
this ad sits in the familiar lotus position with the flame in
her genital area and her arms and hands arranged
symbolically.

--- Sayfa 537 ---
EVERY MAN AND WOMAN IS A STAR
H
5 4 7
This ad in Magical Blend
magazine touts that for
just $1,400 you can order
this pentarle star-shaped
dagger, suitable for
ceremonies and rituals.
The ad also says that the
product is "handcrafted
with love in Vermont."

--- Sayfa 538 ---
548
CODEX MAGICA
A wax talisman created by
occultist Edward Kelley, using
directions obtained in the angelic
language he called "Enochian"
(Enigma magazine, Issue 6).
A friend of Texe Marrs' ministry sent this drawing of Baphomet incorporated in an oval
shaped, irregular pentagram. He noted that such an arrangement indicates the revolving of
Venus (the goddess, or feminine principle) around the sun in an elliptical orbit. The
irregular pentagram is a sign of black magic when shown inverted and enclosing the horned
head of the goat.

--- Sayfa 539 ---
EVERY MAN AND WOMAN IS A STAR
5 4 9
The masthead of the periodic "Scroll of Set" newsletter, published by Dr. (Colonel) Michael Aquino,
High Priest of the Temple of Set. Aquino claims to be an initiate of the "Left-handed Path," which
indicates Lucifer worship.
The empty sanctuary of the Order of the Solar Temple shows signs of Satanic worship—candles on the
floor arranged in a triangular pattern and a Satanic hexagram drawn out on the floor. In October
1994, the 53 adults and children who participated in the unholy rituals of this cult—headquartered in
Switzerland but operating in Canada as well—were found dead, victims of mass, joint suicide and
murder. The official logo of the "Solar Temple" (not shown) is a triangle with 1 pointed Maltese cross.

--- Sayfa 540 ---
550
CODEX MAGICA

--- Sayfa 541 ---
EVERY MAN AND WOMAN IS A STAR
5 5 1
High Priest LaVey and followers at a 1966 ritual. Observe the pentagram
on the wall.
In the 1990s, President George Bush's National Endowment for
the Arts (NEA) gave photographer Robert Mapplethorpe a
$15.000 grant from the tax trough (that's my money and
yours!) to produce photographs. Regrettably classified as "art,"
some of Mapplethorpe's photographs depicted homosexuals
"enjoying" violent, degrading sex acts. Mapplethorpe also
produced vulgar and unseemly pictures of little boys and girls
displaying their sexual genitals.
Extremely satisfied with Robert Mapplethorpe's
pornographic art, the NEA's artist community promptly
arranged for his lewd photographs to be put on exhibit in some
of America's finest art museums. All this, of course, was funded
by the taxpayers through that gracious government cultural agency, the NEA.
Well, tragically, Robert Mapplethorpe is no longer with us. He has died of the AIDS virus,
a result of his homosexual lifestyle. But he left behind a very revealing photograph that he had
taken of himself. The photograph, entitled "Self-Portrait," shows Mapplethorpe in a terrorist/
gangster leather overcoat, machine gun in hands. On the wall behind the posed artist is a satanic
pentagram, the five pointed star so revered by occultists.
Frankly, my heart goes out to the late Robert Mapplethorpe. He was a deceived, sick man.
But I have little sympathy for the politicians who year after year fund the wicked tastes of the
NEA's art crowd. Neither do I have a soft spot in my heart for the liberal clergy who insanely
support and applaud the homosexual lifestyle.
Yes, Robert Mapplethorpe was personally responsible for his actions. He must now answer
to an almighty God. But he had many accomplices to his immoral crimes. And the blood of Robert
Mapplethorpe and thousands of other desperate and confused young men is on their hands!

--- Sayfa 542 ---
552
CODEX MAGICA
Jack Roper, a friend of Texe Marrs who is a law enforcement consultant and an expert on satanic
rituals and crimes, sent Texe this photo of a satanic altar and worshipper.

--- Sayfa 543 ---
EVERY MAN AND WOMAN IS A STAR
553
The United Kingdom's Mick
Hurknell, lead singer of the soul
group Simply Red. Fans call him
a "stage-strutting sex god" in his
red vest wearing a six-pointed
silver star as talisman around
his neck. The band has sold over
20 million albums. (Photo: The
European Magazine, December
6, 1995, p. 17)

--- Sayfa 544 ---
554
CODEX MAGICA
Fortean Times (March 2000), a magazine specializing in the bizarre and strange that is real, devoted
its cover and feature article to the documented story of Jack Parsons, the American rocket scientist
and genius who made space travel possible with his scientific inventions and discoveries. Parsons was
a Luciferian priest and an initiate of the Ordo Templi Orientis (O.T.O.), an occultic order made
infamous by Englishman Aleister Crowley ("the beast, 666"). Parsons died in a mysterious explosion
some 50 years ago, but his name and legend continue to be honored by Illuminists around the world.
NASA, America's space agency, even named a crater on Mars after Parsons. Parsons conducted sex
rituals designed to invoke the coming of the antichrist. Satanists call these perverted, dark rituals
"Babalon Working."

--- Sayfa 545 ---
EVERY MAN AND WOMAN IS A STAR
5 5 5
Popular Science magazine (July 2004) published this artist's conception of a proposed Synthetic Star,
pentagram star of light to be beamed over the city of New York as a memorial to World Trade Center
9/11 victims. The designers believe the five-pointed star, designed to float serenely above a city center
and pulse quietly at the same rate as a beating human heart—will calm the city folk below. Would
you like to look up into the sky each evening and see a huge satanic pentagram like this hovering over
your community?

--- Sayfa 546 ---
556
CODEX MAGICA
"The Great Experiment" was the title of this mural painted by Russian artist llya Glazunov. The mural
claims to picture the history of 20th century Russia. The Bolsheviks' satanic star is the overall
container and inside it is found the satanic pentacle star along with pictures of Lenin, Trotsky,
Gorbachev, and others.

--- Sayfa 547 ---
TWENTY-SEVEN
Lightning Fall From Heaven
And he said unto them, I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven. Behold, I give
unto you power to tread on serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of the
enemy: and nothing shall by any means hurt you.
-Jesus (Luke 10:18-19)

--- Sayfa 548 ---
558
CODEX MAGICA
In this classic oil painting we see
mighty Thor, the Nordic god, with his
hammer and lightning strikes. At
bottom, the black color of the horned
goats and the hand's grasping on the
rock ledge have much occult
significance. In Masonry, the use of a
gavel, or hammer, is said to be a sign
of authority. The Communists in the
U.S.S.R. adopted the hammer and
sickle as official state logos.

--- Sayfa 549 ---
LIGHTNING FALL FROM HEAVEN
5 5 9
Sir Oswald Moslev, founder of
Britain's splinter New Party,
leading a march in London in
1939. The New Party said it's
lightning flash stood for Action
and the circle (wreath) around
it for Unity, or Union. Fascists
rallied around this banner, and
many of the goals of the Party
were Socialist.
Over 30,000 people
attended this rally in
Britain under Mosley's
New Party and its
banner of the lightning
bolt and circle. The
British flag also is
interesting in its
masonic design of the
Osiris X intersecting a
horizontally elongated
cross.

--- Sayfa 550 ---
560
CODEX MAGICA
The lightning bolt has long been a satanic symbol.
Its use stems from Jesus' statement in the Holy
Scriptures: "I beheld Satan as lightning fall from
heaven" (Luke 10:18). The Harry Potter books
were cleverly packaged to introduce tens of
millions of kids to satanic symbols, rituals, and
concepts. Here we see Harry Potter, on the cover
of Time (September 20, 1999) with the lightning
bolt on his forehead. Inside, in the feature article,
is a picture of two tattooed young fans also with
thunderbolts on foreheads.

--- Sayfa 551 ---
LIGHTNING FALL FROM HEAVEN
5 6 1
A Harry Potter bookstore display. Again, note the
satanic symbol, or mark, on Harry's forehead.
This full page color ad in Time magazine (October 23,
2000) by FTD Florist exemplifies how witchcraft has
excited the public imagination. In the upper right corner
it is indicated that this ad is based on Disney's Winnie
the Pooh, a popular kids creation.
Charles Colson, of Prison Fellowship, received the
million dollar, "Progress in Religion" prize at the
Parliament of the World's Religions in Chicago. Now
he's helping to promote the Harry Potter witchcraft
books. Still, official Christendom holds Colson up as the
very epitome of Christian example, and his books are
sold in almost every Christian bookstore.
Most Christian parents are not hesitating to buy
Harry Potter sorcery witchcraft books for their
kids. Witchcraft has now virtually conquered the
whole of the Christian establishment.

--- Sayfa 552 ---
TWENTY-EIGHT
Blood Red—Red Stars, Clenched Fists,
Hammers and Sickles, and Other Signs
and Symbols of Communist Murderers
and Thugs
How is the hammer of the whole earth cut asunder and broken! how is Babylon
become a desolation among the nations!...This is the work of the Lord God of
hosts...
— Jeremiah 50:23, 25
Communism was solely the invention of the Jews.
— Sir Winston Churchill
London Illustrated Herald
(February 8, 1920)
T h e most brutal, murderous, and monstrous gang of all time was the
Communist regime in Soviet Russia, the U.S.S.R. According to noted
historian Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, sixty-six million people perished in
the Soviet gulag concentration camps and in the liquidation of the farmers and small
businessmen.1 In contrast, the notorious Adolf Hitler and his Nazis were pikers. The
real holocaust happened in the Soviet Union, and many of those deaths and torments
occurred before the Nazis had built a single camp. Hitler and Himmler must have
been green with envy.

--- Sayfa 553 ---
564
CODEX MAGICA
What is most surprising—at least to the uninformed general public —is that few
today are even aware of the Soviet Holocaust. Because of the Jewish ownership of the
Western media, all the emphasis is put on the crimes of the Nazis. The horrors of the
Red Terror are neglected. Maybe more remarkable, in many media and academic
circles, the monsters who committed the atrocities in Soviet Russia —led by Lenin,
Trotsky, Stalin, Kaganovich, Beria and others—are often adored, being cast in a
favorable light. This is especially true of Lenin and, to a lesser extent, the theoretical,
so-called "founder" of Communist ideology, the German Karl Marx.
Communist Leaders of Jewish Bloodline
The reason why the Western media, owned and run as it is by Jewish interests, fails
to expose the Communist butchery is easy to discern. The instigators and leaders of
Communism were virtually all of the Jewish race and bloodline! The Lenin Museum
in Russia today admits that Vladimir Lenin was a crypto-Jew (a "crypto Jew is a Jew
who keeps his race hidden from public knowledge). Trotsky, his deputy in crime and
mass murder, was a Jew who had lived in the Bronx, New York under his real name,
Lev Bronstein. Stalin, the third leg of the Soviet troika, was half-Jew, and Yiddish was
the only language spoken in his boyhood home in Georgia. Stalin's real surname was
Dzhugashvilli—Jewish.2
Karl Marx was a German Jew whose grandfather was a rabbi, and the entire
Communist Bolshevik revolution was financed by the Jewish Rothschilds and Jewish
Warburgs in Germany, in partnership with the Jewish Warburgs and Jewish Schiffs
in the United States.
Communism was Jewish from the ground up. Marx's view and his classic texts,
The Capitalists and The Communist Manifesto, were ideological expressions of the
Jewish Cabala, which is also the basis for Marx's theory of dialectical materialism and
economic class evolution, specific throwbacks to Hegelian dialectics and Weishaupt's
Illuminism. Albert Pike's writings in Morals and Dogma are also right out of the
Jewish Cabala aquarium. It seems that the piranhas, the killer "fish" of humanity, all
swam in the same polluted pond: Jewish Cabalism and rabbinical magic and
despotism.
From Lenin to Putin, we have a straight-line succession of Jewish Cabalism under
the guise of Communism and now, "Democratic Capitalism" under Gorbachev,
Yeltsin and Putin.3
Writing in his provocative, fact-filled expose, Bloodlines of the Illuminati, researcher
Fritz Springmeier reveals how incestuously Jewish the rulers of Russia have been,
including their spouses. First, he notes that Stalin married the daughter of his
number 2 man, the Jew Kaganovich. Also:
The wife of Boris Yeltsin is the daughter of Joseph Stalin from Stalin's marriage
with Rosa Kaganovich. Rosa's father was Illuminati...Boris Yeltsin and Rosa are
secretly Jewish.
Lenin was married to a Jewish wife, Krupsakaya. Molotov married a Jewess, too.
And Stalin was married to Jewess Kaganovich. Kaganovich's powerful brother

--- Sayfa 554 ---
BLOOD RED- RED STARS, CLENCHED FISTS
565
Lazar is in the Politburo, and Lazar's son, Mikhail Kaganovich, married Stalin's
daughter, Svetlana. Boris Yeltsin's original (Jewish name) was Baruch Ellia. He in
turn is a good friend of David Rockefeller.4
Communism the Invention of Jews
So dominant was the Jewish influence in the Communist regime and its bloody Red
Terror that Sir Winston Churchill, in the London Illustrated Herald newspaper, stated
that, "Communism was solely the invention of the Jews."5 And, he added, it is not a
new thing, for the Jews are historically the people who have fomented bloody
revolutions and horrors. Churchill said the Jewish global revolutionary plot can be
traced back to the days of Adam Weishaupt and his Bavarian Order of the Illuminati
(1776).
Churchill went on to emphasize that this "worldwide conspiracy for the
overthrow of civilization, and the reconstruction of society...has been steadily
growing." Now, he warns, this band of thugs and murders "have become the
undisputed masters of the enormous Russian empire."6
Solzhenitsyn records that over 60 percent of the Commissars who headed Gulag
camps in the U.S.S.R. were Jewish. Other historians estimate the number at 80
percent. Every leader of the dreaded Checka, KGB and secret police was Jewish,
including the butcher Beria.
May Day—Illuminism and Communism
It is interesting to note that that Adam Weishaupt, infamous founder of the
Illuminati, founded his group on May 1. It was exactly that day that the Communists
under Lenin celebrated. Annually on May 1, the huge May Day parade is held in
Moscow.
Is it a mere accident that the most holy day of paganism and witchcraft, Beltane,
is also celebrated on May 1? On that day, in pagan Europe, children and adults
celebrated around the phallus symbol known as the May Pole, even as witches
howled at the moon.7
Of Wolves and Freemasons
In his expose of Communism, Under the Sign of the Scorpion, Swedish writer and
researcher Jiiri Lina, writes how in his last months, a mad Vladimir Lenin, his body
and brain racked with the sexually transmitted disease syphilis, demanded each
night to be taken out on his balcony in his wheelchair. There, for hours, the angry
Lenin would howl and bay at the moon like a wounded wolf.8
Lenin, Stalin, Marx and all the other top Communist leaders were all Freemasons.
Gorbachev, too, and Yeltsin were Masons, members of the Grand Orient Lodge of
France as well as the Soviet Consistory.
Albert Mackey, 33°, former Sovereign Grand Commander, in his authoritative
Encyclopedia of Freemasonry, states that Alexander Kerensky (Lenin's immediate
predecessor) and the other plotters of the 1917 revolution against the Czar were

--- Sayfa 555 ---
566
CODEX MAGICA
Masons: "The first Revolution in March 1917 is said to have been operated from these
(Masonic) Lodges and all the members of Kerensky's government belonged to
them."9
All Masonic organizations throughout the world are secretly run by Jewish
masters operating behind-the-scenes.10
I also have documentation to prove that Marx, Lenin, and most other Communist
leaders were homosexual perverts. Most, like Beria, were pedophiles as well, and
they all enjoyed brutalizing and degrading women. The wives of these homosexual
deviants led miserable lives. One of Stalin's wives committed suicide.11
Signs and Symbols of Communism
Seeing as how the Communist founders and leaders have all been apostate Jews into
Cabalism, Freemasonry, and blatant satanism (Marx was an official High Priest in a
satanic church), we can be sure the signs and symbols of Communism are also of
cabalistic/Masonic/satanic origins, as is the color red so fanatically adored by the
Communist wackos. Let us now examine these signs and symbols of the Red
Murderers, e.g. the Communists.
The Clenched Fist
In all nations where Communist politicians and insurgents operate, these evil men
and women invariably identify themselves by making the sign of the clenched fist.
Some biblical authorities say that, "The clenched fist represents the (rebellious)
attitude of the people of Babylon toward God."12
The closed, or clenched fist is, in the Illuminist Philosophy, the symbol of secrecy,
dissimulation, and hermeticism. It veils and conceals secrets from the "profane" and
the "vulgar" (the non-Illuminists). Interestingly, the meaning is the same in the
canons of Buddhism.13
Dr. Peter Ruckman, in his fascinating study of things occulticly black and evil,
mockingly titled Black is Beautiful, comments about the raised, clenched fist:
You will find this 'salute' being given by all members of the Communist Party in
New York, in the 1920s and by the (Stalinist) Abraham Lincoln Brigade, during the
civil war in Spain in the 1930s.
By some quirk of 'fate,' this salute was adopted by the Black Panthers in America
during the 1960s...the followers of Martin Luther King called it the 'BLACK
POWER'salute.14
Liberal Afro-American leaders continue to employ this salute to this day. Jesse
Jackson does it almost as an automatic response.
The clenched fist salute, or hand sign, is well-known in Freemasonry. The First
Sign, or Due-guard, in the ritual of the Select Master Degree is the holding up, or
raising, of both arms in an "L" (square) position with the fists of both hands clenched.
The lecture for this degree in Richardson's Monitor of Freemasonry states:

--- Sayfa 556 ---
BLOOD RED-RED STARS, CLENCHED FISTS
567
The signs of a Select Master are then given as follows: The first is similar to the sign
of a Master Mason. The fists are both clenched, in allusion to one of the penalties of
the obligation, which is to have both hands chopped off to the stumps.15
How interesting. Ironically, according to the Masons, the symbol of the clenched
fist relates to having the hand chopped off at the stump. Communists out there:
Maybe you should listen to what your cronies in Freemasonry are teaching you.
In the initiation for the Secret Monitor Degree of the Lodge, the sign of the
clenched fist is given in remarkably similar fashion to the Communist salute, with
one hand and arm.
Hammer and Sickle
The sickle is a universal symbol of the Grim Reaper; that is, a symbol of death.
However, the Communists would maintain that the hammer and sickle represent
workers, or laborers, the proletariat, or common people whom the Communist
leadership represents.
Perhaps the hammer has other relevant meanings, however, which are concealed
by the satanic Illuminists who sponsored — and continue to sponsor Communism.
The Herder Dictionary of Symbols says the hammer "symbolizes power and strength"
and notes, "In some cultures magical protective powers against evil are ascribed to
ritually forged hammers."
Every Masonic Lodge has a gavel, or hammer, wielded by the "Worshipful
Master" or other potentate in charge. In her celebrated dark work, The Secret Doctrine,
Theosophy founder Helena Blavatsky reveals that the god of forces (Lucifer) renders
the "divine hammer" and it is the "mallet or gavel of the Grand Masters of Masonic
Lodges."16
Sarah Terry, a member of the Masonic-aligned group, the Eastern Star, traces the
gavel, or hammer, back to the hammer of the Nordic sun god, Thor, and says it is an
emblem of power.17
If we realize that the Illuminati's chief goal is the rebuilding of Babylon in a
desperate bid to undo what God did as recorded in the Book of Genesis, the
significance of this Bible verse relating to the prophesied destruction of Babylon by
God's might becomes clear:

--- Sayfa 557 ---
568
CODEX MAGICA
A sound of battle is in the land, and of great destruction. How is the hammer of the
whole earth cut asunder and broken. How is Babylon become a desolation among the
nations...The Lord hath opened his armory, and hath brought forth the weapons of his
indignation; for this is the work of the Lord God of Hosts. (Jeremiah 50:22-25)
Red Star
The Red Star is perhaps Communism's best-known symbol. I have examined the
occultic meaning of the five-pointed star in previous chapters, so I simply reiterate
here that the star is a sign of false gods and specifically of the god of Illuminism,
In the Perfect Master Degree, the Masons assembled in the Lodge all simulate the drama of
lamenting the mythical death of their "brother," the false Christ-figure, the Grand Master Hiram
Abiff. Observe the red star on the coffin here. (From Richardson's Monitor of Freemasonry, p. 134)
Lucifer, the solar deity who comes disguised and is worshipped by the deceived
Illuminati as "Angel of Light" and as the "Blazing Star."
Incidentally, so popular is the Red Star in Russia that in late 2000, under pressure
from military brass and segments of public opinion, Vladimir Putin, Russia's
President, brought back the Soviet red banner as the military's flag and agreed to
reinstate the Soviet-era red star as the Russian military's official emblem.
"The star is sacred to all servicemen," said Defense Minister Sergei Ivanov, who
spoke at a meeting of Putin's top generals attended by Putin.18
Oddly enough—or understandably enough for those in the know —the red star is
often seen on U.S.A. military vehicles and uniforms. It became a staple during World
War II, under the direction of the Pentagon's "red brass" leadership put in place by
Zionist fanatic President Franklin D. Roosevelt and his ever watchful guardian,
Jewish financier Bernard Baruch. (No wonder General Eisenhower's West Point
yearbook called Ike the "Swedish Jew.")

--- Sayfa 558 ---
BLOOD RED - RED STARS, CLENCHED FISTS
569
The Color Red
But why the color red? Could it have a relationship with the Bible's identification of
the whore of Babylon as the woman in scarlet?
Also in the Bible, we find that Esau was born red (Genesis 25:25), and God says,
"I have hated Esau."
The color red has a long and non-illustrious history of whoredom and violence.
In pre-Vedic India the people worshipped a primitive form of Shiva as the "red god"
and as "the howler." The god and planet Mars was known by the ancients as the red
god.
In Scandinavia, the major god, Odin, had clothing, shield symbols and runes of
red color. A hero Viking's death became celebrated on the calendar as a "red-letter
day," and thus we have this phrase in common use today.
Robin was the god of witches in the forest and when human sacrifices were made,
they were dedicated to Robin redbreast, or the slain Cock Robin.
Updated to more recent times, we find that in her occult book, A Treatise On The
Seven Rays, Lucis Trust director Alice Bailey taught the occult importance of colors.
"The three major rays," she said, "are red, blue, and yellow." The color red, Bailey
explained, has to do with "Will, or Power."19
In The Symbolism of Color, Faber Birren points out the primacy of the color red. He
notes:20
•
In ancient Egyptian religion, the god Shu was red, and red animals symbolized
Seth.
•
The red poppy was sacred to Ceres, the goddess of the harvest.
•
The face of the wine-god Dionysus was sometimes painted red.
In my researches of occult traditions, the color red is always the color of fire and
blood, of evil and destruction, and of immorality. Even the Devil is sometimes
conceived of as a red beast.
And isn't that what Communism has proven to be—A red beast? Even a Red
Dragon?

--- Sayfa 559 ---
570
CODEX MAGICA
Earl Browder, head of the United States
Communist Party for sixteen years (1931-
1946), giving the Communist salute at the 1936
convention. Browder was a friend of Soviet
dictator Joseph Stalin and worked behind the
scenes to get President Franklin D. Roosevelt re-
elected.
Standing before a U.S. flag
displayed for propaganda effect,
presidential candidate John
Kerry gives the classic
Communist, clenched fist salute.
U.S. Senator John Edwards, 2004 vice
presidential running-mate to Senator John
Kerry, gives Communist salute during
political campaign speech.
Democratic presidential nominee John
Kerry at annual meeting of NAACP.

--- Sayfa 560 ---
BLOOD RED - RED STARS, CLENCHED FISTS
5 7 1
General Wesley Clark giving the traditional clenched fist salute of Marxists at a political
rally in Texas. (Photo: Austin American-Statesman, September 30, 2003)

--- Sayfa 561 ---
572
CODEX MAGICA
President Bill Clinton
giving the
Communist fist in
1993.
From boyhood, the elite
managed and groomed the
young Bill Clinton for
stardom. How many young
men at age 16 got the
opportunity to go to
Washington, D.C. and have
the photo opportunity of
shaking hands with
President John F. Kennedy?
A few years later, college
student Clinton marched in
communist protest
demonstrations.

--- Sayfa 562 ---
BLOOD RED - RED STARS, CLENCHED FISTS
5 7 3
Bill Clinton, an Illuminatus, was made the youngest governor in the history of
Arkansas. Here he is in 1982 with Hillary after winning the governor's mansion.
The late New York Congresswoman
Bella Abzug was a hardened lesbian,
a feminist, and a dedicated
Communist. Abzug and Hillary
Clinton were dear friends.

--- Sayfa 563 ---
574
CODEX MAGICA
South African leader Nelson Mandela, a devoted Communist, with Communist radical wife, Winnie
and the head of the Communist Party.
Nelson Mandela and wife, Winnie,
give the Marxist salute. Winnie
Mandela was known to participate
in torture sessions and directed a
number of "necklace parties"—
events at which a tied up victim has
a tire full of gasoline around his
neck which is lit by fire. (Photo:
from book, In The Words of Nelson
Mandela, edited by Jennifer
Williams, Carol Publishing Group,
1998, p. 43)
"Black Power" symbol.

--- Sayfa 564 ---
BLOOD RED - RED STARS, CLENCHED FISTS
5 7 5
The Communist Party's International Brigades fought a bloody civil war in Spain. Here are some of
the merciless Red thugs at a rally in Barcelona in 1938 (Photo: Vanity Fair, September 2001, p. 302)
Islamic cleric Ayatollah
Khomeni, his hand clenched in
the Communist style in this
poster, led the nation of Iran
until his death.

--- Sayfa 565 ---
576
CODEX MAGICA
Performers of the Cirque du Soleil give the clenched fist salute. Cirque du Soleil (Circus of the Sun) is
a big hit with their dazzling theatre in shows in Las Vegas. The demonic influence in their
performances is thick.
Communist hatred of
Jesus and of Christianity
is evidenced by this
disgusting Soviet
depiction of The Last
Supper, with Jesus and
His disciples having a
drunken orgy. The Soviet
leadership was made up
of Revolutionary Jews.

--- Sayfa 566 ---
BLOOD RED-RED STARS, CLENCHED FISTS
577
The resemblance of the monstrous Communist butcher Leon Trotsky (right) to the shadow devil
creature created by the hand of British satanic high priest Aleister Crowley (left) is remarkable. The
drawing of Trotsky is from a Greek publication while the photo of Crowley is found in an unrelated
British-published book. In fact, Trotsky, whose real name was Bronstein (Jewish) was a satanist,
which is why he was so thrilled to see countless thousands of Russian and other Christians arrested,
tortured, killed, or sent to gulag
concentration camps. Trotsky was
himself murdered in Mexico City by
an assassin wielding an axe.
Star god of Communism? This 1920
propaganda poster by a Communist
artist depicts Trotsky as Saint George
slaying the dragon of capitalism. In
reality, Jewish capitalists, the
Warburgs and Rothschilds, were the
ones who put Trotsky, Lenin, and
Stalin and their Red Terror in power
in Moscow in 1917. Trotsky and his
cohorts were servants of the dragon!

--- Sayfa 567 ---
578
CODEX MAGICA
Vanishing Comrades: The Illuminati throughout
the centuries have falsified history. Want proof?
Check out these two sets of Soviet-era
photographs. Compare the first photo in each set
with the corresponding second photo. Notice
someone missing? The second photo is the
touched up, "remaking of history" photo. Having
purged and killed off certain "comrades," the
Illuminati
inspired Soviet leaders felt obligated to
remove all traces of the disgraced comrades from
history. Textbooks, library archives, press accounts
all had to be changed, much like Orwell's 1984
black hole procedures. Today, in both the East and
the West, the same historical falsification process
continues, with the true accounts of cardinal events like Pearl Harbor attack, the JFK assassination
and the 9/11 World Trade Center disaster being doctored and retouched by the elite's media
puppets. (Note: For the eye-opening account of Soviet Communist falsification of history, see the
book, The Commissar Vanishes, Metropolitan; Also see Newsweek, November 10, 1997, p. 80)

--- Sayfa 568 ---
BLOOD RED - RED STARS, CLENCHED FISTS
5 7 9
General Vo Nguyen Giap was North Vietnam's legendary guerilla leader whose rag tag armies
successively drove the Japanese, the French and the Americans out of Vietnam. Giap co-founded the
Vietnamese Communist Party. (Note: The design of the Vietnam flag is a 5-pointed star against a red
background.)
Russian President Boris
Yeltsin displays the fist
of Soviet Communism
while speaking in 1992
to a joint session of the
U.S. Congress. The
Senators and
Representatives
responded with
prolonged applause.
(Photo and story: The
Washington Post, June
18, 1992, p. 1)

--- Sayfa 569 ---
580
CODEX MAGICA
The Communists adopted both the hammer and sickle and the red star for their official logos, or
symbols. The ancient god Saturn, depicted here in a 15th century drawing, was said to carry the sickle
as the symbol of death. Note also the radiant star in Saturn's genital area, the horns of the goat
(Satan) and the water bearer (Satan's astrological Age of Aquarius). Occultists view the planet Saturn
as representing Satan, because it is the sixth planet from the son and because of Saturn's role as
taught in the mythologies.

--- Sayfa 570 ---
BLOOD RED - RED STARS, CLENCHED FISTS
5 8 1
The similarity of the USSR emblem and the United Nations emblem is undeniable. A friend tells me a
resemblance is also found on products and in commercials for Cadillac automobiles, Lenox china,
George Dickel whiskey, Winston cigarettes, and on the design of "wheat" pennies.
The Shriners, an Islamic-oriented Freemasonry
organization whose members take an oath at
the altar of Allah, erected and dedicated The
Peace Monument in Toronto, Canada in 1930.
Observe how the globe, the angel's arms
position and the sheathes in the angel's hands
are elements found in both the U.S.S.R. and the
U.N. emblems. The statue is called "Lady of
Peace," just as the U.S.S.R. called itself a peace-
loving country and the U.N. proclaims itself to
be devoted to world peace. (Photo: from book,
Parade to Glory—The Shriners and Their
Caravan to Destiny, by Fred van Deventor)

--- Sayfa 571 ---
In his thoughtful, eye-opening book, Scarlet and the
Beast, knowledgeable Christian author and conspiracy
researcher John Daniel illustrates the communist
connection with Freemasonry. The most prominent
emblem of universal Freemasonry is the square and
compass with the letter "G" inside the internal triangle.
Daniel notes that this represents the tools used by the
Lodge's Great Architect (false God) to create the
heavens and the earth. In reality, the letter "G"
represents Gnosticism, the core doctrine of Masonry,
and the Generative process (sex act). Masonry is, as
Daniel notes, a sex cult.
However, English Freemasonry (the United Lodge
of Britain) substitutes a human arm wielding a hammer
in place of the "G." This arm and hammer represents
the Mason as the Builder, as "man at work" creating the
heavens and the earth. Thus, man becomes God. The
arm and hammer is of socialist/communist origins. The
same symbol is found on a bestselling brand of baking
soda. Noted communist financier and oil corporation
CEO Armand Hammer was given his name in honor of
the communist movement. Note, too, that the arm and
hammer symbol inside the square and compass is
configured as a "G."
Finally, we come to the modified square and
compass of French Freemasonry and its Grand Orient
Lodge. This Lodge and its membership are decidedly
anti-Christian and are markedly pro-communist. In
1877, the Grand Orient Lodge declared, "There is no
god but humanity." Embracing Reason as their God,
they replaced the "G" with the now-familiar communist
symbol of the hammer and sickle. This represents
collective common man, the proletariat. John Daniel
points out that the French Lodge's substituted symbol
inside the typical square and compass forms the letter
"G" backward, "which is symbolic of the negation of
God." It was Albert Pike who wrote, in Morals and
Dogma, that there is no real person or entity named
"Satan." Pike claimed that Satan is simply a Force, the
negation of God. (Illustrations: Scarlet and the Beast, by
John Daniel, published 1994, JKI Publishing, P. O. Box
131480, Tyler, TX 75713)
582
CODEX MAGICA

--- Sayfa 572 ---
BLOOD RED - RED STARS, CLENCHED FISTS
5 8 3
In a vain and failing effort to lionize and deify their bloodthirsty founder, the communist Jew
Vladimir Lenin, the U.S.S.R. planned to build this gigantic memorial to the dead Soviet dictator.
Josef Stalin, Lenin's successor, in 1931, commissioned architect Boris Iofan to do the design work.
It was to be the largest building in the world and was to be called the Palace of the Soviets. The
design favors that of Mayan pyramids and the ziggurats of Babylon. The site chosen for the Lenin
monument was a piece of land on which a closed-down Christian church building sat, the 19th
century Cathedral of Christ the Savior. Stalin ordered the church blown up and the debris removed,
and it was. However, World War II intervened and the gargantuan, monstrous structure was never
completed. At the top of the planned monument, a statue of Lenin was to tower above the people
and landscape, his right hand and finger vertically pointed upward toward the heavens. Possibly
this was a fulfillment of scripture. In Isaiah 14, Lucifer vainly boasts that his kingdom will ascend
to the stars and that he will be like the Most High. But Lucifer's true destiny is the pit of hell!

--- Sayfa 573 ---
584
CODEX MAGICA
The occult magic of the Czar is also back! Or did it ever leave? In The European (May 5-M,
1995, p. 4) was found this story reporting on "Black Magicians" among the highest ranks of
Russian military and political circles. Among the magic techniques common in the Kremlin:
Mantras, meditation, astrology and horoscopes, mind powers, telekinesis, spinning saucers,
coded messages, remote viewing, tarot cards, and energy fields.

--- Sayfa 574 ---
BLOOD RED - RED STARS, CLENCHED FISTS 5 8 5
Actress holds up an iron of Vladimir Lenin during Russian
occult stage production, The Fourteen Red HUTS.
The Scarlet Island, another Russian production.

--- Sayfa 575 ---
586
CODEX MAGICA
Gorbachev Red Star" trumpeted this cover of Vanity Fair magazine (February 1990). Ink type,
appropriately, was colored red.

--- Sayfa 576 ---
BLOOD RED-RED STARS, CLENCHED FISTS
587
The red star is universally recognized as a sign of hard-core Communism. So,
why has Macy's department stores adopted it also as its logo, as shown on
these Macy's plastic shopping bags?
In what is clearly a staged
photo in Newsweek
magazine (January 4, 1999),
then U.S. Senator and later
Attorney-General, John
Ashcroft is called "The True
Believer." In the photograph,
Ashcroft sits in a red chair
with golden stars emblazed
on the fabric. On the wall
behind him are a series of
framed United States flags.
Each has the same gold star
prominent inside the blue
field of 50 white stars of the
states. The star and the
colors red and gold have
special significance for
Illuminists.

--- Sayfa 577 ---
588
CODEX MAGICA
Was Lee Harvey Oswald playing the part
of a Communist secret agent when he
displayed the clenched fist shortly after
his arrest for the alleged assassination of
President Kennedy?
Senator John Kerry, failed
presidential candidate, giving
his favorite hand sign.
When Bush nominee John Ashcroft, a
Freemason, was sworn in as Attorney-General
of the United States, he did not swear on the
Holy Bible. In this revealing photo published
in Criminal Politics magazine, Lawrence
Patterson, foremost authority on the global
conspiracy and on secret societies, points out
that Ashcroft—whom the White House and
the press promoted as an "evangelical
Christian"—placed his hands and swore on a
mysterious stack of books. Were they law
books or books of the Jewish Talmud or...?

--- Sayfa 578 ---
FOOTNOTES AND REFERENCES
Introduction: The Occult Script—A Colossal and Monstrous Conspiracy
1.
Henry Makow, "Lucifer is the Secret God of Secular Society—Occult Agents Control
Humanity," internet, savethemales.ca, October 13, 2003.
2.
Ibid
3.
William L. Cummings, "Rites and Rituals," Royal Arch Mason, Winter 1994, p. 107.
4.
Ray V. Denshaw, quoted in Ibid.
Chapter 1: Caution!—You Are Now Entering the Forbidden Zone
1.
Christopher Mark, "Grand Deception: The Theft of America and the World," South East
Christian Witness, Issue #4, PO Box 8129, South Australia 5291, 2003.
2.
Ibid.
3.
Ibid.
4.
Thomas Mann, Famous Quotes.
5.
Paul Huston, Mastering Witchcraft (New York: Wideview/Perigee Books/Putnam &
Sons), p. 21.
6.
Ibid.
7.
Manly P. Hall, Lectures on Ancient Philosophy (Los Angeles, CA., The Philosophical
Research Library, 1984), p. 433.
8.
Robert Guffey, in The Conspiracy Reader (New York: Citadel Press/Carol Publishing,
compiled by Al Hidell and Joan D. Arc, editors, Paranoia Magazine).
9.
Emile Grillot: DeGivry, Picture Museum of Sorcery, Magic, and Alchemy (Hyde Park, NY:
University Books, 1963).
10.
Marie Roberts and Hugh Ormsby-Lennon, Secret Texts: The Literature of Secret Societies
(New York: AMS Press, 1995).
11.
Thomas Carlyle, Sartor Resartus, quoted by Piers Compton, The Broken Cross: The Hidden
Hand in the Vatican (Australia: Veritas Publishing, 1984), p. 11.
12.
Cathy Burns, Hidden Secrets of the Eastern Star (Mt. Carmel, PA: Sharing, 1994), p. 292.
13.
Ibid., p.291.
14.
Ibid.
15.
Alex Horne, Sources of Masonic Symbolism (Missouri Lodge of Research, 1981).
16.
Foster Bailey, The Spirit of Freemasonry (New York: Lucis Press, 1957).
17.
Henry C. Clausen, Emergence of the Mystical (Washington, D.C.: The Supreme Mother
Council of the World, Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry, Southern
Jurisdiction, U.S.A., 1981).
18.
Albert Mackey, Encyclopedia of Freemasonry and Kindred Sciences, Volume Two (Chicago,
IL: The Masonic History Company, 1929).

--- Sayfa 579 ---
590
CODEX MAGICA
19.
Helena Blavatsky, The Secret Doctrine, quoted in column of Edith Kermit Roosevelt, IKR
Syndicate, Washington, D.C., 1962.
20.
Albert Pike, Morals and Dogma of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry
(Richmond, VA: L.H. Jenkins, Inc., 1871).
21.
George Steinmetz, Freemasonry: Its Hidden Meaning (New York: Macoy Publishing and
Masonic Supply Co., 1948), pp.43-44.
22.
Albert Pike, quoted by J.D. Buck, The Lost Word Found in the Great Work (Chicago, IL:
Indo-American Book Co., 3d ed., 1913), pp. 14-15; and see Cathy Burns, Hidden Secrets of
the Eastern Star (Mt. Carmel, PA: Sharing 1994) pp. 136-137.
23.
Lynn F. Perkins, quoted by Cathy Burns, op.cit., p. 17.
24.
Martin Short, Inside the Brotherhood, (London: Harper Collins Publishers, 1990), p. 22.
25.
Juri Lina, Architects of Deception (Stockholm: Referent Publishing 2004), p. 11.
26.
Ibid.
27.
Ibid.
28.
Peter Ruckman, Bible Believers Bulletin, Pensacola, Florida, 2005.
29.
Ibid.
30.
Ibid.
31.
Bob Whitaker, "Situation Terminal...But Not Serious," The Barnes Review, September-
October, 2002, p. 6.
Chapter 2: The Megalomania of the Psychopaths—Why the Illuminati Do What They Do
1.
Essi Viding, quoted by Nic Fleming "Psychopaths Inherit Anti-social Traits," The
Telegraph, United Kingdom; May 25, 2005.
2.
William Krasner, "Neurotica", quoted by Texe Marrs, Big Sister is Watching You, p. 48
(Austin, TX: Living Truth Publishers, 1993).
3.
The New Encyclopedia Brittanica, Volume 7, 15th ed. (London: 1989), p. 671.
4.
Michael A. Hoffman, II, Secret Societies and Psychological Warfare (Coeur d'Alene, ID: 2001).
5.
George Bernard Shaw, quoted by Dave Hunt, The Cult Explosion (Eugene, OR: Harvest
House, 1980).
6.
F. Aster Barnwell, The Meaning of Christ For Our Age (Llewellyn Publications: St. Paul,
MN, 1984).
7.
Newt Gingrich, quoted in Tlte Washington Post, January 3,1985.
8.
Jim Keith, Mind Control and UFOs: A Casebook on Alternative 3 (Lilburn, GA: Illumined
Press).
9.
Ibid.
10.
Israel Shahak, quoted by Normany F. Dacey, Democracy in Israel (Torrance, CA: Institute
for Historical Review).
11.
Barry McWaters, Conscious Evolution (San Francisco: Evolutionary Press, 1983), p. 10.
12.
Ibid, p. 111.
13.
Ibid., p. 57.
14.
Albert Pike, quoted by Brian Garlin in Global Checkmate (New Zealand, 1983), and see
Lady Queensborough, Occult Theocracy, Volume 1, 1933.
15.
Eliphas Levi, quoted by David Carrico, Lucifer- Eliphas Levi-Albert Pike and the Masonic
Lodge (Evansville, IN: Followers of Jesus Christ, 1991); and see A. Ralph Epperson,
Masonry: Conspiracy Against Christianity (Tucson, AZ: Publius Press, 1997).

--- Sayfa 580 ---
FOOTNOTES AND REFERENCES
591
16.
Vera Stanley Alder, The Initiation of the World (York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, Inc.,
1972).
17.
Paul Huston, Mastering Witchcraft (New York: Wideview/Perigee/Putnam & Sons,
1970), p. 32-33.
18. Ibid.
19.
C.W. Leadbetter, quoted by Ted Flynn, Hope of the Wicked: The Master Plan to Rule the
World (Herndon, VA: Maxkol Communications, 2000), p. 48-49.
20.
Ibid.
21.
Alice Bailey, The Rays and the Initiations, Volume V (New York: Lucis Publishing, 1960).
22.
C. Fred Kleinknecht, "A Brave New World of Heroes," The Scottish Rite ]ournal, March
2002.
23.
Vera Stanley Alder, op. cit., p. 164.
24.
Jack Parsons, The Collected Works of Jack Parsons (Falcon Press, O.T.O.,1989).
Chapter 3: Concealed Messages—The Importance of Hand Signs to the Illuminati
1.
Coil's Masonic Encyclopedia, edited by Henry Wilson Coil (Richmond, VA: Macoy
Publishing and Masonic Supply House, 1961 & 19%).
2.
J.C. Cooper, An Illustrated Encyclopedia of Traditional Symbols (London: Thames &
Hudson, 1978), p. 78-79.
3.
Manfred Adler, The Freemasons and The Vatican (Germany), p. 163.
4.
Ibid.
5.
Juan Maler, The Victory of Reason: The World Model of Freemasonry (Buenos Aires,
Argentina, 1978), p. 77.
6.
Johannes Rothkranz, Did You Already Know? (Germany), pp.11, 44.
7. Ibid.
8.
The Herder Dictionary of Symbols (Wilmette, IL: Chiron Publications, 1986).
9.
Ibid.
10.
James Curl, The Art and Architecture of Freemasonry (Woodstock, NY: Overlook Press,
1993), p. 238.
11.
A Dictionary of Symbols, edited by Jean Chevalier and Alain Gheerbant (New York:
Penguin Books, 1996).
12. Ibid.
Chapter 4: Hidden Hand of the Men of Jahbuhlun
1.
Malcolm A. Duncan, Duncan's Masonic Ritual and Monitor, 3d. ed. (New York: Crown
Publishers), p. 226.
2.
Ed Decker, Tlie Dark Side of Freemasonry (Lafayette, LA: Huntington House Publishers,
1994), p. 18.
3.
C.C. Zain, Ancient Masonry: The Spiritual Significance of Masonic Rituals, Degrees, and
Symbols (Los Angeles: The Church of Light, 1994).
4.
W.L. Wilmshurst, The Meaning of Masonry (New York: Gramercy Books & Crown
Publishers, 1980), p. 143.
5. Ibid.
6.
Malcolm C. Duncan, op. cit.; also see Decker, op. cit.

--- Sayfa 581 ---
592
CODEX MAGICA
7.
Christopher Knight and Robert Lomas, The Hiram Key (New York: Barnes and Noble, 1996).
8.
Malcolm C. Duncan, op. cit. p. 254.
9.
C.C. Zain, op. cit
Chapter 5: for He's A Jolly Good Fellow—Sign of the Devil's Claw By the Men of the Craft
1.
Henry W. Coil, Coil's Masonic Encyclopedia (New York: Macoy Publishing & Masonic
Supply Company, Inc., 1961)
2.
Witchcraft, Magic, and The Supernatural (Hong Kong: Mandarin Publishers/Octopus
Books, 1974).
3.
Albert Mackey, Encyclopedia of Freemasonry and Kindred Sciences (Chicago: The Masonic
History Company, 1929).
4.
Ibid., p. 352.
5. Ibid.
Chapter 6: Baphles Me!—Horned Beasts, Leaping Goats, Satanic Beards, and Other Messages of
Evil
1.
Israel Regardie, The Eye in the Triangle: An Interpretation of Aleister Crowley (Phoenix, AZ:
Falcon Press, 1986); also see Aleister Crowley, Confessions of a Heretic.
2.
Aleister Crowley, Confessions of A Heretic, p. 629.
3.
Judith Reisman, Kinsey: Crimes and Consequences (U.S.A.: The Institute for
Media Education, 1998).
4.
Aleister Crowley, Magic in Theory and Practice, p. 559-561.
5.
Anton LaVey, Satan Speaks (Los Angeles: Feral House, 1997).
6.
South East Christian Witness newsletter, Australia, January 1992, p. 5; also see Peter
Sawyer, Inside News, Australia, November, 1981.
Chapter 8: Secret Handshakes of the Illuminati
1. Cathy Burns, Hidden Secrets of the Easter Star (Mt. Carmel, PA: Sharing, 1994); also see
Albert Mackey, A Manual of The Lodge (New York: Charles E. Merrill Co., 1870), p. 40-41.
Chapter 9: A Show of Hands—Illuminists Employ The Grand Hailing Sign and the Sign of
Admiration and Astonishment
1.
Jabez Richardson, Richardson's Monitor and Freemasonry (1860).
2.
Malcolm C. Duncan, Duncan's Masonic Ritual and Monitor, 3d. ed. (New York: Crown
Publishers), p. 216.
3.
Time, January 4, 1993.
4.
John J. Robinson, Born in Blood: The Last Secrets of Freesmasonry (New York: M. Evans &
Co., 1989).
5.
Ibid., p. 217.
6.
Jack Harris, Freemasonry (New Kensington, PA: Whitaker House, 1983).
Chapter 11: "Cross My Heart and Hope to Die"—The Mysterious "X" Factor
1. C. J. Koster, Come Out of Her My People (South Africa: Institute for Scripture Research,
2004).

--- Sayfa 582 ---
FOOTNOTES AND REFERENCES
593
2.
Jim Tresner, "Seventeenth Degree, Knight of the East and the West," Scottish Rite
Journal, June 2000.
3. Ibid.
4. Ibid.
5.
Ibid.
6. Ibid.
7. Ibid.
8.
Jabez Richardson, Richardson's Monitor of Freemasonry (1860), p. 161.
9. Ibid.
10.
The Monitor of Work, Lectures and Ceremonies of Ancient Craft Masonry for the Grand Lodge
of the State of New York (New York: J.J. Little & Ives Co., 1910).
11.
Texe Marrs, Dark Majesty: The Secret Brotherhood and the Magic of a Thousand Points of
Light (Austin, TX: RiverCrest Publishing, 2004).
Chapter 12: That Ravenous Dark Bird—Sublime Mysteries of the Illuminati's Double-Headed Eagle
1.
Albert Pike, Morals and Dogma of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of
Freemasonry (Richmond, VA: L.H. Jenkins, Inc., 1871), p. 861.
2.
Texe Marrs, Circle of Intrigue: The Hidden Inner Circle of the Global Illuminati Conspiracy
(Austin, TX: RiverCrest Publishing, 2000).
3.
Anton LaVey, Satan Speaks (Los Angeles: Feral House, 1997).
4.
Gareth Knight, The Rose and the Goddess (New York: Destiny Books).
5.
Albert Pike, Morals and Dogma of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry
(Richmond, VA: L.H. Jenkins, Inc., 1871), p. 734.
6.
Francis Adams, "The Invisible Sun," The Beacon, published by Lucis Trust, July/August
1986, No. 10, Volume LT, p. 312.
7. Ibid.
8.
Paul Huston, Mastering Witchcraft.
9.
Peggy Noonan, The Wall Street journal, August 25, 2001.
10. Ibid.
Chapter 13: The Riddle of the Great Seal of the United States, and the All-Seeing Eye of the
Serpent of Wisdom
1.
Strange Stories, Amazing Facts of America's Past, Readers Digest Books, 1989, p.56-57.
2.
Albert Pike, Morals and Dogma of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry
(Richmond, VA: L. H. Jenkins, Inc., 1871), p. 477.
3.
Ibid., p. 506; also see A. Ralph Epperson, Masonry: Conspiracy Against Christianity
(Phoenix, AZ: Publius Press, 1997).
4.
Rex Hutchens, A Bridge to Light (Washington, D.C.: Supreme Mother Council, 33" of
Scottish Rite Freemasonry, 1988).
5.
G. H. Pember, Earth's Earliest Ages (Grand Rapids, MI: Kregel Publications, 1987).
6.
Helena P. Blavatsky, The Secret Doctrine (Covina, CA: Theosophical University Press,
1947, 4th ed.).
7. Ibid.

--- Sayfa 583 ---
594
CODEX MAGICA
8.
Barbara G. Walker, The Woman's Encyclopedia of Myths and Secrets (San Francisco: Harper
& Row Publishers, 1983), p. 753.
9.
A.S. Raleigh, Occult Geometry (Marina del Rey, CA: DeVorss & Co., 1932 & 1981).
Chapter 14: "Silence, Slaves, or We'll Cut Your Throat From Ear to Earl"
1.
Malcolm C. Duncan, Duncan's Masonic Ritual and Monitor (New York: Crow Publishers);
also see Jabez Richardson, Richardson's Monitor of Freemasonry (1860), especially p.
142-143.
2.
Jabez Richardson, Ibid., p. 81.
3. Ibid.
4.
Ibid., p. 133.
5.
"Grand Commander Kleinknecht Presents Revised Standard Pike Ritual to the Northern
and Southern Prince Hall Supreme Councils," The Scottish Rite Journal, June 2001, p. 34-
35.
6. Ibid.
7.
David Fideler, Jesus Christ, Sun of God (Wheaton, IL: Quest Books, 1993); also Manly P.
Hall, The Adepts in the Esoteric Classical Tradition (Los Angeles: Philosophical Research
Library, 1988).
8.
Jim Keith, Secret and Suppressed (Feral House, 1993).
9.
David Ovason, The Secret Architecture of Our Nation's Capitol (New York: Harper Collins
Publishers, 1999), p. 372.
10. Lewis Spence, 77k' Encyclopedia of the Occult (London: Bracken Books, 1988).
Chapter 15: Up to Their Necks in Mischief
1.
Albert Mackey, Encyclopedia of Freemasonry and Kindred Sciences (Chicago: The Masonic
History Company, 1929), p. 373.
2.
Ibid., p. 374.
3.
Malcolm C. Duncan, Duncan's Masonic Ritual and Monitor, 3d ed. (New York: Crown
Publishers), p. 269
4.
Ibid., p. 101
Chapter 16: Hand on Heart—Sign of Devotion to Chiefs
1.
Rex Hutchens, A Bridge to Light (Washington, D.C.: Supreme Mother Council, 33° of the
Scottish Rite of Freemasonry, 1988).
Chapter 17: Triangles Up, Triangles Down, Triangles, Triangles All Around
1.
Barbara G. Walker, The Woman's Encyclopedia of Myths and Secrets (San Francisco: Harper
& Row Publishers, 1983), p. 1016-1017.
2.
Ibid.
3.
Rex Hutchens, A Bridge to Light (Washington, D.C.: Supreme Mother Council, 33° of
Scottish Rite Freemasonry, 1988).
4.
Joan Quigley, What Does Joan Say? — My Seven Years As White House Astrologer to
Nancy and Ronald Reagan (New York: Pinnacle Books, 1990), p. 91.
5.
Ibid., p. 79.

--- Sayfa 584 ---
FOOTNOTES AND REFERENCES
595
6.
Telephone interview with historian of Alcoholics Anonymous, New York, 1989; also see
Cathy Burns, Alcoholics Anonymous Unmasked: Deception and Deliverance (Mt. Carmel, PA:
Sharing, 1991), pp.78-82.
7.
S.L. McGregor Mathers, The Kabbalah Unveiled.
Chapter 18: Black Magic, Masonic Witchcraft and Triangle Powers
1.
Dr. O.J. Graham, The Six-Pointed Star (Ontario, Canada: The Free Press 777,1984).
2.
Henry W. Coil, Coil's Masonic Encyclopedia (New York: Macoy Publishing and Masonic
Supply House Company, 1961).
3.
Albert G. Mackey, Mackey's Masonic Ritualist (New York: Clark and Magnard, 1873).
4.
Jim Keith, Secret and Suppressed (Feral House, 1993), p.63.
5.
Jim Tresner, The Scottish Rite Journal, (March, 2000, p. 63.
6.
Arkon Daraul, A History of Secret Societies (Secaucus, NJ: Citadel Press, 1961), p. 193.
7.
"Triangles," Lucis Trust, Geneva, September, 1994.
8.
Alice Bailey, Telepathy, quoted in Ibid.
9.
Ibid.
10.
Aleister Crowley, 77K Book of the Law (1904)
11.
John Yarker, translation of French manuscript, Letters of a Chapter, Senate, and Council
(London: J. Hogg, 1882), p. 86.
Chapter 20: The Merovingian Dynasty, The Priory of Sion, and The Spear of Longinus
1.
Paranoia, Fall 2001, Issue 27, p. 11.
2.
Milton William Cooper, Behold A Pale Horse (Sedona, AZ: Light Technology Publishers,
1991).
3. Ibid.
4.
Anton LaVey, Satan Speaks (Los Angeles: Feral House, 1998), p. 32
5. Ibid.
6.
D.C Yermak, The Axis of Death: Vatican, Masonry, Zionism, Enemies of God (Greece).
7.
Dean Grace, letter to Texe Marrs, June 20, 2001.
8.
Ibid.
Chapter 21: Magical Signs of the Jewish Cabala—The Six-Pointed Star, Babylonian Witchcraft,
and the Hollywood Perdition of Jerry Seinfield and Associates
1.
"Kabbalah The Cure-Ail," New York Post, online edition, 2005.
2.
Ibid; also see "Roseanne Makes Nice in Reality TV," The Jewish Journal of Greater Los
Angeles, July 25, 2003, p.l; "Personality Parade," Parade, February 8, 2004, p. 4;
"Kabbalah goes Hollywood Like A Prayer," by Yossi Klein Halevi, The New Republic,
May 10, 2004, p. 21; and "Once Secretive Jewish Mysticism Gains Popularity," by
Rachel Graves, Associated Press, January 18,1998.
3.
Scottish Rite Journal, cover, September, 2000.
4.
"Gestures and Handshakes: Mr. Spock's Vulcan Greeting,"
www.tvacres.com/greetings.
5.
Cauldron of Abbadon, Video (VHS or DVD), RiverCrest Publishing, Austin, TX, 2004.
6.
Albert Pike, quoted by Faber Birron, The Symbolism of Color (Seacaucus, NJ: 1988), p. 36.

--- Sayfa 585 ---
596
CODEX MAGICA
7.
Ed Decker, Free the Masons Ministry, newsletter, PO Box 1077, Issaquah, WA 98027,
June, 1992.
8.
James L. Holly, The Southern Baptist Convention and Freemasonry (Beaumont, TX: Mission
and Ministry to Men, 1992)
9.
Jabez Richardson, Richardson's Monitor of Freemasonry (1860), p. 143.
10.
Isaac Wise, quoted in Masonic Lodge Over Jerusalem video (VHS or DVD), RiverCrest
Publishing, Austin, TX, 2004.
11.
"Freemasonry Is Based On Judaism," The Jewish Tribune, circa 1927.
12.
Ray Novosel, "Freemasonry Historic Links to Zionism/Judaism," www.rense.com,
March 8, 2004.
13.
"Judaism and Freemasonry," www.harrystruman.org, April 21, 2003.
14.
Albert Pike, Morals and Dogma of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry
(Richmond, VA: L.H. Jenkins, 1871).
15. Ibid.
16.
Lady Queensborough (Edith Starr Miller), Occult Theocracy, Volume I (1933), p. 184-187.
Chapter 22: Scorched By The Sun—Solar Signs, Circles, and Serpents
1.
John Yarker, Notes on the Scientific and Religious Mysteries of Antiquity (London, 1872),
p.8.
2.
G.H. Pember, Earth's Earliest Ages (London: Hodder & Stoughton, 1907).
3.
Reginald Haupt, Jr., Gods of the Lodge ( Savannah, GA: Victory Publishing Company,
1990).
4.
Albert G. Mackey, Encyclopedia of Freemasonry and Kindred Sciences (Chicago: The
Masonic History Company, 1873 and 1912), p. 572-573.
5.
Ibid.
6.
Cathy Burns, Hidden Secrets of the Eastern Star (Mt. Carmel, PA: Sharing, 1994).
7.
Ibid; p. 192-193.
8.
Bill Schnoebelen, in The Dark Side of Freemasonry, edited by J. Edward Decker (Lafayette,
LA: Huntington House Publishers, 1994), p. 174.
Chapter 23: "I Fell In To a Burning Ring of Fire"—Arnold Schwarzenegger's Masonic Ring, Newt
Gingrich's T-Rex Dinosaur, and Other Mysterious Messages on Rings and Neckties of the
Elite
1.
David Roach, "If You Only Knew What This Ring Means to Me," The Louisiana
Freemason, April 2001.
2. Ibid.
3.
Bill Schnoebelen, in The Dark Side of Freemasonry, edited by J. Edward Decker (Lafayette,
LA: Huntington House Publishers, 1994), p. 173.
4.
Barbara G. Walker, The Woman's Dictionary of Symbols and Sacred Objects (San Francisco:
Harper & Row Publishers), p. 12.
5.
Albert P. Mackey, Encyclopedia of Freemasonry and Kindred Sciences (Chicago: The
Masonic History Company, 1873 and 1912), p. 12.

--- Sayfa 586 ---
FOOTNOTES AND REFERENCES
597
Chapter 25: Victory For the Devil—Fabulous Exploits of Sir Winston Churchill and Other Druid
Priests and Illuminati Servants
1.
Paranoia, Winter 1995/1996, p. 23.
2.
Cathy Burns, Masonic and Occult Symbols Illustrated (Mt. Carmel, PA: Sharing, 1998).
3.
Complete Book of Witchcraft, quoted in Ibid, p. 233.
4.
Ibid.
5.
Stephen Knight, The Brotherhood (London: Granada/Grafton, 1984).
6.
Stanley Monteith, Radio Liberty newsletter, October, 1999. Also Winston Churchill's
Jewish bloodline was examined in Criminal Politics magazine, Lawrence Patterson,
publisher, February, 1995, p. 22.
7.
Miranda J. Green, The World of the Druids (London: Green, Thames and Hudson, 1997),
p. 170; also see John Daniel, Scarlet and the Beast (Tyler, TX: JKI Publishing).
8.
For comparison, see Lady Queensborough (Edith Starr Miller), Occult Theocracy (1933).
Chapter 26: "Every Man and Woman Is A Star"
1.
Aleister Crowley, The Book of The Law (1904).
2.
Helena P. Blavastsky, The Voice of the Silence (Pasadena, CA: Theosophical University
Press, 1889).
3.
Steve Worrall-Clare, Freemasonry - The Secret Language (Dorset, England: Freedom
Ministries International).
4.
Eliphas Levi, quoted in Cathy Burns, Hidden Secrets of the Eastern Star (Mt. Carmel, PA:
Sharing, 1994), p. 316.
5.
Cathy Burns, Ibid.
6.
Albert Pike, quoted in Ibid, p. 314.
7.
O.J. Graham, The Six Pointed Star (Ontario, Canada: The Free Press 777, 1984).
8.
Albert P. Mackey, Encyclopedia of Freemasonry and Kindred Sciences (Chicago: Masonic
History Company, 1896 and 1912).
9.
Royal Arch Mason, Fall 1993.
Chapter 28: Blood Red—Red Stars, Clenched Fists, Hammers and Sickles, and Other Signs and
Symbols of Communist Intrigue
1.
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, Two Hundred Years Together (Russia); also see Solzhenitsyn, The
Gulag Archipelago.
2.
"Was Stalin A Rothschild?," by Clifford Shack, www.geocities.com/cliff-
shack/stalinrothschild.html.
3.
"Truth About The World's Bankers," Myron C. Fagan (cassette tape series).
4.
Fritz Springmeier, Bloodlines of the Illuminati (Austin, TX: Ambassador House, 2002).
5.
Winston Churchill, London Illustrated Herald, February 8,1920.
6.
Ibid.
7.
John Sharkey, Celtic Mysteries: The Ancient Religion (London: Thames and Hudson, 1924),
p. 18.
8.
Juri Lina, Under The Sign of the Scorpion (Stockholm: Referent Publishing, 2002).
9.
Albert G. Mackey, Encyclopedia of Freemasonry and Kindred Sciences (Chicago: Masonic
History Company, 1896 and 1912).

--- Sayfa 587 ---
598
CODEX MAGICA
10.
Don Bell, "And the Barbarians Captured the Beloved Country," Don Bell Reports #55,
November 12,1955; also see The Axis of Death, by D. C. Yermak (Greece).
11.
Richard Wurmbrand, Marx and Satan (Bartlesville, OK: Living Sacrifice Book Company,
1986), also see Robert Payne, Marx: A Biography; and Juri Lina, op.cit.
12.
Allen Bonck, America: The Daughter of Babylon (Chichester, England: New Wine Press,
1989).
13.
A Dictionary of Symbols, edited by Jean Chevalier and Alain Gheerbandt (New York:
Penguin Books, 1996).
14.
Peter Ruckman, Black is Beautiful (Pensacola, FL: Bible Believers Press, 1995).
15.
Jabez Richardson, Richardson's Monitor of Freemasonry (1860), p. 84
16.
Helena P. Blavatsky, The Secret Doctrine (Covina, CA: Theosophical University Press,
1947).
17.
Cathy Burns, Hidden Secrets of the Eastern Star (Mt. Carmel, PA: Sharing, 1994).
18.
Sergei Ivanov, quoted by Vladimir Isachenkov, "Putin Brings Back Soviet Red Star,"
Associated Press, November 26, 2000.
19.
Alice Bailey, A Treatise On the Seven Rays (New York: Lucis Publishing), p. 127.
20.
Faber Pirron, The Symbolism of Color (Seacaucus, NJ: Citadel Press, 1988).

--- Sayfa 588 ---
About the Author
Well-known author of the #1 national bestseller, Dark Secrets of The New Age,
Texe Marrs has also written 37 other books for such major publishers as
Simon & Schuster, John Wiley, Prentice Hall/Arco, Stein & Day, and Dow
Jones-Irwin. His books have sold over two million copies.
Texe Marrs was assistant professor of aerospace studies, teaching
American defense policy, strategic weapons systems, and related subjects at
the University of Texas at Austin for five years. He has also taught
international affairs, political science, and psychology for two other
universities. A graduate summa cum laude from Park College, Kansas City,
Missouri, he earned his Master's degree at North Carolina State University.
As a career USAF officer (now retired), he commanded communications-
electronics and engineering units. He holds a number of military decorations
including the Vietnam Service Medal, and has served in Germany, Italy, and
throughout Asia.
President of RiverCrest Publishing in Austin, Texas, Texe Marrs is a
frequent guest on radio and TV talk shows throughout the U.S.A. and
Canada. His monthly newsletter, Power of Prophecy, is distributed around the
world, and he is also heard globally on his popular, international shortwave
radio program, Power of Prophecy.