--- Sayfa 1 ---
FETHULLAH GÜLEN
Biographical Album

--- Sayfa 2 ---
2

--- Sayfa 3 ---
“Be so sympathetic and tolerant that your bosom becomes wide
as the ocean. Be inspired with faith and love the human being.
Let there be no troubled souls to whom you do not offer a hand
and about whom you remain unconcerned.”
F
ethullah Gülen is a Turkish scholar, preacher, thinker,
author, opinion leader, education activist, and peace
advocate. He is regarded as the initiator and inspirer
of the worldwide civil society movement, the Gülen Movement,
which is committed to education, dialogue, peace, social justice,
and social harmony. Gülen has published more than sixty books
in Turkish, many of which have been translated to more than
thirty languages. He was listed among the top hundred public
intellectuals in the world by Foreign Policy magazine in May 2008.

Gülen is known for his philosophical and active stance for human
rights, democracy, interfaith and intercultural dialogue, science,
spirituality, and against violence, segregation, and turning
religion into a political ideology. Not only does his discourse
cherish values such as empathetic acceptance, altruistic service to
one’s community and humanity in general, the complementary
roles of mind and heart, sincerity, and love of the creation; his life
exemplifies them. “Serving humanity to serve God” and “living
to let others live” are the core principles of his understanding of
service. His promotion of sympathy, compassion and harmonious
coexistence can best be reflected in a comparison with that of
Rumi, the 13th century Anatolian Sufi and spiritual poet and
one of Gülen’s sources of inspiration.

Gülen started his career as a preacher and education activist.
In time, he succeeded in mobilizing hundreds of thousands of
people for the purpose of serving society by uniting around high
human values. Despite the high regard millions hold for him, he
considers himself only one of the volunteers of the civil society
movement he helped originate and denounces any attribution
of leadership. Gülen has never married, and has spent most of
his life in Turkey, his native country. He currently resides in
Pennsylvania, the United States, at a retreat facility.
Brief Portrait
3

--- Sayfa 4 ---
4
The city of Erzurum

--- Sayfa 5 ---
F
ethullah Gülen was born into a family of modest means in Erzurum,
Turkey, in 1941, and was raised in a spiritually enriching environ­
ment. He completed his education in modern and traditional insti­
tutions. He studied Islamic sciences and attained his teaching certification.
He attended the training circles of local Sufi teachers, where he learned the
principles of Islamic spirituality and humanism.
He was also introduced to the writings of Said
Nursi, a renowned scholar of Islam who taught
that Muslims should welcome the benefits of
modernity and find inspiration in the sacred
texts to engage with it.

Gülen’s parents played a great role in his early
education. His father, an imam, enjoyed reading
classical books, reciting poetry, and meditat­
ing on the early period of Islam. It was he who
instilled a love of learning and love for the Prophet and his companions in
the young Gülen. His mother, a volunteer Qur’an instructor, taught him the
recitation of the sacred book and exemplified spiritual life and perseverance.
Gülen became a hafiz, one who knows the entire Qur’an by heart, at the age
of twelve, and started preaching in local mosques when he was only fourteen
years old.
Early Life
5
Gülen in his early youth
For centuries, the spiritual and humanistic
tradition of Islam has been represented
mainly by Sufism, which became a major
source of Gülen’s thought and discourse.

--- Sayfa 6 ---
6
 Selimiye Mosque

--- Sayfa 7 ---
P
assing the exam administered by the
Turkish State’s Directorate of Religious
Affairs in 1959, Gülen was appointed
as an imam and preacher to an historic mosque
in Edirne, a city in the European part of Turkey.
In this period of his youth, he was both socially
active and personally ascetic. Living humbly and
residing in a small section of the mosque, he had
the opportunity to deepen his knowledge of Islamic
tradition, informally study the social and natural
sciences, and examine the classics of both Eastern
and Western philosophy and literature. It was his familiarity with a broad range of
literature that would equip him for his comprehensive interpretations.

Gülen became a well-known preacher in the city in only a short time. He developed
good relations with local authorities, leaders and members of the society through
his outreach efforts. In the meantime, he witnessed the erosion of spiritual and
moral values, especially among younger generations, and strove to find a solution
to the problem. For this purpose, he organized a series of public lectures. In
recognition of his success in public service, Gülen was promoted to the positions
of central preacher and director of a boarding school in Izmir, a large city on the
Aegean coast of Turkey.
Early Career
7
a
c
b
a - The monumental Selimiye Mosque in the city of Edirne
b - Daru’l-Hadis Mosque and the Qur’an school where Gülen preached and taught
c - The historic Üç Şerefeli Mosque to which Gülen was appointed as an imam and preacher
Gülen in his twenties

--- Sayfa 8 ---
8
The city of Izmir

--- Sayfa 9 ---
W
orking in Izmir was the turning point in Gülen’s career,
as the city would be the cradle for the movement that
crystallized around his discourse and activism. He main­
tained his ascetic way of life. He found only a couple of hours a day
to sleep because of his daily commitments of reading, preaching,
teaching, giving lectures and seminars, and meeting with community
members. He attracted the atten­
tion of learned citizens, includ­
ing the academic community and
college students, as well as common
people.

Gülen’s discourse was distinguished
by his depth of knowledge, sensitiv­
ity and stellar eloquence. His topics
ranged from religious practices to
social justice, from child education
to naturalism. His sermons were
well structured, and the systematic
presentation of some topics would
extend over many months, which was uncommon at that time. He
also expanded the function of the mosque by launching a Q & A series
in which he responded to people’s concerns and curiosities, including
those regarding the challenges of modern times.

In his endeavors, Gülen especially aimed at urging the younger
generation to harmonize intellectual enlightenment with virtuous
spirituality, and to serve fellow humans altruistically. During the
years of political turmoil in Turkey, he witnessed many young Turks’
attraction to extremist ideologies via the violent polarization of
socialism and nationalism. He strove to inspire the Turkish youth
and lead them toward an apolitical way of service to society, based
on a peaceful life-style.

Nationwide Preacher and Education Activist
9
Gülen giving a public lecture
Gülen speaking in a coffee house

--- Sayfa 10 ---
Gülen traveled to numerous cities and towns across Turkey to give
sermons in mosques and speeches at gatherings in various places,
including theatres and even coffee houses. His sermons and speeches
were recorded on tape, distributed by volunteers all around the
country, and enthusiastically embraced. In his thirties, Gülen was
already one of the few preachers recognized nationwide.

As Gülen asserts, he simply thought to cultivate the public credit given
to him by channeling good intentions and devotional energy toward
a positive end. He encouraged people to set up student dormitories
and hostels to promote better education for the youth. He also encour­
aged people to establish university preparatory courses to support
children, especially the children of middle- and low-income families,
in their preparation for higher education. People who shared Gülen’s
service-ethic initiated local scholarship funds for needy students,
from which thousands of students would benefit every year.

Since the ‘80s, Gülen-inspired entrepreneurs and educators have set
up more than a hundred highly successful private schools in Turkey.
As of the ‘90s, similar private schools have been started mostly in
countries in Central Asia and Africa, and some in Europe and the
Americas. In the meantime, participants in the movement have also
established universities, hospitals, relief organizations, tutoring
centers, business associations, media outlets, publishing houses, etc.
a - Yamanlar High School, established in Izmir by Gülen-inspired people
b - A top-notch university preparatory course in Istanbul
10
a
b

--- Sayfa 11 ---
Macedonia
Azerbaijan
Nigeria
Madagascar
11

--- Sayfa 12 ---
F
ethullah Gülen delivered his last sermons in 1991 in the largest mosques of
the country, after which he ceased preaching. However, he continued to be
active in community life, teaching small groups of graduate students and
taking part in service projects. He traveled abroad to the United States in 1992, where
he visited the 8th President of Turkey, Turgut Özal, during his medical treatment in
Houston. He also met Turkish-American academics and community leaders, as well
as the leaders of other American faith communities.

During the ‘90s, Gülen pioneered a rejuvenation of the interfaith dialogue spirit in
the Turkish-Muslim tradition, which was forgotten amidst the troublesome years of
the early 20th century. The Journalists and Writers Foundation, of which Gülen has
been the honorary president, organized a series of gatherings involving leaders of
religious minorities in Turkey. In January 1998, Pope John Paul II sent a celebration
message to Gülen for the Ramadan Festival, in appreciation of his interfaith dialogue
initiatives. In the following month, Gülen met the Pope at the Vatican for the purpose
of improving dialogue. Gülen offered to help organize a number of interfaith events
in Harran and Jerusalem to contribute to peace in the region. His name eventually
became a symbol for interfaith dialogue and understanding in Turkey.

During this period, Gülen made himself increasingly available for comment and
interviews in the media and began to meet often with prominent state dignitaries,
authors, journalists, artists, businessmen and media leaders. His aim was to
help cultivate a mutual understanding of peaceful coexistence among the diverse
Start of a New Era
a - Gülen with Chief Rabbi of Turkey’s Jewish community David Aseo in 1996
b - Gülen with Greek Orthodox Patriarch Bartholomew in 1996
c - Gülen with Israel’s Sephardic Chief Rabbi Eliyahu Bakshi Doron in 1999
12
a
b
c

--- Sayfa 13 ---
13
Gülen with Pope John Paul II
at the Vatican in 1998

--- Sayfa 14 ---
14
constituents of a society divided into many biased ideological factions. On many occasions,
Gülen reiterated his ideas and opinions regarding human rights, modernity, humane
secularism, democracy, open society, and tolerance. He always emphasized that his way
of service to society was apolitical but not anti-politics. In his own words, his principle
was to keep the same distance to every political party and to support whomever is
serving society without discrimination.

Nonetheless, some marginal religious groups in Turkey opposed Gülen’s interfaith
dialogue initiatives and even accused him of being “heretical” and, more oddly, “a hidden
cardinal.” Responding in friendship, Gülen often declared that interfaith dialogue was
not a novel thing that he had invented, but rather, a neglected tradition of Turkish
society and a religious obligation for establishing sustainable peace. Conversely, some
ultra-secularist, ultra-nationalist, and communist circles, who stood for and even
benefited from a closed and divided society, started a defamation campaign in the
media against Gülen, accusing him of having a long-term political agenda to turn
Turkey into a theocratic state, an ideology that Gülen has always disavowed. They
eventually persuaded a prosecutor to bring charges against him in 2000. These charges
were found to be baseless and were dismissed in 2008. (For further reading, see: Loye
Ashton, “A Contextual Analysis of the Supporters and Critics of the Gülen Movement” at
www.guleninstitute.org/index.php/Articles)
a - Gülen with Prime Minister Tansu Çiller in 1996
b - Gülen with Prime Minister Bülent Ecevit in 1997
c - Gülen receiving visitors from the cinema and the press
a
b
c

--- Sayfa 15 ---
15
Gülen with the recipients
of the Journalists and
Writers Foundation’s
“Tolerance Awards” in 1996

--- Sayfa 16 ---
The retreat facility in Pennsylvania,
where Gülen currently lives
16

--- Sayfa 17 ---
I
n 1999, Fethullah Gülen traveled to the
United States to receive medical care for his
cardiovascular condition. He underwent a
heart operation in 2004, following which his doctors
recommended he avoid stress. For this reason, he chose
to live far away from the politically-charged atmosphere
in Turkey, and was granted permanent residency by
the U.S. government in 2006. He was among the first
Muslim scholars to publicly condemn the September
11 attacks. His condemnation message appeared in The
Washington Post on September 21, 2001.

Gülen currently lives with a group of students and
his doctors at a retreat facility in Pennsylvania, where
he dedicates his time to reading, writing, teaching,
individual and small group worship, and receiving a
few visitors, as his health permits. He has been visited
by American academics and religious leaders as well
as members of the Turkish-American community. He
maintains his ascetic and spiritual way of life, spending
Years of Retreat
in the United States
17

--- Sayfa 18 ---
most of his time in his modest room. He remains
concerned with happiness and alleviating the suffering
of humans around the world. He also encourages people
to be involved in organizing aid campaigns for those
affected by natural disasters throughout the world, in
places such as Indonesia, Myanmar, and Haiti. Most days
he devotes a half an hour to conversation and answering
the questions, and is sometimes consulted about service
projects. His conversations are recorded and made
available to the public on a website (www.herkul.org).
Throughout the years in Pennsylvania, he has been
interviewed several times by local and international
journalists.
a - Turkish journalist Nuriye Akman interviewing Gülen in 2004
b - Gülen suffers from several health problems and receives routine
medical care.
18
a
b

--- Sayfa 19 ---
19
Gülen in his room
at the retreat facility

--- Sayfa 20 ---
20

--- Sayfa 21 ---
21
F
ethullah Gülen’s works can be classified in two
main genres: recorded speeches and books. The
former comprises the published collections of
audiotapes and visual material from his sermons and
conversations over decades. His books consist of the
compilations of the lead articles he has published in
various periodicals and the edited transcriptions of
his speeches. He has also published a book of poetry
which has appealed to lyricists and musicians. Gülen
has published more than sixty books in Turkish, many
of which have become bestsellers in Turkey, reaching
millions of copies in total. Some of his books have been
translated to other languages.
Gülen’s Works
Gülen’s books in English:
• Speech and Power of Expression, New Jersey: The Light, 2010.
• The Messenger of God, Muhammad: An Analysis of the Prophet’s Life,
New Jersey: The Light, 2005.
• Emerald Hills of the Heart: Key Concepts in the Practice of Sufism (Four volumes),
New Jersey: The Light, 2004.
• The Statue of Our Souls: Revival in Islamic Thought and Activism, New Jersey:
The Light, 2005.
• Toward a Global Civilization of Love and Tolerance, New Jersey: The Light, 2004.
• Essentials of the Islamic Faith, New Jersey: The Light, 2006.
• Essays, Perspectives, Opinions, New Jersey: The Light, 2004.
• Pearls of Wisdom, New Jersey: The Light, 2005.
• Questions and Answers about Faith, Fairfax: The Fountain, 2000.

--- Sayfa 22 ---
One of the international conferences on the
Gülen Movement, held at the University of
Southern California, Los Angeles
22

--- Sayfa 23 ---
A
lso called the “Voluntary Service” (Hizmet in Turkish)
by participants, the Gülen Movement is a worldwide
civic initiative rooted in the spiritual and humanistic
tradition of Islam and inspired by the ideas and activism of
Fethullah Gülen. It is a faith-inspired, non-political, cultural
and educational movement whose basic principles stem from
Islam’s universal values, such as love of the creation, sympathy
for the fellow human, compassion, and altruism. The movement
is not a governmental or state sponsored organization. It focuses
on the betterment of the individual toward a positive change
in society. The movement is distinguished for its support of
democracy, its openness to globalization, its progressiveness
in integrating tradition with modernity, and its humanistic
outlook. Gülen describes it as “a movement of people united
around high human values,” and disapproves of the attribution
of the movement to his name.

The bases of the movement are diverse service projects
that are initiated, funded, and conducted by people who
are motivated to various extents by Gülen’s humanitarian
discourse. Ranging from private schools to poverty aid programs,
these projects are independent of each other in operational
terms, so the movement has no hierarchical structure.
The Gülen Movement has paved an exemplary way of working
together to overcome the problems of humankind, regardless
of religious, ethnic or cultural differences. The movement sets a
precedent, not only with its activities, but also through its ways
of generating financial support, thanks to its revivification of the
Islamic values of giving and hospitality. Research shows that the
average financial contribution of participants in the movement
to the service projects is 5 to 10 percent of their annual income.

Although the movement’s origins are tied to the Turkish-Muslim
identity, the Gülen Movement is now active in as many non-
Muslim as Muslim countries and attracts participants of diverse
faiths and cultures. The explanation for this, as sociologist
Helen Rose Ebaugh writes, is that the infrastructure of the
movement, in terms of organizational leadership, volunteers,
financial donors and the inspiration behind the movement, is
transported by the Turkish diaspora, ie. by Turkish immigrants
settling in countries all over the world as students, professionals
and businessmen. The result is that the movement is now
transnational in its outreach and impact.
For further reading:  Helen Rose Ebaugh, The Gülen Movement: A Sociological
Analysis of a Civic Movement Rooted in Moderate Islam, New York and Heidelberg:
Springer, 2010
The Gülen Movement
23

--- Sayfa 24 ---
Students of a Gülen-inspired
elementary school with their
teacher in Turkey
24

--- Sayfa 25 ---
“If we do not plant the seeds of love in the hearts of young people, whom
we try to revive through science, knowledge, and modern culture, they
will never attain moral perfection.”

— F. Gülen, Pearls of Wisdom
E
ducation is the pivotal field of service in the Gülen Movement.
Hundreds of educational institutions have been established
by Gülen-inspired people in Turkey and more than a hundred
countries throughout the world.

The Gülen-inspired schools are non-religious private institutions sponsored
by generous entrepreneurs, altruistic educators, and dedicated parents.
Using cutting-edge instructional technology and having demonstrated
outstanding academic achievements, many of these schools rank among
the most prestigious in their countries. Each school follows the curriculum
of the host country, with a majority of the subjects taught in English. The
schools provide scholarships for students who cannot afford the tuition.
As many people have observed, Gülen-inspired schools are symbols of
peaceful coexistence and dedication to the service of humanity. They also
serve as an environment for intercultural, interethnic, and interfaith
harmony, especially in conflict-ridden regions such as the Philippines,
Macedonia, Afghanistan, Northern Iraq, Bosnia, and Kenya.

Educational Institutions
Fatih High School in Istanbul
Samanyolu High School in Ankara
25

--- Sayfa 26 ---
There are several Gülen-inspired universities in Turkey and
abroad. They are private universities supported by foundations,
and with their academic achievements, stand in service of their
respective nations and humanity in general.

The Gülen-inspired dormitories are distinguished facilities where
students can live and study together under the tutelage of
dedicated teachers. These residencies provide living arrangements,
especially for those who cannot afford room and board, in
addition to tuition and books.

The Gülen-inspired preparatory courses are among the best in
Turkey. They prepare students for the state exams mandatory
for all students who wish to attend science high schools and
universities. All these course-centers provide scholarships for
students who cannot afford the tuition.

Many tutoring centers and reading rooms have been set up by
Gülen-inspired charitable foundations, especially in south-eastern
Turkey, where the youth and women have fewer opportunities to
pursue higher education. These centers and rooms are free and
open to everyone. The teachers working there are all volunteers.
Çağlayan Elementary School in the city of Urfa
One of the tutoring centers in south-eastern Turkey
26

--- Sayfa 27 ---
Fatih University in Istanbul
27

--- Sayfa 28 ---
Volunteers bringing food aid to
a remote village in eastern Turkey
28

--- Sayfa 29 ---
“There is no limit to doing good to others. Those who have dedicated
themselves to the good of humanity can be so altruistic that they live
for others. However, such altruism is a great virtue only if it originates
in sincerity and purity of intention, and if it does not define the others
by racial preferences.”

— F. Gülen, Pearls of Wisdom
T
he Gülen-inspired relief organization “Kimse Yok
Mu” (meaning “Isn’t Anybody There?”) is one of the
largest and most effective in Turkey. It aims to bring
aid to disaster victims and other needy people in Turkey and
around the world. Having created new fundraising techniques,
the organization raised considerable funds for the victims of the
Tsunami in south-east Asia, the floods in Bangladesh, and the
earthquakes in Pakistan, Peru, and Haiti. Kimse Yok Mu built
around 20 schools in those countries after the catastrophes. The
organization brings poverty aid and medical assistance to many
African countries every year.
Sudanese woman receiving
food aid from Kimse Yok Mu
29
Relief & Healthcare Organizations

--- Sayfa 30 ---
There are several Gülen-inspired relief organizations in
the United States. Helping Hands Relief Foundation,
established in New Jersey in 2008, aims to create real
and lasting change for people in need in the United
States and around the world. It is dedicated to providing
relief to disaster victims and the poor, and to helping
people prevent, prepare for, and respond to needs and
emergencies.

There are also several hospitals in Turkey founded by
Gülen-inspired entrepreneurs and doctors. These high-tech
modern hospitals provide top-notch care in an atmosphere
that respects the patients as human beings, and provide
sponsorship for economically disadvantaged citizens.
a - Raindrop Helping Hands’ aid to Hurricane Ike victims in 2008
b - Sema Hospital, one of Istanbul’s largest private hospitals
30

--- Sayfa 31 ---
Kimse Yok Mu volunteers carrying
food supplies in Bangladesh
31

--- Sayfa 32 ---
32

--- Sayfa 33 ---
T
he Gülen Movement is well-known for its interfaith and intercultural dialogue activities. There are numerous institutions for
dialogue established by Gülen-inspired people in many countries. These initiatives aim to help bring various communities
together in order to promote understanding, mutual respect, compassion, cooperation, and broader community service.
The 20th Abant Meeting on “Democratiza­
tion for a New Social Consensus” (March
2010) organized by the Journalists and
Writers Foundation. The JWF is the lead­
ing organization for interfaith and inter­
cultural dialogue in Turkey.
Luncheon Forum featuring John J.
Cullerton, Illinois Senate President, by
Niagara Foundation in Chicago
Lecture on “Christian-Muslim Relations
since Nostra Aetate” organized by
Intercultural Dialogue Platform in
Brussels, Belgium
Left Page  - The 7th Annual Dialog and Friendship Dinner in Houston (November 2009) organized by the Institute of Interfaith Dialog. Headquartered in
Houston, Texas, the IID serves seven southern states.
33
Interfaith & Intercultural Institutions

--- Sayfa 34 ---
Zaman headquarters in Istanbul
is supported by news bureaus in
Ashgabat, Baku, Brussels, Bucharest,
Frankfurt, Moscow, New York, and
Washington, DC.
34

--- Sayfa 35 ---
A
 mong several Gülen-inspired television
stations in Turkey, Samanyolu TV is
committed to balanced, objective, and
socially responsible reporting of news; family-
oriented programming; and the promotion of
interfaith and intercultural dialogue. The station
broadcasts globally by means of satellite.
The mission of Ebru TV, broadcast in the United
States, is to continually educate, inspire and
entertain viewers of all ages through original first-
rate programming in the sciences, sporting events,
fine arts, and every aspect of culture.
Zaman newspaper is the largest circulating daily in
Turkey. Inspired by Gülen’s ideas, Zaman reports
diverse ideological perspectives and opinions in
an objective fashion, emphasizes dialogue and
tolerance, and has been a rigorous advocate for
freedom of speech. It is published in multiple
languages and distributed in 35 countries.
The media group in Turkey that is considered to
be inspired by Gülen’s ideas includes Aksiyon, the
leading weekly magazine, and Cihan News Agency
which is active in more than 50 countries.
Among several Gülen-inspired periodicals, Sizinti,
the monthly magazine of popular science and
culture, has been published since 1979. With nearly
a million subscribers, it is the bestseller of its kind
in Turkey. The Fountain, a magazine of scientific
and spiritual thought, is published in English-
speaking countries.
There are more than twenty publishing houses in
Turkey inspired by Gülen’s thought. Publishing
in many languages and great numbers, they are
considered to have vastly contributed to the fields
of education and literature.
35
Media & Publishing Institutions

--- Sayfa 36 ---
36
“You are contributing to the pro­
motion of the ideas of tolerance
and interfaith dialogue inspired
by Fethullah Gülen in his trans­
national social movement. You
do it through your everyday lives.
You are truly strengthening the
fabric of our common humanity, as well as promoting the ongo­
ing cultural and educational ties that bind our world together.”
—Bill Clinton, 42nd President of the US, in his video message
delivered at the 3rd Annual Friendship Dinner held by the Turkish
Cultural Center, New York City, on September 25, 2008
“Gülen reminds us of the under­
standing of Islam which stems
from love of God and love of hu­
man beings that is practiced in
Turkish public Sufism.” —Bülent
Ecevit, Former Prime Minister
of Turkey
“Fethullah Gülen’s notion of ‘empathic
acceptance, tolerance, and respecting
people as they are’ is very important.
These are really beautiful and neces­
sary ideals. It is wrong to try to change
others forcibly, which has a lot of exam­
ples today.” —Prof. Dr. Annemarie
Schimmel, German Orientalist and
scholar
“The Gülen Movement has be­
come a very influential voice in
the world in both the dialogue
of religions and the civilization
of societies.” —John Esposito,
Professor at Georgetown Uni­
versity
Recognition

--- Sayfa 37 ---
37
“In this post-9/11 world of real
and perceived ‘clash,’ the millions
participating in the Gülen move­
ment continue to provide us with
both spiritual and practical guid­
ance towards peace and tolerance
of others. In a world where the
most prominent Muslim leaders speak of conflict and confron­
tation, Gülen provides us with a new voice that calls people of
all faiths to the divine table.” —Ambassador Akbar Ahmed,
Ibn Khaldun Chair of Islamic Studies at American University
“The Journalists and Writers Foun­
dation and their honorary presi­
dent Gülen are the first group who
made it possible for the members of
the different faiths to come around
the friendship dinner tables. We
now follow their footsteps in these
activities.” —Mesrob Mutafyan
II, Armenian Patriarch of Istanbul
“The [Gülen-inspired] school is
offering Muslim and Christian
Filipino children, along with an
educational standard of high
quality, a more positive way of
living and relating to each other.”
—Thomas Michel, Ex-Director of
the Jesuit Secretariat for Interreligious Dialogue in Rome, in his
paper, “Fethullah Gülen as Educator”
“Gülen’s activities are an enterprise
to be applauded. Let me add that if
my ancestors had not seen that toler­
ance from the Ottomans and Turkey,
I would not be alive.” —Jak Kamhi,
Prominent Turkish-Jewish Business­
man

--- Sayfa 38 ---
Turkish Schools Offer Pakistan a Gentler Vision of Islam
By Sabrina Tavernise (May 4, 2008, excerpted)
The schools, which also operate in
Christian countries like Russia, are
not for Muslims alone, and one
of their stated aims is to promote
interfaith understanding. Mr. Gülen
met the previous pope, as well as
Jewish and Orthodox Christian
leaders, and teachers in the schools
say they stress multiculturalism and
universal values.
The Turkish schools, which have expanded to seven cities in Pakistan since the first one
opened a decade ago, cannot transform the country on their own. But they offer an
alternative approach that could help reduce the influence of Islamic extremists.
They prescribe a strong Western curriculum, with courses, taught in English, from math
and science to English literature and Shakespeare. They do not teach religion beyond
the one class in Islamic studies that is required by the state.
Gülen’s condemnation message of
the September 11 terrorist attacks
that appeared in The Washington Post
on September 21, 2001:
We condemn in the strongest of terms
the latest terrorist attack on the United
States of America, and feel the pain of
the American people at the bottom of
our hearts.

Islam abhors such acts of terror. A re­
ligion that professes, “He who unjustly
kills one man kills the whole of human­
ity,” cannot condone senseless killing of
thousands.

Our thoughts and prayers go out to the
victims and their loved ones.
Fethullah Gülen
Honorary Chairman
Journalists and Writers Foundation,
Turkey
38
In the Press

--- Sayfa 39 ---
Gülen Inspires Muslims Worldwide
(January 21, 2008, online edition, excerpted)
The chief characteristic of the Gülen movement is that it does not seek to subvert modern secular states, but
encourages practicing Muslims to use to the full the opportunities they offer. It is best understood as the
Islamic equivalent of Christian movements appealing to business and the professions.
39
Meet Foreign Policy’s Top Public Intellectual of 2008
(August, 13, 2008, excerpted)
Foreign Policy: You preach a moderate,
tolerant Islam. What do you think causes
terrorism?
Fethullah Gülen: Islam abhors and
absolutely condemns terrorism and
any terrorist activity. I have repeatedly
declared that it is impossible for a true Muslim to be a terrorist,
nor can a terrorist be regarded as a true Muslim. Terrorism is
one of the cardinal sins that the Qur’an threatens with hellfire.
To defeat terrorism, we must acknowledge that we are all
human beings. It is not our choice to belong to a particular
race or family. We should be freed from fear of the other and
enjoy diversity within democracy. I believe that dialogue
and education are the most effective means to surpass our
differences.
How Far They Have Travelled
(March 6, 2008, excerpted)
Turkish-based movement
sounds more reasonable than
most of its rivals and is vying
to be recognized as the world’s
leading Muslim network.
With his stated belief in science, inter-faith dialogue and
multi-party democracy, Mr. Gülen has also won praise from
many non-Muslim quarters. He is an intensely emotional
preacher, whose tearful sermons seem to strike a deep chord
in his listeners; but the movement he heads is remarkably
pragmatic and businesslike.
“If you meet a polite Central Asian lad who speaks good English
and Turkish, you know he went to a Gülen school,” says a
Turkish observer.

--- Sayfa 40 ---
40
The Gülen Movement: A Sociological
Analysis of a Civic Movement Rooted in
Moderate Islam by Helen Rose Ebaugh
— Based on interview data and visits to
Gülen-inspired institutions, the book de­
scribes the movement from a sociological
perspective, especially through the lens
of social movement theory. It is the first
book, grounded in empirical methodology,
to describe the movement to a Western audience.
Islam and Peacebuilding: Gülen Move­
ment Initiatives by John L. Esposito
and Ihsan Yilmaz — The exploration of
the contributions is made with regards
to the title in hand by the thought and
practice of the global movement associ­
ated with the Turkish Muslim scholar
Fethullah Gülen. The importance and dis­
tinctiveness of teaching of Gülen and the
practice of the movement is that it is rooted in a confident Turk­
ish Islamic heritage while being fully engaged with modernity.
A Dialogue of Civilizations: Gülen’s Islamic
Ideals and Humanistic Discourse by Jill
Carroll — Dr. Carroll places the ideas of
Fethullah Gülen into the context of the
larger humanities and compares his opin­
ions with those of major philosophers. The
book includes chapters on the ideas of the
philosophers such as Immanuel Kant, John
Stuart Mill, Confucius, Plato and Sartre.
The Gülen Movement: Civic Service With­
out Borders by Muhammed Çetin — The
book conceptualizes the Gülen Move­
ment using social movement theories in
which the author defines Gülen initiatives
as a civic service dedicated to fostering
dialogue within the global community.
Dr. Çetin first examines the movement
as a cultural actor, and then continues
on another aspect of the movement as
a civil society actor.
Literature on the Gülen Movement
AB 3
Helen Rose Ebaugh
The Gülen Movement
A Sociological Analysis of a Civic  Movement
Rooted in Moderate Islam

--- Sayfa 41 ---
41
Tradition Witnessing the Modern Age: An
Analysis of the Gülen Movement by Meh­
met Enes Ergene — The author addresses
different aspects of the Gülen Movement
with a focus on the movement’s adaptation
of the modern world and its influence on
“the secularist Turkey.”
New Turkish Republic: Turkey as a Pivot­
al State in the Muslim World by Graham
E. Fuller — The Former vice chairman
of the National Intelligence Council at
CIA wrote about Turkey’s new role in the
Middle East especially from a political
perspective along with its relations with
other Muslim countries. As a means to
portray a better view of a Muslim country
with its relation to other Muslim countries, Fuller dedicates a
section to “The Fethullah Gülen Movement.”
A Civilian Response to Ethno-Religious
Conflict: The Gülen Movement in South­
east Turkey by Mehmet Kalyoncu — The
author studied the positive effect of the
actions of the movement in Southeast
province called Mardin that faces ethno-
religious conflict.
Muslim Citizens of the Global World:
Contributions of the Gülen Movement
(edited) by Robert A. Hunt and Yuksel
A. Aslandogan — The book explores the
responses and contributions of Muslims
in general and Turkish Muslims in partic­
ular to the waves of democratization, sci­
entific revolution, changing gender roles,
and religious diversity in an increasingly
globalized world.

--- Sayfa 42 ---
42
The human being is the essence and vital element of being, the
index and core element of the universe. Human beings are at the
center of creation; all other things, living or non-living, compose
concentric circles around them.
Human beings, be they man or woman, young or old, white or black,
are to be respected, protected and inviolate. Their belongings cannot
be taken away, nor can their chastity be touched. They cannot be
driven out of their native lands, and their independence cannot be
denied. They cannot be prevented from living in accordance with
their principles, either.
Compassion is a key which opens up the rustiest locks. It is like the
hand of the Messiah, which can revive dead souls.
Love is the most direct and safest way to human perfection. It is
difficult to attain the rank of human perfection through ways that
do not contain love.
Only those who overflow with love will build the happy and
enlightened world of the future. Their lips smiling with love, their
hearts brimming with love, their eyes radiating love and the most
tender human feelings.
Love is the rose in our belief, a realm of the heart that never withers.
Above all else, just as God wove the universe like lace on the loom
of love, the most magical and charming music in the bosom of
existence is always love.
Emphatic acceptance is our safest refuge and our fortress against
the handicaps that arise from schism, factions, and the difficulties
inherent in reaching mutual agreement.
Emphatic acceptance (hoshgoru in Turkish), a term which we
sometimes use in place of the words respect, mercy, generosity, or
forbearance, is the most essential element of moral systems. It is a
very important source of spiritual discipline and a celestial virtue
of perfected people.
Only a few people seem to realize that social harmony and peace
with nature, between people, and within the individual can only
come about when the material and spiritual realms are reconciled.
Essentials of Gülen’s Thought

--- Sayfa 43 ---
43
The peace of this global village lies in respecting all these
differences, considering these differences to be part of our
nature, and ensuring that people appreciate these differences.
Interfaith dialogue is a must today, and the first step in
establishing it is forgetting the past, ignoring polemical
arguments, and giving precedence to common points, which
far outnumber polemical ones.
People who want to guarantee their future cannot be indifferent
to how their children are educated. The family, school,
environment, and mass media should all cooperate to ensure
the desired result. The school must be as perfect as possible with
respect to its curriculum, the scientific and moral standards of
the teachers, and its physical conditions. A family must provide
the necessary warmth and atmosphere in which to raise children.
In schools, good manners should be considered just as important
as other subjects. If they are not, how can children grow up
with sound characters? Education is different from teaching.
Most people can be teachers, but the number of educators is
severely limited.

--- Sayfa 44 ---
44
Good morals and sound conscience, and good manners
and virtues, are like a currency universally acceptable and
which is not affected by changes in the values of other
means of exchange. Those provided with such qualities are
like merchants with the highest credit who can do business
wherever they want.
Those who want to reform the world must first reform
themselves. If they want to lead others to a better world,
they must purify their inner worlds of hatred, rancor, and
jealousy, and adorn their outer worlds with virtue.
Humility is like a key to all other virtues. One who is humble
may have all other virtues, whereas one who lacks humility
usually is deprived of other virtues as well.
Those who value their parents and regard them as a path
to God’s mercy are the most prosperous in both worlds.
Since its appearance on the earth, humanity has found
true peace and happiness in religion.

--- Sayfa 45 ---
45
Religion is the best school, a most blessed institution founded to
inculcate in people good moral qualities. It is open to everyone, from
the youngest to the oldest, and only those who attend it attain peace,
satisfaction, and freedom.
Science and technology are beneficial to the degree that they
guarantee human happiness and help us attain true humanity. If
they are developed to harm humanity, they become devils blocking
our road.
Ignorance is the worst friend, whereas knowledge is the most faithful
companion.
Art is the spirit of progress and one of the most important means
of developing emotions. Those who cannot make use of this means
are unfortunate indeed, and live a numbed, diminished life.
True knowledge shows itself through art. If a person has never
produced anything in the name of art, how can we say that he or
she knows very much?
Civilization does not mean being rich and putting on fine airs,
nor does it mean satisfying carnal desires and leading a luxurious,
dissipated life. What it really means is being civil and courteous,
kind-hearted, profound in thought, and respectful to others.
Civilization means more than scientific advancement, modern means
of transportation, ships, and living in large cities with skyscrapers.
While such things may be adjuncts to civilization, it is folly and
ignorance to identify civilization with them.
Culture is an important resource that must be used by those seeking
to develop their community in the most beneficial and appropriate
way. There is a vital link between the cohesion and strength of a
community’s direction and the authenticity of its cultural resources.
A woman’s inner depth, chastity and dignity elevate her higher than
angels and cause her to resemble an unmatched diamond.
A good woman is the one who speaks wisdom, has a refined spirit,
and whose behavior inspires admiration and respect.

--- Sayfa 46 ---
46
Freedom allows people to do whatever they want, provided that they
do not harm others and that they remain wholly devoted to the truth.
Democracy, in spite of its many shortcomings, is now the only
viable political system, and people should strive to modernize and
consolidate democratic institutions in order to build a society in
which individual rights and freedoms are respected and protected,
and equal opportunity for all is more than a dream.
It is not possible for democracy to take root in a place where there
is no tolerance. In fact, advocates of democracy should be able to
accept even those who do not share their views, and they should
open their hearts to others.
Good administration and politics are characterized by acknowledging
rights, the rule of law, and consciousness of one’s duty.
Islam does not propose a certain unchangeable form of government
or attempt to shape it. Islam has never offered nor established
a theocracy in its name. Instead, Islam establishes fundamental
principles that orient a government’s general character. So, politics
can be a factor neither in shaping Islam nor in directing Muslims’
acts and attitudes in Islam’s name.
Were I told while entering Paradise that the East and West have come
together and combined by keeping their own values and respecting
each other, I would consider this as one of the greatest glad tidings
given to me in my life. Perhaps I would prefer not entering Paradise,
because there are many things I would like to tell regarding the
coming together of the East and West.

Protecting the environment, conserving and looking after the
ecological balance are among the principal duties of a Muslim.
Goodness, beauty, truthfulness, honesty, and being virtuous are the
essence of the world. Whatever happens, the world will one day find
this essence, for no one can prevent such an event.
Quotations, with a couple of exceptions, are from Pearls of Wisdom by Gülen

--- Sayfa 47 ---
47

--- Sayfa 48 ---
The Gülen Institute
T
he Gülen Institute, established in October 2007, is an
independent, non-profit organization and a joint initiative
of the University of Houston Graduate College of Social
Work and the Institute of Interfaith Dialog. The main goal of the
Institute is to promote academic research as well as grass roots
activity towards bringing about positive social change, namely the
establishment of stable peace, social justice, and social harmony
by focusing on the themes of education, volunteerism and civic
initiatives. The Institute organizes academic and public events,
such as conferences and luncheon forums, publishes scientific
and popular works, provides student scholarships and faculty
research grants, and organizes cultural exchange trips.
Among the values and concerns we share are empathy, hope,
love of humanity, compassion, altruism, honesty, dignity,
trustworthiness, integrity, peaceful coexistence, social justice
and harmony, elimination of violent conflicts and human
suffering, prevention of substance abuse, saving youth from
self-destruction, and protection of the earth’s resources and
habitats. The perspectives of the Institute are inspired by the
life and works of Fethullah Gülen.
48

--- Sayfa 49 ---
Kofi Annan, Secretary-General of the United Nations, 1997-2006, Nobel Peace Prize Recipient
“I think it is extremely important to have institutions like the Gülen Institute bringing people together, getting
them to understand that we all are in the same boat and in today’s world you cannot be secure at the expense of
the other, you cannot be safe and prosperous at the expense of other.” (The Gülen Institute Luncheon Forum,
April 12, 2010)
Madeleine
Albright,
64th US Secre­
tary of State
“In a world that
lacks direction,
there can be
no doubt that
a pathfinder is
needed. It is much more likely to be found in
the values that reside at the heart of the Gülen
Institute and this luncheon series. These values
include commitment to international dialogue,
an understanding of cultural diversity, support
for human justice and a love of peace.” (Lunch­
eon Forum, December 3, 2008)
Sheila J. Lee,
Member of
US Congress,
18th District
of Texas
“The inspiration
of the Gülen
Institute, who
understood
the communicating the word of God, living
for others, the spirit of devotion, sacrifice,
fidelity and loyalty, was clearly the right path
to take.” (Annual Dialog and Friendship
Dinner in Houston, November 2009)
James Baker,
61st US Secre­
tary of State
Problems of the
world would be
easy to address
if, on the global
level, we develop
ways of sharing
respect for each other’s religious perspectives.
It is in this manner, the Gülen Institute and
those who promote shared vision of interfaith
dialogue provide truly invaluable leadership.”
(Luncheon Forum, May 21, 2008)
49

--- Sayfa 50 ---
Further Resources
For further reading and information:
Gülen’s personal websites
www.fgulen.com
www.fethullah-gulen.org
The Gülen Institute
www.guleninstitute.org
Fethullah Gülen Forum
www.fethullahgulenforum.org
Rumi Forum
www.rumiforum.org
The Institute of Interfaith Dialog
www.interfaithdialog.org
The Journalists and Writers Foundation
www.gyv.org.tr
Conferences on the Gülen Movement
www.fethullahgulenconference.org
www.gulenconference.net
www.gulenconference.nl
Some of the international conferences on the Gülen Movement:
East and West Encounters: The Gülen Movement, December 4-6, 2009, Uni­
versity of Southern California, Los Angeles
Future of Reform in the Muslim World: Comparative Experiences with Fethul­
lah Gülen’s Movement in Turkey, October 19–21, 2009, Arab League headquar­
ters, organized by Cairo University and Hira Magazine, Cairo, Egypt
From Dialogue to Collaboration: The Vision of Fethullah Gülen and Muslim-
Christian Relations, July 15-16, 2009, Australian Catholic University, Mel­
bourne, Australia
Muslims between Tradition and Modernity: The Gülen Movement as a Bridge
between Cultures, May 26-28, 2009, University of Potsdam, Berlin, Germany
Islam in the Age of Global Challenges: Alternative Perspectives of the Gülen
Movement, November 14-15, 2008, Georgetown University, Washington, D.C
Muslim World in Transition: Contributions of the Gülen Movement, House of
Lords, October 25-27, 2007, London, United Kingdom
Islam in the Contemporary World: The Fethullah Gülen Movement in Thought
and Practice, November 12-13, 2005, Rice University, Houston, Texas
50

--- Sayfa 51 ---
51

--- Sayfa 52 ---
52
University of Houston
237 Social Work Building, Room 417 | 4800 Calhoun Rd. Houston, TX 77204 – 4013
 Tel: (713) 743-8135  |  Fax: (713) 974-4445
www.guleninstitute.org  |  info@guleninstitute.org
Designed by Helix Design and Production / www.helixproduction.com