--- Sayfa 1 ---
1

THE FLASHES COLLECTION

--- Sayfa 2 ---
2

--- Sayfa 3 ---
3
From the
Risale-i Nur
Collection

The Flashes
Collection

Bediuzzaman
Said Nursi

--- Sayfa 4 ---
4

Translated from the Turkish ‘Lem’alar’
by Şükran Vahide

2009 Edition.

Copyright © 2009 by Sözler Neşriyat A.Ş.
All rights reserved. This book may not be reproduced by any means
in whole or in part without prior written permission.
For information, address:
Sözler Neşriyat A.Ş., Nuruosmaniye Cad., Sorkun Han, No: 28/2,
Cağaloğlu, Istanbul, Turkey.
Tel: 0212 527 10 10;   Fax: 0212 520 82 31
E-Mail: info@sozler.com.tr
Internet: www.sozler.com.tr

--- Sayfa 5 ---
5

Contents

THE FIRST FLASH: An instructive explanation of the verse, “But he cried through
the depths of the darkness…” the famous supplication of the Prophet Jonah
(UWP), showing its relevance for everyone.
17
THE SECOND FLASH: The famous supplication of the Prophet Job (UWP),
“When he called upon his Sustainer saying: ‘Verily harm has afflicted me…’” is
expounded in five points, providing a true remedy for the disaster-struck.
21
THE THIRD FLASH: Three points expounding with the phrases “The Eternal One,
He is the Eternal One!” two important truths contained in the verse, “Everything
shall perish save His countenance…”
30
THE FOURTH FLASH: The Highway of the Practices of the Prophet (UWBP).
This solves and elucidates with complete clarity one of the major points of
conflict between the Sunnis and the Shi‘a, the question of the Imamate, and
expounds two important verses in four points. 35
THE FIFTH FLASH is included in the Twenty-Ninth Flash.
THE SIXTH FLASH is also included in the Twenty-Ninth Flash.
THE SEVENTH FLASH: This describes seven predictions about the Unseen in the
three final verses of Sura al-Fath. Its Postscript describes a further example of
this aspect of the Qur’an’s miraculousness in the verses “All who obey God and
His Messenger…” While the Conclusion demonstrates a clear example of another
aspect of its miraculousness, ‘coincidences.’.
46
THE EIGHTH FLASH is published in Sikke-i Tasdik-i Gaybî (The Ratifying Stamp
of the Unseen) and hand-duplicated editions of Lem’alar (The Flashes
Collection), and is not included in the present collection.

--- Sayfa 6 ---
6
THE NINTH FLASH: The answers to four questions asked by Bediuzzaman’s
student, Hulûsi Bey:
58
The First concerns his descent from the Prophet (UWBP).
59
The Second points out with brilliant clarity the way of the Unity of Existence and
how it is in error.
59
The Third concerns the science of jafr.
62
The Fourth is about Jesus (UWBP) having a human father.
63
Finally is an Addendum to the question about Ibn al-‘Arabi and the Unity of
Existence.
66
THE TENTH FLASH: Fourteen Blows dealt by Divine Compassion received by
students of the Risale-i Nur in their service of the Qur’an, for errors they have
made due to human nature.
70
THE ELEVENTH FLASH: Entitled The Stairway of the Practices of the Prophet
and Antidote for the Sickness of Innovations, this important treatise consists
of eleven points about the Sunna of God’s Messenger (UWBP).
81
THE TWELFTH FLASH: Two verses are explained which have been challenged
and criticized by scientists:
The First explains in two points that all sustenance is bestowed directly by the
All-Powerful One, from the treasury of His mercy.
95
The Second proves in two important matters, the first consisting of four points,
that the earth has seven levels in seven respects, as the heavens consist of seven
levels.  98
THE THIRTEENTH FLASH: This explains, through thirteen indications, the
meaning of the phrase: “I seek refuge with God from Satan the Accursed.” 104
THE FOURTEENTH FLASH consists of two stations:
First Station: In reply to the First Question, which is about the earth resting on a
Bull and a Fish, this sets out three important principles for the understanding of
Hadiths. 128
The Second Question is about the People of the Cloak. 132
Second Station: This important piece expounds six mysteries contained in the
verse “In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.”
134
THE FIFTEEN FLASH: The indexes of Sözler (The Words), Mektûbat (Letters),
and Lem’alar (The Flashes Collection), from the First to the Fifteenth Flashes.
They are included in the relevant volumes.

--- Sayfa 7 ---
7
THE SIXTEENTH FLASH: The answers to various questions:
The First: A relief from difficulties was predicted during Ramadan by those who
divine the realities, why did it not come about?
143
The Second: Why did the author of the Risale-i Nur not oppose those who were
oppressing him? 144
The Third: Why did he oppose war, although with foreign forces interfering in the
government, it would have excited Islamic zeal?
145
The Fourth: Why did he advise his students to be cautious and not to show all
parts of the Risale-i Nur to everyone? 145
Conclusion: The reply to a question about the Prophet’s (UWBP) beard.
147
The answers to three further matters, disputed by atheists:
The First: Dhu’l-Qarnayn “saw the sun setting in a spring of murky water.”
148
The Second: Where is the Barrier of Dhu’l-Qarnayn? Who were Gog and Magog?

149
The Third is about Jesus (PUH) coming at the end of time and killing the Dajjal.

151
A reply about two of the Five Hidden Things.
152
The reply to a question about man’s ten subtle faculties. 155
THE SEVENTEENTH FLASH consists of fifteen notes taken from Bediuzzaman’s
work entitled Zühre:.
157
The First Note shows the reality of those things which captivate the human soul,
severance from which turns man’s face to eternity.
158
The Second Note describes the Qur’anic principle of humility. 158
The Third Note illustrates with a comparison the true face of death and life.
159
The Fourth Note demonstrates that as it is generally the divine practice to restore
and return things exactly the same, man, the perfect fruit of the universe, will be
returned at the Last Judgement. 159
The Fifth Note reveals by means of a comparison with Qur’anic guidance, the true
face of Western civilization. Making believers feel repugnance towards it, this
Notes offers remedies from the pharmacy of the Qur’an.
160

--- Sayfa 8 ---
8
The Sixth Note unmasks the satanic wile of shaking believers in their faith due to
the numerous unbelievers and their agreement in denying some of the truths of
belief.
166
The Seventh Note silences those pseudo-patriots who drive Muslims towards
Western-type progress, greed, and worldly ambition, and offers Qur’anic cures to
any looking towards apostasy or who have fallen into sin.
168
The Eighth Note demonstrates how in His munificence, Almighty God has
included a reward and pleasure in all activity and striving.
170
The Ninth Note explains that the Prophets contain the reality of man, the seed of the
universe, and that by following them in worship, man may attain to perfection
and happiness. The phrase “God is Most Great!” repeated in the Friday and
Festival Prayers is as though uttered by the globe of the earth.
174
The Tenth Note: Three sorts of evidences and proofs of knowledge of God, and
the correct approaches to these. 175
The Eleventh Note points out the compassion in the Qur’an’s manner of address,
and its naturalness.
176
The Twelfth Note: A supplication illustrating a meaning of the Hadith “Die before
you die” 177
The Thirteenth Note: Five matters that have been the cause of confusion:
The First: Strivers in the way of truth should think only of their own duties and
not meddle in God’s concerns. 178
The Second: Worship of God should look only to the divine command and divine
pleasure. 180
The Third: On the meaning of “Happy is the man who knows his limits and does
not exceed them.”
180
The Fourth explains that it is not permissible to accept bounties not given in the
True Bestower’s name, and demonstrates the true nature of apparent causes. 182
The Fifth: The achievements of a community should not be ascribed to its leader
or master.
183
The Fourteenth Note consists of four signs alluding to divine unity:
First Sign: Man’s true object of worship and place of recourse can only be the
One whose rule extends over the earth and the heavens.
184

--- Sayfa 9 ---
9
Second Sign: Man’s intense innate love of immortality should be not for the
mirror of his being, but for the manifestation of the Enduring One of Glory in
the mirror.
185
Third Sign: The tip of a vast truth warning man, for although he is created with a
capacity suitable to eternal life, he sometimes becomes entrapped in minute
matters, due to the caprice of the soul. 185
Fourth Sign: Worldly life and the life of the flesh are like a narrow grave. On
entering the life of the heart and spirit, one enters a broad sphere of life, and the
key to this world is “There is no god but God!”
186
The Fifteenth Note depicts the maximum manifestation of the divine name of
Preserver.
187
THE EIGHTEENTH FLASH has been published in Sikke-i Tasdik-i Gaybî (The
Ratifying Stamp of the Unseen) and in hand-duplicated editions of Lem’alar
(The Flashes).
THE NINETEENTH FLASH: On Frugality. Seven points expounding the verse
“Eat and drink, but waste not in excess”.
189
THE TWENTIETH FLASH: On Sincerity. Seven causes of the awesome situation
indicated by the question: “What is the reason for the conflict among the people
of truth while the misguided and worldly co-operate without rivalry? 200
THE TWENTY-FIRST FLASH: On Sincerity. Four rules whereby one may gain
and preserve sincerity, the most important principle in works pertaining to the
hereafter.
213
A Confidential Letter to Some of My Brothers.
222
THE TWENTY-SECOND FLASH consists of three indications, which comprise
questions about the Risale-i Nur’s author, and their answers: 223
First Indication: Why do the worldly meddle in your hereafter, although you do
not meddle in their world, and the law does not interfere with recluses?
224
Second Indication: Why do you not apply to us? One who applies the law is not a
tyrant. Through attracting attention, you oppose our principles of absolute
equality. 225
Third Indication: Why do you elude our republican laws under the cloak of being
a recluse? Why do you assume the position of someone special?
227

--- Sayfa 10 ---
10
Conclusion: An astonishing assault.
230
THE TWENTY-THIRD FLASH: On Nature.
232
Introduction: Three phrases, representing three ways, used by believers about the
existence of things without realizing their implications:
233
The First Way: The formation of things through the coming together of causes in
the universe.
First Impossibility: The coming together by chance of the elements of living
beings in perfect measure and balance. 234
Second Impossibility: If a fly, for example, is attributed to causes, it necessitates
that many of the elements and causes in the universe intervene physically in its
being.
235
Third Impossibility: “If a being has unity, it can only have issued from one
hand,” particularly if it manifests life, together with perfect order and balance.
 236
The Second Way: “It forms itself.”
First Impossibility: The body resembles a finely ordered machine; if its particles
are not working in accordance with the divine law, each would have to possess
absolute attributes.
236
Second Impossibility: The particles of a living body stand together in perfect
balance and order; if they are not dependent on the master architect of the
universe, each would have to be both dominant over all the others and
subordinate to them.
237
Third Impossibility: If your being is not ‘written’ by the pen of the All-Powerful
One, but ‘printed’ by nature and causes, there would have to be printing-blocks
in nature to the number of cells in your body 238
The Third Way: “Nature necessitates it and makes it.”
First Impossibility: If animate creatures are not ascribed directly to the
manifestation of the Pre-Eternal Sun, each has to be a god with infinite
attributes.
239
Second Impossibility: If attributed to nature, there would have to present in each
bit of soil the means by which innumerable flowers and fruits could grow and
be formed.
239
Third Impossibility: Two comparisons:
The First: A wild savage enters a palace adorned with all the fruits of
civilization.
242

--- Sayfa 11 ---
11
The Second: A rustic bumpkin enters the bounds of a splendid palace and sees
the soldiers at their drill.
243
Conclusion: Three questions and their answers.
The First: What need does God have of our worship, so that He severely
reproves those who give up worship? 248
The Second: What is the secret in the ease in the creation and formation of
things? 249
The Third: Philosophers say there is only composition and decomposition. Is this
correct? 252
THE TWENTY-FOURTH FLASH: The Qur’an enjoins the veiling of women. Four
instances of wisdom in this.
254
A Conversation with the Women, My Believing Sisters of the Hereafter: Three
points showing that since compassion is one of the chief principles of the
Risale-i Nur and women are champions of compassion, they are by nature
drawn to it.
259
THE TWENTY-FIFTH FLASH: Message for the Sick. This consists of twenty-
five remedies. 265
THE TWENTY-SIXTH FLASH: Treatise for the Elderly. This consists of twenty-
six hopes.
285
THE TWENTY-SEVENTH FLASH: The defence speeches from the Eskişehir
trials, which have been published in hand-duplicated editions of The Flashes
Collection, and in part in Bediuzzaman’s biography.
THE TWENTY-EIGHTH FLASH consists of short pieces written in Eskişehir
Prison:
A Small Point Concerning an Important Verse: Hitherto unknown instances of
wisdom in the creation of flies, and other creatures.
337
Some aspects of the element of air, the throne of the divine will and command, and
the Disjointed Letters at the start of some of the Qur’an’s Suras.
342
A discussion about divine speech and its infinity. 345
An explanation of why the verse “And We sent down iron...” is phrased in this
way.
348
The same point explained in connection with the verse “And He sent down for you
eight head of cattle”... 351
Pieces written in Eskişehir Prison as a true solace for the Risale-i Nur students. 353

--- Sayfa 12 ---
12
A Rule
353
A Short Piece
355
Part of My Defence Speech
355
An explanation of the verse “But when they forgot the warning they had received”.
 358
A Warning – two short stories
359
A piece which may benefit everyone, in two points. First Point, the immediate
reward present in good works. 361
Second Point: Two verses whose meaning is not immediately apparent. 362
The times of sleep and the Practices of the Prophet (UWBP).
364
“This is good as well.” On salawat for the Prophet (UWBP).
365
An explanation of the Unity of Existence. 366
The answer to a question about the dispute between Mustafa Sabri and Musa
Bekûf on the subject of Muhyiddin al-‘Arabi. 368
What should be done at festival times.
369
On the evil-commanding soul and its faults.
370
How can incarceration in Hell for an infinite duration in return for unbelief of a
short duration be justice?
371
A meaningful and subtle ‘coincidence’. 372
An explanation of some verses about spying jinns and evil spirits and their
repulsion which had been criticized by the people of misguidance.
373
THE TWENTY-NINTH FLASH: This was written in compliance with the Qur’anic
command to reflect on the creational signs in the universe, and shows the
essence of the way of the Risale-i Nur, reflective thought. The Third of its six
chapters is included in the present collection. It is on the phrase “God is Most
Great” and comprises seven degrees. 377
THE THIRTIETH FLASH: On the six divine names bearing the greatest name,
consisting of six points:
First Point: The Name Most Holy. This describes the cleanliness of the universe
and all beings, one manifestation of this Name.
391
Second Point: The Name All-Just. The balance and equilibrium of the universe
and all beings, one manifestation of the name All-Just.
396

--- Sayfa 13 ---
13
Third Point: the Name Sapient  consists of five matters:
First Matter: The greatest manifestation of the name of Sapient has made the
universe like a book in every page of which hundreds of books have been
written. 400
Second Matter consists of two topics:
First Topic: Beauty wants to reveal itself.
401
Second Topic: There is no place for partners in the dominions of the All-
Powerful Maker.
402
Third Matter: Each of the hundreds of sciences describes a manifestation of the
name Sapient in one realm of creation. 403
Fourth Matter: The wisdom of the All-Wise Maker, to which all beings testify
with their hundreds of instances of wisdom, demands the resurrection of the
dead.
405
Fifth Matter: consists of two topics:
First Topic: There is no wastefulness in the nature of things; wastefulness
being the opposite of the name Wise. 406
Second Topic: The names of Sapient and All-Wise necessitate the
messengership of Muhammad (UWBP).
406
Fourth Point: The Name of Single. This consists of seven indications:
First Indication: Three stamps of divine unity on beings.
409
Second Indication: The beings in the universe are so interwoven that one that
does not possess the universe as a whole, cannot have true disposal over any of
its elements.
411
Third Indication: All things ascribe everything to the One who created them. 411
Fourth Indication: Three points proving the infinite ease of unity and
impossibility of associating partners with God.
411
Fifth Indication: As rulership rejects the interference of others, so divine
rulership necessitates divine unity.
416
Sixth Indication: Divine singleness and unity are the basis of all perfections, the
source of the wisdom in the universe’s creation, and the sole means of man’s
desires being brought about.
418
Seventh Indication: The Messengership of Muhammad (UWBP) was
necessitated by divine singleness and unity. Three evidences testifying to the
importance of his collective personality.
419

--- Sayfa 14 ---
14
Fifth Point: The Name Ever-Living. This consists of five signs:
First Sign: The index-like answer to the questions: “What is life? What is its
nature and purpose?”
421
Second Sign: Both the inner and outer faces of life are transparent and unsullied;
apparent causes have not been made a veil to the disposals of divine power. 423
Third Sign: Life is the result of the universe; thanks and worship are the result of
life and the ultimate reason for the universe’s creation.
424
Fourth Sign: Life looks to the six pillars of belief and proves them.
425
Fifth Sign: Life is a shining seal of divine unity on the face of the universe. 431
Conclusion: The greatest name is not the same for everyone. 433
Sixth Point: The Name Self-Subsistent. This consists of five rays:
434
First Ray: This describes the greatest manifestation of the name Self-Subsistent
and reveals the true face of materialist and naturalist philosophies.
435
Second Ray: This consists of two matters:
The First Matter describes one aspect of the manifestation of Self-Subsistence,
which affords a stability and permanence to all things.
439
The Second Matter points out some of the benefits and wisdom in things
related to the mystery of Self-Subsistence.
440
Third Ray: Discusses the disclosure of the mystery of Self-Subsistence within
divine creativity, including the first two branches of the wisdom in limitless
divine activity. 442
Fourth Ray: The third branch of the wisdom in the constant and astonishing
activity in the universe. 444
Fifth Ray consists of two matters:
First Matter: The greatest manifestation of Self-Subsistence observed in the
heavenly bodies and in minute particles.
448
A Summary examining the light formed by the six names of the greatest name.

448
Second Matter: The manifestation of Self-Subsistence in the universe is at the
level of unity and glory, and in man at the

--- Sayfa 15 ---
15
level of oneness and beauty. Man’s duties and the ways in which he acts as a
mirror to the Self-Subsistent One
449

Note on the Turkish alphabet .

A Brief Look at Bediuzzaman Said Nursi’s Life, The Risale-i Nur, and The Flashes
Collection

--- Sayfa 16 ---
16

--- Sayfa 17 ---
17

In the Name of God,
The Merciful, the Compassionate

But he cried through the depths of darkness, “There is no god but You; Glory
be unto You! I was indeed among the wrongdoers!”(21:87) * When he called
upon his Lord saying: “Verily harm has afflicted me, and You are the Most
Merciful of the Merciful.”(21:83) * But if they turn away, say: “God suffices
me, there is no god but He; in Him do I place my trust – He the Sustainer of
the Throne [of Glory] Supreme!”(9:129) * For us God suffices, and He is the
Best Disposer of Affairs.(3:178) * There is no strength and no power other
than through God, the High, the Mighty.1 * O Eternal One, You alone are
Eternal! O Eternal One, You alone are Eternal! * And to those who believe
guidance and healing.(41:44)

[This, the first section of the Thirty-First Letter, consists of six flashes
each of which depicts one of the many lights of the above verses and
phrases. Their recital thirty-three times each particularly between
Maghrib and ‘Isha, the prayers at sunset and nightfall, is highly
meritorious.]

1 1. See, Bukhari, Maghazi, 38; Muslim, Dhikr, 44-6.
* The translations of the First, Second, and Twentieth Flashes were originally made by Hamid
Algar, Professor of Near Eastern Studies in the University of California, Berkeley, U.S.A., and
published by the Risale-i Nur Institute of America in 1975. They have been slightly amended to fit the
present work. (Tr.)

--- Sayfa 18 ---
18

The First Flash

The supplication of Yunus ibn Matta2 (Peace be upon our Prophet and upon him)
is a most powerful supplication, a most effective means for obtaining answer to
prayer.3 The gist of the celebrated story of Jonah (Peace be upon him) is as follows:
He was cast into the sea and swallowed by a large fish. The sea was stormy, the
night turbulent and dark, and hope exhausted. But it was while he was in such a
situation that his supplication:
There is no god other than You, Glory be unto You! Indeed, I was among the
wrongdoers(21:87)
acted for him as a swift means of salvation. The secret of his supplication’s power
was this:
In that situation all causes were suspended, for Jonah needed to save him one
whose command should constrain the whale and the sea, and the night and the sky.
The night, the sea, and the whale were united against him. Only one whose command
might subdue all three of these could bring him forth on the strand of salvation. Even
if the entirety of creation had become his servants and helpers, it would have been of
no avail. For causes have no effect. Since Jonah saw with the eye of certainty that
there was no refuge other than the Causer of Causes, and unfolded to him was the
meaning of divine oneness within the light of divine unity, his supplication was able
suddenly to subdue the night, the sea, and the whale. Through the light of divine unity
he was able to transform the belly of the whale into a submarine; and the surging sea,
which in its awesomeness resembled an erupting volcano, into a peaceable plain, a
pleasant place of excursion. Through the light of unity, he was able to sweep the sky’s
countenance clear of all

2  The Prophet Yunus in the Qur’an is the Biblical Jonah, which name is henceforth used in the
present work. (Tr.)
3 Tirmidhi, Da‘wat, 81; Musnad, i, 170.

--- Sayfa 19 ---
19
clouds, and to set the moon over his head like a lantern. Creation that had been
pressing and threatening him from all sides now showed him a friendly face from
every direction. Thus he reached the shore of salvation, where beneath the creeping-
gourd tree he observed this favour of his Lord.
Now we are in a situation one hundred times more awesome than that in which
Jonah (Peace be upon him) first found himself. Our night is the future. When we look
upon our future with the eye of neglect, it is a hundred times darker and more fearful
than his night. Our sea is this spinning globe. Each wave of this sea bears on it
thousands of corpses, and is thus a thousand times more frightening than his sea. Our
fish is the caprice of our soul which strives to shake and destroy the foundation of our
eternal life. This fish is a thousand times more maleficent than his. For his fish could
destroy a hundred-year lifespan, whereas ours seeks to destroy a life lasting hundreds
of millions of years. This being our true state, we should in imitation of Jonah (Peace
be upon him) avert ourselves from all causes and take refuge directly in the Causer of
Causes, that is, our Lord and Sustainer. We should say: “There is no god but You,
Glory be unto You! Indeed I was among the wrongdoers,” and understand with full
certainty that it is only He who can repel from us the harm of the future, this world,
and caprice of our souls, united against us because of our neglect and misguidance.
For the future is subject to His command, the world to His jurisdiction, and our soul
to His direction.
What cause is there other than the Creator of the heavens and earth who can
know the most subtle and secret thoughts of our heart; who can lighten the future for
us by establishing the hereafter; who can save us from the myriad overwhelming
waves of the world? No, outside that Necessarily Existent One, there is nothing that
can in any way give aid and effect salvation except by His consent and command.
This being the case, considering that as a result of his supplication, the whale
became for Jonah a vehicle, or a submarine, and the sea, a peaceable plain; and the
night became gently lit for him by the moon, so too, we should make the same
supplication: “There is no god but You, Glory be unto You! Indeed I was among the
wrongdoers.”
With the sentence “There is no god but You” we draw the gaze of mercy upon
our future; with the word “Glory be unto You!” we draw it upon our world; and with
the phrase “Indeed I was among the wrongdoers,” we draw it upon our soul.4 Thus
our future is illumined with the light of belief and the moonlike luminosity of the
Qur’an, and the awe and terror of the night

4 See, Bukhari, Adhan, 149; Tawhid, 9; Muslim, Dhikr, 47-8; Hudud, 23.

--- Sayfa 20 ---
20
are transformed into tranquillity and joy. Then too, embarking on the ship of the truth
of Islam, fashioned in the dockyard of the Most Wise Qur’an, we may pass safely
over the sea of this earthly abode, which through the alternation of life and death is
boarded by corpses unnumbered, borne on the waves of the years and centuries, and
cast into nothingness. Once aboard that ship we may reach the shore of salvation and
fulfil our life’s duty. The tempest and surging of the sea will appear a series of
pleasing images on a screen, and instead of inspiring terror and dread, will delight,
caress and illumine the reflective and the meditative gaze. By virtue of the mystery of
the Qur’an, and the effect of that Criterion of Truth and Falsehood, our soul will no
longer ride us, but instead become our mount. As we ride it, it will be for us a
powerful means for the attainment of life everlasting.
I n  S h o r t : Man, in accordance with the comprehensive nature of his being, as
he suffers and shakes with malaria, so also he suffers from the shaking and tremors of
the earth, and the supreme convulsion of all beings on the Day of Resurrection. As he
fears the infinitesimal microbe, he also fears the shooting star that appears among the
heavenly bodies. As he loves his home, he also loves the wide world. As he loves his
little garden, he also ardently loves infinite and eternal paradise. Man’s object of
worship, Lord, refuge, saviour, and goal then can only be the One in the grasp of
whose power is the whole universe, under whose command are both atom and planet.
Man should therefore constantly say like Jonah (Peace be upon him):

There is no god but You, Glory be unto You! Indeed I was among the
wrongdoers.
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32)

--- Sayfa 21 ---
21

The Second Flash

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
When he called upon his Lord saying: “Verily harm has afflicted me, and
You are the Most Merciful of the Merciful!”(21:83)

The supplication of Job (Upon whom be peace), the champion of patience, is both
well-tested and effective. Drawing on the verse, we should say in our supplication, “O
my Lord and Sustainer! Indeed harm has afflicted me, and You are the Most Merciful
of the Merciful.”
The gist of the well-known story of Job1 (Upon whom be peace) is as follows:
While afflicted with numerous wounds and sores for a long time, he recalled the
great recompense to be had for his sickness, and endured it with utmost patience. But
later, when the worms generated by his wounds penetrated to his heart and his tongue,
the seat of the remembrance and knowledge of God,2 he feared that his duty of
worship would suffer, and so he said in supplication not for the sake of his own
comfort, but for the sake of his worship of God:
“O Lord! Harm has afflicted me; my remembrance of You with my tongue and
my worship of You with my heart will suffer.” God Almighty then accepted this pure
sincere, disinterested and devout supplication in the most miraculous fashion. He
granted to Job perfect good health and made manifest in him all kinds of compassion.3
This Flash contains five points:

1 See, Tabari, Jami‘ al-Bayan, xvii, 71-2; Ibn Hajar, Fath al-Bari, vi, 426; Ibn al-Mubarak, al-
Zuhd, 49.
2 See, Ibn al-Athir, al-Kamil fi’l-Tarikh, i, 98-100.
3 See, Qur’an, 21:84, 38:42-3. Also, Bukhari, Ghusl, 20; Tawhid, 35; Musnad, ii, 314.

--- Sayfa 22 ---
22
FIRST POINT

Corresponding to the outer wounds and sicknesses of Job (Upon whom be peace),
we have inner sicknesses of the spirit and heart. If our inner being were to be turned
outward, and our outer being turned inward, we would appear more wounded and
diseased than Job. For each sin that we commit and each doubt that enters our mind,
inflicts wounds on our heart and our spirit.
The wounds of Job (Upon whom be peace) were of such a nature as to threaten
his brief worldly life, but our inner wounds threaten our infinitely long everlasting
life. We need the supplication of Job thousands of times more than he did himself.
Just as the worms that arose from his wounds penetrated to his heart and tongue, so
too the wounds that sin inflicts upon us and the temptations and doubts that arise from
those wounds will – may God protect us! – penetrate our inner heart, the seat of
belief, and thus wound belief. Penetrating too the spiritual joy of the tongue, the
interpreter of belief, they cause it to shun in revulsion the remembrance of God, and
reduce it to silence.
Sin, penetrating to the heart, will blacken and darken it until it extinguishes the
light of belief.4 Within each sin is a path leading to unbelief. Unless that sin is swiftly
obliterated by seeking God’s pardon, it will grow from a worm into a snake that
gnaws on the heart.
For example, a man who secretly commits a shameful sin will fear the disgrace
that results if others become aware of it. Thus the existence of angels and spirit beings
will be hard for him to endure, and he will long to deny it, even on the strength of the
slightest indication.
Similarly, one who commits a major sin deserving of the torment of Hell, will
desire the non-existence of Hell wholeheartedly, and whenever he hears of the threat
of Hell-fire, he will dare to deny it on the strength of a slight indication and doubt,
unless he takes up in protection the shield of repentance and seeking forgiveness.
Similarly, one who does not perform the obligatory prayer and fulfil his duty of
worship will be affected by distress, just as he would be in case of the neglect of a
minor duty toward some petty ruler. Thus, his laziness in fulfulling his obligation,
despite the repeated commands of the Sovereign of Pre-Eternity, will distress him
greatly, and on account of that distress will desire and say to himself: “Would that
there were no such duty of worship!” In turn, there will arise from this desire a desire
to deny God, and

4 See, Tirmidhi, Tafsir Sura 83:1; Ibn Maja, Zuhd, 29; Muwatta, Kalam, 18; Musnad, ii, 297.

--- Sayfa 23 ---
23
bear enmity toward Him. If some doubt concerning the existence of the Divine Being
comes to his heart, he will be inclined to embrace it like a conclusive proof. A wide
gate to destruction will be opened in front of him. The wretch does not know that
although he is delivered by denial from the slight trouble of duty of worship, he has
made himself, by that same denial, the target for milions of troubles that are far more
awesome. Fleeing from the bite of a gnat, he welcomes the bite of the snake.
There are many other examples, which may be understood with reference to these
three, so that the sense of,
Nay but their hearts are stained(83:14)
will become apparent.

SECOND POINT
As was explained concerning the meaning of divine determining, known as
destiny, in the Twenty-Sixth Word, men have no right to complain in the case of
disasters and illness for the following three reasons:
First Reason: God Most High has made the garment of the body with which He
has clothed man a manifestation of His art. He has made man to be a model on which
He cuts, trims, alters and changes the garment of the body, thus displaying the
manifestation of various of His names. Just as the name of Healer makes it necessary
that illness should exist, so too the name of Provider requires that hunger should exist.
And so on.
The Lord of All Dominion has disposal over His dominion as He wishes.
Second Reason: It is by means of disasters and sicknesses that life is refined,5
perfected, strengthened and advanced; that it yields results, attains perfection and
fulfils its own purpose.6 Life led monotonously on the couch of ease and comfort
resembles not so much the pure good that is being, as the pure evil that is non-being;
it tends in fact in that direction.
Third Reason: This worldly realm is the field of testing, the abode of service. It
is not the place of pleasure, reward, and requital. Considering, then, that it is the
abode of service and place of worship, sicknesses and misfortunes – as long as they
do not affect belief and are patiently endured7 – conform fully to service and worship,
and even strengthen it. Since they make each hour’s worship equivalent to that of a
day,8 one should offer thanks instead of complaining.

5 See, Muslim, Birr, 52; Abu Da’ud, Jana’iz, 1; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, i, 1500.
6 See, Bukhari, Marda, 1; Muslim, Birr, 52; Tirmidhi, Zuhd, 57; Muwatta, Jana’iz, 40.
7 See, Tirmidhi, Da‘wat, 79; Nasa’i, al-Sunan al-Kubra, vi, 106.
8 See, Darimi, Riqaq, 56; Musnad, ii, 159, 194, 198; iii, 148, 238, 258.

--- Sayfa 24 ---
24
Worship consists in fact of two kinds, positive and negative. What is meant by
the positive is obvious. As for negative worship, this is when one afflicted with
misfortune or sickness perceives his own weakness and helplessness, and turning to
his Compassionate Lord, seeks refuge in Him, meditates upon Him, petitions Him,
and thus offers a pure form of worship that no hypocrisy can penetrate. If he endures
patiently, thinks of the reward attendant on misfortune and offers thanks, then each
hour that he passes will count as a whole day spent in worship. His brief life becomes
very long. There are even cases where a single minute is counted as equal to a whole
day’s worship.
I once was extremely anxious because of an awesome illness that struck one of
my brothers of the hereafter, Muhajir Hafız Ahmed.9 But then a warning came to my
heart: “Congratulate him!” Each minute he spends is counted as a whole day’s
worship. He was in any event enduring his illness in patience and gratitude.

THIRD POINT
As we have pointed out in one or two of the Words, whenever one thinks of his
past life, he will say in his heart or with his tongue either “Ah!” or “Oh!” That is he
will either experience regret, or say “Thanks and praise be to God!” Regret is inspired
by the pains arising from the cessation of former pleasures and separation from them.
For the cessation of pleasure is a pain in itself. Sometimes a momentary pleasure will
cause everlasting pain. To think upon it will be like lancing a wound, causing regret to
gush forth.
As for the lasting spiritual pleasure that comes from the cessation of momentary
pains experienced in the past, it inspires man to exclaim, “Thanks and praise be to
God!” In addition to this innate tendency of man, if he thinks of the reward that
results from misfortune and the requital that awaits him in the hereafter, if he realizes
that his brief life will count as a long life because of misfortune, then instead of being
merely patient he should be thankful. He should say, “Praise be to God for every state
other than unbelief and misguidance.”10

9 Muhajir Hafız Ahmed was a merchant in Barla* and among the first students of the Risale-i
Nur. Bediuzzaman stayed in his guesthouse on first arriving in Barla in the early spring of 1926, and he
assisted Bediuzzaman for the eight and a half years he remained in Barla.
* Bediuzzaman’s place of exile, 1926-1934. A small village in Isparta Province
in S. W. Turkey. (Tr.)
10 Tirmidhi, Da‘wat, 45; Ibn Maja, Muqaddima, 23; Du‘a, 2.

--- Sayfa 25 ---
25
It is commonly said that misfortune is longlasting. Indeed it is, but not because it
is troublesome and distressing as people customarily imagine, but rather because it
yields vital results just like a long life.

FOURTH POINT
As was explained in the First Station of the Twenty-First Word, the power of
patient endurance given to man by God Almighty is adequate to every misfortune,
unless squandered on baseless fears. But through the predominance of delusion,
man’s neglect and his imagining this transient life to be eternal, he squanders his
power of endurance on the past and the future. His endurance is not equal to the
misfortunes of the present, and he begins to complain. It is as if – God forbid! – he
were complaining of God Almighty to men. In a most unjustified and even lunatic
fashion, he complains and demonstrates his lack of patience.
If the day that is past held misfortune, the distress is now gone, and only
tranquillity remains; the pain has vanished and the pleasure in its cessation remains;
the trouble is gone, and the reward remains. Hence one should not complain but give
thanks for enjoyment. One should not resent misfortune, but love it. The transient life
of the past comes to be counted as an eternal and blessed life because of misfortune.
To think upon past pain with one’s fancy and then to waste part of one’s patience is
lunacy.
As far as days yet to come are concerned, since they have not yet come, to think
now of the illness or misfortune to be borne during them and display impatience, is
also foolishness. To say to oneself “Tomorrow or the day after I will be hungry and
thirsty” and constantly to drink water and eat bread today, is pure madness. Similarly,
to think of misfortunes and sicknesses yet in the future but now non-existent, to suffer
them already, to show impatience and to oppress oneself without any compulsion, is
such stupidity that it no longer deserves pity and compassion.
In short, just as gratitude increases divine bounty, so too complaint increases
misfortune, and removes all occasion for compassion.
During World War One, a blessed person in Erzurum was afflicted with an
awesome disease. I went to visit him and he said to me complaining bitterly: “I have
not been able to place my head on the pillow and sleep for a hundred nights.” I was
much grieved. Suddenly a thought came to me and I said:
“Brother, the hundred difficult days you have spent are now just like one hundred
happy days. Do not think of them and complain; rather look at them and be grateful.
As for future days, since they have not yet come, place your trust in your
Compassionate and Merciful Lord. Do not weep

--- Sayfa 26 ---
26
before being beaten, do not be afraid of nothing, do not give non-being the colour of
being. Think of the present hour; your power of patient endurance is enough for this
hour. Do not act like the maddened commander who expects reinforcement on his
right wing by an enemy force deserting to join him from his left, and then begins to
disperse his forces in the centre to the left and the right, before the enemy has joined
him on the right. The enemy then destroys his centre, left weak, with a minimal force.
Brother, do not be like him. Mobilize all your strength for this present hour, and think
of divine mercy, reward in the hereafter, and how your brief and transient life is being
transformed into a long and eternal form. Instead of complaining bitterly, give joyful
thanks.”
Much relieved, he said, “Praise and thanks be to God, my disease is now a tenth
of what it was before.”

FIFTH POINT consisting of three matters.
F i r s t  M a t t e r : True and harmful misfortune is that which affects religion.
One should at all times seek refuge at the divine court from misfortune in matters of
religion and cry out for help.11 But misfortunes that do not affect religion in reality are
not misfortunes. Some of them are warnings from the Most Merciful One. If a
shepherd throws a stone at his sheep when they trespass on another’s pasture, they
understand that the stone is intended as a warning to save them from a perilous action;
full of gratitude they turn back.12 So too there are many apparent misfortunes that are
divine warnings and admonishments, others that constitute the penance of sin;13 and
others again that dissolve man’s state of neglect, remind him of his human
helplessness and weakness, thus affording him a form of tranquillity. As for the
variety of misfortune that is illness, it is not at all a misfortune, as has already been
said, but rather a favour from God and a means of purification.14 There is a tradition
which says: “As a tree drops its ripe fruit when shaken, so do sins fall away through
the shaking of fever.”15
Job (Upon whom be peace) did not pray in his supplication for the comfort of his
soul, but rather sought cure for the purpose of worship, when

11 See, Tirmidhi, Da‘wat, 79; Nasa’i, al-Sunan al-Kubra, vi, 106.
12 See, Bukhari, Iman, 39; Buyu’, 2; Muslim, Musaqat, 107; Abu Nu’aym, Hilyat al-Awliya’, i,
11.
13 See, Tirmidhi, Tafsir Sura 4:24; Musnad, ii, 303, 335, 402.
14 See, Muslim, Birr, 52; Abu Da’ud, Jana’iz, 1; al-Daylami, al-Musnad, i, 123; al-Hakim al-
Tirmidhi, Nawadir al-Usul, i, 286.
15 Bukhari, Marda, 3, 13, 16; Muslim, Birr, 45; Ibn Maja, Adab, 56; Darimi, Riqaq, 57; Musnad, i,
381, 441, 455; iii, 152.

--- Sayfa 27 ---
27
disease was preventing his remembrances of God with his tongue and his meditation
upon God in his heart. We too should make our primary intent, when making that
supplication, the healing of the inward and spiritual wounds that arise from sinning.
As far as physical diseases are concerned, we may seek refuge from them when
they hinder our worship. But we should seek refuge in a humble and supplicating
fashion, not protestingly and plaintively. If we accept God as our Lord and Sustainer,
then we must accept too all that He gives us in His capacity of Lord. To sigh and
complain in a manner implying objection to divine determining and decree is a kind
of criticism of divine determining, an accusation levelled against God’s compassion.
The one who criticizes divine determining strikes his head against the anvil and
breaks it. Whoever accuses God’s mercy will inevitably be deprived of it. To use a
broken hand to exact revenge will only cause further damage to the hand. So too a
man who, afflicted with misfortune, responds to it with protesting complaint and
anxiety, is only compounding his misfortune.
S e c o n d  M a t t e r : Physical misfortunes grow when they are seen to be
large, and shrink when they are seen to be small. For example, a dream enters one’s
vision at night. If one pays it attention it swells up and grows; if one does not, it
disappears. So too if one attempts to ward off an attacking swarm of bees, they will
become more aggressive; whereas if one pays them no attention they will disperse.
Thus if one regards physical misfortunes as great and grants them importance, they
will grow, and because of anxiety pass from the body and strike root in the heart. The
result will then be an inward affliction on which the outward misfortune fastens to
perpetuate itself. But if the anxiety is removed by contentment with the divine decree
and reliance on God, the physical misfortune will gradually decrease, dry up and
vanish, just like a tree whose roots have been severed. I once composed the following
verses in description of this truth:
Cry not out at misfortune, O wretch, come, trust in God!
For know that crying out compounds the misfortune and is a great error.
Find misfortune’s Sender, and know it is a gift within gift, and pleasure.
So leave crying out and offer thanks; like the nightingale, smile through your
tears!
If you find Him not, know the world is all pain within pain, transience and loss.
So why lament at a small misfortune while upon you is a worldful of woe? Come,
trust in God!

--- Sayfa 28 ---
28
Trust in God! Laugh in misfortune’s face; it too will laugh.
As it laughs, it will diminish; it will be changed and transformed.
If in single-handed combat one smiles at an awesome enemy, his enmity will be
changed to conciliatoriness; his hostility will become a mere joke, will shrink and
disappear. If one confronts misfortune with reliance on God, the result will be similar.
T h i r d  M a t t e r : Each age has particular characteristics.16 In this age of
neglect misfortune has changed its form. In certain ages and for certain persons,
misfortune is not in reality misfortune, but rather a divine favour. Since I consider
those afflicted with illness in the present age to be fortunate – on condition that their
illness does not affect their religion – it does not occur to me to oppose illness and
misfortune, nor to take pity on the afflicted. Whenever I encounter some afflicted
youth, I find that he is more concerned with his religious duties and the hereafter than
are his peers. From this I deduce that illness does not constitute a misfortune for such
people, but rather a bounty from God. It is true that illness causes him distress in his
brief, transient and worldly life, but it is beneficial for his eternal life. It is to be
regarded as a kind of worship. If he were healthy he would be unable to maintain the
state he enjoyed while sick and would fall into dissipation, as a result of the
impetuousness of youth and the dissipated nature of the age.

Conclusion

God Almighty, in order to display His infinite power and unlimited mercy, has
made inherent in man infinite impotence and unlimited want. Further, in order to
display the endless embroideries of His names, He has created man like a machine
capable of receiving unlimited varieties of pain, as well as infinite varieties of
pleasure. Within that human machine are hundreds of instruments, each of which has
different pains and pleasures, different duties and rewards. Simply, all of the divine
names manifested in the macroanthropos that is the world also have manifestations in
the microcosm that is man. Beneficial matters like good health, well-being, and
pleasures cause man to offer thanks and prompt the human machine to perform its
functions in many respects, and thus man becomes like a factory producing thanks.

16 See, Bayhaqi, Shu’ab al-Iman, iv, 263; Khatib al-Baghdadi, al-Jami‘ li-Akhlaq al-Rawi wa
Adab al-Sami, i, 212, 407.

--- Sayfa 29 ---
29
Similarly, by means of misfortune, illness and pain, and other motion-inducing
contingencies, the other cogs of the human machine are set in motion and revolution.
The mine of weakness, impotence, and poverty inherent in human nature is made to
work. It induces in man a state whereby he seeks refuge and help not only with a
single tongue, but with the tongue of each of his members. Thus by means of those
contingencies man becomes like a moving pen comprising thousands of different
pens. He inscribes the appointed course of his existence on the page of his life or the
Tablet in the World of Similitudes; he puts forth a declaration of the divine names;
and becomes himself an ode to the glory of God, thus fulfilling the duties of his
nature.

--- Sayfa 30 ---
30

The Third Flash

[Emotion and spiritual pleasure have become mixed in this Flash to
an extent, and since their exuberance does not much heed the
principles of the intellect or the scales of thought nor conform to
them, it should not be weighed up on the scales of logic.]

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
Everything shall perish save His countenance; His is the command, and to
Him shall you return.(28:88)
The two phrases, “O Eternal One, You alone are Eternal! * O Eternal One, You
alone are Eternal!” both express the meaning of the above verse, and state two
important truths. It was because of this that some of the chiefs of the Naqshbandi
Order compiled some special invocations based on repetition of the phrases, and held
it to be a concise set of Naqshi supplications. Seeing that the two phrases express the
verse’s meaning, we shall explain several points concerning the significant truth they
state.

FIRST POINT
The first time “O Eternal One, You alone are Eternal!” is recited, like a surgical
operation it severs the heart from everything other than God. It is as follows:
By virtue of his comprehensive nature, man is connected with almost all beings.
Also included in his nature is a boundless capacity to love. For these reasons he
nurtures love towards all beings. He both loves the huge world as though it were his
house, and he loves eternal Paradise as though it were his garden. However, the
beings he loves do not stop, they depart, and he constantly suffers the pain of
separation. That boundless love of his becomes the means of boundless torment.
However, the fault in suffering such torment is his, for he was given a heart with
an infinite capacity to love in order to direct it toward One possessing infinite undying
beauty. By misusing it and spending it on transitory

--- Sayfa 31 ---
31
beings, he has done wrong and suffers the punishment for his fault through the pain of
separation.
Thus, the first time he utters: “O Eternal One, You alone are Eternal!”, it severs
his attachment to transitory beings; he leaves those objects of love before they leave
him and he is thus cleared of his fault. It declares that love should be restricted to the
Eternal Beloved, and expresses this meaning: “You are the only being that endures!
Everything other than You is transient. My heart cannot become attached to anything
transient, for it was created for everlasting love, to feel ardour lasting from pre-
eternity to post-eternity. Since those innumerable beloveds are transitory and they
leave me and depart, declaring, ‘O Eternal One, You alone are Eternal!’ I shall leave
them before they leave me. Only You are immortal, and I know and believe that
beings can only be immortal by Your making them so. In which case, they should be
loved with love of You. They are not otherwise worthy of the heart’s affection.”
When in this state, the human heart gives up innumerable objects of love;
beholding the stamp of transitoriness on their beauty, it severs its attachment to them.
It otherwise suffers wounds to the number of its beloveds. The second “O Eternal
One, You alone are Eternal!” is both a salve and an antidote for those wounds. That
is, “O Eternal One! Since You are Eternal, that is sufficient, You take the place of
everything. Since You exist, everything exists!”
Yes, the beauty, bounty, and perfection in beings, which excite love, are
generally signs of the Truly Enduring One’s beauty and bounty and perfections, and
passing through many veils, are pale shadows of them; indeed, they are the shadows
of the shadows of the manifestations of His most beautiful names.

SECOND POINT
Included in human nature is an intense love of immortality. Even, because of his
power of imagination, man fancies a sort of immortality in everything he loves. He
cries out from the depths of his being whenever he thinks of or sees their passing. All
lamentations at separation are expressions of the weeping caused by love of
immortality. If there were no imagined immortality, there would be no love. It might
even be said that the intense desire for immortality arising from that passionate love
of immortality, and from the spontaneous general prayer for immortality, is a reason
for the existence of the eternal realm and everlasting Paradise. The Eternal One of
Glory accepted man’s intense, unshakeable, innate desire and his powerful, effective,
general prayer, for He created an eternal realm for him, a transient being.

--- Sayfa 32 ---
32
Is it at all possible that the Munificent and Compassionate Creator would accept
the insignificant wish of the tiny stomach and its supplication through the tongue of
disposition for a temporary immortality by creating innumerable delicious foods, and
not accept the intense desire of all humankind, which arises from an overpowering
innate need, and its universal, constant, rightful, just prayer for immortality, offered
through word and state? God forbid, a hundred thousand times! It is impossible that
He would not accept it. Not to accept it would be in keeping with neither his wisdom,
nor His justice, nor His mercy, nor His power.
Since man is most desirous of immortality, all his perfections and pleasures are
dependent upon it. And since immortality is particular to the Eternal One of Glory;
and since the Eternal One’s names are enduring and immortal; and since the Eternal
One’s mirrors take on the hue of the Eternal One, and reflect His decree, and manifest
a sort of immortality; for sure the matter most important for man, his most pressing
duty, is to form a relation with that Eternal One and to adhere to His names. For
everything expended on the way of the Eternal One receives a sort of immortality.
The second “O Eternal One, You alone are Eternal!” expresses this truth. In addition
to healing man’s innumerable spiritual wounds, it satisfies the intense wish for
immortality inherent in his nature.

THIRD POINT
In this world, the effects of time on things, and on their passing, differ greatly.
Beings are one within the other like concentric circles, yet they differ in regard to the
speed of their passage.
Just as the hands of a clock counting the seconds, and those counting the minutes,
hours, and days superficially resemble each other but differ in respect of their speed,
so too the spheres of the body, soul, heart, and spirit in man differ from one another.
For example, the body possesses an immortality, a life, and an existence in the present
day, and even in the present hour while its past and future are dead and non-existent,
but the heart’s sphere of existence and life extends from many days previous to the
present day and to many days in the future. Then the sphere of the spirit is vast; its life
and existence extends from years previous to the present day to years subsequent to it.
By virtue of this capacity – in respect of knowledge, love, and worship of God
the Lord and Sustainer and the pleasure of that Most Merciful One, from which spring
the life of the heart and spirit – transient life in this world contains within it a
perpetual life, results in an eternal life, and resembles everlasting life.

--- Sayfa 33 ---
33
Yes, one second on the way of love, knowledge, and pleasure of the Truly
Enduring One is like a year, otherwise a year is a second. A single second, even, on
His way is immortal and many years. A hundred years of the people of neglect
looking to this world are like a single second. There is the famous saying: “A
moment’s separation lasts a year, and a year’s union passes in an instant.” I say the
complete opposite to this: a moment’s union for God’s sake within the bounds of the
Eternal One of Glory’s pleasure is a window opening onto not a year’s union, but
permanent union. While not one year but perhaps a thousand spent in heedlessness
and misguidance pass in an instant. There is a saying more famous that confirms this:
“With enemies the broad earth is like a small cup, while with friends a needle’s eye
becomes a broad arena.”1
An explicit meaning of the first well-known saying above is this: since union
with transitory beings is transient, however long it lasts it seems brief. A year of such
union is as fleeting as a second; it is an illusion, a dream, causing regret and sorrow.
Since the human heart desires immortality, it can receive in one year’s union only the
tiniest pleasure within a fraction of a second, and a moment’s separation is like not
one year but many. For the arena of separation is broad. If only for a second,
separation inflicts years of destruction on the heart, since it yearns for eternity. For it
bodes of innumerable separations. As for physical and lowly loves, for them the past
and future are filled with separations.
While on the subject, we say this: O man! Do you want to make your brief and
useless life immortal, long, beneficial, and fruitful? Since such a wish is demanded by
humanity, spend your life on the way of the Truly Enduring One. For everything
turned to that Eternal One receives the manifestation of immortality.
Since everyone fervently desires long life and yearns for immortality; and since
there is a means of transforming this fleeting life into perpetual life and it is possible
to make it lengthy; for sure anyone who has not lost his humanity will seek out the
means and try to convert the possibility into reality and will act accordingly. Yes, the
means is this: work for God’s sake, meet with others for God’s sake, labour for God’s
sake; act within the bounds of “For God, for God’s sake, on account of God.”2 Then
all the moments of your life will be turned into years.
Alluding to this truth, verses of the Qur’an state that a single night such as the
Night of Power is the equivalent of a thousand months, that is,

1 See, Ibn al-Jawzi, al-Mudkhish, i, 385; al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, ii, 246.
2 See, Tirmidhi, Sunna, 15; Abu Da’ud, Qiyama, 60; Musnad, iii, 438, 440.

--- Sayfa 34 ---
34
around eighty years. The expansion of time, a tried principle among the people of
sainthood and reality, also alludes to this truth. For through its mystery, a few
minutes’ Ascension become many years and prove the existence of this truth and
demonstrate it in fact. The few hours of the Prophet’s (UWBP) Ascension had the
length, breadth, and comprehensiveness of thousands of years, for by way of it he
entered the world of eternity, and a few minutes of that world comprise thousands of
years of this world.
There are, besides this, the numerous occurrences of the expansion of time
experienced by the saints, constructed on this truth. It is related that some of them did
a day’s work in a single minute, and others performed a year’s duties in an hour,
while others recited the whole Qur’an in the space of a minute. Such veracious people
of truth would never knowingly stoop to lying. There can be no doubt that they
observed exactly the fact of the expansion of time,3 which has been thus numerously
and unanimously reported.
The expansion of time experienced in dreams is a sort confirmed by everyone.
Sometimes a day in the waking world, or many days, would be necessary to
experience the happenings, words, pleasures, and pains experienced in a minute’s
dream.
I n  S h o r t : For sure man is transitory, but he was created for immortality and
to be a mirror to the Eternal One, and he was charged with duties which produce
eternal fruits, and was given a form that is the means to manifesting the impresses of
an Eternal One’s eternal names. In which case, his true duty and happiness is to cling
with all his powers and faculties to the names of that Perpetually Eternal One within
the bounds of those things that please Him; it is to be turned towards Him, and to go
to Him. As man’s tongue utters “O Eternal One, You alone are Eternal!,” so his heart,
spirit, mind, and all his subtle faculties should declare:
“He is the Eternal One! He is Pre-Eternal and Post-Eternal! He is the Everlasting
and Perpetual! He is the One who is sought, the Beloved! He is the One wished for
and Worshipped!”

Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise!(2:32)
O our Sustainer! Do not take us to task if we forget or do wrong.(2:282)

3 The verses, “Said one of them: ‘How long have we stayed [here]?’ They said, ‘We have stayed
[perhaps] a day, or part of a day,’”(18:19) and, “So they stayed in their cave three hundred years, and
[some] add nine [more]”(18:25) point to the traversing of time, while the verse, “Verily a day in the
sight of your Sustainer is like a thousand years of your reckoning”(22:47) points to the expansion of
time.

--- Sayfa 35 ---
35

The Fourth Flash

The title, The Highway of the Practices of the Prophet was
considered appropriate for this treatise.

[The Imamate question is a matter of secondary importance, but
because of the excessive attention paid it, it was as though included
among the matters of belief and dealt with by the sciences of kala\m
and the principles of religion.1 Here, it is discussed partly in this
respect and partly in respect of its relevance to our basic duties
towards the Qur’an and belief.]

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
Now has come a prophet from among yourselves; it heavily weighs upon him
that you might suffer; full of concern is he for you, and full of compassion
and mercy towards the believers. * But if they turn away, say: God is enough
for me, there is no god but He. In Him have I placed my trust, for He is the
Lord and Sustainer of the Mighty Throne.(9:128-9) * Say: I ask no
recompense of you save love of close kin.(42:23)

We shall point out in two stations two of the many vast truths contained in these
glorious verses.

First Station

The first station consists of four points.

FIRST POINT
This describes the perfect compassion and mercy of God’s Noble Messenger
(Upon whom be blessings and peace) towards his community.

1 al-Iji, Kitab al-Mawaqif, iii, 331; Ahmad b. Muhammad, Kitab Usul al-Din, 269, 279

--- Sayfa 36 ---
36
According to sound narrations, when at the terror of the resurrection everyone
including the prophets will cry out for themselves, God’s Messenger (UWBP) will
demonstrate his pity and compassion2 by calling out: “My community! My
community!”3 As is affirmed by those who disclose the realities, when he was born,
his mother heard the same words among his supplications.4 Then the whole history of
his life, as well as the benevolence he taught demonstrate his perfect compassion and
clemency. Also, by evincing an infinite need for his community’s innumerable
prayers,5 he showed a boundless compassion, for he showed that because of it he was
concerned with the happiness of all of them. You can understand, therefore, how
lacking in gratitude and conscience it is not to observe the practices of so kind and
compassionate a leader.

SECOND POINT
Among the universal, general duties of his prophethood, God’s Noble Messenger
(Upon whom be blessings and peace) displayed great compassion in certain
particular, minor matters. Superficially, his behaving so kindly in such matters seems
unfitting for the supreme importance of the prophetic mission. But in reality, such
minor matters were the tips or samples of a chain that would be the means whereby a
universal, general function of prophethood would be fulfilled. The greatest
importance was therefore given to the sample for the sake of the mighty chain.
For example, the extraordinary gentleness God’s Messenger (UWBP) showed
towards Hasan and Husayn in their childhood and the great importance he gave them6
was not only out of love and natural kindness and family feeling, it was rather
because they were each the tip of a luminous thread of the office of prophethood, and
the source, sample, and index of a community of great consequence which would
receive the legacy of prophethood.
Indeed, the Messenger (UWBP) used to take Hasan (May God be pleased with
him) tenderly into his arms and kiss his head7 for the sake of the luminous, blessed,
Mahdi-like descendants who would spring from him, such as Shah Geylani, the
Ghawth al-A‘zam,8 who would be the inheritors of pro

2 See, Bukhari, Tawhid, 32; Muslim, Iman, 326.
3 Bukhari, Tawhid, 36; Tafsir Sura 17:5; Fitan, 1; Muslim, Iman, 326, 327; Tirmidhi, Qiyama, 10;
Darimi, Muqaddima, 8.
4 See, Suyuti, al-Khasa’is al-Kubra, i, 80, 85, 91; al-Nabhani, Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-’Alamin, 224,
227, 228.
5 See, Tirmidhi, Qiyama, 24.
6 See, Bukhari, Fada’il al-Ashab, 22; Muslim, Fada’il al-S˘ahaba, 56, 60.
7 See, Musnad, v, 47; al-Tabarani, al-Mu‘jam al-Kabir, iii, 32; xx, 274.
8 Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir Gilani, d. 561/1165-6. The eponymous founder of the Qadiri Order. (Tr.)

--- Sayfa 37 ---
37
phethood and would uphold the sacred Shari‘a of Muhammad. He saw with the eye of
prophethood the sacred services they would perform in the future, and applauded
them.9 He kissed Hasan’s head as a sign of approval and encouragement.
Also, he embraced Husayn (May God be pleased with him) and showed him
importance and tenderness on account of the illustrious Imams like Zayn al-‘Abidin
and Ja‘far al-Sadiq, and the numerous Mahdi-like luminous persons, the true
inheritors of prophethood, who would spring from his effulgent line, and for the sake
of the religion of Islam and office of prophethood.
Since with his heart with its knowledge of the Unseen, the Prophet Muhammad’s
(UWBP) luminous vision and future-penetrating eye observed from the Era of Bliss in
this world the Assembly of the Resurrection on the side of post-eternity, and from the
earth saw Paradise, and watched events which had occurred since the time of Adam
and were concealed in the dark veils of the past, and even beheld the vision of the All-
Glorious One, he surely saw the spiritual poles and the Imams who were to be the
inheritors of prophethood, and the Mahdis, who would follow on in the lines of Hasan
and Husayn. And for sure he would kiss their heads in the name of all of them. Yes,
Shah Geylani has a large part in his kissing Hasan’s head.

THIRD POINT
According to one interpretation, the verse:
Say: I ask of you no recompense save love of close kin(42:23)
has the meaning: “God’s Noble Messenger (UWBP) wants no reward for fulfilling the
duties of messengership; he wants only love for his family.”
If it is asked: According to this, it seems there is an advantage to be gained from
a family relationship. Whereas, according to the meaning of:
The most honoured of you in the sight of God is the most righteous of you,(49:13)
prophethood functions in respect of closeness to God, not of family relationships?
The Answer: With his vision that penetrated the Unseen, God’s Most Noble
Messenger (UWBP) saw that his family would become a light-giving tree in the world
of Islam. It would be from his family that the overwhelming majority of those persons
who would act as guides and preceptors instructing every level of the world of Islam
in human attainment and per

9 See, Ibn Maja, Muqaddima, 11; Musnad, iv, 172.

--- Sayfa 38 ---
38
fection would emerge. He divined that his community’s prayer for his family in the
final section of the prescribed prayers: “O God, grant blessings to our master
Muhammad and to the family of our master Muhammad, as You granted blessings to
Abraham and to the family of Abraham; indeed, You are Worthy of Praise, Most
Exalted”10 would be accepted. That is to say, just as the vast majority of the luminous
guides among the people of Abraham were prophets of Abraham’s family and line,11
so he saw in his community the spiritual poles of his family performing the
momentous duties of Islam, and in most of the paths and Sufi orders, like the prophets
of Israel.12 Therefore, being commanded to say: “Say: I ask of you no recompense
save love of close kin,” he wanted his community to love his family.
There are numerous narrations corroborating this fact. He repeatedly decreed: “I
leave you two things. If you adhere to them, you will find salvation: one is God’s
Book, the other is my Family.”13 For members of his family were the source and
guardians of his practices (Sunna) and were charged with complying with them in
every respect. This is why what was intended by this Hadith was adherence to the
Book and the Prophet’s practices. That is to say, in respect of the office of
messengership it was the Prophet’s (UWBP) practices that were sought from his
family. So no one who abandoned his practices could truly be a member of his family,
nor could such a person not be a true friend to them.14
Also, the reason he desired his community to gather round his family15 was that,
with God’s permission, he knew it was going to become very numerous in the course
of time, and that Islam was going to become weak. An extremely strong and large
mutually supportive group of people was therefore necessary to be the instrument
through which the Islamic world would progress spiritually and morally, with divine
permission. He thought of this and desired that his community should gather round
his family.
Indeed, even if the members of the Prophet’s (UWBP) family were not greatly in
advance of others in matters of belief and faith, they were still far ahead of them in
regard to submission, partiality, and partisanship. For they were followers of Islam by
nature, birth, and temperament. Even if natural partiality is weak and unworthy, or
unjustifiable even, it cannot be given

10 Bukhari, Anbiya’, 10; Muslim, Salat, 65-6.
11 See, Ibn al-Hajar, Fath al-Bari, xi, 162.
12 See, al-Munawi, Fayd al-Qadir, iv, 384; al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, ii, 83.
13 Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 31; Musnad, iii, 14, 17, 26.
14 See, al-Tabarani, Mu‘jam al-Awsad, iii, 338; Abu Da’ud, Fitan, 2; Musnad, ii, 133.
15 See, al-Bazzar, al-Musnad, ix, 343; al-Tabarani, al-Mu‘jam al-Kabir, iii, 45-6; xii, 34.

--- Sayfa 39 ---
39
up. So would it be possible for a person to give up his support for a truth to which all
his forefathers – who were most strong, most constant and true, and most illustrious –
had been bound, and through which they had won glory, and for which they had
sacrificed their lives, a truth the person clearly felt to be so fundamental and natural?
Thus, due to this intense partiality and natural submission, the Prophet’s (UWBP)
family accepted the least hint in favour of the religion of Islam as though it were a
powerful proof. For they were partial by nature. Others become partial only after
some powerful proof.

FOURTH POINT
In connection with the Third Point, we shall indicate briefly a matter that has
been disputed by the Shi‘ites and the Sunnis and has been magnified to such an extent
that it has been included in the books on doctrine, among the fundamentals of belief.16
The Sunnis say: “‘Ali (May God be pleased with him) was the fourth of the
Rightly-Guided Caliphs. Abu Bakr the Veracious (May God be pleased with him) was
superior to him and was more deserving of the Caliphate, therefore it passed to him
first.”17 While the Shi‘ites say: “It was ‘Ali’s right. An injustice was done to him. ‘Ali
was the most worthy of them all.” A summary of the arguments for their claims is
this. They say: “The Hadiths of the Prophet (UWBP) about ‘Ali,18 and with his title of
King of Sainthood his being the recognized authority of the vast majority of the saints
and spiritual paths, and his extraordinary knowledge, courage, and worship, and the
Prophet’s (Upon whom be blessings and peace) intense concern for him and towards
his descendants all show that he was the most worthy. The Caliphate was always his
right; it was seized from him.”
The Answer: The fact that ‘Ali (May God be pleased with him) followed the
first three Caliphs, whom he repeatedly acknowledged,19 and held the position of their
Shaikh al-Islam, refutes these claims of the Shi‘ites. Furthermore, the victories of
Islam and the struggles against its enemies in the time of the first three Caliphs and
the events in ‘Ali’s time, refute the Shi‘ites’ claims, again from the point of view of
the Islamic Caliphate. That is to say the Sunnis’ claim is rightful.
If it is said, there are two sorts of Shi‘ites, the Sainthood Shi‘a and the

16 See, al-Taftazani, Sharh al-’Aqa’id (Turk. tr. Süleyman Uludağ), 321.
17 See, Ahmad b. Hanbal, al-‘Aqida, i, 123; Ibn Abi ‘Izz, Sharh ‘Aqida al-Tahawiyya, i, 545, 548.
18 Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 19; Ibn Maja, Muqaddima, 11; Musnad, i, 84, 118; iv, 281.
19 See, Bukhari, Fada’il Ashab, 5; Abu Da’ud, Sunna, 7; Musnad, i, 106.

--- Sayfa 40 ---
40
Caliphate Shi‘a. Because they mixed hatred and politics the second group may have
been unjust, but the first group were not concerned with partisan politics. However,
the Sainthood Shi‘a joined the Caliphate Shi‘a. That is, some of the saints of the Sufi
orders looked on ‘Ali as superior and they endorsed the claims of the Caliphate Shi‘a.
The Answer: ‘Ali (May God be pleased with him) has to be considered in two
respects. One is from the point of view of his personal perfections and rank, and the
other is from the point of view of his representing the collective personality of the
Prophet’s (UWBP) family. As for this collective personality, it displays an aspect of
the Most Noble Messenger’s (UWBP) essential nature.
Thus, in regard to the first point, foremost ‘Ali himself and all the people of truth
gave precedence to Abu Bakr and ‘Umar.20 They saw their ranks as higher in the
service of Islam and closeness to God. As for the second point, as the representative
of the collective personality of the Prophet’s (UWBP) family, which represents an
aspect of the Muhammadan Truth, ‘Ali has no equal. The highly laudatory Hadiths
about ‘Ali21 look to this second point. There is a sound narration that corroborates
this: the Noble Messenger (UWBP) decreed: “The descendants of each prophet are
from himself. My descendants are those of ‘Ali.”22
The reason the Hadiths praising ‘Ali more than the other three Caliphs have
become so widespread is that the people of truth, that is, the Sunnis, spread many
narrations about him in response to the Umayyads and Kharijites attacking and
disparaging him unjustly. The other Rightly-Guided Caliphs were not subject to such
criticism and detraction, so no need was felt to spread Hadiths about them.
Furthermore, the Prophet (UWBP) saw with the eye of prophethood the grievous
events and internal strife to which ‘Ali would be exposed in the future, and in order to
save him from despair and his community from thinking unfavourably of him, he
consoled him and guided his community with significant Hadiths like “Whosever
master I am, ‘Ali too is his master.”23

20 See, al-Ghazali, Qawa’id al-‘Aqa’id, i, 228; al-Kalabazi, al-Ta‘arruf li-Madhhab Ahl
Tasawwuf, i, 57.
21 Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 19; Ibn Maja, Muqaddima, 11; Musnad, i, 84, 118; iv, 281.
22 Tabarani, al-Majma‘ al-Kabir, no: 2630; al-Haythami, Majma‘ al-Zawa’id, x, 333; al-Munawi,
Fayd al-Qadir, 223, no: 1717.
23 Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 19; Ibn Maja, Muqaddima, 11; Musnad, i, 84, 118, 119, 152, 331; iv, 281,
368, 370, 383; v, 347, 366, 419; al-Kattani, Nazm al-Mutanathir fi’l-Ahadith al-Mutawatir, 24; al-
Munawi, Fayd al-Qadir, vi, 218; Ibn Hibban, Sahih, ix, 42; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, ii, 130; iii, 134.

--- Sayfa 41 ---
41
The excessive love of the Sainthood Shi‘a towards ‘Ali (May God be pleased
with him) and – influenced by the Sufi Orders – their deeming him superior, does not
make them answerable to the degree of the Caliphate Shi‘a. For those who follow the
path of sainthood look towards their spiritual guides with love, and the mark of love is
excess;24 it wants to see the beloved as greater than his rank. And that is how it sees
him. Ecstatics may be forgiven excesses of love. So their deeming ‘Ali more worthy
because of their love may be excused on condition it does not turn into disparagement
of the other Rightly-Guided Caliphs and enmity towards them, and does not go
beyond the fundamental teachings of Islam.
As for the Caliphate Shi‘a, since political prejudice took a hold of them they
could not rid themselves of hatred and aggression, so forfeited their right to be
excused. Even, confirming the saying, “Not for love of ‘Ali, but out of hatred of
‘Umar,” since Persian national pride was wounded at ‘Umar’s hand,25 they showed
their revenge in the form of love of ‘Ali. So also ‘Amr ibn al-‘As’s rebellion against
‘Ali and ‘Umar ibn al-Sa‘d’s tragic war against Husayn26 aroused in the Shi‘a an
intense anger and enmity towards the name of ‘Umar.
The Sainthood Shi‘a have no right to criticize the Sunnis, for the Sunnis have not
decried ‘Ali, indeed, they love him sincerely. But they avoid the excessive love which
is described as dangerous in Hadiths.27 The Prophet’s (UWBP) praise of ‘Ali’s
followers in the Hadiths28 refers to the Sunnis. For it is the Sunnis among ‘Ali’s
followers who love him in a moderate fashion and are the people of truth. Just as
excessive love of Jesus (Upon whom be peace) is dangerous for Christians, so it has
been made clear in sound Hadiths that that sort of excessive love for ‘Ali is
dangerous.29
If the Sainthood Shi‘a say: “Once ‘Ali’s consummate spiritual attainments are
accepted, it is impossible to give precedence to Abu Bakr the Truthful.”
The reply: It was as though the personal perfections of Abu Bakr, the

24 Abu Da’ud, Adab, 113; Musnad, v, 194; vi, 450.
25 See, Ibn Sa‘d, al-Tabaqat al-Kubra, vi, 12, 21; al-Tabari, Tarikh al-‘Umam wa’l-Muluk, iii,
283, 289.
26 See, al-Tabari, Tarikh al-‘Umam wa’l-Muluk, iii, 298; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya wa’l-Nihaya, viii,
193.
27 Musnad, i, 160; Nasa’i, al-Sunan al-Kubra, v, 137; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iii, 132.
28 al-Tabarani, al-Mu‘jam al-Awsad, vi, 354; vii, 343.
29 Bukhari, Ta’rikh al-Kabir, ii, 257; Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Fada’il al-Sahaba: 1087, 1221, 1222; al-
Haythami, Majma‘ al-Zawa’id, ix, 133; Ibn al-Jawzi, al-‘Ilal il-Mutanahiya, i, 223.

--- Sayfa 42 ---
42
Supremely Veracious, and ‘Umar, the Supreme Distinguisher between True and False
(May God be pleased with them), had been placed in the pan of some scales together
with their achievements during their Caliphates, realized through their performance of
the duties inherited from the Prophet (UWBP), and in the other pan had been placed
‘Ali’s (May God be pleased with him) extraordinary personal perfections together
with the internal Caliphate struggles, which resulted from the tragic events he was
compelled to enter upon and were the object of suspicion and distrust, and the Sunnis
saw that Abu Bakr’s or ‘Umar’s or ‘Uthman’s (Dhi’l-Nurayn) pan weighed heavier,
and so they gave them precedence.
Moreover, as is proved in the Twelth and Twenty-Fourth Words, prophethood is
so elevated in comparison to sainthood that a tiny manifestation of it is superior to a
large manifestation of sainthood. In regard to this, the successes of the Supremely
Veracious and the Supreme Distinguisher between True and False during their
Caliphates was an indication for the Sunnis that their share in the legacy of
prophethood30 and the establishment of its laws had been divinely bestowed. Since
‘Ali’s personal perfections did not dismiss that greater share, which had been
inherited from the Prophet (UWBP), he acted as Shaikh al-Islam for Abu Bakr and
‘Umar, the two Illustrious Elders, in the time of their Caliphates, and esteemed them.
How should the Sunnis, who love and revere ‘Ali, not love and revere the two Elders,
whom ‘Ali loved and revered sincerely? Let us make this truth clear be means of an
example:
One of the sons of a very rich man is given twenty batmans31 of silver and four
batmans of gold from his father’s legacy, and another is given five of silver and five
of gold. So if the third is given three of silver and five of gold, of course the last two
will receive less in quantity, but more in quality. Like this example, the lesser amount
of the two elders’ share of the gold of the truth of divine immediacy, which was
manifested in the legacy of prophethood and the establishment of its laws, would
weigh heavier than the great amount of divine proximity and the perfections of
sainthood which sprang from the jewel of sainthood. These points should also be
taken into account when weighing them up.32 But if they are compared with one
another from the point of view of personal courage, knowledge, and sainthood, the
matter takes on a different complexion.

30 See, Bukhari, Fada’il Ashab, 6; Muslim, Fada’il al-Sahaba, 15-16; Tirmidhi, Ruya, 9.
31 Batman: a weight varying from 5-30 lbs. [Tr.]
32 See, Tirmidhi, Ruya, 10; Abu Da’ud, Sunna, 8; Musnad, v, 44, 50.

--- Sayfa 43 ---
43
Also, there can be no comparison in respect of the collective personality of the
Prophet’s (UWBP) family, which was represented in the person of ‘Ali (May God be
pleased with him), and of the Muhammadan Truth, which was manifested as a total
inheritance in that collective personality. For contained in it was the mighty mystery
of the Prophet Muhammad himself (Upon whom be blessings and peace).
As for the Caliphate Shi‘a, they can claim no rights before the Sunnis other than
shame. For although they say they have tremendous love for ‘Ali (May God be
pleased with him), they disparage him, and their creed necessitates accusing him of
immorality. For they say that although Abu Bakr the Veracious and ‘Umar were
acting unjustly, ‘Ali feigned approval for them; according to Shi’i terminology, he
dissimulated. That is, he was frightened of them and behaved hypocritically.33 But it
is not love to hold that someone who was such a hero of Islam, won the title Lion of
Allah,34 and was the commander and guide of the faithful, was simulating love for
people he did not love out of fear and deception, and was feigning approval for them
in fear for more than twenty years, and was following wrongdoers. ‘Ali (May God be
pleased with him) would disclaim love that sort.
Thus, the people of truth’s creed in no way disparages ‘Ali, nor levels accusations
of immorality at him. It does not attribute cowardice where there was such remarkable
courage, but says that if ‘Ali had not considered the Rightly-Guided Caliphs to be
right, he would not have recognized them for a minute, nor obeyed them. It means
that since he thought them right and preferable, he made over his courage and striving
to the way of justice.35
I n  S h o r t :  Too much or too little of anything is not good. Moderation is the
middle way36 and has been chosen by the Sunnis. But, alas, Kharijite ideas have
infiltrated the Sunnis to an extent; so too addicts of politics and some atheists criticize
‘Ali. They say, God forbid, that he did not understand politics so was not entirely
worthy of the Caliphate and could not govern, and because of these unjust
accusations, ‘Alawis feel affronted at the Sunnis. Whereas Sunnis hold no principles
or basic beliefs that necessitate such ideas. Indeed, they prove the opposite. The
Sunnis cannot

33 See, al-Razi, I’tiqad Firaq al-Muslimin wa’l-Mushrikin, i, 60, 61; Ibn Taymiyya, Minhaj al-
Sunna, vi, 320.
34 See, Ahmad b. ‘Abdullah al-Tabari, al-Riyad al-Nadira, i, 245; Zaha’ir al-’Uqba, i, 92.
35 Ibn Abi al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, i, 130-2.
36 See, al-Bayhaqi, Shu’ab al-Iman, iii, 402; v, 261; al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, i, 470.

--- Sayfa 44 ---
44
be condemned because of ideas that come from Kharijites and atheists. Indeed, the
Sunnis are firmer followers of ‘Ali than the ‘Alawis. They mention ‘Ali in the
laudatory fashion he deserves in all their khutbas and prayers. And the saints and
purified scholars, the vast majority of whom belonged to the Sunni school, recognized
him as a spiritual guide and the king of sainthood.37 The ‘Alawis should ignore the
Kharijites and atheists who have deservedly earned the enmity of both the ‘Alawis
and the Sunnis, and not take sides against the people of truth. Some ‘Alawis even
abandon the Prophet’s (UWBP) Sunna out of spite for the Sunnis. Anyway, we have
said too much on this matter, for it has been discussed inordinately by the religious
scholars.
O Sunnis, who are the people of truth, and ‘Alawis, whose way is love of the
Prophet’s (UWBP) family! Quickly put an end to this meaningless, disloyal, unjust,
and harmful dispute between you. Otherwise the atheistic current which is now so
influential will make one of you a tool against the other, and use the one to crush the
other. And after defeating the one it will destroy the tool. As believers in divine unity,
it is essential that you leave aside unimportant matters that cause division, for there
are a hundred fundamental sacred bonds between you that enjoin brotherhood and
unity.

Second Station

The Second Station will be about the second truth of the verse,
But if they turn away, say: “God suffices me, there is no god but He; in Him
do I place my trust – He the Sustainer of the Throne [of Glory]
Supreme!”(9:129)38

37 See, Imam Rabbani, al-Maktubat, i, 134 (No: 251).
38 The Second Station was designated the Eleventh Flash.
*Note: Our Master, Hazret-i Ustad, said in explanation of these two phrases in the footnote of the
Sixth Chapter of the Twenty-Ninth Flash, which is in Arabic: “The degrees of these two phrases were
written in Arabic because they are reflection and remembrance of God rather than intellectual
knowledge..... ” The Fourth Ray, called Hasbiye Risalesi, about the verse “For us God suffices, and he
is the Best Disposer of Affairs,” was written subsequently in Turkish.

--- Sayfa 45 ---
45

The Fifth Flash

A treatise was to be written that would explain in fifteen degrees a highly
significant meaning of the verse, “For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of
Affairs,”(3:173) but it has been postponed for now since it would have been
concerned more with reflective thought and the recollection of God than with reality
and intellectual knowledge. In fact, the important treatise called The Stairway of the
Practices of the Prophet and Antidote for the Sickness of Innovation was originally
known as the Fifth Flash, but since it comprised eleven points, it was designated the
Eleventh Flash, and the Fifth Flash’s place remained unoccupied.

*   *   *

The Sixth Flash

Again, there was to have been a treatise explaining in fifteen or twenty degrees of
reflective thought the important truth stated in numerous verses of the Qur’an and
expressed by the phrase: “There is no power and strength save through God, the
Exalted, the Mighty.”1,2 Like the Fifth Flash, this consisted of degrees I had perceived
in myself and observed through reflection and remembrance of God in my journeying
of the spirit. Therefore, since it was more a means to illumination and spiritual
pleasure than intellectual knowledge and reality, it seemed appropriate to include it at
the end of the Flashes, which are about reality, rather than among them.

1 See, Bukhari, Tahajjud, 21; Nasa’i, Sahw, 83.
2 See Note above.

--- Sayfa 46 ---
46
The Seventh Flash

[This is about the seven sorts of predictions about the Unseen at the
end of Sura al-Fath.]

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
Truly did God fulfil the vision for His Messenger: You shall enter the Sacred
Mosque, if God wills, with minds secure, heads shaved, hair cut short, and
without fear. For He knew what you knew not, and He granted besides this, a
victory soon to come. * It is He who sent His Messenger with guidance and
the Religion of Truth, to proclaim it over all religion, and enough is God for
a Witness. * Muhammad is the Messenger of God; and those who are with
him are strong against unbelievers, [but] compassionate among each other.
You will see them bow and prostrate themselves [in prayer], seeking grace
from God and [His] good pleasure. On their faces are their marks, [being]
the traces of their prostration. This is their similitude in the Torah; and their
similitude in the Gospel is: like a seed which sends forth its blade, then
makes it strong; it then becomes thick, and it stands on its own stem, [filling]
the sowers with wonder and delight. As a result, it fills the unbelievers with
rage at them. God has promised those among them who believe and do
righteous deeds forgiveness, and a great reward.(48:27-9)
These three verses from Sura al-Fath contain many aspects of miraculousness.
The Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition’s miraculousness has ten universal aspects; the
aspect related to its giving news of the Unseen may be seen in seven or eight ways in
these three verses.

THE FIRST
“Truly did God fulfil the vision for His Messenger” to the end of the verse, gave
certain news of the conquest of Mecca before it happened. It occurred two years later
just as predicted.1

1 Ibn Hisham, Sirat al-Nabawiyya, v, 69; Ibn Sa‘d, al-Tabaqat al-Kubra, ii, 139, 146.

--- Sayfa 47 ---
47
THE SECOND
“And He granted besides this, a victory soon to come” is stating that although the
Truce of Hudaybiya was apparently opposed to Islam’s interests and the Quraysh
were victorious to an extent, in reality it was a great victory and the key to further
conquests. For with the Truce the physical sword was temporarily hung up, but the
flashing diamond sword of the Qur’an was unsheathed, and it conquered minds and
hearts. As a result of it, the two sides mixed with one another. The virtues of Islam
and lights of the Qur’an rent the veils of obduracy and tribalism and prevailed. For
example, people like Khalid ibn al-Walid, a brilliant warrior, and ‘Amr ibn al-‘As, a
brilliant politician, who could not accept defeat, were defeated by the Qur’anic sword
manifested through the Truce of Hudaybiya.2 They submitted in perfect obedience to
Islam in Medina, and Khalid became a “Sword of Allah;” a sword in the conquests of
Islam.
An Important Question: What was the reason the Companions of the Noble
Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace), the Glory of the World and Beloved
of the Sustainer of All the Worlds, were defeated by the idolators at the end of Uhud
and beginning of Hunayn?3
The Answer: Among the idolators were many persons like Khalid who in the
future would be equal to the leading Companions of that time. Therefore, so as not to
degrade them entirely in the view of the future, which for them would be glorious and
honourable, divine wisdom gave them in the past immediate recompense for their
future good works and did not completely destroy their pride. That is to say, the
Companions of the past were defeated by the Companions of the future, so that the
future Companions would enter Islam, not through fear of the flashing sword but
through zeal for the flash of truth, and so that they and their natural valour should not
be brought low.

THE THIRD
The words, “and without fear” say this: “You shall circumambulate the Ka‘ba in
complete safety.” However at that time the majority of the nomadic peoples of the
Arabian Peninsula were hostile, and most of the environs of Mecca and the tribe of
Quraysh, enemies. By predicting: “Soon you shall circumambulate the Ka‘ba without
fear,” it was indicating and

2 Ibn Hisham, Sirat al-Nabawiyya, iv, 7; Ibn Sa‘d, al-Tabaqat al-Kubra, iv, 252.
3 See, Bukhari, Maghazi, 54; Jihad, 52, 61, 97, 167; Muslim, Jihad, 79; Tirmidhi, Jihad, 15.

--- Sayfa 48 ---
48
foretelling that the Arabian Peninsula would submit and all the Quraysh enter Islam
and total security be established. And it all occurred exactly as predicted.4

THE FOURTH
“He it is who sent His Messenger with guidance and the Religion of Truth, to
proclaim it over all religion” predicts with complete certainty that the religion which
the Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) brought would triumph
over all religions. However at that time Christianity, Judaism, and Zoroastrianism had
hundreds of millions of adherents and were the official religions of such world-
dominant states as Rome, China, and Persia, which had hundreds of millions of
subjects, and Muhammad the Arabian was unable to subdue his own small tribe even.
Yet it is foretelling that the religion he brought would triumph over all religions and
be victorious over all states. And it does this most clearly and categorically. The
future confirmed this prediction, with the sword of Islam extending from the Pacific
Ocean in the east to the Atlantic Ocean in the west.

THE FIFTH
“Muhammad is the Messenger of God, and those who are with him are strong
against unbelievers, [but] compassionate among each other. You will see them bow
and prostrate themselves.” The beginning of this verse foretells explicitly the lofty
qualities and virtues that made the Companions the most elevated of humankind after
the prophets. And allusively it indicates the Rightly-Guided Caliphs, who would
succeed to the Prophet’s (UWBP) position after his death through the institution of
the Caliphate, and foretells the fine attributes5 which were what most distinguished
each of them and marked them out. It is as follows:
“And those who are with him” alludes to Abu Bakr the Veracious, who was
distinguished by being among the Prophet’s (UWBP) special followers and party to
his conversation, and again being included among his special followers by being the
first to die. While “are strong against the unbelievers” points to ‘Umar, who in the
future would cause the countries of the globe to tremble at his conquests, and with his
justice would descend on tyrants like a thunderbolt. And “compassionate among each
other” gives news of ‘Uthman, who in the future when the most serious dissension
was being fomented, would sacrifice his own life and spirit out of his perfect

4 Ibn Hisham, Sirat al-Nabawiyya, v, 69; Ibn Sa‘d, al-Tabaqat al-Kubra, ii, 139, 146.
5 See, Ahmad b. Hanbal, Fada’il al-Sahaba, i, 434; Baghawi, Ma‘alim al-Tanzil, iv, 206.

--- Sayfa 49 ---
49
compassion so that the blood of Muslims should not be spilt; he preferred to be
martyred wrongfully while reading the Qur’an. And “You will see them bow and
prostrate themselves [in prayer], seeking grace from God and [His] good pleasure”
tells that with his complete worthiness to undertake the Caliphate and government,
and his heroism, and his choosing perfect asceticism, worship, poverty, and frugality,
and whose bowing and prostrating in prayer was corroborated by everyone, ‘Ali (May
God be pleased with him) was not responsible for his position in the future and the
wars and strife in which he was involved, and that his intention and wish were for
divine favour.

THE SIXTH
The phrase, “This is their similitude in the Torah” makes predictions concerning
the Unseen in two respects:
T h e  F i r s t : It cites these qualities of the Companions that are mentioned in
the Torah, which for an unlettered person like the Prophet (Upon whom be blessings
and peace) belonged to the World of the Unseen. Yes, as described in the Nineteenth
Letter, the Torah contains the following lines about the Companions of the Prophet
who was to come at the end of time: “The banners of the holy ones are together with
them.”6 That is, his Companions would be pious worshippers and righteous saints, so
that they were described as “the holy ones,” that is, “sacred.” The Torah has been
corrupted through translation into numerous languages, yet with many of its verses it
still corroborates the words of Sura al-Fath, “This is their similitude in the Torah.”
T h e  S e c o n d aspect of it giving news of the Unseen is this: with this phrase it
is predicting that the Companions and the generation that followed them would
achieve such a degree of worship that the luminosity of their spirits would shine in
their faces, and that marks would be apparent on their foreheads, like a stamp of
sainthood, caused by their repeated prostrations. And indeed the future proved this
brilliantly, with complete clarity and certainty. Many prominent persons caught up in
that strange dissension and political upheaval demonstrated the mystery of “This is
their similitude in the Torah,” who day and night performed prayers of a thousand
rakats like Zayn al-‘Abidin, and performed the morning prayer with the ablutions of
the previous evening, like Tavus al-Yamani.7

6 Deuteronomy, 33:2; Halabi, al-Sirat al-Halabiya, i, 218; Yusuf Nabhani, Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-
’Alamin, 113.
7 See, Ghazali, Ihya ‘Ulum al-Din, i, 359; al-Dhahabi, Siyar A‘lam Nubala’, iv, 547.

--- Sayfa 50 ---
50
THE SEVENTH
“And their similitude in the Gospel is: like a seed which sends forth its blade,
then makes it strong; it then becomes thick, and it stands on its own stem, [filling] the
sowers with wonder and delight. As a result, it fills the unbelievers with rage at
them.” These phrases give news of the Unseen in two respects:
T h e  F i r s t  is the prediction in the Gospel about the Companions, which for
the unlettered Prophet (UWBP) belonged to the World of the Unseen.
Yes, the Gospels contain such verses as, “With him is a staff of iron, and his
community is like him”8 describing the Prophet who was to come at the end of time.
That is, a Prophet would come who unlike Jesus (UWP) would wield the sword and
be charged with waging jihad, as would his Companions. The one bearing “the staff
of iron” would be the World’s Ruler. For in another place in the Gospels it says: “I
am going so that the Ruler of the World may come.”9 That is to say, the World’s
Ruler will come. It is thus understood from these two verses in the Gospels that at the
outset the Companions would be few and weak, nevertheless they would sprout like
seeds, grow, thicken, and find strength. Then when about to be overwhelmed and
smothered by the rage this caused the unbelievers, they would subjugate mankind
with their swords and prove that the Messenger (UWBP), their leader, was the Ruler
of the World. These verses express exactly the meaning of the above verses of Sura
al-Fath.
S e c o n d  A s p e c t : The verses predict the following: due to their weakness
and small number the Companions accepted the Pact of Hudaybiya, but within a short
time they grew and acquired such strength and loftiness that, planted by the Hand of
Power in the field of the face of the earth, they multiplied in most elevated, powerful,
fruitful, and plentiful fashion. This was true in comparison with the shoots of mankind
at that time, since these latter were short, weak, defective, and scant due to neglect
and heedlessness. The Companions would grow strong causing illustrious
governments to rage at them in envy, jealousy, and anger. The future verified this
prediction in most brilliant fashion.
The prediction also make the following further slight hint: it indicates through the
word “forgiveness” that, although while praising the Companions’ excellent qualities
they should have been promised the greatest rewards, in the future they would commit
serious errors due to strife. For

8 Nabhani, Hujjat Allah ‘ala’l-‘Alamin, 99, 114.
9 John, 16:7; Halabi, al-Sirat al-Halabiya, i, 214.

--- Sayfa 51 ---
51
forgiveness indicates the existence of faults. At that time it would be forgiveness, the
greatest bounty, that the Companions would want. The highest reward would be
absence of punishment, thanks to forgiveness. The word “forgiveness” both makes
this subtle allusion, and it is connected with the verse at the beginning of the Sura,
“That God may forgive you your faults of the past and those to follow.”(48:2) By
giving the good news of forgiveness at the start of the Sura not for true sins, since the
Messenger (UWBP) was exempt from sin and did not commit them, but for a
meaning in keeping with the rank of prophethood, and by giving the good news of
forgiveness for the Companions at the end of the Sura, it adds a further subtlety to the
allusion.
Of the ten aspects of miraculousness contained in the above-mentioned three
verses at the end of Sura al-Fath, we have discussed here only the aspect concerning
predictions about the Unseen, and of the numerous parts of that aspect, only seven. A
flash of miraculousness in the positioning of the letters of the last verse is alluded to
at the end of the Twenty-Sixth Word, which is about divine determining and man’s
faculty of will. This last verse looks to the Companions both with its sentences, and to
their situations with its phrases, and it describes their attributes with its words10 and
letters; so too with the repetition of the number of letters it alludes to classes of
famous Companions like the Companions of Badr, of Uhud, of Hunayn, of the Bench,
and of Ridwan. Moreover, it expresses many further mysteries through ‘coincidences’
and abjad reckoning, which are branches of the science of jafr and keys to it.

Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32)

10 See, Ahmad b. Hanbal, Fada’il al-Sahaba, i, 434; Ibn al-Jawzi, Zad al-Masir, vii, 446; Suyuti,
al-Durr al-Manthur, vii, 544; Alusi, Ruh al-Ma’ani, xxvi, 129; Baghawi, Ma‘alim al-Tanzil, iv, 206.

--- Sayfa 52 ---
52
[Predictions similar to these concerning the Unseen indicated by the
allusive meanings of the verses at the end of Sura al-Fath will be
discussed here briefly, also in connection with their allusive meanings.]

A Postscript

And We should have shown them the Straight Way. * All who obey God and
the Messenger are in the company of those on whom is the grace of God – of
the Prophets, the Veracious, the Witnesses [or Martyrs], and the Righteous:
And how goodly a company are these!(4:68-9)
We shall point out two of the thousands of fine points expounding these verses.

FIRST POINT
Just as the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition expresses truths through its explicit,
clear meanings and senses, so it expresses many allusive meanings through its styles
and manner of exposition. Each of its verses contains numerous levels of meanings.
The Qur’an proceeds from all-encompassing knowledge, so all its meanings may be
intended. Its meanings are not restricted to one or two like man’s speech, the product
of his limited mind and individual will.
In consequence of this, innumerable truths contained in the Qur’an’s verses have
been expounded by Qur’anic commentators, and there are many more that have not
been expounded by them. In addition to its explicit meanings, much significant
knowledge is contained in its letters in particular and in its allusions.

SECOND POINT
With the terms, “of the Prophets, the Veracious, the Witnesses [or martyrs], and
the Righteous: And how goodly a company are these!”, the verse describes the people
of the Straight Path and the groups of the Prophets, the caravan of the Veracious, the
community of the Martyrs, the class of the Righteous, and those who follow them.
These are the members of mankind who truly receive the divine bounties.
Furthermore, having indicated explicitly the most perfect of those five groups in the
world of Islam, it indicates their leaders and chiefs by mentioning their well-known
attributes. In addi

--- Sayfa 53 ---
53
tion, with a flash of miraculousness giving news of the Unseen, it specifies one aspect
those chiefs’ positions in the future.
Yes, “of the Prophets” looks explicitly to the Messenger (Upon whom be
blessings and peace), and the phrase “the Veracious” looks to Abu Bakr the
Veracious. It also indicates that he would be second after the Messenger (Upon whom
be blessings and peace) and first to succeed him, and be known by the special title of
Veracious and be seen at the head of all honest and upright people. Then “the
Witnesses [or Martyrs]” refers to ‘Umar, ‘Uthman, and ‘Ali (May God be pleased
with all of them) together. It intimates that the three of them would succeed to the
Caliphate after the Veracious One, and that the three of them would be martyred and
the merits of martyrdom added to their other virtues.
“The Righteous” alludes to distinguished persons like the Companions of the
Bench, and of Badr and Ridwan. While with its explicit meaning, “And how goodly a
company are these!” encourages others to follow them, and with its implicit meaning,
by showing the generation that succeeded them to be honoured and illustrious, it
alludes to Hasan (May God be pleased with him), who as the fifth Caliph affirmed the
Hadith “After me the Caliphate will last thirty years”1 – in order to show its great
value despite its brief duration.
I n  S h o r t : Similarly to the verses at the end of Sura al-Fath, which look to the
four Rightly-Guided Caliphs, affirming them, these verses look in part and allusively
to their future positions in a way that gives news of the Unseen. Flashes of this sort of
miraculousness, the disclosing of facts about the Unseen, which is one sort of the
Qur’an’s miraculousness, are so numerous as to be incalculable. Literalist scholars
limit them to forty or fifty verses because of their superficial view, but in reality they
number more than a thousand. Sometimes a single verse has four or five aspects
giving news of the Unseen.

O our Sustainer! Do not take us to task if we forget or do wrong.(2:286)
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught
us; indeed You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32)

1 al-Munawi, Fayd al-Qadir, iii, 509; Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr, al-Tamhid, viii, 67. See also, Tirmidhi,
Fitan, 48; Musnad v, 220. 221; al-‘Albani, Sahih Jami‘ al-Saghir, no: 3336.

--- Sayfa 54 ---
54
A Second Explanation
of the Above Postscript1

In addition to corroborating the predictions about the Unseen at the end of Sura
al-Fath, the verse, “All … are in the company of those on whom is the grace of God –
of the Prophets, the Veracious, the Witnesses, and the Righteous: how goodly a
company are these!”(4:69) elucidates what is meant by the people of the Straight Path
and the verse “the path of those whom you have blessed”(1:7) and describes the
luminous, large, familiar, attractive caravan travelling the lengthy road leading to
eternity. It vigorously urges the believers and the intelligent to join, follow, and
accompany it. In addition to its explicit meaning, like the verses at the end of Sura al-
Fath, this verse indicates through allusive and figurative meanings – called in rhetoric
ma’arid al-kalam2 and mustatba’at al-tarakib3 – the four Rightly-Guided Caliphs and
Hasan (May God be pleased with him), the fifth Caliph. It gives news of the Unseen
in several respects, as follows:
Just as the above verse states through its explicit meaning that the caravan of the
Prophets, the group of the Veracious, the community of the Martyrs and Witnesses,
the category of the Righteous, and the class of the generation following the
Companions are the people of the Straight Path and those among mankind who
receive elevated divine bounties, and are ‘the doers of good;’ so too it indicates in a
manner predicting the Unseen that the best and most excellent of those groups are
found in the World of Islam, like this: it points to the heirs of the Prophets who follow
on in succession through the mystery of the legacy of the Messenger of the End of
Time’s (UWBP) prophethood, and to the caravan of the Veracious who follow on
from the source of veracity of the Strictly Veracious One, and to the convoy of the
Martyrs, who are bound through the rank of martyrdom to three of the Rightly-
Guided Caliphs, and to the community of the Righteous, who are tied to it through the
mystery of “And those who believe and do good works,”(2:82, etc.) and to the
categories of the generation following

1 My brothers have written down both explanations, since they found them useful. Otherwise one
of them would have been sufficient.
2 See, Ibn Manzur, Lisan al-’Arab, vii, 183; Qurtubi, al-Jami‘ bi-Ahkam al-Qur’an, x, 191, 199.
3 See, Ibn Hajar, Fath al-Bari, i, 406; al-Munawi, al-Ta‘arif, i, 32, 55; al-Hamawi, al-Adhanat al-
Adab, ii, 194.

--- Sayfa 55 ---
55
the Companions, who represented the mystery of “Say: If you do love God, follow
me: God will love you and forgive you your sins; for God is Oft-Forgiving, Most
Merciful”(3:31) and were in the company of the Companions and the Rightly-Guided
Caliphs. So too, through its allusive meaning, it gives news through the epithet “and
the Veracious” that Abu Bakr the Veracious would succeed to the Noble Messenger’s
(Upon whom be blessings and peace) position after him, and would be Caliph, famous
among the Muslim community with the title Strictly Veracious, and be the chief of the
caravan of “the Veracious.” With the phrase “the Martyrs” it foretells the martyrdom
of three of the Rightly-Guided Caliphs, and that after the Veracious there would three
martyr Caliphs. Because “Martyrs (Shuhada’)” is plural and the lowest number [in
Arabic grammar] of the plural is three. That means, ‘Umar, ‘Uthman, and ‘Ali (May
God be pleased with them) would lead Islam after the Veracious One and would
suffer martyrdom. And it occurred exactly as predicted.
Also, it is giving news through the phrase “the Righteous” that people like the
People of the Bench who performed good works, acts of worship, and feared God,
and are commended in the Torah, would be numerous in the future. While the phrase
“How goodly a company are these!” praises the generation that followed the
Companions and accompanied them in learning and good works. And in addition to
showing that to accompany those four groups on the road to eternity is good and
commendable, it indicates the importance of Hasan’s brief period as Caliph, as was
confirmed by the Messenger’s (UWBP) prophecies: “The Caliphate after me will last
thirty years,”4 and, “This my grandson Hasan is master of men, by means of whom
God will reconcile two great groups,”5 thus quelling dispute and conflict. In this way
it indicates that Hasan would be a fifth Caliph succeeding the four Rightly-Guided
Caliphs. While through a device called in rhetoric mustatba^a\t al-tara\kêb, it alludes
to the fifth Caliph’s name with the phrase “How goodly (hasuna) a company are
these!”
There are many further mysteries like these allusive predictions, but since they
are outside our purpose, that door has not been answered for now. Numerous verses
of the All-Wise Qur’an give news of the Unseen in many respects. This sort of the
Qur’an’s predictions about the Unseen number thousands.

4 al-Munawi, Fayd al-Qadir, iii, 509; Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr, al-Tamhid, viii, 67. See also, Tirmidhi,
Fitan, 48; Musnad, v, 220, 221; al-‘Albani, Sahih Jami‘ al-Saghir, no: 3336.
5 Bukhari, Fitan, 20; Sulh, 9, Fada’il Ashab al-Nabi, 22, Manaqib, 25; Darimi, Sunna, 12;
Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 25; Nasa’i, Jum‘a, 27; Musnad, v, 38, 44, 49, 51.

--- Sayfa 56 ---
56
Conclusion

A miraculous, subtle point of the All-Wise Qur’an that is manifested through
‘coincidences’1 is as follows:
In the All-Wise Qur’an, the divine names of Allah, Merciful (Rahman),
Compassionate (Rahim), Sustainer (Rabb), and He (Hu) in place of Allah, are
mentioned approximately four thousand times in all. The second type of abjad,
reckoned according to the arrangement of the alphabet, makes the value of “In the
Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate” around four thousand also. Small
fractions of large numbers do not spoil ‘coincidence’, so have been disregarded. Also,
together with the two conjunctival waw’s within “Alif. Lam. Mim.”, it makes
approximately two hundred and eighty. In addition to coinciding with both the
approximately two hundred and eighty instances of the word Allah in Sura al-Baqara,
and the around two hundred and eighty verses of the Sura, if reckoned with the
second sort of abjad reckoning, it again makes about four thousand. That coincides
both with the five famous divine names mentioned above, and if the fractions are
disregarded, with the numerical value of “In the Name of God, the Merciful, the
Compassionate.” That is to say, according to this mystery of ‘coincidence,’ “Alif.
Lam. Mim.” is both a title denoting the One it signifies, and a name for al-Baqara, and
a name of the Qur’an, and a concise index of both of them, and a sample, summary
and seed of both, and a summary of “In the Name of God, the Merciful, the
Compassionate.”
According to the well-known Abjad system, “In the Name of God, the Merciful,
the Compassionate” is equal in numerical value to the name of Sustainer. Similarly, if
the doubled Ra in “the Merciful, the Compassionate (ar-Rahman, ar-Rahim)” is
counted twice, it becomes nine hundred and ninety and a key to numerous important
mysteries – with its nineteen letters, the key to nineteen thousand worlds.
Among the subtle ‘coincidences’ of the word Allah in the Qur’an of Miraculous
Exposition is that in the whole Qur’an eighty instances of the

1 ‘Coincidence’ (tevâfuk): the correspondence of letters or words in lines or patterns on one or
several pages. (Tr.)

--- Sayfa 57 ---
57
word at the beginning of the bottom line of pages correspond to each other in patterns.
So too do eighty instances of the name at the end of the bottom line look to each other
in the same way. And again fifty-five instances of the word Allah right in the centre
of the bottom line fall one on top of the other, uniting as though to make a single
instance of the name. At the start of the last line a single and sometimes three-letter
word numbers, with gaps, twenty-five, thus when added to the coinciding fifty-five at
the middle of the lines, makes a ‘coincidence’ of eighty; this makes a coincidence of
eighty both at the beginning of the line and at the end. Could such a subtle, fine,
orderly, symmetrical, miraculous ‘coincidence’ be without wisdom or subtlety? God
forbid, such a thing could not be! Most certainly, significant treasuries could be
opened up with the tip of these coincidences.

O our Sustainer! Do not take us to task if we forget or do wrong.(2:282)
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32)

                                                                             S a i d  N u r s i

*   *   *

The Eighth Flash

This has been published in printed editions of Sikke-i Tasdik-i Gaybî (The
Ratifying Stamp of the Unseen), and in hand-duplicated copies of The Flashes
Collection.

--- Sayfa 58 ---
58
The Ninth Flash

[Not everyone should read this Flash, for some people will not
discern the subtle errors of the Unity of Existence, and are not in need
of it.]

In His Name!
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.(17:44)

My Dear, Loyal, Sincere, Conscientious Brother!
The reason I did not write a separate letter to my brother Abdülmecid,1 was that I
considered the letters I had written to you to be sufficient. After Hulûsî,2 Abdülmecid
is a valuable brother for me and a student. Every morning and evening he is present in
name in my prayers together with Hulûsî, sometimes being mentioned first. First
Sabri,3 then Hakkı Efendi4 profit from the letters I write you. I do not write them
separate letters either. Almighty God made you a blessed elder brother to them.
Correspond with Abdülmecid in my place; he should not worry, for after Hulûsî, I
think of him.

1 Abdülmecid (‘Abd al-Majid) was Bediuzzaman’s younger brother. He was a teacher of the
religious sciences, then a Mufti, and translated parts of the Risale-i Nur into Arabic, and Isharat al-
I‘jaz and Mesnevi-i Nuriye from Arabic into Turkish. He died in 1967. (Tr.)
2 Hulûsi Yahyagil was one of the first students of the Risale-i Nur, and was from Elazığ in eastern
Turkey. When serving as a captain in the army in 1929 he visited Bediuzzaman, and in Bediuzzaman’s
words, “his zeal and seriousness were the most important reason for the last of the Words (Sözler) and
the Letters (Mektûbat) being written.” (Tr.)
3 Sabri Arseven. Known as Santral Sabri, he was one of Bediuzzaman’s most important students
in Barla and was also imam of the neighbouring village of Bedre. He died in 1954. (Tr.)
4 Hakkı Tığlı. He was from Eğridir and was imprisoned together with Bediuzzaman in Eskişehir
in 1935. He also acted as Bediuzzaman’s lawyer. (Tr.)

--- Sayfa 59 ---
59
YOUR FIRST QUESTION
You ask a confidential question about one of your forebears signing himself, “al-
Sayyid Muhammad.” My brother, it isn’t possible for me to give a scholarly answer to
this or to research into it. However, I told my companions: “Hulûsi resembles neither
the present-day Turks, nor the Kurds. I see other qualities in him.” They agreed with
this. We said in accordance with the saying, “No talent is needed to receive God’s
gifts,” the nobility observed in Hulûsi is a divine gift. Also, as you know, God’s
Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) has two families. One
consists of his descendants, and the other is the family of his prophethood’s luminous
collective personality. You certainly belong to the latter, and I am of the opinion,
though unsubstantiated, that in respect of his first family, your forefather’s signature
was not without reason.
My Dear Brother!

A SUMMARY OF YOUR SECOND QUESTION
Muhyiddin al-‘Arabi5 said: “The spirit’s createdness consists of its unfolding.”
With this question you are compelling a powerless wretch like me to contest an
awesomely brilliant scholar of reality and genius of the occult sciences like
Muhyiddin al-‘Arabi. However, relying on the teachings of the Qur’an I can attempt
the discussion; even if I am only a fly, I can fly higher than that eagle.
My brother! You should understand that Muhyiddin would not deceive, but he
could be deceived. He was rightly-guided, but could not act as a guide in all his
works. What he saw was correct, but it was not reality. The reality of man’s spirit,
about which you ask, is explained in the Twenty-Ninth Word, the discussion about the
spirit.
Yes, in respect of its nature, the spirit is a law proceeding from the divine
command, but it is a living law clothed in external existence and possessing external
existence. Muhyiddin thought of it only from the point of view of its essential nature.
His way of the Unity of Existence considers the existence of things to be imaginary.
He had wondrous visions and unveiled the realities, but since he had chosen an
independent way, he was compelled to apply, artificially and with forced
interpretations, certain Qur’anic verses to his way and observations, thus marring the
clarity of the

5 Muhyi al-Din ibn al-’Arabi, an eminent scholar and thinker who profoundly influenced the
development of Sufism. He was born in Andalusia in 560 A. H. and died in Damascus in 638 A. H.
Among his best known works are Fusus al-Hikam and al-Futuhat al-Makkiya.

--- Sayfa 60 ---
60
verses. In others of his treatises he expounds the straight highway of the Qur’an and
of the Sunnis. He was a holy man who held a position all his own, and he was one of
the well-accepted, but he exceeded the mark in his unbalanced disclosures and in
many matters opposed the majority of the learned authorities.
It is because of this that although he was such an elevated and wondrous spiritual
pole, unequalled down the ages, it is as though his particular way was very short and
restricted to Sadruddin al-Qunawi.6 His works are only rarely benefited from by those
on the straight path. Many of the authoritive scholars do not encourage study of those
valuable works and some of them even prevent it.
Lengthy study and a very lofty, broad view is needed to show the fundamental
differences together with their sources between Muhyiddin’s way and that of the
exacting scholars. Yes, the differences are so fine and profound and the sources, so
elevated and extensive that Muhyiddin has not been censured and has continued to be
accepted. For if in regard to thought, scholarship, and illumination the difference and
sources had become apparent, it would have been very humiliating for him, and he
would have been seen to be in serious error. Since the difference is so profound, we
shall try to show it and the sources briefly by means of a comparison, and
Muhyiddin’s errors in the matter.
For example, the sun appears in a mirror. The mirror both contains the sun and is
qualified by it. That is to say, in one respect the sun is present in the mirror, and in
another it adorns the mirror, becoming a brilliant colour, attribute and quality of it. If
the mirror had been a camera, it would have fixed the sun’s image on photographic
paper. In these cases, the sun in the mirror, and its semblance on the photographic
paper, and its aspect that adorns the mirror and becomes like a quality of the mirror,
are other than the actual sun. They are not the sun, but the sun’s manifestation which
has taken on another existence. As for the existence of the sun that is visible in the
mirror, even if it is not identical with the sun that is visible outside, since it is tied to it
and points to it, it is supposed to have the same existence.
In consequence of this, it may be said: “There is nothing apart from the actual sun
in the mirror,” meaning that the mirror contains it and intending the sun’s external
existence in the mirror. But if it is said that the sun’s extended reflection, which has
become like an attribute or quality

6 Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi (1209-74). One of Ibn al-‘Arabi’s foremost students, he wrote a number
of works on Sufism, among which is al-Nusus fi Tahqiq al-Tawr al-Makhsus.

--- Sayfa 61 ---
61
of the mirror, and its image which has been transposed to the photographic paper is
the sun, it is wrong; it is an error to say: “There is nothing in them other than the sun.”
For there is the reflection on the mirror’s shining face and the image formed on its
back, and these have their own separate existences. For sure those existences are from
the sun’s manifestation, but they are not the sun. The human mind and imagination
resemble this example of the mirror, as follows:
The information in the mirror of man’s thought also has two faces: in one respect
it is knowledge, in another, it is known. If we suppose the mind to contain what is
known, then the known thing becomes something known by the mind; its existence is
something different to the mind. If we suppose the mind to be qualified by the thing,
it becomes an attribute or quality of the mind; then the thing becomes knowledge and
has an external existence. Even if the existence of the thing known is essential
(jawhari), it has an accidental external existence like the knowledge.
Thus, according to these two comparisons, the universe is a mirror. The true
nature of beings is also mirror-like; they are subject to divine creation through pre-
eternal power. In one respect, each being is a sort of mirror to one of the names of the
Pre-Eternal Sun, displaying its embroideries. The followers of Muhyiddin’s way
unveiled them only in respect of being mirrors and containers, revealing the similitude
of their existence in the mirror, from the point of view of denial. Supposing the
reflection to be identical with the thing reflected, they did not think of other levels.
They said: “There is no existent but He,” and were in error. They almost went as far
as denying the fundamental rule: “The reality of beings is constant.”
As for the people of reality, they have seen through the mystery of the legacy of
prophethood and the definite statements of the Qur’an that the embroideries and
inscriptions that come into being in the mirrors of things through divine power and
will are His works. They are “all from Him;” they are not “all Him.”7 Things have an
existence and their existence is constant to a degree. For sure it is weak compared to
that of the Necessary Existence, like an illusion or imagining, but through the Pre-
Eternal All-Powerful One’s creation, will, and power, it exists.
In the comparison, the sun in the mirror has an existence through its similitude
apart from its external existence. And its expanded reflection also, which gives colour
to and adorns the mirror, has an accidental and separate external existence. And the
sun’s image which is depicted on the

7 That is, everything is from Him; He creates everything. Not everything is Him so that it may be
said “There is no existent save Him.”

--- Sayfa 62 ---
62
photographic paper on the back of the mirror also has a separate and accidental
external existence.
Similarly, the inscriptions of beings, which appear through the manifestations of
the sacred divine names – occurring through will, choice, and power – in the mirror of
the universe and mirrors of the quintessential natures of things, have a created
existence separate from the Necessary Existence. And this existence has been given a
permanence through pre-eternal power. But if the connection were to be severed, all
things would at once cease to be. Because for their continued existence, all things are
every instant in need of their Creator’s preserving them. “The reality of things is
constant,” but it is constant and permanent only through His making it so.
Thus, Muhyiddin’s saying: “Spirit is not created; it is a reality proceeding from
the world of the divine command and from the attribute of will,” is contrary to many
clear statements of the Qur’an and Hadiths, and according to the investigation above,
he was confused, deceived, and had not seen the weak existences of things.
The places of manifestation of such divine names as Creator and Provider cannot
be illusory or imaginary. Since the names have a reality, their places of manifestation
also have an external reality.

YOUR THIRD QUESTION
You want instruction in the science of jafr that will be a key to it.
T h e  A n s w e r : We are not carrying out this work and service at our own wish
and through our own planning. A better will than ours governs it, over and above our
wills. The science of jafr is an absorbing and pleasurable occupation, but it busies us
and detains us from our true duties. It has often happened that some of the Qur’an’s
mysteries have been revealed through it as though it were a key, but on addressing
myself to them with real enthusiasm and enjoyment, they eluded me. I have
discovered two instances of wisdom in this:
The First: It may be discourteous towards the prohibition of “None knows the
Unseen save God.”
The Second: Teaching the Islamic community about the fundamental truths of
belief and the certain proofs of the Qur’an is a sacred service far exceeding in value
and merit such occult sciences as jafr. Their firm evidences and categorical proofs
allow no opportunity for exploitation, but occult sciences like jafr that are not bound
by any firm rules, and are open to abuse and exploitation by charlatans. In any event,
a little is bestowed whenever the need arises in this service of reality arises.
Among the keys of jafr, the easiest, and perhaps the purest and finest,

--- Sayfa 63 ---
63
are the various sorts of ‘coincidences.’ These proceed from the divine name of
Originator (Bedi’) and have been manifested in the name of Allah in the Qur’an and
adorn the works we have published. They have been pointed out to an extent in
several places in the work Kerâmet-i Gavsiye (The Wonders of al-Gawth al-A‘zam).
For instance, the ‘coincidences’ showing something in several aspects constitutes a
sign that has the strength of a proof. Sometimes with a number of deductions, a single
‘coincidence’ may form a proof. However, this is enough for now. If there is serious
need, it will be made known to you.

YOUR FOURTH QUESTION
That is, not your question but Imam Ömer Efendi’s, about a wretched doctor
saying that Jesus (UWP) had a father.8 With a lunatic interpretation, the doctor tried
to show that a Qur’anic verse justifies his saying this.
At one time, the unfortunate man was trying to create something with the
Disjointed Letters. He was working at it feverishly. Then I understood that he had
perceived from the atheists’ attitude that they were going to attempt to abolish the
Islamic script. He was struggling pointlessly as though to save the script in the face of
that flood. Now in this matter, and in the Second Matter, he saw the atheists’ terrible
attacks against the fundamentals of Islam, and I reckon he wanted to find a way of
compromising through meaningless interpretations like that. Since definite verses
like,
The similitude of Jesus before God is as that of Adam,(3:59)
state that Jesus (Upon whom be peace) had no father, no importance should be given
to what those who attempt to change such certain, veritable facts say with their
idiotic, forced interpretations. For they suppose it impossible that the law of human
reproduction be broken. But there is no law that has no exceptions and to which
individuals have not been subject. And there is no universal rule that has not been
breached by extraordinary individuals.
Since the time of Adam there has been no law to which there have been no
individual exceptions. Firstly, the law of reproduction was violated in

8 The extraordinary achievements of an extraordinary human being who is the leader of a quarter
of mankind, transformed humankind into angels of a sort, and left this world to make the heavens his
dwelling – these extraordinary achievements demand an extraordinary form of the law of reproduction.
For him to have been subject to that law in a dubious, unknown, unnatural, and even base way would
have been inappropriate for him; anyway there was no need for him to have been. Moreover, the
Qur’an’s explicit statements do not bear interpretation. How can the law of the angels’ sexuality, which
is outside reproduction and in no way can be broken for the sake of repairing the law of human
reproduction, which has been broken in a hundred ways – how can this law – together with such
powerful laws as the law of the explicit verses of the Qur’an be violated?

--- Sayfa 64 ---
64
regard to origins by the origins of the two hundred thousand animal species, and
brought to an end. That is, the two hundred thousand progenitors of the species, quite
simply like Adam’s, violated the law of reproduction. They were not born of a father
and mother and were given existence outside the law.
Furthermore, the greater part – innumerable individuals – of the hundred
thousand species we see with our eyes every spring are created outside that law, on
the surface of leaves and on putrified matter. So you can see just how unreasonable
someone is who cannot accept with his reason the exception of a single individual in
one thousand nine hundred years to a law that was violated and breached at its origin
and has been breached every year even, and clings to forced interpretations of the
definite statements of the Qur’an.
The things those wretches call natural laws are the laws called ‘adat Allah or
divine practices, which are a universal manifestation of the divine command and
dominical will, and which Almighty God changes for certain instances of wisdom. He
shows that His will and choice govern in everything and in every law. Certain
extraordinary individuals breach those practices. This truth He points out with His
decree, “The similitude of Jesus before God is as that of Adam.”(3:59)
Ömer Efendi’s S e c o n d  Q u e s t i o n concerning the doctor:
The doctor behaves extremely foolishly in this matter, so that to listen to what he
says or give it importance is very demeaning. The unfortunate wants to be half way
between belief and unbelief. I say the following, in reply not to his trifling words, but
to Ömer Efendi’s questioning:
The reason for the injunctions and prohibitions of the Shari‘a are the divine
command and divine prohibition. Advantages and instances of wisdom are to give
them weight, and may be the reason for the command or prohibition from the point of
view of the divine name of All-Wise.
For example, someone making a journey shortens the five daily prayers. There is
a reason for (illet) and a purpose or instance of wisdom in (hikmet) shortening them.
The reason is the journey, while the purpose is the difficulty involved. If on a journey
and there is no difficulty involved, the prayers are still shortened. If not on a journey,
and the person suffers a hundred difficulties in his own house, he may not shorten the
prayers. For the difficulty occurring on some journeys is sufficient as the purpose for
shortening the prayers, and is again sufficient for making the journey the reason.
Thus, in accordance with this rule of the Shari‘a, the Shari‘a’s injunctions do not
change due to purposes or instances of wisdom; they look to the true reasons. Apart
from the harm and illness caused by pork, as the

--- Sayfa 65 ---
65
doctor said, according to the saying, “The person who eats pork becomes piggish in
some ways;”9 the pig is not harmless like other domestic animals. Its meat causes
considerable harm rather than being beneficial. And it has been established medically
that its powerful fat is also harmful, even in the lands of Europe which are powerfully
cold, and is thus in fact and in meaning extremely harmful.
Instances of wisdom such as these are purposes for the divine prohibition and for
its being forbidden. The wisdom does not have to be present in every instance and all
the time. The reason does not change with the purpose and wisdom changing. If the
reason does not change, the injunction does not change. From this rule it may be seen
just how far from the spirit of the Shari‘a the unfortunate man was when he spoke. No
importance should be given to what he said regarding the Shari‘a. The Creator has
many animals in the form of unreasoning philosophers!

9 I wonder, does the fact that despite all the wondrous progress and civilization of Europe and its
advances in science and knowledge beneficial for humanity, its people eat pork, not play some part in
their becoming piggishly stuck in the darkness of materialism and naturalism, which are entirely the
reverse of that progress, knowledge, and attainment? I ask you. Evidence that man’s temperament is
affected by the food he eats is the saying: “The person who eats meat every day for forty days will
suffer anxiety and sorrow in his heart,” which has become proverbial.

--- Sayfa 66 ---
66
An Addendum to the Answer to Your Question about
Muhyiddin al-‘Arabi

Q u e s t i o n : Muhyiddin al-‘Arabi considered the Unity of Existence to be of
the highest level. Likewise, some of the great saints who took the path of love
followed him. However, you say that this matter is not of the highest level and is not
real; that it is rather the way, to a degree, of those who become intoxicated and
immersed in the divine, and of the people of love and ecstasy. So what, briefly, is the
high level of the affirmation of divine unity pointed out by the clear verses of the
Qur’an, through the mystery of the legacy of prophethood? Can you explain it?
T h e  A n s w e r : It is a hundred times beyond the ability of an utterly
powerless unfortunate like myself to judge those elevated stations with his limited
thought. I shall just explain one or two extremely brief points proceeding from the
effulgence of the All-Wise Qur’an. Perhaps they will be useful in understanding the
matter.

FIRST POINT
There are numerous reasons for becoming embroiled in the way of the Unity of
Existence. One or two of them may be described as follows:
The First Reason: Because they could not squeeze into their brains the
maximum degree of the creativity of dominicality, nor entirely establish in their hearts
the idea that everything, through the mystery of divine oneness, is held directly in the
grasp of dominicality and that all things have existence through divine power, choice,
and will, those who took that way were obliged to say that everything is either Him,
or does not have existence, or is imaginary, or is His manifestation or emanation.
The Second Reason: The mark of passionate love is to want never to be
separated from the beloved and to flee desperately from such separation; to tremble at
the thought of parting, to fear distance from the beloved as though fearing Hell, and to
abominate transience; to love union with the love of one’s own spirit and life, and to
yearn to be near to the beloved as though longing for Paradise. Thus, through
adhering to a manifestation of divine immediacy in all things, those who took the way
of the Unity of Existence disregarded separation and distance; supposing union and
meeting to be permanent, they said: “There is no existent but He;” through the

--- Sayfa 67 ---
67
intoxication of love and as demanded by the ecstasy of permanence, meeting, and
union, they imagined that in the Unity of Existence was a most pleasurable way of
illumination whereby they could be saved from the dreadfulness of separation.
That is to say, the first reason sprang from the fact that the hand of their intellects
was unable to reach up to some of the truths of belief, which were extremely broad
and elevated; they were unable to comprehend them, and had not developed
completely in regard to belief. While the source of the second reason was the
extraordinary unfolding of their hearts from the point of view of love, and their
wondrous expansion and breadth.
However, the supreme level of divine unity, which the Purified Ones – who were
the people of sobriety and great saints of the legacy of prophethood – saw through the
explicit expositions of the Qur’an is both extremely elevated, and shows both the
maximum level of dominicality and creativity and that all the divine names are real. It
preserves the Qur’an’s principles and does not spoil the balance of the decrees of
dominicality. For they say that together with the oneness of His essence and His being
free of space, with His knowledge Almighty God encompasses and determines
directly all things together with all their attributes, and through His will He chooses
and specifies them, and through His power He creates them. He creates and directs
the whole universe as though it were a single being.
He creates the huge spring with the ease of creating a flower. Nothing obstructs
anything else. There is no fragmentation in His regarding things. He is present
everywhere at the same instant through the disposal of His knowledge and power.
There is no division or distribution in His disposal. This mystery has been expounded
and proved decisively in the Sixteenth Word and in the Second Stopping-Place of the
Thirty-Second Word. Since, according to the rule, “Comparisons are incontestible,”
no attention should be paid to defects in comparisons and allegories, I shall set forth a
very faulty comparison so that the difference between the two ways may be
understood to a degree.
For example, let us imagine a huge, matchless, and wondrously adorned peacock
which can fly from east to west in an instant, and opens and closes its wings, which
stretch from north to south, are adorned with hundreds of thousands of fine patterns,
and in every single feather of which are included brilliant arts. Now, there are two
men observing it; they want to fly with the wings of the intellect and heart up to the
elevated qualities of this bird, to its wondrous decorations. One looks at the peacock’s
condition and form and the marvellous inscriptions of power on all its feathers; he
loves it with extreme passion and ardour; he in part abandons his attentive

--- Sayfa 68 ---
68
reflective thought, and clings to love. But then he sees that every day those lovable
decorations change and are transformed. Those objects of his love, which he
worships, disappear and are lost.
While he should have said that through true divine unity, which he could not
encompass with his mind, and absolute dominicality and the oneness of the divine
essence, they were the artistic decorations of an Inscriber possessing universal
creativity, he said instead – in order to console himself – that the spirit of the peacock
was so sublime that its maker was within it, or that the peacock had become him, and
that since its spirit had become one with its being, and its being had combined with its
outward appearance, its spirit’s perfection and being’s exaltedness displayed those
manifestations, displaying every moment a different inscription and beauty; it was not
a true creation through its will, but rather a manifestation, an emanation.
As for the other man, he said that those harmonious, orderly decorations so full of
art definitely required will, choice, intention, and purpose. It was impossible for there
to be a manifestation without will, an emanation without choice.
Yes, the peacock had a beautiful and elevated nature, but it could not be the doer;
it was passive. It could not become one with the active agent. Its spirit was fine and
exalted, but it could not be the creator and disposer, only receptive and a means. For
observedly in each of its feathers was an art performed with infinite wisdom and an
inscription and decoration made through an infinite power. And these could not occur
without will and choice. The arts indicating perfect wisdom within perfect power, and
perfect dominicality and mercy within perfect wisdom were not the work of some sort
of manifestation. The scribe who had written that gilded notebook could not be inside
it and be united with it. The notebook rather only had contact with the nib of the
scribe’s pen. In which case, the wondrous decorations of the similitude of the peacock
known as the universe were a gilded missive of the peacock’s Creator.
Now, look at the peacock and read the missive. Say to its Scribe: “What wonders
God has willed! Blessed be God! Glory be to God!” The person who supposes the
missive to be the scribe, or the scribe to be inside the letter, or fancies the missive to
be imagination, has surely mislaid his reason in the veils of love, and been unable to
see the true form of reality.
Among the varieties of passionate love, the one most giving rise to the way of the
Unity of Existence, is love of this world. When it turns into true love, love of this
world, which is temporary, is transformed into the Unity of Existence. A person loves
a personal beloved with worldly love. Then,

--- Sayfa 69 ---
69
unable to accept in his heart his beloved’s transience and ephemerality, he consoles
himself by saying that his beloved is a mirror reflecting the beauty of the True Object
of Love and Worship, and attaches himself to a reality, so acquiring permanence for
him through true love.
In the same way, when due to the constant blows of death and separation the
strange love of the person who takes the huge world and the universe in its totality as
his beloved is transformed into true love, he seeks refuge in the way of the Unity of
Existence in order to save that great beloved of his from death and separation. If he
has extremely powerful and elevated belief, it becomes a pleasurable, luminous,
acceptable level, as with those resembling Muhyi’d-Din al-‘Arabi. However, it is
possible he may fall into various abysses, embrace materiality, and become
submerged in causes. As for the Unity of Witnessing, it is harmless; it is an exalted
way of the people of sobriety.

O God, show us what is indeed the truth, and make us follow it!
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32)

--- Sayfa 70 ---
70
The Tenth Flash

Blows Dealt by Divine Compassion

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
On the Day when every soul will be confronted with all the good it has done,
and all the evil it has done, it willø wish there were a great distance between
it and its evil. But God cautions you [to remember] Himself. And God is full
of kindness to those who serve Him.(3:30)
One meaning of the above verse is to be expounded and explained by the blows
dealt by divine compassion that my comrades in the service of the Qur’an receive for
mistakes they make as the result of human nature. So a succession of extra-ordinary
events proceeding from the service of the Qur’an will be explained together with an
instance of Gawth al-A‘zam’s1 wonder-working, since he supervises this sacred
service with God’s permission and assists it with his saintly influence. Then those
who perform it may persevere earnestly in their service.
There are three sorts of wonder-working associated with this sacred work:
The First Sort is that aspect which prepares the work and urges those employed
to perform it.
The Second Sort removes obstacles and repulses the evil of those who oppose it
and deals them blows. There are numerous instances of this second sort and they are
lengthy,2 so postponing them to another time we shall discuss the third sort, which are
the lightest.
The Third Sort is this: Whenever those who work sincerely in this ser

1 See Note 8, Page 36-7.
2 For example, people who oppose religion themselves suffer in this world a greater penalty than
the torments and distress they inflict on students of the Risale-i Nur; they receive what they have given.

--- Sayfa 71 ---
71
vice become lax, they receive a compassionate slap. So coming to their senses, they
take up their work again. Incidents of this sort number more than a hundred. Out of
only twenty, thirteen or fourteen received compassionate slaps, while six or seven
received restraining slaps.

THE FIRST
This concerns this unfortunate Said: whenever I have flagged in my duties, and
saying, “What is it to me?,” have become preoccupied with my own private affairs, I
have received a slap. I have formed the opinion that I received it due to my neglect.
Because whatever my purpose was that deceived me and spurred me on, I received a
slap that was the reverse of it. Then studying the compassionate slaps that my sincere
friends have received, they were always the opposite of whatever their aim was – if
they were neglectful – so that we have come to the conclusion that such incidents
were wonders proceeding from service of the Qur’an.
For example, as long as this unfortunate Said was busy teaching the truths of the
Qur’an in Van at the time of the Shaykh Said events,3 the suspicious government did
not and could not interfere with me. Then when I said “What is it to me?,” and
thinking of myself withdrew into a ruined cave on Mount Erek in order to save my
life in the hereafter, they arrested me for no reason and sent me into exile. I was
brought to Burdur.
There, again as long as I was serving the Qur’an… at that time all the exiles were
watched very closely and I was supposed to report to the police in person every
evening, but I and my sincere students held ourselves to be exceptions. The Governor
there complained to Fevzi Pasha4 when he visited but Fevzi Pasha replied: “Don’t
interfere with him! Treat him with respect!” What made him say that was the sacred
nature of service of the Qur’an. Yet whenever I was overcome by the idea of saving
myself and thought only of my life in the hereafter and there was a temporary
slackening in my serving the Qur’an, I received a slap contrary to my intentions. That
is to say, I was sent from one place of exile to another. I was sent to Isparta.
In Isparta I took up my duties again. After twenty days, a number of cowardly
people said by way of a warning: “Perhaps the government won’t look kindly on this
situation. It would be better if you go a bit cautiously.”

3 Shaykh Said of Palu was the Naqshbandi shaikh who led the famous uprising in eastern Turkey
against the Ankara government in early 1925. He was captured and sentenced to death in Diyarbakır,
29th June 1925. (Tr.)
4 This refers to Marshal Fevzi Çakmak, Chief of General Staff of the Turkish army. (Tr.)

--- Sayfa 72 ---
72
Again the idea of thinking only of myself took hold of me, and I said: “Don’t let
anyone come!” And I was taken from that place of exile and sent to a third, to Barla.
And in Barla whenever a slackness has come over me and the idea of thinking of
myself alone has gripped me, one of these serpents and two-faced hypocrites from
among ‘the worldly’5 has been set to pester me. During this eight years eighty such
incidents have befallen me; I could recount them, but am cutting them short so as not
to bore people.
My brothers! I have described some of the compassionate slaps I have received,
now if you will permit it and forgive me, I shall relate some that have befallen you.
Don’t be offended. If anyone is offended, I will not put his name.

THE SECOND
My true brother and first and most superior and self-sacrificing student,
Abdülmecid,6 had a fine house in Van. He was well-off and he was a teacher.
Following his own ideas, he did not join those who were attempting to send me to the
border region against my wishes, which was a place more in need of Qur’anic service,
and as though for my benefit, did not vote for it. As though, if I had gone there, my
service of the Qur’an would not have been apolitical or sincere, and they would have
expelled him from Van – so he did not take part. But he received a compassionate
slap contrary to his intentions, for he had to leave both Van, and his beautiful house,
and his native region; he was compelled to go to Ergani.

THE THIRD
Hulûsi Bey7 was crucial to our service of the Qur’an. There were a number of
things when he returned to his native region from Eğridir that would have afforded
him much enjoyment and worldly happiness, perhaps causing him to become slack in
his service of the Qur’an, which pertains solely to the hereafter. For he was reunited
with his parents, whom he had not seen for a long time, and he was back home, and
because he had returned there with rank and honour, the world was smiling on him
and appeared good. However, for those employed in serving the Qur’an, either the
world must be vexed with them, or they must be vexed at the world, so that they can
perform that service sincerely and earnestly.

5 ‘The worldly’ (ehl-i dünya): those whose view is restricted to the life of this world, and who
disregard the hereafter, or those who sell religion for this world. (Tr.)
6 See note 1, page 58. (Tr.)
7 See note 2, page 58. (Tr.)

--- Sayfa 73 ---
73
Hulûsi’s heart was certainly unshakeable, but his situation drove him to slackness
and he received a slap from divine compassion. For one or two years a number of
dissemblers were set to pester him, which drove away all his worldly pleasure. They
made both the world vexed at him, and him vexed at the world. So in the true
meaning of the word he embraced his duty earnestly.

THE FOURTH
This is Muhâjir Hâfız Ahmed.8 He himself said the following:
“Yes, I confess that I made a mistake when interpretating the question of my life
in the hereafter and its connection with my service of the Qur’an. I had a wish that
would cause me to be lax in my service, and I received a blow that was
compassionate, but also severe and was atonement. It was like this: my Master
(Ustad) was not in favour of the new measures.9 My mosque was next to his house
and the Three Months10 were drawing close. If I had abandoned my mosque, both I
would have forfeited much reward, and the district would have grown accustomed to
not praying. If I had not carried out the new practices, I would have been barred. So
according to my interpretation I wanted my Master, whom I loved more than my life,
to temporarily move to another village. I did not know that if he moved, or went to
another region, it would cause a temporary lapse in my service of the Qur’an. Just at
that juncture I received a blow. It was compassionate but so awesome that three
months later I still have not regained my senses. However, praise be to God,
according to what my Master says, it was imparted to him that we may hope from
divine mercy that each minute of the calamity is equivalent to a day’s worship. For
the mistake was not due to enmity; the wish occurred to me only because I was
thinking of my life in the hereafter.”

THE FIFTH
This is Hakkı Efendi.11 Since he is not here now, I am deputizing for him as I did
for Hulûsi Bey, and say this: while Hakkı Efendi was carrying out to the letter his
duties as student, an immoral Kaymakam12 came to the district. So he hid what he had
written so that harm should come neither to

8 See note 4, page 24. (Tr.)
9 That is, innovations opposed to the marks of Islam, like the Turkish call to prayer.
10 Şuhûr-u selâse (Ar. al-Shuhur al-Thalatha): The three holy months of Rajab, Sha‘ban, and
Ramadan. (Tr.)
11 See note 4, page 58. (Tr.)
12 The head official of a district (Tr.)

--- Sayfa 74 ---
74
his Master, nor to himself. He temporarily gave up his service of the Risale-i Nur.
Suddenly, a court case was opened against him, which was a sort of slap dealt by
divine compassion. He was going to have to pay a fine of a thousand liras. He was
subject to the threat for a year, until he came here and we met, and on his return he
again took up his service of the Qur’an and the duties of being a Risale-i Nur student.
Then the compassionate slap’s sentence was lifted, and he was acquitted.
Later a further duty commenced for the students, which concerned the writing out
of the Qur’an in a new way.13 A section was given to Hakkı Efendi. He embarked on
it enthusiastically and wrote out a thirtieth part of the Qur’an. But because of his
straitened circumstances he felt compelled to secretly undertake someone’s defence in
a court case. He suddenly received another compassionate slap. He broke the finger
he used to hold his pen with. It was as though warning him: “This finger won’t write
out both a lawyer’s case and the Qur’an!” We were astonished at his finger because
we did not know about his taking on the case. Then it was understood that the sacred,
pure service of the Qur’an did not want to involve the fingers which were particular to
it in other work. Anyway I know Hulûsi Bey like I know myself and spoke in his
place, and Hakkı Bey is just the same. If he does not like my acting as his proxy, he
can write about his slap himself!

THE SIXTH
This is Bekir Efendi.14 He is not here at present, so in the same way that I
deputized for my brother Abdülmecid, relying on his confidence and loyalty and what
all my close friends like ﬁamlı Hafız and Süleyman Efendi say and know, I say this:
Bekir Efendi had the Tenth Word printed. Then we sent him the Twenty-Fifth Word,
about the Qur’an’s Miraculousness, to print before the new letters were introduced.15
We also wrote that we would send him the printing costs, as we sent him the costs of
printing the Tenth Word. But thinking of my poverty and seeing that the printing costs
would be around four hundred liras, Bekir Efendi thought to himself: “Perhaps the
Hoja won’t be pleased if I pay it out of my own pocket,” and his soul deceived him. It
was not printed and caused considerable harm to our service of the Qur’an. Two
months later nine hundred liras of his were

13 This refers to its being written so as to show the miracle of the ‘coincidences.’ (For
‘coincidences’, see note 1, page 56 – Tr.)
14 Bekir Dikmen 1898-1954. He was a merchant of Barla. (Tr.)
15 That is, the introduction of the Latin alphabet at the end of 1928. (Tr.)

--- Sayfa 75 ---
75
stolen and he received a compassionate but severe blow. God willing, the lost nine
hundred liras was like a sort of almsgiving.

THE SEVENTH
This is Şamlı Hafız Tevfik.16 He himself says: “Yes, I confess that because of
some things I did unknowingly and in error that would have caused harm to our
service of the Qur’an, I received two compassionate slaps. I have no doubt that they
were the result of that.
“The First: All praise be to God, I was endowed with handwriting of the Arabic
script which is to a degree suitable for writing the Qur’an. My Master first of all
assigned me three thirtieth parts of the Qur’an to write out, and divided the rest
among the others. Desire to write out the Qur’an destroyed my wish to perform the
service of writing out the rough and final drafts of the parts of the Risale-i Nur. I even
had the conceited idea of wanting to surpass the others who did not know how to
write the Arabic script properly. I had even said arrogantly when my Master told me
as a precaution about the writing that it was for him: “I know this. I don’t need to
learn it.” I received an extraordinary and unimaginable slap because of this mistake:
what I wrote was not even as good as that of a brother (Husrev) who knew the least
about writing the Arabic script. We were all astonished. And we have understood now
that it was a slap.
“The Second: I confess that two of my attitudes were damaging for the complete
sincerity necessary for service to the Qur’an, which has to be purely for God’s sake,
and I received a severe blow. For I am like a stranger in the region, and foreign. Also
– but I should not complain – since I did not observe frugality and contentment,
important rules of my Master, I suffer from poverty. I am compelled to mix with
selfish and arrogant people, and so, may God forgive it, I was forced to be generous in
hypocritical and sycophantic manner. My Master frequently warned, reminded, and
scolded me, but unfortunately I could not stop myself. On the one hand satans from
among jinn and men were profiting from this situation of mine which was opposed to
the spirit of service of the All-Wise Qur’an, and on the other it caused a coldness and
slackness in our service.
“In the face of this fault of mine, I received a severe, but God willing
compassionate, blow. I have no doubt that it happened in consequence of that fault.
The blow was this: although for eight years I have had both close

16 Tevfik Göksu, 1887-1965, was Bediuzzaman’s student and scribe in Barla, and was imprisoned
together with him in Eskişehir and Denizli. He saw Bediuzzaman in Damascus in 1911, where his
father was serving in the army, hence his name Şamlı. (Tr.)

--- Sayfa 76 ---
76
relations with my Master and been his writer of rough drafts and final drafts, for
around eight months, I had been unable to benefit from the Risale-i Nur. We were
astonished at this situation. Both I and my Master sought the reason, wondering why
it was thus. Now we feel certain that those truths of the Qur’an are light and
luminous, and cannot unite with the darkness of artificiality, flattery, and abasement.
So the meaning of those truths’ lights were drawing away from me, appearing foreign
to me and as strangers. I beseech Almighty God that He will grant me sincerity
worthy of such service, and save me from hypocrisy and artificiality towards ‘the
worldly.’ I request of firstly my Master and all my brothers that they pray for me.
                                                            “The most faulty,
                                                          “Şamlı Hafız Tevfik”

THE EIGHTH
This is Seyrani. Like Husrev, he was one of my students who was enthusiastic
about the Risale-i Nur and had a good understanding of it. I consulted my students in
Isparta about the ‘coincidences,’ which are a key to the mysteries of the Qur’an and to
the science of jafr. They responded and took part eagerly, but because Seyrani had
other ideas and points of interest, he did not respond, and in addition wanted me to
give up the truth I knew to be certain. He wrote me a letter that upset me
considerably. I said: “Alas! I have lost this student.” Certainly I wanted to enlighten
his ideas, but a further meaning confused matters. He received a blow from divine
compassion: he remained for nearly a year in a place of seclusion (that is, in prison).

THE NINTH
This is the Hâfız Zühtü the Elder. At a time he was as though supervising the
Risale-i Nur students in Ağrus, not considering the students’ spiritual honour to be
sufficient – although they had made it their way to follow the practices of the Prophet
(UWBP) and avoid innovations – he took it on himself to teach a serious innovation
in the hope of increasing his standing in the eyes of ‘the worldly.’ He perpetrated an
error that was diametrically opposed to our way. He received an awesome slap from
divine compassion. An incident occurred that completely destroyed his family’s
honour. Unfortunately, Hâfız Zühtü the Younger was also affected by the grievous
incident although he was not deserving of any slap. But God willing it will act as a
beneficial surgical operation delivering his heart from worldly attachment and making
it over totally to the Qur’an.

--- Sayfa 77 ---
77
THE TENTH
This is someone called Hâfız Ahmed (May God have mercy on him). For two or
three years he wrote out the treatises in encouraging fashion and he benefited from
them. Then ‘the worldly’ took advantage of a weak trait in his character. His
enthusiam was dampened. He had relations with ‘the worldly,’ perhaps so that he
would avoid being harmed by them and have some say with them, and win some sort
of position, and make his scant livelihood more plentiful. But in return for the
slackness and harm that was thus caused to his service of the Qur’an, he received two
blows. One was that he had to support five more people with his scant means, and his
situation became truly wretched. The second slap: as someone who was sensitive in
regard to honour and self-respect and could not brook anyone’s criticism or
objections, he was unknowingly used as a shield by some cunning people in such a
way that his honour was sullied. Ninety per cent of his honour was destroyed and
ninety per cent of people were turned against him. May God forgive him! God
willing, he will come to his senses and return in part to his duty.

THE ELEVENTH
This was not written since perhaps he would not agree.

THE TWELFTH
This is the teacher, Galib (May God have mercy on him). Yes, he performed
great services loyally and appreciatively in writing out final drafts of the treatises,
displaying no weakness in the face of any difficulties. Most days he would come, and
listening eagerly, copy them down. Then in return for a fee of thirty liras he had the
whole of The Words and Letters written out. His aim was to distribute them in his
native region and to enlighten the people there. But due to certain ideas, he did not
distribute the treatises as he had envisaged and left them in their box. Suddenly a
grievous event occurred due to which he suffered distress for a year. He gained
numerous unjust, tyrannical enemies in place of a handful of official enemies who
would have been inimical just because he had distributed the treatises, and lost some
of his friends.

THE THIRTEENTH
This is Hâfız Halid17 (May God grant him mercy). He said:

17 A teacher by profession, Hafız Halid Tekin was a native of Barla. He was one of
Bediuzzaman’s close students there, also acting as his scribe. (Tr.)

--- Sayfa 78 ---
78
“Yes, I confess that I was feverishly engaged in writing out rough drafts of the
works my Master disseminated in serving the Qur’an, when the post of imam in a
mosque in our quarter became available. With the intention of dressing once again in
my former robe and wearing the turban, I temporarily neglected my service and
avoided doing it. I received a compassionate slap contrary to my intentions. Although
for eight or nine months I acted as imam, extraordinarily I was unable to wear the
turban, despite the repeated promises of the Mufti. I have no doubt that this
compassionate slap was the result of my error. I was both someone addressed by my
Master, and was his scribe of rough drafts. He suffered difficulties due to my neglect.
In any event... Still, thanks be to God, we realized my error and understood just how
sacred this service is. We were confident that we had behind us a Master like a
protecting angel, like Shah Geylani.
                                                        “The weakest of God’s servants,
                                                                      “Hâfız Halid”

THE FOURTEENTH
This consists of the three small slaps the three Mustafa’s received.
The First: For eight years Mustafa Çavuş (May God grant him mercy) attended
to our small private mosque, and saw to its stove, paraffin, and even the matches. I
learnt later that for the eight years he provided for the paraffin and matches out of his
own pocket. On the night before Friday in particular he would join the congregation
as long as there was no other essential matter to attend to. Then, taking advantage of
his ingenuousness, ‘the worldly’ said to him: “They are going to interfere in Hâfız’s –
one of the scribes of the Words – wearing a turban. He should also temporarily stop
making the call to prayer secretly. You tell the scribe to take off his turban before they
remove it by force.” They did not know that it was extremely difficult for someone
with a lofty spirit like Mustafa Çavuş to tell someone else employed in service of the
Qur’an to remove his turban. But he told him what they had said.
That night I dreamt that Mustafa Çavuş came to my room with dirty hands behind
the Kaymakam. I asked him the following day: “Mustafa Çavuş, who did you see
today? I dreamt of you with dirty hands behind the Kaymakam.” He replied: “Alas!
The village headman told me to ‘tell the scribe.’ I didn’t know what was behind it.”
Also, that same day he brought almost an okka18 of paraffin to the mosque. In a
way he had never done before, he left the door open and a

18 An okka was the equivalent of 2.9 lbs. (Tr.)

--- Sayfa 79 ---
79
kitten entered. Then a big man came, and supposing the paraffin in the ewer to be
water, sprinkled it all around the mosque, in order to clean it and the mess left by the
kitten on the prayer-mat. It is extraordinary that he did not smell the paraffin. That is
to say, the mosque did not allow the man to smell it, in order to tell Mustafa Çavuş
through the tongue of disposition: “We don’t need your paraffin. I haven’t accepted it
because of the mistake you made.” That week on the eve of Friday and other
important prayers, even, he was unable to join the congregation, although he tried to.
Then he repented earnestly and asked forgiveness, and he regained his purity of heart.
The Second Mustafa’s: These are my worthy, hard-working, and important
student Mustafa from Kuleönü, and his most loyal, self-sacrificing friend, Hâfız
Mustafa (May God grant him mercy). After the religious festival I sent word telling
them not to come lest ‘the worldly’ bother us and discourage us in our service of the
Qur’an, but if they had to come, they should come singly. Then one night, three of
them came all together. They intended to leave before dawn. In a way that had never
happened before, neither Mustafa Çavuş, nor Süleyman Efendi, nor myself, nor
themselves, had thought of taking any clear precautions; we were made to forget to do
so. Each of us left it to the others and took no measures. They left before dawn. Then
for two hours they were pounded by such a storm that I was alarmed thinking that
they would not survive it. This winter there had been no such storm, nor had I pitied
anyone so much. As a punishment for his lack of caution, I was going to send
Süleyman after them to find out if they were well and safe. Mustafa Çavuş said: “If he
goes, he will be stranded too, and I’ll have to go after him to find him. Then Abdullah
Çavuş will have to come after me.” So saying: “We place our trust in God!” we
waited.
Q u e s t i o n : You consider the calamities visited on your special friends to be
slaps; punishment for laxity in their service of the Qur’an. Whereas those that are
truly inimical to you and to the service of the Qur’an remain safe and sound. Why are
friends dealt slaps while enemies are left untroubled?
T h e  A n s w e r : According to, “Wrongdoing does not continue, but unbelief
does,”19 friends’ errors are wrongdoing of a sort in this service of the Qur’an, and
therefore are swiftly punished. A person receives a compassionate slap and if he is
sensible, realizes his error. But enemies oppose this service and try to prevent it on
account of misguidance. Knowingly or

19 al-Munawi, Fayd al-Qadir, ii, 107.

--- Sayfa 80 ---
80
unknowingly, their aggression against our service assists atheism. Since unbelief
persists, generally they do not receive any blows immediately.
Just as the penalties of those perpetrating small crimes are delivered locally and
serious crimes are sent to the high courts, so too, according to the rules, the small
errors of believers and close friends are punished swiftly and in part in this world, in
order to quickly purify them. But the crimes of the people of misguidance are so great
that since their punishments exceed this brief worldly life, as required by justice they
are referred to the Supreme Tribunal in the eternal realm, and mostly they do not
receive any punishment here.
The Hadith “This world is the prison of the believers and the Paradise of the
unbelievers”20 alludes to this truth. That is to say, because the believer receives partial
punishment for his faults in this world, it is a place of punishment for him. It is a
dungeon and Hell in relation to his happiness in the hereafter. And since the
unbelievers will not be released from Hell and they in part receive the rewards for
their good works in this world and their large sins are postponed, this world is their
Paradise in relation to their life in the hereafter. For in reality and in meaning the
believer is also far happier in this world than the unbeliever. A believer’s faith is quite
simply like a Paradise in his spirit; while the unbeliever’s unbelief sets afire a sort of
Hell in his being.

Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32)

20 Muslim, Zuhd, 3; Tirmidhi, Zuhd, 16; Ibn Maja, Zuhd, 3; Musnad, ii, 197, 323, 389, 485.

--- Sayfa 81 ---
81

The Eleventh Flash

The Stairway of the Practices of the Prophet (UWBP)
and Antidote for the Sickness of Innovations

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
Now has come to you a Messenger from among yourselves; it grieves him
that you should perish; ardently anxious is he over you; to the believers is he
most kind and merciful.(9:128)

[The first station of this verse is the Highway of the Prophet’s
(UWBP) Practices,1 and its second station, the Stairway of the
Prophet’s (UWBP) Practices.]

But if they turn away, say: “God suffices me, there is no god but He; in Him
do I place my trust – He the Sustainer of the Throne [of Glory]
Supreme!”(9:129) * Say: “If you do love God, follow me: God will love you
and forgive you your sins; for God is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.”(3:31)

Eleven of the hundreds of points concerning these two sublime verses will be
explained concisely.

FIRST POINT
God’s Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) said: “Whoever
adheres to my practices (Sunna) when my community is corrupted shall receive the
reward of a hundred martyrs.”2
Yes, to adhere to the Prophet’s (UWBP) practices is certainly highly

1 That is, the Fourth Flash. (Tr.)
2 Ibn ‘Adiyy, al-Kamil fi’l-Du‘afa’, ii, 739; al-Mundhiri, al-Targhib wa’l-Tarhib, i, 41; Tabarani,
al-Majma‘ al-Kabir, 1394; ‘Ali ibn Husam al-Din, Muntakhabat Kanz al-‘Ummal, i, 100; al-Haythami,
Majma‘ al-Zawa’id, viii, 132.

--- Sayfa 82 ---
82
commendable and worthwhile, and is even more so when innovations are rife. To
comply with them in even a small matter of behaviour, particularly when the
Prophet’s (UWBP) community is corrupted, signifies a powerful belief and fear of
God. And to follow the practices recalls the Noble Messenger (Upon whom be
blessings and peace) directly, and such recollection is transformed into recollection of
the divine presence. The moment they are observed in even the least significant
dealings, in the conduct of eating,3 drinking,4 or sleeping,5 such habitual, natural acts
become meritorious acts of worship in compliance with the Shari‘a. For the person
thinks of following God’s Messenger (UWBP) and conceives of his actions as
conduct of the Shari‘a. Then he recalls that the Messenger (UWBP) brought the
Shari‘a, and then his heart turns to Almighty God, the True Lawgiver, and he gains a
sort of awareness of the divine presence and a sense of worship.
By virtue of this mystery, the person who makes it his habit to follow the
Prophet’s (UWBP) practices transforms all his acts into worship, and may make his
whole life fruitful and yielding of reward.

SECOND POINT
Imam-i Rabbani, Ahmad Faruqi (May God be pleased with him) said: “I saw
while traversing the degrees in my spiritual journeying that the ranks of the saints that
were most brilliant, splendid, subtle, and sound were those who made following the
Prophet’s (UWBP) practices the basis of their way. Even ordinary saints of those
ranks appeared more splendid than the highest saints of the other.”6
Yes, Imam-i Rabbani, the Regenerator of the Second Millennium (May God be
pleased with him) speaks the truth. One who takes the Prophet’s (UWBP) practices as
his guiding principles rises to the station of being beloved of God under the shadow of
God’s Beloved (UWBP).

THIRD POINT
At a time this poor Said was struggling to emerge from the Old Said, his intellect
and heart were floundering among truths in a terrible spiritual storm resulting from
lack of a guide and the pride of his evil-commanding soul. They were being tossed
around, rising and falling, sometimes from the Pleiades to the ground, sometimes
from the ground to the Pleiades.

3 See, Tirmidhi, At’ima, 47; Abu Da’ud, Ashriba, 15; Ibn Maja, At‘ima, 7; Musnad, vi, 143, 207,
265.
4 See, Bukhari, Ashriba, 26; Muslim, Ashriba, 122-3; Tirmidhi, Ashriba, 14.
5 See, Bukhari, Da‘wat, 8; Tirmidhi, Da‘wat, 29; Abu Da’ud, Adab, 177.
6 Imam Rabbani, al-Maktubat, i, 240 (No: 260).

--- Sayfa 83 ---
83
At that time I observed that like qibla-directing compasses showing the course to
be followed in ships, each of the matters of the practices, even small points of
conduct, were like electric switches among innumerable hazardous, dark ways.
Whenever in the course of that spiritual journeying I saw myself under awesome
pressure overwhelmed by truly burdensome loads, I followed the matters of the
practices touching on the situation, I experienced a lightness as though all my burdens
were being lifted from me. By submitting to them, I was saved from doubts and
scruples, that is, from such anxieties as: “Is this course of action right, is it
beneficial?” But if I gave them up, I looked and saw that the pressure was intense;
there were numerous ways and it could not be known where they led. The load was
heavy, and I was utterly powerless. My view was short, and the way, dark. But
whenever I adhered to the Prophet’s (UWBP) practices, the way was lit up and seen
to be safe. I felt as though the load was being lightened and the pressure lifted. At
those times I confirmed through my own observations what Imam-i Rabbani had said.

FOURTH POINT
At one time, I saw myself in a strange world that arose from a state of mind
produced by contemplating death and affirming the proposition “Death is a reality,”7
and from the transience and passing of the world. I saw myself as a corpse standing at
the head of three huge corpses.
One: I was like a tombstone at the head of the immaterial corpse of all living
creatures, with which I was connected through my life and which had entered the
grave of the past.
The Second: In the graveyard of the globe on the face this century, which was
the tombstone at the head of the vast corpse buried in the grave of the past of all the
species of living creatures, with which mankind is connected through its life, I was a
mere point that would be swiftly erased, an ant that would quickly die.
The Third: Since the universe is certain to die on Doomsday, that is how I saw it.
In addition to seeing myself in terror at the death agonies of that vast corpse, in
wonder and astonishment at its death, my own death too, which is certain to occur in
the future, appeared to be happening at that time. In accordance with “And if they turn
away (to the end of the verse),”(9:129) on my death all beings, all my beloveds,
turned their backs on me, abandoning me and leaving me alone. My spirit was being
driven towards

7 See, Ahmad ibn Muhammad, Kitab Usul al-Din, i, 213; al-Qinnawji, Qatf al-Thamar fi Bayan
‘Aqida Ahl al-Athar, i, 121.

--- Sayfa 84 ---
84
the future on the side of post-eternity, which resembles a boundless ocean. Whether it
wanted or not, it would be cast into the ocean.
While in that truly strange and sorrowful state of mind, help reached me from
belief and from the Qur’an; the verse, “But if they turn away, say: ‘God suffices me,
there is no god but He; in Him do I place my trust – He the Sustainer of the Throne
[of Glory] Supreme!’” came to my assistance, like a safe and trusty boat. My spirit
boarded the verse with complete confidence and joy. I understood that besides its
explicit meaning, an allusive meaning had consoled me so that I had found
tranquillity and serenity.
Yes, its explicit meaning says to God’s Noble Messenger (Upon whom be
blessings and peace): “If the people of misguidance turn away, shun your Shari‘a and
practices and do not heed the Qur’an, do not worry. Say: Almighty God is enough for
me. I place my trust in Him. He will raise up others in their place who will follow me.
The throne of His rule encompasses everything; the rebellious cannot escape outside
its bounds, nor do those who seek assistance remain unaided.” While its allusive
meaning says this:
“O man! And O leader and guide of mankind! If all beings leave you and depart
for non-existence on the path of transience; if living beings part from you and hasten
down the road of death; if people abandon you and enter the graveyard; if the people
of neglect and misguidance do not heed you and fall into darkness; do not be anxious.
Say: Almighty God suffices me. Since He exists, everything exists. Those who have
departed have not gone to non-existence; they have departed for another of His
realms. Out of His infinite generosity and from among His innumerable soldiers, that
Owner of the Sublime Throne sends others in their place. Those who have entered the
graveyard have not been annihilated; they have departed for another world. He will
send other officials in their place. And He can send obedient servants who follow the
true path in place of those who fall into misguidance. Since it is thus, He takes the
place of everything. Nothing can take the place of His favours, His regard.”
This allusive meaning caused the three awesome corpses which had filled me
with terror to take on another form. They became a wisdom-displaying passage, an
instructive excursion, a journeying for the performance of duties, a demobilization
and a charging with duties, whereby the universe is shaken up, and comes and goes.

--- Sayfa 85 ---
85
FIFTH POINT
The sublime verse,
Say: “If you do love God, follow me: God will love you”(3:31)
proclaims in definite fashion just how necessary and important it is to follow the
Prophet’s (UWBP) practices. Yes, among the syllogisms of logic, this verse is the
most powerful and certain of the sort called hypothetical or conditional syllogisms. It
is as follows:
To exemplify a hypothetical syllogism it is said in logic: “If the sun comes out, it
will be daytime.” For a positive result it is said: “The sun has come out. One may
therefore conclude that it is daytime.” For a negative result, it is said: “It is not
daytime. One therefore draws the conclusion that the sun has not come out.”
According to logic, these two conclusions, negative and positive, are definite.
In just the same way, the above verse says: “If you love God, you will follow
God’s Beloved (UWBP). If you do not follow him, it points to the conclusion that you
do not love God.” If a person loves God, it entails following the practices of God’s
Beloved (UWBP). Yes, the person who believes in Almighty God will certainly obey
Him. And the most acceptable, the most direct, and the shortest among the ways of
obeying Him is without doubt the way God’s Beloved (UWBP) showed and followed.
Yes, it is necessary and self-evident that the All-Generous One of Beauty who
fills the universe with so many bounties should want thanks from conscious creatures
in return. And clearly that All-Wise One of Glory who adorns the universe with so
many miracles of art will make the most excellent of conscious creatures His
addressee and interpreter, and the herald and leader of His servants. And certainly and
self-evidently that All-Beauteous One of Perfection, who makes the universe reflect
the innumerable manifestations of His beauty and perfections, will give the most
perfect worshipful stance to the person who is the most comprehensive, perfect
measure and means of displaying His beauty, perfection, names, and art, which He
clearly loves and wants to display; He will make his conduct a fine example to others
and encourage them to follow him so that his fine conduct may appear in others too.
I n  S h o r t : Love of God necessitates and results in following the Prophet’s
(UWBP) practices. How fortunate the person who follows them to a large extent! And
woe on the person who does not appreciate the practices and adopts innovations!

--- Sayfa 86 ---
86
SIXTH POINT
The Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) said: “All
innovations are misguidance, and all misguidance leads to Hell.”8 That is to say,
according to the verse,
This day have I perfected for you your religion,(5:3)
not to care for the rules of the Illustrious Shari‘a and principles of the Prophet’s
(UWBP) practices after they have been completed and perfected and to adopt new
creations, or God forbid, create innovations, which infers considering them to be
deficient, is misguidance and leads to Hell-fire.
There are degrees in the practices:9 some are compulsory; these may not be given
up. This sort are described in detail in the Illustrious Shari‘a. They are incontestable
and can in no way be changed. Another sort are voluntary, and these are of two sorts:
One sort includes those practices related to worship. They too are described in the
books of the Shari‘a and to change them is innovation. The other sort is known as
“conduct” (adab); these practices are mentioned in the books of the Prophet’s
(UWBP) biography. Opposition to them cannot be called innovation, but it is
opposition of a sort to the Prophet’s (UWBP) conduct and means not benefiting from
its light and true courtesy. Following this sort entails emulating him in customary,
natural acts and dealings, which are known through unanimous reports. For example,
there are numerous practices showing the conduct of speaking, and explaining the
principles of eating, drinking, and sleeping, and social relations. Practices of this sort
are called “conduct.” The person who practises them transforms his habitual actions
into worship and receives significant effulgence. Practising the smallest aspect of
such conduct recalls God’s Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace), which
imparts a light to his heart.
The most important among the practices are those that symbolize Islam and are
connected with its ‘marks.’ The marks of Islam are worship, concern the community,
and quite simply are general rights of a sort. Just as the whole community benefits
from one person doing them, so too if he gives them up, the whole community is
answerable. There can be no hypocrisy in the performance of marks of this sort, and
they should be proclaimed openly. Even if they are of the voluntary sort, they are still
more important than personal obligatory acts.

8 Muslim, Jum‘a, 43; Abu Da’ud, Sunna, 5; Nasa’i, ‘Idayn, 22; Ibn Maja, Muqaddima, 6, 7;
Darimi, Muqaddima, 16, 23; Musnad, iii, 310, 371; iv, 126, 127.
9 See, Darimi, Muqaddima, 49; al-Tabarani, al-Mu‘jam al-Awsat, iv, 215; al-Daylami, al-Musnad,
ii, 345.

--- Sayfa 87 ---
87
SEVENTH POINT
The Practices of the Prophet (UWBP) are courtesy. There is no matter among
them beneath which a light, and courtesy, is not found. God’s Noble Messenger
(Upon whom be blessings and peace) said: “My Sustainer taught me good conduct,
and how well he taught me.”10 Yes, anyone who studies his biography and is
acquainted with his practices will certainly understand that Almighty God brought
together in His Beloved every sort of courtesy and good conduct. So if anyone gives
up the practices, he abandons courtesy. He exemplifies the rule, “The ill-mannered
person is deprived of divine favour,” and is discourteous in a way that causes him
loss.
Q u e s t i o n : How can there be courtesy in the face of the Knower of All
Things, who sees and knows everything and from whom nothing can be hidden?
Situations which cause shame or embarrasment cannot be concealed from Him. One
sort of courtesy is covering the necessary members and veiling distasteful situations.
But nothing can be hidden from the sight of the Knower of All Things.
T h e  A n s w e r :  Firstly: Giving it the greatest importance, the Glorious
Creator wants to show that His art is beautiful; He veils detestable things; He attracts
attention to His bounties by decorating them. So too, He wants to show to conscious
beings that His creatures and servants are beautiful. Their appearing in ugly situations
is a sort of rebellion against His names of Beauteous, Adorner, Subtle, and Wise, and
is contrary to courtesy. Thus, the courtesy of the Prophet’s (UWBP) practices means
assuming a stance of pure courtesy within the bounds of the Glorious Maker’s names.
Secondly: Professionally, a doctor may examine the private member of someone
who is canonically a stranger to him, and if necessary it may be shown to him and this
cannot be said to be discourteous. Indeed, it may be said that the conduct of medicine
requires it. But the same doctor may not examine the member as a man, or as a
preacher or teacher, and courtesy cannot issue a fatwa permitting it to be shown. To
do so would be shameless.
In just the same way, the Glorious Maker has numerous names and each has a
different manifestation. For example, just as the name of Oft-Forgiving requires the
existence of sins and Veiler, the existence of faults, so the name of Beauteous does
not wish to see ugliness. Names pertaining to divine beauty and perfection like Subtle,
Munificent, All-Wise, and All-Compassionate require that beings be in the most
beautiful form and best possible situations. Such names want to display their beauties
in the view

10 al-Munawi, Fayd al-Qadir, i, 224; Ibn Taymiyya, Majmu’ Fatawa, xviii, 375; al-‘Ajluni, Kashf
al-Khafa’, i, 70.

--- Sayfa 88 ---
88
of angels, spirit beings, jinn and man through the beautiful states and fine conduct of
beings. Thus, the conduct of the practices are the signs of this elevated conduct, and
its principles and samples.

EIGHTH POINT
Coming after the verse, “Now has come to you a Messenger [to the end of the
verse],”(9:128) which shows the Noble Messenger’s (Upon whom be blessings and
peace) perfect kindness and compassion towards his community, the verse, “But if
they turn away, say: ‘God suffices me...’”(9:129) says:
O mankind! And O Muslims! You should understand how lacking in conscience
and unreasonable it is to turn away from the practices and the decrees that the Noble
Prophet (UWBP) conveys as though casting aspersions on his self-evident
compassion, for he guides you with infinite kindness, expending all his strength for
your good, and curing with his practices your spiritual wounds.
O compassionate Prophet and clement Messenger! If they do not recognize this
vast compassion of yours and out of their foolishness turn their backs and do not
listen, don’t be anxious. Sufficient for you is the All-Glorious One, under whose
command are the cohorts of the heavens and earth, and the sovereignty of whose
dominicality rules over the sublime all-encompassing throne. He will muster around
you His true, obedient troops and make them heed you and accept your decrees!
Yes, there is no matter of the Shari‘a of Muhammad (UWBP) and his practices
which does not contain numerous instances of wisdom. This wretched one claims and
is ready to prove it, despite all his faults and powerlessness. Furthermore, the seventy
to eighty parts of the Risale-i Nur so far written are like seventy to eighty truthful
witnesses testifying to how full of wisdom and truth are the matters of Muhammad’s
(UWBP) practices and his Shari‘a. If I were capable of it and they had been written,
seven thousand treatises on this subject could not completely describe those instances
of wisdom, let alone seventy.
Moreover, I have observed and experienced perhaps a thousand times in my own
self that the principles and matters of the Shari‘a and practices of the Prophet
(UWBP) are all highly beneficial remedies for sicknesses of the spirit, mind, and
heart, and particularly for social sicknesses, and that matters put forward by
philosophy cannot take their place, and to an extent I have made known to others in
the Risale-i Nur what I have experienced. If anyone doubts this claim of mine, let
them refer to the parts of the Risale-i Nur and see for themselves.

--- Sayfa 89 ---
89
It may be seen from this just how profitable it is to try to follow as far as is
possible the practices of such a person, and how advantageous for eternal life, and
how beneficial for worldly life.

NINTH POINT
Actually following to the letter every aspect of the Prophet’s (UWBP) practices is
only bestowed on the highest of the elite. If it is not possible to follow them in
practice, everyone can seek to do so by intention, purpose, and by supporting them
and being biased towards them. In any event one is compelled to follow the obligatory
and compulsory sorts. And even if there is no sin involved in giving up the practices
which are ‘recommended’, it results in considerable loss of merit. And if they are
changed, it is a great error. When the practices are followed in habitual actions and
dealings, such acts become worship. While if they are not followed, it is not to be
reproved, but the benefit from the light of the daily conduct of God’s Beloved
(UWBP) is less.
New creations in the ordinances concerning worship are innovation, and since
innovations are opposed to the verse,
This day have I completed for you your religion,(5:3)
they are to be rejected.11 However, the recitations and invocations of the Sufi way are
not innovations, on condition they originate in the Book and Sunna, and even if they
differ in form and manner, their basis and principles do not oppose the Prophet’s
(UWBP) practices or change them, they are not innovations. Certainly some scholars
classed a number of these as innovations, but called them “commendable
innovations.”12 Imam-i Rabbani, the Regenerator of the Second Millennium, (May
God be pleased with him) said:
“On my spiritual journeying, I saw that words narrated from the Noble
Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) were luminous, shining with the rays
of his practices. But when I saw invocations and states not narrated from him, there
was no light on them, even if they were brilliant and powerful. The most brilliant of
them was not equal to the least of the first sort. I understood from this that the rays of
the Prophet’s (UWBP) practices are an elixir. Also, for those seeking light, the
practices are sufficient; there is no need to seek light outside them.”

11 See, Bukhari, I’tisam, 5; Buyu’, 60; Sulh, 5; Muslim, ‘Aqdiyya, 18; Abu Da’ud, Sunna, 6.
12 See, al-Iji, Kitab al-Mawaqif, i, 159; al-Ghazali, Ihya ‘Ulum al-Din, ii, 256; Ibn Rajab, Jami‘
al-‘Ulum wa’l-Hikam, i, 267; Ibn ‘Abidin, Hashiyya, i, 390.

--- Sayfa 90 ---
90
This statement of such a hero of reality and the Shari‘a shows that the Prophet’s
(UWBP) practices are the foundation stone of the happiness of both worlds and the
source and spring of all attainment and perfection.
O God! Bestow upon us the ability to follow the Illustrious Practices of the
Prophet (UWBP).
O our Sustainer! We believe in what You have revealed to Your Prophet;
then write us down among those who bear witness.(3:53)

TENTH POINT
The verse,
Say: “If you do love God, follow me: God will love you(3:31)
displays a miraculous conciseness, for many phrases are included in its three phrases.
It is as follows:
The verse says: “If you believe in God (May His Glory be exalted), you will
surely love Him. Since you love God, you will act in the manner He loves. To do that,
you must resemble the one God loves, and he may be resembled by following him.
Whenever you follow him, God will love you too. Anyway you have to love God so
that He shall love you.”
These phrases express only a brief and concise meaning of the verse. It means
that man’s most exalted goal is to receive Almighty God’s love. The verse shows that
this may be achieved by following God’s Beloved (UWBP) and his practices. If at
this stage three points are proved, the above truth will become completely clear.
F i r s t  P o i n t : Man was created with an infinite innate love for the universe’s
Creator. For included in his nature are a love of beauty, an ardour for perfection, and
passion for bestowal. His love increases proportionately to the degrees of beauty,
perfection, and bestowal, reaching the furthest degrees of ecstatic ardour.
Furthermore, tiny man’s tiny heart may hold a love as great as the universe. Yes,
the fact that writings equivalent to a library of thousands of books may be inscribed in
the faculty of memory, which is a coffer of the heart’s the size of a lentil, shows that
the human heart may contain the universe and bear love that great.
Since inherent in human nature is such an infinite capacity to love bestowal,
beauty, and perfection; and since the universe’s Creator possesses infinite sacred
beauty, the existence of which is self-evidently established by His works apparent in
the universe; and since He possesses infinite holy perfection, the existence of which is
necessarily proved by the embroideries of His art to be seen in beings; and since He is
the owner of

--- Sayfa 91 ---
91
infinite bounties, the existence of which is certainly, indeed, self-evidently established
by the infinite varieties of His bestowal and bounties to be observed in living
creatures; these surely demand infinite love from man, who is the most
comprehensive, the most needy, the most thoughtful, and the most yearning of
conscious beings.
Indeed, all human beings are capable of infinite love for the All-Glorious Creator,
and in the face of His beauty, perfection, and bestowal, the Creator is more deserving
of love than anyone. All the varieties of love and intense attachment a believing
human being has for his life, immortality, and existence, his world, his self, and other
beings, are mere droplets of his capacity to love God. His various intense emotions
are transformations of that capacity to love, and distillations of it in other forms. It is
clear that just as man takes pleasure at his own happiness, so he receives pleasure at
the happiness of others to whom he is attached. And just as he loves someone who
saves him from disaster, so he loves someone who saves those he loves. In
consequence of this mental attitude, if a person thinks only of this out of all the
varieties of divine bounties bestowed on all men, he will say:
My Creator saved me from non-existence, which is eternal darkness, and gave me
a beautiful world like this one. Then when the time comes for me to die, He will again
save me from non-existence, which is eternal extinction, and from annihilation, and
bestow on me in an eternal realm an everlasting and truly magnificent world. And just
as He has bestowed on me external and inner senses and feelings with which to
benefit from all the varieties of delights and good things of the world and to roam
around it and make excursions, so He bestows innumerable bounties on all my
relatives and friends and fellow-men, all of whom I love and to whom I am attached.
Those bounties are also mine in a way, because I am happy and receive pleasure at
their happiness. Since in accordance with the rule, ‘Man is the slave of bestowal,’13
everyone in a sense worships benevolence, certainly in the face of such innumerable
favours, since I have a heart as great as the universe, it necessitates its being filled
with love at those favours, and I want to fill it. If in fact I am unable to love that
much, I can do so potentially, by intention, belief, acceptance, appreciation, longing,
taking the part of, and by will. And so on.
Analogies may be drawn with the love for bestowal we have briefly alluded to
here for the love man feels for beauty and perfection. As for the unbelievers, they are
infinitely hostile because of their unbelief, and even bear a wrongful and insulting
enmity towards the universe and all beings.

13 Abu Nu’aym, Hilya al-Awliya’, iv, 121; al-Bayhaqi, Shu’ab al-Iman, i, 381; Khatib al-
Baghdadi, iv, 276, vii, 346; al-Hakim al-Tirmidhi, Nawadir al-Usul, i, 149.

--- Sayfa 92 ---
92
S e c o n d  P o i n t : Love of God necessitates following the Practices of
Muhammad (Upon whom be blessings and peace). For to love God is to do what
pleases Him, and the things that please Him are manifested in most perfect form in
the person of Muhammad (UWBP). There are two ways of resembling Muhammad’s
(UWBP) actions and deeds:
The First: Obeying Almighty God’s commands in respect of loving Him and
within the bounds of what pleases Him necessitates following them, for the most
perfect leader in such matters is the person of Muhammad (UWBP).
The Second: Since the person of Muhammad (UWBP) is the chief means of man
receiving innumerable divine favours, he is surely worthy of boundless love for the
sake of Almighty God. If man is capable of resembling someone he loves, by nature
he wants to do so. This definitely necessitates that those who love God’s Beloved
(UWBP) try to resemble him by following his illustrious practices.
T h i r d  P o i n t : Almighty God has boundless love, just as He has infinite
compassion. Just as He makes Himself loved in infinite fashion through all the fine
qualities and adornment of the creatures in the universe, so He loves in particular
conscious beings who respond with love to His making His artefacts loved. It may be
clearly understood how important and exalted an aim it is to try to attract the love of
the Being one manifestation of whose mercy are all the subtle wonders and good
things and delights and bounties of Paradise. Since it is stated clearly that His love is
won only through following Muhammad’s (UWBP) practices, it is certain that it
should be man’s greatest aim and his most urgent duty.

ELEVENTH POINT
This consists of three matters.
F i r s t  M a t t e r : The sources of the Noble Messenger’s (UWBP) illustrious
practices are threefold: his words, his acts, and his conduct. And each of these has
three categories: obligatory, voluntary, and laudable.
It is imperative to follow those that are obligatory and compulsory, and penalties
and punishment are incurred for giving them up. Everyone is charged with following
them. As for the voluntary sort, as a means of winning God’s love, the believers are
again charged with following them, but they receive no penalty if they fail to do so.
However, to act in accordance with them and to follow them is highly meritorious,
while to change them is innovation, misguidance, and a great error. To emulate the
Prophet’s (UWBP) customary actions is extremely laudable and in accordance with
wisdom, and is beneficial for both personal life and social life and for

--- Sayfa 93 ---
93
humankind. For all his habitual actions produce numerous things beneficial for life,
and furthermore, by following them, such conduct and actions become worship.
Yes, since as both friend and foe agree, the person of Muhammad (UWBP)
manifested the highest degrees of moral virtues; and since as all are agreed, he is the
most famous and excellent member of the human race; and since as is indicated by his
thousands of miracles, and testified to by the World of Islam that he founded and its
achievements, and is affirmed by the truths of the Qur’an, which he heralded and
interpreted, he was the most excellent Perfect Man and most excellent guide; and
since as the fruit of following him, millions of the people of perfection have advanced
through the degrees of attainment and reached the happiness of both worlds; for sure
his practices and actions are the finest examples to be followed, and the safest guides,
and the soundest laws to be adopted as principles. Happy the person who has a large
share of following the Prophet’s (UWBP) practices. While those who are lazy and do
not follow them suffer vast loss, and those who consider them to be unimportant
commit a great crime, while if they criticize them, which infers denying them, it is
serious misguidance.14
S e c o n d  M a t t e r : Almighty God decrees in the All-Wise Qur’an,
And you [stand] on an exalted standard of character.(68:4)
According to sound narrations, when the distinguished Companion ‘A’isha the
Veracious (May God be pleased with her) described the Messenger (Upon whom be
blessings and peace), she would say: “His character is the Qur’an.”15 That is to say,
Muhammad (Upon whom be blessings and peace) is the exemplar of the fine moral
qualities described by the Qur’an. He conforms to them more than anyone, and his
nature was created in accordance with them.
So even lunatics would understand how unfortunate are those heedless members
of his community who believe in him yet give no importance to his practices or want
to change them, despite each of his deeds, states, words, and actions being worthy of
emulation by mankind.
T h i r d  M a t t e r : Since the Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and
peace) was created with the most moderate character in the most perfect form, his
actions and rest all proceeded on moderation and

14 See, Bukhari, I‘tisam, 2; Ahkam, 1; Jihad, 109; Muslim, ‘Imara, 33; Nasa’i, Bay’at; 27;
Musnad, ii, 361.
15 Muslim, Salat al-Musafirin, 139; Abu Da’ud, Tatawwu‘, 26; Nasa’i, Tatawwu‘, 2; Musnad, vi,
54, 91, 163, 188, 216; al-Munawi, Fayd al-Qadir, v, 170; Ibn Hibban, Sahih, i, 345; iv, 112.

--- Sayfa 94 ---
94
equanimity.16 His biography shows clearly that he always acted with moderation and
equanimity, and avoided excess and negligence.
Yes, God’s Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) conformed
completely to the command:
Therefore stand firm [in the Straight Way] as you are commanded,(11:112)
and moderation is apparent in all his acts, words, and conduct. For example, since his
reasoning faculty was free of wiliness and stupidity, which are excess and deficiency
– resembling its corruption and darkness, it always functioned with wisdom, the
middle way and means of moderation. Similarly, far from rage and cowardice, which
are the corruption of the power of anger and its excess and deficiency, his power of
anger was always employed with sacred courage, which is the middle way and means
of moderation of that power. And so too, purified of licentiousness and frigidity,
which are the excess and deficiency of the power of animal appetites and its
corruption, his power of passion always took chasteness, the means of moderation of
that power, as guide, at the degree of maximum virtuousness. And so on. In all his
practices, daily conduct, and in carrying out the injunctions of his Shari‘a, he chose
the way of moderation and avoided excess and deficiency, and wastefulness and
prodigality, which are wrongdoing and darkness. He avoided wastefulness absolutely
and took frugality as his guide in his speech even, and in eating and drinking.
Thousands of books have been written describing the details of this truth. In
accordance with “A hint is enough for the wise,” we make do with this drop from the
ocean and cut the story short here.

O God, grant blessings to he who brought together in his person all fine
moral qualities, and manifested the mystery of, “And you [stand] on an
exalted standard of character,” and who said: “Whoever adheres to my
practices when my community is corrupted shall receive the reward of a
hundred martyrs.”
And they shall say: “Praise be to God, who has guided us to this [felicity];
never could we have found guidance, had it not been for the guidance of
God; indeed it was the truth that the prophets of our Sustainer brought to
us.”(7:43)
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught
us; indeed You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32)

16 See, Musnad, vi, 68, 155; al-Tayalisi, al-Musnad, 49; Abu Ya’la, al-Musnad, iv, 478; al-
Tabarani, al-Mu‘jam al-Kabir, x, 314.

--- Sayfa 95 ---
95
The Twelfth Flash

[This explains two fine points related to the Qur’an, and was written
in connection with two minor questions put by Re’fet Bey.1]

In His Name, be He glorified!
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.(17:44)

Peace be upon you, and on your brothers, and God’s mercy and blessings!
My Dear, Loyal Brother, Re’fet Bey,
Your questions at this difficult time put me in a difficult position. On this
occasion they are both unimportant, but they did seem to me to be significant since
they are related to two points of the Qur’an and your question about the globe of the
earth touches on criticisms about the seven levels of the earth and the heavens made
by geography and astronomy. So disregarding the unimportant nature of the
questions, I shall explain two fine points about two verses of the Qur’an, in a
scholarly and general way.

FIRST TOPIC
This consists of two points.
F i r s t  P o i n t : According to the verses,
How many are the creatures that carry not their own sustenance? It is God
who feeds [both] them and you.(29:60) * For God is He who gives [all]
sustenance – Lord of Power, Steadfast [for ever],(51:58)
sustenance is supervised by the All-Powerful One of Glory and comes directly from
the treasury of His mercy. Since the sustenance of all living creatures is guaranteed by
the Sustainer, none should die of hunger.

1 Re’fet Barutçu, 1886-1975. He first visited Bediuzzaman in Barla in 1931 and thereafter became
one of his close students, serving prison sentences together with him in Eskişehir and Denizli. He was a
retired yüzbaşı (captain) in the army.

--- Sayfa 96 ---
96
Whereas apparently many do die of it and of lack of food. This is a fact on the one
hand and a mystery on the other, and may be solved as follows:
The Sustainer’s guarantee is true; none die of hunger. For that All-Wise One of
Glory stores up some of the food He sends to the bodies of living creatures as fat, as
reserves. In fact, He stores up a part of the sustenance He sends to each cell, in the
cell, like a reserve stock to be spent when no food comes from outside. The creatures
die before the store is finished. That is to say, death in such cases is not from lack of
sustenance; the creatures die from mistakenly acquired habits and due to illness
resulting from the desire for the wrong things and the giving up of habit.
Yes, the natural sustenance stored up in the bodies of living creatures in the form
of fat generally lasts perfectly well for forty days. It may even last twice that long in
cases of illness or certain ecstatic states. It was written in the newspapers thirteen
years ago (and now it is thirty-nine) that out of extreme stubbornness, a man in prison
in London managed to live quite healthily for seventy days eating nothing at all.
Since the natural sustenance lasts from forty days to seventy or eighty; and since
the manifestation of the divine name of Provider is apparent on the face of the earth
truly extensively; and since foods flow forth from breasts and from wood even in
completely unexpected fashion; if man so full of evil does not interfere with his
mistaken choices and confuse things, that name comes to the assistance of the living
creature before the natural sustenance is consumed, preventing death from starvation.
In which case, if those who die of hunger do so in less than forty days, it is definitely
not from lack of sustenance. Rather, in accordance with the saying, “the abandoning
of habit is fatal,” it occurs either from a bad habit or from illness resulting from the
giving up of habits. In which case it may be said that there is no death from hunger.
Indeed, observedly, sustenance is in inverse proportion to power and will. For
example, when still in the womb, young are completely deprived of power and will
yet are fed to repletion. Then when they come into the world they still lack power and
will, but since they have some sort of ability and potential senses, needing only to
fasten their mouths to the breast, the most perfect, nutritious and easily digestible food
is given to their mouths from those fountains, in the gentlest form and strangest way.
Then as they acquire a little amount of power and will, that readily available, fine
food starts to be withdrawn from them. The fountains of the breasts dry up and the
infants’ food is sent from elsewhere. However, since their power and will are still
insufficient to search for it, so the Munificent Provider sends their parents’ tenderness
and compassion to assist them. Whenever

--- Sayfa 97 ---
97
their power and will are perfected, then their sustenance does not hasten to them and
is not made to do so. The sustenance remains in its place, saying: “Come and search
for me and take me!” That is to say, sustenance is in inverse proportion to power and
will. We have indeed explained in many parts of the Risale-i Nur that animals most
lacking in will and power are better nourished and live better than those with greater
will and power.
S e c o n d   P o i n t : There are different sorts of possibility, like reasonable
possibility, customary possibility, and ordinary possibility. If an event is not within
the bounds of reasonable possibility, it is rejected, and if it is not within the bounds of
customary possibility, it is a miracle but may not easily be wonder-working. If there is
nothing similar to it, either according to common usage or in principle, it can only be
accepted through a categorical proof as clear as witnessing.
In consequence of this, the extraordinary states of Sayyid Ahmad Badawi,2 who
for forty days refrained from eating bread even, are within the bounds of customary
possibility. It may have been both wonder-working and an habitual practice out of the
ordinary. Yes, there are numerous unanimous reports concerning Sayyid Ahmad
Badawi’s (May his mystery be sanctified) wondrous states and absorption in ecstasy.
On occasion, he ate only once in forty days, but he did not do that all the time; he
achieved it sometimes as an instance of wonder-working. It possibly became a habit
for him because he did not feel the need to eat while in a state of ecstasy. Wonders of
this sort have been reliably narrated about many saints of his kind. As we proved in
the first Point, stored-up sustenance remains undepleted for more than forty days, and
it is possible not to eat for that length of time through habit, and such a state has been
reliably reported about people who were out of the ordinary. It therefore cannot be
denied.

2 Sayyid Ahmad Badawi (d. 675/1276). He was born in Morocco and eventually settled in Tanta
in Egypt. He is famous as one of the four Spiritual Poles whose saintly powers persisted after their
deaths.

--- Sayfa 98 ---
98
Two important matters will be explained in connection with the
second question, for the sciences of geography and astronomy have
criticized the verse and foolishly even tried to deny it, because with
their abbreviated laws and narrow principles and tiny scales they have
been unable to ascend to the heavens of the Qur’an, and have been
unable to discover the seven levels of meanings in the stars of its
verses.

FIRST IMPORTANT MATTER
This is about the earth having seven levels like the heavens. This matter appears
to the philosophers of the present time to be untrue; their sciences about the earth and
heavens find it unacceptable, and making it a pretext, they oppose some of the truths
of the Qur’an. We shall point out concisely a few points about this.
T h e  F i r s t : Firstly, the verse’s meaning is one thing and the parts of the
meaning and points confirming it, another. The meaning cannot be denied if one of
the many parts of the universal meaning is absent. Of the numerous parts of the
universal meaning concerning the seven levels of the heavens and seven layers of the
earth, seven points confirming it are clearly apparent.
Secondly, the verse does not explicitly state that “the earth has seven layers.” The
apparent meaning of the verse is,
God is He Who created seven heavens and of the earth what is similar... [to
the end of the verse]:(65:12)
“He created the earth like the seven heavens, and made it a dwelling place for His
creatures.” It does not say: I created it in seven levels. Its being similar is in regard to
createdness and being the habitation of creatures.
T h e  S e c o n d : The globe of the earth is certainly very small in relation to the
heavens, but as the exhibition, display, gathering place and centre of countless divine
artefacts, as the heart and immaterial centre of the vast, endless heavens, it is
equivalent to them, like the heart may be seen as equivalent to the body. For this
reason, the earth having seven3 climes, as was supposed from early times; also the
well-known seven continents, Europe, Africa, Oceania, the two Asias, and the two
America’s; also together with the seas, the East, West, North, and South, the well-
known seven regions of this face and on the face of the New World; also the

3 The seven repetitions of the word seven here makes a fine ‘coincidence’ (T. tevâfuk; Ar.
tawafuq).

--- Sayfa 99 ---
99
various, contiguous seven levels from the centre to the outer crust, which have been
established by science; and the famous seven universal elements called the seven
levels, which comprise the seventy simple elements that are the means of perpetuating
animate creatures’ lives; also the four elements of water, air, fire, and earth, together
with the animal, vegetable, and mineral kingdoms, making seven levels and realms;
also the seven realms of the earth verified by those who uncover the secrets of
creation and the people of witnessing, who are very numerous, their testimony that
they are the worlds and habitations of jinns, demons, and other various sentient and
living creatures; also the seven levels indicating that seven further globes exist
resembling our globe, and that they are the dwelling places of living creatures – from
these indications it has been understood from verses of the Qur’an that the earth too
has seven levels.
It thus becomes clear that the earth has seven sorts of levels that exist in seven
ways. The eighth, which is the final meaning, is important from another point of view;
it is not included in the seven.
T h e  T h i r d : Since the Absolutely Wise One wastes nothing and creates
nothing in vain; and since creatures exist for conscious beings and find their
perfection by means of conscious beings and rejoice through them and are saved from
futility by means of them; and since observedly the Absolutely Wise One, the All-
Powerful One of Glory, fills the element of air, and world of water, and layer of earth
with innumerable living beings; and since just as air and water are not an obstacle to
the movement of animals, so dense matter like earth and stone do not form obstacles
to the passage of matter like electricity and X-rays; for sure the All-Wise One of
Glory, the Undying Maker, will not leave empty and uninhabited the broad spaces and
worlds and caves and seven contiguous layers from the centre of our globe to the
outer crust, which is our habitation and centre. He has certainly populated them and
created and settled there conscious beings appropriate to those worlds. Since those
sentient creatures must be angels and spirit beings of a sort, the densest and hardest
layer even will be to them as the sea is to fish and the air is to birds. The awesome
heat at the centre of the earth even must be for those conscious creatures like the sun’s
heat is for us. Created from light, for those sentient spirit beings fire is like light.
T h e  F o u r t h : Mentioned in the Eighteenth Letter is a comparison about the
depictions made by the people of illumination of the strange wonders of the earth’s
levels, which are outside the bounds of reason. A summary is this:
In the Manifest Realm the globe is a seed, while in the World of Similitudes and
Intermediate Realm it is so vast as to be equal to the heavens. If

--- Sayfa 100 ---
100
the people of illumination have seen a level of the earth particular to demons which
has a breadth of a thousand years, it is not in the seed of the earth that pertains to the
Manifest World; but is a manifestation of its branches and levels in the World of
Similitudes. Since an apparently insignificant level of the earth has such a vast
manifestation in another world, surely it may be said that it has seven levels which are
the equivalent of the seven levels of the heavens. In order to call to mind the above
points, the Qur’an’s verses allude to them by showing in a miraculously concise way
that the tiny earth is the equivalent of the seven levels of the heavens.

SECOND IMPORTANT MATTER
The seven heavens and the earth and all that is in them extols and glorifies
Him [to the end of the verse](17:44) * And has applied His design to the
heavens and fashioned them into seven heavens, and He has full knowledge
of all things.(2:29)
Numerous verses like these depict the heavens as sevenfold. It is appropriate to
write here only a summary of this matter, which of necessity we expounded extremely
briefly in the commentary Isharat al-I’jaz (Signs of Miraculousness), while on the
front in the first year of Great War. It is as follows:
Ancient philosophy conceived of the heavens as being nine in number; accepting
in the tongue of the Shari‘a the throne of God and seat of God together with the seven
heavens, they depicted the heavens in strange manner. The glittering terms of the
philosophers held mankind under their sway for many centuries. In fact, many
Qur’anic commentators were compelled to make the apparent meanings of verses
conform to their school. In this way the All-Wise Qur’an’s miraculousness was veiled
to an extent. As for the new philosophy, called modern science, in the face of the
excesses of ancient philosophy about the heavens it went to the other extreme and
quite simply denied the heavens’ existence. The former went to excess and the latter
was deficient; they were unable to portray reality in its entirety.
As for the sacred wisdom of the All-Wise Qur’an, it left aside such excess and
deficiency, and choosing the middle way said that the All-Glorious Maker created the
seven levels of the heavens. The planets swim in the heavens like fish and glorify
God. It says in a Hadith: “The skies are waves held back.”4 That is, the heavens are an
ocean the waves of which are stationary.

4 Tirmidhi, Tafsir Sura 58, 1; Musnad, ii, 370; al-Mubarakfuri, Tuhfat al-Ahwadhi, No: 3352; al-
Haythami, Majma‘ al-Zawa’id, viii, 132.

--- Sayfa 101 ---
101
We shall prove this Qur’anic truth extremely briefly with rules and seven aspects
of meaning.
First Rule: It is established by science and philosophy that limitless space is not
an infinite vacuum, but is filled with matter called ether.
The Second: It is established by science and reason, indeed by observation, that a
matter which fills space is the bond of the laws governing the heavenly bodies like
those of attraction and repulsion, and is the conductor and transmitter of such forces
in matter as light, heat, and electricity.
The Third: It has been established empirically that while remaining as ether, it
has various forms and formations like other matter. Just as there are three states of the
same matter, liquid, gas and solid, for instance, steam, water, and ice; so there is
nothing to reasonably prevent ether having seven states or levels; it cannot be
objected to in any way.
The Fourth: If the heavenly bodies are studied carefully, it will be seen that there
is a difference in the levels. The level that contains the vast nebular sphere called the
Milky Way of course does not resemble the level of the fixed stars. It is as if those
stars have ripened and matured like the fruits of summer, while the uncountable stars
apparent in the form of a cloud in the Milky Way are constantly emerging and
beginning to mature. According to accurate conjecture, the level of fixed stars also
appears different to the level of the solar system. And so on. One may adduce seven
systems and seven levels which differ from one another.
The Fifth: It is established by conjecture, sense, inductive reasoning, and
experience that if a material is given order and form and if other artefacts are made
from the material, it is transformed into various levels and forms. For example, when
a diamond mine is worked, from the material, ashes, coal, and diamonds are
produced. And when fire is lit, it separates into the levels of flame, smoke, and
embers. And when water and oxygen are combined, levels like water, ice, and steam
are formed. That is to say, when a single substance is worked, it may separate into
levels. In which case, when Creative Power started to work in the substance called
ether, in accordance with the verse, “And fashioned them into seven heavens,” it
created from it seven sorts of heavens as differing levels.
The Sixth: The above indications necessarily indicate both the existence, and the
plurality, of the heavens. Since the heavens are certainly numerous, and the Bringer of
Sure News (UWBP) stated in the tongue of the Qur’an that they number seven, for
sure they are seven.
The Seventh: Since in Arabic, terms like seven, seventy, and seven hundred
express multiplicity, those universal seven levels may comprise multiple levels.

--- Sayfa 102 ---
102
I n  S h o r t : The All-Powerful One of Glory created the seven heavens from
ether, and forming it into levels, ordered it with a truly fine and wondrous order and
sowed the stars in it. Since the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition is a pre-eternal
address speaking to all the classes of all mankind and the jinn, for sure each of those
classes will receive its share from the Qur’an’s verses and its verses will contain
various and numerous meanings, both explicit and implicit, in a way that will satisfy
the understanding of each.
Yes, the breadth of the Qur’anic address and the comprehensiveness of its
meanings and indications and its conforming to and flattering all the degrees of
understanding from the most uneducated common people to the highest of the elite
shows that all its verses have an aspect which looks to each class. Thus, in
consequence of this mystery, as an example, seven classes of men understand as
follows the meaning of seven various levels from the universal meaning “seven
heavens:”
A short-sighted and narrow-minded class of men understands the atmosphere
from the verse “and fashioned them into seven heavens.” While another class of men
befogged by astronomy understands the famous stars known popularly as the seven
planets, and their orbits. Yet another group understands seven celestial globes
resembling our globe, which are inhabited by living creatures.5 A further group of
men understands the solar system being separated into seven levels, and seven solar
systems together with our system. And yet another group undertands the ether being
separated into seven levels. Another class of men with broader ideas counts all the
visible skies gilded with stars as a heaven, and saying that it is this world’s heaven,
understands that there are six levels of heavens besides it. And mankind’s seventh and
highest class do not consider the seven heavens to be restricted to the Manifest World,
and understands that the Worlds of the Hereafter and the Unseen, and this world, and
the World of Similitudes all have seven heavens, each of which is an encompassing
container and roof.
Similarly, there are many further particular meanings in the universal of the
verse, like the above-mentioned seven levels of meaning of the seven levels.
Everyone receives his share according to his understanding and everyone finds his
sustenance at that heavenly table.
Since the verse has thus numerous points confirming it, the unreasoning
philosophers and foolish astronomers attacking the verse in that way on the pretext of
denying the heavens is like silly children throwing stones at a

5 See, al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, ii, 535; al-Tabari, Jami‘ al-Bayan, xxviii, 153-4.

--- Sayfa 103 ---
103
star in the hope of making it fall. Because if one of the points confirming it from the
verse’s universal meaning is correct, the universal meaning is correct and true. A
particular even which is not literally true but is commonly accepted may be included
in the universal meaning in order to conform to the generally held ideas. Whereas we
saw numerous particulars which are right and true. Now look at this unfair, unjust
geography and drunken intoxicated astronomy: how wrong these two sciences have
been, closing their eyes to the universal meaning, which is right and correct and true,
and not seeing the aspects which confirm it and are absolutely right; they have fancied
an imaginary and extraordinary particular to be the meaning of the verse and thrown
stones at the verse! And they have broken their own heads and lost their belief!
I n  S h o r t : Since like jinns and satans, unbelieving materialist ideas have been
unable to ascend to the seven levels of the skies of the Qur’an, which was revealed in
seven recitations,6 and with seven aspects, seven sorts of miraculousness, seven
truths, and seven pillars, they do not know what there is and what there is not in the
stars of its verses and give false and inaccurate reports. So falling stars like the above
discussion descend on their heads from the stars of those verses and scorch them. Yes,
the heavens of the Qur’an cannot be ascended to by means of the jinn-like ideas of
philosophy. The stars of its verses can only be risen to through the ascension of true
wisdom and the wings of belief and Islam.

O God! Grant blessings to the Sun of the skies of prophethood and Moon of
the firmament of messengerhood, and to his Family and Companions, the
stars of guidance for the rightly-guided.
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught
us; indeed You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32)
O God! O Sustainer of the Heavens and Earth! Adorn the hearts of the
translator of this treatise and his companions with the stars of the truths of
the Qur’an and belief. Amen.

6 See, Bukhari, Fada’il al-Qur’an, 5, 27; Tawhid, 553; Muslim, Salat al-musafirin, 270: Tirmidhi,
Qira’at, 2.

--- Sayfa 104 ---
104
The Thirteenth Flash

This, the Thirteenth Flash, explains the meaning of
“I seek refuge with God from Satan the Accursed”

[This is about seeking refuge with God from Satan. Thirteen
indications will be written. Some of them have been explained and
proved in various places in the Twenty-Sixth Word and other parts of
the Risale-i Nur so here will be discussed only briefly.]

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
And say: O My Sustainer, I seek refuge with You from the whisperings of the
Evil Ones, * And I seek refuge with you, my Sustainer, lest they should come
near me.(23:97-8)

FIRST INDICATION
Q u e s t i o n : Although evil spirits do not interfere in the universe in any way in
regard to creation; and through His mercy and favour Almighty God takes the part of
the people of truth; and the attractive beauties and virtues of truth and reality
strengthen and encourage the people of truth, and the repulsive ugliness of
misguidance revolts the people of misguidance; what is the reason for Satan’s party
very often gaining the upper hand; what is the wisdom in it? And why should the
people of truth always seek refuge with God from Satan’s evil?
T h e  A n s w e r : The wisdom and purpose is this: for the most part,
misguidance and evil are negative, destructive, and pertain to non-existence. While in
the great majority of cases, guidance and good are positive, constructive, repairing,
and pertain to existence. Everyone knows that one man can destroy in one day a
building constructed by twenty men in twenty days. Yes, a person continues to live
due to the existence of all the basic members and conditions of life, life being
particular to the All-Glorious Creator’s power; yet, by severing a member a tyrant
may make

--- Sayfa 105 ---
105
the person manifest death, which is non-being in relation to life. Therefore, the saying
“Destruction is easy” has become proverbial.
In consequence, the people of misguidance sometimes triumph over the people of
truth, who are very powerful, with what is in reality a weak force. But the people of
truth possess a stronghold so unassailable that when they take refuge in it, those
fearsome enemies cannot draw close; they can do nothing. If they cause some
temporary harm, according to the verse,
And the end is [best] for the righteous,(7:128, etc.)
everlasting reward and profit make up for the damage. That impregnable stronghold,
that fortified citadel, is the Shari‘a of Muhammad (UWBP) and his practices.

SECOND INDICATION
Q u e s t i o n : The creation of devils, who are pure evil, and their harassing the
people of belief, and many people not believing and going to Hell because of them,
appears to be terrible and ugly. How does the mercy and beauty of the Absolutely
Beauteous One, the Absolutely Compassionate One, the Truly Merciful One, permit
this infinite ugliness and awesome calamity? Many people have asked about this
question, and it occurs to many people.
T h e  A n s w e r : In addition to the minor evils, there are numerous universal
good purposes in the existence of Satan, and human attainments and perfections. Yes,
however many the degrees from a seed to the huge tree, the degrees in the abilities
lodged in human nature are more numerous. They range from a minute particle to the
sun. For these abilities and potentialities to develop, action is required, a transaction is
necessary. In such a transaction the action of the mechanism of progress is triggered
through striving. And striving occurs due to the existence of evil spirits and harmful
things. Otherwise man’s station would have been constant like that of the angels;
there would have been no classes in humankind, which resembles thousands of
species. It is contrary to wisdom and justice to abandon a thousand instances of good
so as to avoid one minor evil.
For sure the majority of people embrace misguidance due to Satan, but
importance and value look mostly to quality; they look to quantity little or not at all. If
someone has a thousand and ten seeds which he buries, and under the earth the seeds
undergo a chemical reaction as a result of which ten become trees and a thousand rot,
the profit the man receives from the ten seeds which have become trees certainly
eliminates the loss he suffers from the thousand rotted ones. In exactly the same way,
through the struggle against the soul and Satan, the profit, honour, enlightenment, and
value

--- Sayfa 106 ---
106
for humankind gained by ten perfect men, who are like stars, certainly reduce to
nothing the harm caused to mankind through the people of misguidance embracing
unbelief, who are so base as to be considered vermin. Since this is so, divine mercy,
wisdom, and justice have permitted the existence of Satan, and allowed him to molest
men.
O people of belief! Your armour against this awesome enemy is the fear of God
fashioned on the workbench of the Qur’an, and your shield is the Noble Messenger’s
(UWBP) practices, and your weapon, seeking refuge with God from Satan, and
seeking forgiveness, and taking refuge in divine protection.

THIRD INDICATION
Q u e s t i o n : The very great complaints and massing of forces against the
people of misguidance in the All-Wise Qur’an does not appear to the reason to be
conformable with its equitable and apt eloquence and the congruence and moderation
of its style. It is quite simply as though it is mustering armies against a single man. It
threatens him on account of one minor action as though he had committed thousands
of crimes. It affords him a position and complains about him as though he were an
aggressive partner, despite his being bankrupt and having no share of the property.
What is the reason for this and the wisdom in it?
T h e  A n s w e r : The reason for it is this: because the evil spirits and those
who follow them take the path of misguidance, they can cause great destruction with a
small act, and they can violate the rights of many creatures and cause much harm with
a small deed.
For example, by some small action or neglecting a small duty, a man on a king’s
large merchant ship can be the cause of all the efforts of those employed on it and all
the fruits of their labour being lost and going for nothing. The illustrious owner of the
ship therefore complains about and threatens the rebellious man in awesome fashion
on account of all his subjects who are connected with the ship. And he inflicts a
terrible punishment on him, taking into account not his insignificant action but its
dreadful results, not in his own name but in that of the rights of his subjects.
In exactly the same way, through their apparently insignificant mistakes and sins,
the people of misguidance, Satan’s party, who are on the ship of the earth together
with the people of guidance, transgress against the rights of numerous creatures and
nullify the results of their elevated duties. The Monarch of Pre-Eternity and Post-
Eternity’s awesome threats and complaints about them, therefore, and His
mobilization of forces against them are pure wisdom within perfect eloquence, and
are most apt and appropriate.

--- Sayfa 107 ---
107
It is in conformity with the requirements of the situation, which is the definition of
eloquence and its basis.1 And it is free of exaggeration, which is wastefulness in
words.
It is clear that the person will be wretched who does not take refuge in a secure
stronghold in the face of terrible enemies who wreak much destruction with little
action. O people of belief! Such a heavenly stronghold of steel is the Qur’an. Enter it
and be saved!

FOURTH INDICATION
Investigative scholars and the people of illumination have agreed that non-
existence is pure evil and existence, pure good. Yes, in the great majority of cases,
good, virtues, and perfections are based on existence and are related to it. Even if they
are superficially negative and hint of non-existence, their basis is in existence and
pertains to it. While the basis and leaven of all ugliness, such as misguidance, evil,
calamities, and sins, is non-existence and denial. Their badness and ugliness arise
from non-existence. Even if they appear superficially to be positive and pertaining to
existence, essentially they are non-existence and denial.
Also, observedly, the existence of something like a building is realized through
the existence of all its parts. While its destruction, non-existence, and annihilation
occur through the non-being of one of its main parts. Furthermore, existence requires
an existent cause, it is based on a cause that has an actual reality. Whereas non-
existence may be based on things which pertain to non-existence. Such things may be
the cause of something non-existent.
In consequence of this rule, despite the awesome destruction in the universe of
devils from among jinn and men, and the varieties of unbelief, misguidance, evil, and
destruction they perpetrate, they neither interfere one iota in creation, nor do they
have any share in divine sovereignty. Moreover, they do not perform those acts
through any power or ability; they perpetrate many of the things they do through
neglect and abstaining from action. They commit evils by not allowing good to be
done, that is, they become evil. For since bad and evil are a sort of destruction, their
causes do not have to be an existent power and active creativity. Indeed, vast
destruction is wrought due to one non-existent matter or one condition being nullified.
It was because the Zoroastrians did not develop this mystery that they

1 See, al-Khamawi, Khizana al-Adab, ii, 482; al-Qazwani, al-Idah fi ‘Ulum al-Balagha, i, 15-6.

--- Sayfa 108 ---
108
believed there was a creator of good in the universe, called Yazdan, and a creator of
evil, called Ahriman.2 However, the imaginary god of evil they called Ahriman was
Satan, who causes evil through the power of choice and the power to act, which has
no ability to create.
O people of belief! Your most effective weapon and equipment for repairs in the
face of this awesome destruction of Satan is seeking forgiveness from God, and
declaring “I seek refuge with God,” to have recourse to Him. And your stronghold is
the Prophet’s (UWBP) practices.

FIFTH INDICATION
In the revealed scriptures Almighty God points out to mankind great rewards like
Paradise and terrible punishments like Hell, and He gives guidance, many
admonishments and reminders, and threats and encouragement. But despite there
being so many means guiding the people of belief to the straight path, they are
defeated in the face of the feeble, unrewarding, repellent stratagems of Satan’s party.
At one time this caused me much thought. How is it, I wondered, that although they
believe, they disregard Almighty God’s severe threats? Why isn’t their belief enough?
They are carried away by Satan’s baseless wiles and rebel against God, although
according to the verse, “Feeble indeed is the cunning of Satan.”(4:76) Some of my
own friends, even, although they sincerely affirmed the teachings about reality they
had heard from me a hundred times and had an excessively good opinion of me and
relations with me, they were carried away by the trite and hypocritical compliments of
a corrupt person, and took up a position in favour of him and against me. “Glory be to
God!,” I exclaimed, “How can a person fall so low? What a deceitful man he was.” I
slandered him and committed a sin.
Later, the truth explained in the previous Indications became clear and
illuminated many obscure points. Thanks be to God, through its light I understood
both that the All-Wise Qur’an’s powerful encouragement and assurances are
completely in place, and that the people of belief being deceived by Satanic
machinations is not due to a lack of belief or weakness of faith. I understood too that
someone who commits grievous sins is not an unbeliever, and that the Mu‘tazilites
and some Kharijite sects are in error by stating: “The person who commits a grievous
sin is either in a state of unbelief or is between belief and unbelief,”3 and that that
unfortunate

2 See, al-Shahristani, al-Milal wa’l-Nihal, i, 232-3; al-Iji, Kitab al-Mawaqif, iii, 65; Tahir ibn
Muhammad, al-Tabsir fi’l-Din, i, 91, 113, 142.
3 See, al-Iji, Kitab al-Mawaqif, iii, 548; Ibn Abi’l-’Izz, Sharh ‘Aqida al-Tahawiyya, i, 356-62.

--- Sayfa 109 ---
109
friend of mine sacrificing a hundred lessons in reality to win the attentions of such a
scoundrel was not despicable abasement and degeneration; I thanked Almighty God
and was saved from the abyss. For as I said before, Satan pushes man into serious
peril because of some insignificant matter that in reality lacks existence. Moreover,
man’s soul always listens to Satan; and his powers of anger and animal appetites are
like both receivers and transmitters of Satan’s whisperings.
It is in consequence of this that Almighty God’s names of Oft-Forgiving and All-
Compassionate are turned to the people of belief with a maximum manifestation, and
He points out in the All-Wise Qur’an that the greatest gift He bestows on the prophets
is forgiveness and He calls on them to seek forgiveness. Repeating the blessed words,
“In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate” at the start of every Sura and
commanding that it be recited at the commencement of all good works,4 He shows
that His all-encompassing mercy embraces the universe and is a stronghold and place
of refuge. And by the command, “Seek refuge with God,”(7:200, etc.) He makes a
shield of the phrase, “I seek refuge with God from Satan the Accursed.”

SIXTH INDICATION
One of Satan’s most dangerous stratagems is this: he makes certain sensitive and
ingenuous people confuse imagining unbelief with affirming it. He shows the
imagining of misguidance to be the affirmation of it. He also conjures up in their
imaginations ugly thoughts about holy individuals and sacred things. He shows also
things which are essentially possible together with those that are reasonably possible,
thus making those things appear to be doubts opposed to the certainty of belief. Then
the wretched sensitive man supposes that he has fallen into misguidance and unbelief,
and that his certainty of belief has been lost; he falls into despair and becomes the
plaything of Satan. Satan works both his despair, and that weak vein of his, and his
confusion, so that he either goes mad, or exclaiming: “All is lost,” embraces
misguidance. We have explained in some parts of the Risale-i Nur just how lacking in
substance are these diabolical stratagems, so here shall discuss them only briefly, as
follows:
Just as a snake’s image in a mirror cannot bite, nor the similitude of fire burn, or
the reflection of filth soil; so the reflections of unbelief and association of partners
with God cannot corrupt belief nor the shadows of

4 See, Ibn Maja, Nikah, 19; Musnad, ii, 359; al-Nasa’i, al-Sunan al-Kubra, vi, 127-8; ‘Abd al-
Razzaq, al-Musannaf, vi, 189; Ibn Hibban, al-Sahih, i, 173-4.

--- Sayfa 110 ---
110
misguidance, or the imaginings of ugly abuse and words in the mirror of the
imagination or of thought change faith, or damage respectful courtesy. For the well-
known rule goes, “To imagine abuse is not abuse, to imagine unbelief is not unbelief,
and to conceive of misguidance is not misguidance.”
As for the question of doubts in belief, possibilities that are essentially possible
do not belie the certainty of belief and do not harm it. One of the established rules of
the science of the principles of religion is: “An essential impossibiblity cannot negate
the certainty afforded by knowledge.”5 For example, we are certain that Barla Lake is
in its place consisting of water. It is, however, essentially possible that this very
moment the lake sank into the ground. It is within the bounds of possibility that it
might sink. But since there is nothing to indicate such a possibility, it is not a
reasonable possibility and cause doubt. For another established rule of the principles
of religion is: “A possibility that does not arise from any proof or evidence holds no
importance.” That is, an essential possibility unsupported by any indication cannot be
deemed a reasonable possibility and so cause doubts and warrant importance.
Hence, the unfortunate man exposed to those Satanic whisperings supposes that
due to essential possibilities he has lost his certain belief in the truths of faith. For
example, numerous essential possibilites about the human aspects of the Noble
Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) may occur to him which cause no
harm to his firm belief, but he imagines that they have and so suffers harm.
Also, sometimes Satan suggests bad things about Almighty God in the form of
whisperings in the heart. The man trembles, supposing that his heart is corrupted so
that it says such things. But his fear and trembling and lack of consent shows that
those words did not come from his heart; they rather came from Satanic whisperings,
and were imparted and caused to be imagined by Satan.
Also, among man’s subtle faculties are one or two that I have been unable to
specify; they do not heed the will and power of choice and probably should not be
held responsible. Sometimes they govern, do not listen to the truth, and incline
towards wrong. Then Satan whispers to the man: “You’re not capable of attaining to
reality and belief, so you involuntarily attempt what is futile and fruitless. That means
your fate has condemned you to perdition.” The wretched man falls into despair and is
ruined.
The believer’s stronghold in the face of the former stratagems of Satan

5 See, al-Ghazzali, al-Manhul, 122; al-Mujaddidi, Qawa’id al-Fiqh, 11, 143.

--- Sayfa 111 ---
111
are the truths of belief and incontestable matters of the Qur’an, the limits of which
have been defined by the principles of the purified exacting scholars. And in the face
of the latter stratagems, the believer’s stronghold is to seek refuge with God and to
attach no importance to them. For the more importance is given them, the more it
attracts attention to them, and they grow and swell. The believer’s antidote and
remedy for such spiritual wounds is adhering to the practices of the Prophet (UWBP).

SEVENTH INDICATION
Q u e s t i o n : The Mu‘tazilite authorities considered the creation of evil to be
evil, and therefore did not attribute the creation of unbelief and misguidance to God,
as if by so doing they were exonerating Him. They misguidedly said: “Man creates
his own actions.”6 They also said: “A believer who commits a grievous sin loses his
belief,7 for believing in God and affirming Hell is incompatible with such acts. Out of
fear at a minor prison sentence in this world, a man restrains himself from acting
contrarily to the law, so if he commits serious sins, which infers disregard of divine
wrath, it certainly points to his lack of belief.”
T h e  A n s w e r  to the first part of the question: as is elucidated in the treatise
on divine determining,8 the creation of evil is not evil; it is the inclination to do evil
that is evil. For creation and bringing into being look to all the results. Since the
existence of one evil is preliminary to numerous good results, by virtue of those
results, the creation of the evil becomes good, and is as though good. For example,
fire has a hundred good results, but if because they misuse their wills people make the
fire evil for themselves, they cannot say that the creation of evil is evil. In the same
way, the creation of devils has numerous wise results such as human progress; so if a
person is defeated by Satan due to his misuse of his will and misguided inclinations,
he cannot say that the creation of Satan is evil. For he did evil to himself because he
was himself disposed to it.
Yes, since the tendency is a particular relation, it has a particular evil result and
becomes evil. But since creation looks to all the results, the creation of evil is not evil;
it is good. The Mu‘tazilites did not understand this mystery, so they said: “The
creation of evil is evil, and the creation of bad,

6 See, al-Maturidi, al-Tawhid, i, 92, 169, 314, 315; Ibn Hazm, al-Fasl fi’-Milal, ii, 121; iii, 57, 59.
7 See, al-Iji, Kitab al-Mawaqif, iii, 548; Ibn Abi’l-’Izz, Sharh ‘Aqida al-Tahawiyya, i, 356-62.
8 The Twenty-Sixth Word. See, The Words (Istanbul: Sözler Publications, 2008), 477-90. (Tr.)

--- Sayfa 112 ---
112
bad.” And to exonerate Almighty God of all fault, they did not ascribe the creation of
evil to Him; they fell into misguidance, wrongly interpreting the pillar of belief
“belief in divine determining, both the good of it and the evil of it are from God.”9
T h e  A n s w e r to the second part of the question “How can someone who
commits grievous sins remain a believer?”: Firstly, their error may be understood
clearly from the previous Indications, so there is no need to repeat it. Secondly, the
man’s evil-commanding soul prefers an ounce of immediate, present pleasure to a ton
of postponed, hidden pleasure; similarly, he shrinks at the fear of an immediate slap
more than at a year’s torment in the future. Furthermore, if the emotions dominate a
person, they do not heed the reason and mind. Desires and delusions govern in him,
and he prefers the slightest, most trivial present pleasure to huge reward in the future,
and he shrinks from some minor present distress more than from some terrible
postponed torment. For desire, illusions, and emotions do not see the future, indeed,
they deny it. And if the soul assists them, the heart, which is the seat of belief, and the
mind, fall silent and are defeated. In which case, committing grievous sins does not
arise from lack of belief, but from the defeat of the heart and mind by the predominant
emotions, desires, and illusions.
Moreover, as is understood from the previous Indications, since the way the
passions and evil work is through destruction, they are extremely easy. Satans from
among jinn and men quickly drive people down that road. It is an astonishing
situation, for according to a Hadith, a light to the extent of a fly’s wing from the
World of Eternity10 is comparable to the pleasure and bounties a person receives in
his entire life in this world,11 yet following Satan, certain unfortunates prefer the
pleasures of this fleeting world, which are a mere fly’s wing in comparison with the
pleasures of that eternal world, which are worth all this world.
It is for these reasons that the All-Wise Qur’an repeatedly and insistently, and
with encouragement and threats, restrains believers from sin and urges them to do
good.
One time this severe guidance of the All-Wise Qur’an gave me the idea that these
continual warnings and reminders imply that believers are inconstant and faulty. They
suggest a situation inconsistent with man’s integrity.

9 Muslim, Iman, 39; Tirmidhi, Iman, 4; Abu Da’ud, Sunna, 17; Nasa’i, Iman, 6; Ibn Maja,
Muqaddima, 63.
10 Tirmidhi, Zuhd, 13; Ibn Maja, Zuhd, 3; Musnad, v, 154, 177.
11 See, al-Qurtubi, al-Jami‘ al-Ahkam al-Qur’an, xiii, 7.

--- Sayfa 113 ---
113
For although a single order from his superior is sufficient to exact an official’s
obedience, if the superior repeats the same order ten times, the official will be
seriously offended. He will say: “You are insulting me. I am not disloyal.” However,
the All-Wise Qur’an insistently repeats the same command to the most sincere
believers.
At the time I was puzzling over this idea, I had two or three loyal friends. I
frequently used to warn and remind them lest they be deceived by the machinations of
satanic humans. They were not offended at me, nor said I was insulting them.
However I used to tell myself that I was offending them with these continual
admonitions and that I was accusing them of disloyalty and inconstancy. Then
suddenly the truth explained and proved in the above Indications became clear. I
understood that the All-Wise Qur’an’s insistent repetitions were apt and exactly as
required by the situation, and wise and not excessive or accusing; they were pure
wisdom and pure eloquence. I understood too the reason those loyal friends of mine
were not offended. A summary of the truth is this:
Since evil spirits provoke people in respect of destruction, they commit much evil
with few actions. People who take the path of truth and guidance, therefore, are in
need of much caution and great care and repeated warnings and various assistance.
For this reason Almighty God offers assistance to the people of belief through His
thousand and one names by way of those repetitions, and stretches out thousands of
compassionate hands to help them. He does not slight their integrity, but upholds it.
He does not belittle man, but shows Satan’s evil to be great.
O people of truth and people of guidance! The way to be saved from the above-
mentioned wiles of satanic jinn and men is this: make your headquarters the school of
the people of the truth, the Sunnis; enter the stronghold of the Qur’an of Miraculous
Exposition’s incontestable matters; and take the Prophet’s (UWBP) practices as your
guide; find safety and salvation!

EIGHTH INDICATION
Q u e s t i o n : You have proved in the above Indications that the way of
misguidance is easy, and is destruction and aggression, so that many take it. Whereas
in other parts of the Risale-i Nur you have proved decisively that the way of unbelief
and misguidance is so fraught with difficulties and problems that no one should take
it; that it is not possible to follow it. And you have shown that the path of belief and
guidance is so easy and clear that everyone should take it.
T h e  A n s w e r : There are two sorts of unbelief and misguidance. One
pertains to actions and secondary matters, and is also denial and

--- Sayfa 114 ---
114
rejection of the matters of belief. This kind is misguidance is easy. It is a non-
acceptance of the truth, an abdication, non-existence, and the absence of acceptance.
In the Risale-i Nur, this sort has been shown to be easy.
As for the second sort, it pertains not to actions and secondary matters, but is a
judgement of the mind and pertains to belief. It does not only deny belief, but opens
up a way that is the opposite of it. It is the acceptance of what is false and invalid, the
proof of the reverse of truth. This is not only the denial and refutation of belief, it is
its opposite. It is not non-acceptance so that it should be easy, but the acceptance of
non-being, and can only be accepted through proving non-existence. In accordance
with the rule “Non-existence cannot be proved,”12 it is certainly not easy to prove it.
Thus, the unbelief and misguidance shown in other parts of the Risale-i Nur to be
so difficult and problematic as to be impossible is this sort. Anyone with even a grain
of intelligence would not take this way. Moreover, as is demonstrated, it imparts such
grievous pains and suffocating darkness that anyone reasonable to the tiniest degree
would not follow it.
I f  i t  i s  a s k e d : Why do most people take it, seeing that it is so grievous,
dark, and difficult?
T h e  A n s w e r : They have fallen into it and cannot extricate themselves. And
because the animal and vegetable powers in man do not see the consequences and do
not think of them, and come to dominate man’s subtle faculties, such people do not
want to extricate themselves, so console themselves with immediate, temporary
pleasure.
Q u e s t i o n : Since misguidance gives rise to such dreadful suffering and fear,
the unbeliever should not be able to live, let alone receiving pleasure from life. He
should be crushed by the pain and be absolutely terrified. For although by reason of
his humanity he desires innumerable things and loves life, because of his unbelief, he
constantly sees death confronting him as eternal extinction and everlasting separation,
and the passing of beings and deaths of his friends and those he loves as annihilation
and eternal parting, so how can such a man live? How can he receive pleasure from
life?
T h e  A n s w e r : He deceives himself through an extraordinary sophistry of
Satan, and lives. He supposes he receives a superficial pleasure. We shall allude to the
true nature of this with a well-known comparison.
It is related that they said to the ostrich: “You’ve got wings, so fly!” But it folded
its wings and said: “I’m a camel,” and didn’t fly. So it fell into the hunter’s trap, and
not wanting the hunter to see it, stuck its head in the sand. However, it left its huge
body exposed, as prey for the hunter. They

12 Ibn Qayyim, al-Sawa’iq al-Mursala, iv, 1310; al-Ruh fi’l-Kalam, i, 198.

--- Sayfa 115 ---
115
later said to it: “You say you’re a camel, so you should carry loads.” Whereupon it
opened its wings and declared: “I’m a bird,” and so avoided being a beast of burden.
But then it had neither protector nor food, and was pursued by the hunters.
In exactly the same way, the unbeliever gave up absolute disbelief in the face of
the Qur’an’s heavenly proclamations and fell into scepticism. If he is asked: “You
think death is eternal extinction. How can a person live when he perpetually sees
before him the gallows on which he is to be hanged? How can he be happy?” Thanks
to the portion he has received of the Qur’an’s universal mercy and all-encompassing
light, the man replies: “Death doesn’t mean going to nothingness; perhaps there is life
after death.” Or else he plunges his head in the sand of heedlessness like the ostrich so
that the appointed hour will not spot him and the grave will not watch him and the
transience of things will not let fly their arrows at him!
I n  S h o r t : When like the ostrich the unbeliever looks on death and decline as
extinction, his scepticism makes him consider possible the certain tidings of the
Qur’an and revealed scriptures concerning belief in the hereafter afford him a
possibility. He grasps the possibility and does not suffer that ghastly pain. If he is then
told: “Since one will go to an everlasting realm, to have a good life there, here one has
to put up with the difficulties of performing the religious obligations,” his scepticism
leads him to reply: “Perhaps there is no such world, so why should I work for
something that doesn’t exist?” That is to say, he is saved from the pain of eternal
nothingness by the possibility of immortality afforded by that decree of the Qur’an,
and clinging onto the possibility of unbelief, he is saved from the hardship of the
religious obligations by the possibility of non-existence afforded by his scepticism.
That is to say, from this point of view, he supposes he receives more pleasure from
this life than the believers, for due to the possibility afforded by unbelief he is saved
from the hardship of the religious obligations, and due to the possibility afforded by
belief, he does not expose himself to everlasting pains. However, this satanic
sophistry is extremely superficial, temporary, and without benefit.
Thus, the All-Wise Qur’an produces a sort of manifestation of mercy for the
unbelievers too that to an extent saves their lives in this world from being Hell; it
induces doubt in them, so they live through doubt. Otherwise, by recalling the Hell of
the hereafter they would have suffered the torments of a sort of Hell in this world too,
and they would have been compelled to commit suicide.
O people of belief! Fully confident in your belief enter under the protection of the
Qur’an, which will save you from eternal extinction and the

--- Sayfa 116 ---
116
hells of this world and the hereafter. Submissively and appreciatively remain within
the bounds of the Prophet’s (UWBP) practices, and so be saved from both misery in
this world and torment in the next!

NINTH INDICATION
Q u e s t i o n : Why is it that the people of guidance, who are God’s party, are so
often defeated by the people of misguidance, who are Satan’s party, despite the Glory
of the World (Upon whom be blessings and peace) being at their head and their
receiving so much divine mercy and assistance and so many favours? What was the
reason for the dissemblers of Medina insisting on misguidance and their not
embracing guidance, despite being close to the brilliant sun-like prophethood and
messengerhood of the Seal of the Prophets (UWBP) and the Qur’anic truths, which
are more captivating than the universal laws of attraction?
T h e  A n s w e r : To solve the two parts of this awesome question, a profound
principle must be explained. It is like this:
The All-Glorious Creator of the universe has two sort of names, those pertaining
to His glory and those pertaining to His beauty. Since the names require to
demonstrate their decrees through different manifestations, the Glorious Creator
blended together opposites in the universe. Bringing them face to face, he gave them
aggressive and defensive positions, in the form of a wise and beneficial contest.
Making the opposites transgress one another’s bounds, He brought conflict and
change into being, and made the universe subject to the law of change and
transformation and the principles of progress and advancement. In humankind, the
comprehensive fruit of the tree of creation, he gave the law of contest an even
stranger form, and opening the door to striving, which would be the means to all
human progress, He gave Satan’s party certain faculties with which to challenge
God’s party.
It is because of this subtle mystery that the prophets were often defeated by the
people of misguidance. And the people of misguidance, who are extremely weak and
impotent, temporarily triumph over the people of truth, who in reality are extremely
strong, and struggle against them. The wisdom in this strange opposition is as follows:
Misguidance and unbelief comprise both non-existence and omission, so that they
are extremely easy and do not require action. They also give rise to destruction, which
is also easy, and need little action. They are also a source of aggression, which may
cause much harm to many with little action, and by way of intimidating others and
satisfying the soul’s desire for power, may secure rank and position for a person.
There is also

--- Sayfa 117 ---
117
freedom in misguidance and unbelief, which gratifies man’s vegetable and animal
powers, which are blind to consequences and obsessed by present pleasure, and
induces such subtle faculties as the heart and reason to give up their humane and far-
sighted duties.
However, the sacred way of foremost the Noble Messenger (Upon whom be
blessings and peace), the Beloved of the Sustainer of All the Worlds, and of the
people of prophethood and the people of guidance, both pertains to existence, and is
firmly established, and is constructive, and is based on the important principles of
action, moderation, prudence and foresight, worship, and smashing the domination
and independence of the evil-commanding soul.13 It is because of this that the
dissemblers of the Prophet’s (UWBP) time in Medina closed their eyes to that
refulgent sun like bats, and surrendering themselves to a satanic force of repulsion in
the face of that huge attraction, remained in misguidance.
I f  i t  i s  s a i d : The Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace)
was the Beloved of the Sustainer of All the Worlds;14 and he held truth in his hand
and spoke the truth with his tongue;15 and among the soldiers of his army were
angels;16 and he watered a whole army with one handful of water;17 and provided a
feast for a thousand men with four handfuls of wheat and the meat of one kid;18 and
caused the unbelievers’ army to flee by throwing a handful of dust at them, which
entered all their eyes;19 so how was that dominical commander who performed a
thousand miracles similar to these, defeated at the end of Uhud20 and at the beginning
of Hunayn?21
T h e  A n s w e r : God’s Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and
peace) was sent to mankind as an exemplary guide and leader so that

13 See, al-Bayhaqi, al-Zuhd, 157; al-Ghazzali, Ihya ‘Ulum al-Din, iii, 4; al-Daylami, al-Musnad,
iii, 408; Ibn Rajab, Jami‘ al-‘lum wa’l-Hikam, i, 196; al-Munawi, Fayd al-Qadir, v, 538; al-‘Ajluni,
Kashf al-Khafa’, i, 160; ii, 222.
14 See, Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 1; al-Daylami, Muqadddima, 8.
15 See, Qur’an, 17:105.
16 See, Qur’an, 3:123-5. Also, Bukhari, Maghazi, 11.
17 See, Bukhari, Wudu’, 32; Manaqib, 25; Maghazi, 35; Muslim, ‘Imara, 72, 73; Fada’il, 5-6;
Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 6; Nasa’i, Tahara, 61; Musnad, iii, 329.
18 See, Bukhari, Hiba, 28; At‘ima, 6; Maghazi, 29; Manaqib, 25; Muslim, Ashriba, 141-2, 175;
Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 6; Ibn Maja, At‘ima, 47; Muwatta’, Sifat al-Nabi, 19; Musnad, i, 197-8.
19 See, Muslim, Jihad, 81; Darimi, Siyar, 16; Musnad, i, 103, 368; v, 286, 310.
20 See, Bukhari, Jihad, 65; Bad’u’l-Khalq, 11; Manaqib al-Ansar, 22; Maghazi, 18; Ayman, 15;
Diyat, 16; Abu Da’ud, Jihad, 106; Musnad, iv, 293-4.
21 See, Bukhari, Maghazi, 54; Jihad, 52, 61, 97, 167; Muslim, Jihad, 79; Tirmidhi, Jihad, 15.

--- Sayfa 118 ---
118
men might learn from him the rules of social and personal life, become accustomed to
obeying the laws of the All-Wise One of Perfection, and act in conformity with the
principles of His wisdom. If the Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) had
always relied on wonders and miracles, he could not have been absolute guide and
leader.
He therefore displayed miracles from time to time, in answer to need, solely to
make them affirm his claim to prophethood and to nullify the unbelievers’ denial. At
other times he obeyed the divine commands more than anyone, and more than
everyone acted in conformity with the divine laws in creation, established through
dominical wisdom and will, and submitted to them. He used to wear armour when
confronting the enemy,22 and would order his troops to enter their trenches.23 He
received wounds and suffered hardship.24 In this way he obeyed and observed to the
letter the laws of divine wisdom and the Greater Shari‘a of Creation.

TENTH INDICATION
One of the most cunning of Iblis’s wiles is to make those who follow him deny
himself. Since at this time people whose minds have been tainted by materialist
philosophy in particular have been hesitant in these self-evident matters, we shall say
one or two things in the face of this stratagem of Satan. They are as follows:
There are self-evidently corporeal evil spirits who perform Satan’s functions. It is
also certain to the same degree that there are evil spirits without bodies from the jinns.
If they were clothed in physical bodies, they would be the same as those evil human
beings. Also, if those evil spirits in human form were able to leave aside their bodies,
they would be those jinn-satans. Indeed, in consequence of this terrible relationship
one deviant school pronounced: “After they have died, excessively evil spirits in
human form become devils.”
It is well-known that when something of high quality is corrupted it becomes
more corrupted than something of less quality. For example, if yoghurt and milk go
bad they may still be eaten, but if oil goes bad it becomes inedible, and poisonous
even. Similarly, if the most noble, indeed the highest of creatures, man, is corrupted,
he becomes more corrupt than a depraved animal. Like vermin who enjoy the stink of
putrifying matter and

22 See, Abu Da’ud, Jihad, 75; Ibn Maja, Jihad, 18; Musnad, iii, 449.
23 See, Bukhari, Maghazi, 29; Jihad, 34, 161; Qadar, 16; Tamanni, 7; Muslim, Jihad, 125.
24 See, Bukhari, Jihad, 80, 85, 163; Wudu’, 72; Maghazi, 24; Nikah, 123; Tibb, 27; Muslim, Jihad,
101; Tirmidhi, Tibb, 34; Ibn Maja, Tibb, 15.

--- Sayfa 119 ---
119
snakes who take pleasure at biting and poisoning, they take pride and pleasure at the
evils and wicked immorality of the swamp of misguidance, being gratified at the
harms and crimes of the darkness of evil-doing; quite simply they take on the nature
of Satan. Yes, a decisive indication of the existence of devils from the jinn, is the
existence of human satans.
Secondly: All the hundreds of decisive evidences proving the existence of angels
and spirit beings in the Twenty-Ninth Word prove also the existence of evils spirits.
We refer this aspect to that Word.
Thirdly: The existence of the angels, the representatives and supervisors of the
laws of the good matters in the universe, is established and agreed upon by all the
religions. So too, the existence of evil and satanic spirits, who are the representatives
and ushers of evil matters and the means of the laws of such matters, is required by
wisdom and reality, and is certain. Indeed, in evil matters, a conscious screen is more
necessary. For as is stated at the beginning of the Twenty-Second Word, since
everyone cannot see the true good of everything, the All-Glorious Creator has made
apparent intermediaries a screen to apparent evils and defects, so that objections
should not be levelled at Him, nor His mercy be accused, nor his wisdom criticized or
unjustly complained about, and so that objections, criticisms, and complaints should
be directed at the screen, and not turned to the Generous Creator, the Absolutely Wise
One. Just as He made illness a screen to the appointed hour of death in order to save
Azra’il from the complaints25 of His servants who die, so too He made Azra’il a
screen to the seizing of the spirits of the dying so that the complaints at that situation,
which is fancied to be lacking in compassion, should not be directed at Almighty
God. And even more certainly, dominical wisdom demanded the existence of Satan,
so that objections and criticisms in the face of evils and bad things should not be
directed at the All-Glorious Creator.
Fourthly: Just as man is a small world, the microcosm, so is the world a large
human being, the macroanthropos. Small man is an index and summary of the
macroanthropos. The large originals of the samples in man will necessarily be found
in the macroanthropos. For example, the existence of man’s faculty of memory is a
certain indication of the existence of the Preserved Tablet in the world. So too
everyone has experienced in himself the inner faculty situated in a corner of the heart
which is the means to diabolical suggestions26 and temptations and is a satanic tongue
that speaks at the

25 See, Abu Nu’aym, Hilya al-Awliya’, v, 51; al-Hakim al-Tirmidhi, Nawadir al-Usul, i, 177-8;
al-Suyuti, al-Durr al-Manthur, vi, 543.
26 See, Tirmidhi, Tafsir Sura 35:2; al-Nasa’i, al-Sunan al-Kubra, vi, 305; al-Bazzar, al-Musnad, v,
394; Abu Ya’la, al-Musnad, vii, 278; viii, 417.

--- Sayfa 120 ---
120
promptings of the surmising faculty and the corrupted power of imagination, which
becomes like a small Satan and acts contrary to its owner’s will and opposed to his
desires – these are certain evidences of the existence of great satans in the world. And
since the inner faculty which is the means of diabolical suggestions and the power of
imagination are an ear and a tongue, they infer the existence of an external evil
individual who blows on the one and makes the other speak.

ELEVENTH INDICATION
The All-Wise Qur’an states in miraculous fashion that the universe grows angry
at the evil of the people of misguidance, and the universal elements becomes wrathful
and beings, furious. Awesomely, it depicts the storm visited on Noah’s people and the
assaults of the heavens and earth, the anger of the element air at the denial of the ‘Ad
and Thamud peoples, and the fury of the sea and element water at the people of
Pharaoh, and the rage of the element earth at Qarun, and in accordance with the verse,
“Almost bursting with fury,”(67:8) the vehemence and anger of Hell at the people of
unbelief in the hereafter, and the rage of the other beings at the unbelievers and
people of misguidance; in miraculous fashion it restrains the people of misguidance
and rebellion.
Q u e s t i o n : Why do the unimportant actions and personal sins of unimportant
men attract the anger of the universe in this way?
T h e  A n s w e r : As proved in other parts of the Risale-i Nur and in the
previous Indications, unbelief and misguidance are terrible aggression and crimes that
concern all beings. For one of the most important results of the universe’s creation is
man’s worship and his responding to divine dominicality with belief and submission.
However, due to the denial which is a part of disbelief, the people of unbelief and
misguidance reject that supreme result, which is the ultimate reason for the continued
existence of beings, and they therefore perpetrate a sort of transgression against the
beings’ rights. Moreover, since they deny the manifestations of the divine names
which are apparent in the mirrors of beings and exalt their value, they both insult
those sacred names, and by degrading the value of all beings, greatly depreciate them.
Also, although beings are dominical officials charged with elevated duties, by their
unbelief, the people of misguidance cast them down, and showing them to be lifeless,
transitory, meaningless creatures, they in a way violate the rights of all of them.
Thus, since the varieties of misguidance impair to a greater or lesser extent the
dominical wisdom in the universe’s creation and the divine purposes in the world’s
continued existence, the universe becomes angry at the

--- Sayfa 121 ---
121
people of rebellion and misguidance, as do all beings and creatures.
O wretched man, whose being is small but guilt great and sin grievous! If you
want to be delivered from the wrath of the universe, the rage of beings, and the
aversion of creatures, here is the means: enter the sacred bounds of the All-Wise
Qur’an and follow the practices of God’s Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings
and peace), who was the herald of the Qur’an. So put yourself within its fold and
adhere to the practices!

TWELFTH INDICATION
This consists of four questions and answers.
F i r s t  Q u e s t i o n : How can infinite torment in an endless Hell in return for
limited sins in a limited life be justice?
T h e  A n s w e r : It was understood clearly in the above Indications, and
particularly in the Eleventh, that unbelief and misguidance constitute an infinite crime
and are transgression against innumerable rights.
S e c o n d  Q u e s t i o n : It is said in the Shari‘a that Hell is punishment for
actions, but Paradise is a divine favour.27 What is the reason for this?
T h e  A n s w e r : It is clearly shown in the above Indications that with his
faculty of will and trifling wishes, man causes awesome destruction and evils by
giving form and reality to something non-existent or theoretical. Similarly, since his
soul and appetites always incline towards evil and harm, he is responsible for the evils
that occur as a result of his trivial wishes. For his soul wanted them and his desires
gave rise to them. And since evil pertains to non-existence, the servant is the agent
and Almighty God creates it. Being responsible for the infinite crime, he certainly
deserves infinite punishment.
However, since good deeds and actions pertain to existence, man’s will and
wishes cannot be the direct cause of their existence. Man cannot be the true agent in
such acts. Also, his evil-commanding soul does not tend towards good deeds; it is
divine mercy that requires them and dominical power that creates them. Man can only
lay claim to them through belief, a wish, or an intention. And having claimed them,
such good works consist of thanks for the infinite divine bounties received, such as
the gifts of belief and existence. Such thanks looks to past bounties, while Paradise is
a favour of the Most Merciful which since it as been promised by Him will be given.
Apparently it is a reward, but in reality it is a favour.

27 See, Qur’an, 10:58. See also, Bukhari, Riqaq, 18; Marda, 19; Muslim, Sifat al-Munafiqin, 71-3,
75-6, 78.

--- Sayfa 122 ---
122
That is to say, in evils the soul is the cause and deserves the punishment, while in
good deeds, both the cause and the occasion are from God. Man can only lay claim to
them through belief. He may not say: “I want the reward,” but he may say: “I hope for
divine favour.”
T h i r d  Q u e s t i o n : It is understood from the above explanations that since
evils multiply through contagion and aggression, a single evil deed should be
recorded as a thousand; and since good deeds pertain to existence, they do not
multiply nor do they occur through the servant’s creative act or the desires of his soul;
they therefore should not be recorded at all or as only one. So why are evil deeds
recorded as one and good deeds as ten, and sometimes as thousands?28
T h e  A n s w e r : In this way Almighty God demonstrates His perfect mercy
and the beauty of His compassionateness.
F o u r t h  Q u e s t i o n : The successes the people of misguidance have
achieved and the power they display and their victories over the people of guidance
show that they rely on some power and truth. This means either that the people of
guidance possess some weakness, or that the misguided possess some truth?
T h e  A n s w e r : God forbid, neither do they possess any truth, nor do the
people of truth have any weakness. But regretably some of the ordinary people who
are short-sighted and unreasoning become doubtful and hesitant, and harm comes to
their belief. For they say: If the people of truth had possessed complete truth and
reality, they should not have suffered defeat and abasement to this degree. For the
truth is powerful. According to the fundamental principle “Truth is exalted and shall
not be overcome,”29 power lies in truth. If the people of misguidance had not
possessed a true power and point of support, they could not have predominated over
the people of truth and triumphed to this extent.
T h e  A n s w e r : As is proven in the above Indications, the defeat of the people
of truth does not arise from lack of power and absence of truth, and as is also proven,
the people of misguidance’s victory does not spring from their power and capacity
and their having some source of support. Hence, the answer to this question is all the
above Indications; here we shall only point out a number of the tricks and weapons
they employ, as follows:
I myself have frequently observed that mischief-makers, who form ten per cent,
defeat the righteous, who form ninety per cent. I used to be astonished and curious.
Investigating, I understood certainly that their victory

28 See, Qur’an, 6:160. See also, Bukhari, Iman, 31; Muslim, Iman, 206.
29 See, Bukhari, Jana’iz, 79: “al-Islam ya’lu wa la yu’la.”

--- Sayfa 123 ---
123
results not from power, but from corruption, baseness, destruction, taking advantage
of differences among the people of truth, sowing conflict among them, from playing
on their weak traits of character and grafting them with such traits, and exciting the
emotions of the soul and personal hatred, and through working the evil capacities in
human nature which are like mines of corruption, and through hypocritically flattering
the soul’s tyranny in the name of fame and glory, and through everyone fearing their
unfeeling destruction. By means of diabolical machinations like these, they
temporarily triumph over the people of truth. But in accordance with the verse,
And the end is [best] for the righteous,(7:128)
and the rule, “Truth is exalted and shall not be overcome,” in addition to its not
yielding any significant benefit for them, their temporary triumph will lead to their
earning Hell for themselves and Paradise for the people of truth.
Thus, because in misguidance those without power appear powerful and the
insignificant win fame, they take up a position opposed to the people of truth. In this
way conceited, fame-seeking, hypocritical people demonstrate their power although it
has little substance and win a position for themselves through intimidating others and
causing harm; they are seen and attention is drawn to them, and the destruction of
which they are the cause, not through power and ability, but through omission and
failure to act, is attributed to them and they become talked about. Just like the person
obsessed with fame who defiled a place of worship so that everyone would talk about
him. Even if it meant being execrated, so long as he was talked about, his worship of
fame made it appear desirable to him. The case became proverbial.
O wretched man created for the eternal realm and enamoured of this transient
world! Study closely the meaning of the verse,
And neither heaven nor earth shed a tear over them,(44:29)
and heed it. Look, what does it say? With its explicit meaning it says: “When the
people of misguidance die, the heavens and earth, which are connected with man, do
not weep over them, that is, they are pleased at their deaths.” While with its implied
meaning, it says: “The heavens and earth weep over the bodies of the people of
guidance when they die; they do not want them to depart.” For all the universe is
connected with the people of belief and its beings are happy with them. For by virtue
of their belief they know the Creator of the Universe, so appreciate the universe’s
value, and respect and love it. They do not nurture implicit enmity and contempt for it
like the people of misguidance.

--- Sayfa 124 ---
124
O man, think! You are bound to die. If you follow your soul and Satan, your
neighbours, and even your relations, will be happy at being delivered from you. But if
saying, “I seek refuge with God from Satan the Accursed,” you follow the Qur’an and
the Merciful One’s Beloved (UWBP), then in accordance with your degree the
heavens and earth and all beings will be sorry at your parting, and in effect weep.
Mourning in elevated fashion and giving you a splendid send-off, they will indicate
that you will have a good welcome in the world of eternity according to your degree,
when you enter it through the door of the grave.30

THIRTEENTH INDICATION
This consists of three points.
F i r s t  P o i n t : One of Satan’s most cunning wiles is to deceive people with
narrow minds, short views, and constricted hearts concerning the immensity of the
truths of belief. He says: “It is said that a single Being directs and administers within
His dominicality all particles and planets and stars and all the other beings and all
their states. How can a person believe in such an immense and extraordinary matter?
How can it be contained in the heart? How can the mind accept it?” He awakens a
feeling of denial in respect of human impotence.
T h e  A n s w e r : The way to silence this wile of Satan’s is “God is Most
Great!” And its true answer is “God is Most Great!” Yes, the reason “God is Most
Great!” is the most frequently repeated of all the marks of Islam is to eliminate this
wile. For it is through the light of “God is Most Great!” that man’s impotence and
lack of power, weakness and lack of strength, and narrow thought see such infinitely
vast truths and affirm them. It is through the strength of “God is Most Great!” that
man sustains those truths, and situates them within the sphere of “God is Most Great!”
And he says to his heart which starts to doubt:
It is self-evident that the universe is administered and directed in most orderly
fashion. There are two ways in which this may occur:
The First Way: It is possible that despite its wondrous immensity, such an
astonishing work comes about through wondrous art in a wondrous way. So this first
way is that the universe exists through the dominicality, will, and power of a Single
and Eternally Besought One, to whose existence are witnesses to the number of
beings, indeed, of minute particles.
The Second Way: This is the way of unbelief and associating partners with God,
which is in no way possible and is so difficult as to be impossible

30 See, Tirmidhi, Qiyama, 26 (2460); Ibn Maja, Zuhd, 31; Musnad, ii, 364; vi, 140.

--- Sayfa 125 ---
125
and is in no respect reasonable. For as is proved decisively in many parts of the
Risale-i Nur such as the Twentieth Letter and Twenty-Second Word, there would
have to be present in all the beings in the universe and even in every single particle
absolute divinity and all-encompassing knowledge and infinite power so that the total
order and regularity, the sensitive balance and distinction, and the perfect, adorned
embroideries of art to be observed in beings could come into existence.
In Short: If there were no immense and tremendous dominicality, which is
completely appropriate and fitting, it would necessitate following a way that is in
every respect unreasonable and precluded. Even Satan cannot propose fleeing from
such necessary immensity, and suggest accepting impossibility.
S e c o n d  P o i n t : Another of Satan’s cunning wiles is to prevent man
admitting his faults in order to close up the way of seeking forgiveness and taking
refuge with God. He also incites the egotism of the human soul, so that the soul
defends itself like a lawyer, quite simply acquitting itself of all fault.
Yes, a soul that listens to Satan does not want to see its own faults. Even if it does
see them, it explains them away in a hundred ways. According to the saying: “The eye
of contentment is blind to faults,”31 when a person looks with pleasure on his soul, he
does not see its errors. And because he does not see them, he does not admit to them
or  seek forgiveness, or seek refuge with God from them, so becomes the plaything of
Satan. How can the soul be relied on when a noble prophet like Joseph (UWP) said:
“Nor do I absolve my own self [of blame]; the [human] soul is certainly
prone to evil, unless my Sustainer do bestow His mercy.”?(12:53)
The person who accuses his soul, sees its faults. And he who admits his faults, seeks
forgiveness for them. And he who seeks forgiveness, takes refuge with God. And he
who takes refuge with God, is saved from Satan’s evil. Not to see one’s faults is a
greater fault than the first fault. And not to admit to one’s faults is a serious defect. If
one sees the fault, it ceases to be a fault. If one admits it, one becomes worthy of
forgiveness.32
T h i r d  P o i n t : A satanic wile corrupting the life of society is this: not to see
all the virtues of a believer on account of a single bad point. Those unjust people who
heed this wile of Satan are in this way inimical to

31 Ibn ‘Asakir, Tarikh Dimashq, xxxiii, 219; xxxvi, 319; al-Ghazzali, Ihya ‘Ulum al-Din, iii, 36;
al-Qalqashandi, Subh al-A’sha’, ix, 196.
32 See, al-Daylami, al-Musnad, v, 199; al-Quda’i, Musnad al-Shihab, ii, 44.

--- Sayfa 126 ---
126
believers. However, when Almighty God weighs up deeds with absolute justice on the
supreme scales at the Last Judgement, He will judge in accordance with the
predominance of good deeds over evils and vice versa. Seeing that the causes of evil
deeds are numerous and their existence is easy, sometimes He veils numerous bad
deeds with a single good deed.
That is to say, dealings in this world should be in accordance with divine justice.
If a person’s good points are greater in regard to quality or quantity than his bad
points, he is deserving of love and respect. Indeed, one should forgive numerous bad
points on account of a single laudable virtue. However, due to the vein of tyranny in
his nature, at the promptings of Satan, the person forgets the hundred virtues of others
because of a single bad point; he is hostile towards his believing brother, and commits
sins. Just as a fly’s wing covering the eye conceals a mountain, so too, the veil of
hatred makes man conceal virtues as great as a mountain due to a single evil
resembling a fly’s wing; he forgets them, is hostile towards his brother believer, and
becomes a tool of corruption in the life of society.
By means of another wile resembling this one, Satan corrupts the integrity of
peoples’ thoughts. He impairs sound judgement concerning the truths of belief and
damages integrity and correctness of thought. It is like this:
He desires to destroy hundreds of evidences proving the truths of belief with a
slight hint refuting them. Whereas it is an established principle that “a single proof is
superior to a hundred denials.” The statement of a witness proving a claim is
preferable to a hundred people denying it. Consider this truth by means of the
following comparison:
There is a palace with a hundred doors all closed. If one of its doors is opened,
the palace may be entered and all the doors opened. If all the doors are open and one
or two are closed, it may not be said that the palace cannot not be entered.
Thus, the truths of belief are the palace. Each evidence is a key; it proves the
truths and opens a door. If one of the doors remains closed, the truths of belief cannot
be abandoned and denied. Satan however, in consequence of certain things or by
means of heedlessness or ignorance, points out a door that has remained closed, thus
causing a person to disregard all the positive evidences. He deceives the person,
saying: “See, this palace cannot be entered. Perhaps it isn’t a palace and perhaps
there’s nothing inside it.”
O wretched man afflicted by Satan and his wiles! If you want the life of religion
and of society and personal life all to be healthy, and if you want integrity of thought,
a sound view, and a sincere heart, weigh up your

--- Sayfa 127 ---
127
actions and thoughts on the scales of the incontestable matters of the Qur’an and the
balance of the Prophet’s (UWBP) practices. Always take the Qur’an and the practices
as your guide. Say: “I take refuge with God from Satan the Accursed,” and seek
refuge with God Almighty!
The above thirteen Indications are thirteen keys. Use them to open the door of the
fortified stronghold of the Sura,
Say: I seek refuge with the Lord and Cherisher of mankind * The Ruler of
mankind * The God of mankind * From the mischief of the Whisperer [of
evil], who withdraws [after his whisper]–  * [The same] who whispers into
the hearts of mankind–  * Among jinns and among men;(114:1-6)
enter this secure citadel and find safety!
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32)
And say: O My Sustainer, I seek refuge with You from the whisperings of the
Evil Ones, * and I seek refuge with you, my Sustainer lest they should come
near me.(23:97-8)

--- Sayfa 128 ---
128
The Fourteenth Flash

[This consists of two stations. The first consists of the answer to two
questions.]

In His Name be He glorified!
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.(17:44)

Peace be upon you, and God’s mercy and blessings!
My Dear and Loyal Brother, Re’fet Bey!
The answer to the question you ask about the Bull and the Fish is to be found in
several parts of the Risale-i Nur. The Third Branch of the Twenty-Fourth Word
contains an explanation of that sort of question, in the light of twelve important rules
called twelve principles. Those rules all offer criteria for understanding the various
interpretations of the Prophet’s (UWBP) Hadiths, and comprise important principles
for dispelling doubts that may arise about them. Unfortunately at the moment a
number of circumstances prevent my becoming occupied with scholarly matters that
are not inspiration. I therefore cannot reply to your question as you asked it. I have to
be busy with the inspiration when it comes to my heart, I am compelled to be busy
with it. I answer some questions because they coincide with the inspirations, so don’t
be offended. I cannot answer all questions as they deserve. But this time let me reply
briefly to your question.
This time you ask in your question: “The hojas say that the earth rests on a bull
and a fish, but geography sees it hanging in space and travelling like a star. There is
neither bull nor fish?”
T h e  A n s w e r : There is a sound narration attributed to people like Ibn ‘Abbas
(May God be pleased with him) which says that the Noble Messenger (Upon whom
be blessings and peace) was asked: “What does the world rest on?” He replied: “On
the Bull and the Fish.”1 In one narration,

1 See, Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iv, 636; al-Mundhiri, al-Targhib wa’l-Tarhib, iv, 257; al-Haythami,
Majmu‘ al-Zawa’id, viii, 131; Ibn al-Jawzi, al-Muntazam, i, 172.

--- Sayfa 129 ---
129
he said, “On the Bull,” and on another occasion he said, “On the Fish.” Some Hadith
scholars applied this Hadith to superstitions and stories taken from isra’iliyat, related
since early times. Scholars of the Children of Israel who became Muslims especially
applied it to stories about the Bull and the Fish they had seen in the former scriptures,
altering it to mean something strange. For now I shall explain three ‘principles’ and
three ‘aspects’ in connection with your question.

FIRST PRINCIPLE
When some of the Israelite scholars became Muslims, their former knowledge
became Muslim along with them and was ascribed to Islam. However, what they
knew contained errors which were certainly their errors and not Islam’s.

SECOND PRINCIPLE
On comparisons and metaphors passing from the elite to the common people, that
is, on their falling from the hands of learning to those of ignorance, with the passage
of time they are imagined to be literally true. For example, when I was a child an
eclipse of the moon occurred. I asked my mother: “Why has the moon gone like
that?” She replied: “A snake has swallowed it.” “It can still be seen,” I said. She
replied: “The snakes up there are like glass; they show the things inside them!”
For a long time I recalled this childhood memory. Pondering over it, I would say:
“How could such a false superstition come to be repeated by serious people like my
mother?” Then when I studied astronomy I realized that people like her who repeated
it supposed a metaphor to be reality. For when the vast circle called the zodiac, which
is the circle denoting the degrees of the sun, and the circle of the declination of the
moon, which is the circle depicting its mansions, pass over one another, it gives each
of the two circles the form of an arc. Using a subtle metaphor the astronomers called
the two arcs “the two great serpents.” They called the points of intersection of the two
circles “the head” and “the tail.” When the moon comes to the head and the sun to the
tail, in the terminology of astronomy, an interposition of the earth occurs. That is, the
globe of the earth passes right between the two of them and the moon is eclipsed.
According to the above metaphor, “the moon has entered the serpent’s mouth.” Thus,
when this elevated and scholarly metaphor entered the language of the common
people, in the course of time it took on the shape of a huge snake swallowing the
moon.
Thus, with a sacred and subtle metaphor and meaningful allusion, two great
angels were called the Bull (T. Sevr; Ar. Thawr) and the Fish (T. Hût; A. Hut), but on
entering

--- Sayfa 130 ---
130
the common language from the elevated tongue of the prophethood, the metaphor was
transformed and given a literal meaning, and they took on the form of a truly
enormous bull and awesome fish.

THIRD PRINCIPLE
Just as the Qur’an contains allegories and comparisons, and with them teaches
profound matters to the ordinary people; so do Hadiths contain comparisons and
allegories; they express profound truths by means of familiar comparisons. For
example, as we have described in two other places, one time in the presence of the
Prophet (UWBP) a deep rumbling was heard. He said: “It is the sound of a rock which
has been rolling downhill for seventy years and has now hit the bottom of Hell.”2 A
few minutes later someone arrived and reported that a famous seventy-year-old
dissembler had died, thus proclaiming the true meaning of the Noble Messenger’s
(Upon whom be blessings and peace) highly eloquent comparison.
For now, three ‘aspects’ will be explained in reply to your question:
T h e  F i r s t : Almighty God appointed four angels – called the Eagle (Nasr –
Aquila) and the Bull (Thawr – Taurus)3 – as bearers of the divine throne and the
heavens, to supervise His dominical sovereignty. He also appointed two angels as
supervisors and bearers of the earth, which is the small brother of the heavens and
companion of the planets. One of them was called the Bull and the other, the Fish.
The reason for His giving these names is this:
There are two parts to the earth, one is water and the other is land. Fish inhabit
the part that is water, while agriculture, the support of human life, is practised with
bulls and oxen, which inhabit the part of the earth that is land; agriculture rests on the
shoulders of oxen. Since the two angels appointed to the earth are both commanders
and supervisors, they surely have some sort of relationship with the bovine and
piscine species. Indeed, “And the knowledge is with God,” the angels are represented
in the Worlds of the Inner Dimensions of Things and of Similitudes in the forms of a
bull and a fish.4 Thus, alluding to their relationship and supervision and those

2 See, Muslim, Janna, 12; Musnad, iii, 315, 341, 346.
3 Bayhaqi, Shu‘ab al-Iman, 433; Dhahabi, Mizan al-I‘tidal, iv, 352; al-Suyuti, al-Durr al-
Manthur, i, 329.
4 The globe of the earth is a dominical ship ploughing through the oceans of space, and according
to a Hadith, is the tillage of the hereafter, that is, an arable field and nursery. How fitting, then, are the
name of Fish for the angel who commands that huge lifeless and unconscious ship and makes it swim
through those seas at the divine command in regular, purposeful fashion, and the name of Bull for the
angel who with divine permission supervises that arable field.

--- Sayfa 131 ---
131
two important species of the earth, with his miraculous manner of expression the
Prophet (UWBP) said: “The earth is on the Bull and the Fish,” thus stating in one
fine, concise sentence a page of profound truths.
S e c o n d  A s p e c t : If it is said: “What does the government and its rule rest
on?,” it will be said in reply: “On the sword and the pen.” That is, it rests on the
valour of the soldier’s sword and the perspicacity and justice of the official’s pen. In
the same way, since the earth is the dwelling-place of animate beings and the
commander of animate beings is man, and fish are the means of livelihood of the
majority of men who live by the sea, and the majority of those who do not live by the
sea live by means of agriculture, which rests on the shoulders of bulls and oxen, and
fish are also an important means of trade, just as the state rests on the sword and the
pen, so it may also be said that the earth rests on the ox and the fish. For man cannot
survive if the ox does not work or fish do not produce millions of eggs; life would
cease and the All-Wise Creator would destroy the earth.
Thus, replying in a most miraculous, elevated, and wise way, God’s Noble
Messenger (UWBP) said: “The earth rests on the bull and the fish.” He taught an
extensive truth with two words and showed how closely linked man’s life is to the life
of the animal species.
T h i r d  A s p e c t : In the view of ancient cosmology the sun travelled and a
constellation was defined every thirty degrees of its journey. If hypothetical lines
were drawn connecting the stars in the constellations with one another, some take on
the shape of a lion, others the shape of scales, others the shape of a bull, and yet
others the shape of a fish. Names were given to the constellations in consequence of
those relationships. But in the view of astronomy this age, the sun does not travel. The
constellations remain idle and without work, for the earth travels instead of the sun.
They assume shapes on a small scale within the annual orbit of the earth on the
ground, instead of those lofty idle constellations above. Thus, the heavenly
constellations are represented out of earth’s annual orbit, and each month the earth is
in the shadow and likeness of one of the constellations. It is as if they are represented
in the mirror-like annual orbit of the earth.
For this reason, as we mentioned above, on one occasion the Noble Messenger
(Upon whom be blessings and peace) said: “On the Bull,” and on another he said:
“On the Fish.” Yes, he indicated a truly profound truth that would be understood only
many centuries later, and said in the miraculous prophetic tongue: “On the Bull,”
because at that time the earth was in the likeness of the constellation Taurus. And on
being asked a month later, he replied: “On the Fish,” for then the earth was in the
shadow of the constellation of Pisces.

--- Sayfa 132 ---
132
Yes, he said: “On the Bull and the Fish” and alluded to an elevated truth that
would be understood in the future, and hinted at the earth’s duty of motion and
journeying, and the heavenly constellations being idle and without guests in regard to
the sun, and that the constellations which truly work are in the earth’s annual orbit
and that it is the earth which journeys and performs duties in the constellations.
And God knows best what is right.
The extraordinary and unreasonable stories in some Islamic books are either
isra’iliyat, or they are allegories, or they are the interpretations of the Hadith scholars,
which careless people have supposed to be Hadiths and have attributed them to God’s
Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace).
O our Sustainer! Do not take us to task if we forget or do wrong.(2:282)
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught
us; indeed You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32)

THE SECOND QUESTION is about the People of the Cloak.
My brother! Regarding your question about the People of the Cloak, only one of
the many instances of wisdom concerning it will be explained, as follows:
Many mysteries and instances of wisdom are found in God’s Noble Messenger
(Upon whom be blessings and peace) covering ‘Ali (May God be pleased with him)
and Fatima (May God be pleased with her) and Hasan and Husayn (May God be
pleased with them) with the blessed cloak he wore, and his praying for them with the
verse,
[And God only wishes] to remove all abomination from you, members of the
Family, and to make you pure and spotless.(33:33)5
I shall not discuss the mysteries, but one instance of wisdom connected with the
function of messengership is this:
God’s Noble Messenger (UWBP) saw with the eye of prophethood, which
penetrated the Unseen and beheld the future, that thirty or forty years later serious
strife would erupt among the Companions and the generation that succeeded them,
and that blood would be spilt. He witnessed that three of the people under his cloak
would be the most distinguished of

5 This narration has various lines of transmission, see, Muslim, Fada’il al-Sahaba, 61; Tirmidhi,
Manaqib, 60; Musnad, i, 330; iv, 107; vi, 292, 296, 298, 304; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, ii, 416; iii, 147;
al-Haythami, Majma‘ al-Zawa’id, ix, 166, 169; al-Suyuti, al-Durr al-Manthur, v, 197; Kandahlawi,
Hayat al-Sahaba, iv, 105.

--- Sayfa 133 ---
133
them. So he enfolded them in his cloak, giving the four, plus himself, the title of the
Five People of the Cloak.6 In this way he wanted to acquit and exonerate ‘Ali (May
God be pleased with him) in the view of the Islamic community; to console and offer
condolences to Husayn (May God be pleased with him); to congratulate Hasan and
proclaim the honour he would acquire by removing through reconciliation serious
discord, and his supreme value for the Islamic community; and to show that Fatima’s
descendants would be pure and honoured.
For sure ‘Ali was the rightful Caliph, but since the blood that would be spilt held
great importance and since in the view of the community his acquittal and exoneration
were important on account of the function of messengership, the Noble Messenger
(UWBP) in this way absolved him. He invited the Kharijites and the aggressive
supporters of the Umayyads to be silent, for they criticized him and accused him of
error and misguidance. Yes, the excesses perpetrated against ‘Ali (May God be
pleased with him) by the extreme supporters of the Kharijites and Umayyads and their
accusations of misguidance, and the truly tragic, distressing events in Husayn’s (May
God be pleased with him) time together with the excesses and innovations of the
Shi‘a and the absolving of the two Shaykhs, have all been most damaging for the
people of Islam.
Thus, with his cloak and prayer, the Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings
and peace) absolved Husayn of responsibility, and cleared him of the accusations and
bad opinion of the Islamic community. So too he congratulated Hasan for the good he
was to do for the community by bringing about the reconciliation. And he announced
that being known as the Prophet’s Family, the blessed progeny of Fatima would be
highly honoured, like those of Mary’s mother,7 who said:
I commend her and her offspring to your protection from the Evil One, the
Rejected.(3:36)
O God! Grant blessings to our master Muhammad, and to his righteous,
pure, and pious Family, and to his Companions, noble and select strivers in
God’s way. Amen.

6 See, Muslim, Fada’il al-Sahaba, 61; Ibn Abi Shayba, al-Musannaf, vi, 370.
7 She was called Hanna bint Fakuz; see, al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, ii, 648, 651; al-Tabari, Jami‘ al-
Bayan, iii, 235, 237, 241, 244, 294.

--- Sayfa 134 ---
134
Second Station

This consists of six of the thousands of mysteries contained in
“In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate”

NOTE:  A bright light from “In the Name of God, the Merciful, the
Compassionate” concerning divine mercy appeared to my dull mind
from afar. I wanted to record it for myself in the form of notes, to
hunt it down and capture it, and circumscribe the light with twenty to
thirty mysteries. But unfortunately I was not able to do this at the
present time and the twenty or thirty mysteries were reduced to five
or six. When I say: “O man!”, I mean myself. Although this lesson
addresses my own soul in particular, I refer it as the Second Station of
the Fourteenth Flash for the approval of my meticulous brothers in
the hope that it may benefit those with whom I am connected
spiritually and whose souls are more discerning than mine. This
lesson looks to the heart more than the reason, and to spiritual
pleasure and perception rather than rational proofs.

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
[The Queen] said: “Ye chiefs! Here is – delivered to me – a letter worthy of
respect. It is from Solomon, and is [as follows]: In the Name of God, the
Merciful, the Compassionate.”(27:29-30)
A number of mysteries will be mentioned in this station.

FIRST MYSTERY
I saw one manifestation of “In the Name of God, the Merciful, the
Compassionate” as follows:
On the face of the universe, the face of the earth, and the face of man are three
stamps of dominicality one within the other and each showing samples of the others.
The First is the great stamp of Godhead, which is manifested through the mutual
assistance, co-operation, and embracing and corresponding to one another of beings in
the totality of the universe. This looks to “In the Name of God.”
The Second is the great stamp of divine mercifulness, which is manifested
through the mutual resemblance and proportion, order, harmony, favour and
compassion in the disposal, raising, and administration of plants

--- Sayfa 135 ---
135
and animals on the face of the earth. This looks to “In the Name of God, the
Merciful.”
Then is the exalted stamp of divine compassionateness, which is manifested
through the subtleties of divine beneficence, fine points of divine clemency, and rays
of divine compassion on the face of man’s comprehensive nature. This looks to “the
Compassionate” in “In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.”
That is to say, “In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate” is the
sacred title of three stamps of divine oneness, which form a luminous line on the page
of the world, and a strong cord, and shining filament. That is, by being revealed from
above, the tip of “In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate” rests on
man, the fruit of the universe and miniature copy of the world; it binds the lower
world to the divine throne; it is a way for man to ascend to the human throne.

SECOND MYSTERY
In order not to overwhelm minds by divine unity, which is apparent in the
boundless multiplicity of creatures, the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition constantly
points out the manifestation of divine oneness within divine unity. For example, the
sun encompasses numberless things with its light. A truly extensive conceptual ability
and comprehensive view is necessary to behold the sun itself in the totality of its light.
So, lest the sun be forgotten, it is displayed in every shining object by means of its
reflection. And in accordance with their capacities, all lustrous objects reflect the
sun’s attributes, such as its light and heat and the seven colours in its light, together
with the manifestation of its essence. So too, the sun’s attributes encompass all the
things facing it.
In exactly the same way, “And God’s is the highest similitude”(16:60) – but let
there be no mistake in the comparison – just as divine oneness and eternal
besoughtedness have a manifestation together with all the divine names in everything,
in animate creatures in particular, and especially in man’s mirror-like essence; so too
through divine unity each of the divine names connected to beings encompasses all
things. Thus, lest minds become overwhelmed by divine unity and hearts forget the
Most Pure and Holy Essence, the Qur’an constantly draws attention to the stamp of
divine oneness within divine unity. And that stamp, with its three salient points, is “In
the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.”

THIRD MYSTERY
What makes this boundless universe rejoice is clearly divine mercy.

--- Sayfa 136 ---
136
What illuminates these dark beings is self-evidently divine mercy. What fosters and
raises creatures struggling with their endless needs is self-evidently again divine
mercy. What causes the whole universe to be turned towards man, like a tree together
with all its parts is turned towards its fruit, and causes it to look to him and run to his
assistance is clearly divine mercy. What fills and illuminates boundless space and the
empty, vacant world and makes it rejoice is self-evidently divine mercy. And what
designates ephemeral man for eternity and makes him the addressee and beloved of
the Pre-Eternal and Post-Eternal One is self-evidently divine mercy.
O man! Since divine mercy is such a powerful, inviting, sweet, assisting lovable
truth, say: “In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate,” adhere to this
truth and be saved from absolute desolation and the pains of unending needs! Draw
close to the throne of the Pre-Eternal and Post-Eternal Monarch, and availing yourself
of the compassionate and rays of divine mercy, become His addressee, friend, and
beloved.
All the realms of beings in the universe are purposively gathered around man and
are made to hasten to meet all his needs with the utmost order and wisdom, which
clearly arises from one of two situations. Either each realm of beings knows man,
obeys him, and runs to help him, which just as it is completely irrational is also
impossible in many respects; or an absolutely impotent being like man has to possess
the power of the mightiest absolute sovereign; or this assistance occurs through the
knowledge of an Absolutely Powerful One behind the veil of the universe. That is to
say, it is not that the different beings in the universe know man, but that they are the
evidences of a Knowing, Compassionate One who is acquainted with him and knows
him.
O man! Come to your senses! Is it at all possible that the All-Glorious One, who
causes all the varieties of creatures to turn towards you and stretch out their hands to
assist you, and to say: “Here we are!” in the face of your needs – is it possible that He
does not know you, is not acquainted with you, does not see you? Since He does
know you, He informs you that He knows you through His mercy. So you should
know Him too, and with respect let Him know that you know Him, and understand
with certainty that what subjugates the vast universe to an absolutely weak, absolutely
impotent, absolutely needy, ephemeral, insignificant creature like you, and despatches
it to assist you, is the truth of divine mercy, which comprises wisdom, favour,
knowledge, and power.
Most certainly, a mercy such as this requires universal and sincere thanks, and
earnest and genuine respect. Therefore, say: “In the Name of God, the Merciful, the
Compassionate,” which is the interpreter and expression

--- Sayfa 137 ---
137
of such sincere thanks and genuine respect. Make it the means of attaining to the
mercy, and an intercessor at the court of the All-Merciful One.
The existence and reality of divine mercy are as clear as the sun. For just as a
woven tapestry centred on one point is formed by the order and situation of the
threads of its warp and weft coming from all directions, so too the luminous threads
extending from the manifestation of a thousand and one divine names in the vast
sphere of the universe weave such a seal of compassionateness, tapestry of clemency,
and seal of benevolence within a stamp of mercy that it demonstrates itself to minds
more brilliantly than the sun.
The Beauteous All-Merciful One, who orders the sun and moon, the elements and
minerals, and plants and animals like the warp and weft of a vast woven tapestry
through the rays of His thousand and one names, and causes them to serve life; and
demonstrates His compassion through the exceedingly sweet and self-sacrificing
compassion of mothers, plant and animal; and subjugates animate creatures to human
life, and from this demonstrates man’s importance and a most lovely large tapestry of
divine dominicality, and manifests His brilliant mercy; – that Most Merciful One has,
in the face of His own absolute lack of need, made His mercy an acceptable
intercessor for animate creatures and man.
O man! If you are truly a human being, say: “In the Name of God, the Merciful,
the Compassionate.” Find that intercessor! For sure, it is clearly, self-evidently, divine
mercy which, without forgetting or confusing any of them, raises, nurtures, and
administers the innumerable plant and animal species on the earth at precisely the
right time and with perfect order, wisdom, and beneficence, and stamps the seal of
divine oneness on the face of the globe of the earth. The existence of divine mercy is
as certain as the existence of the beings on the face of the earth, so do the beings offer
evidences of its reality to their own number.
Just as there is this seal of mercy and stamp of divine oneness on the face of the
earth, so on the face of man’s nature is a stamp of divine mercy that is not inferior to
the stamp of compassion and vast stamp of mercy on the face of the universe. Simply,
man has so comprehensive a nature he is as though the point of focus of a thousand
and one divine names.
O man! Is it at all possible that the One who gives you this face, and places such
a stamp of mercy and seal of oneness on it would leave you to your own devices,
attach no importance to you, pay no attention to your actions, make the whole
universe, which is turned towards you, futile and pointless, and make the tree of
creation rotten and insignificant with decayed fruit? Would He cause His mercy to be
denied, although it is as

--- Sayfa 138 ---
138
obvious as the sun, as well as His wisdom, which is as clear as daylight, and neither
of which can in any way be doubted, nor are in any way deficient? God forbid!
O man! Understand that there is a way to ascend to the throne of divine mercy,
and that is, “In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.” If you want to
understand the importance of this ascent, look at the beginning of the one hundred and
fourteen Suras of the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition, and at the beginnings of all
estimable books, and at the start of all good works. A clear proof of the God-
determined grandeur of “In the Name of God” is that Imam Shafi‘i (May God be
pleased with him), one of the very foremost Islamic scholars, said: “In the Name of
God, the Merciful, the Compassionate is only one verse, yet it was revealed one
hundred  and fourteen times in the Qur’an.”1

FOURTH MYSTERY
In the face of the manifestation of divine unity within boundless multiplicity,
declaring: “You alone do we worship”(1:5) is not sufficient for everyone; the mind
wanders. One’s heart would have to be as broad as the globe to observe the Single
One behind the unity in the totality of beings, and to say: “You alone do we worship,
and from You alone do we seek help!”(1:5) In consequence, so that the seal of divine
oneness should be apparent on all species and realms of beings just as it is shown
clearly on individual objects, and that they should call to mind the Single One, it is
shown within the stamp of divine mercy. Thus everyone at every level may turn to the
Most Pure and Holy One, and saying: “You alone do we worship, and from You alone
do we seek help,” address Him directly.
It is in order to express this mighty mystery and clearly point out the seal of
divine oneness that the All-Wise Qur’an suddenly mentions the smallest sphere and
most particular matter when describing the vastest sphere of the universe, for
example, the creation of the heavens and the earth. That is, so that the mind does not
wander, nor the heart drown, and the spirit may find its True Object of Worship
directly, while mentioning the creation of the heavens and earth it opens a discussion
of man’s creation and voice, and the subtle details of the bounties and wisdom in his
features, for example. This truth is demonstrated in miraculous fashion by the verse,

1 See, al-Shafi’i, al-Umm, i, 208; al-Jassas, Ahkam al-Qur’an, i, 8; al-Ghazzali, al-Mustafa, i, 82;
Ibn al-Jawzi, al-Tahqiq fi Ahadith al-Khilaf, i, 345-7; al-Zayla’i, Nasb al-Raya, i, 327.

--- Sayfa 139 ---
139
And among His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the
variations in your languages and in your colours.”(30:22)
Within innumerable creatures and infinite multiplicity, there are stamps of unity
like concentric circles of many sorts and degrees from the greatest stamp to the
smallest. But however clear the unity is, it is still unity within multiplicity; it does not
truly address observers. Hence, there has to be the stamp of divine oneness behind
unity so that unity does not call to mind multiplicity and before the Most Pure and
Holy One a way may be opened up to the heart directly.
Furthermore, a truly captivating design, shining light, agreeable sweetness,
pleasing beauty, and powerful truth – which is the stamp of divine mercy and seal of
divine compassion – has been placed on the stamp of divine oneness in order to direct
gazes towards it and attract hearts. Yes, it is the strength of that mercy that attracts the
gazes of conscious beings, draws them to it, and causes them to reach the seal of
oneness and to observe the Single One, and from that to truly manifest the address of
“You alone do we worship, and from You alone do we seek help.”
It is because “In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate” is the index
of Sura al-Fatiha and a concise summary of the Qur’an that it is the sign and
interpreter of this mighty mystery. The person who clasps it may travel through the
levels of divine mercy. And the person who causes this interpreter to speak may learn
about the mysteries of divine mercy and behold the lights of divine compassion and
pity.

FIFTH MYSTERY
There is a Hadith which goes something like this: “God created man in the form
of the Most Merciful.”2 It has been interpreted by some Sufis in an extraordinary way,
unfitting for the tenets of belief. Some of them who were ecstatics even considered
man’s spiritual nature to be in the form of the All-Merciful. Since ecstatics are mostly
immersed in contemplation and confused, they are perhaps to be excused in holding
views contrary to reality. But on consideration, people in their right senses cannot
accept ideas of theirs that are contrary to the fundamentals of belief. If they do, they
are in error.
Indeed, the Most Pure and Holy Deity, who administers with order the whole
universe as though it were a palace or house, and spins the stars as though they were
particles and causes them to travel through space with

2 See, Bukhari, Isti’dhan, 1; Muslim, Birr, 115; Janna, 28; Musnad, ii, 244, 251, 315, 323, 434,
463, 519.

--- Sayfa 140 ---
140
wisdom and ease, and employs minute particles as though they were orderly officials,
has no partner, match, opposite, or equal. So too, according to the meaning of the
verse:
There is nothing whatever like unto Him, and He hears and sees [all
things],(42:11)
He has no form, like, or peer, and there is nothing resembling Him or similar to Him.
However, according to the meaning of the following verse and its parabolic
comparison,
And His is the highest similitude in the heavens and the earth, and He is
Exalted in Might, Full of Wisdom,(30:27)
His actions, attributes, and names may be considered. That is to say, allegory and
comparison may be used in connection with His actions. One of the many things
intended by the above-mentioned Hadith is: “Man is in a form that displays the divine
name of All-Merciful in its entirety.” Yes, as we explained before, the divine name of
All-Merciful is manifested through the rays of a thousand and one names on the face
of the universe, and is apparent through the innumerable manifestations of God’s
absolute dominicality on the face of the earth. Similarly, its complete manifestation is
apparent in a small measure in man’s comprehensive form, the same as on the faces
of the earth and universe.
The Hadith suggests also that the evidences of the Necessarily Existent One
offered by such proofs, mirrors, and manifestations of the Most Merciful as animate
creatures and man are so certain, clear, and obvious that just as it may be said of a
shining mirror which reflects the image of the sun: “That mirror is the sun,” indicating
the clarity of its brilliance and evidence, so it has been said and may be said: “Man is
in the form of the All-Merciful One,” indicating the clarity of his evidence and
completeness of his relation. It is in consequence of this mystery that the more
moderate of those who believed in the Unity of Existence said: “There is no existent
but He,” as a way of expressing the clarity of this evidence and perfection of the
relation.
O God! O Most Merciful One! Most Compassionate One! For the sake of “In
the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate” have mercy on us as
befits Your Compassionateness, and allow us to understand the mysteries of
“In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate” as befits Your
Mercifulness.  AMEN.

--- Sayfa 141 ---
141
SIXTH MYSTERY
O unhappy man afflicted by boundless impotence and endless wants! See from
the following how valuable and acceptable an intercessor is divine mercy. For it is a
way to know the All-Glorious Sovereign in whose army both the stars and minute
particles serve together in perfect order and obedience – the Glorious Monarch of Pre-
Eternity and Post-Eternity, who is self-sufficient and utterly without need. He is rich
without limit and in no way in need of the universe and its beings. The whole cosmos
is under His command and direction, utterly obedient beneath His majesty and
grandeur, submissive before His sublimity. That is divine mercy for you, O man! It
raises you to the presence of the One who lacks all need, the Eternal Sovereign, and
makes you His friend, addressee, and well-loved servant. But just as you cannot reach
the sun and are far from it although it fills your mirror with its light, reflection, and
manifestation, and you can in no way draw near to it; in the same way you are
infinitely distant from the Most Pure and Holy One, the Sun of Pre-Eternity and Post-
Eternity, and cannot draw near to Him, but the light of His mercy brings Him nearer
to us.
O man! Anyone who finds this mercy finds an eternally unfailing treasury of
light. And the way to find it is by following the practices of the Most Noble
Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace), who was the most brilliant
exemplar and representative of mercy, its most eloquent tongue and herald, and was
described in the Qur’an as a “Mercy to All the Worlds.”
The way to attain to this embodiment of mercy who is a mercy to all the worlds is
to utter the prayer calling down God’s blessings upon him. Indeed, the meaning of
this prayer is mercy. As a prayer of mercy for that living embodiment of divine
mercy, it is a means of reaching the Mercy to All the Worlds (UWBP).3 So, make this
prayer the means to the mercy to all the worlds for yourself, and at the same time
make him the means of reaching the mercy of the Most Merciful One.
The whole Muslim community in all its vastness uttering this prayer which is
synonymous with mercy for the Mercy to All the Worlds (UWBP) proves in brilliant
fashion what a precious gift is divine mercy, and how broad is its sphere.
T o  C o n c l u d e : Just as the most precious jewel in the treasury of

3 See, Muslim, Salat, 11, 70; Tirmidhi, Witr, 21; Abu Da’ud, Salat, 36, 210; Witr, 26; Nasa’i,
Jum’a, 5; Adhan, 37; Sahw, 55; Ibn Maja, Iqama al-Salat, 79; Darimi, Salat, 206; Riqaq, 58; Musnad,
ii, 168, 375, 485; iii, 102, 445: iv, 8.

--- Sayfa 142 ---
142
mercy is the Prophet Muhammad (Upon whom be blessings and peace), its
doorkeeper, so is its first key “In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate,”
and its most easy key the prayer for the Prophet (UWBP).
O God! Through the truth of “In the Name of God, the Merciful, the
Compassionate” grant blessings and peace to the one whom You sent as a
mercy to all the worlds as befits Your mercy, and in veneration of him, and to
all his Family and Companions. And grant us mercy so as to make us free of
want for the mercy of any other than You from among Your creatures.
AMEN.
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught
us. Indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32)

*   *   *

The Fifteenth Flash

This consists of the Indexes of Sözler (The Words), Mektûbat (Bediuzzaman Said
Nursi – Letters 1928-1932), and Lem’alar (The Flashes Collection), from the First to
the Fourteenth Flash. They have been included in the relevant volumes and not been
published here.

--- Sayfa 143 ---
143
The Sixteenth Flash

In His Name, be He glorified!
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.(17:44)

Peace be upon you, and God’s mercy and blessings!
My Dear and Loyal Brothers Hoja Sabri, Hâf›z ‘Ali, Mes’ud, the Mustafa’s,
Husrev, Re’fet, Bekir Bey, Rüştü, the Lütfi’s, Hâfız Ahmed, Shaykh Mustafa, and the
others! It occurred to my heart to explain to you in concise informative fashion four
small matters that have been the subject of curiosity and questions.

THE FIRST
Certain of our brothers like Çaprazzâde Abdullah Efendi had heard related from
the diviners of realities that this last Ramadan a relief from difficulties, a victory,
would occur for the Sunnis, whereas it did not occur. Why do such people of
sainthood and illumination make predictions that are contrary to reality? They asked
me, and a summary of the reply I gave them, with which I was inspired, is this:
It says in a Hadith: “Sometimes a calamity is visited on a person, but if it meets
with almsgiving, it is repelled.”1 The underlying meaning of this Hadith shows that
while appointed events are going to come to pass under certain conditions, they do not
occur. That is to say, the appointed events of which the people of illumination are
aware are not absolute, but restricted by certain conditions; if the conditions are not
fulfilled, the event does not occur. However the event, like the appointed hour of
death, which is suspended, is written and determined in the Tablet of Appearance and
Dissolution,2 which is a sort of notebook of the Pre-Eternal Tablet. It is only

1 al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak,  i, 492; al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, ii, 30; Tirmidhi, Zakat, 28;
Tabarani, al-Mu‘jam al-Kabir, viii, 261; al-Bayhaqi, Shu‘ab al-Iman, iii, 245.
2 See, al-Nawawi, Sharh Sahih Muslim, xvi, 114; Ibn Hajar, Fath al-Bari, x, 415-6.

--- Sayfa 144 ---
144
extremely rarely that illuminations penetrate as far as the Pre-Eternal Tablet; mostly
they cannot rise that far.
In consequence, predictions made as a result of interpretations or illuminations
this last Ramadan and Feast of Sacrifices or at other times that do not occur because
the conditions on which they were dependent were not fulfilled, do not give the lie to
those who told of them. For they were determined, but did not come about because
the conditions were not fulfilled.
Yes, the sincere prayers of the majority of the Sunnis that innovations in the
month of Ramadan be abrogated formed a condition and important reason. But since
innovations had entered the mosques in Ramadan, they hindered the acceptance of the
supplications, and the relief did not arrive. Just as in accordance with the above
Hadith, alms-giving repels calamities, the sincere supplications of the majority attract
a general release from troubles. Since the power of attraction was not formed, the
victory was not given.

SECOND CURIOUS QUESTION
The last two months there has been a lively political situation in the face of which
some attempt should have been made to alleviate conditions both for myself and the
brothers with whom I am connected. While there was a strong possibility that this
could have been achieved, I attached no importance to the situation, and on the
contrary, had an idea in support of ‘the worldly’ who oppress me. A number of people
were astonished at this. They said: “What do you think about the policies followed by
those at the head of these innovators and in part dissembling people who torment you,
so that you do nothing to them?” A summary of my reply is as follows:
The greatest danger facing the people of Islam at this time is their hearts being
corrupted and belief harmed through the misguidance that arises from science and
philosophy. The sole solution for this is light; it is to show light so that their hearts
may be reformed and their belief, saved. If one acts with the club of politics and
prevails over them, the unbelievers descend to the degree of dissemblers. And
dissemblers are worse than unbelievers. That is to say, the club cannot heal the heart
at this time, for then unbelief enters the heart and is concealed, and is transformed into
dissembling. And at this time, a powerless person like myself cannot employ both of
them, the club and the light. For this reason I am compelled to embrace the light with
all my strength and cannot consider the club of politics whatever form it is in. We are
not charged with physical jihad at the moment, whatever that duty demands. Yes, in
accordance with a person’s way, a club is necessary to form a barrier against the
assaults of the unbelievers or apostates. But we only have two hands. Even if we had
a hundred

--- Sayfa 145 ---
145
hands, they would be sufficient only for the light. We do not have any other hands
with which to hold the club!

THIRD CURIOUS QUESTION
Why do you violently oppose war, although, with foreign forces like the British
and Italians interfering in the government recently, it would have excited Islamic zeal
– the true point of support and source of moral strength of this country’s government
– and been a means to an extent of reviving the marks of Islam and repulsing
innovations? Why have you offered prayers for its being settled by peaceful means
and come out fervently in support of the innovators’ government? Is this not indirect
support of innovations?
T h e  A n s w e r : We want relief, release, happiness, and victory, but not with
the sword of the unbelievers. Let their swords be the end of them! We are not in need
of any advantage proceeding from them. In fact it is those obstinate Europeans who
have set the dissemblers to pester the people of belief, and have raised the atheists.
As for the calamity of war, it would cause great harm to our service of the
Qur’an. The majority of our most valuable, self-sacrificing brothers are under the age
of forty-five, and would be forced because of war to leave their sacred service of the
Qur’an and enroll in the army. If I had the money, I would gladly pay the thousand
liras necessary to exempt each of such valuable brothers from military service. With
hundreds of my valuable brothers leaving the Qur’anic service of the Risale-i Nur and
laying hands on the club of physical jihad, I feel a loss in myself of a hundred
thousand liras. These two years of Zekâi’s military service, even, have caused perhaps
a thousand liras of his immaterial profit to be lost. Anyway... Like the One Powerful
Over All Things sweeps and cleans in a minute the atmosphere filled with clouds and
shows the shining sun in clear skies, so He may dispel these black, merciless clouds
and show the truths of the Shari‘a like the sun, and give them without expense or
trouble. We await it from His mercy that He will not sell them to us expensively. May
He give intelligence to the heads of those at the top, and belief to their hearts; that
would be enough. Then matters would put themselves to rights.

FOURTH CURIOUS QUESTION
They ask: “Since what you hold in your hand is light, not a club, and light may
not be objected to, nor fled from, nor can harm come from showing it, why do you
advise caution to your friends, and prevent them showing many light-filled parts of
the Risale-i Nur to people?”

--- Sayfa 146 ---
146
A brief reply to the question is this: the heads of most of those at the top are
drunk and they cannot read them. And even if they do read them, they cannot
understand them; they give them the wrong meaning, and interfere. They should not
be shown them until they come to their senses lest they interfere. There are also many
unscrupulous people who out of spite or ambition or fear, deny the light or close their
eyes to it. Therefore, I advise my brothers to be cautious and not to give the truths to
those who are unfit,3 or do things which excite the suspicions of ‘the worldly.’4

3 See, Ibn Maja, Muqaddima, 17.
4 An anecdote about an event that could have led to something serious: yesterday morning the
son-in-law of one of my friends came to me. Joyfully, as one bearing good news, he said to me:
“They’ve printed one of your books in Isparta and a lot of people are reading it.” I replied: “That
prohibited one hasn’t been printed; a number of copies have been obtained by means of a hectograph,
about which the government can say nothing.” And I added: “Be careful not to say anything about this
to those two dissemblers, your friends. They’re looking for something to use as a pretext.” My friends!
The man was the son-in-law of one of my friends, and in that connection may also be thought of as my
friend, but because he is the barber he is the friend of the unscrupulous teacher and dissembling District
Officer. One of our brothers apparently said something there without being aware of it, so it was a good
thing that he came first and told me about it. I warned him and anything untoward was forestalled. And
behind this screen the duplicating machine published thousands of copies.

--- Sayfa 147 ---
147
Conclusion

Today I received a letter from Re’fet Bey. In connection with his question about
the Prophet’s (UWBP) beard, I say this:
It is established by Hadiths that the number of hairs from the blessed beard of the
Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) was small. But despite their
being few – for instance, thirty, forty, fifty or sixty – the fact that there are hairs from
the blessed beard in thousands of places caused me much thought at one time. It
occurred to me then that what is known as his blessed beard consists not only of its
hairs, but also the hair of his blessed head, which the Companions, who neglected
nothing,5 preserved when he cut it. His luminous, blessed hair, which would be
preserved for ever, numbered thousands and may be equal to what is now extant.
I also wondered at that time whether or not it was established with sound
documentary evidence that the hair found in all mosques was the Messenger’s
(UWBP) hair so that it was acceptable to visit it. Then it occurred to me that it was the
cause of visits, and of benedictions being uttered for the Noble Messenger (Upon
whom be blessings and peace), and his being venerated and loved,6 and thus was not
looked at for what it actually was. Therefore, even if the hair was not truly from the
Messenger’s (UWBP) blessed beard, since it was held to be so because of its
appearance, and it functioned as a means of veneration, regard, and benedictions, it
did not have to be authenticated. So long as there was no definite evidence to the
contrary, that was sufficient. For generally held opinions and the acceptance of the
Islamic community count as a sort of proof.
If some of the pious object to such matters on grounds of fear of God, or caution,
or resolution, they do so in particular cases. And if they say it is an innovation, it
should be included among commendable innovations, for it is a means of benedictions
for the Prophet (UWBP) being recited. Re’fet Bey said in his letter that the matter had
led to an argument among the brothers. I advise my brothers that they do not argue in
such a way as to cause differences and conflict; they should grow accustomed to
discussing things as an exchange of ideas, without arguing.

5 See, Bukhari, Wudu’, 33; Muslim, Hajj, 311-26; Musnad, iii, 133, 137.
6 See, Muslim, Salat, 11, 70; Tirmidhi, Witr, 21; Abu Da’ud, Salat, 36, 210; Witr, 26; Nasa’i,
Jum‘a, 5; Adhan, 37; Sahw, 55; Ibn Maja, Iqama al-Salat, 79; Darimi, Salat, 206; Riqaq, 58; Musnad,
ii, 168, 375, 485; iii, 102, 445: iv, 8.

--- Sayfa 148 ---
148
In His Name, be He glorified!
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.(17:44)

Peace be upon you and God’s mercy and blessings.
My Dear and Loyal Brothers from Senirkent, İbrahim, Şükrü, Hâfız Bekir, Hâfız
Hüseyin, Hâfız Receb Efendi!
The atheists have for a long time objected to the three matters you sent with Hâfız
Tevfik.
The First: According to the explicit meaning of the verse, “Until when he
reached the setting of the sun, he found it set in a spring of murky water,”(18:86) he
saw the sun setting in a hot, mud spring.
The Second: Where is the barrier of Dhu’l-Qarnayn?
The Third: This is about Jesus (UWP) coming at the end of time7 and killing the
Dajjal.8
The answers to these questions are lengthy, so indicating them briefly we say
this: since the verses of the Qur’an express matters in accordance with the styles of
Arabic, in conformity with apparent meanings, in a way everyone will understand,
they frequently explain things in the form of metaphors, allegories, and comparisons.
So to consider the verse, “set in a spring of murky water:” Dhu’l-Qarnayn saw the sun
setting on the shores of the Atlantic Ocean, which appeared to be a boiling, muddy
spring, or in the fiery, smoking crater of a volcano. That is, evidently the Atlantic
Ocean appeared to Dhu’l-Qarnayn in the distance as the large pool of a spring
surrounded by a swamp which in the intense heat of summer was steaming and
vaporizing; he saw the sun’s apparent setting in a part of it. Or he saw the sun, the eye
of the skies, being hidden in a new, fiery crater at the summit of a volcano which was
spewing out rocks, earth, and lava.
Yes, the All-Wise Qur’an’s miraculously eloquent expression teaches many
matters with this sentence. Firstly, it explains that Dhu’l-Qarnayn’s journey to the
west coincided with the intense heat of summer, the area of a swamp, sunset, and the
time of a volcanic eruption, and so alludes to many instructive matters, such as the
complete conquest of Africa.
It is well-known that the sun’s motion is apparent, indicating the hidden
movement of the earth and giving news of it. What it intends is not the actual setting
of the sun. Also the spring is a metaphor. From the distance a

7 See, Muslim, Fitan, 110; Tirmidhi, Fitan, 59, 62; Abu Da’ud, Malahim, 14; Ibn Maja, Fitan, 33;
Musnad, iii, 420; iv, 181, 226, 390; vi, 75.
8 The Dajjal is the Antichrist, related to appear at the end of time. (Tr.)

--- Sayfa 149 ---
149
large sea appears to be a small pool. It is most meaningful and apt according to the
mysteries of eloquence9 to liken a sea appearing beyond swamps with mists and
vapours rising from it due to the heat to a muddy spring, with word ‘ayn, which in
Arabic means both spring, and sun, and eye. It appeared like that to Dhu’l-Qarnayn
because of the distance. So too, the Qur’an comes from the sublime throne and
commands the heavenly bodies, so its heavenly address stating that the subjugated
sun, which performs the duty of a lamp in this guesthouse of the Most Merciful One,
is hidden in a dominical spring like the Atlantic Ocean, is fitting for its loftiness and
sublimity; with its miraculous style it shows the sea to be a hot spring and steaming
eye. And that is how is appears to heavenly eyes.
I n  S h o r t : The use of the term “a muddy spring” for the Atlantic Ocean
indicates that Dhu’l-Qarnayn saw that huge ocean as a spring due to the distance. But
because the Qur’an sees everything from close to, it did not see what Dhu’l-Qarnayn
saw, which was a sort of illusion. Indeed, since the Qur’an comes from the heavens
and looks to them, it sometimes sees the earth as an arena, sometimes as a palace,
sometimes as a cradle, and sometimes as a page. So its calling the vast misty,
vaporous Atlantic Ocean a spring shows its lofty sublimity.

YOUR SECOND QUESTION
Where is the barrier of Dhu’l-Qarnayn? Who were Gog and Magog?
T h e  A n s w e r : Long ago I wrote a treatise about this question and it silenced
the atheists. I do not have it with me now, and my memory is not working and helping
me. Also, this question is discussed briefly in the Third Branch of the Twenty-Fourth
Word. We shall therefore only indicate very briefly two or three points about it, as
follows:
 According to explanations given by investigative scholars, and as indicated by
the title Dhu’l-Qarnayn, names beginning with the suffix Dhu, like Dhu’l-Yazan,
were used by the kings of Yemen, so this Dhu’l-Qarnayn was not Alexander the
Great. He was one of the kings of Yemen10 who lived at the time of Abraham
(UWP)11 and received instruction from

9 In accordance with the mysteries of rhetoric the word “spring” (‘ayn) in “in a spring of murky
water” makes a subtle allusion, as follows: after gazing on the beauty of divine mercy on the face of the
earth, the eye of the sun in the face of the sky – and after beholding divine tremendousness above, the
eye of the sea in the earth –  these two eyes close one within the other, and the eyes on the earth close
also. Thus, with one miraculous word the Qur’an recalls this, and alludes to eyes resting from their
duties.
10 See, Abu Su’ud, Tafsir Abi Su’ud, v, 239-40; Ibn Hajar, Fath al-Bari, vi, 385; al-Alusi, Ruh al-
Ma’ani, xvi, 27.
11 See, al-Qurtubi, al-Jami‘ li-Ahkam al-Qur’an, xi, 47; Ibn Kathir, Tafsir al-Qur’an, i, 180; iii,
101; Ibn Hajar, Fath al-Bari, vi, 382; al-Faqihi, Ahbar Makka, iii, 221.

--- Sayfa 150 ---
150
Khidr.12 Alexander the Greek lived approximately three hundred years before Christ,
and was taught by Aristotle.13
Human history goes back in regular fashion approximately three thousand years.
This deficient and short view of history is not accurate concerning pre-Abrahamic
times. It continues back either as superstition, or as denial, or in very abbreviated
form. The reason the Dhu’l-Qarnayn of Yemen was since early times in Qur’anic
commentaries known as Alexander,14 was either because it was one of his names and
he was Alexander the Great or the Alexander of Ancient Times, or else the following:
The particular events mentioned in Qur’anic verses are the tips of universal
events. Thus, through his prophetic guidance, Alexander the Great, who was Dhu’l-
Qarnayn, built a barrier between some peoples, oppressors and oppressed, and built
the famous Great Wall of China to prevent the raids of those cruel enemies. Similarly,
many powerful kings and world conquerors like Alexander the Greek followed in the
path of Dhu’l-Qarnayn materially, while the prophets and spiritual poles, who are the
kings of man’s spiritual world, followed him in spiritual matters and guidance; they
built barriers between mountains, one of the most effective means of saving the
oppressed from oppressors,15 and later constructed strongholds on mountain peaks.
They founded these themselves through their material power, or through their
guidance and planning. Then they built walls surrounding towns and citadels inside
the towns, and finally they made machine-guns and Dreadnoughts, which were like
mobile citadels. The most famous barrier on earth, the Great Wall of China, covers a
distance of several days’ journeying and was built to halt the incursions against the
oppressed peoples of India and China of the savage tribes known in the Qur’an as
Gog and Magog, and otherwise known as the Mongols and Manchurians. These tribes
several times threw the world of humanity into chaos. Pouring out from behind the
Himalayas, they wrought destruction from east to west. A long wall was built between
two mountains close to the Himalayan mountains which for a long time prevented the
frequent assaults of those savage peoples, and barriers were also built through the
efforts of the kings of ancient Persia, who resembled Dhu’l-

12 See, al-Qurtubi, al-Jami‘ li-Ahkam al-Qur’an, xi, 47.
13 See, Ibn Hajar, Fath al-Bari, vi, 382-3; al-Shawkani, al-Fath al-Qadir, iii, 307; al-Khamawi,
Mu‘jam al-Buldan, i, 184; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, ii, 17, 488.
14 See, al-Tabari, Jami‘ al-Bayan, xvi, 17; al-Qurtubi, al-Jami‘ li-Ahkam al-Qur’an, xi, 45; al-
Shawkani, al-Fath al-Qadir, iii, 307; al-Alusi, Ruh al-Ma‘ani, xvi, 26.
15 There are numerous artificial barriers on the face of the earth that with the passing of time have
taken on the appearance of mountains or have become unrecognizable.

--- Sayfa 151 ---
151
Qarnayn, in the mountains of Caucasia, in the region of Darband, to halt the inroads
of the plundering and pillaging Tatar peoples. There are very many barriers of this
sort. Since the All-Wise Qur’an speaks with all mankind, it mentions what is
apparently a particular incident, and recalls all events similar to it. It is from this point
of view that the narrations differ concerning the Barrier and Gog and Magog, as well
as the writings of the Qur’anic commentators about them.
Furthermore, the All-Wise Qur’an switches from one event to another distant one
due to the association of ideas. The person who fails to think of this association
supposes the two events to be close in time. Thus, the Qur’an’s predicting the end of
the world from the destruction of the Barrier is not because the two events are close in
time, but to make two subtle points connected with the association of ideas. That is,
the world will be destroyed just as the Barrier will be destroyed. Also, just as
mountains, which are natural divine barriers, are firm and will be destroyed only at
the end of the world; so the Barrier is firm as a mountain and will be levelled to dust
only at the destruction of the world. Even if it suffers damage from the assaults of
time, it will mostly remain intact. Yes, the Great Wall of China is one particular
meaning of the universal meaning of the Barrier of Dhu’l-Qarnayn and has been
standing for thousands of years and is still there for all to see. It is read as a long,
petrified, meaningful line from ancient history, written by man’s hand on the page of
the earth.

YOUR THIRD QUESTION
Brief replies concerning Jesus (Upon whom be peace) killing the Dajjal are found
in both the First and the Fifteenth Letters, which should suffice you.

--- Sayfa 152 ---
152
In His Name!
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.(17:44)

Peace be upon you, and God’s mercy and blessings.
My Dear Self-Sacrificing, Loyal, Conscientious Brothers, Hoja Sabri and Hâfız
Ali!
Your important question concerning the verse at the end of Sura Luqman about
“the five hidden things”(31:34)16 deserves a serious reply, but unfortunately neither
my present state of mind nor my physical condition permit it. I shall allude only very
concisely to one or two points your question touches on.
Your question indicates that atheists who have deviated from the true path of
religion have made objections and criticisms concerning the time of rain falling and
nature of the embryos in the womb from among “the five hidden things.” They have
said: “Instruments in the observatory can discover when rain is to fall, so someone
other than God knows. Also the sex of embryos can be learnt by means of X-rays.
This means it is possible to learn “the five hidden things.”
T h e  A n s w e r : The time rain falls is tied not to any law, but directly to
divine will. One instance of wisdom in its appearance from the treasury of mercy
being dependent on a particular divine wish is as follows:
The most important things in the universe and the most valuable are existence,
life, light, and mercy. These look directly, without intermediary or veil, to divine
power and a particular divine wish. With other creatures, apparent causes are veils to
the disposal of divine power, and regular laws and principles screen the divine will
and wish to an extent. However, no such veils have been placed on existence, life,
light, and mercy, for the purpose they serve is not in force in those things.
Since the most important truths in existence are mercy and life, and rain is the
source of life and means of mercy, indeed is pure mercy, of a certainty intermediaries
will not veil it, nor will laws and monotony screen the wishes that are God’s alone. In
this way everyone in every situation will all the time be obliged to offer thanks and
worship and supplications and prayers. If rain had been included under a law,
everyone would have relied on the law and the door of thanks and supplication would
have been closed.

16 See, Bukhari, Istisqa’, 29; Tafsir Sura 6:1; 13:1; 31:2; Tawhid, 4; Musnad, ii, 24; 52, 58, 122.

--- Sayfa 153 ---
153
It is clear that there are numerous benefits in the sun’s rising, but since it is tied to
a regular law, supplications are not offered for its rising and thanks are not given. And
since because of the law it is a part of human knowledge that it will rise again
tomorrow, it is not counted among the matters of the Unseen. But the particular
occurences of rain do not follow any law, so men are all the time obliged to take
refuge at the divine court with prayers and supplications. Human knowledge has been
unable to specify the times of precipitation, men therefore consider it a special bounty
proceeding from the treasury of mercy alone, and truly offer thanks.
In consequence the verse includes the time rain falls among “the five hidden
things.” Deducing the preliminaries of rain with instruments in observatories and
specifying the times of precipitation is not knowing the Unseen, but knowing by
studying some of its preliminaries when it has emerged from the World of the Unseen
and drawn close to the Manifest World. When the most hidden events of the Unseen
occur, or when they are close to occurring, they may be perceived through a sort of
premonition. But that is not knowing the Unseen, but knowing that something exists
or is close to existence. In fact, I sometimes perceive the rain twenty-four hours
before it arrives due to a sensitivity in my nerves. That is to say, the rain has
preliminaries, forerunners; they make themselves felt through a sort of dampness,
making it known that rain is to follow. Just like a law, this situation is a means of
reaching matters that have left the World of the Unseen but not yet entered the
Manifest World. But to know when rain will fall that has not yet set foot in the
Manifest World, nor left through a particular divine wish the treasury of mercy, is
peculiar to the One All-Knowing of the Unseen.

THE SECOND MATTER
Learning by means of X-rays whether a child in the womb is male or female is
not contrary to the meaning of the verse, “And He Who knows what is in the
wombs,”(31:34) which refers to the Unseen. For what is intended by the verse are the
preliminaries of the child’s particular capacity and the appointed course of its life,
which it will acquire in the future, and even the wondrous stamp of the Eternally
Besought One on its face – the child being known in this way is particular to the One
All-Knowing of the Unseen.17 Even if a hundred thousand X-ray-like minds of men
were to combine, they still could not discover its true features, each of which is a
mark distinguishing the child from all the other members of the human

17 See, Bukhari, Bad’ al-khalq, 6; Anbiya’, 1; Muslim, Qadar,1.

--- Sayfa 154 ---
154
race. So how could they discover the non-physical features of its abilities, which are a
hundred times more wondrous than its physical features.
We said at the beginning that existence, life, and mercy are the most important
truths in the universe and that the most important station is theirs. Therefore, one
reason for the comprehensive truth of life looking with all its fine points and
subtleties to the divine will and wish and mercy, which are particular to God
Almighty, is this:
Since life together with all its faculties is the source and means of thanks and
worship, laws and monotony – which are a veil to God’s will, and apparent
intermediaries – which screen His mercy, have not been placed on it. Almighty God
has two manifestations in the physical and non-physical features of unborn children.
One shows divine unity, oneness, and eternal besoughtedness, for the child
testifies to divine unity by being similar to other human beings in respect of its basic
members and human faculties. With this tongue it shouts out: “Whoever gave me
these features and members is the Maker of all human beings, for they resemble me in
regard to basic members, and He is the Maker too of all living beings.”
This tongue of the child in the womb does not pertain to the Unseen; it may be
known since it follows a law and general rule and the species. It is a branch and
tongue of the Manifest World that has entered the World of the Unseen.
The Second Aspect: With the tongue of the features of its particular capacity and
its individual features, it proclaims its Maker’s choice, will and wish and particular
mercy and that He is under no restriction. But this tongue comes from the deepest
Unseen; none other than Pre-Eternal Knowledge can see it before it comes into
existence, nor comprehend it. These features cannot be known while in the womb
even if one or other of the child’s thousand members is seen!
I n  S h o r t : The features of the embryo’s innate capacity and its physical
features offer both evidence for divine unity and proofs of divine will and choice. If
Almighty God grants success, a number of further points shall be written about “the
five hidden things.” But for now I have no more time and my condition does not
permit it, so I conclude here.
                                         The Enduring One, He is the Enduring One!
                                                          S a i d  N u r s i

Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You taught us;
indeed You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32)

--- Sayfa 155 ---
155
In His Name, be He glorified!
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise.(17:44)

My Dear, Loyal, Curious Brother, Re’fet Bey!
You ask in your letter about the ten subtle faculties. It is not appropriate to give
instruction in the Sufi way at present; there are in any case the works about them
written by the learned shaykhs of the Naqshbandi Order. Our duty at the present time
is to disclose mysteries, not to relate existent matters. Don’t be offended, I can’t give
the details. I shall only say this much: Imam-i Rabbani defined the ten subtle faculties
as the heart, spirit, inner heart (sirr), khafi, akhfa, and a faculty related to each of the
four elements in man, and he discussed briefly the progress of one faculty in each
stage of the spiritual journeying.
I myself observe that there are numerous subtle faculties in man’s comprehensive
disposition and vital potentialities, of which ten have become famous. The
philosophers and literalist scholars made those ten faculties the basis of their theories
in another form, and called them the five external senses and five internal senses,
these latter being the windows or samples of the ten faculties. In fact, man’s ten subtle
faculties, which are well-known by both the learned and ordinary people, are related
to the Sufis’ ten subtle faculties. For example, if such faculties as the conscience,
nerves, emotions, intellect, desires, power of animal appetites, and power of anger are
added to the heart, spirit, and inner heart, the ten subtle faculties are shown in another
way. There are many other faculties in addition to these, like the sense of
premonition, and various motive and appetitive powers. To expound this question
completely would be very lengthy, and as I have little time, I am compelled to cut it
short.
As for your second question, about the aspect of things which looks to
themselves, and the aspect which looks to their Maker (mânâ-yi ismî and mânâ-yi
harfî), they are explained at the start of all books on Arabic grammar. Moreover, there
are ample explanations of them, together with comparisons, in the works of the
science of reality called The Words and Letters. Further discussion would be
superfluous for someone intelligent and exacting like yourself. If when you look at
the mirror, you look at it for the glass, you will intentionally see the glass; Re’fet will
strike the eye secondarily, indirectly. Whereas if your purpose is to look at the mirror
in order to see your blessed face, you will intentionally see lovable Re’fet. You will
exclaim: “So blessed be God, the Best of Creators!”(23:14) The glass of the mirror
will strike your eye secondarily and indirectly.

--- Sayfa 156 ---
156
Thus, in the first instance, the glass of the mirror is ‘the meaning that looks to the
thing itself,’ while Re’fet is its ‘significative meaning.’ In the second instance, the
glass of the mirror is ‘the significative meaning’, that is, it is looked at not for itself
but for another meaning; that is, the reflection. The reflection is ‘the meaning which
looks to the thing itself.’ That is, it is included in one respect in the definition “it
points to a meaning in itself.” While the mirror verifies the definition of its
‘significative meaning,’ which is “it points to the meaning of another.”
According to the Qur’anic view, all the beings in the universe are letters,
expressing through their ‘significative meaning,’ the meaning of another. That is, they
make known the names and attributes of that Other. Soulless philosophy for the most
part looks in accordance with ‘the meaning which looks to the thing itself’ and
deviates into the bog of nature. However, I do not have the time now for much talk. In
fact, I cannot even write the final and easiest and most important part of the Index.
Convey my greetings to your study companions, in particular, Husrev, Bekir, Rüşdü,
Lütfü, Shaykh Mustafa, Hâfız Ahmed, Sezâi, the Mehmed’s, and the Hojas. I pray for
the blessed innocents in your household.
                                                       The Enduring One, He is the Enduring One!
                                                                              Your brother,
                                                                            S a i d  N u r s i

--- Sayfa 157 ---
157
The Seventeenth Flash
[This Flash consists of Fifteen Notes taken from Zühre.]
Introduction
Twelve years before this Flash was written,1 I wrote down in note form in Arabic
in such treatises as Zühre, Şu’le, Habbe, Şemme, Zerre, and Katre, a number of
flashes concerning divine unity which became clear to me through dominical grace
during an unfolding of the spirit and progress of the mind and journey of the heart in
divine knowledge. But since they were written to show only one tip of a lengthy truth
and point out only one beam of a shining light, and since each was in the form of a
memento and reminder for myself only, their benefits for others were limited, and
particularly as the great majority of my most select and special brothers were unable
to read Arabic. On their insistent and pressing requests, therefore, I was obliged to
write in Turkish an approximation of those notes, those flashes, in part expounding
them and in part abbreviating them. Since these notes and Arabic treatises form the
first of the New Said’s works proceeding from the knowledge of reality, which he to a
degree witnessed in the form of illumination, their meanings have been written
unchanged. Because of this, a number of the sentences are included here despite being
mentioned in others of the Words. And some are not expounded despite being very
concise, so that the refinement of the original should not be lost.

1 Twelve years previously was 1340/1921.

--- Sayfa 158 ---
158
First Note

I addressed myself saying: O heedless Said! Know that it is unworthy of you to
attach your heart to something that will not accompany you after this world comes to
an end and on its destruction will part from you. It is not reasonable to fasten your
heart to transitory things that will turn their backs on you and leave you when the age
in which you live comes to an end, and will not befriend you on the journey through
the Intermediate Realm, or accompany you to the door of the grave,2 and which,
leaving you for ever after one or two years, will burden you with their sins and out of
spite abandon you at the moment of accomplishment.
If you are sensible, you will give up matters that will be shattered and destroyed
under the blows of worldly revolutions and the stages of the Intermediate Realm and
clashing upheavals of the hereafter; which are not able to accompany and befriend
you on the journey to eternity. Give them no importance! Do not grieve at their
passing!
Consider your own nature; among your subtle faculties is one that will be content
with nothing other than eternity and the Eternal One. It can address itself to none but
He. It cannot demean itself for any other. Should you give it the whole world, it
would not satisfy that innate need. It is the sovereign of your senses and faculties. So
obey it, for it obeys the All-Wise Creator’s command! Find salvation!

Second Note

I had a true dream in which I said to people: “O man! One of the Qur’an’s
principles is this: consider nothing other than Almighty God to be greater than
yourself to the degree that you worship it. And do not consider yourself to be greater
than anything else to the degree that you become arrogant and haughty before it. For
just as all creatures are equal in regard to their distance from being fit to be
worshipped, so too are they equal in regard to their createdness.”

2 See, Bukhari, Riqaq, 42; Muslim, Zuhd, 5; Nasa’i, Jana’iz, 52; Musnad, iii, 110.

--- Sayfa 159 ---
159
Third Note

O heedless Said! You have illusions and see the exceedingly temporary world as
undying and permanent. When you look around yourself at the world, you see it as
stable to a degree, and constant. Since looking with the same view you also consider
your own transient self to be constant, you only take fright at Doomsday. You are
only frightened at that as though you were going to live till then.3
Use your reason! You and your personal world are perpetually subject to the
blows of death and decline. Your illusion and sophistry resemble this comparison: if
you have a mirror and hold it up to a house or a town or a garden, their images will
appear in it. If the mirror is moved the tiniest amount or the smallest change occurs to
it, the images become confused and distorted. The fact that the actual house, town or
garden outside the mirror continue and are constant is of no avail to you, for the house
in the mirror in your hand and your town and garden are only in the scale and
proportions which the mirror gives you.
Your life is the mirror. The support and mirror of your world and its centre is
your life. Every minute it is possible that the house, town, and garden will die and be
destroyed, their condition is such that any minute they may collapse on your head and
your doomsday will come. Since it is thus, do not burden this life and world of yours
with loads they cannot raise and support!

Fourth Note

Know that it is generally the practice of the All-Wise Creator to return important
and valuable things exactly the same. That is to say, renewing most things in similar
form in the alternating of the seasons and changing of the centuries, He returns the
things of value and importance exactly. This law of divine practice is seen to be
mostly unvarying in the resurrections of the days, years, and centuries.
In consequence of this constant law, we say: since according to the agreement
and testimony of science, man is the most perfect fruit of the tree of creation, and
among creatures is the most important, and the most valuable, and since a human
person is equivalent to a species of the other

3 See, al-Ghazali, Ihya’ ‘Ulum al-Din, iv, 64; al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, ii, 368.

--- Sayfa 160 ---
160
animals, it may be surmised with certainty that at the supreme resurrection, each
human being will be returned exactly the same, with his body and all his attributes.

Fifth Note

Western science and civilization had to some extent a place in the Old Said’s
thought, so when the New Said embarked on his journeys of the mind and the heart,
they were transformed into sicknesses of the heart and were the cause of excessive
difficulties. The New Said therefore wanted to shake off from his mind that fallacious
philosophy and dissolute civilization. In order to silence the emotions of his evil-
commanding soul, which testified in favour of Europe, he was compelled to hold in
his spirit the following discussion – which in one respect is very brief and in another
is long – with the collective personality of Europe.
It should not be misunderstood; Europe is twofold. One follows the sciences
which serve justice and right and the industries beneficial for the life of society
through the inspiration it has received from true Christianity; this first Europe I am
not addressing. I am addressing the second corrupt Europe which, through the
darkness of the philosophy of Naturalism, supposing the evils of civilization to be its
virtues, has driven mankind to vice and misguidance. As follows:
On my journey of the spirit at that time I said to Europe’s collective personality,
which apart from beneficial science and the virtues of civilization, holds in its hand
meaningless, harmful philosophy and noxious, dissolute civilization:
Know this, O second Europe! You hold a diseased and misguided philosophy in
your right hand and a harmful and corrupt civilization in your left, and claim,
“Mankind’s happiness is with these two!” May your two hands be broken and may
these two filthy presents of yours be the death of you! And so they shall be!
O you unhappy spirit which spreads unbelief and ingratitude! Can a man who is
suffering torments and is afflicted with ghastly calamities in both his spirit and his
conscience and his mind and his heart be happy through his body wallowing in a
superficial, deceptive glitter and wealth? Can it be said that he is happy?
Don’t you see that on feeling despair at some minor matter and his hope for some
illusory wish being lost and his being disillusioned at some insignificant business,
such a person’s sweet imaginings become bitter for him,

--- Sayfa 161 ---
161
what is pleasant torments him, and the world constricts him and becomes a prison for
him? But what happiness can you ensure for such a wretched person who through
your inauspiciousness has suffered the blows of misguidance in the deepest corners of
his heart to the very foundations of his spirit, and because of this whose hopes have
all been extinguished and whose pains all arise from it? Can it be said of someone
whose body is in a false and fleeting paradise and whose heart and spirit are suffering
the torments of Hell that he is happy? See, you have led astray wretched mankind in
this way! You make them suffer the torments of Hell in a false heaven!
O evil-commanding soul of mankind! Consider the following comparison and see
where you have driven mankind. For example, there are two roads before us. We take
one of them and see that at every step is some wretched, powerless person. Tyrants
are attacking him, seizing his property and goods, and destroying his humble house.
Sometimes they wound him as well. The heavens weep at his pitiful state. Wherever
one looks, things are continuing in this vein. The sounds heard on this way are the
roars of tyrants and the groans of the oppressed; a universal mourning envelops the
entire way. A person is afflicted with a boundless grief since due to his humanity man
is pained at the suffering of others. But because his conscience cannot endure so much
pain, one who travels this way is compelled to do one of two things: either he strips
off his humanity and embracing a boundless savagery bears such a heart that so long
as he is safe and sound, he is not affected even if all the rest of mankind perish, or else
he suppresses the demands of the heart and reason.
O Europe corrupted with vice and misguidance and drawn far from the religion of
Jesus! You have bestowed this hellish state on the human spirit with your blind genius
which, like the Dajjal,4 has only a single eye.5 You afterwards understood that this
incurable disease casts man down from the highest of the high to the lowest of the
low, and reduces him to the basest level of animality. The only remedy you have
found for it are the fantasies of entertainment and amusement and anodyne diversions
which temporarily numb the senses. These remedies of yours are being the death of
you, and so they shall be. There! The road you have opened up for mankind and the
happiness you have given it resembles this comparison.
The second road, the All-Wise Qur’an has bestowed on mankind; it is like this:
We see that in every stopping-place, every spot, every town are patrols of a Just
Monarch’s equitable soldiers doing the rounds. From time

4 The Dajjal: the Antichrist related to come at the end of time. (Tr.)
5 See, Bukhari, Anbiya’, 48; Libas, 68; Ta’bir, 11, 13; Fitan, 26; Muslim, Iman, 273-6.

--- Sayfa 162 ---
162
to time at the King’s command a group of the soldiers is discharged. Their rifles,
horses and gear belonging to the state are taken from them and they are given their
leave papers. They are apparently sad to hand over their familiar rifles and horses, but
in reality are happy to be discharged and extremely pleased to visit the Monarch and
return to his court.
Sometimes the demobilization officials encounter a raw recruit who does not
recognize them. “Surrender your rifle!,” they say. The soldier replies: “I am a soldier
of the King and I am in his service. I shall go to him later. Who are you? If you come
with His permission and consent, I greet you with pleasure, show me His orders.
Otherwise go away and stay far from me.  Even if I remain on my own and there are
thousands of you, I shall still fight you, and it would not for myself, because I do not
own myself; I belong to my King. Indeed, my self and the rifle I have now are in trust
from my owner. I shall not submit to you because I have to safeguard the trust and
defend my King’s honour and dignity!”
This situation then is one of thousands on the second way which are the cause of
joy and happiness. You can think of the others for yourself. Throughout the journey
there is the mobilization and despatch of troops with joy and celebrations under the
name of birth, and the discharge of troops with cheer and military bands under the
name of death. This road has been bestowed on mankind by the All-Wise Qur’an.
Whoever accepts the gift wholeheartedly travels down it to happiness in this world
and the next. He feels neither grief at the things of the past nor fear at those of the
future.
O second corrupted Europe! A number of your rotten and baseless foundations
are as follows. You say: “Every living being from the greatest angel to the tiniest fish
owns itself and works for itself and struggles for its own pleasure. It has the right to
life. Its aim and purpose and all its endeavour is to live and continue its life.” And you
declare idiotically: “Life is conflict,” because you suppose to be conflict the
compassionate, munificent manifestations of the universal law of the All-Generous
Creator which is manifested through plants hastening to the assistance of animals and
animals hastening to the assistance of man through a principle of mutual assistance,
which is conformed to in perfect obedience by all the principal beings of the universe.
How can particles of food hastening with total eagerness to nourish the cells of
the body – a manifestation of the principle of mutual assistance – be conflict? How
can it be a clash and struggle? It is, rather, mutual help at the command of a
Munificent Sustainer.
Another of your rotten foundations is, as you say: “Everything owns

--- Sayfa 163 ---
163
itself.” A clear proof that nothing owns itself is this: among causes the most noble and
with regard to choice the one with the most extensive will is man. But out of the most
obvious acts connected to man’s will like thinking, speaking, and eating, only a
hundredth single, doubtful, part is subject to his will and is within his power. So how
can it be said that he owns himself?
If the highest beings with the most extensive will are thus inhibited from real
power and ownership to this degree, someone who says that the rest of beings,
animate and inanimate, own themselves merely proves that he is more animal than the
animals and more lifeless and unconscious than inanimate beings.
What pushes you to make such an error and casts you into this abyss is your one-
eyed genius. That is, your extraordinary, ill-omened brilliance. Due to that blind
genius of yours, you have forgotten your Sustainer, who is the the Creator of all
things, you have attributed His works to imaginary nature and causes, you have
divided up the Creator’s property among idols, false gods. In regard to this and in the
view of your genius, every living creature and every human being has to resist
innumerable enemies on his own and struggle to procure his endless needs. They are
compelled to do this with the power of a minute particle, a fine thread-like will, a
fleeting flash-like consciousness, a fast extinguishing flame-like life, a life which
passes in a minute. But the capital of those wretched animate creatures is insufficient
to answer even one of the thousands of their demands. When smitten by disaster, they
can await no salve for their pain other than from deaf, blind causes. They manifest the
meaning of the verse:
For the prayer of those without faith is nothing but [futile] wandering [in the
mind].(13:14)
Your dark genius has transformed mankind’s daytime into night. And in order to
warm that dark, distressing, unquiet night, you have only illuminated men with
deceptive, temporary lamps. Those lamps do not smile at them with joy, they rather
smirk idiotically at their pitiful and lamentable state. Those lights mock and make fun
of them.
In the view of your pupils, all living beings are miserable, calamity-striken, and
subject to the assaults of oppressors. The world is a place of universal mourning.
Issuing from it are cries and wails at death and suffering. The pupil who has absorbed
your instruction thoroughly becomes a pharaoh. But he is an abject pharaoh who
worships the basest things and holds himself to be lord over everything he reckons
advantageous. A student of yours is obstinate, but an obstinate wretch who accepts
utter abasement

--- Sayfa 164 ---
164
for a single pleasure. He is so despicable as to kiss Satan’s foot for some worthless
benefit. And he is a bully. But because he has nothing in his heart on which to rely, he
is an impotent bullying braggart. His whole aim and endeavour is to satisfy the lusts
of his soul, to cunningly seek his own personal interests under the screen of patriotism
and devotion, and work to satisfy his ambition and pride. He loves seriously nothing
at all other than himself and sacrifices everything for his own sake.
As for the sincere, wholehearted student of the Qur’an, he is a worshipping
servant. But he is an esteemed servant who does not stoop to bow in worship before
even the mightiest of creatures, and does not make the supreme benefit of Paradise the
aim of his worship. And he is mild and gentle, but at the same time noble and
gracious and lowers himself before none but the All-Glorious Creator, and only
stoops before the lowly with His permission and at His command. And he is needy,
but due to the reward his All-Generous Owner is storing up for him in the future, he is
at the same time self-sufficient. And he is weak, but he is strong in his weakness for
he relies on the strength of his Lord whose power is infinite. Would the Qur’an make
its true student take this fleeting, transient world as his aim and purpose while not
making him have even eternal Paradise as his goal? Thus you can understand how the
two students’ aims and endeavours differ from one another.
You can further compare the zeal and self-sacrifice of the All-Wise Qur’an’s
students with the pupils of sick philosophy as follows:
The student of philosophy flees from his brother for his own sake and a files a
lawsuit against him. Whereas, looking on all the righteous worshippers in the heavens
and on the earth as brothers, the Qur’an’s student makes supplication for them in
sincere fashion. He is happy at their happiness and he feels a powerful connection
with them in his spirit, so that praying he says: “Oh God, grant forgiveness to all
believing men and women!” Furthermore, he considers the greatest things, the divine
throne and the sun, to be subservient officials, and servants and creatures like himself.
Also, compare in the following the loftiness and expansion of spirit of the two
students: the Qur’an imparts such a joyous elevation to its students’ spirits that instead
of the ninety-nine prayer-beads, it places in their hands the minute particles of ninety-
nine worlds displaying the manifestations of the ninety-nine divine names, and tells
them to recite their invocations with them. Listen to the invocations of such students
of the Qur’an as Shah Geylani, Rufa’i, and Shazali (May God be pleased with them)!
See, in their fingers are the strings of particles, the droplets of water, the breaths of all

--- Sayfa 165 ---
165
creatures, and recite their invocations with them. They praise and glorify God with
them and mention His most beautiful names.
Behold the miraculous instruction of the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition and
see how man is elevated by it – insignificant man who is stunned and confused at
some minor grief or tiny sorrow and is defeated by a microscopic germ. How his
inner senses expand so that the beings in the mighty world appear inadequate as
prayer-beads for his invocations. He considers Paradise to be insufficient as the aim
of his invocations and recitations of the divine names, yet he does not see himself as
superior to the lowest of Almighty God’s creatures.6 He combines the utmost dignity
with the utmost humility. You can see from this how abject and base are philosophy’s
students.
Thus, the guidance of the Qur’an – which looks at the two worlds with two
shining eyes familiar with the Unseen and points with two hands to the two
happinesses for mankind – says concerning the truths which the one-eyed genius
proceeding from the sick philosophy of Europe sees wrongly:
O man! The self and property you hold is not yours; it is in trust to you. The
owner of the trust is an All-Compassionate and Munificent One, powerful over all
things and with knowledge of all things. He wants to buy from you the property you
hold so that He can guard it for you and it will not be lost. He will give you a good
price for it in the future. You are a soldier under orders and charged with duties. Work
in His name and act on His account, for He sends you the things you need as
sustenance and protects you from the things you are unable to bear. The aim and
result of this life of yours is to manifest your Owner’s names and attributes. When a
calamity comes your way, say:
To God we belong, and to Him is our return.(2:156)
That is to say, “I am in the service of my Owner, O calamity! If you have come with
His permission and consent, greetings, you are welcome! For anyway some time we
shall return to Him and enter His presence, and we yearn for Him. Since He will
release us from the responsibilities of life, let the release and discharge be at your
hand, O calamity, I consent to it. But if He has decreed your coming as a trial for my
dutifulness and loyalty in preserving my trust, then without His permission and
consent to surrender it to you, so long as I have the power, I will not surrender my
Owner’s trust to one not certainly charged to receive it.”
Consider this one example out of a thousand and see the degrees in the

6 Tirmidhi, Zuhd, 9; Ibn Maja, Zuhd, 19.

--- Sayfa 166 ---
166
instruction given by the genius of philosophy and guidance of the Qur’an. In reality,
the two sides proceed in the manner described above, but the degrees of people in
guidance and misguidance differ, and the degrees of heedlessness differ. Not
everyone can perceive completely this truth in every degree, because heedlessness
numbs the senses. In the present age it has so deadened them that the civilized do not
feel this grievous pain and suffering. However, sensitivity is increasing and rending
the veil of heedlessness due to developments in science and the warnings of death
which every day displays thirty thousand corpses. Utter abhorrence and a thousand
regrets should be felt for those who take the way of misguidance due to the
Europeans’ idols and the natural sciences, and for those who follow them in blind
imitation!
O sons of this land! Do not try to imitate Europeans! How can you reasonably
trust in and follow the vice and invalid, worthless thought of Europe after the
boundless tyranny and enmity it has shown you? No! No! You who imitate them in
dissoluteness, are not following them but unconsciously joining their ranks and
putting to death both yourselves and your brothers. Know that the more you follow
them in immorality the more you lie in claiming to be patriots! Because to follow
them in this way is to hold your nation in contempt, to hold the nation up to ridicule!
God guides us, and you, to the Straight Path.

Sixth Note

O you unhappy person who is alarmed at the great numbers of the unbelievers
and their agreement in denying some of the truths of belief, and as a result is shaken
in his faith! You should know that value and importance do not lie in quantity and
number. For if man is not a true human being, he is transformed into a diabolical
animal, and the more he increases in animal greed, the more animal he becomes – like
some Europeans and their imitators. You can see that in number, men are extremely
few in comparison to the countless animals, and yet they are sovereign rulers over all
the animal species and vicegerents of the earth.
The harmful unbelievers and those depraved wretches who follow in their way
are a vicious species among Almighty God’s animals which the All-Wise Maker has
created for the development and prosperity of the world. He has made them a unit of
measurement in order to make known to His believing servants the degrees of the
bounties He has bestowed on them, and finally will consign those animals to the Hell
they deserve.

--- Sayfa 167 ---
167
There is no power in the unbelievers and misguided denying or disputing any
truth of belief. Their agreement lacks power; a thousand deniers are equal to one
denier. Even if the whole population of Istanbul, for example, denies seeing the new
moon at the beginning of Ramadan, the proven testimony of two witnesses invalidates
that great multitude’s negation and agreement.7 In reality unbelief and misguidance
are negation and denial, so are ignorance and non-existence, and the agreement of
large numbers of unbelievers even has no significance.8 Since matters of belief are
true and established, and their validity is proven, the judgement of two believers
based on certain witnessing takes preference and prevails over the agreement of those
vast numbers of the misguided. The reason for this is as follows:
Superficially, the claims of those who deny are the same but in fact they are
diverse and cannot unite and so gain strength. While the claims of those who affirm
unite and receive strength from each other. This is because a person who does not see
the new moon of Ramadan in the sky says: “In my view, there is no moon. It has not
appeared that I can see.” And another says: “In my view, the moon has not appeared.”
And so does another. Each says that in his view, there is no moon. Since the view of
each is different, and the causes that prevent them seeing it may also be different,
their claims are all different as well; each claim cannot reinforce the other claims. But
those who are affirming it are not saying: “In my view and opinion the new moon is
there,” but, “The new moon has actually appeared in the sky.” Those who sight it all
make the same claim and say: “In actuality...” That is to say, all the claims are the
same. But since the views of those who are denying it are all different, their claims
also are different. They are not making the judgement according to what actually is.
Because a negation of what actually pertains cannot be proved; for that, an all-
embracing proof is necessary.
It is an established rule that “absolute non-existence can only be proved with
extreme difficulty.”9 Yes, if you claim that a particular thing exists in the world, it is
enough to merely point that thing out. But if you say it does not exist and you deny it,
the whole world has to be sifted through in order to demonstrate it so that the denial
can be proved. It is in consequence of this that the unbelievers denying a truth is like
solving a problem or passing through a narrow hole or jumping over a ditch; it makes
no difference

7 See, Abu Da’ud, Sawm, 14; al-Sarakhsi, al-Mabsut, iii, 139-40; al-Kashani, Bada‘i al-Sana‘i, ii,
81-2; al-Marghinani, al-Hidaya, i, 121.
8 See, Qur’an, 59:14.
9 Ibn Qayyim al-Jawzi, al-Sawa’iq al-Mursala, iv, 1310; Idem., al-Ruh fi’l-Kalam, i, 198.

--- Sayfa 168 ---
168
whether there is one man or a thousand, because they cannot help one another. But
since those who affirm look at the heart of the matter and reality of the situation, their
claims unite and the individual strength of each of them combines and assists all. It
resembles lifting a great boulder: the more hands there are, the stronger they are and
the easier it becomes.

Seventh Note

O miserable pseudo-patriot who fervently encourages Muslims to embrace this
world and forcibly drives them to European industry and progress! Beware, don’t let
the bonds be broken that tie certain members of this nation to religion! If thus
foolishly blindly imitating and crushed under foot, their bonds with religion are
broken, those irreligious people will become as harmful for social life as fatal poison.
For the apostate’s conscience is completely corrupted and he becomes like poison in
the life of society. It is because of this that according to the science of the principles
of religion, “The apostate forfeits the right to life, whereas if an unbeliever is a
member of the protected minorities or he makes peace, he has the right to life;” this is
a principle of the Shari‘a.10 Furthermore, according to the Hanafi school, the
testimony of such an unbeliever is acceptable,11 whereas the testimony of someone
who has strayed from the path of the Shari‘a is rejected. For he is perfidious.12
O miserable sinner who has deviated from Shari‘a! Do not look at the multitude
of the dissolute and be deceived; do not say: “Most people think the same as me!” For
the depraved do not want to embrace depravity; they rather fall into it and cannot
extricate themselves. There is no sinner who does not want to be righteous and who
does not want to see his superior and chief as religious. Other than if – I seek refuge
with God! – his conscience is corrupted through apostasy and he receives pleasure
from poisoning, like a snake.
O crazy head and corrupted heart! Do you suppose that Muslims do not love the
world, or that they do not think about the poverty into which they have fallen, and that
they are in need of admonishment so that they do not forget their share of the world?

10 Bukhari, Jihad, 149; Tirmidhi, Hudud, 2; Musnad, i, 217, 282, 322; v, 231.
11 al-Kashani, Bada‘i al-Sana‘i, ii, 254-5; vi, 266.
12 See, Tirmidhi, Shahadat, 2; Abu Da’ud, ‘Aqdiyya, 16; Ibn Maja, Ahkam, 30; Musnad, ii, 181,
204, 208.

--- Sayfa 169 ---
169
Your supposition is false, your surmise, wrong. Their greed has increased; that is
the reason they are impoverished. Because for Muslims, greed causes loss and
indigence. The saying: “The greedy is subject to loss and disappointment”13 has
become proverbial.
Yes, there are many things calling and driving man to the world, like his soul and
its appetites, and need, and his senses and emotions, and the Devil, and the superficial
enticement of the world, and false friends like you. While those who call to the
hereafter, which lasts for ever, and to long-lasting eternal life, are few. If you are
patriotic even to the tiniest degree towards this nation and the high aspirations you
brag about are not lies, you should help the few who call to eternal life. For if you
silence them and help the many, you will be befriending Satan!
Do you suppose this nation’s poverty is the result of a sort of religious asceticism
or of laziness arising from abandoning the world? You are wrong to suppose that. Do
you not see that the nations dominated by Europe, such as China and the Brahmins
and Zoroastrians of India, and the blacks of Africa are poorer than we are? And do
you not see that nothing apart from the most basic subsistence is left in the hands of
Muslims? The rest is either stolen or seized by the European infidel tyrants or the
dissemblers of Asia.
You should be certain that if your intention in forcibly driving the people of
belief to degenerate civilization in this way is the country’s law and order and easy
administration, you are mistaken and you are driving them down the wrong path. For
it is more difficult to govern a hundred degenerates whose belief is shaken and morals
corrupted, and to maintain public security among them, than to govern thousands of
the righteous.
Thus, according to these principles, the people of Islam are not in need of being
encouraged and driven to the world and to greed. Progress and public order cannot be
secured in that way. They are rather in need of having their working conditions set in
order, of security being established among them, and of having the principle of co-
operation encouraged. And these needs can be brought about through the sacred
commands of religion, and fear of God, and firm adherence to religion.

13 See, Ibn Qays, Qura al-Dayf, iv,, 301; al-Maydani, Majma’ al-Amthal, i, 24.

--- Sayfa 170 ---
170
Eighth Note

O idle man who is unaware of the pleasure of effort and happiness of work!
Know that out of His perfect munificence, Almighty God placed the reward for work
within it. He included the wage for work within the work itself. It is for this reason
that in their particular duties, which are called creative commands, animate beings,
and even from one point of view inanimate creatures, conform to the dominical
commands with complete eagerness and a sort of pleasure. Everything from bees,
flies, and chickens to the sun and the moon carry out their duties with perfect
pleasure. This means there is an enjoyment in their work so that they perform it
perfectly, although they do not think of the results since they do not possess
intelligence.
I f  y o u  a s k : “Living creatures have the ability to receive pleasure, but how
can inanimate beings experience eagerness and enjoyment?”
T h e  A n s w e r : Inanimate beings desire and seek a position, a rank, perfection,
beauty, and order, not on their own accounts but on account of the divine names
manifested on them. They become illumined and progress because in performing their
natural duties, they become like mirrors and places of reflection of the names of the
Light of Lights.
For example, if, although they are unimportant and of themselves without light, a
droplet of water or fragment of glass are turned with their pure hearts to the sun, they
become thrones to the sun and smile at you. Similarly, by being mirrors in respect of
their duties towards the names of the All-Glorious One, who possesses absolute
beauty and perfection, particles and beings rise from a very lowly position to a most
elevated degree of manifestation and illumination like the droplet and fragment of
glass. Since they rise to a luminous and exalted rank by virtue of their duties, it may
be said that if it is possible and they have the capacity to receive pleasure, that is, if
they receive a share of general life, they perform their duties with perfect pleasure.
For clear evidence of the pleasure to be found in the performance of duties
consider your own members and emotions. Each receives different pleasures in
performing the duties connected to your personal survival and the survival of the
human race. The duties themselves are a means of enjoyment for them, and to give up
a duty is a sort of torment for a member.
Further clear evidence is the self-sacrifice and courage which such animals as
cocks and hens with chicks display in performing their duties: even

--- Sayfa 171 ---
171
if hungry, the cock prefers the hens to itself, summoning them to feed. It does not
peck up the food itself but allows them to do so. And it is clear that it feels pleasure,
pride and enjoyment in carrying out this duty. This means it receives greater pleasure
from carrying out the duty than from feeding. The hen too will sacrifice its life for its
chicks, throwing itself at a dog. It will also remain hungry and give them grain. That
is to say, it receives such pleasure in its duty that it makes preferable the pains of
hunger and pangs of death.
Animal mothers receive pleasure in trying to protect their young, it is their duty
when the young are small. When the young are grown, the duty ceases and so does
the pleasure. The mothers beat their offspring and take the grains of feed from them.
Only, for human mothers the duties continue for some time, for due to their weakness
and impotence, humans are always children in one respect, and are all the time in
need of compassion.
Consider the males and females of the animal species, like the mother hen and the
cock, which acts as shepherd, and understand that they do not perform these duties on
their own account, in their own names, or for their own perfections. For if they have
to sacrifice their lives in the course of their duties, they do so. They rather perform
them on account of the Munificent Bestower of Bounties, the All-Glorious Creator,
who employs them in their duties, in which, through His mercy, He includes pleasure.
Evidence that the wage is present in the duty itself is this: plants and trees
conform to the Glorious Creator’s commands in a manner that implies eagerness and
pleasure. For the fragrant scents they disperse, and their being adorned with
decorations that attract the glances of their customers, and their sacrificing themselves
for their shoots and fruits until they rot, shows to the attentive that they receive such
pleasure in conforming to the divine commands that it rots and destroys them.
Look, fruit-bearing trees like the coconut, which bears so many cans of milk on
its head, and the fig, request through the tongue of disposition the finest food like
milk from the treasury of mercy; they receive it and give it to their fruits to eat, while
they content themselves with muddy water.
In seeds also a longing is clearly apparent in their duty of germinating and
sending out shoots. Like someone imprisoned in a constricted place longs to go out
into a garden or open space, such a longing, such a joyful state, is also apparent in
seeds, in their duty of sprouting.
It is because of this long and mysterious principle, which is in force in the
universe and is called a divine practice, that those idle, lazy people who live in ease
and affluence for the most part suffer more distress than those who strive and work.
For the idle always complain about their lives and

--- Sayfa 172 ---
172
want to pass them quickly by indulging in amusements. Whereas the one who works
and strives is thankful and offers praise and does not want his life to pass quickly.
“The person who lives in idleness and ease complains about his life, while the
industrious striver is thankful” is a universal principle. It is also for this reason that
the saying “Ease lies in hardship, and hardship in ease” has become proverbial.
Indeed, if inanimate creatures are studied carefully, it will be seen that on their
undeveloped innate capacities and abilities expanding from the potential to the actual
through great effort and exertion, a state similar to the above-mentioned divine
practice comes about. This shows that the natural duty produces an eagerness and
pleasure. If the inanimate creature partakes of general life, the eagerness is its own;
otherwise it pertains to the thing which represents and supervises the creature. It may
even be said that when subtle, delicate water receives the command to freeze, it
conforms with such intense eagerness that it may split iron, breaking it into pieces.
That is to say, in conveying the dominical command of “Expand!” with the tongue of
freezing sub-zero temperature to the water in a closed iron container, it breaks the
container with its intense eagerness. It splits the iron and itself becomes ice.
You can make analogies with this for everything. From the rotations of the suns
and their peregrinations to the Mevlevi-like spinning and turning and vibrations of
minute particles, all striving and motion in the universe turns on the law of divine
determining and proceeds from the hand of divine power and is manifested through
the creative command which comprises divine will, knowledge, and command.
Each particle, each creature, each living being, even, resembles a soldier who has
different relations with all the sections of the army and different duties that look to
each; all particles and living beings are similar to this. For example, a particle in your
eye has a relation with the cells of the eye, with the eye itself, the facial nerves, and
the blood vessels of the body; and it has duties arising from those relations, and yields
benefits in accordance with those duties. And so on, you can compare everything with
this. Thus, everything testifies to the Necessary Existence of the Pre-Eternal All-
Powerful One in two respects:
The First: By carrying out duties far exceeding its own power, everything
testifies to the All-Powerful One’s existence.
The Second: By acting in conformity with the laws that form the order of the
world and principles that perpetuate the balance of beings, everything testifies to that
All-Knowing and All-Powerful One. For lifeless things like particles, and tiny
animals like bees cannot know order and balance,

--- Sayfa 173 ---
173
which are the subtle matters of the Clear Book. How can a lifeless particle and tiny
bee read the subtle, significant matters of the Clear Book, which is in the hand of the
All-Glorious One, who opens and closes and gathers up the levels of the heavens as
though they were the pages of a notebook? If you crazily suppose the particle
possesses an eye capable of reading the fine letters of that book, you can try to refute
the particle’s testimony!
Yes, the All-Wise Creator summarizes the principles of the Clear Book in most
beautiful form and abbreviated fashion and with a particular pleasure and through a
special need, and includes them in beings. If everything acts thus with a particular
pleasure out of a particular need, it unknowingly conforms to the principles of the
Clear Book. For example, the minute the mosquito with its proboscis comes into the
world, it emerges from its house, and without hesitation attacks man’s face; it strikes
it with its long staff causing the water of life to spurt out, and it drinks it. It shows the
skill of a practised warrior in dodging the blows directed at it. Who taught the tiny,
inexperienced, newly-born creature the science of war and art of extracting water?
Where did it learn it? I, that is, this unfortunate Said, confess that if I had been in the
place of that mosquito with its proboscis, I could only have learnt this art, this warfare
of attack and retreat, this extracting of water, only after lengthy instruction and much
experience.
Compare with the mosquito animals like the bee, who receives inspiration, the
spider, and the nightingale, who weaves his nest like a stocking, then compare plants
to these animals in just the same way. Yes, the Absolutely Generous One (May His
glory be exalted) has given each living being a memorandum written with the pen of
pleasure and ink of need, and with it has deposited in the being the programme of His
creative commands and index of its duties. See how the All-Wise One of Glory has
written on a receipt the amount concerning the bee’s duties, from the principles of the
Clear Book, and placed it in the coffer in the bee’s head. And the key to the coffer is
the pleasure particular to the diligent bee. With it, it opens the coffer, reads the
programme, understands the command, and acts. It proclaims the meaning of the
verse,
And your Sustainer has inspired the bee.(16:68)
If you have listened to the whole of this Eighth Note and understood it
completely, through the intuition of belief you will understand one meaning of,
And His mercy embraces all things,(7:156)
and one truth of the verse,
And there is nothing but it glorifies Him with praise,(17:44)

--- Sayfa 174 ---
174
and one principle of the verse,
Verily when He intends a thing, His command is “Be!” and it is,(36:82)
and one point of the verse,
So glory to Him in Whose hands is the dominion of all things; and to Him
will you all be brought back.(36:83)

Ninth Note

Know that among mankind prophethood is the summary and foundation of
human good and perfections; True Religion is the index of prosperity and happiness;
belief is sheer, transcendent good. Since apparent in this world are a shining beauty,
an extensive and exalted good, an evident truth, and superior perfection, self-
evidently truth and reality lie in prophethood and in the hands of prophets. While evil,
misguidance, and loss are with those who oppose them.
Of the thousands of merits of worship, consider only the following: the Prophet
(UWBP) unites the hearts of the affirmers of divine unity in the prayers of the
Festivals and of Friday, and worship performed in congregation. He brings together
their tongues in a single phrase so that one man responds to the sublime address of the
Pre-Eternal Worshipped One with the voices, supplications, and invocations uttered
by innumerable hearts and tongues. Strengthening one other, assisting one other and
uniting, those voices, supplications, and invocations display so expansive a worship
before the Godhead of the Pre-Eternal All-Worshipped One that the globe of the earth
as though recites the invocations, offers the supplications, and performs the prayers
with its regions, and conforms with its climes to the command of
And be steadfast in prayer,(2:43, etc.)
which was revealed with glory and tremendousness from beyond the heavens.
Through this mystery of unity, man, a miniscule, powerless creature in the universe
like a particle, by virtue of the vastness of worship becomes a beloved servant of the
Creator of the Heavens and the Earth, vicegerent of the earth, the earth’s ruler and
chief of the animals, and the result and aim of the universe’s creation.
Yes, if the voices of hundreds of millions of people proclaiming “God is Most
Great!” after the five daily prayers, and particularly in the Festival Prayers, unite in
the Manifest World as they do in the World of the Unseen,

--- Sayfa 175 ---
175
the globe in its entirety becomes a huge human being. Since the “God is Most Great!”
it proclaims with a mighty voice is equal to its own greatness, the believers in divine
unity proclaiming “God is Most Great!” at the same instant in unison becomes a
mighty “God is Most Great!” uttered by the earth. The earth is as though shaken with
a great tremor with the invocations and glorifications of the World of Islam at the
Festival Prayers. Proclaiming “God is Most Great!” with all its regions and climes, it
forms its intention with the pure heart of the Ka‘ba, its qibla, and on its uttering “God
is Most Great!” with the tongue of Mount Arafat in the mouth of Mecca, that single
phrase assumes a form in the air in the cave-like mouths of the believers in all parts of
the earth. Just as through the echo of the words “God is Most Great!” innumerable
“God is Most Great’s” come into being, so too that acceptable recitation and
invocation causes the heavens to ring out and resounds rising and falling in the
Intermediate Realms.
We praise and glorify and exalt to the number of the particles of the earth the All-
Glorious One, who made the earth thus prostrate to Him in worship, glorifying and
exalting Him, and made it a mosque for His servants and cradle for His creatures. And
we offer praise to Him to the number of beings that He made us members of the
community of His Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace), who
taught us worship of this kind.

Tenth Note

Know, O heedless, confused Said! If you are to attain to the light of knowledge of
God and look on it, and are to see its manifestations in the mirrors of signs and
witnesses, and behold its proofs and evidences, you should not examine it with the
fingers of criticism. You should not examine critically every light that passes over
you or occurs to your heart or appears to your mind, or criticize it with the hand of
hesitation. Do not stretch out your hand to catch hold of a light that appears to you!
Rather withdraw from the things that cause heedlessness, be turned to the light, and
wait. For I have observed that the witnesses and proofs of knowledge of God are of
three sorts:
One Sort is like water. It is visible and palpable, but cannot be held with the
fingers. For this sort, one has to detach oneself from illusions and submerge oneself in
it as a whole. It cannot be spied on with the fingers of criticism; if it is, it flows away
and is lost. The water of life cannot make the finger its dwelling!

--- Sayfa 176 ---
176
The Second Sort is like air. It may be perceived, but it is neither visible nor may
it be held. You should turn towards it with your face, your mouth, your spirit, and
hold yourself before that breeze of mercy. But do not stretch out the hand of criticism
towards it, for you will be unable to hold it. Breathe it with your spirit. If you look on
it with the eye of hesitation and lay hands on it by criticizing it, it will escape you and
depart. It will not make your hand its dwelling; it would never be content with it!
As for the Third Sort, it is like light. It is visible, but is neither palpable nor may
it be held. So you should hold yourself before it with the heart’s eye and spirit’s
vision; you should direct your gaze towards it and wait. Perhaps it will come of its
own accord. For light cannot be held in the hand or hunted with the fingers; it can be
chased only with the light of insight and intuition. If you stretch out a grasping,
physical hand and weigh it on material scales, even if it is not extinguished, it will
hide itself. For just as such light will not be consent to be imprisoned in matter, so it
cannot be restricted, nor will it accept dense things as its lord and master.

Eleventh Note

Know that there is much kindness and compassion in the Qur’an of Miraculous
Exposition’s manner of expression, for the majority of those it addresses are ordinary
people. Their minds are simple so to flatter them it repeats the signs inscribed on the
face of the heavens and earth, since their vision does not penetrate to fine things. It
facilitates the reading of those large letters. For example, it teaches signs that are
clearly apparent and easily read, like the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the
rain being made to fall from the sky, and the raising to life of the earth. It rarely
directs attention to the subtle signs written in small letters among the large ones lest
ordinary people experience difficulty in reading them.
There is an eloquence, fluency, and naturalness in the Qur’an’s styles whereby it
is like a hafiz; it recites the verses inscribed with the pen of power on the pages of the
universe. It is as though the Qur’an is the recitation of the book of the universe and
the verbal expression of its order, and reads out the Pre-Eternal Inscriber’s attributes
and writes His acts and deeds. If you want to see this eloquence of expression, listen
with an aware and attentive heart to decrees like Sura ‘Amma14 and the verse,
Say: O God! Lord of All Dominion.(3:26)

14 Sura 78, The Great News.

--- Sayfa 177 ---
177
Twelfth Note

O my friends who are listening to these notes! You should know that the reason I
sometimes write down my heart’s prayers, entreaties, and supplications to my
Sustainer, which ought to be secret, is to request divine mercy to accept the words of
my writing when death has silenced the words of my tongue. Yes, my short-lived
tongue’s repentance and regret is insufficient to atone for my numberless sins. The
tongue of writing is permanent to an extent, and more effectual. Thus, thirteen years
ago,15 when as the result of a tumultuous storm of the spirit the laughter of the Old
Said was being transformed into the weeping of the New Said – at a time I awoke
from the heedless sleep of youth in the morning of old age – I wrote these entreaties
and supplications in Arabic. The Turkish meaning of a part of them is as follows:
O my Compassionate Sustainer and Munificent Creator! Due to my mistaken
choices my life and youth are lost and gone, and all that remains to me as their fruits
are grievous sins, abasing sorrows, and misguiding doubts and scruples. I draw close
to the grave shame-faced with this heavy load and sick heart. Like my departed
friends, peers, and relations, without deviating to left or right I am involuntarily
approaching the door of the grave.
The grave is the first stopping-place on the road leading from this fleeting realm
to everlasting separation and all eternity; it is the first door opening onto it.16 But I am
attached to the realm of this world and am captivated by it, and I have understood
with absolute certainty that it is transient and will die, will perish and depart. The
beings within it travel on convoy after convoy and disappear, as is to be observed.
This world is exceedingly cruel and treacherous, especially for those like me with
evil-commanding souls. For one pleasure, it inflicts a thousand pains. For a single
grape, it deals a hundred slaps.
O my Compassionate Sustainer and Munificent Creator! As with the saying “All
that is coming is close,”17 I see now that soon I will have donned my shroud, mounted
the bier, bade farewell to my friends. Approaching my grave I call out to the court of
Your mercy through the mute tongue of my corpse and the articulate tongue of my
spirit: “Mercy! Mercy! Most Kind, Most Clement! Deliver me from the shame of my
sins!”

15 Thirteen years before this treatise was written. (That is, 1920 or 1921 – Tr.)
16 See, Tirmidhi, Zuhd, 5; Ibn Maja, Zuhd, 32; Musnad, i, 63.
17 Ibn Maja, Muqaddima, 7; Darimi, Muqaddima, 23.

--- Sayfa 178 ---
178
Now I have reached the brink of my grave. I am standing at the head of my
corpse stretched out beside it. Raising my head to the court of Your mercy, I cry out
beseechingly with all my strength: “Mercy! Mercy! Most Clement! Most Kind!
Deliver me from the heavy burden of my sins!”
Now I have entered my grave, I am wrapped in my shroud. Those who came to
send me on my way have left me alone and departed. I await Your forgiveness and
mercy. I see clearly that other than You there is no place of refuge or succour. I cry
out with all my strength at the ugly face of sin, the savage form of rebellion against
God, at the narrowness of the place:
“Mercy! Mercy! Most Merciful One! Most Clement! Most Kind! Just Judge!
Deliver me from the companionship of my ugly sins! Broaden my place! My God!
Your mercy is my recourse. Your Beloved, the Mercy to All the Worlds, the means to
Your mercy. I complain, not about You, but about my soul and my state.
“O my Munificent Creator and Compassionate Sustainer! Your creature and
servant called Said is both rebellious, and impotent, and heedless, and ignorant, and
sick, and base, and a sinner, and aged, and a wrong-doer, and like a runaway slave;
but forty years late he has repented and wants to return to Your court. He seeks refuge
in Your mercy. He confesses his countless sins and errors. Suffering from doubts and
every sort of affliction, he beseeches and entreats You. If out of Your perfect mercy
You accept him, if You forgive and have mercy on him, that befits you. For You are
the Most Merciful of the Merciful. If You do not accept me, whose door can I
approach? What other door is there? Other than You there is no sustainer to whose
court recourse may be made. Other than You there is nothing fit to be worshipped
with whom refuge may be sought.”
There is no god but You, You are One, You have no partner; the last word in this
world and the first word in the hereafter, and in the grave, is: I testify that there
is no god but God and I testify that Muhammad is His Messenger, may God
Almighty grant him blessings and peace!

Thirteenth Note

This consists of five matters that have been the cause of confusion.
T h e  F i r s t  M a t t e r
Although those who strive on the way of Truth should think only of their own
duties, they think of those that pertain to Almighty God, base

--- Sayfa 179 ---
179
their actions on them, and fall into error. It is written in the work Adab al-Din wa’l-
Dunya, that one time Satan tempted Jesus (Upon whom be peace) saying: “The
appointed hour of death and all things are specified by divine determining, so throw
yourself down from this high place, and see, you’ll die.” Jesus (Upon whom be peace)
replied: “God tries his servants, but His servants may not try their Sustainer.”18 That
is, “Almighty God tests his servant, saying to him: If you do that I shall do this. Let’s
see, are you able to do it? But the servant does not have the right and power to test
Almighty God and say: If I do that, will You do this? To assume such a stance, as
though subjecting Almighty God’s dominicality to test and examination, is bad
conduct and contrary to worship and man’s being God’s slave.” Since this is the case,
man should do his own duty and not interfere in Almighty God’s business.
It is well-known that when one of the heroes of Islam who many times defeated
Jenghis Khan’s army, Jalaluddin Khwarazmshah, was going to the war, his ministers
and followers told him: “You will be victorious; Almighty God will make you
victor.” He replied: “I am charged by God’s command to act on the way of jihad, I do
not interfere in God’s concerns. To make us victor or vanquished is His business.”
Because he thus understood the mystery of submission, he was wondrously victorious
on numerous occasions.
In his voluntary actions man should not think of the results which pertain to
Almighty God. For example, for some of our brothers, when people join the Risale-i
Nur it fires their enthusiasm and makes them increase their efforts. Then when others
do not listen, the weak ones among them become demoralized and their enthusiasm
wanes somewhat. Whereas God’s Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and
peace), who was the Absolute Master, Universal Leader, and Perfect Guide, took as
his absolute guide the divine decree,
No more is the Messenger bound to do than deliver the message,(5:99)
and when people held back and did not listen, conveyed the message with greater
effort, endeavour, and earnestness. For in accordance with the verse,
It is true you will not be able to guide everyone whom you love; but God
guides those whom He will,(28:56)

18 Mawardi, Adab al-Dunya wa’l-Din, 12; Ma’mar ibn Rashid, al-Jami‘, xi, 113; Abu Nu’aym,
Hilya al-Awliya’, iv, 12; Ibn al-Jawzi, Talbis Iblis, i, 344; Ibn Hajar, al-Isaba, iv, 764.

--- Sayfa 180 ---
180
he understood that making people listen and guiding them was Almighty God’s
concern. And he did not interfere in God’s concerns.
And so, my brothers! You shouldn’t be officious either by basing your actions on
what is not your business, or take up a position testing your Creator!
T h e  S e c o n d  M a t t e r
Worship and servitude of God look to the divine command and divine pleasure.
The reason for worship is the divine command and its result is divine pleasure. Its
fruits and benefits look to the hereafter. But so long as they are not the ultimate reason
and not intentionally sought, benefits looking to this world and fruits which come
about themselves and are given are not contrary to worship. They are rather to
encourage the weak and make them incline to worship. If those fruits and benefits are
made the reason for the invocation or recitation, or a part of the reason, it in part
invalidates the worship. Indeed, it renders the meritorious invocation fruitless, and
produces no results.
Thus, those who do not understand this mystery, recite for example the Awrad
Qudsiya Shah Naqshband, which yields a hundred benefits and merits, or Jawshan al-
Kabir, which yields a thousand, making some of those benefits their prime intention.
Then they do not receive the benefits, and shall not receive them, and do not deserve
to receive them. For the benefits may not be the reason for the invocation and may not
themselves be intended and sought. For they are obtained when unsought, in
consequence of the sincere invocation, as a favour. If they are intended, it damages
the sincerity to an extent. Indeed, it ceases being worship and loses all value. But
there is one matter, which is that weak people need something to encourage them to
recite meritorious invocations. If they think of the benefits and eagerly recite them
purely for God’s sake and for the hereafter, it causes no harm and is acceptable even.
But because this instance of wisdom has not been understood, many of them come to
doubt or even to deny the benefits narrated from the spiritual poles and righteous ones
of former generations when they do not receive them.
T h e  T h i r d  M a t t e r
“Happy is the man who knows his limits and does not exceed them.”19 The sun
has manifestations from a fragment of glass and a droplet of water to a pool, the
ocean, the moon, and the planets. Each contains the sun’s

19 Bukhari, al-Tarikh al-Kabir, iii, 338; Tabarani, al-Mu‘jam al-Kabir, v, 71; Bayhaqi, al-Sunan
al-Kubra, iv, 182.

--- Sayfa 181 ---
181
reflection and image in accordance with its capacity, and knows its limits. In
accordance with its capacity, a drop of water says: “There is a reflection of the sun on
me.” But it cannot say: “I am a mirror like the ocean.” In just the same way, the ranks
of the saints have degrees, in accordance with the variety of the divine names’
manifestations. Each of the divine names has manifestations like a sun, from the heart
to the divine throne. The heart too is a throne, but it cannot say: “I am like the divine
throne.”
Thus, those who proceed reluctantly and with pride instead of knowing their
impotence, poverty, faults, and defects, and prostrating entreatingly before the divine
court, which form the basis of worship, hold their miniscule hearts equal to the divine
throne. They confuse their droplet-like stations with the ocean-like stations of the
saints. They stoop to artificiality, false display, and meaningless self-advertisement in
order to make themselves fitting for those high ranks, and cause themselves many
difficulties.
I n  S h o r t : There is a Hadith which says: “All will perish save those who
know, and those who know will perish save those who act, and those who act will
perish save the sincere, and the sincere are in grave danger.”20 That is to say, the only
means of salvation and deliverance is sincerity. It is of the greatest importance to gain
sincerity. The tiniest act performed with sincerity is preferable to tons performed
without sincerity.21 A person should understand that what gains sincerity for his
actions is his doing them purely because they are a divine command and that their
result is divine pleasure, and he should not interfere in God’s business.
There is sincerity in everything. A jot of love, even, with sincerity is superior to
tons of official love for which return is wanted. Someone described this sincere love
as follows: “I do not want a bribe, recompense, return or reward for love, for love
which seeks recompense is weak and short-lived.”22 Sincere love has been lodged in
human nature and in all mothers. The compassion of mothers manifests this sincere
love in its true meaning. Evidence that through the mystery of this compassion
mothers do not want or seek a reward or bribe for their love of their children, is their
readiness to sacrifice their lives and even their eternal happiness for them. All a hen’s
capital is its life, and one hen sacrificed its head in order to save its chick’s head from
the jaws of a dog – as Hüsrev witnessed.

20 See, al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, ii, 415; al-Ghazali, Ihya ‘Ulum al-Din, iii, 414; iv, 179, 362.
21 al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iv, 341; Abu Nu’aym, al-Hilya al-Awliya’, i, 244.
22 See, Ibn Qays, Qura al-Dayf, i, 95, 207; al-Dhahabi, Tarikh al-Islam, 103.

--- Sayfa 182 ---
182
T h e  F o u r t h  M a t t e r
One should not accept bounties which arrive at the hands of apparent causes on
account of the causes. If a cause like an animal or a tree does not possess will, it gives
the bounty directly on account of Almighty God. It says: “In the Name of God”
through the tongue of disposition and gives it to you. So you too should say: “In the
Name of God,” and take it for God’s sake. If the cause possesses will, he should say:
“In the Name of God,” and you may accept it, otherwise you should refuse it. Apart
from its explicit meaning, the verse,
Eat not of [meats] on which God’s name has not been pronounced,(6:121)
has an implicit meaning: Do not partake of bounties that do not recall the True
Bestower of Bounties and are not given in His name.
Since this is so, both the one who gives and the one who receives should say “In
the name of God.” If the giver does not say it and you are in need, you say, “In the
Name of God,” and seeing the hand of divine mercy upon him, kiss it in thanks, and
take the bounty from him. That is to say, look from the bounty to the bestowal, and
from the bestowal think of the True Bestower. To reflect in this way is a sort of
thanks. Then if you wish, offer a prayer for the apparent means, since it was by his
hand that the bounty was sent to you.
What deceives those who worship apparent causes is the two things coming
together or being together, which is called ‘association;’ they suppose the two things
cause one another. Also, since the non-existence of one thing is the cause of a
bounty’s non-existence, they suppose that the thing’s existence is also the cause of the
bounty’s existence. They offer their thanks and gratitude to the thing and fall into
error. For a bounty’s existence results from all the bounty’s conditions and
preliminaries. Whereas the bounty’s non-existence occurs through the non-existence
of only a single condition.
For example, someone who does not open the canal to water the garden is the
reason and cause of the garden drying up and the non-existence of bounties. But the
existence of the garden’s bounties is dependent on hundreds of conditions besides the
man’s duty and the bounties come into being through dominical will and power,
which are the true cause. So understand just how clear is the error of this sophistry
and how mistaken are those who worship causes!
Yes, ‘association’ is one thing and the cause is another. You receive a bounty, but
the intention of a person to bestow it on you was the ‘associate’

--- Sayfa 183 ---
183
of the bounty, not the cause. The cause was divine mercy. If the man had not intended
to give you the bounty, you would not have received it and it would have been the
cause of the bounty’s non-existence. But in consequence of the above rule, the desire
to bestow cannot be the cause of the bounty; it can only be one out of hundreds of
conditions.
For example, some of the Risale-i Nur students (like Hüsrev and Re’fet) who
have received Almighty God’s bounties have confused the ‘association’ and the
cause, and have been over-grateful to their Master. However, Almighty God put
together the bounty of benefiting from the Qur’anic instruction which He bestowed on
them, and the bounty of instructing which He had bestowed on their Master; He
‘associated’ the two. They say: “If our Master had not come here, we would not have
received this instruction, so his instruction is the cause of our benefiting.” However, I
say:
“Brothers! The bounties Almighty God bestowed on you and on me arrived
together. The cause of both bounties is divine mercy. Like you, I at one time confused
the association with the cause, and felt much gratitude towards the hundreds of
Risale-i Nur students with diamond pens like yourselves. I would say: ‘If it had not
been for them, how could have a semi-literate unfortunate like myself have performed
this service?’ Then I understood that after bestowing on you the sacred bounty by
means of the pen, He bestowed on me success in this service. He associated the two;
they were not the cause of each other. I do not thank you, but congratulate you. You
too pray for me and congratulate me, rather than being grateful to me.”
It may be understood from this Fourth Matter just how many degrees there are in
heedlessness.
T h e  F i f t h  M a t t e r
Just as if the property of a community is given to one man, it is wrong; or if one
man lays hands on charitable foundations which belong to the community, he does
wrong; so too to ascribe to the leader or master of a community the results of that
community’s labours or the honour and merits resulting from its good works, is
wrong both for the community and for the leader or master. Because to do so flatters
his egotism and encourages pride. While being the door-keeper, he supposes himself
to be the king. He also does wrong to himself. Indeed, he opens the way to a sort of
concealed association of partners with God.
Yes, the colonel cannot claim for himself the booty, victory, and glory belonging
to a regiment which conquers a citadel. The master and spiritual guide should not be
considered to be the source and origin, but known to be

--- Sayfa 184 ---
184
the place of reflection and manifestation. For example, heat and light reach you by
means of a mirror. It would be crazy if you forget the sun, and considering the mirror
to be the source, are grateful to it instead of being grateful to the sun. The mirror
should be preserved because it is the place of manifestation. Thus, the guide’s spirit
and heart are a mirror; they are the place for reflecting the effulgence emanating from
Almighty God. He is the means of its being reflected to his followers. He should not
be ascribed a station higher with regard to the effulgence than that of being the means.
It sometimes even happens that a master considered to be the source is neither the
place of manifestation nor the source. The follower supposes the effulgences he
receives due to the purity of his sincerity, or his strength of attachment, or his
concentration on his master, or in other ways, to have come from the mirror of his
master’s spirit. Like by means of mesmerism, some people open up a window onto
the World of Similitudes by gazing attentively at a mirror, and observe strange and
wonderful things in the mirror. But they are not in the mirror; by focussing their
attention on the mirror, a window opens up in their imaginations outside the mirror
and they see those things. It is for this reason that sometimes the sincere student may
be more advanced than a deficient shaykh. He returns, guides his shaykh and becomes
the shaykh’s shaykh.

Fourteenth Note

This consists of four short signs alluding to divine unity.
F i r s t  S i g n
O worshipper of causes! You see a wondrous palace fashioned of rare jewels
which is being made. Some of the jewels used in its construction are found only in
China; others in Andalusia; others in Yemen; while others are found nowhere but
Siberia. If you see that as it is being made, the precious stones are summoned that
same day from north, south, east, and west, would you have any doubt that the master
builder making the palace was a miracle-worker who ruled the whole earth?
Thus, every animal is a divine palace, and man is the finest and most wondrous of
the palaces. Some of the jewels in the palace called man come from the World of
Spirits, others from the World of Similitudes and the Preserved Tablet, and others
from the world of the air, the world of light, and the world of the elements. He is also
a wondrous palace whose needs stretch to eternity, whose hopes have spread to all the
regions of the heavens

--- Sayfa 185 ---
185
and the earth, and who has relations and ties with all the epochs of this world and the
hereafter.
O you who considers yourself to be a true man! Since your true nature is thus,
you can only be made by One for whom this world and the hereafter are each a
dwelling, the earth and the skies each a page, and who has disposal over pre-eternity
and post-eternity as though they were yesterday and tomorrow. In which case, the
only being fit to be worshipped by man, and his place of recourse and saviour, can be
one who rules the earth and the heavens, and holds the reins of this world and the
next.
S e c o n d  S i g n
There are certain foolish people who because they do not recognize the sun, if
they see it in a mirror, start to love the mirror. With intense emotion they try to
preserve the mirror so that the sun within it will not be lost. Whenever the foolish
person realizes that the sun does not die on the mirror’s dying and is not lost on its
being broken, he turns all his love to the sun in the sky. He understands then that the
sun appearing in the mirror is not dependent on the mirror, and its continued existence
does not depend on it. It is rather the sun that holds the mirror and supplies its shining
light. The sun’s continuance is not dependent on the mirror; the continuance of the
mirror’s living brilliance is dependent on the sun’s manifestation.
O man! Your heart, identity, and nature are a mirror. The intense love of
immortality in your nature and heart should be not for the mirror, nor for your heart
and nature, but for the manifestation of the Enduring One of Glory whose
manifestation is reflected in the mirror according to the mirror’s capacity. However,
out of stupidity that love of yours is directed to other places. Since it is thus, say: “O
Enduring One! You alone are Enduring!” That is, “Since You exist and are enduring,
whatever transience and non-existence want to inflict on us, let them, it is of no
importance!”
T h i r d  S i g n
O man! The strangest state the All-Wise Creator has included in your nature is
your inability to settle in the whole world; like someone suffocating in prison, you
gasp for somewhere wider than the world. Yet you enter the minutest matter, a
memory, a moment, and settle in it. Your heart and mind which cannot settle in the
vast world settle in that jot. You wander about with your intensest emotions in that
brief moment, that tiny memory.
And He lodged in your nature such immaterial powers and subtle faculties that if
some of them devoured the world, they would not be satisfied; and some of them
cannot sustain even a minute particle within themselves. Like the eye cannot bear a
hair although the head can bear heavy stones,

--- Sayfa 186 ---
186
those faculties cannot bear the weight of even a hair, that is, some insignificant state
arising from heedlessness and misguidance. They are sometimes extinguished and die
even.
Since it is thus, be careful, tread with caution, be frightened of sinking! Do not
drown in a mouthful, a word, a seed, a flash, a sign, a kiss! Do not plunge your
extensive faculties, which can swallow the world, in such a thing. For there are things
which are very small that can in one respect swallow things which are very large. The
sky together with its stars can enter a small fragment of glass and be drowned. And
most of the pages of your actions and leaves of your life enter your faculty of
memory, tiny as a mustard-seed. So too there are tiny things that swallow things thus
large, and contain them.
F o u r t h  S i g n
O world-worshipping man! You conceive of your world as very broad, yet it
resembles a narrow grave. But since the walls of that narrow grave-like dwelling are
of glass, they are reflected one within the other and stretch as far as the eye can see.
While being narrow as the grave, your world appears to be as large as a town. For
despite both the right wall, which is the past, and the left wall, which is the future,
being non-existent, they are reflected one within the other, unfolding the wings of
present time, which is extremely brief and narrow. Reality mixes with imagination,
and you suppose a non-existent world to be existent.
On being spun round at speed, a line appears to be broad like a surface, despite in
reality being a fine line. Your world too is in reality narrow, but due to your
heedlessness, delusions, and imagination, its walls have drawn far apart. If driven by a
calamity you stir in that narrow world, you will hit your head on the wall, which you
supposed to be distant. It will dispel the illusions in your head and banish your sleep.
Then you will see that that broad world of yours is narrower than the grave, finer than
the Bridge of Sirat. Your life passes faster than lightning, it pours away more swiftly
than tea.
Since worldly life and the life of the flesh and animal life are thus, shake free of
animality, leave behind corporeality, enter the level of life of the heart and spirit! You
will find a sphere of life, a world of light, far broader than the world you imagined
was broad. The key to that world is to make the heart utter the sacred words “There is
no god but God,” which express the mysteries of divine unity and knowledge of God,
and to make the spirit work them.

--- Sayfa 187 ---
187
Fifteenth Note

This consists of three matters.23
T h e  F i r s t  M a t t e r
This is the verse
And whoever has done an atom’s weight of good shall see it,  * And whoever
has done an atom’s weight of evil, shall see it.(99:7-8)
which indicates the fullest manifestation of the name of Preserver. If you want proof
of this truth of the All-Wise Qur’an, look at the pages of the book of the universe,
which is written on the pattern of the Clear Book; you will see the maximum
manifestation of the divine name of Preserver and many things similar in many ways
to the supreme truth of this verse.
For instance, take a handful of seeds of various trees, flowers, and plants, which
are like the small coffers and are themselves all different and various, then bury them
in the darkness of simple and lifeless earth. Then water them with simple water,
which lacks balance, cannot distinguish things, and runs wherever you pour it.
Now come back in the spring, the arena of the annual resurrection, and look!
Note carefully the time in the spring when the Israfil-like angel of thunder calls out to
the rain as though sounding his trumpet, giving the good news of the breath of life
being breathed into the seeds buried beneath the ground; you will see that under the
manifestation of the divine name of Preserver, those seeds that resemble each other
and are all mixed up and confused, conform perfectly and without error to the creative
commands proceeding from the All-Wise Creator. They conform so exactly that in
their growth a brilliant consciousness, insight, purpose, will, knowledge, perfection,
and wisdom are apparent. For you see that those seeds which all resemble each other
separate out and are distinguished from one another.
For example, this tiny seed has become a fig-tree, it has started to spread the All-
Wise Creator’s bounties over our heads. It distributes them, stretching them out to us
with its hands. And these two seeds which are superficially the same have produced
the flowers called sun-flowers and pansies. They have adorned themselves for us.
They smile in our faces, making us love them. And this sort of seed has produced fine
fruits; they became shoots, then trees. Whetting our appetites with their delectable

23 The second and third matters of the Fifteenth Note are parts of the Twenty-Fourth Flash. The
second is included in the Twenty-Fourth Flash, and the third in Barla Lahikası.

--- Sayfa 188 ---
188
tastes, scents, and forms, they invite us to themselves. They sacrifice themselves for
their customers so that they may rise from the level of vegetable life to that of animal
life. And so on. You can make further examples in the same way. The seeds
developed in such a way that the single handful became a garden filled with
multifarious trees and flowers. There was no fault, no error among them. They
demonstrated the meaning of the verse,
So turn your vision again; do you see any flaw?(67:3)
Through the manifestation and bestowal of the name of Preserver, each of the
seeds preserves and shows without confusion or defect the legacy inherited from its
parent and origins.
This is a certain indication that the Preserver who carries out this wondrous work
will demonstrate the supreme manifestation of His preservation at the resurrection of
the dead and Last Judgement.
Yes, the manifestation of preservation that is thus faultless and without defect in
insignificant, fleeting, transient states is a decisive proof that the actions, works,
words, and good deeds and bad deeds of man, the holder of the Supreme Trust and
vicegerent of the earth – deeds which have an eternal effect and supreme importance
– are precisely preserved and will be subject to account.
Does man suppose he will be left to his own devices? God forbid! He is destined
for eternity, and for everlasting happiness and perpetual misery. He will be called to
account for all his actions, small and great, many and few. He will receive either
reward or punishment.
Witnesses to the maximum manifestation of preservation and to the truth of the
first-mentioned verse are beyond count or calculation. Those we have shown in this
Matter are a mere drop from the ocean, an atom from a mountain.
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32)

*   *   *

The Eighteenth Flash

This has been published in Sikke-i Tasdik-i Gaybî (The Ratifying Stamp of the
Unseen) and in hand-duplicated editions of Lem’alar (The Flashes Collection).

*   *   *

--- Sayfa 189 ---
189
The Nineteenth Flash

On Frugality

[This treatise is about frugality and contentment, and
wastefulness and extravagance.]

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
Eat and drink, but waste not by excess.(7:31)
This verse gives most important and wise instruction in the form of categorically
commanding frugality and clearly prohibiting wastefulness. The matter contains
seven points.
FIRST POINT
The All-Compassionate Creator desires THANKS in return for the bounties He
bestows on mankind, while wastefulness is contrary to thanks, and slights the bounty
and causes loss. Frugality, however, shows respect for the  bounty and is profitable.
Yes, frugality is both a sort of thanks, and shows respect towards the divine mercy
manifested in the bounties, and most definitely is the cause of plenty. So too, like
abstinence, it is health-giving for the body, and since it saves a person from the
degradation of what is in effect begging, is a cause of self-respect. It is also a
powerful means of experiencing the pleasure to be found in bounties, and tasting that
pleasure in bounties which apparently afford no pleasure. As for wastefulness, since it
is opposed to these instances of wisdom, it has grave consequences.
SECOND POINT
The All-Wise Maker created the human body in the form of a wonderful palace
and resembling a well-ordered city. The sense of taste in the mouth is like a door-
keeper, and the nerves and blood vessels like telephone and telegraph wires; they are
the means by which the sense of taste communi

--- Sayfa 190 ---
190
cates with the stomach, which is at the centre of the body, and informs it of the food
that enters the mouth. If the body and stomach have no use for it, it says:
“Forbidden!”, and expels it. And sometimes the food is harmful and bitter as well as
not being beneficial for the body, and it spits it out immediately.
Thus, since the sense of taste is a doorkeeper, from the point of view of
administering the body, the stomach is a master and a ruler. If the gifts arriving at the
palace or city and those given to the palace’s ruler are worth one hundred liras, only
five liras’ worth is appropriate for the doorkeeper in the form of a tip, lest he becomes
conceited and is corrupted, then forgetting his duty he lets revolutionaries into the
palace who will give him a bigger tip.
In consequence of this mystery we shall now imagine two mouthfuls. One
consists of nutritious food like cheese and egg and costs forty para,1 and the other is
of the choicest pastries and costs ten kurush. Before entering the mouth, there is no
difference in these two mouthfuls with respect to the body, they are equal. And after
passing down the throat, they are still equal in nourishing the body. Indeed, forty
paras’ worth of cheese is sometimes more nutritious. Only, in regard to pampering the
sense of taste in the mouth, there is a half-minute difference. You can see from this
what a meaningless and harmful waste it is to increase the cost from forty para to ten
kurush for the sake of half a minute.
Now, although the gift arriving for the palace’s ruler is worth one lira, to give the
doorkeeper a tip nine times bigger than his due will corrupt him. He will declare: “I
am the ruler,” and will allow to enter whoever gives him the biggest tip and most
pleasure; he will cause a revolution and conflagration to break out. Then he will
compel them to cry out: “Oh! Call the doctor and get him to put out this fire in my
stomach and bring down my temperature!”
Thus, frugality and contentment are in conformity with divine wisdom; they treat
the sense of taste as a doorkeeper and give it its remuneration accordingly. As for
wastefulness, since it is to act contrarily to wisdom, it swiftly receives its punishment,
upsets the stomach, and causes real appetite to be lost. Producing from the
unnecessary variety of foods a false and artificial appetite, it causes indigestion and
illness.

1 There were forty para to a kurush, and a hundred kurush to a lira. (Tr.)

--- Sayfa 191 ---
191
THIRD POINT
We said in the Second Point that the sense of taste is a doorkeeper, and indeed,
for the heedless and those who have not progressed spiritually or advanced in the way
of thanks, it is like a doorkeeper. Wastefulness should not be indulged in or the sense
of taste’s price be raised from one to ten for the sake of giving it pleasure.
However, the sense of taste of those truly on the way of thanks, those seeking
reality, and those who approach reality with their hearts is like a supervisor and
inspector in the kitchens of divine mercy, as is explained in the comparison in the
Sixth Word. Its duty is to recognize and weigh up the varieties of divine bounties on
the tiny scales present in it to the number of foods, and to send the body and stomach
news of the food in the form of thanks. In this respect the sense of taste does not only
look to the physical stomach; since it looks also to the heart, spirit, and mind, it holds
a position and importance superior to the stomach. It can follow its pleasure on
condition it is not wasteful or extravagant, and is purely to carry out its duty of thanks
and recognize and perceive the varieties of divine bounty, and on condition it is licit
and does not lead to degradation and begging. In fact, delicious foods may be
preferred in order to employ the tongue which bears the sense of taste in giving
thanks. The following is an instance of Shaykh Geylani’s wonder-working which
alludes to this truth:
At one time, being instructed by Ghawth al-A‘zam, Shaykh Geylani (May his
mystery be sanctified), was the only son of an aged and anxious woman. This
esteemed lady had gone to her son’s cell and seen that he had nothing to eat but a
piece of dry, black bread. Her maternal compassion was aroused by his emaciated
condition resulting from his asceticism. She felt sorry for him. Later she went to
Ghawth al-A‘zam in order to complain, and saw the Shaykh was tucking into roast
chicken. Out of her concern, she declared: “O Master! My son is dying of hunger
while you are eating chicken!” Whereupon Ghawth al-A‘zam said to the chicken:
“Rise up, with God’s permission!” At this, the cooked chicken bones assembled and
were thrown out of the dish as an entire live chicken. This has been related
unanimously through many reliable and documented channels as a marvel of someone
whose extraordinary wonder-working is world-famous. Ghawth al-A‘zam said to her:
“When your son reaches this level, then he too can eat chicken.”2 Thus, the meaning
of Ghawth al-A‘zam’s words is this: whenever your son’s spirit rules his body, and
his heart rules the

2 See, Gilani, Ghunya al-Talibin, 502; Nabhani, Jami‘ Karamat al-Awliya’, ii, 203.

--- Sayfa 192 ---
192
desires of his soul, and his reason rules his stomach, and he wants pleasure for the
sake of offering thanks, then he may eat delicious things.
FOURTH POINT
According to the Hadith the meaning of which is: “The thrifty will suffer no
family difficulties as regards livelihood,”3 the frugal and economical person will not
suffer undue trouble and hardship in supporting his family.
There are countless proofs that frugality yields plenty and good living. For
instance, I have seen myself and I can say according to the testimony of those who
have befriended and assisted me that by being frugal I have sometimes seen a tenfold
increase, and so have my friends. Even, nine years ago – and now it is thirty, a
number of the tribal leaders who were exiled to Burdur together with me did their best
to make me accept their zakat so that I would not suffer privation and humiliation due
to lack of money. I said to those rich leaders: “I have very little money, but I am
frugal and economical and I am accustomed to being content with little. I am richer
than you.” I refused their repeated and insistent offers. It is worth noting that two
years later some of those who had offered me their zakat were in debt because they
had not been frugal. Praise be to God, seven years on from that, thanks to the plenty
resulting from frugality that small amount of money was still sufficient for me; it did
not degrade me, nor compel me to present my needs to the people, nor make me
deviate from my way of self-sufficiency and being independent of people, which is
one of the principles of my life.
The person who is not frugal is certain to be abased and reduced to poverty and in
effect to begging. At the present time, money, the means of wastefulness and
extravagance, is extremely expensive. Sometimes a person sells his honour and self-
respect and bribes are taken to obtain it. Sometimes the sacred things of religion are
sold, then some inauspicious money received in return. That is to say, material goods
worth ten kurush are procured in return for an immaterial loss of a hundred lira.
However, according to the implied meaning of the verse,
Indeed, it is God Who gives all sustenance, Lord of all power and
strength,(51:58)
and the explicit meaning of the verse,
And there is no moving creature on the earth but its sustenance is provided
by God,(11:6)

3 Musnad, i, 447; al-Munawi, Fayd al-Qadir, v, 454, no: 7939; al-Hindi, Kanz al-‘Ummal, iii, 36;
vi, 49, 56, 57.

--- Sayfa 193 ---
193
if a person is frugal and restricts his needs to the essential, he will find enough
sustenance to live on in unexpected ways. The verse guarantees it. Yes, there are two
sorts of sustenance:4
One is true sustenance, which is enough to subsist on. As the verse decrees, this
is guaranteed by the Sustainer. So long as man’s inclination towards evil does not
interfere, he will find this essential sustenance under any circumstances. He will be
compelled to sacrifice neither his religion, nor his honour, nor his self-respect.
The second sort is metaphorical sustenance, due to which and its abuse,
inessential needs become like essential ones, and owing to the calamity of custom and
tradition, people become addicted to them and cannot give them up. Such sustenance
is not guaranteed by the Sustainer, so the obtaining of it is extremely expensive –
especially at the present time. These unfruitful, inauspicious goods are obtained by
first of all sacrificing one’s self-respect and accepting degradation, and sometimes
stooping to what is in effect begging, kissing the feet of the vile, and sometimes
sacrificing the sacred things of religion, which are the light of eternal life.
Also, at this time of poverty and hardship, the distress people with consciences
feel at the anguish of the hungry and needy sours any pleasure to be had from
unlawfully acquired money. As far as doubtful goods are concerned, one has to make
do with them to the minimum degree necessary during strange times such as these.
For according to the rule, “Necessity is determined according to its extent,” if
compelled, illicit goods may be taken to the minimum degree necessary, not more.
Someone in dire need may eat prohibited meat, but he may not eat his fill. He may eat
enough only to remain alive. Also, one could not fully enjoy more than this in the
presence of a hundred people who are hungry.
The following is a story showing that frugality is the cause of dignity and
distinction:
One time, Khatim Tay, who was world-famous for his generosity, was giving a
large banquet. Having given his guests a superfluity of presents, he went out to walk
in the desert. There he saw a poor old man carrying a load of thorny bushes and plants
on his back. The thorns were piercing his skin and making him bleed. Khatim said to
him: “Khatim Tay is giving a large banquet and giving away gifts. Go there and you
will be given five hundred kurush in return for  your load worth five kurush.” The
frugal old man replied: “I raise and carry this thorny load with my self-respect; I am
not going to become obliged to Khatim Tay.” Later, they asked Khatim

4 See, al-Jurjani, Tarikh Jurjan, 366; al-Ghazali, al-Maqsad al-Asna, 85-6.

--- Sayfa 194 ---
194
Tay: “Have you come across anyone more generous and estimable than yourself?” He
replied: “The frugal old man I met in the desert was more estimable, elevated, and
generous than me.”5
FIFTH POINT
Out of His perfect generosity, Almighty God makes a poor man understand the
pleasure of His bounty the same as a rich man, and a beggar the same as a king.
Indeed, the pleasure a poor man obtains from a dry piece of black bread because of
hunger and being frugal is greater than the pleasure a king or a rich man obtains from
the choicest pastries consumed with the weariness and lack of appetite resulting from
excess.
It is surprising but some dissolute, extravagant people accuse the frugal and
economical of being mean and stingy. God forbid! Frugality is dignity and generosity.
Stinginess and meanness are the inner face of the apparently noble qualities of the
wasteful and extravagant. There is an event corroborating this which occurred in my
room in Isparta the year this treatise was written. It was as follows:
One of my students insisted on my accepting – contrary to my rule and life-long
principle – a present of nearly two and a half okkas6 of honey. However much I
reiterated my rule, he was not to be persuaded. So I told the three brothers who were
with me to take it, saying that by being economical they would eat the honey for thirty
to forty days in the months of Sha‘ban and Ramadan, and not lack something sweet to
eat, and the one who brought it would earn the reward. I myself had an okka of honey
as well. Although my three friends were moderate and appreciated frugality, because
they offered the honey to each other, and flattered each others’ souls, and each
preferred the others to himself, which in one respect is a good quality, they forgot
about being economical. They finished the two and a half okkas of honey in three
nights. Laughing, I said: “I would have given you the taste of that honey for thirty to
forty days, but you have reduced the thirty days to three. I hope you enjoyed it!” I
consumed my one okka of honey frugally. For the whole of Sha’ban and Ramadan
both I ate it, and, Praise be to God, every evening while breaking the fast I gave each
of those brothers a spoonful,7 and it became the means of signficant reward. Perhaps
anyone who saw my doing this thought it was stinginess and what my brothers did for
three nights was generosity. But in point of

5 See, Bukhari, Musaqat, 13; Zakat, 50; Buyu’, 15; Ibn Maja, Zakat, 25; Musnad, i, 167.
6 One okka equalled 2.8 lbs. (Tr.)
7 That is, a fairly large teaspoon.

--- Sayfa 195 ---
195
fact I perceived that concealed beneath the apparent stinginess lay an elevated dignity,
increase and plenty, and great reward. If they had not stopped, it would have led to
something much worse than stinginess beneath the generosity and excess, like
beggarliness and watching another’s hand greedily and expectantly.
SIXTH POINT
There is a great difference between frugality and stinginess. Just as humility is a
praiseworthy quality superficially resembling but different to the bad quality of
servility, and dignity is a laudable virtue superficially similar to but different from the
bad quality of haughtiness, so too frugality, which was one of the Prophet’s (UWBP)
elevated qualities and indeed is one of the things on which the divine wisdom in the
order of the universe depends,8 bears no relation to stinginess, which is a mixture of
baseness, avarice, miserliness, and greed. There is merely a superficial resemblance.
The following is an event corroborating this fact:
‘Abdullah ibn ‘Umar, who was one of the famous Companions of the Prophet
known as the seven ‘Abdullahs,9 was the greatest and most important of the Caliph
‘Umar, Faruq al-A‘zam’s sons, and one of the most distinguished and learned of the
Companions. One day while shopping in the market, in order to be economical and to
preserve the confidence and integrity on which trade depends,10 he disputed hotly
over something worth a few kurush. One of the Companions saw him, and imagining
the Illustrious Successor of the Prophet on Earth, the Caliph ‘Umar’s son’s wrangling
over a few kurush to be an extraordinary stinginess, he followed him in order to
understand his conduct. Next he saw that ‘Abdullah was entering his blessed house
and had spotted a poor man at the door. He chatted with him for a bit, and the man
left. Then he came out of the second door of the house and saw another poor man. He
chatted with him for a while too, and the man left. The Companion, who was
watching from the distance, was curious. He went and asked the poor men:
“‘Abdullah paused a while with you. What did he do?” Each of them replied: “He
gave me a gold piece.” “Glory be to God!,” exclaimed the Companion, and thought to
himself: “How is it that he wrangled like that over a few kurush in the market, then
was completely happy to give away two hundred kurush in his house without letting
anyone know?”

8 Abu Da’ud, Adab, 2; Musnad, i, 296.
9 The seven ‘Abdullah’s (al-’Abadila al-Sab’a): ‘Abdullah b. ‘Abbas, ‘Abdullah b. ‘Umar,
‘Abdullah b. Mas’ud, ‘Abdullah b. Rawaha, ‘Abdullah b. Salam, ‘Abdullah b. ‘Amr b. al-’As,
‘Abdullah b. Abi Awfa (R. A.). (Tr.)
10 See, Tirmidhi, Buyu’, 3; Ibn Maja, Tijarat, 1; Darimi, Buyu’, 98.

--- Sayfa 196 ---
196
He went to ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Umar and said: “O Imam! Solve this difficulty for me!
In the market you did that, while in your house you did this.” ‘Abdullah replied to
him saying: “What I did in the market was not stinginess, but arose from frugality; it
was perfectly reasonable, and to preserve confidence and honesty, which are the basis
and spirit of commerce. And what I did by my house arose from the heart’s
compassion and the spirit’s perfection. Neither was the first stinginess, nor the second
immoderateness.”
Alluding to this, Imam Abu Hanifa said: “There can be no excess in good, just as
there is no good in excess.”11 That is to say, just as in good works and benevolence
there can no excess or wastefulness – on condition they are for the deserving, so there
is no good at all in wastefulness and immoderateness.
SEVENTH POINT
Excess and wastefulness lead to greed, and greed has three consequences:
The First is dissatisfaction, and as for dissatisfaction, it destroys endeavour and
enthusiasm for work, and causes the dissatisfied person to complain instead of giving
thanks, and makes him lazy. Such a person abandons possessions which though few
in number are licit,12 and seeks possessions which are illicit and trouble-free. He
sacrifices his self-respect on the way, and even his honour.
The Second Consequence of Greed is disappointment and loss. The greedy
person drives away what he wishes for, is found disagreeable, and is deprived of
assistance and help. He even confirms the saying: “The greedy person is unsuccessful
and suffers loss.”13
Greed and contentment have their effects in the animal kingdom in accordance
with an extensive law. For instance, the natural contentment of trees needy for
sustenance makes their sustenance hasten to them; this shows the huge benefits of
contentment. While animals’ running after their sustenance greedily and with
difficulty and deficiency demonstrates the great loss of greed.

11 See, al-Ghazali, Ihya ‘Ulum al-Din, i, 262; Qurtubi, al-Jami‘ li-Ahkam al-Qur’an, vii, 110; al-
Munawi, Fayd al-Qadir, v, 454.
12 Consumers increase and producers decrease as a result of wastefulness and lack of economy.
Everyone fixes his eye on the government’s door, and industry, trade, and agriculture, on which social
life depend, decrease. And the nation declines and is impoverished.
13 See, Ibn Qays, Qura al-Dayf, iv, 301; al-Maydani, Majma‘ al-Amthal, i, 214

--- Sayfa 197 ---
197
Also, the contentment apparent through their tongues of disposition of the
helpless young and a pleasant food like milk flowing out to them from an unexpected
place, while wild animals greedily attack their deficient and dirty sustenance, prove
our claim in clear fashion.
Also, the contented attitude of fat fish being the means of their perfect
sustenance, and intelligent animals like foxes and monkeys remaining puny and weak
because they cannot find sufficient sustenance although they pursue it with greed,
again show the degree to which greed is the cause of hardship and contentment the
cause of ease.
Also, certain people finding through greed, usury, and trickery their degrading,
miserable, illicit sustanance only at subsistence level, and the contented attitude of
nomads and their living with dignity and finding sufficient sustenance, proves
decisively what we say once more.
Also, many scholars14 and literary figures15 being reduced to poverty because of
the greed arising from their intelligence, and many stupid and incapable people
becoming rich due to their innate contentedness16 proves decisively that licit
sustenance comes because of impotence and want, not by virtue of ability and will.
Indeed, licit sustenance is in inverse proportion to ability and will. For the more
children increase in ability and will, the more their sustenance decreases, the further it
is from them and the more difficult to digest. According to the Hadith, “Contentment
is an unfailing treasure,”17 contentment is a treasury of good living and ease of life,
while greed is a mine of loss and abasement.
The Third Consequence: Greed destroys sincerity and damages actions in
regard to the hereafter. For if a God-fearing person suffers from greed, he will desire
the regard of others, and someone who considers the

14 It was asked of Bozorgmehr, the Wazir of the Persian Shah Nushirvan the Just and scholar
famous for his intelligence, “Why are the learned to be seen at the doors of rulers and rulers not to be
seen at the doors of the learned, whereas learning is superior to rulership?” He replied: “Because of the
knowledge of the learned and the ignorance of the rulers.” That is to say, due to their ignorance, rulers
do not know the value of learning so that they approach the doors of the learned to seek it. But because
of their knowledge, the learned know the value of their rulers’ goods and possessions and seek them at
the rulers’ doors. Explaining thus wittily the greed resulting from the cleverness of the learned, which
causes some of them to be impecunious and in want, Bozorgmehr replied in a refined manner.
                                                                                     Signed:     Hüsrev

15 An event corroborating this: in France, a beggar’s licence was given to literary figures because
they were so proficient at begging.
                                                                                     Signed:    Süleyman Rüştü

16 See, al-Daylami, al-Musnad, iv, 385.
17 See, Tabarani, al-Mu‘jam al-Awsat, vii, 84; Bayhaqi, al-Zuhd, ii, 88; al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-
Khafa’, ii, 133.

--- Sayfa 198 ---
198
attention of others cannot have complete sincerity. This consequence is extremely
important and worth noticing.
I n  S h o r t : Excess and wastefulness lead to lack of contentment. And lack of
contentment destroys enthusiasm for work; it causes laziness, opens the door to
complaining about life, and makes the dissatisfied person grumble continuously.18
Also, it destroys sincerity, and opens the door to hypocrisy. And it destroys self-
respect, and points the way to begging.
As for frugality and economy, these result in contentment. According to the
Hadith, “The contented person is respected, and the greedy person despised,”19
contentment gives rise to self-esteem. It also encourages effort and work. It increases
enthusiasm, and induces striving. For example, a person worked for one day. Because
he was content with the petty wage he received in the evening, he worked again the
second day. But because the wasteful and immoderate person was not content, he did
not work the following day, or if he did, he did so without enthusiasm.
Also, the contentment arising from frugality opens the door of thanks and closes
the door of complaint. Throughout his life, the contented person is thankful. And in so
far as he is independent of others due to his contentment, he does not seek their
regard. The door of sincerity is opened and the door of hypocrisy closed.
I observed the fearsome harm of wastefulness and excess on a broad scale. It was
as follows: nine years ago I visited a fortunate town. It was winter and I could not see
its sources of wealth. Several times the town’s Mufti, may God have mercy on him,
said to me, “Our people are poor.” His words touched me. The next five or six years I
felt continual pity for the people of the town. Eight years later I again visited it, in the
summer. I looked at the gardens and recalled the words of the late Mufti. “Glory be to
God!”, I exclaimed, “These gardens’ crops are far greater than the needs of the town.
Its people should be very rich.” I was amazed. Then remembering a truth that has
never deceived me and is my guide in understanding other truths, I understood that
the abundance and plenty had disappeared due to wastefulness and excess, so that
although the town possessed such sources of wealth, the late Mufti used to say: “Our
people are poor.”
Indeed, just as giving zakat and being frugal and economical is proven by
experience to be the cause of increase and plenty in goods and

18 Whenever you meet a wasteful, immoderate person, you hear complaints. No matter how rich
he is, his tongue still complains. But when you meet even the poorest, but contented, person, you hear
only thanks.
19 See, Ibn al-Athir, al-Nihaya fi Ghara’ib al-Hadith, iv, 114; al-Zabidi, Taj al-‘Arus, xxii, 90.

--- Sayfa 199 ---
199
possessions,20 so too innumerable events show that wastefulness and the failure to
give zakat cause increase and plenty to be taken away.
The Plato of Islamic sages, the shaykh of physicians, and master of philosophers,
the famous genius Abu ‘Ali Ibn Sina explained the verse,
Eat and drink, but waste not in excess(7:31)
just from the point of view of medicine, as follows: “I concentrate the science of
medicine in two lines, the best word is the shortest; when you eat, eat little, and do not
eat again for four or five hours. Health lies in digestion. That is to say, eat so much as
you can digest easily. The heaviest and most tiring thing for your stomach and
yourself is to eat many things one on top of the other.”21
An Extraordinary and Instructive ‘Coincidence’:22 In all the
copies of the Treatise on Frugality written by five or six scribes –
three of whom were inexperienced, who were in different places far
from one another, were writing it out from different copies, whose
handwriting was all different, and who did not take the Alifs23 into
consideration at all, the Alifs which ‘coincided’ numbered fifty-one,
or with a prayer, fifty-three. These numbers coinciding with the date
the Treatise on Frugality was written and copied, which was [13]51
according to the Rumi calendar and [13]53 according to the Hijri
calendar, undoubtedly cannot be chance. It is an indication that the
blessing of plenty resulting from frugality has risen to the degree of
wondrousness, and that this year is fit to be named Frugality Year.
Indeed, this wonder of frugality was proved two years later,
during the Second World War, by the widespread hunger,
destruction, and waste, and mankind and everyone being compelled
to be frugal.

Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32)

20 See, al-Tabarani, al-Mu‘jam al-Kabir, x, 128: Idem., al-Mu‘jam al-Awsat, ii, 161, 274; al-
Bayhaqi, al-Sunan al-Kubra, iii, 382; iv, 84.
21 That is to say, the most harmful thing for the body is to eat without having had a break of four
to five hours, or to fill the stomach with a variety of foods one on top of the other just for the pleasure
of it.
22 ‘Coincidence’ (T. tevâfuk; Ar. tawafuq): the correspondence of letters or words in lines or
patterns on one or several pages. (Tr.)

--- Sayfa 200 ---
200
The Twentieth Flash

On Sincerity

[While being the first of the five Points which form the
Second of the seven Matters of the Seventeenth Flash, this
became the Twentieth Flash because of its importance.]

In the Name of God,  the Merciful, the Compassionate.
The verse:
Verily We sent the Book down to you in truth, so worship God in sincerity,
for God’s is sincerely practised religion,(39:2)
and the noble saying of the Prophet (UWBP):
“All men will perish, except the scholars, and all scholars will perish except
those who act in accordance with their knowledge, and all of them will
perish except the sincere, and even the sincere are in great danger,”1
demonstrate together how important a principle of Islam is sincerity. From among the
innumerable points concerning sincerity, we will briefly expound only five.
Note: An auspicious sign of blessed Isparta which causes one to
offer thanks is that compared with other places, there is no visible
rivalry and dispute between the pious, those who follow the Sufi
path, and the religious scholars. Even if the required true love and
union is not present, comparatively speaking, there is no harmful
rivalry and conflict.

1 See, al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, ii, 415; al-Ghazali, Ihya ‘Ulum al-Din, iii, 414.

--- Sayfa 201 ---
201
First Point

An Important and Awesome Question: Why is it that while the worldly and the
neglectful, and even the misguided and hypocrites, co-operate without rivalry, the
people of religion, the religious scholars, and those who follow the Sufi path, oppose
each other in rivalry, although they are the people of truth and concord? Agreement
belongs in reality to the people of concord and dispute to the hypocrites; how is it that
these two have changed places?
T h e  A n s w e r :  We will set forth seven of the extremely numerous causes of
this painful, disgraceful and awesome situation, one that causes the zealous to weep.
THE FIRST
Just as dispute among the people of the truth does not arise from lack of the truth,
so too the agreement prevailing among the people of neglect does not arise from any
possession of truth. Rather it is that a specific duty and particular function has been
assigned to the classes in society, like ‘the worldly,’2 those engaged in politics, and
those who have received a secular education, and thus the functions of the various
groups, societies, and communities have been defined and become distinguished from
one another. Similarly, the material reward they are to receive for their functions in
order to maintain a livelihood, as well as the moral reward that consists in the
attention they receive from men for the sake of their ambition and pride – this too is
established and specified.3 There is therefore nothing held in common to the degree
that it might produce conflict, dissension and rivalry. However evil be the path that
they tread, they will be able to preserve unity and agreement.
But as for the people of religion, the scholars, and those who follow the path, the
duty of each is concerned with all men; their material reward is

2 ‘The worldly’ (ehl-i dünya): those people whose view is restricted to the life of this world and
who disregard the hereafter, or those who sell religion for this world. (Tr.)
3 Be aware that the attention of men cannot be demanded, but only given. If it is given, one should
not delight in it. If one delights in it, sincerity is lost and hypocrisy takes its place. The attention of
men, if accompanied by the desire for honour and fame, is not a reward and a prize, but a reproach and
chastisement for lack of sincerity. Such attention of men, such honour and fame, harm sincerity, the
source of vitality for all good deeds, and even though they yield a slight pleasure as far as the gate of
the tomb, on the other side of that gate they take on the form of torment. One should not therefore
desire the attention of men, but flee and shy away from it. Be warned, all you who worship fame and
run after honour and rank!

--- Sayfa 202 ---
202
not set and specified; and their share in social esteem and acceptance and public
attention is not predetermined. Many may be candidates for the same position; many
hands may stretch out for each moral and material reward that is offered. Hence it is
that conflict and rivalry arise; concord is changed into discord, and agreement into
dispute.
Now the cure and remedy for this appalling disease is sincerity. Sincerity may be
attained by preferring the worship of God to the worship of one’s own soul, by
causing God’s pleasure to vanquish the pleasure of the soul and the ego, and thus
manifesting the meaning of the verse:
Verily my reward is from God alone;(11:29)
by renouncing the material and moral reward to be had from men4 and thus
manifesting the meaning of the verse:
Naught is incumbent on the Messenger but conveying the message;(5:99)
and by knowing that such matters as goodly acceptance, and making a favourable
impression, and gaining the attention of men are God’s concern and a favour from
Him, and that they play no part in conveying the message, which is one’s own duty,
nor are they necessary for it, nor is one charged with gaining them – by knowing this
a person will be successful in gaining sincerity, otherwise it will vanish.
SECOND CAUSE
The agreement among the poeple of misguidance is on account of their
abasement, and the dispute among the people of guidance is on account of their
dignity. That is to say that the people of neglect – those misguided ones sunk in
worldly concerns – are weak and abased because they do not rely on truth and reality.
On account of their abasement, they need to augment their strength, and because of
this need they wholeheartedly embrace the aid and co-operation of others. Even
though the path they follow is

4 One should also take as one’s guide the quality of preferring others to oneself, the same quality
of the Companions that is praised in the Qur’an. For example, when giving a present or performing an
act of charity, one should always prefer the recipient to oneself, and without demanding or inwardly
desiring any material reward for religious service, know one’s act to be purely God’s grace and not
impose a sense of obligation on men. Nothing worldly should be sought in return for religious service,
for otherwise sincerity will be lost. Men have many rights and claims, and may even deserve zakat. But
it cannot be demanded. When one receives something, it cannot be said: “This is the reward for my
service.” Rather in perfect contentment one should always prefer to oneself others who are more
deserving. Thus manifesting the meaning of “They prefer others to themselves, though poverty be their
lot” (Qur’an, 59:9), one may be saved from this terrible danger and gain sincerity.

--- Sayfa 203 ---
203
misguidance, they preserve their agreement. It is as if they were making their
godlessness into a form of worship of the truth, their misguidance into a form of
sincerity, their irreligion into a form of solidarity, and their hypocrisy into concord,
and thus attaining success. For genuine sincerity, even for the sake of evil, cannot fail
to yield results, and whatever man seeks with sincerity, God will grant him it.5
But as for the people of guidance and religion, the religious scholars and those
who follow the Sufi path, since they rely upon truth and reality, and each of them on
the road of truth thinks only of his Sustainer and trusts in His succour, they derive
dignity from their belief. When they feel weakness, they turn not toward men, but
toward God and seek help from Him. On account of difference in outlook, they feel
no real need for the aid of the one whose outlook apparently opposes their own, and
see no need for agreement and unity. Indeed, if obstinacy and egoism are present, one
will imagine himself to be right and the other to be wrong; discord and rivalry take
the place of concord and love. Thus sincerity is chased away and its function
disrupted.
Now the only remedy for the critical consequences of this awesome state consists
of nine commands:
1. To act positively, that is, out of love for one’s own outlook, avoiding enmity
for other outlooks, not criticizing them, interfering in their beliefs and sciences, or in
any way concerning oneself with them.
2. To unite within the fold of Islam, irrespective of particular outlook,
remembering those numerous ties of unity that evoke love, brotherhood and concord.
3. To adopt the just rule of conduct that the follower of any right outlook has the
right to say, “My outlook is true, or the best,” but not that “My outlook alone is true,”
or that “My outlook alone is good,” thus implying the falsity or repugnance of all
other outlooks.
4. To consider that union with the people of truth is a cause of divine succour and
the high dignity of religion.
5. To realize that the individual resistance of the most powerful person against
the attacks through its genius of the mighty collective force of the people of
misguidance and falsehood, which arises from their solidarity, will inevitably be
defeated, and through the union of the people of truth, to create a joint and collective
force also, in order to preserve justice and right in the face of that fearsome collective
force of misguidance.

5 Yes, “Whoever seeks earnestly shall find” is a rule of truth. Its scope is comprehensive and
includes the matter under discussion.

--- Sayfa 204 ---
204
6. In order to preserve truth from the assaults of falsehood,
7. To abandon the self and its egoism,
8. And give up the mistaken concept of self-pride,
9. And cease from all insignificant feelings aroused by rivalry.
If this ninefold rule is adhered to, sincerity will be preserved and its function
perfectly performed.6
THIRD CAUSE
Disagreement among the people of truth does not arise from lack of zeal and
aspiration, nor does union among the people of misguidance arise from loftiness of
aspiration. That which impels the people of guidance to the misuse of their high
aspiration and hence to disagreement and rivalry is the desire for heavenly reward that
is counted as a praiseworthy quality in respect of the hereafter, and extreme eagerness
with respect to duties pertaining to the hereafter. Thinking to oneself, “Let me gain
this reward, let me guide these people, let them listen to me,” he takes up a position of
rivalry towards the true brother who faces him and who stands in real need of his
love, assistance, brotherhood and aid. Saying to oneself, “Why are my pupils going to
him? Why don’t I have as many pupils as him?” he falls prey to egoism, inclines to
the chronic disease of ambition, loses all sincerity, and opens the door to hypocrisy.
The cure for this error, this wound, this awesome sickness of the spirit, is the
principle that “God’s pleasure is won by sincerity alone,” and not by a large following
or great success. For these latter are a function of God’s will; they cannot be
demanded, although they are sometimes given. Sometimes a single word will result in
someone’s salvation and hence the pleasure of God. Quantity should not receive too
much attention, for sometimes to guide one man to the truth may be as pleasing to
God as guiding a thousand. Moreover sincerity and adherence to the truth require that
one should desire the Muslims to benefit from anyone and at any place they can. To
think “Let them take lessons from me so that I gain the reward” is a trick of the soul
and the ego.
O man greedy for reward in the hereafter and the performance of deeds

6 It is even recorded in authentic traditions  of the Prophet that at the end of time  the truly pious
among the Christians will unite with the People of the Qur’an and fight their common enemy,
irreligion. And at this time, too, the people of religion and truth need to unite sincerely not only with
their own brothers and fellow believers, but also with the truly pious and spiritual ones among the
Christians, temporarily refraining from the discussion and debate of points of difference in order to
combat their joint enemy – aggressive atheism.

--- Sayfa 205 ---
205
entitling you to that reward! There have been certain prophets who had only a limited
following but received the infinite reward of the sacred duty of prophethood. The true
achievement lies, then, not in gaining a vast following, but in gaining God’s pleasure.
What do you imagine yourself to be, that saying, “Let everyone listen to me,” you
forget your function, and interfere in what is strictly God’s concern? To gain
acceptance for you and to have people gather round you is God’s concern. So look to
your own duty and concern, and do not meddle with God’s concerns.
Moreover, it is not only men who earn reward for those who hear and speak the
truth. The sentient and spiritual beings of God and His angels have filled the universe
and adorned its every part. If you want plentiful reward, take sincerity as your
foundation and think only of God’s pleasure. Then every syllable of the blessed words
that issue forth from your mouth will be brought to life by your sincerity and truthful
intention, and going to the ears of innumerable sentient beings, they will illumine
them and earn you reward. For when, for example, you say, “Praise and thanks be to
God,” millions of these words, great and small, are written on the page of the air by
God’s leave. Since the All-Wise Inscriber did nothing prodigally or in vain, He
created innumerable ears, as many as were needed to hear those multiple blessed
words. If those words are brought to life in the air by sincerity and truthful intent, they
will enter the ears of the spirit beings like some tasty fruit in the mouth. But if God’s
pleasure and sincerity do not bring those words to life, they will not be heard, and
reward will be had only for the single utterance made by the mouth. Pay good
attention to this, you Qur’an reciters who are sad that your voices are not more
beautiful and that more people do not listen to you!
FOURTH CAUSE
In just the same way that rivalry and disagreement among the people of guidance
do not arise from failure to foresee consequences or from shortsightedness, so too
wholehearted agreement among the people of misguidance does not result from
farsightedness or loftiness of vision. Rather the people of guidance, through the
influence of truth and reality, do not succumb to the blind emotions of the soul, and
follow instead the farsighted inclinations of the heart and the intellect. Since,
however, they fail to preserve their sense of direction and their sincerity, they are
unable to maintain their high station and fall into dispute.
As for the people of misguidance, under the influence of the soul and caprice, and
the dominance of sense-perception, which is blind to all consequences and always
prefers an ounce of immediate pleasure to a ton of

--- Sayfa 206 ---
206
future pleasure, they come together in eager concord for the sake of instant benefit
and immediate pleasure. Indeed, lowly and heartless worshippers of the ego are bound
to congregate around worldly and immediate pleasures and benefits. It is true that the
people of guidance have set their faces to the rewards of the hereafter and its
perfections, in accordance with the lofty instructions of the heart and the intellect, but
even though a proper sense of direction, a complete sincerity and self-sacrificing
union and concord are possible, because they have failed to rid themselves of egoism,
and on account of deficiency and excess, they lose their union, that lofty source of
power, and permit their sincerity to be shattered. Their duty in regard to the hereafter
is also harmed. God’s pleasure is not had easily.
The cure and remedy for this serious disease is to be proud of the company of all
those travelling the path of truth, in accordance with the principle of love for God’s
sake; to follow them and defer leadership to them; and to consider whoever is walking
on God’s path to be probably better than oneself, thereby breaking the ego and
regaining sincerity. Salvation is also to be had from that disease by knowing that an
ounce of deeds performed in sincerity is preferable to a ton performed without
sincerity, and by preferring the status of a follower to that of a leader, with all the
danger and responsibility that it involves. Thus sincerity is to be had, and one’s duties
of preparation for the hereafter may be correctly performed.
FIFTH CAUSE
Dispute and disagreement among the people of guidance are not the result of
weakness, and the powerful union of the people of misguidance is not the result of
strength. Rather the lack of union of the people of guidance comes from the power
that results from the support provided by perfect belief, and the union of the people of
neglect and misguidance comes from the weakness and impotence they experience as
a result of their lack of any inward support. The weak form powerful unions precisely
because of their need for union.7 Since the strong do not feel a similar need, their
unions are weak. Lions do not need union like foxes and therefore live as individuals,
whereas wild goats form a herd to protect themselves against wolves. The community
and collective personality of the weak is strong, and the community and collective
personality of the strong is weak. There

7 Among the most powerful and effective organizations in the West is the American Organization
for Women’s Rights and Liberty, even though women are called the fair sex, and are weak and
delicate. Similarly, the organization of the Armenians, despite their weakness and small numbers when
compared to other peoples, with its strong, self-sacrificing behaviour, provides another proof of our
observation.

--- Sayfa 207 ---
207
is a subtle allusion to this in the Qur’an in the words, “And women in the city
said,”(12:30) the verb “said” being in the masculine form, although it should be
feminine for two reasons [women is a feminine noun, and also a plural – so-called
“broken” plurals in Arabic are always regarded as feminine]. But by contrast see the
words, “the desert Arabs said,”(49:14) the verb said in this case being in the feminine,
even though its subject designates a community of men. Herein lies an indication, that
an association of weak, meek and soft women gains strength, toughness and force,
and even acquires a certain kind of virility. The use of the masculine form of the verb
is therefore most appropriate. Strong men, by contrast, and in particular Beduin
Arabs, trust in their own strength; therefore their associations are weak, for they
assume a stance of softness and caution and take on a kind of femininity, for which
the use of the feminine form of the verb is most suitable. Similarly the people of truth
submit to and place their reliance in the firm source of support that is belief in God;
hence they do not present their needs to others or request aid and assistance from
them. If they do sometimes make the request, they will not adhere to the persons
concerned at all cost. But the worldly ignore in their worldly affairs the true source of
support; they fall into weakness and impotence, and experiencing an acute need of
assistance, come together sacrificing themselves wholeheartedly.
The people of truth do not recognize and seek the true strength that is to be found
in union; hence they fall into dispute, as an evil and harmful consequence of this
failure. By contrast, the people of misguidance and falsehood perceive the strength to
be found in union, by virtue of their very weakness, and thus acquire union, that most
important means for the attainment of all goals.
The cure and remedy for this disease of discord among the people of truth is to
make one’s rule of conduct the divine prohibition contained in this verse:
Do not fall into dispute, lest you lose heart and your power depart,(8:46)
and the wise divine command for social life contained in this verse:
Work together for the sake of virtue and piety.(5:3)
One must further realize how harmful to Islam dispute is, and how it helps the people
of misguidance to triumph over the people of truth, and then, wholeheartedly and self-
sacrificingly, join the caravan of the people of truth, with a sense of his own utter
weakness and impotence. Finally, one

--- Sayfa 208 ---
208
must forget his own person, abandon hypocrisy and pretension, and lay hold of
sincerity.
SIXTH CAUSE
Discord among the people of truth does not arise from lack of manliness,
aspiration and zeal; similarly, the wholehearted union among the misguided,
neglectful and worldly with respect to their worldly affairs does not result from
manliness, aspiration and zeal. It is rather that the people of truth are generally
concerned with benefits to be had in the hereafter and hence direct their zeal,
aspiration and manliness to those important and numerous matters. Since they do not
devote time – the true capital of man – to a single concern, their union with their
fellows can never become firm. Their concerns are numerous and of a wide scope. As
for the neglectful and worldly, they think only of the life of this world, and they
firmly embrace the concerns of the life of this world with all their senses, their spirit
and heart, and cling firmly to whoever aids them in those concerns. Like a mad
diamond merchant who gives an exorbitant price for a piece of glass worth virtually
nothing, they devote time, which is of the highest value, to matters which in reality
and in the view of the people of truth are worth nothing. Paying such a high price and
offering oneself with the devotion of all the senses will naturally result in a
wholehearted sincerity that yields success in the matter at hand, so that the people of
truth are defeated. As a result of this defeat, the people of truth decline into a state of
abasement, humiliation, hypocrisy and ostentation, and sincerity is lost. Thus the
people of truth are obliged to flatter and cringe before a handful of vile and lowly men
of the world.
O people of truth! O people of the law, people of reality and people of the path,
all worshipping God! Confronted by this awesome disease of discord, overlook each
other’s faults, close your eyes to each other’s shortcomings! Behave according to the
rule of courtesy established by the criterion that is the Qur’an in the verse:
When they pass by error, they pass by it with honourable avoidance.(25:72)
Regard it as your primary duty – one on which your state in the hereafter depends – to
abandon internal dissension when attacked by an enemy from the outside, and thereby
to deliver the people of truth from their abasement and humiliation! Practise the
brotherhood, love and co-operation insistently enjoined by hundreds of Qur’anic
verses and traditions of the Prophet (UWBP)! Establish with all of your powers a
union with your fellows and

--- Sayfa 209 ---
209
brothers in religion that is stronger than the union of the worldly! Do not fall into
dispute! Do not say to yourself, “Instead of spending my valuable time on such petty
matters, let me spend it on more valuable things such as the invocation of God and
meditation;” then withdrawing and weakening unity. For precisely what you imagine
to be a matter of slight importance in this moral jihad may in fact be very great. In just
the same way that under certain special and unusual conditions the watch kept for one
hour by a soldier may be equal to a whole year’s worship, in this age when the people
of truth have been defeated, the precious day that you spend on some apparently
minor matter concerning the moral struggle may be worth a thousand days, just like
the hour of that soldier. Whatever is undertaken for the sake of God cannot be divided
into small and great, valuable and valueless. An atom expended in sincerity and for
the sake of God’s pleasure becomes like a star. What is important is not the nature of
the means employed, but the result that it yields. As long as the result is God’s
pleasure and the substance employed is sincerity, any means to which recourse is had
will be great, not small.
SEVENTH CAUSE
Dispute and rivalry among the people of truth do not arise from jealousy and
greed for the world, and conversely union among the worldly and neglectful does not
arise from generosity and magnanimity. It is rather that the people of truth are unable
to preserve fully the magnanimity and high aspiration that proceed from the truth, or
the laudable form of competition that exists on God’s path. Infiltrated by the
unworthy, they partially misuse that laudable form of competition and fall into rivalry
and dispute, causing grave harm both to themselves and to the Islamic community. As
for the people of neglect and misguidance, in order not to lose the benefits with which
they are infatuated and not to offend the leaders and companions they worship for the
sake of benefit, in their utter humiliation, abasement and lack of manliness, they
practise union at all costs with their companions, however abominable, treacherous
and harmful they be, and wholeheartedly agree with their partners in whatever form
may be dictated by their common interest. As a result of this wholeheartedness, they
indeed attain the benefits desired.
So O people of truth given to dispute and afflicted with disaster! It is through
your loss of sincerity and your failure to make God’s pleasure your sole aim in this
age of disaster that you have caused the people of truth to undergo this humiliation
and defeat. In matters relating to religion and the hereafter there should be no rivalry,
envy or jealousy; indeed there can be

--- Sayfa 210 ---
210
none of these in truth. The reason for envy and jealousy is that when several hands
reach out after a single object, when several eyes are fixed on a single position, when
several stomachs hunger for a single loaf of bread, first envy arises as a result of
conflict, dispute and rivalry, and then jealousy. Since many people desire the same
thing in the world, and because the world, narrow and transitory as it is, cannot satisfy
the limitless desires of man, people become rivals of each other. However, in the
hereafter a five-hundred-year paradise will be given to a single individual; seventy
thousand palaces and houris will be granted to him; and every one of the people of
Paradise will be perfectly satisfied with his share.8 It is thus clear that there is no
cause for rivalry in the hereafter, nor can there be rivalry. In that case, neither should
there be any rivalry with respect to those good deeds that entail reward in the
hereafter; there is no room for jealousy here. The one jealous here is either a
hypocrite, seeking worldly result through the performance of good deeds, or a sincere
but ignorant devotee, not knowing the true purpose of good deeds and not
comprehending that sincerity is the spirit and foundation of all good deeds. By
cultivating a kind of rivalry and hostility toward God’s saints, he is in fact placing in
doubt the breadth of God’s compassion.
An instance supporting this truth: One of my former companions nurtured
hostility to someone. His enemy’s good deeds and sanctity were once

8 An important question raised by a significant person: According to tradition a five-hundred-year
paradise will be given to everyone in Paradise. How can worldly intelligence comprehend this truth?
The Answer: In this world everyone has his private and temporally limited world as broad as the
world, the pillar of which is his life. He makes use of his world through his inner and outer senses. He
says to himself, “The sun is my lamp, the stars are my candles.” The existence of other creatures and
animate beings in no way negates his ownership of these; on the contrary, they brighten and illumine
his world. In the same way, although on an infinitely higher plane, in addition to the garden of each
believer that contains thousands of palaces and houris, there is a private five-hundred-year paradise for
everyone, apart from the general Paradise. He will benefit from this paradise and eternity through his
senses and feelings, according to the degree of development they have reached. The fact that others
share in the general Paradise in no way harms his ownership or benefit, but on the contrary strengthens
these, and adorns that vast Paradise. Man in this world benefits from a garden lasting an hour, a
spectacle lasting a day, a country lasting a month and a journey lasting a year, with his mouth, his ear,
his eye, his taste and all his other senses. So too, in that realm of eternity, his sense of smell and touch,
which in this transient world barely profit from a garden lasting an hour, will benefit as if from a
garden lasting a year. The sense of sight and hearing which here barely profit from an excursion lasting
a year, will there be able to benefit from a five-hundred-year excursion in a manner fitting that realm,
adorned from end to end. Every believer will benefit there according to his spiritual rank, and gain
delight and pleasure through his senses that will expand and develop in relation to the reward he has
earned in this world and the good deeds he has performed.

--- Sayfa 211 ---
211
favourably described in his presence. He was not jealous or upset. Then someone
said, “That enemy of yours is courageous and strong.” We saw a strong vein of
jealousy and rivalry suddenly appearing in that man. We said to him:
“Sanctity and righteousness bestow a strength and exaltation like a jewel of
eternal life, yet you were not jealous of them. Now worldly strength is to be found in
oxen, and courage in wild beasts; in comparison with sanctity and righteousness they
are like a piece of glass compared to a diamond.”
The man replied:
“We have both fixed our eyes in this world on a single object. The steps that lead
to it are provided by things such as courage and strength. It is for this reason that I
was jealous of him. The objects and stations of the hereafter are without number.
Although he is my enemy here, there he can be my beloved and intimate brother.”
O people of the truth and the path! The service of the truth is like carrying and
preserving a great and weighty treasure. Those who carry that trust on their shoulders
will be happy and grateful whenever powerful hands rush to their aid. Far from being
jealous, one should proudly applaud the superior strength, effectiveness and capacity
of those who in upright love come forward to offer their help. Why then look on true
brothers and self-sacrificing helpers in a spirit of rivalry, thus losing sincerity? You
will be exposed to fearsome accusations in the eyes of the people of misguidance,
such as pursuing worldly interest through religion, even though it is something a
hundred times lower than you and your belief, earning your livelihood through the
knowledge of truth and rivalling others in greed and acquisitiveness.
The sole remedy for this disease is to accuse your own soul before others raise
these charges, and always to take the side of your fellow, not your own soul. The rule
of truth and equity established by the scholars of the art of debate is this: “Whoever
desires, in debate on any subject, that his own word should turn out to be true,
whoever is happy that he turns out to be right and his enemy to be wrong and
mistaken – such a person has acted unjustly.” Not only that, such a person loses, for
when he emerges the victor in such a debate, he has not learned anything previously
unknown to him, and his probable pride will cause him loss. But if his adversary turns
out to be right, he will have learned something previously unknown to him and
thereby gained something without any loss, as well as being saved from pride. In
other words, one fair in his dealings and enamoured of the truth will subject the desire
of his own soul to the demands of the truth. If

--- Sayfa 212 ---
212
he sees his adversary to be right, he will accept it willingly and support it happily.
If then the people of religion, the people of truth, the people of the path, and the
people of learning take this principle as their guide, they will attain sincerity, and be
successful in those duties that prepare them for the hereafter. Through God’s mercy,
they will be delivered from this appalling wretchedness and misfortune from which
they presently suffer.
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught
us; indeed You are All-Knowing, All Wise.(2:32)

--- Sayfa 213 ---
213
The Twenty-First Flash

On Sincerity

[Although originally the Fourth of the Seven Matters of the
Seventeenth Note of the Seventeenth Flash, because of its
connection with sincerity, it became the Second Point of the
Twentieth Flash. Finally, due to its luminous character, it was
included in the Flashes as the Twenty-First Flash.]

This Flash should be read at least once a fortnight

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
Do not fall into dispute, lest you lose heart and your power depart.(8:46) *
And stand before God in a devout [frame of mind].(2:238) * Truly he
succeeds that purifies it, * And he fails that corrupts it.(91:9-10) * Nor sell
my signs for a small price.(2:41. etc.)
O my brothers of the hereafter! And O my companions in the service of the
Qur’an! You should know – and you do know – that in this world sincerity is the most
important principle in works pertaining to the hereafter; it is the greatest strength, the
most acceptable intercessor, the firmest point of support, the shortest way to reality,
the most acceptable prayer, the most wondrous means of achieving one’s goal, the
highest quality, and the purest worship. Since sincerity comprises much strength and
many lights like those mentioned above; and since at this dreadful time, despite our
small number and weak, impoverished, and powerless state and our being confronted
by terrible enemies and suffering severe oppression in the midst of aggressive
innovations and misguidance, the extremely heavy, important, general, and sacred
duty of serving belief and the Qur’an has been placed on our shoulders by divine
grace, we are certainly compelled more than anyone to work with all our strength to
gain sincerity. We need more than anything to instil sincerity in ourselves. Otherwise
what we have achieved

--- Sayfa 214 ---
214
so far in our sacred service will in part be lost and will not persist; and we shall be
held responsible; we shall manifest the severe threat contained in the divine
prohibition,
Nor sell my signs for a small price.(2:41, etc.)
We shall otherwise destroy sincerity, thus harming eternal happiness for the sake of
meaningless, unnecessary, harmful, sad, self-centred, tedious, hypocritical base
feelings and insignificant benefits. And if we were to do that, we would violate all our
brothers’ rights, transgress against the duty of service to the Qur’an, and be
disrespectful towards the sacredness of the truths of belief.
My brothers! There are many obstacles before significant good works. Satans put
up a powerful struggle against those who assist in them. In the face of those obstacles
and satans you have to rely on the strength of sincerity. You should avoid things that
harm sincerity as you avoid snakes and scorpions. In accordance with the words of
Joseph (Upon whom be peace),
Nor do I absolve my own self [of blame]; the [human] soul is certainly prone
to evil, unless my Sustainer do bestow His mercy,(12:53)
the evil-commanding soul cannot be relied upon. Do not let egotism and the soul
deceive you! To gain sincerity and preserve it you should take as your guide the
following rules:
YOUR FIRST RULE
You should seek divine pleasure in your actions. If Almighty God is pleased, it is
of no importance if the whole world even is displeased. If He accepts an action and
everyone else rejects it, their rejection has no effect. Once His pleasure has been
gained and He has accepted an action, even if you do not ask it of Him, should He
wish it and His wisdom requires it, He will make others accept it. He will make them
consent to it too. For this reason, to seek divine pleasure should be the sole aim in this
service.
YOUR SECOND RULE
This is not to criticize your brothers who are employed in this service of the
Qur’an, and not to excite their envy by displaying superior virtues. For just as one
hand cannot compete with the other, so one eye cannot criticize the other, nor the
tongue object to the ear, nor the heart see the spirit’s faults. Each of a person’s
members completes the deficiencies of the others, veils their faults, assists their needs,
and helps them out in their duties. Otherwise his life would be extinguished, his spirit
flee, and his body fall apart.

--- Sayfa 215 ---
215
Similarly, the components of a factory’s machinery cannot compete with one
another in rivalry, take precedence over each other, or dominate each other. They
cannot spy out one another’s faults and criticize each other, destroy the other’s
eagerness for work, and cause him to become idle. They rather assist each other’s
motions with all their capacity in order to achieve the common goal; they march
towards the aim of their creation in true solidarity and unity. If even the slightest
aggression or desire to dominate were to interfere, it would throw the factory into
confusion, cancelling its products and results. The factory’s owner would then
demolish the factory entirely.
O Risale-i Nur students and servants of the Qur’an! You and I are members of
such a collective personality, worthy of the title of the perfect man. We are like the
components of a factory’s machinery which produces eternal happiness within eternal
life. We are hands working on a dominical boat which will disembark the community
of Muhammad (UWBP) at the realm of peace, the shore of salvation. So we are surely
in need of solidarity and true union, obtained through gaining sincerity – for the
mystery of sincerity secures through four individuals the moral strength of one
thousand one hundred and eleven – indeed, we are compelled to obtain it.
Yes, if three alifs do not unite, they have the value of three, but on uniting,
through the mystery of numbers they acquire the value of one hundred and eleven. If
four times four remain apart, they have a value of sixteen. But if, through the mystery
of brotherhood and having a common goal and joint duty, they unite coming together
shoulder to shoulder on a line, they acquire the strength and value of four thousand
four hundred and forty-four. Indeed, numerous historical events testify that the moral
strength and value of sixteen self-sacrificing brothers have exceeded that of four
thousand.
The underlying reason for this mystery is this: each member of a true, sincere
union may see with the eyes of the other brothers, and hear with their ears, as if each
person of a true union of ten acquires the value and strength to see with twenty eyes,
think with ten minds, hear with twenty ears, and work with twenty hands.1

1 Yes, through the mystery of sincerity heartfelt solidarity and union produce innumerable
benefits, and are also an effective shield and point of support against fear, and even death. For if death
comes, it takes one spirit. But since through the mystery of true brotherhood on the way of divine
pleasure in works connected with the hereafter there are spirits to the number of brothers, if one of
them dies, he meets death happily, saying: “My other spirits remain alive, for they in effect make life
continue for me by constantly earning me reward, so I am not dying. I live in respect of merit through
their spirits; I am only dying in respect of sin.” And he lays down in peace.

--- Sayfa 216 ---
216
YOUR THIRD RULE
You should know that all your strength lies in sincerity and truth. Yes, strength
lies in truth and sincerity. Even those who do wrong gain strength from their sincerity
in their wrongdoing.
Evidence that strength lies in truth and sincerity is this service of ours. A small
amount of sincerity in our work proves this claim and is evidence for itself. For seven
or eight years of service to learning and religion here has surpassed a hundredfold the
twenty years of service I performed in my native region and in Istanbul. And in these
places the people assisting me were a hundred or even a thousand times more
numerous than my brothers who work together with me here, where I am alone, with
no one, a stranger, semi-literate, under the surveillance of unfair officials and
persecuted by them. I have absolutely no doubt that the service I have carried out with
you these seven or eight years and the moral strength which has resulted in success a
hundred times greater than formerly, has arisen from your sincerity. I have also to
confess that by your heartfelt sincerity, you have saved me to an extent from the
hypocrisy which used to flatter my soul under the veil of fame and renown. God
willing, you will be successful in gaining absolute sincerity, and you will cause me to
gain it too.
You should be aware that it is because of this mystery of sincerity that ‘Ali2 (May
God be pleased with him) and Ghawth al-A‘zam3 (May his mystery be sanctified)
honour you with their miraculous wonder-working and wondrous vision of the
Unseen. They offer you consolation in protecting manner and applaud your service.
Yes, you should have no doubt that this attention of theirs is because of sincerity. If
you knowingly harm it, it is from them that you will receive punishment. You should
bear in mind “the blows of compassion” in the Tenth Flash.
If you want to be backed by the support of such spiritual heroes, and have them
as masters at your head, gain complete sincerity in accordance with the verse,
But give them preference over themselves.(59:9)
Prefer your brothers’ souls to your own soul in honour, rank, acclaim, and in the
things your soul enjoys like material benefits, and even in such

2 ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib: the son of the Prophet Muhammad’s (UWBP) uncle, who from a young age
was brought up by the Prophet (UWBP), who later married him to his daughter, Fatima. ‘Ali was one
of the first to believe in the Qur’anic revelation, and was famous for his heroism in battle. He became
the fourth caliph.
3 Sayyid ‘Abd al-Qadir Gilani (Geylanî), known as the Gawth al-A‘zam, was the eponym of the
Qadiri Order and a towering spiritual figure in the history of Islam. He lived 470/1077-561/1166 and is
buried in Baghdad.

--- Sayfa 217 ---
217
innocent, harmless benefits as informing a needy believer about one of the fine truths
of belief. If possible, encourage one of your disinclined companions to inform him, so
that your soul does not become conceited. If you have the desire to tell him the
edifying matter to gain the reward, it surely is not a sin and there is no harm in it, but
the essence of sincerity between you might be damaged.
YOUR FOURTH RULE
This is to imagine your brothers’ virtues and merits in your own selves, and to
thankfully take pride at their glory. The Sufis have terms they use among themselves,
“annihilation in the shaykh,” “annihilation in the Prophet;” I am not a Sufi, but these
principles of theirs make a good rule in our way, in the form of “annihilation in the
brothers.” Among brothers this is called “tefânî;” that is, “annihilation in one
another.” That is to say, to forget the feelings of one’s own carnal soul, and live in
one’s mind with one’s brothers’ virtues and feelings. In any event, the basis of our
way is brotherhood; it is not the relationship (lit. means) between father and son, or
shaykh and follower; it is that of true brotherhood. At the very most a Master [Ustad]
intervenes. Our way is the closest friendship. This friendship necessitates being the
closest friend, the most sacrificing companion, the most appreciative comrade, the
noblest brother. The essence of such friendship is true sincerity. The person who
spoils this true sincerity falls from the high pinnacle of this friendship, possibly to the
bottom of a deep depression. There is nothing onto which he may cling in between.
Yes, the way is seen to be two. There is the possibility that those who part now
from this way of ours, the great highway of the Qur’an, are unknowingly helping the
forces of irreligion, who are hostile to us. God willing, those who enter the sacred
bounds of the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition by way of the Risale-i Nur will
always add strength to light, sincerity, and belief, and will avoid such pitfalls.
O my companions in the service of the Qur’an! One of the most effective means
of attaining and preserving sincerity is “contemplation of death.” Yes, just as worldly
ambition damages sincerity and drives a person to hypocrisy and the world, so the
contemplation of death causes disgust at hypocrisy and gains sincerity. That is, to
think of death and grasp that this world is transient, and so be saved from the tricks of
the soul. Yes, the instruction the Sufis and people of truth received from such verses
of the All-Wise Qur’an as,
Every soul shall taste death.(3:185) * Truly you will die [one day], and truly
they [too] will die [one day],(39:30)

--- Sayfa 218 ---
218
led them to make the contemplation of death fundamental to their spiritual
journeyings; it dispelled the illusion of eternity, the source of worldly ambition. They
imagined themselves to be dead and being placed in the grave. With prolonged
thought the evil-commanding soul becomes saddened and affected by such imagining
and gives up its far-reaching ambitions and hopes to an extent. There are numerous
advantages in this contemplation. It is taught by the Hadith which says something
like, “Frequently mention death which dispels pleasure and makes it bitter.”4
However, since our way is not that of the Sufis but of reality, we are not
compelled to perform this contemplation in an imaginary and hypothetical form like
they do. To do so is anyway not in conformity with the way of reality. Our way is not
to bring the future to the present by thinking of the end, but to travel in the mind to
the future from the present in respect of reality, and to gaze on it. Yes, dispensing
with the need to imagine, one may look on one’s own corpse, the single fruit on the
tree of this brief life. One may look on one’s own death, and if one goes a bit further,
see the death of this century, and going further still, observe the death of this world,
opening up the way to complete sincerity.
T h e  S e c o n d  M e a n s : By attaining a sense of the divine presence through
the strength of certain, affirmative belief and through the lights proceeding from
reflective thought on creatures which leads to knowledge of the Maker; by thinking
that the Compassionate Creator is all-present and seeing; and by not seeking the
attention of any other than He, and realizing that looking to others in His presence or
seeking help from them is contrary to right conduct in His presence, one may be
saved from such hypocrisy and gain sincerity. However, this comprises many degrees
and stages. Whichever degree a person reaches, he will profit to that extent. There are
numerous truths in the Risale-i Nur that will save a person from hypocrisy and gain
him sincerity, so referring him to those, we cut short the discussion here.
Of the very many things that destroy sincerity and drive one to hypocrisy, we
shall briefly explain two or three.
The First: Rivalry towards material advantages slowly destroys sincerity. It is
also detrimental to the results of our service. So too it causes the material benefits to
be lost. This nation has always nurtured respect for those who work for reality and the
hereafter, and has assisted them. With the intention of actively sharing in their
genuine sincerity and in the works

4 Tirmidhi, Zuhd, 4; Qiyama, 26; Nasa’i, Jana’iz, 3; Ibn Maja, Zuhd, 31; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak,
iv, 321.

--- Sayfa 219 ---
219
they carry out devotedly, it has always showed respect by assisting them with material
benefits like alms and gifts to save them from preoccupation with securing their
material needs and wasting their time. But such assistance and benefit may not be
sought; it is given. It may not even be sought through the tongue of disposition by
inwardly desiring it or awaiting it. It should rather be given unexpectedly, otherwise
sincerity will be harmed. It would otherwise bring a person close to the prohibition
stated by the verse,
Nor sell my signs for a small price,(2:41, etc.)
and in part destroys the action.
The evil-commanding soul selfishly excites a feeling of rivalry towards a true
brother and companion in that particular service by first desiring and expecting such a
material benefit, then not allowing it to go to someone else. Sincerity is damaged, and
the sacredness of the service is lost, and the person becomes disagreeable in the eyes
of the people of reality. He also loses the material benefit. This subject needs much
discussion, but I shall curtail it and only mention two examples which will strengthen
sincerity and true union between my true brothers.
First Example: ‘The worldly,’ and even certain politicians and secret societies
and manipulators of society, have adopted as their guiding principle, that of shared
property, in order to procure wealth and power. They do acquire an extraordinary
strength and advantage, despite all their exploitation and losses. However, the nature
of common property does not change with sharing, despite its many harms. Although
each partner is as though the owner and supervisor of the rest in one respect, he is
unable to profit from it.
Nevertheless, if the principle of shared property is applied to the works of the
hereafter, it accumulates vast benefits and produces no loss. For it means that all the
property passes to the hands of each partner. For example, there are four or five men.
With the idea of sharing, one of them brings paraffin, another a wick, another the
lamp, another the mantle, and the fifth matches; they assemble the lamp and light it.
Each of them becomes the owner of a complete lamp. If each of those partners has a
full-length mirror on a wall, he will be reflected in it together with the lamp and room,
without deficiency or being split up.
Just the same are mutual participation in the goods of the hereafter through the
mystery of sincerity, and co-operation through the mystery of brotherhood, and joint
enterprise through the mystery of unity: the total obtained by those joint acts, and all
the light, enters the book of good deeds of each person taking part. This is a fact and
has been witnessed by the

--- Sayfa 220 ---
220
people of reality. It is required also by the breadth of divine mercy and munificence.
My brothers! God willing, material benefits will not provoke rivalry among you.
You may possibly be deceived in regard to the benefits of the hereafter like some of
those who follow the Sufi path. But how can some personal, minor merit be compared
with the merit and light manifested in respect of the shared actions mentioned in the
above example?
Second Example: Craftsmen are obtaining significant wealth by co-operating so
as to profit more from the products of their crafts. Formerly ten manufacturers of
sewing needles all worked on their own, and the fruit of their individual labour was
three needles a day. Then following the rule of joint enterprise the ten men united.
One brought the iron, one lit the furnace, one pierced the needles, one placed them in
the furnace, and another sharpened the points, and so on; each was occupied with only
part of the process of needle-making. Since the work in which one man was employed
was simple, he did not waste time; he acquired skill and performed the work with
considerable speed. The manufacturers divided up the work performed in accordance
with the rule of joint enterprise and the division of labour: they saw that instead of
three needles a day for each man, it worked out at three hundred. This event was
widely published among the craftsmen of ‘the worldly’ in order to encourage them to
pool their labour.
My brothers! Since union and accord in worldly matters and in dense materials
yield such results and advantages, you can compare how vastly profitable it is for
each to reflect in his own mirror through divine grace the light of all, which is
luminous and pertains to the hereafter and does not need to be divided up and
fragmented, and to gain the equivalent reward of all of them. This huge profit should
not be lost through rivalry and insincerity.
The Second Obstacle Destroying Sincerity: This is to flatter the ego and give
high status to the evil-commanding soul by attracting attention to oneself and public
acclaim, driven by the desire for fame, renown, and position. This is a serious
spiritual sickness that also opens the door to the hypocrisy and self-centredness called
the hidden association of partners with God, and damages sincerity.
My brothers! Our way in the service of the Qur’an is reality and brotherhood, and
the true meaning of brotherhood is to annihilate one’s personality among one’s
brothers5 and to prefer their souls to one’s own. Rivalry of

5 Yes, happy is he who, in order to gain access to a large pool of fresh water filtered from the
spring of the Qur’an, casts his personality and egotism – which are like blocks of ice – into the pool
and melts them.

--- Sayfa 221 ---
221
this sort arising from desire for rank and position should not therefore be provoked. It
is altogether opposed to our way. The brothers’ honour may be all the individuals’
generally; so I am hopeful that sacrificing that great collective honour for personal,
selfish, competitive, minor fame and renown is far from being something the Risale-i
Nur students would do. Yes, the heart, mind, and spirit of the Risale-i Nur students
would not stoop to such lowly, harmful, inferior things. But everyone has an evil-
commanding soul, and sometimes the soul’s emotions affect certain veins of
character, and predominate to an extent in spite of the heart, mind, and spirit; I am not
accusing your hearts, minds, and spirits. I have confidence in you because of the
effect of the Risale-i Nur. But the soul, desires, emotions, and imagination sometimes
deceive. For this reason you sometimes receive severe warnings. The severity looks to
the soul, emotions, desires, and imagination; act cautiously.
Yes, if our way had been subjection to a shaykh, there would have been a single
rank, or limited ranks, and numerous capacities would have been appointed to them.
There could have been envy and selfishness. But our way is brotherhood. Among
brothers there is no position of father among them, nor can they assume the position
of spiritual guide. In brotherhood ranks are broad and cannot be the cause of envious
jostling. At the most brother helps and supports brother; he completes his service.
Evidence that much harm and many mistakes have resulted from the envy, greed for
spiritual reward, and high aspirations of the paths of spiritual guides are the conflict
and rivalry among those who follow them despite their vast attainments, perfections
and benefits, which have had the disastrous consequence of their vast and sacred
power being unable to withstand the gales of innovation.
The Third Obstacle: This is fear and greed. This obstacle has been explained
comprehensively in The Six Attacks6 together with other obstacles. We therefore refer
you to that, and making all the most beautiful names of the Most Merciful of the
Merciful our intercessor, we beseech that He will grant us success in attaining
complete sincerity.
O God! For the sake of Sura al-Ikhlas, place us among Your servants who
attain sincerity. Amen. Amen.
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32)

6 See, Bediuzzaman Said Nursi, Letters 1928-1932 (Istanbul: Sözler Neşriyat, new edn. 2009) the
Sixth Section of the Twenty-Ninth Letter, pp. 474-90. (Tr.)

--- Sayfa 222 ---
222
A Confidential Letter to Some of my Brothers
I shall mention a point concerning two Hadiths to my brothers who become bored
of writing, and prefer other recitations during the Three Months, the months of
worship, to writing out the Risale-i Nur, although to do this is worship in five
respects.1 The two Hadiths are these:
The First: “At the Last Judgement, the ink spent by the scholars of religion will
weigh equally to the blood of the martyrs.”2
The Second: “Whoever adheres to my Sunna when my community is corrupted
shall earn the reward of a hundred martyrs.”3 That is, those who adhere to and serve
the Prophet’s (UWBP) practices and the Qur’an’s truths when innovations and
misguidance are rife may gain the reward of a hundred martyrs.
O my brothers who weary of writing out of laziness! And O my brothers who
lean to Sufism! These two Hadiths show that the black light flowing from your
blessed, pure pens serving the truths of belief and mysteries of the Shari‘a and
practices of the Prophet (UWBP) at a time such as this – even a drop of their water-
of-life-like ink – may win for you on the Day of Judgement reward equal to a hundred
drops of martyrs’ blood. So try to win it!
If you say: It says scholars in the Hadith and some of us are only scribes.
The Answer: Anyone who reads these treatises for a year and comprehends and
accepts them, may become a valuable, exacting scholar at this time. Even if he does
not understand them, since the Risale-i Nur students have a collective personality,
doubtless it is learned. As for your pens, they are the immaterial fingers of that
collective personality. With your good opinion of me, you have afforded me the
position of Master (Ustad) and religious scholar, and attached yourselves to me
although in my view I am unworthy. I am unlettered and have difficulty in writing, so
your pens may be thought of as mine; you will receive the reward indicated in the
Hadith.
                                                                              S a i d   N u r s i

1 We asked for an explanation of the five sorts of worship which our Master indicates in this
valuable letter. The explanation we received is below:
i. To strive against the people of misguidance, the most important struggle.
ii. To serve our Master in the form of helping him spread the truth.
iii. To serve Muslims in respect of belief.
iv. To obtain knowledge by means of the pen.
v. To perform worship in the form of reflective thought, one hour of which may sometimes be
equal to a year’s worship.                      Signed:  Rüştü, Hüsrev, Re’fet

2 al-Ghazali, Ihya ‘Ulum al-Din, i, 6; al-Munawi, Fayd al-Qadir, vi, 466; al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-
Khafa’, ii, 561; al-Suyuti, Jami‘ al-Saghir, No: 10026.
3 Ibn ‘Adiyy, al-Kamil fi’l-Du‘afa’, ii, 739; al-Mundhiri, al-Targhib wa’l-Tarhib, i, 41; Tabarani,
al-Majma‘ al-Kabir, 1394; ‘Ali ibn Husamuddin, Muntakhabat Kanz al-‘Ummal, i, 100; al-Haythami,
Majma‘ al-Zawa’id, vii, 282.

--- Sayfa 223 ---
223
The Twenty-Second Flash

In His Name, be He glorified!

This highly confidential short treatise, which I wrote twenty-
two years ago specifically for my closest and most select and
sincere brothers while in the village of Barla in the Province
of Isparta, I am dedicating to Isparta’s just Governor,
judiciary, and police. This is because of the concern shown by
both the people and the authorities of Isparta. If appropriate,
several copies should be written by typewriter in either the old
or new letters so that those who have been holding me under
surveillance and searching out my secrets these twenty-five
years may know that I have no hidden secrets whatsoever.
They should know that my most hidden secret is this treatise!
                                                                S a i d  N u r s i

Three Indications

[While being the Third Matter of the Seventeenth Note of the
Seventeenth
Flash,
because
of
the
harshness
and
comprehensiveness of the questions and strength and
brilliance of the answers, this was incorporated in the Flashes
as the Twenty-Second Flash of the Thirty-First Letter. The
Flashes had to give it a place. It is confidential and special to
my most select, sincere, and loyal brothers.]

In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
And if anyone puts his trust in God, sufficient is [God] for him. For God will
surely accomplish His purpose. Verily for all things has God appointed a due
proportion.(65:3)
This matter consists of three indications.

--- Sayfa 224 ---
224
FIRST INDICATION
An important question about my person and the Risale-i Nur: many people ask,
“Although you have not meddled in ‘the worldly’s’ world, why do they meddle in
your hereafter at every opportunity? Whereas no government’s laws interfere with
recluses and people who have abandoned the world?”
T h e  A n s w e r : The New Said’s reply to this question is silence. The New
Said says: “Let divine determining give the answer for me.” Nevertheless, since I’m
compelled to, the Old Said’s head, which the New Said has borrowed on trust, says:
those who should give the answer to this question are the authorities of Isparta
Province, and its people. For they are much more concerned with the meaning
underlying this question than I am. Since the administration, which consists of
thousands of people, and the people, who number hundreds of thousands, are obliged
to consider it and defend it in my place, why should I speak with the prosecutors
unnecessarily, and defend myself?
I have been in this province for nine years, and I am gradually turning my back
more and more on their world. No aspect of my life has remained hidden. Even my
most secret and confidential treatises have come into the hands of the government and
some of the deputies. If I had meddled at all in worldly matters, which would have
caused ‘the worldly’ alarm and anxiety, or if I had made any attempt to meddle, or if I
had had any idea of doing so, this province and the local government in the towns
would have known. But although I have been under their scrutiny and surveillance for
nine years, and I too have not hesitated to divulge my secrets to those who have
visited me, the authorities have remained silent and have not bothered me. If I had
displayed any fault that could have been harmful to this country’s happiness and
future, and to its people, over this nine years everyone from the Governor to the
village police chief would have been responsible. So to save themselves from such
responsibility they are obliged to defend me in the face of those who make molehills
into mountains concerning me, and make the mountains into molehills. In which case,
I refer this question to them to answer.
The reason the people of this province are mostly obliged to defend me more than
I do myself is that with hundreds of treatises that have demonstrated their
effectiveness materially and in fact, I have worked these nine years for their eternal
life and strength of belief and happiness in life, for they are both brothers, and friends,
and blessed; and no upset or harm at all has been suffered by anyone on account of
the treatises; and not the slightest

--- Sayfa 225 ---
225
sign of anything political or worldly has been encountered; and, praise be to God, by
means of the Risale-i Nur, this province of Isparta has gained in respect of strength of
belief and firmness in religion a degree of blessedness resembling the blessedness of
Damascus in former times and of al-Azhar in Egypt; and the Risale-i Nur has made
the power of belief prevail over indifference and the desire to worship prevail over
vice in the province, and has made it more religious than any other province. Since
this is the case, all its people, even supposing they are irreligious, are obliged to
defend me and the Risale-i Nur. While they have such important rights of defence, my
unimportant right does not drive me to defend myself now that I, lacking all power,
have completed my duty and, thanks be to God, thousands of students have worked
and are working in my place. Someone with so many thousands of advocates does not
defend his own case.
SECOND INDICATION
The answer to a critical question.
‘The worldly’ ask: “Why are you angry with us? You have not made application
to us even once, and are silent. You complain about us bitterly, saying that we are
unjust towards you. But we have our principles, we have our particular rules as
demanded by the times, and you do not accept that they should be applied to you. The
person who applies the law is not a tyrant, and the person who does not accept the law
is rebellious. For instance, in this age of freedom and new republican era which we
have inaugurated, the principle – on the basis of equality – of abolishing oppression
and subjugation of others is as though our fundamental law. However, it is understood
from your open behaviour and your adventurous life in the former period that whether
by assuming the position of hoja or of being an ascetic, you try to draw the public
gaze on yourself and attract attention, so to secure a power and social position outside
the government’s influence. This may appear desirable within – according to current
terminology – the despotic tyranny of the bourgeouisie. But since the principles of
pure socialism and bolshevism, which have emerged with the awakening and
ascendancy of the common people, are more conformable with our interests, we have
accepted them, and your position is disagreeable to us; it opposes our principles. For
this reason you do not have the right to complain about or be angry at the distress we
cause you.”
T h e  A n s w e r : If someone who opens up a new way in the life of human
society does not act in conformity with the natural laws in force in the universe, he
cannot be successful in beneficial works and in progress. All his acts come to serve
the interests of evil and destruction. Since

--- Sayfa 226 ---
226
actions have to be in conformity with the natural laws, absolute equality can be
applied only by changing human nature and removing the fundamental wisdom in the
mankind’s creation. Yes, by birth and the way I have lived I am from the class of
common people, and I am one of those who by temperament and intellectually have
accepted the way of equality of rights. And due to compassion and the justice
proceeding from Islam, I am a person who for a long time has opposed and worked
against the despotism and oppression of the elite class called the bourgeouisie. I
therefore support total justice with all my strength, and oppose tyranny, oppression,
arbitrary power, and despotism.
However, human nature and the underlying wisdom in humankind are contrary to
the law of absolute equality. For to demonstrate His perfect power and wisdom, the
All-Wise Creator produces many crops from a single thing, causes many books to be
written on a single page, and causes many functions to be performed by a single
thing; and in the same way, He causes the duties of thousands of species to be carried
out by humankind. It is because of this great mystery that Almighty God created man
with a nature that would produce the shoots of thousands of species and display the
levels of the thousands of other species of living creatures. No limit was placed on his
powers, subtle faculties, and senses like the other animals; since He left him free and
gave him a capacity whereby his senses could roam through endless degrees, although
only one species, mankind became like thousands of species. For this reason, man
became vicegerent of the earth, the result of the universe, and monarch of animate
beings.
The most important leaven and mechanism giving rise to the variety in mankind
is competition and the true virtue resulting from belief. Virtue can only be removed
through changing human nature, extinguishing the reason, killing the heart, and
annihilating the spirit. Yes, this age with its awesome tyranny under the veil of
freedom deserves to be struck in the face with the following masterly lines, which,
written by a most important person,1 have been wrongly brandished in his face,
although he deserved no slap:
It is not possible through tyranny and injustice to destroy freedom;
Try to remove consciousness, if you can, from humankind.
In place of these lines, I say, in order to strike this age in the face:
It is not possible through tyranny and injustice to destroy reality;
Try to annihilate the heart, if you can, in humankind.
Or,

1 Namık Kemal (1840-1888) in his famous kaside ...

--- Sayfa 227 ---
227
It is not possible through tyranny and injustice to destroy virtue;
Try to annihilate the conscience, if you can, in humankind.
Yes, just as the virtue arising from belief cannot be the cause of oppression, so it
cannot be the cause of despotism. Oppression and arbitrary despotism indicate the
absence of virtue. The chief way the people of virtue in particular interfere in the life
of society is through impotence, poverty, and humility. All praise be to God, my life
has passed on this way, and is passing on it. I do not claim this out of pride, saying
that I possess some virtue. I say the following as thanks and to make known a divine
bounty:
Through His grace and munificence, Almighty God bestowed on me the virtue of
working for the sciences of belief and the Qur’an. All praise be to God, throughout
my life I have spent this divine bounty for the benefit and happiness of this Muslim
nation, and just as at no time have I used it to dominate and oppress people, so for an
important reason I detest public attention and being fêted by people, which is sought
after by the neglectful; I flee from it. Twenty years of my former life were lost
because of it, so I look on it as harmful for me. But since I know that public attention
is a sign that the people like the Risale-i Nur, I do not put them off.
O you whose view is restricted to the life of this world! In no way have I meddled
in your world, nor have I had anything to do with your principles, nor as is testified to
by my life these nine years of captivity, have I had any intention or desire to meddle
in the world again. So according to what law have you inflicted all this surveillance
and oppression on me as though I were an old oppressor who was ever ready to seize
an opportunity and supported the idea of tyranny and despotism? No government in
the world permits such treatment over and above the law, nor is it recommended by
anyone. It is not only me who is sick of the ill-treatment I have had meted out to me
so far, if they knew of it all mankind would be disgusted, and even the universe!
THIRD INDICATION
A fallacious, crazy question.
Some members of the judiciary say: “Since you reside in this country, you
should abide by its republican laws. So why do you elude those laws under the cloak
of being a recluse? For instance, according to the present laws of the government, it is
opposed to one of the principles of the republic, which is based on equality, to assume
some virtue, some merit, outside one’s duty, and through it to dominate some of the
nation and exercise power and influence. Why do you have your hand kissed, though
you hold

--- Sayfa 228 ---
228
no position? Why do you assume a position advertising yourself and wanting the
people to listen to you?”
T h e  A n s w e r : Those who apply the law, may apply it to others after first
applying it to themselves. If you apply a principle to others which you have not
applied to yourselves, you are infringing and opposing your own principle and law
before anyone. You want to apply this law of absolute equality to me. So I say this:
Whenever a common soldier rises to the social rank of a field marshal and shares
in the respect and acclaim the nation shows to the field marshal and is the object of
acclaim and respect the same as him; or whenever the field marshal becomes as
common as the soldier and assumes the soldier’s lowly position and he retains no
value whatsoever outside his duty; and whenever the most brilliant military
commander who leads the army to victories receives public acclaim, respect and
affection equal to that of the dimmest common soldier; then as required by this law of
equality of yours, you can tell me: “Don’t call yourself a hoja! Don’t accept respect!
Deny your virtue! Serve the servants, and take beggars as your friends!”
I f  y o u  s a y : “Respect, social position, and public attention are in regard to
functions and particular to those who perform them when they are performing them.
But you have no function, so you may not accept the people’s respect as though you
did have one.”
T h e  A n s w e r : If man consisted only of a body, and he were going to live in
this world for ever, and if the door of the grave were closed and death had been killed,
then his duties and functions would have been limited to those of the army and
government officials, and what you say would have had some meaning. But since
man does not consist only of a body, and his heart, tongue, mind, and brain cannot be
plucked out to feed his body; they cannot be annihilated; they too have to be
administered.
And since the door of the grave does not close, and since anxiety for the future
beyond the grave is the most pressing question for everyone, then the duties based on
the respect and obedience of the nation are not restricted to the social, political, and
military duties looking to its worldly life. Yes, just as it is a duty to give a passport to
those travelling abroad, so is it a duty to give a passport to those travelling to post-
eternity and to give them a light for that dark way, and there is no other duty so
important. It is a duty that can be denied only by denying death and giving the lie to
the testimony of the thirty thousand witnesses who every day set their signatures with
the seals of their corpses on the claim “Death is a reality,” affirming it.
Since there are moral and spiritual duties based on moral and spiritual

--- Sayfa 229 ---
229
needs, and the most important of those duties are the passport for the journey to post-
eternity, and the pocket-torch of the heart in the darkness of the Intermediate Realm,
and belief, the key to eternal happiness, and instruction in belief and its strengthening,
for sure, the learned who perform those duties will not with ingratitude count as
nothing the divine bounties bestowed on them and the virtues arising from belief, and
descend to the level of sinners and the dissolute. They will not soil themselves with
the innovations and vices of the inferior. Thus, the solitude which you do not like and
suppose to be inequality is because of this.
In addition to this truth I say the following, not to those like you who torment and
pester me and who in egotism and contempt of the law of equality are as overweening
as the Pharaoh – for the arrogant suppose humility to be abasement, so one should not
be humble before them – I say rather to the fair-minded, the modest, and the just:
All praise be to God, I know my faults and impotence. I do not arrogantly want
any position superior to Muslims which demands respect. I am always aware of my
endless faults and utter insignificance. Finding consolation by seeking divine
forgiveness, I want not respect from the people, but their prayers. I reckon all my
friends know of this way of mine. However, while serving the All-Wise Qur’an and
teaching the truths of belief, in order to preserve the dignity and pride of learning that
such a rank requires, on account of those truths and in honour of the Qur’an and in
order not to bow before the people of misguidance, I temporarily assume that
dignified stance. I do not think ‘the worldly’s’ laws can oppose these points!
Some Astonishing Treatment
It is well-known that everywhere teachers judge in accordance with knowledge
and learning. Out of love of their profession, in whomever and wherever they
encounter knowledge and learning, they will nurture friendship and respect for the
person concerned. If a professor from an enemy country visits this country even,
teachers will visit him out of respect for his knowledge and learning, and offer him
respect.
However, when the highest learned council of the English asked for a six-
hundred-word answer to six questions they asked the Shaykh al-Islam’s Office, a
scholar and teacher who has met with the disrespect of the education authorities here,
answered those six questions with six words which met with approval, and answered
with true knowledge and learning the most basic principles of the Europeans and their
philosophers, and defeated them. Through the strength he received from the Qur’an,
he challenged

--- Sayfa 230 ---
230
those European philosophers. And in Istanbul six months before the proclamation of
the Second Constitution, he invited both the religious scholars and scholars of modern
science to debate, and himself asking no questions answered completely correctly
without exception all questions posed to him.2 Those who have caused most distress
to this scholar and teacher – who has devoted all his life to the happiness of this
nation, and publishing hundreds of treatises in the people’s own language of Turkish
has illuminated them, and is both a fellow-citizen and a co-religionist and friend and
brother – those who have nurtured enmity towards him, and indeed been disrespectful
towards him, have been certain members of the educational establishment as well as a
few official hojas.
What have you got to say to this? Is this civilization? Is it encouraging education?
Is it patriotism? Is it love of the nation? Is it republicanism? God forbid! It is nothing
at all! It is rather that divine determining showed hostility where this scholar and
teacher hoped for friendship so that hypocrisy would not become mixed with his
learning due to respect, and he might gain sincerity.

Conclusion

An assault which in my view was astonishing,
but was the cause of thanks
‘The worldly,’ who are extraordinarily egotistical, are so sensitive in their
egotism that if it had been conscious, it would have reached the degree of wonder-
working or of great genius. The matter in question was this:
With the sensitive balance of their egotism, they perceive in me a little
hypocritical egotism which I had not perceived with my soul and mind, and in violent
fashion confront it. This eight or nine years I have experienced the following eight or
nine times: after they have treated me wrongfully and unjustly, I have considered
divine determining and searched out the tricks of my soul, asking why they been set
to pester me. Each time I have understood that my soul has unconsciously and
naturally inclined to egotism, or else has knowingly deceived me. So then I have said
that divine determining has acted justly towards me within those tyrants’ injustice.

2 The New Said says: I do not concur with the words uttered here proudly by the Old Said, but I
cannot silence him since I gave him say in this treatise. Thinking, Let him display a bit of egotism
before the egotists, I am silent.

--- Sayfa 231 ---
231
For instance, this summer my friends mounted me on a fine horse and I rode out
into the countryside. A selfish desire for pleasure awakened in me without my being
aware of it, and ‘the worldly’ opposed that hidden desire of mine so violently that
they destroyed both it, and my appetite for many other things. Even, for example,
after Ramadan and learning of the allusions made to us by one of the great, holy
imams of former times through his wonder-working which penetrated the Unseen,
and being faced with the piety and sincerity of my brothers and the respect and good
opinion of visitors, without my realizing it my soul wanted proudly to assume a
hypocritical position under the veil of being thankful. Suddenly with their infinite
sensitivity and in a way in which the very particles of hypocrisy could be felt, ‘the
worldly’ attacked me. I thank Almighty God that their tyranny was a means of my
gaining sincerity.
And say: “O my Sustainer! I seek refuge with you from the suggestions of the
Evil Ones. * And I seek refuge with You lest they should come near
me.”(23:97)
O God! O Protector! O Preserver! O Best of Protectors! Preserve me and
preserve my companions from the evil of the soul and of Satan, and from the
evil of people of misguidance and of rebellion. Amen. Amen. Amen.
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32)

--- Sayfa 232 ---
232
The Twenty-Third Flash

On Nature

[First written as the Sixteenth Note of the Seventeenth Flash,
this part of the Risale-i Nur was later designated the Twenty-
Third Flash because of its importance. For it puts naturalistic
atheism to death with no chance of reanimation, and totally
shatters the foundation stones of unbelief.]

A Reminder
This treatise explains through nine ‘Impossibilities,’ themselves comprising at
least ninety impossibilities, just how unreasonable, crude and superstitious is the
way taken by those Naturalists who are atheists. In order to cut short the
discussion here and because these impossibilities have been explained in part in
other sections of the Risale-i Nur, some steps in the arguments have been
skipped. It occurs to one, therefore, how is it that those famous and supposedly
brilliant philosophers accepted such a blatantly obvious superstition, and continue
to pursue that way. Well, the fact is they cannot see its reality. And I am ready to
explain in detail and prove through clear and decisive arguments to whoever
doubts it that these crude, repugnant and unreasonable impossibilities are the
necessary and unavoidable result of their way; in fact, the very gist of their
creed.1

1 What occasioned the writing of this treatise were the attacks being made on the Qur’an by those
who called everything that their corrupted minds could not reach a superstition, who were using Nature
to justify unbelief, and were vilifying the truths of belief in a most aggressive and ugly fashion. Their
attacks stirred up in my heart an intense anger which resulted in those perverted atheists and falsifiers
of the truth receiving vehement and harsh slaps. Otherwise, the way generally followed by the Risale-i
Nur is a mild, polite and persuasive one.

--- Sayfa 233 ---
233
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
Their prophets said: “Is there any doubt about God, Creator of the heavens
and the earth?”(14:10)
By declaring through the use of a rhetorical question that there cannot and should
not be any doubt about God Almighty, this verse clearly demonstrates the divine
existence and unity.
A point to be mentioned before our discussion:
When I went to Ankara in 1922, the morale of the people of belief was
extremely high as a result of the victory of the army of Islam over the
Greeks. But I saw that an abominable current of atheism was treacherously
trying to subvert, poison and destroy their minds. “O God!” I said, “this
monster is going to harm the fundamentals of belief.” At that point, since the
above-mentioned verse makes self-evidently plain God’s existence and unity,
I sought assistance from it and wrote a treatise in Arabic consisting of a
proof taken from the All-Wise Qur’an that was powerful enough to disperse
and destroy that atheistic current. I had it printed in Ankara at the Yeni Gün
Press. But, alas, those who knew Arabic were few and those who considered
it seriously were rare. Also, its argument was in an extremely concise and
abbreviated form. As a result, the treatise did not have the effect it should
have done and sadly, the current of atheism both swelled and gained
strength. Now, I feel compelled to explain a part of the proof in Turkish.
Since certain parts of it have been fully explained in other sections of the
Risale-i Nur, it will be written in summary form here. Those numerous
proofs in part unite in this proof; so each may be seen as an element of this
proof.
Introduction
O man! You should be aware that there are certain phrases which are commonly used
and imply unbelief. The believers also use them, but without realizing their
implications. We shall explain three of the most important of them.
The First: “Causes create this.”
The Second: “It forms itself; it comes into existence and later ceases to exist.”
The Third: “It is natural; nature necessitates and creates it.”
Indeed, since beings exist and this cannot be denied, and since each being comes
into existence in a wise and artistic fashion, and since each is not outside time but is
being continuously renewed, then, O falsifier of the

--- Sayfa 234 ---
234
truth, you are bound to say either that the causes in the world create beings, for
example, this animal; that is to say, it comes into existence through the coming
together of causes, or that it forms itself, or that its coming into existence is a
requirement and necessary effect of nature, or that it is created through the power of
One All-Powerful and All-Glorious. Since reason can find no way apart from these
four, if the first three are definitely proved to be impossible, invalid and absurd, the
way of divine unity, which is the fourth way, will necessarily and self-evidently and
without doubt or suspicion, be proved true.
THE FIRST WAY
This to imagine that the formation and existence of things, creatures, occurs
through the coming together of causes in the universe. We shall mention only three of
its numerous impossibilities.
First Impossibility
Imagine there is a pharmacy in which are found hundreds of jars and phials filled
with quite different substances. A living potion and a living remedy are required from
those medicaments. So we go to the pharmacy and see that they are to be found there
in abundance, yet in great variety. We examine each of the potions and see that the
ingredients have been taken in varying but precise amounts from each of the jars and
phials, one ounce from this, three from that, seven from the next, and so on. If one
ounce too much or too little had been taken, the potion would not have been living
and would not have displayed its special quality. Next, we study the living remedy.
Again, the ingredients have been taken from the jars in a particular measure so that if
even the most minute amount too much or too little had been taken, the remedy would
have lost its special property.
Now, although the jars number more than fifty, the ingredients have been taken
from each according to measures and amounts that are all different. Is it in any way
possible or probable that the phials and jars should have been knocked over by a
strange coincidence or sudden gust of wind and that only the precise, though different,
amounts that had been taken from each of them should have been spilt, and then
arranged themselves and come together to form the remedy? Is there anything more
superstitious, impossible and absurd than this? If an ass could speak, it would say: “I
cannot accept this idea!”, and would gallop off!
Similarly, each living being may be likened to the living potion in the
comparison, and each plant to a living remedy. For they are composed of

--- Sayfa 235 ---
235
matter that has been taken in most precise measure from truly numerous and truly
various substances. If these are attributed to causes and the elements and it is claimed,
“Causes created these,” it is unreasonable, impossible and absurd a hundred times
over, just as it was to claim that the potion in the pharmacy came into existence
through the phials being knocked over; by accident.
I n  S h o r t : The vital substances in this vast pharmacy of the universe, which
are measured on the scales of divine determining and decree of the All-Wise and Pre-
Eternal One, can only come into existence through a boundless wisdom, infinite
knowledge and all-encompassing will. The unfortunate person who declares that they
are the work of blind, deaf and innumerable elements and causes and natures, which
stream like floods; and the foolish, delirious person who claims that that wondrous
remedy poured itself out when the phials were knocked over and formed itself, are
certainly unreasonable and nonsensical. Indeed, such denial and unbelief is a
senseless absurdity.
Second Impossibility
If everything is not attributed to the All-Powerful and All-Glorious One, who is
the Single One of Unity, and is attributed to causes, it necessitates that many of the
elements and causes present in the universe intervene in the being of every animate
creature. Whereas that different and mutually opposing and conflicting causes should
come together of their own accord in complete order, with the finest balance and in
perfect concord in the being of a tiny creature, like a fly, is such an obvious
impossibility that anyone with even an iota of consciousness would say: “This is
impossible; it could not be!”
The tiny body of a fly is connected with most of the elements and causes in the
universe; indeed, it is a summary of them. If it is not attributed to the Pre-Eternal and
All-Powerful One, it is necessary for those material causes to be themselves present in
the immediate vicinity of the fly; rather, for them all to enter into its tiny body; and
even for them to enter each of the cells of its eyes, which are minute samples of its
body. For if a cause is of a material nature, it is necessary for it to be present in the
immediate vicinity of, and inside, its effect. And this necessitates accepting that the
constituents and elements of the universe are physically present inside that minute
cell, a place too small even for the tip of its antenna, and that they work there in
harmony like a master.
A way such as this, then, shames even the most foolish of the Sophists.

--- Sayfa 236 ---
236
Third Impossibility
It is an established rule that, “If a being has unity, it can only have issued from a
single being, from one hand.” Particularly if it displays a comprehensive life within a
perfect order and sensitive balance, it demonstrates self-evidently that it did not issue
from numerous hands, which are the cause of conflict and confusion, but that it issued
from a single hand that is All-Powerful and All-Wise. Therefore, to attribute such a
well-ordered and well-balanced being which has unity to the jumbled hands of
innumerable, lifeless, ignorant, aggressive, unconscious, chaotic, blind and deaf
natural causes, the blindness and deafness of which increase with their coming
together and intermingling among the ways of numberless possibilities, is as
unreasonable as accepting innumerable impossibilities all at once. If we leave this
impossibility aside and assume that material causes have effects, these effects can
only occur through direct contact and touch. However, the contact of natural causes is
with the exteriors of living beings. And yet we see that the interiors of such beings,
where the hands of material causes can neither reach nor touch, are ten times more
delicate, well-ordered and perfect as regards art than their exteriors. Therefore,
although tiny animate creatures, on which the hands and organs of material causes can
in no way be situated, indeed they cannot touch the creatures’ exteriors all at once
even, are more strange and wonderful as regards their art and creation than the largest
creatures, to attribute them to those lifeless, unknowing, crude, distant, vast,
conflicting, deaf and blind causes can result only from a deafness and blindness
compounded to the number of animate beings.
THE SECOND WAY
This is expressed by the phrase “It forms itself.” It too involves many
impossibilities and is absurd and impossible in many aspects. We shall explain three
examples of these impossibilities.
First Impossibility
O you obstinate denier! Your egotism has made you so stupid that somehow you
decide to accept a hundred impossibilities all at once. For you yourself are a being
and not some simple substance that is inanimate and unchanging. You resemble an
extremely well-ordered machine that is constantly being renewed and a wonderful
palace that is undergoing continuous change. Particles are working unceasingly in
your body. Your body has a connection and mutual relations with the universe, in
particular with regard to sustenance and the perpetuation of the species, and the
particles

--- Sayfa 237 ---
237
that work within it are careful not to spoil that relationship nor to break the
connection. In this cautious manner they set about their work, as though taking the
whole universe into account. Seeing your relationships within it, they take up their
positions accordingly. And you benefit with your external and inner senses in
accordance with the wonderful positions that they take.
If you do not accept that the particles in your body are tiny officials in motion in
accordance with the law of the Pre-Eternal and All-Powerful One, or that they are an
army, or the nibs of the pen of divine determining with each particle as the nib of a
pen, or that they are points inscribed by the pen of power with each particle being a
point, then in every particle working in your eye there would have to be an eye such
as could see every limb and part of your body as well as the entire universe, with
which you are connected. In addition to this, you would have to ascribe to each
particle an intelligence equivalent to that of a hundred geniuses, sufficient to know
and recognize all your past and your future, and your forbears and descendants, the
origins of all the elements of your being, and the sources of all your sustenance.
To attribute the knowledge and intelligence of a thousand Plato’s to a single
particle of one such as you who does not possess even a particle’s worth of
intelligence in matters of this kind is a crazy superstition a thousand times over!
Second Impossibility
Your being resembles a thousand-domed wondrous palace in which the stones
stand together in suspension and without support. Indeed, your being is a thousand
times more wonderful than such a palace, for the palace of your being is being
renewed continuously in perfect order. Leaving aside your truly wonderful spirit,
heart and other subtle faculties, each member of your body resembles a single-domed
part of the palace. Like the stones of a dome, the particles stand together in perfect
balance and order demonstrating the eye and the tongue, for example, each to be a
wondrous building, extraordinary work of art, and miracle of power.
If these particles were not officials dependent on the command of the master
architect of the universe, then each would have to be both absolutely dominant over
all the other particles in the body and absolutely subordinate to each of them; and both
equal to each and, with regard to its dominant position, opposed; and both the origin
and source of most of the attributes that pertain only to the Necessarily Existent One,
and extremely restricted; and both in absolute form, and in the form of a

--- Sayfa 238 ---
238
perfectly ordered individual artefact that could only, through the mystery of unity, be
the work of the Single One of Unity.
Anyone with even a particle of intelligence would understand what an obvious
impossibility this is; to attribute such an artefact to those particles.
Third Impossibility
If your being is not ‘written’ by the pen of the Pre-Eternal and All-Powerful One,
who is the Single One of Unity, and is instead ‘printed’ by nature and causes, there
would have to be printing-blocks in nature not only to the number of cells in your
body, but to the number of their thousands of combinations, which are arranged in
concentric circles. For if this book, for example, which we hold in our hand is written,
a single pen may write it relying on the knowledge of its writer. If, on the other hand,
it is not written and is not attributed to its writer’s pen, and if it is said that it exists of
its own accord or it is ascribed to nature, then, as a printed book, it would be
necessary for there to be a different iron pen for each letter so that it could be printed.
In a printing-press there have to be pieces of type to the number of letters in the
alphabet so the letters in the book come into existence by means of them; pens to the
number of those letters being necessary in place of a single pen.
As may be seen, sometimes a whole page is written in a single large letter from
among those letters with a small pen in fine script, in which case a thousand pens
would be necessary for one letter. Rather, if it took the form of your body, with all its
components one within the other in concentric circles, there would have to be
printing-blocks in each circle, for each component, to the number of the combinations
that they form.
Now, see, if you claim this, which involves a hundred impossibilities, to be
possible, then again if they are not attributed to a single pen, for those well-ordered,
artistic pieces of type, faultless printing-blocks and iron pens to be made, further pens,
printing-blocks and letters to the same number as themselves would be necessary.
And they too would have to have been made; and they too would have to have been
well-ordered and artistically fashioned. And so on. It would carry on in succession ad
infinitum.
There, you too understand! This way of thinking is such that it involves
impossibilites and superstitions to the number of particles in your body. O denier of
God! See this, and quit the way of misguidance!
THE THIRD WAY
“Nature necessitates it; nature makes it.” This statement contains many
impossibilities. We shall mention three of them by way of examples.

--- Sayfa 239 ---
239
First Impossibility
If the art and creativity, which are discerning and wise, to be seen in beings and
particularly in animate beings are not attributed to the pen of divine determining and
power of the Pre-Eternal Sun, and instead are attributed to nature and force, which are
blind, deaf and unthinking, it becomes necessary that nature either should have
present in everything machines and printing-presses for their creation, or should
include in everything power and wisdom enough to create and administer the
universe. The reason for this is as follows:
The sun’s manifestations and reflections appear in all small fragments of glass
and droplets on the face of the earth. If those miniature, reflected imaginary suns are
not ascribed to the sun in the sky, it is necessary to accept the external existence of an
actual sun in every tiny fragment of glass smaller than a match-head, which possesses
the sun’s qualities and which, though small in size, bears profound meaning; and
therefore to accept actual suns to the number of pieces of glass.
In exactly the same way, if beings and animate creatures are not attributed
directly to the manifestation of the Pre-Eternal Sun’s names, it becomes necessary to
accept that in each being, and especially animate beings, there lies a nature, a force, or
quite simply a god that will sustain an infinite power and will, and knowledge and
wisdom. Such an idea is the most absurd and superstitious of all the impossibilities in
the universe. It demonstrates that a man who attributes the art of the Creator of the
universe to imaginary, insignificant, unconscious nature is without a doubt less
conscious of the truth than an animal.
Second Impossibility
If beings, which are most well-ordered and well-measured, wise and artistically
fashioned, are not ascribed to One who is infinitely powerful and wise and instead are
attributed to nature, there has to be present in every bit of soil as many factories and
printing-presses as there are in Europe so that each bit of soil can be the means for the
growth and formation of innumerable flowers and fruits, of which it is the place of
origin and workshop. The seeds of flowers are sown in turn in a bowl of soil, which
performs the duty of a flower-pot for them. An ability is apparent in the bowl of soil
that will give shapes and forms which differ greatly from one another to all the
flowers sown in it. If that ability is not attributed to the All-Glorious and All-Powerful
One, such a situation could not occur without there being in the bowlful of soil
immaterial, different and natural machines for each flower.

--- Sayfa 240 ---
240
This is because the matter of which seeds, like sperm and eggs for example,
consists is the same. That is, they consist of an orderless, formless, paste-like mixture
of oxygen, hydrogen, carbon and nitrogen. Together with this, since air, water, heat
and light also are each simple, unconscious and flow against everything in floods, the
fact that the all-different forms of those flowers emerge from the soil in a most well-
ordered and artistic fashion self-evidently and necessarily requires that there are
present in the soil in the bowl immaterial, miniature printing-presses and factories to
the number of presses and factories in Europe so that they could weave this great
number of living fabrics and thousands of various embroidered textiles.
So you can see how far the unbelieving thought of the Naturalists has deviated
from the realm of reason. And although brainless pretenders who imagine nature to be
creator claim to be men of science and reason, see just how distant from reason and
science is their thought, so that they have taken a superstition that is in no way
possible, that is impossible, as a way for themselves. See this and laugh at them!
I f  y o u  a s k : If such extraordinary impossibilities and insurmountable
difficulties occur when beings are attributed to nature, how are those difficulties
removed when they are attributed to the Single and Eternally Besought One? And
how is the difficult impossibility transformed into that easy necessity?
T h e  A n s w e r : We saw in the First Impossibility that the manifestation of the
sun’s reflection displays its radiance and effect through miniature imaginary suns with
complete ease and lack of trouble in everything from the minutest inanimate particle
to the surface of the vastest ocean. If each particle’s relationship with the sun is
severed, it becomes necessary to accept that the external existence of an actual sun
could subsist, with a difficulty at the level of impossibility, in each of those minute
particles.
Similarly, if each being is ascribed directly to the Single Eternally Besought One,
everything necessary for each being can be conveyed to it through a connection and
manifestation with an ease and facility that is at the level of necessity. If the
connection is severed and each being reverts from its position as an official to being
without duties, and is left to nature and its own devices, it becomes necessary to
suppose that, with a hundred thousand difficulties and obstacles that reach the degree
of impossibility, blind nature possesses within it the power and wisdom to create and
administer the universe so that it might bring into existence the wonderful machine of
the being of an animate creature like a fly, which is a tiny index of the universe. This
is impossible not just once but thousands of times over.

--- Sayfa 241 ---
241
I n  S h o r t : Just as it is impossible and precluded for the Necessarily Existent
One to have any partner or like in respect of His Essence, so too is the interference of
others in His dominicality and in His creation of beings impossible and precluded.
As for the difficulties involved in the Second Impossibility, as is proved in many
parts of the Risale-i Nur, if all things are attributed to the Single One of Unity, all
things become as easy and trouble-free as a single thing. Whereas if they are
attributed to causes and nature, a single thing becomes as difficult as all things. This
has been demonstrated with numerous, decisive proofs and a summary of one of them
is as follows.
If a man is connected to the king by being a soldier or an official, by reason of the
strength of the connection he may perform duties far exceeding his individual
strength. He may, on occasion, capture another king in the name of his own king. For
he himself does not carry the equipment and sources of strength necessary to carry out
the duties and work he performs, nor is he compelled to do so. By reason of the
connection, the king’s treasuries, and the army, which is behind him and is his point
of support, carry his equipment and sources of strength. That is to say, the duties he
performs may be as grand as the business of a king, and as tremendous as the actions
of an army.
Indeed, through being an official, an ant destroyed Pharaoh’s palace; through the
connection, a fly killed Nimrod off; and through the connection, the seed of a pine the
size of a grain of wheat produces all the parts of a huge pine-tree.2
If the connection is severed and the man discharged from his duties as an official,
he will be compelled to carry the equipment and sources of strength necessary for his
work himself. He will then only be able to perform duties commensurate with the
sources of strength and ammunition he is able to carry. If he is required in this
situation to carry out his duties with the extreme ease of the first situation, it will be
necessary to load on his back the sources of an army’s strength and the arsenals and
munitions factories of a king. Even clowns who invent stories and superstitions to
make people laugh would be ashamed at this fanciful idea.

2 Yes, through this connection, the seed receives an order from divine determining and displays
those wonderful duties. If the connection were to be severed, the creation of the seed would require
more equipment, power and art than the creation of the mighty pine-tree. For it would be necessary for
the pine-tree out there on the mountain, which is the work of divine power, to be physically present
together with all its limbs and parts in what is only the potential tree within the seed and is the work of
divine determining. For the mighty tree’s factory is the seed. The determined, potential tree within it
becomes manifest in the external world through divine power and becomes a physical pine-tree.

--- Sayfa 242 ---
242
I n  S h o r t : To attribute all beings to the Necessarily Existent One is so easy as
to be necessary, while to attribute their creation to nature is so difficult as to be
impossible and outside the realm of reason.
Third Impossibility
The following two comparisons, which are included in other parts of the Risale-i
Nur, explain this impossibility.
A wild savage entered a palace which had been built in an empty desert and
completed and adorned with all the fruits of civilization. He cast an eye over its
interior and saw thousands of well-proportioned and artistically fashioned objects.
Out of his boorishness and lack of intelligence, he said: “No one from outside had a
hand in this, one of the objects from inside must have made this palace together with
all of its contents,” and he started to investigate. But it did not appear possible even to
his untaught intelligence that anything he had looked at could have made those things.
Later, he saw a notebook in which had been written the plan and programme of
the palace’s construction, an index of its contents and the rules of its administration.
For sure, the notebook too, which was without hand, eye, or implement, like the rest
of the objects in the palace, was completely lacking the ability to construct and
decorate the palace. But since he saw that in comparison with all the other things, the
notebook was related to the whole palace by reason of its including all its theoretical
laws, he was obliged to say: “There, it is this notebook that has organized, ordered
and adorned the palace, and has fashioned all these objects and set them in their
places.” He transformed his uncouthness into ludicrous jabber.
Thus, exactly like this comparison, a boor who subscribed to Naturalist thought,
which denies God, entered the palace of the universe, which is infinitely more well-
ordered, more perfect and everywhere full of miraculous instances of wisdom than the
palace in the comparison. Not thinking that it was the work of art of the Necessarily
Existent One, who is outside the sphere of contingency, and shunning that idea, he
saw a collection of the laws of divine practice and an index of dominical art, which
are like a slate for writing and erasing of divine determining in the  sphere of
contingency, and like a constantly changing notebook for the laws of the functioning
of divine power, and are extremely mistakenly and erroneously given the name
‘nature,’ and he said:
“These things require a cause and nothing else appears to have the relationship
with everything that this notebook has. It is true that reason will in no way accept that
this unseeing, unconscious and powerless notebook could carry out this creation,
which is the work of an absolute dominicality

--- Sayfa 243 ---
243
and requires infinite power. But since I do not recognize the Eternal Maker, the most
plausible explanation is to say the notebook made it, and makes it, so I shall say that.”
To which we reply:
You mistaken unfortunate! Your foolishness exceeds anything imaginable! Lift
your head out of the swamp of nature and look beyond yourself! See an All-Glorious
Maker to whom all beings from particles to planets testify with their different tongues
and to whom they point with their fingers! Behold the manifestation of the Pre-
Eternal Inscriber, who fashions the palace and who writes its programme in the
notebook! Study His decree, listen to the Qur’an! Be delivered from your delirious
raving!
Second Comparison: A rustic bumpkin entered the bounds of a splendid palace
and saw there the uniform actions of an extremely well-disciplined army carrying out
its drill. He observed a battalion, a regiment and a division stand to attention, stand at
ease and march, and open fire when commanded as though they were a single private.
Since his rude, uncultured mind could not comprehend, so denied, that a commander
had been given command by the country’s laws and by royal decree, he imagined that
the soldiers were attached to one another with strings. He thought of what wonderful
string it must be, and was amazed.
Later, he continued on his way till he came upon a mosque as magnificent as Aya
Sophia. He entered it at the time of Friday prayer and watched the congregation of
Muslims rising, bowing, prostrating and sitting at the sound of man’s voice. Since he
did not understand the Shari‘a, which consists of a collection of immaterial, revealed
laws, nor the immaterial rules proceeding from the Lawgiver’s command, he fancied
the congregation to be bound to one another by physical string, and that this
wonderful string had subjected them and was making them move like puppets.
Coming up with this idea, which is so ridiculous as to make the most ignorant roar
with laughter, he went on his way.
Exactly like this comparison, an atheist who subscribed to materialist thought,
which is denial and pure brutishness, entered the universe, which is a splendid
barracks of the Monarch of Pre-Eternity and Post-Eternity for His innumerable forces,
and a well-ordered mosque of that Pre-Eternal All-Worshipped One. He imagined the
immaterial laws of the ordering of the universe, which proceed from the Pre-Eternal
Monarch’s wisdom, each to have material and physical existence; and supposed the
theoretical laws of the sovereignty of dominicality, and the rules and ordinances of
the Greater Shari‘a, the Shari‘a of Creation, which are immaterial and exist only as
knowledge, each to have external, material and physical existence. But to set up in
place of divine power those laws, which proceed from the divine

--- Sayfa 244 ---
244
attributes of knowledge and speech and only exist as knowledge, and to attribute
creation to them; then to attach the name ‘nature’ to them, and to deem force, which is
merely a manifestation of dominical power, to be an independent almighty possessor
of power, is a thousand times more low-fallen ignorance than the ignorance in the
comparison.
I n  S h o r t : The imaginary and insubstantial thing that Naturalists call nature, if
it has an external reality, can at the very most be work of art; it cannot be the Artist. It
is an embroidery, and cannot be the Embroiderer. It is a set of decrees; it cannot be
the Issuer of the decrees. It is a body of the laws of creation, and cannot be the
Lawgiver. It is but a created screen to the dignity of God, and cannot be the Creator. It
is passive and created, and cannot be a Creative Maker. It is a law, not a power, and
cannot possess power. It is the recipient, and cannot be the source.
To Conclude: Since beings exist, and as was stated at the beginning of this
treatise, reason cannot think of a way to explain the existence of beings apart from the
four mentioned, three of which were decisively proved through three clear
impossibilities to be invalid and absurd, then necessarily and self-evidently the way of
divine unity, which is the fourth way, is proved in a conclusive manner. The fourth
way, in accordance with the verse quoted at the beginning:
Is there any doubt about God, Creator of the heavens and the earth?
demonstrates clearly so that there can be no doubt or hesitation the Divinity of the
Necessarily Existent One, and that all things issue directly from the hand of His
power, and that the heavens and the earth are under His sway.
O you unfortunate worshipper of causes and nature! Since the nature of each
thing, like all things, is created, for it is full of art and is being constantly renewed,
and, like the effect, the apparent cause of each thing is also created; and since for each
thing to exist there is need for much equipment and many tools; there must exist a
Possessor of Absolute Power who creates the nature and brings the cause into
existence. And that Absolutely Powerful One is in no need of impotent intermediaries
to share in His dominicality and creation. God forbid! He creates cause and effect
together directly. In order to demonstrate His wisdom and the manifestation of His
names, by establishing an apparent causal relationship and connection through order
and sequence, He makes causes and nature a veil to the hand of His power so that the
apparent faults, severities and defects in things should be ascribed to them, and in this
way His dignity be preserved.
Is it easier for a watch-maker to make the cog-wheels of a clock, and then arrange
them and put them in order to form the clock? Or is it easier for him to make a
wonderful machine in each of the cog-wheels, and then

--- Sayfa 245 ---
245
leave the making of the clock to the lifeless hands of those machines? Is that not
beyond the bounds of possibility? Come on, you judge with your unfair reason, and
say!
And is it easier for a scribe to collect ink, pen and paper, and then using them
proceed to write out a book himself? Or is it easier for him to create in the paper, pen
and ink a writing-machine that requires more art and trouble than the book, and can
be used only for that book, and then tell the unconscious machine: “Come on, you
write it!”, and himself not interfere? Is that not a hundred times more difficult than
writing it himself?
I f  y o u  s a y : Yes, it is a hundred times more difficult to create a machine that
writes a book rather than writing it out oneself. But is it not in a way easier, because
the machine is a means of producing numerous copies of the same book?
T h e  A n s w e r : Through His limitless power, the Pre-Eternal Inscriber
continuously renews the infinite manifestations of His names so as to display them in
ever-differing ways. And through this constant renewal, He creates the identities and
special features in things in such a manner that no missive of the Eternally Besought
One or dominical book can be the same as any other book. In any case, each will have
different features in order to express different meanings.
If you have eyes, look at the human face: you will see that from the time of Adam
until today, indeed, until post-eternity, together with the conformity of its essential
organs, each face has a distinguishing mark in relation to all the others; this is a
definite fact. Therefore, each face may be thought of as a different book. Only, for the
artwork to be set out, different writing-sets, arrangements, and compositions are
required. And in order to both collect and situate the materials, and to include
everything necessary for the existence of each, a completely different workshop will
be required.
Now, knowing it to be impossible, we thought of nature as a printing-press. But
apart from the composition and printing, which concern the printing-press, that is,
setting up the type in a specific order, the substances that form an animate being’s
body, the creation of which is a hundred times more difficult than that of the
composition and ordering, must be created in specific proportions and particular
order, brought from the furthest corners of the cosmos, and placed in the hands of the
printing-press. But in order to do all these things, there is still need for the power and
will of the Absolutely Powerful One, who creates the printing-press. That is to say,
this hypothesis of the printing-press is a totally meaningless superstition.
Thus, like the comparisons of the clock and the book, the All-Glorious Maker,
who is powerful over all things, has created causes, and so too does

--- Sayfa 246 ---
246
He create the effects. Through His wisdom, He ties the effect to the cause. Through
His will, He has determined a manifestation of the Greater Shari‘a, the Shari‘a of
Creation, which consists of the divine laws concerning the ordering of all motion in
the universe, and determined the nature of beings, which is only to be a mirror to that
manifestation in things, and to be a reflection of it. And through His power, He has
created the face of that nature which has received external existence, and has created
things on that nature, and has mixed them one with the other.
Is it easier to accept this fact, which is the conclusion of innumerable most
rational proofs – in fact, is one not compelled to accept it? – or is it easier to get the
physical beings that you call causes and nature, which are lifeless, unconscious,
created, fashioned and simple, to provide the numberless tools and equipment
necessary for the existence of each thing and to carry out those matters, which are
performed wisely and discerningly? Is that not utterly beyond the bounds of
possibility? We leave it to you to decide, with your unreasonable mind!
The unbelieving nature-worshipper replied: “Since you are asking me to be fair
and reasonable, I have to confess that the mistaken way I have followed up to now is
both a compounded impossibility, and extremely harmful and ugly. Anyone with even
a grain of intelligence would understand from your analyses above that to attribute the
act of creation to causes and nature is precluded and impossible, and that to attribute
all things directly to the Necessarily Existent One is imperative and necessary. I say:
‘ALL PRAISE BE TO GOD FOR BELIEF,’ and I believe in Him. Only, I do have
one doubt:
“I believe that Almighty God is the Creator, but what harm does it do to the
sovereignty of His dominicality if some minor causes have a hand in the creation of
insignificant matters and thereby gain for themselves a little praise and acclaim? Does
it diminish His sovereignty in some way?”
T h e  A n s w e r : As we have conclusively proved in other parts of the Risale-i
Nur, the mark of rulership is its rejection of interference. The most insignficant ruler
or official will not tolerate the interference of his own son, even, within the sphere of
his rule. The fact that, despite being Caliph, certain devout Sultans had their innocent
sons murdered on the unfounded apprehension that the sons would interfere in their
rule demonstrates how fundamental is this law of the rejection of interference in
rulership. And the law of prevention of participation, which the independence
intrinsic to rulership necessitates, has shown its strength in the history of mankind
through extraordinary upheavals whenever there have been two governors in a town
or two kings in a country.

--- Sayfa 247 ---
247
If the sense of rulership and sovereignty, which is a mere shadow in human
beings, who are impotent and in need of assistance, rejects interference to this degree,
prevents the intervention of others, does not accept participation in its sovereignty,
and seeks to preserve the independence of its position so jealously, if you can,
compare this with an All-Glorious One whose absolute sovereignty is at the degree of
dominicality, whose absolute rulership at the degree of Divinity, absolute
independence at the degree of oneness, and absolute lack of need at the degree of
absolute power, and understand what a necessary requirement and inevitable necessity
of that rulership is this rejection of interference, prevention of participation, and
repulsion of partners.
Concerning the second part of your doubt, you said: “If some of the worship of
some insignificant beings is directed towards certain causes, does this cause any
deficiency to the worship of all beings, from particles to planets, which is directed
towards the Necessarily Existent One, the Absolute Object of All Worship?”
T h e  A n s w e r : The All-Wise Creator of the universe made the universe like
a tree with conscious beings as its most perfect fruit, and among conscious beings He
made man its most comprehensive fruit. And man’s most important fruit, indeed the
result of his creation, the aim of his nature, and the fruit of his life are his thanks and
worship. Would that Absolute Sovereign and Independent Ruler, that Single One of
Unity, who creates the universe in order to make Himself known and loved, give
away to others man, the fruit of the whole universe, and man’s thanks and worship,
his most elevated fruit? Totally contrary to His wisdom, would He make vain and
futile the result of creation and fruit of the universe? God forbid! Would He be
content to give away the worship of creatures to others in a way that would deny His
wisdom and His dominicality? And although He demonstrates through His actions
that He wishes to make Himself known and loved to an unlimited degree, would he
cause His most perfect creatures to forget Him by handing over to causes their thanks
and gratitude, love and worship, and cause them to deny the exalted purposes in the
universe?
O friend who has given up the worship of nature! Now it is for you to say! To
which he replied:
“All praise be to God, these two doubts of mine have now been resolved. And
your two proofs concerning divine unity which demonstrate that the only True Object
of Worship is He, and that nothing other than He is worthy of worship are so brilliant
and powerful that to deny them would require as much arrogance as to deny the sun
and the daytime.”

--- Sayfa 248 ---
248
Conclusion
The person who gave up atheistic Naturalism and came to believe said: “All
praise be to God, I no longer have any doubts, but there are still a few questions about
which I am curious.”
FIRST QUESTION
“We hear many lazy people and those who neglect the five daily prayers ask:
‘What need has God Almighty of our worship that in the Qur’an He severely and
insistently reproves those who give up worship and threatens them with so a fearsome
a punishment as Hell? How is it in keeping with the style of the Qur’an, which is
moderate, mild and fair, to demonstrate the ultimate severity towards an insignificant,
minor fault?”
T h e  A n s w e r : God Almighty has no need of your worship, nor indeed of
anything else. It is you who needs to worship, for in truth you are sick. As we have
proved in many parts of the Risale-i Nur, worship is a sort of remedy for your
spiritual wounds. You can understand how absurd it would be if an ill person
responds to a kindly doctor who insists on his taking medicines that are beneficial for
his condition by saying: “What need do you have of it that you are insisting in this
way?”
As for the severe threats and fearsome punishments in the Qur’an concerning the
giving up of worship, they may be likened to a king who in order to protect his
subjects’ rights, inflicts a severe punishment on an ordinary man in accordance with
the degree that his crime infringes those rights.
In the same way, the man who gives up worship and ritual prayer is violating in a
significant manner the rights of beings, who are like the subjects of the Monarch of
Pre-Eternity and Post-Eternity, and is in fact acting unjustly towards them. For the
perfections of beings are manifested through the glorification and worship performed
by that aspect of them which is directed towards their Maker. The one who abandons
worship does not and cannot see this worship. Indeed, he denies it. Furthermore,
beings occupy an exalted position by reason of their worship and glorification, and
each is a missive of the Eternally Besought One, and a mirror to its Sustainer’s names.
Since he reduces them from their high positions and considers them to be
unimportant, lifeless, aimless, and without duties, he is insulting them, and denying
and transgressing their perfections.
Indeed, everyone sees the world in his own mirror. God Almighty

--- Sayfa 249 ---
249
created man as a measure and scale for the universe. And from the world He gave a
particular world to each person. This world He colours for him in accordance with his
sincere beliefs. For example, a despairing, lamenting, weeping person sees beings as
weeping and in despair, while a cheerful, optimistic, merry person sees the universe
as joyful and smiling. A reflective man given to solemn worship and glorification
discovers and sees to a degree the certain, truly existent worship and glorification of
beings, while a person who abandons worship through either neglect or denial sees
beings in a manner totally contrary and opposed to the reality of their perfections and
so transgresses their rights.
Furthermore, since the person who gives up prayer does not own himself, he
wrongs his own soul, which is a slave of its True Owner. His Owner delivers
awesome threats in order to protect His slave’s rights from his evil-commanding soul.
Also, since he has given up worship, which is the result of his creation and the aim of
his nature, it is like an act of aggression against divine wisdom and dominical will,
and he therefore receives punishment.
I n  S h o r t : The abandoner of worship both wrongs his own soul, which is the
slave and totally owned property of Almighty God, and wrongs and transgresses the
rights of the perfections of the universe. Certainly, just as unbelief is an insult to
beings, so is the abandonment of worship a denial of the universe’s perfections. And
since it is an act of aggression against divine wisdom, it is deserving of awesome
threats and severe punishment.
Thus, it is to express this deservedness and the above facts that the Qur’an of
Miraculous Exposition chooses in a miraculous way that severe style, which, in
complete conformity with the principles of eloquence, corresponds to the
requirements of the situation.
SECOND QUESTION
The person who had given up Naturalism and come to believe next asked:
“It is indeed a vast truth that each being is dependent on divine will and
dominical power in every aspect; in all of its functions, qualities and actions. Our
narrow minds cannot comprehend this because of its vastness. However, the infinite
abundance that we see around us, and the boundless ease in the creation and
formation of things, and the infinite ease and facility in the way of unity, which was
established through your proofs above, and the infinite ease that verses of the Qur’an
like the following clearly demonstrate and expound,

--- Sayfa 250 ---
250
Your creation and resurrection is as a single soul,(31:28)
and,
The matter of the Hour shall be but as the twinkling of the eye, or even
closer(16:77)
show this mighty truth to be a matter that is most acceptable and rational. What is the
wisdom and secret of this ease?”
T h e  A n s w e r : This matter was elucidated in a most clear, decisive and
convincing fashion in the explanation of “And He is powerful over all things,” which
forms the Tenth Phrase of the Twentieth Letter. And it was demonstrated even more
clearly in the Addendum to that letter that when attributed to the Single Maker, all
beings become as easy as a single being. If they are not attributed to that Single One
of Unity, the creation of a single creature becomes as difficult as that of all beings,
and a seed as problematical as a tree. When they are ascribed to their True Maker, the
universe becomes as easy and trouble-free as a tree, a tree as easy as a seed, Paradise
as easy as the spring, and the spring as easy as a flower. We shall now point out
briefly one or two evidences that have been explained in detail in other parts of the
Risale-i Nur out of the hundreds which explain the underlying reasons for and
instances of wisdom in the conspicuous, boundless abundance and profusion of
beings, the ease of the great number of individuals in each species, and the fact that
well-ordered, artistically fashioned and valuable beings come into existence with
immense speed and ease.
For example, if the command of a hundred soldiers is given to one officer, it is a
hundred times easier than if the command of one soldier is given to a hundred
officers. And if to equip an army it is assigned to one headquarters, one law, one
factory and the command of one king, it quite simply becomes as easy as equipping a
single soldier. In the same way, if to equip one soldier it is referred to numerous
headquarters, numerous factories and numerous commanders, it becomes as difficult
as equipping an army. Because in order to equip a single soldier, it would require as
many factories as are necessary for a whole army.
Again, since by reason of the mystery of unity, the vital necessities of a tree are
provided through one root, one centre and according to one law, it produces thousands
of fruits as easily as a single fruit. This is plain to see. If unity changes to multiplicity
and all the necessities vital for each fruit are provided from different places, to
produce each fruit becomes as difficult as to produce the tree. And to produce a single
seed, even, which is a sample and index of the tree, becomes as difficult as the tree.
Because all the necessities vital for the tree’s life are necessary for the seed.

--- Sayfa 251 ---
251
There are hundreds of examples like these which show that it is easier for
thousands of beings to come into existence through unity than for a single being to
come into existence through multiplicity and ascribing partners to God. Since this
truth has been proved with absolute certainty in other parts of the Risale-i Nur, we
refer you to them and here only explain an important reason for this ease and facility
from the point of view of divine knowledge, divine determining, and dominical
power. It is as follows:
You are a being. If you attribute yourself to the Pre-Eternal All-Powerful One, He
creates you at a command through His infinite power out of nothing in an instant, like
striking a match. If you do not do this and rather attribute yourself to physical causes
and nature, since you are a well-ordered summary, fruit, and miniature index and list
of the universe, in order to make you, it would be necessary to sift with a fine sieve
the universe and its elements, and to gather in precise measure from all the corners of
the universe the substances of which your body is composed. For physical causes only
gather and join together. It is confirmed by people of reason that they cannot create
out of nothing what is not present in them. Since this is the case, they would be
compelled to collect together the body of a tiny animate being from every corner of
the cosmos.
Now understand what ease there is in unity, divine unity, and what difficulties lie
in misguidance and attributing partners to God!
Secondly, there is an infinite ease also with regard to divine knowledge. It is like
this: divine determining is an aspect of divine knowledge; it determines a measure for
each thing, which is like its particular and immaterial mould; the determined measure
is like a plan or model for the thing’s being. When divine power creates, it does so
with extreme ease in accordance with the determined measure. If the thing is not
attributed to the All-Powerful One of Glory, who possesses all-embracing, infinite
and pre-eternal knowledge, as was described above, not only thousands of difficulties
appear, but hundreds of impossibilities. For if it were not for the determined measure
which exists in divine knowledge, thousands of material moulds with external
existences would have to be employed in the body of even a tiny animate being.
So, understand one reason for the infinite ease in unity and the endless difficulties
in misguidance and ascribing partners to God. Realize what a veracious, correct, and
exalted truth is stated by the verse,
The matter of the Hour shall be but as the twinkling of the eye, or even
closer.

--- Sayfa 252 ---
252
THIRD QUESTION
The former enemy and now rightly-guided friend then asked: “Philosophers, who
have made many advances these days, claim that nothing is created out of nothing,
and nothing is annihilated and goes to nothing; there is only compostion and
decomposition, and this makes the factory of the universe run. Is this correct?”
T h e  A n s w e r : Since the most advanced philosophers who did not consider
beings in the light of the Qur’an saw that the formation and existence of beings by
means of nature and causes was so difficult as to be impossible – in the manner
proved above, they diverged into two groups.
One group became Sophists; abdicating reason, which is exclusive to human
beings, and falling lower than mindless beasts, they found it easier to deny the
universe’s existence and even their own existences, than to follow the way of
misguidance, which claims that causes and nature have the power to create. They
therefore denied both themselves and the universe and descended into absolute
ignorance.
The second group saw that in misguidance, according to which causes and nature
are creator, the creation of a fly or a seed, even, entails innumerable difficulties and
requires a power unacceptable to reason. They were therefore compelled to deny the
act of creation and to say: “Nothing can exist out of nothing.” Seeing total
annihiliation also to be impossible, they declared: “What exists cannot go to nothing.”
They fancied an imaginary situation in which combining and decomposition,
gathering together and dispersion, occur through the motion of particles and the winds
of chance.
Now, see! Those who consider themselves to be the most intelligent are the most
profoundly ignorant and stupid. Understand just how ludicrous, debased, and ignorant
misguidance makes man, and take a lesson!
Indeed, a Pre-Eternal Power created the heavens and the earth in six days, every
year creates four hundred thousand species simultaneously on the face of the earth,
and in six weeks every spring constructs a living world more full of art and wisdom
than the world itself. Thus, it is more foolish and ignorant than the Sophists, the first
group above, to deny the act of creation and deem it unlikely that, like a chemical that
when applied shows up invisible writing, Pre-Eternal Power should give external
existence to beings, which, though externally non-existent, exist as knowledge, and
whose plans and measures are determined in the realm of a Pre-Eternal Knowledge.
Those unfortunates are absolutely impotent and have nothing at their disposal
apart from the faculty of will. Although they are inflated like

--- Sayfa 253 ---
253
Pharaohs, they can neither annihilate anything nor create anything from nothing, even
a minute particle. And so, although nothing comes into existence out of nothing at the
hand of causes and nature on which they rely, out of their stupidity they say: “Nothing
comes from non-being, and nothing goes to non-being.” And they even extend this
absurd and erroneous principle to the Absolutely All-Powerful One.
Indeed, the All-Powerful One of Glory has two ways of creating:
The First is through origination and invention. That is, He brings a being into
existence out of nothing, out of non-existence, and creates everything necessary for it,
also out of nothing, and places those necessities in its hand.
The Second is through composition, through art. That is, He forms certain beings
out of the elements of the universe in order to demonstrate subtle instances of
wisdom, such as displaying the perfections of His wisdom and the manifestations of
many of His names. Through the law of providing, he sends particles and matter,
which are dependent on His command, to these beings and employs the particles in
them.
Yes, the Absolutely All-Powerful One creates in two ways: He both originates
and He composes. To annihilate what exists and to make exist what does not exist is
most simple and easy for Him. It is one of His constant and universal laws. The man,
therefore, who says: “He cannot give existence to what does not exist” in the face of a
power that in one spring makes exist out of nothing the forms and attributes of three
hundred thousand animate creatures, and, besides their particles, all their conditions
and states, such a man should himself be obliterated!
The person who gave up nature and embraced the truth said: “Praise and thanks
be to God Almighty to the number of particles in existence for I have attained to
complete belief. I have been saved from delusion and misguidance. Not one of my
doubts remains.
“ALL PRAISE BE TO GOD FOR THE RELIGION OF ISLAM, AND
COMPLETE AND PERFECT BELIEF!”
All glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have
taught us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32)

--- Sayfa 254 ---
254
The Twenty-Fourth Flash
On Islamic Dress for Women
[While being the Second and Third Matters of the Fifteenth
Note, this treatise was made the Twenty-Fourth Flash because
of its importance.]
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
O Prophet! Tell your wives and daughters, and the believing women, that
they should cast their outer garments over their persons [when abroad] [to
the end of the verse].(33:59)
This verse enjoins the veiling of women. However, dissolute civilization opposes
this command of the Qur’an; it does not consider the veiling of women to be natural
and says it is slavery of a sort.1
T h e  A n s w e r : We shall explain only four of the many instances of wisdom
in this injunction of the Qur’an, showing that it is entirely natural and those who
oppose it are opposing the innate disposition of women.
FIRST INSTANCE OF WISDOM
To veil themselves is natural for women and their innate dispositions demand it.
For women are weak and delicate, and since they are in need of a man’s protection
and help for themselves and for their children whom

1 Part of my defence for the Appeal Court, which opposed the [Eskişehir] Court and silenced it: “I
say to this court of law that if there is justice on the face of the earth, it will surely quash the decision to
convict a person who has expounded a most sacred, true, and right divine principle which has been in
force in the social life of three hundred and fifty million people every century for one thousand three
hundred and fifty years, relying on the confirmation and unanimity of three hundred and fifty thousand
Qur’anic commentaries and following the beliefs of our forefathers for one thousand three hundred and
fifty years; it will surely quash such a ruling!”

--- Sayfa 255 ---
255
they love more than their own lives, they have a natural desire to make themselves
loved and not loathed, and not to be rebuffed.
Also, seven out of ten women are either old or ugly and they do not want to show
their age or unsightliness to everyone. Or they are jealous, and they do not want to
appear ugly in relation to others who are more beautiful. Or they are frightened of
assault or aspersions, and want by nature to cover themselves so as not to suffer
assault, nor to be accused of unfaithfulness by their husbands. If noted carefully, it is
seen that it is the elderly who hide themselves most. While only two or three out of
ten women are both young and beautiful and do not feel uncomfortable at displaying
themselves.
It is clear that people are discomforted at being looked at by people they do not
like or find tedious; they are upset by it. If a beautiful immodestly dressed woman
takes pleasure at two or three out of ten men who are canonically strangers looking at
her, she is bored by the seven or eight. Also, since a woman with uncorrupted morals
is sensitive and easily affected, she will certainly be distressed at dirty looks whose
effects have been physically experienced, indeed, are poisonous. We even hear that in
Europe, the place of open dress, many women are fed up at being the object of
attention, and complain to the police, saying: “These brutes keep staring at us and
disturbing us.” This means that present-day civilization’s unveiling women is contrary
to their natures, while the Qur’an’s command to veil themselves is both inconformity
with women’s natures, and saves them – those mines of compassion who may be
worthy companions for all eternity – from degeneration, degradation, what is in effect
slavery and wretchedness.
Furthermore, by nature women are fearful of men who are strangers, and are
anxious at them. Fear naturally demands the veiling of women. For in addition to
suffering the difficulty of bearing the load of a child for eight or nine months, which
certainly embitters the eight or nine minutes’ pleasure, there is the possibility of
suffering the calamity of bringing up a child for eight or nine years without protector.
Since this happens frequently, by creation they truly fear strange men and by nature
want to hide themselves from them. Being weak, their creation demands that through
veiling themselves they do not excite the appetites of men outside the stipulated
degrees of kinship, nor allow any opportunity for assault; their weak creation gives
powerful warning. It shows that their cloaks and coats are shields and fortresses. The
fact that, according to news received, the bare-legged wife of a high-ranking man in
the world was accosted in the country’s capital, in the market-place in daylight in
front of everyone by a common shoe-shiner, deals a slap in the shameless faces of
those opposed to the veiling of women!

--- Sayfa 256 ---
256
SECOND INSTANCE OF WISDOM
The geniune, intense relationship, love, and affection between men and women
do not arise only from the needs of worldly life. Yes, a woman is a companion to her
husband not only in this worldly life, she is his companion in eternal life too. Since
she will be her husband’s companion in eternal life, she surely should not attract the
looks of others besides her husband, her everlasting friend and companion, and should
not offend him and make him jealous. In consequence of the mystery of belief, her
believing husband’s relations with her are not confined to this worldly life and his
love is not only animal and temporary, so long as her beauty lasts; he holds true,
earnest love and respect for her because she will be his companion in eternal life. And
he bears that love and respect for her, not only during her youth when she is beautiful,
but also when she is old and unsightly. Certainly in return for this, she should show
her beauties to him alone and restrict her love to him; this is demanded by humanity.
Otherwise she would gain very little and lose much.
According to the Shari‘a, the husband should be a good match for the wife. That
is, they should be suitable to one another. The most important aspect of this is with a
view to religion.
Happy the husband who sees the wife’s firm religion and follows her, and
himself becomes pious in order not to lose his companion of eternal life.
Happy the wife who sees her husband’s firmness in religion and becomes pious
so as not to lose her eternal friend.
Alas for the man who becomes dissolute, which will lose him for ever that
righteous woman.
Alas for the woman who does not follow her pious husband and loses her eternal
blessed friend.
And a thousand woes on the unhappy husband and wife who imitate each other in
sin and vice, helping one another to enter Hell-fire!
THIRD INSTANCE OF WISDOM
Happy family life is perpetuated through mutual confidence between husband
and wife, and heartfelt respect and love. Immodest dress and free-and-easy behaviour
destroy the confidence, and spoil the mutual respect and love. For out of ten women
who favour immodest dress only one will not try to make herself liked by strangers
because she does not find other men more attractive than her husband. Nine will find
others better than their husbands. And only one out of twenty men will not find other
women

--- Sayfa 257 ---
257
more attractive. Then besides the true love and mutual respect disappearing, it may
arouse extremely ugly and base feelings, as follows:
By nature, men do not feel any lust towards those within the stipulated degrees of
kinship like their sisters, because, since such relatives’ faces induce kindness and licit
love due to their close kinship, it nullifies any sexual or lusty inclinations. But to
leave uncovered parts of the body which according to the Shari‘a it is not permissible
to expose to close relatives like the legs, may awaken extremely ugly feelings in men
of low character. For the face of a close relative reminds the man of their close
kinship and does not resemble the face of someone outside the degrees of kinship, but
a bare leg is the same as that of canonical strangers. The leg does bear any
distinguishing mark to recall the close kinship of its owner, so may arouse carnal
feelings in the man. To look on such things is so degenerate as to make one’s hair
stand on end.
FOURTH INSTANCE OF WISDOM
It is clear that everyone wants lots of children. There is no nation or government
that does not support an increase in population. In fact, God’s Most Noble Messenger
(Upon whom be blessings and peace) said: “Marry and increase, for at the Last Day I
shall take pride in your large numbers.”2 However, the abandoning of Islamic dress
for women does not increase marriage, it decreases it significantly. For even the most
lay-about and modern youth wants his wife to be chaste. He does not want her to be
modern, that is, careless in questions of dress and morals like himself, and so remains
single, and even frequents prostitutes.
Women are not like that, they cannot restrict their husbands’ behaviour to the
same extent. Women’s most basic characteristics are loyalty and trustworthiness,
since being the director of all the matters to do with the home, the woman is charged
with protecting and preserving her husband’s property and possessions, and his
children. Carelessness in dress and morality destroys that loyalty, and her husband
loses confidence in her and makes her suffer pangs of conscience. In fact, if the two
qualities of courage and generosity, which are desirable in men, are found in women,
it damages this loyalty and confidence and so are undesirable for women and are
considered to be bad qualities. But since the husband’s duty is not loyalty and
stewardship, but protection, kindness, and respect, he cannot be restricted and refined,
and may marry other women as well.

2 al-Munawi, Fayd al-Qadir, iii, 269, No: 3366; al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, No: 1021; al-Suyuti,
Jami‘ al-Saghir, No: 3366.

--- Sayfa 258 ---
258
Our country cannot be compared with Europe, because there honour may be
preserved to a degree by violent means such as the duel, despite immodest dress. The
person who makes eyes at the wife of a self-respecting man takes his life in his hands,
and then looks. Also the people of Europe are cold and frigid, like the climate. Asia,
that is, the lands of Islam, are relatively torrid. It is well-known that the environment
has an effect on people’s morality. Perhaps in those cold countries immodest dress
does not stimulate the animal appetites and carnal desires of those cold people, and
lead to abuse. But the carnal lusts of the easily influenced and sensitive people of hot
countries are continually excited by immodest dress, which is thus the cause of much
abuse and waste and the weakening of the young generation, and the loss of strength.
Instead of answering natural needs one a month or every three weeks or so, a person
considers it necessary every few days. And then, since he is obliged to avoid his wife
for perhaps two weeks out of every month due to contingencies like her monthly
period, if he is defeated by his appetites, he will incline to houses of ill-fame.
The veiling of women may not be abolished on the pretext of the women of small
towns and villages and nomad women, for innocent working-women and somewhat
coarse women being partially unveilled does not excite carnal desires since it is due to
their working to secure their livelihoods and their physical, wearying labour.
Moreover, since idle, lay-about men are few, and not even one in ten of the immoral
men of the large towns can be found among them. Such a comparison should not
therefore be made.

--- Sayfa 259 ---
259
In His Name, be He glorified!
A Conversation with the Women,
My Believing Sisters of the hereafter
At the time I returned to blessed Isparta, which bears the meaning of the
Medresetü’z-Zehra,1 for the third time, I had seen the sincere and enthusiastic interest
shown by women towards the Risale-i Nur in some other provinces, and had realized
that in a way far exceeding my due they had confidence in my instruction in it. I heard
then that the women in Isparta, my blessed sisters of the hereafter, were waiting to
receive instruction from me, as though I were going to instruct them in mosques in the
manner of preaching. I was ill with five or so different illnesses, in a wretched state,
lacking the strength to speak and think, yet that night the following was imparted to
my heart, impellingly: “Fifteen years ago you wrote A Guide for Youth at the request
of some youths and it was a source of benefit for many. Women, however, are in even
greater need of a guide at this time.” Despite my extreme weakness, wretchedness,
and powerlessness, in the face of this warning I wrote very concisely in three points a
number of necessary matters which I now explain to my blessed sisters and young
spiritual offspring.
FIRST POINT
Since one of the fundamental principles of the Risale-i Nur is compassion and
women are champions of compassion, they are by nature more closely connected with
the Risale-i Nur than others. Praise be to God, this natural sympathy is felt in many
places. The self-sacrifice within such compassion seeks nothing in return and
expresses true sincerity, and so is of the greatest importance at this time.
Yes, the fact that wanting nothing in return, a mother will sacrifice her life to
save her young from danger, as demanded by her nature and with true sincerity,
shows that women are capable of great heroism. By developing this heroism, they
may save their lives both in this world and in the hereafter. However, this important
attribute does not unfold under the influence of certain bad currents of thought, or else
it is exploited. A small example out of hundreds is as follows:

1 For the Medresetü’z-Zehra, See note 21, page 325.

--- Sayfa 260 ---
260
A compassionate mother undertakes every sort of self-sacrifice so that her child
should not fall into danger in this worldly life and should receive every sort of benefit
and advantage; she brings him up with this in view. Thinking, “My son is going to be
a Pasha,” she gives him all her property, takes him from the Qur’an school and sends
him to Europe. But it does not occur to her that her child’s eternal life has fallen into
danger. She tries to save him from prison in this world and does not take into
consideration his being sentenced to the prison of Hell. Reversing that innate
compassion, she makes her innocent child a claimant against her in the hereafter,
though he should be her intercessor. He will rebuke her saying: “Why did you not
strengthen my belief and so cause me to be lost?” In this world too, since he did not
receive a proper Islamic upbringing, he cannot respond to his mother’s wondrous
compassion in the way it deserves; in fact he does so very deficiently.
If she does not misdirect her true compassion and works to save her unhappy
child from everlasting incarceration in Hell and from dying while in misguidance,
which will result in eternal extinction, the equivalent of each of the child’s good
works will pass to the mother’s book of good deeds. And after her death he will
continuously send lights to her spirit with his good works, and in the hereafter, will be
not a claimant but with all his spirit and life an intercessor for her, and a blessed child
of her’s for all eternity.
Yes, man’s first master and most influential teacher is his mother. In connection
with this, I shall explain the following to you, which I have always felt strongly in my
own self:
I am eighty years old and have received lessons from eighty thousand people. Yet
I swear that the truest and most unshakeable lessons I have received are those
inculcated in me by my late mother, which have always remained fresh for me. They
have been planted in my nature as though they were seeds planted in my physical
being. I observe that other instruction has been constructed on those seeds. That is to
say, the lessons instilled in my nature and spirit by my mother when I was one year
old I now see at the age of eighty to be fundamental seeds amid great truths.
For instance, I consider it certain that I learnt from the compassionate behaviour
and acts of my mother and from her teaching, to be compassionate, which is the most
important of the four principles of my way, and to be kind and clement, which is the
greatest truth of the Risale-i Nur. Yes, the compassion of motherhood comprises true
sincerity and true self-sacrifice, but it is a misuse of it to not think of the hereafter – a
treasury of diamonds for her innocent child – and to turn his face towards this world,
which

--- Sayfa 261 ---
261
resembles temporary, transient fragments of glass, and to be kind to him in that way,
is to misuse that compassion.
A proof of this heroism of women in respect of compassion, which wants
absolutely no recompense and nothing in return, and of their sacrificing their very
spirits, which in no way seeks personal benefit and no show, is that a hen, which bears
a tiny sample of that compassion, will attack a lion and sacrifice its life for its chicks.
Now, sincerity is the most valuable and most essential principle in Islamic
training and in deeds pertaining to the hereafter. True sincerity is present in the
heroism of this kind of compassion. If these two points begin to develop among
women, it will lead to considerable happiness within the domain of Islam. When it
comes to the heroism of men, it can never be for nothing; they always want
recompense in perhaps a hundred ways. At the very least they want glory and renown.
But regretably, unfortunate women practise hypocrisy in another form in order to be
saved from the evil and oppression of tyrannical men; this sort arises from weakness
and impotence.
SECOND POINT
This year, although I had withdrawn from the life of society and was in seclusion,
I looked at the world for the sake of some of my brothers and sisters who were Risale-
i Nur students. I heard from most of the friends who visited me complaints about their
family lives. “Alas!”, I said, “Family life is the refuge of people, and particularly of
Muslims, and a sort of Paradise, and a small world. Has this now started to break up
as well?” I sought the reason and I understood that one or two covert groups were
working to mislead the youth and drive the young to vice by exciting their appetites,
so as to cause harm to Islamic social life and thereby to the religion of Islam. I also
realized that one or two groups were working covertly and effectively to drive
neglectful women down the wrong road. I understood too that a severe blow would be
dealt to this Muslim nation from that quarter. I therefore categorically state the
following to you my sisters and spiritual children:
The sole means of saving women’s happiness in the hereafter, and their happiness
in this world, as well as saving their elevated innate qualities from corruption, is the
training given by the religion of Islam; there is no other means. You hear about the
situation into which the unfortunate women of Russia have fallen. It says in one part
of the Risale-i Nur that no sensible man builds love and affection for his wife on her
fleeting, superficial beauty of five to ten years; he should build it on her fine conduct,
the

--- Sayfa 262 ---
262
most permanent and best of beauty, which is particular to womanhood and its
compassion. Then, when the unfortunate advances in years, her husband’s love for her
will persist. For his wife is not merely a temporary helper and companion in this
worldly life, but an eternal, lovable companion in everlasting life, so the older they
grow their love for each other should also grow, and their compassion and respect.
Under the guise of culture and civilization, family life is now is a temporary animal
relationship followed by eternal separation, and is being destroyed at its very
foundations.
In another place in the Risale-i Nur it says: “Happy the man who in order not to
lose his companion of eternity, copies his righteous wife and so becomes righteous
himself. And happy the woman who, seeing her husband to be pious, adheres to
religion herself so as not to lose her everlasting friend and companion. Unhappy the
man who follows his wife in sin, does not try to make her give it up, but joins her.
And unhappy the woman who, seeing her husband’s sinfulness, follows him in
another way. And alas for the wife and husband who assist one another in throwing
each other into the Fire. That is, who encourage one another to embrace the evils of
civilization.”
These lines have the following meaning: at this time, Islamic conduct within the
bounds of the Shari‘a is the only means of developing family life and finding
happiness in this world and the hereafter, and causing the elevated qualities of women
to unfold. Now, the most important matter in family life is this, that if the woman sees
bad conduct and disloyalty in her husband and to spite him, stints in her loyalty and
faithfulness to him, which is her duty as far as the family is concerned, then the
factory of that family life will be thrown into confusion, exactly like discipline in the
army being spoilt. The woman should try to reform her husband’s faults as far as she
can in order to save her companion of eternity. It is harmful in every respect if she
starts to show herself to others by unveiling herself and tries to make herself attractive
to others. For a woman who gives up complete loyalty pays the penalty in this world
too. Because it is her nature to be fearful and upset at the looks of those canonically
strangers to her, and to avoid them. She is discomforted at the looks of eighteen out of
twenty strangers. As for men, they are discomforted and upset at the looks of only one
out of a hundred women who are canonically strangers to them. The woman suffers
torment in that respect, and so too may be accused of disloyalty, and due to her
weakness, will be unable to defend her rights.
In Short: Just as in respect of compassion women do not resemble men in
heroism and sincerity, and men cannot compare with them in that

--- Sayfa 263 ---
263
regard; so too innocent women can in no way compare with men in vice. For this
reason by their natures and weakness, they are truly frightened of strangers and feel
themselves compelled to conceal themselves beneath their abundant outer garments.
For if for eight minutes’ pleasure a man commits sin, he only suffers a loss of eight
liras. But as the penalty of the pleasure of eight minutes’ sin, in this world the woman
bears a heavy load for eight months and then has the hardship of rearing the
unprotected child for eight years. She therefore cannot compete with men in vice and
pays a penalty a hundred times greater.
The not infrequent incidents of this sort show that just as by nature women are
the source of elevated morals, so do they virtually lack the capacity for worldly
pleasure in vice and dissipation. That is to say, they are a type of blessed creature
created to pass happy lives in the family within the bounds laid down by Islam. God
damn those covert groups who are corrupting these blessed creatures! And may
Almighty God preserve my sisters from the evil of such dissolute wretches.
My sisters! I have this to say to you confidentially: rather than entering under the
domination of a dissolute, immoral, Westernized husband due to straitened
circumstances, try to economize and obtain your own livelihood like innocent peasant
women with the frugality and contentment which is in your natures; do not try to sell
yourselves. If it is your fate to have a husband who is unsuitable for you, be content
with your fate and resigned to it. God willing, he will be reformed through your
contentment and resignation. But to apply to the courts for a divorce, which I have
heard of recently; that is not in keeping with the honour of Islam and this nation’s
good name!
THIRD POINT
My dear sisters, you should be certain that as is demonstrated with powerful
proofs and examples in the Risale-i Nur, present in pleasures and enjoyment outside
the bounds of the licit are pains and distress ten times greater. You may find detailed
expositions of this in the Risale-i Nur. For instance, the Sixth, Seventh and Eighth
Words from The Short Words and A Guide For Youth will elucidate this truth for you
completely in place of me. In which case, make do with licit pleasures and be content
with them. Innocent conversation with your innocent children in your home is more
pleasurable than a hundred cinemas.
You should also know certainly that true pleasure in the life of this world lies in
belief and the sphere of faith. There is an immaterial pleasure to be found in all good
works. The Risale-i Nur has proved with hundreds

--- Sayfa 264 ---
264
of decisive evidences that even in this world most bitter and grievous suffering is
present in vice and misguidance. I myself have experienced on numerous occasions as
certainly as seeing it with my own eyes, that a seed of Paradise is contained in belief,
while a seed of Hell is found in vice and misguidance. This truth is repeated many
times in the Risale-i Nur. Although the Risale-i Nur has come into the hands of those
who oppose it most obstinately and severely, they have been unable to refute this
truth; neither have the committees of experts and the courts been able to refute it.
Now, my blessed and innocent sisters and your children who are like my spiritual
children, foremost the Treatise on Islamic Dress, and A Guide For Youth, and The
Short Words should teach you in my place.
I have heard that you want me to teach you in the mosque, but my wretched state
and my illness and many other circumstances do not permit it. I have decided to
include all my sisters who read and accept this instruction which I have written for
you in all my prayers and spiritual gains, like all the students of the Risale-i Nur. If
you obtain and read part of the Risale-i Nur in my place, or listen to it, then in
accordance with my rule you too will have a share in the prayers and spiritual gains of
all the Risale-i Nur students, your brothers.
I was going to write more, but I am very ill and very weak and very old and have
many duties like correcting copies of the Risale-i Nur, so for now I have sufficed with
this much.

                                                     The Eternal One, He is the Eternal One!
                                                 Your brother who is in need of your prayers,
                                                                     S a i d   N u r s i

--- Sayfa 265 ---
265
The Twenty-Fifth Flash
Message for the Sick
[This treatise consists of twenty-five remedies. It was written
as a salve, a solace, and a prescription for the sick, and in
order to visit them and wish them a speedy recovery.]
Warning and Apology
This immaterial prescription was written with a speed greater than all my
other writings,1 and since time could not be found to correct and study it,
unlike all the others it was read only once, and that at great speed like its
composition. That is to say, it has remained in the disordered state of a first
draft. I did not consider it necessary to go over carefully the things which had
occurred to me in a natural manner, lest they be spoilt by arranging them and
paying them undue attention. Readers and especially the sick should not feel
upset and offended at any disagreeable expressions or harsh words and
phrases; let them rather pray for me.
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
Those who say when afflicted by calamity: “To God do we belong and to
Him is our return.”(2:156) * Who gives me food and drink * And when I am
ill it is He Who cures me.(26:79-80)
In this Flash, we describe briefly twenty-five remedies which may offer true
consolation and a beneficial cure for the sick and those struck by disaster, who form
one tenth of mankind.

1 This treatise was written in four and a half hours.
                                                        Signed, Rüştü, Re’fet, Hüsrev, Said.

--- Sayfa 266 ---
266
FIRST REMEDY
Unhappy sick person! Do not be anxious, have patience! Your illness is not a
malady for you; it is a sort of cure. For life departs like capital; if it yields no fruits, it
is wasted; and if it passes in ease and heedlessness, it passes swiftly. Illness makes
that capital of yours yield huge profits. Moreover, it does not allow your life to pass
quickly, it restrains it and lengthens it, so that it will depart after yielding its fruits. An
indication that your life is lengthened through illness is the following much repeated
proverb: “The times of calamity are long, the times of happiness, most brief.”
SECOND REMEDY
O ill person who lacks patience! Be patient, indeed, offer thanks! Your illness
may transform each of the minutes of your life into the equivalent of an hour’s
worship. For worship is of two kinds. One is positive like the well-known worship of
supplication and the five daily prayers. The other are negative forms of worship like
illness and calamities. By means of these, those afflicted realize their impotence and
weakness; they beseech their All-Compassionate Creator and take refuge in Him; they
manifest worship which is sincere and without hyprocrisy. Yes, there is a sound
narration stating that a life passed in illness is counted as worship for the believer – on
condition he does not complain about God.2 It is even established by sound narrations
and by those who uncover the realities of creation that one minute’s illness of some
people who are completely patient and thankful becomes the equivalent of an hour’s
worship and a minute’s illness of certain perfected men the equivalent of a day’s
worship. So you should not complain about an illness which as though transforms one
minute of your life into a thousand minutes and gains for you long life; you should
offer thanks.
THIRD REMEDY
Impatient sick person! The fact that those who come to this world continuously
depart, and the young grow old, and man perpetually revolves amid death and
separation testifies that he did not come to this world to enjoy himself and receive
pleasure.
Moreover, while man is the most perfect, the most elevated, of living beings and
the best endowed in regard to members and faculties, he dwells on past pleasures and
future pains, and so passes a grievous, troublesome

2 al-Albani, Sahih Jami‘ al-Saghir, 256. See also, al-Suyuti, al-Fath al-Kabir, ii, 148.

--- Sayfa 267 ---
267
life, lower than the animals. This means that man did not come to this world to live in
a fine manner and pass his life in ease and pleasure. Rather, he possesses vast capital,
and he came here to work and do trade for an eternal, everlasting life.
The capital given to man is his lifetime. Had there been no illness, good health
and well-being would have caused heedlessness, for they show the world to be
pleasant and make the hereafter forgotten. They do not want death and the grave to be
thought of; they cause the capital of life to be wasted on trifles. Whereas illness
suddenly opens the eyes, it says to the body: “You are not immortal. You have not
been left to your own devices. You have a duty. Give up your pride, think of the One
who created you. Know that you will enter the grave, so prepare yourself for it!”
From this point of view, illness is an admonishing guide and adviser that never
deceives. It should not be complained about in this respect, indeed, should be thanked
for. And if it is not too severe, patience should be sought to endure it.
FOURTH REMEDY
Plaintive ill person! You have no right to complain; what is due to you is to offer
thanks and be patient. For your body and members and faculties are not your
property. You did not make them, nor did you did buy them from other workshops.
That means they are someone else’s property, and their owner has disposal over his
property as he wishes.
As is related in the Twenty-Sixth Word, an extremely wealthy and skilful
craftsman, for example, employs a poor man as a model in order to show off his fine
art and considerable wealth. In return for a wage, for a brief hour he clothes the poor
man in a bejewelled and skilfully wrought garment. He works it on him and gives it
various states. In order to display the extraordinary varieties of his art, he cuts the
garment, alters it, and lengthens and shortens it. Does the poor wage-earner have the
right to say to that person: “You are causing me trouble, you are causing me distress
with the form you have given it, making me bow down and stand up?” Has he the
right to tell him that he is spoiling his fine appearance by trimming and shortening the
garment which makes him beautiful? Can he tell him he is being unkind and unfair?
O sick person! Just like in this comparison, in order to display the garment of
your body with which He has clothed you, bejewelled with luminous faculties like the
eye, the ear, the reason, and the heart, and the embroideries of His most beautiful
names, the All-Glorious Maker makes you revolve amid numerous states and changes
you in many situations. Just

--- Sayfa 268 ---
268
as you learn of His name of Provider through hunger, so come to know His name of
Healer through your illness. Since suffering and calamities show the decrees of some
of His names, many instances of good are to be found within those flashes of wisdom
and rays of mercy. If the veil of illness, which you fear and loathe, were to be lifted,
behind it you would find many agreeable and beautiful meanings.
FIFTH REMEDY
O you who is afflicted with illness! Through experience, I have formed the
opinion at this time that for some people sickness is a divine bounty, a gift of the
Most Merciful. Although I was not worthy of it, over the past eight or nine years a
number of young people have come to me in connection with their illnesses, to
request my prayers. I have noticed that all of them have begun to think of the
hereafter more than other young people. They lack the drunkenness of youth, and
have renounced to an extent animal desires and heedlessness. So I consider them and
then remind them that their illnesses are a divine bounty within bearable limits. I tell
them: “Brother! I am not opposed to this illness of yours. I don’t feel sorry for you
because of it that I should pray for you. Try to be patient until the illness awakens you
completely, and once it has performed its duty, the Compassionate Creator will
restore you to health, God willing.”
I also tell them: “Owing to the calamity of good health, some of your fellows
become neglectful, give up the five daily prayers, do not think of the grave, and forget
God Almighty. The superficial pleasure of a brief hour’s worldly life causes them to
shake and damage eternal life, and even to destroy it. Whereas because of your
illness, you see the grave, which you will in any event enter, and the dwellings of the
hereafter beyond it, and you act accordingly. So for you, illness is good health, while
for some of your peers good health is a sickness.”
SIXTH REMEDY
O sick person who complains about his suffering! I say to you: think of your past
life and remember the pleasurable, happy days and the distressing, troublesome times,
and you will surely exclaim either “Oh!” or “Ah!” That is, your heart and tongue will
either say “All praise and thanks be to God!”, or “Alas and alack!”  Note carefully,
what makes you exclaim “Praise and thanks be to God!” is thinking of the pains and
calamities that have befallen you; they induce a sort of pleasure so that your heart
offers thanks, for the passing of pain is a pleasure. With the passing of pains and
calamities, a legacy of pleasure is left in the spirit, which on being aroused by
thinking, pours forth from the spirit in thanks.

--- Sayfa 269 ---
269
What makes you exclaim “Alas and alack!” are the pleasurable and happy times
you have experienced in the past, which with their passing leave a legacy in your
spirit of constant pain. Whenever you think of them, the pain is again stimulated,
causing regret and sorrow to pour forth.
Since one day’s illicit pleasure sometimes causes a year’s suffering in the spirit,
and with the pain of a fleeting day’s illness causes many days’ pleasure and
recompense in addition to the pleasure at being relieved at its passing, think of the
result of this temporary illness with which you are now afflicted, and of the merits of
its inner face. Say: “All is from God! This too will pass!”, and offer thanks instead of
complaining.
SIXTH REMEDY3
O brother who thinks of the pleasures of this world and suffers distress at illness!
If this world were everlasting, and if on our way there were no death, and if the winds
of separation and decease did not blow, and if there were no winters of the spirit in
the calamitous and stormy future, I would have pitied you together with you. But
since one day the world will bid us to leave it and will close its ears to our cries, we
must forego our love of it now through the warnings of these illnesses, before it drives
us out. We must try to abandon it in our hearts before it abandons us.
Yes, illness utters this warning to us: “Your body is not composed of stone and
iron, but of various materials which are ever disposed to parting. Leave off your pride,
perceive your impotence, recognize your Owner, know your duties, learn why you
came to this world!” It declares this secretly in the heart’s ear.
Moreover, since the pleasures and enjoyment of this world do not continue, and
particularly if they are illicit they are both fleeting, and full of pain, and sinful, do not
weep on the pretext of illness because you have lost those pleasures. On the contrary,
think of the aspects of worship and reward in the hereafter to be found in illness, and
try to receive pleasure from those.
SEVENTH REMEDY
O sick person who has lost the pleasures of health! Your illness does not spoil the
pleasure of divine bounties, on the contrary, it causes them to be experienced and
increases them. For if something is continuous, it loses its effect. The people of reality
even say that “Things are known through their

3 This Flash occurred to me in a natural manner, and two remedies have been included in the
Sixth Remedy. We have left it thus in order not to spoil the naturalness; indeed, we did not change it
thinking there may be some mystery contained in it.

--- Sayfa 270 ---
270
opposites.” For example, if there were no darkness, light would not be known and
would produce no pleasure. If there were no cold, heat could not be comprehended. If
there were no hunger, food would afford no pleasure. If there were no thirst of the
stomach, there would be no pleasure in drinking water. If there were no sickness, no
pleasure would be had from good health.
The All-Wise Creator’s decking out man with truly numerous members and
faculties, to the extent that he may experience and recognize the innumerable varieties
of bounties in the universe, shows that He wants to make him aware of every sort of
His bounty and to acquaint him with them and to impel him to offer constant thanks.
Since this is so, He will give illness, sickness, and suffering, the same as He bestows
good health and well-being. I ask you: If you had not suffered this illness in your head
or in your hand or stomach, would you have perceived the pleasurable and enjoyable
divine bounty of the good health of your head, hand or stomach, and offered thanks?
For sure, you would not have even thought of it, let alone offering thanks for it! You
would have unconsciously spent that good health on heedlessness, and perhaps even
on dissipation.
EIGHTH REMEDY
O sick person who thinks of the hereafter! Sickness washes away the dirt of sins
like soap, and cleanses. It is established in a sound Hadith that illnesses are atonement
for sins. And in another Hadith, it says: “As ripe fruits fall on their tree being shaken,
so the sins of a believer fall away on his shaking with illness.”4
Sins are the chronic illnesses of eternal life, and in this worldly life they are
sicknesses of the heart, conscience, and spirit. If you are patient and do not complain,
you will be saved through this temporary sickness from numerous perpetual
sicknesses. If you do not think of your sins, or do not know the hereafter, or do not
recognize God, you suffer from an illness so fearsome it is a million times worse than
your present minor illnesses. Cry out at that, for all the beings in the world are
connected with your heart, spirit, and soul. Those connections are continuously
severed by death and separation, opening up innumerable wounds. Particularly since
you do not know the hereafter and imagine death to be eternal non-existence, as
though lacerated and bruised, your being suffers illness to the extent of the world.

4 Bukhari, Marda, 1, 2, 13, 16; Muslim, Birr, 45; Darimi, Riqaq, 57; Musnad, i, 371, 441; ii, 303,
335; iii, 4, 18, 38, 48, 61, 81.

--- Sayfa 271 ---
271
Thus, the first thing you have to do is to search for the cure of belief, which is the
certain healing remedy for the innumerable illnesses afflicting that infinitely wounded
and sick, extensive immaterial being of yours; you have to correct your beliefs. The
shortest way of finding such a cure is to recognize the power and mercy of the All-
Powerful One of Glory by means of the window of your weakness and impotence
shown you behind the curtain of heedlessness, rent by your physical illness.
Yes, one who does not recognize God is afflicted by a world-full of tribulations.
While the world of one who does recognize Him is full of light and spiritual
happiness; he perceives these in accordance with the strength of his belief. The
suffering resulting from insignificant physical illnesses is dissolved by the immaterial
joy, healing, and pleasure that arise from belief; the suffering melts away.
NINTH REMEDY
O sick person who recognizes his Creator! Illness gives rise to pain, fear, and
anxiety because it sometimes leads to death. Since superficially and to the heedless
death is terrifying, illnesses which may lead to it cause fear and apprehension.
So know firstly and believe firmly that the appointed hour is determined and does
not change. Those weeping beside the grievously sick and those in perfect health have
died, while the grievously sick have been cured and lived.
Secondly: Death is not terrifying as it appears to be superficially. Through the
light afforded by the All-Wise Qur’an, in many parts of the Risale-i Nur we have
proved in completely certain and indubitable fashion that for believers death is to be
discharged from the burdensome duties of life. For them it is a rest from worship,
which forms the instruction and training in the arena of trial of this world. It is also a
means of their rejoining friends and relations, ninety-nine out of a hundred of whom
have already departed for the next world. It is a means of entering their true homeland
and eternal abodes of happiness. It is also an invitation to the gardens of Paradise
from the dungeon of this world. And it is the time they receive their wage from the
munificence of the Most Compassionate Creator in return for service rendered to
Him. Since the reality of death is this, it should be regarded not as terrifying, but on
the contrary as the introduction to mercy and happiness.
Moreover, some of the people of God have feared death, not out of terror at it but
because they hoped to gain additional merit by performing more good works with the
duties of life continuing.

--- Sayfa 272 ---
272
Yes, for the people of belief, death is the door to divine mercy, while for the
people of misguidance, it is the pit of everlasting darkness.
TENTH REMEDY
O sick person who worries unnecessarily! You worry at the severity of your
illness and that worry exacerbates it. If you want your illness to be less severe, try not
to worry. That is, think of the benefits of your illness, the recompense for it, and that
it will pass quickly; it will remove the worry and cut the illness at the root.
In fact, worry doubles the illness, for it causes an immaterial illness of the heart
underlying the physical illness; the physical illness subsists through that and persists.
If the worry ceases through submission, contentment, and comprehension of the
reason for the illness, a large part of the illness is eradicated; it becomes less severe
and in part disappears. Sometimes a minor physical illness increases tenfold just
through anxiety. If the anxiety ceases, nine tenths of the illness disappears.
Worry increases illness. It also an accusation against divine wisdom and a
criticism of divine mercy and complaint against the Compassionate Creator. For this
reason, the person who worries receives a rebuff and it increases his illness contrary
to his intentions. Yes, just as thanks increases bounty, so complaint increases illness
and tribulations.
Furthermore, worry is itself an illness. Its cure is to recognize the wisdom in
illness and its purpose. Since you have now learnt these, apply the salve to your worry
and find relief! Say “Ah!” instead of “Oh!”, and “All praise be to God for every
situation” instead of sighing and lamenting.
ELEVENTH REMEDY
O my impatient sick brother! Although illness causes you an immediate
suffering, your illness through the past until today produces a spiritual pleasure and
happiness arising from the reward received for enduring it. From today forward, from
this hour even, the illness does not exist, and certainly no pain is suffered from non-
being. And if there is no pain, there can be no distress. You become impatient because
you imagine things wrongly. For both the physical illness prior to today, and its pain,
have departed; all that remains are its reward and the pleasure at its passing. This
should afford you profit and happiness, so to think of past days and feel grieved and
impatient is crazy. Future days have not yet arrived. To dwell on them now, and to
feel upset and impatient by imagining a day that does not exist and an illness that does
not exist and distress that does not exist, is to impart existence to three degrees of
non-existence – if that is not crazy, what is?

--- Sayfa 273 ---
273
If the previous hour was one of illness, it produces joy; and since the time
subsequent to the present hour is non-existent, and both the illness and the distress are
non-existent, do not scatter the power of patience given you by Almighty God to right
and left, but muster it in the face of pain of the present hour; say: “O Most Patient
One!” and withstand it.
TWELFTH REMEDY
O sick person who due to illness cannot perform his worship and invocations and
feels grief at the deprivation! Know that it is stated in a Hadith that “A pious believer
who due to illness cannot perform his customary invocations, receives a reward equal
to them.”5 If an ill person performs his obligatory worship as far as it is possible with
patience and relying on God, the illness takes the place of Sunna worship during that
time of severe illness – and in sincere form.
Moreover, illness makes the person understand his impotence and weakness; it
causes him to offer supplication both verbally and through the tongue of his
impotence and weakness. For Almighty God bestowed on man a boundless impotence
and infinite weakness so that he would perpetually seek refuge at the divine court and
beseech and supplicate. The verse,
Say: Your Sustainer would not concern Himself with you if it was not for
your prayers;(25:77)
has the meaning, “what importance would you have if you did not offer prayer and
supplication?” According to this, sincere prayer and supplication are the reason for
man’s creation and for his value. Since illness is one cause of this, from this point of
view it should not be complained about but thanks be offered to God for it, and the
tap of supplication which illness opens should not be closed by regaining health.
THIRTEENTH REMEDY
O unhappy person who complains at illness! For some people illness is a rich
treasury, a precious divine gift. Every sick person can think of his illness in this way.
The appointed hour is not known: in order to deliver man from absolute despair
and absolute heedlessness, and to hold him between hope and fear and so preserve
both this world and the hereafter, in His wisdom Almighty God has concealed the
appointed hour; it may come at any time. If it captures man in heedlessness, it may
cause grievous harm to eternal life.

5 Bukhari, Jihad, 134; Musnad, iv, 410, 418.

--- Sayfa 274 ---
274
Illness, however, dispels the heedlessness; it makes a person think of the hereafter; it
recalls death, so he may prepare himself. Some illnesses are so profitable as to gain
for a person in twenty days a rank they could not otherwise have risen to in twenty
years.
For instance, among my friends were two youths, may God have mercy on them.
One was Sabri from the village of ‹lema, the other Vezirzâde Mustafa from ‹slâmköy.
I used to note with amazement that although these two could not write they were
among the foremost in regard to sincerity and the service of belief. I did not know the
reason for this. After their deaths I understood that each had suffered from a serious
illness. Due to the guidance of the illness, they had considerable fear of God,
performed highly valuable service, and attained a state beneficial to the hereafter,
unlike other youths who heedlessly gave up obligatory worship. God willing, the
distress of two years’ illness allowed them to attain the happiness of millions of years
of eternal life. I understand now that the prayers I sometimes offered for their health
were maledictions in respect of this world. God willing, they were accepted for their
well-being in the hereafter.
Thus, according to my belief, the two gained profit equal to that which may be
gained through ten years’ fear of God. If like some young people, they had relied on
their youth and good health and thrown themselves into heedlessness and vice, and
stalking them, death had grabbed them right in the midst of the filth of their sins, they
would have made their graves into nests of scorpions and snakes, instead of that
treasury of lights.
Since illnesses contain such benefits, they should be not complained about but
borne with patience, relying on God, indeed, thanking God and having confidence in
His mercy.
FOURTEENTH REMEDY
O sick person whose eyes have developed cataracts! If you knew what a light and
spiritual eye is to be found beneath the cataract that may cover a believer’s eyes, you
would exclaim: “A hundred thousand thanks to my Compassionate Sustainer!” I shall
recount an incident to explain this salve. It is as follows:
One time, the aunt of Süleyman from Barla, who served me for eight years with
complete loyalty and willingness, became blind. Owing to her good opinion of me,
which was a hundred times better than I deserved, the righteous woman caught me by
the door of the mosque and asked me to pray for her sight to be restored. So I made
the blessed woman’s righteousness the intercessor for my supplication, and
beseeching Almighty God, I

--- Sayfa 275 ---
275
prayed: “O Lord! Restore her sight out of respect for her righteousness.” Two days
later, an oculist from Burdur came and removed the cataract. Forty days later she
again lost her sight. I was most upset and prayed fervently for her. God willing, the
prayer was accepted for her life in the hereafter, otherwise that prayer of mine would
have been a mistaken malediction for her. For forty days had remained till her death;
forty days later she died – May God have mercy on her.
Thus, rather than gazing sorrowfully at the gardens of Barla with the eye of old
age, she profited in her grave by being able to gaze for forty thousand days on the
gardens of Paradise. For her belief was strong and she was completely righteous.
Yes, if a believer loses his sight and enters the grave blind, in accordance with his
degree he may gaze on the world of light to an extent much greater than other dead in
their graves. Just as we see many things in this world that blind believers do not see, if
the blind depart with belief, they see to a greater extent than other dead in their
graves. They can behold the gardens of Paradise and watch them like the cinema as
though looking through the most powerful telescopes, according to their degree.
Thus, through thanks and patience you may find beneath the veil on your present
eye an eye which is thus light-filled, and with which while beneath the earth you may
see and observe Paradise above the skies. That which will raise the veil from your
eye, the eye doctor that will allow you to look with that eye, is the All-Wise Qur’an.
FIFTEENTH REMEDY
O sick person who sighs and laments! Do not look at the outward aspect of illness
and sigh, consider its meaning and be pleased. If in meaning illness had not been
good, the All-Compassionate Creator would not have given it to the servants He loves
most. For there is a Hadith the meaning of which is, “Those afflicted with the severest
trials are the prophets, then the saints and those like them.”6 That is, “Those most
afflicted with tribulations and difficulties are the best of men, the most perfect.”
Foremost the Prophet Job (Peace be upon him) and the other prophets, then the saints,
then the righteous, have regarded the illnesses they have suffered as sincere worship,
as gifts of the Most Merciful; they have offered thanks in patience. They have seen
them as surgical operations performed by the All-Compassionate Creator’s mercy.

6 al-Munawi, Fayd al-Qadir, i, 519, no: 1056; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, iii, 343; Bukhari, Marda,
3; Tirmidhi, Zuhd, 57; Ibn Maja, Fitan, 23; Darimi, Riqaq, 67; Musnad, i, 172, 174, 180, 185; vi, 369.

--- Sayfa 276 ---
276
O you who cries out and laments! If you want to join this luminous caravan, offer
thanks in patience. For if you complain, they will not accept you. You will fall into
the pits of the people of misguidance, and travel a dark road.
Yes, there are some illnesses which if they lead to death, are a sort of martyrdom;
they result in a similar degree of sainthood. For example, people become martyrs who
die from the illnesses accompanying childbirth7 and pains of the abdomen, and by
drowning, burning, and plague. There are also many blessed illnesses which gain the
degree of sainthood for those who die from them. Moreover, since illness lessens love
of the world and attachment to it, it lightens parting from the world through death,
which for the worldly is extremely grievous and painful, and it sometimes even makes
it desirable.
SIXTEENTH REMEDY
O sick person who complains at his distress! Illness prompts respect and
compassion, which are most important and good in human social life. For it saves
man from self-sufficiency, which drives him to unsociableness and unkindness. For
according to the meaning of the verse,
Indeed man transgresses all bounds * In that he looks upon himself as self-
sufficient,(96:6-7)
an evil-commanding soul which feels self-sufficient due to good health and well-
being, does not feel respect towards his brothers in many instances, who are deserving
of it. And he does not feel compassion towards the sick and those smitten by disaster,
although they deserve kindness and pity. Whenever he is ill, he understands his own
powerlessness and want and he has respect towards his brothers who are worthy of it.
He feels respect towards his believing brothers who visit him or assist him. He feels
human kindness, which arises from fellow-feeling, and compassion for those struck
by disaster, a most important Islamic characteristic. And comparing them to himself,
he pities them in the true meaning of the word and feels compassion for them. He
does what he can to help them, and at the very least prays for them and goes to visit
them to ask them how they are, which is Sunna according to the Shari‘a, and thus
earns reward.

7 The period this martyrdom may be won through illness is around the forty days of ‘lying-in.’

--- Sayfa 277 ---
277
SEVENTEENTH REMEDY
O sick person who complains at not being able to perform good works due to
illness! Offer thanks! It is illness that opens to you the door of the sincerest of good
works. In addition to continuously gaining reward for the sick person and for those
who look after him for God’s sake, illness is a most important means for the
acceptance of supplications.
Indeed, there is significant reward for believers looking after the sick. Inquiring
after their health and visiting the sick – on condition it does not tax them – is Sunna8
and also atonement for sins. There is an Hadith which says, “Receive the prayers of
the sick, for they are acceptable.”9
To look after the sick, especially if they are relations, or parents in particular, is
important worship, yielding significant reward. To please a sick person’s heart and
console him, is a sort of significant alms-giving. Fortunate is the person who pleases
the easily touched hearts of father and mother at a time of illness and receives their
prayer. Even the angels applaud, exclaiming: “Ma’shallah! Barekallah!” before loyal
scenes of those good offspring who respond with perfect respect and filial kindness at
the time of their parents’ illness showing the exaltedness of humanity – for they are
the most worthy of respect in the life of society.
Yes, pleasures are experienced at the time of illness which arise from the
kindness, pity, and compassion of those around, and are most pleasant and agreeable
and reduce the pains of illness to nothing. The acceptability of the prayers of the sick
is an important matter. For the past thirty or forty years, I myself have prayed to be
cured from the illness of lumbago from which I suffer. However, I understood that the
illness had been given for prayer. Since prayer cannot be removed by prayer; that is,
since prayer cannot remove itself, I understood that the results of prayer pertain to the
hereafter,10 and that it is a sort of worship, for through illness one understands one’s
impotence and seeks refuge at the divine court. Therefore, although for thirty years I
have offered supplications to be healed and apparently my prayer has not been
accepted, it has not occurred to me to give it up. For illness is the time for
supplication. To be cured is not the result of the supplication. If the All-Wise and
Compassionate One bestows healing, He bestows it out of His abundant grace.

8 al-Munawi, Fayd al-Qadir, ii, 45, No: 1285.
9 Ibn Maja, Jana’iz, 1; Daylami, Musnad al-Firdaws, i, 280.
10 Yes, while certain illnesses are the reason for the existence of supplication, if the supplication is
the cause of the illness’ non-existence, the existence of the supplication would be the cause of its own
non-existence, and this could not be the case.

--- Sayfa 278 ---
278
Furthermore, if supplications are not accepted in the form we wish, it should not
be said that they have not been accepted. The All-Wise Creator knows better than us;
He gives whatever is in our interests. Sometimes he directs our prayers for this world
towards the hereafter, and accepts them in that way. In any event, a supplication that
acquires sincerity due to illness and arises from weakness, impotence, humility and
need, is very close to being acceptable. Illness makes supplication sincere. Both the
sick who are religious, and believers who look after the sick, should take advantage of
this supplication.
EIGHTEENTH REMEDY
O sick person who gives up offering thanks and takes up complaining! Complaint
arises from a right, and none of your rights have been lost that you should complain.
Indeed, there are numerous thanks which are an obligation for you, a right over you,
and these you have not performed. Without Almighty God giving you the right, you
are complaining as though demanding rights in a manner which is not rightful. You
cannot look at others superior to you in degree who are healthy, and complain. You
are rather charged with looking at the sick who from the point of view of health are at
a degree lower than yourself, and should offer thanks. If your hand is broken, look at
theirs, which is severed. If you have only one eye, look at the blind, who lack both
eyes, and offer thanks to God!
For sure, no one has the right to look to those superior to him in regard to
bounties and complain. Concerning tribulations, it is everyone’s right to look to those
above themselves in that regard, so that they should offer thanks. This mystery has
been explained in a number of places in the Risale-i Nur with a comparison; a
summary of it is as follows:
A person takes a wretched man to the top of a minaret. On every step he gives
him a different gift, a different bounty. Right at the top he gives him the largest
present. Although he wants thanks and gratitude in return for all those various gifts,
the peevish man forgets the presents he has received on each of the stairs, or considers
them to be of no importance, and offering no thanks, looks above him and starts to
complain, saying, “If only the minaret had been higher, I could have climbed even
further. Why isn’t it as tall as that mountain over there or that other minaret?” What
great ingratitude it would be if he begins to complain like this, what a wrong!
In just the same way, man comes into existence from nothing, not as a rock or a
tree or an animal, but as a human being and a Muslim, and most of the time
experiences good health and acquires a high level of bounties. Despite all this, to
complain and display impatience because he is not

--- Sayfa 279 ---
279
worthy of some bounties, or because he loses them through wrong choices or abuse,
or because he could not obtain them, and to criticize divine dominicality saying
“What have I done that this has happened to me?”, is a state of mind and spiritual
sickness more calamitous than the physical one. Like fighting with a broken hand,
complaint makes his illness worse. Sensible is the person who in accordance with the
meaning of the verse,
Those who when struck by calamity say: To God do we belong, and to God is
our return(2:156)
submits and is patient, so that the illness may complete its duty, then depart.
NINETEENTH REMEDY
As the attribute of the Eternally Besought One, “the most beautiful names”
indicates, all the All-Beauteous One of Glory’s names are beautiful. Among beings,
life is the most subtle, the most beautiful, and the most comprehensive mirror of
Eternal Besoughtedness. The mirror to the beautiful becomes beautiful. The mirror
that displays the virtues of beauty becomes beautiful. Just as whatever is done to the
mirror by such beauty is good and beautiful, whatever befalls life too, in respect of
reality, is good. For it displays the beautiful impresses of the most beautiful names,
which are good and beautiful.
Life becomes a deficient mirror if it passes monotonously with permanent health
and well-being. In one respect, it suggests non-existence, non-being, and nothingness,
and causes weariness. It reduces the life’s value and transforms the pleasure of life
into distress. For thinking he will pass his time quickly, out of boredom a person
throws himself either into vice or into amusements. He becomes hostile to his
valuable life and wants to kill it and make it pass quickly as though it were a prison
sentence. But when it revolves in change and action and different states, life makes its
value felt, and its importance and pleasure. Such a person does not want his life to
pass quickly, even if it is in hardship and tribulation. He does not complain wearily,
saying, “Alas! The sun hasn’t set yet,” or, “it is still nighttime.”
Yes, ask a fine gentleman who is rich and idle and living in the lap of luxury,
“How are you?” You are bound to hear a pathetic reply like: “The time never passes.
Let’s have a game of backgammon. Or let’s find some amusement to pass the time.”
Or else you will hear complaints arising from worldly ambition, like: “I haven’t got
that; if only I had done such-and-such.”
Then ask someone struck by disaster or a worker or poor man living in

--- Sayfa 280 ---
280
penury: “How are you?” If he is sensible, he will reply: “All thanks be to God, I am
working. If only the evening did not come so quickly, I could have finished this work!
Time passes so quickly, and so does life; they flash by. For sure things are hard for
me, but that will pass too. Everything passes quickly.” He in effect says how valuable
life is and how regretful he is at its passing. That means he perceives the pleasure and
value of life through hardship and labour. As for ease and health, they make life bitter
and make one hope for its speedy passing.
My brother who is sick! Know that non-existence is the origin and leaven of
calamities and evils, and even of sins, is, as is proved decisively and in detail in other
parts of the Risale-i Nur. As for non-existence, it is evil. Monotonous states like ease,
silence, tranquillity, and arrest are close to non-existence and nothingness, and
therefore make felt the darkness of non-existence and cause distress. As for action and
change, they are existence and make existence felt. And existence is pure good; it is
light.
Since the reality is thus, your illness has been sent to your being as a guest to
perform many duties such as purifying your valuable life, and strengthening it and
making it progress, and inducing the other human faculties in your being to turn in
assistance towards your sick member, and to display various of the All-Wise Maker’s
names. God willing, it will carry out its duties quickly and depart, and will say to
good health: “Come, and stay permanently in my place, and carry out your duties.
This house is yours. Remain here in good health.”
TWENTIETH REMEDY
O sick person who is searching for a remedy for his ills! Illness is of two sorts.
One sort is real, the other, imaginary. As for the real sort, the All-Wise and Glorious
Healer has stored up in His mighty pharmacy of the earth a cure for every illness. It is
licit to obtain medicines and use them as treatment, but one should know that their
effect and the cure are from Almighty God. He both gives the ailment and provides
the cure.
Following the recommendations of skilful, God-fearing doctors is an effective
medicine. For most illnesses arise from abuses, lack of abstinence, wastefulness,
mistakes, dissipation, and lack of care. A religious doctor will certainly give advice
and instructions within the bounds of the lawful. He will forbid abuses and excesses,
and give consolation. The sick person has confidence in his advice and consolation,
and his illness lessens; it produces as easiness for him in place of distress.
But when it comes to imaginary illness, the most effective medicine is to give it
no importance. The more importance is given to it, the more it grows

--- Sayfa 281 ---
281
and swells. If it is disregarded, it lessens and disperses. The more bees are upset the
more they swarm around a person’s head, but they disperse if no attention is paid to
them. Similarly, the more importance one pays to a piece of string waving in front of
one’s eyes in the darkness and to the apprehension it causes one, the more it grows
and makes one flee like a madman. While if one pays it no importance, one sees that
it is an ordinary bit of string and not a snake, and  laughs at one’s fright and anxiety.
If hypochondria is chronic, it is transformed into reality. It is a serious illness
afflicting the nervous and those given to imaginings; such people make mountains out
of molehills and their morale is destroyed. Then if they encounter unkind ‘half’
doctors or unfair doctors, it further provokes their hypochondria. If they are rich, they
lose their wealth, or they lose their wits, or their health.
TWENTY-FIRST REMEDY
My sick brother! Your illness is accompanied by physical pain. However, you are
surrounded by a significant spiritual pleasure that will remove its effect. For if your
father, mother, and relations are with you, their most pleasurable compassion which
you have forgotten since childhood will be reawakened and you will see again the
kind looks you received in childhood. In addition, friendships envelop you that had
remained secret and hidden; these too look towards you with love through the
attraction of illness. In the face of these, your physical pain is reduced to
insignificance. Also, you have become a master of the masters since those whom you
used to serve proudly now serve you kindly at the decree of illness. Moreover, you
have attracted towards yourself the fellow-feeling and human kindness in people, and
so have found numerous helpful friends and kind companions. And again, you have
received the order from your illness to rest from many taxing duties and are taking a
rest. For sure, in the face of these immaterial pleasures, your minor pain should drive
you to thanks, not complaint.
TWENTY-SECOND REMEDY
My brother who suffers from a severe illness like apoplexy! Firstly I give you the
good news that for believers apoplexy is considered blessed. A long time ago I used
to hear this from holy men and I did not know the reason. Now, one reason for it
occurs to me, as follows:
In order to attain union with Almighty God, be saved from the spiritual perils of
this world, and to win eternal happiness, the people of God have chosen to follow two
principles:

--- Sayfa 282 ---
282
The First is contemplation of death. Thinking that both the world is transiory,
and they themselves are temporary guests charged with duties, they work for eternal
life in this way.
The Second: Through fasting, religious exercises and asceticism, they try to kill
the evil-commanding soul and so be saved from its dangers and from the blind
emotions.
And you, my brother who has lost the health of half his body! Without choosing
it, you have been given these two principles, which are short and easy and the cause
of happiness. Thus, the state of your being perpetually warns you of the fleeting
nature of the world and that man is transient. The world can no longer drown you, nor
heedlessness close your eyes. And for sure, the evil-commanding soul cannot deceive
with lowly lust and animal appetites someone in the state of half a man; he is quickly
saved from the trials of the soul.
Thus, through the mystery of belief in God and submission to Him and reliance
on Him, a believer can benefit in a brief time from a severe illness like apoplexy,
resembling the severe trials of the saints. A severe illness such as that thus becomes
exceedingly cheap.
TWENTY-THIRD REMEDY
Unhappy ill person who is alone and a stranger! Even if your aloneness and exile
together with your illness were to arouse sympathy towards you in the hardest hearts
and attract kindness and compassion, could it be a substitute for your All-
Compassionate Creator? For He presents Himself to us at the start of all the Qur’an’s
Suras with the attributes of “the Merciful and the Compassionate,” and with one flash
of His compassion makes all mothers nurture their young with that wonderful
tenderness, and with one manifestation of His mercy every spring fills the face of the
earth with bounties. Eternal life in Paradise together with all its wonders is but a
single manifestation of His mercy. Then surely your relation to Him through belief,
your recognizing Him and beseeching Him through the tongue of impotence, arising
from your illness and the affliction of your loneliness in exile, will attract the glance
of His mercy towards you, which takes the place of everything. Since He exists and
He looks to you, everything exists for you. Those who are truly alone and in exile are
those who are not connected with Him through belief and submission, or attach no
importance to that relation.

--- Sayfa 283 ---
283
TWENTY-FOURTH REMEDY
O you who look after innocent sick children or the elderly, who resemble
innocent children! You have before you important trade for the hereafter. So procure
it through your enthusiasm and effort! It is established by the people of reality that the
illnesses of innocent children are like training for their delicate bodies, and injections
and dominical training to allow them to withstand in the future the upheavals of the
world; that in addition to many instances of wisdom pertaining to the child’s worldly
life, instead of the atonement for sins in adults which looks to spiritual life and is the
means to purifying life, illnesses are like injections ensuring the child’s spiritual
progress in the future or in the hereafter; and that the merits accruing from such
illnesses pass to the book of good works of the parents, and particularly of the mother
who through the mystery of compassion prefers the health of her child to her own
health.
As for looking after the elderly, it is established in sound narrations and many
historical events that together with receiving huge reward, to receive the prayers of
the elderly and especially of parents, and to make happy their hearts and serve them
loyally, leads to happiness in both this world and the next. And it is established by
many events that a fortunate child who obeys to the letter his elderly parents will be
treated similarly by his children, but if a wretched child wounds his parents he will be
punished by means of many disasters in this world and in the hereafter. Yes, Islam
requires that one looks after not only relatives who are elderly or innocents, but also
elderly believers if one encounters them – through the mystery of the true brotherhood
of belief – and that one serves to one’s utmost ability the venerable sick elderly if they
are in need of it.
TWENTY-FIFTH REMEDY
My sick brothers! If you want a most beneficial and truly pleasurable sacred cure,
strengthen and develop your belief! That is, make use of belief, that sacred cure, and
of the medicine which arises from belief through repentance and seeking forgiveness,
and the five daily prayers and worship.
You as though possess a sick immaterial being as large as the world due to love
of this world and attachment to it, like the heedless. We have proved in many parts of
the Risale-i Nur that belief at once heals that immaterial being of yours, which is
bruised and battered by the blows of death and separation, and saves it from the
wounds and truly heals it. But I cut short the discussion here so as not to weary you.

--- Sayfa 284 ---
284
As for the medicine of belief, it shows its effect when you carry out your
religious obligations as far as is possible. Heedlessness, vice, the lusts of the soul, and
illicit amusements reduce its effectiveness. Illness dispels heedlessness, cuts the
appetites, is an obstacle to illicit pleasures, so take advantage of it. Make use of the
sacred medicines and lights of belief through repentance and seeking forgiveness, and
prayer and supplication.
May Almighty God restore you to health and make your illnesses atonement for
your  sins. Amen. Amen. Amen.
And they say: All praise be to God Who has guided us to this; never could we
have found guidance if it had not for been the guidance of God; indeed, the
Messengers of our Sustainer did bring the truth.(7:43)
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32)
O God! Grant blessings to our master Muhammad, the medicine for our
hearts and their remedy, the good health of our bodies and their healing, the
light of our eyes and their radiance, and to his Family and Companions, and
grant them peace.

*   *   *

Addendum to the Twenty-Fifth Flash

This is the Seventeenth Letter, which having been included in the Mektûbat (Letters
1928-1932), has not been included here.

*   *   *

--- Sayfa 285 ---
285
The Twenty-Sixth Flash
Treatise For The Elderly
 [This Flash consists of twenty-six hopes, lights, and solaces.1]
REMINDER: The reason I have described my sorrows and afflictions at the
beginning of each Hope in a truly grievous way that will sadden you is in
order to show the extraordinary efficaciousness of the remedies proceeding
from the All-Wise Qur’an. This Flash, concerning the elderly, has been
unable to preserve its beauty of expression in three or four respects:
The First: It is about my life the events of which I revisited in my
imagination; it was written in the state of mind of those times. It was not
possible, therefore, to preserve an orderly arrangement in the way it is set
out.
The Second: It was written at a time I felt extreme fatigue, after the morning
prayers, and I was also compelled to write it at speed; its manner of
expression therefore became confused.
The Third: There was not always someone with me to write, and the scribe
who generally accompanied me had four or five other duties connected with
the Risale-i Nur. We therefore could not find sufficient time to correct it and
it remained in a disordered state.
The Fourth: We were both tired after its composition, and not thinking
carefully of the meaning, made do with correcting it only superficially; so
there are bound to be faults in the manner of expression. I request the
generous elderly to look tolerantly on such errors and to include us in their
prayers when they raise their hands to the divine court, since divine mercy
does not reject the prayers of the blessed elderly.

1 It is written in a handwritten copy of this Flash corrected by the respected author: “The
remaining Hopes, from the Fourteenth to the Twenty-Sixth, have not been written due to the well-
known calamity (Eskişehir Prison); the time of writing them having passed now, it has remained
without them.” (The Fourteenth to the Sixteenth were composed subsequently. Tr.)

--- Sayfa 286 ---
286
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
Kaf. Ha. Ya. ‘Ain. Sad. * [This is] a recital of the mercy of your Sustainer to
His servant Zakariya. * Behold! he cried to His Sustainer in secret, *
Praying: “O my Sustainer! Infirm indeed are my bones, and the hair of my
head glistens with grey; but I am never unblest, O my Sustainer, in my
prayer to you.”(19:1-4)
FIRST HOPE
Respected elderly brothers and sisters who have reached maturity! Like you, I am
elderly. I am going to write the ‘hopes’ I have found in my old age and some of the
things that have befallen me, out of the desire to share with you the lights of
consolation they contain. Of course the lights I have seen and the doors of hope I have
encountered have been seen and opened in accordance with my defective and
confused abilities. God willing, your pure, sincere dispositions will make those lights
shine more brightly and strengthen the hopes I have found.
Thus, the spring, source and fount of the following hopes and lights is belief in
God.
SECOND HOPE
One day as I was entering upon old age, in the autumn at the time of the
afternoon prayer, I was gazing on the world from a high mountain. Suddenly I was
overwhelmed by a plaintive, sorrowful and in one respect dark state of mind. I saw
that I had become old. The day too had grown old, and so had the year; so too had the
world become old. As the time of departure from the world and separation from those
I loved was drawing close within these instances of old age, my own old age shook
me severely. Suddenly divine mercy unfolded in such a way that it transformed that
plaintive sadness and separation into a powerful hope and shining light of solace. Yes,
you who are elderly like myself! The All-Compassionate Creator presents himself to
us in a hundred places in the All-Wise Qur’an as the Most Merciful of the Merciful,
and always sends His mercy to the assistance of living creatures on the face of the
earth who seek it, and every year fills the spring with innumerable bounties and gifts
from the Unseen, sending them to us who are needy for sustenance, and manifests His
mercy in greater abundance relatively to our weakness and impotence. For us in our
old age, therefore, His mercy is our greatest hope and most powerful light. It may be
obtained by forming a relation with the Most Merciful One through belief, and
performing the five daily prayers, by being obedient to Him.

--- Sayfa 287 ---
287
THIRD HOPE
One time when I awoke in the morning of old age from the sleep of the night of
youth I looked at myself and saw that my life was hastening towards the grave as
though racing down a slope. As Niyazi Misri said:
Each day a stone from the building of my life falls to the ground;
Heedless one! You slumber, unaware that the building is in ruins!
My body, my spirit’s dwelling, was becoming dilapidated with every day a stone
of it falling away. My hopes and ambitions which bound me strongly to the world had
begun to be broken off from it. I felt that the time I would be separated from my
innumerable friends and those I loved was drawing near. I searched for a salve for
that deep and apparently incurable spiritual wound, but I could not find one. Again
like Niyazi Misri I said:
While my heart desired its immortality, Reality required the passing of my body;
I am afflicted with an incurable ill, which even Luqman could not cure!2
Then suddenly the light and intercession of the Glorious Prophet (UWBP), the
tongue, model, exemplar, herald, and representative of divine compassion, and the
gift of guidance he brought to mankind, soothed and healed the wound I had supposed
to be incurable and endless.
Yes, respected elderly men and women who feel their old age like I do! We are
departing, there is no use in deceiving ourselves. Even if we close our eyes to it, we
will not remain here. There is a mobilization. The land of the Intermediate Realm,
which appears to us to be dark and full of separation due to the gloomy delusions
which arise from heedlessness and in part from the people of misguidance, is the
meeting-place of friends. It is the world where we shall meet with foremost God’s
Beloved (Upon whom be blessings and peace), and with all our friends.
We are going to the world of the one who every year for one thousand three
hundred and fifty years has been the ruler of one thousand three hundred and fifty
million people, and the trainer of their spirits, the teacher of their minds, and the
beloved of their hearts; to whose book of good works, in accordance with the meaning
of “the cause is like the doer,” is every day added the equivalent of all the good works
performed by his community; who is the means by which the elevated divine
purposes in the universe are accomplished and the high value of beings are realized.
When he came into the world, according to authentic narrations and accurate divining
of

2 That is to say, although with all its strength my heart wanted my body to be immortal, divine
wisdom necessitated its destruction. I was afflicted with an incurable ill for which even Luqman the
Wise could find no solution.

--- Sayfa 288 ---
288
reality, he exclaimed: “My community! My community!” So too at the Last
Judgement when everyone thinks only of themselves, he will again declare: “My
community! My community!”, and with sacred, elevated self-sacrifice hasten with his
intercession to its assistance. We are going to such a world, illuminated by the stars of
countless saints and purified scholars revolving around that Sun (UWBP).
Thus, the way to share in that Being’s (UWBP) intercession and profit from his
light, and be saved from the darkness of the Intermediate Realm, is to follow his
glorious practices.
FOURTH HOPE
At the time I approached old age, my physical health, which perpetuates
heedlessness, was broken. Old age and illness attacked me in concert. Hitting me over
the head, they chased away sleep. I had nothing to bind me to the world like family,
children, and possessions. Having wasted the fruits of my life’s the capital on the
giddiness of youth, I saw them to consist only of sins and mistakes. Crying out like
Niyazi Misri, I said:
I had concluded no trade; the capital of life was all lost;
I came to the road to find the caravan had moved on, unaware.
Lamenting, I continued down the road, all alone, a stranger;
My eyes weeping, my heart in anguish, my mind bewildered, unaware.
I was in exile at the time; I felt a despairing sorrow, a regretful penitence, a
longing for assistance. Suddenly, the All-Wise Qur’an came to my aid. It opened a
door of hope so powerful and afforded a light of consolation so true that it could have
dispelled despair and darknesses a hundred times more intense than mine.
Yes, respected elderly men and women whose attachment to the world has begun
to be sundered and the ties binding them to be broken! Is it possible that the All-
Glorious Maker who creates this world as a perfectly ordered city or palace would not
speak with his most important guests and friends or not meet with them? Since He
knowingly made the palace and ordered and adorned it through His will and choice,
certainly as one who makes knows, so one who knows will speak. Since He made this
palace and city into a fine guesthouse and place of trade for us, He will surely have a
book, a file, to explain His relations with us and what He desires from us.
The most holy of such Books is the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition; it is a
miracle in forty respects and is every instant on the tongues of at least a hundred
million people; it scatters light, and every letter of it affords at

--- Sayfa 289 ---
289
least ten merits and rewards, and fruits of Paradise and lights in the Intermediate
Realm, and sometimes ten thousand, and sometimes – through the mystery of the
Night of Power – thirty thousand. There is no book in the universe to compete with it
in this respect and no one could put one forward. Since this Qur’an which we have is
the Word of the All-Glorious Creator of the heavens and earth, proceeding from His
absolute dominicality, the tremendousness of His Godhead, and His all-encompassing
mercy, and is His decree and a source of His mercy; adhere to it. In it are found a cure
for every ill, a light for every darkness, and a hope for all despair. And the key to this
eternal treasury is belief and submission to God, and listening to the Qur’an and
accepting it, and reciting it.
FIFTH HOPE
One time at the start of my old age when I desired solitude, I retired to Yuşa
Tepesi, Mount Joshua, away up the Istanbul Bosphorus. My spirit was seeking ease in
loneliness. One day on that high hill, I gazed around me at the broad horizon, and I
cast a glance from the high position of the forty-fifth branch, that is, the forty-fifth
year of the tree of my life to its lower levels. I saw that down on the lower branches of
each year were the countless corpses of those I had known and had loved and with
whom I had been connected. I felt a truly piteous sorrow at their parting and
separation, I wept like Fuzuli Baghdadi for the friends from whom I was parted:
As I recall their company I weep,
So long as there is breath in this dry body, I cry out.
I sought a solace, a light, a door leading to hope. Suddenly belief in the hereafter
came to my assistance, shedding an inextinguishable light, offering an indestructible
hope.
Yes, my brothers and sisters who are elderly like me! Since the hereafter exists
and it is everlasting, and it is a better world than this; and since the One who created
us is both All-Wise and All-Compassionate; we should not complain and regret our
old age. On the contrary, we should be happy at it in so far as with age one reaches
perfect maturity through worship and belief, and it is a sign one will be released from
the duties of life and depart for the world of mercy in order to rest.
According to narrations, some relying on witnessing and some on ‘absolute
certainty’, mankind’s most eminent individuals, the one hundred and twenty-four
thousand prophets,3 have unanimously given news of the

3 Musnad, v, 266; Wali al-Din Tabrizi, Mishkat al-Masabih, iii, 122; Ibn al-Qayyim al-Jawzi, Zad
al-Ma‘ad (tahqiq: al-Arnavud) i, 43-4.

--- Sayfa 290 ---
290
existence of the hereafter, and that men will be sent there and the universe’s Creator
will bring it about in accordance with His certain promise. Similarly, affirming
through illumination and witnessing in the form of ‘certainty at the degree of
knowledge’ the reports of the prophets, the one hundred and twenty-four million
saints have testified to the hereafter’s existence. And through the manifestations they
display in this world, all the names of the universe’s All-Wise Maker self-evidently
necessitate an everlasting realm. So too the infinite pre-eternal power and the
boundless eternal wisdom which allowing nothing to be vain and purposeless every
year in the spring, raise to life with the command of “‘Be!’ and it is”(36:83, etc.) the
incalculable corpses of the dead trees on the face of the earth, making them manifest
life after death, and revivify three hundred thousand species of plants and animals as
thousands of samples of the resurrection of the dead. These observedly necessitate the
existence of the hereafter, as does the eternal mercy and perpetual favour which with
perfect compassion and in wondrous fashion provide the livelihoods of all living
beings needy for sustenance and in a brief time in spring display their uncountable
sorts of adornment and decoration; they too necessitate the existence of the hereafter.
Together with man, the most perfect fruit of the universe and its Creator’s most loved
creature, who of all beings is the most closely concerned with the beings in the
universe, and the clear indications and certain evidence of his intense, unshakeable,
constant desire for immortality and his hopes which extend to eternity – all these
prove so decisively that after this transient world there will be an eternal world, a
realm of the hereafter and everlasting happiness that they self-evidently necessitate
acceptance of the hereafter’s existence.4
Since the most important thing the All-Wise Qur’an teaches us is belief in the
hereafter, and since this belief is thus powerful and it yields such hope and solace that
if a person was overwhelmed by old age a hundred thousand times over, the
consolation arising from this belief would be

4 The ease of reporting a definite matter and the difficulty in denying it may be seen in the
following comparison: if one person says: “There is a wondrous garden on earth whose trees produce
fruits which are cans of milk,” and another says: “There isn’t,” the one claiming it only has to point out
where it is or some of its fruits in order to easily prove it. Whereas the one denying can only prove his
denial by seeing and showing the whole face of the earth. In just the same way, even if one disregards
the hundreds of thousands of signs, fruits, and marks of Paradise which those who give news of it have
indicated, the testimony of two truthful witnesses to its certain existence is sufficient; while the one
who denies it can only prove his denial after observing the infinite universe and infinite, unending time,
and seeing it and investigating it exhaustively; only then can he demonstrate its non-existence. And so,
my elderly brothers, you may understand just how powerful is belief in the hereafter.

--- Sayfa 291 ---
291
sufficient to face it; for sure we elderly people should love our old age and say: “All
praise be to God for perfect belief!”
SIXTH HOPE
One time during my distressing captivity, I was alone on the top of Çam Da€›,
the Pine Mountain, in the mountains of Barla, having withdrawn from the company of
men. I was searching for a light in my loneliness. One night on the small platform at
the top of a tall pine-tree on the summit of that high mountain, old age recalled to me
three or four exiles, one within the other. As is described in the Sixth Letter, the
melancholy sound of the rustling, murmuring trees on that lonely, silent, distant night
affected me grievously in my old age and exile. Old age gave me the following
thought: like the day changed into this black grave and the world donned its black
shroud, the daytime of your life, too, will turn into night, and the daytime of the world
turn into the night of the Intermediate Realm, and summertime of life will be
transformed into the winter nighttime of death. It whispered this in my heart’s ear. My
soul was then obliged to say:
Yes, I am far from my native land, but being separated from all those I have
loved during my fifty years’ lifetime who have died, and remaining weeping for them,
is a far more grievous and sorrowful exile than the exile from my country. Moreover,
I am drawing close to a much sadder and more painful exile than the melancholy exile
of the night and the mountain: old age informs me that I am approaching the time of
separation from the world. I then sought a light, a hope from these sorrowful exiles
one within the other. Suddenly belief in God came to my assistance and afforded such
a familiarity that even if the compounded desolation in which I found myself
increased a thousandfold, its consolation would have been sufficient.
Elderly men and women! Since we have a Compassionate Creator, there can be
no exile for us! Since He exists, everything exists for us. Since He exists, the angels
exist. The world is not empty. Lonely mountains and empty deserts are full of
Almighty God’s servants. Apart from His conscious servants, stones and trees become
like familiar friends when seen through His light and on His account. They may
converse with us and give us enjoyment.
Yes, evidences and witnesses to the number of beings in the universe and to the
number of the letters of this vast book of the world testify to the existence of our All-
Compassionate, Munificent, Intimate, Loving Creator, Maker, and Protector; they
show us His mercy to the number of living creatures’ members, foods, and bounties,
which may be a means of receiving

--- Sayfa 292 ---
292
His compassion, mercy, and favour, and indicate His court. Impotence and weakness
are the most acceptable intercessor at His court. And old age is precisely the time of
impotence and weakness. So one should not feel resentful at old age, which is thus an
acceptable intercessor at a court, but love it.
SEVENTH HOPE
One time at the start of my old age when the laughter of the Old Said was being
transformed into the weeping of the New Said, supposing me still to be the Old Said,
the worldly in Ankara invited me there, and I went. At the close of autumn I climbed
to the top of the citadel, which was far more aged, dilapidated, and worn out than me.
It seemed to me to be formed of petrified historical events. The old age of the season
of the year together with my old age, the citadel’s old age, mankind’s old age, the old
age of the glorious Ottoman Empire, and the death of the Caliphate’s rule, and the
world’s old age all caused me to look in a most grieved, piteous and melancholy state
in that lofty citadel at the valleys of the past and the mountains of the future. As I
experienced an utterly black state of mind in Ankara encompassed by four or five
layers of the darknesses of old age one within the other,5 I sought a light, a solace, a
hope.
As I sought consolation looking to the right, that is, to the past, my father and
forefathers and the human race appeared in the form of a vast grave and filled me
with gloom rather than consoling me. Seeking a remedy I looked to the future, which
was to my left. I saw that it appeared as a huge, dark grave for myself, my
contemporaries, and future generations; it produced horror in place of familiarity.
Feeling desolate in the face of the left and right, I looked at the present day. It
appeared to my heedless, historical eye as a coffin bearing my half-dead, suffering
and desperately struggling corpse. So despairing of that direction too, I raised my
head and looked at the top of the tree of my life, and there was my corpse; it stood at
the top of the tree and was watching me. Feeling horror at this direction, too, I bowed
my head. I looked to the foot of the tree of my life, to its roots, and saw that the soil
there, the earth which was the source of my creation and the dust of my bones mixed
together, was being trampled underfoot. That was no remedy, it only added further
pain to my affliction.
Then I was forced to look behind me. I saw that this unstable, transient world was
tumbling, disappearing, into the valleys of nothingness and the

5 My state of mind at that time prompted me to write a supplication in Persian. It was printed in
Ankara, in a treatise entitled, Hubab.

--- Sayfa 293 ---
293
darkness of non-existence. I was seeking a salve for my pain, but it only added
poison. Since I could see no good in that direction I looked in front of me, I sent my
view forward to the future. I saw that the door of the grave was open right in the
middle of my path; it was watching me with its mouth agape. The highway beyond it
which stretched away to eternity, and the convoys travelling that highway, struck the
eye from the distance. But apart from a limited will as my support and defensive
weapon in the face of the horrors coming from these six directions, I had nothing.
The faculty of will, man’s only weapon against those innumerable enemies and
endless harmful things, is both defective, and short, and weak, and lacks the power to
create, so he is capable of nothing apart from ‘acquisition.’ It could neither pass to the
past in order to silence the sorrows which came to me from there, nor could it
penetrate the future to prevent the fears which arose from there. I saw that it was of no
benefit for my hopes and pains concerning the past and future.
As I was struggling in the horror, desolation, darkness and despair proceeding
from these six directions, the lights of belief which shine in the sky of the Qur’an of
Miraculous Exposition suddenly came to my assistance. They lit up and illuminated
those six directions to such a degree that if the terrors and darkness I had seen
increased a hundredfold, the light would still have been sufficient to meet them. One
by one it transformed all those horrors into solace and the desolation into familiarity.
It was as follows:
Belief rent asunder the desolate view of the past as a vast grave, and showed it
with utter certainty to be a familiar, enlightened gathering of friends.
And belief showed the future, which had appeared in the form of a huge grave to
my heedless eyes, to be most certainly a banquet of the Most Merciful One in
delightful palaces of bliss.
And belief rent the view of present time as a coffin, as it had appeared to my
heedless view, and showed it with certainty to be a place of trade for the hereafter and
a glittering guesthouse of the All-Merciful One.
And belief showed with utter certainty that the only fruit at the top of the tree of
life was not a corpse as had appeared to my neglectful eye, but that my spirit, which
would manifest eternal life and was designated for eternal happiness, would leave its
worn-out home to travel around the stars.
And through its mystery, belief showed that my bones and the earth that was the
source of my creation were not valueless pulverized bones trampled underfoot, but
that the earth was the door to divine mercy and veil before the halls of Paradise.
And through the mystery of the Qur’an, belief showed that the world

--- Sayfa 294 ---
294
which had appeared to my heedless eye as tumbling behind me into nothingness and
non-existence to consist of missives of the Eternally Besought One and pages of
decorations and embroideries glorifying God which had completed their duties, stated
their meanings, and left their results in existence in their place. It made known with
complete certainty the true nature of the world.
And through the light of the Qur’an, belief showed that the grave which would
open its eyes and look at me in the future was not the mouth of a well, but that it was
the door to the world of light, and that the highway which stretched to eternity beyond
it led not to nothingness and non-existence, but to existence, a realm of light, and
eternal bliss. Since belief demonstrated this to a degree which afforded utter
conviction, it was both a remedy and a salve for my afflictions.
And in place of a very minor ability to receive, belief puts a document into the
hand of the limited faculty of will through which it may rely on an infinite power and
be connected to a boundless mercy in the face of those innumerable enemies and
layers of darkness. Indeed, belief is a document in the hand of man’s will, and
although this human weapon of will is in itself both short, powerless, and deficient,
just as when a soldier utilizes his partial strength on account of the state, he performs
duties far exceeding his own strength, so too through the mystery of belief, if the
limited faculty of will is used in the name of Almighty God and in His way, it may
gain also a paradise as broad as five hundred years.
And belief takes from the hands of the body the reins of the faculty of will, which
cannot penetrate to the past and future, and hands them over to the heart and spirit.
Since the sphere of their life is not restricted to present time like the body, and
included within it are a great many years from the past and a great many years from
the future, the will ceases being limited and acquires universality. Through the
strength of belief it may enter the deepest valleys of the past and repel the darkness of
its sorrows; so too with the light of belief it may rise as far as the farthest mountains
of the future, and remove its fears.
My elderly brothers and sisters who are suffering the difficulties of old age like
myself! Since, praise be to God, we are believers, and in belief are found this many
luminous, pleasurable, agreeable, and gratifying treasures; and since our old age
impels us even more to the contents of the treasure, for sure, rather than complaining
about old age accompanied by belief, we should offer endless thanks.

--- Sayfa 295 ---
295
EIGHTH HOPE
At a time grey hairs, the sign of old age, were appearing in my hair, the turmoil
of the First World War, which made even heavier the deep sleep of youth, the
upheaval of my captivity as a prisoner-of-war, the position of great fame and honour
accorded to me on my return to Istanbul, and the kind treatment and attention far
exceeding my due I received from everyone, from the Caliph, even, Shaykh al-Islam,
and Commander-in-Chief of the Army to the students of religion, the intoxication of
youth, and the mental state produced by my position all made the sleep of youth so
heavy that I quite simply saw the world as permanent and myself in a wonderful
undying situation cemented to it.
Then one day in Ramadan I went to Bayezid Mosque to listen to the sincere
Qur’an reciters. With their tongues, the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition was
proclaiming with its exalted heavenly address the decree of:
Every living creature shall taste death,(3:185, etc.)
which powerfully gives news of man’s death and that of all animate creatures. It
entered my ear, penetrated to the depths of my heart and established itself there; it
shattered my profound sleep and heedlessness. I went out of the mosque. Because of
the stupor of the sleep which for a long time had settled in my head, for several days a
tempest raged in it, and I saw myself as a boat with smoking boilers and compass
spinning. Every time I looked at my hair in the mirror, the grey hairs told me: “Take
note of us!” And so the situation became clear through the warnings of my grey hairs.
I looked and saw that my youth which so captivated me with its pleasures and in
which I so trusted was bidding me farewell, and that this worldly life which I so loved
and with which I was so involved was beginning to be extinguished, and that the
world with which I was closely connected and of which I was quite simply the lover
was saying to me: “Have a good journey!”, and was warning me that I would be
leaving this guesthouse. It too was saying “Good-bye,” and was preparing to depart.
The following meaning was unfolding in my heart from the indications of the Qur’an
of Miraculous Exposition’s verse,
Every living creature shall taste death:
the human race is a living creature; it shall die in order to be resurrected. The globe of
the earth is a living creature; it also will die in order to take on an eternal form. The
world too is a living creature; it will die in order to assume the form of the hereafter.
While in this state, I considered my situation. I saw that youth, which is the
source of pleasure, was departing; while old age, the source of sorrow,

--- Sayfa 296 ---
296
was approaching; that life, which is so shining and luminous, was taking its leave;
while death, which is terrifying and apparently darkness, was preparing to arrive; and
that the lovable world, which is thought to be permanent and is the beloved of the
heedless, was hastening to its decease.
In order to deceive myself and again plunge my head into heedlessness I
considered the pleasures of the social standing I enjoyed in Istanbul, which was far
higher than I deserved, but there was no advantage in it at all. All the regard,
attention, and consolation of people could only accompany me as far as the looming
door of the grave; there it would be extinguished. Since I saw it to be a tedious
hypocrisy, cold conceit, and temporary stupefaction under the embellished veil of
glory and renown, which is the illusory aim of those who chase fame, I understood
that these things which had until then deceived me could provide me with no solace,
there was no light to be found in them at all.
I again started to listen to the reciters in Bayezid Mosque in order to hear the
Qur’an’s heavenly teaching, and to awaken once more. From its sublime instruction I
heard good news through sacred decrees of the sort,
And give glad tidings to those who believe.(2:25, etc.)
With its effulgence, I sought consolation, hope, and light, within the points at
which I had felt horror, desolation and despair, not outside them. Endless thanks be to
Almighty God, I found the cure within the malady itself, I found the light within the
darkness itself, I found the solace within the horror itself.
Firstly, I looked in the face of death, which is imagined to be most terrible and
terrifies everyone. Through the light of the Qur’an I saw that although its veil is black,
dark, and ugly, for believers its true face is luminous and beautiful. We have proved
this truth decisively in many parts of the Risale-i Nur. For example, as we explained
in the Eighth Word and the Twentieth Letter, death is not annihilation and separation,
but the introduction to eternal life, its beginning. It is a rest from the hardships of
life’s duties, a demobilization. It is a change of residence. It is to meet with the
caravan of one’s friends who have already migrated to the Intermediate World; and so
on. I saw death’s true, beautiful face through truths like these. I looked at death’s face
not with fear, but with a sort of longing. I understood one meaning of the Sufis’
contemplation of death.
Then I considered my departed youth – youth, which makes everyone weep on its
passing, which infatuates them and fills them with desire, causing them to pass it in
sin and heedlessness. I saw that within its beautiful embroidered garb was an ugly,
drunken, stupified face. Had I not learnt its

--- Sayfa 297 ---
297
true nature, it would have made me weep for a hundred years if I remained in the
world that long, instead of intoxicating and amusing me for a few years. Just as one
such peson said lamenting:
“If only one day my youth would return, I would tell it of the woes old age has
brought me.”
Indeed, elderly people like the above who do not know the true nature of youth,
think of their own youth, and weep with regret and longing. But when youth belongs
to believers with sound minds and hearts, it is a most powerful, agreeable and
pleasant means of securing good works and trade for the hereafter, so long as they
spend it on worship, and that trade and those good works. For those who know their
religious duties and do not misspend their youth, it is a precious and delightful divine
bounty. But when it is not spent in moderation, uprightness, and fear of God, it
contains many dangers; it damages eternal happiness and the life of this world. In
return for the pleasures of one or two years’ youth, in old age it causes many years of
grief and sorrow.
Since for most people youth is harmful, we elderly people should thank God that
we have been saved from its dangers and harm. Like everything else, the pleasures of
youth depart. If they have been spent on worship and good works, the fruits of such a
youth remain perpetually in their place and are the means of gaining youth in eternal
life.
Next, I considered the world, with which most people are infatuated and to which
they are addicted. Through the light of the Qur’an, I saw that it has three faces, one
within the other:
The First looks to the divine names; it is a mirror to them
Its Second Face looks to the hereafter, and is its tillage.
Its Third Face  looks to the worldly; it is the playground of the heedless.
Moreover, everyone has his own vast world within this world. Simply, there are
worlds one within the other to the number of human beings. The pillar of each
person’s private world is his own life. If his body gives way, his world collapses on
his head, it is doomsday for him. Since the heedless and neglectful do not realize that
their world will be so quickly destroyed, they suppose it to be permanent like the
general world and worship it. I thought to myself: “I too have a private world that will
swiftly collapse and be demolished like the worlds of other people. What value is
there in this private world, this brief life of mine?”
Then, through the light of the Qur’an, I saw that both for myself and everyone
else, this world is a temporary place of trade, a guesthouse which is every day filled
and emptied, a market set up on the road for the passers-

--- Sayfa 298 ---
298
by to shop in, an ever-renewed notebook of the Pre-Eternal Inscriber which is
constantly written and erased, and every spring is a gilded letter, and every summer a
well-composed ode; that it is formed of mirrors reflecting and renewing the
manifestations of the All-Glorious Maker’s names; is a seed-bed of the hereafter, a
flower-bed of divine mercy, and a special, temporary workshop for producing
signboards which will be displayed in the world of eternity.
I offered a hundred thousand thanks to the All-Glorious Creator who had made
the world in this way. And I understood that while love for the beautiful, inner faces
of the world which look to the hereafter and divine names had been given to mankind,
since they spent it on its transient, ugly, harmful, heedless face, they manifested the
meaning of the Hadith: “Love of this world is the chief of all errors.”6
Elderly people! I realized this truth through the light of the All-Wise Qur’an, and
the warnings of my old age, and belief opening my eyes. And I have demonstrated it
with decisive proofs in many places in the Risale-i Nur. I experienced a true solace,
powerful hope, and shining light. I was thankful for my old age, and I was happy that
my youth had gone. You too do not weep, but offer thanks. Since there is belief and
the truth is thus, it should be the heedless who weep and the misguided who lament.
NINTH HOPE
In the First World War, as a prisoner, I was in the distant province of Kosturma
in north-eastern Russia. There was a small mosque belonging to the Tatars beside the
famous River Volga. I used to become wearied among my friends, the other officers. I
craved solitude, yet I could not wander about outside without permission. Then they
took me on bail to the Tatar quarter, to that small mosque on the banks of the Volga. I
used to sleep there, alone. Spring was close. I used to be very wakeful during the
long, long nights of that northern land; the sad plashing of the Volga and the mirthless
patter of the rain and the melancholy sighing of the wind of those dark nights in that
dark exile had temporarily roused me from a deep sleep of heedlessness. I did not yet
consider myself old, but those who had experienced the Great War were old. For
those were days that, as though manifesting the verse:
A day that will turn the hair of children grey,(73:17)
made even children old. While I was forty years old, I felt myself to be

6 al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, No: 1099; al-Suyuti, al-Durar al-Muntathira, 97; Isfahani, Hilyat
al-Awliya’, vi, 388; al-Munawi, Fayd al-Qadir, iii, 368, No: 3662.

--- Sayfa 299 ---
299
eighty. In those long, dark nights and sorrowful exile and melancholic state, I
despaired of life and of my homeland. I looked at my powerlessness and aloneness,
and my hope failed.
Then, while in that state, succour arrived from the All-Wise Qur’an; my tongue
said:
God is enough for us; and how excellent a guardian is He.(3:173)
And weeping, my heart cried out: “I am a stranger, I am alone, I am weak, I am
powerless: I seek mercy, I seek forgiveness, I seek help from You, O my God!”
And, thinking of my old friends in my homeland, and imagining myself dying in
exile there, like Niyazi Misri, my spirit poured forth these lines:
Fleeing the world’s grief,
Taking flight with ardour and longing,
Opening my wings to the void,
Crying with each breath, Friend! Friend!
It was searching for its friends.
Anyway, my weakness and impotence became such potent intercessors and
means at the divine court on that melancholy, pitiful, separation-afflicted, long night
in exile that now I still wonder at it. For several days later I escaped in the most
unexpected manner, on my own, not knowing Russian, across a distance that would
have taken a year on foot. I was saved in a wondrous fashion through divine favour,
which was bestowed as a consequence of my weakness and impotence. Then, passing
through Warsaw and Austria, I reached Istanbul, so that to be saved in this way so
easily was quite extraordinary. I completed the long flight with an ease and facility
that even the boldest and most cunning Russian-speakers could not have
accomplished.
That night in the mosque on the banks of the Volga made me decide to pass the
rest of my life in caves. Enough now of mixing in this social life of people. Since
finally I would enter the grave alone, I said that from now on I would chose solitude
in order to become accustomed to it. But regretfully, things of no consequence like
my many and serious friends in Istanbul, and the glittering worldly life there, and in
particular the fame and honour accorded me, which were far greater than my due,
made me temporarily forget my decision. It was as though that night in exile was a
luminous blackness in my life’s eye, and the glittering white daytime of Istanbul, a
lightless white in it. It could not see ahead, it still slumbered. Until two years later,
Ghawth al-Geylani opened my eyes once more with his book Futuh al-Ghayb.

--- Sayfa 300 ---
300
O elderly men and women! Know that the weakness and powerless of old age are
means for attracting divine grace and mercy. The manifestation of mercy on the face
of the earth demonstrates this truth in the clearest fashion, just as I have observed it in
myself on numerous occasions. For the weakest and most powerless of animals are
the young. But then it is they who receive the sweetest and most beautiful
manifestation of mercy. The powerlessness of a young bird in the nest at the top of a
tree attracts the manifestation of mercy to employ its mother like an obedient soldier.
Its mother flies all around and brings it its food. When with its wings growing strong
the nestling forgets its impotence, its mother tells it to go and find its own food, and
no longer listens to it.
Just as this mystery of mercy is in force for the young, so is it in force for the
elderly, who resemble young in regard to weakness and impotence. I have had
experiences which have led me to form the unshakeable conviction that just as the
sustenance of infants is sent to them in wondrous fashion by divine mercy on account
of their impotence, being made to flow forth from the springs of breasts; so too the
sustenance of believing elderly, who acquire innocence, is sent in the form of plenty.
This truth is also proved by the Hadith which says: “If it were not for your elderly
folk with their bent backs, calamities would have descended on you in floods.”7 It
states both that a household’s source of plenty is its elderly inhabitants, and that it is
the elderly that preserve the household from the visitation of calamities.
Since the weakness and impotence of old age are thus the means of attracting
divine mercy to this extent; and since with its verses:
Whether one or both of them attain old age in your life, say not to them a
word of contempt, nor repel them, but address them in terms of honour. *
And out of kindness, lower the wing of humility, and say: “My Sustainer!
Bestow on them Your mercy even as they cherished me in childhood,”(17:23-
4)
the All-Wise Qur’an summons children most miraculously in five ways to be kind and
respectful towards their elderly parents; and since the religion of Islam commands
respect and compassion towards the elderly; and since human nature also requires
respect and compassion towards the aged; we elderly people certainly receive
significant, constant mercy and respect from divine grace and human feeling in place
of the fleeting physical pleasures and appetites of youth, as well as the spiritual
pleasures arising from

7 al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, ii, 163; al-Munawi, Fayd al-Qadir, v, 344, No: 7523; al-Bayhaqi,
al-Sunan al-Kubra, iii, 345.

--- Sayfa 301 ---
301
respect and compassion. Since this is the case, we would not exchange this old age of
ours for a hundred youths. Yes, I can tell you certainly that even if they were to give
me ten years of the Old Said’s youth, I would not give one year of the New Said’s old
age. I am content with my old age, and you too should be content with yours!
TENTH HOPE
For a year or two in Istanbul after returning from being held as a prisoner-of-war,
I was overcome by heedlessness. The politics of the day directed my attention away
from myself and scattered it on the outside world. Then one day I was sitting on a
high spot overlooking the valley of the Eyüb Sultan graveyard in Istanbul when I was
overcome by a state of mind in which, while I was looking down on it, it seemed my
private world was dying and my spirit was withdrawing. I said: “I wonder if it’s the
inscriptions on the gravestones that are giving me such illusions?”, and I drew back
my gaze. I looked not at the distance, but at the graveyard. Then the following was
imparted to my heart: “This graveyard around you holds Istanbul a hundred times
over, for Istanbul has been emptied here a hundred times. You cannot escape from the
command of the All-Wise and Powerful One who has poured all the people of
Istanbul into here; you are no exception; you too will depart.”
I left the graveyard and with those awesome thoughts entered a small cell in
Sultan Eyüb Mosque where I had stayed many times before. I thought to myself, I am
a guest in three respects: I am a guest in this tiny room, I am also a guest in Istanbul,
and a guest in this world. A guest has to think of the road. Just as I shall leave this
room, so one day I shall leave Istanbul, and yet another day I shall depart from this
world.
While in this state of mind, I, my heart, was overwhelmed by a most pitiful,
grievous sorrow. I was not losing only one or two friends; I would be parted from the
thousands of people I loved in Istanbul, and I would also part from Istanbul, which I
also loved much. And just as I would be parted from hundreds of thousands of friends
in this world, so I would leave the beautiful world, with which I was captivated and I
loved. While pondering over this, I climbed once more to that spot in the graveyard. I
had been to the cinema from time to time to take lessons, and just then all the dead of
Istanbul appeared to me to be walking around, like the cinema shows in the present
the images of the past. And all the people I could see at that time appeared to be
corpses walking around. My imagination told me: some of the dead in the graveyard
appear to be walking around as though on the cinema-screen, so you should see the
people of the present, who are bound

--- Sayfa 302 ---
302
to enter the graveyard in the future, as having entered it; they too are corpses, walking
around.
Suddenly through the light of the Qur’an and through the guidance of Ghawth al-
A‘zam, Shaykh Geylani, my grievous state was transformed into a joyful one. It was
like this:
The light proceeding from the Qur’an gave me the following thought: you had
one or two officer friends while a prisoner-of-war in exile in Kosturma in the north-
east. You knew that they would in any event go to Istanbul. If one of them had asked
you: “Do you want to go to Istanbul, or to stay here?” For sure if you had had a jot of
intelligence, you would joyfully have chosen to go to Istanbul. For out of a thousand
and one friends, nine hundred and ninety-nine were already in Istanbul. Only one or
two remained there, and they too would leave. Going to Istanbul for you would not be
a sad departure and sorrowful separation. Moreover you have come here and were
you not happy to do so? You were delivered from the long, dark nights and cold,
stormy winters in that enemy country. You came to Istanbul, a worldly paradise.
In just the same way, from your childhood to your present age, ninety-nine out of
a hundred of those you love have migrated to the graveyard, which terrifies you. You
have one or two friends still in this world, and they too will depart. Your death in this
world is not separation; it is union; it is to be reunited with all those friends. I was
reminded that they, that is those immortal spirits, have left behind under the earth
their worn-out dwellings, and some of them are travelling about the stars and some in
the levels of the Intermediate Realm.
Yes, the Qur’an and belief proved this truth so certainly that you should believe it
as though seeing it if you are not entirely lacking heart and spirit, and misguidance
has not suffocated your heart. For most certainly and self-evidently the All-Generous
Maker who adorns this world with innumerable sorts of gifts and bounties, and
demonstrates His dominicality munificently and compassionately, and preserves even
the least significant things like seeds, would not annihilate or send to nothingness or
waste man as unkindly and purposelessly as it superficially appears, for he is the most
perfect, comprehensive, important, and beloved among His creatures. Rather, like the
seeds a farmer scatters on the earth, the Compassionate Creator temporarily casts that
beloved creature of His under the ground, which is a door of mercy, in order to
produce shoots in another life.8

8 This truth has been proved as clearly as twice two equals four in other parts of the Risale-i Nur,
and especially in the Tenth and Twenty-Ninth Words.

--- Sayfa 303 ---
303
After receiving this reminder of the Qur’an, the graveyard became more familiar
to me than Istanbul. Solitude and retirement became more pleasurable to me than
conversation and company, and I found a place of seclusion for myself in Sar›yer on
the Bosphorus. There, Ghawth al-A‘zam (May God be pleased with him) became a
master, doctor, and guide for me with his Futuh al-Ghayb, while Imam Rabbani (May
God be pleased with him) became a companion, sympathetic friend, and teacher with
his Maktubat (Letters). Then I was extremely happy I had approached old age,
withdrawn from civilization, and slipped free of social life. I thanked God.
O respected persons who have entered upon old age and who frequently recall
death through its warnings! In accordance with the light of the teachings of belief
taught by the Qur’an, we should look favourably on old age, death, and illness, and
even love them in one respect. Since we have an infinitely precious bounty like belief,
old age, and illness, and death are all agreeable. If there are things that are
disagreeable, they are sin, vice, innovations, and misguidance.
ELEVENTH HOPE
After my return from captivity, I was living together with my nephew
Abdurrahman9 in a villa on the hill at Çamlıca in Istanbul. From the point of view of
worldly life, my situation could have been thought to be the most fortunate for people
like us. For I had been saved from being a prisoner-of-war and in the Darü’l-Hikmet
we were being successful in propagating knowledge in an elevated way suitably to my
profession, the learned profession. The honour and esteem afforded me were far
greater than my due. I was living in Çamlıca, the most beautiful place in Istanbul.
Everything was perfect for me. I was together with the late Abdurrahman, my
nephew, who was extremely intelligent and self-sacrificing, and was both my student,
and servant, and scribe, and spiritual son. But then, knowing myself to be more
fortunate than anyone else in the world, I looked in the mirror and I saw grey hairs in
my hair and beard.
Suddenly, the spiritual awakening I had experienced in the mosque in Kosturma
while in captivity recommenced. I began to study the circumstances and causes to
which I felt geniune attachment and which I supposed were the source of happiness in
this world. But whichever of them I studied, I saw that it was rotten; it was not worth
the attachment; it was

9 Abdurrahman was the son of Bediuzzaman’s elder brother, ‘Abdullah. He was born in Nurs in
1903, and was Bediuzzaman’s spiritual son, student, and assistant. He joined his uncle in Istanbul after
the First World War, and published a short biography of him at that time. He died in Ankara in 1928,
where he is buried. (Tr.)

--- Sayfa 304 ---
304
deceptive. Around that time, I suffered an unexpected and unimaginable act of
disloyalty and unfaithfulness at the hands of a friend whom I had supposed to be most
loyal. I felt disgust at  the world. I said to myself: “Have I been altogether deceived? I
see that many people look with envy at our situation, which in reality should be pitied.
Are all these people crazy, or is it me that has gone crazy so that I see all these
worldly people as such?”
Anyway, as a result of this severe awakening caused me by old age, first of all I
saw the transitoriness of all the ephemeral things to which I was attached. Then I
looked at myself, and I saw myself to be utterly impotent. So then my spirit declared,
which desires immortality and was infatuated with ephemeral beings imagining them
to be immortal: “Since I am a transient being with regard to my body, what good can
come of these ephemeral things? Since I am powerless, what can I await from these
powerless things? What I need is one who is Eternal and Enduring, one who is Pre-
Eternal and All-Powerful, who will provide a remedy for my ills.” And I began to
search.
Then, before everything, I had recourse to the learning I had studied of old, I
began to search for a consolation, a hope. But unfortunately, up to that time I had
filled my mind with the sciences of philosophy as well as the Islamic sciences, and
quite in error had imagined those philosophical sciences to be the source of progress
and means of illumination. However, those philosophical matters had greatly dirtied
my spirit and been an obstacle to my spiritual development. Suddenly, through
Almighty God’s mercy and munificence, the sacred wisdom of the All-Wise Qur’an
came to my assistance. As is explained in many parts of the Risale-i Nur, it washed
away and cleansed the dirt of those philosophical matters.
For instance, the spiritual darknesses arising from science and philosophy
plunged my spirit into the universe. Whichever way I looked seeking a light, I could
find not a gleam in those matters, I could not breathe. And so it continued until the
instruction in divine unity given by the phrase from the All-Wise Qur’an “There is no
god but He” dispersed all those layers of darkness with its brilliant light, and I could
breathe with ease. But relying on what they had learnt from the people of misguidance
and philosophers, my soul and Satan attacked my reason and my heart. All thanks be
to God, the ensuing debate with my soul resulted in the victory of my heart. Those
exchanges have been described in part in many parts of the Risale-i Nur. So deeming
them to be sufficient, here I shall explain only one proof out of thousands in order to
show one thousandth part of that victory of the heart. In this way it may also cleanse
the spirits of certain elderly people which

--- Sayfa 305 ---
305
have been dirtied in their youth, and their hearts sickened and souls spoilt, by matters
which though called Western philosophy or the sciences of civilization, are in part
misguidance and in part trivia. And through divine unity, they may be saved from evil
of Satan and the soul. It is as follows:
My soul said in the name of science and philosophy: “According to the nature of
things, the beings in the universe intervene in other beings. Everything looks to a
cause. The fruit has to be sought from the tree and seed from the soil. So what does it
mean to seek the tiniest and least insignificant thing from God and to beseech Him for
it?”
Through the light of the Qur’an, the meaning of divine unity then unfolded in the
following way: like the greatest thing, the tiniest and most particular proceeds directly
from the power of the Creator of the whole universe and emerges from His treasury. It
cannot occur in any other way. As for causes, they are merely a veil. For in regard to
art and creation, sometimes the creatures we suppose to be the smallest and least
important are greater than the largest creatures. Even if a fly is not of greater art than
a chicken, it is not of lesser art. In which case, no difference should be made between
great and small. Either all should be divided between material causes, or all should be
attributed at once to a single Being. And just as the former is impossible, the latter is
necessary and imperative.
For if beings are attributed to a single Being, that is to a Pre-Eternal All-Powerful
One, since His knowledge, the existence of which is certain by reason of the order and
wisdom in all beings, encompasses everything; and since the measure of all things is
determined in His knowledge; and since observedly beings which are infinitely full of
art continuously come into existence from nothing with infinite ease; and since in
accordance with innumerable powerful evidences that All-Knowing All-Powerful
One is able to create anything whatever through the command of “‘Be!’ and it is” as
simply as striking a match, and as is explained in many parts of the Risale-i Nur and
proved particularly in the Twentieth Letter and at the end of the Twenty-Third Flash,
He possesses unlimited power – since this is the case, the extraordinary ease and
facility which we observe arises from that all-encompassing knowledge and vast
power.
For example, if a special solution is applied to a book written in invisible ink, that
huge book suddenly demonstrates its existence visibly and makes itself read. In just
the same way, the particular form and appointed measure of everything is determined
in the all-encompassing knowledge of the Pre-Eternal All-Powerful One. Through the
command of “‘Be!’ and it is” and with that limitless power of His and penetrating
will, like spreading the solution on the writing, the Absolutely All-Powerful One
applies a

--- Sayfa 306 ---
306
manifestation of His power to the being which exists as knowledge and with utter
ease and facility gives it external existence; He displays and makes read the
embroideries of His wisdom.
If all things are not all together attributed to that Pre-Eternal All-Powerful One,
the One Knowing of All Things, then as well as having to gather together in a
particular measure from most of the varieties of beings in the world the body of the
tiniest thing like a fly, the particles which work in that tiny fly’s body will have to
know the mysteries of the fly’s creation and its perfect art in all its minutest details.
For as all the intelligent agree, natural causes and physical causes cannot create out of
nothing. In which case, if they do create, they will gather the being together. And
since they will gather it together – whatever animate being it is, there are within it
samples of most of the elements and most of the varieties of beings, for living
creatures are quite simply like a seed or essence of the universe – it will of course be
necessary for them to gather together a seed from the whole tree and an animate being
from the whole face of the earth sifting them through a fine sieve and measuring them
with the most sensitive balance. And since natural causes are ignorant and lifeless,
and have no knowledge with which to determine a plan, index, model, or programme
according to which they can smelt and pour the particles which enter the immaterial
mould of the being in question, so they do not disperse and spoil its order, it is clear
how far it is from possibility and reason to suppose that, without mould or measure,
they can make the particles of the elements which flow like floods remain one on the
other in the form of an orderly mass without dispersing, for everything has a single
form and measure amid possibilities without calculation or count. For sure, everyone
who does not suffer from blindness in his heart will see it. Yes, in consequence of this
truth, according to the meaning of the verse,
Those on whom you call besides God cannot create [even] a fly, if they all
met together for the purpose,(22:73)10
if all material causes were to gather together and if they possessed will, they could not
gather together the being of a single fly and its systems and organs with their
particular balance. And even if they could gather them together, they could not make
them remain in the specified measure of the being. And even if they could make them
remain thus, they could not make those minute particles, which are constantly being
renewed and coming into existence and working, work regularly and in order. In
which case,

10 That is, “Should all the things you call upon and worship other than God were to gather
together, they could not create so much as a fly.”

--- Sayfa 307 ---
307
self-evidently, causes cannot claim ownership of things. That is to say, their True
Owner is someone else.
Indeed, their True Owner is such that, according to the verse,
Your creation and your resurrection is as a single soul,(32:28)
He raises to life all the living beings on the face of the earth as easily as He raises to
life a single fly. He creates the spring as easily as He creates a single flower. For He
has no need to gather things together. Since He is the owner of the command of
“‘Be!’ and it is;” and since every spring He creates from nothing the innumerable
attributes, states, and forms of the innumerable beings of spring together with the
elements of their physical beings; and since He determines the plan, model, index,
and programme of everything in His knowledge; and since all minute particles are in
motion within the sphere of His knowledge and power; He therefore creates
everything with infinite ease as though striking a match. And nothing at all confuses
its motion so much as an iota. And minute particles are like a regular, disciplined
army in the same way that the planets are an obedient army.
Since they are in motion relying on that pre-eternal power and function in
accordance with the principles of that pre-eternal knowledge, those works come into
existence in accordance with the power. They therefore cannot be deemed
insignificant by considering their unimportant individualities. For through the strength
of being connected to that power, a fly can kill off Nimrod, and an ant can destroy the
Pharaoh’s palace, and the minute seed of the pine bears on its shoulder the burden of
the pine-tree as tall as a mountain. We have proved this truth in numerous places in
the Risale-i Nur: just as through his enlistment in the army and being connected to the
king, an ordinary soldier can take another king prisoner, exceeding his own capacity a
hundred thousand times; so too, by being connected to pre-eternal power, all things
can manifest miracles of art exceeding the capacity of natural causes hundreds of
thousands of times.
In Short: The fact that all things come into existence with both infinite art and
infinite ease shows that they are the works of a Pre-Eternal All-Powerful One
possessing all-encompassing knowledge. Otherwise, let alone coming into existence
with a hundred thousand difficulties, leaving the bounds of possibility and entering
those of impossibility, nothing could even come into existence, indeed, their coming
into existence would be impossible and precluded.
Thus, through this most subtle, powerful, profound, and clear proof, my soul,
which had been a temporary student of Satan and the spokesman for the people of
misguidance and the philosophers, was silenced, and, all praise be to God, came to
believe completely. It said:

--- Sayfa 308 ---
308
Yes, what I need is a Creator and Sustainer who possesses the power to know the
least thoughts of my heart and my most secret wishes; and as He will answer the most
hidden needs of my spirit, so he will transform the mighty earth into the hereafter in
order to give me eternal happiness, and remove this world and put the hereafter in its
place; and create the heavens as He creates a fly; and as He fastens the sun as an eye
in the face of the sky, so he can situate a particle in the pupil of my eye. For one who
cannot create a fly cannot intervene in the thoughts of my heart and cannot hear the
pleas of my spirit. One who cannot create the heavens, cannot give me eternal
happiness. In which case, my Sustainer is He who both purifies my heart’s thoughts,
and like He fills and empties the skies with clouds in an hour, so he will transform
this world into the hereafter, make Paradise, and open its doors to me, bidding me to
enter.
My elderly brothers who as a result of misfortune, like my soul, have spent part
of their lives on lightless Western materialist philosophy and science! Understand
from the sacred decree of “There is no god but He” perpetually uttered by the tongue
of the Qur’an, just how powerful, true, unshakeable, undamageable, unchanging, and
sacred a pillar of belief it is, and how it disperses all spiritual darkness and cures all
spiritual wounds!
I included this long story among the doors of hope of my old age as though
involuntarily. I did not want to include it, indeed, I held back from doing so because I
thought it would be tedious. But I have to say that I felt compelled to write it.
Anyway, to return to the main topic:
In consequence of grey hairs appearing in my hair and beard and of a loyal
friend’s unfaithfulness, I felt a disgust at the pleasures of Istanbul’s worldly life which
was so glittering and superficially agreeable and gilded. My soul searched for spiritual
pleasures in place of the pleasures with which it was obsessed. It wanted a light, a
solace, in this old age which in the view of the heedless is cold, burdensome, and
disagreeable. And all praise be to God and a hundred thousand thanks, just as I found
true, lasting, and sweet pleasures of belief in “There is no god but He” and in the light
of divine unity in place of all those false, disagreeable, fleeting worldly pleasures, so
through the light of divine unity, I saw old age which in the view of the heedless is
cold and burdensome to be most light, and warm, and luminous.
O you elderly men and women! Since you have belief and since you pray and
offer supplications which illuminate and increase belief, you can regard your old age
as eternal youth. For through it you can gain eternal youth. The old age which in truth
is cold, burdensome, ugly, dark, and full of pain is the old age of the people of
misguidance, indeed, their youth as

--- Sayfa 309 ---
309
well. It is they who should weep with sighs and regrets. While you, respected
believing elderly people, should joyfully offer thanks saying: “All praise and thanks
be to God for every situation!”
TWELFTH HOPE
One time, I was being held in the district of Barla in the province of Isparta in a
distressing captivity called exile, in a truly wretched state suffering both illness, and
old age, and absence from home, and in a village alone with no one, barred from all
company and communication. Then, in His perfect mercy, Almighty God bestowed a
light on me concerning the subtle points and mysteries of the All-Wise Qur’an which
was a source of consolation for me. With it, I tried to forget my pitiful, sad state. I
was able to forget my native land, my friends and relations, but alas, there was one
person I could not forget and that was Abdurrahman, who was both my nephew, and
my spiritual son, and my most devoted student, and my  bravest friend. He had parted
from me six or seven years previously. Neither he knew where I was so that he could
hasten to help and console me, nor did I know his situation so that I could correspond
with him and we could confide in each other. Now in my old age, I was in need of
someone loyal and self-sacrificing like him.
Then out of the blue someone gave me a letter. I opened it and saw it was from
Abdurrahman, written in a way which showed his true self. A part of it that clearly
shows three instances of wonder-working has been included among the pieces of the
Twenty-Seventh Letter. It made me weep, and it still makes me weep. The late
Abdurrahman wrote in the letter seriously and sincerely that he was disgusted with the
pleasures of the world and that his greatest desire was to reach me and look to my
needs in my old age just as I had looked to his when he was young. He also wanted to
help me with his capable pen in spreading the mysteries of the Qur’an, my true duty
in this world. He even wrote in his letter: “Send me twenty or thirty treatises and I’ll
write out twenty or thirty copies of each and get others to write them.”
His letter made me feel very hopeful in respect of the world. With the thought
that I had found a bold student who was so intelligent as to be a genius and would
assist me more loyally and with greater attachment than a true son, I forgot my
torturous captivity, loneliness, exile, and old age.
He had obtained a copy of the Tenth Word about belief in the hereafter before
writing the letter. It was as if it had been a remedy for him curing all the spiritual
wounds he had received during those six or seven years. He then wrote the letter to
me as if he was awaiting his death with a truly

--- Sayfa 310 ---
310
strong and shining belief. Then one or two months later while thinking of once again
passing a happy worldly life together with Abdurrahman, alas, I received news of his
death. I was so shaken that five years later I am still under its effect. It afflicted me
with a grief, sorrow, and sense of separation far exceeding the torturous captivity,
aloneness, exile, old age, and illness I was then suffering. Half of my private world
had died with the death of my mother, and now with Abdurrahman’s death, the other
half died. My ties with the world were now completely cut. For if he had lived, he
could have been both a powerful help in my duties which looked to the hereafter, and
a worthy successor to fill my place completely after me, and a most self-sacrificing
friend and consolation. He would have been my cleverest student and companion, and
a most trustworthy protector and owner of the Risale-i Nur.
Yes, in regard to humanity, such losses are extremely distressing and painful for
people like me. It’s true outwardly I was trying to endure it, but a fierce storm was
raging in my spirit. If from time to time solace proceeding from the Qur’an’s light had
not consoled me, I would not have been able to endure it. At the time I used to wander
alone in the mountains and valleys of Barla. Sitting in lonely places amid my sorrows,
pictures of the happy life I had spent in former times with my loyal students like
Abdurrahman passed through my imagination like the cinema; since due to old age
and exile I was swiftly affected, they broke my resistance. Suddenly the sacred
meaning of the verse,
Everything shall perish save His countenance; His is the command, and to
Him shall you return(28:88)
was unfolded to me. It caused me to declare: “O Eternal One, You alone are Eternal!
O Eternal One, You alone are Eternal!”, and truly consoled me.
Then, inspired by this verse’s meaning as is described in the treatise, The
Highway of the Practices of the Prophet (UWBP), I saw myself while in that lonely
valley and sad state, at the head of three vast corpses:
One was the sight of myself as a gravestone on the grave of the fifty-five dead
Said’s of my fifty-five years who had been buried in the course of my life.
The second corpse was the vast corpse of all my fellow-men who had died since
the time of Adam (UWP) and had been buried in the grave of the past. I saw myself as
a miniscule ant-like living creature at the head of that corpse, wandering over the face
of this century, which was like its gravestone.
The third corpse was the greater world which, like human beings and

--- Sayfa 311 ---
311
the travelling worlds which every year die, would also – in accordance with the above
verse – die; this was embodied before my imagination.
Then the verse,
But if they turn away, say: “God suffices me, there is no god but He; in Him
do I place my trust—He the Sustainer of the Throne [of Glory]
Supreme!”(9:129)
illuminated with its true solace and inextinguishable light that awesome vision arising
from my grief at Abdurrahman’s death; it came to my assistance with its allusive
meaning, which states: since Almighty God exists, He takes the place of everything.
Since He is Eternal, He is surely sufficient. A single manifestation of His grace takes
the place of the whole world. One manifestation of His light infuses with life the three
vast  corpses mentioned above, showing that they are not corpses but having
completed their duties, have departed for other worlds. This mystery has been
explained in the Third Flash, so that sufficing with the above, here I only say that the
two repetitions of the phrase: “O Eternal One, You alone are Eternal!  O Eternal One,
You alone are Eternal!”, which illustrates the meaning of “Everything shall perish
save His countenance [to the end of the verse],”(28:88) saved me from that
distressing, sad state. It was like this:
The first time I uttered “O Eternal One, You alone are Eternal!”, it began to cure
me like a surgical operation on the endless spiritual wounds arising from the passing
of the world and of the friends in this world to whom I was attached, and from the ties
binding me being broken.
The second time, the phrase “O Eternal One, You alone are Eternal!” was both a
salve and an antidote for all those innumerable wounds. That is to say: “You are
eternal. If the rest depart, let them; You are enough for me. Since You abide for ever,
a single manifestation of Your mercy is sufficient in place of all transient things.
Since You exist, everything exists for the person who knows of the connection with
Your existence established through belief and Islam acts in accordance with that
relation. Transience and decline, death and non-existence are a veil, a renewal; like
travelling through different domains.” Thinking this, my painful, sad, grievous, dark,
awesome, separation-stained state of mind was transformed into a happy, joyful,
pleasurable, luminous, lovable, familiar state. My tongue and heart, indeed all the
particles of my being through the tongue of disposition, exclaimed: “All praise be to
God!”
One thousandth of that manifestation of mercy is this: I returned to Barla from
that sorrowful valley and melancholy state of mind, where I saw that a young man
called Kuleönlü Mustafa had come to ask me some

--- Sayfa 312 ---
312
questions about the five daily prayers and ablutions. Although I did not accept visitors
at that hour, my spirit perceived as though with foresight his sincerity of spirit and the
future valuable services he would perform for the Risale-i Nur,11 and I did not turn
him away, I accepted him.12 It later became clear that Almighty God sent Mustafa to
me as a sample in place of Abdurrahman, who as a worthy successor would carry out
completely the duty of a true heir in the work of the Risale-i Nur, as though saying: “I
took one Abdurrahman from you, but I shall give you thirty like the Mustafa you see
in return, who will be both students, and nephews, and spiritual sons, and brothers,
and self-sacrificing comrades in this duty for religion.”
Yes, praise be to God, He gave me thirty Abdurrahman’s. So I told myself: “O
weeping heart! Since you have seen this sample and through him He has healed the
most serious of your spiritual wounds, be assured that He will heal all the rest of
them.”
My elderly brothers and sisters who like me have lost at the time of their old age
a child or relative they love dearly, and who have to bear the searing sorrows of
separation together with the burdens of old age! You have understood from my
situation that although it was much harsher than yours, it was cured and healed by a
verse of the Qur’an. This being so, there are remedies in that sacred pharmacy to heal
all your difficulties. If you have recourse to it through belief and make use of those
remedies

11 With his fine pen, Mustafa’s younger brother, Küçük Ali, wrote out more than seven hundred
copies of parts of the Risale-i Nur and himself became an Abdurrahman. He also trained many other
Abdurrahman’s.
12 He truly showed that he was not only worthy of being accepted, but also worthy of the future.*
* An event confirming that Ustad’s prediction that Mustafa, the first student of the Risale-i Nur,
was worthy of the future:
The day preceding the eve of ‘Eid al-Adha, the Feast of Sacrifices, Ustad intended to go out to
take some air. When he sent me to fetch the horse, I said to him: “Don’t you go down. I’ll lock the door
from the back, and go out from the wood-store.” Ustad said: “No. You go out of the door.” And he
went down. After I had gone out, he bolted the door after me. I went out and he returned upstairs. He
then slept. A while later Kuleönlü Mustafa arrived together with Haji Osman. Ustad was not accepting
anyone, and he was not going to accept anyone. He would never have taken in two people together,
especially at that hour, and would have turned them away. Nevertheless, when our brother Kuleönlü
Mustafa, whom we are talking about here, came with Haji Osman, it was as though the door said to
him through the tongue of disposition: “Ustad will not accept you, but I’ll open for you.” And although
it was bolted from the inside, the door opened of its own accord for Mustafa. That is to say, just as the
future verified what Ustad had said about him: “Mustafa is worthy of the future,” so did the door testify
to it.
                                                                                              Signed:  Hüsrev
Yes, what Hüsrev has written is correct and I confirm it. The door both greeted this blessed
Mustafa in my place, and accepted him.                                           Said Nursi

--- Sayfa 313 ---
313
through worship, the heavy burdens of your old age and your sorrows will be
alleviated considerably.
The reason for writing this long piece was to seek more prayers for
Abdurrahman, not to weary you. Also, my purpose in showing my worst wound in an
extremely grievous and unpleasant way which may upset you unduly and put you off,
is to demonstrate what a wondrous remedy and brilliant light is the sacred antidote of
the All-Wise Qur’an.
THIRTEENTH HOPE13
In this Hope I shall describe an important scene from my life; it is bound to be
somewhat lengthy, so I hope you will not become bored or be offended.
After being saved from captivity in Russia during the Great War, my serving
religion in the Darü’l-Hikmet kept me in Istanbul for two or three years. Then through
the guidance of the All-Wise Qur’an and spiritual influence of Ghawth al-A’zam and
the awakening of old age, I felt a weariness at the civilized life of Istanbul and a
disgust at its glittering social life. A feeling of longing for my native land drove me
there, I went to Van with the thought that since I am bound to die, I’ll die in my own
country.
First of all, I went to visit my medrese in Van, the Horhor. The Armenians had
razed it during the Russian occupation, like the rest of the buildings. It was right
under and adjacent to Van’s famous citadel, which is a great monolith like a
mountain. My true friends, brothers, and close students of the medrese were embodied
before my eyes. Some of those devoted friends had become actual martyrs, while
others had died due to that calamity and had in effect become martyrs.
I could not restrain myself from weeping. I climbed to the top of the citadel
which overlooking the medrese, towers above it to the height of two minarets, and I
sat down. I went back in my imagination seven or eight years. Having a powerful
imagination, I wandered all around that time in my mind. There was no one around to
distract me and draw me back. For I was alone. As my view of those seven or eight
years expanded, I saw enough to fill a century. I saw that the town at the foot of the
citadel had been completely burnt and destroyed. It was as though two hundred years
had passed from when I had seen it previously to them, it seemed so infinitely sad.
Most of the houses’ inhabitants had been my friends and

13 It is a subtle ‘coincidence’ that the incident of the medrese* which this Thirteenth Hope
describes occurred thirteen years ago. (1921 – Tr.)
* Medrese: school where religious sciences were taught. See also, note 21, page 325. (Tr.)

--- Sayfa 314 ---
314
acquaintances. The majority of them had died in the migrations, may God have mercy
on them, or had gone to a wretched exile. Only the Armenian quarter remained, all the
Muslim houses of Van had been levelled. My heart was lacerated. I was so affected, if
I had had a thousand eyes they would have all wept together. I had returned to my
homeland from exile; I had supposed that I had been saved from exile. But alas! the
most lamentable exile I experienced was in my homeland. I saw that hundreds of my
students and friends to whom I had been closely attached, like Abdurrahman in the
Twelfth Hope, had entered the grave and that their places were all ruins.
There were some lines that had long been in my mind but I had not understood
their true meaning. Now before that sad scene I gained a full understanding of them.
The lines were these: “If there was no separation from friends, death could find no
way to our spirits to seize them.”14 That is to say, what kills man most is separation
from those he loves. Yes, nothing had caused me as much suffering and sorrow as that
situation. If assistance had not come from the Qur’an and from belief, my grief and
sorrow and suffering would have made my spirit fly away.
Since early times in their verses, poets have lamented the destruction with time of
the places they have been together with their beloveds. I had seen this most painfully
with my own eyes. With the sorrow of someone passing by the dwellings of beloved
friends after two hundred years, my heart and spirit joined my eyes in weeping. Then
one by one the happy scenes of the life I had passed for nearly twenty years in study
with my valuable students, when the places which were now in ruins were flourishing
and happy, sprang to life before me like pictures at the cinema, then died away and
vanished. This continued before the eye of my imagination for some time.
Then I felt astonished at the state of the worldly, how is it that they deceive
themselves? For the situation there showed clearly that this world is transitory and
that human beings are guests within it. I saw with my own eyes how true are the
constantly repeated words of the people of reality: “The world is cruel, treacherous,
bad; don’t be deceived by it!” I also saw that just as man is connected with his own
body and household, so is he connected with his town, his country, and with the
world. For while weeping with my two eyes at the pitifulness of old age in respect of
my body, I wanted to weep with ten eyes not only at my medrese’s old age, but at its
death. And I felt the need to weep with a hundred eyes at the half-death of my
beautiful homeland.

14 These lines are in Arabic in the original text, and are by Mutanabi. (Tr.)

--- Sayfa 315 ---
315
It states in a Hadith that every morning an angel calls out: “You are born to die,
and construct buildings that they may be destroyed.”15 I was hearing this truth not
with my ears, but with my eyes.
Ten years later I still weep when I think of that situation, as it made me weep
then. Yes, the ruins of the houses at the foot of the ancient citadel, thousands of years
old, and the town ageing eight hundred years in eight years, and the death of my once-
flourishing medrese which had been the gathering-place of friends, all indicated the
vastness of the immaterial corpse of all the medreses in the Ottoman Empire, which
now had died; the great monolith of Van’s citadel had become a gravestone to all of
them. It was as though my students who had been together with me in the medrese
eight years previously were weeping in their graves together with me. Indeed, the
ruined walls of the town and its scattered stones were weeping with me. I saw them to
be weeping.
Then I understood that I could not endure this exile in my native land. I thought
that I would either have to join them in the grave, or withdraw into a cave in the
mountains and await my death there. I told myself: “These unendurable, searing
separations which destroy patience and resistance surely make death preferable to life.
The pains of such a life are unbearable.”
I then cast a glance over the six aspects and saw that they were all black. The
heedlessness resulting from my intense grief showed me the world as terrifying,
empty, desolate, and about to collapse over my head. My spirit sought a point of
support in the face of innumerable hostile calamities. Its endless desires which stretch
to eternity were seeking out something to satisfy them. While awaiting consolation in
the face of the sorrow arising from those endless separations and deaths, that endless
devastation, suddenly the truth was manifested of the All-Wise Qur’an’s verses:
Whatever is in the heavens and on earth—let it declare the praises and glory
of God; for He is Exalted in Might, the Wise. * To Him belongs the dominion
of the heavens and the earth: it is He Who gives life and death; and He has
power over all things.(57:1-2)
It saved me from that pitiful, terrible, sad, separation-stained imagining, and opened
my eyes. I saw that the fruits at the tops of the fruit-trees were looking at me as
though smiling. “Note us as well,” they were saying. “Do not only look at the ruins.”
The verses’ truth brought the following thought to mind:

15 al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, ii, 128, No: 2041; al-Munawi, Fayd al-Qadir, v, 483, No: 8053; al-
Haythami, Majma‘ al-Zawa’id, i, 94.

--- Sayfa 316 ---
316
“Why does an artificial letter written in the form of a town by the hand of man,
who is a guest on the page of Van’s plain, being wiped out by a calamitous torrent
called the Russian invasion sadden you to this extent? Consider the Pre-Eternal
Inscriber, everything’s True Owner and Sustainer, for His missives on this page
continue to be written in glittering fashion, in the way you used to see. Your weeping
over those desolate ruins arises from the error of forgetting their True Owner, not
thinking that men are guests and imagining them to be owner.”
A door to reality opened up from my error, from that searing sight, and my soul
was prepared to accept the reality completely. Like iron is plunged in the fire so that it
softens and may be profited from, that grievous sight and terrible state were fire
which softened my soul. Through the reality of the above verses, the Qur’an of
Miraculous Exposition showed my soul the effulgence of the truths of belief, causing
it to accept it.
Yes, all thanks be to God, as is proved conclusively in such parts of the Risale-i
Nur as the Twentieth Letter, through the effulgence of belief in God, the truth of the
verses becomes a source of strength for the spirit and heart which unfolds
proportionately to the firmness of each person’s belief. This was so powerful it
afforded me the strength to confront calamities even a hundred times more dreadful
than the situation I beheld. It uttered this reminder: “Everything is subjected to the
command of this country’s True Owner, your Creator. He holds the reins of all things.
Your relation with Him should be sufficient.”
On recognizing my Creator and relying on Him, all the things that had  appeared
hostile gave up their enmity, and the grievous things that had made me weep started
to make me happy. As we have demonstrated with certain proofs in many places in
the Risale-i Nur, through the light proceeding from belief in the hereafter, that
recognition and reliance afforded such assistance in the face of my endless desires
that it was sufficient not only for my attachment to and desire for insignificant,
temporary, brief worldly friendships, but for my innumerable far-reaching desires in
the world of permanence, for everlasting happiness through all eternity. For through
one manifestation of His mercy, the All-Merciful and Compassionate One every
spring lays on the table of that season incalculable numbers of delightful, artful
bounties in order to please His guests of one or two hours. Then after providing them
with these, which are a sort of snack or appetizer, He prepares for His servants
innumerable varieties of bounties, and for an unending time fills eight permanent
Paradises with them from among His everlasting dwelling-places. The person who
relies on the mercy of such an All-Merciful and Compassionate One through belief
and

--- Sayfa 317 ---
317
knows his relation surely finds such a source of assistance that even its least degree
provides for innumerable hopes reaching to eternity, and causes them to continue.
Furthermore, through the reality of the verses, the light proceeding from the
effulgence of belief was manifested in such brilliant fashion that it lit up those six
dark aspects like daytime. It illuminated the grief I felt for my students and friends in
my medrese and in the town with this reminder: “The world your friends have gone to
is not dark. They have merely gone somewhere else; you will meet again.” It put an
end to my tears entirely, and made me understand that I would find others resembling
them in this world who would take their place.
Yes, all praise be to God, He both raised to life the dead Van medrese with the
medrese of Isparta, and He in meaning raised my friends there to life with the more
numerous and valuable students and friends here. It also made known that the world is
not empty and meaningless and that my thinking of it as a ravaged country had been
wrong: as required by His wisdom, the True Owner changes the artificial scenes made
by man and renews His missives. The more the fruits of some trees are plucked, the
more others grow in their places; so too death and separation among mankind
constitute renewal and change. In respect of belief, they are a renewal that produces
not the grievous sorrow arising from the lack of friends, but the sweet sorrow born of
parting in the hope of meeting again in another, better place.
The verses also illuminated the face of the beings in the universe which had
appeared dark in the former ghastly situation. I wanted to offer thanks for this, and the
following Arabic lines occurred to me, which described that reality exactly. I said:
“All praise be to God for the light of belief, which dispels the illusion of beings
as hostile strangers, moribund and savage, as weeping orphans, and shows them to be
loving brothers, living and familiar, joyfully employed in mentioning God’s names
and glorifying Him.”
That is to say, due to the heedlessness resulting from my grievous state of mind,
some of the beings in the universe appeared to my neglectful soul as hostile and
strange,16 others as awesome corpses, and yet others as orphans weeping in their
loneliness. In the light of belief I saw that they were all friends and brothers. As for
the awesome corpses, some were living and friendly while others had been released
from their duties. Seeing through the light of belief the wailing of the orphans to be
the murmuring

16 Like earthquake, storm, tempest, plague, and fire.

--- Sayfa 318 ---
318
of remembrance and glorification of God, I offered endless praise and thanks to the
Glorious Creator, for He had given me belief, the source of these innumerable
bounties. And seeing that it is incumbent on me to think of all the beings in my
personal world, which is as vast as the world, as being engaged in the praise and
glorification of God, and through intention to make use of them, it means that I say
“All praise and thanks to God for the light of belief” together with all those beings,
who utter it singly and as a whole through the tongue of disposition.
 Moreover, the pleasures of life, which had been reduced to nothing by my
heedless and dreadful state of mind, and my hopes, which had withered up entirely,
and my personal enjoyment and bounties, which had been constricted within the
narrowest bounds, indeed, destroyed, suddenly so expanded through the light of belief
that narrow sphere around my heart that it contained the whole universe – as has been
proved clearly in other  parts of the Risale-i Nur – and in place of the bounties which
had withered up in the garden of the Horhor Medrese and lost their taste, it made the
realms of this world and the hereafter each a merciful table of bounties. It showed that
not only the ten or so human members like the eyes, ears, and heart, but also the
hundred members were an extremely long arm which believers might extend each
according to his degree, to those two tables of the Most Merciful, to gather in the
bounties from all sides. At that time, I uttered the following words both to express this
elevated truth, and as thanks for those endless bounties:
“I offer praise and thanks to my Creator for the light and bounty of belief to my
very utmost, with all the particles of my being, for it shows me that this world and the
hereafter are overflowing with bounties and mercy, and allows me and all true
believers to benefit from those two vast tables with the hands of all their senses,
which develop and unfold through the light of belief and Islam.”
Since belief is so tremendously effective in this world, certainly in the Eternal
Realm it will have such fruits and effulgences that they cannot be comprehended with
the mind in this world, nor described.
O you elderly people who like me experience the pains of separation from
numerous friends due to old age! However much older than me in years the oldest of
you is, my guess is that in meaning I am older than him. For since by nature I feel
excessive pity and compassion for my fellow beings, I have experienced the
sufferings of thousands of my brothers in addition to my own pains and feel as though
I have lived for hundreds of years. However much you have suffered the calamity of
separation, you have not suffered it as I have. For I have no son that I should think
only of

--- Sayfa 319 ---
319
him. I feel pain and sympathy towards thousands of Muslim sons and their sorrows,
and even innocent animals, due to the excessive pity and compassion in my nature. I
do not have a house of my own that I should think only of it; I am bound through
Islamic zeal to this country and even the Islamic world, as though they were my
house. I am saddened at the pains of my fellow Muslims in those two great houses,
and am sorrowful at being parted from them!
Thus, the light of belief was sufficient for me and all my sorrows arising from old
age and the pains of separation; it gave me an inextinguishable hope, an unassailable
faith, an unquenchable light, unending solace. Belief then is certainly more than
enough for you in the face of the darkness, heedlessness, sorrows, and griefs of old
age. In fact, the old age that is utterly black and lacking in light and solace, and is the
most grievous and terrible separation, is the old age and separation suffered by the
people of misguidance and the dissipated. It is possible to experience the belief that
affords hope, light, and solace, and its effects by adopting a consciously worshipful
attitude, worthy of old age and appropriate to Islam. It is not possible by trying to
imitate the young, and plunging one’s head into heedlessness and forgetting old age.
Dwell on the Hadith, the meaning of which is: “The best of the youths among
you are those who imitate those of mature years, while the worst of your elderly are
those who imitate the young.”17 That is to say, “The best youths are those who
resemble the elderly in self-restraint and abstaining from vice, while the worst elderly
people are those who resemble the young in plunging themselves into dissipation and
heedlessness.
My elderly brothers and sisters! There is a Hadith which says: “Divine mercy is
ashamed to leave unanswered the prayers offered to the divine court by elderly
believers of sixty or seventy years.”18 Seeing that divine mercy holds you in such
respect, be respectful towards this respect by performing your worship!
FOURTEENTH HOPE
The summary at the start of the Fourth Ray, on the luminous verse “For us God
suffices,”(3:173) describes how having been isolated from everything by ‘the
worldly’, I was afflicted with five sorts of exile. The heedlessness arising from
distress led me to look not to the consoling lights of the

17 ‘Ali Mawardi, Adab al-Dunya wa’l-Din, 27; al-Ghazali, Ihya’ ‘Ulum al-Din, i, 142; al-Munawi,
Fayd al-Qadir, iii, 487; al-Haythami, Majma‘ al-Zawa’id, x, 270.
18 al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, i, 244; al-Haythami, Majma‘ al-Zawa’id, x, 149.

--- Sayfa 320 ---
320
Risale-i Nur which would have aided me, but directly to my heart and my spirit. I saw
that governing in me were an overpowering desire for immortality, an intense love of
existence, a great yearning for life, together with an infinite impotence and endless
want. But an awesome transience was extinguishing the immortality. Suffering this
state of mind, I exclaimed like the poet:
Reality wanted the passing of my body, though my heart
desired its immortality;
I was afflicted with an incurable ill that not even Luqman could cure!
I bowed my head in despair. Suddenly the verse, “For us God suffices, and He is
the Best Disposer of Affairs” came to my assistance, summoning me to read it with
attention. So I recited it five hundred times every day. The more I recited it, nine
levels of meaning were unfolded to me out of its many lights, at the level of ‘certainty
at the degree of knowledge,’ and even of ‘certainty at the degree of witnessing.’
The First Level of the Luminous Verse “For us God suffices”
By virtue of a shadow in my essential being of a manifestation of a name of the
One of Glory and Perfection, who, possessing absolute perfection, is of Himself and
for no other reason worthy of love, I had an innate desire for immortality, directed not
to my own immortality but to the existence, perfection, and immortality of that
Absolutely Perfect One. But due to heedlessness that innate love had lost its way,
become attached to the shadow and enamoured of the mirror of immortality. Then the
verse, “For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of Affairs” raised the veil. I
saw and felt and experienced at the degree of ‘absolute certainty’ that the pleasure and
happiness of my immortality lay exactly and in more perfect form in the immortality
of the Enduring One of Perfection and in affirming my Sustainer and God, and in
believing in Him, and submitting to Him. The evidence for this has been explained in
the Fourth Ray, the treatise on the verse “For us God suffices,” in twelve sections
which are extremely profound and subtle and will fill with wonder anyone with fine
sensibilities.
The Second Level of the Luminous Verse “For us God suffices”
At a time when, in my old age, exile, aloneness, and isolation, ‘the worldly’ were
attacking me with their spies and stratagems despite my boundless innate impotence, I
told my heart: “Whole armies are attacking a single man whose hands are tied and is
ill and weak. Is there nothing from which he can seek help?” I had recourse to the
verse “For us God suffices and He is the Best Disposer of Affairs,” and it informed
me of the following:
Through the document of belief, you become connected to a Ruler of

--- Sayfa 321 ---
321
Absolute Power who every spring equips in perfect order all the plant and animal
armies on the face of the earth composed of four hundred thousand different nations.
In addition, He places in the ‘extracts’ of the Most Merciful known as seeds and
grains, which are like the meat, sugar and other food extracts discovered recently by
the people of civilization but a hundred times more perfect, all the sustenance of the
huge armies of foremost man, and of all the animals. He folds up inside those extracts
the instructions of divine determining concerning their cooking and development, and
places them in their tiny protective cases. The creation of those tiny coffers is with
such ease, speed, and abundance from the “Ka\f. Nu\n” factory, which is governed by
the command of “‘Be!’ and it is,” that the Qur’an states: “The Creator merely
commands and it comes into being.” Gaining such support with the document of the
relationship of belief, you can rely on an infinite strength and power. As I assimilated
this lesson from the verse, I found such a moral strength arising from belief that
through its power I could have challenged not only my present enemies, but the whole
world. With all my spirit I declared: “For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer
of Affairs!”
The Third Level of the Luminous Verse “For us God suffices”
At a time when, finding my attachment to the world to be broken due to suffering
the oppression of those exiles and illnesses, belief recalled to me that I was destined
for perpetual happiness in an eternal world, an everlasting realm, I gave up sighing
regretfully, which caused further grief and yearning, and became cheerful and happy.
However, this goal of the imagination and spirit and result of man’s nature could only
be realized through the infinite power of an Absolutely Omnipotent One who knows
and records the action and rest and conduct and states, in word and deed, of all
creatures, and takes as His friend and addressee insignificant and absolutely impotent
man, giving him a rank superior to all beings; it could only be realized through His
infinite favours to man and the importance He gives him. While thinking of these two
points, that is, the activity of such a power and the importance of apparently
insignificant man, I wanted an explanation which would deepen belief and satisfy the
heart. Again I had recourse to the verse, and it told me to note the “na\,” “For us,” and
to heed who is saying “For us God suffices” together with me.
I at once looked and saw that innumerable birds and flies, which are miniature
birds, and uncountable animals, and boundless plants and trees were, like me, reciting
through the tongue of disposition “For us God suffices, and He is the Best Disposer of
Affairs.” They recall to everyone the

--- Sayfa 322 ---
322
immensity and majesty of a power which before our eyes particularly in the spring
creates in most abundant plenitude, with the greatest ease and on a vast scale, from
eggs, seeds, grains, and droplets of fluid, which all resemble each other and whose
substance is the same, the hundred thousand species of birds, the hundreds of
thousands of sorts of animals, the hundred thousand types of plants, and the hundred
thousand varieties of trees, without error, defect, or confusion, in adorned, balanced,
well-ordered fashion, and in forms all different from one another. They demonstrate
to us His unity and oneness by being made in this way together, one within the other
and resembling each other. I understood that any interference or participation in the
dominical, creative act of disposal which displays thus incalculable miracles was not
possible. Those who want to understand my personality and human character, which
is like that of all believers, and those who want to be like me, should look at the
explanation of the ‘I’ in the first person plural ‘us’ in “For us God suffices,” that is,
the explanation of myself. What is my apparently insignificant, wanting being – like
that of all believers? What is life? What is humanity? What is Islam? What is certain,
affirmative belief? What is knowledge of God? How should love be? They should
understand and take a lesson!
The Fourth Level of the Luminous Verse “For us God suffices”
A time I was being shaken by old age, exile, illness, and defeat coincided with a
period of heedlessness. I was grievously anxious that my being, to which I was
intensely attached and by which I was captivated, indeed all creatures, were departing
for non-existence, then again I had recourse to the verse. It told me: “Note my
meaning carefully and look through the telescope of belief!”
So I looked and with the eye of belief and saw that like all believers, my
miniscule being was the mirror of a limitless being, and through infinite expansion,
the means of gaining innumerable existences, and was a word of wisdom producing
the fruits of numerous permanent existences far more valuable than itself. I knew with
‘certainty at the degree of knowledge’ that to live for an instant in this respect was as
valuable as an eternal existence. For I understood through the consciousness of belief
that this being of mine was the work of art, artefact, and manifestation of the
Necessarily Existent One. So being saved from the anxiety of loneliness and from
innumerable separations and their pains, I formed relations and bonds of brotherhood
with beings to the number of divine acts and names connected with beings and
especially living beings, and I knew that there was a permanent union with all the
beings I loved, and only a temporary separation. And so, through belief and the
relations of belief, like all beings, my being gained

--- Sayfa 323 ---
323
the lights of innumerable existences untouched by separation. Even if it departed, they
would remain behind and it would be happy as though it had remained itself.
In short, death is not separation, it is union; it is a change of abode; it is the
producing of an eternal fruit.
The Fifth Level of the Luminous Verse “For us God suffices”
Another time my life was being shaken by harsh conditions, they directed my
attention towards life. I saw that my life was departing at speed; the hereafter was
drawing close; due to the oppression I was suffering my life had started to be
extinguished. As is explained in the section of the Risale-i Nur on the divine name of
Ever-Living, I thought sorrowfully of how with its important functions, and great
benefits and virtues, life did not deserve to be so swiftly extinguished but to last a
long time. I again had recourse to my master, the verse, “For us God suffices, and He
is the Best Disposer of Affairs.” This time it told me: “Consider life from the point of
view of the Ever-Living and Self-Subsistent One, who gives you life!”
So I looked and I saw that if only one aspect of my life looked to me, a hundred
looked to the Ever-Living and Self-Subsistent One. And if, of its results, one looked
to me, a thousand looked to my Creator. Since this is the case, to live for one instant
within the bounds of divine pleasure is sufficient; a long time is not required. This
truth may be explained in four matters. Anyone who is not dead or who wants to be
alive should seek the nature and reality of life and its true rights in those four matters;
they will find them and be raised to life!
A summary is this: the more life looks to the Ever-Living and Self-Subsistent
One, and the more belief becomes the life and spirit of life, the more it becomes
perpetual and produces enduring fruits. It also becomes so elevated that it receives the
manifestation of eternity; it no longer looks to the brevity or length of a lifetime.
The Sixth Level of the Luminous Verse “For us God suffices”
At a time when my advancing years and old age were giving warning of my
particular parting amid the events of the end of time, which tell of the destruction of
the world, the time of general parting, the feelings in my nature of love of beauty and
passion for loveliness and fascination by perfection were unfolding in an
extraordinarily sensitive manner. I saw with extraordinary clarity and sorrow that
transience and decline, which are always destructive, and death and non-existence,
which perpetually cause separations, were tearing apart this beautiful world and these
beautiful creatures in terrible fashion, and destroying their beauty. The metaphorical
love

--- Sayfa 324 ---
324
in my nature boiled up and rebelled against this situation. In order to find consolation,
I again had recourse to the verse “For us God suffices.” It told me: “Recite me and
consider my meaning carefully!”
So I entered the observatory of the verse in Sura al-Nur,
God is the Light of the Heavens and the Earth [to the end of the
verse],(24:35)
and looked through the telescope of belief to the most distant levels of the verse “For
us God suffices,” then through the microscope of the insight of belief at its most
subtle mysteries, and saw the following:
Mirrors, pieces of glass, transparent things, and even bubbles, show the various
hidden beauties of the sun’s light and of the seven colours in its light; and through
their disappearance and renewal, and different capacities and refractions, they renew
that beauty; and with their reflections, they display the hidden beauties and loveliness
of the sun and its light. In exactly the same way, in order to act as mirrors to the
sacred  beauty of the All-Beauteous One of Glory, the Pre-Eternal and Post-Eternal
Sun, and to the everlasting loveliness of His most beautiful names, and to renew their
manifestations, these beautiful creatures, these lovely artefacts, these exquisite beings,
arrive and depart without stopping. Powerful proofs are expounded in detail in the
Risale-i Nur that demonstrate that the beauties apparent on them belong not to them,
but are signs, indications, flashes, and manifestations of a transcendent, sacred beauty
which wants to become manifest. The explanation begins by saying that three of those
proofs have been mentioned briefly and most reasonably. The treatise leaves in
amazement everyone of fine perception who sees it so that in addition to benefiting
from it themselves, they find it necessary to try to allow others to benefit from it.
Anyone whose mind is not rotten and heart not corrupted, will appreciate, admire, and
recommend the five points explained in the second proof, and exclaiming:
“Ma’shallah! Barakallah!” will perceive and affirm that it is a wondrous marvel
which will exalt his apparently lowly, wanting being.
FIFTEENTH HOPE19
One time when I was in compulsory residence in Emirdağ,20 in what

19 This Fifteenth Hope was written by a Nurju to complete in the future the Treatise for the
Elderly, and as a source for its composition, since the period of the Risale-i Nur’s writing had come to
an end three years’ previously.
20 The small town in central Anatolia where Bediuzzaman was exiled in 1944, following his
release from Denizli Prison. He remained in compulsory residence here until 1951, with a break of
twenty months in Afyon Prison, from January 1948 to September 1949. (Tr.)

--- Sayfa 325 ---
325
was virtually solitary confinement, I became wearied of life due to the torments they
inflicted on me with their surveillance and arbitrary treatment, which I found hard to
bear, and I regretted having been released from prison. I longed for Denizli Prison
with all my spirit, and wanted to enter the grave. But while thinking, prison and the
grave are preferable to such a life, and deciding to enter one or the other, divine grace
came to my assistance: it bestowed on the students of the Medresetü’z-Zehra,21 whose
pens were like duplicating machines, one of the machines, which had just appeared.
All at once, five hundred copies each of the valuable collections of the Risale-i Nur
appeared from a single pen. Their presaging new victories made me love that
distressing life, and caused me to offer unending thanks.
A while later, unable to endure the Risale-i Nur’s victories, its covert enemies
prompted the government to act against us. Again life became difficult for me. Then
suddenly dominical grace was manifested: the officials connected with the case, who
were those most in need of the Risale-i Nur, studied the confiscated copies in the
course of their duties most curiously and carefully, and its treatises gave their hearts a
sense of bias towards it. As they began to appreciate it rather than criticize it, the
Risale-i Nur’s circle of study greatly expanded. It produced profits a hundred times
greater than our material losses, reducing to nothing our anxiety and distress.
Then, secret, hostile dissemblers directed the government’s attention towards my
person. They recalled my former political activities. They aroused suspicions about
me in both the judiciary, and the education authorities, and the police, and the Home
Affairs Office. These spread at the hand of the different parties and the incitement of
concealed communist anarchists. They started to pressure us and arrest us, and
confiscate the parts of the Risale-i Nur that fell into their hands. The activities of the
Risale-i Nur students came to a standstill. A number of officials made false
accusations which no one at all could believe. They tried to spread around the most
extraordinary slander, but they could make no one believe it.
Then they arrested me during the coldest days of winter on some trite

21 The name of the university Bediuzzaman strove throughout his life to found in eastern Anatolia,
where the religious sciences would be taught together with the modern sciences.  He received funds
from Sultan Reşad and laid the foundations on the shores of Lake Van in 1911, but it was not
completed due to the outbreak of World War I. With the spread of the Risale-i Nur in the first decades
of the republic, Risale-i Nur Medreses, or places where the Risale-i Nur was studied or copies of it
were written, opened throughout Turkey. Bediuzzaman then called the Risale-i Nur students, students
of the Medresetü’z-Zehra. (Tr.)

--- Sayfa 326 ---
326
pretext, and put me into solitary confinement in prison in a large and extremely cold
ward, leaving me two days without a stove. I was accustomed to light my stove
several times a day in my small room and always had live coals in the brazier, so with
my illness and weakness I could endure it only with difficulty. While struggling in
this situation suffering from both a fever and the cold, and dreadful distress and anger,
a truth unfolded in my heart through divine grace. It uttered the following warning to
my spirit:
“You called prison the Medrese-i Yûsufiye – the School of the Prophet Joseph,
and while in Denizli, things like relief a thousand times greater than your distress, and
spiritual profit, and the other prisoners benefiting from the Risale-i Nur, and its
widespread triumphs, all made you offer endless thanks instead of complaining. They
made each hour of your imprisonment and hardship the equivalent of ten hours’
worship, and made those passing hours eternal. God willing, the calamity-stricken in
this third School of Joseph benefiting from the Risale-i Nur and finding consolation
will heat this cold, severe distress of yours and transform it into joy. If the people you
are angry at are being deceived and are ill-treating you without realizing it, they are
not worth being angry at. And if they are tormenting you and causing you suffering
knowingly, out of spite and on account of misguidance, they will in a short time enter
the solitary confinement of the grave due to the eternal execution of death, to suffer
everlasting torment and torture. Their oppression is earning for you both merit and
spiritual pleasures, and is making transient hours eternal, and is allowing you to
perform scholarly and religious duties with sincerity.”
With all my strength I exclaimed: “All praise be to God!” Out of humanity, I
pitied those tyrants and prayed: “O my Sustainer, reform them!” As I wrote in my
statement to the Ministry of Internal Affairs, in this new incident the truly guilty are
those tyrants who in ten respects act unlawfully in the name of the law. They found
extraordinary pretexts showing to anyone fair-minded with their slanders and
fabrications, which would have made those who heard them laugh and lovers of the
truth weep, that they can find no way to attack the Risale-i Nur and its students in
respect of the law and right, so deviate into lunacy.
For instance, the officials who spied on us for a month could find nothing
incriminating, so they wrote out a memorandum saying: “Said’s servants bought rak›
from a shop and took it to him.” They could find no one to sign the memo, but finally
arrested a drunken stranger and got him to sign it under threat. Even he said: “God
forgive us! Who would sign this extraordinary lie?” So they were compelled to tear it
up.

--- Sayfa 327 ---
327
A  S e c o n d  E x a m p l e : Someone I did not know and still do not know, lent
his horse so that I could go out for a ride. I used to go out most days for a couple of
hours in the summer, for my illness and to take some air. I had given my word that I
would give the owner of the horse and phaeton books worth fifty liras, so as not to
break my rule and become indebted to him. Could any harm come of such a thing?
But then both the Governor, and the court officials, and the police questioned us fifty
times about the horse’s owner. As though it were some important political event
affecting public security! One person even said loyally that the horse was his and
another, that the phaeton was his, in order to put a stop to this meaningless
questioning, and they were both arrested together with me. We watched numerous
childish escapades like these two examples and laughed till we cried. And we
understood that those who attack the Risale-i Nur and its students make fools of
themselves.
An amusing incident from among those examples: the reason given on the paper
authorizing my arrest was “disturbing public order.” Not having seen the document, I
told the public prosecutor: “I slandered you last night. I said to a police officer who
was questioning me for the Police Chief: ‘If I haven’t served this country’s public
security as much as a thousand public prosecutors and a thousand police chiefs – three
times – may God damn me!’”
Just at that point, when in those freezing conditions I was in most need of rest and
not catching cold and not thinking of the world, I was overcome with anger and
vexation at those who had sent me into this intolerable exile, isolation, imprisonment,
and oppression, in a way that spelt out their hatred and ill-intentions. Divine grace
came to my assistance, and the following was imparted to my heart:
“Divine determining, which is pure justice, has a large part in the wrongful
oppression which these people are inflicting on you. You have food to eat in this
prison; that sustenance of yours called you here. It should be met with contentment
and resignation. Dominical wisdom and mercy have a large part, which is to
illuminate those in this prison and console them, and to gain you reward. This share
should be met with endless thanks and patience. Your soul has a part in it, due to its
faults which you did not know about. In the face of this, you should tell your soul by
repenting and seeking forgiveness that it deserved this blow. Some of your secret
enemies have a part in it, with their intrigues and deceiving certain ingenuous and
suspicious officials and inciting them to such oppression. In the face of this share, the
terrible immaterial blows dealt by the Risale-i Nur on those dissemblers have avenged
you completely. That is enough for them. The final

--- Sayfa 328 ---
328
part is the officials who were the actual means. In the face of this share, it is an act of
magnanimity to forgive them in accordance with the rule,
Those who suppress their anger and forgive people—verily God loves those
who do good,(3:134)
for whether they wanted to or not they may have benefited from the Risale-i Nur in
respect of belief, although they looked at with the intention of criticizing it.
I felt such happiness and gratitude at this veracious warning that I decided to
commit some harmless offence and incur a prison sentence, so that I might remain in
this new School of Joseph and perhaps even help those who were opposed to me. For
someone like me who was seventy-five years old, without attachment, and only five
out of the seventy people he loved in this world remained alive, the grave was a
hundred times preferable to this prison. For seventy thousand copies of the treatises of
the Risale-i Nur were in free circulation and would perform my duties connected with
the Risale-i Nur, and I had brothers and heirs who would continue to serve belief with
thousands of tongues in place of my one tongue. This prison too was a hundred times
more comfortable and more beneficial than the unfree liberty outside subject to that
tyranny and oppression. For in place of having to suffer all alone outside the arbitrary
treatment of hundreds of officials, in prison, together with hundreds of other prisoners
one only has to suffer the slight arbitrariness of one or two people like the prison
governor and chief warder, which will yield benefits. And in the face of this, one
receives the brotherly kindness and consolation of many fellow-prisoners. With the
thought that the compassion of Islam and human nature are shown as kindness to the
elderly in such a position, thus turning the hardship of prison into mercy, I became
resigned to prison.
At the time I attended this third trial, because of my difficulty in remaining on my
feet due to weakness, old age, and illness, I sat on a chair outside the door of the
court. The judge suddenly appeared and angrily asked in insulting manner: “Why isn’t
he waiting on his feet?” I was angry at this unkindness in the face of my old age. Then
I looked and saw that a large number of Muslims had gathered around us and were
watching in most kind and brotherly fashion, and not dispersing. I was suddenly
warned of the following two truths:
T h e  F i r s t : The covert enemies of myself and the Risale-i Nur had deceived
certain ingenuous officials with the intention of putting a stop to the Risale-i Nur’s
conquests by destroying the public’s good opinion of me, which in any event I did not
want, and of destroying my character in

--- Sayfa 329 ---
329
the people’s view; they had prompted those officials to act contemptuously towards
me in that way. See these hundred people in place of that one man’s insults! In return
for the Risale-i Nur’s service to belief – as a divine favour – they are kindly offering
their sympathy by appreciating your service, and both welcoming you and seeing you
off. Even, while I was in the examining magistrate’s office on the second day of the
trial answering the public prosecutor’s questions, around a thousand people gathered
in the courtyard opposite the court windows and showed their concern; they appeared
to be telling them through the tongue of disposition not to pressurize us. The police
could not make them disperse. It was imparted to my heart that in this dangerous age
these people want a true solace, an inextinguishable light, powerful belief, and certain
good news about eternal happiness, and that they search for these by nature. They
must have heard that what they are searching for is to be found in the Risale-i Nur so
that they show my unimportant person much more attention than I deserve because I
have performed some small services for belief.
S e c o n d  T r u t h : I was reminded that in return for the ill-treatment a few
contemptuous, deceived individuals inflicted on us with the intention of insulting us
and destroying public regard for us, due to their unfounded suspicions of our
disturbing public order, was the applause and appreciation of innumerable people of
reality and forthcoming generations.
Yes, through the strength of certain, affirmative belief, in every part of this
country the Risale-i Nur and its students halt the awesome corruption and efforts of
anarchy to destroy public order under the veil of communism. They work to maintain
public order and security so that these twenty years three or four related courts and the
police of ten provinces have not been able to find or record any incidents involving
the infringement of public order connected with the Risale-i Nur students, who are
very numerous and found in every part of the country. And the fair-minded police of
three provinces stated: “The Risale-i Nur students are moral police. They assist us in
preserving public order. Through certain, affirmative belief, they leave in everyone’s
head who reads the Risale-i Nur something that restrains them from committing
misdemeanours. They work to maintain public order.”
An example of this was Denizli Prison. When the Risale-i Nur entered there and
Fruits of Belief was written for the prisoners, within a space of three or four months
more than two hundred of those prisoners became so extraordinarily obedient and
acquired such religious and righteous conduct that a man who had murdered three or
four people refrained from killing bedbugs even. They became completely
compassionate, harmless members

--- Sayfa 330 ---
330
of the nation. The officials were astonished at this situation and looked on in
appreciation. Some youths even said before receiving their sentences: “If the Nurjus
remain in prison, we shall try to have ourselves convicted so that we can be taught by
them and become like them. We shall reform ourselves through their instruction.”
So those who accuse the Risale-i Nur students, who are thus, of disturbing public
order are surely seriously deceived, or have been fooled, or knowingly or
unknowingly are deceiving the government on account of anarchy, and try to crush
and repress us. We say this to them:
Since death is not to be killed, and the grave is not to be closed, and the travellers
in this guesthouse of the world, convoy after convoy enter the earth with great speed
and ado, and vanish; for sure we shall part from one another very soon. You shall
receive the penalty for your tyranny in awful fashion. At the very least you shall
mount the gallows of death and eternal extinction, which form the discharge papers of
the oppressed people of belief. The fleeting pleasures you have received in this world
imagining them to be everlasting, will be transformed into everlasting, grievous pains.
Regretfully, our secret dissembling enemies sometimes attach the name of Sufism
to the reality of Islam, which has been gained and preserved through the swords and
blood of the hundred million martyrs at the rank of saints, and heroic war veterans of
this religious nation. While the way of Sufism is only a single ray of that sun, they
show it to be the sun and deceive certain lax government officials. Calling the Risale-i
Nur students “Sufis” and “members of a political society” – because they work
effectively for the truths of the Qur’an and belief – they want to incite them against
us. We say to them, and to those who listen to them against us, what we told the just
court at Denizli:
“Let us too be sacrificed for this sacred truth for which hundreds of millions of
people have been sacrificed! Even if you set fire to the world around us, we who
sacrifice ourselves for the truths of the Qur’an will not lay down our arms before
atheism; we shall not abandon our sacred duty, God willing!”
Thanks to the sacred solace arising from belief and the Qur’an for the pains and
despair at the adventures of my old age, I would not exchange this most distressing
year of my old age for ten of the happiest years of my youth – especially since for
those who repent and perform the obligatory prayers each hour in prison is the
equivalent of ten hours’ worship, and with respect to merit, each transient day spent in
illness and under oppression gains ten days of perpetual life. I thus understood from
those warnings just how deserving of thanks are these days for someone like me
awaiting his

--- Sayfa 331 ---
331
turn at the door of the grave. I exclaimed: “Endless thanks be to my Sustainer!”, and
was happy at my old age and pleased with my imprisonment. For life does not stop, it
passes swiftly. If it passes in pleasure and happiness, since the passing of pleasure is
pain, it becomes transient, passing without thanks and in heedlessness; leaving sins in
the place of pleasures, it departs. Whereas if it passes in prison and hardship, since the
passing of pain is a sort of pleasure, and since it is considered to be a sort of worship,
it becomes perpetual in one respect, and through its good fruits gains everlasting life.
It becomes atonement for the mistakes that were the cause of past sins and
imprisonment, and purifies them. From this point of view, the prisoners who perform
the compulsory parts of the obligatory prayers should offer thanks in patience.
SIXTEENTH HOPE
One time in my old age, I was released from Eskişehir Prison after serving a
years’ sentence. They exiled me to Kastamonu,22 where I stayed for two or three
months as a guest in the police station. It may be understood how much torment
someone like me suffered in a place like that, who was a recluse, wearied by seeing
even his loyal friends, and could not endure the changes in dress.23 While suffering
this despair, divine grace suddenly came to the assistance of my old age. The
inspector and police in the police station became like firm friends. They not once
warned me about not wearing a peaked cap, and like my servants, used to take me for
trips around the town.
Then I took up residence in Kastamonu’s Risale-i Nur Medrese, opposite the
police station, and started to write further parts of the Risale-i Nur. Heroic Risale-i
Nur students like Feyzi, Emin, Hilmi, Sâdık, Nazif, and Salâhaddin, attended the
medrese in order to duplicate the treatises and disseminate them. We held scholarly
debates even more brilliant than those I had held in my youth with my old students.
Then our hidden enemies aroused the suspicions of some officials and some
egotistical hojas and shaykhs concerning us. They caused us and Risale-i Nur students
from five or six provinces to be gathered together in the School of Joseph of Denizli
Prison. The details of this Sixteenth Hope are described clearly in the brief letters I
sent secretly to my brothers while

22 A provincial centre in the İlgaz Mountains to the north of Turkey. Bediuzzaman was exiled
here in March 1936, after being released from Eskişehir Prison. He remained in Kastamonu for seven
years, until 1943, when he was sent to Denizli Prison. (Tr.)
23 This refers to the compulsory adoption of European dress following the Dress Laws passed in
the first years of the Republic. The Hat Act of 1925 banned the wearing of all headgear other than
European-style hats. (Tr.)

--- Sayfa 332 ---
332
in Denizli Prison, in those sent from Kastamonu, and in the collection containing the
court defence speeches. So referring the details to those letters and to my defence
speech, I shall allude to it only very briefly here:
I hid the confidential and important collections, and particularly those about the
Sufyan and the Risale-i Nur’s wonder-working, under the coal and fire-wood so that
they might be published after my death or after the authorities had come to their
senses and listened to the truth. Then, when feeling easy at this, some detectives and
the assistant public prosecutor suddenly raided my house. They pulled out those secret
and important treatises from under the wood then arrested me and sent me to Isparta
Prison, although I was in bad health. While greatly upset and sad at the harm that had
come to the Risale-i Nur, divine grace came to our aid. The authorities carefully and
curiously began to read those important treatises which had been hidden, of which
they were in much need, and the government offices became like Risale-i Nur study
centres. Although they began to read with the idea of criticizing, they appreciated
them. In Denizli even, although we were unaware of it, numerous people read the
printed edition of Ayetü’l-Kübra (The Supreme Sign), officially and unofficially, and
strengthened their belief. This reduced to nothing the calamity of prison we were
suffering.
Later they took us to Denizli Prison and put me into solitary confinement in a
stinking, cold, damp ward. I was most unhappy at my old age and illness and the
difficulties visited on my friends because of me. I was feeling most distressed at the
confiscations of the Risale-i Nur and the cessation in its activities when divine grace
suddenly came to my aid. It transformed that huge prison into a Risale-i Nur medrese,
proving it was a School of Joseph. The Risale-i Nur started to spread through the
diamond pens of the heroes of the Medresetü’z-Zehra.24 The great hero of the Risale-i
Nur even, in those severe conditions, wrote out more than twenty copies of The Fruits
of Belief and the Defence Speeches Collection in the space of three or four months.
The conquests began both within the prison and outside. It transformed our losses in
that calamity into significant gains and our distress into joy. It once again showed the
meaning of the verse,
But it is possible that you dislike a thing which is good for you.(2:216)
Then we were subject to severe criticisms because of the incorrect and superficial
statements of the first experts’ committee, and the Education Minister’s savage
attacks. A statement was published against us. Then just when according to some
reports they were even trying to secure the execu

24 See note 21, page 325.

--- Sayfa 333 ---
333
tion of some of us, divine grace came to our assistance. Chiefly, while expecting a
severely critical report from the Experts Committee in Ankara, they sent a
commendatory one. And although they found less than ten errors in five chests of
copies of the Risale-i Nur, we proved in court that the points they had shown to be
errors were completely correct and that they themselves had been in error in the
matters they said were wrong; we showed between five and ten errors and mistakes in
their five-page report. And while awaiting severe reprisals in the face of The Fruits of
Belief and Defences Collection, which we had sent to seven government offices, and
the entire Risale-i Nur which had been sent to the Ministry of Justice, and especially
in return for the effective, stinging slaps dealt by the confidential treatises, they
responded extremely leniently, and like the even consoling letter sent to us by the
Prime Minister, they were most conciliatory and did not attack us. This proved
decisively that as a miracle of divine grace, the truths of the Risale-i Nur had defeated
them, making them study its treatises as though it were a guide. It made those broad
circles into a sort of study circle and saved the belief of numerous hesitating and
bewildered people, causing us spiritual joy and profit far exceeding our distress.
Then our hidden enemies poisoned me; and the late Haf›z Ali, the martyr hero of
the Risale-i Nur, went to hospital instead of me, travelled to the Intermediate Realm
in my place, and made us weep despairingly. Before this calamity, on many occasions
I had insisted on the mountain at Kastamonu: “My brothers, don’t give meat to the
horse and grass to the lion!” That is to say: “Don’t give all the treatises to everyone,
lest they use them to attack us.” Although Haf›z Ali (May God have mercy on him)
was around seven days away on foot, as though he heard with his spiritual telephone,
that same time he was writing to me: “Yes, Ustad, it is a wonder of the Risale-i Nur
that horses should not be given meat, nor lions, grass. Rather, since horses should be
given hay, and lions meat, he gave that lion-like Hoja the treatise on sincerity.” I
received his letter seven days later. We worked it out, and at the same time I was
shouting it out on the mountain, he was writing the strange words in his letter.
Thus, just at the time that hero of the Risale-i Nur died, and we were being
pressurized by the secret dissemblers who were trying to have us punished through
their intrigues against us, and we were anxious that I would be sent to hospital on
official orders because I was ill from poison, divine grace came to our assistance.
Thanks to the sincere prayers of my blessed brothers the danger to my life from the
poison passed; and according to powerful signs our martyr was occupied in his grave
with the Risale-i Nur, and replied with the Risale-i Nur to the questioning angels; and
the

--- Sayfa 334 ---
334
Denizli hero, Hasan Feyzi (May God have mercy on him), who would work according
to Hafız Ali’s system, and his friends were secretly serving the Risale-i Nur
effectively; and because the other prisoners were being reformed by the Risale-i Nur,
even our enemies supported our being released from prison; and like the Companions
of the Cave, the Risale-i Nur students turned that place of ordeal into an ascetic’s cave
of olden times; all this, together with their endeavours in writing out and
disseminating the Risale-i Nur with easy hearts, proved that divine grace had come to
our aid.
It also occurred to my heart that since a great interpreter of the law like Imam
A‘zam suffered imprisonment; and a supreme mujahid like Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal
was severely tortured in prison for the sake of a single matter of the Qur’an and
endured it in perfect patience, yet not remain silent about the matter in question; and
numerous religious leaders and scholars were completely patient and unshaken,
offering thanks, despite suffering torments far greater than yours; for sure you are
obliged to offer endless thanks for the very few difficulties you suffer, although the
reward you receive is great for those many truths of the Qur’an. Yes, I shall describe
briefly a manifestation of divine grace in the midst of man’s wrongful tyranny:
When I was twenty years old I used to say repeatedly: “Towards the end of my
life I shall withdraw from the life of society into a cave or onto a mountain like the
people of olden times who abandoned the world and withdrew into caves.” Then
when in the Great War I was being held as a prisoner in the north-east, I took this
decision: “After this I shall spend my life in caves. I shall slip away from political and
social life. Enough now of mixing in them.” At that point both dominical grace and
the justice of divine determining were manifested. It transformed the caves I had
imagined into prisons, places of seclusion, loneliness in places of ordeal and solitary
confinement in a way far better than my decision and wish, compassionately for my
old age. It bestowed on me Schools of Joseph and places of solitary confinement
where my time would not be wasted that were far superior to the mountain caves of
ascetics and recluses. It gave both the benefits pertaining to the hereafter of the cave,
and strenuous service of the truths of belief and the Qur’an. I had even determined to
show myself guilty of some crime and remain in prison after my friends had been
released. Solitaries like Husrev and Feyzi would have remained with me, and on some
pretext I would have remained in the solitary confinement ward so as not to meet with
people and waste my time on unnecessary conversation and egotistical artificiality.
But then divine determining and our

--- Sayfa 335 ---
335
fate sent us to another place of ordeal. Out of compassion for my old age and in order
to make us work harder in the service of belief, duties were given us outside our will
and power in this third School of Joseph, in accordance with the verse, “But it is
possible that you dislike a thing which is good for you,” and the saying: “Good lies in
what God chooses.”
Yes, there are three instances of wisdom and important benefits in respect of the
service of the Risale-i Nur in divine grace turning – out of compassion for my old age
– the caves of my youth, when I had no powerful, hidden enemies, into the solitary
confinement of prison:
First Instance of Wisdom and Benefit: It is only in the School of Joseph that the
Risale-i Nur students can gather together without harm. Outside it is expensive and
causes suspicion if they meet together. Some who came to visit me would spend forty
or fifty liras, then see me for only twenty minutes or not at all, and would have to
return. I would have willingly chosen the hardship of prison to be closer to some of
my brothers. This means that for us prison is a bounty and instance of mercy.
Second Instance of Wisdom and Benefit: The service to belief at this time
through the Risale-i Nur has to be through advertising it everywhere and attracting the
attention of those in need. Attention is drawn to the Risale-i Nur by our
imprisonment; it is like an advertisement. The most stubborn or most needy find it
and save their belief; their obduracy is broken and they are saved from danger, and
the Risale-i Nur’s study-circle is widened.
Third Instance of Wisdom and Benefit: The Risale-i Nur students who are sent
to prison learn from one another’s conduct, qualities, sincerity, and self-sacrifice, and
they no longer seek worldly benefits in their service. Yes, since in the School of
Joseph they have seen with their own eyes the ten and perhaps a hundred benefits
gained for every hardship and difficulty, and the good results, and the extensive and
sincere service to belief, they are successful in attaining pure sincerity and no longer
lower themselves by seeking minor, personal benefits.
A subtle but sad, yet at the same time agreeable, point concerning these places of
ordeal that concerns myself only is this: I observe the same situation here that I saw in
the old medreses in my native region in my youth. For traditionally in the eastern
provinces, some of the medrese students’ needs were met from outside, and in some
medreses their food was cooked in the medrese. There were other ways they
resembled this place of ordeal. As I watch the prison here, I feel a pleasurable regret
and longing, and travel in my imagination to those enjoyable times of youth, and
forget the difficulties of old age.

--- Sayfa 336 ---
336
The Addendum to the Twenty-Sixth Flash

This is the Twenty-First Letter, which, having been included in Mektûbat (Letters
1928-1932), has not been added here.

*   *   *

The Twenty-Seventh Flash

This consists of the defence speeches from the Eskişehir trials, which have been
published in the hand-duplicated editions of The Flashes Collection, and in part in
biography.

*   *   *

--- Sayfa 337 ---
337
The Twenty-Eighth Flash
[This Flash comprises some of the short pieces I wrote as
consolation for my brothers who were (in the ward) opposite
me in Eskişehir Prison, at a time I was forbidden to mix with
them or speak with them.]
An amusing and absorbing conversation with Süleyman Rüştü,1
famous for his fidelity and distinguished by his sincerity of heart
A Small Point Concerning an Important Verse
It was autumn and approaching the time flies are discharged from their duties,
and because of their minor annoyance, selfish humans were employing chemicals in
my prison cell in order to eliminate them. It aroused a sharp pity in me. There was a
washing-line in my cell. In order to thwart the humans the flies multiplied even more.
In the evening those miniature birds would line themselves up in most orderly fashion
on the line. When he wanted to hang up the washing, I said to Rüﬂtü: “Don’t disturb
those little birds; hang it somewhere else.” To which he replied, completely seriously:
“We need the line; let the flies find somewhere else for themselves.”
Anyhow... In the early morning a discussion started up in connection with this
exchange, about the very numerous small creatures like flies and ants. I said the
following to him:

1 Süleyman Rüştü Çakın, 1899-1974. He was born in Isparta where he was the Director of the Tax
Assessment Office. He became one of Bediuzzaman’s close students and was imprisoned together with
him in Eskişehir and Denizli.

--- Sayfa 338 ---
338
The species whose copies are thus numerous have important duties and great
value, like the copies of a book are multiplied in relation to the book’s importance.
That is to say, the species of flies have important duties and high value so that the All-
Wise Creator has greatly multiplied those tiny missives of divine determining and
copies of the words of divine power. The All-Wise Qur’an states:
O men! Here is a parable set forth; listen to it! Those on whom you call
besides God cannot create [even] a fly, if they all met together for the
purpose! And if the fly should snatch away anything from them, they would
have no power to release it from the fly. Feeble are those who petition and
those whom they petition!(22:73)
That is to say, if those things claimed to be gods by the people of misguidance were to
gather together all causes and false gods apart from God Almighty, they would be
unable to create even a fly. That is, the creation of a fly is such a dominical miracle
and clear sign of the creative act that even if all causes were to assemble they would
be unable to make anything like it or to duplicate it, and would be unable to dispute
that dominical sign.
Flies, the significant subject of the above verse, defeated Nimrod, and when
Moses (Upon whom be peace) complained about their bothering him, saying: “O my
Sustainer! Why have You made these irritating creatures so very numerous?”, the
following answer came to him by way of inspiration:
“You have objected about the flies once while the flies have asked many times:
‘O our Sustainer! This man has a huge head, yet he praises You with only one tongue,
and sometimes he neglects to do that. If you had created us out of only his head, there
would have been creatures like us praising You with thousands of tongues!’”
Moreover the flies, which thus defended the wisdom in their creation against
Moses’ complaint sufficiently powerfully to withstand a thousand such objections,
also pursue great cleanliness. These insects continually wash their faces, eyes, and
wings as though taking ablutions, and have important duties. The common view is
short-sighted; it is still unable to comprehend those duties.
Indeed, Almighty God has created an orderly group of carniverous beings as
public health officials of a sort; they cleanse the seas by gathering up the corpses of
other sea-creatures2 that die every day in their millions,

2 One fish produces thousands of eggs and thousands of young. So to maintain the balance, from a
roe consisting of a million eggs the young fish that hatch and survive will equal the fish that die. Also,
the mother fish cannot always superintend her young because of the great difference in size between
them, and she cannot enter the     places they hide. So as a manifestation of divine compassion, the All-
Wise and Compassionate promotes one of the young to supervise the others, and employs the tiny
creature in the mother’s duties.

--- Sayfa 339 ---
339
and prevent the sea from becoming polluted and disgusting with their corpses. If those
public health officals of the sea did not carry out their extremely regular duties, the
sea would not sparkle like a mirror; it would rather display a sad and touching
turbidity.
Also, Almighty God has created carniverous and carrion-eating birds, and wild
animals to be like cleansing and public health officials which collect the corpses of
the wild animals and birds that die every day in their millions, cleanse the face of the
earth of those putrid remains, and save other animate beings from such sad,
discomforting sights. Some, like eagles for example, through a divine impulse,
wonderfully perceive the location of a corpse from a distance of five or six hours,
though hidden and distant, and hasten to remove it. If those health officals of the land
were not extremely efficient and orderly in carrying out their official duties, the face
of the earth would become such so as to make all weep.
The licit food of carniverous animals is the flesh of dead animals. The flesh of
living animals is unlawful for them. If they eat it, they receive punishment. The
Hadith which states: “Retaliation shall be made for the hornless sheep on the horned
on Resurrection Day”3 points out that although the bodies of animals with immortal
spirits perish, they will receive reward and punishment in a manner appropriate for
them in an eternal realm. In consequence, it may be said that the flesh of live animals
is unlawful for wild animals.
Furthermore, ants are employed as cleansing officials to collect the corpses of
tiny creatures and small particles and fragments of bounty. They are given duties as
public health officals to preserve tiny particles of divine bounty from waste, from
being trodden underfoot, contempt and futility, and to gather up the corpses of other
small creatures.
Similarly, flies are charged with duties of cleaning away poisonous substances
and microbes which breed disease and are invisible to the human eye. They do not
transmit microbes, on the contrary, through sucking up and imbibing harmful
microbes they destroy them and cause them to be transformed into a different state;
they prevent the spread of many contagious diseases. A sign that they are both health
workers and cleansing officials and chemists and that they exhibit extensive wisdom
is the fact that

3 Musnad, ii, 235.

--- Sayfa 340 ---
340
they are extremely numerous. For valuable and beneficial things are multiplied.4
O you self-centred human being! Apart from the thousands of instances of
wisdom in the creation of flies, consider the following small benefit that concerns you
and leave off your hostility towards them. For just as they offer you some familiarity
in your exile, solitude and loneliness, so do they warn you against sliding into
heedlessness and your thought wandering. You see flies that through their delicate
manner and their washing their faces and eyes as though taking ablutions are giving
you a lesson and reminding you of human duties like action and cleanliness.
Moreover, bees, which may be thought of as a sort of fly, give you honey to eat,
the sweetest and most delicate of bounties. And as is stated by the Qur’an of
Miraculous Exposition, they are distinguished by receiving divine inspiration. So to
be hostile towards them although they should be loved; indeed, to be hostile towards
creatures that suffer all sorts of difficulties in hastening in friendship to assist man, is
wrongful and unjust. We may combat harmful creatures only to repel their harm. We
fight wolves to protect sheep from their attack, for example.
Mosquitoes and fleas fall upon the turbid blood flowing in the veins polluted by
harmful substances, indeed they are charged with consuming the polluted blood. So in
hot weather when there is blood surplus to the body’s needs, why should they not be
natural cuppers? It is possible...
Glory be to Him whose art bewilders the mind!
At one time when I was struggling with my evil-commanding soul, it was
imagining that the bounties it saw in itself to be its own property, and it became
conceited, proud and boastful. I told it: “This property is not yours; it is on trust.” So
it gave up its conceit and pride but became lazy, it said: “Why should I bother about
someone who is not mine? Let him perish, what is it to me?” Suddenly I saw that a fly
had alighted on my hand and had started to thoroughly clean its eyes, face, and wings,
which were its trust from God. The fly was washing itself just like a soldier cleans his
rifle and uniform thoroughly, which belong to the state. I said to my soul: “You look
at that!” It looked and learned a good lesson. As for the fly, it became my conceited
and lazy soul’s teacher and instructor.
Fly excretion is not harmful medically; in fact, sometimes it is a sweet

4 How beautifully and subtly the following lines by the celebrated Yunus Emre allude to the
wonderful works of dominical art that are the fly’s wings and body: “I loaded a single fly’s wing onto
forty ox carts; Forty of them could not haul it; it remainded thus decreed.”

--- Sayfa 341 ---
341
syrup. For it is not distant from dominical wisdom, it is indeed a function of that
wisdom, that while flies contain thousands of harmful substances, microbes, and
poisons from what they have eaten, they are like tiny transformation and purification
machines. Apart from bees, there are other species of flying insects5 that eat various
putrid substances and then continuously excrete droplets of syrup in place of the filth.
By transforming those rotten, poisonous substances into a sweet and healing syrup, a
confection of divine power, that rains onto the leaves of trees, they prove that they are
machines for transmuting one substance into another. They demonstrate before one’s
eyes what a mighty nation and group these tiny individuals form. Through the tongues
of their beings they say: “Don’t look at our smallness, consider the vastness of our
species, and declare, ‘All Glory be to God!’”

5 At the end of spring there is one species of small fly which is created in the form of a black
mass that becomes stuck to the branches of almond and wild apricot trees, and remains there. In place
of waste matter, droplets continuously flow from the flies. These drops are like honey and other species
of flies gather round them suck them up.
Another species is employed in the pollination of the flowers of plants and some trees, like the
fig. Just as the fire-fly is worthy of observation, since it is a sort of fly that flashes, sparkles, and is
luminous; so do other species that are gilded and glisten like gold deserve notice. Also, we must not
forget flies armed with lances, and wild bees, which are like brigands. If the All-Merciful Creator had
not pulled in their reins, if they attacked human beings like fleas, in the same way that those armed
species killed Nimrod, they would have assailed the human race and expounded the implicit meaning
of the verse, “And if the fly should snatch away anything from them.” Thus, the hundred famous
species of flies like these bearing special qualities are of great importance so that this mighty verse
makes them its subject:
O men! Here is a parable set forth; listen to it! Those on whom you call besides God cannot
create [even] a fly, if they all met together for the purpose! And if the fly should snatch away
anything from them, they would have no power to release it from the fly. Feeble are those who
petition and those whom they petition!

--- Sayfa 342 ---
342
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
Verily, when He intends a thing, His command is “Be!” and it is.(36:82)
As this verse indicates, creation is through a command. The treasuries of divine
power are in the Kaf. and Nun.1 Several of the many aspects of this subtle mystery
have been mentioned in various places of the Risale-i Nur. Here, in order to make
more comprehensible in this century’s materialist view Hadiths about the
characteristics, qualities, and material effects of the Qur’an’s letters, and particularly
the disjointed letters at the start of some Suras, we shall illustrate this mystery with a
material example.
The All-Glorious One, the Owner of the sublime throne, has four thrones by
which He directs the creatures on the earth, which is like a centre of the world and a
heart and qibla of the universe:
One is the throne of preservation and life, which is earth. This is the
manifestation of the divine names of Preserver and Giver of Life.
The Second Throne is the throne of bounty and mercy, which is the element of
water.
The Third is the throne of knowledge and wisdom, which is the element of light.
The Fourth is the throne of will and command, which is the element of air.
We see with our eyes that the minerals and innumerable various plants are
formed from simple earth, through which are met the innumerable needs of animals
and human beings – boundless multiplicity from unity with perfect order, an infinite
variety of species from a simple element, innumerable regular embroideries on a plain
page. And although water, and especially the sperm of animals, is a simple fluid,
innumerable miracles of art become manifest through it in the many animate
creatures. This shows that similarly to these two thrones, light and air are the places of
manifestation of the wondrous miracles of the pen of knowledge, command, and will
of the Pre-Eternal Inscriber, the All-Knowing One of Glory, despite their simple
nature.
For now we shall leave aside the element of light, and in connection with our
question here, try to unveil a little the marvels of command and will within the
element of air, which for the globe of the earth is the throne of the divine command
and will.
With the air in our mouths we sow letters and words which at once

1 The two letters of the Arabic alphabet in the word “Kun!”, that is, “Be!” (Tr.)

--- Sayfa 343 ---
343
sprout and send forth shoots. That is to say, in a instant, in no time at all, a word
becomes a seed in the air, sprouting in the surrounding air and producing the shoots of
innumerable instances of the same word, great and small, in the air all around. We
consider the element of air and we see that it is so obedient and subjugated to the
command of “‘Be!’ and it is” that it is as if like a soldier in a regular army, each of its
particles is as though ever awaiting its orders, demonstrating its compliance with and
submission to commands manifested from the command of “Be!”, arriving
instantaneously from another particle far off.
For example, the fact that human speech may be heard anywhere in the air by
means of radio transmitters and receivers – on condition there is a receiver –
everywhere on earth, at the same moment, instantaneously, demonstrates how
perfectly each particle of air obediently conforms to the manifestation of the
command of “‘Be!’ and it is.” In respect of sacredness and in accordance with the
mystery of compliance, the letters, which have an unstable existence in the air, may
manifest many external effects and material qualities.
Innumerable signs like these show that letters, which are the beings of the air, and
especially sacred and Qur’anic letters, and in particular the letters of the divine
cyphers at the beginning of some Suras, are orderly and infinitely sensitive, and as
though listening to the instantaneous commands and acting accordingly They
therefore surely make the particles of air submit to their material qualities and
wondrous properties, which reflect the manifestation of the command of “‘Be!’ and it
is” and of pre-eternal will.
In consequence of this mystery, sometimes the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition
describes the works of divine power as though they proceed from the attributes of will
and speech, meaning that they govern like power apart from utter speed of creation,
submission of things and subjugation of beings. That is to say, the letters proceeding
from the creative command govern in the existence of beings like a physical force,
and the creative command is manifested identically with power and will.
Yes, the works of will and the creative command appear to be identical with
power in beings of this sort whose physical existence is invisible, like the air, which is
semi-material and semi-immaterial; indeed, they are identical with power. It is as
though the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition decrees, “Verily, when He intends a
thing, His command is ‘Be!’ and it is” in order to attract attention to beings which are
an isthmus between the material and the immaterial.
It is thus in keeping with the sacred letters of the divine cyphers like Ha.

--- Sayfa 344 ---
344
Mim. Ta. Sin., and Alif. Lam. Mim. that they should each be switches among the
particles of the air for causing the wires of the hidden, subtle relations to vibrate and
so be the means of the immaterial sacred wireless and telecommunications between
the earth and divine throne; it is entirely reasonable that this should be their function.
In addition to the duties of all particles of the air dispersed throughout the world,
their conforming to the commands in connection with such things as wirelesses,
radios, telephones, and telegraphs, and acting as receivers and conductors of subtle
forces such as electricity – I conjectured and observed even a further duty in the
blossom of my almond-tree. The state the tree acquired through the touch of the air in
the blowing breeze – with its particles like receivers conforming to the same
command at the same instant – and all the trees on the face of the earth like a
disciplined army, afforded me a conviction as certain as two plus two equals four.
That is to say, the air is a swift and agile servant on the face of the earth, tending
the guests of the Most Merciful and Compassionate One. Resembling radio and
telephone receivers and soldiers under orders, all its particles deliver the sacred
commands of that Most Merciful One to the plants and animals. At the command of
“‘Be!’ and it is,” they carry out numerous orderly duties such as acting as fans for
those creatures, aiding their respiration; that is, after performing the duty of purifying
their blood, the water of life, and kindling their bodily heat, the fire of life, they
emerge from them and are the means of forming words in their mouths.
As a result of this quality of the air, when letters, the beings of the air, acquire
sacredness; that is, when they take up the position of being receivers; that is, they take
up the position of receivers because they are letters of the Qur’an, and become like
switches, and even more so when the letters at the start of some Suras become the
sensitive central switches of those hidden relations, just as their existences in the air
possess this quality, so their existences in the mind and even as inscriptions have a
share in it. That is to say, like physical medicines, healing cures and other purposes
may be achieved by reading and writing those letters.
                                                                                            S a i d   N u r s i

--- Sayfa 345 ---
345
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
Say: “If the ocean were ink [wherewith to write out] the words of my
Sustainer, sooner would the ocean be exhausted than would the words of my
Sustainer, even if we added another ocean like it, for its aid.(18:109)
[This mighty verse is a vast, elevated ocean. A large volume
in order to describe all its jewels. So postponing those
precious jewels to another time, for now I shall explain a few
rays of a subtle point in order to recall those truths. They
appeared faintly to me a few days ago during the tesbihat,
recited following the five daily prayers, which is an important
time for me, and struck my attention. I did not write them
down at the time and they gradually grew fainter. So before
they are lost altogether so as to hunt down a manifestation of
those points, I shall say a few words as though encircling
them.]
F i r s t  W o r d : In respect of being a divine attribute like knowledge and power,
pre-eternal speech is infinite. Certainly, if the seas were ink for something infinite,
they would never get to the end of them.
S e c o n d  W o r d : Speech is the clearest and most powerful thing that makes
known someone’s existence. Hearing someone’s speech proves that he exists as
clearly as a thousand proofs, indeed, as clearly as seeing him. Thus through its
allusive meaning, this verse says:
“If the seas were ink to the extent of divine speech, which demonstrates the All-
Glorious Sustainer’s existence, and the trees were pens, and they were to write His
speech, they would never come to the end of them. That is to say, just as any speech
points to its own extent and at the degree of witnessing to the existence of the one
who spoke it, so the extent that the above speech points to and tells of the One who
spoke it – the Single and Eternally Besought One – is beyond measure, so that if all
the seas were ink they would still be insufficient for writing it.”
T h i r d  W o r d : When teaching the truths of belief to all classes of men, the
Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition apparently repeats the same truth, which is in
accordance with the wisdom of establishing, verifying, and convincing them of a
truth. This verse is in effect an answer to the entirely unjustifiable attacks of the
Jewish scholars, who were the learned People of the Book of the time, on the
Illustrious Prophet (UWBP) concerning this, because he was unlettered and not
learned. It is as follows:
The verse says: “The repetition of a truth containing numerous benefits

--- Sayfa 346 ---
346
and results in different and miraculous ways for numerous instances of wisdom, such
as verification and persuasion, does not arise from restricted speech or intellectual
deficiency or lack of capital. Nor does the repetition of such matters as the pillars of
belief comprising thousands of truths each of which is infinitely valuable, in order to
establish them in the hearts of the mass of people in particular.  For the Qur’an
proceeds from the endless, infinite pre-eternal treasury of divine speech, and being
turned to the Manifest World on account of the World of the Unseen, speaks with
man and the jinn, spirits, and the angels, resounding in the ears of each person. If the
seas were ink, sentient beings scribes, plants pens, and particles the pens’ nibs for
counting the words of pre-eternal speech, the source of the Qur’an, they would still
never come to the end of them. For they are finite, while divine speech is infinite.”
F o u r t h  W o r d : It is clear that the issuing of speech from something
unexpected increases the speech’s effectiveness and makes it heeded. The speech-like
voices of large bodies like the clouds and the atmosphere in particular make everyone
listen to them. The sounds of a gramophone the size of a mountain would attract
attention even more. The heavenly voice of the Qur’an, which takes the levels of the
heavens as gramophone records, issues forth to make the head of the globe of the
earth listen to it. And with the power of the radio, the molecules of air become like the
receivers and transmitters of its letters. The verse alludes to the fact that the air
molecules each become mirrors, tongues, needle points, and ears for the All-Wise
Qur’an’s letters, and indicates how important, valuable, significant, and living those
letters are, saying: “The Qur’an, which is divine speech, is so living and valuable that
if all the seas were to become ink, and the angels scribes, and minute particles points,
and plants and hairs pens to the number of the ears that listen to it and hear it, and to
the number of the sacred words that enter those ears, they could still never come to
the end of them.”
No, they could never come to the end of them, because if Almighty God
multiplies man’s weak, lifeless speech millions of times in the air, for sure each word
of the speech of that Peerless Sovereign of the heavens and earth, which looks to all
the earth and the heavens and addresses all the conscious beings within them, will
comprise words to the numbers of particles of air.
F i f t h  W o r d : This consists of two letters.
The First Letter: Just as the divine attribute of speech has words, so does power
have embodied words, and knowledge too has wise words of divine determining;
these consist of all beings. Living beings, and small

--- Sayfa 347 ---
347
creatures in particular, are each dominical words which point to the Pre-Eternal
Speaker in a way more powerfully than speech. If the seas were ink they could never
come to the end of them. That is, the verse looks to this meaning too in allusive
fashion.
The Second Letter: All the inspiration received by angels and men, and even by
animals, are divine speech of a sort. Its words are certainly infinite. It means that the
verse is telling us how numerous and infinite are the inspirations and words of divine
command which the innumerable cohorts of absolute sovereignty continually receive.
The knowledge is with God alone. * None knows the Unseen save God.

--- Sayfa 348 ---
348
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
And We sent down iron, in which is [material for] mighty war, as well as
many benefits for mankind.(57:25)
[A brief reply to a question about the above verse, which has
come to have great importance, for with it a prominent person
with knowledge of modern science silenced a number of
hojas.]
Q u e s t i o n : It is normally said that iron is mined from the earth, so why is it
said in this verse “We sent down” or “revealed” rather than We excavated or
extracted; this appears to be inappropriate?
T h e  A n s w e r : With the phrase “We sent down,” the Qur’an of Miraculous
Exposition recalls the vast and important bounty of iron. For it does not consider iron
only for itself so that it should say extracted, but recalls the tremendous divine bounty
in iron and how needy mankind is for it. Its aspect of being a bounty does not come
upwards from below, but down from the treasury of mercy. The treasury of mercy is
certainly elevated, above, and at a high level, so the bounty descends from above; and
needy mankind’s level is surely below. The bestowal of bounty is superior to need, so
the correct way to express the fact that bounty comes from the treasury of mercy to
meet mankind’s need is “We sent down;” it is not We extracted.
Also, since the gradual extraction of iron is at man’s hand, the word extract does
not alert the heedless person to its aspects of bounty. If what is meant is iron’s
material substance, it is extracted in respect of its physical situation. But iron’s quality
of being a bounty, which is the intended meaning here, is immaterial. This meaning
looks not to physical situation, but to immaterial degree or level. Bounties proceeding
from the treasury of mercy, which is a manifestation of the infinitely exalted degree of
the Most Merciful, are certainly sent down from the highest level to the lowest. Thus,
the correct expression is “We sent down:” it recalls to mankind that iron is one of the
greatest divine bounties.
Yes, iron is the source of all mankind’s industries, and of its advancement and
progress, and the means of its power and strength. So in order to call to mind this
tremendous bounty and bestowal of favour, in lofty style the Qur’an states:
And We sent down iron, in which is [material for] mighty war, as well as
many benefits for mankind.
In a similar way it declares about David’s important miracle:

--- Sayfa 349 ---
349
And We made the iron soft for him.(34:10)
That is to say, it points out the softening of iron, a great miracle and great bounty
for a great prophet.
Secondly: Above and below are relative. They are above and below in relation to
the earth’s centre. In fact, something which is below in relation to us is above from
the point of view of the American continent. This means the situation of substances
coming from the earth’s centre to its surface changes according to the position of
people on the surface.
With the tongue of miraculousness, the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition states
that iron contains so many benefits and has such extensive uses that it is not some
common substance to be extracted from the store of the globe, and that it is not some
natural substance to be used for any chance need. Rather, in order to express iron’s
general uses it states that it is a bounty stored up by the Creator of the Universe in the
treasury of mercy and huge workshop of the universe which He sent down through
His majestic title of Sustainer of the Heavens and Earth to meet the needs of the
earth’s inhabitants. It is as if, like rain, heat, and light, which descend from the skies,
it contains such all-embracing advantages that it was sent from the workshop of the
universe, not from the narrow store of the earth. It was sent having been prepared in
the great treasury of mercy in the palace of the universe, and situated in the store of
the globe, from which it is extracted little by little over the centuries in proportion to
need.
The Qur’an of Mighty Stature does not want to express the iron which is
extracted bit by bit from this small store only as being utilized, but as being sent down
together with the globe of the earth from the supreme treasury, as a tremendous
bounty. That is to say, the thing most necessary for the house of the earth is iron, for
when the All-Glorious Creator separated the earth from the sun and sent it down for
mankind, He sent down iron together with it, and met most of mankind’s needs with
it. The All-Wise Qur’an decrees in miraculous fashion: “Use this iron in your works
and try to excavate it and take advantage of it.”
The verse describes two bounties; both the repulsion of enemies and the
attraction of benefits. Iron was put to important human uses before the revelation of
the Qur’an, but with the phrase, “in which is [material for] mighty war” it points out
that in the future, it would be used for travelling through the sea, air, and land, and
would subjugate the globe wondrously and astonishingly, and demonstrate a
wondrous death-tainted strength. Thus of its various sorts of miraculousness, it
displays a flash of miraculousness in its predicting the future.

--- Sayfa 350 ---
350
While discussing the above point, the subject of Solomon’s Hoopoe came up. A
persistent questioner from among our brothers1 asked: “What is the reason for the
Hoopoe describing Almighty God with a relatively insignificant attribute in the
sentence, “Who brings to light what is hidden in the heavens and the earth,”(27:25)
while there are more significant divine attributes?
T h e  A n s w e r : One aspect of eloquence is to make understood the occupation
or craft with which the speaker is mostly employed. Like the nomad diviners who
intuitively discover the places where water is to be found in the Arabian Peninsula,
Solomon’s Hoopoe, a diviner from among birds and animals, was a blessed bird who
was employed in various duties and also found water for Solomon (Upon whom be
peace), so it could be used. It is stating through the measure of its own art that
Almighty God proves His fitness to be worshipped and prostrated before by making
known the things hidden in the heavens and earth.
Yes, the Hoopoe understood it well, for the natural inclination of the incalculable
numbers of seeds and minerals under the earth is not to emerge upwards from below.
Because since such beings lack life and will, they cannot go upwards of their own
accord; on their own, they can only tumble downwards. A body concealed under the
heaviness of the earth certainly could not shake that heavy load off its shoulders on its
own and emerge upwards. It means that it does so through a wondrous power.
The Hoopoe understood through his divining this most hidden and important of
the proofs of divine fitness to be worshipped, so that the All-Wise Qur’an imparted a
miraculousness to its statement concerning it.

1 This refers to Re’fet, who is diligent in asking questions but lazy when it comes to writing!

--- Sayfa 351 ---
351
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
And He sent down for you eight head of cattle in pairs: He makes you in the
wombs of your mothers, in stages, one after the other.(39:6)
This verse comprises the same point we explained in the discussion of the verse,
“And We sent down iron;”(57:25) it both corroborates it and is corroborated by it.
By saying in Sura al-Zumar, “And He sent down for you eight head of cattle in
pairs,” and not saying: And He created for you eight head of cattle in pairs, the
Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition is stating: “Eight sorts of blessed animals have been
sent down to you from the treasury of mercy, as though they were bounties of
Paradise.” Yes, those blessed animals are a gift for mankind with all their parts, for
their wool or hair is made into the mobile homes and clothes of nomads, good food is
made from their flesh, delicious sustenance is had from their milk, shoes and so on are
made from their hides, cultivated land is nourished by their manure and men make
fuel from it. It is as though those blessed animals are pure bounty and embodied
mercy.
It is because of this that like rain is called “mercy” (rahma), these blessed beasts
are called “bounty” (an‘am). As though just as embodied mercy becomes rain, so too
embodied bounty takes on the form of goats, sheep, cattle, water-buffalo, and camels.
For sure their physical bodies are created on the earth, but since the attribute of being
bounties and the meaning of mercy have totally predominated over their physical
beings, in accordance with the phrase “And He sent down,” the All-Compassionate
Creator sent down these blessed animals directly from the exalted degree of His
mercy and His elevated, immaterial Paradise, as gifts from the treasury of mercy.
Sometimes art of high worth is present in material worth virtually nothing. It is
given value in respect of the art, not of the material’s value, like the tiny material
being of a fly and the sublime dominical art within it. Sometimes valuable material
worth five lira contains art worth nothing; then the material predominates.
In just the same way, sometimes in some physical material the meaning of bounty
and mercy is found to such a degree that it is a hundred times more important than the
material. The physical matter is quite simply hidden and its aspect of bounty
predominates. Thus, just as the vast benefits of iron and the many products it yields
conceal its material aspect, so too bounty being present in every member of the
blessed animals mentioned

--- Sayfa 352 ---
352
above has transformed their physical matter into bounty. It is because of this that their
immaterial attributes have been considered, and their physical beings disregarded, and
this is expressed with the phrases, “And He sent down,” and, “And We sent down.”
These two phrases state the above-mentioned point both in regard to reality, and
they miraculously express an important meaning in respect of eloquence. It is as
follows:
Together with its extremely tough nature, and its being hidden, frequently deep
underground, iron is found everywhere, bestowed with the quality of being easily
softened. Everyone can therefore obtain it easily everywhere for everything. In order
to express this, it states through the phrase “And We sent down iron,” that iron tools
are obtained so easily they are as though sent down from a workbench above as
natural, heavenly bounties, and placed in man’s hand.
Furthermore, although some animal species, from the mosquito to snakes,
scorpions, wolves, and lions are harmful to human beings, large beasts like the water-
buffalo, ox, and camel, who are important among animals, are extremely docile and
submissive. So much so they may be led by even a child. To express the idea of their
submissiveness, the verse “And He sent down for you eight head of cattle in pairs”
states that being neither wild nor dangerous, these blessed beasts do not resemble
worldly animals. They are rather useful and harmless like paradisaical animals. They
have been sent down from above, that is, from the treasury of mercy.
Perhaps this is why some Qur’anic commentators have said that these animals
have been sent down from Paradise. It is hardly prolix to write a whole page about a
single letter of the All-Wise Qur’an,1 for it is God’s Word. It has therefore not been
wasteful to write two or three pages on the expression “And We sent down.”
Sometimes one letter of the Qur’an is the key to a treasury.

1 What some Qur’anic commentators intended by saying “Their origins were the heavens” was
this: the continued existence of the animals known as “an‘am” is through sustenance, and their
sustenance is fodder. The fodder’s sustenance is rain. Rain is the water of life and mercy; so sustenance
also comes from the heavens. The verse, “And in the heavens is our sustenance”(51:22) alludes to this.
Since those animals’ continually renewed existences lie in the rain which comes from the skies, the
expression “And He sent down” is apt, for it expresses the meaning of having been sent down from the
sky.

--- Sayfa 353 ---
353
Pieces Written in Eskişehir Prison
as a True Solace for the Risale-i Nur Students

My Dear Brothers!
I was exceedingly unhappy for you; I was crushed by grief. But it was imparted
to me that divine determining and your fate have given you this prison’s water to
drink and bread to eat, all together. I saw that as a mark of divine mercy and
manifestation of dominical favour, your eating this bread together and drinking this
water was the easiest, lightest, best, and most meritorious of ways; that this prison
was a most beneficial place of instruction for the Risale-i Nur students, and a most
effulgent place of ordeal; that it was a most exacting place of examination teaching
just how essential it is to act prudently in the face of one’s enemies. I saw it in the
form of a luminous place of study and tekke for learning and benefiting from the
elevated qualities and fine characteristics of our friends here, which are all different,
and to establish and renew the brotherhood between them. I did not complain about
this situation therefore, but offered thanks with all my spirit. Yes, our way is thanks.
And it is to see an aspect of mercy, an aspect of bounty, in everything.
From your brother who is grieved at the pains of all of you,
                                                                        S a i d   N u r s i
*   *   *
A Rule
Risale-i Nur students should not seek light outside the circle of the Risale-i Nur,
and they cannot seek it. If they do so, they will find a lamp in place of the immaterial
sun giving light through the window of the Risale-i Nur, and perhaps lose the sun.
Also, the pure and powerful way of friendship and brotherhood within the circle
of the Risale-i Nur, which gains numerous spirits for each person and through the
mystery of the legacy of prophethood depicts the Companions’ way of brotherhood,
leaves no need for seeking a spiritual guide or father outside that sphere, in a way that
is harmful to them in three respects; it provides many a€abeys that is, elder brothers,
in place of a single father. The joint compassion of elder brothers reduces a father’s
compassion to nothing.

--- Sayfa 354 ---
354
Someone who has a shaykh before entering the Risale-i Nur circle may keep him
after entering it. But the person who does not, may only seek a guide within the circle.
Moreover, the knowledge of reality taught within the circle of the Risale-i Nur, which
offers the effulgence of the legacy of prophethood, the greater sainthood, leaves no
need for the Sufi orders outside that circle – unless of course they are self-indulgent
people who misunderstand the way of Sufism, are addicted to pleasant dreams and
imaginings, lights and spiritual pleasures, and desire worldly, fanciful pleasures which
are different to the virtues of the hereafter, and want a rank where people have
recourse to them.
This world is the abode of labour and service; recompense is commensurate with
hardship and difficulty; it is not a place of reward. The people of reality attach no
importance, therefore, to the pleasures and lights of illuminations and wonder-
working. Indeed, they sometimes flee them and want to conceal them.
Furthermore, the Risale-i Nur’s circle is very broad, and its students, very
numerous. It does not seek anyone who depart from it. It gives them no importance
and perhaps will not again admit them. Everyone has only one heart, and a single
heart cannot be both within the circle and outside it.
Also, those desirous for guidance outside should not busy themselves with the
Risale-i Nur students. For they may receive harm in three respects. Those people who
are within the bounds of fear of God do not need guidance, but outside it there are
abundant people who do not perform the five daily prayers. To leave aside the latter
and busy oneself with the former is not guidance. If such a person loves the students,
let him firstly enter the circle and be not a father, but a brother, and if he is very
virtuous, an elder brother.
It has also become apparent from this incident that attachment to the Risale-i Nur
holds much importance and has a high price. If he is sensible, the person who gives
this price and takes up a position striving against irreligion in the name of the Islamic
world, will not abandon this way which is as valuable as diamonds, and embrace
other ways.
                                                                                     S a i d

--- Sayfa 355 ---
355
A Short Piece Written in Eskişehir Prison
My Brothers!
On numerous occasions I have defended the Risale-i Nur students in the manner
of which they are worthy. God willing, I shall shout it out in court. I shall make the
world hear both of the Risale-i Nur, and of its students’ value. However, I remind you
of the following: the condition of my retaining this mention of your value in my
defence is your not feeling offended at the Risale-i Nur due to your painful
experiences in this affair, nor at your Master, nor to feel disgust at your brothers on
the pretext of the difficulties you suffer, nor to find fault with or accuse one another.
You will recall that in the treatise on divine determining we have proved that there are
two aspects to the wrongs that are visited on us: one is man’s aspect, the other, divine
determining’s. In the same event, man does wrong, but divine determining is fair and
acts in justice. In this matter of ours, we should think more of the justice of divine
determining and mystery of divine wisdom than man’s tyranny and wrongdoing.
Yes, divine determining summoned the Risale-i Nur students to this gathering.
And the wisdom in this was the unfolding of their striving and struggle, which drove
them to this truly very distressing School of Joseph. Man’s tyranny and pretexts were
the means. So beware, do not say to one another: “If I had not done such-and-such I
would not have been arrested.”
                                                                           S a i d   N u r s i
*   *   *
Part of My Defence Speech,
which was included here and not later removed
I seek an important right from the Chief and Members of the Court, as follows:
In this matter it is not only my person which is under scrutiny so that with your
exonerating me and becoming aware of the reality of the case, the case would be
solved. For the collective personality of the pious and the people of learning has been
incriminated in the eyes of the nation, and a lack of confidence has been engendered
in the government towards the pious and religious scholars, and they need to know
how they will avoid dangerous and harmful attempts against them. I therefore request
that this

--- Sayfa 356 ---
356
last part of my defence be printed in the new letters and distributed. Then the pious
and the scholars will not be deceived by the intrigues, or embark on any dangerous
and damaging enterprises. Their collective personality will be saved from being
suspect in the eyes of the nation. The government too will have confidence in the
scholars and an end will be put to this misunderstanding. Incidents and
misunderstandings like this, which are extremely harmful for the government and the
nation and the country, will not then be repeated.
                                                                                S a i d   N u r s i
*  *  *
My  Brothers!
If everyone, and even I, withdraw from defending and preserving the Risale-i
Nur, five of our brothers should not withdraw. These are Hüseyin Usta, Halil ‹brahim,
Re’fet Bey, Hüsrev, and Hakk› Efendi. The involuntary lack of caution of the first
three... because of the personal grudges of the open enemies of the latter two – the
intention was to cause excessive harm to the Risale-i Nur. If it had not resulted in a
great bounty like the Risale-i Nur being spread and made known to a significant
degree, these brothers would have been greatly upset at having caused the
unhappiness of so many innocent Risale-i Nur students. Thus, more than everyone,
these five brothers should be cautious and united.
                                                                               S a i d   N u r s i
*  *  *
My Brothers!
It was imparted to my heart that just as the Mathnawi was the mirror to one of
seven truths appearing from the Sun of the Qur’an, thus acquiring a sacred
illustriousness and becoming the undying guide of numerous people of the heart
besides the Mevlevis; so too represented together in the mirror of the Risale-i Nur are
the seven colours of the Qur’anic sun’s light and its various, multicoloured
effulgences. God willing, it will be an eternal guide and teacher for the people of
reality, illustrious and sacred in seven respects, as much as seven Mathnawi’s.
*  *  *

--- Sayfa 357 ---
357
My Brothers!
Look at the protection of the All-Glorious Preserver! As a coincidence with the
number of treatises of the Risale-i Nur, one hundred and twenty people were
questioned together with their confidential documents. Yet despite the intrigues of the
foreigners and the stratagems of the secret societies, nothing was found to connect
any Risale-i Nur student with any of the many existent associations. This was a most
clear and brilliant instance of dominical protection and divine preservation, and was a
favour of the Most Merciful corroborating the wondrous predictions concerning the
Risale-i Nur of Imam ‘Ali (May God be pleased with him) and Ghawth  al-A‘zam
(May God be pleased with him). The hands of forty-two of our innocent, wronged
brothers raised in supplication to the divine court halted a missile directed at them,
turned it back and in effect exploded it over the heads of those who had fired it. Our
losses amount to only a few minor cuts and bruises which will gain us reward. It is a
marvel to be saved with such minor injury from a gun that was being charged for the
past year. One should respond with thanks and joy to such a great bounty. After this
our lives will not be our own, for according to the plans of the spreaders of
corruption, we were to be completely wiped out. That means after this we should
pledge our lives not to ourselves, but to truth and reality. We should try to always see
the trace, face, and essence of mercy in things, which will cause us not to complain,
but to offer thanks.
                                                                                S a i d   N u r s i
*  *  *
I request of my brothers that they are not offended at one another due to
discomfort, or distress of the spirit, or fastidiousness, or being deceived by Satan’s
wiles, or at the offensive language uttered by some of them. They should not say that
their honour has been insulted. I take upon myself any bad words that are spoken.
They should not be offended. If I had a hundred honours, I would sacrifice all of them
for love and cordiality among my brothers.
                                                                                   S a i d   N u r s i
*  *  *

--- Sayfa 358 ---
358
My Brothers!
I have understood certainly the last two or three days that unfortunately we
suffered a blow from divine mercy. I understood even that one of the many
indications of a verse concerning the people of rebellion looks to us. It is this:
But when they forgot the warning they had received.... on a sudden We called
them to account.(6:44; 7:165)
That is, “When they forgot the instruction and advice with which we have warned
them and did not act in accordance with it, We took hold of them and afflicted them
with disaster.”
Yes, recently we were prompted to write a treatise on the meaning of sincerity. In
truth, it was a most luminous and exalted rule of brotherhood, a sacred principle
which allows ten men to withstand calamities and events which normally could only
be withstood with the strength of tens of thousands. But unfortunately we, and
foremost myself, did not act in accordance with the warning. In accordance with the
allusive meaning of the verse, according to the science of jafr, the value of “We called
them to account” is one thousand three hundred and fifty-two. We were arrested on
the same date. Some of us suffered a slap dealt by divine compassion. Others
suffered, not such a blow, but were included in these tribulations in order to be a
solace to our brothers who did suffer it, so that it might be a means of earning reward
and profit.
For three months I was barred from mixing with others, but for the past three
days I have been able to learn my brothers’ states of mind. An unimaginable incident
had occurred opposed to the meaning of sincerity involving brothers whom I had
supposed to be the most sincere. I understood from this that an allusive meaning of
the verse, “But when they forgot the warning they had received.... on a sudden We
called them to account” looked to us from afar. For the people of misguidance, for
whom the verse was revealed, it is punishment, but for us it is a blow from divine
compassion in order to train our souls, as atonement for sins, and so that we may raise
our spiritual degrees. Evidence that we suffered this blow because we did not
completely appreciate the value of the divine bounty we had received is that we were
not contented with our sacred service of the Qur’an through the Risale-i Nur, a most
sacred striving in God’s way which receives the effulgence of ‘greater sainthood’
through the mystery of the legacy of prophethood and is a means to attaining the
essence of the way of the Companions. Through my severe warnings on several
occasions, the wish to join a Sufi order was forestalled, the advantages of which are
very few for us at the moment and could possibly have caused us much

--- Sayfa 359 ---
359
harm in this situation. Otherwise, both our unity would have been destroyed, and it
would have caused both differences in ideas which would have reduced the value of
four alifs – which through solidarity is one thousand one hunded and eleven – to four,
and mutual antipathy, which would have reduced our strength to nothing.
The author of the Gulistan, Shaykh Sa‘di Shirazi, relates: “I saw one of the
people of the heart in a tekke while occupied with his spiritual journeying. Several
days later I saw him among students in the medrese. I asked him why he had left the
effulgent tekke and come to the religious school. He replied that there everyone could
save themselves, if they were successful, whereas here in the religious school persons
of high aspiration were trying to save many others besides themselves. Nobility and
high endeavour were theirs; virtue and exertion were theirs; that was why he went
there.
Shaykh Sa‘di wrote a summary of this in his Gulistan.
So if the small matter of students parsing verbs is superior to the recitations in the
tekkes, since the Risale-i Nur teaches in the clearest and most certain manner the
sacred truths of belief of the confession of faith: “I believe in God, and His angels,
and His Books, and His prophets, and in the Last Day” and silences the most obdurate
atheists and obstinate philosophers, to abandon it, or cause its activities to come to a
standstill, or not to be content with it, and desiring the Sufi way to enter the dissolved
Sufi tekkes without asking permission of the Risale-i Nur, is entirely wrong and
shows how much we deserve this blow of divine compassion.
                                                                                 S a i d  N u r s i
*  *  *
A Warning
[Two short stories]
T h e  F i r s t : Fifteen years ago when a prisoner-of-war in the north of Russia I
was being held together with ninety other officers in a large factory. Numerous
arguments and disturbances arose due to the discomfort and oppressive conditions. I
used to pacify them, since they all had great respect for me. I appointed four or five
officers to keep the peace, telling them: “Whenever you hear an uproar, go there and
help whichever side is in the wrong.” It is a fact that with this precaution a stop was
put to the noise. They asked me why I helped those who were in the wrong. In reply I
told them:
People in the wrong are unfair. They do not give up a single benefit for

--- Sayfa 360 ---
360
the sake of public peace forty times greater. Whereas the person who is in the right is
fair. He sacrifices and waives his own right, worth little, for the advantage of his
friend, which is part of the public peace and worth much. The disturbance ceases and
peace is restored. The ninety people in this ward can be comfortable. If the person in
the right is helped, the noise would increase even more. In communal life of this sort,
the general good takes precedence.
And so, my brothers! In this communal life of ours, do not say: “I am fed up with
my brother, for he’s been unfair to me.” To do so is a great error. If such a friend of
yours has caused you a little harm, your being angry with him causes us harm of high
cost. It is possible it would even cause excessive harm to the Risale-i Nur. But, praise
be to God, with our friends being prevented from repeatedly going to be questioned,
no harm came to our powerful and rightful defences. Otherwise like getting
something as tiny a fly’s wing in one’s eye or a spark falling into gunpowder, due to a
little pique brothers who are vexed with one another can cause a great deal of harm.
S e c o n d  S t o r y : There was once an elderly women who had eight sons. She
gave each of them a loaf of bread from the loaves she had, but none remained for
herself. So each of them gave her half his loaf. She then had four loaves, while theirs
was reduced to half a loaf.
My brothers! I feel in myself half the pains of the share in this calamity of each of
the forty of you. I take no notice of my own hardships. One day I felt excessively
afflicted and studied my previous position wondering if I was paying the penalty for
some error I had committed. I saw that I had no part at all in the fomenting and
incitement of this calamity; on the contrary I had employed every possible means to
avoid it. That means it is a divine decree. It has been planned against us by intriguers
over the past year, and made inevitable. It was not possible to avoid it. It was
inevitable that we should be embroiled in it. A hundred thousand thanks to Almighty
God that He reduced the calamity from a hundred to one.
In consequence of this fact therefore, do not blame me saying “We are suffering
this disaster because of you!” Forgive me rather, and pray for me. And do not criticize
each other, saying: “If you had not done such-and-such, this would not have
happened.” For example, with one of our brothers mentioning two or three signatures,
the plan the mischief-makers were hatching in order embroil numerous people in a
calamity, was restricted and many were saved from it. It was the cause not of harm,
but of great advantage. It resulted in many innocent people being saved from this
disaster.
                                                                                S a i d   N u r s i

--- Sayfa 361 ---
361
[This piece is very valuable. Everyone may benefit from it as far as
the Second Point.]
In connection with certain unpleasant situations which come about in Eskişehir
Prison, not through bad morality but because of the distress, this is about one fine
point of a well-known verse that has remained undisclosed, and a point concerning
good behaviour.
FIRST POINT
Out of His perfect munificence, compassion, and justice, Almighty God has
included in good works an immediate reward and in bad actions an immediate
punishment. He has included in good works spiritual pleasures that recall the rewards
of the hereafter, while in bad works are spiritual penalties which recall the torments of
Hell.
For example, love between believers is a praiseworthy action for the people of
faith. Included in that good work are a spiritual pleasure, a gratification, an ease of
mind that recall the physical rewards of the hereafter. Anyone who refers to his heart
will feel this pleasure.
And for example, enmity and hostility between believers are an evil that cause
noble spirits to feel torment of the conscience enough to overwhelm the heart and
spirit. I myself have experienced it perhaps more than a hundred times: when I have
felt enmity towards a believing brother I have suffered such torment that it has left me
in no doubt that it was the immediate punishment for my evil deed.
And for example, to be respectful towards those worthy of respect, and
compassionate to those worthy of compassion, and to assist them, are good works,
good deeds. They hold a pleasure and gratification so great they make felt the rewards
of the hereafter. And they so increase the respect and compassion they make the
person ready to sacrifice his very life. The pleasure and reward a mother receives
through the compassion she feels for her child may be so great she will sacrifice her
life due to it. The hen who attacks a lion in order to save her chick is an example of
this truth in the animal kingdom. This means that there is an immediate reward in
compassion and respect. Magnanimous people of high aspiration feel it, and for this
reason assume their heroic attitude.
And for example, in greed and wastefulness is such a punishment that, afflicting
his heart and spirit, it makes man complaining and anxious, and bewilders him. And
in jealousy and envy is such an immediate punishment that it scorches the one who
feels them. While in contentment and reliance

--- Sayfa 362 ---
362
on God is such an immediate, pleasurable reward that it dispels all the pains and
tribulations of poverty and indigence.
And for example, in pride and conceit is a heavy burden, for the proud man wants
respect from everyone. And because he is despised due to this desire, he suffers
constant torment. Yes, respect is given, it may not be sought.
And for example, in humility and the giving up of egotism is a pleasurable
reward by which a person is saved from the heavy burden of trying to make himself
liked.
And for example, in pessimism and always interpreting things unfavourably is an
immediate punishment in this world. In accordance with the rule, “Whoever strikes is
struck,” those who think unfavourably of others are also thought of unfavourably. The
actions of those who misinterpret the actions of their believing brothers are also
misinterpreted, and they suffer the punishment for it.
And so on, all good and bad deeds should be measured according to this
yardstick. I beseech divine mercy that those who witness the Qur’anic miraculousness
manifested at this time in the Risale-i Nur, experience these spiritual pleasures; they
will not suffer from bad morals, God willing.
*   *   *
SECOND POINT
[The Second of Twenty-Two Points]
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
I created not jinn and mankind except that they might worship me. * No
sustenance do I require of them, nor do I require that they should feed me. *
For God is He Who gives [all] sustenance—Lord of  Power—Steadfast [for
ever].(51:56-8)
For a long time these verses worried my mind, since according to many Qur’anic
commentaries their apparent meaning did not reflect the Qur’an’s elevated
miraculousness. I shall now explain briefly three aspects of their extremely beautiful
and exalted meanings, which proceed from the effulgence of the Qur’an.
T h e  F i r s t : Sometimes Almighty God attributes to Himself certain states that
could pertain to His Messenger, so as to honour and exalt him. Here too, the verses, “I
created you for worship; not to give Me sustenance and feed me,” have this meaning:
“My Messenger does not want a wage, recompense, or reward, or to be fed in return
for his duty of messengership and conveying to you the obligations of worship;” they
refer to the Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) being given food
and

--- Sayfa 363 ---
363
sustenance. Otherwise it would be making known something self-evident and clear,
and would be incompatible with the Qur’an’s miraculous eloquence.
T h e  S e c o n d  A s p e c t : Man is excessively preoccupied with his
sustenance. So lest he is deluded into making his winning it a pretext for neglecting
worship, or making it an excuse, the verse says: “You were created for worship. The
result of your creation is worship. Winning sustenance is worship of a sort, from the
point of view of its being a divine command. I have undertaken to provide your
sustenance and that of your families and animals, my creatures; it pertains to me; you
were not created to procure food and sustenance, for I am the Provider. I provide the
sustenance of my servants, your dependants. So do not make it an excuse and give up
worship!”
If its meaning is not this, it becomes a statement of the obvious, for to provide
Almighty God with food and sustenance is self-evidently impossible. It is an
established rule of rhetoric that if the meaning of a sentence is clear and obvious, it is
not that meaning which is intended, but a meaning necessitated by it and dependent
on it. For example, if you say to someone: “You are a hafiz,” it is stating the obvious.
The intended meaning is “I know that you are a hafiz.” You are informing him
because he did not know that you knew.
Thus, in consequence of this rule, the meaning of the verse, in which the
prohibition of giving food to Almighty God is a metaphor, is this: “You were not
created in order to produce food for My creatures, which are Mine and the providing
of whose sustenance I have undertaken. Your fundamental duty is worship. But to
strive to procure sustenance in accordance with My commands is also a sort of
worship.”
T h e  T h i r d  A s p e c t : In Sura al-Ikhlas the apparent meaning of,
He begets not, nor is He begotten(112:3)
is self-evident and obvious, hence another meaning is intended which is necessitated
by it. That is to say, Almighty God states extremely clearly and self-evidently “He
begets not, nor is He begotten,” meaning: “Anyone who has a father and mother
cannot be a god,” and, “pre-eternal and post-eternal,” to deny the divinity of Jesus
(UWP), and of Uzayr, and the angels, and stars, and other false gods. It is just the
same with our example, the verse, “The All-Glorious Provider, your object of
worship, does not require sustenance for Himself, you were not created to provide
Him with food” means: “Things with the ability to receive sustenance and food
cannot be gods and objects of worship,” meaning: “Beings that are in need of
sustenance and being provided for are not worthy of worship.”
                                                                                  S a i d   N u r s i

--- Sayfa 364 ---
364
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
Or while they slept for their afternoon rest.(7:4)
This was written in connection with Re’fet being curious and asking about the
word ‘qa’ilun – slept for their afternoon rest – in the verse, “Or while they slept for
their afternoon rest” and to prevent his diamond-like pen becoming idle in prison, and
lethargic, as a result of sleeping after the morning prayer like the others.
Sleep is of three sorts:
The First is Ghaylula. This is from pre-dawn to forty minutes or so after the sun
has risen, the time when prayer is lawful but reprehensible. Sleep at this time is
contrary to the Practices of the Prophet (UWBP), since according to Hadiths, it leads
to a decrease in livelihood and its being unfruitful. The most appropriate time for
preparing to earn one’s living is when it is cool. One is overcome by lethargy when
this has passed. It has been established by many experiences that this is both
detrimental to the day’s labour and indirectly to one’s livelihood, and is the cause of
unfruitfulness.
The Second  is Faylula. This is from the afternoon prayer till sunset. Sleep at this
time leads to a diminution of life, that is, it makes life that day shorter and pass in a
state of semi-sleep and drowsiness, thus causing a physical deficiency to life.
Moreover, immaterially, since most of the day’s results, material and immaterial,
become apparent after the afternoon prayer, to pass that time in sleep as though
prevents the results being reaped and the day becomes as though unlived.
The Third is Qaylula, which is in accord with the Prophet’s (UWBP) practices.1
It is from mid-morning to just past noon. Such sleep is Sunna since it allows a person
to rise at night to pray. So too it is the custom in the Arabian Peninsula to rest from
work at noon when it is intensely hot, corroborating this practice of the Prophet
(UWBP). This sleep augments both life and sustenance. For half an hour’s Qaylula
sleep is the equivalent of two hours’ sleep at night. This means it adds one and a half
hours’ to a person’s life every day. It saves one and a half hours from the hand of
sleep, the brother of death, and gives it life, increasing the time of working for one’s
livelihood.

1 Ibn Maja, Siyam, 22; al-Munawi, Fayd al-Qadir, iv, 531; al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, 330; al-
Albani, Sahih Jami‘ al-Saghir, No: 4307.

--- Sayfa 365 ---
365
“This is good as well”
While reciting, “Endless blessings and endless peace be upon you, O Messenger
of God!” in the tesbihat following the prayers, I saw from afar a subtle point which
gradually unfolded. I was unable to grasp all of it, and shall recount one or two
sentences by way of alluding to it.
I saw that the world of the night is like a newly opened dwelling of the world. I
entered it during ‘Isha, the prayer at nightfall. Since man is connected to all the world,
through an extraordinary expansion of the imagination I saw the mighty world that
night as a dwelling. Living creatures and men became so tiny they were invisible. I
observed with the imagination that the only thing that inhabited the dwelling and
made it familiar, and filled it with light, was the collective personality of Muhammad
(UWBP). As a person greets those present when he enters a house, I was
overwhelmed with the desire to say: “Endless peace be upon you, O Messenger of
God!”1 It was as though I was greeting him to the number of all men and jinn. That is
to say, I offered greetings, meaning: I renew my allegiance to you, accept your
mission, submit to the laws and commands you brought, and state through the
greetings that they will be safe from our assaults, and making speak all the parts of
my world and all jinn and men, all conscious beings, I offer greetings in their name.
As he illuminated my world through the light and gift he brought, so he
illuminates and fills with bounties the worlds of everyone in this world. In grateful
response for the gift, I exclaimed: “Endless blessings be upon you!” That is, “We
cannot respond to this goodness of yours, so we show our gratitude to you by
beseeching that mercy be bestowed upon you from our Creator’s treasury of mercy, to
the number of the inhabitants of the heavens.” I perceived this meaning in my
imagination.
In respect of his worship and on account of his being turned from creation to
Creator, the person of Muhammad (UWBP) requires blessings which have the
meaning of mercy. While in respect of his messengership and

1 The divine mercy received by Muhammad (UWBP) looks to the needs of all his community
through all eternity. For which reason, endless greetings are appropriate. If someone enters a vast house
like the world, desolate and empty and dark due to heedlessness, how frightened and dismayed he will
be. Then suddenly the house is lit up and a familiar, friendly, lovable and beloved Lieutenant appears
in the forefront. If he describes and makes known the house’s Compassionate and Generous Owner
through all its fittings and furnishings, you can understand what joy, familiarity, happiness, light, and
ease it will give. From this you may appreciate the value and pleasure of the greetings for the
Messenger (UWBP).

--- Sayfa 366 ---
366
being the envoy sent from Creator to creation, he requires peace. He is worthy of
peace to the number of jinn and men, and we offer a general renewal of our allegiance
to their number. So too he is worthy of blessings from the treasury of mercy to the
number of the inhabitants of the heavens and in the name of all of them. For it was
through the Light he brought that the perfections of all things became apparent, and
the value of beings was made manifest, and the dominical duties of creatures could be
observed, and the divine purposes in creatures were made known. Therefore, if all
things uttered verbally what they express through their tongues of disposition, it is
certain that they would declare: “Blessings and peace be upon you, O Messenger of
God!”, and we say in the name of all of them: “Endless blessings and endless peace
be upon you O Prophet of God, to the number of jinn and men, and of angels and
stars!”
It is enough that Allah grants him blessings,
And assigns him peace and benedictions.
                                                                                         S a i d   N u r s i
*  *  *
My Dear Brother!
You want an explanation of the Unity of Existence. In one of the Flashes of the
Thirty-First Letter there is a very powerful and elucidating answer to Muhyiddin’s
ideas concerning this matter. For now we just say the following:
Teaching this question of the Unity of Existence to people at the present time
causes serious harm. Like when metaphors and similes pass from the hands of the
learned to those of the common people and knowledge passes from scholars to the
ignorant, they are thought to be literally true,1 so when elevated truths such as the
Unity of Existence pass to the heedless and to the common people submerged in
causes, they are thought to be Nature, and cause three significant instances of harm.
T h e  F i r s t : The way of the Unity of Existence is quite simply to deny the
universe on account of Almighty God. Despite this, when it is adopted by the heedless
common people and enters their ideas which are tainted by materialist thought in
particular, it leads to denial of the Godhead on account of the universe and
materiality.

1 Just like the two angels, called the Bull and the Fish in connection with certain metaphors, were
supposed by the common people to be a vast bull and enormous fish.

--- Sayfa 367 ---
367
T h e  S e c o n d : The way of the Unity of Existence rejects the dominicality of
anything other than God so vehemently that it denies everything other than God and
removes duality. Since it does not recognize the independent existence of anything,
let alone that of evil-commanding souls, with the predominance of the idea of nature
at this time and pride and egotism inflating the evil-commanding soul and causing the
hereafter and the Creator to be forgotten, to inculcate the Unity of Existence in people
whose evil-commanding souls are small pharaohs and quite simply are disposed to
taking their own selves as their objects of worship, so inflates the evil-commanding
soul that – I seek refuge with God – it can no longer be contained.
T h e  T h i r d : While the All-Glorious One is free and exempt from, pure of
and exalted above all change, alteration, division, and being comprehended in time or
place, the Unity of Existence gives rise to conceptions that are not fitting for His
necessary existence, holiness, and being free of all defect, and leads to false teachings.
Yes, if one who speaks of the Unity of Existence rises in the mind from the ground to
the Pleiades, leaves the universe behind and fixes his gaze on the sublime throne,
ecstatically reckoning the universe to be non-existent, through the strength of his
belief he may see everything to be directly from the Single One of Unity. But the
person who stands behind the universe and looks at it, and sees causes before him and
looks from the ground may possibly become submerged in causes and immersed in
the swamp of nature. The person who rises in the mind to the divine throne may say
like Jalaluddin Rumi: “Listen! The words you hear uttered by everyone, you may hear
as uttered by Almighty God, like natural gramophones.” But if you say to the one who
cannot rise as high as Jalaluddin, nor see all beings from the ground to the divine
throne in the form of mirrors: “Listen! You will hear the divine speech from
everything,” he will in effect fall from the throne to the ground, and will also be
afflicted by false imaginings contrary to the truth!
Say: “God [sent it down]”: then leave them to plunge in vain discourse and
trifling.(6:91) * Glory be to the One whose Essence is holy above anything
similar to It and whose attributes are free of anything resembling them, and
whose signs testify to His dominicality, may His glory be exalted, for there is
no god but He.
                                                                                    S a i d   N u r s i
*   *   *

--- Sayfa 368 ---
368
The Answer to a Question
I do not have the time to weigh up the ideas of Mustafa Sabri1 and those of Musa
Bekûf.2 I shall only say this much, that the one went to one extreme and the other, to
the other extreme. Mustafa Sabri was right relatively to Musa Bekuf, but it is not right
to denigrate someone like Muhyiddin who was a miracle of the Islamic sciences.
Yes, Muhyiddin was himself rightly-guided and acceptable, but should not be the
guide and instructor with all his works. Since he very often proceeded in the realities
without balance, he opposed the rules of the Sunnis and some of the things he said
apparently denote misguidance. However, he himself was free of misguidance. A
word may sometimes appear to be unbelief, but the one who speaks it is not an
unbeliever. Mustafa Sabri did not take these points into consideration; he was extreme
concerning certain points of Sunni law, due to bigotry.
As for Musa Bekûf, he was excessively in favour of renewal; because of this and
the concessions he made to modernity in respect of his ideas, he was very much in
error. He corrupted some of the truths of Islam with his false interpretations. He went
far to excess by maintaining that someone rejected like Abu’l-A‘la al-Ma‘arrê was
superior to authoritative scholars, and favouring disproportionately matters stated by
Muhyiddin which oppose the Sunnis because they suited his own ideas.
Muhyiddin said: “Other people who are not one of us and do not know our station
should not read our books, for it may be damaging for them.” Yes, it is harmful to
read Muhyiddin’s books at the present time, especially the matters related to the Unity
of Existence.
                                                                             S a i d   N u r s i
*   *   *

1 Mustafa Sabri (1869-1954). A leading religious scholar and public figure in the last decades of
the Ottoman Empire, he was publisher of the journal Beyanu’l-Hak, and Shaykh al-Islam 1919-1920.
He left Turkey in 1922 and remained in exile in Egypt till his death.
2 Mûsa Jarullah Bigi(yef) was a native of Turkestan and a reformist Islamic scholar and prominent
figure. He was sent into exile by the Russians in 1904 together with Abdurrashid Ibrahim, and was the
author of many works.

--- Sayfa 369 ---
369
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
I shall explain a matter that unfolded before the gaze of my imagination one
glittering night of the festival, while watching from my prison window through the
lens of prudence and foresight the laughter of mankind that would turn into tears. As
the lives of people of previous ages who lie in the graveyard may be seen in the
cinema, so I as though saw the moving corpses of people who would inhabit it in the
near future. I wept for those merry-makers. All of a sudden a feeling of desolation and
pity came over me. I turned to my intellect and asked of reality: “What is this
imagining?” Reality replied, saying:
In fifty years time, out of the fifty who are now laughing and enjoying themselves
with such joy five will be bent and stooping seventy-year-olds, while forty-five will
have rotted in the graveyard. Those beautiful features and joyful smiles will have
been transformed into their opposites. According to the rule of “All that is coming is
close,” since it is to some degree true that things that are going to happen in the near
future are seen to have already arrived, then surely what you see is not imagination.
Furthermore, since the heedless laughter of this world veils bitter facts that thus
turn it into tears, and is temporary and subject to decline, most certainly it is only
thankful, innocent enjoyment within the bounds of the licit, which leads to awareness
of God’s presence and dispels heedlessness, and pleasures that will be permanent by
reason of their reward that will cause joy to wretched man’s eternity-worshipping
heart and his spirit, which has an irresistible desire for immortality, and  make them
smile.
It is because of this that there are among the narrations many that strongly
encourage thanks and remembrance of God at festival times, in order to prevent
heedlessness from prevailing and deviation into the illicit. To do this at such times
may transform the bounties of joy and happiness into thanks and make the bounty
continue and increase it. For thanks increases bounty and dispels heedlessness.
                                                                              S a i d   N u r s i
*   *   *

--- Sayfa 370 ---
370
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
This1 concerns one point contained in the verse,
The [human] soul is certainly prone to evil,(12:53)
and in the Hadith the meaning of which is, “Your worst enemy is your soul.”2
The person who loves himself – if his evil-commanding soul has not been
purified – will love no one else. Even if he does apparently, he does not do so
sincerely, but only for the pleasure of it or for some good he receives. He always tries
to make himself liked. Also, he never ascribes faults to himself; he defends and
exonerates himself like a lawyer. He praises himself, exaggerating and even lying,
showing himself to be free of fault, as though sanctifying himself, and according to
his degree receives a slap from the verse,
Who takes as his god his desires.(25:43; 45:23)
His self-praise and efforts to make himself liked have the reverse effect, for he attracts
contempt and is treated coldly. He also loses sincerity in his actions that look to the
hereafter and they become mixed with hypocrisy. He is defeated by the emotions and
desires of the soul, which are blind to the consequences, do not think of results, and
are obsessed with present pleasure; he serves a year’s prison sentence due to one
hour’s pleasure demanded by his emotions, which have gone astray. He pays ten
years’ penalty on account of one minute’s pride or revenge. Quite simply like a silly
child who sells the portion of the Qur’an he is learning to buy a single sweet, in order
to flatter his emotions, gratify his senses, and satisfy his appetites, he makes his
diamond-like good deeds the means to egotistical pleasures as insignificant as
fragments of glass,  and he loses out in profitable works.
O God! Preserve us from the evil of the soul and of Satan, and from the evil of
jinn and men.
*   *   *

1 This piece is beneficial for everyone.
2 al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, i, 143; al-Ghazali, Ihya ‘Ulum al-Din, iii, 4.

--- Sayfa 371 ---
371
A Question
How can incarceration in Hell for an infinite duration in return for unbelief for a
short duration be justice?
T h e  A n s w e r : Reckoning a year to be three hundred and sixty-five days, the
law of justice requires for a one-minute murder, seven million eight hundred and
eighty-four thousand minutes’ imprisonment. So, since one minute’s unbelief is like a
thousand murders, according to the law of human justice, someone who lives a life of
twenty years in unbelief and dies in that state deserves imprisonment for fifty-seven
billion, two hundred and one thousand two hundred million years. It may be
understood from this how conformable with divine justice is the verse,
They will dwell therein for ever.(33:65, etc.)
The reason for the connection between these two numbers, so far from one
another, is this: since murder and unbelief are destruction and aggression, they have
an effect on others. A murder which takes one minute negates on average at least
fifteen years of the victim’s life, so the murderer is imprisoned in their place. While
since one minute of unbelief denies a thousand and one divine names and denigrates
their inscriptions, violates the rights of the universe and denies its perfections, and
gives the lie to innumerable evidences of divine unity and rejects their testimony, the
unbeliever is cast down to the lowest of the low for more than a thousand years, and
“dwells” in imprisonment.
                                                                             S a i d   N u r s i
*   *   *

--- Sayfa 372 ---
372
A Meaningful and Subtle ‘Coincidence’
The ‘coincidence’1 of Article 163,2 under which the Risale-i Nur students were
charged and sentenced, and the number of deputies, one hundred and sixty-three out
of two hundred, who allotted one hundred and fifty thousand liras for the medrese3 of
the Risale-i Nur’s author in effect says this: the appreciative signatures of one
hundred and sixty-three deputies of the government of the republic quashes the ruling
of Article 163 of the Criminal Code concerning him.
Another subtle and meaningful ‘coincidence’ is this: the one hundred and twenty-
eight parts of the Risale-i Nur are put together in one hundred and fifteen booklets.
The number of days from when the Risale-i Nur students and its author were first
arrested on 27th April, 1935 to the date on which the court passed judgement on 19th
August, 1935 was one hundred and fifteen coinciding with the number of books of the
Risale-i Nur. In addition, the one hundred and fifteen people found guilty coincides
with the number exactly, showing that the calamity visited on the Risale-i Nur
students and its author is being regulated by a Hand of Favour.4
*   *   *

1 For ‘coincidence’ (tevâfuk), see, note 22, page 199. (Tr.)
2 Article 163 of the Turkish Criminal Code. (Tr.)
3 This refers to the Medresetü’z-Zehra. See, note 21, page 325.  (Tr.)
4 It is worth noting that the arrests of some of the Risale-i Nur students started on 25 April 1935.
Thus, because in the indictment one hundred and seventeen people were cited as guilty – the names of
two of them had been repeated – the number shown for the students was one hundred and seventeen,
this coincided with the one hundred and seventeen days from the date that group were arrested to the
date of the court’s judgement, adding a further subtlety to the former ‘coincidence.’

--- Sayfa 373 ---
373
The Twenty-Eighth Point
of the Twenty-Eighth Flash
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
[So] they should not strain their ears in the direction of the Exalted
Assembly, but be cast away from every side * Repulsed, for they are under a
perpetual penalty, * Except such as snatch away something by stealth, and
they are pursued by a flaming fire, of piercing brightness.(37:8-10) * And
We have adorned the lowest heaven with lamps, and We have made them
missiles to drive away the evil ones.(67:5)
An important point concerning verses like these will be explained in connection
with criticisms made by the people of misguidance. It is as follows:
Spies from among the jinn and satans eavesdrop on events in the heavens, and
like soothsayers, mediums, and some spiritualists, convey news from the World of the
Unseen. So that their giving information about the Unseen should not give rise to any
doubts when the Qur’an was first revealed, their continual espionage was prevented to
a greater extent and they were repulsed by shooting stars. The following is a brief
reply to an extremely important question in three parts concerning the above verses,
which are about this subject.
Q u e s t i o n : It is understood from verses like these that spying satans infiltrate
the distant lands of the heavens in order to learn of some minor and even personal
event in the Unseen. Rumours of such minor events as though spread everywhere in
those vast lands, and any satan anywhere may hear a confused version of them and
pass it on. However, reason and science cannot accept such a thing.
Also, it is said that some of the people of prophethood and some wonder-workers
as though pluck the fruits of Paradise from nearby, which according to definite verses
of the Qur’an, is above the heavens, and they sometimes gaze on Paradise from near
at hand. This matter, which concerns infinite distance within infinite proximity, is not
conformable with the understanding of the present age.
Also, the unimportant situation of an unimportant person being the subject of
discussion in the Sublime Assembly in the universal, vast land of the heavens is not
conformable with the wisdom of the utterly wise administration of the universe.
Nevertheless, these three matters are considered to be among the truths of Islam.

--- Sayfa 374 ---
374
T h e  A n s w e r :
Firstly: In the seven ‘Steps’ of the treatise called the Fifteenth Word, the
repulsion and ejection with stars of diabolical spies from the heavens, expressed by
the verse,
And We have adorned the lowest heaven with lamps, and We have made
them missiles to drive away the evil ones,
is proved so certainly with seven premises that it convinces the obdurate materialist,
silencing him and forcing him to accept it.
Secondly: We shall allude to those three truths which are supposed to be far from
the reason with a comparison that will bring them close to narrow minds.
For example, if a state’s Army Office is in the east of the country, its Ministry of
Justice in the west, its Education Ministry in the north, its Religious Affairs
Department in the south, and its Civil Service in the centre, and each department and
ministry communicates and is connected with the others by means of radio, telephone,
and telegraph in most regular and orderly fashion, the whole country will quite simply
be its Army Office the same as it is its Ministry of Justice, and will be its learned
establishment as it is its Civil Service.
And for example, it sometimes happens that numerous countries and states whose
capitals are different have sovereignty over a single country in different ways, through
colonies, or concessions, or trade. Although the country’s subjects and nation are one,
through its concessions, each state has connections with them. The affairs of those
states, which are distant from one another, touch on each other; they come close to
each other in all the houses of the country, and they share in each of its people. Its
minor matters are seen in a minor sphere in its points of contact. For each minor
matter is not taken from the universal sphere. But when those minor matters are
discussed, they are mentioned as though they are taken from the universal sphere,
since they are directly in accordance with the universal sphere’s laws; they are given
the form of a matter discussed in that sphere.
Like these two comparisons, although the land of the heavens is extremely distant
in respect of its centre and capital, it has immaterial telephones reaching the hearts of
men in the land of the earth. Furthermore, it does not only look to the corporeal world,
but in one respect encompasses the Manifest World since it comprises the Spirit
World and World of the Inner Dimension of Things.
The sphere of influence of Paradise too, which is from the world of eternity and
everlasting realm, stretches out and spreads in luminous fashion

--- Sayfa 375 ---
375
beneath the veil of the manifest, despite its infinite distance. Just as although, through
the wisdom and power of the All-Wise and Glorious Maker, the centres of the senses
in man’s head are all different, each governs the body taking it under its disposal; so
the universe, the macroanthropos, comprises thousands of worlds one within the other
like concentric circles. Sometimes the situations and events that occur in them are the
object of attention in respect of their universality and particularity and insignificance
and immensity; that is to say, those particulars are to be seen in particular, near
places, while the universals and immense matters are seen in universal, vast stations.
However, sometimes a minor, particular event occupies a vast world. In
whichever corner of the world you listen, you will hear about it. And sometimes some
vast mobilization is not against the enemy’s forces, but for a show of pomp and
majesty. For example, the event of Muhammad (UWBP) and sacred occurrence of the
Qur’an’s revelation were the most important events in the land of the heavens and
were bruited in every corner of it. Then there were more falling stars, which was a
dominical sign proclaiming the degree of splendour of the Qur’anic revelation and its
glittering sovereignty and the degree of its truthfulness, which could be penetrated by
no doubt, and was expressed and illustrated by the sentries posted on the distant,
towering bastions of the vast heavens raining down missiles to drive off and repulse
the devils. The Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition expounds and proclaims that cosmic
proclamation, and alludes to those heavenly signs.
Yes, such a tremendous heavenly sign, and the spying satans, who being made to
do battle with the angels although they could have been blown away at the puffing of
an angel, was surely to show the majesty of the Qur’anic Revelation’s sovereignty.
Also, this splendid exposition of the Qur’an and vast heavenly mobilization indicate
that there was nowhere the jinns and devils could interfere on the long way from the
heart of Muhammad (UWBP) to the world of the heavens and the Sublime Throne,
not that the jinns and satans possess some power which drove the inhabitants of the
heavens to fight them and defend against them. The Qur’anic Revelation was a truth
discussed by all the angels in the heavens; in order, the satans were compelled to rise
to the heavens to draw close to it a little, but were not successful and were repulsed.
This shows that the Revelation that came to the heart of Muhammad (UWBP), and
Gabriel who came to his presence, and the truths of the Unseen which appeared to his
gaze, were sound and straight and could be pierced by no doubts. The Qur’an of
Miraculous Exposition tells this in miraculous fashion.

--- Sayfa 376 ---
376
As for Paradise being seen from very close despite its great distance and being
part of the World of Eternity, and sometimes fruits being plucked from it, this
transient world and Manifest Realm is a veil to the World of the Unseen and
Everlasting Realm as may be understood from the above two comparisons. Paradise
may be seen everywhere by means of the mirror of the World of Similitudes, despite
the distance of its supreme centre. So too, where there is belief at the degree of
‘absolute certainty’, Paradise may have sorts of colonies and ministries in this
transient world – if there is no mistake in the comparison – and by means of the
telephone of the heart, may communicate with elevated spirits, and its gifts may come
to them.
As for a universal sphere being preoccupied with particular, personal matters;
that is to say, satans rising to the heavens and eavesdropping in order to bring reports
of the Unseen to soothsayers, and their bringing false, confused news, as is described
in Qur’anic commentaries, it must be as follows: it is not a question of their going as
far as the capital of the land of the heavens and gathering particular news; but of there
being certain places resembling police outposts – if the metaphor is not mistaken – in
the country of the heavens, which encompasses the atmosphere. In these they have
relations with the country of the earth. The satans eavesdrop on particular events in
those particular places. The human heart even is one such place, where the angel of
inspiration and personal devil do battle.
Also, however particular the truths of belief and the Qur’an and the events
connected with Muhammad (UWBP), they are as though the greatest and most
universal and important events and are published at the sublime throne and in the
sphere of the heavens, the most universal sphere, in – if the comparison is not
mistaken – the newspapers of the appointed events of the universe. They are
discussed on every corner. Since from the heart of Muhammad (UWBP) to the sphere
of the throne there is no way the satans can interfere, they do nothing apart from
listening to the heavens. Thus, the verse proclaims and shows most eloquently,
indeed, miraculously, how elevated and true are the Qur’anic revelation and
prophethood of Muhammad (UWBP), and that it is in no way possible to oppose them
or draw close to them with subterfuge or falsehood.
                                                                                       S a i d   N u r s i

--- Sayfa 377 ---
377
The Twenty-Ninth Flash
Preface
Thirteen years ago, my heart combined with my mind and urged me to the way of
reflective thought which the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition commands with such
verses as,
That you may consider.(2:219; 2:266) * Perchance they may reflect.(7:176,
etc.) *  Do they not reflect in their own minds, did God create the heavens
and the earth?(30:8) * There are signs for those who consider.(13:3, etc.)
The Hadith the meaning of which is “An hour’s reflective thought is better than a
year’s [supererogatory] worship”1 states that on occasion an hour’s reflection may be
equivalent to a year’s worship. It also offers powerful encouragement for reflective
thought. For myself, in order to preserve the extensive lights and lengthy truths which
appeared to my mind and heart during the thirteen years I have followed this way, I
recorded a number of phrases by way of indications, not to point out those lights but
to indicate their existence, facilitate reflection, and preserve the order. I used to recite
the phrases to myself verbally in varying Arabic terms when I embarked on the
reflection. Although repeated thousands of times over this long period, I never
became wearied, nor did the pleasure they afforded diminish, nor the spirit’s need of
them lessen. For since the reflection all consisted of flashes from Qur’anic verses, the
qualities of not causing weariness and preserving their sweetness, which are qualities
of the verses, were represented in the mirror of that reflective thought.
I realized recently that the powerful source of life and brilliant lights in the
various parts of the Risale-i Nur are flashes of those sequences of

1 al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, i, 143; al-Ghazali, Ihya’ ‘Ulum al-Din, iv, 409 (Kitab al-Tafakkur);
al-Haythami, Majma‘ al-Zawa’id, i, 78.

--- Sayfa 378 ---
378
thought. Thinking that they would affect others as they had affected me, I formed the
intention to set them all down in writing towards the end of my life. For sure,
important parts of them have been included in the Risale-i Nur but a further power
and value will be found in them in their totality.
Since the end of life is not clear, and since the conditions here of my
imprisonment have taken on a form worse than death, not waiting for my life to end,
on the insistence and importunity of my brothers I have written those sequences of
thought without changing them, as seven chapters.
[The remaining six chapters of this Flash have been published in hand-duplicated
editions of The Flashes, and not included here.]
T H E  T H I R D  C H A P T E R
On the Degrees of ‘God is Most Great!’
We shall mention seven of its thirty-three degrees. An important part of those
degrees have been expounded in the Second Station of the Twentieth Letter, at the
end of the Second Stopping-Place of the Thirty-Second Word, and at the beginning of
the Third Stopping-Place. Those who want to understand the reality of those degrees
should refer to those two parts of the Risale-i Nur.
THE FIRST DEGREE
Say: “Praise be to God who begets no son and has no partner in [His]
dominion: nor [needs] He any to protect Him from humiliation: yes, magnify
Him for His greatness and glory!”(17:111)
God is Most Great, may His Glory be exalted! In power and knowledge, greater
is He than everything. For He is the Creator, the Maker, the Giver of Form, who
through His power fashions man like the universe; He writes the universe with the
pen of His determining as He writes man with the same pen. For the macrocosm is
like the microcosm: both are fashioned by His power, inscribed by His pen; He
creates the macrocosm as a place of prostration, while He gives existence to the
microcosm as prostrating; He brings the former into being as a property, while He
gives existence to the latter as owned and needy for the property; His art in the former
displays it as a book, while His colouring in the latter shines through speech; His
power in the former reveals His majesty, while His mercy in the latter arrays His
bounty; His majesty in the former testifies that He is One, while His bounty in the
latter proclaims that He is Single, Undivided; His stamp

--- Sayfa 379 ---
379
on the former is on all things, universal and particular, whether at rest or in motion,
while His seal on the latter is on the body and on the limbs, and on their cells and
particles.
Now consider His works as a whole: you will see as clearly as daylight absolute
profusion within absolute order and regularity; with absolute speed yet absolute
balance; with absolute ease yet with absolute skill; on a vast scale yet with absolute
beauty of art; over infinite distances yet with complete unity of kind; with absolute
intermingling, yet absolute differentiation; with absolute lack of expense together
with absolute value. This situation testifies to the mind, as it compels the foolish
dissembler to accept, that this art and unity is the work of a possessor of absolute
power, a possessor of absolute knowledge.
In unity lies absolute ease, while in multiplicity and associating partners with
God are incomprehensible difficulties.
If all things are attributed to one, the universe’s creation is as easy as the creation
of a palm-tree, and the palm-tree as the fruit. But when ascribed to multiplicity, to
create a palm-tree is as difficult as creating the universe and each fruit as difficult as
the tree – so difficult as to be impossible. For with a single act, a single person may
obtain a single result and situation for many things without difficulty and without
having recourse to other means. Whereas if the situation and result are referred to
many, they could be obtained only with great trouble and dispute and pursuing other
means. It would be like an officer referring his duty to the soldiers, the master builder
to the stones of a building, the earth to the planets, the waterfall to the drops of water,
and the central point of a circle to all the points on the circumference.
Through the mystery of relations an unlimited power is present in unity. A thing
or cause is not compelled to carry the sources of its strength, and the work resulting
from the cause acquires greatness in relation to the thing on which it relies. But when
partners are associated with God, all causes are obliged to carry their own sources of
strength, and the resulting works diminish to their extent. It is because of this that an
ant and a fly defeated tyrants, and a tiny seed bears upon it a huge tree.
If all things are ascribed to one person, there is no need for creation from absolute
non-existence, for it consists of transferring a being which has existence in knowledge
to external existence, like transferring the image on the mirror at the back of a camera
onto photographic paper, thus establishing its external existence with complete ease,
or like revealing words written in invisible ink by spreading a special substance on the
writing.
When things are ascribed to causes and multiplicity, it necessitates their

--- Sayfa 380 ---
380
creation from absolute non-existence and this is impossible, the most difficult of
things. In unity is an ease; it is so easy as to be necessary. While in multiplicity is
great difficulty; such difficulty as to be impossible.
With unity, it is possible to create a being from absolute non-existence. That is, to
create a being out of pure non-being instantaneously, without matter, and to pour
particles into a mould that exists as knowledge without difficulty or confusion. While
as all the intelligent agree, with multiplicity and associating partners with God,
original creation is not possible from non-existence. Because for the existence of a
living creature, particles and elements dispersed throughout the earth have to be
gathered together. And when there is no mould existent in knowledge, all the particles
have to possess all-encompassing knowledge and absolute will so as to preserve the
particles in the body of the animate creature.
In addition, there is no need at all for those things assumed to be partners to God,
just as it is impossible that they should be. To make such a claim, therefore, is purely
arbitrary; there is nothing in beings to suggest that they have any role in their creation,
no sign. For the creation of the heavens and the earth necessitates perfect, infinite
power, which is in no need of partners. If there were partners, it would necessitate
their limiting that infinite and utterly perfect power and bringing it to an end in
infinite time, although there is no necessity for this, indeed, although the reverse is
necessitated; and this is impossible in five respects. Such partners are therefore
impossible and precluded. Moreover, beings in no way suggest or point to their
existence.
We have expounded this matter in the First Stopping-Place of the Thirty-Second
Word, showing how all things from minute particles to planets, and from the planets
to individual facial features in the Second Stopping-Place, reject the ascribing of
partners to God, and pointing out the stamp of divine unity on each of them.
Just as He has no partners, so He has no assistants or ministers. Causes are
merely fine veils to the disposals of pre-eternal power; in reality they have no creative
effect. For man is the highest of causes and the one with the most extensive will, and
out of a hundred parts of the most obvious volitional acts such as eating, speaking,
and thinking, he has only one dubious part. If the true power of disposal of the highest
of causes and the one with the most extensive will is thus restricted, how is it possible
for the animals and inanimate creatures to have a part in the creation and dominicality
of the Creator of the heavens and the earth? Just as the envelope in which a king sends
a gift, or the handkerchief in which he wraps a present, or the retainer who brings the
gift to you, cannot be partners in the king’s

--- Sayfa 381 ---
381
sovereignty, so the causes by which bounties are sent, or the coffers containing the
bounties stored up for us, or the causes wrapped up as divine gifts and sent to us as
presents, cannot be partners to or assistants of God, or intermediaries which have any
effect.
THE SECOND DEGREE
God is Most Great, may His glory be exalted; He is greater than everything in
power and knowledge. He is the Creator, All-Knowing, the Maker, All-Wise, Most
Merciful, All-Compassionate. For the beings of the earth and the lofty celestial bodies
in the garden of the universe are self-evidently miracles of an All-Knowing Creator’s
power; and the adorned, multicoloured plants laid out in the park of the face of the
earth and the many varieties of animals displayed and dispersed through the park are
necessarily the wonders of art of an All-Wise Maker; and the smiling flowers and
decorated fruits in the gardens of this park are clearly the gifts of One Most Merciful
and Compassionate. These miracles of power and wonders of art and gifts of mercy
testify, call out, and proclaim that their Creator, Fashioner, and Bestower is powerful
over all things, and knowing of all things, that His mercy and knowledge encompass
all things. In relation to His power particles and stars are equal; few and many are
equal; small and great, finite and infinite are equal. All the events of the past and its
strange happenings, which are miracles of an All-Wise Maker’s art, testify that the
Maker is powerful over all the possibilities of the future and its strange events, for He
is an All-Knowing Creator, Exalted, All-Wise.
Glory be to the One who made the earth the exhibition of His art, the gathering
place of His creatures, the manifestation of His power, the means of His wisdom, the
garden of His mercy, the arable field of His Paradise, the place of passage of
creatures, the river-bed through which beings flow, the measure of His artefacts.
The embellished animals, the decorated birds, the fruitful trees, the flower-
adorned plants are all miracles of His knowledge, marvels of His fashioning, gifts of
His munificence, proofs of His grace.
Blossoms smiling with the adornment of fruits, birds singing in the early morning
breeze, rain pattering on the petals of flowers, mothers tenderly embracing their
young, all make known One All-Loving, make loved One Most Merciful, Most Kind
and Generous to jinn and man, to spirit beings, the angels, and to animals.
Grains and fruits, seeds and flowers are miracles of wisdom, marvels of art, gifts
of mercy, proofs of unity; they testify to His grace in the realm of the hereafter. They
are truthful witnesses testifying that their Creator is

--- Sayfa 382 ---
382
powerful over all things, and knowing of all things; that with His mercy and
knowledge and creativity, planning, art, and fashioning He encompasses all things. In
relation to His creation, planning, art, and fashioning, the sun is a tiny seed; a star, a
flower; the earth, a grain.
For seeds and fruits are mirrors of unity in every part of multiplicity; they point to
divine determining; they are signs of power showing the unity of the multiplicity’s
source. Proceeding from it they testify to the unity of their Creator’s art and
fashioning. Then on their coming to an end in unity they recount the wisdom of their
Maker’s creativity and planning.
Seeds and fruits are also allusions of wisdom indicating that the universe’s
Creator looks with His all-encompassing view to the particular, then to the parts. For
the fruits are clearly the aim of the tree’s creation. Thus, man is the aim of the
universe, and the chief aim of the Creator of beings. Man’s heart is like a seed, and
the most luminous mirror to the Maker of creatures. It is due to this wisdom that in
the universe, insignificant man is the chief means to and reason for the resurrection of
beings, and the destruction, transformation, change and renewal of the universe.
God is Most Great! O Mighty One! The mind cannot penetrate the essence of
Your tremendousness!
All beings recite together “There is no god but He!”
Perpetually seeking their needs, they declare “O Truth!”
Altogether they recite “O Living One!”
THE THIRD DEGREE2
This is explained at the beginning of the Third Stopping-Place of the Thirty-
Second Word.
God is Most Great, may His glory be exalted! – in respect of power and
knowledge greater than all things. For He is All-Powerful, the Determiner, All-
Knowing, All-Wise, the Giver of Form, Munificent, Gracious, the Adorner, the
Bestower of Bounties, Loving, who makes Himself known, Most Merciful, All-
Compassionate, Kind, the Beauteous One of Absolute Beauty and Perfection, the Pre-
Eternal Inscriber. The reality of the universe as a whole and with its parts, and with its
levels and pages, and the reality of beings as a whole and as individuals, in regard to
existence and permanence consist of :—

2 This third degree considers a flower and a beautiful woman. The huge spring is a flower, and so
is Paradise. They are the places of manifestation of this degree. The world is a vast, beautiful human
being. Houris, and spirit beings, animals, and men, all as realms of being, bear the meaning of a human
being; through their pages, they display the divine names this degree depicts.

--- Sayfa 383 ---
383
The orderly, measured writings of the pen of His determining and decree,
according to knowledge and wisdom;
The depictions of the compasses of His knowledge and wisdom, traced with art;
The adornments of the shining hand of His art and bestowal of form, His
embellishing and illuminating, with grace and munificence;
The flowers of the subtleties of His grace and munificence, His making Himself
known and loved, bountifully, with mercy;
The fruits of the superabundance of the fount of His mercy and bounty, His pity
and tenderness, with beauty and perfection;
The flashes of an eternal beauty, a perpetual perfection, testified to by the
transience of the mirrors and flowing on of the places of reflection together with the
continuance of the beauty’s manifestation throughout the passage of the seasons, the
centuries, and epochs, together with the perpetual bestowal of bounty throughout the
passage of creatures, time, and beings.
Yes, the fleeting nature of the mirrors and the passing of beings together with the
constant manifestations and effulgences shows with the utmost clarity that the evident
beauty and shining perfection do not belong to the places of manifestation; they prove
most clearly and eloquently that they belong to a transcendent Beauty, a transcendent
Bestower, to the Necessary Existent, the Enduring One, the Loving One.
For a perfect work self-evidently points to a perfect act. A perfect act necessarily
points to a perfect name and a perfect performer of the act. And a perfect name
doubtlessly points to a perfect attribute. A perfect attribute indubitably points to a
perfect quality. And a perfect quality certainly points in a way worthy of such a one,
to the perfection of his essence. This is absolutely certain.
THE FOURTH DEGREE
God is Most Great, may His glory be exalted! For He is All-Just, the Pre-Eternal
All-Wise Arbiter and Sovereign, who established the body of the tree of the universe
in six days in accordance with the principles of His wisdom and will. He divided it
into sections in accordance with the rules of His determining and decree. He set it in
order through the laws of His practices. He adorned and embellished it according to
the laws of His mercy and favour. He illumined it through the manifestations of His
names and attributes. All this is testified to by the order and regularity of His
artefacts, the adorning of His beings, and their mutual resemblance and harmony,
their mutual assistance and co-operation, their embracing one another, and

--- Sayfa 384 ---
384
the conscious, skilful art in all things in accordance with the measure of their
capacities, specified by divine determining.
The universal wisdom in the order of the universe,
the perfect favour in its adornment,
the all-encompassing mercy in the grace bestowed in it,
the sustenance and provisions nurturing its beings,
through its manifesting the essential attributes of its Creator, the wondrous life
and art it displays,
the intended beauties of its embellishment,
despite its transience, the constant manifestation of reflected beauty within it,
the true love in its heart for the One it worships,
the attraction evident in its ecstasy,
the agreement of all perfected ones in it concerning its Creator’s unity,
the benefits followed in all its parts,
its results achieved through wise planning,
the generous nurturing of its living beings,
the perfect order in the changes undergone by its chief elements,
the vast aims followed in the order of its totality,
its instantaneous creation with utterly perfect art, without need for either time or
matter,
the wise individualities given to its beings, hesitant amid limitless possibilities,
the numerous, various needs of its beings being met at the most appropriate times
in unexpected ways, together with their smallest wishes, which they themselves
cannot answer,
the absolute strength manifested in its weakness,
the absolute power manifested in its impotence,
the life apparent in its lifelessness,
the encompassing consciousness apparent in its ignorance,
the perfect order within its changes, necessitating the existence of another who is
unchanging,
its glorifications like concentric circles centred on one point,
the acceptance of its three sorts of supplications, offered through the tongue of
latent ability, the tongue of innate need, and the tongue of exigency,
the invocations, and witnessings, and effulgences in its worship,
the order in its determining,
the peace found in the remembrance of its Creator,

--- Sayfa 385 ---
385
the worship in it being a means of bringing together its beginning and its end, and
the cause of its perfections becoming apparent and the purposes of its Maker being
realized,
together with these, all the rest of the universe’s attributes, states, and
circumstances testify that all its beings are under the direction of a Single Wise
Planner, and sustained by a Single Munificent Provider; that they are all the servants
of a Single Master; under the disposal of a Single Disposer, and that their source is the
power of a Single One the many seals of whose unity are apparent on all the missives
of all the pages of His beings.
Yes, all flowers and fruits, and plants and trees, and animals and stones, and even
particles and clods, in all valleys and on all mountains, and deserts and wildernesses,
are seals on the inscriptions and the works. To those who look with care, they show
that whoever fashioned the work, wrote the inscription that comprises the place it is
found. He is also the Inscriber of the face of the earth and beneath the seas. He also
inscribed the sun and the moon on the face of the heavens, which contains many such
missives. May the glory of their Inscriber be exalted, God is Most Great!
The world and all in it recite together “There is no god but He!”
THE FIFTH DEGREE3
God is Most Great! For He is the All-Powerful Creator, the Giver of Form, All-
Seeing, proofs of whose divinity and tremendousness are the heavenly bodies and
brilliant glittering stars; they are rays testifying to His dominicality and splendour.
They testify to and proclaim His glittering sovereignty and dominicality; they
proclaim the vast extent of His rule and His wisdom, and the majestic vastness of His
power.
Listen to the verse:
Do they not lok at the sky above them? How We have made it and adorned it,
and there are no flaws in it?(50:6)
Then look at the face of the heavens, you see how it is silent in its tranquillity, in
motion with wisdom, radiant with majesty, how it smiles with its adornment, within
the order of its creation, the symmetry of its art.
The shining of its lamp, the sun, for the changing of the seasons, the stages of its
candle, the moon, to illuminate the tracks, the glittering of its stars to adorn the
worlds, proclaim to those who think an infinite, unending sovereignty that regulates
this world.
Thus, the All-Powerful Creator is Knowing of all things, His will is all-

3 This is explained and illustrated in the Addendum to the First Stopping-Place of the Thirty-
Second Word and in the Second Station of the Twentieth Word.

--- Sayfa 386 ---
386
encompassing; what He wills is, and what He does not will is not. He is Powerful
over all things through His essential, all-embracing, absolute power. Neither is it
possible or imaginable for the sun today to exist without light or heat, nor is it
possible or imaginable for a god and creator of the heavens to exist without all-
embracing knowledge and absolute power. Of necessity He is Knowing of all things
with all-encompassing knowledge essential to His being. Of necessity such
knowledge is connected with all things; by virtue of the mystery of presence,
witnessing, penetration, and luminous all-comprehension, nothing can be separate
from or outside of such knowledge.
The balance and order to be observed in beings, and the ordered
proportionateness, and universal wisdom, and perfect bestowal, and measured
regularity, and determined fruitfulness, and the appointed hour of death, and regular
sustenance, the utter excellence and precision as established by science, and the
solicitous adornment, and the utterly perfect differentiation, balance, order, and skill,
and the absolute ease, all testify to the all-encompassing knowledge of the One All-
Knowing of the Unseen and all things.
As is indicated byt the verse,
Should He not know – He that created? And He is the One that understands
the finest mysteries [and] is well-acquainted [with them](67:14)
the existence of a thing necessitates knowledge, and the light of existence of things
necessitates the light of knowledge.
In comparison with the evidence of man’s creation to His Creator’s knowledge,
man’s fine art, which points to his intelligence is like the infinitesimal light of a fire-
fly on a dark night in comparison with the splendid brilliance of the noon-day sun on
the face of the earth.
And if He is knowing of all things, so He is wills all things. For something cannot
be realized without being willed. And just as power is effectual and knowledge
distinguishes, so will specifies; then the existence of things is realized.
There are evidences to the existence of the divine will and choice to the number
of states, stages, and attributes of things.
Yes, all beings being given order and particular attributes from among limitless
possibilities, amid fruitless ways from among confused floods of incongruous
elements, with such fine and sensitive order, and their being given balance with such
fine and sensitive balance, as is to be observed; and the creation of the various well-
ordered living beings from simple life

--- Sayfa 387 ---
387
less matter – like man and his physical systems from sperm, and birds and their limbs
from eggs, and trees and their various members from seeds – show that all things are
specified and determined through His will, choice, and volition. Just as things of the
same sort corresponding to one another and members of the same species resembling
each other in regard to basic members shows that of necessity their Maker is One,
Single; so too each member having a wise individuality marked by orderly
distinguishing features indicates that that One, Single Maker is an Agent with Will
and Choice who acts as He wishes and commands as He wills.
Just as that All-Knowing and Willing Creator has knowledge of all things and is
willing of all things, and has all-embracing knowledge and all-encompassing will and
total choice; so too He has necessary, essential perfect power, proceeding from His
Essence and necessary to it. The intervention of its opposite is impossible, as all are
agreed. So there are no degrees in His power. Particles and stars are equal in relation
to it, as are many and few, small and great, particulars and universals, parts and the
whole, man and the universe, and the seed and the tree.
Through the mystery of luminosity, transparency, reciprocity, balance, order, and
conformity;
According to the testimony of absolute order, absolute balance, and absolute
differentiation, together with absolute speed, ease, and multiplicity;
Through the mystery of the assistance of unity, the facility of unity, and the
manifestation of oneness;
Through the wisdom of necessity, total detachment and disengagedness, and
complete otherness of essence;
Through the mystery of unrestrictedness, not being bound by space, and
indivisibility;
Through the wisdom of the transformation of obstructions and difficulties into
means of facilitation – if there were need, though there is none – like veins in human
beings and metal wires for conducting electricity and subtle forces;
Through the wisdom of particles being of no less eloquence than the stars, nor
particulars of less eloquence than universals, nor parts less than wholes, nor the few
less than the many, nor the small less than the great, nor man less than the world, nor
seeds being of less eloquence than the tree;
According to all these, particles are equal to the stars before that power, few are
equal to many, small are equal to great, the parts and equal to the whole, particulars
are equal to universals, man is equal to the world,

--- Sayfa 388 ---
388
and the seed equal to the tree; it cannot be deemed unlikely that whoever creates the
former creates the latter. For the beings that are encompassed are miniature samples
of the universal, encompassing beings, and like tiny missives, or points distilled from
them. That is to say, the thing that is encompassed has to be in the grasp of power of
the Creator of the encompassing being so that the miniature sample of the
encompassing being may be contained within the encompassed thing through the
principles of His knowledge, and the summary of the encompassing being may be
pressed out of it in accordance with the balance of His wisdom.
A Qur’an of Wisdom written on an atom in particles of ether is of no less
eloquence than a Qur’an of Grandeur written on the pages of the heavens with the ink
of the sun and stars. Similarly, the creation of a bee or an ant is of no less eloquence
than the creation of a date-palm or an elephant, and the art in a rose is of no less
eloquence than a shining star. And so on, further examples may be made in the same
way.
Furthermore, the complete ease in the creation of things has led the people of
misguidance to confuse the formation of things with self-formation, which
necessitates superstitious impossibilities that not only the reason rejects, but from
which even fancy flees in disgust, while for the people of truth and reality it proves
certainly and necessarily that before the power of the Creator of the universe, stars
and particles are equal.
May His glory be exalted and name be magnified; there is no god but He!
THE SIXTH DEGREE4
May His glory be exalted and sublimity extolled, God is Most Great! In regard to
power and knowledge He is greater than all things. For He is All-Just, All-Wise, All-
Powerful, All-Knowing, One, Single, the Pre-Eternal Sovereign. All the worlds are
within the grasp of His order and balance, and ordering and balancing; of His justice,
and wisdom, and knowledge, and power, and under their sway. They manifest His
unity and oneness, as may be surmised certainly, indeed, may be observed. For there
is nothing in existence which is outside the bounds of the order and balance and
ordering and balancing. They are the two domains of the Clear Record and the Clear
Book. These are two titles, the former of the knowledge and command of the All-
Knowing and Wise One, the latter of the power and will of

4 If this sixth degree had been written similarly to the other degrees, it would have been extremely
lengthy, for the Clear Book and the Clear Record cannot be explained in concise terms. However, there
is a brief discussion of it in the Thirtieth Word, so we have cut short the discussion here, and left
detailed explanation of it to the study session [ders].

--- Sayfa 389 ---
389
that Mighty and All-Compassionate One. For the order and balance in this Book and
Record are two shining proofs for people of reason who have two eyes in their head,
that nothing at all in existence and time is outside the grasp of power of a Most
Merciful One, the ordering of One Most Kind, the adorning of One Most Clement, the
balancing of a Requiter.
I n  S h o r t : The manifestations of the names of First and Last in creation look
to the beginnings and ends of beings, and their origin and progeny, and the past and
the future, and to the divine command and knowledge; they point to the Clear Record.
While the manifestation of the names of Outward and Inward in the creation of things
indicate the Clear Book.
For the universe is like a vast tree, and all the worlds within it also are like trees.
You may therefore draw a comparison between the creation of a single tree and that
of the universe together with all its worlds and realms. The tree has an origin and
source, which is the seed from which it sprang, and it has a progeny which continues
its functions after its death, which is the seed in its fruit.
Thus its beginning and end are the manifestations of the names of First and Last.
Through order and wisdom, its beginning and original seed are an index and timetable
comprising all the laws of the tree’s formation. The seeds in its fruits, which are its
end, are the place of manifestation of the name of Last.
The seeds in its fruit created with perfect wisdom are like small coffers in which
have been placed an index and timetable for the formation of a similar tree. Inscribed
in them with the pen of divine determining are the laws of the formation of future
trees.
The tree’s outer aspect is the manifestation of the name of Outward. For its outer
appearance displays perfect order and balancing and wisdom, like an ornate and
decorated garment with which the tree has been clothed with perfect wisdom and
grace in accordance with the measure of its stature.
The tree’s inner aspect is the manifestation of the name of Inward. It displays
perfect order and planning and astounds minds. It distributes the substances necessary
for the tree’s life to its various members with complete regularity, as though this inner
aspect were a wondrous machine working with the utmost orderly balance.
Thus, its origin is a wondrous timetable and its end an astonishing index, both
indicating the Clear Record. While its outer aspect is a gorgeous robe full of art, and
its inner aspect, a machine of the utmost regularity; both pointing to the Clear Book.
Just as man’s faculty of memory points to the Preserved Tablet and is a proof it,
so the original seeds of trees and their fruits point to the Clear

--- Sayfa 390 ---
390
Record. While their outer and inner aspects allude to the Clear Book. Comparisons
may therefore be drawn between this particular tree and the tree of the earth and its
past and its future, and the tree of the universe and its beginnings and its future, and
the tree of man and his forebears and progeny. And so on.
May their Creator’s glory be exalted, there is no god but He!
Oh One Sublime! You guide not the mind to the true essence of Your grandeur
nor lead it to the substance of Your tremendousness, for it is powerless to comprehend
them!
THE SEVENTH DEGREE
God is Most Great, may His glory be exalted! In respect of power and knowlege
He is greater than all things. For He is the Creator,5 the Opener, the Doer, Most
Knowing, the Bestower, Most Effulgent, the Pre-Eternal Sun. The universe together
with its realms and beings is a shadow thrown by His lights; they are the works of His
acts, and the colours of the impresses of the various manifestations of His names, and
the lines inscribed by the pen of His determining and decree, and mirrors to the
manifestations of His attributes, beauty, glory, and perfection.
According to the consensus of the Pre-Eternal Witness, known through all His
Books and Scriptures, and His Qur’anic verses, and creational signs;
And the consensus of the earth with all its worlds, together with their total
essential want and need, and the absolute wealth and riches displayed on them;
And the consensus of all the prophets, saints, and purified scholars, the people of
witnessing with luminous spirits, light-filled hearts, and illumined minds, through all
their researches, uncoverings, effulgences, and invocations;
All from the earth to the lofty and lowly bodies with their endless certain
testimony and certain affirmation, agree in accepting the testimony of the creational
signs and Qur’anic verses, and the revealed Books and Scriptures, the very testimony
of the Necessary Existent One, that all beings are the works of His power, the
missives of His determining, the mirrors to His names, and the representations of His
Lights.
May His glory be exalted, there is no god but He!

5 If one looks through the telescopes of these divine names at the divine acts and works beneath
their manifestations in beings, the mind is transposed to the Glorious One whom the names signify.

--- Sayfa 391 ---
391

The Thirtieth Flash
This, the Thirtieth Flash of the Thirty-First Letter
and a fruit of Eskişehir Prison, consists of six points
 [Just as Meyve Risalesi (The Fruits of Belief) was the
supreme lesson of the Denizli School of Joseph, and El-
Hüccetü’z-Zehrâ (The Shining Proof) was a most valuable
lesson of the Afyon School of Joseph, so too this Thirtieth
Flash, which expounds six points about the six divine names
bearing the greatest name was a powerful lesson of the
greatest importance of the Eskişehir School of Joseph.
Everyone will not immediately understand and appreciate
the profound, extensive matters in the pieces about the names
of Ever-Living and Self-Subsistent from the greatest name,
but they will not remain without a share of them either.]
THE FIRST POINT
The Divine Name Most Holy
 [This point concerns one aspect of the divine name of Most
Holy. It is appropriate that it should form an addendum to the
Addendum of the Thirtieth Word.]
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
And the earth We have spread wide; and how well have We ordered
it.(51:48)
One manifestation of the divine name Most Holy, which is one meaning of the
above verse and is a greatest name or one of the six lights contained in the greatest
name, became clear to me in the month of Sha‘ban in Eskişehir Prison. It
demonstrated with complete clarity both the divine existence and divine unity. I saw it
as follows:

--- Sayfa 392 ---
392
The universe is a vast, constantly working factory and the globe of the earth a
hostel and guesthouse which is continually filled and emptied. Generally, factories,
hostels and guesthouses which are thus used become much dirtied and soiled with
filth, debris and rubbish, and putrid matter accumulates in all parts of them. They
cannot be occupied unless they are kept with care and cleaned and swept; human
beings are overwhelmed by the dirt. The factory of the universe and guesthouse of the
earth, however, are totally pure, clean and spotless, and completely unsoiled,
untainted and fresh; there is nothing unnecessary, nothing without benefit, not a
random piece of dirt to be found. Even if there is apparently, it is quickly thrown into
a transformation machine and cleaned.
This means that the One who looks after this factory does so very well. Its Owner
is such that He sweeps and cleans and orders the vast factory and extensive palace as
though they were small rooms. Considering the size of the huge factory, there is no
dirt or rubbish remaining from its filth and debris. Indeed, its cleanness and tidiness
are remarkable.
If someone does not wash himself and clean his small room for a month, they
will become extremely dirty and soiled. That is to say, the cleanliness, purity, and
luminosity in this palace of the world arise from a continuous, wise, and diligent
cleaning. If it were not for this cleaning, sweeping and careful tending, in one year all
the hundred thousand animal species would have been choked on the face of the earth.
Also, the debris of the globes in space and the heavens, which manifest life and
death, and of satellites and stars, would have smashed not only our heads and those of
the other animals, but also the head of the earth itself and of our world. They would
have rained down on our heads rocks the size of mountains and driven us away from
our homeland in this world. However, for a long time past, if as a warning a few
meteorites have fallen as a result of destruction and reconstruction in those lofty
worlds, they have not broken any heads.
Furthermore, the corpses of a hundred thousand animal species and the debris of
two hundred thousand plant species each year on the face of the earth resulting from
the alternation and struggles of life and death would have so utterly filthied the land
and the sea that conscious creatures, rather than loving and delighting in the face of
the earth, would have felt disgust and aversion at such ugliness and fled to death and
non-existence.
Just as a bird cleans its wings with ease and a scribe his pages, so too the wings
of the aircraft of the earth and the birds of the heavenly bodies and the pages of the
book of the universe are cleaned and made beautiful. So much so that people who do
not consider the infinite beauty of the hereafter

--- Sayfa 393 ---
393
and think with belief become lovers of this cleanliness and beauty of the world, they
worship it.
That is to say, this palace of the world and factory of the universe display a
greatest manifestation of the divine name Most Holy whereby it is not only the
carniverous cleaners of the seas and the eagles of the land which obey the commands
proceeding from that sacred cleansing, but also its cleansing officials which gather up
corpses, like worms and ants. Like the red and white blood-corpuscles flowing in the
body obey those sacred commands and do the cleaning in the body’s cells, so does
breathing purify and clean the blood.
And as eyelids obey the command to clean the eye and flies to brush their wings,
so the extensive atmosphere and the clouds obey it. The air blows upon the pieces of
dust and soil settled on the surface of the earth and cleans it. The sponges of the
clouds sprinkle water on the garden of the earth and dampen the dust and soil. Then,
so as not to dirty the sky, the air quickly collects the earth’s rubbish and withdraws
and hides itself with perfect orderliness. It displays the beautiful face and eye of the
skies as swept and polished, all sparkling and shining.
And as the stars, elements, minerals, and plants obey the command to clean, all
particles and atoms obey it: they pay attention to cleanliness within the astonishing
upheavals of change and transformation. They never congregate anywhere
unnecessarily and get in the way. If they do become soiled, they are quickly cleaned.
They are impelled by a hand of wisdom to acquire the cleanest, neatest, and most
shining states and the most beautiful, pure and subtle forms.
Thus, this single act, that is, making clean, which is a single truth, is a greatest
manifestation of a greatest name, the name of Most Holy, which shows itself in the
maximum sphere, that is, throughout the universe. Like the sun, it shows directly to
eyes that are far-seeing and broad-sighted the divine existence and unity together with
the most beautiful divine names.
It has been established with decisive proofs in many parts of the Risale-i Nur that
the act of ordering and order, which are a manifestation of the names of Sapient and
All-Wise; and the act of weighing and balance, which are a manifestation of the
names of Justice and All-Just; and the act of adorning and munificence, which are a
manifestation of the names of Beauteous and All-Generous; and the act of sustaining
and bestowal, which are a manifestation of the names of Sustainer and Most
Compassionate are each a single truth and a single act, they therefore demonstrate the
necessary existence and unity of a Single Being. In exactly the same way, the act of
purifying and making clean, which is a manifestation and display of the

--- Sayfa 394 ---
394
name Most Holy, demonstrates like the sun both the existence of the Necessarily
Existent One, and like daylight, His unity.
And as the wise acts of ordering, balancing, adorning and making clean
mentioned above point to a Single Maker by reason of their unity of kind in the
maximum sphere, so most of the beautiful names, indeed, the thousand and one
names, each have such a greatest manifestation in the maximum sphere. And the act
proceeding from that manifestation points to the Single Unique One with clarity and
decisiveness in relation to its extensiveness.
The self-evident truths and single acts that illuminate the face of the universe and
make it smile, such as the universal wisdom that causes all things to conform to its
law and order, the comprehensive munificence that adorns all things and causes them
to smile, the all-embracing mercy that makes all things pleased and happy, the
universal providing of sustenance which nurtures and gives pleasure to all things, and
the life and giving of life which connects each thing with all things and makes each
thing benefit from, and to some extent own, all things – these self-evident truths and
single acts point as plainly as light points to the sun to a single All-Wise, All-
Generous, and All-Compassionate One, a single Sustainer, a single Ever-Living Giver
of Life.
If those hundreds of extensive acts, each of which is a clear proof of God’s unity,
are not attributed to the Single Unique One, each necessarily becomes impossible in
hundreds of respects. For example, let alone such self-evident truths and single
evidences as wisdom, providence, mercy, sustaining and giving of life, if only the act
of making clean is not attributed to the Creator of the universe, then the following
becomes necessary in the unbelieving way of the people of misguidance:
Either all the creatures connected to cleansing from particles and flies to the
elements and the stars would have to have the ability to know and consider the
adorning, balancing, and cleansing of the vast universe and would act accordingly, or
each would have to possess the sacred attributes of the world’s Creator, or each would
have to be present at a consultative meeting the size of the universe in order to
regulate the equilibrium of the adorning and cleansing of the universe and its
incomings and outgoings, and innumerable particles, flies, and stars would have to be
participants in the meeting; and so on. Hundreds of superstitious, nonsensical and
sophistical impossibilities like these would have to occur so that the universal,
comprehensive, and exalted adorning, purifying and cleansing that is to be seen and
observed everywhere could come about. As for this, it is not impossible once, but a
hundred thousand times over.
If daylight and the imaginary miniature suns represented in the shining

--- Sayfa 395 ---
395
objects on the earth are not attributed to the sun and they are not said to be the
manifestation of the sun’s reflection, it would be necessary for the actual sun to be
present in all fragments of glass, drops of water and snow-flakes glistening on the
face of the earth, and even in all particles of air, so that the universal light could exist.
Thus, wisdom is a light; all-embracing mercy is a light; adorning, balancing,
ordering, and cleansing are each an encompassing light: they are all the rays of the
Pre-Eternal Sun. So see how misguidance and unbelief have entered a bog from
which there is no escape! See just how idiotic is the ignorance of misguidance! Say:
“Praise be to God for the religion of Islam and complete and perfect belief!”
For sure, this exalted, universal cleansing which keeps the palace of the universe
clean is the manifestation and requirement of the divine name Most Holy. Yes, just as
the glorification of all creatures looks to the name Most Holy, so does the name of
Most Holy require their cleanliness.1
 It is because of this sacred connection of cleanliness that the Hadith,
“Cleanliness is a part of belief”2 deems it to be a light of belief. And the verse,
Indeed, God loves those who turn to Him constantly and He loves those who
keep themselves pure and clean(2:222)
shows that cleanliness is a means of attracting God’s love.

1 We must not forget that bad qualities, false beliefs, sins and innovation are all instances of moral
and spiritual dirt.
2 Muslim, Tahara, 1; Darimi, Vudu’, 2; Musnad, v, 342, 344; al-‘Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa’, 291.

--- Sayfa 396 ---
396
THE SECOND POINT
The Divine Name All-Just
And there is not a thing but its [sources and] treasures [inexhaustible] are
with Us; but We only send down thereof in due and ascertainable
measures.(15:21)
One point concerning this verse and one manifestation of the name All-Just,
which is a greatest name or one of the six lights comprising the Greatest Name, like
the First Point, appeared to me from afar while in Eskişehir Prison. In order to bring it
closer to the understanding, we say the following; again by means of a comparison:
The universe is a palace, but it is such a palace that within it is a city that suffers
the upheavals of constant destruction and reconstruction. Within the city is a country
that is being continuously agitated by war and emigration. Within the country is a
world which is unceasingly revolving amid death and life. But such an astonishing
balance, equilibrium and equilibration prevail in the palace, city, country and world
that it self-evidently proves that the transformations, and incomings and outgoings
apparent in their innumerable beings are being measured and weighed every moment
on the scales of a Single Being who sees and supervises the whole universe.
For if it had been otherwise, if causes had been free and unrestrained, which try
to destroy the balance and overrun everything, with a single fish laying a thousand
eggs and a single flower like the poppy producing twenty thousand seeds, and with
the onslaught and violence of change and the elements flowing in floods, or if it had
been referred to aimless, purposeless chance, anarchic blind forces, and unconscious
dark nature, the equilibrium of beings and balance of the universe would have been so
utterly destroyed that within a year, indeed within a day, there would have been
chaos. That is to say, the seas would have been filled with wreckage in total disorder
and confusion and would have become fetid; the atmosphere would have been
poisoned with noxious gases; and as for the earth, it would have turned into a refuse-
heap, slaughter-house, and swamp. The world would have suffocated.
Thus, everything from the cells of an animate body, the red and white corpuscles
in the blood, the transformations of minute particles, and the

--- Sayfa 397 ---
397
mutual proportion and relation of the body’s organs, to the incomings and outgoings
of the seas, the income and expenditure of springs under the earth, the birth and death
of animals and plants, the destruction of autumn and the reconstruction of spring, the
duties and motion of the elements and the stars, and the alternations, struggles and
clashes of death and life, light and darkness, and heat and cold, are ordered and
weighed with so sensitive a balance, so fine a measure, that the human mind can
nowhere see any waste or futility, just as human science and philosophy observe
everywhere and demonstrate the most perfect order and beautiful symmetry. Indeed,
human science and philosophy are a manifestation and interpreter of that order and
symmetry.
So, come and consider the balance and equilibrium of the sun and its twelve
planets. Does it not point as clearly as the sun to the All-Glorious One who is All-Just
and All-Powerful? Especially our ship, that is, the globe of the earth, which is one of
the planets; it travels an orbit of twenty-four thousand years in one year, not scattering
or shaking the things stored up and stacked on its face, despite its extraordinary speed,
nor throwing them off into space. If its speed had been increased or reduced just a
little, it would have thrown its inhabitants off into the atmosphere, and scattered them
through space. And if its balance was to be destroyed for a minute, or even a second,
it would destroy the world. Indeed, it would clash with another body and doomsday
would break forth.
Especially the compassionate balance on the face of the earth of the births,
deaths, livelihoods, and lives of the four hundred thousand plant and animal species; it
shows a single Just and Compassionate One, as clearly as light shows the sun.
Especially the members, faculties, and senses of a single of the innumerable
members of those species; they are related to each other with so fine a balance and
equilibrium that their balance and mutual proportion show an All-Wise and Just
Maker so clearly as to be self-evident.
Especially the cells and blood-vessels in the bodies of animals, and the corpuscles
in the blood and particles in the corpuscles; they have such a fine, sensitive, and
wondrous balance that it self-evidently proves that they are being nurtured and
administered through the balance, law, and order of a single All-Just and Wise
Creator who holds the reins of all things, has the key to all things, for whom nothing
is an obstacle to anything else, and directs all things as easily as a single thing.
If someone who does not believe or deems it unlikely that the deeds of jinn and
men will be weighed up on the supreme scales of justice at the Last Judgement notes
carefully this vast balance, which he can observe in

--- Sayfa 398 ---
398
this world with his own eyes, he will surely no longer consider it unlikely.
O wasteful, prodigal.. wrongful, unjust.. dirty, unclean.. wretched man! You have
not acted in accordance with the economy, cleanliness, and justice that are the
principles by which the whole universe and all beings act, and are therefore in effect
the object of their anger and disgust. On what do you rely that through your
wrongdoing and disequilibrium, your wastefulness and uncleanliness, you make all
beings angry? Yes, the universal wisdom of the universe, which is the greatest
manifestation of the divine name of All-Wise, turns on economy and lack of waste. It
commands frugality. And the total justice in the universe proceeding from the greatest
manifestation of the Name All-Just, administers the balance of all things and enjoins
justice on man. Mentioning the word balance four times, the verses in Sura al-
Rahman,
And the firmament has He raised high, and He has set up the balance [of
justice], * In order that you may not transgress [due] balance. * So establish
weight with justice and fall not short in the balance,(35:7-9)
indicate four degrees and four sorts of balance, showing its immensity and supreme
importance in the universe. Yes, just as there is no wastefulness in anything, so in
nothing is there true injustice or imbalance.
The cleanliness and purification proceeding from the name Most Holy cleans and
makes beautiful all the beings in the universe. So long as man’s dirty hand does not
interfere, there is no true uncleanliness or ugliness in anything.
So you may understand how basic to human life are the principles of justice,
frugality, and cleanliness, which are truths of the Qur’an and Islamic principles. And
know how closely connected with the universe are the injunctions of the Qur’an,
having spread their firm roots everywhere, and that it is as impossible to destroy those
truths as it is to destroy the universe and change its form.
Is it at all possible that although hundreds of comprehensive truths like these
three vast lights, such as mercy, grace, and preservation, require and necessitate the
resurrection of the dead and the hereafter, such powerful and all-encompassing truths
as mercy, favour, justice, wisdom, frugality, and cleanliness, which govern in the
universe and all beings, should be transformed into unkindness, tyranny, lack of
wisdom, wastefulness, uncleanliness, and futility, by there being no hereafter and the
resurrection not occurring?
God forbid, a hundred thousand times, God forbid! Would a mercy and

--- Sayfa 399 ---
399
wisdom which compassionately preserve the rights of life of a fly violate the
countless rights of life of all conscious beings and the numberless rights of
numberless beings, by not bringing about the resurrection? And if one may say so,
would a splendid dominicality which displays infinite sensitivity and care in its mercy
and compassion and justice and wisdom, and a divine sovereignty which adorns the
universe with His endless wondrous arts and bounties in order to display His
perfections and make himself known and loved, permit there to be no resurrection,
which would reduce to nothing the value of creatures and all their perfections, and
make them denied? God forbid! Such an absolute beauty clearly would not permit
such absolute ugliness.
Yes, the person who wants to deny the hereafter must first deny all the world and
all its truths. Otherwise the world together with all its truths will give him the lie with
a hundred thousand tongues, proving the compounded nature of his lie. The Tenth
Word proves with certain evidences that the existence of the hereafter is as definite
and indubitable as the existence of this world.

--- Sayfa 400 ---
400
THE THIRD POINT
Which alludes to the Third of the Six Lights
of the Greatest Name,
The Divine Name Sapient
Invite [all] to the way of your Sustainer with wisdom.(16:125)
[One manifestation of the divine name Sapient, which is a
greatest name or one of the six lights of the greatest name, and
a fine point of the above verse, appeared to me in the month of
Ramadan while in Eskişehir Prison. This Third Point consists
of five matters, and forms only an allusion to it. It was written
in haste and has remained in its original form.]
FIRST MATTER
As is indicated in the Tenth Word, the greatest manifestation of the divine name
of Sapient has made the universe like a book in every page of which hundreds of
books have been written, and in every line of which hundreds of pages have been
included, and in every word of which are hundreds of lines, and in each letter of
which are a hundred words, and in every point of which is found a short index of the
book. The book’s pages and lines down to the very points show its Inscriber and
Writer with such clarity that that book of the universe testifies to and proves the
existence and unity of its Scribe to a degree far greater than it shows its own
existence. For if a single letter shows its own existence to the extent of a letter, it
shows its Scribe to the extent of a line.
Yes, one page of this mighty book is the face of the earth. Books to the number of
the plant and animal species are to be observed on this page in the spring, one within
the other, together, at the same time, without error, in the most perfect form.
A single line of the page is a garden. We see that written on this line are well-
composed odes to the number of flowers, trees, and animals, together, one within the
other, without error.
One word of the line is a tree which has opened its blossom and put forth its
leaves in order to produce its fruit. This word consists of meaningful passages lauding
and praising the All-Glorious Sapient One to the number of orderly, well-
proportioned, adorned leaves, flowers, and fruits. It is

--- Sayfa 401 ---
401
as though like all trees, this tree is a well-composed ode singing the praises of its
Inscriber.
It is also as if the All-Glorious Sapient One wants to look with thousands of eyes
on His wonderful antique works displayed in the exhibition of the earth.
And it is as if the bejewelled gifts, decorations and uniforms given to the tree by
that Pre-Eternal Monarch have been given such adorned, well-proportioned, orderly,
meaningful and wise forms in order to present them to His view in the spring, its
particular festival and parade, that each of its flowers and fruits testifies in numerous
ways and with many evidences one within the other to its Inscriber’s existence and
Names.
For example, in all its blossoms and fruits is a balance. The balance is within an
order, and the order is within an ordering and balancing which is being constantly
renewed. The ordering and balancing is within an art and adornment, and the
adornment and art are within meaningful scents and wise tastes. Thus, each flower
points to the All-Glorious Sapient One to the number of the tree’s blossoms.
And in the tree, which is a word, the point of a seed in a fruit, which is like a
letter, is a small coffer containing the index and programme of the whole tree. And so
on. To continue the same analogy, through the manifestation of the name of Sapient
and Wise, all the lines and pages of the book of the universe – and not only its lines,
but all its words, letters, and points – have been made as miracles so that if all causes
were to gather together, they could not make the like of a single point, nor could they
dispute it.
Yes, since each of the creational signs of this mighty Qur’an of the universe
displays miracles to the number of points and letters of those signs, in no way could
confused chance, blind force, aimless, anarchic, unconscious nature interfere in that
wise, percipient particular balance and most sensitive order. If they had interfered,
some traces of confusion would certainly have been apparent. Whereas no disorder of
any sort is to be seen anywhere.
SECOND MATTER
F i r s t  T o p i c : As is explained in the Tenth Word, it is a fundamental rule
that infinitely perfect beauty and infinitely beautiful perfection want to behold
themselves and show and exhibit themselves. In consequence of this, in order to make
Himself and His perfections known, and to display His beauty and make Himself
loved the Pre-Eternal Inscriber of the mighty book of the universe makes known and
loved the beauty of His perfection and perfection of His beauty with the universe and
all its pages,

--- Sayfa 402 ---
402
lines and even letters and points, with the innumerable tongues of all beings from the
most particular to the most universal.
O heedless man! Come to your senses! Know just what a compounded ignorance
it is and what a loss if in the face of the Sapient and All-Wise Ruler of Glory and
Beauty’s making Himself known to you and loved by you by means of all His
creatures in this brilliant, endless fashion you do not recognize Him with belief and
you do not make yourself loved by Him with your worship.
T h e  S e c o n d  T o p i c of the Second Matter: There is no place for
partnership in the dominions of the universe’s All-Powerful and Wise Maker. For the
infinitely perfect order present in everything does not accept partners. Many hands
intervening in a single matter confuses it. If there are two kings in a country, two
governors of a town, or two headmen in a village, disorder will occur in all their
affairs. Similarly, the lowest official does not accept interference in his duties, which
shows that the fundamental characteristic of rulership is independence and singleness.
That is to say, order necessitates unity, and rulership necessitates independence.
If a temporary shadow of rulership in impotent man needy for assistance rejects
interference in this way, the true, absolute rulership at the degree of dominicality of
the One who possesses absolute power will certainly reject interference with all its
strength. Even the tiniest interference would spoil the order.
However, the universe has been created in such a way that to create a seed, the
power to create a tree is necessary. And to create a tree, the power to create the
universe is necessary. If any partner interfered in the universe, he would have to share
in the tiniest seed. For the seed is a sample of the universe. So then two dominicalities
which cannot reside together in the vast universe, would have to reside in a seed, and
even in a minute particle. This is the most precluded and meaningless of
impossibilities and false delusions. Know that unbelief and associating partners with
God are an infinitely compounded contradiction, error, and falsehood, for they
necessitate the impotence – even if only in a seed – of the Absolutely Powerful One
who holds in the balance of His justice and order of His wisdom all the states and
attributes of the vast universe; and know that divine unity is an infinitely compounded
truth, reality and verity, and say: “All praise and thanks be to God for belief!”

--- Sayfa 403 ---
403
THIRD MATTER
With His names Sapient and All-Wise, the All-Powerful Maker has included
thousands of well-ordered worlds in this world. Within those worlds, He created man
as a centre and pivot who of all creatures manifests the wisdom and purposes in the
universe. The most important of the instances of wisdom and beneficial things in the
sphere of the universe look to man. And in the human sphere, He made sustenance a
centre; in the human world most of the instances of wisdom and benefits look to
sustenance and are manifest through it. The manifestation of the name of All-Wise is
apparent in brilliant form in man through his intelligence and the pleasure he receives
from sustenance. Each one of the hundreds of sciences discovered by human
intelligence describes a manifestation of the name of Sapient in a realm of creation.
For example, if the science of medicine were to be asked: “What is the
universe?”, it would be bound to reply: “It is an exceedingly vast, orderly and perfect
pharmacy. All remedies are prepared and stored up in it in the best way.”
If the science of chemistry were asked: “What is the earth?”, it would reply: “It is
a perfectly ordered chemist’s shop.”
The science of engineering would reply: “It is totally faultless, perfect factory.”
The science of agriculture would reply: “It is an infinitely productive, regular and
well-laid-out field and garden which produces all kinds of seeds at the required time.”
The science of commerce would reply: “It is an extremely well-set-out
exhibition, orderly market, and shop stocked with most artistic wares.”
The science of economics would reply: “It is an exceedingly well-arranged
warehouse containing every sort and kind of food.”
The science of dietetics would reply: “It is a dominical kitchen and cauldron of
the Most Merciful in which are cooked most regularly hundreds of thousands of the
most delicious foods.”
The science of soldiering would reply: “The earth is a military camp. Although
there are four hundred thousand different nations in that army, newly taken under
arms with their tents pitched on the face of the earth, they are given their rations,
uniforms, weapons, training, and discharges, which are different for each nation, in
perfect order, with no confusion and none being forgotten, through the command,
power, compassion of a single Commander-in-Chief, from His treasury; they are all
administered in the most regular fashion.”

--- Sayfa 404 ---
404
And if the science of electricity were to be asked: “What is this world?”, it would
certainly reply: “The roof of this magnificent palace of the universe has been adorned
with innumerable orderly and balanced electric lamps, and the order and balance are
so wondrous that foremost the sun, and those heavenly lamps which are a thousand
times larger than the earth, do not spoil their balance, although they burn
continuously; they do not explode or burst into flames. Their expenditure is endless,
so where do their income and fuel and combustible material come from? Why are
they not exhausted? Why is the balance not spoilt with their burning? A small lamp
goes out if it is not tended regularly. See the wisdom and power of the All-Wise One
of Glory, who makes the sun, which according to astronomy is a million times larger
than the earth and a million years older,1 burn without coal or oil, without being
extinguished; say: ‘All Glory be to God!’ Say: ‘What wonders God has willed!
Blessed be God! There is no god but He!’ to the number of seconds of the sun’s
existence.
“This means there is a wondrous order in these heavenly lamps, and they are
tended with the greatest care. It is as if the boiler of those huge, numerous fiery
masses, those light-shedding lamps, is a Hell whose heat is never exhausted; it
provides them with lightless heat. While the machinery and central factory of those
electric lamps is a perpetual Paradise; it provides them with light and luminosity;
through the greatest manifestation of the names of Sapient and All-Wise, they
continue to burn in orderly fashion.”
And so on; through the certain testimony of hundreds of sciences like these, the
universe has been adorned with innumerable instances of wisdom, purposes, and
beneficial things within a faultless, perfect order. And the order and wisdom given
through that wondrous, all-encompassing wisdom to the totality of the universe have
been included in small measure in seeds and the tiniest living creatures. It is clear and
self-evident that aims, purposes, instances of wisdom, and benefits can only be
followed through choice, will, intention, and volition, not in any other way. Neither
could they be the work of unconscious causes and nature, which lack will, choice, and
purpose, nor could they interfere in them.

1 You can reckon just how much wood, coal, and oil would be necessary for the stove or lamp of
the sun, which heats the palace of the world. According to the reckoning of astronomy, piles of wood
equal to a million earths and thousands of oceans of oil would be necessary for it to burn each day.
Now think! And say: “Glory be to God! What wonders God has willed! Blessed be God!” to the
number of the sun’s particles in the face of the majesty, wisdom, and power of the All-Powerful One of
Glory, who makes it give light continuously without firewood or oil.

--- Sayfa 405 ---
405
That is to say, it is extraordinary ignorance and foolishness not to recognize or to
deny the All-Wise Maker, the Agent with Choice, whom the universe and all its
beings necessitate and demonstrate through their infinite order and the instances of
wisdom they contain. Yes, if there is anything astonishing in the world, it is such
denial. For the endless aspects of order and instances of wisdom in the beings in the
universe testify to His existence and unity, so that even the most profoundly ignorant
can understand what blindness and ignorance it is not to see or not to recognize Him. I
might even say that among the people of unbelief, the Sophists, who are supposed to
be stupid because they denied the universe’s existence, are the most intelligent. For
since on accepting its existence, it was not possible not to believe in God and its
Creator, they started to deny the universe’s existence. They denied themselves as
well. Saying, “There is nothing,” they abdicated their intelligences, and being saved
from the boundless unreasonableness – under the guise of reason – of the other
deniers, they in one sense drew close to reason.
FOURTH MATTER
As is indicated in the Tenth Word, for a Wise Maker, a most wise master builder,
to follow carefully hundreds of instances of wisdom in each stone of a palace, then
not to construct the palace’s roof so it falls into ruin and all the innumerable purposes
and instances of wisdom are lost, is something no conscious being could accept.
Similarly, it is in no way possible that having followed out of his perfect wisdom tons
of benefits, aims, and purposes in a tiny seed, a possessor of absolute wisdom should
go to the great expense of the mighty tree as tall as a mountain so it should produce a
single benefit, a single small aim, a single fruit worth virtually nothing, and so to be
wastefully prodigal in a way entirely opposed and contrary to his wisdom.
In just the same way, the All-Wise Maker attaches hundreds of instances of
wisdom to each of the beings in the palace of the universe and equips them to perform
hundreds of duties, and to all trees bestows instances of wisdom to the number of its
fruits and gives duties to the number of its flowers. For Him not to bring about the
resurrection of the dead and the Great Gathering and for all those incalculable
numbers of purposes and instances of wisdom and infinite duties to be meaningless,
futile, pointless, and without purpose or benefit, would impute absolute impotence to
that Absolutely Powerful One’s perfect power, just as it would impute futility and
purposelessness to that Absolutely Wise One’s perfect wisdom, and utter ugliness to
the beauty of that Absolutely Compassionate One’s mercy,

--- Sayfa 406 ---
406
and boundless tyranny to that Absolutely Just One’s perfect justice. It would be quite
simply to deny the wisdom, mercy, and justice in the universe, which may be seen by
everyone. It would be an extraordinary impossibility comprising innumerable
absurdities. Let the people of misguidance come and see just what a terrifying
darkness, obscurity, there is in their misguidance, just as there is in their graves; and
how they are the nests of scorpions. They should know that belief in the hereafter is a
way as beautiful and luminous as Paradise, and should embrace  belief.
FOURTH MATTER
This consists of two topics.
F i r s t  T o p i c : Necessitated by His name All-Wise, the All-Glorious Maker
follows the lightest way, the shortest path, the easiest fashion, the most beneficial
form, which shows that there is no wastefulness, futility, or absence of benefits in the
nature of things. Wastefulness is the opposite of the name Wise, just as frugality is
necessitated by it and is its fundamental principle.
O prodigal, wasteful man! Know that by not practising frugality, the most basic
principle in the universe, you have acted in a way entirely contrary to reality! You
should understand what an essential, encompassing principle is taught by the verse,
Eat and drink, but waste not in excess.(7:31)
S e c o n d  T o p i c : It may be said that the names Sapient and All-Wise point to
and necessitate the messengership of God’s Noble Messenger (Upon whom be
blessings and peace) to the degree of being self-evident.
Yes, since a meaningful book requires a teacher to explain it; and an exquisite
beauty requires a mirror to show itself and see itself; and a perfect work of art
requires a herald to announce it; for sure among mankind, who is addressed by the
mighty book of the universe, in every letter of which are hundreds of meanings and
instances of wisdom, will be a perfect guide, a supreme teacher. For he will teach the
sacred, true wisdom in the book; that is, make known the existence of the wisdom and
purposes in the universe; indeed, be the means of the appearance, and even existence,
of the dominical purposes in the universe’s creation; and make known and act as a
mirror to the perfect art of the Creator, and the beauty of His names, which He willed
to display throughout the universe, showing their importance.
And since the Creator wants to make Himself loved through all His

--- Sayfa 407 ---
407
beings and to be responded to by all His intelligent creatures, one of them will
respond with comprehensive worship in the name of all of them in the face of those
comprehensive dominical manifestations; he will bring the land and sea to ecstasy,
and with a tumultuous announcement and exaltation that will cause the heavens and
earth to reverberate turn the gazes of those conscious creatures to the One who made
the art; and with sacred instruction and teaching and a Qur’an of Mighty Stature that
will draw the attention of all reasonable people, will demonstrate in the best way the
divine purposes of that Sapient and All-Wise Maker; and who will respond most
completely and perfectly to the manifestations of all His instances of wisdom and of
His beauty and glory; the existence of such a being is as necessary, as essential for the
universe as the existence of the sun. And the one who did this and performed those
functions most perfectly was self-evidently the Most Noble Messenger (Upon whom
be blessings and peace). In which case, all the wisdom in the universe necessitates the
messengership of Muhammad (UWBP) as the sun necessitates light, and light, the
day.
Yes, just as through their greatest manifestation, the names of Sapient and All-
Wise necessitate the messengership of Muhammad (UWBP) at the maximum degree,
so too numerous most beautiful names like Allah, Most Merciful, All-Compassionate,
Loving, Bestower, Munificent, Beauteous, and Sustainer necessitate through their
greatest manifestation apparent in the universe, at the maximum degree and with
absolute certainty, the messengership of Muhammad (UWBP).
For example, the all-embracing mercy which is the manifestation of the name of
Most Merciful is apparent through the being sent as a Mercy to All the Worlds.
Almighty God’s making Himself known and loved, which is the manifestation of the
name of Loving, yields the fruit of that Beloved of the Sustainer of All the Worlds
and finds response in him. All instances of beauty, which are the manifestation of the
name of Beauteous, that is, the beauty of the divine essence, the beauty of the divine
names, beauty of art, and the beauty of creatures, are seen and displayed in the mirror
of Muhammad (UWBP). The manifestations of the splendour of dominicality and
sovereignty of divinity are known, become apparent and understood, and are
confirmed through the messengership of Muhammad (UWBP), the herald of the
dominion of dominicality. And so on, like these examples, most of the most beautiful
names are shining proofs of the messengership of Muhammad (UWBP).
In Short: Since the universe exists and cannot be denied, neither can such
observable truths as wisdom, grace, mercy, beauty, order, balance, and adornment,
which are like the colours, embellishments, lights,

--- Sayfa 408 ---
408
rays, arts, lives, and bonds of the universe be denied. Since it is impossible to deny
these attributes and acts, certainly the Necessarily Existent, All-Wise, Munificent,
Compassionate, Beauteous, Sapient, and Just One also, who is the One signified by
those attributes, and is the Doer of those deeds, and the Sun and Source of those
lights, can in no way be denied. And certainly the messengership of Muhammad
(Upon whom be blessings and peace), who is the supreme guide, most perfect teacher,
pre-eminent herald, solver of the talisman of the universe, mirror of the Eternally
Besought One, beloved of the Most Merciful, and the means of those attributes and
acts being known, indeed of their perfection, and even of their being realized, can in
no way be denied. His messenership is the universe’s most brilliant light, like the
lights of the world of reality and of the reality of the universe.
Blessings and peace be upon him to the number of seconds of the days and of
the particles of creatures.
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which you have taught
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32)

--- Sayfa 409 ---
409
THE FOURTH POINT
The Divine Name Single
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
Say: He is God, the One and Only.(112:1)
[One fine point of this verse and a manifestation of the divine
name of Single, which is a greatest name comprising the
names of One and Unique, or one of the six lights comprising
the greatest name, appeared to me in Eskişehir Prison in the
month of Shawwal. Referring the details of that greatest
manifestation to the Risale-i Nur, we shall here explain
extremely briefly in seven short Indications the true
affirmation of divine unity which the name of Single
demonstrates through its maximum manifestation.]
FIRST INDICATION
The Twenty-Second Word and Thirty-Third Letter have shown in detail that
through a greatest manifestation, the greatest name Single has placed a seal, a stamp,
of divine unity on the universe as a whole and on each realm of beings in it, and on
each individual being. Here, we shall point out only three stamps.
F i r s t  S t a m p : The manifestation of divine singleness has placed a seal of
unity on the face of the universe whereby it has made it an indivisible whole. One
who does not have power of disposal over the whole universe cannot be the true
owner of any part of it. The seal is this:
Like the finest machinery in a factory, the beings and realms of beings in the
universe assist one another and work to complete each other’s functions. With their
solidarity and co-operation, their answering each other’s requests and hastening to
assist to each other, their embracing each other and being one within the other, they
form a unity of existence according to which, like the members of the human body,
they cannot be separated from each other. A person who controls one of its members
yet does not have control over all of them, will not have true mastery over the single
member.
Thus, this co-operation, solidarity, mutual response, and embracing one another
forms a most brilliant supreme seal of divine unity.
S e c o n d  S t a m p : Through the manifestation of the name Single, so brilliant
a seal of divine oneness and stamp of unity has been placed on

--- Sayfa 410 ---
410
the face of the earth and face of the spring that it proves that one who does not
administer all the living creatures on the face of the globe together with all their
members and attributes and states, and who does not know and see them all together,
and cannot create them, cannot interfere in anything in respect of creation. The stamp
is this:
Disregarding the truly orderly, yet hidden, stamps of the mineral substances, the
elements, and inanimate creatures of the earth, consider the following stamp
consisting of the woven threads of the two hundred thousand animal species and two
hundred thousand plant species: we see with our own eyes in the spring on the earth
that all things with their different duties, different forms, different sustenance,
different members are given everything they need, without confusion and without
error, with complete distinction and differentiation, with extremely sensitive balance,
without difficulty, at exactly the right time, from unexpected places despite their
being one within the other and all mixed up together. This situation, this planning, this
administration forms such a seal of divine unity and stamp of oneness that one who
cannot create all those creatures at once from nothing, cannot interfere in anything at
all in respect of dominicality and creation. For if something had interfered, the
equilibrium of that utterly vast administration would have been spoilt. However, man
apparently serves the smooth application of those laws of dominicality, at the divine
command.
T h i r d  S t a m p : This stamp of divine oneness is on man’s face, indeed, is
man’s face: one who does not hold in his gaze all the human beings who have come
and will come from the time of Adam till the end of the world, and cannot place a
distinguishing mark on each of their faces, indeed, hundreds of distinguishing marks,
can have no part in respect of creation in the stamp of unity on the face of any single
one of them. Yes, the one who places that stamp on man’s face must surely hold
within his view and encompass with his knowledge all the members of the human
race, for although the basic members of the human face resemble one another, each
face possesses points of difference. All the members of the face, such as the eye and
ear, resembling each other forms a stamp of unity testifying that humankind’s Maker
is One; similarly, the many wise differences – unlike other species – distinguishing
one from the other so they are not confused and to preserve the rights of all of them,
are both subtle stamps of divine oneness, and denote the Maker of unity’s will,
choice, and volition. They show that one who cannot create all men and animals,
indeed, the universe, cannot apply that stamp.

--- Sayfa 411 ---
411
SECOND INDICATION
The worlds, species, and elements of the universe are so intertwined and
interwoven that any cause that does not possess the universe as a whole cannot have
true disposal over any of its elements. The manifestation of unity proceeding from the
name of Single has included the whole universe within a unity so that everything
proclaims it. For example, the universe’s lamp, the sun, being one indicates that the
whole universe belongs to one, so too, the sponges of clouds which water the garden
of the earth being the same, and the rain which comes to aid of all living creatures
being the same and falling everywhere, and most of the animal and plant species
spreading freely over the earth and their species and habitats being the same, are most
certain signs and testimonies indicating that all those beings, as well the places they
are found, are the property of a single being.
Following this analogy, the realms of beings in the universe are so interwoven
they have made the universe into a totality which is indivisible in respect of creation.
A cause that does not have rule over the whole universe can govern nothing at all in
respect of dominicality and creativity; it cannot make a single particle heed it.
THIRD INDICATION
Through its greatest manifestation, the name Single has made the universe into
innumerable missives of the Eternally Besought One whereby each displays seals of
divine oneness and stamps of unity to the number of its words – as though printed –
and points to its Scribe to the number of those seals.
Yes, all flowers, all fruits, all grasses, and all animals even, and all trees are seals
of divine oneness and stamps of divine unity, which, together with the places they are
found, which take the form of missives, are like signatures showing the one who
wrote the place. For example, a buttercup in a garden is like a seal of the garden’s
inscriber. Whosever seal the flower is, all flowers of the same sort on the face of the
earth indicate clearly that they are his words and that the garden too is his writing.
This means that all things ascribe everything to the One who created them, pointing to
a maximum affirmation of divine unity.
FOURTH INDICATION
In addition to being clear as the sun, the greatest manifestation of the name Single
is so reasonable as to be necessary and can be accepted with infinite ease. Numerous
proofs demonstrating that the association of partners with God, the opposite and
opponent of that manifestation, is

--- Sayfa 412 ---
412
infinitely difficult and infinitely far from reason, indeed, impossible and precluded,
have been explained in various parts of the Risale-i Nur. For the present referring the
details of the points of those proofs to those treatises, we shall here expound only
three Points.
T h e  F i r s t : We have demonstrated with certain proofs, briefly at the end of
the Tenth and Twenty-Ninth Words and in detail at the end of the Twentieth Letter,
that in relation to the power of the Single and Unique One, the creation of the greatest
thing is as easy as the smallest. It administers a large tree as comfortably as a small
fruit. Whereas if referred to numerous causes, each fruit becomes as difficult and
expensive as a tree, and a flower as difficult and troublesome as the spring.
Yes, if the equipment of an army is made on the orders of a single commander in
a single factory, it is as easy as making the equipment of a single soldier, whereas if
the equipment of all the soldiers is made in different factories and the army’s
administration passes from a single officer to many, then each soldier will require
factories to the number of the army’s soldiers. In just the same way, if everything is
ascribed to the Single and Unique One, the innumerable members of an entire species
become as easy as a single member. While if attributed to causes each becomes as
difficult as the whole species.
Yes, both unity and singleness come about through everything being connected
with the One of Unity, and through reliance on Him. And this reliance and connection
may become a boundless power and strength for the thing. Through the strength of the
reliance and connection, that small thing may perform works far exceeding its
individual strength, and produce results. While something very powerful that does not
rely on the Single Unique One and is not connected to Him can perform small works
in accordance with its individual strength, and the results diminish accordingly.
For example, a strong, bold man who is not a regular soldier is compelled to carry
his own ammunition and provisions himself, and so can hold out only temporarily
against ten enemy. For his individual strength is limited. But a soldier who by
belonging to the army is connected to and relies on the commander-in-chief, is not
compelled to carry his own sources of strength and provisions; his connection and
reliance become an inexhaustible strength for him, like a treasury. Through the
strength of his connection, he may capture a field marshal of the defeated enemy
army, together with thousands of others.
That is to say, in divine unity and divine singleness, through the strength of the
connection, an ant may defeat a Pharaoh and a fly defeat a Nimrod

--- Sayfa 413 ---
413
and a microbe a tyrant, and a seed as tiny as a chickpea may bear on its shoulders a
pine-tree as majestic as a mountain. Yes, a commander-in-chief may send an army to
the assistance of one soldier and assemble an army behind the soldier so that he has
the moral support of the army behind him and through that strength may perform
great works in the commander’s name. Similarly, since the Pre-Eternal Monarch is
Single and One, He has no need of any sort. If to suppose that He did have need, He
would send all things to the assistance of everything and assemble the army of the
universe behind one thing and everything could rely on a strength as great as the
universe and in the face of everything, all things – to suppose that He did have the
need – could become like the Single Commander’s strength. If there were no divine
singleness, everything would lose all this strength and become as nothing; their results
too would dwindle to nothing.
Thus, the appearance of these truly wondrous works out of most insignificant
unimportant things which we all the time observe with our eyes self-evidently
demonstrates divine singleness and divine oneness. If it were not for them, the results,
fruits, and works of everything would decrease to the substance and strength of each
thing; they would be reduced to nothing. Nothing of the infinite abundance and
infinite inexpensiveness of the extremely valuable things we see around us would
remain. A melon or pomegranate that we now buy for a small sum, we would not be
able to procure for a fortune. Yes, all the ease, all the abundance, all the
inexpensiveness in the world arise from divine unity and testify to divine singleness.
S e c o n d  P o i n t : Beings are created in two ways; one is creation from
nothing called origination and invention, and other is the giving of existence through
bringing together existent elements and things, called composition and assembling.
When in accordance with the manifestation of divine singleness and mystery of divine
oneness, this occurs with an infinite ease, indeed, such ease as to be necessary. If not
ascribed to divine singleness, it would be infinitely difficult and irrational, difficult to
the degree of impossibility. However, the fact that the beings in the universe come
into existence with infinite ease and facility and no difficulty at all, and in perfect
form, self-evidently shows the manifestation of divine singleness and proves that
everything is directly the art of the Single One of Glory.
Yes, if things are ascribed to the Single One of Unity, they are created from
nothing through His infinite power, the immensity of which is perceived through its
works, like striking a match. And through His all-embracing, infinite knowledge
everything is appointed a measure like an immaterial mould. The particles of all
things are situated easily in the

--- Sayfa 414 ---
414
mould existent in knowledge, in accordance with the form and plan of everything in
the mirror of knowledge and they preserve their positions in good order.
If it is necessary to gather together particles from round about, the particles are
bound together in regular fashion like the soldiers of an obedient army in accordance
with the comprehensive principles of power and laws of knowledge. Driven by power
in accordance with knowledge, they come, enter the mould existent in knowledge in
accordance with the measure of divine determining, which encompasses the thing’s
existence, and with ease form its being. Like the reflection in a mirror being clothed
in external existence on paper by means of a camera, or the invisible writing of a
letter appearing when it is spread with a special substance, with the greatest ease
power clothes with external existence the essences of things and forms of beings
present in the mirror of the Single One of Unity’s pre-eternal knowledge; it brings
them from the World of Meaning to the Apparent World, and shows them to us.
If beings are not ascribed to the Single One of Unity, it would be necessary to
gather together the being of a fly from all round the earth and from the elements, quite
simply sifting the face of the earth and the elements and bringing from everywhere
the particles particular to its being. And in order to situate them in proper order in its
being so full of art, a physical mould, indeed moulds to the number of its members
would be necessary. Then too the senses in its being, and its fine, subtle immaterial
faculties like spirit, would have to be drawn from the immaterial worlds in a particular
measure.
Thus, the creation of a fly in this way would be as difficult as that of the universe.
The difficulties would be multiplied a hundred times, indeed, would be a compounded
impossibility. For as all the people of religion and scientists are agreed, nothing apart
from the Single One can create from nothing and non-existence. In which case, if
referred to causes and nature, everything may be given existence only through being
gathered together from most things.
T h i r d  P o i n t : We shall explain briefly two or three comparisons which are
elucidated in other parts of the Risale-i Nur, showing how, if ascribed to a Single One
of Unity, all things become as easy as a single thing, whereas if referred to causes and
nature, the existence of a single thing becomes as difficult as that of all things.
For example: If the positions and administration of a thousand soldiers are
referred to one officer, and that of one soldier to ten officers, to command the one
soldier will be ten times more difficult than commanding a battalion. For those who
command him will form obstacles to one another,

--- Sayfa 415 ---
415
and in the resulting disorder, the soldier will have no peace. Whereas if to obtain the
desired result and situation a battalion is referred to a single officer, he can achieve
the result easily, without difficulty, and give it that situation. If to obtain the result and
situation, it is referred to the soldiers without a chief, leader, or sergeant, they will
only be achieved with much dispute and difficulty, in great disorder, and deficiently.
Second Comparison: For example, if a master builder is appointed to give the
stones in the dome of a mosque like Aya Sophia their suspended position, he may do
so easily. But if it is referred to the stones themselves, they will all have to be both
absolutely dominant and absolutely subject to each other in order to support each
other in that suspended position. For the work the master builder performs easily to be
carried out, work a hundred times greater, of a hundred builders, will have to be
carried out, only then may such a position be achieved.
Third Comparison: For example, since the globe of the earth is an official, a
soldier, of the Single One of Unity which heeds that single One’s single command,
such results are obtained as the change of the seasons, the alternation of day and
night, the lofty, majestic motions of the heavens, and the changes in the cinema-like
celestial scenes. On receiving the single command of that Single One, in rapturous joy
at its duty, a single soldier like the earth rises to revolve in two motions like an
ecstatic Mevlevi dervish, and is the means to those splendid results being achieved. It
is as if the single soldier is commanding magnificent manoeuvres on the face of the
universe.
If not ascribed to a Single One whose rule of divinity and sovereignty of
dominicality encompass the whole universe, and whose command and rule cover all
beings, those results, heavenly maneouvres, and earthly seasons could only be
obtained by millions of stars and globes a thousand times larger than the earth
travelling the long distance of millions of years every twenty-four hours and every
year.
Thus, those results being obtained through the two motions – in its orbit and on
its axis like an ecstatic Mevlevi dervish – of a single official like the globe of the
earth, is an example of the infinite ease there is in divine unity. While their being
obtained through endlessly long ways millions of times more difficult than the motion
described above is an example of just how difficult, indeed, impossible is the way of
associating partners with God and unbelief, and just what impossible, absurd things
are found on it.
Consider the ignorance of those who worship causes and nature through the
following example: you can understand how far from reason it is and how ignorant to
suppose that after preparing in orderly fashion through his

--- Sayfa 416 ---
416
wondrous art the parts or machinery of a wonderful factory, or marvellous clock, or
splendid palace, or fine book, a person does not himself assemble the parts easily and
work them, but with protracted and high expense makes each part, each mechanism,
and even each sheet of paper and pen into extraordinary machines in order to make
the parts themselves construct and work the factory, palace, and clock, and write the
book instead of the craftsman. And he refers to them the art and craft, which is the
means of displaying all his arts and skills, which he has great desire to exhibit.
In just the same way, those who attribute creation to causes and nature fall into
compounded ignorance. For above nature and causes are extremely well-ordered
works of art, and they too are artefacts like other creatures. The one who makes them
thus, makes their results too and displays them together. The one who makes the seed,
also makes the tree above it. And the one who makes the tree, is the one who makes
the fruits above it. Otherwise further well-ordered natures and causes would be
necessary for other, different natures and causes to come into existence. And so on, ad
infinitum. One would have to accept the existence of an infinite, meaningless,
impossible chain of illusory fancies. This would be the most extraordinary ignorance.
FIFTH INDICATION
We have demonstrated with decisive proofs in many places that the most
fundamental characteristic of rulership is independence and separateness. Even the
weak shadow of rulership in impotent men vehemently rejects the interference of
others and does not permit others to meddle in its duty, and in this way preserves its
independence. Many kings have mercilessly put to death their innocent children and
loved brothers on account of this rejection of interference. That is to say,
independence, separateness, and the rejection of the interference of others are the
most basic characteristics of true rulership, and are its inseparable necessities and
perpetual essentials.
It is because of this characteristic that divine rulership, which is at the degree of
absolute dominicality, most vehemently rejects the association of any partners and the
participation and interference of others. The Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition too,
insistently, repeatedly, and sternly, indicates divine unity and rejects with severe
threats the association of partners with God.
Thus, the divine rulership in dominicality necessitates divine unity and indicates
a most powerful motive and necessitating cause for it. So too the

--- Sayfa 417 ---
417
infinitely perfect order and harmony on the face of the universe, apparent from the
totality of the universe and the stars, and the plants, animals and minerals to
particulars, individuals, and minute particles, form an indubitably veracious witness to
and clear proof of that singleness and unity. For if others had interfered, this most
sensitive balance, order, and regularity of the universe would have been spoilt and
signs of disorder would have been apparent. In accordance with the meaning of the
verse,
If there were in the heavens and the earth, other gods besides God, there
would have been confusion in both!,(21:22)
this wondrous, perfect order of the universe would have been thrown into confusion
and been spoilt. Whereas, according to the verse,
So turn your vision again; do you see any flaw?,(67:3)
from minute particles to the planets, from the ground to the divine throne, there is no
sign of fault, defect, or confusion. Thus the order of the universe and of creatures and
the balance of beings, demonstrate most brilliantly the greatest manifestation of the
name of Single and testify to divine unity.
Moreover, since, through the mystery of the manifestation of divine oneness, the
tiniest living creature is a miniature sample of the universe and a small index of it,
only the One who holds the whole universe in the grasp of His power can lay claim to
it. And since, in regard to creation, a seed is not inferior to a tree, and a tree is a small
universe, and all living beings are like small universes and small worlds, this mystery
of divine oneness has made the association of partners with God impossible.
By virtue of this mystery, the universe is not only an indivisible whole, but is also
by its nature, a universal whose division and being broken up into parts is impossible
and which does not accept participation and numerous hands in its creation. Thus,
since each part of it is a particular and individual part, and the whole also is a
universal, it precludes the participation of others in it. It proves to the degree of being
self-evident the greatest manifestation of the name of Single, the reality of divine
unity, and this mystery of divine oneness.
Yes, since the realms of beings in the universe are interwoven and interbonded
and the functions of each look to all, it has made the universe, in respect of
dominicality and creation, like an indivisible whole. So too, the all-encompassing
general acts in the universe are interwoven and interpenetrated. For example, the acts
of nurturing and giving of sustenance are apparent at the same instant within the act of
giving life. And the acts of ordering and decking out the living creature’s body are
observed at the same time within those acts of nurturing and giving of life. And at the
same

--- Sayfa 418 ---
418
time the acts of giving of form, raising, and regulating strike the eye within those acts
of nurturing, giving life, ordering, and decking out. And so on, since such all-
encompassing and general acts are interpenetrated and one within the other and
blended together like the seven colours in light, indeed, are united; and since each of
those acts encompasses and embraces most beings and are a single act and by nature
are the same; and since the one who performs the acts must be the same; and since
each of them pervades the whole universe and unites with the other acts in co-
operation and assistance; it has made the universe into an indivisible whole. Similarly,
since all living creatures are like seeds, indexes, and samples of the universe, it has
made the universe from the point of view of dominicality like a universal whose
division and breaking into parts is impossible. That is to say, the universe is a totality
so that to be Lord and Sustainer of a part of it is only possible by being Lord and
Sustainer of the whole. And it is a universal so that each part of it has become like a
single member; to make any one single member submit to His dominicality is only
possible by subjugating the universal.
SIXTH INDICATION
Dominical singleness and divine unity are the means and basis of all perfections,1
and the source and origin of the purposes and wisdom in the universe’s creation. They
are also the source and sole means of attaining the wishes and desires of conscious
beings and rational beings, and particularly of man. If not for divine singleness, all
man’s wishes and demands would be extinguished. The results of the universe’s
creation would also decline to nothing, and the majority of existent, certain
perfections would be annihilated.
For example, man has an intense, unshakeable, passionate desire for immortality.
Only One who through the mystery of singleness holds the whole universe in His
grasp and can close down this world and open up the hereafter as easily as shutting up
one house and opening another can satisfy this desire. And like this one, man’s
thousands of desires which stretch to eternity and are spread throughout the universe
are tied to the mystery of

1 In fact, divine unity is the clearest proof and most powerful evidence for the existence of endless
divine perfections and beauty. For if the universe’s Maker is known to be the Unique One of Unity, all
the perfections and beauty of the universe are known to be the shadows, manifestations, signs, and
distillations of the sacred perfections and beauty present in that Maker of Unity. Otherwise the
universe’s perfections and beauties would have pertained to creatures and causes, and the eternal
treasury of divine perfections would have remained unknown for the human mind, and without a key.

--- Sayfa 419 ---
419
singleness and the reality of divine unity. If not for divine singleness, they would not
be, they would be fruitless. And if not for the Single One who through divine unity
has disposal over the entire universe, those desires could not be satisfied. And even
supposing they were, they would be so very deficiently.
It is because of this mighty mystery that the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition
repeatedly and fervently and with elevated eloquence teaches divine unity and
singleness. Similarly, all the prophets, purified scholars, and saints found their
greatest pleasure and happiness in the profession of divine unity, “There is no god but
God.”
SEVENTH INDICATION
Just as Muhammad (Upon whom be blessings and peace) taught, proved, and
proclaimed most perfectly the true affirmation of divine unity in all its degrees, so his
messengership was established as surely and certainly as divine unity. For since he
taught divine unity, the greatest reality in the sphere of existence, together with all its
truths, it may be said that all the arguments proving divine unity indirectly though
decisively prove his messengership, the authenticity of his duty, and the rightness of
his cause. Yes, a messengership that discovered and truly taught divine singleness and
unity, which bring together those thousands of elevated truths, is most definitely
necessitated and required by that singleness and unity; they certainly require it.
Thus, Muhammad (Upon whom be blessings and peace) carried out that duty to
the letter. Now, we shall explain by way of example, three out of numerous evidences
and causes that testify to the importance and elevatedness of his collective
personality, attesting that it is a sun in the universe.
T h e  F i r s t : In accordance with the rule “The cause is like the doer,” the
equivalent of all the good deeds performed throughout the centuries by all his
community has passed to the book of good deeds of Muhammad (Upon whom be
blessings and peace). So too, by thinking of the certain acceptance of the salawa\t
prayers for the Prophet (UWBP), which every day all his community recite for him,
and the station and degree that those endless prayers necessitate, it may be understood
that the collective personality of Muhammad (UWBP) is a sun in the universe.
T h e  S e c o n d : Think of Muhammad’s (Upon whom be blessings and peace)
spiritual progress: his essential being was the source, seed, life, and means of the
mighty tree of the world of Islam: it arose from his performing with his extraordinary
capacity and faculties the sacred worship and glorifications which form the spiritual
aspects of the world of Islam,

--- Sayfa 420 ---
420
perceiving all their meaning; so understand how much more elevated than other
sainthoods was the sainthood of Muhammadan (UWBP) worship, by which he rose to
the rank of God’s beloved.
At one time, a single glorification was unfolded to me in one of the prayers in a
manner close to how the Companions of the Prophet perceived them, and it appeared
to me as important as a month’s worship. I understood the Companions’ high worth.
It meant that in the early days of Islam, the effulgence and light proceeding from the
sacred words had a different quality. Their newness imparted a different flavour,
subtlety, and freshness that with the passage of time have become obscured and have
diminished through neglect. With his wondrous capacity Muhammad (UWBP)
received them new and fresh from their original source, the Most Pure and Holy
Essence, and absorbed and assimilated them. He could therefore receive the
effulgence from a single glorification that others could receive only from a years’
worship.
From this you may understand the degree Muhammad (Upon whom be blessings
and peace) progressed through the degrees of perfections, which are without bound or
limit.
T h e  T h i r d : Since mankind is the pivot of all the Creator’s purposes in the
universe; and since with his superior understanding man has received the addresses of
that Glorious One; and since Muhammad (UWBP) was the most famous and
renowned of mankind, and as his works and achievements testify, its most perfect and
magnificent individual; that Single One of Glory took Muhammad (UWBP) as His
addressee in the name of mankind, indeed, on account of the whole universe; He
made manifest in him boundless effulgences and endless perfections.
There are numerous points like these three that prove conclusively that just as the
collective personality of Muhammad (UWBP) is the spiritual sun of the universe, so
is it the supreme sign of the mighty Qur’an known as the universe, and the greatest
name of that Supreme Distinguisher between Truth and Falsehood, and the mirror of
the greatest manifestation of the name Single. We beseech the Single, Unique,
Eternally Besought One that blessings and peace to the number of particles of the
universe multiplied by the seconds of the minutes of all time descend on Muhammad
(Upon whom be blessings and peace) from the infinite treasury of His mercy.
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32)

--- Sayfa 421 ---
421
THE FIFTH POINT
The Divine Name Ever-Living
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
Look, then, to the signs of God’s mercy – how He restores life to the earth
after its death – verily He it is Who quickens the dead, for He is powerful
over all things.(30:50)
There appeared to my mind in the distance in the month of Shawwal in Eskişehir
Prison a fine point concerning this mighty verse, and another about the following
mighty verse,
God! There is no god but He, the Living, the Self-Subsisting, Eternal. No
slumber can seize Him nor sleep,(2:255)
together with a manifestation of the name Ever-Living, which is the greatest name or
one of the two lights of the greatest name or one light of its six lights. I did not record
them, for at the time I was unable to swiftly capture that sacred bird. Now after it has
drawn away, I shall at least indicate briefly by means of a number of signs a few rays
of that supreme truth and sublime light.
FIRST SIGN
The index-like answer to the questions “What is life?”and “What is its true nature
and purpose?”, which are a greatest manifestation of the names of Ever-Living and
Giver of Life, is this:
Life is:
The most important aim of the universe;
Its greatest result;
Its most brilliant light;
Its subtlest leaven;
Its distilled essence;
Its most perfect fruit;
Its most elevated perfection;
Its finest beauty;
Its most beautiful adornment;
The secret of its undividedness;
The bond of its unity;
The source of its perfections;

--- Sayfa 422 ---
422
In regard to art and nature, a most wondrous being endowed with spirit;
A miraculous reality which makes the tiniest creature into a universe;
A most extraordinary miracle of divine power that connects the animate creature
to most beings and makes it a tiny universe as well as being the means whereby the
universe is situated in a tiny animate creature and displays a sort of index of the huge
universe in the creature;
A wondrous divine art that makes a tiny part the greatest whole, and makes a
particular a universal or world, and shows that in regard to dominicality the universe
is an indivisible whole or universal that cannot be broken into parts and which accepts
no participation;
The most brilliant, the most decisive, and the most perfect of proofs testifying to
the necessary existence of the Ever-Living and Self-Subsistent One; and among
divine artefacts is the lightest and most  apparent, and the most valuable and
abundant, and the purest, most shining, and most meaningful embroidery of dominical
art;
A graceful, refined, delicate manifestation of divine mercy which makes other
beings serve itself;
A comprehensive mirror of the divine attributes;
A wonder of dominical creation comprising the manifestations of such numerous
most beautiful names as Merciful, Provider, Compassionate, Munificent, and All-
Wise, that subjects to itself many truths like sustenance, wisdom, grace, and mercy,
and is the source and origin of all the senses, like sight, hearing, and touch;
A transformation-machine in the vast workshop of the universe that continuously
cleanses everywhere, purifies, allows progress, and illuminates, while living bodies,
the dwellings of life, are guesthouses, schools, and barracks for instructing and
illuminating the caravans of particles, enabling them to perform their duties. Quite
simply the Ever-Living Self-Subsistent One makes subtle this dark, transient, lowly
world, illuminates it and gives it a sort of permanence, preparing it to go to another,
everlasting world;
Life’s two faces, that is, its inner and outer faces, are both shining, elevated, and
without dirt or defect. It is an exceptional creature on which apparent causes have not
been placed, veiling the disposal of power, in order to show clearly that it has
emerged directly without veil or means from the hand of dominical power;
The reality of life looks to the six pillars of belief, proving them in meaning and
indirectly. That is to say, it is a luminous truth which looks to and proves both the
necessary existence of the Necessarily Existent One

--- Sayfa 423 ---
423
and His eternal life, and the realm of the hereafter and everlasting life, and the
existence of the angels, and the other pillars of belief.
Also, just as life is the purest essence of the universe, distilled from of it, so it is a
mighty mystery producing thanks, worship, praise, and love, the most important
divine purposes in the universe and most important results of the world’s creation.
So consider these twenty-nine significant, valuable characteristics of life, and
elevated, general duties. Then look and see the tremendousness of the name of Ever-
Living behind the name of Giver of Life. Understand too how with these immense
characteristics and fruits of life, the name of Ever-Living is a greatest name.
Also understand that since life is the most important result of the universe, and its
greatest aim and most valuable fruit, it must have an aim and result as vast as the
universe. For the tree’s result is its fruit, so the fruit’s result is the future tree by
means of the seed. Yes, just as the aim and result of this life is eternal life, so one of
its fruits is thanks to the Ever-Living Giver of Life, and worship and praise of Him
and love for Him. And just as this thanks, love, praise and worship are the fruit of life,
so are they the aim of the universe.
Understand also from this, the ugly ignorance and denial, indeed, unbelief, of
those who say that the purpose of life is to live comfortably, enjoy oneself heedlessly,
and indulge oneself in pleasure, and how they denigrate and insult the precious
bounty of life, gift of consciousness, and bounty of reason, and what ghastly
ingratitude they display.
SECOND SIGN
One would have to write treatises to the number of life’s attributes to explain all
its degrees, attributes, and duties, which is a maximum manifestation of the names
Ever-Living and Giver of Life, mentioned in the index in the First Sign. So since
some of them have been elucidated in various parts of the Risale-i Nur, we refer you
to them for some of the details, and here point out only a few others.
It was said in the twenty-third of the twenty-nine properties of life that since
life’s two faces are transparent and unsullied, apparent causes have not been made a
veil to the disposals of dominical power.
Yes, the meaning of this is as follows: for sure everything in the universe
contains good and beauty, while evil and ugliness are minor, and have the function of
being units of measurement to show the degrees of good and beauty and to augment
and multiply their realities. In this way the evil becomes good and the ugliness,
beauty. And apparent causes have

--- Sayfa 424 ---
424
been made a veil to the disposals of power so that the complaints and anger arising
from what are to the superficial view of conscious beings apparently ugliness,
badness, disasters, and calamities, should not be directed to the Ever-Living and Self-
Subsistent One, and so that the contact of sacred, pure divine power with apparently
vile and filthy things should not offend the dignity of power. The causes cannot
create, but have been placed to be the target of unjust complaints and objections and
to preserve the dignity, sacredness, and unblemished nature of divine power.
As is explained in the Introduction to the Second Station of the Twenty-Second
Word, Azra’il (Upon whom be peace) supplicated Almighty God concerning his duty
of seizing the spirits of the dying, saying: “Your servants will be angry with me.” He
was told in reply: “I shall place the veil of illness and calamity between your duty and
the dying, then they shall fling their arrows of complaint and objection, not at you, but
at those veils.”
According to this supplication, Azra’il’s (Upon whom be peace) duty is a veil as
other causes are apparent veils, so that the anger and complaints of those who do not
see the true, beautiful face of death – beautiful for the people of belief – and do not
know the manifestation of mercy on it, are not directed to the Ever-Living and Self-
Subsistent One. Yes, dignity and grandeur require that causes are curtain-holders to
the Hand of Power in the mind’s view, while divine unity and glory demand that
causes withdraw their hands and have no true effect.
However, since both the outer and inner faces of life are without dirt, defect, or
fault, there is nothing to invite complaints and objections; they hold no filth or
ugliness contrary to the dignity and sacredness of power. The faces of life, therefore,
have been surrendered directly, without veil, to the hand of the life-giving, restoring,
resurrecting name of the Ever-Living Self-Subsistent One. Light is the same, and so
are existence and the giving of existence. For this reason, creation and the giving of
existence look directly without veil to the power of the All-Glorious One. Moreover,
since rain is a sort of life and mercy, the time of its precipitation has not been made
subject to a regular law, so that at all times of need hands will be raised to the divine
court to seek it. If like the rising of the sun, rain had been subject to a law, that vital
bounty would not have been sought and asked for at times of need.
THIRD SIGN
It was said in the twenty-ninth property of life that just as the result of the
universe is life, so are thanks and worship the result of life, and the cause and ultimate
reason for the universe’s creation, and its desired result.

--- Sayfa 425 ---
425
Yes, the universe’s Ever-Living Self-Subsistent Maker certainly wants thanks
from living creatures in return for His making Himself known and loved through so
many sorts of bounties, and He wants their praise and laudation in return for His
precious arts, and for His creatures to respond with worship and obedience to His
dominical commands.
In accordance with this mystery of dominicality, it is because thanks and worship
are the most important purpose of every sort of life and therefore of the whole
universe that the Qur’an of Miraculous Exposition urges thanks and worship with
fervour, intensity, and sweetness. It states repeatedly that worship is for God alone,
thanks is due only to Him, and praise is particular to Him. To state that thanks and
praise should go directly to its True Owner, verses like,
It is He Who gives life and death, and to Him [is due] the alternation of night
and day.(23:80) * It is He Who gives life and death; and when He decides
upon an affair, He says to it: “Be!”, and it is.(40:68) * And gives life to the
earth after its death,(30:24)
point out that He holds life together with all its attributes, without veil, in the grasp of
His power, and they reject intermediaries explicitly, and ascribe life directly to the
Ever-Living and Self-Subsistent One’s hand of power, restricting it to Him. The
verses,
For God is He Who gives [all] sustenance – Lord of Power – Steadfast for
ever.(51:58) * And when I am ill, it is He Who cures me.(26:80) * He is the
One that sends down rain [even] after [men] have given up all hope,(42:28)
show that things which provoke thanks such as sustenance, healing and rain, which
also invite gratitude and thanks and stimulate a feeling of love and praise, also pertain
directly to the Healing Provider, and that causes and intermediaries are a veil; that is,
that sustenance, healing, and rain are particular to and restricted to the power of the
Ever-Living and Self-Subsistent One. To express this in accordance with the rules of
grammar, the restrictive pronoun, “For God is He Who” [Hu ar-Razzaq] and “He is
the One that” [Hu aladhi] has been used. The True Healer is the one who gives
medicines their properties and creates their effects.
FOURTH SIGN
It was explained concerning the twenty-eighth property of life, that life looks to
the six pillars of belief and proves them; it points to their truth.
Yes, since life is the most important result and fruit of the universe, and the
purpose of its creation, certainly that elevated reality is not restricted to this fleeting,
brief, deficient, painful worldly life. The aim and result of the

--- Sayfa 426 ---
426
tree of life, the immensity of which is understood through its twenty-nine properties,
is eternal life and the life of the hereafter; it is life in the realm of bliss, the very
stones, trees, and earth of which are alive. The tree of life, decked out with this many
significant members, would otherwise remain without fruit, benefit, purpose, and
reality for intelligent beings and especially for man. Then man, whose capital and
faculties are twenty times greater and more numerous than those of a sparrow and is
the most exalted and important creature in the universe, and the highest living being,
would fall lower than a sparrow in respect of the happiness of life, and become the
most unhappy, the most debased of wretches.
Furthermore, by dwelling on the pains of the past and fears of the future, the
intelligence, the most precious of bounties, would continuously wound the human
heart; because it mixes nine pains with a single pleasure, it would become a
calamitous affliction. This would be false to the hundredth degree. That is to say, the
life of this world proves the pillar of belief in the hereafter decisively and in the
spring, lays before our eyes more than three hundred thousand examples of the
resurrection of the dead.
Is it at all possible that the All-Powerful Disposer of Affairs, who prepares with
wisdom, grace, and mercy in your garden and country all the things and members
necessary for your life; who makes them reach you at the appropriate time; who
knows and hears even the tiny, particular prayer for food offered by your stomach
through its desire for continued existence; and gratifies it, showing with innumerable
delicious foods that He accepts its prayer – is it at all possible He does not see you
and know you; would not prepare everything necessary for eternal life, mankind’s
greatest goal; and would not accept mankind’s most urgent, important, universal
prayer for immortality, of which it is worthy, through constructing the hereafter and
creating Paradise; that He would not hear man’s most powerful, general prayer, which
rings out from the ground to the divine throne, although he is the ruler and result of
the earth, nor hold him as important as a stomach, would not gratify him, so make him
deny His perfect wisdom and endless mercy? God forbid, a hundred thousand times!
Is it at all possible that He should hear the most secret voice of the tiniest
particular of life, heed its plaint, supply its cure, answer its want, nourish it
solicitously, cause others to serve it attentively, and make His large creatures assist it;
then not hear the thunderous voice of the largest and most valuable, immortal, most
delicate life; and not take into consideration its powerful plea and prayer for
immortality? That He should equip and superintend a common soldier with the
greatest care and disregard a magnificent, obedient army? That He should see an atom
and not see the sun?

--- Sayfa 427 ---
427
That He should hear the buzzing of a mosquito and not hear the roar of thunder? God
forbid! A hundred thousand times, God forbid!
Could the reason in any way accept that an All-Powerful and All-Wise One who
is infinitely merciful, loving, and compassionate, who greatly loves His own art,
makes Himself much loved, and loves greatly those who love Him, would condemn to
everlasting death the life that loves Himself more than anything, is lovable and loved
and by nature loves its Maker, condemn to death the spirit, the essence and substance
of life; would He offend and make angry with Himself for all eternity that beloved
friend of His, and wounding him in terrible fashion deny the mystery of His mercy
and light of His love, and make him deny it? A hundred thousand times, God forbid!
The absolute beauty which adorns the universe with its manifestation, the absolute
mercy which makes happy all creatures, is most certainly exempt from such infinite
ugliness, far elevated above such absolute tyranny, such unkindness.
C o n c l u s i o n : Since there is life in this world, those who understand the
secret of life and do not misuse their lives will manifest eternal life in the realm of
eternity and everlasting Paradise. In this we believe!
Shining objects on the face of the earth glistening with the sun’s reflection, and
bubbles on the surface of the sea sparkling and dying away with flashes of light and
the bubbles that follow on after them again acting as mirrors to the imaginary
miniature suns, self-evidently show that those flashes are the reflections and
manifestations of a single, elevated sun. They recall the sun’s existence with various
tongues, and point to it with their fingers of light.
In just the same way, through the greatest manifestation of the Ever-Living and
Self-Subsistent One’s name of Giver of Life, the living creatures on the earth and in
the sea shine through divine power, and in order to make way for those that follow
after them, utter “O Living One!” and vanish behind the veil of the Unseen, thus
indicating and testifying to the life and necessary existence of the Ever-Living and
Self-Subsistent One, who possesses eternal life.
Furthermore, all the evidences testifying to divine knowledge, the effect of which
is apparent in the ordering of all creatures; and all the proofs demonstrating the power
which has disposal over the universe; and all the evidences proving the will and
volition which governs and directs the universe; and all the signs and miracles
proving the missions of the prophets, the channels of divine revelation and dominical
speech; and all the evidences attesting to the seven divine attributes – all these
unanimously indicate, denote, and testify to the life of the Ever-Living and Self-
Subsistent One.

--- Sayfa 428 ---
428
For if a thing has sight, it also has life; and if it has hearing, it is a sign of life; and
if it has speech, it points to the existence of life; and if it has will and choice, it shows
life. Thus, attributes such as absolute power, comprehensive will, and all-embracing
knowledge, the existence of which is clear and certain due to their works and effects
in the universe, testify, through all their evidences, to the life and necessary existence
of the Ever-Living and Self-Subsistent One, the eternal life which illuminates the
whole universe with a single of its shadows, and, through a single of its
manifestations gives life to the realm of the hereafter, even its very particles.
Life looks also to the pillar of belief in the angels and proves it indirectly. For
since the most important result of the universe is life; and it is living beings that are
most widely spread, and because of their value, their copies are most duplicated, and
who populate the guesthouse of the earth with their travelling caravans; and since the
globe of the earth has been filled with so many living creatures, and for the purpose of
renewing and multiplying the animate species is continuously emptied and refilled;
and since life is created on it in even rotting and corrupt matter and it has become a
mass of micro-organisms; and since consciousness and intelligence, the purest
distilled essence of life, and spirit, its most subtle and stable substance, are created in
great profusion on the earth, and quite simply the earth has been infused with life
through life, intelligence, consciousness, and spirits, and inhabited in that way; since
this is so, surely the heavenly bodies, which are subtler, more luminous, larger and
more important than the earth, could not be dead, inanimate, lacking life and
consciousness; it would be beyond the bounds of possibility. That is to say, in
accordance with the mystery of life, there will surely be living, conscious inhabitants
of the skies, the suns, and the stars suitable to the heavens, who will endow them with
their living state, demonstrate the result of the creation of the heavens, and receive the
divine addresses; and they are the angels.
The essential nature of life also looks to the pillar of belief in the messengers, and
proves it indirectly. Yes, since the universe was created for life, and life is a greatest
manifestation of the Pre-Eternal Self-Subsistent One, a perfect inscription of His, a
most beautiful work of His art; and since the Eternal Life shows Itself through the
sending of messengers and revealing of scriptures, for if there were no Books or
messengers, that Pre-Eternal Life would not be known – just as it is through his
speech that it is understood that a person is alive, so too it is messengers and the
scriptures they bring that make known the words and speech of the One who speaks
from beyond the World of the Unseen, beneath the veil of the universe,

--- Sayfa 429 ---
429
who commands and prohibits and utters His address – then certainly just as the life in
the universe testifies decisively to the necessary existence of the Pre-Eternal Ever-
Living One, it looks also to the pillars of belief the sending of messengers and
revelation of scriptures, which are the rays, manifestations, and communications of
that Pre-Eternal Life. And since the messengership of Muhammad (UWBP) and the
Qur’anic revelation are like the spirit and intelligence of life, it may be said that their
truth is as certain as the existence of life.
Yes, just as life is the distilled essence of the universe; and consciousness and
sense perception are distilled from life and are the essence of life; and intelligence too
is distilled from consciousness and sense perception and is the essence of
consciousness; and spirit is the pure, unsullied substance of life, its stable and
autonomous essence; so too, the physical and spiritual life of Muhammad (UWBP) is
the distilled quintessence of the life and spirit of the universe; and the messengership
of Muhammad (UWBP) is the very purest essence distilled from the senses,
consciousness, and intelligence of the universe. Indeed, the physical and spiritual life
of Muhammad (UWBP), is, through the testimony of its works, the very life of the
universe’s life. And Muhammad’s (UWBP) messengership is the consciousness and
light of the universe’s consciousness. While the Qur’anic revelation, according to the
testimony of its living truths, is the spirit of the universe’s life and the intelligence of
its consciousness.
Yes, yes, yes! If the light of Muhammad’s (UWBP) messengership were to
depart from the universe, the universe would die. If the Qur’an were to depart, the
universe would go mad, the earth would lose its head and its reason; it would even
strike its now unconscious head on a planet and Doomsday would occur.
Life also looks to the pillar of belief in divine determining and proves it
indirectly. Because, since life is the light of the Manifest World, and it dominates it,
and is the result and aim of existence, and since it is the most comprehensive mirror
of the Creator of the universe and the most perfect sample and index of dominical
activity, and – let there be no mistake in the comparison – is like a sort of programme;
for sure, the mystery of life necessitates that the creatures in the World of the Unseen,
that is, the past and the future, that is, that have been and will come, are predisposed
to conform to order, regularity, being known and observed, specific individual
existence, and the creative commands, which are their lives in one respect.
The original seed of a tree and its root, as well as the seeds contained in its fruit
and final outcome, all manifest a sort of life no less than the tree

--- Sayfa 430 ---
430
itself; indeed, they bear within themselves laws of life more subtle than those of the
tree. Similarly, the seeds and roots left by last autumn, before the present spring, as
well as the seeds and roots that will be left to subsequent springs after this spring has
departed – they all bear the manifestations of life, just like this spring, and are subject
to the laws of life. In just the same way, all the branches and twigs of the cosmic tree
each have a past and a future. They have a chain consisting of past and future stages
and circumstances. The multiple existences and stages of each species and each
member of each species, existing in divine knowledge, forms a chain of being in
God’s knowledge, and like its external existence, its existence in God’s knowledge is
a manifestation of universal life that draws all the aspects of its life from these
meaningful and vital Tablets of divine determining.
The fact that the World of Spirits – which is one form of the World of the Unseen
– is full of the essence of life, the matter of life, and the spirits, which are the
substances and essence of life, of a certainty demands and requires that the past and
future – which are another form of the World of the Unseen and its second segment –
should also receive the manifestation of life.
In addition, the perfect order, the meaningful circumstances and vital fruits and
stages inherent in the existence of a thing within God’s knowledge, also demonstrate
the manifestation of a sort of life. Such a manifestation of life, which is the light
emitted by the sun of eternal life, cannot be limited to this Manifest World, this
present time, this external existence. On the contrary, each world receives the
manifestation of that light in accordance with its capacity, and the cosmos together
with all its worlds is alive and illumined through it. Otherwise, as the misguided
imagine, beneath a temporary and apparent life, each world would be a vast and
terrible corpse, a dark ruin.
One broad aspect of the pillar of belief in divine determining and decree is, then,
understood through the mystery of life and is established by it. Just as the life and
vitality of the Manifest World and existent, visible objects become apparent from
their orderliness and the consequences of their existence, so too past and future
creatures – regarded as belonging to the World of the Unseen – have an immaterial
existence and sort of life, and a spiritual presence in God’s knowledge. The trace of
this life and presence is made manifest and known by means of the Tablet of divine
determining and decree and through all the stages and circumstances of their external
lives and existences.

--- Sayfa 431 ---
431
FIFTH SIGN
Also, it was said concerning the sixteenth property of life that when life enters a
thing, it makes it into a world; if a part, it affords it the comprehensiveness of a
whole; if a particular, the extensiveness of a universal.
Yes, life possesses such extensiveness it is simply a comprehensive mirror of
divine oneness, showing in itself most of the divine names manifested throughout the
universe. When life enters a body, it makes it a small world; like a sort of seed of the
tree of the universe, containing an index of it. In the same way that a seed can only be
the work of a power capable of making the tree that bears it, the one who creates the
tiniest living beings has to be the Creator of all the universe.
Thus, through this comprehensiveness, life demonstrates in itself a most obscure
mystery of divine oneness. That is, like the mighty sun is present with its light,
reflection, and seven colours in every drop of water and fragment of glass facing it, so
the divine names and attributes which encompass the universe are manifested together
in all living beings. From this point of view, in regard to creation and dominicality,
life makes the universe into an indivisible whole, a universal whose being broken into
parts and in which others can share is outside the bounds of possibility.
Yes, the stamp on your face shows self-evidently that the One who creates you is
the One who creates all humankind. For the nature of man’s creation is the same; it
cannot be split up. Also, by means of life the parts of the universe are like the
individual members of mankind, and the universe, like the species. It shows the seal
of divine oneness and stamp of eternal besoughtedness on every individual, the same
as it shows them on the whole, thus in every way repulsing the associating of partners
with God.
Also, there are such extraordinarily wondrous miracles of dominical art in life
that one, a power, that cannot create the whole universe cannot create the tiniest
animate creature. Yes, a pen that inscribes in a tiny seed the index of the huge pine-
tree, and the programme of its life, like writing the whole Qur’an in a chickpea, can
surely be none other than the pen that writes the heavens together with the stars. And
the one who places in the tiny head of a bee the ability and faculties to know the
flowers in the garden of the universe, be connected with most of its realms, convey a
gift of divine mercy like honey, and know on the day it comes into the world the
conditions of life, can surely be none other than the Creator of the entire universe.
I n  S h o r t : Life is a shining seal of divine unity on the face of the

--- Sayfa 432 ---
432
universe; and in respect of life all beings with spirits are stamps of divine oneness;
and the embroideries and art in every living being form a seal of eternal
besoughtedness; and living creatures set their signatures with their lives on the
missive of the universe in the name of the Ever-Living and Self-Subsistent One to
their number, and are seals of divine unity, stamps of divine oneness, and signets of
divine eternal besoughtedness. Similarly, just as all living beings are seals of divine
unity in this book of the universe, like life; so a seal of divine oneness has been placed
of the faces and features of each.
Furthermore, just as life forms signatures and seals testifying to the unity of the
Ever-Living and Self-Subsistent One to the number of its particulars and of animate
beings, the act of raising and restoring to life also puts signatures to divine unity to the
number of beings. For example, the raising to life of the earth, which is a single
individual, testifies to divine unity as brilliantly as the sun. For in the raising to life of
the earth in spring, three hundred thousand species and the species’ innumerable
individual members are restored to life one within the other, without fault or defect, in
perfect, regular order. The one who performs a single act such as that together with
innumerable other orderly acts must surely be the Creator of all beings and the Ever-
Living and Self-Subsistent One, and the Single One of Unity any partnership in
whose dominicality is impossible.
For now, this small number of life’s properties has been described briefly, and we
refer the explanation and detailed discussion of its other properties to the Risale-i Nur
and to another time.

--- Sayfa 433 ---
433
Conclusion
The greatest name is not the same for everyone; it differs. For example, for Imam
‘Ali (May God be pleased with him) it was the six names Single, Ever-Living, Self-
Subsistent, Sapient, All-Just, and Most Holy. For Imam al-A‘zam, it was two names;
Sapient and All-Just. While for Ghawth al-A‘zam it was Ever-Living. For Imam
Rabbani, the greatest name was Self-Subsistent, and so on; many other people held
different names to be the greatest name.
In connection with this Fifth Point being about the name Ever-Living, as both a
blessing, and a witness, and an evidence, and as a sacred proof, and as a prayer for
ourselves, and as a happy conclusion to this treatise, we include the following, uttered
by God’s Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings and peace) in the supreme
supplication called al-Jaushan al-Kabir, which shows the extremely elevated and
comprehensive degree of his knowledge of God. We shall travel in the imagination to
that time and saying “Amen” to what the Noble Messenger (Upon whom be blessings
and peace) said, shall utter the same supplication with his voice as though saying it
ourselves:
O He who was living before all living beings;
O He who shall live after all living beings;
O Living One whom no living being resembles;
O Living One whom nothing is like;
O Living One who needs no other living being;
O Living One who takes no living being as partner;
O Living One who causes all living beings to die;
O Living One who provides the sustenance of all living beings;
O Living One who restores to life the dead;
O Living One whom death touches not —
Glory be unto You! There is no god but You! Mercy! Mercy! Deliver us from
Hell-fire! Amen!
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught
us; indeed, You are All-Knowing, All-Wise.(2:32)

--- Sayfa 434 ---
434
THE FIFTH POINT
The Divine Name Self-Subsistent
[This point discusses the divine name Self-Subsistent. It is a
summary of the Fifth Point about the name Ever-Living, is an
addendum to Nur Çeşmesi (The Fountainhead of Light), and is
also considered appropriate to be an Addendum to the
Thirtieth Word.]
       An Apology
These important matters concerning the profound, comprehensive greatest
manifestation of the name of Self-Subsistent occurred to me as separate
flashes and are therefore not well-arranged. They have moreover remained in
the form of an ill-arranged, speedily written uncorrected rough copy. For
these reasons many deficiencies and much disorderliness are bound to be
apparent in the phraseology and manner of expression. You must forgive my
defects for the sake of the beauties of the matters discussed.
A Reminder
The points concerning the greatest name are comprehensive to the utmost
degree and also extremely profound, especially the matters concerned with
the name of Self-Subsistent, as are those of the First Ray in particular.1
Furthermore since these latter look to the materialists and have penetrated the
subject to an even greater degree, everyone will not be able to understand
every matter in all its aspects. They will, however, be able to grasp a part of
each matter. According to the rule of “A thing should not be abandoned
completely even if it is not wholly obtained,” it is not reasonable to leave
aside such a  matter altogether, saying: “I cannot pick all the fruits in this
immaterial garden.” Whatever the amount of fruit a person can pick, it will
be of benefit. For just as the matters connected with the greatest name are
extensive to a degree beyond comprehension, so are they also subtle to the
degree the mind cannot distinguish them. Not everyone’s mind will reach the
Fifth and Sixth Points concerning the names of Ever-Living and Self-
Subsistent, in particular the allusions of life to the pillars of belief and
particularly to the pillar of divine determining and decree in the Fifth Point,
but

1 If the person reading this treatise does not have a knowledge of science, he should not begin
with the First Ray, but with the Second and should read the First at the end.

--- Sayfa 435 ---
435
they will not remain without some share of them and in any event these
matters will strengthen their belief. The importance of strengthening belief,
the key to eternal happiness, is truly tremendous. Even an iota’s increase is a
treasure. Imam Rabbani, Ahmad al-Faruqi, said: “In my view, increase in
only a small aspect of belief is preferable to hundreds of illuminations and
spiritual delights.”
In the Name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
In Whose hand is the dominion of all things.(36:83) * To Him belong the
keys of the heavens and the earth.(39:63; 42:12) * And there is nothing but
with Us are its treasuries.(15:21) * There is not a moving creature but He
has grasp of its forelock.(11:56)
Imparted to my mind during the month of Dhi’l-Qa‘da was a point concerning
verses like these that allude to divine Self-Subsistence, a greatest manifestation of the
name Self-Subsistent, which is either the greatest name, or the second of the two
lights of the greatest name, or the sixth of its six lights. My situation in Eskişehir
Prison does not allow me to explain that greatest light fully. However, Imam ‘Ali
(May God be pleased with him) expounded the greatest name in his ode Arjuza under
the exalted name of Sakina, and in his ode Jaljalutiyya he considered these six names
contained within the greatest name together with some other sublime names, and said
they were the greatest and most important. I have received extraordinary consolation
from his discussion of them. And so, similarly to the preceeding five names, we shall
allude to the name Self-Subsistent, to that greatest light, with five rays in what is at
the very least an abbreviated form.
FIRST RAY
The universe’s Glorious Creator is Self-Subsistent, that is, He subsists, continues,
endures of Himself. All things subsist and continue through Him, they remain in
existence and have permanence. If the relationship of Self-Subsistence were cut off
from the universe for even the fraction of a second, the universe would be annihilated.
Furthermore, as the Qur’an of Mighty Stature decrees, together with the All-
Glorious One’s Self-Subsistence,
There is nothing that is like unto Him.(42:11)
That is, He has  no like, equal, peer, or partner in either His essence, or His attributes,
or His actions. Indeed, it is not possible for the Most and Holy One who holds the
universe with its circumstances and functions in the

--- Sayfa 436 ---
436
grasp of His dominicality and regulates, administers, sustains and nurtures it with
perfect order as though it were a house or a palace to have any like, equal, partner, or
peer; it is impossible.
Yes, it is indeed impossible that the All-Glorious Ever-Living and Self-Subsistent
One for whom the creation of the stars is as easy as that of particles; to whose power
the greatest thing is subjugated as is the most minute; for whom nothing is an obstacle
to any other thing and no action obstructs any other action; in whose view
innumerable individuals are present in the same way that a single individual is
present; who hears all voices simultaneously and is able to answer the limitless needs
of all simultaneously; outside the sphere of whose will and volition is nothing, no
state, as is testified to by the order and balance of the beings in the universe; who
although He is in no place, is present everywhere through His power and knowledge;
and although everything is utterly distant from Him, is utterly close to them – that He
should have any like, equal, partner, deputy, opposite or peer is not possible; it is
impossible. His sacred qualities and attributes can be considered only through
allegory and comparison. All the comparisons and allegories in the Risale-i Nur are of
this sort.
Yes, the Most Pure and Holy One is without like, necessarily existent, utterly
remote from matter, and beyond space; His fragmentation and division are impossible
in every respect as is any sort of change or alteration; His being needy or impotent is
beyond the bounds of possibility. And yet, a group of the people of misguidance
suppose certain manifestations of the Most Pure and Holy Essence which are
manifested in the pages of the universe and in the levels of beings to be the Most Pure
and Holy One Himself and ascribe the decrees of the divinity to certain creatures;
they attribute some of the All-Glorious One’s works to nature.
However, it is demonstated with conclusive proofs in numerous places in the
Risale-i Nur that nature is a divine art, and cannot be the artist. It is a dominical book,
and cannot be the scribe. It is an embroidery, and cannot be the embroiderer. It is a
register, and cannot be the accountant. It is a law, and cannot be the power. It is a
pattern, and cannot be the source. It is a recipient and is passive, and cannot be the
author. It is an order, and cannot the orderer. It is a code of creation, and cannot be the
establisher of the code.
If, to suppose the impossible, the tiniest animate creature was referred to nature
and it was told: “You made this;” as is demonstrated in many places in the Risale-i
Nur with decisive proofs, it would be necessary to provide moulds, or rather
machines, to the number of the tiny creature’s members and bodily systems so that
nature could carry out the work.

--- Sayfa 437 ---
437
Moreover, although a group of the people of misguidance called materialists
perceived a greatest manifestation of divine creativity and dominical power within the
orderly transformations of minute particles, since they did not know from where the
manifestation came and could not understand from where that universal force was
being directed, which originated from the manifestation of the Eternally Besought
One’s power, they supposed matter and force were pre-eternal and began to attribute
the divine works to particles and their motion. Glory be to God! Could human beings
be so ignorant as to attribute actions and works that can only be carried out by one
who is both beyond space and present in such a way as to see, know, and direct all
things in the creation of all things everywhere, to particles and their motion, which are
tossed around in the storms of lifeless, blind, unconscious chance that lacks will and
balance? Anyone who possesses even a jot of intelligence must see just what an
ignorant and superstitious idea this is.
Indeed, because those wretches have abandoned absolute unity, they have fallen
into a limitless, endless absolute multiplicity. That is, since they do not accept one
single God, they are compelled to accept endless gods. Which means that since they
are unable to squeeze into their corrupted minds the idea of one single Most Pure and
Holy Essence and the pre-eternity and creativity that are necessary and essential to
Him, they are compelled by their opinions to accept the pre-eternity, indeed the
divinity, of those limitless, endless, lifeless particles.
So, come and consider this complete and utter ignorance! For certainly, the
manifestation on particles has made that mass of particles into an orderly and
magnificent army through the strength, power, and command of the Necessarily
Existent One. If the Commander-in-Chief’s command and power were withdrawn
even for a second, that numerous, lifeless, unconscious mass would degenerate into
irregular soldiers, it would altogether cease to exist.
Furthermore, it is as if another group of people see even further, that is, they are
even more ignorantly misguided. They imagine the matter known as ether, which is
an extremely subtle, fine, obedient and subjugated page of the Glorious Maker’s
activities, a means for the transmitting of His commands, a flimsy veil for the exercise
of His power, a refined ink for His writing, a fine raiment for His creating, a leaven of
His artefacts and a tillage for His seeds, to be the origin and the author because it acts
as a mirror to the manifestation of His dominicality.
This extraordinary ignorance requires endless impossibilities because ether is
matter that is unconscious, lifeless and without will and is finer

--- Sayfa 438 ---
438
than the matter of which particles consist, which drowns the materialists, and is
denser than the index of primordial matter into which the ancient philosophers thrust
themselves. To attribute to this matter, which may be fragmented and divided without
limit and is equipped with the qualities and duties of being passive and the ability to
transmit – to attribute to its minute particles, which are far minuter than particles of
other matter, the actions and works that exist through a will and power that sees,
knows, and directs all things in all things is mistaken to the number of particles of
ether.
The act of creation apparent in beings is such that it demonstrates it proceeds
from a power and will which sees and knows most things, the whole universe even, in
each thing particularly if it is animate, and which recognizes and secures the animate
creature’s relationship with the universe; it thus demonstrates that it cannot be the act
of causes, which are material and are not all-encompassing. Through the meaning of
Self-Subsistence, a particular creative act bears a mighty meaning that points to its
being directly the act of the Creator of the universe. For example, an act pertaining to
the creation of a bee demonstrates that it is peculiar to the Creator of the universe in
two respects.
First Respect: The fact that all the other bees throughout the world resembling
that particular bee manifest the same act at the same time demonstrates that the
particular and individual act is the tip of a comprehensive act which embraces the face
of the earth. In which case, whoever the author and owner of that vast act  is, he must
be the author of the particular act.
Second Respect: In order to be the author of the action directed towards the
creation of the bee in question, a power and will are necessary that are vast enough to
know and secure the conditions for the life of the bee, and its members, and its
relationship with the universe. Therefore, the one who performs the particular action
can only perform it thus perfectly by having authority over most of the universe.
Hence the most particular and insignificant action demonstrates in two respects
that it is peculiar to the Creator of all things.
The most remarkable and surprising thing is this: the Necessarily Existent One
possesses necessity, which is the firmest level of existence; absolute isolation from
matter, which is the most immutable degree of existence; absolute freedom from
space, which is the state of existence furthest from cessation; and unity, which is the
soundest quality of existence and the one remotest from change and non-existence.
And yet they attribute pre-eternity and everlastingness, which are the Necessarily
Existent One’s most particular qualities and are necessary and essential to Him, to
things like ether and particles, which are matter that is material, unbounded and

--- Sayfa 439 ---
439
numerous, is the least stable level of existence and the least tangible, the most
changing and the most varying and the most dispersed through space; they ascribe
pre-eternity to them and fancy them to be pre-eternal; and some of them even suppose
that it is out of them that the divine works arise. It has been demonstrated through
cogent arguments in many places in the Risale-i Nur how contrary to truth and reality,
how unreasonable and absurd, is this idea.
SECOND RAY
This consists of two matters.
F i r s t  M a t t e r :
Neither sleep overcomes Him nor slumber.(2:255) * There is not a moving
creature but He has grasp of its forelock.(11:56) * To Him belong the keys of
the heavens and the earth.(39:63; 42:12)
These verses point to a greatest manifestation of the name Self-Subsistent. One aspect
of the mighty truth that these and verses like them indicate is as follows:
The existence, continuance, and perpetuation of the heavenly bodies in the
universe are tied to the mystery of Self-Subsistence. If the manifestation of Self-
Subsistence were to avert its face for a moment, millions of globes, some of them a
thousand times larger than the earth, would be scattered into the infinite void of space,
and colliding with one another would crash into nothingness.
For example, the power of the Self-Subsistence of the One who keeps thousands
of stately palaces in place in perfect order and makes them travel like aircraft through
space is measured through the stability, order, and continuance of those palaces in
space. So too a measure of the greatest manifestation of the name Self-Subsistent are
the facts that the All-Glorious and Self-Subsistent One bestows on the innumerable
heavenly bodies within ethereal matter a stability, permanence, and continuance
within the utmost order and balance through the mystery of Self-Subsistence; and
together with upholding without prop or support in the void millions of mighty
globes, some a thousand and some even a million times larger than the earth, entrusts
them all with duties and causes them to submit in perfect obedience like a majestic
army to the decrees proceeding from the command of “‘Be!’ and it is.” The particles
of all beings also exist, like the stars, through the mystery of Self-Subsistence, and are
permanent and continue through it.
The particles in an animate creature’s body do not disperse but are assembled in
groups and systems peculiar to each limb, and without

--- Sayfa 440 ---
440
scattering, preserve their position within the storms of the elements, which flow like
floods, and remain regular and in order. Since this self-evidently does not occur
through themselves but through the mystery of Self-Subsistence, and since each body
is like a well-ordered regiment and each species like a regular army, these particles
proclaim the mystery of Self-Subsistence with innumerable tongues in the same way
that the continuance and motion of animate creatures and their assemblages on the
earth and that of the stars in the world of space proclaim it.
S e c o n d  M a t t e r : This station requires that some of the benefits and
instances of wisdom in things connected with the mystery of Self-Subsistence are
pointed out.
The wisdom in the existence of things, and the aims of their natures, the benefits
in their creation, and the results of their lives are of three sorts.
The First Sort looks to each thing itself and to man and to man’s affairs.
The Second Sort is more important. It is the meanings of all things being set out
for innumerable readers, for each is a sign, a missive, a book, an ode for conscious
beings to study, an indication making known the manifestation of the Glorious
Creator’s names.
The Third Sort: This concerns the Glorious Maker and looks to Him. While one
of the benefits and results of things look to the things themselves, countless look to
the Glorious Maker. For the Glorious Maker beholds the wonders of His art Himself,
He observes the manifestation of His names in the beings which He Himself has
fashioned. In regard to this mighty third sort, it is sufficient if beings live only for a
second.
Another mystery of Self-Subsistence that requires the existence of all things will
be explained in the Third Ray.
At one time I was investigating the talisman of the universe and riddle of
creation, which lies in its being a manifestation, together with the instances of wisdom
and benefits in beings, and I asked: “I wonder why these things display themselves in
this way, then swiftly vanish and are lost? I look at their individual features; they have
been attired, decked out and adorned in an orderly, purposeful fashion and sent to this
display and exhibition. But then they disappear in a day or two, and some of them
within a few minutes; uselessly and in vain they vanish. What is the purpose in their
being seen by us for this brief time?” I was most curious.
Then, through divine favour, I discovered an important instance of wisdom in the
fact that beings, in particular animate beings, come into the place of instruction that is
this world. It was as follows: each being, and especially if it is animate, is an
extremely meaningful word, missive, dominical ode

--- Sayfa 441 ---
441
and divine proclamation. After it has been studied by intelligent beings and has stated
its meaning to innumerable readers, its corporeal form, which is like a letter or a
word, disappears.
For about a year this instance of wisdom was sufficient for me. Then the truly
wonderful and subtle miracles of art to be found in creatures, in particular in animate
beings, were disclosed. I understood that these subtleties of art which are so fine and
wonderful are not only to set forth meanings for the gazes of intelligent beings. For
although innumerable such creatures may study each being, their studying is both
limited, and not all of them will be able to penetrate all the subtleties of art in those
animate beings. That is to say, the most important result of the creation of animate
beings and the most significant purpose of their natures is to present to the Pre-Eternal
Self-Subsistent One’s own gaze the marvels of His art and the compassionate gifts
and bounties He has bestowed.
As for this purpose, it satisfied me for a long time and from it I understood the
following: the wisdom and purpose of creation, which is to present the endless
subtleties of art in beings, particularly in animate beings, to the gaze of the Pre-
Eternally Self-Subsistent One, that is, for He Himself to behold His own art, was
sufficient for that vast outlay.
Some time later I realized that the subtleties of art in the individual features and
forms of beings did not continue; they were being renewed and were undergoing
change at great speed; they were being transformed within an endless activity and
creativity. I started to ponder over it, saying: “The wisdom in this creativity and
activity must necessarily be as extensive as the activity itself.” Then, the two
instances of wisdom mentioned above began to seem insufficient; they lacked
something. With extreme curiosity I began to search and seek for a further purpose
and instance of wisdom.
All praise be to God, through the effulgence of the Qur’an of Miraculous
Exposition, after some time a vast, limitless wisdom and purpose became apparent at
the level of the mystery of Self-Subsistence. And  through it, the divine mystery
called the talisman of the universe and riddle of creation was understood. It is
explained in detail in the Twenty-Fourth Letter, so here in the Third Ray we shall
briefly mention only two or three points.
Look from this point to the manifestation of the mystery of Self-Subsistence: it
has plucked all beings out of non-existence, and according to the meaning of the
verse,
It is God who has raised the heavens without any supports that you can
see,(13:2)

--- Sayfa 442 ---
442
has caused each one of them to remain in infinite space. It has bestowed stability and
permanence on them, and caused them all to display the manifestation of the mystery
of Self-Subsistence. If not for this support, nothing at all could continue to exist of its
own accord. Everything would topple over into the infinite void and tumble into non-
existence.
Furthermore, just as all beings rely on the All-Glorious Self-Subsistent One for
their existence, stability, and permanence, they continue in existence through Him, so
according to the meaning of the verse,
And to Him goes back every affair,(11:123)
the tips of thousands of chains or lines in the states and conditions of beings are
fastened to the mystery of Self-Subsistence, which, if the comparison is not mistaken,
is like the centre or central pole of telephone and telegraph lines. If they did not rely
on that luminous point of support, thousands of unending sequences of causes would
be necessary, which according to scholars is an impossible and false notion; in fact,
there would have to be as many of these absurd unending sequences of causes as there
are beings. For example, one thing – protection or light or existence or sustenance, for
instance – in one respect relies on the next thing, and that on the next, and that on the
next, until finally since it cannot be infinite, it has to come to an end.
Thus, the end of all such lines and sequences lies in the mystery of Self-
Subsistence. But when this mystery has been understood, the links and the meaning of
each thing relying on the next in those imaginary sequences do not remain, they
disappear and everything is seen to look directly to the mystery of Self-Subsistence.
THIRD RAY
By means of one or two introductory points, we shall point out to a small degree
the disclosure of the mystery of Self-Subsistence within divine creativity and
dominical activity, which verses like the following allude to:
Every day He manifests Himself in yet another way.(55:29) * A sovereign
doer of whatever He wills.(11:107) * He creates whatever he wishes.(30:34,
etc.) * In Whose hand is the dominion of all things.(36:83) * So look to the
signs of God’s mercy, how He restores the earth to life after its death.(30:50)
T h e  F i r s t : When we look at the universe, we see that one group of creatures,
which are tossed around in the flood of time and follow on one after the other convoy
after convoy, come for a second and then immediately

--- Sayfa 443 ---
443
vanish. Another group comes for a minute and then passes on. One species stops by in
the Manifest Word for an hour, then enters the World of the Unseen. Some of them
come and alight in the Manifest World for a day, some of them for a year, some for a
century, and some for an age; they perform their duties and then depart.
This astonishing travelling and passage of beings and flow and flux of creatures
is driven and directed with such order, balance and wisdom, and the one who
commands them and those convoys does so with such insight, purpose and planning
that even if all minds were to unite and become one mind, it would be unable to
comprehend the essence of this wise direction; it would be unable to find any fault in
it and so could not criticize it.
Thus, within this dominical activity, not allowing any of those pleasing creatures
that it loves, especially animate creatures, to open their eyes, the pen of divine
determining and decree despatches them to the World of the Unseen; not permitting
them even to draw a breath, it discharges them from the life of this world. It
continuously fills the guesthouse of the world and empties it without the guests’
consent. Making the globe of the earth like a slate for writing and erasing, through the
manifestation of
He grants life and deals death,(2:258)
the pen of divine determining and decree ceaselessly inscribes writings on it, and
renews and replaces them.
One meaning of the wisdom in this dominical activity and divine creativity and a
fundamental requirement and a motive cause of them is a limitless, endless instance
of wisdom that may be divided into three important branches.
The First Branch of that wisdom is this: Every sort of activity, whether
particular or universal, yields pleasure. There is a pleasure in all activity. Indeed,
activity is pure pleasure. Yes, activity is the manifestation of existence, which is pure
pleasure and is the shaking off and becoming distant from non-existence, which is
pure suffering.
Everyone with ability follows with pleasure the unfolding of his ability through
activity. The revealing of innate talents through activity arises from a pleasure and
results in a pleasure. Everyone who possesses some perfections follows with pleasure
their disclosure through activity.
Since there is present in every activity a perfection and pleasure which is thus
loved and sought after, and activity too is a perfection; and since there are apparent in
the world of animate creatures the manifestations of a boundless love and infinite
compassion which arise from a perpetual and pre-eternal life; those manifestations
show that as the requirement of that

--- Sayfa 444 ---
444
eternal Life which is fitting for the necessary existence of the One who thus loves and
is compassionate and makes Himself loved, and is worthy of His holiness, there are –
if the terms are not mistaken – at the utmost level such sacred qualities in that Most
Pure and Holy Life as divine passion, hallowed love, and sheer pleasure. And it is
these qualities that continuously renew, agitate, and change the universe through
endless activity and infinite creativity.
The Second Branch of the wisdom in the limitless divine activity which looks
to the mystery of Self-Subsistence: This looks to the divine names. It is well-known
that everyone who possesses beauty wants to both see and display his beauty; that
everyone who possesses some skills desires and loves to attract attention to his skills
by exhibiting and proclaiming them; he desires and loves his skill, which is a
beautiful truth and meaning that has remained concealed, to be revealed and to find
ardent admirers.
These fundamental rules are in force in all things according to the degree of each.
According to the testimony of the universe and the evidence of the manifestations and
embroideries of the thousand and one most beautiful names of the All-Glorious Self-
Subsistent One, who possesses absolute beauty, there are in every degree of each of
those names a true loveliness, a true perfection, a true beauty and a most exquisite
truth. Indeed, in every degree there are endless different sorts of loveliness and
innumerable beautiful truths.
Since the beings of the universe are mirrors reflecting the sacred beauties of those
names and the tableaux displaying their beautiful embroideries and the pages setting
forth their beautiful truths, those constant and eternal names will entirely and
unceasingly renew and change the universe through their manifestations as a
consequence of that sacred divine love and due to the mystery of Self-Subsistence. In
this way they will display their endless manifestations and infinite, meaningful
embroideries and books both to the witnessing gaze of the All-Glorious Self-
Subsistent One, whom they signify, and to the studying gaze of uncountable numbers
of intelligent creatures and creatures endowed with spirits, and will display countless
tableaux out of a finite and limited thing and numerous individuals out of a single
individual and multiple truths out of a single truth.
FOURTH RAY
The Third Branch of the wisdom in the constant and astonishing activity in
the universe: Everyone who is compassionate is happy at giving pleasure to others;
and everyone who is kind is gratified at making others happy; everyone who is loving
is gladdened by pleasing others who are

--- Sayfa 445 ---
445
worthy of being pleased; and everyone who is noble-hearted takes pleasure at making
others happy; everyone who is just rejoices at upholding justice and at winning the
gratitude of those whose rights are vindicated by punishing the deserving; and every
skilful craftsman takes pride in exhibiting his work, at its functioning as he hoped it
would function, and at its giving the desired results.
Thus, each of the above-mentioned principles is a fundamental rule which is in
force throughout the universe and the world of mankind. Three examples
demonstrating that these rules function in the divine names have been explained in the
Third Stopping Place of the Thirty-Second Word. It is appropriate to write a summary
of them at this point, so we say the following:
For example, an extremely kind, generous, munificent, noble-hearted person who
embarks the poor and needy on a large ship, gratifies them with banquets and bounties
and sails it in the seas around the world, will watch them happily since he is superior
to them, take pleasure at those needy people’s gratitude, rejoice and be pleased at
their taking pleasure, and feel proud.
If someone who is merely a distribution official takes such pleasure and delight at
holding an insignificant banquet, consider the following: the Ever-Living and Self-
Subsistent One embarks all animals and men and countless angels, jinn and spirit
beings on the ship of the earth, which is a vessel of that All-Merciful One; He spreads
the face of the earth before them as a dominical table laden with varieties of foods,
and with delights and sustenance for all the senses; he causes those needy, thankful,
grateful and happy creatures to sail the regions of the universe, and not only makes
them happy in this world with all these bounties but also makes the bounties tables in
the unending banquets in the Paradises of the Eternal Realm. It is therefore the
meaning of dominicality alluded to by the divine qualities resulting from the thanks,
gratitude, joy and delight of those creatures which look to the Ever-Living and Self-
Subsistent One, which we are powerless and not permitted to express, like holy
pleasure, sacred pride, and hallowed delight that necessitate this constant activity and
ceaseless creativity.
And for example, if a skilful craftsman builds a gramophone that requires no
records and it plays just as he wishes, how proud and delighted he will be; he will say
to himself: “What wonders God willed!” Seeing that an insignificant piece of art in
which there is no true creation engenders a feeling of such pride and pleasure in the
craftsman’s spirit, then consider the following:

--- Sayfa 446 ---
446
The All-Wise Maker creates the totality of the universe as a divine orchestra and
wondrous workshop which strikes up and gives forth countless sorts of songs and
hymns praises and glorification; He displays all the species, all the worlds, in the
universe through a different craft and different miracles of art; and not only does He
fashion many machines in the heads of animate creatures, each like a gramophone,
camera or telegraph, He also fashions in the heads of human beings, both a
gramophone without records, a camera without a film, a telegraph without wires, and
a machine twenty times more wonderful. It is therefore meanings like sacred pride
and holy pleasure and the exalted qualities of this sort which proceed from
dominicality and arise from creating such machines, and their functioning in the
required way and producing the desired results that necessitate this unceasing activity.
And for example, a just ruler takes pleasure and is gratified and feels proud at
taking the part of the oppressed against tyrants in order to uphold justice, at protecting
the poor against the wrongdoing of the powerful, and at giving to everyone his due.
Since this is a fundamental rule of rulership and justice, consider the following:
The Ever-Living and Self-Subsistent One, who is the All-Wise Ruler and is
Absolutely Just, bestows on creatures and especially on animate ones the necessary
conditions for life, which are known as the rights of life; and to preserve their lives,
He grants them the necessary abilities and members; and He compassionately protects
the weak from the evil of the powerful. Therefore, the dominical qualities and sacred
meanings, which we are powerless to express, that arise from this and from the
execution of the mystery of justice, which in this world is total with regard to
establishing justice for all animate beings and partial with regard to punishing
wrongdoers, and especially that arise from the manifestation of supreme justice at the
supreme tribunal of the resurrection, necessitate the constant activity in the universe.
Thus, as these three examples show, since each of the most beautiful names give
rise to certain sacred divine qualities in this unceasing activity, they require unceasing
creativity. And since the development, unfolding and blossoming of abilities and
faculties yield a joy, expansiveness and pleasure; and since on the performance and
completion of a duty and on being released from it, everyone entrusted with such a
duty experiences a feeling of relief and gratitude; and since to receive many fruits
from a single seed and to gain a hundredfold profit from a single thing is a most
pleasurable trade, then most certainly the One who causes the innumerable abilities of
creatures to unfold, after employing the creatures in valuable duties,

--- Sayfa 447 ---
447
will discharge them, but to a higher state. That is to say, He raises elements to the
level of minerals; minerals to plant life; plants to the level of animal life by means of
sustenance; and animals to the high level of human life, which is conscious.
It may be understood then just how important are the sacred meanings and divine
dominicality arising from the constant activity and dominical creativity which, on the
demise of their external existences, cause all animate creatures to leave behind them
multiple existences taken from them, like their spirits, essences, identities, forms,
existences in the Worlds of Similitudes, Knowledge, and the Unseen, the sheaths of
their spirits, and astral bodies, all of which are charged with duties in their places.
This is explained in the Twenty-Fourth Letter.
A Decisive Answer to an Important Question
One group of the people of misguidance says that the being who changes and
transforms the universe with this constant activity must himself be subject to change
and alteration.
T h e  A n s w e r : God forbid! A hundred thousand times, God forbid! The fact
that mirrors on the ground change demonstrates not that the sun in the sky changes,
but on the contrary that its manifestations are being renewed. Moreover, change and
alteration are impossible in the Most Pure and Holy Essence, who is pre-eternal, post-
eternal, sempiternal, in every respect absolutely perfect and absolutely self-sufficient,
totally free of, detached from, and beyond matter, space, restriction, and contingency.
Change in the universe points to his lack of change and alteration, not to His
changing. For one who causes constant change and causes numerous things to move
must himself be unchanging and not move.
For example, if you spin a large number of globes and balls which have each
been tied to a piece of string and cause them all to move unceasingly within an order,
you have to remain in one place and not change or move, for if you did, it would spoil
the order. It is clear that one who causes objects to move within an order must himself
not move, and one who causes objects to change ceaselessly must himself be
unchanging so that these actions may continue in an orderly fashion.
Secondly: Change and alteration arise from createdness, from being renewed in
order to be perfected, from need, materiality, and contingency. Since the Most Pure
and Holy Essence is both eternal, and in every respect absolutely perfect and
absolutely self-sufficient, and totally detached from matter, and necessarily existent,
most certainly His changing and altering is not possible; it is impossible.

--- Sayfa 448 ---
448
FIFTH RAY
F i r s t  M a t t e r
If we wish to see the greatest manifestation of the name Self-Subsistent, we shall
set up two telescopes in order to observe the whole universe with our imaginations.
One of them will show the most distant objects, the other minute particles. So if we
look through the first telescope, we see that through the manifestation of the name of
Self-Subsistent and without support, of millions of globes and stars thousands of
times larger than the earth, some have been made apparently stationary in the matter
known as ether, which is subtler than air, while others have been made to travel
apparently as their duty.
Then we look through the second telescope, which is the microscope of the
imagination, to observe minute particles. Through the mystery of Self-Subsistence,
taking up orderly positions like the stars, the particles of the bodies of animate
creatures on the earth are all in motion and performing their duties. We see that
especially the miniscule agglomerations forming the particles known as red
corpuscles and white corpuscles in the blood of animate beings, like the planets, move
with two orderly motions like Mevlevi dervishes.
A Summary2
A summary is appropriate here in order to examine the sacred light the six names
of the greatest name form, blending together like the seven colours in light. It is as
follows:
Look beyond the greatest manifestation of the name Self-Subsistent which thus
upholds and gives permanence and continuity to all the beings in the universe: the
greatest manifestation of the name Ever-Living has set aflame all animate beings with
its manifestation. It has illuminated the universe. It gilds all animate beings with its
manifestation.
Now look again: beyond the name Ever-Living, the greatest manifestation of the
name Single confers a unity on the universe with all its elements and parts. It puts a
stamp of unity on each being’s forehead. It places a seal of oneness on each being’s
face. It causes them to proclaim its manifestation with endless, countless tongues.
Now consider the greatest manifestation of the name Sapient beyond

2 This is a brief summary of the six sacred names which bear the greatest name and are the basis
and subject of the six main sections of the Thirtieth Flash.

--- Sayfa 449 ---
449
the name Single: it incorporates in a fruitful order, wise regularity and purposeful
harmony appropriate to each all the beings we observe through the two telescopes of
the imagination, from stars to particles, whether universal or particular, from the
greatest sphere to the most minute. It adorns and gilds all beings.
Then look beyond the greatest manifestation of the name Sapient: in regard to its
aspect that was examined in the Second Point, through the greatest manifestation of
the name All-Just, the universe with all its beings is administered with such balance,
equilibrium and measure within unceasing activity, that if just one of the heavenly
bodies were to lose its balance even for a second, that is, if it were to break free of the
manifestation of the name All-Just, it would cause chaos among the stars; it would be
like Doomsday.
Thus, all beings and all the different realms of beings from the army of the stars
to the army of minute particles, that is, from the largest sphere that is the vast belt
known as the Milky Way to the sphere of the motion of red and white corpuscles,
stand shoulder to shoulder in a manner gauged with the finest balance and measure, so
demonstrating that all those beings are obedient and totally subjugated to the
commands proceeding from the command of “‘Be!’ and it is.”
Now look beyond the greatest manifestation of the Name All-Just to the greatest
manifestation of the name Most Holy, which was explained in the First Point: the fact
that it renders all the beings in the universe so pure, clean, clear, beautiful, adorned
and shining demonstrates that it has bestowed on the universe and on all beings the
form of beautiful mirrors worthy of reflecting the utter essential beauty of the
Absolutely Beautiful One and the sheer loveliness of His most beautiful names.
In Short: These six names and six lights of the greatest name have enwrapped
the universe and all beings in ever-differing, multifarious colours, embroideries and
adornment.
S e c o n d  M a t t e r  o f   t h e  F i f t h  R a y
Just as the manifestation of Self-Subsistence in the universe is at the level of
unity and glory, so in man, who is the centre, pivot, and conscious fruit of the
universe, it is at the level of oneness and beauty. That is to say, just as the universe
subsists through the mystery of Self-Subsistence, so it in one respect subsists through
man, who is the most complete place of manifestation of the name of Self-Subsistent.
For since most of the wisdom, aims, purposes, and benefits in the universe look to
man, the manifestation of Self-Subsistence in him is as though a support for the
universe. It

--- Sayfa 450 ---
450
may be said that the Ever-Living and Self-Subsistent One willed man to be in the
universe and created it for him. For with the comprehensiveness of his nature, man
can understand and take pleasure in all the divine names. He can understand many of
names through the pleasure to be found in sustenance in particular. Whereas the
angels cannot know them through that pleasure.
Because of this important comprehensiveness, the Ever-Living and Self-
Subsistent One has given man a stomach and appetite with which He allows him to
understand all His names and to taste all the varieties of His bounty, and He has
generously laden the table with endless varieties of foods for man’s stomach. He has
also made life a stomach, like the physical one, and has spread an extensive table of
bounties before the senses, which are like the hands of the stomach of life. With its
senses, life offers a sort of thanks for all the ways it benefits from the table of
bounties.
After the stomach of life, He has bestowed on man the stomach of humanity,
which requires sustenance and bounties in a wider sphere than life. Intelligence, mind,
and imagination, the hands of this stomach, benefit from the table of mercy, which is
as broad as the heavens and the earth, and give thanks.
After the stomach of humanity, He has spread before man another table of
bounties which is infinitely vast. He has made the beliefs of Islam like an immaterial
stomach requiring extensive sustenance and has extended its table outside the sphere
of contingency and included in it the divine names. With this stomach and the great
pleasure of sustenance, man perceives the names of All-Merciful and All-Wise and
exclaims: “All praise be to God for His mercifulness and His wisdom!” And so on.
Man is able to benefit from limitless divine bounties with this vast immaterial
stomach. And there is a further sphere in this stomach, which is the pleasure of divine
love.
Thus, the Ever-Living and Self-Subsistent One has made man a centre and pivot
of the whole universe; He has spread before him a table of bounties as broad as the
universe, and subjugated the universe to him. The reasons for this and for the universe
in one respect subsisting through the mystery of Self-Subsistence manifested through
man are man’s three important duties:
His First Duty
All the varieties of bounties dispersed throughout the universe are put into order
through man. All those things beneficial to man are strung like prayer-beads on a
string and the ends of the strings of those bounties are tied to man’s head. Man is thus
made a list of all the various contents of the treasuries of mercy.

--- Sayfa 451 ---
451
His Second Duty
By reason of his comprehensiveness, this is for man to be the most perfect
addressee of the Ever-Living and Self-Subsistent One; by appreciating and admiring
His astonishing arts, to be His loudest herald; and by offering every kind of conscious
thanks, to give praise, glory, and thanks for all the varieties of His bounties and the
limitless different sorts of His gifts.
His Third Duty
Through his life, this is to act in three respects as a mirror to the Ever-Living and
Self-Subsistent One and His qualities and all-embracing attributes.
First Aspect: This is to perceive through his own absolute impotence the absolute
power of his Creator and its levels, and through the degrees of his impotence, the
degrees of His power. It is to understand through his own absolute poverty, His mercy
and the degrees of His mercy, and through his weakness, His strength; and so on. It is
to be a mirror and measuring instrument for his Creator’s attributes of perfection
through his own defective attributes. Just as darkness is a perfect mirror for displaying
electric light, the brilliance of the light being proportionate to the darkness of the
night, so man acts as a mirror to the divine perfections through his own defective
attributes.
Second Aspect: Using the universe as a yardstick and with his own partial will,
tiny knowledge, minute power, and apparent ownership, and by building his own
house, man understands and acts as a mirror to the ownership, art, will, power, and
knowledge of the universe’s Fashioner.
Third Aspect: Man’s acting as a mirror in this respect has two faces:
First: It is to display in himself the ever-differing embroideries of the divine
names. To put it simply, by reason of his comprehensiveness, man is like a tiny index
and miniature specimen of the universe and so displays the embroideries of all the
names.
Second Face: This face acts as a mirror to the divine attributes. That is to say,
just as man points to the life of the Ever-Living and Self-Subsistent One through his
own life, so he acts as a mirror to and makes known such attributes of the Ever-Living
and Self-Subsistent One as hearing and sight, by means of his own sense of hearing
and sense of sight that develop during his life-time.
Furthermore, man acts as a mirror to the sacred attributes of the Ever-Living and
Self-Subsistent One through the very numerous and responsive senses, meanings, and
emotions that are present with his life, which do not develop but which boil up in the
form of feelings and emotions. For example,

--- Sayfa 452 ---
452
as a result of such emotions, through meanings like loving and feeling proud, pleased,
happy and cheerful he acts as a mirror to attributes of that sort, on condition they are
suitable and worthy for the sacredness and absolute self-sufficiency of the Most Pure
and Holy Essence.
Also, through his comprehensive life, man is an instrument that recognizes and
measures the attributes and qualities of the All-Glorious One, and is an index of the
manifestation of His names, and a conscious mirror, and so on, he acts as a mirror to
the Ever-Living and Self-Subsistent One in many respects. Man is also a unit of
measurement, an index, a scale, and a balance to the truths of the universe.
For example, extremely decisive evidence for the existence of the Preserved
Tablet in the universe and an example of it is man’s faculty of memory. And a
decisive evidence of the existence of the World of Similitudes and an example of it is
man’s faculty of imagination. And evidence for the existence of spirit beings in the
universe and an example of them are the powers and subtle faculties in man.3 And so
on. In small measure man may display almost visibly the truths of belief present in the
universe.
Man performs many important functions like those mentioned above. He is a
mirror to enduring beauty. He is the place of manifestation announcing sempiternal
perfection. He is one needy and thankful for eternal mercy. Since beauty, perfection,
and mercy are everlasting and eternal, it is surely necessary and inevitable that man,
who is the desirous mirror to enduring beauty, the enraptured herald of everlasting
perfection, and thankful and needy for eternal mercy, will go to an everlasting realm
to remain there permanently, that he will go to eternity to accompany those eternal
qualities, and will accompany that eternal Beauty, everlasting Perfection, and ever-
enduring Mercy for all eternity.
For an eternal beauty cannot be content with an impermanent admirer, a mortal
lover. Since beauty loves itself, it desires love in return for its love. Transience and
impermanence transform such love into enmity. If man was not going to go to eternity
and remain there permanently, he would feel enmity rather than innate love for eternal
beauty.
As is described in a footnote in the Tenth Word, one time a celebrated

3 The elements in man point to the elements in the universe, and his bones to its stones and rocks,
his hair to its plants and trees, and the blood which flows in his body and the fluids which issue from
his eyes, ears, nose and mouth to the spring and mineral waters of the earth. Similarly, man’s spirit
points to the spirit world, his faculty of memory to the Preserved Tablet, and his power of imagination
to the World of Similitudes, and so on. Each of his members and faculties points to a different world
and bears decisive witness to their existence.

--- Sayfa 453 ---
453
beauty expelled a lover from her presence, whereupon his love turned into enmity and
in order to console himself, he said: “Ugh! How ugly she is!”, thus insulting and
denying her beauty.
Indeed, man is hostile to what is unfamiliar to him, just as he quite simply wishes
to be hostile to and find fault in things he cannot obtain or possess. Since, as the
whole universe testifies, the True Beloved and Absolutely Beautiful One causes man
to love Himself through His most beautiful names, which are altogether exquisite, and
desires man to love Him, then most certainly He would not endow man who is both
His beloved and His lover with an innate enmity and cause him to be vexed with
Himself from afar; He would not endow man’s spirit with a hidden enmity, which
would be altogether contrary to man’s nature, who is by his nature the most lovable
and loving creature and the most exceptional that He has created for worship. For man
would only be able to cure the deep wounds caused by eternal separation from an
Absolute Beauty that he loves and whose value he appreciates by enmity towards it,
being vexed with it, and denying it.
It is from this point that the unbelievers’ enmity towards God Almighty arises. In
which case, the Pre-Eternal Beauty will surely make manifest in man a perpetual life
in a permanent realm in order to be present together with him who is an enraptured
mirror to Himself on the journey to post-eternity.
Since man has been created in such a way that by his very nature he longs for and
loves an Ever-Enduring Beauty; and since an Ever-Enduring Beauty cannot be
content with an impermanent lover; and since, in order to find consolation from the
pain and sorrow arising from some aim that he does not know or cannot attain or
possess, man pacifies himself through discovering the faults of such an aim, rather,
through nurturing a hidden enmity towards it; and since the universe was created for
man, and man was created to know and love God; and since the Creator of the
universe, together with His names, is eternal; and since the manifestation of His
names will be perpetual, everlasting, and post-eternal; then man will most certainly go
to an everlasting realm and will manifest an everlasting life.
Furthermore Muhammad the Arabian (Upon whom be blessings and peace), who
is the supreme guide and perfect man, made known and demonstrated most perfectly
in himself and in his religion the value and all the perfections and duties we have
explained above concerning man. This demonstrates that the universe was created for
mankind and its aim and object is mankind. So too the aim and object of mankind,
and its choicest and

--- Sayfa 454 ---
454
most valuable member, and its most brilliant mirror to the Single and Eternally
Besought One is Ahmad Muhammad (Upon whom be blessings and peace).
Upon whom and upon whose family be blessings and peace to the number of
good deeds of his community. O God! O Most Merciful! O Most
Compassionate! O Single One! O Ever-Living! O Self-Subsistent! O Sapient!
O All-Just! O Most Holy! We beseech You through the truth of Your All-Wise
Criterion of Truth and Falsehood, the Qur’an, and through veneration for
Your Most Noble Beloved, and through the truth of Your Most Beautiful
Names, and through veneration for Your Greatest Name, to preserve us from
the evil of the instinctual soul and of Satan and from the evil of jinn and of
men. Amen.
Glory be unto You! We have no knowledge save that which You have taught
us; indeed You are All-Knowing, All-Wise!(2:32)

--- Sayfa 455 ---
455
The Thirty-First Flash
This has been assigned to The Rays Collection. The Fourteeth Ray consists of the
defence speeches and letters of Afyon Court and Prison, while the Fifteenth Ray has
been named Elhüccetü’z-Zehrâ (The Shining Proof), and published.1
*   *   *
The Thirty-Second Flash
This consists of Lemeât, the last work of the Old Said, which itself assumed a
poetic form and was composed in twenty days during the month of Ramadan. It has
been included in Sözler (The Words).
*   *   *
The Thirty-Third Flash
This consists of the works called in Arabic Katre, Habbe, Şemme, Zerre, Hubab,
Zühre, and Şûle, and their appendices, the first works of the New Said, inspired in his
heart by reality. Turkish translations of them having been included in Mesnevi-i
Nûriye, part of the Risale-i Nur Collection, and published.

1 As designated by our Master, Üstad, the Fourteeth Ray was finally called The Defence Speeches
and Letters of Afyon Court, while the Fifteenth Ray was named El-Hüccetü’z-Zehrâ, and published.
                                                                          Signed: Bediuzzaman’s Assistants