--- Sayfa 1 ---
25
knight templar
The Four Masonic Elements
Part 1 of a series
By
Sir Knight David E. Stafford
Editor’s Note
This article was originally presented by Dr. Stafford to the Tennessee Lodge of
Research. Both he and the Lodge have granted permission to reprint it here. Be­
cause of the length, we have broken it into sections and now present it as a series
in the magazine. References will be found following the last part of the series.
F
reemasonry has been described
as being veiled in allegory and il­
lustrated by symbols. Through the
centuries of time, the allegories and
symbols of the Craft have been obscured
and made only partially recognizable to
the meanings they held in antiquity. The
ritual, as used in each jurisdiction, has
evolved and been pruned in such a man­
ner that within the work are blurbs and
sections that have little meaning in its
present context or to modern Masons;
however, it is within these scattered
gems of purpose that a studious Mason
may find great enlightenment.
One such portion of the ritual may
be found with the seemingly haphazard
mentioning of the four elements, wa­
ter, fire, earth, and air, usually found at
the conclusion of the steroptics in the
Entered Apprentice Degree. Their in­
clusion within the ritual seems a little
awkward and misplaced, but as will be
discussed within this paper, other Ma­
sonic rites use the elements in a more
prominent and pronounced manner
than does the common American York
Rite system.
In either event, it raises the question
as to why the classical elements of water,
fire, earth, and air were ever introduced
to the rituals of the Craft.
The American Ritual
The rituals used in American Lodges
are for the most part similar. Most Unit­
ed States Grand Lodges confer a deriva­
tive of the Preston/Webb ritual. There
are but few exceptions. The variations
within the majority of the rituals adopt­
ed by United States Grand Lodges are
usually only associated with the verbiage
and sequence of events. Although, this
ritual does illustrate the importance of
our Mother Earth, the elements are not
mentioned at all within the ritual of the
First Degree as practiced under the aus­
pice of the Grand Lodge of Tennessee, to
whom the author owes allegiance. The
following is from the 2003 edition of the
Tennessee ritual, and it is very similar to
Indiana’s ritual (Taylor, 1975).
Our ancient brethren, we are
told, served their master with
freedom,
fervency,
and
zeal,
which are symbolically illustrated
by chalk, charcoal, and clay. For
there is nothing more free than
chalk, which upon the slight­
est touch leaves a trace; nothing
more fervent than charcoal, which
when properly ignited melts the
most obdurate metals; and noth­

--- Sayfa 2 ---
26
may 2015
ing more zealous than clay or our
Mother Earth, for from the earth
we came and unto the earth we
must all inevitably return.
Another common passage found
within the Preston/Webb Rituals pays lit­
tle to no attention to freedom, fervency,
and zeal and a larger amount to the ele­
ments. McCoy (1855) and Sickels (1868)
are both examples. It will later be shown
how this passage is extremely similar to
the wording of an ancient Greek author­
ity. On page 98 of Daniel Sickels’ 1868
edition of The General Ahiman Rezon
and Freemason’s Guide, the ritual reads:
Our Mother Earth alone, of all
the elements, has never proved
unfriendly to man; the bodies of
water deluge him with rain, op­
press him with hail, and drown him
with inundations. The air rushes in
storms, prepares the tempest, and
lights up the volcano; but the earth,
ever kind and indulgent, is found
subservient to his wishes. Though
constantly harassed, more to fur­
nish the luxuries than the neces­
saries of life, she never refuses
her accustomed yield, spreading
his path with flowers and his table
with plenty; though she produces
poison, still she supplies the anti­
dote and returns with interest ev­
ery good committed to her care,
and when at last he is called upon
to pass through the “dark valley of
the shadow of death,” she once
more receives him and piously cov­
ers his remains within her bosom:
this admonishes us that from it we
came, and to it we must shortly
return.
The Freemason’s Guide to the Sym­
bolic Degrees (Reed, 1968) welds the
two afore quoted passages together in
the Entered Apprentice Degree. The
combination is found in the same place
within the ritual, after the discourse on
the virtues and before the charge. The
same is done in the Kentucky Monitor,
the Louisiana Masonic Monitor, New
York’s monitor, and the Masonic Manual
of Missouri (Carman, 1952; Huckaby,
1927; Missouri, 1952; Pirtle, 1990). The
Tennessee ritual includes the latter dis­
course not in the First Degree but within
the Masonic Funeral Service.
These three variations appear to be
the most common within the American
York Rite craft degrees as practiced in
the United States. Within the context
of the entire discourse of the third sec­
tion of the First Degree, the inclusion of
references to any of the elements seems
a little out of place. The reason for the
inclusion of any of these variations has
been questioned for at least the last six­
ty years, and it would probably be safe
to say for much longer (Barbour, 1946;
Wells, 1947).
The Elements in Other Rites
In various rites and obediences, a
candidate for the First Degree of Free­
masonry must endure a series of tri­
als to prove his sincerity and character.
Perhaps the trial that would be familiar
to most American Freemasons would
be the chamber of reflection, for many
have experienced a similar trial in at
least one of the concordant bodies. Ac­
cording to Mackey (1927), the use of
the chamber of reflection prior to the
Entered Apprentice Degree is common
in the French and Scottish Rites, neither

--- Sayfa 3 ---
27
knight templar
of which are widely practiced within
the regular Grand Lodges in the United
States. The chamber
of reflection will be
discussed and exam­
ined later in this work.
In a 1946 article
found in The Phila­
lethes, Barbour dis­
cusses the use of the
four elements as trials
in the Rite of Misraim.
Pike and Cummings
(2001) spent a great
deal of time in com­
bating the legitimacy
of this rite and that of
Memphis in the Unit­
ed States. They clearly
assert the spuriousness of the Rite of
Misraim, the Rite of Memphis, and the
one formed through their union. All
three of these are frequently, albeit per­
haps harshly, called Masonic bastards
(Stevens, 1899).
The modern irregularity of the rite in
the United States is without question;
however, according to Barbour, Marc
Bedarride, a former Grand Master of the
Rite of Misraim in France and accused
charlatan, recorded a “quite lengthy, de­
tailed, and perhaps imaginary” descrip­
tion of the rite’s trials. The description
includes the proselyte being caused to
transverse an underground cavern, pass
between two engulfing flames, to wade
a swift current of water of unknown
depth without extinguishing his torch,
being exalted through space where his
light is darkened by a blustering gust
of air, and finally being hastened into a
“chamber of horror” just outside of the
room where he is to be initiated. This is a
dramatic account of this obedience’s tri­
als, but it illustrates the passage presum­
ably required of those seeking enlight­
enment within
the
French Rite of Misraim,
at least in spirit.
Although extremely
impractical within the
setting of a Lodge hall,
the description cor­
responds, in narrative,
to the trials detailed
within Pike’s (1993)
Porch and the Middle
Chamber: Book of the
Lodge and Ambelain’s
(2006)
Freemasonry
in Olden Times: Cer­
emonies
and
Ritu­
als from the Rites of
Mezaraim and Memphis.1 At least one
current Rite of Memphis and Misraim
in the United States is purportedly using
Ambelain’s work (Brother Methodius,
personal communication, July 15, 2008).
Robert Ambelain is of Martinist fame. It
appears the ritual is more heavily influ­
enced by esoteric and occult thought
than is mainstream American Masonry;
however, the ritual shows a very strong
similitude to Pike’s craft ritual. This is not
surprising since both find their origin de­
veloping within France. Ambelain’s ritual
warrants a review by anyone who is in­
terested in variations of Masonry.
Pike’s craft rituals are not widely
known within the United States. He re­
vised the Scottish Rite version of the Craft
Degrees not to be worked within the halls
of a Lodge but instead as a perquisite
reading for a York Rite Mason venturing
through the Scottish Rite’s fourth through
thirty-second degrees (Pike, 1993). This
objective explains the frequent digres­
sions within Pike’s ritual to clarify the

--- Sayfa 4 ---
28
may 2015
differences between York Rite work and
Scottish Rite work. It was believed by
Pike that the rites contrasted so greatly
in presentation that the York Rite Mason
would not be able to fully understand the
lessons within the Scottish Rite without
some exposure to its craft degrees. Pike
believed that after familiarizing himself
with the Scottish Rite version of the three
degrees that a candidate for the “higher”
degrees would not be puzzled by their
order. To provide one example of the
differences between the American York
Rite craft ritual and that of the Scottish
Rite, within the American York Rite ritual,
the ruffians are apprehended and pun­
ished before the conclusion of the Third
Degree. This is not so within the Scottish
Rite workings of the degree; it is not until
the completion of the 10th degree or Elu
of the Fifteen, that the fullness of retribu­
tion is paid to the ruffians. The following
is an examination of Pike’s use of the el­
ementals within the First Degree.
Pike’s “Blue Degrees” and the
Elements
Pike’s version of the First De­
gree involved four tests or trials
by the elements. The first trial
experienced by the candidate is that of
earth and involves the Chamber of Reflec­
tion. The following three trials are known as
“The Journeys” and are made up of circum­
ambulations around the Lodge with various
barriers and experiences to encounter. Each
journey is accredited with an element; air,
water, and fire. The following is a descrip­
tion of each trial paraphrased from Pike’s
(1993) Porch and the Middle Chamber:
Book of the Lodge and (1996) Esoteric Word
of the 1st through 3rd Degree, According to
the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite.
Chamber of Reflection
The first trial of a candidate for the first
degree is that of earth. The proselyte is
delivered to the lodge by the individual
who recommended him to Masonry. The
profane is promptly left in the hands of
a conductor who blindfolds the proselyte
and leads him about the lodge in the allu­
sion of descending into a deep pit or cata­
comb. The candidate is then seated on a
stool and turned over to the instruction
of the preparer. The room is prepared
with images of death and despair. Pres­
ent also is a cup of water, a piece of bread,
and dishes of salt, sulfur, and mercury.
The proselyte is left to explore
the crypt and answer four writ­
ten questions before him. Each
question is related to the duties
the candidate owes to himself,
his fellow-creatures, his country,
and his creator, respectively. He
is instructed that once he has answered
the questions and followed all the in­
structions, he is to ring a bell signifying
his completion.
The preparer observes the candidate
through a hidden wicket, and when
the candidate begins to answer the
questions, a disturbance outside of the
chamber occurs. The pros­
elyte hears chains rattling,
cries, and a loud explosion,
followed by silence. Once
he answers the questions, the candi­

--- Sayfa 5 ---
29
knight templar
date is required to write a will, drink the
water, eat the bread, and reflect upon
the salt, sulfur, and mercury. The latter
substances’ connections to alchemy are
explained. They are described as being
representative of man’s three fold be­
ing: body, mind, and spirit. The salt is
a reminder of the endless cycle of the
dead becoming part of the living. The
smoke from burning a particle of sulfur
represents good and evil thoughts. The
mercury with its inability to be easily di­
vided into portions is representative of
the spirit in simple oneness. After the
proselyte has completed his tasks, the
preparer blindfolds the candidate and
leads him back through the path from
whence he arrived at the chamber.
The First Journey
The first journey represents trial by air.
During this journey, the candidate is con­
ducted three times around the lodge. He
is caused to traverse objects on the floor
as if passing over rocks and through hol­
lows. All the while, sounds
of thundering and loud
claps are made about the
journeyman. The candidate
is stopped by the Junior Warden and
caused to make an alarm by striking the
Junior Warden on the left shoulder three
times. At this point, the candidate is given
a light electric shock accompanied by a
loud clap of thundering sounds. After an­
swering the Junior Warden’s brief inter­
rogation, the first journey is completed.
The candidate is then informed that the
element air is a representation of vitality
or life. In a deeper explanation, the trial
by air is said to be emblematical of the
whims of life and more especially the
quality of tolerance and progress from a
terrestrial to a celestial state of being.
The Second Journey
The second journey represents trial
by water. During this trial, the candidate
is conducted three times around the
lodge. After each circumambulation, the
candidate’s right hand is dipped in a la­
ver of water. The lodge is completely si­
lent during the journey. Af­
ter the third revolution, the
candidate is stopped at the
Senior Warden and caused
to make the regular alarm by striking
him three times on the left shoulder. It
is explained to the candidate that bap­
tism by water is a symbol of purification
and was used by the Essenes and John
the Baptist. It is to be a reminder to the
candidate that all men must be driven
by a desire to serve his fellow creatures;
otherwise, when fortune finds opportu­
nity to invest him with rank and honor,
he will serve himself and not the people
who gave him opportunity.
The Third Journey
The third and last journey represents
trial by fire. To best convey the venture
taken by the candidate on the third jour­
ney, much of the description to follow is
taken directly from Pike’s (1996) Esoteric
Work of the 1st through the 3rd Degree.
According to the Ancient and
Accepted Scottish Rite. The
profane is once again con­
ducted three times around
the lodge. “He is continually exposed
to heat which is produced by means of
a long metallic tube, having at one end
a mouth-piece and at the other a spirit-
lamp surrounded with wire-gauze. The

--- Sayfa 6 ---
30
may 2015
tube contains lycopodium or arcanson
powder which, blown upon the spirit-
lamp, inflames and passes through the
wire-gauze, making a hot flame. Torches
may be used with cotton saturated in
alcohol and powered with lycopodium
which rains out in flames when the
torch is shaken (p. 12).” The candidate
is to clearly feel the heat from the ap­
paratus but not to be burned. Upon the
last circumambulation, the candidate is
stopped by the Worshipful Master and
caused to make an alarm on the Worship­
ful Master’s shoulder just as before. The
candidate is then taught that through
the baptism of both water and fire, he is
symbolically free from all sin and vice. He
is then instructed that the flame teaches
all Masons to aspire for perfection and la­
bor with aspiration, ardor, and zeal (very
similar to freedom, fervency, and zeal in
the American York Rite ritual).
Ambelain’s Ritual and the Elements
Ambelain’s Freemasonry in Olden
Times contains two separate sets of ritu­
als, those of the Rite of Memphis and
the Rite of Mizraim. It is suggested that
any reader with an interest in various
Masonic craft rituals spend some time
in studying these unique and beautiful
systems. There are some interesting dif­
ferences between Ambelain’s ritual and
that of Pike. The first variation of Ambe­
lain’s ritual from that of Pike’s is the ab­
sence of mercury, sulfur, and salt from
the Chamber of Reflection. The order
of the trials is different in the rituals. In
Ambelain’s ritual, the order is water, air,
and fire (air, water, and fire in Pike’s).
The first journey includes the can­
didate being conducted around the
lodge with immense noise and harass­
ment. At the conclusion of the circum­
ambulation, at the Junior Warden, the
candidate’s hand is plunged into pure
water for purification.
The second journey being a test of air,
the candidate is led around the lodge in
silence, although obstacles are still pres­
ent. Stopping at the Senior Warden, the
Master of Ceremonies blows three times
on the candidate’s forehead.
The third and last journey is a trial
by fire. The candidate is once again con­
ducted around the lodge and stopped
by the Worshipful Master. The Master
of Ceremonies takes the right hand of
the candidate and passes it three times
through the flame of a lit candle.
These differences are only presented
to give the reader a little broader view of
how the elements are used in different
rituals. It is hoped that a reader with an
interest will seek out these rituals and
read them fully, for they all have a great
many gems of purpose to impart to the
Masonic student.
To be continued in next month’s issue
of the Knight Templar magazine.
Sir Knight David E. Stafford, is a mem­
ber of Nashville Commandery No.
1, Nashville, Tennessee. He is a Past
Master of Bethpage Lodge No. 521
and Secretary of Conlegium Ritus
Austeri No. 779. He may be reached
at david.stafford@sumnerschools.org.
1 For other rituals, reference Arturo de Hoyos’
Rituals of the Masonic Grand Lodge of the
Sun Bayreuth, Germany, Kessinger Publish­
ing, 1997 and Hoyos and S. Brent Morris’
Committed to the Flames: The History and
Rituals of a Secret Masonic Rite, A Lewis Pub­
lishing, 2007.

--- Sayfa 7 ---
21
knight templar
The Four Masonic Elements
Part 2 of 2 of a series
By
Sir Knight David E. Stafford
Editor’s Note
This article is continued from the May 2015 issue of the Knight Templar magazine.
The Elements in Literature
Throughout antiquity and the more
modern era, the four elements have been
included in literature, ranging in genre
from poetry and science fiction mov­
ies to academic works on conservation
and physics (Besson, 1997; Laurie, 1929;
Rupp, 2005; Sylvester, 1979). Of particu­
lar interest is that the majority of the pas­
sage concerning the four elements from
Sickel’s monitor and various other York
Rite renditions is lifted from the ancient
writings of Pliny the Elder. Practically
word for word, depending on translation,
the Sickel and McCoy monitors recite
Pliny’s discourse from Book II, Chapter 63
of Naturalis Historia (Laurie, 1929; Pliny,
1987). Naturalis Historia was completed
around the year 77 AD, and it is consid­
ered to be one of the largest works, con­
sisting of thirty-seven books, to have sur­
vived from the era of the Roman Empire
until today (Rupp). Pliny reads:
“It is the earth that, like a kind
mother, receives us at our birth
and sustains us when born. It
is this alone, of all the enemies
around us, that is never found
an enemy to man. The floods of
waters deluge him with rains, op­
press him with hail, and drown
him with inundations; the air
rushes on in storms, prepares
the tempest, or lights up the vol­
cano; but the earth, gentle and
indulgent, ever subservient to
the wants of man, spreads his
walks with flowers, and his table
with plenty; returns with inter­
est every good committed to her
care; and though she produces
the poison, she still furnishes
the antidote, though constant­
ly teased more to furnish the
luxuries of man than his neces­
sities, yet even to the last, she
continues her kind indulgence,
and when life is over, she piously
hides his remains in her bosom.”
Joshua Sylvester (1979) in the robust
work The Divine Weeks and Works, first
published in 1621, presents a stanza that
is very reminiscent of Pliny the Elder’s
writing. All four elements are referred
to; however, it is the earth that is most
revered. Pay particular attention to the
commonality of line 467.
“459: The Earth receives man
when he first is born:
460: Th’Earth nurses him; and
when he is forlorn
461: Of th’other Elements, and
Nature loaths-him,
462: Th’Earth in her bosom
with kind burial

cloaths-him.

--- Sayfa 8 ---
22
june 2015
463: Oft hath the Aire with
Tempests set-vpon-vs,
464: Oft hath the Water with
her Floods vndon-vs,
465: Oft hath the Fire
(th’vpper as well as ours)
466: With wofull flames
consum’d our Towns
and Towrs:
467: Onely the Earth, of all
the Elements,
468: Vnto Mankind is kind
without offence:
469: Onely the Earth did neuer
iot displace
470: From the first seat
assign’d it by thy grace.”
In recent literature, the four ele­
ments have received considerable atten­
tion for their prominent inclusion in Dan
Brown’s (2000) work, Angels and De­
mons. The book fictionally connects the
four classical elements with the practice
of an Illuminati conspiracy and an assas­
sin. On page 360, Brown depicts what
he refers to as The Illumi­
nati Diamond, an artistic
creation forming the words
Earth, Air, Fire, and Water
into a square figure. The
novel repeatedly mentions
political figures’ connec­
tions to Freemasonry and
Freemasonry’s
supposed
and illusionary connection
with symbols such as the
eye within a triangle and
the Great Seal of the Unit­
ed States. In the fictional novel, bodies
are found branded with an anagram of
one of the four elements somewhere on
their person.
There are numerous other references
in literature that compare favorably to
the subject at hand; however, it would
be beyond the scope of the current fo­
cus to expound more fully upon them.
Let it be made very clear that the simi­
larity of our modern ritual to these older
works does not in any way point to the
age of the fraternity; yet, it does indicate
that the ideas and thoughts propagated
within the Lodge are linked to those of a
more ancient time.
The History of the Four Elements
It would now be prudent to briefly
examine the development of the four
elements. Throughout all ages and even
today, man sought to identify the prima
materia, prime matter, or primary ma­
terial of all substances (Vorhand-Ariel,
1998). The debate over the fundamental
building blocks of all material is as old
as civilization itself. It was the group of
thinkers belonging to the school of nat­
ural philosophers in the sixth century
BC who first begun to seri­
ously debate the elements
(Rupp, 2005). Thales is ac­
credited with being the first
to develop a theory of ele­
ments. He proclaimed that
water was the most basic
of all elements and that all
things were made of some
variation of this base mate­
rial. The debate continued
for centuries. Anaximander,
Thales’s student, proclaimed
that air was the basic unit of matter. Her­
aclitus proclaimed the simplest element
must be fire, and Xenophanes asserted
that all things were made of the funda­
mental element of earth (Rupp).

--- Sayfa 9 ---
23
knight templar
It was Empedocles (494-435 BC) who
is accredited with combining the theo­
ries of his predecessors and developing
a four-prong theory of the elements, al­
though Buddha’s teachings of the four
elements pre-date Empedocles’. In Thet­
rasomia or Doctrine of the Four Elements,
Empedocles postulated that all things
were made up of various combinations
of earth, air, fire, and water. According
to Rupp (2005), the development of a
set of basic elements was not exclusive
to Greece, the cradle of western thought.
Japanese and Hindu traditions taught a
five element belief. Both taught the four
classical elements and a fifth element
akasha, aether, or the void which explains
the unseen spiritual influences of life and
nature. Within the Greek philosophy, the
presence of a fifth element, ether, was
regularly discussed and debated. Aristot­
le added a fifth element he called “aether”
later termed “quintessence.” The peoples
of India developed a three element the­
ory and those of China a five element
theory. The Indian theory contained fire,
water, and earth to which the Chinese
added wood and metal. The Indians later
expanded the theory to include air.
The Greek thought of the four classi­
cal elements has been greatly confused
in modern time. When the Greeks de­
bated and discussed the four elements,
they did not have a physical substance in
mind. When the Greeks discussed earth,
they did not necessarily intend for it to
be taken as soil; although, it would often
be represented as such. The four clas­
sical elements more readily referenced
physical states of being. The following
excerpt clearly explains:
“For Aristotle, matter (hyle),
inert and shapeless by itself,
gained its shape and properties
by the action of form (morphe)
which could be expressed by
such factors as hot, cold, dry
and humid, giving in turn, by
their combination, four ele­
ments: earth (cold and dry),
water (cold and humid), air (hot
and humid), and fire (hot and
dry). The elements were eter­
nal and indestructible and by
synthesis (chemical reaction),
mixis (mechanical mixing), or
krasis (dissolution) gave birth
to different substances whose
properties depended solely on
the contents of each element.”2

During the Middle Ages, Western
thought was stifled and oppressed. Al­
chemy and the study of the four ele­
ments was overcome in the Western
world by superstition and blind faith in
the church; however, in the East, the
same period was a time of great growth
in science, literature, philosophy, and
overall intellectual achievement. Al­
chemy “developed in close relation with
metallurgy and medicine” within the
Islamic Arabian-Persian world (Tramer,

--- Sayfa 10 ---
24
june 2015
Voltz, Lahmani, & Szczepinska-Tramer,
2007, p. S6). It was during this time that
the Arab scholar Abu Musa Jabir ibn
Hayyan, more readily known as Gerber
(720-780 AD), lived and worked (Tramer,
Voltz, Lahmani, & Szczepinska-Tramer).
Gerber was profoundly interested in al­
chemy, and he believed that all metals
were made up of a combination of sulfur
and mercury. Gerber’s sulfur-mercury
theory was expanded by Al-Razi (850-
940 AD), a Persian physician, to include
salt (Rupp, 2005).
In the late Middle Ages (12-14th cen­
turies), alchemy was studied by such
eminent personalities as Albertus Mag­
nus – Albert von Bollstadt (1193-1280),
professor of philosophy and theology
at the Universities of Cologne and Paris
and Arnaldus de Villanova (1235-1313),
rector of Montpellier University” (Tra­
mer, Voltz, Lahmani, & Szczepinska-
Tramer, 2007, p. S6). In the 16th Century,
the Greek theory of elements and the
Arabian three elements were combined.
Paracelsus (Phillip von Hohenheim,
1493-1541) determined that, though the
Greek four were indeed the fundamen­
tal components of all matter; earth, air,
fire, and water in turn were composed
of the three Arabic “principles;” mercury,
sulfur, and salt (Rupp, p. 23).
The classical elements composed of
either four or five elements dominated
philosophic, scientific, esoteric, and
mathematical thought from Empedocles
through Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Gerber,
and Paracelsus, and their dominance be­
gan to weaken in the middle of the 17th
Century with the scientific research of
Robert Boyle. Boyle’s (2008) The Scepti­
cal Chymist signaled the end of the four
elements’ dominance in science. For the
next one hundred years, the dominance
of alchemy and the four elements over
Western society waned. The death of
alchemy has been symbolically repre­
sented by Antoine Lavoisher who listed
thirty-three elements classified as gases,
metals, non-metals, or earths in his 1789
dissertation entitled Elementary Trea­
tise on Chemistry (Donovan, 1996; Rupp,
2005). From this point, the number of
identified elements increased at a steady
if not amazing rate (Rupp). It is notewor­
thy to mention, however, that even today,
the classical elements and alchemy are
used in astrology, esoteric thought, and
several other occult philosophies.
It was not uncommon for cultures to
connect their belief of the elements with
other basic knowledge such as colors,
seasons, symbols, directions, religious
iconography, virtues, or planets, attrib­
uting one of each to a specific element.
The Greeks were no different from their
global companions. The Pythagoreans,
those philosophers who followed the
teaching of Pythagoras, had a natural
affection for numbers, and to them, the
world of nature and reality seemed to di­
vide itself nicely into units of four. They
observed four elements, “four prime
faculties, four societies, four seasons,
four ages of man, and four parts of living
things” (Rupp, p. 12). It was the Pythago­
reans who are credited with developing
four of the seven liberal arts and sciences,
the quadrivium; arithmetic, geometry,
astronomy, and music (Stahl, Johnson, &
Burge, 1991). Hippocrates took this fasci­
nation with four and connected the four
elements to his four essential fluids of
the human body (yellow bile, black bile,
blood, and phlegm).
Ginsburgh (1995) asserted that the
Hebrew people saw a correspondence
between the four classical elements

--- Sayfa 11 ---
25
knight templar
and the letters of
the
Tetragramma­
ton. In Ginsburgh’s
view, water corre­
lates with Yod, fire
with Heh, air with
Vav, and earth with
the final Heh. Bog­
dan (2007), Castells
(2005), and Ozaniec
(2005) concur that
there is a correlation
between the name
of God and the four
classical
elements.
According to some
writers, the four clas­
sical elements when
corresponded
with
the Tetragrammaton
may be further asso­
ciated with the four
senses, four evange­
lists, four angels rul­
ing over the corners
of the world, and the
four triplicities (Cas­
tells (2005); Gold­
stein, 1990; Labriola
& Simmonds, 2000;
Ozaniec). “A triplic­
ity is a set of three
zodiacal signs: there
are four triplicities in
all, each of which is
associated with one
of the four elements” (Goldstein, p. 1).
Bogdan stresses that the illustration of
this connection is displayed more fully or
clearly in the rituals of the Order of the
Golden Dawn than they are within Free­
masonry. Kabalistic philosophy is deeply
rooted in the study of the Tetragramma­
ton. The Tetragrammaton and Kabalistic
philosophy are repeatedly seen within
the degrees of the Scottish Rite, includ­
ing the craft degrees (Hutchens, 1995a;
Hutchens, 1995b).
Within the American York Rite’s
“higher” degrees is a very clear example
of how units of four were associated
with each other. In the Royal Arch De­
gree, the candidate is caused to pass

--- Sayfa 12 ---
26
june 2015
through four veils, each representing
one of the principal tribes of Israel. The
first veil represents the tribe of Dan and
is represented by a blue banner bear­
ing the representation of an eagle. The
second veil represents the tribe of Rue­
ben and is represented by a banner of
purple bearing the representation of a
man. The third veil represents the tribe
of Ephraim and is represented by a scar­
let banner bearing the representation
of an ox. The fourth veil represents the
tribe of Judah and is represented by a
banner of white bearing the represen­
tation of a lion. According to Royal Arch
and early Christian tradition, each of
the four veils is said to represent one of
the four Christian Gospels of John, Mat­
thew, Luke, and Mark, respectively. The
representations of the eagle, man, ox,
and lion are further described as cor­
responding to four astrological symbols
of the Zodiac: Scorpio, Aquarius, Taurus,
and Leo, respectively.
In Morals and Dogma, Albert Pike
(1956) connects even more units of four
with the four representations on the
Royal Arch’s banners while discussing
the twenty-eighth degree of the Scot­
tish Rite. On page 791, Pike presents an
illustration connecting the eagle with az­
oth and air; the man with mercury and
water; the ox with salt and the earth;
and the lion with sulfur and fire. Pike
continues to explain how the Zohar fur­
ther connects each illustration on the
banners with an angel: the lion with
Michael; the ox with Gabriel; the eagle
with Uriel; and the man with Raphael.
Alchemy
The four classical elements are inti­
mately related to the ancient science of
alchemy. The discipline, not unlike Free­
masonry, is divided into two denomina­
tions, material and spiritual or operative
and speculative (Tramer, Voltz, Lahmani,
& Szczepinska-Tramer, 2007). Alchemy
was very en-vogue with the thinkers of
the Renaissance (14th-17th centuries) but
fell out of popularity with the rise of the
“rational and critical philosophy of the
enlightenment” mind (Tramer, Voltz, La­
hmani, & Szczepinska-Tramer, p. S6). It is
not to be assumed however that alche­
my instantaneously disappeared from
the social, political, and scientific scenes.
Whereas the material practice of
alchemy sought to explain and manip­
ulate the physical world, the spiritual
alchemist sought to use the terminol­
ogy, science, and ideas of the material
to explain the psychological, spiritual,
and sociological existence of man. Al­
chemy was interested in transmuting
one thing into another. Of course the
most widely known idea of alchemy is
the search for a technique of convert­
ing base metals into silver or gold; how­
ever, within the spiritual denomination
of alchemy there was a search to return
man to a pure oneness with the Divine
Creator. Although the once prominent
theories of alchemy lost position in the
open scientific world view, its spiritual
half found refuge in the esoteric beliefs
of organizations such as Freemasonry
and the Rosicrucian movement. The
traditional quest within alchemy was
transmutation or change into another
substance or form (Von Franz, 1980).
This quest in relationship to the four
elements can still be found within The
Elemental Trials of Freemasonry.
Before going farther, it would be
advantageous to explore what connec­
tions the framers of the Craft had with

--- Sayfa 13 ---
27
knight templar
alchemy and its practice. The begin­
nings of Freemasonry are shrouded in
mystery. At what point the operative
Lodges transformed into an organization
accepting men of stature and prestige
is blurred; however, it is generally ac­
cepted that Elias Ashmole, Robert Mo­
ray, and Christopher Wren were among
the first to transcend the barriers and
become speculative or accepted Ma­
sons (Beresiner, 2004; Koltko-Rivera,
2007; MacNulty, 1998). It is also note­
worthy that all three of these men were
founding members of the Royal Soci­
ety. It is possible that more members
of the Royal Society were Freemasons;
however, even of the three afore men­
tioned, Wren and Moray are occasion­
ally questioned as Freemasons. It is not
suggested that the Royal Society has any
connection in origin to Freemasonry;
however, it is implied that both organi­
zations developed during the transition
from the Renaissance to the Enlighten­
ment thought. It is also suggested that
the men in both organizations probably
shared similar interests, two of which
were alchemy and the rapidly develop­
ing science of chemistry.
Elias Ashmole was born on the 23rd
of May 1617 at Lichfield, Staffordshire
England (Beresiner, 2004). Ashmole
was made a Freemason in 1646 within
the lodge at Warrington (Koltko-Rive­
ra, 2007). From an early age, Ashmole
found a fond interest in esoteric teach­
ings. He had a passion for botany, as­
tronomy, and alchemy. He became fast
friends with William Backhouse, a noted
alchemist, and this relationship was so
strong that, according to Koltko-Rivera,
Ashmole became the alchemical suc­
cessor to Backhouse. Ashmole also had
an interest in Rosicrucianism; however,
there seems to be no record of him ever
being a participant in Rosicrucian activi­
ties. Ashmole published several works
with esoteric and alchemic connotations
including Fasciculus Chemicus, Theat­
rum Chemicum Brittannicum, and The
Way of Bliss (Beresiner; Koltko-Rivera;
MacNulty, 1998).
Robert Moray was born March 6,
1609. He was initiated into Masonry in
1641 at the Lodge in Edinburgh. Mo­
Elias Ashmole
Robert Moray

--- Sayfa 14 ---
28
june 2015
ray was a lover of hermetic philosophy
and alchemy, and he was the patron
of Thomas Vaughn, an active alchemist
(MacNulty, 1998; McGregor, 2005).
Christopher Wren was born October
20, 1632 (McGregor, 2005). It is believed
that Wren was initiated into Freema­
sonry in May of 1691 as evidenced by
John Aubray’s Naturell Historie of Wilt­
shire. There is little to no firm evidence
however to substantiate the assertion
that Wren was definitely a Freemason.
His interests in intellectual endeavors,
however, are unquestionable. Wren
was raised in an Anglican family that
leaned towards the Royalist agenda dur­
ing the civil unrest in England. He was
educated at an early age by his father
and Reverend William Shepherd. He at­
tended Westminster School for several
years. Following a change in prosperity,
the Wrens resided with William Holder.
It was here that Wren was exposed to
William Scarburgh, a physician. Scar­
burgh was a member of a small group of
thinkers who met weekly to discuss such
topics as alchemy, physics, astronomy,
statics, and the like. Wren was allowed
to attend many of these meetings. Chris­
topher Wren was among the first twelve
founding members of the Royal Society
and served as president for several years
(McGregor, 2005).
The Elemental Trials as
Illustrations of Transmutation
“According to Aristotle, the prima ma­
terial combines with the four qualities
of coldness, dryness, heat, and mois­
ture to develop into the four elements.
He believed that manipulating these
qualities would change their elemental
composition, resulting in transmutation”
(Vorhand-Ariel, 1998, p. 110). Within al­
chemy, it was believed that the elements
could be manipulated in order to produce
a mystical substance or the philosopher’s
stone. This belief in manipulating what
was found in nature into a supernatural
substance, transmutation, transposed it­
self into the philosophy of Rosicrucianism
and Freemasonry. Nowhere within all of
Freemasonry is this more clearly evident
than in the elemental trials.
Earth
Within the American York Rite, it is
taught that “our Mother Earth alone, of
all the elements, has never proved un­
friendly to man.” The ritual further ad­
monishes us that “from the earth we
came, and to it we must shortly return.”
The element of earth represents man’s
alpha and omega, his beginning and his
end. Man’s body was molded together
with the dust of the earth and water. His
mortal temple was an earthen clay ves­
sel into which God breathed air through
his nostrils to transmute him into a liv­
ing soul. The first living man was Adam
who is recognized within Masonic tradi­
tion and myth as being the first Freema­
son. The name Adam comes from ada­
mah, meaning earth or ground (Mackey,
1927; Vorhand-Ariel, 1998). It may be of
interest to mention here that according
to Jewish law, it is unlawful for a corpse
to be cremated. One explanation for this
edict is that a body that is returned to
the earth “is capable of bringing forth
new life;” whereas, a body that is turned
to ash through burning by fire repre­
sents complete destruction (Kaplan,
1990, p. 149). The Jewish religion and
Freemasonry both teach that man is an
eternal being that awaits resurrection

--- Sayfa 15 ---
29
knight templar
after death. It is therefore proper that
man’s body be laid under the solemn
clods of clay as a symbol of his awaiting
resurrection and return to the endless
cycle of life.
It is appropriate that the Masonic
rituals of elemental trials begin with the
candidate being placed deep within the
earth. It may be interpreted as a symbol
of his beginnings. When the profane
candidate leaves the Chamber of Reflec­
tion, he is born anew and prepared to
receive instruction as a tabula rasa or
blank slate (Zeldis, 2008).
Air
The word wind is intimately related
to the word spirit. It has already been
mentioned that it was breath that made
man a living soul. God breathed air into
man’s nostrils to make him a free moral
agent, made in the likeness of the God­
head, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. The
Arabic word “ruch” and the Hebrew
word “ruach” are words meaning both
soul and wind (Kaplan, 1990; Vorhand-
Ariel, 1998). Jung (1989) asserted that it
was only natural for man to associate air
with the soul. For life begins with a ba­
by’s first gasp for breath and ends with a
man’s last struggle to breathe. When a
man breathes his last breath and the air
leaves his body, his soul vacates the car­
nal clay vessel and transmutes to eternal
reward or damnation.
Water
The second journey within Pike’s
ritual is the trial by water. In Western,
alchemist, and Jewish thought, water
has a deep rooted connection with cre­
ation, birth, and renewal (Rupp, 2005;
Vorhand-Ariel, 1998). The first two ele­
ments mentioned within the Christian
and Jewish Bible are earth and water. In
modern science, it is taught that life on
earth began within the primordial ooze
of the ancient oceans. The process of a
mother delivering a baby is signaled by
the breaking of her water. Through a
study of ancient civilizations, it is found
that the earliest societies developed on
the banks of the fertile rivers of life; the
Tigris, the Euphrates, the Nile, the Indus,
and the Yellow Rivers; thus it might be
suggested that water has always been a
source of life and fertility to the human
race (Kaplan, 1990; Vorhand-Ariel, 1998).
Water has played a vital part in the
rituals of the world’s major religions.
Although much of the Christian world
views baptism and ceremonial immer­
sion as a rite isolated within their prac­
tice, mikvah is a ritual bath practiced in
Judaism (Vorhand-Ariel). The Holy Scrip­
tures of the Jews require followers to
participate in a ceremonial immersion
in order to purify themselves. Causes
for such a requirement are varied but
include women after childbirth or men­
strual cycles, converts to Judaism, and
the Cohen Gadol or High Priest before
performing a ceremony representing
the people (Vorhand-Ariel). Within the
Muslim religion, practitioners are re­
quired to go through purification by
water before prayer. It is thereby a safe
assertion that the washing of the body
in water is an ancient symbol of the pu­
rification of the immortal soul and the
carnal vessel. Its use within the Craft is
no different. The alchemist used water
as a sign of transmutation and purifica­
tion. Before setting to work, the alche­
mist prepared his tools and vessels by
immersing and washing them in a bath

--- Sayfa 16 ---
30
june 2015
of water (Vorhand-Ariel). Perhaps it is
only fitting for the first degree of Free­
masonry to purify and prepare a candi­
date for the ancient mysteries within a
symbolic water baptism.
Fire
To the ancient Hebrews and to alche­
mists, fire was the most active of the ele­
ments. It was fire that served as a cata­
lyst. According to Vorhand-Ariel (1998),
“Heraclitus regarded fire as an agent of
transmutation and as a symbol of re­
newal, representing light, spirit, the sun,
radiance, and purification” (p. 111). The
alchemists used fire as well as water as
a source of purifying their tools. The al­
chemist and metallurgist both used fire
to refine metals and make them pure.
It separates the base from the precious
metal (Tramer, Volts, Lahmani, & Szcze­
pinska-Tramer, 2007). Fire was used by
them to transform a crude convoluted
mixture into a separated collection of
base and precious metals. “The Zohar
says that the flaming sword (referred
in Genesis as being placed east of the
Garden of Eden) symbolizes the trials
with which God overwhelms man that
he may be purified and restored to the
way of goodness” (Vorhand-Ariel, 1998,
p. 112). It might be mentioned here that
the tiler’s sword was traditionally wavy
in shape to represent the sword placed
in the Garden of Eden (Lawrence, 1999;
Mackey, 1927). As afore mentioned, fire
is a symbol of renewal and has been
since time immemorial. Perhaps one of
the best images of this is the traditional
phoenix. The phoenix is a mythical bird
that after an extensive life combusts into
flames and is reborn from its own ashes.
In Thus Spake Zarathustra, Nietzsche
(2003) wrote, “You must be willing to
burn in your own flame: how could
you become new unless you had first
become ashes?” (p. 49). The ancients
implemented a trial by fire perhaps simi­
lar to Pike’s variation of the Entered Ap­
prentice degree. Perhaps it is a reminder
to the neophyte that he must set aside
or destroy his old image of life and self
to receive the teachings of Freemasonry
and become a new and better creature.
Conclusion
At the onset of this work, the ques­
tion was raised concerning the inclusion
of the classical four elements within the
Entered Apprentice Degree in various
ritual variations. The examination of
this topic has transcended time, passing
through the studies of religion, philoso­
phy, and history. In the study of the ele­
ments, the topic of alchemy repeatedly
revealed itself. It has been illustrated
how the discipline of alchemy dominat­
ed the religious, political, scientific, and
social aspects of human existence. Tra­
mer et al. said of alchemy, “alchemy, an
integral part of the medieval world-view,
was doomed to death by the spirit of en­
lightenment well before its official death
which coincided with the appearance of
the modern chemistry of Lavoister and
Dalton. [Now] Only its phantom is still
alive” (p. S5). It is most probable that a
very prominent place where alchemy is
still shining is within Freemasonry. The
early speculative Freemasons came
from the ages of the Renaissance and
the Enlightenment. It is without ques­
tion that these patriarchs of the Craft
were knowledgeable in both denomi­
nations of alchemy and their relation­
ship with the four classical elements. It

--- Sayfa 17 ---
31
knight templar
is proposed, and hopefully supported
that sporadic mentioning of the four el­
ements within the York Rite system and
the blatant use of the elements within
the rites of continental Europe are direct
decendents from the reign of alchemy
in pre-Enlightenment Europe. The early
framers of the Craft during the Renais­
sance probably drafted the rituals to in­
clude the philosophies of spiritual alche­
my that aligned with the spiritual needs
and goals of the fledgling organization of
Speculative Freemasonry.
Elements
Water
Fire
Earth
Wind/Air
Zodiac
Aquarius
Leo
Taurus
Scorpio
Gospels
Matthew
Mark
Luke
John
Daniel’s Vision
Man
Lion
Ox/Bull
Eagle
Principal Tribes
Reuben
Judah
Ephraim
Dan
Angels
Raphael
Michael
Gabriel
Uriel
Alchemy
Mercury
Sulfur
Salt
Azoth
Greek Gods
Neptune
Vulcan
Juno
Jupiter
Hippocrates’
Four Humours
Phlegm
Yellow Bile
Black Bile
Blood
Platonic Shapes
Icosahedron
Tetrahedron
Cube
Octahedron
Colors (Pike)
White
Red
Black
Blue
(Barbour, 1946; Pike, 1956; Rupp, 2005; Wells, 1947)
Sir Knight David E. Stafford, is a mem­
ber of Nashville Commandery No.
1, Nashville, Tennessee. He is a Past
Master of Bethpage Lodge No. 521
and Secretary of Conlegium Ritus
Austeri No. 779. He may be reached at
david.stafford@sumnerschools.org.
References
Ambelain, R. (2006). Freemasonry in Olden Times: Ceremonies and Rituals from
the Rites of Mizraim and Memphis. Adventures in Spirit Series/Robert Laffont,
Translated by Piers A. Vaughan.
Barbour, P. P. (1946). The four elements, The Philalethes, 1(3).
Beresiner, Y. (October 2004), “Elias Ashmole: Masonic icon”, MQ Magazine (11): 6–11
Besson, L. (1997). The Fifth Element. Columbia Pictures.
Bogdan, H. (2007). Western Esotericism and Rituals of Initiation. New York, NY:
SUNY Press.
Boyle, R. (2008). The Sceptical Chymist. New York: BiblioLife.
Brown, D. (2000). Angels and Demons. New York: Pocket Books.

--- Sayfa 18 ---
32
june 2015
Carman, E. R. (1952). Monitor of the Work, Lectures and Ceremonies of Ancient
Craft Masonry in the Jurisdiction of the Grand Lodge of Free and accepted Ma­
sons of the state of New York. New York, NY.
Castells, F. (2005). Arithmetic of Freemasonry. Canada: Templar Books.
Donovan, A. (1996). Antoine Lavoisier: Science, Administration and Revolution,
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Ginsburgh, Y. (1995). The Alef-beit. Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson Inc.
Goldstein , B., R. Bernard, D. Pingree (1990). Levi Ben Gerson’s Prognostication for the
Conjunction Of 1345. Transactions, 80(6) The American Philosophical Society
Huckaby, G. C. (1927). Louisiana Masonic Monitor. Grand Lodge of Louisiana: Louisville, KY.
Hutchens, R. R. (1995a). A Bridge to Light. The Supreme Council 33°, AASR, S.J..
Hutchens, R. R. (1995b). Pillars of Wisdom. The Supreme Council 33°, AASR, S.J..
Jung, C. G. (1989). The Collected Works of C. G. Jung (Vol. 14). Princeton, NJ: Princ­
eton University Press.
Kaplan, A. (1990). Innerspace: Introduction to Kabbalah, Meditation, and
Prophecy. Moznaim.
Koltko-Rivera, M. E. (2007). “The transmission of esoteric knowledge and the
origins of modern Freemasonry: Was Macky right?”. Heredom, Volume 15.
Washington, D.C.: The Scottish Rite Research Society.
Labriola, A. C. & Simmonds, J. D. (2000). Milton Studies. University of Pittsburg
Press: Pittsburgh, PA.
Laurie, A. (1929). Fertilizers for Greenhouse and Garden Crops. The A. T. DeLa Mare
Company: New York, NY.
Lawrence, J. T. (1999). Perfect Ashlar and Other Masonic Symbols. Kessinger Publishing.
Mackey, A. G. (1927). Encyclopedia of Freemasonry and its Kindred Sciences. Phila­
delphia, PA: McClures Publishing Company.
MacNulty, W. K. (1998). “Kabbalah and Freemasonry”, Heredom, Volume 7. Wash­
ington, D.C.: The Scottish Rite Research Society.
McCoy, R. (1855). The Masonic Manual. J. W. Leonard, Harvard University.
McGregor, M. I. (2005). The Life and Times of Sir Christopher Wren. (Retrieved from
http://www.freemasons-freemasonry.com/christopher_wren_freemasonry.html).
Missouri (1952). Masonic Manual of Missouri. Grand Lodge, A.F. & A.M. of Missouri: USA.
Nietzsche, F. (2003). Thus Spake Zarathustra: A Book for All and None. New York:
Algora Publishing.
Ozaniec, N. (2005). The Kabbalah Experience: The Practicel Guide to Kabalistic Wis­
dom. Sterling Publishing Company: UK.
Pike, A. (1956). Morals and Dogma of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of
Freemasonry. Richmond, VA: D. H. Jenkins, Inc..
Pike, A. (1993). Porch and the Middle Chamber: Book of the Lodge. Kessinger Publishing.
Pike, A. (1996). Esoteric Work of the 1st through the 3rd Degree. According to the
Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite. Kessinger Publishing.
Pike, A. & W. L. Cummings (2001). The spurious rites of Memphis and Misraim,
Heredom, Volume 9. Washington, D.C.: The Scottish Rite Research Society.
Pirtle, H. (1990). Kentucky Monitor. Grand Lodge of Kentucky, F&AM.

--- Sayfa 19 ---
33
knight templar
Foreign aid might be defined as a
transfer of money from poor people
in rich countries to rich people in
poor countries.

-- Douglas Case
Giving money and power to govern­
ment is like giving whiskey and car
keys to teenage boys.
Pliny the Elder (1987). Naturalis Historia. Teubner, New York, NY.
Rupp, R. (2005). Four Elements: Water, Air, Fire, Earth. Profile Books, New York, NY.
Sickel, D. E. (1868). The General Ahiman Rezon and Freemason’s Guide. New York:
Masonic Publishing and Manufacturing Company.
Stahl, W. H., Johnson, R., & Burge, E. L. (1991). Martianus Capella and the Seven
Liberal Arts. Volume I: The Quadrivium of Martinanus Capella. New York: Co­
lumbia University Press.
Stevens, A. (1899). The Cyclopedia of Fraternities. Hamilton, New York.
Sylvester, J. (1979). The Divine Weeks and Works. Oxford University Press.
Taylor, L. R. (1975). Indiana Monitor and Freemason’s Guide. Most Worshipful
Grand Lodge of Free and Accepted Masons of the State of Indiana.
Tennessee. (2003). Tennessee Craftsman or Masonic Textbook, 25th Edition. Most
Worshipful Grand Lodge of the State of Tennessee: Nashville, TN.
Tramer, A., Voltz, R., Lahmani, F., Szczepinska-Tramer, J. (2007). What is (was) Al­
checmy?, Acta Physica Polonica A, 112(Suppl.), S5-S18
Von Franz, M. (1980). Alchemy: An Introduction to the Symbolism and the Psychol­
ogy. Toronto: Inner City Books.
Vorhand-Ariel, S. (1998). Alchemy and Jewish Mysticism: A Psychological Explo­
ration of their Symbolism, Art, and Practices. (Doctoral Dissertation, UMI
#3008502) Pacifica Graduate Institute.
Wells, L. E. (1947). The elements, The Philalethes.
Zeldis, L. (2008). The Initiation in the Ancient Accepted Scottish Rite. The Journal of
the Masonic Society, 1.
2 Tramer, A., Voltz, R., Lahmani, F., Szczepinska-Tramer, J. (2007). What is (was) Alchecmy?,
Acta Physica Polonica A, 112(Suppl.), S5-S18.
If you think health care is expensive
now, wait until you see what it costs
when it’s free!

-- P. J. O’Rourke
Democracy must be something more
than two wolves and a sheep voting on
what to have for dinner.

--James Bovard
Subscriptions to the Knight Templar magazine are available from the
Grand Encampment office at a rate of $15.00 per year. Individual issues
in quantities of less than 10 can be obtained for $1.50 each from the of­
fice of the managing editor if available. Inquire via e-mail to the manag­
ing editor for quantities in excess of 10. Some past issues are archived on
our web site.  http://www.knightstemplar.org.