--- Sayfa 1 ---
Freemasonry, Shriners, Eastern Star, Illuminati, Bilderbergers and others
How many times have you heard people say when it comes to religion, "they don't know and they don't
care?" or that they "don't respect people who claim to have the truth about religion"? 2 Peter 3:5 says
people will be willingly ignorant, and we are seeing that at an alarming rate these days. It is almost as
though people really don't want to know the truth about anything. Deut. 11:24 "as children of God,
everywhere we go is ours". 2 Chron. 7:14 "If my people humble themselves..." On the U2 album "POP"
in the lyrics of "Last Night on Earth", Bono writes, "The less you know the more you believe" and then
again on the album "Achtung Baby" in the song "Even Better Than the Real Thing" he writes, "well my
heart is where it's always been, my head is somewhere in between". This sadly is the exact state of our
world as we hear comments like, "you can't trust the Bible" and "we're not sure if God really exists".
For those who have any faith in the Bible or in God, their faith is usually damaged or destroyed
through popular opinion. Well truth is not nor has it ever been determined by popular opinion. Hosea 4:6
says, "people are destroyed for lack of knowledge: because thou hast rejected knowledge, I will also reject
thee...". Our purpose here is to try to educate individuals on Masonry and many of its affiliate
organizations so that no one will get trapped into their organizations unaware of what they are doing. 2
Peter 1:20 and 2:1-2 state that, "there were false prophets also among the people, even as there shall be
false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that
bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction. And many shall follow their pernicious ways;
by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of'. Isa 5:20, "Woe unto them that call evil good,
and good evil; that put darkness for light, and light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for
bitter"! That is where we are today, when we are told things like God's law is evil while abortion is good!
In Matt. 24:3 the disciples asked Jesus what would be the sign of the end times. He responded that you
should not be deceived... Matt. 7:15 says you will know the false prophets by their fruit. The fruit in the
Bible refers to different things at different times, but most often it refers to the fruit of the spirit which
means souls being saved and going to heaven. In the end times there will be a great falling away from
the gospel (2Thes. 2:3); do not be deceived by another gospel for even Satan disguises himself as an
angel of light (2 Con 11:14). Any spirit who denies that Jesus is God incarnate Who has come in the flesh
is from the antichrist.
We are called to be the salt of the earth (Matt. 5:13). Since salt was used back then to preserve food, the
implication here is that we are to preserve God's word and teachings. However in the last days 1 Tim. 4:1
says, that many will depart from the faith and we are seeing that at an unbelievable rate today.
Jude 3 tells us to contend earnestly for the faith, while 1 Thes. Says to "test all things and every spirit' to
see if they are declaring the truth. The Bible tells us to beware of the Scribes and Pharisees (Matt. 5:20, 7:29,
16:21, 23:14,15,23,25,27,29, Luke 11:44). The Scribes were Jews who wrote, taught and interpreted the
scriptures. They believed themselves to have a higher intellect which enabled them to tell "what the scriptures
meant, instead of what they said". They believed that they had a higher sanctification because of their
adherence to the traditions and the law. Jesus not only called them hypocrites but He chose none of them to
be his disciples. Jesus only picked out laymen who had not been corrupted by the Scribe's and the
Pharisee's teachings. Scribes and Pharisees live among us today; we call them theologians. Not all
theologians are bad, however we must be able to discern their teachings to see if what they are saying is
correct (Matt. 16:3, Heb. 5:14). If they preach a different gospel other than the one we have come to know
then they are not from God. Anyone who takes what the Bible says and reinterprets it to say something
else is a Scribe or Pharisee and heretic. In starting, let us state that of all the Masons less than 1 percent
of them have any real idea about what they are involved in. One Freemasonry web site states that they
donate over 1.25 million dollars daily to worthy causes so the vast majority of Masons honestly believe
that they are involved in a truly charitable organization. In one of Freemasonry's authorized web-sites

--- Sayfa 2 ---
(freemasonry.net) you can find the following quotations; "Freemasonry is not a religion, nor is it a
substitute for religion", "Freemasonry...has no theological doctrine", "Freemasonry...does not claim to
lead to salvation by works...", "Freemasonry is not a secret society...its ceremonies are private...In
ordinary conversation there is very little about Freemasonry which may not be discussed...copies of the
constitutions and rules can be obtained from Freemason's Hall by interested members of the public".
Since they say we can discuss Freemasonry openly, that is what we're going to do.
There are currently over 6,000,000 Masons worldwide (about 200,000 in Canada and about 4,000,000 in
the United States). They have about 33,000 lodges worldwide with about 1600 in Canada and 15,300 in
the United States. The original beginnings of Freemasonry started around the 1500's. The Mason will tell
you that they are not a religion, just a brotherhood more than an organization. Their symbol of the square
and compass with the "G" inside is said to represent the crafts of Freemasonry with God in the centre!
Is this true? This organization is one whose members are the regular working class predominantly and this
legacy goes back farther than anyone can remember where workers of old, got together to preserve their
abilities. In olden times there were no unions to protect the average worker so the workers themselves
started up lodges whose members were the craftsmen and they could maintain their abilities without fear
of outsiders learning their skills and taking over their jobs at a lower wage. These lodges were set up with
oaths of secrecy, so that these craft Masons could exist in comfort and without fear of fellow members
telling their secrets to outsiders. However, over the centuries this genuine regard began to be infiltrated by
something more than just craftsmen. In the late 17th and early 18'h centuries there was a growing
discontent among many people with respect to the church leaders, the politicians and the leading
monarchies of the world, not unlike today. Most everyone was exceedingly discontent with the leadership
of these positions because of the unending corruption in all those arenas. Some individuals got together
because they wanted to start a "revolution" as it were, with the intentions of reforming the world's
religions and politics while replacing the world's monarchies with themselves (hidden of course). However, for
one to even hint at this would be called treason and the individual would almost immediately lose their head
(literally). They determined to go into hiding and work out their plan through whatever medium they could find.
They selected the already existing Masonic lodges in which to operate out of. The original Masons (called
craft-masons) allowed these new members to enter, but referred to them as speculative-masons because in general,
they didn't know the difference between a compass and a square. But the union was a good one because each got what
they wanted. The craft-masons got more help (in terms of physical, mental and monetarily), while the speculative-
masons infiltrated an already existing organization in which they could promote their "New World Order".
The speculative-masons formalized their organization in 1717, in London England. The Masonic lodge
was established in 1729 in the United States, while the lodge started in Canada during 1745. Albert Pike
(1809-1891) became a Mason in 1850 then rose to become Grand Commander of the U.S. by 1859.
Giuseppi Mazzini (1805-1872) was Pike's counter part in Europe. The two decided to work together to
build underground organizations to infiltrate the government and control the country from the inside
through espionage. Pike started the "Ku Klux Klan" while Mazzini started the "MAFIA" (Mafia stands for
"Mazzini autorizza furti, incendi, avvelenamenti" or, "Mazzini authorizes thefts, arson and poisoning").
These organizations started around 1860 while their alliance was solidified in 1870. Albert Pike was
the Supreme Grand Commander, Sovereign Pontiff of the world of Freemasonry and was replaced by C.
Fred Kicinick when he died. Kleinick says, "Albert Pike's book Morals and Dogma endures as the most
complete exposition of Masonic philosophy there is". The Scottish Rite Freemasonry magazine for North
America called "New Age", in their September 1989 issue, called for a memorial service for Albert Pike
to be held at the world headquarters at the Washington temple in Washington, D.C. Norman Vincent Pill
was to be the speaker. He is a 33rd degree mason and the leading promoter of Freemasonry for North
America. Albert Pike is so revered that he was actually buried at their world head quarters in Washington,
D.C. The July 1990 issue of "New Age", magazine has a ten-page spread talking about the virtues of
Albert Pike. The background of Pike is given here to establish Masonic authority given to him and his

--- Sayfa 3 ---
writings. There are even Masonic Lodges dedicated to Pike.
How is someone initiated? When a member is initiated into the lodge, he starts in what is referred to as
the Blue Lodge. There are three levels at this stage. Level 1 is the "entered apprentice", level 2 is the
"fellow craft" and level 3 is the "master Mason". The vast majority of Masons (at least 90 percent) never
go beyond this third degree. After becoming a third degree Mason you have the choice of entering either
the Scottish or the York rites, if you choose to go further. The York rite has 43 degrees while the Scottish
rite has 33 degrees (with the 33rd degree being honorary). There are at least 90 hidden degrees in
Masonry. Every degree costs up to $100.00 or more with dues, memberships, etc. to be paid as well, so
there is a great deal of money to be made throughout this organization. Most who decide to proceed into
the higher degrees go through the Scottish rite. Once you have completed all the degrees of the Scottish
rite or the York rite you are now to be sworn in to the highest degrees of Freemasonry. This "highest
degree graduate" of the Scottish rite can then enter, "the ancient and Arabic order of the nobles of the
mystic shrine". Or in short he is now officially a "Shriner". What about the Shriners and their costumes?
Where did the red Fez with the Islamic sword and crescent come from? Understand, that in order to become a
Shriner you must swear allegiance to Allah, the God of Islam. In the early 8'h century Muslims were
conquering the northern continent of Africa. When they got to Fez, Morocco they found 50,000 Christians who
would not bow down to Allah so they massacred them. The streets ran thick with their blood, and then the Muslims
dipped their hats into the blood to celebrate the victory. Shriners wear the red Fez in order to celebrate the defeat of
Christianity. For a follower of Christ to wear this would be pure blasphemy! The highest degree of the York rite is the
Knight's Templar, which will be discussed later. Before the Mason is to proceed on to any new level of
Freemasonry he must be "initiated". So, what are some of these initiation rites that each Mason must make before
proceeding on to the next level?
During each of the first three degrees, the initiate must first have his jacket, tie and money removed. His
right shoe is removed and replaced with a slipper. His shirt is opened to show his left breast and his left
trouser is rolled up over his knee. He is then blindfolded and a noose is placed around his neck (cable-
toed). He is led to the outer door of the sanctuary and told he is in darkness and only Masons have the
light of the world. A sword or knife is placed to the left breast of the initiate and while he is blindfolded
he is led to the "worshipful master" of the lodge. The initiate is required to bow down before the
"worshipful master" and is required to state that he is "lost in darkness and needs the light of
Freemasonry". He is told never to reveal the secrets of the lodge, as he is about to learn them or else bear
the consequences. Then with his hand or thumb to his neck he is required to recite an oath part of which
says, "...binding myself to no less penalty than having my throat cut across and my tongue torn out by its
roots and buried in the rough sands of the sea".
The second degree requires the following recital; "...binding myself under no less penalty than having my
left breast torn open and having my heart plucked out and given as prey to the wild beasts of the field and
the fowl of the air".
The third degree requires the following recital; "...binding myself under no less penalty than having my
body severed in twain, my bowels taken from hence and burned in ashes". One of the Templar's oaths
which is done before a human skull states, "as the sins of the whole world were once visited upon the
head of our Saviour, so may all the sins of the person whose skull this once was, in addition to my own,
be heaped upon my head, and may this libation appear in judgement against me, should I ever knowingly
or willingly violate my most solemn vow of a Knight Templar, so help me God..." (pages 227-228 of
"Illustrated Ritual of the Six Degrees of the Council of Commandery" by Charles Pawner, 1975).
These oaths are supposedly made to protect the secret handshakes, passwords, etc. as well as the
lost name of God. After three degrees the initiate is supposed to receive the lost name of God, but instead
they are given "Mah-Hah-Bone", and are told that they must go higher to receive the name of God.

--- Sayfa 4 ---
Every level is another act of deception. At level 13 you get the name "Jah-Bul-On" as the name of God,
which refers to a three headed God made up of Jehovah, Baal and On (another name for Osiris). Masons
claim this is a trinity of Gods which they worship and when three Masons greet themselves together they
are required to chant this name and hold all their hands together in the shape of three sixes (666) while
doing this. The 17th level name of God is Abaddon who is described in Rev. 9:11 as the angel with the
keys to the abyss. In each degree the Mason is deliberately deceived and also required to swear allegiance
to a different god without them even realizing what they were doing. What does the Bible say about this?
2 Cor. 6:14-18 says, "be ye not unequally yoked with unbelievers"
Luke 16:13 says, "No servant can serve two masters".
Ezek. 8:12 says, "they think the Lord doesn't see".
1 John 1:5 says that "Jesus is light", so how can any believer say he needs the light of Freemasonry? Matthew 6 says
you can't have two masters so how can a believer call someone other than God his "worshipful master"? Understand
that in order to become a Mason you must swear allegiance to their command through blood oaths without even
knowing what it is you are swearing to. Matt. 5:33-37, James 5:12 and 1 Car. 11:27 say not to swear oaths, and by
taking these oaths of Masonry no less than three of the ten commandments are broken. Matthew 5:34 records
Jesus saying that you shouldn't take any oaths at all, as well as in James 5:12. What does Masonry teach
about these degrees, oaths and symbols? Masonic scholar Roland Blackmur states, "It is a lamentable fact
that the great mass of our membership are ignorant of everything connected with Freemasonry".
Another scholar George Steinmetz states, "Most of the truly great Masonic writers have deplored
the lack of esoteric Masonic knowledge among the craft in general. The average Mason is lamentably
ignorant of the real meaning of the Masonic symbols and knows as little of its esoteric teachings". Albert
Pike's book "Morals and Dogma" (the supreme teaching of the world of Masonry) says on page 819, "The
blue degrees are but the outer court or portico of the Temple. (The lodge is actually referred to as a
temple). Part of the symbols are displayed there to the initiate, but he is intentionally mislead by false
interpretations. It is not intended that he shall understand them, but it is intended that he shall imagine
that he understands them. Their true explication is reserved for the adepts of Princes of Masonry. It is
well enough for the mass of those so called Masons to imagine that all is contained in the blue degrees."
Masonry is purposely lying to its own members; what do you think they are trying to hide? What are these
hidden meanings? Malcolm C. Duncan on page 15 of his book "Duncan's Masonic Ritual Monitor" says,
"we worship God as the sun rises in the east in the temple" and then on page 52 he states, "to be a true
representation of Solomon's temple we leave the north empty as a place of darkness". (Isaiah 14:13, Ezek.
1:4 and Psalm 48:2 say that God is in the north of the temple. Masons call God "darkness". Ezek.
8:16 says "to face the east you must turn your back to God". Masons worship the east, which is exactly
opposite of what the Lord commanded.
What are the secrets they aren't supposed to reveal? Most Masons say Masonry isn't a religion, what do
their leaders say? Page 210 says, "Masonry is from the earliest times a custodian and depository of the
great religious truths, unknown to the world at large and handed down from age to age by an unbroken
current of tradition that was embodied in symbols, emblems and allegories." Morals and Dogma, page
213 says, "every Masonic Lodge is a temple of religion and its teachings are instructions in
religion...Masonry propagates no creed except its own most simple and sublime one; that universal
religion taught by nature and reason". In "Mackey's Revised Encyclopedia of Freemasonry", on pages
409-410 Albert Mackey states, "Be assured...that God is equally present with the pious Hindu in the
temple, the Jew in the Synagogue, the Mohammedan in the Mosque and the Christian in the Church".
(You must understand what they mean by God. Just because different people of different religions call
upon the name of God, it does not mean that we are all calling upon the same God. Whatever is most
important to you in life can be classified as your God whether it be money, sex, music, wealth, work or

--- Sayfa 5 ---
whatever. If you had an old buddy by the name Bill Smith who you lost touch with over the years and tried
looking up his name in the phone book you are likely to have a few to choose from. You can only figure out
the proper one by calling them one by one to see which one is correct. We must do the same thing with the many
religious organizations in the world. Each one must be questioned as to the nature of God to determine
whether they are following the True God). Why do you need to take blood oaths to become a Mason?
What are they trying to hide? Why do you have to swear not to reveal anything before you even know what it is
that is going to be revealed to you? Does any of this make sense? It's like when a sales person tells you that you
can get something for free...your first question is, what will this cost me? Your question to Freemasonry
should be no different, what will this cost me (and not just monetarily)? Page 219 of "Morals and Dogma"
also says, "Masonry is a worship. Masonry is the universal religion in the heart of universal humanity.
The ministers of this religion are all Masons. Its sacrifices to God are good works, and perpetual efforts to
attain to all the moral perfection of which man is capable." In the 28th degree of the Scottish rite you
hear that, "The true Mason...raises himself by degrees until he reaches heaven". Page 219 shows that
three of the claims of freemasonry.net are outright lies. Masonry teaches that you can save yourself by
good works and approach the great white throne of the great architect of the universe. Eph. 2:8-9 says we
are saved "not by works", and Rev. 20:11-12 says that the ones who are in front of the Great White
Throne are the ones whose names are not written in the Lamb's Book of Life and are then cast into hell.
What Masons don't realize is that the great white throne in the Bible is the one that the people who are
about to be thrown into hell are standing before. Their own books tell Masons that they are doomed for
the eternal fires of hell. Proverbs 14:12 says that there is a way that seems good to man but leads to
destruction. The first secret of Masonry is that it is a secret religion based on works!
So what do Masons think about the Bible? Morals and Dogma page 105 says, "The teachers, even of
Christianity, are, in general, the most ignorant of the true meaning of that which they teach. There is no
book of which so little is known as the Bible. To most who read it, it is as incomprehensible as the Sohar
(a Kabalistic book of Jewish mysticism)". Duncan's Masonic Ritual and Monitor says on page 36 "the
Holy Bible is the rule and guide of our faith". If that is so why does the Matt. 4:10 say "serve the Lord thy
God and Him only"? Who is wrong here Masons or the Lord God Almighty? Page 11 of Morals and
Dogma says, "The Holy Bible, square and compass are not only styled the great lights in Masonry but
they are also technically called the furniture of the Lodge. The Bible is an indispensable part of the
furniture of the Christian Lodge only because it is sacred to the Christian. The Hebrew Pentateuch in a
Hebrew Lodge, the Koran in a Muslim Lodge, they belong on the alter." Page 17 says, "The Holy
Scriptures were an entirely modern day addition to the Lodge." Page 525 says, "Masonry reverences all
the great reformers. It sees in Moses the lawgiver of the Jews, in Confucius and Zoroaster and Jesus of
Nazareth, in the Arabian Iconoclast are all great teachers in morality and imminent reformers if no more.
Masonry does not tell the sincere Christian that Jesus of Nazareth was but a man like us, or is history, but
the unreal revival of a legend. Masonry belongs to all time of no one religion. Masonry is a worship but
one in which all civilized man can unite together." Page 540 says, "The history of Masonry is the history of
philosophy. None can deny that Christ taught a lofty morality. The early Christians followed in his footsteps.
Their sole object was to make men better by bringing them back to the simple worship of what universal
morality was the basis." Masonry teaches that the Bible is just furniture and that Jesus was just a moral teacher.
Go ahead and lie and deceive the sincere Christian; it's ok!
Manly P. Hall (33rd degree Mason and former head of Masonic Philosophical Society), in his book "Lost Keys of
Freemasonry" says on pages 64 and 65, "The true disciples of ancient Masonry has given up forever the worship of
personalities. With his great insight from the Lodge, he realizes that all forms of their position and material affairs are
of no importance to him compared to the life which is evolving within. The true Mason is not creed bound. He
realizes with the divine illumination of his Lodge, that as a Mason his religion must be universal. Christ, Buddha or
Muhammad, the name means little, for the Mason recognizes only the light and not the bearer. The Mason
worships at every shrine, bows before every altar whether in temple, mosque or pagoda realizing what this

--- Sayfa 6 ---
truer understanding the oneness of all spiritual truths. No true Mason can be narrow for his Lodge is the
divine expression of all broadness." Freemasonry says that it doesn't matter who or what you worship.
Matthew 7:13-15 says the way to destruction is the broad way. Acts 4:12 says Jesus is the name to
worship. Masons tell us (and want us to believe) that they are not a religion but merely a group of
individuals who are free to express their different religious beliefs among non-judgmental people. This is
obviously not true. For a Mason to claim this they have obviously not read their own material or they are
deliberately lying! Every initiate gets a white lambskin apron. This shows that they are living a pure life
and are saved by their good works. Isaiah 64:6 says that our good works are like filthy rags. hi Joseph
Ford Newton's book "The Builders", he states, "The goal of Masonry is to bring about a universal league
of mankind and form mankind into a great redemptive brotherhood". Newton declares, "As Masonry
expands, all religious dogmas will cease to be. All individual creeds and doctrines will be done away
with. What remains will be what is termed the one eternal religion that Masons are bringing to the world.
This is also described in Revelation 13:15! On page 104 of Pike's book he writes, "Masonry, like all
religions and all the mysteries, conceals its secrets from all except the adepts and sages and uses false
explanations and misinterpretations of its symbols. The rites of initiation become progressively more
complicated. Signs and tokens were initiated by which the children of light could with facility make
themselves known to each other. Different degrees were invented in the lodge as the number of initiates
enlarged in order that there might be in the inner apartment of the temple, a favoured few to whom alone
the more valuable secrets were entrusted. All persons were initiated into the lesser mysteries but few
attained the greater, in which the true spirit of them and most of their secret doctrines were hidden. The
veil of secrecy was impenetrably sealed with blood oaths". Albert Pike says that only a few are entrusted
with the real secrets of Freemasonry, and the others are purposely lied to. Masonry teaches that all non-
Masons are living in spiritual darkness and must be reformed. The ritual of Masonry for the first degree of
"Entered Apprentice" teaches the candidate that he has long been in darkness and now seeks to be brought
into the light of Freemasonry. The Lodge teaches that only true Masons are enlightened and live in the
truth.
The next secret they aren't supposed to reveal is what this universal mystery religion is! Page 311 of
"Morals and Dogma" says, "In all religions there is a basis of truth, in all there is pure morality. All
teachers are reformers of mankind we admire and revere. Masonry has her mission to perform. She invites all
men from all religions to enlist under her banner" (or One World Religion, Rev. 13:4). Page 226 says,
"Masonry, around whose alters the Hebrew, the Christian, the Moslem, the Brahmin, the followers of
Confucius and Zoroaster can assemble as brothers and unite in prayer to the one God who is above all the
Baalim." Masonry actually teaches that they are putting together a unifying one-world religion. Page 276 says, "In no
other way could Masonry possess its character of universality which enables two kings, worshippers of different
deities, to sit together as master and sit in the same lodge as brethren." Page 277 says, "The first Masonic
teacher was Buddha. He called to the priesthood all man. Masonry wisely requires no more than a belief in
one great all-powerful deity, preserver of the universe. Therefore it teaches toleration is the one chief duty of every
good Mason (tolerate everyone except true Christians). For in every faith there are excellent moral precepts." Page
226 says, "The Mason considers that if there were no written revelation, he could safely rest the hopes
that animate him, and the principles that guide him on the deductions of reason and the conviction of
instinct and conscience. He can find a sure foundation for his religious belief in these deductions of
intellect and convictions of the heart." In other words use your conscience and heart, not the writings from
the Bible. They teach that all religions are basically the same and that all teachers of religion (including
Jesus) are/were just good moral teachers. In summary, if all religions teach the same thing, then all
religions must be right! This whole premise is absurd. Anyone who knows anything about religious
studies knows that this statement is absolutely ridiculous. It is obvious that not all religions teach the same
thing; if they did there would only ever have been one religion in the first place. Page 352 of "Morals and
Dogma" states, "Among the nations there was in addition to the public worship, a private one styled "The
Mysteries". Where "The Mysteries" originated is not known. It is supposed they came from India by way

--- Sayfa 7 ---
of Chaldea into Egypt and then were carried to Greece. The powers revered in "The Mysteries" were all in
reality, nature gods. "The Mysteries" taught the doctrine of "Divine Oneness". Masonry, successor of
"The Mysteries", still follows the ancient manner of teaching". Pike tells us that Masonry is identical with
the ancient mysteries of Egypt, Babylon and the great mysteries of India. Page 207 of Morals and Dogma
says, "Zoroaster, Confucius, Socrates and Plato taught their esoteric doctrines. They did not communicate
them to the people at large but only to a favoured few who had been initiated. And as they were
communicated in Egypt, India, Persia, Phoenicia and Greece to the initiates, the communication of this
knowledge and other secrets constitutes under other names what we now call Masonry or free or frank
Masonry." Masons claim to be the custodians of the "Ancient Mystery Religion".
What exactly is this "Mystery Religion"? Col. 2:2 says, "God's mystery is Christ Himself'. 2 Cor. 14-18
says, "Do not be bound with unbelievers".
Page 356 of Morals and Dogma states, "The Mysteries, like the symbols of Masonry were but an image of
the eloquent analogies of nature. The Mysteries embrace the three great doctrines of ancient theosophy.
They treated God, man and nature (a kind of New-Age trinity just like life, truth and love) as symbolic
forms. The Mysteries exhibited the Universal One". Page 304 says, "The Blue Lodge finds symbolic
meaning with the temple and the whole structure which was intended to represent the universe. The grand
principle of the occult philosophy veiled under the Kabala and so little understood by the mass of initiates
of the ancient and modern Freemasonry." (The Kabala was the ancient occultic book written by Jews
during the time when they fell away from God and worshipped other gods. It was full of numerology,
witchcraft, astrology, sorcery, etc. It would appear that much of this teaching was initiated by one
of Noah's sons who probably rebelled from God after the flood and worshipped Satan instead of
God). Page 208 of Morals and Dogma says, "The temple of Solomon presented a symbolic image of the universe. The
system of numbers was intricately connected with their religion and worship and has come down to us through
Freemasonry. Every Masonic Lodge represents the universe. In it are represented the sun, moon and stars. Three great
torches in the east, west and south forming a triangle bringing light. These three great lights also represent
the great mystery of the three principles of creation, destruction and reproduction or regeneration." Page 393 says,
"All souls are part of the universal soul. The human soul is itself a god within the mind, capable through its own
power of making itself immortal by the practice of good (just like when Satan tempted Eve by saying in Genesis
that you can be a god yourself). Man descended (evolved) from the elemental forces who fed on the body
of the pantheistic deity creating the universe. Death is inseparable and antecedent of life, the seed dies in
order to produce the plant. Hence, the significance of the phallic or its inoffence substitute the obelisk
rising as an emblem of resurrection." Pages 401 and 402 state, "The male and female organs, emblems of
regeneration and reproduction in which appear "The Mysteries" are such the Masonic point within a circle
expresses the philosophical idea as to the union of the two great causes of nature. Not only the Egyptians,
but every other people that consecrates this symbol (male reproductive organ) deemed that they thereby
do honour to the active force of the universal generation of all living things". Page 407 says, "The
ancients had their religious initiation into the worship of the sun god represented by the phallic organ. One
of the principle ceremonies of which consented in clothing the initiate with the skin of a white lamb and
in this we see the origin of the apron of the white lambskin used today in Freemasonry." The white
lambskin apron is worn to cover the males generating principle of life, therefore making him "spotless".
Freemasonry is clearly the resurrection of ancient paganism with new names and symbols only. Albert
Mackey on page 353 of "Symbols of Freemasonry" says, "The point within the circle is derived
from sun worship, and is in reality of phallic origin. It is a symbol of the universe, the sun being
represented by the point, while the circumference is the universe. He states in another of his books
(Manual of the Lodge) that, "The phallus was an imitation of the male generating organ. It was
represented usually by a column which was surrounded by a circle at the base...the point within the circle
was intended by the ancients as a type of the prolific powers of nature which they worshipped under the
united form of the active or male principle and the passive or female principle." Page 156 of Albert

--- Sayfa 8 ---
Mackey's book "Manual of the Lodge" says, "The point within the circle is an...important symbol in
Freemasonry, but it has been debased in the interpretation of it in the modern lectures (given in the
lodges) that the sooner that interpretation is forgotten by the Masonic student, the better it will be. The
symbol is really a beautiful but somewhat abstruse allusion to the old sun-worship, and introduces us for
the first time to that modification of it, known among the ancients as the worship of the phallus." In places
like India, Egypt, the Vatican and many others you can still see the idols (and obelisks) of old standing as
if they are awaiting the resurgence of paganism. Masonry is the modern day revival of the "Ancient
Mysteries of Paganism". Paganism abounded all over the world even in Jesus' time. The moon god was
Osiris in Egypt, Diana in Rome and Mania in Greece, while the sun god was Isis in Egypt, Apollo in
Rome and Cirano in Greece. These religions never went away, they only went underground. This religion is
still highly practiced even within the walls of Roman Catholicism; do not be convinced otherwise!
The pagan life cycle of rebirth taught that god dies on October 31st (Halloween) and the new "baby god" is reborn on
December 23rd. In Egyptian paganism Isis is the key goddess of Egypt. She was the sister, lover, wife and mother of
Osiris. They had a baby boy god named Horns. Osiris had a wicked brother Set who murdered him. Set killed Osiris,
but Isis brought him back to life. Set kills Osiris a second time but this time cuts him into little pieces and disperses
the parts. Isis finds all the parts except one (his "generating principle"). Without this important part she cannot bring
him back to life. Osiris becomes the lord of the dead while Set becomes the Egyptian form of the Devil. Horus grows
up and avenges his father's death by killing Set. Horus then marries his mother Osiris and they rule together. Morals
and Dogma on page 401 says, "In the mysteries was also taught the division of the Universal Cause into an
Active and a Passive cause; of which two, Osiris and Isis, the heavens and the earth were symbols...the
Active and Passive Principles of the Universe were commonly symbolized by the generative parts of man
and woman; to which, in remote ages, no idea of indecency was attached; the phallus and cteis, emblems
of generation and production, and which, as such appeared in the mysteries...which were symbolized by
what we now term Gemini, the Twins, at the remote period when the Sun was in that Sign in the Vernal
Equinox, and when they were Male and Female; and of which the Phallus was perhaps taken from the
generative organs of the bull". On page 22 of Morals and Dogma it states, "Masonry, successor of the
Mysteries, still follows the ancient manner of teaching. Her ceremonies are like the ancient mystic
shows". Page 497 of Albert Mackey's book "Mackey's Revised Encyclopedia of Freemasonry" says,
"...the secret worship of the rites of the pagan gods. Each of the pagan gods had, besides the public and
open, a secret worship paid to him, to which none were admitted but those who had been selected by
preparatory ceremonies called Initiation". Albert Pike on pages 13-14 of "Morals and Dogma" says, "The
sun and moon...represent the two grand principles of all generations, the active and passive, the male and
the female...both shed their light upon their offspring, the blazing star or Horus...in the three forms, the
great equilateral triangle in the centre of which is the omnific letter of the Kabala by which creation is
said to be effected. In the east of the lodge over the master, enclosed in the triangle, is the Hebrew
letter "YOD", in the English, Canadian and American lodges the "G" is substituted." In the lower levels
of Freemasonry, the "G" is said to represent God or geometry, but it is not until later that they inform the
Mason that it actually represents the reproductive sexual organs of the male human being (generating
principle of life). This male organ is represented by the obelisk. This is pure paganism as practiced
thousands of years ago. This pagan worship goes back to before Abraham's time. The religion at that
time was sun and moon worship along with much idol worship. Masons love to tell you of the story of
Hiram Abiff (1 Kings 7:13 & 2 Chron. 4:16) who was supposedly a Mason helping to build Solomon's
temple. Hiram Abiff was actually a metal worker hired by Solomon, but Masons describe him as being
the head of the project. Through the building of the temple the true name of God was apparently lost and
only Hiram Abiff knew it. They claim that Hiram is the only one who possessed the name of God (doesn't
it seem odd that Solomon didn't know it?), and during the close of the building three Masons
demanded from Hiram that he tell them the naine at that time. He refuses so they kill him and hide the
body in a hill on Mt. Moriah. Solomon searches for him and finally finds him in the makeshift grave. Masons
treat Hiram Abiff a kind of Jesus. John 1:1&14, Col. 1:15, Col. 2:9 say Jesus is God, but Masons don't believe it.

--- Sayfa 9 ---
Romans 1:22-25 says, "they exchanged the truth of God for a lie".
Freemasonry teaches that they alone are now the custodians of God's real name and you must become a
Mason to learn it. Since Masons like to review Masonic history let us also look at its history, but in more depth
than the Masons do. There are two references found in the Bible to "The Book of Jasher". One in Joshua 10:13 and
the other in 2 Samuel 1:18. Since one of the greatest generals of God who ever lived, and one of the greatest Prophets
of God who ever lived both believed in the authenticity of this book let's look at it. From Jasher 7:29-27:17 we
see Nimrod with his evil dealings and his pagan worship. He started out worshipping God at first in 7:30 but by 7:46
he was more wicked than anyone who had lived before. In chapter 9:25-35 Nimrod builds the tower of Babel (in
modem day Babylon) because he wanted to ascend into heaven to fight God, then put his own gods in His
place, then to finally kill the Almighty God but God put an end to that idea. From 9:13-19 Abraham tried
to follow Nimrod's religion by worshipping the sun, then the moon, but concluded that these are not truly
gods. By chapter 11:13-12:41 Abraham was a true follower of God and he began converting people
around him and thereby rebelled against king Nimrod, so Nimrod threw him into the furnace for three
days. God saved Abraham from the furnace because of his faith and obedience. Abraham was the only
one at that time who actually stood up for God. This is why God refers to Abraham as a "friend of God".
(Many will become saved but only a few will inherit the term "friend of God"). The symbol "Two ball
cane" is actually a play on words and is a password for the Master Mason. The implication is two-fold;
one is the male phallus and the other is "Tubal-Cain". In "The handbook of Freemasonry" by Edmond
Ronayne on page 177 he says, "Tubal-Cain" was the first Mason. Albert Mackey in "Mackey's revised
encyclopedia of Freemasonry" says on page 513, that "Nimrod was the second saint of Masonry". Rev.
Alexandra Hislop in his book "The Two Babylon's" on pages 28-38 describes how Nimrod and his queen
Semiramis began all the world's cultic worships in the mysteries. Nimrod and Semiramis were
worshipped as gods. Nimrod was eventually killed by Esau and the son Mardon became the first
reincarnated god. Freemasonry is resurrecting this religion!
So what do the square, compass and "G" symbols really mean in Freemasonry? Page 851 of "morals
and Dogma" states, "Returning now to the degrees of the blue masonry, and for your last lesson (32nd
degree), receive the explanation of the symbols. The square is a natural and appropriate symbol of the
earth; the compass is an equally natural and appropriate symbol of the heavens. The heavens and the earth
were personified as deities. The earth therefore, the great producer, was always represented as the female,
as the mother, as the procreative and generative agent. The heaven and the sun have always been regarded
as the male as the generator that impregnates the earth, that causes it to produce. The compass therefore,
is the symbol of the creative deity (male), and the square, the productive earth or universe (female)." Page
708 goes on to say, "Thus we reach the threshold of religions and are in communication with the great
philosophies and the religions, which cover the earth and repose on the sacred foundation of natural
religion. Religion which reveals to us the natural light given to all man without the aide of any practical
revelation. (In other words they don't need the Bible; they keep the Bible around to make it look good
but in actual fact they pay no heed to it). Pages 714 and 715 go on to say, "Beautiful above the great
white chaos of human error shines the calm clear light of natural human religion. Beautiful around
stretches off every way the universe, the great Bible of God. Material nature is the Old Testament; human nature is
the New Testament. Everything is a thought of the Infinite God."
So the logical question here is who is this "Infinite God" that Masonry worships? This is secret number three!
Who is the god of Masonry? What is this light they worship? "The Bible in Masonry" written by Rev. Joseph
Fort Newton says, "Masonry knows what so many forget, that religions are many but religion is one...knowing that,
if they use different names for "The Nameless One of a Hundred Names" they are yet praying to the One God and
Father of All". In Coil's Masonic encyclopedia by Henry Wilson Coil on pages 516-517 it says, "Men have to
decide whether they want the God like the ancient Hebrew Jahweh, a partisan, tribal god, with whom they can talk and
argue and from whom they can hide, if necessary, or a boundless, eternal, universal undenominational and

--- Sayfa 10 ---
international, divine spirit, so vastly removed from the speck called man that he cannot be known... So
soon as man begins to laud his God and endow him with the most perfect human attributes such as justice,
mercy, beneficence, etc., the divine essence is depreciated and despoiled." Malcolm C. Duncan writes on
page 129 of "Duncan's Ritual Monitor", "...that the All-Seeing Eye, whom the sun, moon and stars obey,
and under whose watchful care even comets perform their stupendous revolutions, beholds the inmost
recesses of the human heart, and will reward us according to our works". In 1889 Paris, France, Albert
Pike was quoted by A.C. De La Rive in "La Femme et l'Enfant dans la Franc-Maconnerie Universelle"
saying, "That which we must say to the crowd is: we worship a god, but it is the god that one adores
without superstition. To you Sovereign Grand Inspectors General, we say this, that you may repeat it to the
brethren of the 32nd, 31st and 30th degrees-the Masonic religion should be, by all of us initiates of the high
degrees, maintained in the purity of the Luciferian doctrine. If Lucifer were not god, would Adonay
(Jesus) whose deeds prove his cruelty, perfidy, and hatred of man, barbarism and repulsion for science,
would Adonay and his priests calumniate (spread false statements about) him?...Yes Lucifer is God, and
unfortunately Adonay is also god. For the eternal law is that there is no light without shade, no beauty
without ugliness, no white without black, for the absolute can only exist as two gods: darkness being
necessary for light to serve as its foil as the pedestal is necessary to the state...Thus, the doctrine of
Satanism is a heresy; and the true and pure philosophical religion is the belief in Lucifer, the equal of
Adonay; but Lucifer, God of Light and God of Good, is struggling for humanity against Adonay, the God
of Darkness and Evil." Morals and Dogma, page 321 says, "Lucifer, the light-bearer! Strange and
mysterious name to give to the spirit of darkness! Lucifer, the Son of the Morning! Is it he who bears the
Light, and with its splendors intolerable blinds feeble, sensual or selfish Souls? Doubt it not! For
traditions are full of Divine Revelations and Inspirations: and Inspiration is not of one Age nor one
Creed". Page 102 of Morals and Dogma says that Satan is "not a person, but a Force, created for good,
but which may serve for evil. It is the instrument of Liberty or Free Will. They represent this Force,
which presides over the physical generation (sex), under the mythical and homed form of the god PAN;
thence came the he-goat of the Sabbat (witches' festival), brother of the Ancient Serpent and the Light
Bearer or Phosphor of which the poets have made the false Lucifer of the legend". (In other words Satan
is the force used by Luciferians). Manly P. Hall writes in page 48 of "The Lost Keys of Freemasonry"
that, "When the Mason learns that the key to the warrior on the block is the proper application of the dynamo
of living power, he has learned the Mystery of his Craft. The seething energies of Lucifer are in his hands and
before he may step onward and upward, he must prove his ability to properly apply this energy". The "Masonic
Monitor" 54:111 states that, "The all-seeing eye...pervades the inmost recess of the human heart, and will reward us
according to our merits" the 19th degree initiate hears, "...Masons who have given proof of their attachments to the
statutes and rules of the order...which in the end will make them deserving of entering the celestial Jerusalem
(heaven)..." Secret number three is that the god of Freemasonry is Lucifer. They proclaim it with great
boasting. Freemasonry is the resurrection of Satan worship through the symbols of heavenly bodies and sex
organs.
The obelisk represents the male sex organ impregnating the female. This is often shown as a dot within a circle.
Masonry teaches the ancient mystery which says that immortality comes from producing offspring through the male
impregnating the female. Only the male has the ability to carry the seed, therefore women cannot be Masons.
Females are initiated into the Eastern Star organization, which is the female version of the Masonic
Lodge. The Eastern Star started in 1868 as a woman's auxiliary to the Masonic Lodge. A Master Mason
must be present for each meeting of the Eastern Star. The Eastern Star organization is said to follow the
star that led the wise men to Jesus as described in Matt. 2:2. However, Albert Pike on pages 14-15 of
Morals and Dogmas says, "To find in the Blazing Star of five points of allusion to Divine Providence is
fanciful; and to make it commemorative of the Star that is said to have guided the Magi, is to give it a
meaning comparatively modern. Originally, it represented Sirius, or the Dog-star, the forerunner of the
inundation of the Nile... Then it became the image of Horns, the son of Osiris, himself symbolized also by
the Sun, the author of the Seasons and the God of Time...It became the sacred and potent sign or character

--- Sayfa 11 ---
of the Magi, the Pentalph..." Albert Pike says the Eastern Star is the "pentagram star". The pentagram star
(called the eastern star or blazing star), represents the dog-star or Sirius which is the symbol of Set. Set
represents man's broken relationship with the universe which man is now trying to reestablish. Who is
Set? Dr. Michael A. Aquino writes in "The Wewelsburg Working" dated Oct. 19, 1984 that "Set is the
oldest from of what we now call Satan". How does Aquino know? Michael Aquino is the leader of the
"Temple of Set", one of the most elite Satanic churches in the world. He refers to himself as an
Ipsissimus or god on earth. The pentagram has the same meaning in Masonry and Witchcraft; this is no
coincidence. Therefore the Eastern Star is the pentagram of Satan. Masonic organizations are actually
occultic in nature. What does occult mean? The English form of occult is from the Latin word occultus,
meaning "hidden or secret things". There are three different types of occultic (mantic) behaviour. The first
level includes magic, divination, astrology, alchemy, soothsaying, fortune-telling, tea reading, tarot cards,
channeling, palmistry, witchcraft, crystal balls, mediums, ouija boards, sorcery, spiritist, numerology and
any other of the mystic arts. The second level includes white magic where the teaching is based on
tapping into the one real spiritual force of nature (believed to be basically good), so that they can gain
power over their lives as well as others, and black magic where you tap into Satan's power. The third level
is communicating with the dead. Steve Hahrer and Ralph Kofler were former witches and they described
that their occultic practices were almost identical to that of Masonry, indicating that both witchcraft and
Masonry are in fact both Paganism. They both use the "so-mote-it-be" expression to close their meetings.
Morals and Dogma also states on page 839, "The Occult Science of the Ancient Magi
was concealed under the shadows of the Ancient Mysteries; it was imperfectly revealed or rather
disfigured by the Gnostics; it is guessed at under obscurities that cover the pretended crimes of the
Templars; and it is found enveloped in enigmas that seem impenetrable in the Rites of the Highest
Masonry". Who are the Templars? The Knight's Templar started in 1118 as warrior monks assigned
to protect Christian pilgrims to the Holy Land during the Crusades. The order grew very rich and very corrupt and
the Templars were finally driven out of the eastern lands by the Muslims. They returned to Europe with all
their wealth and King Philippe IV of France determined to take it from them. On Friday October 13th, 1307 the
raids began. Many Templars were killed but their wealth was never found. They had heard of the impending raids
and had hidden all their wealth. How was the king able to raid the Templars who were supposed to be protected by
the Roman Catholic Church? Before the king could start his raids he needed the blessing from the Pope. In order
to get the Catholic Church on his side King Philippe IV had the Pope murdered, then he poisoned a
second one and then had his pick Pope Clement V put in their place. He now controlled the Catholic
Church. The Templars were murdered for their money, but also because they practiced black magic,
pederasty, homosexuality, baby sacrifices, etc. but the most heinous accusation was that they worshipped
a god by the name of Baphomet. Who is Baphomet? Manley P. Hall (Masonic scholar) in his book
"Secret teachings of all age" published 1978 says that Baphomet represents the "Goat of Mendes" and is
best known as Lucifer of occultism. Since the Lord God Almighty has many names, Lucifer needs to be
worshipped under many names.
There has always been a struggle between good and evil ever since creation. This is shown in the lineage
of the first ten generations of mankind from creation. The descendants of Adam split into two groups. One
group following after The Lord God Almighty and the other one following after Lucifer. From Adam the
line following God was Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared, Enoch, Methuselah, Lamech and Noah.
The followers of Lucifer were Cain, Enoch, had, Mehujael, Methusael, Lamech and TubalCain. After the
flood the evil line continued from king Nimrod. Ever since Genesis there has always been a struggle
between good and evil. The two worldviews have always been at odds. The one view of the pagan
mysteries (such as polytheism, pantheism and monism indicating endless circles of the life cycle and
therefore the worship of it (sex), is opposed to the other view of monotheism (One True God) which holds
to a literal view of history and eternity resulting in the true worship of God (Jesus). Esau and
Jacob struggled, Isaac and Ishmael struggled and the list goes on and on. Even when the new colonies

--- Sayfa 12 ---
started in the Americas, before 1776 a colony of Rosicrucians settled in Ephrata, PA. The order of the
"Rosy Cross" is referred to as the Rosicruciana. This order of the "CROSS" is not the cross of Jesus; it is
the letter "T" which represents TAMMUZ, another name for Satan. The Washington Monument has the
obelisk inside a big circle, the pagan symbols of immortality...Go figure! And now today religions are still
struggling for the possession of the souls of mankind. The most recent religion is the New Age Religion,
however upon closer inspection it isn't that new at all. It teaches that god is an impersonal force, everyone
can evolve into a god themselves, reincarnation makes you born again (no real death), Christ is not Jesus;
but the teacher of Jesus called "Maitreya", sin is not real only karma is real and all religions lead to god so
any religion that teaches otherwise is counter revolutionary and must be destroyed. The New Age religion
is just paganism "repackaged". In a letter called "Freemasonry" Cary N. Dolinko from the Tara Center (a
major New Age group) states, "The Masonic movement is one of the three main channels through which
the preparation for the new age is going on. In it are found disciples of the Great Ones who are steadily
gathering momentum and will before long enter upon their designated task". Also quoted in that letter is
Alice Bailey saying, "The Masonic movement...will meet the need of those who can, and should wield
power. It is the custodian law; is the home of the Mysteries and seat of Initiation. It holds in its symbolism
the ritual of Deity, and the way of salvation is pictorially preserved in its work. The methods of Deity are
demonstrated in its temples, and under the All-Seeing Eye the work can go forward. It is a far more occult
organization than can be realized, and is intended to be the training school for the coming advanced occultists". Even
occultists call Masonry an occultic religion! In "The Reappearance of The Christ", pages 84 and 87
Benjamin Crème (the prophet for this Maitreya) states, "Through theMasonic tradition and certain esoteric
groups, will come the process of initiation. In this coming age millions of people will take the first and
second initiation through these transformed and purified institutions... The new religions will manifest, for
instance, through organizations like Freemasonry. in Freemasonry is embedded the core of the secret heart
of the occultic mysteries-wrapped up in number, metaphor and symbol. When these are purified...these
will be seen to be a true occult heritage. Through the Orders of Masonry, the initiatory Path will be
trodden and Initiation will be taken..." the New Age religion is infiltrating the existing religions and
making the Christian belief system conform to theirs.
Ezek. 22:30-31 "what will happen in the future?" Matt. 7:22 says many will say Lord, Lord and He will
say depart from me I never knew you. Mark 13:22 says even some of the elect may be deceived. Do not
let them deceive you!
The children's organizations made for training future individuals for Masonic organizations, are the
"Order of DeMolay" (who was Jaques DeMolay? He was the last Great Master of the Knights Templar
who was burned at the stake for worshipping Baphomet, practicing homosexuality, pedophilia and
witchcraft), "Rainbow Girls", "Pointers", "Job's Daughters". Jesus said in Matt. 18:6 "whosoever offends
one of these little ones, it were better to have a millstone hanged around his neck and he were drowned in
the depth of the seas". The I.O.C.F. (International Order Of Co-Freemasonry) is a newer organization
founded to integrate religions under themselves.
Our conclusion is that Masonry and all its interrelated organizations only exist in order to promote
Luciferian theology. This is exactly what Satan wanted to accomplish 6000 years ago. Rev. 12:9
says, " The serpent (Devil of old), went out to deceive the whole world" and he's been doing it for 6000
years. Over the past 6000 years he sure has gotten smart and figured us out along the way. The play is
finally coming to a close but we know the outcome of the ending because we have the Bible to understand
these things. Before we continue we must review some more history. In 1717 the theology of the
Illuminatists were integrated with the Grand Lodge. Paganism was incorporated in order to unify all the
different religious dispositions of the different Lodges all over the world. (It is noteworthy that in order to
resurrect the old Babylonian religion; Babylon must be rebuilt to its former glory. Remember that
Nimrod and his tower of Babel was in Babylon. Satan wants to finish what he started by

--- Sayfa 13 ---
establishing his religion where it began. Why else would the world have invaded Iraq? The world
already has access to Iraq's oil and there were no weapons of mass destruction found, so there must have
been another reason for the invasion. There was, it was because Babylon is in Iraq). The religion of
Freemasonry is actually the ancient Babylonian religion resurrected under a new banner. The Ancient
Mystery Religion has always been hidden from the general public. On May 1, 1776 Adam Weishaupt
founded a secret society called the Ancient and Illuminated Seers of Bavaria. He integrated Illuminism with
Freemasonry with the intention of taking control of the world through religion, politics and finance. In 1785 the
courier of the illuminati was killed by a lightening bolt (Ephesians 5:6 says, "Let no-one deceive you for the wrath
of God comes"), and all the documents of their intentions were made public to the world. The name of the
courier who was killed was a man named Lanze. Many of the conspirators were killed for treason but most
escaped and they then made a more secret society.
One leader of the Illuminati said (reported by Henri deLubec in "Atheistic Humanist" page 10) that "the
turning point of history will be the moment man becomes aware that the only god of man is man himself'. The
name Illuminati is derived from the same root word that Lucifer is derived from. It means "bearer of the
light". Their motto is "Novas Ordo Seclorum" which means "New World Order". Remember that Lucifer
was the first Illuminist when he declared that he wanted to be the exalted one, now he is trying to get
everyone else to worship him as the Illuminated One, just as much as he worships himself. Weishaupt
called himself "Spartacus", and with his fellow conspiroters Herr Von Zwack, Baron Mengenhoffen and
others orchestrated the French Revolution four years later. Their goals are to abolish all ordered
governments, private property, inheritance, patriotism, all religion, family (such as morality and
marriage), establish state education for children, and establish a New World Order under their
government. They infiltrated Protestant and Reformed Church circles with their own educated theologians
(and carried on to other seminaries). The Illuminati solicited them with the promise of destroying the
Catholic Church, while they solicited Jesuits to destroy the Protestant Churches. Both, all the while being
absorbed into their New World Order. Members included Thomas Jefferson, Dewitt Clinton, Clinton
Roosevelt, Horace Greeney, Charles Dana, David Papp (Harvard) and many others. In 1829 these
individuals started raising funds to control the education system, religious schools and the medical
institutions. In 1830 Adam Weishaupt died and Giuseppe Mazzini was appointed director of the Illuminati
in 1834 until he died in 1872. Moses Mordecai Marx Levy (Karl Marx) joined the illuminati and was
asked to write the "communist manifesto" for the Illuminati in 1847. Mazzini asked Albert Pike to head
the American Illuminati. They created a new super "rite" called the "palladism" where only the elite were
initiated and invited to join. In 1894 (before Marconi invented the radio) Bataille wrote how the Illuminati
communicated around the world and that Gallatin Mackey once showed me that "arcula mystica" (magic
box) that each "sovereign master" used of which seven exist in Charleston, Rome, Berlin, Washington,
Monte Video, Naples and Calcutta. These boxes can be spoken into where instantly the others could hear
everything (Le Diable au XIX Sielle, page 391,392). This demonic device is documented in the book of
Jasher chapter 31:41-43.
Meanwhile the Illuminati were looking for a front man for their worldwide revolution when Karl Marx's
socialistic teachings came about. In 1864 Marx organized the "International Working Man's Association"
which is quite ironic because Marx is said to have never worked an honest day in his life. He leached off
of everyone and had so few friends that at the time of his death in 1883 only six people attended his
funeral. He had six children in his life three of whom died of starvation while they were still infants and
of the other three, two committed suicide. It is almost unbelievable that this man is so revered by the
world's leaders, that they all want to adopt his socialistic policies. Why? Actually it is not too hard to
understand why socialism is being adopted when you understand the agenda of the New World Order is to
decrease the population of the world by about five and half billion people. Marx's International Working
Man's Association later merged into the Socialist Party in 1868. The Second Socialist International which
was founded in Paris on July 14, 1889 was formed to unify all workers around the world but they got very

--- Sayfa 14 ---
few workers to enlist under their banner. It seemed that most people in general, foresaw the trouble they
would be in for down the road if they joined. The masses needed to be manipulated into joining. This is where the
Socialist Party began infiltrating workers unions around the world. Most unions around the world today have a pure
socialistic agenda and most members are completely ignorant of it. Socialism never brings the abilities of the
weaker members up to the stronger ones; it always brings the abilities of the strong down to the weak.
While the infiltration of the unions was underway, the infiltration of the school systems was also
underway. The indoctrination of the young minds into socialistic thinking was quite easy.
Also in the early 1900's Mayer Amschel Rothschild who said, "give me control of the money and it
doesn't matter who makes the laws" began establishing central banks (under his control) in various
countries where the country would have to borrow money from his central bank at huge interest rates in
order to pay that countries bills. One country who he wasn't able to take control of initially was the United
States. However, in 1907 a financial panic was caused which led to the establishment of the Federal
Reserve Act (central bank) in 1913. At this time J.P. Morgan and the Rockefeller family were controlling
most businesses in the U.S. Now that congress of the U.S. passed the central bank law, the Illuminati
needed a way to make the United States borrow against it. World War Two was created by the
Illuminati in order to bankrupt the European countries and also to establish socialist countries instead
of democratic ones. One only needs to think about the two world wars and realize that even though the
democracy led allies won both wars, most of the countries who won became socialist societies. Why? The
American population didn't want to join either of the world wars so a crisis needed to be created in order
to draw them in. In World War One, a ship called the "Lusitania" was loaded with explosives and lots of
passengers (mostly Americans) then left New York on May 1, 1915. The ship's cargo was made known to
the Germans and the Germans issued a warning against the United States that this "target" was in danger.
The Germans torpedoed the ship with 1201 lost souls (The Lusitania, Ballantine Books, 1974). With
the loss of lives the American public demanded that they enter the war. Pearl Harbour was also a crisis
created to draw the Americans into World War Two. ("The Final Secret of Pearl Harbour" by Rear
Admiral Robert Theobold, and "Warlords of Washington" by Anthony J. Hilder). Germany could easily
have been defeated by the end of 1943 but allied orders were regularly made in order to slow down the
allied soldiers. They were advancing too quickly for the illuminati. They didn't have enough time to set up
their infrastructure in the countries which they wanted to control ("Descent into Slavery" pages 177-191).
The Illuminati needed more time to set up socialist governments and allow the USSR to over power them
at the end of the war. In 1938 a document called "Red Symphony" published a meeting between a
captured spy C.G. Rakovsky (member of the Illuminati) who was questioned by Rene Duval, a
representative of Stalin. The paper tells of how World War Two will unfold, which countries will end up
communist, etc. The results of the war are told seven years before they actually take place. For those who
doubt a conspiracy, doubt it no more! In 1956 Hungary (a country turned socialist from the war) had an uprising
against the communists through the "Hungarian Freedom Fighters", who immediately asked for help from the United
States and other international allied countries. All allies denied helping them and on November 4, 1956 Khrushchev
sent in the tanks of the red army to squash the freedom fighters. If the U.S. is truly anti-Communist why
didn't they help? Why did the U.S. support Fidel Castro to take over Cuba when they knew for years that he was a
communist? The truth is that the leaders of the U.S. really want communism (socialism) to rule every country of the
world. As soon as every country of the world is fully socialist then the New World Order government will displace
those governments and take over the world with their agenda. The Vietnam War was costing the United States $30
billion per year and orders were made not to bomb anystrategic Vietnam sites or to fly over their controlled
areas. How bizarre to have rules of engagement during wartime. The truth is that the United States was
never supposed to win the war. What about the Vietnam War? The Vietnam War could easily have been
over in a matter of weeks but it was initiated to create huge debt in the U.S. and to supply the communist
countries with billions of dollars of armaments for future country take over's through military might. This
requires several years to achieve. Understand that the tanks, guns and trucks manufactured for the
communists were made in European plants owned by American companies such as Ford and about 80

--- Sayfa 15 ---
other American companies ("National Suicide, Military Aid to the Soviet Union" by Antony C. Sutton of
the Hoover Institute). Think about this, American companies killing American soldiers. Amazing! There
were three main purposes to the Vietnam War on behalf of the Illuminati; to greatly increase the
dependency of the U.S. on international money, to cause internal political strife in the U.S. among its
young people (the best way to overthrow a country is with an internal civil war so they can do the job for
you) and also to draw sympathy away from the war and towards a New World Order. The Illuminati
wants all world countries to become poor and in need of their financial support. If all countries become
immensely poor then every country's currency becomes the same value, then it becomes easy to institute a
single common world currency. The Illuminati also wants to determine who lives and who dies. The
Council for Foreign Relations as well as the Trilateral Commission are arms of the One
World Government. During Ronald Reagan's leadership the United States debt ran from $1 trillion
to $3 trillion and then Bush brought it to $4 trillion. When Clinton took over he tried to keep pace. One
point of interest is that almost every president elected has been a member of the C.F.R. and/or the T.C. It
should come as no real surprise what the true purpose of the Illuminati is as described from some of their
members. At the end of the 1800's Cecil Rhodes (a British multimillionaire and close associate of the
Rothschilds and other international bankers) started up the Rhodes scholarship to finance any bright
young men who could be molded into their line of thinking (Tragedy and Hope, pages 330-331). What
were Rhodes thoughts? Let's look at his will to find out. "Cecil Rhodes" by Basil Williams page 50 says
he left part of his estate to repatriate the United States under British control as well as the rest of the
world's countries that were Anglo-Saxon ruled and have them establish a New World Order with pure
Aryan Anglo-Saxons. The September, 1991 meeting of the United Nations Conference on Environment
and Development (UNCED) held in Des Moines, Iowa states, "The time is pressing... Given global
instabilities...the need for firm control of world technology, weaponry and natural resources, is now
absolutely mandatory...The present vast overpopulation... must be met in the present by the reduction in
the numbers now existing. It must be done by whatever means necessary...This is the time to save the Anglo-Saxon
race and its most glorious production, the Anglo-Saxon system of banking, insurance and trade. Do you not see
that failure now is to be pulled down by the billions of Lilliputians of lesser race who care little or nothing for
the Anglo-Saxon system? Those races proven superior by superior achievements ought to rule the lesser
nations...The UN will take possession of all the natural resources...to be used and preserved for the good of the
Major Nations of the Security Council...All of the above constitute the New World Order..." The September 1950
issue of the "New Age Magazine" states that, "Providence (the code name for the god of Masonry) has chosen...the
Nordic race to unfold the "New Age" of the world-a "Novus Ordo Seclorum" (New World Order). The
magazine goes on to state that, "The Great God ourKing has chosen the great American Public Schools to
pave the way for the new race, the new religion, and the new civilization". There really are no real
democratic governments anymore they are all set up by behind the scenes infiltration. Members of the
"Establishment" refer to true Christians as "nonrehabilitatable".
On May 29-31, 1954 the Bilderberger Hotel in Oosterbeek, Netherlands had a meeting of the world's
leading banking, business, government and academia. Since then they have become known as the
Bilderbergers. In 1962 and again in 1973 their meeting was in Baden-Baden, Germany and some of the
people attending were David Rockefeller, Henry Kissinger, Queen Beatrix of the Netherlands, Queen
Sophia of Spain, Katherine Graham (Washington Post), Bill Clinton, Giovanni Angelli (Chairman of
Fiat), Robert Bartley (Editor of the Wall Street Journal) and many others. There are representatives from
politics, manufacturing, royalty, news-people and every aspect of the world's influence. These meetings
are heavily guarded (1000 troops) so they must be considered very important. The goals of the
Bilderbergeres are to create a single world financial system controlled by them and to control all political
arenas from all countries as well as their economies and religions. David Rockefeller admitted it during
their 1991 meeting. They don't care anymore about who knows about them so long as no one tries to
stop them. The CIA is the enforcement arm of the CFR, which was established by J.P. Morgan, J.D.
Rockefeller, Paul Warburg and Jacob Schiff. The Illuminati refer to all other people as the GOYIM. This

--- Sayfa 16 ---
is an ancient term that refers to the wild beasts of the field. That's what they think of us; how gracious!
Every time the New World Order wants some thing they create a crisis and the general public gives them
what they want. The New World Order also cried for the establishment of "The League of Nations"
which later became "The United Nations". The main purpose of The United Nations is to control all
aspects of the world including government, money, food, science and religion. Jacob Schiff, an American
banker sunk $20 million in 1917 to finance the Bolshevik revolution in order to control the USSR. The
international bankers caused the 1929 crash of the stock market by changing the rules of borrowing
money and allowing the extension of credit, then they called in the loans overnight. They did this only
after they had sold all their stocks and bought silver and gold with their profits. The Illuminati seal is on
the American dollar bill. It says, "Annuli Coeptis" which means "our enterprise (conspiracy) has been
crowned with success. It also says, "Novas Ordo Seclorum" which means "New World Order". Also
printed on the seal is the pyramid with the capstone being "The all-seeing eye" which represents
"Lucifer". What most people don't realize is that the printed money of almost every country in the world
(including Canada, Britain and the United States) is not owned by that country. It is owned by the
international moneylenders and loaned to those countries at high interest rates. With the international
moneylenders creating wars and then financing both sides of the war they end up controlling everything
when the war is over.
In order to control the money of the world the Illuminati started up monopolies of products and the profits of
those were used to buy up more monopolies. Lord Rothschild monopolized the gold mines of South
Africa through DeBeers by the late 1800's. In the early 1900's John D. Rockefeller who had built a massive
empire by "eliminating competition", decided to take over education in the United States in order to prepare the way
for the New World Order. The Rockefeller and Carnegie foundation exists to turn the world's education systems
into proponents of socialism. In order to do this they had to infiltrate all the teacher's colleges (in all aspects
from science to religion).
To help their cause, Rockefeller enlisted the help of John Dewey, an atheistic humanist and communist
who became head of the Teacher's College at Columbia University. With Rockefeller money Dewey
founded the "Progressive Education Association" with the intent to spread socialism. A Congressional
Committee was set up by Carroll Reese of Tennessee in order to investigate the communistic influence
into the teacher's organizations from the Dewey-Rockefeller coalition but it had to be disbanded because
the established "powers that be" threw up a solid wall in order to oppose the investigation (Quigley pages
954-955). Four years later the Congressional Committee's general counsel, Rene Wormser, wrote a paper
called "Foundation: Their Power and Influence" which stated that their conclusion was that, "there was
indeed a conspiracy among leading educators in the United States to bring about Socialism". Also stated
was, "A very powerful complex of foundations and allied organizations he has developed over the
years to exercise a high degree of control over education. Part of this complex, and ultimately responsible
for it, are the Rockefeller and Carnegie groups of foundations". In a book called "The Great Technology",
Dr. Harold Ruggs states on page 32 that "A new public mind is to be created" and on page 271 he
writes, "through the schools of the world we shall disseminate a new conception of government-one
that will embrace all the activities of men, one that will postulate the need of scientific control and
operation of economic activities in the interest of all people" What they don't tell you is that what
they mean by the "interest of all people" is what they dictate in the form of a New World Order under
their control. Dr. George Counts, a professor of education and leading member of Dewey's "Frontier
Thinkers", says in his book "Dare the Schools build a New Social Order?" on pages 28-29, "the teachers
should teach for power and then make the most of their conquest...to the extent that they are allowed to
fashion the curriculum and procedures of the schools they will definitely and positively influence the
social attitudes, ideals and behaviour of the coming generation". By the mid 1900's the newspapers,
textbooks, magazines, radio and television stations were owned or operated by the socialistic lefts so they
began their onslaught of propaganda that only large government intervention can fix the problems

--- Sayfa 17 ---
experienced in society by creating a new social mind of the countries. Comments from the elite educators
speak for themselves. Ashlet Montagu stated in a lecture at Anaheim California on November 9, 1970
that, "The American family structure produces mentally ill children". (In other words the family
structure must be destroyed so then government can take over the minds of the children without
interference from the parents who try to teach their children correctly when they come home. Dr. Pierce
from Harvard University in 1973 proclaimed "Every child in America who enters school at the age of five
is mentally ill, because he comes to school with allegiance toward our elected officials, toward the preservation
of this form of government...patriotism, nationalism, sovereignty...all these prove the child is sick, because the truly
well individual is one who has rejected all those things and is what I call the true international child of the
future". Paul Brandwein on page 10 of "The Social Science" of 1970 states, "Any child who believes in God is
mentally ill". Now you know what they think of people who believe in liberty, family and in God. Admiral
Hyman Rickover realized what was happening when he was quoted in "The Tablet" dated August 11, 1959 when he
said we are now, "reaping the consequences of the destruction of traditional education by the Dewey-Kilpatrick
experimental philosophy. Dewey's ideas have led to the elimination of the many academic subjects on the ground
that they wouldnot be useful in life...the student thus receives neither intellectual training nor the factual
knowledge that will help him understand the world he lives in, or to make well-rounded decisions in his
private life or as a responsible citizen". Hosea 4:6 says people are destroyed by lack of knowledge. This,
all because they want a New World Order full of zombie-like robots to do as they are told and never to
think on their own.
What about vaccinations? Are they safe?
Vaccines are supposed to build up our immunities to help us fight certain diseases later on in life. For
example in the 1700's smallpox was considered a more deadly disease than cholera, Black Death or
yellow fever. On May 14, 1796 Edward Jenner figured out that one of the weaker strains of cowpox
when injected into a human, made antibodies that inside the body which prevented that individual from
getting smallpox. Even though Jenner was ridiculed, he went ahead anyway, and countless people were
saved by his vaccine (the root word vacca means cow). The British government gave him 10,000.00
pound reward and many countries declared May 14 a holiday in his honour. So how do they make
vaccines today? Today disease germs are passed through animals (called serial passage) in order to
weaken the germ before injecting it into humans. Measles is passed through chick embryos, polio is
passed through monkey kidneys, diphtheria is passed through horse's blood and Rubella is passed through
aborted human fetuses (that is one of the reasons why there is a demand for fetuses). The strain is then
removed from the host and preserved for later human injection. The first question to ask is how do we
know that the animal doesn't have any disease that will be passed on to the human? The answer is that
they don't. Then in order to preserve the serum it is placed into viles full of drugs such as neomycin,
streptomycin, sodium chloride, sodium hydroxide, aluminum hydroxide, sorbitol, hydrolyzed gelatin,
formaldehyde and mercury derived thimerosal. They say this makes it safe for humans even though at
least two of the additives are linked to cancer. The truth is that between 1850 and 1940 childhood
diseases dropped by 90 percent without vaccines. On top of that bubonic plague, scarlet fever
and tuberculosis have all disappeared without the use of vaccines. Polio, smallpox and diphtheria have all
disappeared in countries where they never had vaccines and they did it at a rate faster than in countries
that had the vaccines (study by Mendelsohn and Scheibner). The link here is that the diseases disappeared
by proper nutrition and sanitation. Dr. Coulter in a book called "OPT: A shot in the dark" states that the
DPT vaccine affects the vagus nerve in the back of the spine which controls the breathing functions. A
1979 study by UCLA stated that 1000 babies die every year as a direct result from the DPT vaccination
but the deaths were classified by doctors as SIDS. In the 1974 book by Dr. Kalokerinos called "Every
second child" documented where up to half of the children in Australia vaccinated died in areas of poor
nutrition. Dr. Scheibner's book "Vaccinations, The Medical assault on the immune system (subtitled, 100
years of orthodox research shows that vaccines represent a medical assault on the immune system)" states,

--- Sayfa 18 ---
"Immunizations, including those practiced on babies, not only did not prevent any infectious disease, they
caused more suffering, more deaths than any other human activity in the entire history of medical intervention".
In a 1996 book called "Emerging viruses: AIDS & Ebola, Nature, Accident or Intentional", Dr. Leonard
Horowitz states the, "Rockefeller-led military-medical-industrial complex whose plan for a New World Order
called for massive depopulation at home and abroad" is responsible for many diseases like AIDS being unleashed on
the population of the world. William Douglas M.D. states in his book "Vaccines: are they really safe and effective?"
in the1980's that only males who were promiscuous were given hepatitis B vaccines in Africa, then in
1984 the CDC stated that about 60 percent of those males were found to have contracted AIDS". The
vaccine they were given as described in Schreibner's book was one that was knowingly contaminated with
VS40 (Simian Immuno-deficiency Virus) and bovine retrovirus, which are known to mutate into AIDS
when injected into humans. There are literally hundreds of examples of this type of harmful and
intentional inoculation. There is a positive side to the story though. All the things taken into our bodies
through vaccines can be combated by good nutrition through good diet by raw fruits and vegetables (Gen.
1:29). For example the following diseases are directly related to poor nutrition:
Scurvy
lack of vitamin C
Beriberi
lack of thiamine (B 1)
Rickets
lack of vitamin D
Anemia
lack of Vitamin cyanocobalamin (B12)
Night blindness
lack of vitamin A
Pellagra
lack of Niacin
Skin disease
lack of riboflavin (B2)
Nervous system diseases
lack of (B6)
Ulcers
lack of Folic Acid
Skin lesions, gray hair, stunted growth
lack of Pentothenic acid
Depression, dermatitis
lack of Biotin
All these diseases are not contagious and are therefore called chronic metabolic diseases. The list is quite
endless when it is researched, yet the current medical establishment still insists on trying to find germ
related causes for disease. The evidence is quite overwhelming in favour of proper diet to prevent disease
yet the medical establishment still doesn't "buy" into this. The question is WHY? Obviously the answer is
money, and more importantly it is that the intention from 'the establishment" that the reduction in
population is paramount to their goals. Now it is timely that we discuss the "war on cancer". What exactly
is cancer? Cancer is not contagious, so therefore it is a chronic metabolic disease. This implies that it is a
disease related to a deficiency such as scurvy or any of the other diseases. How does cancer grow in the
body? In 1902 Professor Beard of the University of Edinburgh, Scotland (published in the British medical
journal "Lancet") discovered that cancer cells were in fact the same as trophoblasts which are normal cells
found in human embryos as they are growing in the womb of the mother. Cancer is simply these
trophoblast cells reproducing uncontrollably in the human body. They are in fact human cells produced by
the human patient which in fact kill the host by over producing. Estrogen in the female body is what
triggers the reproduction of the trophoblast cells in the fetus. Dr. Stewart M. Jones in his book "Nutritian
Rudiments in Cancer" dated 1972 page 6 says that when hormones go imbalanced in the human body
promoting trophoblast production, that is the beginning of cancer. It has been discovered that almost any
kind of hormonal imbalance can cause different kinds of cancers (i.e. estrogen or testosterone, etc.). In
short, trophoblast cells (cancer) are a result of hormone imbalance which is directly related to poor diet.
Why doesn't the human fetus continue to grow uncontrollably with the trophoblast cells? Trophoblast
cells continue to grow until about the eight week when the pancreas forms. The pancreas sends out special enzymes
to fight the trophoblast. One main problem with the pancreas in today's world is that the modern diet is so
short in vitamins and minerals that the pancreas is busy supplying enzymes to supplement the food
consumed by people that it cannot keep up with the production of enzymes to fight the trophoblast

--- Sayfa 19 ---
cells. When this imbalance occurs then the individual is susceptible to cancer (carcinoma). There is
however one chemical compound available to us in nature that will make up the deficit. It is called
vitamin B17 (Laetrile or Amygdalin). B17 contains nitriloside, which is a chemical composition made of
two units of glucose, one of benzaldehyde and one of cyanide. Cyanide is a poison but it is completely
inert in this molecular structure. Many people say that this makes it unsafe for human consumption.
Before commenting on that let us review that water is made up of hydrogen and oxygen both of which are
explosive individually but inert when you put them together. B17 is no different than water. B17 is a
vitamin and has never killed anyone, but aspirin, which is twenty times more toxic than B17 kills 90
people a year in the U.S. alone. Cyanide is also in vitamin B12 but no one says we can't consume it. There
are 100,000 people who die every year from prescription drugs in the U.S. alone and no one says stop
selling prescription drugs. Why this outcry against B17? So how does 1317 work? The only thing that can
unlock the cyanide and benzaldehyde is an enzyme called beta-glucosidase. Once this unlocking
enzyme contacts the B 17 molecule with water it releases the poison on contact with the cell that releases
the beta-glucosidase. The amazing thing is that the only cell in the body that releases a beta-glucosidase
enzyme is the cancer cell. It is as though the B 17 molecule was specifically designed for killing cancer
cells. Amazing or is it? The vitamin 1317 is found in seeds such as the apricot, peach, plum, nectarines,
cherries, apples, lima beans, bean sprouts, millet, alfalfa, peas, buckwheat and almost all berries. Oddly
enough in Genesis 1:29 The Lord God Almighty said as part of our diet to eat seeds. Flow do you suppose
God knew this, or could it be that He planned it? In 1922 a report was written on the Hunza's in the
Himalaya Mountains where they never died of cancer and many lived well beyond the 120-year age. They
prize their apricot seeds as we would prize gold. Apricots are a main staple of the Hunzas In 1960 a study
was done on the Inuit of the far north who also never died of cancer. Their diet consisted mainly of tundra
grasses of which Arrow grass is very high in B17. Today there is a whole conspiracy against vitamin
therapy especially B 17. In order to discredit the B 17 complex the FDA tried to release biased studies that
would reveal the B17 didn't work. Their criteria was to advise if the B 17 was able to reduce the tumor
size by at least 60 percent. If so it would be called a success. Now understand that not all tumors are made
entirely up of cancer cells. Many tumors have less than 15 percent of the whole mass made up of cancer cells. In
cases such as these a 15 percent reduction in tumor size is classified as cured. Of the 22 patients 18 were cured but
since not all of the tumors shrunk by at least 60 percent it was called a failure. How can you have an 82 percent
success rate called a failure? Of all the tests that were performed on B 17 by the AMA or any other cancer institute
controlled by Rockefeller money, every one of them was declared as a failure. The Sloan-Kettering Institute
(operated by the Rockefeller conglomerate) was hired to discredit B17. In 1978 the National Cancer Institute
was contracted to study B17. Even when world famous cancer research Doctor Kanematsu Sugiura was contracted to
study B17 by the SloanKettering's laboratory and the first test was a 100 percent success, but the results were too
embarrassing to formally publish (even though the results were leaked to the media by insiders), so they reissued the
tests by reducing the amount of prescribed 1317 to the patients until the results were to the liking of the institute.
They then tried to ruin Dr. Sugiura's reputation by spreading false rumours about him in order to take away his
credibility. While all this was going on Dr. Martin of the Sloan-Kettering's laboratory admitted in an
interview on December 23, 1977 that the experiment was not set up to answer whether 1317 works it was
set up to embarrass the B17 proponents. The implication here is that the Sloan-Kettering's institute is
above reproach and would not "doctor" results of any experiments. Let us be reminded that in 1974 Dr.
William Summerlin, who was a top ranking researcher of the Sloan-Kettering institute claimed to have
developed a drug to prevent transplanted skin grafts from being rejected by different donors. To prove this
he painted black skin patches on white mice claiming they were the transplanted grafts (The Patchwork
mouse, 1976 New York Anchor press, by Joseph Hixon). There is nothing these people won't do to
protect their financial investments. Make no mistake about that. No matter what they did Dr. Sugiura
would not stop promoting the use of B17. There is now a foundation started by Doctors who promote the
use of B17 called "The Cancer Cure Foundation" where doctors can be contacted who will assist in the
administration of B17 (cancure.org).

--- Sayfa 20 ---
Why doesn't the establishment want a cure for cancer found? Because nutritional therapy is the exact
opposite of what the drug industry promotes, because anyone can use nutritional therapy through free
enterprise which is not patentable (Rockefeller organizations cannot corner the market on it), and because
if a cancer cure was found hundreds of billions of dollars in revenue will be lost by the drug
companies. The American Cancer Society's corporate statement is that it is "an emergency organization,
a temporary organization, seeking in its independent Crusade to obtain enough dollars to wage an
unrelenting fight against cancer" (ACS booklet, page 17). Notice that the cancer society is not interested
in finding a cure for cancer. Very interesting!
Philip E. Binzel, M.D. in his book "Alive and Well" 1994, Westlake Village CA, American Media page
113 says that his experience with metastatic cancer (cancer that has moved to multiple parts of the body)
was that his results were 287 percent better than orthodox methods. John A. Richardson M.D. had similar
results published in "Laetrile case Histories" Westlake Village, CA American Media, 1977 where he
writes that 76 out of 108 patients with metastatic cancer lived long-term using B17.
In the booklet "Laetrile Ban May Soon Be Lifted" Twin Circle, June 16, 1972 page 11 stated "When we
add Laetrile to a cancer culture under the microscope, providing the enzyme glucosidase also is present,
we can see the cancer cells dying off like flies". In the booklet "Amygdalin Claimed Nontoxic Anti-
Cancer Therapeutic Agent" from Infectious Diseases dated Oct 15, 1971 pages 1 and 23, "Amygdalin (B
17) with glucosidase (unlocking enzyme) added also succeeded in killing 100 percent of the ascites tumor
cells, due to the freeing of the same two chemicals".
With all this information available to us why are we not using this vitamin therapy to fight disease? It is
non-toxic with side effects such as lowered blood pressure, increased energy levels, destroys cancer cells while
nourishing non-cancer cells and on and on, while the alternatives are surgery with an average 10-15 percent
survival rate, radiology which spreads the cancer and makes a long term survival rate very low, or chemotherapy
which very often spreads the cancer and has serious side effects as well as a low long term survival rate. Why?
Understand we can buy liquor and tobacco products, which we know, are harmful to our bodies. We are also forced
to drink water containing fluoride, chlorine and soon to be ammonium which are known to be toxic combinations,
but when it comes to getting a vitamin supplement B17 the government says no, it's not good for you! It is high
time we figure out what is happening in this world.
John T. Flynn in his book "God's Gold; The Story of Rockefeller and His Times" New York, Harcourt
and Co. 1932, explains how Rockefeller hated competition and conspired to buy up and control all
companies in order to set world prices and profit margins for himself without any competition. By the
1870's the Rockefeller empire had acquired full control of the Standard Oil Company which controlled all
the oil in the United States (and most of the world too). In 1911, Rockefeller was forced to break Standard
Oil into six companies and sell off five of them. This worked out great for Rockefeller because no-one
had enough money to buy his five companies so he loaned the money out to the other companies to buy
his shares and he ended up owning all companies under different names with dividends on his money.
This worked out to so well that to this day almost no one has any idea what has happened. It is only after
understanding this fact that you can understand how the prices at the gas station all go up at the exact
same time at all the different oil companies. It doesn't end there. There are literally hundreds of thousands
of different synthetic byproducts that can be made from oil. These synthetic compounds are used in the
drug and tobacco industries. The tobacco prices are all the same for all the different manufacturers, which
implies monopoly. This can also be seen in the banking and insurance industries. There are few industries
around the world in which you can imply that monopoly does not exist. In a book called "The Rich and
Super Rich" by Lundberg page 461 he states that one percent of the population owns more than 70
percent of the industries, while ten percent owns all of it. The Rockefeller group needed to control the
American Medical Association too, so he sent all kinds of grants into the association when they needed

--- Sayfa 21 ---
money which made the organization obliged to hire on Rockefeller associates to control their boards. This
has been the Rockefeller trademark. When they want to gain control of an organization they create a
conflict of sorts or a crisis and then offer the solution by giving money and providing expertise to solve
the conflict (a good example is the "mad-cow" crisis). They always end up controlling it by having their
associates in control of the boards and controlling future decisions. Their motives are never questioned
because of their benevolence. By 1910 the Flexner Foundation (controlled by Rockefeller and Carnegie)
had "invested" over one billion dollars into the medical schools of America alone and placed their people
at the heads of the boards of each of those medical schools. Since 1922 the medical journals have become
financial linked with the AMA journal. The AMA journal is financed (operated) by the pharmaceutical
companies through advertising. In other words the drug companies (owned by the oil companies, which
are owned by the Rockefeller groups) tell the government what to put into law.
In a book called "A history of the AMA" by Morris Fishbein M.D, Philadelphia and London, 1947 on pages
987 and 989 he tells that in 1908 after the "foundation" had . infiltrated the AMA it was going after the rest of
the professions such as law, medicine, theology, etc. With the Rockefeller foundations infiltrating the many
different aspects of society is it any wonder that they are also infiltrating the religious institutions? As an example,
Chicago University (a Baptist stronghold) was given a $600,000.00 grant through John D. Rockefeller. As a result
they named as president of the institution Dr. William Rainey Harper at the request of Rockefeller. Within two
years all teachers who disagreed with Rockefeller were let go!
For those who say that the FDA has good standards and they are there to help us must look at some of their standards
for processed food. The FDA allows one rodent pellet for

--- Sayfa 22 ---
every pint of wheat, ten fly eggs per eight ounces of fruit juice and on and on, I think you
get the picture. Then some will say that the FDA polices bad drugs that get into the market.
Is this true? The FDA kept using Diethylstilbestrol (DES) as an additive for cattle feed
even when it was proved as a link to cancer (DES is an artificial female sex hormone like
estrogen). In 1940 Winthrop Chemical shipped out 400,000 tablets of mislabeled Luminal
which were actually Sulfathiazole (an agent for putting animals to sleep). Even though they
were aware of the mistake they did nothing to notify the public which they are required by
law to do. When seventeen people died from it, the FDA went in and refused to recall the
pills (in order for Winthrop Chemical to deplete their inventory) adding to the deaths.
Let's look at some examples of people saved by B17. In 1980 Steve McQueen was
diagnosed with terminal stomach cancer. He went to Mexico for B17 treatment and came
back cured but had a large dead cancer tumor in his abdomen. For cosmetic reasons he had
it removed by surgery. He died from complications due to surgery but it was reported that
he died from cancer because of the failed B17 treatments. In 1971 David Edmunds of
Pinole, CA had his colon removed due to cancer. When he was opened up during surgery it
was found that the cancer has metastasized to the bladder and other areas. He was sown up
and given six months to live. He took B 17 therapy instead and walked into the hospital six
months later and formally requested his colon to be reattached. This was first time it was
ever done, and when the operation was complete the doctors said they couldn't find any
cancer in his body anymore ("Cancer miracle cure" Berkeley Daily Gazette July 27, 1972).
Alicia Buttons (actor Red Buttons wife) was diagnosed with terminal cancer in November
1972. She went to West Germany for B 17 treatments and was cured (The National Tattler,
Aug. 17, 1973 page 5). As of 23 years later she was still alive and well. There are literally
hundreds of examples of this type of cure, yet you would never know about them unless
you do your research.
Eph. 6:10 says, "Put on all the armour of God". Duet. 18:9-14 and Lev. 19:31 & Lev. 20:6,
tells us not to do the things outlined in the occult. Col. 2 says, "In Christ dwells all the
hidden knowledge and wisdom". Rom. 1:22 says, "Professing to be wise they became
fools". Deut. 13:1-5 says, "God may be testing us". Since Satan wants to take the place of
God here on earth, he has to replace all of God's laws too! Think about whom is in control
of this world.
U2's lyrics in the "Rattle and Hum" album, in the song named "God Part 2" state, "don't
believe the devil I don't believe the book, but the truth is not the same without the lies he
made up". The lyrics are very insightful because it is hard to understand truth until you can
compare it to a lie. It is hard these days to discern truth because truth is being defined as being relative
to an individual. This is an absurd statement. It is like saying if I want to believe that two plus two
is five, then that is truth for me. Truth is and always will be absolute.
The mark of the beast! Rev. 14:9-11 says, "he who receives the mark of the beast will go to hell".
New Bible versions are now changing these verses to state that you should receive the mark. Those
who are preaching that the church needs to get back to basics and teach the Bible as literal writings are
being labeled as dividing the Church. However, Rom. 16:17 says, that the ones who are
creating divisions are the ones who are teaching doctrine contrary to what you have learned. In
other words, anyone who brings a new or different teaching into the Church that it has not known
previously. That is happening at an unprecedented way today by people within the Church. 2 Tim.
3:12 says, "all that live

--- Sayfa 23 ---
Godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution".
In Isaiah 14:12-15 Lucifer (whose name means light-bearer, probably because he was
allowed into the presence of the Lord God Almighty) said, "I will ascend into heaven, I will
exalt my throne above the stars of God, I will sit upon the mount of the congregation of the
north, I will ascend above the heights of the clouds and I will be like the Most High".
However God said no you won't and in Rev. 12:7-9 "Satan was cast down to earth with all
his angels (demons) after he fought with God in heaven and lost". Luke 10:18 says "Satan
fell like lightening from heaven". Eph. 6:12 says, "we wrestle not against flesh and blood
but against rulers of darkness of this world". When Jesus was being tempted by the Devil in
Luke 4:2-13, the Devil tempted Jesus with giving Him all the power of the kingdoms of the
world if Jesus worshipped him, Jesus didn't argue with Satan so it must be true that Satan
has been given some dominion over the earth at least for now. Satan has been endowed
with a huge amount of power such as:
Making giants on the earth
Gen. 6:4, Num. 13:33, books of Enoch & Jasher
Making rods into serpents
Ex. 7:11-12
Evil spirit in Saul
1 Sam. 16:23
Lying spirits of Ahab
1 Kings 22:23, 2 Chron. 18:22
Sending a spirit message
Job 4:15-16
Change water to blood
Ex. 7:22
Make frogs multiply
Ex. 8:7
Kill oxen, sheep, people,
Job's kids Job 1:14-19
Boils on Job's skin
Job 2:7
Translation of Jesus in a moment
Matt. 4:5 & 8, Luke 4:5 & 9
Thom in Paul's side
2 Cor. 12:7
John 8:44 also says that Satan is a murderer from the beginning and the father of lies. In
Book 1 of Adam and Eve Satan kills Adam twice on 67:12 and 69:3 both times God had
to resurrect Adam. And then in Jasher 23:86 Satan kills Abraham's wife Sarah. We cannot
make the mistake that Satan is God's equal because he is not (as outlined in the book of Job
Satan still has to present himself before God and ask permission to do certain things).
Satan's doom is to take place soon though, but for now he is a very powerful individual
with all of his demons helping him. However we do have access to an individual who is
more powerful. In Mark 1:27 even the evil spirits obeyed Jesus. Then in Mark 3:11 the evil
spirits proclaimed that Jesus was the Son of God. You see the Demons knew this because
Jesus was the one who created them, they knew that Jesus defeated them on the cross, they
knew that Jesus preached to them during the crucifixion and Jesus was the one who
condemned them to Hell at judgement time. There was no doubt in the Demons minds who
Jesus was. Is it any wonder why 2 Car. 11:14-15 says that Satan disguises himself as an
angel of light and his ministers as ministers of light? 1 Tim. 4:1 says, "In the last days people
will follow evil spirits and doctrines of devils". God equates Himself to the law in many instances.
Romans 5:13 says, "sin is not taken into account when there is no law" and that is why Satan is
having laws changed. Satan hates God and God's law:
We are made perfect in Christ, Col. The
heart goes to God, Psalm 84:2 God
is truth, John 14:6
God is light, Matt 5:14
God is holy, Rev. 15:4
1:28
The law of the Lord is perfect, Psalm 19:7 Thy
law written within my heart, Psalm 40:8 The law is truth,
Psalm 119:142 The law is light, Prov. 6:23 The law
is holy, Rom. 7:12

--- Sayfa 24 ---
God is life, John 14:6 The law is life, Rom. 8:2
This helps explain why the laws are being changed in our societies such as abortion being
legal when God's commandments say don't kill. God's law says don't commit adultery and
we don't even know what marriage is anymore. God says remember the Sabbath and we
now work seven days a week. We worship everything today but God, everyone has their
own idol and we can go on and on.
1 Cor. 1:10 says to not have divisions while Romans defines what those divisions are.
Rom. 16:17 says to avoid people who are making divisions in the church by teaching
doctrine contrary to what the church has previously learned (such as evolution, we can
become gods, etc.). Eph. 5:11 says, "have no fellowship with darkness, but reprove them".
We are seeing an unprecedented falling away from the faith today. Current statistics state
that in this generation, there is a 75 percent chance that children raised in Christian homes
will reject the faith by the time they enter post secondary school education. It's not hard to
understand this statistic when we hear what some of our church leaders are saying.
Kenneth Hagin in "Ministering to the oppressed, 1977" says he was having a
conversation with Jesus when an evil spirit came and Jesus couldn't cast him away so
Kenneth did it for him". Paul Crouch during a TBN interview Nov. 6, 1990 said that Jesus
wasn't divine. Oral Roberts in a Jan. 1, 1985 e-mail said send him money and God will
send it back to them at 100 fold. Gloria Copeland in "God's will is prosperity" says" give
$10.00 and receive $1000.00, give $1000.00 and receive $100,000.00...see Mark 10:30 is a
very good deal". Benny Hinn in "Our position in Christ #2, 1991" says God came from
heaven, became a man and made man into little gods". Kenneth Copeland in his tape #
12-0017 (What happened from the cross to the throne?) says God is subordinate to
Satan. Robert Schuller in "BDM letter Oct. 1993, vol. 2, no. 8, pages 2-3 says, "no need
to recognize sin, no need to repent, no need for crucifixion". Billy Graham in "Vine
and Branches" June 1998, vol. 13, issue 3, page 7 says, "Muslims and Jews can be saved by
finding God in their own worship system". What is happening to the leaders of the church?
Luke 8:12 says that Satan comes to take away the word so they can't be saved! Heb. 10:31
says, "it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the Living God". Rom. 8:31 says, "If God
is for us who can be against us?"
Our conclusion is that Satan and his instruments on Earth are carrying out their plans to
take over the world and destroy everyone in their path.
Jesus said, "Surely I come quickly" amen, even so, come Lord Jesus (Rev. 22:20).