--- Sayfa 1 ---
Jerusalem Quarterly 22/23  [ 37 ]
Freemasonry in
Ottoman Palestine
Michelle Campos
In 1956, in honour of the 50th anniversary
of the founding of the Barkai (L’Aurore)
Freemasonry lodge in Jaffa (today based in
Tel Aviv), the all-Jewish lodge published
a complete roster of its past members.
According to the Masonic editor, the group
sought to publicize the names of their former
Jewish, Christian, and Muslim members
“in the name of a pleasant memory and
out of the hope that perhaps days of real
peace between the peoples might return and
those...[former brothers] can return to us.”1
Using language like “one family,”2 “the best
of the country,”3 and the “best of Jaffa from
the three religions,”4 the literature of the
Israeli Barkai lodge invokes an idyllic non-
sectarian past.
Certainly, one of the important ramifications
of the 1908 Young Turk Revolution in
Palestine was an increasingly active civic
sphere. A rising Palestinian-Ottoman
modernizing class emerged, not only
from the notables and bureaucrats of the
Tanzimat era, but (importantly) from the
effendiyya social strata of the white-collar
middle class. Having received liberal
Diploma of the Grand Orient Ottoman,
from the Bibliotheque Nationale, Paris

--- Sayfa 2 ---
[ 38 ]   HISTORICAL FEATURES  Freemasonry in Ottoman Palestine
educations and belonging to the free professions,
these Palestinians were attuned to the advances of
the West and determined to forward the interests
of their homeland.5 Christians, Jews, and Muslims
of this stratum studied in similar schools (where
they acquired tools such as foreign languages,
accounting, geography), sometimes belonged to the
same clubs, and worked and lived in close proximity
to one another. Members of all three religions
took part in creating a new social network which
aspired to transcend communal boundaries for
the economic, cultural, and political betterment of
Palestine and the Ottoman Empire.
In this article, part of a broader work on late
Ottoman Palestine, I will analyze the Freemasons
in Palestine, their contribution to a ‘bourgeois’ civil
society and its contours in the Ottomanist public
sphere. Contrary to the ‘separate spheres’ model that
still dominates much of the historical literature on
the region, I will show that Muslims, Christians and
Jews in Palestine were deeply interdependent. These
relationships gradually weakened, however, as the
political climate changed and sectarian differences
gained prominence.
While the Barkai lodge did – as it reminisced
– include members of all three religions, and while
it did succeed during the Young Turk period in
mobilizing across communal lines, by 1913 inter-
communal tensions and rivalry had penetrated
Freemasonry in Palestine. This communal divide
foreshadowed a coming similar separation within
the broader Masonic world.
Philosophy, Progress and Politics in Freemasonry
Evolving out of medieval Europe as a guild for mason craftsmen employed in the
cathedral boom, by the eighteenth century philosophical Freemasonry had taken shape
in England (1717) and France (1720) and soon established itself throughout Europe.
Not long after, European Freemasonry had spread from the European metropole to the
various colonies in Africa, the Caribbean, and the Americas.6
Freemasonry also spread to the Middle East,7 and between 1875 and 1908
Two different mast-heads of the Barkai
lodge letterhead. The first one, with the
cross and the slogan “In hoc signo vinces”
(By this sign you conquer) was considered
anti-Masonic and so the lodge was asked to
change it by the Paris headquarters.  They
did, to the general compass of the second
letterhead. Source: M. Campos

--- Sayfa 3 ---
Jerusalem Quarterly 22/23  [ 39 ]
Freemasonry was to prove itself one of the most influential social institutions in the
Ottoman Empire.8 Despite the fact that they were considered outposts of European
influence,9 secularism,10 and borderline revolutionary ideologies,11 Freemason lodges
in the Middle East were extremely popular and influential. Incorporating a belief in
a Supreme Being,12 secretive rituals,13 and modern Enlightenment ideals, Freemasonry
offered its members a progressive philosophical and social outlook, an important
economic and social network, ties to the West, as well as a potential arm for political
organizing.14 All four of these elements proved central to the spread and impact of
Freemasonry lodges in the last several decades of the Ottoman Empire.
At its most basic level, Freemasonry offered a world-view based on progressive
humanism. In its founding constitution, the Grand Orient de France (GODF), the
French Masonic order with arguably the greatest international impact,15 firmly rooted
itself in such an outlook:
Freemasonry,
which
is
essentially
a
philanthropic,
philosophical and progressive institution, aims to search
for the truth, study ethics and practice mutual support. It
works for the material and moral improvement of humanity,
towards intellectual and social perfection. (...)Its principles
are mutual tolerance, the respect of others and of oneself,
absolute freedom of conscience. Believing that metaphysical
considerations are the exclusive concern of individual
members, it refuses any dogmatic position (...).16
As such, there was a natural sympathy between Freemasonry and French revolutionary
ideals, and it is no wonder that generations of nineteenth century reformers found
themselves closely allied with Freemasonry ideals. As we learn from the work of Paul
Dumont, Ottoman intellectuals in the mid-nineteenth century were impacted deeply by
French revolutionary principles, intellectual pursuits, and social questions of the day.17
Dumont writes that most of the Ottoman Masonic lodges at the time discussed themes
of the French Revolution: liberty, social justice, equality of citizens before the law, and
brotherhood - all of which were timely in the Ottoman context.
Thus the Freemasonry lodges of the Ottoman Empire provided a fertile partnership for
Young Ottomanist thinkers and reformers such as Namık Kemal,18 and Freemasonry
as an institution played a significant role along with other secret societies (including
what Zarcone calls “para-Masonic organizations”) in drawing up the 1876 Ottoman
Constitution.19
At the same time, Freemasonry in Egypt provided an outlet for political and social
organization in the era of British colonization, and Masons played a role in the ‘Urabi
revolution.20 Anti-colonialist organizers such as the Islamic thinker Jamal al-Din al-
Afghani, 21 Muhammad ‘Abduh, and the noted writer Ya’qub Sannu’ (of Abu Naddara
fame) were prominent members of various Egyptian Masonic lodges. According

--- Sayfa 4 ---
[ 40 ]   HISTORICAL FEATURES  Freemasonry in Ottoman Palestine
to one source, al-Afghani actively sought out Freemasonry because of its political
dimension as a liberation movement:
If the Freemason society does not interfere in cosmic politics,
while it includes every free builder, and if the building tools
it has are not used for demolishing the old buildings to erect
the monuments of true liberty, brotherhood, and equality,
and if it does not raze the edifices of injustice, arrogance
and oppression, then may the hands of the free never carry
a hammer and may their building never rise...The first
thing that enticed me to work in the building of the free was
a solemn, impressive slogan: Liberty, Equality, Fraternity
- whose objective seemed to be the good of mankind, the
demolition of the edifices and the erection of the monuments
of absolute justice. Hence I took Freemasonry to mean a
drive for work, self-respect and disdain for life in the cause of
fighting injustice.22
Thierry Zarcone argues that, to the east, Freemasonry and para-Masonic organizations
that merged Sufism, politics, and Masonry played a critical role in the 1905-1907
Iranian Constitutional Revolution.23 And, of course, most prominent was the role
accorded to Freemasons in the Young Turk revolution of 1908, as well as the founding
leadership of the Committee for Union and Progress (CUP).24 Four Salonikan
lodges in particular played an instrumental role in supporting the revolution - Loge
Macedonia Risorta (Grand Orient d’Italie), Veritas (Grand Orient de France), Labor
et Lux (Grand Orient d’Italie), and Perseverencia (Grande Oriente Español).25
Jamal Muhammad al-Din al-Afghani

--- Sayfa 5 ---
Jerusalem Quarterly 22/23  [ 41 ]
Furthermore, while it is difficult to quantify the contribution of Freemasonry lodges
to the Young Turks before the revolution, a number of important Young Turks were
active Masons, and hence the overlapping affinities of the two movements is clear.26
It has been suggested that CUP involvement with Freemasonry in Salonika was
only instrumentally aimed at evading the Ottoman police (who were barred from
penetrating European organizations),27 but there was clearly an overlap between
the groups in political, philosophical and social aims. The slogan of the revolution
(“Liberty, Equality, Fraternity”) was the slogan of Freemasonry as well as the CUP,
and the crossover was not incidental. A member of the then-defunct lodge L’Étoile
du Bosphore wrote from Constantinople that “all the Ottoman youth carry a ribbon
on his [sic] chest with our slogan (Liberty-Equality-Fraternity) written in French,
and the army in revolution in Macedonia plays the Marsellaise.”28 Just two months
after the Young Turk revolution, the annual assembly of the Grand Orient de France
in Paris included greetings and congratulations to “Brother Masons” within the CUP
and throughout the Ottoman Empire, articulating their support for the confluence of
Freemasonic and Young Turk ideals and goals.
This convention, in the face of the admirable revolutionary
movement of the Young Turks, whose patient energy, ceaseless
work, and marvellous heroism overcame all the forces of
reaction and of cruelty, addresses its fraternal greeting and
a cordial expression of its sympathy with the sister lodges of
Turkey, take joy in their imposing work of enfranchisement
and wish for the complete realization, in Turkey, of the
Masonic ideals of justice, freedom, and fraternity.29
Immediately following the revolution, Freemasonry flourished in the Ottoman Empire,
particularly in the Arab and Balkan provinces.30 Between 1909 and 1910, at least
seven new Freemason lodges were established (or old ones revived from dormancy)
in Istanbul alone; most of them had names that linked them to the new spirit of
liberty and progress (Les vrais amis de l’Union et Progrès, La Veritas, La Patrie, La
Renaissance, Shefak - also called L’Aurore).31 In Salonika the Freemason lodges
multiplied so much so that Dumont has characterized the period as “proliferation
that was likely to emerge, shortly, in a true Masonic colonization of the Ottoman
Empire.”32 We can only assume that the Masonic and revolutionary principles of
liberty, universalism and civic engagement played at least some role in the appeal
of Masonry to large numbers of Muslims, Christians, and Jews in this period.
Freemasonry’s philosophical orientation echoed the broader public enthusiasm for
liberty and other liberal ideals that emerged in the post-revolution Ottoman Empire.
One surviving application for admission to a Beirut Masonic lodge premises its
motivation precisely in this way: “the Freemasonry order is an order that has rendered
great services to humanity throughout the centuries and always raised high the banner
of equality, fraternity, and liberty. It is an order that seeks to bring together mankind

--- Sayfa 6 ---
[ 42 ]   HISTORICAL FEATURES  Freemasonry in Ottoman Palestine
and to better them. I would also like to be part of such an order, to take part in
benevolence and the useful works of your order.”33
New members swore to abide by these principles as well as to promote mutual
aid, public service, and Masonic loyalty, on pain of excommunication.34 Thus, all
Freemasons, regardless of their motivations for joining, were held accountable and
complicit in theory in upholding these Masonic principles. Of course, it is also likely
that the close relationship between the Young Turks and the Freemasonry movement
gave it a stamp of approval, as well as a certain cachet and political expediency, and
that these socio-political power considerations played a role in Masonry’s popularity.35
Ideology and professed ideals alone do not account for what actually happens on the
ground - to have a more accurate picture, one must examine the social consequences
of participation in a Masonic lodge.
The Grand Orient Ottoman –
Nationalizing and Mobilizing Freemasonry
Far from its origins as a closeted secret society pursued by the state and its
secret police, during the Young Turk period Freemasonry became legitimate and
institutionalized as part of the new socio-political order. One indication of the
increasingly important role of the Freemasonry movement in the post-1908 Ottoman
Empire was that in 1909, the long-defunct “Supreme Council” of the Scottish rite
of Masonry within the Ottoman Empire was re-constituted. Also in 1909, the Young
Turks sought to institutionalize, ‘nationalize’, and mobilize Freemasonry through the
establishment of the Grand Orient Ottoman (or GOO, sometimes called the Grand
Orient de la Turquie), an umbrella mother lodge that aimed to bring foreign-sponsored
lodges under its control.36 In the summer of 1909, eight Constantinople-based lodges
united to establish the GOO.37 In its first elections held in August, Ottoman Minister of
the Interior Talat Pasha was elected Grand Master of the GOO,38 assisted by a multi-
ethnic cast of Who’s Who in the capital. Among the GOO’s important innovations was
its refusal to use the Masonic concept of “Grand Architect of the Universe,” feeling
that such a quasi-deistic formulation would offend its Muslim constituents. Instead,
the GOO asserted that the “Grand Architect” was an ideal to strive for, not an actual
personage.39
The GOO leadership sought to establish an autonomous Masonry in the spirit of
political and national emancipation, as well as to form a core of constitutional liberals
who would be able to stand up to the numerous reactionaries found throughout the
empire.40 Under the aegis of the GOO, Ottoman lodges were established throughout
the empire and existed side-by-side with foreign lodges.41 Paul Dumont has written
that initially some lodges expressed reservations at the new Young Turk Masonic
institutions, precisely because of their attempts to institutionalize Masonry within
a specific political agenda. The GODF lodge Veritas in Salonika, for example,
complained that the establishment of the GOO was “entirely premature”:

--- Sayfa 7 ---
Jerusalem Quarterly 22/23  [ 43 ]
Among the reasons which push to me to place obstacles at the
development of this new Masonic power, is that I noted, alas,
that the lodges subjected to its influence completely neglect
the regulations of the Masonic statutes and regulations
with regard to the recruitment of the members and blindly
are subjects to the instructions of parties which work with
another collective aim.42
Within weeks, however, de Botton’s reservations had dissipated and he wrote to
the GODF to ask them to do all that was “humanly and Masonically possible” to
recognize the GOO.43
The GOO served as an important link between the new ruling party and the broader
Masonic public. In its early efforts to co-opt foreign Masonic lodges throughout
the empire, the founders of the GOO invited Ottoman Freemasons to a “national
convention” in Constantinople in the fall of 1909. But despite ambitions to become
the umbrella lodge for all Masons empire-wide, the founders of the GOO continued to
belong to foreign lodges as well as to lodges racked by national schisms.44
Freemasonry as a Social Club
During this period, religious community played an important role in defining the
contours of daily life - Muslim, Jewish and Christian children usually studied
in separate schools,45 and inter-communal civic organizations were limited to
professional guilds and bourgeois social groups, among them the Freemasons. As one
of the few private forms of organization that existed in the Middle East in this period,
Masonic lodges attracted a wide variety of members and supporters. Thus Freemason
lodges could serve as rare ‘common meeting grounds’ for the spectrum of religious,
ethnic and national communities.46 According to historian Jacob Landau, “...by the end
of the [19th] century, there was hardly a city or town of importance without at least
one lodge. Christians, Muslims and Jews mingled freely in these lodges (although
certain lodges were preponderantly of one faith...) which were among the few
meeting-places for members of different faiths, as well as for foreigners and natives.”47
Beyond serving as a ‘neutral’ meeting ground for various ethnicities and religions,
Masonic lodges also served as vehicles for internal solidarity and social cohesion
across various elite and middle-strata groups, including the traditional aristocracy,48
ruling administration,49 rising merchant classes,50 and lower-level employees and
intellectuals. In Egypt, for example, Muslim Masons by-and-large hailed from similar
rural notable backgrounds, had links with the military, were educated in the new
school system, and were mostly concerned with efficient rule rather than democracy.51
Masonry provided the Syrian Christians of Egypt not only with an opportunity to
push for a constitutional parliamentary regime, but also a means of preserving their
‘insider’ Ottoman status in the face of foreign domination.52

--- Sayfa 8 ---
[ 44 ]   HISTORICAL FEATURES  Freemasonry in Ottoman Palestine
In this regard, it is important to note that to a large extent, Freemasonry in the colonies
and beyond was another face of ‘humanistic colonialism’, which aimed to spread
western ideas of progress, public health, secular education, justice, social laws,
solidarity, freedom of opinion, press, and association, and economic and technological
development. Among other things, colonial Freemasonry created a social and cultural
elite and sought to assimilate the ‘native’ Freemasons to Francophone and European
values and culture.53 Of course, this reception was a dynamic process, and we can
assume that local Freemasons adapted Freemasonry to themselves as much as
themselves to Freemasonry.
Since recruitment to Freemasonry lodges depended on the recommendation of two
members, the organization often had the effect of re-affirming class54 and, in some
areas, ethnic or religious distinctions.55 Furthermore, Masons were also active in
other organizations, creating a linkage between Freemason lodges and other civil
organizations. In this way Freemasonry helped shape the civic public sphere evolving
in the Ottoman Empire.
As the site of the ancient temple of Solomon, Palestine was considered the birthplace
of Freemasonry’s traditions and ideals. The first Freemason lodge in Palestine was
established in 1873 in Jerusalem by Robert Morris, a visiting American Freemason,
Henry Mondsley, an English engineer, and Charles Netter, a French Jew. Morris had
set off for the Middle East to forge ties with local and potential Masons; when he
arrived in Jerusalem he brought with him a charter for the Royal Solomon Mother
Lodge (No. 293) from the Grand Lodge of Canada.56 According to local Masonic
history, most of the members of the lodge were American Christians who had settled
in Jaffa.57 Little is known of the lodge’s work, but in 1907 the lodge’s charter was
finally formally revoked “on account of bad management,” and the lodge quietly
disappeared.58 After the Jerusalem lodge, Le Port du Temple de Salomon was founded
in August 1891 in Jaffa by a group of Arab and Jewish locals, working in French;59
soon thereafter the Frenchman Gustave Milo, along with other European engineers
who had arrived to construct the Jaffa-Jerusalem railroad, joined the lodge.60 The lodge
followed the Misraim (Egyptian) rite, one of the 154 rites in Freemasonry.61 Little is
known of the lodge’s first decade and a half, other than a report that the members of
Le Port du Temple de Salomon wanted to purchase land for a cooperative Freemason
village. The endeavour was apparently racked by disputes and never came to fruition.62
According to one Mason historian,63 because the Misraim rite was not recognized by
most other obediences in Freemasonry, Le Port du Temple de Salomon lodge decided
to leave the Egyptian grand lodge and transfer its allegiance to the Grand Orient de
France (GODF), a leading umbrella organization for Middle Eastern Freemasonry
lodges.64 In April 1904, the lodge applied to the GODF, and by March 1906, the lodge
was notified that it had completed all requirements for adoption by the GODF, and
was renamed L’Aurore (Barkai in Hebrew; Shafaq in Arabic).65
Based on an internal correspondence between the lodge and the GODF, it seems
that the Jaffa Freemasons hoped to benefit from European patronage, acting as both

--- Sayfa 9 ---
Jerusalem Quarterly 22/23  [ 45 ]
catalyst and safeguard. The lodge Venerable (President) wrote to the GODF: “The
difficulties and obstacles all being almost surmounted we are sure that under the
auspices of the GODF we will be able to work with more freedom and for a long
time. We hope to catch up with ourselves over wasted time.”66 Eager to quickly fall in
line under the GODF, Barkai asked for a charter, instructions, ritual, constitution, and
several books of “catechism” for the first three grades.
From the outset, the lodge faced numerous obstacles in Palestine, mostly from the
religious leaderships, and it seems they were physically pursued upon opening the new
lodge headquarters. Several months after its founding, Barkai wrote to the GODF:
We will work assiduously to surmount all the difficulties that
we encounter here. It is a country which will take a little time
to be reformed; let us not be unaware that it is Palestine the
Holy Land. We are bothered by the clergy that drove out
us from our premises, and each day, of new congregations
forming. The spirit of the natives is quickly captured by the
spirit of the Church, by its men. It is the greatest cause of the
delay of our establishment. We had to deploy a great force to
hasten the opening and to be in time to send the balance of
our account to you, for the appointment of our delegate to the
convention.67
Although its existence was marred by difficulties, including “abuses and irregularities”
by government functionaries in the aftermath of the Young Turk revolution,68 by
the beginning of World War I, the Barkai lodge was the largest, most successful
Freemason lodge in Palestine.69
A Study of the Effendiyya
In 1906, the dozen founding members of the Barkai lodge were exclusively Jewish
and Christian: Alexander Fiani, Dr. Yosef Rosenfeld, Jacques Litwinsky, Hanna ‘Issa
Samoury, David Yodilovitz, Yehuda Levi, Musa Khoury, Maurice Schönberg, Moise
(Moshe) Goldberg, Marc Stein, Michel Hourwitz, and Moise (Moshe) Yachia.70 Within
a few years, however, and due to the changed atmosphere in Palestine in the aftermath
of the Young Turk Revolution, Barkai quickly became a centre for leading members
of the political, intellectual and economic elite of all three religions. Importantly,
there was significant Muslim participation in the lodge in the post-1908 period. Of the
157 known members and affiliates in the years 1906-1915, 70 were Muslim, 52 were
Christian, and 34 were Jews.71
This composition is particularly significant when we consider that much of the anti-
Masonic literature denounces Masonry as the purview of the ‘minority’ Jewish,
Christian and foreign European communities. The high participation of Muslims

--- Sayfa 10 ---
[ 46 ]   HISTORICAL FEATURES  Freemasonry in Ottoman Palestine
in Palestine contradicts this charge, even as we note that Christians and Jews were
over-represented in the lodge as compared to the population as a whole. In 1907,
for example, Muslims comprised 75 percent of the population of the Jaffa region,
Christians 19 percent, and Jews between 6 to 10 percent (depending on whether or
not non-Ottomans are considered).72 By 1914, the Jewish proportion of the Jaffa-area
population had risen to almost 25 percent, while the Muslim majority had declined to
56 percent and the number of Christians remained stable at 19 percent.
Concurrently, Freemasonry became more appealing for Palestine’s leading Muslim
families. At the beginning of 1908, Barkai claimed only three Muslim members out
of a total of 37; by the end of 1908, another 14 Muslims had joined the lodge along
with six Jews and Christians, marking the first time that new Muslim enlistment in
the lodge exceeded that of the other two communities. In the six years following, new
Muslim recruits annually exceeded Christian and Jewish recruits; in most years the
Muslim initiates exceeded new Jewish and Christian members combined.
At the same time, Barkai witnessed a dramatic decline in new Jewish membership.
The peak for Jewish membership was in the first year of the lodge’s founding; after
1907, Barkai never admitted more than four Jewish members in any given year. Some
of this declining interest was offset by the establishment of two new lodges based in
Jerusalem, Temple of Solomon (established 1910), and Moriah (established 1913). In
Temple of Solomon, Jews comprised 37 percent of the membership, while Muslims
and Christians were 41 percent and 19 percent respectively. More markedly, the
Moriah lodge, which existed from 1913 to 1914, was 60 percent Jewish, 29 percent
Christian, and only three percent Muslim. While some of this can be accounted
for by the dramatically different demographics of Jerusalem (where Jews were the
majority),73 we will see below that the founding of the Moriah lodge was a political act
rooted in a rupture with the Temple of Solomon lodge that pitted Europeans (and their
protégés) against Ottomans and Zionists against anti-Zionists.
According to the membership logs, Christians and Jews were more likely to take
leading roles within the lodges, and they were more likely to stick around for Masonic
promotion. Of the officers of the three Palestinian Masonic lodges, 43 percent were
Christian, 36 percent Jewish, and only 16 percent Muslim. That is to say, of the three
groups, Muslims were much more likely to remain at the entry-level apprentice stage
than Christians or Jews. Of course, this is in part accounted for by their comparatively
recent exposure to Masonry, unlike their Christian and Jewish counterparts, some of
whom had been among the founding members of the lodge.
Further demographic details provide a more vivid picture of just how deeply-rooted
and localized Freemasonry was in Palestine. By birth, Freemasons in Palestine were
overwhelmingly Ottoman (87-88 percent), and by-and-large Palestinian (60 percent).
Of those born in Palestine, 82 percent were born in Jaffa or Jerusalem, with the rest
coming from other towns such as Nablus, Gaza, Hebron, and Bethlehem. Only one
Palestinian Freemason was born in a village. Thus, Palestine’s Freemasonry lodges

--- Sayfa 11 ---
Jerusalem Quarterly 22/23  [ 47 ]
were fairly indigenous lodges, much more so than anti-Masonic critics claimed.
Only 11% of lodge members were European-born, most of them Jewish immigrants
to Palestine (in some cases Ottomanized citizens), and a few of them European
Christians employed locally.
That most of the lodge’s membership came from Palestinian families of the three
religions (60 percent) tells us the manner in which Freemasonry lodges served as
social networks for the growing middle class and various elites. To a certain extent,
this sector was largely pre-selected and self-perpetuating. In order to be accepted into
a lodge, a prospective candidate had to secure the sponsorship of two lodge members
in good standing. These recommendations often came from relatives (older brothers,
cousins, uncles, and sometimes fathers), business partners or acquaintances, and also
geographically-based extended family networks (for example, strong ties existed
among the several Christian families from Beirut in Jaffa, as well as among the North
African (Maghrebi) Jewish families). Family ties were the single most important
factor in joining - fully 32 percent of all Freemasons in Palestine had family members
who were also member Masons – but educational and professional ties also proved
significant. Among the Freemasons in Barkai lodge were at least six recent graduates
of the American University in Beirut, in addition to many who had studied in various
professional schools in Constantinople. Furthermore, nine employees of the Jaffa and
Jerusalem branches of the Ottoman Imperial Bank were Freemasons.
Socially, the members of Palestine’s Freemasonry lodges, like Masons elsewhere,
were largely of the newly mobile middle classes of the effendiyya in the liberal
professions, the commercial and bureaucratic elite, as well as from the traditional
notable families.74 Though coming from different religious communities, they shared
similar modes of modern education, exposure to foreign languages and Western ideas, a
relatively high level of economic independence, and a growing socio-political weight
in Palestine and the empire as a whole. As a new class, these men were to have an
important impact on the future. Rashid Khalidi has observed:
By the late Ottoman period, a military officer, a postal
official, a teacher in a state preparatory school, or a company
clerk was part of a large and growing new elite, not rooted
for the most part in the old notable class, and with a modern
education involving a number of western elements, and access
to quite considerable power. This new social stratum was to
play a role of extraordinary importance in the politics of the
Middle East throughout the 20th century. The importance of
the Ottoman context, and specifically of the universal impact
of the changes which had been taking place throughout the
empire can be seen here, for the pattern in the Arab provinces
followed that in Rumelia and Anatolia, where Turkish-
speaking members of these or newly-trained professional
groups totally transformed Ottoman and later Turkish

--- Sayfa 12 ---
[ 48 ]   HISTORICAL FEATURES  Freemasonry in Ottoman Palestine
politics, through the Committee of Union and Progress and
later via the Kemalist revolution.75
Two-page initiation certificate of Sa’id
Nashashibi. Source: GODF Archive, Paris
In Palestine, these Masons came from important
families of this new social stratum as well as
from more traditional communal and notable
families. Among the Muslims, there were quite a
few members of the traditional notable families,
including: ‘Arafat,76 Abu Ghazaleh,77 Abu
Khadra,78 al-Bitar,79 al-Dajani,80 al-Khalidi,81
al-Nashashibi82 and Nusseibi. The Christian
families were largely members of the growing
middle-classes, employed in commerce and
the liberal professions: Burdqush,83 al-‘Issa,84
Khoury, Mantura,85 Sleim,86 Soulban,87 and
Tamari.88
Among the Jewish members, the Ashkenazim
were largely colonists who arrived in the
1880s and ‘90s and lived in the early Jewish
agricultural settlements, adopting Ottoman
citizenship upon arrival. The Sephardi and
Maghrebi Jews, on the other hand, were
younger members of economically and
communally established families: Amzalek,89
Elyashar,90 Mani,91 Moyal,92 Panijel,93 Taranto,
and Valero.94
Thus there was a certain degree of what Ran
Halevi has called the “democratic sociability”
of the Freemasonry movement.95 The radical
innovation of a single organization that would
voluntarily encompass both Khalidis and
Nashashibis as well as Burdqushes, Manis, and
other young men from ‘regular‘ families cannot
be overlooked. Most Palestinian Freemasons
in this period joined in their mid-20s to mid-
30s (the average age was 31.8 years old at time
of pledging), although they were sometimes
younger (especially those with family legacies)
and sometimes older. While all of the men
had to be fairly independent financially and
professionally in order to afford membership
dues and other lodge expenses,96 the lodges did
not attract the older leaders of each community.

--- Sayfa 13 ---
Jerusalem Quarterly 22/23  [ 49 ]
Members were the same men who supported the Committee for Union and Progress,
and later, the various decentralization and nationalist parties.
The overall professional composition of Palestine’s Freemasons leaned heavily
towards commerce and banking/accounting, education, medicine, law, government,
and miscellaneous white-collar professions (such as clerkships). Christians were
over-represented in these professions due to their more European-style education and
knowledge of foreign languages, as well as the fact that they were generally favoured
by consulates and foreign companies as potential employees.97 Muslim Freemasons,
in contrast, were dominant in government bureaucracy, legal and judicial occupations,
and military/police work. Twelve members of the local police and military personnel
were Freemasons in Palestine, a phenomenon that repeated itself elsewhere.98
In fact, Freemasons of all three religions penetrated the most central areas of
Palestinian society and economy. Most notably, one of Palestine’s representatives in
the Ottoman parliament, Ragheb al-Nashashibi of Jerusalem (who later became mayor
of Jerusalem), was a Freemason.99 Because of this demographic and professional
profile, access to these networks played an important role in Masonic appeal and
cachet.100
Inter-Masonic commercial relationships were frequent, and it was not uncommon
for businessmen to request letters of introduction with a Masonic stamp of approval.
Such a letter was obtained by Yosef Eliyahu Chelouche, himself not a Mason, from
then-president of Barkai lodge Iskandar Fiuni (Alexander Fiani) in preparation for
a business meeting with a Greek in Egypt.101 Furthermore, a significant number (22
percent) of Freemasons in Palestine belonged to other Freemason lodges, whether
locally or abroad, indicating the extent to which Freemasonry itself served as an
overlapping affiliation network. Beyond the direct networking of Freemasonry lodges,
there was a great deal of indirect networking and cross-fertilization of other groups
and organizations. As was the case empire-wide, one of the most significant groups at
the time was the local branch network of the CUP.
Public Participation and Philanthropy
Because of its status as a secret society as well as the seeming loss of the Barkai lodge
archives,102 it is difficult to retrace the full scope of the lodge’s activities. Furthermore,
we know (thanks to a shocking case of ‘Masonic treason’ within the Jerusalem lodges)
that the Freemasons had good reason to be silent about their activities, in order to
protect themselves from both religious and government intervention.103 Nevertheless,
we are aware that the Palestine lodges’ regular activities focused on the following
areas: philanthropy,104 mutual aid,105 and lay education. In this they continued the work
of other Masonic lodges, which regularly had committees to deal with justice, welfare,
property, general subjects, and propaganda.106

--- Sayfa 14 ---
[ 50 ]   HISTORICAL FEATURES  Freemasonry in Ottoman Palestine
Socially, Masonic lodges annually held summer and winter solstice banquets, with
elaborate programs and ceremonies;107 as far as I can tell this was the only Freemason
activity to which entire families were invited and were thus semi-open to the public.
The scathing critique of the Lebanese priest Father Cheikho centred on his claim that
Freemason lodges in Lebanon had unacceptable innovations that challenged the rights
and roles of the church, such as performing their own marriage ceremonies along
‘civil’ lines;108 I have found no evidence of this in Palestine, however, and so it is
possibly fabricated or exaggerated.
Beyond that, we can only wonder at what sort of Masonic activity was implied when
members spoke of their missionary-like activities of “contributing to the diffusion of
Masonic ideas in this Ottoman Empire which is our fatherland, which greatly needs
to take as a starting point our motto to ensure the well-being of its children.”109 In this
context, Barkai requested that it be allowed to affiliate itself with the Grand Orient
Ottoman, in order to coordinate Masonic activities empire-wide:
Considering that the current state of our country is a large
sphere of activity for the Masonic ideas, that the presence of
a GOT in Constantinople as a regular Masonic power would
contribute much to the improvement of all the classes of the
country, the Barkai lodge asks you to recognize this new
Masonic power.110
Because of its close ties with leading members of the new government and ruling
party, the GOO was an important friend to have, a fact not lost on Palestine’s Masons
facing - for example - attack by one of Palestine’s newly elected parliamentarians,
apparently an avowed enemy of Freemasonry.
By the same occasion we must let you know that the deputy
of Jaffa,111 a backward, fanatical man imbued with retrograde
ideas, conducts a campaign against our Freemasons
Fawzi and Yahia, police chief and policeman of our city,
by denouncing them to the authorities of the capital as
reactionaries and guilty of misappropriation, which is
absolutely contrary to the truth. His goal is to attack the
Freemasons employed with the government. We have informed
the GOT of the remainder of these intrigues, as its president
is the current Minister of the Interior. But fearing that this
intriguing and fanatical deputy does succeed thanks to his
influence in directing the authorities, superiors of the capital,
against our wrongfully disparaged Freemasons, we ask you
to support our intervention with the GOT and to support our
Freemasons so that calumnies of the model of this infamous
deputy remain without effect.

--- Sayfa 15 ---
Jerusalem Quarterly 22/23  [ 51 ]
Eventually in 1910 the GODF did establish “fraternal relations” with the GOO and
authorized its members to fraternize with the Ottoman organization.112As a result, in
June of that year, several members of Barkai decided to revive the defunct Temple
of Solomon lodge in Jerusalem. They wrote to the GODF, and were told they should
open it under the auspices of the GOO, since it was the recognized grand lodge of the
region. The GODF also instructed them to invoke the Grand Architect of the Universe
and preserve the French slogans “Liberty, Equality, Fraternity.”113
Eventually, at least 22 members of Barkai also became members of the new lodge,
and there were close relations between the two lodges. Within a few years, however,
the Temple of Solomon was to undergo an internal split that would divide Palestinian
Freemasonry and foreshadow events to come.
Against Foreigners and Zionists
By March 1913, a faction of the Temple of Solomon lodge broke off and formed its
own provisional lodge, demanding “symbolic and constitutional acceptance” by the
GODF.114 The new Moriah lodge immediately requested catechism books, proposed
a lodge seal, began searching for a garden as lodge headquarters, and set strict
guidelines for admission to the lodge: only those with “irreproachable reputations”
and decent French need apply. According to its new president, the task of the Masons
of Moriah would be to defend the ideas of freedom and justice, particularly in
Jerusalem where clericalism and fanaticism were strongly against Masonic work.115
Avraham Abushadid, newly-elected Speaker of the lodge, urged his fellow Masons to
ensure that “mutual tolerance, respect of others and yourself, and absolute freedom of
conscience are not words in vain.”116 According to Abushadid, in the East “the word
‘freedom’ is replaced by ‘servility’ and ‘fanaticism,’ while ‘equality’ and ‘fraternity’
are vocabulary replaced by the synonyms of ‘superstition’ and ‘hypocrisy’.” Through
their Masonic mission, Abushadid envisioned
a renaissance of the Ottoman people: …this new star which
comes from our East, continues to shine with an increasingly
sharp glare, and our route is clear...the day will come when
its luminous clarity will disperse all darkness, and the base of
this shaking humanity will collapse and one will see then, all
the nations, all the races, all the religions will be erased and
disappear, and to make place for a rising generation, young
people, free, fraternizing and sacrificing a whole glorious
past, for a new era of peace, truth and justice.
Despite this claim to the erasure of lines between peoples, the split within the TOS
had been a cultural and political division between two separate factions - one Arabic
speaking, largely Muslim and Christian, and the other French-speaking, largely
Jewish and foreign. Of the eight known Temple of Solomon members who defected

--- Sayfa 16 ---
[ 52 ]   HISTORICAL FEATURES  Freemasonry in Ottoman Palestine
to form Moriah, five of them were Jewish, one Christian, and two were foreigners
(Frenchmen).117 The ‘natives’ of TOS accused the ‘foreigners’ of being, among other
things, Zionists, while they were accused in turn of being “xenophobes.”118 If before
the split TOS had been 40 percent Muslim, 33 percent Jewish, and 18.5 percent
Christian, afterwards both TOS and Moriah were far more homogenous lodges.
In the face of this schism among Freemasons
in Jerusalem, the Jaffa-based Barkai lodge
appealed to the GODF to deny Moriah’s
request for recognition.119 According to
Barkai president ‘Araktinji, the presence
of two competing Freemasonry lodges in
Jerusalem would cause discord.
His request was politely denied by the
GODF, which had long wanted a lodge in
Jerusalem. “…Tell our Freemason brothers
of the lodge of the Temple of Solomon
that they should not look at [Moriah] as
a rival lodge, but rather a new hearth also
working to realize our ideals of justice
and brotherhood.”120 Not to be dissuaded,
‘Araktinji again appealed to the GODF,
stating that the founders of Moriah had
acted improperly in founding a lodge on their own. He also asserted that language
problems were a catalyst in the defection, since many of the Temple of Solomon
members did not know French, and several of the defectors apparently did not know
Arabic.121 Furthermore, most of the TOS members had been initiated under the GODF
order through Barkai, and as a result, the GODF owed them special consideration.
Finally, according to ‘Araktinji, the main instigator of the defections, Henri Frigere,
had promoted personal animosity among Jerusalem’s Freemasons, and he should be
transferred elsewhere in the region in order to mend the growing rifts in Palestinian
Freemasonry.122
In their defence, the founders of the Moriah lodge wrote again to the GODF, this time
indicting not only the members of TOS from whom they split, but also the Jaffa-based
lodge Barkai and all “indigenous” Freemasons. According to Moriah,
The indigenous Turkish and Arab element is still unable
to understand and appreciate the superior principles of
Masonry, and in consequence, of practicing them. For the
majority, Freemasonry is probably only an instrument of
protection and occult recommendation [?], and for others an
instrument of local and political influence. The work of the
lodges consists primarily of [illegible] and recommendations,
Picture of Cesar ‘Araktinji, long-time Barkai lodge
president, from a lodge pamphlet.
Source: M. Campos

--- Sayfa 17 ---
Jerusalem Quarterly 22/23  [ 53 ]
not always unfortunately, for just causes and in favour of
innocent Freemasons. The rest does not exist and cannot exist
because the indigenous know only despotism, from which they
suffer for long centuries, and their instruction is very little
developed, and is not prepared to work with a disinterested
aim for humanity and justice. Many events that you have
knowledge of will assure you of this point of view, which
explains the particular way the Masons in Jerusalem have
accommodated the news of the creation of our lodge and their
fight against what they ingeniously call competition!123
This situation, according to Moriah, had caused a deadlock in lodge work, since the
“indigenous” lodge members vetoed suggestions of the second faction. Naturally,
this letter also carries a racist and patronizing thread woven into Masonry: “natives”
cannot be expected to truly understand Masonic principles as “Europeans” do. While
proposing universalism on the one hand, Freemasonry lodges in practice expounded
a very Eurocentric - and in the case of the GODF, a Francophile - view of the modern
liberal man. The irony here, of course, is that only Ottomans who were already
predisposed to European language, ideology, or manners sought out membership in
European lodges. Members of a certain class and cultural milieu sought fraternity and
legitimacy in this very European institution, precisely because of all it represented:
cosmopolitanism, liberalism, modernity, and acculturation to a changed global setting.
That orientation towards Europe was fraught with tension. The core indigenous
TOS lodge members were reportedly suspicious of the two Frenchmen (Frigere and
Drouillard) and their influence over the other defectors. Frigere reported that the TOS
leadership “persuaded the other Freemasons that our lodge [Moriah] was created
with the aim of facilitating the descent of the French into Palestine...and other stupid
stories, which can appear ridiculous by far, but which were not, considering the
particular situation of Turkey, without a rather pressing danger.”124
Of course, during this period the Ottoman Empire had recently fought and lost several
wars, one against Italy over its annexation of an Ottoman province (Libya), and the
other against former Ottoman provinces of Greece, Bulgaria, Serbia and Montenegro
over the remaining Ottoman regions of the Balkans. Furthermore, long-standing
local resentments against the privileges accorded foreigners in the Empire under the
Capitulations, as well as the arrogance of European consuls who repeatedly insisted
on running warships to intimidate and control the local population also weighed
into the equation. As a result, anti-European sentiment and suspicions were running
particularly high.
Of course, general Ottoman resentment against an increasingly encroaching Europe
overlapped with the changing contours of Palestine due to the rise of the Zionist
movement. In this period, the Palestinian urban and rural populations were acutely
aware of the growing presence of Jewish immigrants in the country; Palestinian

--- Sayfa 18 ---
[ 54 ]   HISTORICAL FEATURES  Freemasonry in Ottoman Palestine
opposition to these developments was manifest in the Arabic press, in telegrammed
petitions to the central government in Istanbul, and in periodic rural clashes among
peasants and Jewish colonists.125 As a result, by the next year the depiction of the split
had changed slightly: Barkai president ‘Araktinji wrote to the GODF complaining that
the Moriah lodge had emerged after a failed bid for leadership over the TOS lodge,
and that moreover, it harboured Zionists, a fact which had hardened the position of its
external opponents and generated its own internal critics.
The high officials of the government and the few notables
of Jerusalem have remained loyal to their Ottoman lodge of
which they are active members and did not want to recognize
the brothers of the Moriah lodge. We have gone twice to
Jerusalem to appease the hatred and reconcile the brother
members of both lodges and we have succeeded only slightly,
because Frigere as president did not know well how to
behave in the choice of his initiates, the majority of whom are
Zionists, an Israelite society having particularistic ambitions
in Palestine.
Nobody can ignore the fact that 90 percent of the population
of Turkey are fanatical ignoramuses, especially in Palestine;
the enlightened are exceedingly rare. It is because of the
declarations of Dr. Herzl and his friends the founders of
Zionism, through several conferences in Europe on Palestine
for the Zionists, which has engendered an implacable hatred
against them on the part of the inhabitants of this country.
Our brothers in Jerusalem are the high functionaries of the
government, they are the notables (though well-educated,
non-fanatics) who fear being carried in derision in the eyes
of their compatriots and prefer to move away from their
Freemason brothers, the Zionists; the proof is that several
of them during the slumber of the Turkish lodge, instead
of initiating themselves and affiliating themselves with the
Moriah lodge, came to Jaffa and presented themselves at
the Barkai lodge, such as for example: Nashashibi Ragheb
Bey, deputy of Jerusalem, Djelal Bey, General Prosecutor
of Jerusalem and at present President of the Commercial
Tribunal, Khaldi Djamil, teacher, Tawfik Mohamed,
commander of the gendarmerie in Jerusalem, Osman Cherif
Bey, General Prosecutor in Jerusalem, Zia Joseph, police
chief in Jerusalem, Audi Joseph, large proprietor in Ramallah
next to Jerusalem, Assaf Bey, president of the Court of First
Instance in Jerusalem, etc.

--- Sayfa 19 ---
Jerusalem Quarterly 22/23  [ 55 ]
Moreover, several active members of the Moriah lodge who
are in the minority of the lodge realized this state of affairs
and [in light of] the part taken by the Zionist majority, asked
us many times to help them to form a new lodge under the
auspices of the Grand Lodge of France of the Scottish rite;
we ask them to have patience while waiting to reform their
lodge Moriah.126
According to ‘Araktinji, the members of the TOS would have liked to have joined
a GODF-sponsored lodge in Jerusalem had Moriah not undercut them. He again
recommended that the GODF withhold its support for Moriah and arrange for the
professional transfer of Frigere, which would eventually open the way for reform and
reconciliation. In ‘Araktinji’s optimistic view, “the balance at the time of the elections
will be right and our brother Zionists will be more useful in secrecy and more content,
though the majority of the lodge would be notable natives and senior officials of the
government, at least the name of the lodge ceases being a Zionist lodge and will be
respected more in the eyes of the population of Jerusalem.”127
As it was, the Moriah lodge faced a great deal of persecution by the local ‘clerics’,
especially the French among them.
In Jerusalem initially [there was] a Canadian lodge of the
Scottish whose ritual was adapted perfectly to the very
religious mentality then of the population. Then it was the
turn of the Grand Orient of Turkey; this one marked already
a considerable progress in ideas. The lodge, either because it
reached only one certain class of the population or for other
reasons, did not excite the fear of the religious communities.
But it was not the same for us. As soon as the communities,
especially the Assumptionists, learned that a lodge of the
GODF had been formed in the Holy City, a fury of fear,
we believe, seized them and, although we were careful to
avoid causing anything, they adopted a combative attitude
immediately.128
The Moriah lodge blamed the French consul and vice consul in Jerusalem, along
with a French priest, for striking such an anti-Masonic tone, and went so far to ask
that they be replaced. In repeated requests to the GODF to intervene with the Quai
d’Orsay, Moriah pointed out that not only did the local French representation act in a
way that would not be tolerated in France, they were also negligent in their duties and
were neglecting French interests. As they sought fit to point out to the GODF, French
commerce and trade in Palestine had declined over ten years from first place to fifth
place.129
Moriah was the only Palestinian lodge that left a record of its activities and projects,

--- Sayfa 20 ---
[ 56 ]   HISTORICAL FEATURES  Freemasonry in Ottoman Palestine
and as these were merely propositions made to the GODF we have little way of
knowing if they were carried out. Among the projects Moriah proposed were the
opening of a “scientific, sociological and philanthropic library” for the use of
lodge members; opening a dispensary under the aegis of the French Consulate in
Jerusalem to provide free medical care to newly-enfranchised Moroccans under
French protection; and encouraging establishment of a French society to compete
for concessions in providing electricity and electric tramways for Jerusalem.130
Of all its proposed projects, the most idealistic was the establishment of a secular
(laïque) school in Jerusalem. At the time, virtually all of the schools in Palestine
were private and confessional, including the state school system that educated only
Muslim students at the lower levels.131 In an effort to gain popular support for the
idea, the Moriah lodge published an article in a local newspaper and led a delegation
to meet with the French consul in the city to request the establishment of a French
secular secondary school. The consul said he would recommend to the ministry
that a congregational high school be established instead, a proposition that was not
welcomed, according to Moriah, from either the French or Masonic point of view.
“From the French point of view,” Moriah complained, “the solution of the Consul is
not good because all the Greek, Arab, and Jewish elements that are the most numerous
will never come to a religious school, and it is precisely at this element which [the
project] is aimed. From the Masonic point of view, we would lose an excellent
occasion to attract with our ideas the rising generation, which would carry a serious
blow to religious omnipotence in our city.”132
The Moriah lodge presented a petition signed by 316 heads of household in support
of the establishment of a French lay school, representing 622 children.133 By the
next year, however, there had been no progress on the matter of the school, although
there were similar Freemason-sponsored ideas floating around both Beirut and
Alexandria.134 A report in the Arabic press of French plans to establish a scientific
school of higher education in Palestine along the lines of the American University
in Beirut came to naught, as did Moriah’s suggestion that they establish a school for
“rational thought.”135
By 1914, the members of the Moriah lodge had modified their original Francophone
elitism and requested permission to establish an Arabic-speaking lodge; while
acknowledging that they wanted to keep the “homogeneity and brotherhood” of their
French-speaking lodge, they recognized that doing so kept out initiates who did not
know French well enough to join.136 The GODF’s response was clear: while they did
not object to occasional meetings in Arabic, as necessary, they warned their brothers
to “advise you of the greatest prudence with regard to the initiation of the indigenous
laymen.”137
With the war, however, all three Palestinian Masonic lodges ceased activity, so Moriah
was unable to carry out its plans for an Arabic branch. Barkai also closed its doors and
its president, along with other members, was exiled to Anatolia. In 1919 ‘Araktinji
returned from exile to find the lodge headquarters in shambles. From 1920 to 1924

--- Sayfa 21 ---
Jerusalem Quarterly 22/23  [ 57 ]
the lodge was shut down due to Jewish-Arab clashes in the aftermath of the British
Balfour Declaration and subsequent Mandate over Palestine, which was predicated
on recognizing a “Jewish national home” in Palestine at the expense of its Arab
inhabitants. With the 1929 clashes in Palestine, most of the remaining Arab members
of the lodge left to join all-Arab lodges, and by the 1930s mixed Jewish-Arab
Freemasonry lodges in Palestine were a thing entirely of the past, another pillar fallen
to the rising nationalist conflict.138
Whereas heterogeneity in the Ottomanist context enabled mixed Freemasonry lodges
to flourish as long as they assumed a shared outlook, the seeds of sectarian and
national discord nevertheless infiltrated the supposedly sacred Masonic order. Masonic
lodges and individual Masons did not live separate from Ottoman Palestinian society,
but rather were deeply integrated into it, and as such were sensitive to the balance
between Ottomanism and particularism, Ottoman patriotism and European influence,
and growing inter-communal rivalry.
Michelle Campos is the author of A ‘Shared Homeland’ and its Boundaries: Empire,
Citizenship, and the Origins of Sectarianism in Late Ottoman Palestine, 1908 - 13.
(Ph.D. Dissertation, Stanford University 2003). She is an assistant professor in the
Department of Near Eastern Studies at Cornell University.
the Middle East to the mid-18th century (in Aleppo,
Izmir, and Corfu in 1738, Alexandretta in the 1740s,
and Armenian parts of Eastern Turkey in 1762 and
Constantinople in 1768/9). However, these were small,
uncentralized, and short-lived, and little is known
about them other than their existence. Jacob Landau,
“Farmasuniyya,” The Encyclopedia of Islam: New
Edition (Supplement), (1982).
8 M. Şükrü Hanioğlu, “Notes on the Young Turks and
the Freemasons, 1875-1908,” Middle Eastern Studies
25, (1989): 2. See also Paul Dumont, “La Turquie dans
les Archives du Grand Orient de France: Les Loges
Maçonniques d’Obédience Française a Istanbul du
Milieu du XIXe siècle a la veille de la Première Guerre
Mondiale,” in Jean Louis Bacqué- Grammont and Paul
Dumont, eds., Économie et Sociétés dans l’Empire
Ottoman (Paris: Presses du CNRS, 1983). See Robert
Morris, Freemasonry in the Holy Land. Or Handmarks of
Hiram’s Builders (Chicago: Knight and Leonard, 1876)
for a travelogue account of Middle Eastern Masonry
in the second half of the 19th century. In Izmir, Morris
found eight lodges, some of which were comprised of
specific ethnic majority groups. Beirut was home to three
lodges, but the largest among them, Palestine (Grand
Lodge of Scotland) had 75 members from as far south as
Gaza, as far north as Aleppo, and as far east as Baghdad.
For contemporary accounts, Jurji Zeidan published
Tarikh al-Masuniyya al-‘am in Cairo in 1889, and from
1886-1910, Shahin Macarious published a Masonic
Endnotes
1 David Tidhar, Barkai: Album ha-yovel [Barkai: Album
of Its 50th Anniversary].
2 Ibid.
3 David Tidhar, Sefer Kis: Lishkat Barkai [Pocketbook:
The Barkai Lodge] (Tel Aviv: Ruhold, 1945).
4 David Yodilovitz, Skira al ha-bniah ha-hofshit [A
Survey of Freemasonry].
5 Joseph Bradley has stated that rather than class,
“education, urbanization, and sensibility” were key.
Joseph Bradley, “Subjects into Citizens: Societies, Civil
Society, and Autocracy in Tsarist Russia,” American
Historical Review, 107, 4 (2002): 1101. This construction
is echoed in the Middle Eastern context in Keith
Watenpaugh, “Bourgeois Modernity, Historical Memory
and Imperialism: The Emergence of an Urban Middle
Class in the Late Ottoman and Inter-War Middle East,
Aleppo, 1908-1939” (Ph.D. Dissertation: UCLA, 1999).
According to Watenpaugh, the Aleppine chronicler
Kamil al-Ghazzi expanded the notion of ‘ayan from the
traditional notables to include the urban upper-middle
class, indicating the importance of education, urbanism,
and weltanschauung. Along these lines, Watenpaugh
eschews a purely economic definition and instead defines
the middle class as “an intellectual and social construct
linked to a specific set of historical circumstances,” p. 9.
6 Georges Odo, “Les réseaux coloniaux ou la <magie des
Blancs>,” L’Histoire (Special: Les Francs- Maçons), 256
(2001).
7 Jacob Landau dates the first Freemason lodges in

--- Sayfa 22 ---
[ 58 ]   HISTORICAL FEATURES  Freemasonry in Ottoman Palestine
magazine in Egypt, al-Lata’if.
9 The Ottoman sultan Abdülhamid II often clamped
down on Masonic activities, viewing them as unwelcome
European incursions into Ottoman society as well as
challenges to his sovereignty. Conservatives in the late
Ottoman period considered Freemasonry a danger to
the Ottoman regime as well as a danger to Islam. Jacob
Landau, “Muslim Opposition to Freemasonry,” Die Welt
des Islams, 36, 2 (1996).
10 Freemasonry has been denounced based on its
supposed association with Jews, missionaries,
communists, atheists, revolutionaries, Zionists, and
Satanism. The Catholic Church was a long-time critic of
the Freemasonry movement based on its supposed anti-
religious and ritualistic elements - in 1738 the Church
banned Freemasonry in a papal bull issued by Pope
Clement XII. “Freemasons,” Encyclopedia Judaica. In
the Middle East, local clerical anti-Masonic activities
started around the time of Robert Morris’ 1876 trip to the
Holy Land; he reported that local priests issued a tract
against Masonry in Arabic. See Morris, Freemasonry
in the Holy Land, 310. In 1906 there were a series of
persecutions against Freemasons in Mount Lebanon,
and a few years later, Beirut-based Father Louis Cheiko
published a series of anti-Masonic pamphlets in Arabic
calling for a “jihad” against organized Freemasonry.
See Archives of the Grand Orient de France (hereafter
GODF), Box 685, and al-Ab Louis Cheikho al-Yasu’i,
Al-Sirr al-Masun fi Shi’at al-Farmasun (Beirut: Catholic
Publishing House, 1910). For a local example of
“virulent” Muslim opposition to Muslims participating in
Freemasonry lodges, see Yves Hivert-Messeca, “France,
Laïcité et Maçonnerie dans l’Empire Ottoman: La Loge
<Prométhée> à l’Orient de Janina (Epire),” Chroniques
d’Histoire Maçonnique, 45 (1992): 125-6.
11 Critics of the 1908 Young Turk revolution blamed
Freemasons, Jews, and other ‘enemies’ for eventually
overthrowing the Ottoman sultan; the British government
also saw a CUP-Freemason-Jewish-Zionist plot against
them. For further reading on these conspiracy theories
see Jacob Landau, “The Young Turks and Zionism:
Some Comments,” in his book Jews, Arabs, Turks
(Jerusalem: Magnes Press, 1993); Elie Kedourie,
“Young Turks, Freemasons, and Jews,” Middle Eastern
Studies, 7/1 (1971); and Mim Kemal Öke, “Young
Turks, Freemasons, Jews, and the Question of Zionism
in the Ottoman Empire, 1908-13,” Studies in Zionism, 7/2
(1986). Specific examples of local conspiracy theories
from the 1908-14 press can be found surrounding the
spring 1909 counter-coup against the Young Turks which
took on the “Freemasons, the defiers of religion and
the discarders of the heart of the people behind them.”
See “The disturbances in Turkey and the victory of
the constitution,” in ha-‘Olam, v. 3, no. 14 (27 April,
1909) and “The Jews and the Committee for Union and
Progress,” in ha-Herut, v. 1, no. 20 (14 July, 1909).
12 In the aftermath of the French Revolution, French
Freemasonry took on a strong anti-clericalist tone, and
by 1877 had abolished the required belief in God. French
obediences refer instead to the “Grand Architect of the
Universe.” L’Histoire (Special: Les Francs-Maçons) 256,
(2001): 24.
13 Freemasonry membership is highly hierarchical-
initiates are ‘apprentice’, the second degree is
‘companion’, and the third degree is ‘master’. Each level
involves memorization of a catechism and performance
of elaborate symbolic rituals.
14 While the British model of Freemasonry was more
conservative in bent and generally was supportive of the
religious and political status quo, the French tradition
of Freemasonry (the one which became more prominent
throughout the Middle East, including Palestine)
has emphasized liberal, philosophical positions and
encouraged political engagement and critique, including
support for revolution. Karim Wissa, “Freemasonry in
Egypt from Bonaparte to Zaghloul,” Turcica, 24, (1992).
15 The Grand Orient de France, Grand Lodge de France,
Grand Orient d’Italie, Grande Oriente Español, Grand
Lodge of Scotland, and later Grand Orient de Turquie/
Grand Orient Ottoman all vied for hegemony in the
Ottoman Masonic world.
16 First Article of the Constitution of the Grand Orient de
France, (http://www.godf.org/english/index_k.htm).
17 Paul Dumont, “La Franc-Maçonnerie Ottomane
et les <Idées Françaises> à l’Époque des Tanzimat,”
REMMM, 52/53, 2/3 (1989). See also Thierry Zarcone,
Mystiques, Philosophes et Francs-Maçons en Islam: Riza
Tevfik, Penseur Ottoman (1868-1949), du Soufisme a la
Confrérie (Paris: Librairie d’Amérique et d’Orient Jean
Maisonneuve, 1993).
18 According to Thierry Zarcone, “The ideas developed
by Namık Kemal and the other Ottoman reformers were
not all borrowed from Freemasonry. Actually Ottoman
thinkers who became Masons had already developed
their own system of thought and in most cases,
particularly for Namık Kemal, they only ‘recognized’
their ideas in the Masonic ideology.” Zarcone,
Freemasonry and Related Trends in Muslim Reformist
Thought in the Turko-Persian Area (unpublished
conference paper).
19 According to Hanioğlu, the constitutional reformers
supported the deposed sultan Murad V, earning them
the unending hostility and police supervision of Sultan
Abdülhamid II. Hanioğlu, “Notes on the Young Turks
and the Freemasons.”
20 See Juan Cole, Colonialism and Revolution in the
Middle East (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1993) and also Wissa, “Freemasonry in Egypt from
Bonaparte to Zaghloul”, Éric Anduze, “La Franc-
Maçonnerie Égyptienne (1882-1908),” Chroniques
d’Histoire Maçonnique, 50 (1999), and A. Albert
Kudsi-Zadeh, “Afghani and Freemasonry in Egypt,”
Journal of the American Oriental Society, 92, (1972) for
a discussion of 19th century Egyptian Freemasonry’s
political involvement.
21 See Kudsi-Zadeh, “Afghani and Freemasonry in
Egypt”. Although first a member of Italian and British
Masonic lodges, al-Afghani later formed a ‘national
lodge’ (mahfal watani).
22 Quoted by Muhammad Pasha al-Makhzumi, author of
Utterances of Jamal al-Din al-Afghani al- Husayni, cited
in Ra’if Khuri, Modern Arab Thought: Channels of the
French Revolution to the Arab East (Princeton: Kingston
Press, 1983) 30.

--- Sayfa 23 ---
Jerusalem Quarterly 22/23  [ 59 ]
23 Zarcone, “Freemasonry and Related Trends.”
24 Hanioğlu, “Notes on the Young Turks and the
Freemasons”. Hanioğlu argues that while Freemasonry
in the Ottoman Empire had its own political arms active
in the opposition until 1902, and while it supported
the Young Turk Revolution as it had supported the
Armenian, Bulgarian and Albanian committees, in the
post-1908 period the CUP and organized Freemasonry
followed divergent paths. According to Zarcone, the CUP
itself should be considered a “para-Masonic” institution,
as it continued the tradition of secrecy, an oath of loyalty,
and hierarchy. See Zarcone, “Freemasonry and Related
Trends.”
25 Is. Jessua, Grand Orient (Gr : Loge) de Turquie :
Exposé Historique Sommaire de la Maçonnerie en
Turquie (Constantinople: Francaise L. Mourkides, 1922).
26 Paul Dumont, “La Franc-Maçonnerie d’Obédience
Française à Salonique au Début du XXe Siècle,” Turcica,
16 (1984): 73.
27 Öke, “Young Turks, Freemasons, Jews, and the
Question of Zionism.” In 1908, for example, the lodge
Veritas appealed for protection to the GODF, stating
that their lodge archives were under attack from the
government, and that they feared compromising some of
their members. The lodge Macedonia Risorta, protected
by the Italian consul, provided immunity from police
scrutiny for its many Young Turk activists.
28 Cited in Anduze, “La Franc-Maçonnerie Égyptienne”,
79.
29 Grand Orient de France. Suprême Conseil pour
la France et les Possessions Françaises, “Compte
Rendu aux Ateliers de la Fédération des Travaux de
L’Assemblée Générale du GODF du 21 au 26 Septembre
1908,” Compte Rendu des Travaux du Grand Orient de
France, 64 (1908).
30 Landau, “Muslim Opposition to Freemasonry”, 190.
31 Kedourie, “Young Turks, Freemasons, and Jews.”
32 Dumont, “La Franc-Maçonnerie d’Obédience
Française à Salonique,” 76.
33 Letter from Suleiman (Shlomo) Yellin (Beirut), no
date. Central Zionist Archives (hereafter CZA), A412/13.
34 See the text of the Obligation for the Initiation to the
First Degree (Apprentice).
35 Najdat Safwat, Freemasonry in the Arab World
(London: Arab Research Centre, 1980) 16. Jessua, Grand
Orient (Gr: Loge) de Turquie also claims that a large
number of participants sought to reap benefits from the
Young Turks through the lodges. “Each one wanted
to become a Mason like the leaders of the new order.
Those who entered a lodge by conviction were not very
numerous.”
36 In 1910, a debate erupted between the Grand Lodge
of Egypt and the Grand Orient Ottoman, both of the
Scottish rite, concerning rights of jurisdiction over
Scottish Freemasonry in Egypt (formally still an
Ottoman vilayet though in essence a British colony).
See Joseph Sakakini, Rapport Concernant L’Irregularité
de la Gr* L* d’Egypte (n.p.: n.p., 1910) and Joseph
Sakakini, Incident avec la Grande Loge d’Egypte:
Rapport du Fr* Joseph Sakakini (Constantinople: n.p.,
1910). The main Grand Lodge of Scotland refused to
recognize the legitimacy of the Grand Orient Ottoman
over its members in the empire. See Dumont, “La Franc-
Maçonnerie d’Obédience Française à Salonique”, 76.
37 These lodges included Vatan/La Patrie, Mouhibbani
Hourriyet/Les Amis de la Liberte, Vefa/Perserverance,
Resna, Shefak/Aurore, Bisanzio Risorta, Les Vrais Amis
de l’Union et Progrès, and La Fraternite Ottomane.
Jessua, Grand Orient (Gr: Loge) de Turquie.
38 According to one source’s claim, Talat had in mind
the establishment of an underground network of Islamic
Freemasons who would provide a channel for solidarity
among Muslims in the anti-imperialist struggle. See Öke,
“Young Turks, Freemasons, Jews, and the Question of
Zionism”, 210.
39 Zarcone, Freemasonry and Related Trends, 17-18.
Zarcone sees this as an example of Muslim creativity
within Freemasonry as opposed to a simple absorption of
European ideals and standards.
40 Jessua, Grand Orient (Gr: Loge) de Turquie, 10.
41 For example GOO lodges existed in Salonika (Midhat
Pasha), Jerusalem (Temple of Solomon), and Egypt
(Nour al-Mouhabba, al-Nassra, al-Talah, and Chams al-
Mushreka).
42 Isaac Rabeno de Botton, Venerable (President) of the
Veritas lodge, to the GODF, 10 October, 1910; cited in
Dumont, “La Franc-Maçonnerie d’Obédience Française
à Salonique”, 77.
43 Dumont, “La Franc-Maçonnerie d’Obédience
Française à Salonique”, 77.
44 For an extensive discussion of the Grand Orient
Ottoman, see Éric Anduze, “La Franc-Maçonnerie
Coloniale au Maghreb et au Moyen Orient (1876-1924):
Un Partenaire Colonial et un Facteur d’Éducation
Politique dans la Genèse des Mouvements Nationalistes
et Révolutionnaires.» Universités des Sciences Humanes
de Strasbourg, 1996.
45 There was some overlap of Muslim children who
were sent to local Jewish schools (particularly those of
the Alliance Israélite Universelle as well as the Evelina
de Rothschild school for girls. However, by and large,
children were sent to primary schools within their own
religious community. (The Ottoman state schools, the
Rudiyya, were technically open to all three religions
though I have found no evidence that any non-Muslims
attended these schools). By university, however,
there was significantly more crossover, as chosen and
accomplished Ottoman youth attended imperial law,
medical, and other schools in the capital. Also many
well-to-do youth attended the American University in
Beirut.
46 Paul Dumont gives as an example the 1869 membership
count of the lodge L’Union d’Orient: 143 members,
among them 53 Muslims, consisting of magistrates,
military, functionaries, religious leaders, and some
notables. See Dumont, “La Franc-Maçonnerie Ottomane
et les <Idées Françaises> à l’Époque des Tanzimat.” In
contrast, the Grand Orient d’Egypt, founded by the Le
Caire lodge which split off from the GLNE in 1908 in
order to “practice [as well as proclaim] liberty” seemed
to be composed largely of minorities. Bibliothèque
Nationale de France (hereafter BN), FM2-140.
47 Landau, “Farmasuniyya”.
48 In Lebanon, Syria, and Egypt, there was widespread

--- Sayfa 24 ---
[ 60 ]   HISTORICAL FEATURES  Freemasonry in Ottoman Palestine
participation of the notable classes in Freemasonry. See
Safwat, Freemasonry in the Arab World.
49 According to Robert Morris’ travelogue from 1876,
the then-vali of Syria (Muhammad Rashid), kaymakam
of Jaffa (Nureddin Effendi), and kaymakam of Nablus
(Muhammad Sa’id) were all Freemasons. Morris,
Freemasonry in the Holy Land.
50 See Cole, Colonialism and Revolution in the Middle
East.
51 Wissa, “Freemasonry in Egypt from Bonaparte to
Zaghloul”.
52 Cole, Colonialism and Revolution in the Middle East,
147.
53 Odo writes that the first Arab Mason was inducted in
Algeria in 1839; by 1864 the induction of the Algerian
emir  ‘Abd al-Qadir signaled both a stalemate between
the colonizer/colonized communities as well as de facto
integration of Muslims into French Freemasonry. See
Odo, “Les réseaux coloniaux ou la <magie des Blancs>”.
54 As Jacob Landau pointed out, while lodge membership
figures were generally modest (between one dozen
and 100 members), there was a high concentration of
prominent members as well as “people of means” due to
high membership fees. Landau, “Farmasuniyya”.
55 While lodges in the Balkans had Jewish, Armenian,
and Muslim members, Greeks generally had their own
separate lodges, often belonging to the Grand Orient
of Greece. See the example of the “Prométhée” lodge
in Janina, which was mixed until the 1897 Greco-
Ottoman war closed its doors. Paul Dumont, “La Franc-
Maçonnerie dans l’Empire Ottoman: La Loge Grecque
Prométhée à Janina,” in Daniel Panzac, ed., Les Villes
dans l’Empire Ottoman: Activités et Sociétés (Paris:
Presses du CNRS, 1991), and Yves Hivert-Messeca,
“France, Laïcité et Maçonnerie dans l’Empire Ottoman.”
56 The founding of the Royal Solomon Mother Lodge
was 7 August, 1873; Mr. Rolla Floyd was reported to be
the master of the lodge. File [18368]; (National Archives
Microfilm Publication M862, roll 1034); Jerusalem;
Numerical File, 1906-10; Central Files of the Department
of State, Record Group 59; National Archives - College
Park (hereafter NACP).
57 Leon Zeldis, “Israeli Freemasonry” (www.freemason
ry.org.il).
58 File [18368]; (National Archives Microfilm
Publication M862, roll 1034); Jerusalem; Numerical
File, 1906-10; Central Files of the Department of State,
Record Group 59; NACP.
59 Among the founders claimed by one Masonic report
were Ahmad Bedir al-Khalidi, Gabriel Samoury, Cesar
‘Araktinji, Tamari “and others”; among the Jews were
Moritz Steinberg, Yosef Feinberg, Menachem Stein,
Ya’kov Litwinsky, David Moyal, Avraham Levy, and
Michal Horwitz. See ha-Boneh he-Hofshi (Jan 1935).
CZA A192/1108.
60 Zeldis, Israeli Freemasonry. Most scholars attribute the
lodge’s founding to this group of foreigners, but lodge
historians insist on local initiative instead.
61 Tidhar, Barkai: Album ha-yovel.
62 See Ha-Boneh he-Hofshi (Jan 1935). CZA A192/1108.
63 Zeldis, Israeli Freemasonry.
64 At the time other leading GODF lodges in the Middle
East included: Syria (Aleppo, founded 1890); Le Liban
(Beirut, founded 1876); Les Pyramides d’Egypte
(Alexandria, 1891-1900); Le Nil (Cairo, founded 1894);
Etoile du Bosphore (Constantinople, 1880); and Veritas
(Salonika, founded 1904). GODF, Catalogue.
65 22 April, 1904 letter from Schönberg to GODF. Lodge
correspondence indicates that the lodge was referred to
by its Hebrew name, Barkai. GODF, Boxes 1126-7.
66 Letter from M. Schönberg to Vadecard, Secretary
General of the GODF, 19 March, 1906. GODF, Boxes
1126-7.
67 Letter from M. Schönberg to GODF, 30 August, 1906.
GODF, Boxes 1126-7.
68 Letter from Barkai to GODF, 31 August, 1908. The
mentioned report is missing from the records. In response
to these complaints, the lodge Veritas in Salonika, with
close ties to the new ruling powers, promised to inform
the Young Turks of the situation in Palestine and to
demand reparations. Letter from Veritas to Barkai, 20
October, 1908. GODF, Boxes 1126-7.
69 I have found evidence of three Freemason lodges in
Palestine in the pre-World War I period: Barkai, Temple
of Solomon and Moriah. There was also an irregular
(unrecognized) lodge established by Shimon Moyal
in Jaffa in 1910-11, but aside from a complaint issued
by Barkai that Moyal was “initiating people right and
left” we know little of this lodge. Letter from Barkai to
GODF, 10 February, 1911. GODF, Boxes 1126-7. An
Israeli Freemason claims there was at least one other
lodge, Carmel in Haifa. Zeldis, Israeli Freemasonry.
I have found evidence of the existence of a lodge in
the north, but little more than that. Letter from the
Vice Consul of France in Haifa to the French Foreign
Minister, 20 February, 1912. Microfilm roll 134,
Correspondence Politique et Commerciale/Nouvelle
Série (Turquie), France - Ministère des Affaires
Étrangères (hereafter FMAE). The Encyclopedia Judaica
also claims that three lodges were founded under the
auspices of the Grand Lodge of Scotland from 1910-11,
but this is also likely not true. «Freemasons».
70 Yodilovitz, Skira ‘al ha-bniah al-hofshit, 12. Alexander
Fiani and Maurice Schönberg served as the first president
and secretary of the lodge, respectively. In 1907. Cesar
‘Araktinji was selected as lodge president, a post he was
to hold (with various interruptions) until 1928.
71 All lodge statistics were compiled by the author with
data from the membership lists found in GODF, Boxes
1126-7, and David Tidhar, Barkai: Album ha-yovel.
72 See Mordechai Eliav, Die Juden Palästinas in der
deutschen Politik: Dokumente aus dem Archiv des
deutschen Konsulats in Jerusalem, 1842-1914 (Tel Aviv:
ha-Kibbutz ha-Meuchad, 1973).
73 According to the 1905 Ottoman census, Jerusalem’s
Ottoman population of 32,000 was broken down to
41.3% Jewish, 33.8% Muslim and 24.8% Christian.
If non-Ottoman resident Jews were considered, the
proportion would have been much higher. See Uziel
Schmelz, “The Population of Jerusalem’s Urban
Neighborhoods according to the Ottoman Census of
1905”, Scripta Hierosolytmitana 35 (1994).
74 See Dumont, “La Franc-Maçonnerie d’Obédience
Française à Salonique” for a discussion of the social

--- Sayfa 25 ---
Jerusalem Quarterly 22/23  [ 61 ]
background of Salonikan Freemasons; Dumont, “La
Franc-Maçonnerie dans l’Empire Ottoman” and Hivert-
Messeca, “France, Laïcité et Maçonnerie dans l’Empire
Ottoman” for a discussion of the composition of
Janina’s lodge; and Cole, Colonialism and Revolution
in the Middle East for an analysis of the social basis of
Egyptian Freemasonry.
75 Rashid Khalidi, “Society and Ideology in Late
Ottoman Syria: Class, Education, Profession and
Confession”, in John Spagnolo, ed., Problems of the
Modern Middle East in Historical Perspective: Essays in
Honor of Albert Hourani (Ithaca: Reading, 1992), 126.
76 Kamal al-Din ‘Arafat was the mayor of Nablus.
77 Rafiq and Suleiman Abu Ghazaleh were both civil
judges from Nablus.
78 Sa’id Abu Khadra from Gaza had served on the majlis
al-‘umumi and was a failed candidate for the 1912
Ottoman parliament.
79 ‘Umar al-Bitar was the mayor of Jaffa.
80 Eight members of the Jaffan Dajani family were
members of Barkai; they were all members of the
Ottoman legal, municipal, bureaucratic, and educational
establishment.
81 Four members of the al-Khalidi family were
Freemasons in the Barkai lodge. One of them, Jamil al-
Khalidi, was also a member in Temple of Solomon.
82 Sa’id Ahmad Nashashibi and Ragheb Nashashibi were
members of Barkai; Ragheb, elected to the Ottoman
parliament in 1912, was also a member of Temple of
Solomon.
83 ‘Atallah, Ya’qub and Yusuf Burdqush were all recent
AUB graduates.
84 Yusuf and Na’im al-‘Issa belonged to the Barkai lodge.
Yusuf was a leading member of the Jaffa branch of the
Committee for Union and Progress and well as serving as
the editor of the important newspaper Filastin.
85 Selim and Wadie Mantura were businessmen.
86 George, Hanna and Jean Sleim were all merchants in
Barkai lodge.
87 Ricardo Habib Soulban worked at the Imperial
Ottoman Bank, while Shukri was the chief of the
Derabane train station.
88 Emil Tamari was a translator and Wadih Salim Tamari
a businessman.
89 The Amzaleks were a wealthy Jewish family that
arrived in Jaffa from Gibraltar; as a result, they held
British citizenship.
90 Several Elyashars were Chief Rabbi of Jerusalem, from
a notable Sephardi family.
91 The Manis were the most important Jewish family in
Hebron.
92 David Moyal, the son of a wealthy North African
immigrant in Jaffa, was a lawyer dealing in land sales
and a frequent mediator in Jewish-Arab negotiations.
93 Another important rabbinical family in Jerusalem.
94 The Valero family was a wealthy Sephardi Jewish
banking family in Jerusalem. Three members of the
family were Freemasons, in Moriah and Barkai lodges.
95 Quoted from Benjamin Nathans, “Habermas’s Public
Sphere in the Era of the French Revolution,” French
Historical Studies, 16, 3 (1990): 633.
96 The dues for the Moriah lodge, for example, were 100
francs for initiation (payable in 2 chunks); 20 francs for
passing from the first to second degree; 40 francs for
passing from the second to third degree. Annual fees
were 30 francs payable on the trimester; affiliation was
40 francs annually, with a discount to 10 francs if one
was a Master (3rd degree). Importantly, officers of the
Ottoman army were exempt from paying any dues. See
letter on March 11, 1913. BN, RES FM2-142. While this
was far out of the reach of a regular day laborer, who
earned from .5-2 francs a day (for cobblers) to 6-8 francs a
day (for upholsters), doctors earned from 6-15,000 francs
annually, while lawyers could earn 1000-3600 francs
annually. See “La Palestine Economique,” May 1, 1908,
Box 477, FMAE; and Ruppin to ZAC, April 25, 1912.
CZA, Z3/1448.
97 According to Clay, the OIB for example hired almost
exclusively Christians, some Jews, and Muslims only
in subordinate service positions. Christopher Clay,
“The Origins of Modern Banking in the Levant: The
Branch Network of the Imperial Ottoman Bank, 1890-
1914,” International Journal of Middle East Studies 26/4
(November 1994).
98 Jessua, Grand Orient (Gr: Loge) de Turquie.
99 Rashid Khalidi writes that another Jerusalem MP,
Ruhi al-Khalidi, was also a Freemason, member of
the GODF. Although I have not found his name in any
of the membership lists of the Palestinian lodges, it is
likely he was inducted while serving as Ottoman consul
in Bordeaux. Rashid Khalidi, Palestinian Identity: The
Construction of Modern National Consciousness (New
York: Columbia University Press, 1997) 79.
100 From the files of various Egyptian Masonic lodges
we know that there were periodic Masonic assemblies
for networking purposes, and Masons who moved or
traveled from one locale to another had a ready network
awaiting them. See CZA A192/812.
101 Yosef Eliyahu Chelouche, My Life [Parshat hayai],
1870-1930 (Tel Aviv: Stroud, 1930) 194.
102 The current Barkai lodge secretary refused to disclose
whether or not the lodge was in possession of archival
material from the Ottoman period. Long-time lodge
president Cesar ‘Araktinji reported to the GODF central
office after World War I that his home (the former lodge
headquarters) had been destroyed during the war. It is
possible (though not conclusive) that the lodge’s entire
contents did not survive the Masons’ wartime exile or
the numerous subsequent wars. Letter from ‘Araktinji
(in Konya) to GODF, 8 January, 1919. GODF, Boxes
1126-7.
103 In the winter of 1913, an Italian named Salvatore
Garcea penetrated the Moriah lodge and reported its
activities to both the (anti-Masonic) French consul
as well as to the various religious communities. As
a result, seven or eight members faced ‘complete ruin’
due to the expose. Garcea later tried to establish another
Masonic lodge in Egypt, passing himself off as a Jew and
compromising the daughter of a respectable rabbinical
family in the process. Frigere to GODF, 12 February,
1917. BN, RES FM2-142.
104 Lodge banquets were held to raise funds for the
Ottoman army’s winter clothes drive, for example.
105 For example the lodge attempted to intervene

--- Sayfa 26 ---
[ 62 ]   HISTORICAL FEATURES  Freemasonry in Ottoman Palestine
for Anis Djaber Bey who was rendered destitute by
September 1908. ‘Araktinji also attempted to secure
GODF intervention on behalf of Freemasons with
potential and former employers. In 1907 for example
Astruc successfully lobbied for the job as director of the
Rothschild Hospital in Jerusalem thanks to the assistance
offered by Paris. In two cases of wrongful dismissal of
Masons involving the Jaffa-Jerusalem railroad and the
Messageries Maritimes at the Jaffa port, however, the
GODF in Paris refused to intervene on the pretext that
the importance of Jaffa (to France) overruled brotherly
obligations. Letter, July 1913. GODF, Boxes 1126-7.
106 Instituto de Cultura Juan Gil-abert, Exposición: La
Masoneria Española, 1728-1939, 34.
107 Grand Orient de France. Suprême Conseil pour la
France et les Possessions Françaises, Instruction Pour Le
Second Grade Symbolique (Compagne).
108 al-Yasu’i, al-Sirr al-Masun Fi Shi’at al-Farmasun.
109 11 January, 1910. GODF, Boxes 1126-7.
110 11 January, 1910. GODF, Boxes 1126-7.
111 Hafiz al-Sa’id. ‘Araktinji wrote in a postscript: “We
have already written to the Grand Orient Ottoman of all
his wretched qualities, especially his election which was
by the despotic ways.” Letter from Barkai to GODF, 8
November, 1909. GODF, Boxes 1126-7.
112 Letter from ‘Araktinji to GODF, 7 April, 1913. GODF,
Boxes 1126-7.
113 See André Combs, “Le Grand Orient de France en
Palestine,” Chroniques d’Histoire Maçonnique, 52
(2001): 37.
114 11 March, 1913. BN, RES FM2-142.
115 11 March, 1913. BN, RES FM2-142.
116 29 April, 1913. BN, RES FM2-142.
117 Avraham Abushadid, Yom Tov Amon, Nissim Farhi,
Ezra Astruc and Moshe Yeshaia; Ibrahim Cattan; and
Henry Frigere and Marcel Drouillard.
118 They were called “foreigners” despite the fact that
all of the Jewish members had been born in Ottoman
territories (two in Jerusalem, one in Constantinople, and
two in Sofia). BN, RES FM2-142.
119 ‘Araktinji to GODF, 7 April, 1913. GODF, Boxes
1126-7.
120 GODF to ‘Araktinji, 24 April, 1913. GODF, Boxes
1126-7.
121 Although French was the official “liturgical language”
of the GODF lodges, Barkai in Jaffa informed Paris
headquarters that they were using Arabic for substantive
lodge activities, since many members did not know
French well enough. A lodge in Egypt (Les Amis du
Progrès, Mansura) had translated the GODF rites into
Arabic, and Barkai was using these translations in
their work alongside a summary in French. Letter from
‘Araktinji to GODF, 19 May, 1911. GODF, Boxes 1126-
7.
122 ‘Araktinji to GODF, 24 June, 1913. GODF, Boxes
1126-7.
123 Frigere to GODF, 27 June, 1913. BN, RES FM2-142.
This letter cited from Lucien Sabah, “La loge Moriah
à l’Or:: de Jérusalem, 1913-14,” Chroniques d’Histoire
Maçonnique, 35 (1985), 70-74. GODF, Boxes 1126-7.
Araktinji to GODF, 24 June, 1913.
124 Ibid.
125 See Khalidi, Palestinian Identity and Neville Mandel,
The Arabs and Zionism before World War I (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1976).
126 ‘Araktinji to GODF, 24 July, 1914. GODF, Boxes
1126-7.
127 Ibid.
128 18 October, 1913. Citation taken from Sabah, “La
loge Moriah”.
129 Sabah, “La loge Moriah”.
130 According to Moriah, “This work, which appears at
first to be commercial, is on the contrary a primarily
secular work and we greatly await it. It should be known
indeed that the secular French population is excessively
restricted in Jerusalem,” most of them being Freemasons.
“The rest of the population is composed of religious
of all orders.” Moriah to GODF, 2 October, 1913. BN,
RES FM2-142. In 1912 Henry Frigere had written to
the French government proposing the establishment
of a French concessionary society along the model of
the Société Commerciale de Palestine, established by
Jerusalem’s notables of all three religions. See Frigere
letter of 17 May, 1912. BN, RES FM2-142.
131 In the study submitted by Moriah lodge member
Nissim Farhi (director of the AIU primary school in
Jerusalem), there were 20 schools from six religions/
confessions and five different nationalities serving
10,000 children in Jerusalem. 19 June, 1913. BN, RES
FM2-142. A report in El Liberal claimed there were 73
schools in Jerusalem. El Liberal, v. 1, no. 22, 23 April,
1909.
132 Sabah, “La loge Moriah.”
133 18 October, 1913. BN, RES FM2-142.
134 See the file, CZA, A192/812. See also CZA, A192/
816, in particular the November 1910 meeting of the
L’Assemblée Maçonique de la Neutralité Scolaire et des
Études Laïques. In Lebanon the Freemasons of Le Liban
lodge claimed that confessional education promoted the
“division of the country, intolerance, and the perpetuation
of religious hatred.”
135 10 February, 1914. BN, RES FM2-142.
136 Moriah to GODF, 25 May, 1914. BN, RES FM2-142.
137 GODF to Frigere, 11 June, 1914. BN, RES FM2-142.
This statement was crossed out in the original letter,
perhaps considered too brash or stating the obvious.
138 See Tidhar, Barkai: Album Ha-Yovel and David
Tidhar, Sefer Ahim: 60 Years of Barkai [Book of
Brothers: 60 Years of Barkai] (Tel Aviv).