--- Sayfa 2 ---
Games, Information, and Politics

--- Sayfa 3 ---
Analytical Perspectives on Politics
ADVISORY EDITORS:
John Aldrich, Duke University
Bruce Bucno de Mesquita, Hoover Institution and New York University
Robert Jackman, University of California, Davis
David Rohde, Michigan State University
Political Science is developing rapidly and changing markedly, Keeping in
touch with new ideas across the discipline is a challenge for political scientists
and for their students,
To help meet this challenge, the series Analytical Perspectives on Politics
presents creati ve and sophisticated syntheses of major areas of research in the
fields of political science. In each book, a high-caliber author provides a clear
and discriminating description of the current state of the art and a strong-minded
prescription and structure for future work in the field.
These distinctivc books provide a compact review for political scientists. a
helpful introduction for graduate students, and central reading for advanced
undergraduate courses.
Robert W. Jackman, Power without Force: The Political Capacity ot
Natioll-State.1
Linda L. Fowler. Candidates, Congress, alld the American Democracy
Ole R. Holsti, Public Opinion and American Foreign Policy
Scott Gates and Brian D. Humes, Games , Information. and Politics:
ApplYing Game Theoretic Models to Political Science
Lawrence Baum. The Puzzle ofludicial Behavior
Barbara Geddes, Paradigms and Sand Castles: Theory Building and Research
Design in Comparative Politics

--- Sayfa 4 ---
Games, Information,
and Politics
Applying Game Theoretic Models
to Political Science
Scott Gates and Brian D. Humes
Ann Arbor
THE liNIvERSITr OF MIcmGAN PREss

--- Sayfa 5 ---
Copyright © by the University of Michigan 1997
All rights reserved
Published in the United States of America by
The University of Michigan Press
Manufactured in the United States of America
@) Printed on acid-free paper
2007
2006
2005
2004
6
5
4
3
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, or
otherwise, without the written permission of the publisher.
A CIP catalog record for this book is available from the British Llu ary.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Gates, Scott.
Games, information, and politics: applying game theoretic models
to political science / Scott Gates and Brian D. Humes.
p.
cm. - (Analytical perspectives on politics)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-472-09564-1 (cloth). - ISBN 0-472-06564-5 (paper)
I. Game theory.
I. Humes, Brian D.
JA72.5.G37
1996
320'.0I'51-dc20
2. Political science-Mathematical models.
II. Title.
Ill. Series.
96-35062
CIP

--- Sayfa 6 ---
To my parents, from Scott
and
To my family, Evelyn, Nathaniel, and Maggie, from Brian

--- Sayfa 8 ---
Contents
Preface
IX
Chapter 1 . Modeling with Games
1
Chapter 2. A Brief Introduction to Game
Theoretic Models
23
Chapter 3 . Strategic Choice and Progressive
Ambition in American Politics: An Examination
of Rohde's Model
61
Chapter 4. Dynamic Games and the Politics
of International Trade: An Examination
of Coneybeare's Trade Wars
Chapter 5. Information and Transitions to
Democracy: An Examination of Przeworski's
Democracy and the Market
Chapter 6. Commitment, Bluffs, and Reputation
Chapter 7. Conclusion
References
Index
83
1 13
141
163
169
177

--- Sayfa 10 ---
Preface
We wrote this book for those political scientists who have an interest
in game theory and want to know more. Most political scientists now
know some rudimentary game theory but really do not understand
how it can be used to improve our understanding of politics. Our
intention is to address this problem. In other words, we aim to demon­
strate to scholars who have little or no training in fonnal theory how
game theoretic analysis can be applied to politics. We provide applica­
tions of game theoretic models to three subfields of political science­
American government and politics, comparative politics, and interna­
tional relations. But more significantly we demonstrate how game
theory can be substantively applied to each of these subfields by
drawing from three distinct pieces of research. While this book intro­
duces many concepts, it is not a text in game theory (although it
certainly could be used in association with one). What we really want
to do here is clear up some common misperceptions about game
theory and show how it can be used to improve our understanding of
politics.
This book originated with a series of conversations regarding the
state of game theory in political science. Our conversation basically
went as follows: game theory has been a part of political science since
the end of World War II. But surprisingly, despite this long shared
history, the influence of and appreciation for game theory have been
uneven. We concluded that this issue needed to be addressed. What
began as a series of gripe sessions evolved into a paper. With the
encouragement of Colin Day at the University of Michigan Press, the
paper became the basis of this book.
Many people helped us improve this manuscript . Becky Morton
and David Leblang used our manuscript in their courses and provided
extremely valuable comments. Evelyn Fink and Ken Williams also
read several drafts; their criticisms proved to be invaluable. Jon Hovi,
Gretchen Hower, and Bjji)rn Erik Rasch helped us enormously with
their insightful comments. David Rohde and an anonymous reviewer
for the American Journal of Political Science made very useful com-

--- Sayfa 11 ---
x
Preface
ments on our paper, which eventually evolved into this book. The
ANZUS example that serves as a basis of chapter 2 was initially part
of a collaborative effort between James Alt, Randall Calvert, and
Brian Humes. John Aldrich was instrumental in the development of
chapter 3. Sherry Bennett Quinones's earlier collaboration with Scott
was instrumental in the development of the introduction and chapter
4. Misha Taylor's comments on chapter 5 were also quite valuable.
We also extend our thanks to Colin Day, who started us along , Mal­
colm Litchfield and Charles Myers, who helped us finish, the editors
of the series on Analytical Perspectives on Politics, and several anon­
ymous reviewers of our proposal and manuscript at the University of
Michigan Press.
Our graduate students at Michigan State University, the Univer­
sity of Trondheim, and the University of Nebraska who served as
guinea pigs as we used the manuscript in our game theory courses also
deserve our thanks. Scott extends special appreciation to Renee
Agress, Chris Butler, Lu-Huei Chen, Erick Duchesne, Sara Mc­
Laughlin, Pal Martinussen, Anette Einarsen, Stale T0mmerras, Pat
Bakken, Tina Vikhagen, Marit Masdal, Chris Sprecher, Bryan Mar­
shall, and Junhan Lee. Brian especially thanks Kelly Kate Pease, Jeff
Walz, Cameron Thies, Ethan Zorich, Linda Swanson, Albert van
Cleef, Dan Cox, Debra Bozell, Scott Brunner, and Michele Leonard
for their comments on the manuscript and its precursors.
Scott sends special thanks to Ola Listhaug , who provided a won­
derful environment for finishing the manuscript at the University of
Trondheim in Norway.
In addition , we would like to thank those individuals who helped
introduce us to game theory. None of these individuals should be held
responsible for any mistakes that might be found in this book. They
should take credit for anything that is correct in the following pages.
Scott would like to thank his friend Doug Dion, who sparked an
interest in game theory through the years both at the University of
Minnesota's Department of Applied and Agricultural Economics and
at the Department of Political Science at the University of Michigan.
Brian would like to thank Kenneth Shepsle, Randall Calvert, John
Roberts , David Kreps, and Robert Wilson. He would also especially
like to thank Forrest Nelson and Chong Lim Kim, who first interested
him in game theory.

--- Sayfa 12 ---
C H A PTER 1
Modeling with Games
A game involves situations in which individuals are aware that their
actions affect one another. To study the strategic interaction of indi­
viduals, we use game theory. Social, political, and economic interac­
tions abound with such strategic behavior. Politics, in particular, is
inherently strategic. All aspects of politics are affected by it. Interna­
tional relations, for example, is rife with strategic interaction, be it
military or economic. Parties in a legislature or parliament regularly
engage in strategic intrigue as they attempt to outmaneuver the oppo­
sition. Individual politicians must attend to strategy or their careers
will be amazingly brief.
Given the central role strategic interaction plays in politics, it is
hardly surprising that so many have applied game theory to the study
of politics. Game theoretic analysis has played a significant role in the
study of political science for more than 40 years. In fact, these models
have been applied to international conflict and strategic studies for
almost as long as the field of game theory has existed.l Game theory
subsequently has been employed to research in all the subfields of
political science. As expected, game theoretic applications to political
science have followed the same path as those of game theory in
general. The intellectual history of game theory is marked by several
innovations that have revolutionized the field.2
John von Neumann derived the first prominent game theoretic
1 . Some of the earliest applications were seen at the RAND Corporation, where a
number of prominent game theorists gathered to apply game theory to military and strategic
policy. Even Pete Seeger sang about the game theorists at RAND: "The RAND Corpora­
tion's the boon to the world / They think all day long for a fee. / They sit and play games
about going up in flames / For counters they use you and me . . . . " ("The RAND Hymn,"
words by Malvina Reynolds, copyright 196 1 Schroder Music Co. , AS CAP, renewed in
1989 by Nancy Schimmel [cited in Poundstone 1 992, 83 D. Some of the game theorists
working at RAND in the 1 940s and 1 950s included the following: John Von Neumann (the
inventor of game theory), Kenneth Arrow, George Dantzig, Melvin Dreshler, Daniel
Ellsberg (yes, the one of Pentagon Papers fame), R. Duncan Luce , John Nash, Anatol
Rappoport, Lloyd Shapley, and Martin Shubik (Poundstone 1992, 94).
2. Readers interested in a more complete history of game theory should read Au­
mann ( 1 989).

--- Sayfa 13 ---
2
Games, Information, and Politics
result with the Minimax Theorem in 1928.3 Game theory, however,
was familiar only to mathematicians until von Neumann together with
Oskar Morgenstern wrote Theory of Games and Economic Behavior
(1944). All game theory applied to economics and political science
can be traced back to this work. For political scientists, an equally
important book in this area is Luce and Raiffa's Games and Decisions
(1957). This text served as the basis for most courses on game theory
at the graduate level in political science until the early 1980s (Riker
1990, 14-15).
Both books prominently featured zero-sum and cooperative games.
Zero-sum games model situations in which one person's gain is equal
to another's loss. For example, most sports competitions are zero sum
in that one player or team earns a win and the other a loss. From von
Neumann and Morgenstern's discussion of zero-sum games came
many features of modem game theory (such as mixed strategies), but
for the most part zero-sum games have little application to political
science.4 Riker notes that theoreticians at the Rand Corporation fo­
cused on zero-sum games because of their focus on the winning or
losing of battles. Political scientists, however, were interested in
larger events in which one actor's gains do not exactly equal the other
actor's losses (Riker 1990, 15). In fact, Brams's use of zero-sum
games in the The Presidential Election Game (1978) is one of the few
uses of this type of game in political science.
Today in political science noncooperative game theory is applied
much more often than is cooperative game theory, but there was a
time when cooperative game theory played a dominant role. The
fundamental assumption underlying cooperative games is that binding
contracts are possible; this leads to an analytical focus on how a
number of players divide a joint product. The Shapley value is one of
the first applications of cooperative games to politics. In fact, Shapley
and Shubik (1954) was the first article to discuss game theory in a
political science journal. Shapley's power index has been applied to a
number of political situations. The first application by Shapley and
Shubik (1954) involved measuring power in legislative committees.
Other applications include Mann and Shapley (1964) on the relative
powers of states in the electoral college, Riker and Shapley's analysis
(1968) of weighted voting systems, Brams and Riker (1972) on the
3. Some authors also point to Emile Borel's work, which mathematically defined
pure and mixed strategies in the early 1 920s.
4. Almost all games applied to politics are non-zero-sum games wherein one
player's gain does not necessarily equal another's loss. In non-zero-sum games some
outcomes involve both players benefiting.

--- Sayfa 14 ---
Modeling with Games
3
bandwagon effect in coalition fonnation, and Ordeshook and Riker's
examination (1973) of changing rules in the Security Council of the
United Nations. Few political scientists have used the Shapley value
since the development of the Banzhaf index ( 1 965) and Straffin's
critique ( 1977) of the Shapley index.
Cooperative bargaining and coalition games have also had a rich
history in political science. Such works were applied to the study of
legislatures, parliaments, committees, and international alliances. For
example, Riker's Theory of Political Coalitions (1963) used von Neu­
mann and Morgenstern's model of cooperative N-person games to
derive the size principle.5 Riker applied the size principle to interna­
tional alliances and political parties in the United States. Most of the
other works using this notion examined the size of cabinet govern­
ments in parliamentary systems. These include Leiserson (1968), Ax­
elrod ( 1970), DeSwaan ( 1 970), Taylor and Laver (1973), Browne and
Franklin ( 1973), Dodd (1976), and Schofield and Laver (1985). While
there is a long history of cooperative games applied to political sci­
ence, noncooperative games predominate.6 For example, one of the
few recent applications of cooperative game theory is in the interna­
tional realm (Ordeshook and Niou 1989a, 1989b). 7 One of the major
reasons for the downfall of cooperative games is that this type of game
assumes that binding agreements are possible. This assumption has
fallen into disfavor with a number of political scientists. Because
cooperative game theory is no longer used by many political scientists
(and is used by a decreasing number of economists), we do not discuss
cooperative games in this book.
Noncooperative games make no allowance for binding commit­
ments . Such games provide the basic approach for most of political
science today. John Nash revolutionized game theory with the devel­
opment of noncooperative games. 8 The conceptual device that spurred
the development of noncooperative games was the Nash equilibria.
While we devote more attention to this concept in chapter 2, Nash
equilibria are defined as a combination of strategies whereby no
player has an incentive to unilaterally alter her or his own strategy. All
noncooperative game theory today rests on Nash's work from the
1950s.
5 . Riker's size principle is defined as follows: in constant sum and zero-sum cooper­
ative N-person games with transferable utility, only minimum winning coalitions form.
6. For more discussion. see reviews by Wagner ( 1 983) and Snidal ( 1 985).
7. Ordeshook and Niou 1 989a is a cooperative model, while the 1 989b paper is a
noncooperative version of the model of balance of power.
8. John Nash won the Nobel Prize in economics in 1 994, along with Reinhard Selten
and John Harsanyi, whose work we describe subsequently.

--- Sayfa 15 ---
4
Games, Information , and Politics
The best known noncooperative game is the Prisoners' Dilemma.
Many scholars have used this simple two-person non-zero-sum game
to analyze many forms of political interaction. For example, Rap­
poport and Chammah ( 1 965) applied this model directly to interna­
tional politics. Many others have applied this model to other arenas.
In the late 1970s another application of the Prisoners' Dilemma model
had a significant impact on political science as well as population
biology. This application involved the analysis of repeated Prisoners'
Dilemma games as was done by Axelrod (198 1 , 1984) and Maynard­
Smith ( 1 982). This analysis led to a huge growth of applications of
game theory in both of these fields. Axelrod and Dion ( 1 988) and
Axelrod and D'Ambrosio (1994) provide exhaustive listings of the
uses of this work in political science and biology.
While many political scientists applied simple two-person non­
zero-sum games to political situations with the aide of Nash equi­
libria, Reinhard Selten (1965) refined this concept with the develop­
ment of the concept of subgame perfect equilibria. While we discuss
subgame perfect equilibria in greater detail in chapters 2 and 4, it
suffices to say here that this concept involves players looking forward
through the steps of a game and that all players follow through the
play of the game making consistently rational decisions. This concept
rules out some Nash equilibria that seem unreasonable.
John Harsanyi ( 1967) introduced the concept of incomplete infor­
mation to game theory in the late 1 960s. Chapters 2, 5, and 6 focus on
the role information plays in a game. For now, we will define incom­
plete information as a player being uncertain of the other player's
payoffs. Instead of knowing the other player's payoffs with certainty,
the first player believes that the second could have one of many sets of
payoffs. To make the analysis tractable, we assume that the first player
can assign a probability to each set of payoffs.
The equilibrium concepts of perfect Bayesian and sequential
equilibrium serve a central role in most prominent works in political
science today.9 Through the use of the concept of perfect Bayesian
equilibria, Harsanyi was able to model how players update their be­
liefs about another player as a game progresses . We demonstrate
applications of this concept in chapters 5 and 6.
For political science these equilibria concepts allow us to model
situations involving uncertainty. For example, see Calvert ( 1 986) for a
review of models of uncertainty in politics and Banks ( 1991) for a
9. A number of game theorists have further refined the equilibria concept. Examples
include trembling hand perfect, divine , proper, evolutionary stable strategy, intuitive and
reactive equilibria, and many more. Discussion of these concepts is beyond the scope of this
book.

--- Sayfa 16 ---
Modeling with Games
5
discussion of signaling games in political science. In electoral poli­
tics, incomplete information models have been applied to a number of
topics: why people vote (Palfrey and Rosenthal 1985), candidate com­
petition and voting behavior (McKelvey and Ordeshook 1986), retro­
spective voting (Ferejohn 1986; Austen-Smith and Banks 1 989), the
effect of voting rules (Myerson and Weber 1993), popular initiatives
(Lupia 1992), and political activism (Lohmann 1 993). To model polit­
ical control of bureaucracy, a number of authors have also employed
incomplete information models (Bendor, Taylor, and Van Gaalen
1987; Banks 1 989; Banks and Weingast 1992). Leadership is exam­
ined by Calvert (1987) among legislators, by Alt, Calvert, and Humes
(1988) in an international context, and by Bianco and Bates ( 1990) in
a more general setting. In international relations, models of uncer­
tainty examine issues of deterrence and crisis bargaining (Morrow
1989; Powell 1990; Kilgour and Zagare 199 1 ; Bueno de Mesquita and
Lalman 1 992; Fearon 1 994), arms control agreements (Wittman 1989;
Downs and Rocke 1990; Kilgour and Brams 1 992), domestic-interna­
tional two-level games (Mo 1994), and alliance formation (Morrow
1994). This is just a small sample of the many many applications to
political science.
Despite the long history shared by game theory and political
science, many political scientists remain unaware of the many excit­
ing game theoretic techniques that have been developed over the
years. Because they are unaware of these developments, many
scholars continue to use inappropriate techniques to examine political
situations. As a result, they use overly simple games to illustrate more
complicated processes. The problem is model underspecification.
These authors often overextend their simple models, leaving many
important factors discussed in the text but not incorporated into the
model itself. Such works often discuss, but do not model, such fea­
tures as bluffing, reputation, commitment, and other factors brought
about by uncertainty. Techniques explicitly modeling uncertainty,
asymmetric information, and commitment allow game theoretic
models to directly address these more complex political interactions.
Our intention in writing this book is to introduce some of these model­
ing techniques to a diverse set of political scientists. This book is
about applying game theoretic models to political science.
The Advantages of Game Theoretic Modeling
Why use game theoretic models? Beyond the advantages achieved
from any form of social science modeling, formal analyses, such as
game theory, are characterized by rigor and precision. So what do we

--- Sayfa 17 ---
6
Games, Information , and Politics
gain from rigor and precision? First and foremost, formal analysis
requires that the modeler make the assumptions explicit. Verbal argu­
ments, in contrast, often possess hidden or blurred assumptions. One
of the central tasks of formal modeling is to lay out the assumptions
explicitly. This focus on assumptions sheds additional light on the
connections between the broad theory and model we are developing to
study a particular social phenomenon. The second advantage from
formal modeling stems from analytical clarity and rigor. Arguments
structured by formal logic or mathematical analysis are explicit and
unambiguous. Such models demand that the links between assump­
tions and analysis are clear. Moreover, formal analysis allows us to
eliminate certain conclusions that contradict the assumptions of a
model. In this way formal models can be used to determine inconsis­
tencies in analysis or disjunctures between assumptions and conclu­
sions . There is no room for whitewashing the details. Formal model­
ing requires a precision that rewards the investigator with clear
insight, consistency of argument, and explicit reasoning.
Game theory as applied in political science belongs solidly in the
camp of social scientific research. This becomes quite evident when
we relate game theoretic modeling to King, Keohane, and Verba's
( 1994) four characteristics of scientific research.
1 . The goal is inference. Formal analysis in general and game
theoretic models in particular can provide valuable insight.
The deductive logic employed by these techniques aims at
providing an explanation of various aspects of social interac­
tion. This is not a simple reporting of facts and opinion but a
carefully laid out and developed formal argument. Deductive
analysis works from general principles to specific inferences.
Developing a formal model forces one to think through under­
lying assumptions and the logical structure of an argument. It
is this rigor and explicitness of game theoretic analysis that
can give us insight into various social interactions.
2. The procedures are pUblic. The rigor of formal analysis and
the explicit presentation of assumptions make this an espe­
cially public enterprise. The logic of the analysis is presented
for all to see and evaluate. With formal models there is no
glossing over the details. This explicit presentation aids in the
accumulation of knowledge as others are able to clearly build
on previous work.
3. The conclusions are uncertain. Formal models, and more par­
ticularly game theoretic models, are especially effective in

--- Sayfa 18 ---
Modeling with Games
7
providing unexpected results. Such unexpected results are
clearly uncertain. The logical structure of these models some­
times produces conclusions that are at variance with accepted
wisdom. In fact, the formal structure of these arguments can
serve to demonstrate inconsistencies in the reasoning that was
used to arrive at the accepted wisdom. Formal models can also
be used to show how commonly used tests of theories are
inappropriate. In this way we see how the formal structure of a
game theoretic model often forces us to challenge conven­
tional wisdom that is less formally grounded.
4. The content is the method. The validity of a scientific argu­
ment depends on a set of rules of inference. Game theoretic
modeling is characterized by a set of explicit rules regarding
the procedure by which a social phenomenon is analyzed. This
book focuses on this method. Our book is about applying
game theoretic models specifically to political interactions be­
tween individuals.
The basic orientation of game theoretic modeling is toward the
development of general explanations. This involves the development
of theory. The enterprise is not to take a particular case, design a game
in which the payoffs lead to the outcome that actually occurred, and
then claim that the case is now explained. Along these lines, "too
many 'applications' of game theory have merely been in the spirit of
sorting out whether the Cuban Missile Crisis was really Chicken or
Prisoners' Dilemma."10 Such an approach ends up fitting the structure
of some preexisting game theoretic model to a particular situation, but
it does not generate new explanations or predictions. Such an ap­
proach toward game theory fails to meet the criteria of good social
SCIence.
The principal advantage of formal modeling is the clarity and
rigor afforded through deductive analysis . For game theoretic analysis
this means identifying equilibrium conditions not predicting specific
outcomes of a particular case. By focusing on equilibria, a modeler is
developing hypotheses about how the world works. Yet the rigor of
game theory cries out for application where strategic interactions are
to be explained. Of course, one hopes that the inference gained from
game theoretic modeling will be used by others to help explore spe­
cific situations of strategic interaction, for otherwise the game theory
has little to offer the scientific community. Our concern is that all too
---- ----
-------
---- ------
-----
10. See Snidal ( l 985. 26-27) for criticism of such applications of game theory.

--- Sayfa 19 ---
8
Games, Information, and Politics
often the application of specific game theoretic insights is mistaken
(as well as misused) for the much broader goal of developing general
models. Like any other abstract model, game theory helps identify
relevant information, relevant processes, and likely outcomes. If a
butcher shop's sales were down one particular month, the butcher
would no more blame comparative statics results for the lack of sales
than she would blame the sun, moon, and stars. But she might use the
ideas from comparative statics to examine how her price structure
compares to those of other markets. Yet it may not explain everything.
They may have just started construction on the street in front of her
store.
This is a common occurrence in the literature, where researchers
applying game theory (unfortunately in too simplistic a manner) often
express dismay that the theory does not perfectly explain their particu­
lar situation. When they do so, first, they are judging it by a unrealis­
tic standard, and, second, they are ignoring the difference between
game theoretic modeling and its application.
As with other social science models, game theoretic models do
not even attempt to address all the complexity of social interaction.
The value of modeling comes through the development of an elegant
explanation. For game theory this means narrowing down the context
of a social interaction. Only the essentially relevant actors and choices
are considered; additional assumptions can be considered as the model
is developed. The objective should be to provide the best explanation
with the simplest model. In this respect game theory is no different
from other social science approaches.
The Basic Assumptions of Game Theory
Game theoretic modeling constitutes one type of rational choice the­
ory. When we speak of rationality we refer to some form of goal­
directed behavior. As such this means that individuals are seen to
choose the means to best gain a set of ends, where goals are related to
outcomes through action or choice. More formally we make three
basic assumptions about individual's preferences: completeness, fixed
preferences, and transitivity. Completeness means that actors prefer
one outcome over another or they are indifferent. Essentially this
entails some notion of comparison and choice over alternative out­
comes. Fixed preferences assumes that an actor's preferences over a
set of outcomes do not change. Actors may alter the means of achiev­
ing these outcomes (changing strategies or actions), but they do not
change their basic underlying preferences over the consequences.
Transitivity, whereby an individual preferring A to Band B to C will

--- Sayfa 20 ---
Modeling with Games
9
then prefer A to C, precludes preference cycles. For example, an
individual preferring strawberry ice cream to vanilla and preferring
vanilla to chocolate operating under transitivity will then prefer straw­
berry to chocolate. This implies some coherence and consistency in
choice. These three assumptions serve as the basis for the conceptual­
ization of preferences. The concept of utility, in tum, serves as a way
of measuring preferences. One can also characterize the assumption
of rationality as the assumption of utility maximization. The three
assumptions of rational choice characterize what is meant by rational
choice. Fundamentally a rational actor possesses preferences over a
set of outcomes and, in tum, selects actions that satisfy these prefer­
ences. This is the essence of choice in game theory.
Game theory as a way to model strategic interaction relies on
these assumptions of rational choice. Players of a game are seen to
make a choice based on the assumptions of rational choice while
taking into account the choices of other players. Game theory is akin
to decision theory except for this latter point. Players want to make
the best choice for themselves, but they realize that obtaining their
best choice is only partially dependent on their own actions. They
must take into account the influence of other people's choices.
Game theoretic models also typically assume that players of a
game possess common knowledge. By this we assume that everybody
in a game knows something, everyone knows that everybody knows
it, everybody knows that everyone knows that everybody knows
something, and so on, ad infinitum. Common knowledge plays a
fundamental role in the manner in which players' expectations take
shape. It is a beginning point for modeling the strategic interest that is
the essence of game theory. Game theorists typically assume that
players possess common knowledgel l about the rationality of other
players and the structure of the game and other players' preferences.
In other words , we assume that individuals are characterized by the
common knowledge that other players are rational actors, as they are
themselves. It is also assumed that players possess common knowl­
edge about the rules of the game that they are playing.l2
How do individuals playing a game select an action? Game theo-
1 1 . For a thorough discussion of the topic of common knowledge , see Geanakoplos
1 992, 1994.
12. Common knowledge is exhibited in (I) cases where it is common knowledge both
that the horizon is infinite and what the number of stages is, (2) cases where it is common
knowledge that the horizon is infinite, and (3) cases where it is common knowledge that the
horizon is finite but the number of stages is uncertain. In fact, this case can be broken down
into two categories-one where the maximum number of iterations is common knowledge
and one where this number is unknown. The former category can be shown to reflect the
finite horizon case. The second category is more similar to the infinite horizon case.

--- Sayfa 21 ---
1 0
Games, Information , and Politics
rists answer this question by focusing on two aspects of behavior:
rational choice and strategic interaction. Rational choice provides a
way of understanding an individual's preference for one outcome over
another. Strategic interaction then shapes the action that is selected
since it is the interaction of choice that leads to different outcomes
associated with different payoffs. Game theoretic models then explain
the structure and rules for how individuals' decisions and actions are
interrelated and how different social outcomes come to be.
Applying Game Theory to Politics
The goal of social science is to explain, predict, and understand
human behavior. As such, it is not so much the goals of different
methodological techniques within the social sciences that differ but
rather the orientations of each. Game theoretic analysis fundamentally
focuses on particular aspects of a social interaction. Such formal
models allow us to form clear and explicit assumptions and examine
their implications through formal analysis. We learn about social be­
havior through the cumulative knowledge gained by the analysis of
such models. In other words, accumulation of knowledge takes place
by seeing how different assumptions lead to different predictions or
explanations. In such a way, game theoretic models provide a progres­
sive understanding of the world. Those who set out to directly "test"
game theoretic models miss the point. Green and Shapiro (1994)
make this mistake in examining the fruits of rational choice mod­
eling.
The problems of model misspecification and underspecification
must be addressed by any social science method. Game theoretic
modelers need to attend to these problems, as does anyone who em­
ploys statistical analysis. Specification problems mean that a model
fails to incorporate significant aspects of the phenomenon being an­
alyzed. In the case of misspecification, the model involves the incor­
poration of the wrong elements into a model. For the problem of
model underspecification there are elements missing from the model.
These two problems are evident in many attempts by political scien­
tists to apply game theoretic models to their subject matter.
These problems are manifested in three common ways when
game theory is applied to politics. These are: not explicitly modeling
the structure of decisions and actions, not explicitly modeling infor­
mation asymmetries that may exist between political actors playing a
game, and not taking into account the strategic interaction between
players . These three errors amount to problems of model misspecifi­
cation and underspecification. Such problems can be avoided to a

--- Sayfa 22 ---
Modeling with Games
1 1
large degree by using game theoretic models as they should be used,
as rigorous deductive analytical tools. We can address problems of
model underspecification and misspecification by employing some of
the many techniques that have been developed over the last few de­
cades in game theory. One way to avoid such problems is to focus on
the enterprise of model building.
Social scientific modeling relies on three basic stages of model
building: conceptualization, operationalization, and interpretation. We
examine each of these stages and discuss how they relate to game
theoretic modeling. 13
Conceptualization and Game Theoretic Modeling
Conceptualization involves specification. In game theoretic analysis,
conceptualization involves the deduction of the formal game struc­
ture. A game includes: the players, the structure of the payoffs, as­
signment of decision nodes to players, actions, information sets, and
probability distributions for each node. In the next chapter we discuss
each of these aspects of a game in greater detail.
A game theoretic model has been described as "a special concep­
tual structure for organizing and structuring thoughts about concepts
in an attempt to order them and predict their effects" (Myerson 1992,
62). Formalizing a game, specifying actions, payoffs, information,
and so on, imposes restrictions on a model. A game's assumptions
constitute the initial conditions within a model and the parameters that
will be manipulated. "Rational choice theorists deliberately simplify
and abstract reality in their models. Game models do not even attempt
to address all the complexity of the social world. Instead, they focus
on certain elements of social situations to lay bare how motivations
and actions are interrelated" (Morrow 1 994, 8). The enterprise of all
social science modeling is oriented toward clarification and sim­
plification of complex social interactions, not toward providing a
complete picture. Game theoretic modeling is one means of gaining
an understanding of specific aspects of different social phenomena.
Operationalization and Game Theoretic Modeling
Operationalization of game theoretic models involves a process of
delineating strategies that produce equilibria. After conceptualizing a
given theory into a game theoretic form, game theory relies on deduc-
--
--
-
---- --------
----- -----
13 . See Gates and Quinones 1994, wherein the authors compare statistical, empiri­
cal, and game theoretic modeling across these stages.

--- Sayfa 23 ---
1 2
Games, Information, and Politics
tive analysis of the strategies that produce solutions for the game.
These solutions are the equilibria we derive from our games. Chapter
2 devotes considerable attention to the most basic of these concepts,
that is , Nash equilibria. Recall that a Nash equilibrium is a situation in
which no player has an incentive to unilaterally alter her or his own
strategy. In game theoretic models it is assumed that players condition
their actions on what they believe is "rational" under certain circum­
stances. 14 "As in any analytic approach to real-life problems, the best
we can hope for is to have a class of models sufficiently rich and
flexible that, if anyone objects that our model has neglected some
important aspect of the situation that we are trying to analyze, we can
generate a more complicated extension of our model that takes this
aspect into account" (Myerson 1 99 1 , 83).
Operationalization within any modeling framework is a major
problem. To a large extent this is unavoidable. 15 How do we translate
opaque constructs into tangible variables? Operationalizing constructs
into variables within an empirical framework is often problematic; it
is often as great an issue for game theoretic models.
Interpretation of Game Theoretic Models
Interpretation of our results is of critical importance. Indeed, this
process highlights the real power of game theory, as it is used to
generate new findings and understandings of our theories (Snidal
1985). Through the interpretation of our results we develop our expla­
nations and understanding of the real world. 16 The rigorous manner in
which game theoretic models are deduced can allow political scien­
tists to evaluate theories in a more rigorous manner.
Examples of Effective Applications of Game Theoretic
Models in Political Science
Game theoretic analysis has played a significant role in the field of
political science. Over the years we have seen more and more articles
using this approach appear in the major journals in the discipline.
Many of these are true examples of quality work. Some have led many
14. Recall the two central assumptions of game theory: rationality (or utility maximi­
zation) and common knowledge.
1 5. Recall QUine's (1953) critique of the analytic-synthetic distinction.
16. Game theoretic models are rarely explicitly tested with actual observations in the
real world . Note, however, some prominent exceptions discussed in the next section.
Experiments are the most common empirical approach used to test game theoretic models.
See, for example , Morton 1993 (382-392) or Palfrey 1 99 1.

--- Sayfa 24 ---
Modeling with Games
1 3
of us to question long-held conventional views. Others serve to con­
firm certain perspectives. Ultimately, such quality work contributes to
the body of knowledge of political science.
We use the following criteria for assessing game theoretic model­
ing in political science. To a large degree these criteria reflect the
qualities of social science research previously discussed. First, such
work is characterized by explicit assumptions. Second the analysis is
rigorous and clear when the structure of the game (actors, actions,
strategies, information, payoffs, and equilibria) are reproducible.
Third, the conclusions are clear. These conclusions, in turn, can be
used to derive propositions that can be verified empirically. Fourth,
the very best of such work forces us to reassess the ways we perceive
the world.
High-quality game theoretic work has been applied to all sub­
fields of political science. Nonetheless, it is safe to say that most of it
has been used to study voting behavior and legislatures, often (but not
always) applied to American government and politics. 17 Our under­
standing of voting has been greatly influenced by such work as Fiorina
( 1 98 1 ); Abramson, Aldrich, and Rohde (1995); Shepsle ( 1 991); and
Enelow and Hinich (1984) among others. Similarly the study of legis­
latures has benefited significantly from the concept of structure­
induced equilibrium (Shepsle ( 1979); Shepsle and Weingast ( 1 987);
and Weingast ( 1989». Austen-Smith ( 1990) and Austen-Smith and
Riker ( 1 987, 1 990) model legislative debate as a signaling game.
Baron and Ferejohn ( 1989) created a cottage industry of game theo­
retic analyses of the distributional effects of the U.S. Congress's poli­
cies. For example, Krehbiel ( 1 991), Kiewiet and McCubbins (199 1 ),
and Cox and McCubbins ( 1 993) have all addressed this topic. IS Ap­
plications to parliamentary legislatures have seen the imprint of qual­
ity game theoretic work, including that of Dodd ( I 976), Austen-Smith
and Banks ( 1 989, 1 990), Laver and Shepsle ( 1 990, 1 995), and Baron
( 1 991).
Game theory has also been useful in analyzing international rela­
tions. We discuss in subsequent sections several examples of impor­
tant work in international crisis bargaining. Most of the best work in
international relations applies game theory to conflict and general
17. We limit our discussion here to noncooperative games.
1 8 . To illustrate the impact of this literature, one needs only to note that both Krehbiel
(1991) and Cox and McCubbins (1993) received the Fenno Award from the Legislative
Studies Section of the American Political Science Association for the best book published
that year in legislative studies. Also, these works have generated a set of articles that
consumed two issues of Legislative Studies Quarterly and are being published separately in
Shepsle and Weingast 1995.

--- Sayfa 25 ---
14
Games, Information, and Politics
theory. These studies include Niou and Ordeshook (1990) and Powell
( 1 988). There are also some good applications in international politi­
cal economy, for example, Morrow ( 1994) and Mo (1994).
Of course, there are many more examples.19 We only present
these few to give an idea of where good work is being applied. For the
most part these works possess the qualities of good game theoretic
applications in political science. Integrating game theoretic and em­
pirical methods still appears to be a novel idea. A move in this
direction can only serve to advance the discipline, as it can help our
theories become more rigorous and systematic. If our aim as political
scientists is to contribute to the discipline in this manner, then inte­
grating these two analytic disciplines certainly is reaching toward that
goal. We now tum to attempts to more explicitly link game theoretic
and statistical methods of analysis .
A Deductive Approach to Integration
Game theoretic models can be linked to empirical analysis in a purely
deductive manner. 20 The procedure is to take a theory about a particu­
lar phenomenon, form a game theoretic model, and subsequently use
the game theoretic model to shape an empirical test. This process
consists of using game theoretic models a priori as a theoretical device
to specify relevant parameters in a model.
One of the first applications of game theory to the study of
political science in this manner was Dodd ( 1976). Dodd applied
Riker's notion of minimum winning coalitions to examine the sus­
tainability of parliamentary coalitions in Western Europe. After deriv­
ing several hypotheses from Riker's model, Dodd tested these hypoth­
eses using empirical data on the stability of governments in Western
Europe. He found that a "key to durable government is the coalitional
status of the cabinet; minimum winning cabinets endure whereas cabi­
nets that deviate from minimum winning status do not" (1976, 234).
This occurs whether the cabinet is formed of several parties or one
majority party. This result helped to change the focus of the durability
1 9. There are several sources that offer reviews of the literature in various fields. For
example, O'Neill ( 1 994) provides a comprehensive review of game theoretic models ap­
plied to the study of international conflict. Bendor ( 1 988) provides a review of the use of
game theory in the study of bureaucracies. Aldrich ( 1 993) reviews the work on voter
turnout. Krehbiel ( 1 988) provides a review of the literature on legislatures. Also there are
good reviews of the uses of different types of game theoretic models (Calvert 1986; Banks
1 991 ).
20. Much of the following discussion about how game theoretic and statistical model­
ing techniques can be integrated is derived from Gates and Quinones J 994.

--- Sayfa 26 ---
Modeling with Games
15
of governments in parliamentary systems, which up to that time had
been on the problems of mUltiparty governments.
Bueno de Mesquita and Lalman (1992) also illustrate how useful
it can be to deductively integrate game theoretic and statistical
methods. Their analysis begins with an international interaction game
characterized by sequential decisions. Bueno de Mesquita and Lal­
man's game features the actions of two rival nations and the potential
outcomes that result from their strategic choices. From this game
theoretic model they derive a set of propositions, which, in tum, are
used to assess two competing theories of international relations: real­
politik, which stresses the role of systemic constraints , and the do­
mestic politics variant, which features both systemic and domestic
political constraints. These propositions are analyzed both fonnally
and empirically through statistical analysis. After examining 707
dyadic interactions, the authors conclude that the domestic politics
model provides a better explanation of international relations. The
analysis is deductive in that it begins with a general model, general
propositions are derived, and finally propositions are empirically an­
alyzed. Of course, Bueno de Mesquita and Lalman's analysis is not
purely deductive. In fact, no one's research is ever purely deductive or
inductive but exhibits general tendencies in one direction or another.
Using the deductive approach, a game theoretic model is devel­
oped and fonnalized from a more general theory to model a social
interaction. Assumptions (initial conditions) and equilibria for the
game are then identified. From this analysis, a set of propositions are
presented and empirically evaluated. The empirical analysis essen­
tially tests propositions derived from the analysis and identification of
equilibria. What this suggests is that propositions can be extracted
from game models and empirically tested in an effort to confinn or
disconfinn the explanatory power of our models. A deductive ap­
proach, in this manner, provides a direct path of integration for game
theory and empirical methods.
The deductive approach also provides an opportunity to test a
variety of propositions derived from a set of fonnal models. As a
variety of fonnal models provides a better understanding of the nature
of specific social interactions, this type of comparative evaluation of
propositions derived from a set of fonnal models contributes even
more to our understanding. In fact, such a comparative evaluation of
propositions may be one of the best ways to maintain theoretical
analytical rigor and provide a more fully specified empirical model
that can be statistically evaluated.
The deductive approach also provides an opportunity to test a

--- Sayfa 27 ---
1 6
Games, Information, and Politics
variety of propositions derived from a set of formal models. A com­
parative evaluation of a variety of deductively derived propositions
may be one of the best ways to attain more fully specified empirical
models that can be statistically evaluated. The deductive approach,
however, is not the only path for integrating game theoretic and statis­
tical methods . There is also a more inductive approach.
An Inductive Approach
Game theoretic models can also be used to evaluate empirical results
and to compare statistical models. Such an approach could be charac­
terized as possessing inductive characteristics. Such an inductive ap­
proach consists of using game theoretic models to compare competing
empirical models . This approach has been employed very infre­
quently. It is interesting to note that these two examples of this induc­
tive approach, Fearon ( 1994) and Morrow (1989), both involve the
study of international crisis bargaining. Like Nalebuff (1986), Powell
(1990), Fearon (1990), Wagner (1991), Kilgour (1991), and Bueno de
Mesquita and Lalman ( 1992), Fearon ( 1994) and Morrow (1989) de­
velop different game theoretic models that examine how sequence and
information compel actors to select certain actions in a crisis bargain­
ing situation.
Unlike all of these previous game theoretic analyses of interna­
tional crisis bargaining (except for Bueno de Mesquita and Lalman
1992), Fearon and Morrow subsequently use their respective game
theoretic models to assess the viability of several empirical models of
crisis bargaining. In this manner, both demonstrate how game theo­
retic models can be used to develop testable propositions and reex­
amine empirical studies. These formal models serve "to draw logical
links between postulated underlying processes and empirical regu­
larities. By demonstrating what empirical patterns should follow from
an assumed process, the formal model serves as a tool to judge evi­
dence" (Morrow 1989, 964).
In light of his game theoretic model, Fearon reanalyzes Huth
(1988) using the same data set (Huth and Russett 1988). Morrow, on
the other hand, uses his model to reinterpret a larger set of empirical
works, though less directly. Both demonstrate how empirical models
of crisis behavior are plagued by the joint problems of selection bias
and misspecification. Both of these problems stem from the unobserv­
able nature of beliefs. Fearon presents a model wherein two nations
engage each other in a sequential game of threats and action; Morrow

--- Sayfa 28 ---
Modeling with Games
17
develops a sequential equilibrium of the model that characterizes the
offers and acceptance of offers for both sides, for all moves within the
game theoretic model. From these game theoretic analyses, they eval­
uate existing empirical models in an attempt to see which studies more
appropriately characterize the nature of crises bargaining.
By viewing several empirical studies through the lens of a se­
quential game, the problems affecting existing empirical models can
be more easily detected. As a result, such problems can be corrected
so that new conclusions can be drawn. Indeed, this process highlights
the real power of game theory, using it to generate new findings and
understandings of our theories (Snidal 1985). Moreover, this empha­
sizes the benefits to be gained from integrating game theory and
statistical methods, namely, that competing empirical models can be
evaluated for analytic correctness and rigor with a corresponding
game theoretic analysis. The game's analytic framework can be used
to show systematically which factors are important in explaining be­
havior and which are improperly being ignored. For example, Fowler
( 1 993) notes that the empirical models of candidate recruitment and
the incumbency effect disagree and conflict with each other. Game
theory could provide a way to choose between these competing
models. Statistical methods are not perfect in choosing between
models. Instead, we can use game theory to develop prior knowledge,
which would lead us to accept or reject certain statistical results.
This type of formal integration can also be useful for conducting
encompassing tests. It has already been established that game theo­
retic analysis is able to rigorously specify relevant parameters in a
model. Moreover, as the previous discussion suggests, it is also able
to dismiss parameters that are largely irrelevant in empirical models.
As such, if game theoretic analysis is used to assess irrelevant and
relevant parameters in empirical models, in the same vein it can be
used to determine which models explain more. That is, game theoretic
models can help identify and derive empirical models that explain the
most and yet at the same time prove to be the most parsimonious.
Both inductive and deductive forms of integration can help foster an
effective dialogue between these two fonnal approaches. The combi­
nation of the two approaches can help develop systematic and rig­
orous models in political science.
Our book addresses several problems that are common among
game theoretic work applied to political science. Our aim is show how
correcting these problems will lead to a better quality of game theo­
retic modeling.

--- Sayfa 29 ---
1 8
Games, Information , and Politics
Overview of Book Chapters
This book features two themes: ( 1 ) when is a strategic decision best
modeled with game theory and when is it more appropriate to use
decision theory? and (2) how should the game be modeled? What are
the differences between decision theory and game theory? How can
we best model different political situations? In chapter 3 we highlight
the differences between these two modeling techniques and comment
on their application to politics. In chapter 4 we discuss the conditions
under which large N-player games resemble decision theory prob­
lems. We further contrast the differences between large N-player and
small N-player games. In both of these discussions we to a large
extent ask: when is a strategic interaction a game and when is it not?
After determining whether game theory is an appropriate modeling
tool, we discuss the various game theoretic tools available to the
modeler. Our focus here is on the structure of the game. Do the
players move simultaneously or sequentially? Do the players possess
complete or incomplete information? How does this affect our under­
standing of a game? How does this affect our understanding of the
political concept that we are modeling?
We introduce these methods through the examination of the ap­
plication of game theory in three subfields of political science. Exam­
ining specific uses of game theory in American politics, comparative
politics, and international relations, we illustrate how this research
can be improved through the application of different methods of game
theory. For each example, we focus on what elements have been left
out of the model and then address these missing features by develop­
ing and applying models that explicitly incorporate these features.
Our purpose is not to provide a thorough review of the substantive
literature in each of these three cases. The book's orientation is meth­
odological not substantive. Moreover, our focus is not to criticize the
examples or their authors; rather, it is to show how these cases can be
improved through the use of different methods.
Chapter 2 provides "A Brief Introduction to Game Theoretic
Models." Three primary forms of noncooperative game theory have
been applied to political science. These three forms consist of simple
matrix, repeated, and extensive form games . Of these three, extensive
form games have only recently been applied to the study of political
situations. The other two forms have been used more frequently. This
chapter examines each form in detail and discusses their advantages
and disadvantages. The roles of complete and perfect information,

--- Sayfa 30 ---
Modeling with Games
19
incomplete information, and imperfect information games are dis­
cussed at length. Different equilibria concepts are also examined in
conjunction with the different game forms. We focus primarily on
Nash, subgame perfect, and perfect Bayesian equilibrium. Special
attention is given to the Folk Theorem in our discussion of repeated
games. This chapter introduces the reader to these three principal
forms of game theory and provides a basis for the following chapters
in which applications using each form are discussed.
This chapter should not be seen as a replacement for a text or
course in game theory. Rather, the goal is to introduce the reader to
these concepts and their uses. The level of mathematical sophistica­
tion is kept at a minimum. After finishing this chapter, the typical
reader should have an intuitive understanding of the techniques pre­
sented.
Chapter 3 examines "Strategic Choice and Progressive Ambition
in American Politics." Rohde (1 979) models the choice calculus of
members of the U.S. House of Representatives regarding their deci­
sion to remain in the House or try for another political office. In this
paper, he did not develop a game theoretic model. Instead, he devel­
oped a decision theoretic model in which the member makes his or her
decision without taking into account the choices of potential competi­
tors. We develop a game theoretic model of this process. This model
takes into account other potential entrants. It allows us to illustrate the
importance of using game theory instead of decision theory to model
strategic interactions and also to review the extensions that were used
in the previous two chapters. We focus on when to use decision theory
and when to employ game theory.
Chapter 4 is entitled "Dynamic Games and the Politics of Interna­
tional Trade: An Examination of Conybeare's Trade Wars." Interna­
tional trade is one of the primary topics of analysis in international
political economy. In this chapter, we examine the work of Conybeare
( 1 987), who has applied game theory to study strategic aspects of
trade policy. In examining Conybeare's work, we focus on his re­
liance on simple matrix games. We focus our analysis around three of
Conybeare's games applied to the politics of trade wars: Prisoners'
Dilemma, Hybrid Chicken-Stag Hunt, and Asymmetric Trade. Ex­
panding on his analysis, we show how topics that he addressed in his
analysis but did not explicitly model can be modeled directly. Specifi­
cally, we address the topic of game structure through a discussion of
simultaneous versus sequential moves. While we demonstrate that
both of these types of moves can be considered with simple matrix

--- Sayfa 31 ---
20
Games, Information, and Politics
games, we focus our presentation on the use of extensive form games
with imperfect information. We also expand each of his models from
two-player games to N-player games. In tum, we highlight the differ­
ences between two-player and three-player games and then show the
implications of expanding to a large number of players. We end with a
model of leadership and international trade that extends several con­
cepts discussed by Conybeare.
Chapter 5 discusses "Information and the Politics of Transitions
to Democracy." Democratization, privatization, and other aspects of
policy reform attract a good deal of analysis by scholars of compara­
tive politics. Recently, comparativists have begun to apply game theo­
retic models to their analysis of the strategic aspects of administrative
reform. A significant example of such work is Adam Przeworski's
study of reform in Latin American and Eastern European democracies
(1991 ). This is an interesting extensive form game-theoretic analysis
of the incentives facing politicians who are responsible for initiating
reforms.
However, while Przeworski implicitly assumes that there are in­
formation asymmetries, he does not explicitly model these asymmet­
ries. By applying a set of models that directly incorporate such condi­
tions as play repeated over time and incomplete information, we show
how reputation and credibility can be explicitly incorporated into an
analysis of political reform using perfect Bayesian equilibria. We
apply this revised model directly to Przeworski's analysis.
Chapter 6, "Commitment, Bluffs, and Reputation," further ex­
amines the role of incomplete information in strategic interactions. In
this chapter we return to the models developed in chapters 3 and 4 and
utilize the modeling techniques introduced in chapter 5 . In other
words, we present incomplete information models of strategic ambi­
tion and asymmetric trade. We also introduce a model of sanctions to
highlight the strategic problems of commitment. These models dem­
onstrate the importance of bluffs, commitment, and reputation to po­
litical interactions and the advantage of explicitly modeling these
concepts.
Game theory and political science share a long history. In recent
years this relationship has become even more important. More and
more political scientists are utilizing game theoretic models for their
analysis. Yet a gap lies between the types of game theoretic models
applied to political science and the techniques available. Without
know ledge of this new technology, the work in this area tends to
overextend simpler game theoretic models. Currently the number of
scholars in this field who utilize more sophisticated game theoretic

--- Sayfa 32 ---
Modeling with Games
2 1
techniques is quite limited. There is a significant need and demand for
an introduction and overview of these game theoretic approaches.
This book will serve as a vehicle for exposing the political science
community to newer game theory technology. This book is designed
to be instructive and introductory. Above all we want to demonstrate
how game theoretic models should be applied to political science.

--- Sayfa 34 ---
C H APTER 2
A Brief Introduction to Game Theoretic Models
Introduction
In this chapter, a brief overview of game theory is provided. This
overview includes examinations of matrix fonn games, repeated
games, extensive fonn games, and the equilibrium conditions con­
nected with each. The purpose of this chapter is not to provide the
reader with an in-depth knowledge of the theory discussed here. In­
stead, we are providing the reader with an introduction to these con­
cepts that will be used throughout the rest of the book.
In order to present these techniques, we have chosen to motivate
our discussions with a substantive example . Specifically, we will
focus on the decision by New Zealand to exclude ships with nuclear
weapons and the action of the United States to withdraw its support
for the ANZUS (Australia, New Zealand, United States) alliance. We
use this example because it is easy to understand and can be used to
illustrate many different techniques in game theory. The discussion of
the disruption of the ANZUS alliance is not meant to be an in-depth
case study. Instead, it is used only for the motivation of discussion of
the game theory techniques that follow.
This chapter proceeds as follows. First, a brief introduction to the
theory of games is provided. Second, a brief discussion concerning
the interaction between the United States and New Zealand is pre­
sented. Third, a discussion of matrix form games is provided. This
discussion, as well as that of other techniques, is motivated with the
aid of the ANZUS example. Fourth, we tum to a discussion of exten­
sive fonn games. Fifth, and finally, a discussion of iterated games is
presented.
A Brief Introduction to Game Theory
What is a "game" in game theory? Technically, each game consists of
three parts. These are the actors, their strategies, and the payoffs
connected with any combination of the players' strategies (Luce and
23

--- Sayfa 35 ---
24
Games , Information, and Politics
Raiffa 1 957, 5-6). I For example, most researchers are familiar with
matrix, or strategic fOnTI, games. A common game of this type is the
Prisoners' Dilemma, which is presented in matrix 1 . There are two
players in this game: Player 1 and Player 2. These players each have
two pure strategies. 2 They may choose either C or D. These strategy
combinations are linked to an outcome of the game. For example, if
each player chooses C we say that mutual cooperation has occurred.
Connected with these outcomes are the payoffs of the game. These
payoffs represent how each player values the outcomes of the game.
Thus, there are strategies that yield outcomes that yield payoffs for the
players of the game. Outcomes and payoffs differ in that payoffs are
used to evaluate the outcomes of the game.
In matrix 1 (and throughout this book), Player 1 's payoff is listed
first and is followed by the payoff to Player 2. Let us examine these
payoffs from the perspective of Player 1 . Player 1 's best payoff occurs
when she chooses D and the other player chooses C. With this strat­
egy combination, she receives a payoff of 4. Her next best payoff
results when she chooses C and the other player chooses C, which
yields a payoff of 3. Her next best payoff occurs when both she and
the other player choose D. The payoff connected with this strategy
combination is 2. The worst payoff for Player 1 results from the
strategy combination {C ,D} in which the first strategy is that of Player
I and the second is that of Player 2. This combination yields a payoff
of 1. Player 2's payoff structure is similar.
When examining a game, one looks for its equilibrium or equi­
libria. There are several ways to define an equilibrium in game theory.
The most basic of these is a Nash equilibrium. Intuitively, a Nash
equilibrium is a set of strategies such that no individual player can be
made better off by unilaterally changing his or her choice. There is
one Nash equilibrium in the game in matrix 1. This is {D,D}. To better
understand the concept of a Nash equilibrium, we examine this strat­
egy pair more closely in order to investigate why it fits the criteria. In
1 . This discussion considers only noncooperative game theory. As such, we do not
focus on cooperative game theory. This is done for two reasons. First, the topics that are
addressed later in the book have traditionally been considered from a noncooperative game
theoretic viewpoint. Second, most of the work in political science that uses game theory has
used noncooperative game theory. For a good nontechnical introduction to the theory of
cooperative games . see Ordeshook 1986 (chap. 7). For applications of cooperative game
theory in political science see Ordeshook 1992 (chap. 6).
2. There are actually more than two strategies available to each player. Besides C or
D , each player can play a mixed strategy that weights each of these strategies with a nonzero
probability. The use of these strategies will be considered more fully later in this chapter as
well as in chapter 3.

--- Sayfa 36 ---
Player 1
A Brief Introduction to Game Theoretic Models
25
Player 2
c
D
c
3,3
1,4
D
4, 1
2,2
Matrix 1. A matrix game representation of the Prisoners' Dilemma
this strategy pair, Player I plays D and Player 2 plays D. For this
strategy pair to be an equilibrium, neither player should be willing to
unilaterally change his or her strategy. Player I has no incentive to
change since she receives 2 from playing D and I if she chooses C
instead. Player 2 also has no reason to change. In his case, D yields a
payoff of 2 while C would yield a 1 . Thus, {D,D} is a Nash equilib­
rium. The equilibrium of this game is not represented by the outcome
associated with the strategies or even with the payoffs associated with
this outcome and the strategy combinations that yield it. Rather, it is
defined solely by the strategies that yield the payoff.
Another way to think of equilibria in a game is to examine each
player's best reply correspondence. This correspondence allows one
to consider what a player should do if the other player chooses a
certain strategy. For example, if Player 2 chooses D, then Player 1 's
best reply would be D. Likewise, if Player 2 chooses C, Player 1 's
best reply would D. Player l's best reply correspondence when the
exogenous variable is Player 2's strategy, then, is
for all choices by Player 2. Likewise, Player 2's best reply correspon­
dence is:
for all choices by Player 1 . Thus, the strategy combination {D,D} is a
Nash equilibrium since D is a best reply for both players to each
strategy choice of the other player. Once again, the reader should note

--- Sayfa 37 ---
26
Games , Information, and Politics
that the equilibrium of this game is not mutual defection or the payoffs
of 2,2. Equilibria are only formed out of strategies.
Another common game is Chicken, which is presented in matrix
2. There are two players in this game: Player 1 and Player 2. These
players each have two pure strategies. They may each choose either L
or R. Connected with these choices of strategies are the outcomes or
payoffs of the game. Let us examine these payoffs from the perspec­
tive of Player 1. Player l 's best payoff occurs when she chooses L and
Player 2 chooses R. In that case Player 1 gets a payoff of 3 . Her next
best payoff occurs when she chooses R and Player 2 chooses R. This
payoff is a 2. Her third best payoff occurs when she chooses R and
Player 2 chooses L, which yields a payoff of 1 for Player 1. Her worst
payoff occurs when both players choose L. Player 2 would rank his
most preferred outcome to his least preferred outcome in the follow­
ing manner when the first strategy listed is that of Player 1 and the
second is that of Player 2: {R,L}, {R,R}, {R ,L}, and {L,L}.
Remember, a Nash equilibrium is a set of strategies such that no
individual player can become better off by unilaterally changing his or
her strategy choice. There are three Nash equilibria in this game. Two
of these are {R,L} and {L,R}. The other Nash equilibrium in this game
is the result of the use of mixed strategies . Mixed strategies result
from a player choosing between his or her pure strategies in a random
manner. The mixed strategy Nash equilibrium of this game is
{(0.5,0.5),(0.5,0.5)}. With this strategy combination, Player 1 chooses
to play R with a probability of 0.5 and to play L with a probability of
0.5. Player 2 chooses between the two strategies with the same proba­
bilities. In order to see why this combination is a Nash equilibrium,
we will examine what occurs if Player 1 chooses to change her strat­
egy. We need to calculate Player 1 's expected payoff from playing this
strategy. The expected payoff of this strategy combination can be
calculated in the following manner:
EP l = 0.5[0. 5(0) + 0.5(3)] + 0.5[0.5(1) + 0 .5(2)] .
This yields a payoff of 1. 5. If Player 1 chooses one of the pure
strategies instead, she would receive one of two payoffs. If she
chooses R or L, her payoff would remain at 1.5. Thus, she would be
indifferent between playing either of these pure strategies or her
mixed strategy if Player 2 continues to play his mixed strategy.
Given this indifference, why is {R ,(0.5 ,0.5)} not a Nash equilib­
rium? It will only be a Nash equilibrium if both players will not
unilaterally change strategies . With this combination, Player 2 has an

--- Sayfa 38 ---
Player 1
A Brief Introduction to Game Theoretic Models
27
Player 2
L
R
L
0,0
3,1
R
1,3
2,2
Matrix 2. A matrix game representation of Chicken
incentive to change strategies. By moving from (0.5,0.5) to playing
L, his payoff changes from 2.5 to 3. Thus, {R,(0.5,0.5)} cannot be a
Nash equilibrium. Likewise, it can be easily shown that {L,(0.5 ,0.5)}
cannot be an equilibrium either.
We have argued that in this game no pure strategy can be com­
bined with the mixed strategy (0.5,0.5) to result in a Nash equilib­
rium. In fact, {(0.5 ,0.5),(0.5,0.5)} is the only mixed strategy equilib­
rium in this game. Proving the previous statement is beyond the scope
of this chapter. 3 However, we can illustrate what occurs when Player
1 chooses to unilaterally change her strategy. Assume that Player 1
chooses to play (0.7,0.3). Her expected outcome would then become
EP1
= 0.7[0.5(0) + 0.5(3)] + 0. 3[0.5(1) + 0.5(2)] .
The payoff for Player 1 would be 1 .5. Player 1 would then be indif­
ferent between playing (0.5,0.5) and (0.7,0.3). However, Player 2
would have an incentive to change strategies. His payoff in this situa­
tion would be
EP2 = 0.5[0.7(0) + 0.3(3)] + 0.5[0.7(1) + 0.3(2)] .
The payoff for Player 2 would then be 1 . 1 , which is less than 1 .3,
which he would receive if he played R .
The best reply correspondences in this game are more compli­
cated than those for matrix 1 . Let a equal the probability that Player 2
plays L. The respective best reply correspondences are
3. Moulin (1986, 1 48ȑ90) provides an excellent introduction to mixed strategies.
See also Rasmussen 1989 (chap. 3).

--- Sayfa 39 ---
28
Games, Information, and Politics
RJ(') = (0.5 ,0.5) a = 0.5.
Likewise, Player 2's best reply correspondence is where {3 equals the
probability that Player I plays L:
Ri') = L (3 < 0.5
Ri') = (0.5 ,0. 5) (3 = 0.5.
In the prior examples, we have provided a game with one pure
strategy Nash equilibrium and another game with two pure strategy
Nash equilibria and a mixed strategy equilibrium. In the next exam­
ple, we present a case in which the only equilibrium is a mixed
strategy equilibrium. This game is presented in matrix 3. With any
pure strategy combination, one of the players has an incentive to
change strategies. Thus, no pure strategy equilibrium exists.
A mixed strategy equilibrium does exist in this game. This mixed
strategy equilibrium is {(0.5,0.5),(0.5,O.5)}. If one player decided to
unilaterally change his strategy, his payoff would be no better than
that yielded by this combination. In addition, the other player would
have an incentive to change her strategy. For example, the payoff
function for Player 1 of this game is
PJ(a,f3) = {3 - 2a{3 + 2
where a is the probability that Player 2 will choose L and (3 is the
probability that Player 1 will choose L. If a is 0.5, then the best
expected payoff Player 1 can receive is 2. This expected payoff results
from any possible mixed strategy by Player 1 . However, if Player 1
chooses a strategy different from (0.5,0.5), Player 2 has an incentive
to change strategies. This can be seen by examining Player 2's payoff
function, which is presented in the following equation:
P2(a,{3) = 2a{3 - a - 2{3 + 3
where a is the probability that Player 2 will choose L and {3 is the
probability that Player 1 will choose L. If f3 is .5, then Player 2's

--- Sayfa 40 ---
A Brief Introduction to Game Theoretic Models
29
Player 2
L
R
L
Player 1
1,2
3, 1
R
2,2
2,3
Matrix 3. A matrix game with no pure strategy equilibrium
expected payoff is 2 regardless of what mix she chooses. On the other
hand, if f3 is 0.75, Player 2's optimal mix would be ( l ,0), that is, play
L with certainty. Likewise, if f3 is 0.25 , Player 2's optimal mix would
(0, 1), that is, play R with certainty. These responses by Player 2 to
Player l's strategy choice can be calculated by using the preceding
payoff function. If Player 1 sets f3 at 0.75, then Player l's payoff
function becomes
Pia,0.75) = 0.5a + 1 .5 .
This expression is maximized by setting a equal to 1 . If Player 1 set f3
at 0.25 , then Player l ' s payoff function becomes
P2(a,0.25) = -0.5a + 2.5.
This expression is maximized by setting a equal to 0. Thus, a
change from the mix of (0.5,0.5) leads the other player to also change
his or her mix. The only mixed strategy equilibrium in this game,
then, is {(0.5,0.5),(0.5,0.5)}.
Thus far we have shown what a mixed strategy equilibrium is.
However, we have not illustrated how to find a mixed strategy equilib­
rium. If you study matrix 3 , you will observe that there is no pure
strategy equilibrium. To find a mixed strategy equilibrium in this
game, one first must calculate Player 1 's expected values for playing L
and R and then set these expectations equal to each other. When we
solve for f3 (where this represents the probability of Player 1 playing
L), the probability that is yielded provides us with the mixed strategy
for Player 1 when Player 2 is indifferent between playing L or R. The
relevant expectations are

--- Sayfa 41 ---
30
Games , Information, and Politics
EPJ (L) = al + (l - a)3
and
EPI (R) = a2 + (1 - a)2.
Setting these two equations equal, we find that a equals Ih. Thus,
Player 1 will be indifferent between playing L and R when Player 2
chooses to play the mixed strategy (0.5,0.5). Since this is a symmetric
game, one can show that Player 2 will be indifferent between L and R
when Player 1 chooses the mixed strategy (0.5,0.5). Thus, {(0.5,0. 5),
(0.5,0.5)} is a Nash equilibrium.
Games can have two types of equilibrium: pure strategy and
mixed strategy. Each game has at least one equilibrium.4 However,
many games, as shown in this section, have more than one equilib­
rIum.
There are other ways to represent the games presented in the
preceding. For example, one could represent these games in extensive
form. This form is examined later in this chapter. It is sometimes
more convenient and/or useful to model a game in extensive form
instead of matrix form. To motivate the usefulness of matrix versus
extensive form games , a brief case study is presented in the next
section. This case concerns the destruction of the ANZUS alliance.
Following a description of the case, three sections show how this case
can be studied with matrix games, repeated games, and extensive
form games.
A Brief Examination of the Decline of ANZUS
The U.S. Department of State on February 4, 1985 , announced that
New Zealand had turned down an American request for the destroyer
Buchanan to pay one of its ports a call. This action followed the New
Zealand election of July 1984 in which the Labour Party and its
leader, David Lange, took control of Parliament. One of the planks of
this party's platform advocated that New Zealand be declared a nu­
clear free zone: no nuclear weapons would be allowed on its lands or
in its territorial waters. Thus, when the Pentagon requested permis­
sion for a destroyer to pay a New Zealand port a call, the New Zealand
government refused to allow the ship into port without an American
guarantee that it did not carry nuclear weapons. The United States, for
4. In fact. all games have at least one Nash equilibrium (Nash 1 950, 1 95 1 ).

--- Sayfa 42 ---
A Brief Introduction to Game Theoretic Models
31
security reasons, refused to acknowledge whether the ship had nuclear
weapons. Without this guarantee New Zealand would not allow the
ship to enter port.
During the next three months, relations between New Zealand
and the United States became more troubled. On February 4, the
United States cancelled the ANZUS "Sea Eagle" exercise. A State
Department official stated that: "The denial of port access would be a
matter of grave concern which goes to the core of our mutual obliga­
tions to our allies" (New York Times, February 6, 1985). Secretary of
Defense Caspar Weinberger, while testifying before the Senate Armed
Services Committee on February 4, warned New Zealand that its
actions "constituted a serious attack upon the effectiveness of an alli­
ance which is absolutely essential to the security of New Zealand"
(Washington Post, February 5 , 1985). He also stated that Prime Minis­
ter Lange was setting "a course which can only be of great harm to
themselves, and I hope they'll change it" (Washington Post, February
5, 1 985).
The United States withdrew from a joint New Zealand-United
States antisubmarine exercise on February 19. Secretary of State
George Schultz, testifying before the Senate Budget Committee,
stated that the United States was in the process of withdrawing from
all military operations with New Zealand since it "has basically taken
a walk" from its alliance responsibilities (Washington Post, February
21 , 1985). It was made clear that while New Zealand was still consid­
ered a friendly government it would no longer be treated as an ally. On
February 26, the United States announced that it would no longer
supply New Zealand with military intelligence. On March 4, the
United States and Australia announced that the ANZUS meeting
scheduled for July had been canceled. Assistant Secretary for Asian
and Pacific Affairs of State Paul Wolfowitz, testifying before the
Subcommittee on Asian and Pacific Affairs of the House Foreign
Affairs Committee, stated that: "A military alliance has little meaning
without military cooperation . . . . New Zealand cannot have it both
ways" (Washington Post, March 19, 1985). He also added that mili­
tary relations with New Zealand would be restored as soon as the ban
on nuclear weapons was rescinded.
How can we explain the actions of these two nations? New Zea­
land was faced with two options. It could have either refused to allow
U . S. vessels carrying nuclear weapons into its harbors or it could have
allowed such entry. Why did this country choose the former course by
refusing to allow the Buchanan into its territorial waters? This action
was not without cost. Because of the retaliation of the United States,

--- Sayfa 43 ---
32
Games, Information, and Politics
New Zealand on the thirteenth of June was forced to increase its
military expenditures by 1 8 percent to compensate for the loss of
protection resulting from the shelving of ANZUS. Perhaps Lange and
the other leaders of New Zealand did not foresee the U.S. reaction to
this situation. On February 4, Lange, reflecting this view, stated:
"[ANZUS is] an association which is of long standing, its end is not
currently threatened, and it is impossible even in the communication
emerging from the United States to detect a threat to ANZUS" (Wash­
ington Post, February 5 , 1985). Thus, we would not expect that the
New Zealand government believed it would face immediate retaliation
for excluding the Buchanan . This point is reinforced by a later com­
ment of Lange's in which he said: "They are not, in my view, the kind
of actions which a great power should take against a small loyal ally
which has stood by it, through thick and thin, in war and peace"
(Washington Post, February 27, 1 985).
How can we explain the actions of the United States? The United
States was not reacting to New Zealand's action in isolation. Other
allies viewed its reaction with interest. Japan at that time had laws that
prohibited nuclear weapons on its territory. However, despite the pro­
tests of the antinuclear opposition, the Japanese government had al­
ways allowed U. S. vessels to enter its harbors without inquiring
whether or not they held nuclear weapons . If the United States had
allowed New Zealand's actions to go unchecked, it could have had
repercussions in Japan. Also, many Western European governments
were facing increased pressure to remove and/or refuse the installa­
tion of American nuclear weapons within their borders. An accep­
tance of New Zealand's actions might have increased the chances of
these arms being either removed or not installed in these European
countries.
Given this situation, the United States had two strategies vis­
a-vis New Zealand. It could acquiesce or it could retaliate by declar­
ing the ANZUS treaty not binding as long as New Zealand held its
present course. If it subscribed to the first option, it would be setting a
precedent that could be followed by "allies that really count, the ones
in NATO and, of course, Japan" (Washington Post, February 26,
1985). Thus , it chose to take the second course. It is clear from
comments by Bernard Kalb and Prime Minister Lange that the United
States had its reputation in mind when it took this action. Kalb said:
"We hoped that our response to New Zealand would signal that the
course of these [antinuclear and peace] movements would not be cost­
free in terms of security with the United States" (New York Times,
February 6, 1985). Lange stated on March 1 that: "We have been told
by some officials in the United States administration that our decision

--- Sayfa 44 ---
A Brief Introduction to Game Theoretic Models
33
is not, as they put it, cost-free-that we are to be made an example of
and that we are to be convicted of some sort of heresy, not by our
enemies, but by our allies" (Washington Post, March 2, 1985). Thus,
the United States may have chosen to retaliate against New Zealand in
order to avoid presenting the wrong image to its other allies.
In summary, New Zealand faced the following choices. It could
either refuse U. S . ships carrying nuclear weapons entry into its terri­
torial waters or it could allow such entry. If New Zealand chose to
exclude U.S. vessels, the United States faced two choices. It could
either acquiesce to the new demand by New Zealand or it could
retaliate.
In this section, we have presented a brief discussion of the inter­
action between the United States and New Zealand immediately after
the elections of Prime Minister Lange. This case study will be used
throughout the rest of this chapter to illustrate different game theory
techniques. We begin this discussion by considering matrix form
games.
Matrix Form Games
In this section, our discussion of matrix form games is expanded from
that of our earlier presentation. In addition, we use the ANZUS exam­
ple developed in the previous section to motivate our discussion of
this type of game.
The application of game theory to political science has been
dominated by the use of a pair of 2x 2 games, that is, the Prisoners'
Dilemma and Chicken. Other 2 x 2 games have been considered to
lesser degrees, that is, Stag Hunt and Assurance. Most political scien­
tists possess at least passing familiarity with the first two games. As
such, we will not consider them at this point in the book. The other
two games are thoroughly discussed in chapter 4. Instead of consider­
ing these four games, the task for this section is to develop games that
are connected with the interaction between the United States and New
Zealand as described in the ANZUS example.
Matrix 4 is a matrix form representation of the interactions be­
tween the United States and New Zealand . The game shown in this
figure applies to the case in which decision makers in the United
States are myopic.5 First, note that each player has two strategies.
New Zealand can either acquiesce (A) or rebel (R); the United States
._-----
---.---Ā---
5 . By myopic, we mean that they do not take into account how their actions at this
point in time might affect their future interactions with New Zealand as well as other states.
Repetitions and the addition of actors will be addressed in subsequent sections of this
chapter.

--- Sayfa 45 ---
34
Games, Information, and Politics
A
United States
p
New Zealand
A
b,b -
c
b - p ,-c - d
For New Zealand:
b > b - c > -d > -c - d
For the United States: b > b - p > 0 > -p
R
O,b
-p ,-d
Matrix 4. A matrix game involving the United States and New Zea­
land
can either acquiesce (A) or punish (P). The payoff each actor connects
with the interaction of two strategies is presented in the box of the
matrix representing this interaction.
We will begin the analysis of this game by developing the payoffs
of each player. New Zealand's best outcome occurs when it receives
the benefit of the alliance without any of the costs, that is, remaining
in the alliance and not allowing U. S. vessels with nuclear weapons
into its ports. This payoff is represented by b. Its next worst outcome
occurs when it acquiesces to the demands of the United States. In this
case, it still receives the benefits of the alliance while allowing the
United States to freely send vessels into its ports. This payoff is
represented by b - c. The next worst payoff arises when it decides to
refuse U. S. vessels free entry into its ports and the United States
retailiates for such actions. This payoff is represented by
- d . The
least preferred alternative arises from the inability of matrix form
games to exclude nonsensical strategy combinations. This occurs
when New Zealand allows U . S. vessels entry into its ports but the
United States still punishes its ally. The payoff in this situation is
- c
- d .
What about the United States? The United States' most preferred
outcome arises when both nations acquiesce. In this case, it receives
the payoff of b. Its next most preferred outcome occurs when New
Zealand allows U.S. vessels into its ports and the United States still
punishes. In this case , it receives b
- p . The next most preferred

--- Sayfa 46 ---
A Brief Introduction to Game Theoretic Models
35
outcome arises when New Zealand rebels and the United States acqui­
esces to this rebellion. In this case, the payoff is O. The worst outcome
for the United States occurs when it chooses to punish New Zealand
for its choice to exclude U.S. naval vessels. In this case, the United
States loses the benefits of the alliance as well as incurring the cost of
punishing New Zealand. This payoff is represented by -po
In this game, both the United States and New Zealand have
dominant strategies. A strategy is dominant if it is a player's strictly
best response to any strategies the other players might choose. In
other words, the dominant strategy is one that yields the player her
highest payoff given the strategy choice of the other players. There are
actually two types of domination in game theory. We can talk of
strictly dominating strategies and weakly dominating strategies. Our
previous informal definition of a dominant strategy is actually the
definition of a strictly dominant strategy. On the other hand, a strategy
is a weakly dominant strategy if it does at least as well as any other
strategy against all possible strategies chosen by other players and if it
sometimes does better.
If each actor plays her dominant strategy, the resulting outcome is
New Zealand restricting access to its ports and the United States not
retaliating against this action. This outcome arises from the Nash
equilibrium of the game. A Nash equilibrium is an equilibrium if no
actor has an incentive to change her strategy unilaterally once each
player has chosen her component of the Nash equilibrium as her
strategy choice. In the game in Matrix 4, neither actor has an incen­
tive to unilaterally change his or her strategy from {A,R}. Neither
would do better by unilaterally changing to A in the case of New
Zealand or P in the case of the United States .
There are other factors that may be integrated into our game
theoretic framework. This game can be changed in three ways. First,
if the United States chose to punish New Zealand for its rebellion,
this would lead us to believe that the United States was reacting to
the actions of New Zealand. We would not expect the United States
to punish New Zealand if that nation did not rebel. The actors,
then, were not acting simultaneously; rather, they were acting sequen­
tially. The common manner for considering such situations is with
extensive form games, which will be considered elsewhere in this
chapter. However, one can consider these situations with a matrix
form game.
A second factor may be that the payoffs of the game are incor­
rectly specified. If the United States explicitly took into account the
effects of its decision on the calculations of other allies, the payoffs of

--- Sayfa 47 ---
36
Games, Information , and Politics
this game would be different.6 For example, the United States may
believe that punishing New Zealand's rebellion would deter other
nations from acting similarly. As such, the cost of punishing this
rebellion may not be as costly as was represented in the preceding
analysis.
Or, third, we could explicitly take into account the actions of
other players or repeated play between the two players in the game. To
do this , we would have to create an N-person game that would include
New Zealand, the United States, and its other allies, or create a
repeated game involving New Zealand and the United States.7 This
change will be considered in the next section. In considering the other
two changes to this game, we will consider changes in payoffs first
and then will examine sequential moves with a matrix form game.
Modeling Sequential Moves within a Matrix Game
An alternative form of the game is shown in matrix 5 . This form
considers a situation in which the decision makers in the United States
consider the effects of their decision on the calculations of other allies.
For example, decision makers would take into account the effect of
their decision on the choices of their European allies to base cruise
missiles in their nations. The only difference between this game and
the one represented in matrix 4 occurs in the lower right hand box.
Here, the payoff for the United States changes from -p to -p + r.
The r term reflects the rewards the United States gains in its reputation
from punishing this rebellion.
In this case, New Zealand still possesses a dominant strategy.
However, the United States no longer has a dominant strategy. In this
game, the Nash equilibrium occurs when New Zealand rebels and the
United States punishes this rebellion.
There are some problems with even this game and its resulting
solution. The most obvious is that this approach neglects the fact that
New Zealand and the United States did not act simultaneously. New
Zealand moved first, and the United States reacted. However, the
representations in matrices 4 and 5 do not take this sequence into
account. To take the orders of moves into account, one would have to
6. Another way to take into account the effects of U. S . actions on other players is to
develop this game as a repeated game. The repetition could involve either repeated interac­
tions between the United States and New Zealand or interactions between the United States
and other nations. This notion will be considered in a later section.
7. We have combined repeated and N-person games here because they can be con­
sidered as similar in some circumstances. For example, see Kreps and Wilson 1 982 and
Milgrom and Roberts 1 982.

--- Sayfa 48 ---
A Brief Introduction to Game Theoretic Models
37
New Zealand
A
R
A
United States
b,b - c
O,b
p
b - p,-c - d
-p + r,-d
For New Zealand:
b > b - c > -d > -c - d
For the United States: b > b - p > -p + r > 0
Matrix 5. A revised matrix game involving the United States and
New Zealand
allow the United States to have conditional strategies. For example,
the United States could have a strategy that allows it to punish New
Zealand if it rebels and acquiesce if New Zealand does the same.
Matrix 6 represents the conditional strategy of the game presented in
matrix 4.
The United States no longer chooses just one action. Instead, it
chooses an action depending on what New Zealand does. For ex­
ample, the second strategy available to the United States is (A,P). This
means that if New Zealand chose A the United States would choose A
and if New Zealand chose R the United States would choose P. Thus,
the first component of U.S. strategy represents what it does if New
Zealand chooses A, while the second component represents what it
does if New Zealand chooses R.
In this game, New Zealand no longer has a dominant strategy.
However, the United States does have a weakly dominant strategy.
This is (A,A). A Nash equilibrium in this game is {(A,A),R}. Neither
party has an incentive to unilaterally change strategies with this strat­
egy combination. There are two other pure strategy Nash equilibria in
this game. These are {(A,P),A} and {(P,A),R}. None of these equilibria
corresponds to the actual events that transpired between the United
States and New Zealand.
We could also represent the game in matrix 5 in which sequence
is taken into account. This game then becomes the one represented in
matrix 7. The United States has a weakly dominant strategy in this
game. This strategy is (A,P). One of the Nash equilibria of this game

--- Sayfa 49 ---
38
Games, Information, and Politics
A,A
United States
A,P
P,A
P,P
New Zealand
A
b,b - c
b,b - c
b - p ,-c - d
b - p,-c - d
For New Zealand:
b > b - c > -d > -c - d
For the United States: b > b - p > 0 > -p
R
O,b
-p,-d
O,b
-p,-d
Matrix 6. A matrix game with sequential moves involving the
United States and New Zealand
is then {(A ,P),A}. Of course, this is not what occurred in our case. The
other Nash equilibrium is {(P ,P),R}. The strategy of the United States
seems unreasonable. Why would the United States choose to punish
New Zealand if New Zealand did not exclude U.S. naval vessels from
its ports? Thus, even the use of conditional strategies does not elimi­
nate one of the problems noted with our original game.
It is unusual to model a sequential process with a matrix form
game. Instead, we will examine it from an extensive form game
perspective. Before beginning our consideration of extensive form
games , it is important to reexamine the games in matrices 6 and 7. If
the United States had a weakly dominant strategy, why did a Nash
equilibrium exist in each game that did not use this weakly dominant
strategy? To answer this question, consider the nature of a weakly
dominant strategy. Unlike a strictly dominant strategy, a player will
not always receive a better payoff from playing a weakly dominant

--- Sayfa 50 ---
A Brief Introduction to Game Theoretic Models
39
New Zealand
A
R
A,A
b,b - c
O,b
United States
A,P
b,b - c
-p + r,-d
P,A
b - p ,-c
- d
O,b
P,P
b - p ,-c - d
-p + r,-d
For New Zealand:
b > b - c > -d > -c - d
For the United States: b > b - p > -p + r > °
Matrix 7. A revised matrix game with sequential moves involving
the United States and New Zealand
strategy instead of other strategies. This fact is what allows us to have
more than one Nash equilibrium in these games, and two of the Nash
equilibria result when the United States does not choose to play its
weakly dominant strategy.
In the next section, we consider the sequential nature of this
game more thoroughly. This discussion is accomplished through the
development of extensive form games.
Extensive Form Games
Extensive form games provide another approach for applying game
theory to political situations. This approach is very flexible in that it
can be used to model sequential and simultaneous decision choices. In
addition, we are able to consider situations in which the actors possess
different levels of information about the game. Through the continued

--- Sayfa 51 ---
40
Games, Information, and Politics
use of the ANZUS case, these applications of the extensive form are
considered in the following.
The extensive form is a very natural way to model. The sequence
of play is explicitly portrayed and can easily be seen in this form of
the game. The extensive form game is also quite versatile. All situa­
tions that can be considered with a matrix form game can also be
considered with an extensive form game. In addition, different levels
of information can be considered in this game. While these consider­
ations can also be addressed in a matrix form game, the representation
of these characteristics in this form can be awkward.
A simple extensive form game is presented in figure 1 . This game
may remind the reader of decision trees . However, there is a key
difference between decision trees and game trees. A decision tree
represents the choice opportunities of a single player. A game tree, on
the other hand, represents the choice opportunities of two or more
players. The relationship between a myopic United States and New
Zealand is portrayed in this figure. This is an extensive form game
representation of the game modeled in matrix 4 with one key differ­
ence. The game in figure 1 clearly identifies the sequence of decisions
that transpired between these two countries. The first decision is made
by New Zealand. The United States then moves with knowledge of
the relevant actors and the action taken by New Zealand. In matrix 4,
the two actors were, for all practical purposes, moving simultane­
ously. The United States chose its strategy without the knowledge of
what action New Zealand had taken.
The game in figure 1 is one of perfect information while the game
in matrix 4 is one of imperfect information. The difference is the
information that is available to the United States. A game of perfect
information is one in which a player moving in the game knows what
moves all previous players have made. Of course, such games can
also be examined using matrix form games. The reader should note
that figure 1 is merely the extensive form representation of the game
in matrix 6. A game of imperfect information is one in which a player
moving in the game does not know the actions of one or more pre­
vious players. Matrix 4 presents a game of imperfect information
since neither player knows the stategy chosen by the other until these
strategies are revealed simultaneously.
Extensive form games are not limited to games of perfect infor­
mation. One could easily model a game of imperfect information
using this form. Figure 2 presents such a game. This game differs
from the game presented in figure 1 because of the inclusion of an
information set. This information set, denoted in figure 2 by a broken

--- Sayfa 52 ---
A Brief Introduction to Game Theoretic Models
4 1
New Zealand
b - c,b
- c - d,b - p b,O
-d , -p
New Zealand b > b - c > -d > -c - d
United States b > b - p > -p + r > 0 > -p
Fig . 1 . An extensive form game involving the United States and
New Zealand with perfect information
line, is used to show that the United States does not know what
decision New Zealand had made. An information set denotes what
information a player has about the actions of players who move before
him. A node or decision node is the point at which one of the players
makes a decision. An information set may contain one or more nodes.
If a game consists of an information set composed of singletons, that
is, containing only one node, we refer to this game as a game of
perfect information. If any information set within a game is not a
singleton, then the game is one of imperfect information. The game in
figure 2 is definitely one of imperfect information since the United
States possesses a nonsingleton information set. The United States
does not know whether New Zealand has chosen to acquiesce or
rebel.
Returning to figure 1 , we should examine the equilibria in this
game. The payoffs of this game are identical to those in matrix 4. As
such, we will not repeat their discussion here. The equilibrium for this
game can be found by using backwards induction. Backwards induc­
tion refers to a technique in which one analyzes the game by moving
from the node or information set of the last decision maker to that of
the next actor. This continues until either you have reached the infor­
mation set of the first actor to move or an information set does not
allow you to move further. For example, New Zealand when making

--- Sayfa 53 ---
42
Games , Information, and Politics
New Zealand
b - c,b
New Zealand b > b - c > -d > -c - d
United States b > b - p > -p + r > 0 > -p
-c - d,b - p
b,O
-d , -p
Fig. 2. An extensive form game involving the United States and
New Zealand with imperfect information
its choice will take into account what the United States will do with its
subsequent move. Thus, New Zealand will examine the payoffs for
the United States in each of its two subgames. If the United States had
to choose between acquiescing and punishing after New Zealand
chose to acquiesce, it would choose to acquiesce. This would result in
a payoff of b
-
c for New Zealand. If New Zealand, on the other
hand, chose to rebel , the United States would still choose to respond
by acquiescing. This choice would yield a payoff of b for New Zea­
land. Since h is greater than h
- p , New Zealand would choose to
rebel given the expected reaction of the United States. Thus, this
game is solved by examining what each player will do given the
potential actions of subsequent players.
What is the Nash equilibrium of this game? Thus far we have
described the payoffs of a Nash equilibrium . However, we have not
presented the strategies that would lead one to this payoff. An easy
answer to this question would be {R,A}. However, this combination
does not fully represent the strategy space available to the United
States . The U.S. strategy should represent what it would do depend­
ing on the choice of New Zealand. In other words, the U. S. strategy
should consist of two choices. The first would represent the U. S.
response to New Zealand choosing to rebel, while the second would

--- Sayfa 54 ---
A Brief Introduction to Game Theoretic Models
43
represent its response to New Zealand choosing to acquiesce. Thus,
any of the following two strategy combinations can yield this out­
come. These are {R,(A ,A)} and {R,(P,A)}.
This game, of course, is the same one as presented in table 6.
There we presented a matrix representation of this game. In that
game, we identified the two equilibria as well as a third equilibrium,
that is, {A,(A,P)}. This third strategy combination calls for the United
States to commit to punishing New Zealand for rebelling. Of course,
if New Zealand actually chose to rebel, the United States would be
better off acquiescing. But if New Zealand chooses to acquiesce, the
United States would have no reason to unilaterally change its strategy,
and New Zealand could not be made better off by unilaterally chang­
ing its own strategy. While this strategy combination is then a Nash
equilibrium, it does not seem reasonable.
Can we distinguish between this equilibrium and the other two?
We can make this distinction by using a common refinement of the
Nash equilibrium concept. These refinements have been developed in
order to distinguish between the multitude of Nash equilibria that can
result in a game. The most common refinement is that of a subgame
perfect equilibrium. A subgame perfect equilibrium allows us to dis­
tinguish between these three equilibria. Before defining subgame per­
fect equilibrium, we need to define a subgame. A subgame (actually
a proper subgame) is any subset of the complete game tree, that
( 1 ) begins with an information set that is a singleton for all players,
(2) includes all subsequent nodes , and (3) ends with the associated
payoffs.8 Note that this means that an entire game is always a sub­
game and that a subgame cannot cross any player's information set.
From this definition of a subgame, a subgame perfect equilibrium can
be defined as a strategy that is an equilibrium for all subgames of a
game. In other words, a subgame perfect equilibrium of a game is a
Nash equilibrium that holds for all subgames.9
Is {A,(A,P)} a subgame perfect equilibrium? This is not a sub­
game perfect equilibrium. This can be seen by examining the sub­
game that results when New Zealand decides to rebel. In the resulting
subgame, the United States has a dominant strategy to acquiesce to
this rebellion. The choice of punishment would make the United
States worse off at this point. Thus, while his combination is a Nash
8 . For more discussion. see Friedman 1 986 (77-82), Tirole 1 988 (428-29), or
Rasmussen 1 989 (83-85)
9. For more details of subgame perfect equilibrium, see Selten 1 975 , Friedman 1 986
(77 -82), or Tirole 1 988 (428-3 1 ).

--- Sayfa 55 ---
44
Games, Information , and Politics
equilibrium, it is not subgame perfect. This refined has allowed us to
eliminate a Nash equilibrium which arises because of a noncredible
commitment.
What about the two remaining Nash equilibria? These are
{R,(A,A)} and {R,(P,A)}. Are both of these Nash equilibria also sub­
game perfect equilibria? We will examine each equilibrium individu­
ally. {R,(A,A)} is a subgame perfect equilibrium. In order for it to be
an equilibrium, A must be the equilibrium strategy for each subgame
of the game for the United States. In both subgames, the United States
receives a better payoff from playing acquiesce than from punishing.
This strategy combination then defines a subgame perfect equilibrium
since neither party would want to unilaterally change strategies and
since it represents an equilibrium for each subgame of the game.
On the other hand, {R,(P,A)} is not a subgame perfect equilib­
rium. If the subgame was reached that resulted from New Zealand
playing acquiesce, the United States is made worse off by playing
punish than by playing acquiesce. Thus, this strategy combination
does not define an equilibrium for each subgame of this game. The
United States would have an incentive to change strategies unilaterally
if the subgame is reached in which New Zealand plays acquiesce. The
Nash equilibrium that is excluded in this manner is one that lies off the
equilibrium path. In other words , it is excluded because of the pro­
posed action of the United States when New Zealand chooses not to
play its equilibrium strategy.
Recapping the following analysis, we have introduced the reader
to extensive form games, games of perfect information, subgames,
and subgame perfect equilibrium. With these concepts in mind, we
will analyze another extensive fonn game. This game is also a game
of perfect infonnation. It differs from the game in figure 1 in that the
payoffs have been changed to reflect those that were developed in
matrix 5 . This game is presented in figure 3.
If New Zealand chose to acquiesce, the United States would
choose to respond with aquiesce, which would result in a payoff of
b
-
c for New Zealand. If New Zealand chose to rebel, the United
States would respond by punishing, which would yield New Zealand a
payoff of -d . New Zealand would then choose to acquiesce. Given
this choice, the United States would respond with acquiesce. The
Nash equilibrium that would represent this behavior is {A, (A ,P)}. This
strategy combination is also a subgame perfect equilibrium since the
U . S. strategy choice is a Nash equilibrium for each subgame of the
game.
There is another Nash equilibrium in this game. This strategy

--- Sayfa 56 ---
A Brief Introduction to Game Theoretic Models
45
New Zealand
b - c,b
New Zealand b > b - c > -d > -c - d
United States b > b - p > -p + r > 0 > -p
-c - d,b -p
b,O
-d,-p + r
Fig. 3. A revised extensive form game involving the United States
and New Zealand with perfect information
pair, {R ,(P ,P)}, is not a subgame perfect equilibrium. This is because
the United States would prefer to play acquiesce instead of punish if
New Zealand chose to acquiesce. Thus, there is only one subgame
perfect equilibrium in this game.
Thus far, we have considered cases in which New Zealand knew
with certainty what the payoffs of the United States were. However, it
could be the case that there is uncertainty in New Zealand concerning
the payoffs of the United States. These payoffs could be those pre­
sented in figure 3 or those presented in figure 1 . Such a game would
be one of incomplete information. A game of complete information is
one in which each player knows the following: (1) who the other
players are, (2) all strategies available to these players, and (3) the
other players' payoffs with certainty. A game of incomplete informa­
tion results when one or more of these conditions do not hold. The
most common form of a game of incomplete information is one in
which a player does not know other players' payoffs with certainty.
We now tum to analyzing the interaction between New Zealand and
the United States from this perspective.
Extensive form games are well suited for modeling games of
incomplete information. The typical manner in which incomplete in­
formation is treated in extensive form games is through the introduc­
tion of Nature. Nature is portrayed as moving first and is unobserved

--- Sayfa 57 ---
46
Games, Information, and Politics
by at least one of the players. Nature serves to determine a player's
type, which includes strategy set, information partitions, and payoff
functions. 10 One player, then, does not know the type of the other
player. From our ANZUS example, New Zealand would not know
whether it was facing a United States that prefers to acquiesce when
New Zealand rebels or a United States that prefers to punish when a
rebellion occurs. In game theoretic terms, the United States then can
be one of two types.
U sing this conceptualization of Nature in a game of incomplete
information, the extensive form can be used to integrate both of the
basic games previously developed concerning the interaction between
New Zealand and the United States. Figure 4 depicts the relationship
between the United States and New Zealand in an extensive form
game with one -sided information. 1 1 In this game, the United States
possesses either payoffs from figure I or the payoffs from figure 3.
The game i s one of one-sided incomplete information since the United
States knows its own payoff structure as well as that of New Zealand
but New Zealand does not know the payoffs of the United States .
Instead, New Zealand believes with a probability of a that the United
States possesses the payoffs from figure 1 . This is represented in
figure 4 with an information set that envelopes New Zealand's deci­
sion nodes . This indicates that New Zealand possesses incomplete
information concerning the payoffs of the United States .
What are the equilibria of this game? And do the equilibria de­
pend on the value of a? In finding the equilibria, we can once again
use backwards induction to partially solve this game . In all but one of
the subgames , the United States would choose A over P. Thus , New
Zealand faces the tree in figure 5 when it is deciding between its two
strategies .
Unlike the previous games, the equilibrium of this game depends
on New Zealand's subjective estimate of a . This is caused by the fact
that New Zealand does not have a dominant strategy in this game . If
Nature chooses the first option , then New Zealand's best choice would
be R. On the other hand , if Nature chooses the second option, then
New Zealand's best choice would be A . Thus , the choice of New
Zealand is conditional on its perceptions of the type of United States it
is facing . Is it facing the type with payoffs from figure 1 or is it facing
the type with payoffs from figure 3? For convenience, we will label
10. See Rasmussen 1989 (48-54).
1 1 . Games of one-sided incomplete infonnation are also referred to as games of
asymmetric infonnation. Banks ( 1 99 1 ) provides an excellent review of the uses of this
modeling technique in political science .

--- Sayfa 58 ---
b - c,b
A Brief Introduction to Game Theoretic Models
47
a
-c - d,b - p
b,O
New Zealand
United States
-d,-p
b - c,b
A
I - a
-c - d,b -p
b,O
R
-d,-p + r
New Zealand b > b - c > -d > -c - d
United States b > b - p > -p + r > 0 > -p
Fig. 4. An extensive form game involving the United States and
New Zealand with incomplete information
the fonner Type I and the latter type Type II. From our substantive
discussion of this case earlier in the chapter, a Type I United States
was the type of actor that New Zealand was expecting to face. New
Zealand did not expect the United States to retaliate against its deci­
sion to keep ships with nuclear weapons out of its ports. However,
New Zealand seemed to face a United States that acted as if it were a
Type II. This United States chose to punish New Zealand's rebellion.
New Zealand, in this way, is facing an expected payoff problem.
In other words, it does not know which game it is playing with
certainty unless a equals 0 or 1 . It must make a choice between two
potential outcomes that can occur with a given probability. Thus , New
Zealand needs to compare the expected value of R with that of A in
order to choose between the two strategies. New Zealand needs to
discover the values of a for which the expected payoff of acquiesce is
greater than that of rebel and those values for which the expected
value of rebel is greater than that of acquiesce. In order to do so, we
have created the following inequality in which the expression to the
left of the inequality is the expected value of R and the value to the
right of the inequality is the expected value of acquiesce:
ab + ( 1 - a)(-d) > a(b - c) + (1 - a)(b
- c).

--- Sayfa 59 ---
48
Games, Information, and Politics
Nature
a
New Zealand
b - c,b
b,O
New Zealand b > b - c > -d > -c - d
United States b > b - p > -p + r > 0 > -p
I - a
A
b - c,b
Fig. 5. The reduced form of the game in figure 4
This reduces to:
(b + d - c)
0: >
(b + d) .
R
-d,-p + r
New Zealand should choose R if this inequality holds; if not, it should
choose A . Before proceeding to characterize the equilibrium of this
game, we need to consider whether the restraint on a is a real one. In
other words, can the fraction on the right side of the second inequality
take on values between 0 and I? From New Zealand's payoffs, we
know that b - c is greater than -d. As such, we know that b + d is
greater than c. Thus, the numerator of this fraction must always be
positive and less than the denominator. This inequality then puts a
meaningful restraint on a.
The equilibria of this game depend on New Zealand's beliefs
concerning the value of a as well as the actual type of payoffs the
United States possesses. Thus, the equilibria can be characterized as
follows.
1 . If the United States is of Type I, then
{A (A A)} 'f
< (b + d - c)
"
I
0:
(b + d)
{R (A A)} 'f
> (b + d - c)
"
I
0:
(b + d)

--- Sayfa 60 ---
A Brief Introduction to Game Theoretic Models
49
2. If the United States is of Type II, then
{A (A P)} . f
< (b + d - c)
"
I
a
(b + d)
.
(b + d - c)
{R,(A,P)} If a >
(b + d)
.
To illustrate why these combinations are equilibria, examine the
first equilibrium. 1 2 If the United States is a Type I player, it has no
incentive to deviate from the strategy combination of (A,A) since it
receives its best payoffs from this choice. New Zealand also has no
incentive to deviate since its expected value of playing A is higher
than its expected value of playing R in this case. Since neither party
has an incentive to change strategies unilaterally this is an equilib­
num.
Unlike our previous games, if the United States is a Type II
player, this one does result in an equilibrium in which New Zealand
rebels and the United States punishes the rebellion. Thus , we have
finally discovered an equilibrium that is similar to the actual outcome
of the interaction between the United States and New Zealand. Exam­
ining this equilibrium further, one might suppose that New Zealand
would want to change its strategy to A given the response of the
United States. After the fact, New Zealand may well have regretted its
actions . However, this regret occurs because New Zealand now pos­
sesses knowledge of what type the United States is. Without this
knowledge, it can only use a as an estimate of this type.
What would happen if New Zealand could not directly observe
the United States' type, but it could observe actions taken by the
United States? Could New Zealand use these actions to gain a better
estimate of what type it is facing? The game in figure 4 is transformed
with some minor changes to the one presented in figure 6. In this
game, Nature again moves first to select the type of the United States.
The United States, knowing its type, then announces its policy. It can
announce that it will punish (P) or it can choose to acquiesce (A). New
Zealand then acts. It can decide to acquiesce (A) or rebel (R). New
Zealand has complete knowledge of the announced actions of the
United States; it does not possess any knowledge of Nature's choice
except for the probabilities that Nature chooses the United States to be
1 2 . There is a mixed strategy equilibrium in which a = [(b + d - c)/(b + d)). We do
not explore the topic of mixed equilibria in this type of game in this chapter. This topic is
considered in chapter 5 .

--- Sayfa 61 ---
50
Games, Information, and Politics
G,b
b,b - c
O,b
New Zealand b > b - c > -d > -c - d
Nature
b,b - c
-p + r,-d
b,b - c
United States b > b - p > -p + r > 0 > -p
O,b
Fig. 6. A game of incomplete information between the United
States and New Zealand
b,b - c
a Type I or Type II nation. These probabilities are, respectively, ex and
1
-
ex. After New Zealand chooses its action, the United States can
then decide to change its policy. For instance, a Type II United States
could choose P initially and then change this policy to A if New
Zealand chooses A. 13
By adding a second choice for the United States, there is the
possibility that the United States may try to bluff. This ability to bluff
arises from the fact that the United States can choose without cost a
different action after New Zealand has acted. For example, a Type I
United States could choose P initially and then change this policy to A
regardless of New Zealand 's choice . New Zealand , not knowing the
type it is confronting, must somehow decide whether the United
States is bluffing, that is, whether it is Type I or Type II. How should
New Zealand react to this potential for bluffing? According to game
theorists, a commonly accepted way would be to use the United
States' announced strategy as well as its action to update its proba­
bility of ex, that is , the probability that the United States is a Type I
1 3 . This second choice is not shown in figure 6 because we assume that the United
States will makes its optimal choice at each end node.

--- Sayfa 62 ---
A Brief Introduction to Game Theoretic Models
5 1
nation. Game theorists have traditionally used Bayes' theorem for the
updating of beliefs. 14 The form of Bayes' Theorem used in this pro­
cess is as follows:
P(Type I I Punish)
P(Punish I Type I)p(Type I)
(2. 1 )
P(Punish I Type II)P(Type II) + P(Punish I Type I)P(Type I) .
The conditional probability that is calculated from this expression
provides New Zealand with an updated estimate of the probability that
the United States is a Type I nation given that it chose punish as its
first action. These calculations are dependent on the choice of strate­
gies of the United States since this choice leads New Zealand to assign
values to the conditional probabilities on the right-hand side of the
equation. Thus, this updated estimate is dependent on the announced
strategies of the United States as well as New Zealand's initial beliefs
concerning a , that is , P(Type I). After calculating this Bayesian esti­
mate, New Zealand would use it to calculate the expected value of
playing its strategy versus the expected value of all alternative strate­
gies. It would, of course, choose the strategy that provided it with the
highest expected payoff.
We now proceed to work through a case using figure 6 to illus­
trate how Bayesian updating can be used in deciding whether a set of
strategies is an equilibrium. We will examine the following strategy
combination: 15
( 1 ) The United States chooses P if Nature chooses A.
chooses P if Nature chooses B.
(2) New Zealand chooses R if the United States has chosen A.
chooses A if the United States has chosen P.
To determine whether this is an equilibrium, we will use the form of
Bayes' Theorem presented above to calculate the probability that the
United States is a Type I if it announces it will P. The values for the
right-hand side of equation 2. 1 can be developed easily from the game
14. However, not all game theorists are satisfied with standard applications of Bayes'
theorem. For example, see Binmore 1 993 .
1 5 . For ease of discussion, we have chosen not to present the United States' response
to New Zealand as a separate strategy. Instead, the reader should assume that the strategies
presented concerning this game include the optimal response by the United States to New
Zealand's action. For example, assume that in this case the United States would choose at
the final stage to acquiesce to New Zealand if it chose acquiesce.

--- Sayfa 63 ---
52
Games, Information, and Politics
and the above strategies. P(Type I) and P(Type II) are, respectively, a
and I - a. The conditional probability PcP I Type II) equals I since
the strategy of the United States calls for it to choose P with certainty
if Nature chooses A , that is, the United States is a Type I nation.
Similarly, the conditional probability PcP I Type I) equals l . Thus,
equation 2. 1 becomes
I
.
l ea)
P(Type I Pumsh) = [ 1 (1 - a)] + l (a)] ·
(2.2)
The conditional probability P(Type I I P) then equals a. It can then be
easily shown that P(Type II I P) then equals I - a. Before proceeding
to calculate the expected values for New Zealand, the reader should
note that the updated probability in this particular case is no different
than the initial ones. In other words, no additional information was
gleaned from the action of the United States. 16
Given these probabilities, should New Zealand choose to change
its strategies? Clearly, New Zealand has no reason to change its first
option. Since the United States will not choose A , New Zealand does
not gain any advantage by choosing A instead of R. It does need to
examine its choices concerning a response to the United States' an­
nouncement of P. Thus, we need to examine the E(R I P) and
E(A I P). These expected values are
E(R I P) = b(a) + ( -d)( l - a)
= ab + ad - d
= a(b + d) - d
E(A I P) = (b - c)(a) + (b - c)( l - a)
= ab - ac + b -
c - ab + ac
= b -
c .
Comparing these expected values, we find that
E(R I P) > E(A I P)
a(b + d) - d > b - c .
Solving for a yields
b + d - c
a >
b + d
(2.3)
---
-- -- -
-ü
ý --
- ---- ---
1 6 . This is not always the case. Other cases in this chapter and in chapters 5 and 6
present situations in which the initial probabilities differ from their updated counterparts.

--- Sayfa 64 ---
A Brief Introduction to Game Theoretic Models
53
Thus, New Zealand will choose R if a exceeds this value on the
right-hand side of equation 2.3. Given this choice by New Zealand,
the United States will change its strategy. Instead of choosing P if
Nature chose A , it would choose to A . This is because its payoff for
the P in this situation would be b instead of O.
On the other hand, if a is less than the value in equation 2.3,
New Zealand would not change its strategy since the expected value
of acquiescing is greater than that of rebelling. This set of strategies
would then be an equilibrium. However, the equilibrium is not fully
specified by the set of strategies since it is also dependent on the
beliefs of the players concerning a. Thus, properly stated the equilib­
rium of this game would be
( 1 ) The United States chooses to P if Nature chooses A.
chooses to P if Nature chooses B.
(2) New Zealand chooses to R if the United States has chosen A.
chooses A if the United States has chosen P.
(3) And,
b + d - c
a <
b + d .
This is a perfect Bayesian equilibrium. 1 7 A perfect Bayesian equilib­
rium consists of a set of strategies and beliefs such that the strategies
for the remainder of the game follow the criteria for Nash equilibria
given the beliefs and strategies of the other players, and these beliefs
are based if possible on priors updated by Bayes' rules given the
observed actions of the other players.
This specific perfect Bayesian equilibrium is also sometimes
called a pooling equilibrium. It is a pooling equilibrium because both
Type I and Type II nations will take the same actions. Thus, New
Zealand will be unable to distinguish which type the United States is.
If the equilibrium were differentiated between different types, then it
would be called a separating equilibrium. For example, a separating
equilibrium would be one in which a Type I nation would choose to
acquiesce and a Type II nation would choose to punish. New Zealand
would then be able to distinguish between the different types.
This is, of course, only one of the equilibria of this game. Let us
examine another case, which arises from our original one. What if the
1 7 . There is a mixed strategy equilibrium in which a = [(b + d - c)f(b + d)] . We do
not explore the topic of mixed equilibria in this type of game in this chapter. This topic is
considered in chapter 5 .

--- Sayfa 65 ---
54
Games , Information, and Politics
inequality in equation 2.3 holds? As stated, if Nature chooses A , the
United States would choose to change its strategy to A away from P
since New Zealand would choose R regardless of the actions of the
United States. The new set of strategy combinations would be
( 1 ) The United States chooses A if Nature chooses A.
chooses P if Nature chooses B.
(2) New Zealand chooses R if the United States has chosen A .
chooses R if the United States has chosen P.
If this strategy combination were an equilibrium, it would be a
separating equilibrium since the United States would choose to act
differently depending on its type. However, this strategy combination
is not an equilibrium. Given that the United States is revealing its type
in this strategy by its actions, New Zealand has no incentive to choose
to rebel if the United States has chosen to punish. This can be seen by
applying Bayes' Theorem in the following manner:
P(Type II I Punish)
P(Punish I Type Il)P(Type II)
(2.4)
P(Punish I Type II)P(Type II) + P(Punish I Type I)P(Type I) .
Substituting the values for PcP I Type II), P(Type II), PcP I Type I),
and P(Type I) yields
I
·
1 ( 1 - CY)
P(Type II PUnIsh) = O(CY) + [ 1 ( 1 - CY)] .
The P(Type II I P) then equals 1 . In this case, the action of the United
States did provide additional information to New Zealand. As long as
the original a was not equal to 0, the action of the United States
allows New Zealand to clearly recognize the type of nation it is
facing .
We then calculate the following expected values:
E(R I P) = b(O) + (-d) l
= - d
E(A I P) = (b
- c)(O) + (b - c)( 1 )
= b - c.

--- Sayfa 66 ---
A Brief Introduction to Game Theoretic Models
55
New Zealand then will choose its strategy, which is conditional on the
United States' choice of P because the E(A I P) is greater than the
E(R I P) since by definition b
-
c is greater than
-d . Thus, this
strategy combination is not an equilibrium.
To find the other pure strategy equilibria in this game, one would
have to test all possible sets of strategy combinations and beliefs. This
would mean checking 16 strategy combinations and examining
whether there are beliefs that would lead them to equilibria. While it
will not be shown here, the only pure strategy equilibrium in this
game is the one previously noted. Thus, this game only has a pooling
equilibrium in pure strategies. Thus, substantively, the only equilib­
rium in pure strategies is one in which the United States is able to bluff
and New Zealand is unable to detect the bluff.
Another way that New Zealand could gain information about the
United States' type would be to examine the actions of the United
States compared with those of other actors. For example, what if the
basing of additional nuclear weapons in Europe took place before
New Zealand made its decision to rebel? Or what if Japan had previ­
ously chosen to exclude naval vessels from the United States that
carried nuclear weapons? If these events occurred prior to New Zea­
land's decision, New Zealand could have used information from these
actions to update its information concerning which type of payoffs the
United States possessed. Of course, the United States, knowing that
future interactions could take place and knowing that its current inter­
actions were being monitored, might act strategically to make New
Zealand believe it was a Type II nation instead of Type 1. If New
Zealand knew that the United States was a Type II, it would not
choose to rebel. This notion of repetition is explored in the next
section.
Repeated Games
The notion of repetition can be addressed in a number of different
ways in game theory. One could think of the United States playing the
same game with New Zealand repeatedly. Or the United States could
play a number of different actors sequentially in similar games. Up to
this point, we have considered the interaction between the United
States and New Zealand to be an isolated event, which occurs once
and is never repeated. However, this is a very unrealistic way to view
this and most other interactions. Very seldom does one player interact
with another once and only once. Even less likely is the possibility

--- Sayfa 67 ---
56
Games , Information, and Politics
that an actor plays this other actor once and then never plays a similar
game with a like player again. Given the prevalence of repetition, we
tum to the subject of repetition in this section and consider its effect
on the manner in which the players participate in the game.
Let us return to the game presented in figure I . This is an exten­
sive form game in which the United States will always acquiesce and
New Zealand will in tum rebel. This is also a game of complete and
perfect information. We can expand this game to include other allies.
This is done by having the United States play a series of allies that
have the same payoff structure as does New Zealand. 18 The game in
figure 1 then becomes a constituent game that is repeated or iterated.
Will repetition change the equilibrium of this game?
If there is a finite number of allies facing the United States, the
United States, surprisingly, will maximize its payoff by acquiescing.
In each constituent part of the game, the United States gets a higher
payoff by acquiescing than by punishing a rebellion. This fact pre­
vents the United States from building a tough reputation at the begin­
ning of the iterated game, which is then used to force the remaining
allies to choose to acquiesce instead of punish. This result is devel­
oped using backwards induction. Take for example , a case in which
the United States faces 1 7 allies sequentially (all playing a game
identical to the one in figure 1). Given the same payoffs in the final
period as in the first period, Player 17 maximizes her payoffs by
rebelling; the United States' corresponding decision is to play cooper­
atively. Why does this occur? The United States has no incentive to
punish the seventeenth ally given that this is the last stage of the game;
it no longer needs to worry about its reputation. The seventeenth ally,
realizing this fact, then chooses to rebel since no punishment will be
forthcoming. Working backward along the tree, we can show that the
same decisions hold for all periods of play. The United States would
not punish a rebellion of the sixteenth ally since it knows that its
actions will have no affect on the future actions of the seventeenth
ally. The sixteenth ally would then choose to rebel since no punish­
ment would be forthcoming. This process, which is called backwards
induction, can be repeated for each constituent part of the game. What
is rational in the last period is rational for all the periods. Thus, the
United States would always choose to acquiesce and the allies would
1 8 . If the payoffs of the players are the same and if each player is aware of the
outcome of each game, it does not matter whether we are talking about the interaction
between the United States and a series of other nations or the United States and New
Zealand repeatedly interacting . Both games would be analyzed in the same fashion.

--- Sayfa 68 ---
A Brief Introduction to Game Theoretic Models
57
always choose to rebel. Repetition, then, does not assure the occur­
rence of reputation building. And, more importantly, it does not
change the strategies that are being played in the constituent games of
the repeated game. In both games, the United States chooses to acqui­
esce and New Zealand chooses to rebel.
How can repetition change the strategies played in this game or a
similar one? There are two answers to this question. These answers
are based on the potential number of repetitions of this game as well
the level of information available to the players of the game. Chang­
ing the game from one of finite known repetitions to one with either
infinite repetitions or an unknown stopping point changes the behavior
of the actors in the game. For instance, the allies can no longer rely on
backwards induction to solve this game. Instead, other techniques
must be considered.
Shubik (1970), Taylor (1976, 1987) and Axelrod (1980a, 1980b,
198 1 , 1984) have all shown that cooperation can be sustained in a
repeated Prisoners' Dilemma game under certain conditions. They
show that when the game is played with the discounting of future
payoffs and/or an exogenous probability of the game terminating after
a finite number of iterations mutual cooperation can arise as one of the
equilibria of the game. This finding is remarkable given that the only
Nash equilibrium in this game in its single-shot form is defection. In
its repeated form, there are many more equilibria.
Axelrod's The Evolution o/Cooperation ( 1984) has had a signifi­
cant impact on the use of game theory in political science, especially
in the field of international relations. For example, Keohane's After
Hegemony: Cooperation and Discord in the World Political Economy
( 1984) and a whole issue of World Politics (1985) are based upon
Axelrod's findings. In Axelrod's formulation 19 of the repeated Pris­
oners' Dilemma, cooperation may or may not emerge depending on
the importance each player places on future payoffs or, in other
words, the manner in which they discount the utility of the outcomes
of future actions. Before considering an application to our case study,
we consider a problem with this approach concerning the number of
possible equilibria.
In game theory, repeated games have been of interest for many
years. This interest has resulted in a set of findings that have been
commonly labeled "folk theorems." Ordeshook (1992) summarizes
these theorems in the following manner.
19. This fonnulation is very similar to Taylor's work ( 1 976, 1987).

--- Sayfa 69 ---
58
Games, Information, and Politics
In an infinitely repeated game, any outcome that gives each
player what that player can guarantee himself if he plays the
game without coordinating with anyone else-any outcome that
satisfies the security value of each player-can correspond to an
equilibrium.20 ( 179-80)
This family of theorems leads us to the conclusion that there can be a
plethora of equilibria in an infinitely repeated game. For example, in
the Prisoners' Dilemma game presented in matrix l one can find an
equilibrium set of strategies for any outcome that would provide each
player at minimum his or her security value. In this case, each player
would need to average a payoff of at least 2 per round. There can exist
a large number of equilibria that support or provide such payoffs. Two
such strategies would be {All C, All C} and {All D, All D}. Of course ,
there are more complicated strategies that would provide the same
payoffs. And, since an equilibrium is defined by its strategies and not
its payoffs , any of these could be an equilibrium.
How does the Folk Theorem affect our analysis of the interaction
between the United States and New Zealand? An easy answer would
be that it provides support for the actions of the United States and
New Zealand in an interaction as portrayed in figure 4. However, this
answer is problematic in two ways. First, we would need to find the
equilibrium strategy that would yield this payoff in a constituent game
of the repeated game . This would not be difficult. For example, {All
R , All P} would yield this payoff in each and every constituent game
of the repeated game. However, this strategy would not be an equilib­
rium because it does not provide both players' with their security
levels. New Zealand does get its security level, which is -d. The
United States, however, does not. It receives -p where the security
level is O.
The payoff for the United States does not necessarily lead us to
rule out the game in figure 4 as an incorrect representation of the
interaction between the United States and New Zealand. All we have
argued is that the {All R , All p} is not an equilibrium . We could still
have an equilibrium in which both parties receive their respective
payoffs of -p and -d in one round or many rounds. In fact, we could
have several equilibria in which these payoffs are received in one or
20. A security value is the lowest payoff a player can receive if she plays her "best"
strategy. For example , a security level for a player who has a dominant strategy would be
the worst payoff that strategy provides. Of course, one does not need a dominant strategy to
have a security level. The security level for the game in figure 2 is 1 .

--- Sayfa 70 ---
A Brief Introduction to Game Theoretic Models
59
more interations of the game as long as the average payoff of the
supergame is equal to or exceeds the security level for each player.
Thus, while repeated games do provide us with a way in solving
this game in a "reasonable manner," that is, we find the solution that
actually occurred, we are left with many other solutions. We do not
have as yet a reasonable way to choose between these equilibria. As
such, we are left with many equilibria in most repeated games.
Conclusion
In this chapter, we have taken the reader from very simple matrix
games to games of incomplete infonnation and repeated games. We
have introduced simple concepts such as Nash equilibria and dominant
strategies. We have also considered more complicated concepts such
as subgame perfect equilibria, Bayesian equilibria, and the Folk The­
orem. By now your head might be reeling from the amount of infor­
mation that we have introduced in this chapter. Our purpose was not,
however, to teach you all these concepts in such a short time. Instead,
you will be seeing these concepts used in the next four chapters. This
chapter merely introduced you to them. The next four chapters will
serve to strengthen your knowledge by examining how they can be
used to develop more fully the work of other political scientists.

--- Sayfa 72 ---
C H A PTER 3
Strategic Choice and Progressive Ambition
in American Politics : An Examination
of Rohde's Model
Introduction
A common problem in political science is the usage of decision the­
ory, implicitly or explicitly, to examine strategic interactions. Depend­
ing on the question being asked, using a decision theoretic focus may
yield vastly different results than a game theoretic one will. By using
decision theory instead of game theory to study political situations
involving strategic interactions, scholars may ignore the importance
of the strategic interactions between sets of actors.
For example, much of the literature on campaign donations by
political action committees has focused on the committees' choices
whom to provide with contributions. Scholars who focus on who gets
how much money from political action committees usually consider
only the characteristics of those receiving the money. These attributes
include incumbency, seniority, committee membership, chairman­
ships of relevant committees, and commitment to the views supported
by the political action committee. On the other hand, little work has
been done concerning the ways in which choices by one political
action committee affect and are affected by other political action com­
mittees. The strategic interaction part of this problem has not been
addressed. Are conservative committees more or less likely to provide
funds to a candidate running against a competitor who may receive
substantial funds from liberal groups? Do liberal committees coordi­
nate their spending in order to insure that most if not all liberal
candidates are adequately funded? By focusing on the characteristics
of the candidate and not the potential actions of other political action
committees, these scholars may have missed part of the analysis.
Let us consider this problem more concretely. Each political ac­
tion committee has a finite amount of money to divide between a finite
number of candidates. For simplicity's sake assume that there are only
two political action committees. One is liberal, and the other is con-
61

--- Sayfa 73 ---
62
Games , Information , and Politics
servative. There are six types of political candidates who possess
combinations of two political characteristics, ideology and incum­
bency. These candidates are either liberal, moderate, or conservative,
and they are either incumbents or challengers. How should the polit­
ical action committees ration their resources? Clearly, the choice of
any committee depends on what the other committee is doing. For
example, if the liberal committee chooses to divide its funds evenly
among liberal incumbents, the conservative committee may choose to
provide token funding to conservative incumbents and use the rest of
its money on moderate incumbents, moderate challengers, and con­
servative candidates who are challenging liberal incumbents. Given
this strategy choice by the conservative committee, the liberal com­
mittee may choose to provide fewer funds to liberal incumbents and
more funds to liberal challengers of conservative incumbents. Strate­
gic considerations need to be considered in these situations. I
In this chapter, our focus is on another situation in which the
strategic interaction between actors has not been taken into account.
Rohde ( 1 979) considers under what conditions incumbent office­
holders will strive for higher office. Briefly, his theory argues that an
incumbent will only try for higher office if the expected value of
running for higher office is greater than the expectation of not running
for higher office. His analysis is problematic because the potential
actions of other actors, including other potential challengers and the
incumbent in the higher office, are not explicitly taken into account.
Actions of these other actors would surely have some effect on the
incumbent's decision to pursue the higher office.
We focus on the problems that arise from modeling strategic
situations using decision theory instead of game theory. In doing so,
the differences between decision theory and game theory are noted. In
addition, we explore the case studied by Rohde in order to illustrate
why one should use game theory instead of decision theory to study a
situation involving strategic interaction.
This chapter proceeds as follows. First, a brief introduction to
decision theory is provided in which we contrast game theory with
decision theory. Second, a more complete discussion of Rohde's
model of progressive ambition is presented. In the discussion of his
---
-- . .. -.- .. ---.. -----û . . . _ - -
1 . Of course, one may object that this situation becomes too simplified by examin­
ing only two political action committees. Why is doing this to capture strategic interaction
necessarily better than assuming n actors, treating n
- i as the environment for e and
focusing on i's decisions? The answer to this question is "it depends. " It depends on the
question you are asking . The question, of course , frames the manner in which you approach
the answer.

--- Sayfa 74 ---
Strategic Choice and Progressive Ambition
63
analysis, the problems with using decision theory in this and similar
situations are noted. Third, we develop a set of simple game theoretic
models in order to model explicitly the strategic interactions discussed
in Rohde's analysis. Fourth, and finally, we consider the differences
between mixed strategies and the decision theoretic techniques used in
this chapter.
What Is Decision Theory?
Decision theory, unlike game theory, focuses on choices made by a
single actor in which only his or her choice and nature can affect the
outcome. A classic example from decision theory involves choosing
between two lotteries. There are prizes offered in each lottery. Con­
nected with each prize is a probability of winning that prize. Mini­
mally, a lottery consists of a set of prizes and the probabilities of
winning those prizes. These probabilities and payoffs are not affected
by your action or the action of others. 2
Figure 7 shows two simple lotteries. Which would you choose to
play? In Lottery A, you have a 0.5 probability of winning $25 .00 and
a 0.5 probability of getting nothing. In Lottery B, you have a 0.4
probability of winning $36.00 and a 0.6 probability of getting noth­
ing. Given this choice, most people would choose Lottery B over
Lottery A. Why is that the case?
This would be the case if we believe a person making this choice
uses expected utility calculations to make his or her decision. In this
case, such a person would make the following calculation in which
E(') represents the expected value of a lottery:
E(A) = 0.5(25) + 0.5(0)
E(B) = 0.4(36) + 0.6(0).
The expected value of Lottery A is $ 1 2.50 while that of Lottery B is
$14.40. A person who wants to maximize his or her expected payoff
would choose Lottery B over Lottery A.
On a technical note, this decision holds if the person making this
2. Thus, a lottery in which people choose which number to play and the payoffs of
the lottery are decided by the number of people playing and the number of people choosing
the winning option would not be a lottery in the sense the term is used here. Instead, this
lottery is similar to the scratch-off lotteries that have been adopted by a number of states. In
these lotteries, all the cards are printed in advance. As such, the odds and payoffs are
established in advance. When you buy your ticket you can easily find out the probability of
getting certain payoffs.

--- Sayfa 75 ---
64
Games , Information, and Politics
$25
$O
Lottery A

 $36
 $O
Lottery B
Fig. 7. Choosing between two lotteries
choice equates money with his or her utility. In other words, the above
result is true if we assume that the person's utility function is linear in
money. It will not hold for all types of utility functions. For example,
assume that the person choosing between the two lotteries has a utility
function that can be represented as
Vex) = \IX.
The choice between lotteries then becomes
E(A) = 0.5(v2s) + 0.5(Vo)
E(B) = 0.4(\136) + 0.6(Vo) .
This person would choose Lottery A since the expected value of A is
2.5 and that of B is 2.4.3
Decision theory, then, is used to describe situations in which a
person is making a choice under risk. There is no strategic interaction
between two or more players; rather, the player makes choices given
her utility function, the possible outcomes, and the probabilities of
these outcomes occurring. Decision theory differs from game theory,
then, in two important aspects . First, a decision theoretic problem
involves the calculations of only one player while a game theoretic
problem involves the calculations of two or more players. Second, the
actor in the decision theoretic problem takes an action that proba­
bilistically leads to some outcome. The actor in a game theoretic
3 . There are many different types of utility functions. For example, the utility
function could be
U(x)= Ixl.

--- Sayfa 76 ---
Strategic Choice and Progressive Ambition
65
problem takes an action that in combination with actions taken by
other players yields an outcome.4
A Problem with Using Decision Theory to Model
Strategic Interactions
A major problem with using decision theory to model a situation that
is more suited to game theoretic analysis concerns the problem of
interdependency. In a game theoretic situation, outcomes are arrived
at by examining the intersection of the two players' strategies. In
decision theory, outcomes are not seen as being dependent on the
actions of others. When examining the former problem from the latter
perspective, one can easily forget that the actions of others may be
predicated on what they think your actions will be.5 How could this
affect the predicted versus the actual outcome of a game?
Matrix 8 illustrates a simple two-person game. Instead of analyz­
ing it as a game, we first examine it from the perspective of decision
theory. Player I would see this game as a choice between two lot­
teries. He could play lottery L or lottery R. If he chose to play L, he
could expect one of two payoffs. He could receive 0 or 3. Assume that
w is the probability that he receives 0; then I
- w is the probability
that he receives 3. If he chose to play R, his payoffs would be 1 and 2
with the probability of w and 1
- w, respectively. The probabilities
are identical between L and R because Player 1 assumes that his
actions or potential actions will have no effect on Player 2's choices.
In other words , he ignores any chance of strategic interaction in this
situation. Thus , he creates the following set of expectations in which
w is the probability that Player 2 chooses L:
E(L) = w(O) + (1
- w)(3)
E(R) = w(1 j + ( l - w)(2).
4. Of course , probability could still play a role in this situation. For example, a
player could choose to use a mixed strategy. See chapter 2 for a brief discussion of mixed
strategies.
5. Of course, in situations in which there are many actors, one may want to use
decision theory instead of game theory. An example of this situation is a model of perfect
competition in microeconomics. In this situation, individual firms see themselves as price
takers, that is, their choice of price does not affect other competing firms. See chapter 4
for a discussion of using game theory versus decision theory in situations with many
actors.

--- Sayfa 77 ---
66
Games , Information, and Politics
L
L
0,2
Player 1
R
1 ,3
Player 2
R
3,3
2,3
Matrix 8. A simple matrix game illustrating the interdependence of
choices
Solving these equations simultaneously,6 we find that Player 1 will
choose L if the probability that Player 2 chooses L is less than one­
half. Player 1 will choose R if the probability that Player 2 chooses L
is greater than one-half. If these probabilities are equal, then Player 1
receives the same expected payoff regardless of his choice. Of course,
the value of w is subjective.
Player 2 , of course, would be making similar calculations. She
has a choice between two lotteries , L and R. If she chooses L, her
payoff will be either 2 or 3. Assume that the probabilities of these
payoffs will be a and I - a , respectively. If she chooses R, her payoff
will be 3. The probability of this payoff is, of course , 1 . 7 Player 2
would evaluate the following expectations in order to decide between
these two lotteries .
6. To solve these two equations simultaneously, we first create the inequality
E(L) > E(R).
We then replace the expectation operators to create the inequality
w(O) + ( I - w)(3 ) > w( l ) + ( l - w)(2).
This expression can be simplified as
3 - 3w > w + 2 - 2w
- 3w > -w -
)
-2w > - )
w < '/2 .
Thus, E(L) is greater than E(R) if w < . 5 .
7 . This probability i s 1 since [ll' + (I - ()' )1 = ) .

--- Sayfa 78 ---
Strategic Choice and Progressive Ambition
67
E(L) = 0:'(2) + (l
- 0:')(3)
E(R) = 0:'(3) + (1
- 0:')(3)
Solving these two equations simultaneously, one finds that Player 2
will always choose R unless 0:' equals 0. At that probability, Player 2 is
indifferent between R and L.
The joint solution of these decision theoretic problems is:
a. If 0:' = 0, then Player 2 will be indifferent between L and R and
i. If w > 0.5 , then Player I will choose R.
ii. If w < 0.5, then Player I will choose L.
iii. If w = 0.5 , then Player I will choose either R or L with
equal probability.
b. If 0:' > 0, then Player 2 will choose R and
i. If w > 0.5, then Player 1 will choose R.
ii. If w < 0.5, then Player 1 will choose L.
iii. If w = 0.5 , then Player I will choose either R or L.
All four outcomes are possible when players examine this situation
from a decision theoretic perspective. The final outcome is dependent
upon the subjective estimate by Player I of the probability of Player 2
playing one of her two strategies and the subjective estimate by Player
2 of Player 1 playing one of his two strategies. If 0:' equals 0, then
Player 2 will be indifferent between L and R. If 0:' > 0, then Player 2
will choose R. If w is greater than 0.5, then Player I will choose R. If
w is less than 0.5 , then Player 1 will choose L. It is possible, then, to
have any of the four possible outcomes occur.
What would be the outcome if we analyzed this situation as a
game? Player 2's strategy R weakly dominates strategy L. R weakly
dominates L since Player 2 receives payoffs from this strategy that are
not less than the payoffs yielded by L and, in some cases, are better
than those payoffs. Given this domination, Player I is safe in assum­
ing that Player 2 will play R regardless of what Player 1 does. Thus ,
Player 1 will choose to play L. Player 2, realizing that Player I will be
reasoning in this manner, will in tum play R. The outcome of the
game would then be {L,R}. This outcome is a Nash equilibrium.
Thus, different results occur when we analyze this situation in a
decision theoretic manner rather than as a game. In the former case,
there are two possible outcomes. Any of the four possible strategy
combinations are possible if this situation is examined from a decision

--- Sayfa 79 ---
68
Games, Information , and Politics
theoretic point of view. In the game theoretic situation, there is one
determinate outcome, {L,R}.8 Why would the other three outcomes
not occur if both players analyzed the situation from a game theoretic
perspective? For the outcomes {L,L} and {R,L} to occur, Player 2
would have to choose a strategy, L, which is weakly dominated by R.
There is no incentive for her to make this choice since she will always
do at least as well if not better than L by choosing R. Outcome {R,R}
would only occur if Player I chose to ignore the fact that for Player 2
R weakly dominates L. Given this weak domination, Player I has no
reason to expect that Player 2 would choose L. As long as that is the
case his only real choice is that of R. From a game theoretic view­
point, we may exclude {R ,R} as a potential outcome since it would
only result from one player believing that the other player is going to
play a weakly dominated strategy.
Before proceeding to Rohde's model of progressive ambition, let
us examine two simple situations and consider whether game theory
or decision theory would be more useful in examining them. Candi­
dates for political office take policy stances that they think will attract
voters . The choice of stances involve both game theoretic and deci­
sion theoretic frameworks. Each candidate must decide what will
appeal to potential voters. In examining possible policy stances, the
candidate takes the voters as given and determines which stances will
appeal to the most voters. Here the voters' preferences are assumed to
be given and to respond to the candidates choices. At the same time,
the candidate has to worry about the actions of other candidates. Their
appeals may be more attractive to certain segments of the potential
electorate. For example, a Republican candidate may try to moderate
her stance by taking a pro-choice position. This might appeal to a
large number of potential voters. However, when making this deci­
sion, she must consider whether a Democratic candidate may try to
appeal to disaffected voters by taking a pro-life stance. Thus, the
taking of positions by candidates for public office combines both a
decision theoretic and a game theoretic focus. Appealing to voters
could be effectively modeled using decision theory, while considering
the choices of one's opponents would be more appropriately consid­
ered with game theory.
In this section, we have argued that approaching game theoretic
- ù-
--ú-------
8 . The reader should not assume that game theoretic approaches will always yield
fewer outcomes than decision theoretic approaches do. It could easily be the case that the
game theoretic approach would yield several outcomes or equilibria. The point of this
example is to show that one's results differ depending on whether game theory or decision
theory is used.

--- Sayfa 80 ---
Strategic Choice and Progressive Ambition
69
problems from a decision theoretic perspective can yield different
results. Implicitly we have argued that results derived from the misap­
plication of decision theory will not occur when the situation is an­
alyzed properly.
In the next section, Rohde's model of progressive ambition is
introduced. This model was explicitly developed in a decision theo­
retic framework. After introducing this model, factors that might lead
one to decide to model the same situation as a game are discussed.
Rohde's Model of Progressive Ambition
In Joseph Schlesinger's Ambition and Politics: Political Careers in
the United States ( 1 966, 9- 1 0) three types of political ambition are
discussed. These are discrete, static, and progressive. Discrete ambi­
tion applies to a politician who seeks an office for a specific length of
time, usually one tenn, and then retires from political life. Static
ambition applies to a politician who seeks and attains a political office
with the purpose of holding that office as long as possible. A politician
of this type does not try to move from this office to a higher one.
Progressive ambition applies to a politician who holds an office and
seeks to obtain an office that is considered to be of higher status. Jack
Kemp and Richard Gephardt would both be considered politicians
with progressive ambitions. These politicians, who either were or are
members of the U. S . House of Representatives, were willing to try to
move from their current positions to the White House.
While Schlesinger assumes that manifested behavior can be used
as a proxy for what type of ambition a politician possesses, Rohde
argues that almost all members of the House have progressive ambi­
tions. He states the assumption that "if a member of the House, on his
first day of service, were offered a Senate seat or a governorship
without cost or risk, he would take it" (3). Static ambition, on the
other hand, is only seen when the member for some reason is not able
to pursue higher office. In other words, static ambition is manifested
when the costs or risks of pursuing higher office are too high. Thus,
Rohde's focus shifts from that of Schlesinger (categorizing politicians
into different ambition types) to one of examining the conditions
under which incumbents will choose to run for higher office.
To examine this decision by candidates , he develops the follow­
ing decision calculus. The candidate chooses between at , in which
she chooses to run for her currently held office (that is, reelection) and
a2, in which she chooses to pursue higher office. These cases are
mutually exclusive. Thus, a politician who chooses to run for higher

--- Sayfa 81 ---
70
Games , Information, and Politics
office must relinquish her present seat. C(a) represents the direct
utility cost incurred by choosing alternative j. These costs would
include the cost of campaigning for the different offices. Each action
can yield one of three outcomes . The politician will not occupy an
office after the election (0 I )' will hold her present office after the
election (°2), or will hold the higher office being considered after the
election (03). These outcomes , of course, are also assumed to be
mutually exclusive . U(O) represents the utility the incumbent re­
ceives if outcome j occurs . Finally, the incumbent assigns a proba­
bility Pie OJ) that outcome j will occur if action i is taken . For example,
the probability that the incumbent will win higher office if she chooses
not to run for it is represented by P I (°3). The first subscript refers to
the action taken by the incumbent. In this case, the action is to run for
reelection . The second subscript categorizes the type of outcome be­
ing examined. In this case , the outcome is the incumbent moving to
higher office .
To understand an incumbent's choice of whether or not to run for
higher office , Rohde examines the expectations
E(a l ) = PI (O I )U(O I ) + PI (02)U(02)
+ PI (03)U(03) - C(a l )
E(a2) = P2(01 )U(0 1 ) + P2(02)U(02)
+ P2(03)U(03) - C(a2)·
(3 . I )
(3 .2)
Rohde simplifies these expectations by assuming that a candidate can
only run for one office at a time . Therefore, PI (03) = P2(02) = O. In
addition , he assumes that ° I is the least preferred alternative . This
seems reasonable for his purposes since he assumes that all politicians
have progressive ambition . As such , the worst possible alternative for
these politicians is that of holding no office . Since 01 is the least
preferred alternative , he arbitrarily sets U(O I ) = O. This simplifies
expectations (3. 1 ) and (3 .2) to
(3. 3)
(3 .4)
A run for higher office is justified if and only if

--- Sayfa 82 ---
Strategic Choice and Progressive Ambition
71
In other words , a run for higher office will be made if and only if the
expected value of running for the office is greater than the expected
value of not running for the office. If this were the only result from
Rohde's model, this article would not have been cited and used by
numerous authors.9 Rohde presents seven hypotheses, which are de­
veloped using comparative statics arguments.
H I : Among House members, the proportion of opportunities to
run for the Senate that is taken will be greater than the
proportion of opportunities taken to run for governor. (7-8)
H2: Among House members, the proportion of opportunities to
run for governorships with a four-year term that is taken will
be greater than the proportion of opportunities taken to run
for governorships with a two-year term. (8)
H3: Among House members, for both Senate and gubernatorial
races, the proportion of opportunities to run for higher office
that is taken in situations where no incumbent is seeking
reelection will be greater than the proportion of opportunities
taken in situations where an incumbent is seeking reelec­
tion. (9)
H4: Among House members , for both Senate and gubernatorial
races, the proportion of opportunities to run for higher office
that is taken in states which are "safe" for the opposition party
will be less than the proportion of opportunities taken in states
which are competitive or "safe" for their own party. (9)
Hs: Among House members, for Senate races, the probability
that a House member will run will be directly related to the
proportion of the state's population the population of his
House constituency comprises. ( 1 1 )
H6: For both Senate and gubernatorial races, the probability that
a House member will run will be inversely related to his
seniority. ( 1 1 - 1 2)
H7: If two House members are presented with similar oppor­
tunities to seek higher office, and one is a "risk taker" and the
other is not, then the "risk taker" will have a greater proba­
bility of running for higher office than the other. ( 1 2)
Of these seven hypotheses, five of them clearly describe decision
theoretic situations when all other factors are held constant. The re-
9. For example, see Hibbing 1982a, 1982b; Robeck 1982; Sapiro 1982; Brace 1984;
Loomis 1 984; Squire 1 989, 1 991 ; Copeland 1 989; Canon and Sousa 1992; Abramson,
Aldrich, and Rohde 1 987; and Banks and Kiewiet 1 989.

--- Sayfa 83 ---
72
Games, Infonnation, and Politics
maining two hypotheses, the third and seventh, are game theoretic in
nature and, as such, cannot be considered properly by means of
Rohde's decision theoretic approach. Before discussing these two
hypotheses, let us first examine why the remaining five hypotheses are
decision theoretic in nature.
Three of these hypotheses, the first, second, and sixth, concern
the value a candidate places on either her present office or the higher
office. The first two hypotheses concern the length of term of a U.S.
senator vis-a-vis a state governor. The first hypothesis is derived from
the fact that no term of a state governor is longer than four years while
that of a senator is six years The second hypothesis differentiates
between governorships with two-year versus four-year terms. In both
of these hypotheses, it is argued that representatives will be more
willing to take the risk of running for higher office as the length of
term of such an office increases. The sixth hypothesis does not focus
on the length of term of a candidate's potential office. Instead, it takes
into account the fact that members of the House of Representatives
gain more influence as their seniority grows. As such, as a member's
seniority increases, the ratio of benefits of her present position vis­
a-vis either a governorship or a Senate seat increases . The average
member would be less likely to run for higher office as her seniority
increases because she would not see a major increase in utility from
such an exchange of offices. In each of these cases , a potential chal­
lenger cannot affect the utility of the position or the probability of
gaining the position through her choice. A decision theoretic model
would be appropriate in considering each of these three situations.
The other two hypotheses that are decision theoretic in nature are
Hypotheses 4 and 5. These concern the probability of the member
winning a contest for higher office. The fourth hypothesis concerns
the disposition of voters in the state to elect candidates from her party.
A potential candidate will be more likely to run if her party wins a
disproportionate number of the offices in the state. The fifth hypoth­
esis concerns the candidate's electoral base of her current office. As
the proportion of this base increases relative to the electorate for
higher office, the member is more likely to run for this higher office.
Both of these hypotheses concern factors that the potential challenger
does not directly control. Or, at minimum, she does not control these
factors in the short run. Neither party identification nor geographic
electoral base can be manipulated by potential candidates or the in­
cumbent in the short run. 1 0
---ă. ----
--
-------
10. Of course , there may be some form of manipUlation occurring in the case of

--- Sayfa 84 ---
Strategic Choice and Progressive Ambition
73
While these five hypotheses clearly fall within the realm of deci­
sion theory, the other two do not. The third hypothesis concerns the
likelihood of members running for higher office in situations in which
there is no incumbent versus those in which there is an incumbent.
Rohde conjectures that a member is more likely to run for higher
office if there is no incumbent running for reelection to that office.
While on the surface this case seems to be one in which decision
theory is applicable, this is not the case. The choice of the incumbent
may be based on that of a potential challenger. For example, when
Governor Charles S . Robb of Virginia was contemplating a run for the
Senate, the incumbent Republican, Paul S. Trible Jr. , decided not to
run for reelection. Though Trible stated publicly that he had decided
not to run for reelection because of his inability to make good public
policy in Washington, it was widely assumed that his action occurred
because he believed Robb would run for his seat and win. In this case,
clearly the incumbent chose to give up his seat because of a potential
challenger. How does this affect Rohde's hypothesis?
The problem with Hypothesis 3 is that it assumes that the action
of the potential challenger has no effect on the incumbent. This is
clearly not the case. Both the incumbent and the potential challenger
are dealing with a case of strategic choice or interdependent decision
making. These situations should be considered by using game theory
not decision theory. In other words, it is important in this situation to
take into account the potential actions of the incumbent as well as
those of the challenger.
Finally, we move to examine Rohde's seventh hypothesis. In this
hypothesis, Rohde considers how potential candidates consider risk as
a reason for them to run or not run for higher office. This leads him to
divide the population into two parts: people who are risk takers and
people who are risk averse. The second person choosing between two
lotteries earlier in this chapter illustrates the case of a risk taker. In this
example, the person is willing to take the riskier alternative, that is,
the one with a higher probability of winning nothing, because he or
she valued the higher payoff in that lottery much more than the highest
payoff in the other lottery. 1 1 The first person choosing between the
two lotteries is an example of someone who is risk neutral. Rohde
argues that potential candidates who are risk acceptant are more likely
Hypothesis 4, that is, a potential candidate may choose to switch parties. See Aldrich and
Bianco 199 1 for a discussion of this topic.
1 1 . For a discussion of risk acceptance, risk averseness, and risk neutrality, see
Ordeshook 1986.

--- Sayfa 85 ---
74
Games , Information, and Politics
to run for higher office, given similar situations, than are those who
are risk averse.
While this argument is fundamentally a decision theoretic argu­
ment, the problem that arises in Rohde's analysis is his operationaliza­
tion of this variable. He categorizes a member as a risk taker if the
member originally ran for his House seat when an incumbent was
running for reelection or if the other party received 57 percent or more
of the vote during the last three previous elections. If a potential
challenger did not satisfy either of these requirements, they were
labeled as "other. " 1 2
Why is this definition problematic? It is problematic for the same
reasons that Rohde's third hypothesis was challenged. The decision of
an incumbent to retire may be predicated on the actions of the poten­
tial challenger. However, a candidate may be classified as "other" if
she happens to run against an incumbent who chooses to retire instead
of facing certain defeat at the hands of the challenger. For example,
would we consider Senator Robb of Virginia to be "other" because the
incumbent declined to run against him for this office? In this case, the
potential candidate's actions have affected those of the incumbent.
Strategic interaction does take place. This situation is game theoretic
because the actions of one of the actors are predicated on the potential
actions of the other candidate.
In the next section , we explore these topics further. Two simple
game theoretic models are developed, which consider the strategic
nature for both actors of whether or not to run for office. In analyzing
these games, we show that the results of the model will change de­
pending on whether the incumbent and the potential challenger view
the situation as being game theoretic or decision theoretic. The reader
should note that these games do not capture the entire essence of the
situation. A more complicated model will be considered in the sixth
chapter of this book. This more complicated model is not presented
here because it uses a game of incomplete information. This type of
game will be considered more completely in chapter 5.
Explicitly Considering the Strategic Aspects
of Progressive Ambition
In this section, two models are developed concerning the choices of
both an incumbent and a potential challenger to run for office. The
first model examines a situation in which the incumbent has the upper
1 2. To be fair to Rohde , it should be noted that he argues that this group of "others"
should be considered "[nJot as 'risk averters' because we do not know that they would not

--- Sayfa 86 ---
Strategic Choice and Progressive Ambition
75
hand, that is, he will win the upcoming election regardless of whether
the potential challenger decides to enter the race. In this case, it is
shown that by approaching this problem from a decision theoretic
standpoint the potential challenger may make the wrong decision,
entering even though she has no hope of winning the race. The second
model considers a case in which the incumbent will lose if the poten­
tial challenger actually enters the race. Once again, it is demonstrated
that an incumbent using a decision theoretic approach may actually
decide not to retire even though he will be defeated by the challenger.
Each of these cases are similar to those considered in Rohde's hypoth­
eses 3 and 7. These models illustrate that problems occur when one
analyzes game theoretic situations using decision theory. 1 3
Matrix 9 illustrates a simple electoral game between an incum­
bent and a challenger. The incumbent has two strategies. He can
decide to either pursue reelection , R, or leave office, L. The chal­
lenger also has two strategies. She can either enter the campaign for
higher office, E, or stay with her present office, S. The payoffs for
both actors are similar. The best outcome for each is attaining the
elected office held by the incumbent; this payoff is presented as 1 . The
second best outcome is not to run an unsuccessful campaign; this
payoff is presented as O. The worst outcome is to wage an unsuccess­
ful campaign. This payoff is represented by
- 1 . Matrix 9 presents a
game in which the incumbent is electorally invulnerable to the chal­
lenger, that is, the incumbent is returned to office regardless of
whether the challenger decides to run. In this case, the incumbent has
a dominant strategy of vying for reelection. One would then expect
the incumbent to choose this strategy when playing this game. The
challenger, however, does not have a dominant strategy. The lack of a
dominant strategy in this case does not lead to any indeterminacy of
outcomes. 14 This is caused by the fact that the challenger knows that
the incumbent has a dominant strategy. As such, the challenger has no
reason to believe that the incumbent will play any strategy but R. The
outcome (and equilibrium) of this game is then {S,R}.
Of course, this outcome assumes that both players view this
situation as one in which there is strategic interaction between both
have run if the previous incumbent had run" ( 1 979 , 1 5 , n. 27). Rohde's emphasis on this
claim actually strengthens our case because it illustrates the strategic nature of the interac­
tion between the incumbent and any potential candidate.
1 3 . Of course, a more complete model would include a set of potential challengers
instead of a single challenger. However, N-person games are not considered until the next
chapter. Thus, here we will only consider the two-candidate case.
14. See chapter 2 concerning situations in which multiple equilibria exist.

--- Sayfa 87 ---
76
Games , Information, and Politics
R
E
- 1 , 1
Challenger
s
0, 1
Incumbent
L
1,0
0,0
Matrix 9. A simple matrix game with a strong incumbent
actors . What happens if one of the actors instead sees this case as
decision theoretic in nature? Assume that the payoffs of the game
remain the same, but the challenger believes that he is playing a game
against Nature. If he approaches his choice from a decision theoretic
vantage point, he must choose between the following two lotteries, in
which a is the probability that the incumbent will not retire and 0 <: a
<: 1 :
Ec(E) = a(- I ) + ( 1 - a)( l )
(3 .6)
EAS) = a(O) + ( 1 - a)(O).
(3 .7)
After simplifying these equations, we find that E is preferred to S if
the challenger believes that the probability that the incumbent will run
again is less than one-half. The challenger then will enter the race if
and only if she perceives this probability to be less than 0.5. This
result, of course, is different from what would happen if both players
were examining this situation from a game theoretic standpoint. Thus,
a potential challenger may find herself pursuing a hopeless challenge
because she chose to use decision theory instead of game theory.
What if the situation is not hopeless for the challenger? Matrix 10
illustrates a case in which the challenger now has a dominant strategy.
In this case, the challenger wins the higher office regardless of
whether the incumbent decides to run. The equilibrium of this game,
then, is {E ,L}. The challenger plays her dominant strategy, E, and the
incumbent, noting that choice, chooses to leave office, L.
This outcome once again assumes that both players are looking
upon this situation as game theoretic. What if the incumbent decided
to approach this problem from a decision theoretic standpoint instead?
In this case, the incumbent would be choosing between the following

--- Sayfa 88 ---
Strategic Choice and Progressive Ambition
77
Incumbent
R
L
E
1 ,-1
1 ,0
Challenger
s
0,1
0,0
Matrix 1 0. A simple matrix game with a strong challenger
two lotteries, in which {3 represents the probability that the challenger
chooses not to run for higher office and 0 <: (3 <: 1 :
E/R) = (3(1) + ( 1 - (3)( - 1 )
(3 .8)
E/L) = (3(0) + (1 - (3)(0).
(3 .9)
After simplifying these two lotteries, we find that the incumbent will
choose to run for reelection if he perceives that the probability of the
challenger running is less than 0.5. Thus, once again a different result
occurs depending on whether one uses game or decision theory. In this
case, an incumbent with no chance of retaining his office may choose
to run again if he misperceives the probability of a challenger running
against him. This misperception occurs because he fails to realize that
the challenger is not choosing between two lotteries.
How does this analysis affect Rohde's hypotheses and/or results?
Since only the third and the seventh hypotheses improperly had a
decision theoretic focus, our consideration is limited to those hypoth­
eses. By examining the simple models developed above, it is clear
that both of these hypotheses are affected when they are considered
from a game theoretic instead of a decision theoretic perspective. In
the third hypothesis, Rohde posits that members of the House will be
more likely to run for open seats than for those held by incumbents
who are seeking reelection. Our analysis illustrates that incumbents
may choose to leave office because of a potential challenge. Of
course, if the incumbent chooses not to run for reelection, the race
becomes one for an open seat. Rohde would then use this race as a
case to provide support for this hypothesis. However, the incumbent
stepped down because of a potential challenge. The challenger, then,
did not decide to run because the seat was open. In fact, the challenger

--- Sayfa 89 ---
78
Games, Information , and Politics
caused the seat to become open. Thus, our simple models lead us to
question Rohde's results concerning his third hypothesis.
On the other hand, our models lead to the opposite conclusion
about the seventh hypothesis. This hypothesis concerns the actions of
risk takers vis-a-vis those who were classified as "others." Here our
original problem dealt not with the hypothesis but with the way in
which the notion of risk taker is operationalized. For a person to be a
risk taker, she needed either to have run for her House seat against an
incumbent or to have run for an open House seat in a district in which
the other party in the prior three elections received on average at least
57 percent of the total vote. In this case, Rohde's coding of the data
may have understated his case. This would occur if the incumbent in
the House seat chose not to run for reelection because of his potential
challenger. The challenger may or may not be a risk taker. We cannot
gamer any evidence about the challenger in this situation based on the
actions of the incumbent. In any event, Rohde may have under­
counted the number of risk takers in his data set.
In this section, we demonstrated how one could get misleading
results in the case of progressive ambition if one used decision theory
instead of game theory. We also showed how Rohde's hypotheses are
affected by examining them in game theoretic instead of decision
theory terms. In the next section , we briefly consider the role of mixed
strategies in game theory. Specifically, we show how mixed strategies
are different from a decision theoretic approach.
A Comment on Mixed Strategies and Decision Theory
In chapter 2, we introduced mixed strategies. A mixed strategy is the
result of a player deciding to choose between two or more strategies in
a random fashion. In this section, we address how mixed strategies
differ from the decision theoretic techniques examined in this chapter.
Matrix 1 1 presents a game of Chicken. In this game, neither
player has a dominant strategy. In chapter 2, we showed that there are
three Nash equilibria to this game. Two are pure strategy Nash equi­
libria. These are {R ,L} and {L,R}. There is also a mixed strategy
equilibrium to this game. This is {(0. 5 ,0.5),(0.5,0.5)}.
What does this mixed strategy Nash equilibrium mean? We can
interpret it as Player 1 randomly choosing between L and R with a
probability of 0.5. Player 2 would choose in a similar manner.
Why is this strategy combination a Nash equilibrium? It is an
equilibrium because no single actor has an incentive to deviate given
the action of the other player. For example, assume that Player 1

--- Sayfa 90 ---
L
Player 1
R
Strategic Choice and Progressive Ambition
79
Player 2
L
R
0,0
3,1
1,3
2,2
Matrix 1 1 . A matrix game representation of Chicken
continues to play this mixed strategy, but Player 2 decides to deviate
by playing either of the pure stategies. If Player 2 plays her pure
strategy R, her expected payoff is 1 .5; if she plays her pure strategy L,
her expected payoff is also 1 .5 . For the mixed strategy combination to
be a Nash equilibrium, the expected payoff must be at least as high as
1 . 5. The expected payoff of the mixed strategy equilibrium is also
1 .5. Since this is a symmetric game, neither player has an incentive to
change strategies. In this game, there are three possible strategy com­
binations in equilibrium. These are the two pure strategies and the one
mixed strategy.
From a decision theoretic perspective, the following outcomes
are possible. Player 1 chooses L if the probability of Player 2 playing
L is less than 0. 5 . If the probability that Player 2 will play L is greater
than 0.5, then Player 1 chooses R. Since this is a symmetric game,
these same conditions hold for Player 2's choices given her beliefs
about the probability of R and L occurring. Using this perspective,
any of the four outcomes could occur depending on the subjective
probability estimates of the two players.
How are probabilities used in these two cases? In a mixed strat­
egy, a probability is found that maximizes the payoff of the player
subject to the actions of the other player. For this mixed strategy to be
part of an equilibrium, neither player should have an incentive to
deviate from the mixed strategy. On the other hand, the probabilities
used in the decision theoretic calculus are subjective estimates . Each
player decides independently what action to take given his or her
subjective estimate of the probability that certain events will occur.
They do not let the effects of their calculation on the other player be
taken into account.
For example, what if in the game theoretic analysis of the
Chicken game in matrix 1 1 one player decides to play a mixed strat-

--- Sayfa 91 ---
80
Games, Information, and Politics
egy of (0.4,0.6)'1 Would such a strategy yield an equilibrium if the
other player is playing (0.5,0.5)'1 In other words, do players have a
reason to unilaterally change their strategies given this strategy pair?
The second player does. This is shown below. Assume Player 1 has
chosen the mixed strategy of (0.4,0.6). Can Player 2 get a better
payoff than the 1 .7 that would result from playing the mixed strategy
(0.5 ,0.5)'1 Player 2 would have to maximize the following statement,
in which a is the probability that she plays L:
a[O.4(O) + 0.6(3)] + ( l - a)[O.4( l ) + 0.6(2)] .
This expression reduces to
aO . S) + ( 1 - a)( l .6).
This expression is maximized by setting a equal to 1 . Player 2 would
choose to play the pure strategy L instead of the mixed strategy
(0.5 ,0.5). Thus, a change in the probabilities in one player's mixed
strategy results in a different outcome. I S
In a decision theoretic framework, a change in the probability
estimates of the other party would not affect the players' actions. For
example, if Player 2 changed her estimate of the probability of Player
1 choosing R, this would only affect her choice of action. There is no
way it can affect Player l 's decision calculus. This is because the two
players are not considering the strategic interaction between the two
parties. A mixed strategy, then, explicitly takes into account the
choices of the other players. On the other hand, a decision theoretic
framework does not make these connections between players.
Conclusion
In this chapter, we have presented a case for why one should not use
decision theory in situations that are clearly game theoretic. It has
been argued that different results would be predicted depending on
which method one was to use. We provided examples of this differ­
ence both abstractly and by examining Rohde's theory of risk takers.
In our analysis of Rohde's hypotheses, our move to game theory
yielded mixed results . With respect to one hypothesis, Rohde's deci­
sion theoretic framework overstated his case; in the other, it actually
understated the case.
1 5 . I f Player 2 moved to R , Player 1 would react by abandoning his mixed strategy
and choosing L. Of course , {L ,R} is one of the two mixed Nash equilibria.

--- Sayfa 92 ---
Strategic Choice and Progressive Ambition
8 1
The goal of this chapter, however, was not to criticize his work.
Our goals were to show that ( 1 ) one gets different results if decision
theory is used to examine a situation of strategic interdependence
instead of game theory; and (2) the results yielded by the game theo­
retic approach in these situations are more reasonable. Did we satisfy
these goals? Our results do vary from those derived from Rohde's
decision theoretic focus. Thus, condition number one is met. How­
ever, little support for goal number two has been given. This results
not from the appropriateness of the technique as much as from the
operationalization of the variables .
The reader should note that the models presented in this chapter
are very simplistic. For instance, how likely is it that the players in
this game will move simultaneously or that they will know with
certainty who will win the election? These topics will be addressed in
the next two chapters. Chapter 4 considers the problem of simul­
taneous versus sequential moves while chapter 5 addresses the ques­
tion of incomplete information. After presenting that material, we will
revisit this problem of electoral risk bearing with a more complete
model in chapter 6. In developing this model, we will also show how
Rohde's hypotheses are consistent with it.

--- Sayfa 94 ---
C H APTER 4
Dynamic Games and the Politics
of International Trade : An Examination
of Conybeare's Trade Wars
Introduction
In this chapter we examine how game theory has been applied to the
analysis of trade wars. Continuing with the theme of our book, we
emphasize how game theoretic models can be used to model political
phenomena with parsimony. John Conybeare has written an intriguing
book entitled Trade Wars (1987) I which analyzes issues of interna­
tional trade. Expanding his analysis, we show how topics that he
addressed but did not explicitly model can be modeled directly. Cony­
beare often relies on factors not related to the games he has developed
to explain the strategic interactions between nations engaged in trade
conflict. He frequently turns to non-game theoretic solutions to an­
swer the substantive questions he asks. We show how these explana­
tions can be reached completely within the context of a game theoretic
framework. In no way do we take issue with the substantive conclu­
sions presented in this fascinating book. Rather, we mean to extend
Conybeare's rich analysis and provide an introduction to a variety of
game theoretic modeling techniques.
This chapter consists of two parts. In the first we look at dynamic
games as opposed to static games. How do players move within a
game? Does it make a difference whether players move simultane­
ously or sequentially? If the moves are sequential, how does order of
choice affect outcomes? What happens if the game is repeated? The
second part of the chapter examines N-player games. How do N­
player games compare with two-player games? We answer these ques­
tions by focusing on the strategic aspects of trade policy.
Conybeare's Analysis of International Trade
Conybeare analyzes one of the most salient issues in political econ­
omy, conflict and cooperation over international trade. Lobbying pres-
1 . The full title is Trade Wars: The Theory and Practice of International Commer­
cial Rivalry (1987).
83

--- Sayfa 95 ---
84
Games, Information, and Politics
sure against free trade seems to be growing annually. The practice of
economic brinkmanship is now so widespread that the future of insti­
tutions such as General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) are
called into question. Yet, we also have seen the evolution of the
European Union (EU) and the creation of the North American Free
Trade Agreement (NAFfA), which seem to demonstrate that coopera­
tion is still possible. What are the prospects for international eco­
nomic policy coordination? To answer this question, Conybeare ex­
amines the total breakdown of economic cooperation, trade war. One
of Conybeare's fundamental assumptions is that trade wars are the
product of strategic interactions between countries. His primary ana­
lytical emphasis is on bilateral conflict. This bilateral focus allows
Conybeare to move from traditional microeconomic models of inter­
national trade to strategic games. The central difference between tra­
ditional models of international trade and game theoretic models of
trade conflict revolves around the assumptions of perfectly competi­
tive markets in which countries must be price takers. Microeconomic
models of trade decisions in such an environment possess the charac­
teristics of decision theory. The essential assumption of such models
is that one country's actions do not affect others. Offering an alterna­
tive perspective, Conybeare models situations in which countries stra­
tegically interact. Game theory is most appropriate for the analysis of
how nations strategically choose their trade policy. In this way, chap­
ter 3 of our book echoes one of Conybeare's central points: trade wars
are inherently strategic and are most appropriately modeled as games.
The central feature distinguishing each of his games is nation
size. By size, Conybeare is specifically referring to import price elas­
ticities in respective countries. Large countries face relatively higher
import price elasticities while small countries are more at the mercy of
the (international) market, facing low import price elasticities. While
the correlation between size, as defined in terms of national income
ratios and import price elasticity, is far from perfect, it is high. Size is
directly related to the game structure through the determination of the
payoffs. Conybeare operationalizes payoffs as products of revenue
and balance of trade as affected by import price elasticities. We utilize
this basic framework throughout this chapter. We differ with Cony­
beare when he draws on non-game theoretic explanations (cognitive
aspects of bargaining, political linkages, and domestic politics) to
address perceived model specification problems associated with his
games. Our principal argument is that Conybeare does not have to rely
on these extra-game theoretic concepts. By drawing on more sophis­
ticated game theoretic modeling techniques we can address most of

--- Sayfa 96 ---
Dynamic Games and the Politics of International Trade
85
the problems and inconsistencies that so trouble Conybeare. We have
the technology. We can build it. We can develop consistent, parsi­
monious models based on a consistent set of assumptions and analyti­
cal techniques.
Conybeare, reflecting most of the discipline of political science,
focuses his game theoretic analysis on the use of several 2 x 2 strategic
(matrix) fonn games, including Prisoners' Dilemma, Chicken, Stag
Hunt, and Deadlock.2 Chapter 2 provides a careful and detailed pre­
sentation of the structure and equilibria of these types of games. In
this chapter we focus on how these games are applied to a political
situation, international trade conflict. After presenting Conybeare's
analysis, we reexamine international trade and conflict through the
use of extensive form games and N-person games.
Conybeare draws on the Prisoners' Dilemma, Chicken, Dead­
lock, and Stag Hunt games to model aspects of trade cooperation and
conflict. As applied to bilateral trade conflicts, these three two-player
games involve two states (X,y) which choose to either cooperate (C,
not to impose a tariff) or defect CD , to impose a tariff). Arranged in a
matrix, these choices of strategies produce four possible outcomes:
CxCy, DxDy, CxDy, CyDx. The general form of this game is pre­
sented in matrix 12. Arranging these payoffs ordinally defines these
four games. Prisoners' Dilemma (matrix 1 3) is defined by an ordinal
ranking for nation-state X of DXCy > CxCy > DXDy > CxDy. The
Chicken game (matrix 14) is defined by an ordinal ranking for player
X of DxCy > CxCy > CxDy > DXDy, where mutual defection leads
to a disastrous outcome for both players. Stag Hunt (matrix 1 5) is
defined by CxCy > DXCy > DxDy > CxDy as arranged ordinally for
country X, where one would expect to see mutual cooperation as long
as players possess complete information and this payoff ordering does
not change. Deadlock (matrix 16) occurs when DxCy > DXDy >
CxCy > CxDy. The dominant strategy here, as with the Prisoners'
Dilemma, is defection. This, in turn, leads to a mutual defection
equilibrium, but one in which the outcome provides all players with a
higher payoff than does mutual cooperation.
As was discussed in chapter 2, the equilibrium for the Prisoners'
Dilemma game is mutual defection. While both players get higher
payoffs from mutual cooperation than from mutual defection, there is
no incentive for either player unilaterally to alter his or her choice
from mutual defection. The game of Chicken, in which mutual defec-
2. For example, a whole issue of World Politics ( 1 985) focused on the applications
of Prisoners' Dilemma in international relations. Our book aims to broaden the set of game
theoretic tools used in political science.

--- Sayfa 97 ---
86
Games, Information , and Politics
C
t
oopera e
Cooperate
CX,Cy
x
Defect
Dx,Cy
y
D £
e ect
Cx,Dy
Dx,Dy
Matrix 12. The general form of the two-player, simultaneous move
game
tion is least preferred, is characterized by two pure-strategy equilibria
{cooperate, defect} and {defect, cooperate}, and a mixed strategy
equilibrium.3 Stag Hunt, on the other hand, possesses an equilibrium
of mutual cooperation.
Each of these games are two-player, single-shot games with si­
multaneous moves. Actually, these games do not have to involve
simultaneous play as long as each player does not know how another
player has moved. We characterize games in which a player must
make a move without knowing the full history of the game as contests
of complete and imperfect information. Recall from chapter 2, perfect
information means that all players know the full history of the game
when they make their choices . Any game with simultaneous choice
requires the players to make a decision without knowing how the
other player has moved and is therefore a game of imperfect informa­
tion. Such games of complete and imperfect information take the
following form.
1 . Players X and Y simultaneously select actions. Player X
chooses ax from the feasible set of Ax while Y chooses ay from
the feasible set Ay.
2. Payoffs are ux(ax, ay) and uy{ax, ay).
The emphasis now is on imperfect information and the requirement
that players must make decisions without knowing how other players
have moved. As is evident in the preceding discussion, as payoffs
vary across these different two-player, one-shot games , the equilibria
change.
Using this game theoretic framework, Conybeare ( 1 987, 44-45)
3 . Please refer to our discussion of mixed strategy equilibria in chapter 2.

--- Sayfa 98 ---
x
Dynamic Games and the Politics of InternationaL Trade
87
y
C
t
oopera e
D fi t
e ec
Cooperate
3,3
1,4
Defect
4,1
2,2
Matrix 13. Prisoners' Dilemma
derives three hypotheses regarding bilateral trade wars. These hypoth­
eses involve games between two large countries, two small countries,
and asymmetric conflict between a large and a small country.
1 . In a trade conflict between two large countries, the payoff
ordering reflects a Prisoners' Dilemma game. Given this game
structure, each country has a dominant strategy to defect.
These strategic choices lead to an equilibrium of mutual defec­
tion, an outcome that provides lower payoffs for both players
than does mutual cooperation. 4
2. Two small countries in a trade conflict face a game with a
payoff ordering that combines the games of Chicken and Stag
Hunt. The payoffs are ordered from best to worst, from mutual
cooperation (CxCy), to unilateral defection (DXCy), to uni­
lateral cooperation (CxDy), to mutual defection (DxDy). Co­
operation here is the dominant strategy for both players, lead­
ing to an equilibrium of mutual cooperation in the Hybrid
Chicken-Stag Hunt game.
3 . Asymmetric conflict between a large and small country is de­
fined by the small country facing a payoff ordering resembling
the Hybrid Chicken-Stag Hunt game played between two
small countries while the large country plays Deadlock. This
asymmetric trade conflict game is characterized by an equilib­
rium of unilateral cooperation by the small country (CxDy) in
which the small country is X and the large country is Y.
Let us examine each of these games played between two players
involving single play with imperfect information. Subsequently we
4. Conybeare's discussion regarding the implications of iterating the game is sum­
marized later in this chapter.

--- Sayfa 99 ---
88
Games, Information, and Politics
C ooperate
Cooperate
3,3
x
Defect
4,2
y
Matrix 1 4. Chicken
D fi
e ect
2,4
1, 1
examine each of these games under finitely repeated, infinitely re­
peated, sequential choice (perfect and complete information), and
N-player conditions. The one-shot Prisoners' Dilemma is described
above. Matrix 1 7 portrays the game played between two small coun­
tries, the hybrid Chicken-Stag Hunt game. The matrix demonstrates
the propensity for a mutual cooperation outcome of this game. In light
of this game we do not expect to see trade wars emerge between two
small countries. This game addresses bilateral trade conflict between
two countries of relatively equal size.
Conybeare also discusses asymmetric conflict that can take place
between large and small countries. In such a situation, small countries
(X) face a payoff ordering of CxCy > DxCy > CXDy > DxDy, while a
large country's (Y's) preference ordering for payoffs is DyCx > DyDX
> CyCx > CyDx. In such a situation, a small country only hurts itself
by implementing a tariff. It cannot alter its terms of trade. The large
country, on the other hand, unconditionally prefers defection, regard­
less of what the small country does. As a result of these preferences,
DyC x (large country defects, small country cooperates) is the ex-
y
C
t
oopera e
D fi
t
e ec
Cooperate
4,4
1,3
x
Defect
3 , 1
2,2
Matrix 15. Stag Hunt

--- Sayfa 100 ---
x
Dynamic Games and the Politics of International Trade
89
y
C
t
oopera e
D fi
t
e ec
Cooperate
2,2
1 ,4
Defect
4, 1
3,3
Matrix 16. Deadlock
pee ted result. This asymmetric game is portrayed in matrix 1 8 . In the
environment of these two-player simultaneous choice (imperfect in­
fonnation) games, we can expect trade wars between two large coun­
tries, no trade conflict between two small countries, and exploitation
of a small country by a large country.
What substantive conclusions can be drawn from Conybeare's
analysis? Under game theoretic conditions of single play with com­
plete and imperfect infonnation we can assess each hypothesis in tum.
Regarding Hypothesis 1 , big countries will fight trade wars. The
characteristics of the Prisoners' Dilemma game make mutual defec­
tion the equilibrium. Hypothesis 2 points to the opposite conclusion
for two small countries. The equilibrium for the Hybrid Chicken-Stag
Hunt game is mutual cooperation with single play and imperfect infor­
mation. Hypothesis 3 involves an Asymmetric Trade game between a
large and small country. In this situation, the large country's dominant
strategy to defect forces a small country to acquiesce. These conclu­
sions stand under the game theoretic conditions of two-player, single­
play games with imperfect and complete infonnation. Conybeare's
y
C
t
oopera e
D fi
e ect
Cooperate
4,4
2,3
x
Defect
3,2
1, 1
Matrix 17. Hybrid Chicken- Stag Hunt

--- Sayfa 101 ---
90
Games, Information, and Politics
C
t
oopera e
Cooperate
4,2
x
Defect
3, 1
y
D £
e ect
2,4
1 ,3
Matrix 18. Asymmetric Trade
formal analysis is limited to these conditions. In the subsequent sec­
tions of this chapter, we examine Conybeare's three hypotheses in
light of different game theoretic conditions. We first relax the single­
play condition and examine repeated games.
Dynamic Games of Trade
Repeated Games of Trade
In the spirit of this book, Conybeare finds these simple models inade­
quate for explaining trade conflict. He extends his analysis by examin­
ing how these game structures are affected by iteration. In other
words, how are one-shot and repeated games different? Making refer­
ence to a variety of works, Conybeare posits that iteration increases
the prospects for mutual cooperation (free trade) for Prisoners' Di­
lemma, Stag Hunt, and Chicken.5 We can reasonably assume that
economic interactions cannot be restricted to single plays; such games
are almost always ongoing, repeated over long periods of time. Re­
peated games thus provide a more accurate modeling base for model­
ing trade wars. Let us further examine Conybeare's insight. Does
iteration allow mutual cooperation to be achieved more easily?
Finitely Repeated Games
What happens if these games are repeated finitely? If you know you
will face a player again in the future, do you alter your behavior? How
--
-
- -------- Ąą-
5 . Actually, Stag Hunt should produce mutual cooperation in either a one-shot or a
repeated game environment.

--- Sayfa 102 ---
Dynamic Games and the Politics of International Trade
9 1
are repeated games different from single-shot games? In this section
we restrict our attention to two-period games. Suppose two nations
play the imperfect information (simultaneous play) game twice, mov­
ing in the second round knowing what happened in the first round.
Such a game is referred to as a two-stage game of complete but
imperfect information. Consider the two-period Prisoners' Dilemma
game. To solve this game, we work backward from stage 2 to stage l .
The equilibrium at the second stage of this game is the same as that of
any other Prisoners' Dilemma game, mutual defection. This equilib­
rium holds regardless of the outcome of the first round. As a result,
the first stage of the two-period Prisoners' Dilemma game resembles a
one-shot game. Thus, the outcome of the two-stage Prisoners' Di­
lemma game is DxDy in the first stage and DxDy in the second stage.
In fact, the outcome is mutual defection throughout.
The one-shot equilibrium holds across finitely repeated games
generally as long as the game possesses a unique Nash equilibrium.
The basic form of a finitely repeated game with complete and imper­
fect information (a game with simultaneous moves) takes the follow­
ing form.
1 . Players X and Y simultaneously select actions. Player X
chooses ax from the feasible set of Ax while Y chooses ay
1
1
1
from the feasible set Ay .
I
2. Players X and Y observe ax and ay from stage one of the
I
I
game and then simultaneously select actions ax and ay from
2
2
the feasible sets Ax and Ax .
2
2
3. Payoffs are ux(ax , ay ) and uy(ax , ay ) for one stage of the
I
1
1
1
game. Payoffs for the game are the sum of payoffs from each
stage of the game.
If a unique Nash equilibrium holds for the single-shot version of a
game, it will hold for all stages of a finitely repeated game. The
principle that worked for the two-stage Prisoners' Dilemma game
holds across other games with a single equilibrium.6 Given that the
payoffs for the game are the sum of all stages of the game, a single
equilibrium that holds for one stage applies to the finitely repeated
game for all stages.
6. This condition does not hold for games with more than one equilibrium. Take, for
example, the game of Chicken. Repeat Chicken for two rounds and nine equilibria are
possible. These equilibria are the possible combinations of (cooperate, defect), (defect,
cooperate), and the game's mixed strategy equilibrium.

--- Sayfa 103 ---
92
Games, Infonnation, and Politics
What are the implications of finitely repeating the games pre­
sented by Conybeare? All three of these games, Prisoners' Dilemma,
Hybrid Chicken-Stag Hunt, and Asymmetric Trade, possess unique
equilibria. Repeating these games a finite number of times does not
alter the outcome; the equilibria remain unchanged.
In his discussion of the Asymmetric Trade game, Conybeare
makes reference to a small country credibly threatening to hurt it­
self in order to induce a big country to cooperate. A paradox arises
similar to that of the Chain Store paradox.7 The Chain Store paradox
derives from Selten's Chain Store game in which a chain store faces
potential competitors in several different towns who must decide
whether or not to enter the market. In tum, the chain store must decide
whether or not to engage in a price war with any entrant. For a single
round of the game the utility maximizing choice for the chain store is
to acquiesce and not engage in a price war intended to drive the
entrant out of business. The equilibrium set of strategies is {enter,
acquiesce}. The paradox is that if the game is repeated finitely the
chain store would be better off having deterred subsequent market
entry by driving early entrants out of business. The paradox involves
the apparent conflict that seems to emerge between short-run and
long-run self-interest. 8 In terms of the Asymmetric Trade game, this
short-termllong-term paradox revolves around a small country's at­
tempt to establish a credible threat. In the short run the small country
is better off unilaterally cooperating, allowing the large country to
exploit the situation. In the long run the small country would be better
off convincing the large country that it is willing hurt itself to insure
cooperation. For the time being, however, the result of the finitely
repeated game holds; the equilibria for the finitely repeated Asymmet­
ric Trade game is unilateral cooperation by the small country.
How do Conybeare's hypotheses fare under these game theoretic
conditions? Examining these hypotheses with two-player, finite play
games with complete and imperfect information, we see Conybeare's
conclusions unaffected. Each of the games associated with hypotheses
1 , 2, and 3 possess a single equilibrium in the single play. Given these
unique equilibria the finitely repeated versions of these games possess
the same equilibria as do the single-play games.
7. See Selten 1978.
8. The problem with this paradox is that it is an artifact of the game structure.
Incomplete information games (to be discussed in the next chapter) better address these
issues. We will elaborate on this discussion in the sections of this chapter concerned with
sequential choice games and N-player games.

--- Sayfa 104 ---
Dynamic Games and the Politics of International Trade
93
Infinitely Repeated Games
We have seen what happens when a game is repeated finitely. What
happens when there is no clear end to a game? International economic
relations such as trade should be considered to be infinitely repeating.
Trade relations are rarely (if ever) considered to be terminal . Any
model of trade relations should take this into account. Conybeare does
discuss the implications of repeating his games, but he provides no
formal analysis. We formalize his argument here.
Central to any discussion of infinitely repeated games is the Folk
Theorem (Rasmusen 1989, 92).9 In an infinitely repeated N­
person game with finite action sets at each repetition, any com­
bination of actions observed in any finite number of repetitions
is the unique outcome of some subgame perfect equilibrium
given
Condition 1 : The rate of time preference is zero, or positive
and sufficiently small.
Condition 2: The probability that the game ends at any repeti­
tion is zero, or positive and sufficiently small.
Condition 3: The set of payoff combinations that strictly
Pareto-dominate the minimax payoff combinationsIO in the
mixed extension of the one-shot game is n-dimensional. I I
9. The reference to the Folk Theorem is analogous to a traditional folk song; we
ascribe its origins to no single author. The result of the Folk Theorem was widely known
among game theorists as far back as the 1950s, despite the fact that no one had published it.
Friedman ( 1 97 1 ) deserves specific mention, however. His refinement of the Folk Theorem
involving subgame perfect equilibria is noteworthy. Actually, ours is one of many versions
of the folk theorem. See chapter 2 for a more intuitive version.
10. The strategy s* i is a set of (n - I) minimax strategies chosen by all the players
except i to keep i's payoff as low as possible, regardless of how he responds (Rassmusen
1 989, 1 04). Pareto domination implies that a set of payoff combinations provides greater
utility to at least one player and gives no player lower utility than any other payoff combina­
tion .
II. The latter condition is one that applies to games in which there are three or more
players. At this point in the chapter we are only dealing with two-player games. We deal
with the ramifications of this third condition later, in discussing N-player games . See
Rasmuscn 1 989 (92-93, 1 03A), Aumann 1 98 1 ( 1 2- 1 3), and Fudcnbcrg and Maskin 1 986
for a discussion of the Folk Theorem .

--- Sayfa 105 ---
94
Games , Information, and Politics
In order to understand the implications of this theorem as applied to
infinitely repeated games, we need to break it down into its constitu­
ent parts.
First, Condition 1 concerns the type of discount parameter being
used. If the rate of time preference is zero, this means that the individ­
ual considers payoffs gained in one period of the game to be equal to
the same payoffs gained in another period. In other words, the player
does not value the present over the future. This rate is restricted to
being zero or positive and sufficiently small to rule out two situations.
The first is a perverse case in which individuals prefer future out­
comes over past outcomes-in other words, their rate of time prefer­
ence is negative. The second is a case in which an individual's time
preference is very large. In this situation, future plays of the game
may have no impact on individuals' current actions because they value
the future so very little. Thus, the Folk Theorem holds when the
future matters to the player in a nonperverse manner. The essential
characteristic of this condition is that future play of the game is
important to the players. If players do not value the payoffs from
future games, they will play each stage of an infinitely repeated game
as if it were a single-shot game.
Second, Condition 2 considers the probability of the game con­
tinuing. If a player knows that this is the last period of the game, then
she may choose a different strategy since she realizes that she will not
be receiving any further payoffs from this interaction. Regardless of
her rate of time preference and her beliefs about how her action might
affect the future actions of others, the individual will choose her best
strategy with the constituent game. Thus, the Folk Theorem holds
when players believe that their interaction will continue. The essential
characteristic of this condition is that players do not know when the
final game comes and cannot see it approaching. If there is a per­
ceived end to the game, the Folk Theorem does not apply, and the
characteristics of finitely repeated games hold.
The Folk Theorem posits that if a game is infinitely repeated
many combinations of strategies are in equilibrium. Given that
players value the payoffs of future games and believe that the game is
ongoing, many sets of choices made by a player will be in equilib­
rium. This indeterminacy needs to be stressed. A large number of
political scientists have argued that by infinitely repeating a game the
new equilibrium is mutual cooperation. While mutual cooperation is
one possible equilibrium, it is only one of many possible equilibria.
Specfically, the Nash equilibria of the constituent game are always
equilibria of the infinitely repeated game. Hence, mutual defection in

--- Sayfa 106 ---
Dynamic Games and the Politics of International Trade
95
the Prisoners' Dilemma game is still an equilibrium when infinitely
repeated.
How does the Folk Theorem affect Conybeare's three trade
games? We tum first to the Prisoners' Dilemma game. Shubik ( 1970),
Taylor (1976, 1987), and Axelrod ( 1980a, 1980b, 198 1 , 1984) have
introduced political scientists to the infinitely iterated Prisoners' Di­
lemma. Conybeare draws on Axelrod in particular. In Axelrod's for­
mulation of the infinitely repeated Prisoners' Dilemma, cooperation
may or may not emerge, depending on the importance each player
places on future payoffs or, in other words, the manner in which the
players discount the utility of the outcomes of future actions. Since
mutual cooperation provides both players with higher payoffs than
does mutual defection, we can expect to see players choose coopera­
tion over defection if the conditions of the Folk Theorem hold. Mutual
cooperation, however, is not the only equilibrium strategy. Ongoing
trade relations between large countries could lead to mutual coopera­
tion.
The indeterminant results of the Folk Theorem also apply to an
infinitely iterated Hybrid Chicken-Stag Hunt game. While mutual
cooperation is the equilibrium of the single-shot game, if the Folk
Theorem holds, other combinations of strategies are also in equilib­
rium. Nevertheless, we can expect players to continue to choose mu­
tual cooperation since it is pareto efficient to alternatives. Ongoing
trade relations between small countries most likely will continue to
remain cooperative.
How does the Folk Theorem affect the Asymmetric Trade game?
While there is an indeterminacy to results of this game when infinitely
repeated, as long as the large country possesses complete information
a small country cannot credibly deter the large country from exploit­
ing its situation. Without the ability to credibly deter a large country,
the best the small country can do is continue unilaterally to cooperate;
the outcome is no different than if the game were played once.
Games of Sequential Choice
Up to this point we have only used 2 x 2 matrix games involving
simultaneous choice (complete and imperfect information) between
two countries. There are, however, some problems with modeling
trade conflict using simple matrix form games. The most obvious is
that this approach neglects the fact that nations involved in trade
disputes do not necessarily act simultaneously, without knowing the
history of play between the two countries. In most cases, one nation

--- Sayfa 107 ---
96
Games , Information, and Politics
moves first and another reacts to this initial action, knowing full well
what the other has done. However, these simple matrix games,
whether Prisoners' Dilemma, Chicken, Stag Hunt, Hybrid Chicken­
Stag Hunt, or Asymmetric Trade, do not take sequence into account.
In fact, the matrix presentation of this game disregards all information
concerning the sequence of moves and the information revealed as
players move. For example, if country X implements an import tariff
on a specific good exported by country Y, country Y reacts knowing
what action country X has taken. The choices made by these two
players are sequential. This sequence is not modeled in this represen­
tation of the game. Thus, the rules of the game become obscured. In
this form of the trade game:
Strategies are now regarded not as complex sets of instructions
but as abstract objects to be manipulated formally, without regard
for their meaning. The outcomes or payoffs can now be given in
tabular form or in mathematical formulas that may not reveal
anything about the original extensive-form rules. It can be an
interesting puzzle in cryptographic detection to try to infer the
most likely information conditions, number of moves, and other
elements of a game that is given in its strategic (matrix) form.
(Shubik 1982, 67)
Simple matrix games do, however, offer some advantages. The
most important of these is that they provide simple metaphors or
analogies for us to use to describe political interactions. The Pris­
oners' Dilemma, Chicken, and Stag Hunt games have been used by
many scholars in a productive manner in order to understand various
political situations. While these games may not perfectly describe a
situation, they do provide a first step in understanding social interac­
tions. Conybeare's work fits this description. He offers an insightful
view of the strategic aspects of international trade conflict and cooper­
ation.
On the other hand, if we can explicitly model a situation more
realistically there may be good reason to do so. Of course, any model
involves simplification and parsimony, which should be a goal for any
modeler. Nevertheless, Conybeare himself points to the need to con­
sider the sequence of events. In the remainder of this section we
present Conybeare's models in forms that take into account the se­
quential aspects of decision making in games with imperfect informa­
tion.
An alternative form of modeling is through sequential choice or

--- Sayfa 108 ---
Dynamic Games and the Politics of International Trade
97
Stackelberg games. These games are characterized by complete and
perfect information, where all the players know the history of the
game and all relevant payoffs. The basic form of a dynamic game with
complete and perfect information takes the following form.
1 . Player X chooses an action ax from the feasible set Ax.
2. Player Y observes ax and then selects an action ay from the
feasible set Ay.
3. Payoffs are ux(ax, ay) and uy(ax, ay).
Such games possess three important characteristics: players' moves
take place in sequence, all previous moves are observed before the
next move is chosen, and players possess common knowledge about
the payoffs. Such games are easily portrayed in the extensive form as
a game tree (see figure 8). This approach is very flexible in that it can
be used to model sequential decisions as well as problems of incom­
plete and imperfect information. The sequence of play is explicitly
portrayed and can easily be seen in this form of game. The extensive
form is also quite versatile. It can be used to model decisions in
environments of perfect and complete information or under imperfect
or incomplete information. In this section, we examine the extensive
form, or dynamic games, under conditions of complete and perfect
information and compare them to games of complete and imperfect
information.
Conybeare points to the need to take such dynamics of choice
into account: "Trade games cannot be treated as if they were static,
with all the moves occurring in real time (i.e. , all at once). A general
theory of bilateral trade wars must presume that trade games are
invariably iterated, in the sense that moves occur sequentially and
players may have an opportunity to communicate, observe each
others' behavior, change their own behavior, and possibly contrive
enforceable agreements" (38). The problem is that these possibilities
are not explicitly modeled by Conybeare. Dynamic sequential choice
games provide the means for modeling sequential as well as repeated
games.
How does sequential choice affect Conybeare's three models of
trade conflict? To more completely answer this question we introduce
the concepts of backwards induction and subgame perfect equilib­
rium. The notion of subgame perfectness is an equilibrium concept
that is intrinsically linked to the extensive form game. We introduce
this concept by examining a Prisoners' Dilemma game involving se­
quential choice . This game is characterized by complete and perfect

--- Sayfa 109 ---
98
Games, Information , and Politics
CxDy
DxCy
Fig. 8. The general extensive form of the two-player, single-play
game
information (models of incomplete information are presented in chap­
ter 5). Turn to figure 9; this figure depicts country X moving first,
deciding whether to cooperate or defect. Country Y reacts to X's
choice, also choosing between cooperation and defection. We can
solve this game by following a procedure referred to as backwards
induction. Look at the payoffs at the end of each branch of the game
tree. Now compare those payoffs associated with branches that are
connected by the most recent decision node. In this case we compare
the C xC y branch with the C XDy branch payoffs and the DxC y branch
with the DXDy branch. For each comparison, select the branch that
produces the highest payoff for the player making the decision at the
nearest node; in the case of the Prisoners' Dilemma this is C XDy,
associated with a payoff of 4 for Y, and DXDy, which gives Y a payoff
of 2. Next we move up to X's decision node. With complete and
perfect information, X knows that Y will make choices that lead to the
highest payoffs. Given this knowledge, X compares the payoffs asso­
ciated with cooperation and defection, which are respectively deter­
mined by y's decision to defect at each of these decision nodes. Faced
with this choice, X chooses defect over cooperation.
Stackelberg equilibrium refers to the leader-follower aspects of
sequential (perfect information) rather than simultaneous-move (im­
perfect information) games. As discussed above, sequentially played
games sometimes have multiple Nash equilibria; often only one of
these Nash equilibria can be determined through backwards induction.
Stackelberg equilibrium implies sequential moves as well as a refine­
ment of the Nash equilibrium concept. Stackelberg equilibria are a
conceptual subset of the more general equilibrium concept of sub-

--- Sayfa 110 ---
Dynamic Games and the Politics of International Trade
99
3,3
1,4
4, 1
2,2
Fig. 9. Extensive form representation of Prisoners' Dilemma
game perfect equilibrium. 12 Mutual defection is the subgame perfect
equilibrium for the sequential choice Prisoners' Dilemma game. This
game possesses three subgames: ( 1 ) the entire game, starting from the
node where X makes its decisions and all subsequent choices made by
Y; (2) the subgame starting at V's decision node following X's cooper­
ation path; and (3) the subgame starting at V's decision node following
X's defection path. Subgame perfect equilibria take the history of a
game into account by tracing the paths of the game tree through
backwards induction; the basic rule is that all subgame perfect equi­
libria lie along the equilibrium path so that all equilibria make sense.
It should be pointed out that all the information contained in an
extensive form game can be portrayed in matrix form; it is simply
awkward for analysis. The reader should not conclude that matrix
form games are only applicable to simultaneous choice games or that
those only involving imperfect information and extensive form games
are best for dynamic games with perfect information (see matrix 19).
This matrix represents the extensive form game of figure 9 in matrix
form. In a game such as that portrayed in figure 9 we can see that
player Y has four strategies but two actions, since there are four
contingencies. After observing player X's move, player Y chooses
between two actions after player X has made a choice between two
actions. These four strategies can be represented as eyey , C,Dy,
Dyey , and DVDy . cve)' represents player V's decision to cooperate if
player X has chosen to cooperate and to cooperate if player X has
chosen to defect. C\Dv represents player V's decision to cooperate if
player X cooperates and to defect if player X defects. Dyey occurs
1 2 . See chapter 2 for a discussion of subgame perfect equilibria.

--- Sayfa 111 ---
1 00
Games, Information , and Politics
CyCy
x
Cx
3,3
Dx
4,1
y
CyDy
DyCy
DyDy
3,3
1,4
1,4
2,2
4, 1
2,2
Matrix 19. Matrix form of two-player, sequential move Prisoners'
Dilemma
when player Y defects if player X cooperates and cooperates if player
X defects. D)Dy , on the other hand, represents player Y's decision to
defect if player X has chosen to cooperate and to defect if player X
defects. Player X has only two strategies and two actions, since there
is only one contingency for player X, the opening move. The payoffs
are derived from figure 9, matching player Y's strategy to the contin­
gency based on player X's choice. Hence, the combination of strate­
gies, (cooperate, C\,CJ is associated with a payoff of (3 ,3) while
(defect, C"CJ is associated with a payoff of (4, I ). With the CyCy
strategy, player Y cooperates whether player X chooses to cooperate
or defect. While we can represent a sequentially played game in
matrix form it is awkward to analyze. The extensive form will be used
from now on to portray games of imperfect and complete information
as well as games of incomplete information (to be presented in chap­
ter 5).
For all three games, Prisoners' Dilemma, Hybrid Chicken-Stag
Hunt (fig. 1 0), and Asymmetric Trade (fig. 1 1 ), sequential choice and
simultaneous outcomes are the same. All three of Conybeare's hy­
potheses remain unaffected in this game environment. Nevertheless,
we want to emphasize that we get the same results relying exclusively
on game theory. We do not need to rely on ad hoc non-game theoretic
explanations. These results, moreover, have special relevance to the
Asymmetric Trade game. Do sequential choices make it more tempt­
ing for a smal l country to attempt to deter a large country from
defecting? Not as long as there is a likely end to the game. As long as
there is a final decision node, large countries will always defect.
Given this information, a small country will only punish itself by
choosing to cooperate at the first node of the game. Assuming that it
seeks to maximize its payoff, a small country in an Asymmetric Trade
game will cooperate even when moving first in a sequential choice
game to avoid what it regards as the disastrous outcome of mutual
defection.

--- Sayfa 112 ---
Dynamic Games and the Politics of International Trade
101
4,4
2 ,3
3,2
1 , 1
Fig. 1 0. Extensive form representation of Hybrid Chicken- Stag
Hunt
When does sequential choice make a difference? It makes a dif­
ference when a simultaneous choice or (imperfect information) game
possesses a mixed strategy equilibrium. Such a game is Chicken. In
such a game under simultaneous choice conditions, players mix their
choices across cooperation and defection according to expected payoff
calculations. In the sequential form, no mixing takes place (see fig.
12). The player who chooses first is allowed to dictate the options to
the player choosing later. In this case the first player can defect first,
forcing the second player to unilaterally cooperate. Given complete
and perfect information, the first player knows that the second player
will choose cooperation to avoid the disaster of mutual defection.
Sequential choice guarantees that mutual defection is avoided, but it
also puts the player choosing second always in an unfavorable posi­
tion. Sequential decisions only make a difference when there is no
pure strategy equilibrium or more than one pure strategy equilib­
rium. 13
Just as we demonstrated above how a sequential game can be
portrayed in matrix form, a simultaneous choice game (or, more pre­
cisely, a game of imperfect information) can be represented in the
extensive form. Figure 1 3 is an extensive form game of Chicken with
imperfect information. The dashed line connecting the two-player Y
decision nodes represents the information set containing both contin­
gencies involving player X's choices.
While Conybeare's hypotheses are not affected by making these
games sequential with perfect and complete information, as opposed
1 3 . This also assumes finite plays.

--- Sayfa 113 ---
102
Games , Information , and Politics
4,2
2,4
3, 1
1,3
Fig. 1 1 . Extensive form representation of Asymmetric Trade
to simultaneous choice involving imperfect and complete information,
these can be extremely important distinctions for many games. Our
modeling approach more precisely follows Conybeare's own discus­
sion. In this manner, we take advantage of the strengths of game
theory. We have provided an alternative approach to modeling these
games relying exclusively on game theory.
N-Player Games of Trade
So far we have only dealt with games involving two players. Yet many
strategic situations arise in which more than two players are involved.
Due to the nature of international economic relations, many players
are often involved. Multilateral agreements play a particularly promi-
3,3
2,4
4,2
1 , 1
Fig. 12. Extensive form representation of Chicken

--- Sayfa 114 ---
Dynamic Games and the Politics of International Trade
1 03
3,3
2,4
4,2
1 , 1
Fig. 1 3. Extensive form representation of Chicken with imperfect
information
nent role in international trade. What happens when additional people
are added to the strategic interaction? Do additional players make a
difference? Yes, additional players do make a difference. John von
Neumann and Oskar Morgenstern (1944) note how additional players
can substantially affect a game. Include an infinite number of players
and a noncooperative game resembles N-player maximization prob­
lems solved simultaneously. Each player treats all other players as part
of the broader environment. In microeconomics we see such behavior
in perfectly competitive markets. Many-player games are charac­
terized by limiting properties, wherein every player calculates his or
her expected utility in the manner described in chapter 3 regarding
decision theory. Multilateral trade relations, however, cannot always
be characterized as many-player games (or indeterminantly large
N-player games). Such multilateral arrangements involve a small
number of (but more than two) players. Such games characterize
oligopolistic markets, political coalitions, cartels, and multilateral ne­
gotiations and agreements. In this section we focus on this variety of
N-player games (small-number as opposed to many player games).
All involve three or more players .
Conybeare devotes considerable attention to "large-number trade
wars." He emphasizes that free trade cannot be characterized as a
public good. Conybeare persuasively argues that free trade is exclud­
able and rival and further asserts that his basic game structures stand.
Conybeare, however, offers no formal model of N-player games. In
this section of this chapter, we formally present some N-player games
and provide a theoretical base to support Conybeare's hypotheses in
an N-player environment (for which he provides no formal analysis).

--- Sayfa 115 ---
lO4
Games, Information, and Politics
We focus our attention on N-player games involving few but more
than two players. We do not restrict our examination to the limiting
conditions of large N-player games. We demonstrate here what hap­
pens when a few additional players are added.
What happens to Conybeare's games when they are transformed
from two-player games to N-player games? In the case of the Pris­
oners' Dilemma, Hybrid Chicken-Stag Hunt, and Asymmetric Trade
games there is no difference in equilibria in either the two-player or
the N-player form. In fact, if all strategy sets in a game are eliminated
by domination except for the set of strategies (S I ' .
.
.
 , Si - 1 ' sl, Si+ l '
. .
. , sn), then these strategies constitute the Nash equilibria for the
N-player game. Therefore, N-player Prisoners' Dilemma and Hybrid
Chicken-Stag Hunt games are characterized by universal defection
and universal cooperation as their respective Nash equilibria. As for
the N-player Asymmetric Trade game, in which there is one large
country and N - 1 small countries, the big country possesses a domi­
nant strategy to defect while all small powers have a dominant strat­
egy to continue to cooperate. Given these dominant strategies, the
Nash equilibrium for the N-player Asymmetric Trade game is for
the large power to defect and for all N
- 1 small countries to co­
operate. This situation is described by Conybeare as hegemonic
predation.
We focus our attention here on solving collective action prob­
lems . In the remainder of this section, we present a trade game involv­
ing a three-player Prisoners' Dilemma game. We also develop an
N-player game with leadership. Our analysis is drawn from Bianco
and Bates ( 1990), Quinones (1992), and Quinones and Gates (1993).
We begin by looking at three players facing the same payoffs as those
presented in figure 9. What difference does a third player make?
Consider this third player, Z, who makes a decision with complete and
perfect information following players X and Y. Analyzing this game
as before, the equilibrium is {D,D,D}, which is analogous to the
{D,D} equilibrium of the two-player Prisoners' Dilemma game. In
fact, the likelihood of mutual cooperation in the three-player game is
less likely than in the two-player environment.
Consider the three-player game as a game in which the players
have the option of forming coalitions. In the case of the three-player
game each has the option of forming a coalition of three, two, or one.
A coalition of three cooperators receives a higher payoff than a coali­
tion of three defectors, but one defector gets a higher payoff than any
coalition of two or three regardless of whether they all cooperate or
defect. Moreover, a coalition of two defectors obtains higher payoffs

--- Sayfa 116 ---
Dynamic Games and the Politics of International Trade
105
than does a coalition of two cooperators. These factors make the
incentive to defect even stronger than in the two player game. 14
This same payoff ordering holds in the N-player environment.
The distinguishing characteristics of the N-player and two-player ver­
sions of the Prisoners' Dilemma game is that: (a) all players have the
dominant strategy to defect, (b) if every player follows his or her
dominant strategy, all players end up with a Pareto inferior outcome
with mutual cooperation, and (e) given nonbinding commitments,
there is always an incentive for a player to defect.
We now tum to a similar game involving N-players comprising a
trade regime. The regime is a long-term trade agreement among a set
of member nation-states. We therefore assume that players will inter­
act in the future. The game is thus characterized by infinite repetition
and discounting. Nation-states interact over a series of rounds in a
game, where each iteration is designated as t. Each player makes its
decision with imperfect information, not knowing what other nation­
states have decided. The strategy set for each follower contains two
choices:
S( = 0,
defect
S ( = 1 , cooperate.
All countries are rewarded with an evenly distributed proportion of
total benefits, Bn- Total benefits, B(st), are derived from the strategies ,
S(s), of all nation-states. The resulting vector of all of these stratgies
is represented in the equation
Payoffs for each player's strategy at iteration (t) involve dividing the
goods created by the regime among all N members. The payoffs for
cooperation and defection can be expressed as
_ B(S()
V Ni (S Ni ) -
-
N
- e
if cooperate
,
I
V
. (S
. ) = B(St)
if defect.
NI,
Nil
N
Each player possesses a dominant strategy to defect at each itera­
tion of the game. This is because cooperation always involves a cost,
e , while defection results in no cost. Given the nature of individual
1 4. The good here is a public good for which excludability is the primary problem.

--- Sayfa 117 ---
106
Games, Information, and Politics
benefits, B(Si), defecting is the dominant strategy no matter how
many players cooperate or defect. Nevertheless, universal coopera­
tion always provides a higher payoff for all actors than does universal
defection. Regardless of the number of countries that can benefit from
mutual cooperation, an individual nation-state always has an incentive
to defect since the benefits from defecting always exceed the gains
from cooperation. In this respect, N-player Prisoners' Dilemma is no
different from the two-player version of the game. As the number of
cooperators or defectors increases, the payoff to a single nation i
follows either a payoff vector from cooperating or from defecting.
Look to table I for further illustration of this point. This table presents
the payoffs for a country in a IO-nation trade regime. From this table it
is evident that defection always provides a higher payoff even when
one or more other players are defecting.
Players make maximizing decisions based on the actions of other
players. Several parameters shape the payoffs associated with differ­
ent strategies . Since every nation-state has an incentive to defect from
the economic regime, this model possesses characteristics of a collec­
tive action problem. In this way the regime produces public goods that
are nonexcludable and nonrival . Note, however, that these nation­
states can expect to interact with each other in the future. As such this
is a game of repeated play. The Folk Theorem (as noted earlier)
demonstrates that, if discount rates are high enough, full cooperation
can be maintained as a subgame perfect equilibrium. I S In such re­
peated garnes , players often rely on a trigger strategy. A trigger strat­
egy is a strategy in which players follow a particular action until the
behavior of another player (or players) serves to "trigger" a change in
action. For example, a nation-state will cooperate in the regime until
someone else defects, in which case punishment is triggered. Such a
trigger strategy can be characterized as possessing two phases, a
cooperative phase and a trigger phase. 16 As long as the Folk Theorem
applies to this game, there exists an equilibrium whereby one nation­
state will be willing to punish another for the sake of higher future
payoffs , even in the face of short-term losses due to the costs of
punishing. This makes intuitive sense, if one compares the payoffs
over an infinite time horizon to some short-term period, so that
1 5 . In this case the payoff from defecting is valued more . while future gains from
cooperation are valued less. Given a discount rate that is sufficiently high. a game most
likely will be one shot . Therefore . any game that depends on a large number of repetitions
also relies on the discount rate not being too high.
16. See Fudenberg and Tirole 1 99 1 ( 1 85-86). Also see Green and Porter 1 984 on
trigger-price strategies and Friedman 1 97 1 for the original work on trigger strategies.

--- Sayfa 118 ---
Dynamic Games and the Politics of International Trade
1 07
TABLE 1 .
Payoffs to Player 1 When a,
= 2 and c
= 1 in a 10 Player Trade Game
Number of Member Nation-States That Select the Strategy St = I (cooperate)
St ol NI
S
= 9
s,
S
= 8
s,
S
= 7
s,
S
= 6
s,
S
= 5
s,
S
= 4
s,
S
= 3
s,
S
= 2
s,
S
= I
s,
S
= 0
s,
S
= I
I,
. 8
. 6
. 4
. 2
0
- . 2
- .4
- . 6
-
. 8
(cooperate)
S
= 0
I,
1 . 8
1 .6
1 .4
1 .2
1 .0
. 8
.6
.4
.2
0
(defect)
players are willing to carry out punishment to encourage cooperation.
The Folk Theorem tells us that cooperation is possible if an N-player
game is infinitely repeated, but it does not necessitate universal coop­
eration. Universal defection is still an equilibrium result. These re­
sults formally support what Conybeare contends with words about
N-player trade games.
Leadership
One situation left unexplored by many analysts of international trade
is the role of leadership in securing cooperation, that is, global free
trade. In the remainder of this section we draw from Quinones and
Gates (1993) for a model of regime leadership. Alt, Calvert, and
Humes (1988) is one of the few formal models to show how coopera­
tion can be obtained over time in a regime with the existence of a
hegemon. A hegemon here implies a country significantly larger in
economic size than other countries. With this size comes the ability to
serve as a regime leader. In the game presented in this section, we
characterize the hegemon as a leader to distinguish it from Cony­
beare's predatory hegemon. Although Alt, Calvert, and Humes sug­
gest that in some instances cooperation does not necessitate the exis­
tence of a hegemon, if defection is imminent, the hegemon's presence
can induce cooperation. They argue that strategic reputation building
by the hegemon is the key to maintaining cooperation in an iterated
game. Although Alt, Calvert, and Humes's model is one of the first
(and few) attempts at illustrating formally how cooperation can be
maintained in a regime, the authors do not address how actors within
the regime affect one another. The model presented here extends some
of the concepts examined by Alt, Calvert, and Humes by not only
generalizing the static concept of a hegemon into a dynamic leader­
ship role but by including multiple actors. The inclusion of multiple
actors permits us to illustrate how countries affect one another and how
leaders (hegemons) influence these interactions. Moreover, we can

--- Sayfa 119 ---
1 08
Games, Information, and Politics
model such multilateral trade relationships within a game theoretic
framework.
To understand the nature and role of leadership in international
economic regimes we include leaders in our analysis. Leaders serve
the role of distributing residuals produced by the regime to followers,
and in so doing they both reward and punish. As a residual claimant,
leaders receive a share equal to s (0 < s < I), which is a portion of
each benefit plus all undistributed remaining benefits. Now a com­
ment is in order. Conybeare directly criticizes another production by
teams model applied to international trade (e.g. , Yarbrough and Yar­
brough 1 985 , 1986). He makes two arguments: (a) the gains from
trade are not controlled by the hegemon, and (b) hegemons have no
incentive to be leaders of free trade systems when they can enforce
bilateral trade contracts themselves. Before proceeding, these criti­
cisms need to be addressed. As for how a hegemon controls the
residuals from trade, we argue that the gains from trade also stem
from the international rules of trade. The hegemon in many ways is
able to dictate these rules and use them to reward and punish other
members of the system. As for whether hegemons will be strictly
predatory or benevolent, we contend that they function as maximizing
agents; if serving as a regime leader, provides a higher long-term
payoff than predatory bilateral actions do, then a large country will
engage in such activity. Regime leaders may obtain significant payoffs
by shaping and determining the rules of international trade to their
own advantage. So the issue boils down to what activity produces
larger long-term payoffs, bilateral predation or international leader­
ship. We assume the latter; Conybeare assumes the former.
This is a point to note. We are able to clearly distinguish our work
from Conybeare's here in that we rely on different assumptions about
the relative payoffs of bilateral predation and international leadership.
In operationalizing the payoffs associated with different outcomes, we
posit a very different game structure than Conybeare does. In this way
the role of clear assumptions is evident.
Let us now return to our N-person trade leadership game. Recall
that each of the regular nation-states makes its initial decision with
imperfect information, not knowing what other nation-states have
decided. Leaders, on the other hand, move afterward with complete
and perfect information. We now examine the payoffs obtained by a
leader of such an international regime. A leader's payoffs come from
some portion of the total benefits produced by the trade regime. The
portion of the total benefits available to the leader depends on the

--- Sayfa 120 ---
Dynamic Games and the Politics of International Trade
109
number punished for defecting. Punishment of the followers means
that the leader withholds rewards from defectors. The payoff function
for a leader is characterized as
where CTb(st) is the portion of benefits, x is the number of players
sanctioned for defection, and N is the total number of regime mem­
bers. 17 A leader's payoff is affected by the actions taken by other
members of the regime. As the proportion of defectors rises, the
payoff to the leader grows. In this way, the leader has a stake in the
total benefits created by the regime plus the special role as leader,
sanctioning members that do not cooperate.
Payoffs for followers (other members of the trade regime) are
influenced by the stream of benefits produced by the regime as well as
the costs associated with cooperating. Both of these parameters are
seen in the payoff function for followers at any t iteration of the game.
The behavior of other players affects the stream of benefits produced
by the regime, but unlike the leader they do not exercise sanctions
against defecting states. These payoffs are presented as
( l - a)b(s )
Vi,eSt) =
N
t
-
c
Ai cooperate n get reward
( l - a)b(s )
Vi,eSt) =
N
t
A2 defect n get reward
Vi (St) = 0 A3 defect n get punished .
/
Given these payoff functions, followers utilize two different trig­
ger strategies. The first, the grim trigger (g-trigger), means that a
follower cooperates until another follower defects or a leader fails to
reward after cooperation, such that
g-trigger t = 0:
cooperate
t > 0: cooperate if b(s;) = bN and all followers, f,
are rewarded, i, for all t* < t, defect
otherwise.
1 7 . This payoff is a generalization of the payoff to Bianco and Bates's enhanced
leader ( 1 990).

--- Sayfa 121 ---
1 1 0
Games, Information , and Politics
Alternatively, followers will utilize a strategic trigger wherein
they defect when it is in their best interest for that iteration of the
game, such that
s-trigger t = 0:
cooperate
t > 0: cooperate if b(s;) :> Bn- I and the leader re­
wards follower, i, on all t* < t, defect
otherwise .
With the s-trigger strategy, followers will cooperate as long as the
benefits of cooperating exceed the benefits of defecting. Given these
strategies, cooperation can occur without a leader. 18 Such coopera­
tion, however, is difficult to sustain. There is always an incentive to
defect. Such a defection, in turn, can set off other players' triggers ,
resulting in widespread defection.
A leader can play a critical role in sustaining cooperation.
Threats of fellow followers can sustain cooperation (that is, the grim
trigger strategy), but the rewards and punishments of leaders do play a
role. Leaders of regimes observe each follower's strategy choice, Si ,
{
for each iteration, t, of the game, rewarding and punishing each
follower separately. In this manner, the leader establishes an incentive
system to influence the actions of members of a regime. A leader
serves the role of distributing the residuals produced by the trade
regime and sanctioning all defecting followers. Leaders follow an
L-trigger strategy whereby they create an incentive system by reward­
ing and punishing followers:
L-trigger t = 0:
reward all followers , i
t > 0: reward follower i if Shi = I on all t* < t,
I
punish nation-state Ni otherwise.
Under such conditions, with such leadership capabilities, cooper­
ation can be enforced through punishment . Leadership in the form of
a hegemon can play a more significant role in attaining cooperation
than simply repeating the N-player game. Our model of leadership
follows from a broader set of models known as principal-agent anal­
ysis. More directly our model reflects the work of Holmstrom's pro-
1 8 . These two follower triggers reflect the b-trigger and s-trigger strategies in Bianco
and Bates 1 990 .

--- Sayfa 122 ---
Dynamic Games and the Politics of International Trade
1 1 1
duction by teams model ( 1982) and, in tum, Bianco and Bates's
leadership game (1990) as well as Miller (1992), which can be charac­
terized as iterated production by teams games. The game presented
here is a further generalization of the Bianco and Bates game.
Such a game serves as an alternative model and conception to
Conybeare's predatory hegemon. We do see leadership and multi­
lateral cooperation in international trade. Trade can be characterized
as an iterated game where the game is unlikely to end and interna­
tional actors have consistent expectations about other players' inten­
tions to reciprocate. As long as these two conditions persist (a low
probability of the game ending and mutual expectations about reci­
procity), we can expect to see cooperation. If these conditions are
called into question, leaders can serve to facilitate cooperation by
enforcing compliance.
Conclusion
Trade games can be used to model the politics and institutions that
affect strategic trade interactions and reciprocity. Conybeare's analyt­
ical structure, which focuses on country size, leads to a series of
interesting conclusions regarding two large countries, two small coun­
tries, and asymmetric trade conflict. In their simple 2 x 2, single-shot
format, we would expect to see (as does Conybeare) mutual defec­
tion, mutual defection, and unilateral cooperation across these three
games. These outcomes hold for sequential choice and finitely re­
peated games as well. The game played between two large countries
(Prisoners' Dilemma) can change if the game is infinitely repeated and
the Folk Theorem applies. N-player games can also be used to explic­
itly model multilateral interactions and collective action problems.
Results for N-player games do not change unless an explicit third
party, a leader, is incorporated into the game. For all of Conybeare's
games, because each equilibrium is influenced by the principle of
domination, the results are robust.
What we have attempted to demonstrate in this chapter is how
different circumstances can be explicitly modeled within games. This
demonstrates the relevance and importance of clearly specifying the
structure of the game. We also demonstrate the need to justify model­
ing choices. By explicitly modeling the structure of a game we exploit
one of the strengths of this methodology. By clearly specifying one's
modeling choices and the structure of a game we are able to avoid
relying on non-game theoretic factors to justify our conclusions. In

--- Sayfa 123 ---
1 1 2
Games, Information, and Politics
this chapter we have shown how games can be modeled with simul­
taneous and sequential play, with single play and repeated play (with
either finite or infinite time horizons), and with either two players or N
players. In the next chapter we examine games under conditions of
incomplete information.

--- Sayfa 124 ---
C H A PTER 5
Information and Transitions to Democracy:
An Examination of Przeworski's Democracy
and the Market
Information plays a critical role in many political interactions. When
political actors must make choices under uncertainty, they may act
differently than they would if they possessed complete and perfect
information. This chapter stresses how uncertainty can make a differ­
ence. More specifically, we compare games of complete and incom­
plete information. l We will also discuss games of imperfect informa­
tion.
To more clearly explicate our discussion of incomplete informa­
tion games, we examine several models of policy reform. We focus
particular attention on the models developed by Adam Przeworski in
Democracy and the Market (1991). 2 Przeworski's work is an insight­
ful examination of the strategic interactions that characterize the poli­
tics of democratization and privatization. In this chapter, we first
present Przeworski's model of political liberalization. After discuss­
ing how this model is underspecified, we then show how certain game
theoretic concepts can be utilized to better specify this model of policy
reform. We take Przeworski's games and extend them to both demon­
strate the significance of information in such strategic interactions,
and demonstrate how Przeworski's conclusions can be strengthened
with our analysis.3 The chapter proceeds as follows. We start with an
examination of Przeworski's models of political liberalization. We
then extend these models and discuss how the games are interrelated.
The theme of this chapter is information. In particular, we em­
phasize the difference between incomplete and complete information.
Players playing games of complete information possess knowledge
1 . Please refer to chapter 2 for a more detailed discussion of complete and incom­
plete information as well as perfect and imperfect information.
2. This is Adam Przeworski's Democracy and the Market: Political and Economic
Reform in Eastern Europe and Latin America (1991).
3 . Przeworski presents many models in this book. We attempt to address only one of
them here.
1 1 3

--- Sayfa 125 ---
1 14
Games, Information, and Politics
about the structure of the game and associated payoffs. Players play­
ing games of incomplete information do not know the payoffs associ­
ated with all choices . Games of incomplete information allow us to
analyze strategic interactions that involve uncertainty on the part of
one or both players. 4 Harsanyi ( 1967) introduced a way to model
games of incomplete information by introducing the concept of Na­
ture. Nature moves in such a way that payoffs are determined for the
players of the game. Players must make their choices without know­
ing what move Nature has made. With incomplete information about
payoffs, players may make different decisions than they would make
with complete information. In this manner, incomplete information
can make a difference .
Models of Democratic Transition
Przeworski's Models of Pol itica l Li beral ization
We start our analysis by focusing on a set of models developed by
Przeworski. Next we present two alternative models of political liber­
alization. Then we analyze a repeated game of reputation building.
Przeworski's models examine the strategic interaction between liber­
alizers within an authoritarian government and mobilizers within civil
society. Przeworski refers to this as the period of liberalization. He
presents several alternatives that stem from liberalization, "either to
incorporate the few groups that can be incorporated and to repress
everyone else, returning to the authoritarian stasis, or to open the
political agenda to the problem of institutions, that is, of democracy"
(60). Refer to figure 14 for the extensive form representation of this
interaction.5 The liberalizers make the initial move, deciding between
opening up the political process (open) and maintaining the status quo
(stay tough). If a decision to stay tough is made, the outcome is a
strong dictatorship (SDIC). If a decision to open up the political
process is made, civil society is given an opportunity to choose be­
tween entering into a compact (enter) with the state or organizing
politically (organize). If civil society enters, the outcome is broad
dictatorship (BDIC). Given a decision to politically organize, the
liberalizers must decide whether to further political reforms (turn into
reformers) or to repress the organized political activity. If the liber-
4 . By uncertainty we mean that players have incomplete information and are thus
uncertain about the payoffs .
5 . Refer to Przeworski 1 99 1 (54-66) for a discussion of this process and this game .
The game tree appears on page 62.

--- Sayfa 126 ---
stay
SDIC
NDIC
Information and Transitions to Democracy
1 1 5
LIBERALIZERS
open
CIVIL SOCIETY
~
oeganiz,
BDIC
LIBERALIZERS
repress
Nature
reform
r
l - r
INSURRECTION
TRANSITION
Fig. 14. Przeworski's model of democratic transition. (From Prze­
worski 1991, 62. Reproduced by permission of Cambridge Univer­
sity Press.)
alizers allow further political reform, political transition to democracy
(Transition) is the outcome. Repression can be successful, leading to a
narrow dictatorship (NDIC) with a probability of r. On the other
hand, repression could be unsuccessful (with a probability of 1
- r)
which leads to widespread insurrection (Insurrection). Keep in mind,
Nature plays a role in this game. This is a game of incomplete infor­
mation. We can summarize this game as follows.
1 . Liberalizers (L) choose an action, av from the feasible set,
AL, where AL = {stay with hardliners, open}, and where stay
with hardliners ends the game, providing the payoffs to both
players associated with the outcome of SDIC.
2. Civil society (CS) observes the liberalizers' choice under per­
fect and complete information. If the liberalizers choose open,
then civil society chooses an action, Qcs, from the feasible set
Acs = {enter, organize}, where enter ends the game with the
payoffs to both players associated with the BDIC outcome.
3. Liberalizers observe civil society's move with complete and
perfect information (as well as perfect recall of its own earlier
move). If the preceding choices were open and organize, liber­
alizers choose either repress or turn into reformers, where turn

--- Sayfa 127 ---
1 1 6
Games, Information, and Politics
into reformers ends the game with the payoffs to both players
associated with Transition.
4. If the preceding choices were open, organize, and repress,
Nature determines the payoffs for both players associated with
the outcomes NDIC and Insurrection, and the game ends.
Using this game structure, Przeworski alters the players' payoffs asso­
ciated with these different outcomes to explore facets of political
liberalization. In the remainder of this section we present each of
Przeworski's variations of this game.
Figure 15 portrays the payoffs and structure of the game that
would lead to no reform and the maintenance of a strong dictatorship
(SDIC). The structure of the game is the same as that represented in
figure 14. The payoff ordering for civil society for this situation and
all variations of this game is Transition > BDIC > Insurrection >
SDIC > NDIC. We have assigned payoffs to each of these outcomes
such that Transition = 5 , BDIC = 4, Insurrection = 3, SDIC = 2,
and NDIC = 1. The payoff ordering for the liberalizers within the
government in this situation is BDIC > SDIC > Transition > NDIC
> Insurrection. We have assigned payoffs to each of these outcomes
such that BDIC = 5 , SDIC = 4, Transition = 3, NDIC = 2, and
Insurrection = 1 . To solve for equilibrium in this game we use back­
wards induction. Start with the final move by Nature with proba­
bilities of r and 1 - r. Nature's move determines whether repression
leads to narrow dictatorship (NDIC), which sits at the end of one
branch of the game tree, or insurrection, which sits at the end of the
other branch of the tree.
In this case the two outcomes associated with repression are
narrow dictatorship (NDIC) and Insurrection, which give payoffs of 2
and 1 , respectively. The value of r shapes the expected payoff associ­
ated with a decision to repress any organized political activity. As the
payoffs are set up here, liberalizers have a dominant strategy to choose
reform over repression since a payoff of 3 is greater than either 1 or 2.
(So, even with r
= 1 , where successful repression is guaranteed,
reform will be selected over repression.) Following the game tree
backward to the next decision node, civil society must decide whether
to enter the government to form a broad dictatorship (BDIC) or orga­
nize politically. Given backwards induction, we compare the payoffs
associated with BDIC (4) to Transition (5). Civil society chooses to
organize. Now move backward one more step to the liberalizers'
decision to open or stay tough. Staying tough results in the continua­
tion of a strong dictatorship (a payoff ranking of 4). Compare this to

--- Sayfa 128 ---
SDIC
4,2
stay
NDIC
2,1
Information and Transitions to Democracy
1 1 7
LIBERALIZERS
r
open
CIVIL SOCIETY
BDIC
5,4 ~
organize
repress
Nature
1 - r
INSURRECTION
1,3
LIBERALIZERS
reform
TRANSITION
3,5
Fig. 15. First variation of Przeworski's model. (Data provided by
the authors, adapted from Przeworski 1991, 62.)
opening up, which eventually leads to transition with a payoff of 3.
Since the payoff associated with SDIC is greater than the payoff for
Transition, liberalizers will stay tough and no reform takes place. The
equilibrium for this game is thus {(stay with hardliners, reform),
organize}. Note how we present this equilibrium: the liberalizers'
decisions in equilbrium are grouped in parentheses. These choices
reflect decisions that follow the path of backwards induction. So in
this case reform is a choice that occurs at the final decision node of
liberalizers even though this choice is actually precluded by the pre­
ceding decision to stay with hardliners. In this way, this format for
expressing the equilibrium provides information about the path of
backwards induction.
What payoffs are needed to attain Transition? See figure 16. Here
the payoff ordering for the liberalizers is BDIC > Transition > SDIC
> NDIC > Insurrection. Using backwards induction, we look first to
the last decision node. Here Transition (with a payoff of 4) is strictly
preferred to repression (with payoffs of 1 for Insurrection or 2 for
NDIC). Again, civil society prefers Transition (5) to BDIC (4). But
now liberalizers value Transition (4) more highly than the status quo,
SDIC (3). In this case, liberalizers choose to open up the political

--- Sayfa 129 ---
1 1 8
Games, Information, and Politics
LIBERALIZERS
stay
open
SDIC
3,2
CIVIL SOCIETY
NDIC
2,1
r
BDIC
5,4 ~
organi"
repress
Nature
l - r
INSURRECTION
1 ,3
LIBERALIZERS
reform
TRANSITION
4,5
Fig. 16. Second variation of Przeworski's model. (Data provided bV
the authors, adapted from Przeworski 1991, 62.1
process which leads to transition to democracy. Hence, the equilib­
rium is {(open, reform), organize}. In this example, Przeworski has
set up the game so that the payoffs directly determine the outcome.
The game portrayed in figure 16 is not affected by the incomplete in­
formation associated with the success of repression. Payoffs associ­
ated with this game make this uncertainty irrelevant to the determina­
tion of equilibria. Information, nevertheless, can play a significant
role in determining the equilibria of a game. Przeworski posits a game
in which incomplete information plays a critical role in shaping an
outcome that leads to the transition to democracy. Figure 1 7 repre­
sents this situation . Both players face incomplete information; neither
player knows if repression will be successful or not. As with the game
described in figure 1 5 , nature dictates the success of repression with a
probability of r , which leads to an outcome of narrow dictatorship
(NOlC). Insurrection stems from unsuccessful repression; Nature de­
termines this lack of success with a probability of I
- r. In this game,
narrow dictatorship is preferred to Transition. The payoff ordering for
the liberalizers in this situation is BOIC > SOlC > NOIC > Transi­
tion > Insurrection. The respective ordinal ranking of the payoffs
associated with each of these outcomes is BOlC = 5 , SOIC = 4,

--- Sayfa 130 ---
SDIC
4,2
stay
NDIC
3, 1
Information and Transitions to Democracy
1 1 9
LIBERALIZERS
r
open
CIVIL SOCIETY
BDIC
5,4 ~
organize
repress
Nature
l - r
INSURRECTION
1,3
LIBERALIZERS
reform
TRANSITION
2,5
Fig. 1 7. Third variation of Przeworski's model. (Data provided bV
the authors, adapted from Przeworski 1991, 62.)
NDIC = 3, Transition = 2, and Insurrection = 1 . Here, it is clear, the
liberalizers have little interest in Transition.
To solve for the equilibria associated with this game we again use
backwards induction. As before, begin the analysis by examining the
final decision made by the liberalizers: whether or not to repress
organized groups. Now two outcomes associated with repression
(NDIC and Insurrection) produce payoffs of 3 and 1 , respectively.
With these payoffs the value of r makes a difference if the expected
payoff associated with a decision to repress any organized political
activity is greater than the payoff for Transition. The value of r repre­
sents the probability of successful repression. This probability is de­
termined by Nature and is unknown to either player. The expected
payoff for repression is determined in the same manner as is any
decision theory calculation . In this case , we multiply the payoffs and
their respective probabilities, such that
EL(repress;on) = (r)3 + (1 - r) 1 .
(5. 1)
Using the expected payoff for repression, we can determine the
value of r needed to entice liberalizers to choose Transition over

--- Sayfa 131 ---
1 20
Games, Information, and Politics
repression. To do this, set the expected payoff for repression equal to
the expected payoff for Transition (which is 2, given complete infor­
mation). With these payoffs, we see that if r = 0.5 liberalizers would
be indifferent between repression and Transition. We find three equi­
libria structured by liberalizers' beliefs about r, including:
Case J : {(stay, reform), organize}. This occurs if r < 0.5 , caus­
ing EfJreform) > EL(repress).
If r < 0.5, liberalizers will choose reform over repression despite
preferring narrow dictatorship over Transition; in this case, the danger
of Insurrection is too great with such a low probability of successful
repression. Civil society, looking ahead and reasoning backward,
chooses to organize over enter. This in turn induces liberalizers to stay
with the hardliners. This equilibrium leads to an outcome of SDle.
Case 2 : {(open, repress), enter}. This equilbrium is evident when
r > 0.5 .
If both players know that r > 0.5, civil society also makes an ex­
pected utility calculation on the payoffs it will obtain if the liberalizers
choose repression. Given such a value of r and using the logic of
backwards induction, the expected payoff to civil society for organiz­
ing is less than 2.5. Comparing this payoff to the payoff 4 associated
with BDIC, civil society will choose to enter rather than organize.
Given that the liberalizers prefer BOIC to SOIC, BOIC is the outcome
associated with this equilibrium strategy combination.
Case 3 : {(open, (lh reform, 'h repress» , (213 enter, '13 organize)},
when r = 0.5 .
This is a mixed strategy equilibrium. When r = 0.5, liberalizers are
indifferent between reform and repress. Using backwards induction,
we can then compare the expected payoffs of civil society between
organize and enter. By entering, civil society guarantees itself a pay­
off of 4, such that Ecs(enter) = 4. When civil society chooses to
organize, the mixed strategy of the liberalizers must be taken into
account, such that
Ecs(organize) = r( 1 - p) l + ( 1 - r)( l - p)3 + (p)5 .
Here, the payoff of I results when repression is successful (r); the
payoff of 3 comes when repression is unsuccessful ( 1 - r); and the

--- Sayfa 132 ---
Information and Transitions to Democracy
1 2 1
payoff of 5 follows a decision by liberalizers to refonn with a proba­
bility (p). Substituting in 0.5 for r we get
Ecs(organize) = 0.5(1 - p) l + 0.5( 1 - p)3 + (p)5 .
By setting Ecs(organize) = Ecs(repress) we can calculate p (liber­
alizers' mixed strategy for refonn and repress).
This simplifies to
4 = 2 + 3p,
and
p = 2/3.
Drawing from this calculation, it i s evident that liberalizers choose to
refonn two-thirds of the time.
Now we move up the game tree to liberalizers' decision regarding
stay and enter. By setting EL(stay) = EL(open), civil societies' mix
can be calculated. Such that
4 = g5 + (1 - g)[r(1 - p)3 + (1 - r)( 1 - p) l + p2] .
This simplifies to
g = 2/3.
In words, civil society will use a mixed strategy in which they enter
two-thirds of the time. This combination of equilibrium strategies
leads to the mixed strategy equilibrium identified in Case 3 .
So how can this game get to a point of political transition? What
payoffs are needed to induce political actors to make the decisions that
lead to regime transfonnation? Przeworski describes a game like the
one portrayed in figure 17, but one in which the belief about r changes
after the game has begun (or at least after civil society begins to
organize politically). Przeworski presents this case intuitively, where
liberalizers' beliefs about r change after civil society begins to orga­
nize. In this situation, society believes that r is low, hence its decision
to organize. Observing this decision, the liberalizers' belief about r
falls to a point where the probability of successful repression is below
0.5. Przeworski does not provide a rigorous analysis of how players
make decisions under such uncertainty. In the remainder of this sec-

--- Sayfa 133 ---
1 22
Games, Information, and Politics
tion we show how Bayes' rule and perfect Bayesian equilibrium can
be used to analyze such a game.
This discussion of how decisions are made under uncertainty can
be more rigorously analyzed using Bayes' rule. This mechanism al­
lows us to incorporate subjective probability or beliefs into our calcu­
lation of equilibria. Bayes' rule is:
p(AIB)
p(BIA)p(A)
(5 .2)
p(BIA)P(A) + p(BI -.A)p( -.A) '
where peA IB) is the conditional probability that an event, A, will take
place given the occurrence of B; p(BIA) is the conditional probability
of B given A; peA) is the prior probability that A would occur; and
p(BIA)p(A) + (B I-.A)p( -.A) is the marginal likelihood of seeing A
given either B or -,B (not B).6 In the case of this political liberaliza­
tion game, liberalizers update their beliefs when society begins to
organize, calling into question the liberalizers' prior beliefs about the
probability of successful repression (r). Society's action sends a signal
to the liberalizers regarding r.
One way to determine an equilibrium when beliefs are involved
is to apply Bayes' rule and the concept of perfect Bayesian equilib­
rium (PBE), which is defined as a strategy combination consisting of
best responses such that beliefs follow Bayes' rule in the equilibrium
path and do not contradict Bayes' rule out of the equilibrium path.7
The process of finding the perfect Bayesian equilibrium of a game
involves an interaction between backwards induction and forward
Bayesian inference.8 Through a process of Bayesian updating, actors
alter their beliefs as a game of incomplete information progresses.
With each move, an actor updates his or her probability estimates
regarding the other player. Each update is based on an assumption that
the other actor is following an equilibrium strategy.
Liberalizers' beliefs are referred to as J..tv such that J..tL(r)
=
6. All alternatives are summed in this manner. In this case, there are two alternative
conditions for B, B , and not B .
7. Also see Tirole 1988 (436-45) and Fudenberg and Tirole 1991 (209-434).
8 . It should be noted that a significant problem with the perfect Bayesian equilib­
rium concept is that it has a tendency to produce many equilibria. Since the PBE concept
calls for an examination of beliefs that lie off the equilibrium path, this should not be too
surprising. Many game theorists are now seeking refinements to the notion of equilibrium
theory. For example, see Kohlberg and Mertens 1986; Cho and Kreps 1987; Banks and
Sobel 1987; Fudenberg, Kreps, and Levine 1988; and Dekel and Fudenberg 1990. Unfor­
tunately, no consensus has emerged on which refinement to use. Nevertheless, PBE is a
useful concept for understanding games of incomplete information. See Banks 1991 for a
nice review of signaling games applied to political science .

--- Sayfa 134 ---
Information and Transitions to Democracy
123
JLL(successful repression). If society organizes, liberalizers update
their beliefs about r conditional on society's decision to organize. This
conditional probability belief is represented as, JLL(rlsoc. organizes).
Now, applying Bayes' rule, we can calculate the conditional proba­
bility that repression is successful given that society has organized,
such that
JLL(rlsoc. orgn.)
(5.3)
To apply Bayes' Theorem to this game and to calculate JLL(rlsoc.
organizes), we need the values of JLL(SOC. organizeslr) and JLL(SOC.
organizesl l - r). From backwards induction we know that the condi­
tional probability of society organizing given successful repression (r)
is 0.0; society will not organize if it knows that repression is success­
ful. On the other hand, society will organize with a probability of 1 .0
if it knows that repression will be unsuccessful. Plugging this value
into Bayes' Theorem, we get
.
reO)
JLL(rlsoc. organizes) = reO) + (l _ r)(1)
= 0.0.
(5.4)
What does this 0.0 mean?9 It means that if liberalizers see civil
society organize politically, they will alter their beliefs about the value
of r down to 0.0. In other words, if society organizes, liberalizers will
believe that the chance of successfully repressing society is 0.0. In
response they will opt for reform rather than repression. To look at the
other side of the story, what happens to the liberalizers' beliefs about r
if society enters into a broad dictatorship? This time we need to know
the conditional probability of society entering given successful repres­
sion; if society knows that repression will be successful, it will enter
into a broad dictatorship with a conditional probability of 1 .0. Follow­
ing the same reasoning, society will not enter a broad dictatorship if it
knows that repression will be unsuccessful; the conditional probability
of society entering given successful repression is 0.0. Plugging these
values into Bayes' Theorem we see that
I
r(l .O)
JLL(r soc. enters) = r(1 .0) + (1 _ r)(O.O)
= 1 .0 .
---------
(5.5)
9. Recall that, if r = 0.5, liberalizers are indifferent between repression and reform.
If we set the prior belief about the value of r at the level where Iiberalizers would be
indifferent between repression and reform (0.5), it would make no difference since the
conditional probability is O.

--- Sayfa 135 ---
1 24
Games , lnformation, and Politics
This demonstrates that, if society enters into a broad dictatorship,
liberalizers do not alter their priors about the value of r.
What is to be learned from this exercise? First we provided a
more rigorous framework for analyzing Przeworski's game. We have
offered a payoff ordering for civil society so that we may actually
solve for the equilibria of these games. (Przeworski only provides a
payoff ordering for one player, the liberalizers.) Through this more
rigorous analysis, we have also explicitly incorporated incomplete
information into our analysis. In this way, we have exploited the
advantages of game theory, namely, its explicit assumptions, rigorous
analysis, and clear conclusions. Moreover, from this exercise we also
learned that Przeworski's intuition is right, maybe even understated. If
society organizes, the liberalizers will not choose repression since
they believe such an action will be unsuccessful. It should also be
pointed out that the actual value of r does not have to change; only
beliefs about r need to change. In this way, beliefs play a central role
in building a reputation. We will discuss the role of reputation in
political reform in much greater detail in chapter 6. In the next section
of this chapter we extend Przeworski's models, using the concept of
incomplete information. We examine how uncertainty can play a role
in the strategic process of regime transformation.
Alternative Models of Political Liberalization
Two Types of Li beral izers
In Przeworski's models of political liberalization, both players pos­
sess complete certainty about the other's type of orientation. Civil
society, for example, knows that liberalizers favor broad dictatorship
(BOIC) over strong dictatorship (SOle); this, after all, is what distin­
guishes them as liberalizers. Incomplete information affects players'
assessment of the success of repression, but not actors' preferences.
Przeworski presents several alternative games to model variations in
liberal preferences. Each game portrays the strategic interaction be­
tween civil society and a different type of liberalizer; these are seen in
figures 15- 17. What happens if civil society does not know what type
of liberalizers it faces? Given that these games model aggregated
actors, such uncertainty seems quite likely. These actors are actually
groups, which would make it difficult to determine what type of
player one is facing. In this section, we extend Przeworski's analysis
by presenting some alternative models that account for this kind of

--- Sayfa 136 ---
Information and Transitions to Democracy
1 25
incomplete information. Such an extension more closely reflects the
actual politics of reform, in which actors face considerable uncer­
tainty.
We start with a game involving civil society playing against
liberalizers who exhibit preference orderings that reflect the games
played in figures 15 and 16. These two games are combined into a
single game of incomplete information, which is portrayed in figure
18. In this game liberalizers come in two types, those more and less
committed to reform. Nature is used to model in the extensive form
whether liberalizers are more committed or less committed to reform.
Nature moves first, determining the payoffs associated with different
outcomes. Liberalizers make the next choice with complete informa­
tion about their type. This makes this an asymmetric game. As far as
the liberalizers are concerned, Nature dictates the type of game they
are playing. Once nature moves, liberalizers make decisions as in the
games described in figures 1 5 and 16. Civil society, however, makes
its decision not knowing what type of liberalizers it faces . The game
can be summarized as follows.
1 . Nature determines a type of liberalizer from a set of types, ti E
T, where T = {x,y}, where x = less committed to reform and y
= more committed to reform. Type t is drawn with a proba­
bility distribution of O(tJ, where O(tJ > 0 and OCT) = 1 .
2. Liberalizers observe ti and then choose an action, av from the
feasible set AL, where AL = {stay with hardliners, open}, and
where stay with hardliners ends the game, providing the pay­
offs to both players associated with the outcomes of SOICx
and SOICy, where SOICx and SOICy are outcomes of SOIC
contingent on whether Nature has chosen x or y as the type of
liberalizer.
3. Civil society observes the liberalizers' choice under incom­
plete information. If the liberalizers choose open then civil
society chooses an action, acs, from the feasible set Acs =
{enter, organize}, where enter ends the game with the payoffs
to both players associated with the BOICx and BOICy out­
comes, depending on whether Nature has chosen x or y. Civil
society, making a decision with incomplete information, uti­
lizes Bayes' rule to update its beliefs (f.,Lcs) about the liber­
alizers' type.
4. If the preceding choices were open and organize, liberalizers
choose either repress or turn into reformers, where turn into
reformers ends the game with the payoffs to both players

--- Sayfa 137 ---
1 26
Games, Information, and Politics
less committed
--AIllore committed
-
- ,- --/-
-
- -
/\ LIBERALIZERS
,
\
LIBERALIZERS
/1
\
stay/
\
\ open
/
open
SDIC
4,2
'
\CIVIL SOCIETY
/ Ş - - - -- - - -
--
- -
/
\
,
entey/
\orgamze
//
SDIC
3,2
enter/
/
\
\CIVIL SOCIETY
- 7\
/ \
\organize
\
\
BDIC
5,4
) LIBERALIZERS
/ \
/
BDIC
5,4
> LIBERALIZERS
;/ \
/
repress /
/ ,
'\ reform
\Nature
,
/
,/\Nature
, reform
/
ɜ//
,, 1 - r
\\,
/
\
/
, \
NDIC
INSURRECTION
TRANSITION
NDIC
\\
INSURRECTION TRANSITION
2 , 1
1 , 3
3,5
2, 1
1,3
4,5
Fig. 18. Przeworski's game with incomplete information. (Data
provided by the authors, adapted from Przeworski 1991 , 62.)
associated with Transitionx and Transitionv, depending on
whether Nature chose x or y.
5. If the preceding choices were open, organize, and repress,
Nature determines the payoffs for both players associated with
the outcomes, NDIC,. , NDICv, Insurrection .. , and Insurrec­
tion", and the game ends.
To analyze this game we begin as before with backwards induc­
tion starting at the bottom of the game t.ree. We start with the final
decision node of the liberalizers. From either of the final liberalizer
decision nodes , transition is preferred to either narrow dictatorship
(NDIC) or Insurrection on both branches of the game tree. Liber­
alizers possess a dominant strategy to reform.
Now move backward up the game tree to the civil society deci­
sion nodes . These two decision nodes are connected by a dotted line
representing an information set, meaning that civil society does not
know from which node it must make its decision. It makes its decision
with incomplete information since it does not know the payoffs asso­
ciated with different decisions. Given that liberalizers have a domi­
nant strategy to reform, preferring transformation over either Insur­
rection or narrow dictatorship (NDIC), civil society, in tum, has a

--- Sayfa 138 ---
Information and Transitions to Democracy
1 27
dominant strategy to organize. Nature, at this point, does not alter
society's choice. Move up the game tree to the initial decision made
by the liberalizers; here the liberalizers know their payoffs for differ­
ent choices. The game possesses asymmetric information; liberalizers
possess complete and perfect information while society must operate
with incomplete information. Knowing their payoffs, the liberalizers
make different choices at different decision nodes. At the left-hand
node (being less committed to reform), liberalizers choose to remain
hard nosed, preferring strong dictatorship (SOIC) to Transition. At the
right-hand node (being more committed to reform), liberalizers
choose to open up the political process, preferring Transition to strong
dictatorship (SOIC). We see two cases for equilibrium.
Case 1 : {(stay with hardliners, reform), organize}. This equilib­
rium exists if Nature determines liberalizers to be less com­
mitted.
Case 2: {(open, reform), organize}. This equilibrium exists if
Nature determines liberalizers to be more committed.
Three Types of Liberalizers
We now tum to a game in which Nature determines three types of
liberalizers. This game integrates the three types of liberalizers de­
scribed by Przeworski, represented in figures 15- 1 7 . We designate
these types of liberalizers as x, y, and z, respectively. This game is
presented in extensive form in figure 19. As with the game repre­
sented in figure 1 8 , this game is characterized by asymmetric informa­
tion, where the liberalizers possess complete and perfect information
and civil society must make a decision with incomplete information.
The game can be summarized as follows.
1 . Nature determines a type of liberalizer from a set of types, ti E
T, where T = {x,y,z}, where x = less committed to reform, y
= more committed to reform, and z = affected by the proba­
bility of successful repression (the value of r). Type t is drawn
with a probability distribution of (J(tJ, where (J(tJ > 0 and
(J(T) = 1 .
2. Liberalizers observe ti and then choose an action, av from the
feasible set Av where AL = {stay with hardliners, open} and
where stay with hardliners ends the game, providing the pay­
offs to both players associated with the outcomes of SOICx,

--- Sayfa 139 ---
N a-
x Ŝ
Iy
śz
 I Z E R S
/z Y L I B E R A L I Z E R S ----- ----ŝ/L I B E R A L I Z E R S
s t a y / \
s t a y Ś
s t a y
/
o p e n
ř
o p e n
\ o p e n
S D I C
S D I C
3 , 2
4 2
S D I C
C I V I L S O C I E T Y
C I V I L S O C I E T Y
'
\C I V I L S O C I E T Y
4 , 2
e n t e r
\
o r g a n i z e
e n t e r
r g a n i z e
e n t e r
o r g a n i z e
B D I C
\
B D I C
5 , 4
/
I B E R A L I Z E R S 5 , 4
B D I C
L I B E R A L I Z E R S
5 , 4
,\ B E R A L I Z E R S
/ \
,
a t u r e
\ r e fo r m
r e p r e s s
r e p r e s s
r
N
r e fo r m
a t u r e
/
N a t u r e
r e f o r m
1 - r
\
/ \ - r
I N S U R R E C T I 0 N\
I N S U R R E C T I O N
N D I C
1 , 3
T R A N S I T I O N N D I C
1 , 3
T R A N S I T I O N
2 , 1
3 , 5
2 , 1
4 , 5
r e p r e s s
r
\ - r

 U R R E C T I O N
N D I C
3 , 1
1 , 3
T R A N S I T I O N
2 , 5
Fig. 19. Przeworski's game with three types of liberalizers. (Data provided by the authors, adapted from
Przeworski 1991, 62.)

--- Sayfa 140 ---
I nfortrUltion and Transitions to Democracy
1 29
SOICy, and SOICz, where SOICr is the outcome of SOIC
contingent on whether Nature has chosen x, y, or z as the type
of liberalizer.
3. Civil society observes the liberalizers' choice with incomplete
information. If the liberalizers choose open, then civil society
chooses an action, acs, from the feasible set Acs = {enter,
organize}, where enter ends the game with the payoffs to both
players associated with the BOICx, BOICy• and BOICz out­
comes, depending on whether Nature chose x, y, or z. Civil
society, making a decision with incomplete information uti­
lizes Bayes' rule to update its beliefs (JLcs) about the liber­
alizers' type.
4. Liberalizers observe civil society'S move with incomplete in­
formation (but with perfect recall of its own earlier move). If
the preceding choices were open and organize, liberalizers
choose either repress or turn into reformers, where turn into
reformers ends the game with the payoffs to both players
associated with Transitionx, Transitiony, or Transitionz• de­
pending on whether Nature chose x, y, or z.
5. If the preceding choices were open, organize, and repress,
Nature determines the payoffs for both players associated with
the outcomes NOICx, NOICy, NOICz' Insurrectionx, Insurrec­
tiony• or Insurrectionz and the game ends.
To determine the equilibria for this game we again use backwards
induction. At the liberalizers' decision nodes at the end of the x and y
branches of the game tree, liberalizers have dominant strategies to
reform rather than repress, regardless of the value of r. Branch z,
however, is different. Under these conditions, the value of r does
make a difference. If r > 0.5, liberalizers will choose repression over
reform. On the other hand, if r < 0 .5 , the chances of successfully
repressing political organization are sufficiently low to induce liber­
alizers to choose reform over repression.
Now move backward up the game tree to society's decision node.
Remember, society does not know where it is on the game tree. The
best it can do is calculate the probability of being at a particular node.
In other words, society attempts to anticipate what type of liberalizers
it faces with incomplete information. One way to narrow its choices is
to observe what liberalizers have chosen at the first decision node. If
Nature chooses x, liberalizers will choose to stay with the hardliners,
valuing strong dictatorship (SOIC) more than transformation. If Na­
ture chooses y , liberalizers open the political process; in this case they

--- Sayfa 141 ---
1 30
Games, Information, and Politics
get a higher payoff from transition than from strong dictatorship. If
Nature chooses z, liberalizers will stay with hardliners if r < 0.5 and
will open up if r > O. If Nature selects x or z, where liberalizers know
that r < 0.5, the game is over and society has no choice to make.
Otherwise, if Nature opts for y or z , where liberalizers know that r >
0.5, civil society has a choice because liberalizers will open. If soci­
ety knew it was on the y branch, it would prefer to organize. If society
knew that r > 0.5 and that it was on the z branch, it would choose to
enter into a broad dictatorship. But society does not know.
How does society make its choice under such conditions of un­
certainty? We have shown that, given a choice, civil society knows
that nature has selected either y or z, where it is known that r > 0. 5. 10
If the game is played once with no chance of repetition, civil society
will choose between entering and organizing based on its beliefs about
the liberalizers' type.
The problem is that civil society in this game does not know what
type of liberalizers it faces. Bayes' rule can be used to make a decision
under such uncertainty such that
where Bc.,(tLlaL) is the conditional probability that liberalizers will be
of type tL given the action, aL, taken by the liberalizers, Cc.JaLltL) is
the conditional probability of aL given tL, Dcs(tL) is the prior belief
that tL would occur, and Dcs(aLltL) Ccs(tL) + Ccs(aLI -,tL) CcsC -,tL) is
the marginal likelihood of seeing aL given either tL or -,tL (not td. 1 1
In this game , in which liberalizers know the value of r, civil society
knows that if liberalizers make a decision to open up the political
process, r > 0.5, or they are on the y branch of the game tree. If
r < 0.5, liberalizers would choose to stay with the hardliners, and the
game would be over. Civil society uses Bayes' rule to estimate the
probability of the liberalizers being committed to reform, such that
/L,jopenltl
= V)/L,)tL = v) + /L, \(openlt = z 1\ r > 0.5)/LcJI = Z 1\ r > 0.5)
(5.7)
where 1\ signifies the logical expression "and."
1 0 . For this example we will assume that only liberalizers know the value of r.
partic ularly whether or not r > or < 0.5. In the next example , we will examine what
happens to this game if the value of r is not known by either party.
I I . All alternatives are summed in this manner. In this case, there are three alterna­
tive conditions for I: x. v. and z .

--- Sayfa 142 ---
Information and Transitions to Democracy
1 3 1
This calculation of beliefs, in tum, can be used to calculate the
expected utilities for entering and organizing. The expected utility of a
decision can be calculated by multiplying civil society's beliefs about
the type of liberalizers it faces with the payoff associated with being
on each respective branch of the game tree. To some extent the liber­
alizers' decision to open signals to civil society what its type is. 12 For
example, to obtain the expected utility of politically organizing, civil
society multiplies its sUbjective probability estimate (beliefs) that it is
on the y branch of the game tree by the payoff of 5 and adds an
estimate regarding the probability of being on the z branch of the tree
and r = 1 multiplied by a payoff of 1 . (We assume r = 1 to simplify
our game.) These payoffs are identified through a process of back­
wards induction. If civil society knows it is on the y branch of the
game tree, the equilibrium is {(open, reform), organize}, which is
associated with a payoff to civil society of 5 . If civil society knows it
is on the z branch of the game tree and knows r = 1 , the equilibrium is
{(open, repress), organize}, which is associated with a payoff of 4 for
civil society. These calculations can be represented as
Ecs(organize) = !-tcs(tL = ylopen)(5)
+ (tL = z 1\ r > O.5Iopen)(l).
(5.8)
Similarly, the expected utility of entering into an alliance with the
government can be portrayed as
Ecs(enter) = 4.
(5 .9)
Whether on the y or the z branch of the game, the liberalizers' move to
open up the political process provides a payoff of 4 to civil society if it
chooses to enter. Therefore, the expected payoff of entering is 4.
Given this information we know that civil society will organize politi­
cally if the expected payoff of organizing exceeds the expected payoff
of entering into an alliance with the government. Thus, civil society
organizes if
Ecs(organize) > 4.
(5 . 10)
If the expected payoff of organizing is less than the expected payoff of
entering, civil society will enter into an alliance with the government.
----
þ-- -- - --
1 2 . Przeworski mentions such a signal ( 1 99 1 , 61), but provides no mechanism for
incorporating the concept into his analysis . By explicitly incorporating the concepts of
incomplete information and perfect Bayesian equilibrium, we can explicitly analyze the role
of signals in this game.

--- Sayfa 143 ---
1 32
Games , Infonnation, and Politics
Whether the expected payoff of organizing politically is greater or less
than the expected payoff of entering is largely determined by the
priors assigned to this game. To show how priors affect the expected
utility calculation let us make some assumptions about different be­
liefs and then work through an example . \3 For this example, assume
that each branch of the game has almost the same chance of occurring.
Keep in mind that civil society does not know the probability associ­
ated with each branch of the game tree. Thus, we assume the follow­
ing beliefs about these probabilities:
ILcs(X) = 0.33,
f-tcsCZ /\ r > 0.5) = 0. 16,
and
ILcs(Z /\ r < 0.5) = 0. 16. 14
Given these probabilities, we proportionally set the conditional beliefs
as
ILcsCopenly) = 0.66,
and
ILcsCopenlz /\ r > 0.5) = 0.34.
Plugging these values into the expected utility calculation for organiz­
ing we get
EcsCorganize) =
(0.66)(0.33)
(0.66)(0. 33) + (0. 34)(0.16) (5)
(0.34)(0. 16)
+ (0.34)(0. 16) + (0.66)(0.33) (1) .
(5 . 1 1)
1 3 . Of course. in real life prior beliefs are not given but stem from specific experi­
ences.
14. We assume here that liberalizers will not be indifferent between repress and
reform.

--- Sayfa 144 ---
Information and Transitions to Democracy
1 33
This simplifies to
1 .089
.0544
4 20
Ecs(organize) =
.2722
+ .2722
=
.
.
(5 . 12)
Given these priors, the expected payoff from organizing is 4.20; since
this is greater than 4, the expected payoff from organizing exceeds the
expected payoff from entering. Civil society, in tum, will organize
politically. In the more general case, in which priors are not exog­
enously assumed, civil society will organize when
Ecs(organize) > Ecs(enter).
We can also solve for a more general result. Conditional beliefs
allow us to set
p-cs( ylopen) = 1 - [P-cs(z 1\ r = l lopen)].
Set
p-cs(ylopen) = 0
and
P-cs(z 1\ r = 0.5Iopen) = 1 - o.
Then the expected payoff of organizing is
Ecs(organize) = 0(5) + ( l - O)(l ).
Simplified,
EcsCorganize) = 0(4) + 1 .
Now set the expected payoffs of enter and organize equal to one
another to establish the indifference point, such that
Ecs(enter) = 4 = (4)(} + 1 = Ecs(organize).
Solving for 0, it is evident that:
o = 3/4.

--- Sayfa 145 ---
1 34
Games , Information, and Politics
Recall that 8 equals the belief that the liberalizers' type is y, given
a choice of open, that is, /LcsCopenly) = 8. We now see that EcsCorga­
nize) > Eo/enter) when 8 > 3/4 and EcsCenter) > EcsCorganize)
when 8 < 3/4. In other words, civil society needs to believe that there
is a 3/4 (75 percent) chance that it is on the y path before organizing,
given a decision to open made by liberalizers.
What if 8 = 3/4? Then EcsCenter) = Ecs(organize) and the equi­
libria are: {(open, reform), ('h enter, 'h organize)} when t = y or
{(open, repress), ( 'h enter, 'h organize)} when t = (z A r > 0.5).
There are two equilibria because liberalizers know their type and civil
society does not, but the mixing is the same, given an indifference
between enter and organize. That leads us to ask, what happens if
both liberalizers and civil society make their decisions under condi­
tions of uncertainty? What if the game is characterized by two-sided
incomplete information?
Two-Sided Incomplete Information
Now we tum to an example in which civil society does not know what
type of liberalizer it faces and neither civil society nor the liberalizers
know the value of r (the probability of successfully repressing any
political organization). The game can be summarized as has been
done previously, except in step 4, where the game differs as follows.
4. Liberalizers observe civil society's move with incomplete in­
formation (but with perfect recall of their own earlier move).
If the preceding choices were open and organize, liberalizers
choose either repress or tum into reformers, where turn into
reformers ends the game with the payoffs to both players
associated with Transition>:, Transition", or Transitionz' de­
pending on whether Nature chose x, y, or z. Liberalizers must
make this choice with incomplete information regarding the
probability of successful repression (r).
To better understand the role of liberalizers not knowing the value of
r, recall equations 5 . 3 , 5.4, and 5.5, wherein liberalizers utilized
Bayes' rule to help calculate expected payoffs when r is unknown. In
this game we combine elements of equations 5 . 3 and 5.7, wherein
neither liberalizers nor civil society possess complete information. Let
us begin with the liberalizers' beliefs. We assume that liberalizers
know their type. The problem is that they do not know the value of r.
Liberalizers must calculate their expected payoffs from opening the

--- Sayfa 146 ---
Information and Transitions to Democracy
1 35
political process drawing on their beliefs about the chances of suc­
cessful repression (r). Civil society also makes its decision with uncer­
tainty, not knowing the type of liberalizers it faces. This turns out to
be an unusual game in that it exhibits aspects of asymmetric infonna­
tion (regarding the type of liberalizer) and two-sided incomplete infor­
mation regarding the value of r.
To analyze this game we examine a set of possible equilibrium
candidates. Drawing from our previous analysis we present three pure
strategy and one mixed strategy perfect Bayesian equilibrium candi­
dates. Many other mixed strategy equilibria exist involving civil soci­
ety's and liberalizers' beliefs about r and civil society's beliefs regard­
ing the type of liberalizer they face. I S
Case 1 : {({stay, reform), organize}. This pure strategy perfect
Bayesian equilibrium exists if civil society believes that Nature
has detennined that the liberalizers are Type x. The existence
of this equilibrium was demonstrated earlier in this chapter.
This equilibrium also exists if civil society believes that Nature
has detennined that liberalizers are Type z and the expected
payoff for liberalizers of staying exceeds that of opening. This
takes place when /-tcs(r < 0.5), that is, when civil society
believes that Nature has detennined that liberalizers are Type z
and successful repression is unlikely.
Case 2 : {(open, repress), enter}. This pure strategy perfect
Bayesian equilibrium exists if civil society believes that Nature
has detennined that liberalizers are Type z and r > 0.5, so that
liberalizers' expected payoff from opening the political process
exceeds the expected payoff from staying with the hardliners.
We are assuming common knowledge regarding the value of r.
This means that we are assuming that both players believe that
r possesses the same value.
Case 3: {(open, reform), organize}. This pure strategy perfect
Bayesian equilibrium exists if civil society believes that Nature
has detennined that liberalizers are Type y (those most likely to
favor political refonn and transition). The existence of this
equilibrium was demonstrated earlier in this chapter.
Case 4: (mixed strategy equilibrium) {(open, (213 open, 113 re­
press» , (113 organize, 213 enter)}. This mixed strategy perfect
-
-- -
ø-
----
1 5 . Any situation involving civil society's belief that they are on the z path results in
the civil society possessing beliefs about the liberalizers' beliefs about r. Situations involv­
ing beliefs about beliefs are often referred to as common knowledge problems. We, how­
ever, will not elaborate on issues of common knowledge here.

--- Sayfa 147 ---
1 36
Games , Information, and Politics
Bayesian equilibrium exists if civil society believes that Nature
has determined that liberalizers are type z and that liberalizers
believe that r = 0.5. Keep in mind that liberalizers know that
they are on the z path. This mixed strategy equilibrium was
determined in Case 3 of our version of Przeworski's game
depicted in figure 1 7. Many other mixed strategy equilibria
also exist regarding uncertainty about the type of liberalizers
civil society faces ( y or z) and beliefs about r.
Information obviously plays a role in the analysis of these games .
What players know and what they do not know profoundly affects
their decisions, which in tum affect the equilibria of these games. By
using the analytical concept of information we are also able to com­
bine the variety of games discussed by Przeworski. We have demon­
strated that when civil society does not know the type of liberalizers it
faces, beliefs become important to such strategic interactions. In the
real world of political liberalization, doubts about what type of liber­
alizers they face within the government are going to significantly
affect the behavior of members of civil society.
Reputation : Repeated Games with
Incomplete Information
One important way to manipulate an adversary's beliefs is to develop
a reputation. This process of reputation building is an important as­
pect of these games . When a player lacks complete information, he or
she must rely on beliefs when making a decision. This is particularly
important in games played over a period of time. As such a game
progresses, a player, such as the liberalizers, presumably discloses
information (his or her probability distribution regarding the propen­
sity to push for reform) through the moves the player makes. 16 With
the revelation of this information, civil society will alter its beliefs and
may change its moves in response to this revealed information. What
one player believes about another can be manipulated very easily,
however. By taking "irrational" actions, liberalizers can lead civil
society to come to the wrong conclusion about its true propensity for
moving toward democratic transition. In other words, an actor manip­
ulates the beliefs of another by making moves that work to establish a
reputation.
Now it should be noted that Przeworski argues against modeling
16. Or, in game theoretic terms, its type.

--- Sayfa 148 ---
InforrmItion and Transitions to Democracy
1 37
democratic transition as a repeated game. This is quite evident in his
statement:
But I do not think that situations in which regime change is at
stake are repeatable. These are unique situations . . . . Once Re­
formers decide to make a move alea iacta est-they cannot go
back to the status quo. Payoffs for the future change as a result of
the actions chosen now. (1991 , 72)
Despite Przeworski's claim to the contrary, it is possible to develop a
game theoretic model of political liberalization that maintains the
spirit of his statement but is technically a repeated game. Theoreti­
cally this is done as follows. Take the one-round game presented in
figure 19. With regard to the previous three games, as long as liber­
alizers choose stay with the hardliners the game ends and can be
repeated; nothing has changed in society. Choosing to stay with the
hardliners in effect means maintaining the status quo. A decision to
open, on the other hand, changes the political system to such an extent
that the game is permanently altered. In this section we consider such
a repeated game, in which all rounds of the game having an outcome
of SDIC lead to a new round of the game with the same payoff
structure. All other outcomes end the game with no further repeti­
tions. This game can be summarized as follows.
1 . Nature determines a type of liberalizer from a set of types, t; E
T, where T = {x,y,z}, where x = less committed to reform, y
= more committed to reform, and z = affected by the proba­
bility of successful repression (the value of r). Type t; is drawn
with a probability distribution of Oct;), where OCt;) > 0 and
OCT) = 1 .
2. Liberalizers observe t; and then choose an action, av from the
feasible set AL, and where AL = {stay with hardliners, open}
and where stay with hardliners leads to the next round of the
game, starting again with Nature's determination of the liber­
alizers' type. This game is repeated K rounds such that no
player knows when the Kth round will occur. (This holds
except when liberalizers choose to open and then later choose
to reform. As such, there is an end that can be predicted given
liberalizer's actions.)l7
3. Civil society observes the liberalizers' choice with incomplete
17. The relevance of such conditional probabilities is examined earlier in this chapter.

--- Sayfa 149 ---
1 38
Games , Information , and Politics
infonnation. If the liberalizers choose open, then civil society
chooses an action, acs, from the feasible set Acs = {enter,
organize}, where enter ends the game with the payoffs to both
players associated with the BDICt" , BDICv' and BDICz out­
comes, depending on whether Nature chose x, y, or z. Civil
society, making a decision with incomplete infonnation, uti­
lizes Bayes' rule to update its beliefs (/-tc.) about the liber­
alizers' type.
4. Liberalizers observe civil society's move with incomplete in­
fonnation (but with perfect recall of their own earlier move).
If the preceding choices were open and organize, liberalizers
choose either repress or turn into reformers, where turn into
reformers ends the game with the payoffs to both players
associated with Transitionx, Transitiony, or Transitionz, de­
pending on whether Nature chose x, y, or z. Liberalizers must
make this choice with incomplete infonnation regarding the
probability of successful repression (r).
5. If the preceding choices were open, organize, and repress,
Nature detennines the payoffs for both players associated with
the outcomes, ND1Ct" , NDICy, NDICz, Insurrection" Insur­
rection" or Insurrection::, and the game ends.
How does repeating this game in this manner change things? Due
to the characteristics of the game, civil society gets no choice if
liberalizers stay with the hardliners. If liberalizers open the political
process, civil society knows that either liberalizers are on the y branch
or the z branch of the game, where r > 0.5. In such a repeated
environment, the liberalizers' actions signal their type (x, y, or z) each
round of the game. This game is characterized by a semiseparating
equilibrium such that the actions taken by the liberalizers do not fully
identify their type. 1 H A hybrid or semiseparating equilibrium operates
in the environment in which liberalizers and civil society play a re­
peated game where choices between open and stay with hardliners
and organize and enter are randomized; thus the hybrid equilibrium.
The posterior beliefs are then /-to·(t = zlopen) E (O,w), /-tcs(t =
ylopen)
=
I , and /-tcs(t = xlopen)
= O . Given this equilibrium,
repeating the game plays an important role. Since a choice of staying
with the hardliners only leads to another round of the game, the
equilibria for this game are as follows.
1 8 . We do not mean to imply that all rounds of the political liberalization game
possess a separating equilibrium .

--- Sayfa 150 ---
Information and Transitions to Democracy
1 39
Case 1 : {(open, reform), organize}, when civil society believes
that it is on the y path.
Case 2 : {(open, repress), enter}, when civil society believes it is
on the z path and r > 0.5.
Case 3: {(stay, reform), organize} when liberalizers are on the z
path and believe that r < 0.5.
Case 4 : {(stay, reform), organize} when liberalizers are on the x
path.
Case 5 : {a set of mixed strategies of open and enter, and a set of
mixed strategies of repress and reform}.
The implication is that repeating the game does not have significant
implications beyond the changes that result from incomplete informa­
tion.
Summary
So, how has the analysis presented in this chapter contributed to
Przeworski's work? The most elementary contribution was to specify
civil society's payoffs. Przeworski alludes to these preferences in his
text, but nowhere does he directly incorporate them into his analysis;
he only specifies the payoff ordering for the liberalizers. With this
change we are able to provide a more rigorous analysis of Przeworski 's
games and any variations that we subsequently develop. The second
part of the chapter examines situations in which civil society faces
liberalizers whose type is unknown to it. Such a scenario more accu­
rately reflects actual situations of political liberalization. Such an
analysis allows us to integrate several of Przeworski's games into one
game. He alludes to such an integration in his text but never attempts
such an analysis. We provide several variations here, varying the
amount of information various actors possess. Finally, this analysis
also allows us to demonstrate the implications of incomplete informa­
tion and the role of beliefs in these games. Uncertainty is pervasive in
the political world. This chapter provides a perspective on the role of
information and beliefs on strategic behavior and outcomes.

--- Sayfa 152 ---
C H A PTER 6
Commitment, Bluffs, and Reputation
Any poker player will tell you that bluffing is an essential element of
strategy. Bluffing is also important in strategic political interactions.
When we bluff we manipulate an adversary's beliefs. As was demon­
strated in the previous chapter, any player lacking complete informa­
tion must rely on beliefs when making a decision. When a game is
played over time, these beliefs can be updated. As such a game
progresses a player discloses information about its probability of mak­
ing a particular choice through the moves he or she makes. In game
theoretic terms, we say that one type of player is more likely to make a
certain choice than is another type of player. As players move, they
presumably reveal what types of players they are. Beliefs about an­
other player, however, can be manipulated easily. "Irrational" actions
can lead another player to the wrong conclusion about what type of
player he or she faces. In other words, reputation is used to manipu­
late the beliefs of another. In this chapter we feature the role of
incomplete information in repeated games, examining bluffing, com­
mitment, and reputation.
Chapter 3 served to differentiate game theory from decision the­
ory using Rohde's model of strategic ambition. Chapter 4 distin­
guished between perfect and imperfect information using Conybeare's
models of trade wars. In this chapter we return to the strategic model
of progressive ambition and Conybeare's Asymmetric Trade game,
presenting more fully explicated models that account for incomplete
information. Modeling the strategic interaction between a challenger
and an incumbent with incomplete information provides a richer un­
derstanding of strategic ambition. In this chapter we also introduce the
sanction game to examine the politics of commitment. Examining the
Asymmetric Trade game in an environment of incomplete information
with repeated play, we can appreciate the role that bluffing and com­
mitment can play in international politics.
The Chain Store game has been examined from a variety of
perspectives to provide insights for understanding the role of reputa­
tion. Many political scientists are familiar with the Chain Store para­
dox (Selten 1978). In Selten's original game, decisions are made in an
I 4 I

--- Sayfa 153 ---
1 42
Games, Information , and Politics
environment of complete and perfect information. The game involves
a chain store (M) with branches in 20 towns . In each of these towns
there is a potential competitor, k (where k E { I , 2, . . . 20}), who
decides whether or not to enter the market. This entry decision is
represented in the first decision node in one play of the extensive
game presented in figure 20. If the potential competitor actually enters
the market, the chain store monopolist can respond either aggressively
or cooperatively (seen in the second decision node in figure 20). The
game proceeds in the same fashion for all 20 potential competitors .
Using backwards induction , Selten determined that responding
aggressively to potential entrants is precluded by rational behavior
with complete and perfect information . In fact, the nonaggressive
response is a subgame perfect equilibrium. I Given the payoffs in the
final period, Player 20 will maximize her payoffs by entering the
market; the chain store's corresponding decision is to play coopera­
tively and not try to drive away the competition through predatory
pricing . 2 Working backward, the same decisions hold for all periods
of play. The equilibrium point for the chain store occurs when a
cooperative strategy is selected; this outcome , however, runs counter
to intuition . Selten contends that a paradox exists since a chain store
could deter entry by sanctioning early in the game to establish reputa­
tion effects . Thus, he argues that it makes more sense for the chain
store to play tough in the initial periods of the game to deter the entry
of additional competitors in the future . This is a solution contrary to
the one produced through game theoretic analysis. This divergence
between the intuitively derived best strategy and the subgame perfect
equilibrium is the source of the paradox . Selten's solution to this
paradox suggests a limited rationality view of decision making.
Kreps and Wilson ( 1 982) and Milgrom and Roberts ( 1 982) pro­
vide ways to resolve the Chain Store paradox by examining the game
under conditions of incomplete or asymmetric information. As has
been shown , if entrants (k) possess perfect information , a rational
monopolist (M) never responds aggressively to market entry; how­
ever, if entrants lack complete information , incumbent monopolists
(M) may select an aggressive strategy to deter subsequent market
entry. Milgrom and Roberts assume that entrants have doubts about
the alternatives available to the monopolist. Potential competitors thus
----
.--_ .... __ . .
. - ----. . . ------
1 . In equilibrium, no player has an incentive to alter a chosen strategy. Under
perfect equilibrium, the equilibrium holds for all subgames of a supergame. A more com­
plete discussion of subgame perfect equilibrium can be found in chapter 2.
2. Predatory pricing occurs when a firm cuts prices to drive other firms out of the
industry or to deter entry.

--- Sayfa 154 ---
out
1 ,5
Commitment, Bluffs, and Reputation
143
k
in
M
Aggressive
Cooperative
0,0
2,2
Fig. 20. Selten's Chain Store game. (From Selten 1978, 129. Repro­
duced with kind permission from Kluwer Academic Publishers.)
perceive that the monopolist may only be able to retaliate. For exam­
ple, a monopolist may not be a unitary rational actor and may be
locked into an aggressive response strategy due to some set of factors
affecting individuals within the firm. The source of the monopolist's
decision, however, is not the issue; what is relevant is the entrant's
doubt about whether the monopolist will respond cooperatively or
aggressively. It is this uncertainty that may deter market entry. Figure
21 provides a simplified representation of the Milgrom and Roberts
game, in which Nature dictates whether or not the monopolist (M) can
only respond aggressively. 3
Kreps and Wilson also consider the role of incomplete informa­
tion. Rather than focusing on the available alternatives, they examine
the payoffs of the incumbent firm. In this situation, the chain store is
either strong or weak. A weak monopolist faces the same payoffs as in
Selten's game; a strong monopolist, on the other hand, obtains a
higher payoff from responding aggressively to market entry than from
cooperating (even in the short run). This difference can be seen in a
simplified version of this game in figure 224 in which Nature deter­
mines whether a chain store (M) is strong or weak. A strong firm is
shown to obtain a payoff of 2 for an aggressive strategy as opposed to
o for a cooperative strategy; with a weak monopolist, cooperation
provides a payoff of 2, while aggressive behavior is a worse alterna­
tive, giving a payoff of O. Entrants in this situation lack the complete
information needed to determine whether the incumbent is a strong or
weak chain store. This uncertainty, in tum, may serve to deter market
3 . This figure is similar to one found in Trockel 1986 ( 1 63-79).
4. Again, see Trockel 1986.

--- Sayfa 155 ---
144
Games , Infonnation, and Politics
Nature
k
out
Aggressive
Cooperative
1,5
0,0
2,2
in
0,0
1 ,5
Fig. 21. Milgrom and Roberts' entry deterrence game. (From
Trockel 1986, 168. Reproduced with kind permission from Kluwer
Academic Publishers.)
out
entry. As long as this uncertainty exists, it becomes rational for even a
weak monopolist to play aggressively to establish a strong chain store
reputation early in the game in order to discourage market entry in the
later stages. The long-term benefits of building a reputation through
bluffing, then, may outweigh the short-term costs.
The Chain Store game provides insight beyond antitrust policy.
The Kreps and Wilson version of the Chain Store game has been
applied to political leadership in two very different contexts. Calvert
( 1 987) modifies the game to examine the effect of reputation on legis­
lative leadership. Alt, Calvert, and Humes (1988) apply a version of
this game to the international scene by examining hegemonic leader­
ship, specifically drawing on an example from recent developments in
the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC). Also
refer to chapter 2, where we applied this model to the conflict between
the United States and New Zealand regarding U.S. naval vessels
carrying nuclear weapons and the breakdown of ANZUS . In these
analyses , unlike those of Kreps and Wilson, costs may vary from one
situation to the next. Here the legislative followers (Calvert) and allies
of the hegemon (Alt, Calvert, and Humes) take on the role of entrants ,
choosing to obey or rebel in each period, t, of the game. The legisla­
tive leader, or hegemon , in tum , operates in the same manner as does
the chain store (M), deciding to either acquiesce or punish a rebellious
follower. Followers lack certainty about the payoffs available to a

--- Sayfa 156 ---
out
Aggressive
1,5
0,0
Commitment, Bluffs, and Reputation
145
in
M
Cooperative
Aggressive
Cooperative
2,2
1,5
0,2
2,0
Fig. 22. Kreps and Wilson's entry deterrence. (From Trockel 1986,
168. Reproduced with kind permission from Kluwer Academic Pub·
lishers.)
leader and thus can be deterred from rebelling if a leader possesses a
reputation for punishing rebels. In these two applications, a model
with incomplete information is used to show the role of reputation in
developing and maintaining leadership.
Commitment is another significant aspect of reputation. To ex­
amine commitment, Trockel (1986) makes another modification of
Selten's game. Rather than looking at situations of incomplete infor­
mation, Trockel examines this game in light of complete but imperfect
information. Under conditions of incomplete information, players are
uncertain about their opponents' choices since they lack information
about the other players' payoffs. With imperfect information, players
are unaware of what the other player has done. In a sequential game
this can make a big difference. Figure 23 provides a representation of
what happens when the choices are reversed with a weak monopolist.
Here the monopolist (M) decides first whether to cooperate or respond
aggressively. If Player k decides in ignorance of M's decision, it
makes no real difference to the entrant whether she is playing Selten's
or Trockel's game. (This lack of information is represented by the
information set connecting Player k's decision nodes.) Nevertheless,
the monopolist's decision is affected. In this new scenario, the mo­
nopolist must decide between cooperation and aggression before
knowing whether the potential competitor has chosen in or out. There
would be no difference between selecting cooperation or aggression if
the potential competitor decides not to enter, since there is no differ-

--- Sayfa 157 ---
1 46
Games, Information, and Politics
M
Aggressive
out
in
5 , 1
0,0
Cooperative
k
out
in
5, 1
2,2
Fig. 23. Trockel's entry deterrence game. (TrockeI 1986, 1 70. Repro­
duced with kind permission from Kluwer Academic Publishers.)
ence in the consequences. Yet, there is a difference in payoffs if the
monopolist chooses a cooperative strategy. Under these conditions,
the cooperative (in) path remains a perfect sequential equilibrium, but
now the aggressive (out) choice is also a sequential equilibrium. If
this game is repeated, a monopolist can develop a reputation for
playing aggressively and later entrants will respond by choosing to
stay out of the market Such a strategy does not call into question the
rationality of the monopolist but provides an equilibrium outcome.
To summarize, the characteristics of the Chain Store game, both
in Selten's (1978) and later variations, are listed below. First, all entry
firms are assumed to be essentially identical; the monopolist, there­
fore, faces little uncertainty. In fact, the potential competitor is the
player facing uncertainty regarding the ability of the chain store to
impose a sanction without incurring great costs. This, however, is not
the case with the Calvert (1987) and the Alt, Calvert, and Humes
(1988) versions of this game, where payoffs to the hegemon change
from time to time. Second, the payoffs of the Chain Store games do
not change over time; everything is held constant. Again, this is not
the case with either Calvert or Alt, Calvert, and Humes, where pay­
offs change with different players over time. Third, in the Chain Store
game, payoff values emanate from the qualities and capabilities of the
monopolist. Under conditions of incomplete information, payoffs
change with respect to the capabilities of the incumbent. Kreps and
Wilson (1982) make the distinction between strong and weak chain
stores. Potential market entrants face an uncertain decision about
whether an incumbent is weak or strong. This uncertainty, in turn, can

--- Sayfa 158 ---
Commitment, Bluffs, and Reputation
147
be used by the chain store in responding to entry; hence, a weak firm
can establish a reputation by acting as though it were strong and cost
effectively able to sanction a market entrant. Outside of these reputa­
tion effects, however, it is the capability to respond to market entry
that establishes the payoff levels.
Com mitment and International Sanctions
This section concerns when and why dominant nation-states will im­
pose sanctions on other powers. It also concerns the ability of one
country to induce policy change in another. In order to address these
points, the following questions need to be examined. How do these
factors motivate dominant states to impose or not impose sanctions,
and what are the costs and benefits associated with such sanctions?
The Sanction game involves several players: a dominant state (D)
and the recipients (Players, k E {I , 2, . . . , m}). The game is broken
down into a separate period for each actor. The payoffs for a single
period are shown below in figure 24 in an extensive form representa­
tion of the game. A recipient's best outome occurs when he or she
receives the benefits of the relationship with the donor without paying
the cost of the policy change. This payoff is represented as b.5 The
next best outcome occurs when a recipient acquiesces to the demands
of the donor. In this case, the recipient still receives the benefits of the
relationship but must bear the costs of policy reform. This payoff is
represented as b
-
c. The worst payoff for the recipient takes place
when he or she does not comply with the donor's conditions and is
subsequently sanctioned. This payoff is designated as
-d . The do­
nor's most preferred outcome occurs when the recipient complies with
the conditions and alters his or her policy. This payoff is represented
as h. The worst outcome for the donor takes place when the recipient
does not comply and the donor imposes sanctions. The cost of this
penalty to the donor is -p. A preference located somewhere between
these two outcomes occurs when the recipient does not comply and
the donor acquiesces. Since the donor avoids the costs of imposing a
sanction, this payoff is 0 for the donor. This game is then repeated for
each player. Thus , the single play game is part of a time dependent
supergame. The game proceeds as follows.
5 . The use of algebraic payoffs i s preferred to the use of cardinal numbers. We know
the preference ordering; we do not know how much more one outcome is valued than
another except by assumption. In this way, algebraic payoffs are more general . We pre­
sented numerical payoffs earlier because they are easier for the reader to follow.

--- Sayfa 159 ---
1 48
Games, Information, and Politics
K b - c
D b
comply
sanction
-d
-p
do not
comply
D
acquiesce
b
o
D
o
-r
K: b > b - c > O > -d
D: b > 0 > -r > -p
Fig. 24. The conditionality game
1 . In period t, Player D first decides whether or not to impose a
set of policy conditions designed to induce policy reform in
the recipient country, k E { I , . . . , m}. Thus, D chooses an
action, aD' from the feasible set, AD, where AD = {specify
conditions, no conditions}. If there is a decision not to impose
conditions for policy reform, neither player makes a move
during the remainder of this period, providing payoffs of
(0,0). On the other hand, if Player D announces a decision to
impose conditions for policy reform, the game continues.
2. Given a decision to specify conditions by Player D, Player k
chooses an action, ak> from the feasible set Ak = {comply, do
not comply}, where comply provides a payoff of (b, b - c) for
the period. If the recipient accepts the tenns of conditionality,
the dominant state, D , has no reason to respond with sanc­
tions, and the game ends for this round.
3 . If Player k chooses not to comply, D then must decide whether
or not to impose sanctions; if Player k opts for compliance, no
sanction decision is needed from Player D. The payoffs are
(-p, -d) if sanctions are chosen, (0, b) if they are not.
Given the structure of the Sanction game, equilibrium for each
period of the game lies along a path whereby conditions for policy

--- Sayfa 160 ---
Commitment, Bluffs, and Reputation
149
refonn are specified by D , the recipient of these conditions does not
comply with these policy refonns, and D responds by not sanctioning
the noncompliant aid recipient {(specify conditions, acquiesce), do not
comply}.
As with the Chain Store game, the outcome of Sanction is para­
doxical. Player D ought to be able to do better by being tough initially,
but he or she does not. By sanctioning the first recalcitrant recipients,
D could deter further noncompliance. When noncompliant recipients
are not sanctioned, future recipients are more likely to view continu­
ing to pursue controversial policies to be relatively risk free. In this
manner, the effect is not limited to future plays with recipient k, but is
extended to other recipients as well. For the most part, this aspect of
the Sanction game is borne out empirically. The cases in which sanc­
tions were implemented are regarded as exceptional. What is found is
that, despite following a utility maximizing strategy, a dominant state
playing the Sanction game finds that such a strategy does not lead to
an optimal outcome.
Essentially this is a problem of "dynamic inconsistency," whereby
selecting a decision that is best for the current situation is suboptimal
in the long run. For the Sanction game, the problem from D's perspec­
tive is not with a particular decision not to sanction but the effect of
such a choice on other recipients. Facing a noncompliant recipient, a
dominant state encounters a broad strategic choice. Should D follow a
reactive or finnly committed strategy?
A reactive strategy essentially is a decision made to satisfy short­
tenn interests that runs counter to a choice to maximize long-tenn
returns. Individuals face this dilemma regUlarly. After making a reso­
lution to start dieting, the reactive decision maker violates the resolu­
tion by taking a third helping of pie and ice cream. These backsliders
realize that such choices are not optimal, but they are maximizing in
the short run. The trick used by Ulysses facing the Sirens, as well as
most dieters, is to prevent oneself from following a reactive decision
path.6 Such techniques of binding involve an actor making a decision
at time t to increase the probability that another choice will be made at
time t. In the case of international sanctions, a dominant state follow­
ing a committed strategy essentially makes its choice before the recip­
ient does.
Up to this point, the Sanction game has portrayed D as a reactive
decision maker. In most cases, D chooses not to implement costly
sanctions, thereby opting to maximize payoffs for one round of the
Sanction game rather than over the long run. Figure 25 serves to focus
6. See Elster 1984, Schelling 1980, and Gates 1989.

--- Sayfa 161 ---
1 50
Games, Information , and Politics
K b - c
D
b
comply
K: b > b - c > -d
D: b > O > -p
K
sanction
-d
-p
do not
comply
D
acquiesce
b
o
fig. 25. A reduced form of the conditionality game
attention on the reactive nature of D's strategy. This figure portrays
one round of this part of the Sanction game. It is important to note that
many such games proceed in parallel, involving numerous recipients .
In a single round of the game, after the recipient has not complied
with the conditionality agreement, D must choose whether or not to
sanction the noncompliant recipient. Given a reactive strategy, D is
completely responsive to the immediate circumstances. D chooses to
maximize U (k,d ) such that d = D(k). Given that the recipient decides
whether or not to comply before D decides whether or not to sanction,
the recipient opts for i in order to maximize U(k,D(k)). For the Sanc­
tion game this means that recipients will choose noncompliance and D
reacts by not imposing costly sanctions.
Under a committed strategy, D could alter this outcome. Figure
26 diagrammatically demonstrates this point. This figure reflects the
one developed by Trockel ( 1986) as presented in figure 23 . A domi­
nant state, D, that can commit itself to sanctioning a noncompliant
recipient before the recipient can successfully deter such a decision.
Essentially, D commits to d before the recipient chooses. In this
manner, the recipient chooses to maximize U(k,d) such that k = K(d).
D commits to a choice of d to maximize U(K(d),d). In figure 26, the
recipient is shown to make its choice after D but in ignorance of D's
decision. This is represented by the information set connecting Player
k's decision node. The recipient thus makes its decision under com­
plete but imperfect information. This means that a committed D is
able to deter recipients from noncompliance.
Reputation plays a key role for both the recipient and the domi-

--- Sayfa 162 ---
do not
comply
D
-p
K
-d
D: b > O > -p
K: b > b - c > -d
Commitment, Bluffs, and Reputation
1 5 1
D
aggressive
acquiesce
K
comply
do not
comply
comply
b
0
b
b - c
b
b - c
Fig. 26. Conditionality with commitment
nant state. While dominant states have a difficult time appralsmg
compliance, they do have a pretty good idea about a recipient's record
of compliance in previous years; if a recipient develops a reputation
for never complying with any conditions, a dominant state interested
in imposing sanctions may determine that it is not worth attempting to
induce policy reform. Sanctioning countries do not know if a recipient
is going to comply with a particular condition but can use previous
actions as an indicator of future actions. In many respects, a sanction­
ing state's use of this reputation information is analogous to what
economists refer to as a signal. 7 A signal essentially serves to convey
otherwise unobservable information; in this way previous actions are
used to convey information about future decisions.
Reputation information is used by recipients as well as dominant
states . Powers that tend to follow reactive strategies develop a reputa­
tion for not sanctioning noncompliant recipients. Such a reputation
can be very costly, since no recipient is likely to be deterred by a
dominant state with a reputation for not sanctioning. This, in a nut­
shell, is the cost involved in following a short-run, maximizing, reac­
tive strategy.
Given the temptation of the short-run reward of a reactive strat­
egy, institutional devices are developed to limit or discourage such
choices. Without such devices, a committed strategy will be rare.
7. See Banks 1991 for applications of signaling games to politics.

--- Sayfa 163 ---
1 52
Games, Information, and Politics
These mechanisms essentially work by increasing the cost of reactive­
ness, Such attempts include limiting decision latitude or directly re­
ducing the payoffs of a reactive choice before the decision is made. In
other words, a decision is made ex ante to reduce the payoffs of a
reactive strategy ex post.
Laws serve as one method of limiting decision latitude to im­
prove commitment. Laws can restrict the actions of future decision
makers. For example, the U.S. Congress has passed legislation that
commits the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) to
particular actions . In particular, USAID is committed to sanctioning
aid recipients found to be insufficiently restraining the trafficking of
illegal narcotics or pursuing the development of nuclear weapons
capabilities. Such laws, of course, can also be repealed; however,
regularly repealing laws is costly. Nevertheless, the U.S. Congress
has repealed such laws. One such case involved the development of
nuclear weapons capabilities in Pakistan (Gates 1989). Legal restric­
tions can limit the reactiveness of bilateral foreign assistance donors
and insure that noncompliant recipients are sanctioned; such arrange­
ments, however, are not as applicable for multilateral institutions.
Note that the law restricts the dominant state. It does not limit the
recipient's ability to not comply with conditions specified by the dom­
inant state. Contracts can never specify all contingencies and are
unenforceable among sovereign states. The covenants of a condi­
tionality agreement essentially are contracts; yet, as with many inter­
national agreements, they are without legal authority. Dominant states
must rely on sanctioning noncompliant recipients themselves.
The other technique for avoiding the problems of a reactive strat­
egy is to reduce the costs of commitment. For the Sanction game this
involves diminishing the costs of imposing sanctions on noncompliant
recipients. By altering these costs, the relative payoffs from a reactive
choice are reduced, thereby making a reactive strategy less tempting.
The problem is that there are few mechanisms by which a power can
reduce the costs of commitment.
The important question is which is more important, maintaining
the international relationship or inducing policy change. If policy
reforms are more highly valued by a dominant state, a committed
strategy should be pursued. Alternatively, if maintaining the interna­
tional relationship (e.g. , continuing to give foreign aid or maintaining
most-favored-nation trade status) is more important than the policy
reforms prescribed by conditionality, then the costs of foregoing aid
make sanctioning too costly even in the long run. Things are seldom
so easy, however. Global powers often want both the benefits from the

--- Sayfa 164 ---
Commitment. Bluffs. and Reputation
1 53
relationship and the reforms that come with policy reform. This dilemma
basically comes down to a question of the value of policy reform.
Progressive Ambition with Incomplete Information
In chapter 3, we argued that Rohde's approach to studying progressive
ambition was problematic since he used a decision theoretic, as op­
posed to game theoretic, framework. We then developed two simple
game theoretic models involving the choices of a challenger and an
incumbent in deciding whether or not to run for the same office. One
model considered the case of a strong incumbent and the other the
case of a strong challenger. Both games assumed that the choices of
the candidates occurred simultaneously. In this section, a more com­
plicated model is developed. Using the techniques developed in the
previous chapters, we develop a game of incomplete information that
represents the choices faced by an incumbent and a potential chal­
lenger.
This game is presented in figure 27. In this game, Nature moves
first. With a probability of a the incumbent is stronger electorally than
is the challenger (A). With a probability of 1
-
a, the incumbent is
weaker than the challenger (B). While the value of a is known to both
the incumbent and the challenger, the actual choice of Nature is only
revealed to the incumbent. The challenger does not know if she is
facing a strong or a weak incumbent. After Nature moves, the incum­
bent must decide whether to retire (Rt) or run again (Rn). After making
this choice, the challenger must then decide whether to stay with her
present office (St) or run for the incumbent's elected office (En). This
decision is made with knowledge of the actions of the incumbent but
without knowledge of Nature's choice, that is, the incumbent's type.
What is the equilibrium in this game? Since we are dealing with a
game of incomplete information, we must search for Bayesian Nash
equilibria. As in the example in chapter 2, there are 16 possible
combinations of pure strategies. However, these combinations can be
summarized in six cases. In the rest of this section, we will develop
these cases.
Case (i): The incumbent chooses (a) Rn if Nature chooses A
and (b) Rt if Nature chooses B.
The challenger chooses (a) St if the incumbent
chooses to Rn
and (b) En if the incumbent
chooses to Rt•

--- Sayfa 165 ---
1 54
Games, Information, and Politics
Nature
1.-1
1,0
0,1
0,0
- 1 , 1
1,0
0,1
Fig. 27. A model of progressive ambition with incomplete informa­
tion
0,0
This case is not an equilibrium since the incumbent will choose to
change his strategy. If the challenger will not challenge the incum­
bent, the incumbent receives a better payoff by running regardless of
Nature's choice. In both possible scenarios, the incumbent increases
his payoff from 0 to 1 by choosing Rn instead of Rf•
How should the challenger react to this change in strategy? This
case is developed in case (ii).
Case (ii): The incumbent chooses (a) Rn if Nature chooses A
and (b) Rn if Nature chooses B.
The challenger chooses (a) Sf if the incumbent
chooses to Rn
and (b) En if the incumbent
chooses to Rf•
This case is not as simple to analyze. We need to resort to Bayes'
Theorem to consider whether this case is an equilibrium. The proba­
bility that the state of Nature is A, given that the incumbent chose Rn,
is provided in the following equation:
p(AIR ) -
p(RnIA)P(A)
n - p(RnIA)P(A) + p(RnIB)P(B) '
Substituting the appropriate values yields

--- Sayfa 166 ---
Commitment. Bluffs. and Reputation
155
This probability is then a. Similarly, P(B/Rn) = 1
- a.8 To decide
whether the challenger should choose St if the incumber chooses Rn,
one must examine the relationship between E(St/Rn) and E(En/Rn).
These values are calculated below. 9
E(St/Rn) > E(En/Rn}
a(O) + ( 1 - a)(O) > a(- l) + 1 ( 1
- a)
o > 1
- 2a
a > '12 .
If a is greater than 0.5, this strategy combination and set of beliefs
define a Bayesian Nash equilibrium. This equilibrium is a pooling
equilibrium since the incumbent will choose Rn regardless of Nature's
choice. If a is less than 0.5 , the challenger will change her strategy
such that she chooses En if the incumbent chooses to Rn- Thus, this
strategy combination is only an equilibrium if a is greater than 0.5 .
This brings us to our next case.
Case (iii): The incumbent chooses (a) Rn if Nature chooses A
and (b) Rn if Nature chooses B.
The challenger chooses (a) En if the incumbent
chooses to R n
and (b) En if the incumbent
chooses to Rt•
This case is not an equilibrium. The incumbent will be better off if he
chooses to R, when Nature chooses B given that the challenger is
going to run regardless of the incumbent's choice. By choosing Rn in
this case, the incumbent increases his payoff from
- 1 to O.
The change in strategy yields our next case, in which the incum­
bent chooses to Rn if Nature chooses A and chooses to Rt if Nature
chooses B, while the challenger chooses En regardless of the action of
the incumbent.
Case (iv): The incumbent chooses (a) Rn if Nature chooses A
and (b) Rt if Nature chooses B.
The challenger chooses (a) En if the incumbent
chooses to Rn
and (b) En if the incumbent
chooses to Rt.
8. The challenger gains no new infonnatlon from observing the incumoent's actlOn
in this case. The P(A) is equal to the p(AIRn).
9. We use cardinal utilities here so that the results can be more easily compared with
the games presented in chapter 3 .

--- Sayfa 167 ---
1 56
Games, Information , and Politics
This case is not an equilibrium. The challenger will choose St if the
incumbent chooses Rn since this yields the challenger a instead of - 1 .
In this case, the challenger, realizing that the incumbent is truthfully
revealing his type, has no incentive to challenge an incumbent who
does not retire. An incumbent who runs for reelection will only be a
strong incumbent in this case. Of course, this change does not yield an
equilibrium because the incumbent now has an incentive to bluff, as
was shown in case (i).
Thus far, we have considered combinations of strategies individ­
uall y. In dealing with the remaining 1 2 strategy combinations, we will
consider them jointly in the two remaining cases . The first eight are
considered in the following case.
Case (v): The incumbent chooses (a) Rt if Nature chooses A.
This case is also not an equilibrium. If Nature chooses A, the incum­
bent knows that he can defeat the challenger. Why, then, would the
incumbent choose to retire? In each of the eight cases of strategy
combinations that involve the incumbent retiring if Nature chooses A,
he would want to choose instead to run for reelection.
The remaining four possible pure strategy combinations can be
examined by using the following case.
Case (vi): The challenger chooses (b) St if the Incumbent chooses
to Rt.
This case cannot be an equilibrium since the challenger should always
run if the incumbent retires. The office is there for the taking . Why,
then, would she choose not to run?
In this game, we have identified one perfect Bayesian Nash equi­
librium with pure strategies. This arose from case (ii). This equilib­
rium seems to be a "reasonable" one. It calls for a challenger to refrain
from running for the higher office if she believes that there is a greater
than 0.5 probability of the incumbent being strong. Alternatively, if
the challenger believes that this probability is actually less than 0.5,
she will choose to run regardless of the actions of the incumbent. This
equilibrium only holds for a certain set of beliefs.
How does this game enhance Rohde's analysis? In this analysis,
we have explicitly considered the interaction between the incumbent
and a potential challenger. The actions of the incumbent have been
shown to depend on those of the challenger and vice versa. In addition,
we have considered how subjective beliefs concerning the strength of

--- Sayfa 168 ---
Commitment. Bluffs. and Reputation
1 57
the challenger and incumbent can affect the outcome of this game.
These are all factors Rohde could not consider given his decision
theoretic framework.
Asymmetric Trade with Incomplete Information
Bluffing has special relevance in the Asymmetric Trade game. Recall
our presentation of Conybeare's Asymmetric Trade game in chapter 4
(portrayed in matrix 18 as a matrix form and in fig. 1 1 as an extensive
form). One could also refer to Asymmetric Trade as a game involving
a "predatory hegemon." Does incomplete information make it more
tempting for a small country to attempt to deter a large country from
defecting (from playing the role of the predator)? Yes, incomplete
information does make a difference. Consider the extensive form of
the Asymmetric Trade game. With complete and perfect information,
a small country will cooperate even when moving first in a sequential
choice game to avoid what it regards as the disastrous outcome of
mutual defection. As long as there is a final decision node, large
countries will always defect, knowing that they can prey on the coop­
erative small power. With incomplete information, it is possible for a
small country to bluff that it is also strong or at least capable of
standing up to the large power. Conybeare describes such a situation
"where the small country is willing to hurt itself (or credibly threaten
to hurt itself) in order to hurt the large country" (1987, 36). See figure
28 . As is evident from this game, Nature determines whether the
small country, X, is weak or strong. A weak X cannot harm Y, but a
strong X can harm Y. Moreover, a large country facing a strong small
country will prefer to cooperate while a large country facing a weak
small country will prefer to defect. Essentially, this game involves a
situation that is characterized either by the Asymmetric Trade game
(when X is weak) or the Stag Hunt game (when X is strong). The large
country (Y) is uncertain as to which game it is playing.
1 . Nature determines the type of the small country (X) from a set
of types, ti E T, where T = {weak, strong}. Type t is drawn
with a probability distribution of O(ti), where OCt;) > 0 and
OCT) = 1 .
2. Small country X observes ti and then chooses an action, ax,
from the feasible set Ax, where Ax = {defect, cooperate}.
3. Large country Y observes small country X's choice under in­
complete information and chooses an action, ay, from the
feasible set Ay = {defect, cooperate}. Large country Y, mak-

--- Sayfa 169 ---
1 58
Games , Information , and Politics
defects
Nature
X (strong)
X (weak)
x
x
defects
cooperates
defects
cooperates
/
/
y Ő
/
/
cooperates
defects
cooperates
defects
cooperate
defects
cooperates
2,2
3, 1
1,3
4,4
1 ,4
2, 1
3,3
4 ,2
Fig , 28. A variation on Asvmmetric Trade
ing a decision with incomplete infonnation, utilizes Bayes'
rule to update its beliefs (/-ty) about small country X's type.
4. Payoffs are given by UX(ti, ax, ay) and Uy(ti' ax, ay).
To analyze this game we begin as before with backwards induc­
tion starting at the bottom of the game tree. We start with the final
decision node of the large country Y. At this point the large country
will only know whether the small country has defected or cooperated;
it will not know whether X is strong or weak. If X defects, Y has a
dominant strategy to defect also. Given that X defects, if X is strong, Y
will receive a payoff of 2; if X is weak, Y gets a payoff of 3. \0 Despite
the differences in payoffs, the decision is the same. The large country
Y has a dominant strategy to defect whenever the small country X
defects .
The situation is different if the small country X cooperates. Given
incomplete information, Y must decide to cooperate or defect contin­
gent upon its beliefs about X's type. If X is strong and X has cooper­
ated, Y gets a payoff of 4 for cooperation and 3 for defection. If X is
weak and X has cooperated, Y obtains a payoff of 2 for cooperation
and 4 for defection . There is no dominant strategy in this situation.
10. We also use cardinal utilities here so that comparisons to chapter 4 and
Conybeare's analysis can be made more easily.

--- Sayfa 170 ---
Commitment, Bluffs, and Reputation
1 59
Given this problem, in which Y does not know what type of X it
faces, Y uses Bayes' rule to make a decision under uncertainty such
that:
JA,y(axlt = strong)JA,y(t = strong) + JA,y(axlt = weak)JA,y(t = weak) ,
where p.,y(t = stronglax) is the conditional probability that X will be a
strong type given the action, ax, taken by X, p.,y(axlt = strong) is
the conditional probability of ax given t = strong, p.,y(t = strong) is
the prior belief that t = strong would occur, and p.,y(axlt = strong)
p.,y(t = strong) + p.,y(axlt = weak) p.,y(t = weak) is the marginal
likelihood of seeing ax given either t = strong or t = weak. l l The
strong country Y can use Bayes' rule to estimate the probability of the
small country being strong, such that:
JA,y(t = strong I coop)
JA,y(cooplt = strong)JA,y(t = strong)
JA,y(cooplt = strong)JA,y(t = strong) + JA,y(cooplt = weak)JA,y(t = weak) '
This calculation of beliefs, in tum, can be used to calculate Y's
expected utilities for cooperating and defecting. The expected utility
of such a decision can be calculated by multiplying Y's beliefs about
the type of X it faces with the payoff associated with being on each
respective branch of the game tree.
Now move up the game tree to the decision made by the small
power X; here X knows its type. The game possesses asymmetric
information; liberalizers possess complete and perfect information
while society must operate with incomplete information. X also
knows that if it defects, Y has a dominant strategy also to defect
regardless of whether X is strong or weak. We can see that the best X
can achieve if it defects is a payoff of 2 (when X is strong and Y
defects); if X is weak, (defect, defect) gives X a payoff of 1 . Using
backwards induction we can compare the payoffs from defection with
those from cooperation. If X cooperates, the worst it can do is get a
payoff of 2 (when Y defects and X is weak).
To analyze this game, we examine a set of four possible equilib­
rium candidates. The strategy combination {(defect, cooperate), co­
operate} is ruled out as an equilbrium by backwards induction.
1 1 . All alternatives are summed in this manner. In this case, there are two alternative
conditions for t, weak and strong.

--- Sayfa 171 ---
1 60
Games, Information, and Politics
Case (i): {cooperate, cooperate}. This equilibrium is detennined
(as are all of these equilibrium candidates) by y's beliefs re­
garding X's type. This equilibrium occurs whenever Y's ex­
pected utility for cooperating exceeds that of defecting, such
that Ey(cooperate) > Ey(defect). This depends on Y's beliefs
about X's type.
Case (ii): {cooperate, defect}. This equilibrium exists if Y's ex­
pected utility for defecting exceeds that of cooperating, such
that Ey(cooperate) < Ey(defect). This also depends on Y's
beliefs.
Case (iii): {(defect, cooperate), defect}. This equilibrium exists
when Y believes that X is weak, whereby: Ey(defect) < Ey(co­
operate).
Case (iv): (mixed strategy equilibrium). We can calculate the
mixed strategy by estimating when the large power Y is indif­
ferent between cooperating and defecting, such that Ey(coop­
erate)
= Ey(defect). To calculate Y's expected payoff from
cooperating under conditions of incomplete infonnation about
X's type, we use Y's subjective beliefs about X's type, such that
Ey(coop) = p.y(t = strongjcoop)4 + p.y(t = weakjcoop)2.
The expected payoffs for defecting are calculated similarly, such that
Ey(defect) = p.y(t = stronglcoop)3 + p.y(t = weaklcoop)4.
Setting these equations equal to one another, we can calculate the
portion of time Y would have to believe that X is strong for it to be
indifferent between cooperating and defecting, such that
p.y(t = strongjcoop)4 + [ 1 - p.y(t = stronglcoop)]2
= p.y(t = strongjcoop)3 + [1 - p.y(t = strongjcoop)]4.
Simplifying this , we see
p.y(t = strongicoop)2 + 2 = 4 - p.y(t = strongjcoop).
Further simplifying,
p.y(t = strongjcoop) = 213 .
This means that Y's belief that given a decision by small power X to
cooperate , it will face a strong X two-thirds of the time . In this manner

--- Sayfa 172 ---
Commitment. Bluffs. and Reputation
1 6 1
we determine the mixed strategy equilibrium, where X has a weakly
dominant strategy to cooperate and Y will cooperate or defect half of
the time if it believes that X is strong two-thirds of the time.
This belief can also be used to determine the other equilibrium
candidates. These results demonstrate a situation in which a large
country's beliefs about the type of small country it faces can lead to
cooperative behavior. We should note here that this result does not
stem from the behavior of the small country X but from Nature and
Y's beliefs about Nature's role in determining whether X is strong or
weak. Beliefs and uncertainty play a big role in this game. Under
certain conditions this uncertainty, coupled with the large power Y's
beliefs about X, will lead it to cooperate. Such beliefs, in this way,
lead to mutual cooperation. Accounting for the role of beliefs and
incomplete information allows us to see how mutual cooperation
could emerge between large and small trading partners.
Summary
In this chapter we have discussed the role of reputation, bluffing, and
commitment. These three issues inherently involve situations in which
one party lacks complete information about another. Beliefs play a big
role in helping us analytically determine the equilibria for games with
incomplete information. Backwards induction does not allow us to
cross the multiple nodes that define games of incomplete information.
By incorporating the concept of beliefs and utilizing Bayes' Theorem
we can express the likelihood of a player's move from each node of an
information set as an expected utility calculation. Beliefs determine
the subjective probabilities of the expected utility calculation. Such a
technique demonstrates how beliefs and strategies are interrelated.
By directly incorporating beliefs into our analysis we also can
begin to explore the subjective aspects of choice and action. In the
game theoretic models presented in this book, outcomes, actions, and
choice stem from the interplay between beliefs and strategies. Equi­
libria derive directly from this interplay. To model the complexities of
strategic political interaction realistically, we are sometimes going to
have to incorporate beliefs into our analysis . Bluffing , reputation , and
commitment play too big a role in politics to be ignored.

--- Sayfa 174 ---
C H A PTER 7
Conclusion
Over the last 15 years the use of game theory in political science has
exploded in popUlarity. Pick up any copy of the American Political
Science Review or the American Journal of Political Science and this
becomes quite evident. Yet, a good proportion of the political science
community has no background or training in this methodology. We
provide an introductory overview of game theoretic methodology in
this book. However, our aim in writing this book is to address some
common problems affecting a significant portion of work that applies
game theory to political science. By attempting to clarify some popu­
lar misconceptions about game theoretic methodology and explicitly
discussing what constitutes good work in this area, we hope to dem­
onstrate the power and utility of game theoretic analysis.
In the introduction we discussed some basic principles that char­
acterize good works in applied game theory. These criteria include:
explicit assumptions, explicit and rigorous analysis (where the struc­
ture of the game is reproducible), and clear conclusions. The very best
work also demands that we reassess the ways in which we view the
world. Yet, despite the widespread use of some very sophisticated
game theoretic techniques, there are many cases in which scholars fail
to meet these criteria. All too often they rely heavily on extragame
theoretic assumptions or analysis. Throughout this book we have fo­
cused on this problem. More specifically, we have identified some
specific problems, including: not taking into account the strategic
interaction between players, not explicitly modeling the structure of
the game, and not explicitly modeling information asymmetries that
may exist between political actors.
With these factors in mind, a summary of the chapters of the
book is provided in the next section. This summary highlights the
problems noted in the previous paragraph. Following this section, we
provide the reader with a list of criteria for evaluating applications of
game theory to political situations. This checklist reinforces the
themes developed in this book.
1 63

--- Sayfa 175 ---
1 64
Games, Information, and Politics
Summary
Chapter 2 provided an overview of game theoretic techniques and a
discussion of ho"w to apply such models to politics. The chapter de­
votes considerable attention to the concepts of incomplete and imper­
fect information. Information asymmetries play an important role in
political interactions. Game theoretic models provide a nice vehicle
for explicitly accounting for the role information plays in politics.
Using the example of the conflict between New Zealand and the
United States, we demonstrate how to model political phenomena
with game theory. In modeling this interaction, we illustrate how we
can use different techniques to bring additional information into the
model instead of relying on explanations outside of our game theoretic
framework.
In chapters 3 and 4 we explored the differences between decision
theory and game theory. When is a game really a game? Chapter 3
explicitly examines how the strategic interaction between political
actors affects their behavior and compares this with situations in
which there is no strategic interaction. In this chapter, we draw from
Rohde ( 1 979) to examine how using decision theory versus game
theory alters our interpretation of a political phenomenon. Here we
address a fundamental assumption of game theory. Does the political
phenomenon in question involve strategic play between actors? With­
out strategic play, a decision theoretic framework is appropriate. With
strategic play, one should turn to a game theoretic framework.
Chapter 4, in part, explores the same issue as chapter 3 does by
contrasting two-player, small N-player, and large N-player games.
Here we discuss how large numbers of players can fundamentally
alter the nature of choice. The key difference is whether actors realize
that their actions affect one another. The decisions made by actors in
large N-player games are best modeled with decision theory; we see
such situations in economics, where firms or consumers are price
takers in a perfectly competitive market. When markets are not per­
fectly competitive and actors' decisions do affect one another, we
should use game theoretic analysis. As with economics, political phe­
nomena that involve large numbers of players, where individual ac­
tions do not affect others' behavior, should be modeled with decision
theoretic models. Game theory should be employed when interactions
are strategically motivated.
Chapter 4 also examines the importance of providing an explicit
presentation and analysis of the structure of a game. By providing an

--- Sayfa 176 ---
Conclusion
1 65
explicit analysis of the structure of a game, some insights into the
information conditions of the game can be obtained. Imperfect infor­
mation, especially regarding the sequence of decisions that takes
place in a game, can play a big role in some games. In particular,
chapter 4 is an examination of Conybeare's analysis of trade conflict.
We demonstrate how Conybeare's conclusions are strengthened by
drawing exclusively on game theoretic analysis instead of factors
outside his games.
Chapters 5 and 6 explore the issue of incomplete information,
with particular emphasis on how players deal with uncertainty by
updating their beliefs. Using the concept of perfect Bayesian equilib­
rium, we model this process. In chapter 5 we reexamine Przeworski's
analysis of democratic transition. We show how explicitly modeling
uncertainty enhances Przeworski's work. We are able to integrate the
different models presented by Przeworski, deepening and strengthen­
ing his conclusions by only relying on game theoretic analysis.
Chapter 6 further examines specific topics of reputation, bluffs,
commitment, and beliefs. Here we reanalyze some games presented
in chapters 3 and 4, drawing on incomplete information and perfect
Bayesian equilibrium. More specifically, we extend our analysis of
progressive ambition among political candidates where politicians
make their decisions under uncertainty about the electoral strength of
the other candidate or possible candidate. We also extend our discus­
sion of Conybeare 's model of asymmetric trade with incomplete infor­
mation. In addition, we consider efforts by one government to induce
policy reform in another country (sometimes referred to as condi­
tionality). By drawing on the perfect Bayesian equilibrium technique
we are able to directly incorporate the issues of reputation, bluffs, and
commitment to the updating of beliefs in these three examples.
In this book, our examples have been drawn from three subfields
of political science. We used these cases to highlight the problems that
need to be addressed when employing game theoretic methods. To a
large extent we chose the three works by Rohde, Coneybeare, and
Przeworski because of their widespread recognition. We do not mean
specifically to call these works into question. In each case, our anal­
ysis never threatens the major thesis of the author; in fact, in most
cases our analysis strengthens each author's claims. Instead, our focus
is to model explicitly the assertions and contentions these authors
make outside of their game theoretic framework. This problem is
particularly relevant for Conybeare and Przeworski. We demonstrate
here that game theoretic techniques can be applied to situations that

--- Sayfa 177 ---
1 66
Games , Information, and Politics
integrate the authors' assertions. Using these techniques does not lead
us to contradictory results; rather, the results strengthen Conybeare's
and Przeworski's conclusions.
Applying Game Theoretic Models to Politics
In the previous section, we reviewed how we have dealt with integrat­
ing considerations that authors have left outside of their games into an
explicit game theoretic framework. In this section, we provide readers
with a checklist with which to consider their own applications of game
theory to political interactions as well as those of others. When apply­
ing game theoretic methods to the analysis of politics, here are some
specific points that should be addressed.
Assumptions
-Have you made the assumptions clear?
-Is the model consistent with the assumptions?
-Have you identified all the actors that play the game?
-Have you clearly explicated the characteristics of choice,
information, and the game structure?
-Have you been explicit about the payoffs?
Analysis
-Have you been explicit about the actions, events, and
general structure of the game?
-Is the analysis of the equilibria explicit and clear? Is it
replicable?
-Have you been clear about what type of equilibrium con­
ditions you have employed?
Conclusions
-Are your conclusions clear?
-Are your conclusions drawn from the analysis of your
game? Do your conclusions stem from your equilibria
analysis?
-Have you been careful to employ assumptions and anal­
ysis that are related only to your game? Have you avoided
drawing on nongame theoretic analysis?
-If you alter your assumptions or analytical structure , how
does this affect your game?
-If you alter the equilibria concept, how does this affect
the game?

--- Sayfa 178 ---
Conclusion
1 67
After answering each of these, a final question should be addressed.
This may be the most important of all: How does the game theoretic
model help our understanding of politics?
Let us appraise each of the questions listed in the checklist. Start
with the assumptions. Each of these questions is oriented toward
getting you to think about making assumptions clear and formal.
These questions also force you to think about which factors are to be
considered explicitly within the game and which are not. One of game
theory's chief advantages is the explicit nature of its assumptions. By
being explicit about one's assumptions, one is able to be clear about
which factors are important in the political interaction and which are
not. Any analyst applying game theory to political science should be
aware of this advantage and act accordingly.
Another advantage of game theory stems from the formal nature
of the analysis employed. The questions asked concerning the anal­
ysis focus on such methodological issues as replicability and clarity of
the analysis . At this stage, it is important to clearly note how the
factors that you chose to include in the model through the selection of
your assumptions fit into the game . In addition, it is also beneficial to
think about how varying an analytical technique can lead to different
conclusions. For example, do your results differ if you vary the
amount of information that the various players possess, that is, chang­
ing a game of perfect information to one of imperfect information or
changing a game of incomplete information to one of complete infor­
mation? The more your results are reachable, regardless of these
choices, the more robust your result will be.
The third advantage involves conclusions. Here the analyst is
reminded of how the assumptions and analysis are interconnected and
used to derive conclusions. These questions primarily deal with the
sanctity of the model . Do your conclusions arise from your game
theoretic approach or is your model discarded and replaced with extra­
game reasoning? Throughout this text, we have argued that many of
the factors addressed through extragame factors can be integrated into
the games themselves. It also important to note that in addition to
outside factors we note the importance of examining the robustness of
your results again. If you change your model slightly will you get
different results? The more robust the model, the more confident we
are of its results.
These three areas-assumptions, analysis, and conclusions­
make game theoretic analysis a fruitful enterprise. The rigor and
precision of this technique can lead us to startling new conclusions,

--- Sayfa 179 ---
1 68
Games, Information, and Politics
call into question accepted perspectives, and provide a way of sifting
through a complex and varied set of empirical analyses. All we need
to do is let the method work for us, that is, apply it correctly and
properly carry out application.
There are many advanced topics that we have not examined in
this book. For the most part, the techniques we utilized are not sophis­
ticated. Those looking for more technical and sophisticated modeling
approaches should seek out a good text in game theory. We have
limited our analysis to concepts that are more widely used and
learned. Our chief aim is to demonstrate how game theoretic models
can be used to effectively model political phenomena and conditions.
Game theoretic modeling techniques are available that can serve
to strengthen work and, more importantly, to make such work analyt­
ically consistent. Game theory is a formal analytical tool that provides
rigor and consistency to any analysis. Good game theory inherently
involves the employment of explicit and clear analysis, rigorous anal­
ysis, and clear conclusions. Game theory benefits considerably from
rigor and explicitness. That is what game theory is good for and how
it should be used.

--- Sayfa 180 ---
References
Abramson, Paul R . , John H . Aldrich, and David W. Rohde . 1 987. Progressive
Ambition among United States Senators: 1 972- 1 988. Journal of Politics
49:3-35 .
Abramson, Paul R . , John H . Aldrich, and David W. Rohde . 1 995 . Change and
Continuity in the 1994 Elections. Washington, D. c . : Congressional Quar­
terly Press.
Aldrich, John H . 1 993 . Rational Choice and Turnout. American Journal of Politi­
cal Science 37:246-78 .
Aldrich, John . H . , and William T. B ianco. 1 99 1 . A Game-Theoretic Model of
Party Affiliation of Candidates and Office Holders . Unpublished Manuscript.
Aldrich, John H . , and William T. Bianco. 1 992. A Game-Theoretic Model of
Party Affiliation of Candidates and Office Holders . Mathematical and Com­
puter Modelling 16: 1 03- 1 6.
Alt, James, Randall L. Calvert, and Brian D . Humes . 1 988. Reputation and
Hegemonic Stability: A Game-theoretic Analysis . American Political Sci­
ence Review 82 :445-66 .
Aumann , Robert J. 1 989. Game Theory. In The New Palgrave: Game Theory,
edited by John Eatwell , Murray Milgate , and Peter Newman. New York:
W. W. Norton.
Aumann, Robert, ed. 1 98 1 . Essays in Game Theory and Mathematical Eco­
nomics in Honor of Oscar Morgenstern. Mannheim: Bibliographisches Insti­
tut .
Austen-Smith, David. 1 990. Information Transmission in Debate . American
Journal of Political Science 34: 1 20-52 .
Austen-Smith, David, and Jeffrey S . Banks. 1 989. Electoral Accountability and
Incumbency. In Models of Strategic Choice in Politics, edited by Peter
Ordeshook. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press .
Austen-Smith, David , and Jeffrey Bank s . 1 990. Stable Governments and the
Allocation of Policy Portfolios . American Political Science Review 37:799-
833 .
Austen-Smith, David, and William H . Riker. 1 987. Asymmetric Information and
the Coherence of Legislation. American Political Science Review 8 1 :897-
9 1 8 .
Austen-Smith, David, and William H . Riker. 1 990. Asymmetric Information and
the Coherence of Legislation: Correction. American Political Science Review
84:243-48 .
Axelrod, Robert. 1 970. Conflict of Interest. Chicago: Markham Press.
Axelrod, Robert. 1 980a. Effective Choice in the Prisoners' Dilemma. Journal of
Conflict Resolution 24:3-25 .
1 69

--- Sayfa 181 ---
1 70
References
Axelrod , Robert . 1 980b. More Effective Choice in the Prisoners' Dilemma.
Journal of Conflict Resolution 24:379-403 .
Axelrod, Robert . 1 98 1 . The Emergence of Cooperation among Egoists . Ameri­
can Political Science Review 75: 306- 1 8 .
Axelrod , Robert . 1 984. The Evolution of Cooperation . New York: Basic Books .
Axelrod , Robert, and Lisa D 'Ambrosia. 1 994. Annotated Bibliography on The
Evolution o{ Cooperation . Unpublished manuscript, University of Michi­
gan .
Axelrod , Robert, and Doug Dion . 1 988 . The Further Evolution of Cooperation .
Science 242: 1 385-90.
Axelrod, Robert , and Robert Keohane . 1 985. Achieving Cooperation Under An­
archy: Strategies and Institutions. World Politics 38: 226-54 .
Bahnzhaf, 1.
1 965 . Weighted Voting Doesn't Work: A Mathematical Study.
Rutgers Law Review 1 9: 3 1 7-43 .
Banks, Jeffrey. 1 989. Agency Budgets , Cost Information, and Auditing. Ameri­
can Journal of Political Science 3 3 : 670-99 .
Banks , Jeffrey. 1 99 1 . Si!?nallin!? Games in Political Science . New York: Harwood
Academic Press .
Banks , Jeffrey S . , and Roderick D . Kiewiet. 1 989 . Explaining Patterns of Candi­
datc Compctition in Congressional Elections . American Journal o{ Political
Science 33:997- 1 0 1 5 .
Banks, Jeffrey, and Joel Sobe l . 1 987 . Equilibrium Selection i n Signalling Games.
Econometrica 55:647-6 1 .
Banks, Jeffrey, and Barry Weingast . 1 992. The Political Control of Bureaucracies
under Asymmetric Information. American Political Science Review 36:509-
25 .
Baron , David . 1 99 1 . Majoritarian Incentives, Pork Barrel Programs , and Pro­
cedural Control . American Journal of Political Science 35:57-90.
Baron, David , and John Ferejohn . 1 989. Bargaining in Legislatures. American
Political Science Review 83: 1 1 8 1 -206 .
Bendor, Jonathan . 1 988. Review Article: Formal Models of Bureaucracy. British
Journal o{ Political Science 1 8: 35 3-95 .
Bendor, Jonathan , Serge Taylor, and Roland Van Gaalen . 1 987 . Politicians, Bu­
reaucrats, and Asymmetric Information . American Journal of Political Sci­
ence 3 1 : 796-828 .
Bianco, William , and Robcrt Bates . 1 990 . Cooperation By Design: Leadership,
Structure , and Collective Dilemmas . American Political Science Review
84: 1 33-47 .
Binmore. Ken. 1 993 . De-Bayesing Game Theory. In Frontiers of Game Theory ,
edited by Ken Binmore , Alan Kirman, and Piero Tani . Boston: MIT Press.
Brace , Paul . 1 984 . Progressive Ambition in the House : A Probabilistic Ap­
proach. Journal of Politics 46:556-7 1 .
Brams, Stevcn 1. 1 978 . The Presidential Election Game . New Haven: Yale Uni­
vcrsity Press .
Brams, Steven 1. , and William H . Riker. 1 97 2 . Models of Coalition Formation in
Voting Bodies . In Mathematical Applications in Political Science , VI, edited
by 1. L. Bernd . Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia.
Browne , Eric C. and Mark N. Franklin . 1 973 . Aspects of Coalition Payoffs in
European Parliamentary Democracies . American Political Science Review
67:453-69 .

--- Sayfa 182 ---
References
1 7 1
Bueno de Mesquita, Bruce , and David Lalman. 1992. War and Reason: Domestic
and International Imperatives. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Calvert, Randall. 1 986. Models of Imperfect Information in Politics. New York:
Harwood Academic Press.
Calvert, Randall. 1 987. Reputation and Legislative Leadership. Public Choice
55:8 1 - 1 19.
Canon, David T. , and David 1. Sousa. 1 992. Party System Change and Political
Career Structures in the United States Congress. Legislative Studies Quar­
terly 17:347-63 .
Cho, In-Koo, and David M . Kreps. 1 987. Strategic Stability and Stable Equi­
libria. Quarterly Journal of Economics 102: 179-221 .
Conybeare, John A. C . 1 987. Trade Wars: The Theory and Practice of Interna­
tional Commercial Rivalry . New York: Columbia University Press.
Copeland, Gary. 1989. Choosing to Run: Why House Members Seek Election to
the Senate . Legislative Studies Quarterly 14:549-65 .
Cox , Gary, and Mathew McCubbins. 1 993 . Legislative Leviathan: Party Govern­
ment in the House . Berkeley: University of California Press.
Dekel , Eddie and Drew Fudenberg. 1 990. Rational Play under Payoff Uncer­
tainty. Journal of Economic Theory 52:243-67.
DeSwaan, Abraham. 1 970. An Empirical Model of Coalition-formation as an
N- person Game of Policy Distance Minimization. In The Study of Coalition
Behavior, edited by Sven Groenning , E . Kelley, and Michael Leiserson.
New York: Holt, Rinehart , and Winston.
Dodd, Lawrence. 1 976. Coalitions in Parliamentary Government. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Downs, George, and David M . Rocke . 1 990. Tacit Bargaining, Arms Races, and
Arms Control. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Elster, Jon. 1 984. Ulysses and the Sirens: Studies in Rationality and Irrationality.
Rev. ed. New York: Cambridge University Press .
Enelow, James, and Melvin Hinich . 1 984. The Spatial Theory of Voting: An
Introduction . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Fearon, James. 1 990. Deterrence and the Spiral Model: The Role of Costly
Signalling in Crisis Bargaining. Paper presented at the annual meetings of
the American Political Science Association, San Francisco.
Fearon, James. 1994 . Signalling versus the Balance of Power and Interests .
Journal of Conflict Resolution 38:236-69.
Ferejohn , John. 1 986. Logrolling in an Institutional Context: A Case Study of
Food Stamp Legislation. In Congress and Public Policy, edited by Gerald C.
Wright, Leroy N . Rieselbach, and Lawrence C . Dodd. New York: Agathon
Press.
Fiorina, Morris . 1 98 1 . Retrospective Voting in American National Elections. New
Haven: Yale University Press .
Fowler, Linda. 1 993 . Candidates, Congress, and the American Democracy. Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Friedman, James . 1 97 1 . A Noncooperative Equilibrium for Supergames . Review
of Economic Studies 38: 1 - 12.
Friedman, James . 1 986. Game Theory with Applications to Economics. New
York: Oxford University Press .
Friedman, James. 1990. Game Theory with Applications to Economics. 2d ed.
Boston: MIT Press.

--- Sayfa 183 ---
172
References
Fudenberg, Drew, David Kreps , and David Levine . 1988. On the Robustness of
Equilibrium Refinements . Journal of Economic Theory 44:354-80.
Fudenberg, Drew, and Eric Maskin. 1 986. The Folk Theorem in Repeated Games
with Discounting or with Incomplete Information. Econometrica 54:533-
54.
Fudenberg, Drew, and Jean Tirole. 1 99 1 . Game Theory. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Gates, Scott . 1989. The Limits of Conditionality: An Examination of Individual
Incentives and Structural Constraints. Ph .D. diss . , University of Michigan .
Gates, Scott, and Sherry Bennett Quinones. 1 994 . Game Theoretic and Empirical
Methodologies: Ever the Two Shall Meet? Political Methodologist 6(2):30-
36.
Geanakopolis, John. 1 992. Common Knowledge . Journal of Economic Perspec­
tives 6(4):58-82.
Geanakopolis, John. 1 994. Common Knowledge . In Handbook of Game Theory
with Economic Applications, Vol. 2 , edited by Robert 1. Aumann and Sergiu
Hart . Amsterdam: North Holland Press .
Green, Donald, and Ian Shapiro. 1 994. Pathologies of Rational Choice Theory: A
Critique and Applications in Political Science . New Haven: Yale University
Press .
Green , E. , and R . Porter. 1 984. Noncooperative Collusion Under Imperfect Price
Information . Econometrica 52:87- 100.
Harsanyi , John . 1 967 . Games o f Incomplete Information Played by Bayesian
Players . Management Science 14: 1 59-82, 320-34, 486-502 .
Hibbing , John R . 1 982a. Choosing to Leave. Washington, D.C . : University Press
of America.
Hibbing , John R. 1 982b. Voluntary Retirement from the U . S . House: Who Quits?
American Journal of Political Science 26:467-84.
Holmstrom, Bengt . 1 982. Moral Hazard in Teams . Bell Journal of Economics
1 3(2):324-40.
Huth, Paul. 1 988 . Extended Deterrence and the Prevention of War. New Haven:
Yale University Press .
Huth , Paul , and Bruce Russett. 1988. Deterrence Failure and Crisis Escalation .
International Studies Quarterly 3 1 :29-45 .
Keohane , Robert . 1 984. Ajier Hegemony: Cooperation and Discord in the World
Political Economy. Princeton: Princeton University Press .
Kiewiet, Rod , and Mathew McCubbins . 1 991 . The Logic of Delegation: Con­
gressional Parties and the Appropriations Process. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Kilgour, D . Marc . 1 99 1 . Domestic Political Structure and War Behavior: A
Game-Theoretical Approach . Journal of Conflict Resolution 35:266-84.
Kilgour, D . Marc . , and Steven Brams . 1 992. Putting the Other Side "on Notice"
Can Induce Compliance in Arms Control . Journal of Conflict Resolution
36:395-4 1 4 .
Kilgour, D. Marc. , and Frank Zagare. 1 99 1 . Credibility, Uncertainty, and Deter­
rence . American Journal of Political Science 35:304-35 .
King , Gary, Robert O. Keohane , and Sidney Verba. 1994 . Designing Social
Inquiry. Scientific Inference in Qualitative Research . Princeton: Princeton
Univeristy Press .
Kohlberg, Elon , and Jean-Francois Mertens . 1986. On the Strategic Stability of
Equilibria. Econometrica 54: 1003-37.

--- Sayfa 184 ---
References
173
Krehbiel , Keith. 1 988. Spatial Models of Legislative Choice . Legislative Studies
Quarterly. 8:259-319.
Krehbiel , Keith. 1991 . Information and Legislative Organization. Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press.
Kreps , David M. 1 990. A Course in Microeconomic Theory. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Kreps , David, and Robert Wilson. 1982. Reputation and Incomplete Information.
Journal of Economic Theory 27:253-79.
Laver, Michael , and Kenneth Shepsle . 1 990. Coalitions and Cabinet Govern­
ment. American Political Science Review 84:873-90.
Laver, Michael and Kenneth Shepsle , eds . 1 995 . Cabinet Ministers and Parlia­
mentary Government. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Leiserson , Michael. 1 968. Factions and Coalitions in One-party Japan: An Inter­
pretation Based on the Theory of Games. American Political Science Review
62:770-87.
Lohmann, Susanne. 1 993. Electoral Cycles and International Policy Cooperation.
European Economic Review 37: 1 373-92 .
Loomis, Burdette .
1 984.
Congressional Careers and Party Leadership in
the Contemporary House. American Journal of Political Science 28: 1 80-
202 .
Luce , R . Duncan, and Howard Raiffa . 1 957. Games and Decisions: Introduction
and Critical Survey. New York: John Wiley.
Lupia, Arthur. 1 992. Busy Voters , Agenda Control , and the Power of Informa­
tion . American Political Science Review 86:390-403 .
Mann, Irwin, and Lloyd S . Shapley. 1 964. "The a priori Voting Strength of the
Electoral College. In Game Theory and Related Approaches to Social Behav­
ior, edited by Martin Shubik. New York: Wiley.
Maynard-Smith, John. 1982 . Evolution and the Theory of Games. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
McKelvey, Richard, and Peter Ordeshook. 1 986. Elections with Limited Informa­
tion: A Fulfilled Expectations Model Using Contemporaneous Poll and En­
dorsement Data as Information Sources. Journal of Economic Theory
36:55-85 .
Milgrom, Paul, and John Roberts. 1 982 . Predation, Reputation, and Entry Deter­
rence . Journal of Economic Theory 27:280-3 1 2 .
Miller, Gary J . 1 992. Managerial Dilemmas: The Political Economy of Hier­
archy. New York: Cambridge University Press .
Mo, Jongryn. 1994. Two-level Games with Endogenous Domestic Coalitions.
Journal of Conflict Resolution 38:402-22.
Morrow, James D . 1989. Capabilities , Uncertainty, and Resolve: A Limited
Information Model of Crisis B argaining. American Journal of Political Sci­
ence 33:941-72.
Morrow, James D. 1 994. Game Theory for Political Scientists. Princeton: Prince­
ton University Press.
Morton, Rebecca. 1 993 . Incomplete Information and Ideological Explanations of
Platform Divergence . American Political Science Review 87:382-92.
Moulin, Herve. 1 986. Game Theory for the Social Sciences. 2d ed. New York:
New York University Press .
Myerson, Roger. 1 99 1 . Game Theory: Analysis of Conflict. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.

--- Sayfa 185 ---
1 74
References
Myerson , Roger. 1 992. On the Value of Game Theory in Social Sciences . Ratio­
nality and Society 4:62-73 .
Myerson , Roger, and Robert Weber. 1 993 . A Theory of Voting Equilibria. Ameri­
can Political Science Review 87: 1 02- 1 4 .
Nalebuff, Barry. 1 986. Brinksmanship and Nuclear Deterrence: The Neutrality of
Escalation . Conflict Management and Peace Science 9: 1 9-30.
Nash, John F. 1 950. Equlibrium Points in N- person Games. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Science 36:48-49 .
Nash , John F. 1 95 1 . Non-cooperative Games. A nnals of Mathematics 54:286-
95 .
Niou , Emerson M . S . , and Peter 1. Ordeshook. 1 990. Stability in Anarchic
International Systems . American Political Science Review 84: 1 207-34 .
O ' Neill, Barry. 1 994. Game Theory Models of Peace and War. In Handbook of
Game Theory With Economic Applications , Vol . 2 , edited by Robert 1.
Aumann and Sergiu Hart . Amsterdam: North Holland Press .
Ordeshook, Peter C . 1 986. Game Theory and Political Theory . Cambridge: Cam­
bridge University Press .
Ordeshook , Peter C . 1992. A Political Theory Primer. New York: Routledge .
Ordeshook , Peter and Emerson Niou. 1 989a. The Geographical Imperatives of
the Balance of Power in Three-country Systems. Mathematics and Computer
Modelling 1 2:5 1 9-3 1 .
Ordeshook, Peter, and Emerson Niou . 1 989b. Stability in International Systems
and the Costs of War. In Models of Strategic Choice in Politics. edited by
Peter Ordeshook. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press .
Ordeshook , Peter, and William H . Riker. 1 97 3 . An Introduction to Positive Politi­
cal Theory . Englewood Cliffs , N . 1. : Prentice Hall .
Oye , Kenneth A . . ed . , 1 986. Cooperation under Anarchy . Princeton: Princeton
University Press .
Palfrey, Thomas , ed . 1 99 1 . Laboratory Research in Political Science . Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press.
Palfrey, Thomas , and Howard Rosenthal . 1 985 . Voter Participation and Strategic
Uncertainty. American Political Science Review 79:62-78 .
Poundstone , William . 1 992 . Prisoners' Dilemma: John von Neumann , Game
Theory. and the Puzzle of the Bomb. New York: Doubleday.
Powell , Robert . 1988. Nuclear Brinkmanship with Two-sided Incomplete Infor­
mation . American Political Science Review 82: 1 55-7 8 .
Powell , Robert . 1 990. Nuclear Deterrence Theory : The Search for Credibility .
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .
Przeworski . Adam . 1 99 1 . Democracy and the Market: Political and Economic
Reforms in Eastern Europe and Latin America . Cambridge: Cambridge Uni­
versity Press .
Quine , William V . 1 95 3 . Two Dogmas of Empiricism. From a Logical Point of
View. Cambridge: Harvard University Press .
Quinones, Sherry Bennett . 1 992. International Coordination of Macroeconomic
Policy: The Role of Leadership and Triggering Strategies in a Cooperative
Policy Regime . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Midwest Inter­
national Studies Association, Michigan State University, East Lansing , No­
vember 20 .
Quinones, Sherry Bennett, and Scott Gates. 1 993 . International Trade Policy
Coordination: Controlling Moral H azard Problems with Regime Leadership.

--- Sayfa 186 ---
References
1 75
Paper presented at the University of Illinois, Merriam Laboratory, Cham­
paign-Urbana, October.
Rappoport , Anatol , and Albert Chammah . 1 965 . Prisoners' Dilemma: A Study in
Conflict and Cooperation . Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Rasmusen, Eric. 1 989. Games and Information. Cambridge: Basil Blackwell.
Riker, Wi l liam H. 1 963. Theory of Political Coalitions. New Haven: Yale
University Press.
Riker, William H. 1 990. "Political Science and Rational Choice. In Perspectives
of Positive Political Economy, edited by James E. Alt and Kenneth A.
Shepsle . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .
Riker, William H. , and Lloyd S. Shapley. 1 968. Weighted Voting: A Mathemati­
cal Analysis for Instrumental Judgements . In Representation , edited by J. R.
Pennock and J. W. Chapman . New York: Atherton.
Robeck, Bruce . 1 982 . State Legislator Candidacies for the United States House:
Prospects for Success. Legislative Studies Quarterly 7:507- 1 4 .
Rohde , David W. 1 979. Risk-bearing and Progressive Ambition: The Case of
Members of the United States House of Representatives . American Journal
of Political Science 23: 1 -26.
Sapiro , Virginia. 1 982. Private Costs of Public Commitments or Public Costs of
Private Commitments? Family Roles versus Political Ambition . American
Journal of Political Science 26:265-79.
Schelling, Thomas . 1 980. The Intimate Contest for Self-Control . The Public
Interest 60:94- 1 1 8 .
Schlesinger, Joseph . 1 966. Ambition and Politics: Political Careers in the United
States. Chicago: Rand McNally.
Schofield , Norman , and Michael Laver. 1 985. Bargaining Theory and Portfolio
Payoffs in European Coalition Governments, 1 945- 1 983. British Journal of
Political Science 1 5 : 1 43-64 .
Selten, Reinhart. 1 965 . Spieltheoretische Behandlung eines Oligopolmodells mit
Nachfragetragheit. Ze itsch rift fur die gesammte Staatswissenschaft 1 2 1 :30 1 -
24 , 667-89.
Selten, Reinhart . 1 975 . Reexamination of the Perfectness Concept for Equilib­
rium Points in Extensive Games. International Journal of Game Theory
4:25-55 .
Selten, Reinhart. 1 978. The Chain-Store Paradox . Theory and Decision 9: 1 27-
59.
Shapley, Lloyd S . , and Martin Shubik. 1 954. A Method of Evaluating the Distri­
bution of Power in a Committee System. American Political Science Review
48:787-92 .
Shepsle , Kenneth . 1 979. Institutional Arrangements and Equilibrium in Multi­
dimensional Voting Models . American Journal of Political Science 23:27-
59.
Shepsle, Kenneth . 1 99 1 . Models of Multiparty Competition . New York: Harwood
Academic Press.
Shepsle , Kenneth , and Barry Weingast . 1 987 . The Institutional Foundation of
Committee Power. American Political Science Review 8 \ :85- 1 04 .
Shepsle , Kenneth A . , and Barry R. Weingast. 1 995 . Positive Theories of Con­
gressional lnstitutions. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Shubik, Martin . 1 970. Game Theory, Behavior and the Paradox of the Prisoners'
Dilemma: Three Solutions. Journal of Conflict Resolution , 1 4: 1 8 1 -93 .

--- Sayfa 187 ---
1 76
References
Shubik, Martin. 1 982. Game Theory in the Social Sciences: Concepts and Solu­
tions . Cambridge: MIT Press .
Snidal , Duncan . 1 985 . The Game Theory of International Relations . World Poli­
tics 3 8 : 25-57.
Squire , Peverill. 1 989. Competition and Uncontested Seats in United States
House Elections . Legislative Studies Quarterly 1 4: 28 1 -95 .
Squire , Peverill. 1 99 1 . Preemptive Fundraising and Challenger Profiles in Senate
Elections . Journal of Politics 5 3 : 1 1 50-64 .
Straffin, Philip D. 1 97 7 . Homogeneity, Independence , and Power Indices . Public
Choice 30: 1 07- 1 8 .
Taylor, Michae l . 1 976. Anarchy and Cooperation . New York: John Wiley &
Sons .
Taylor, Michael. 1 98 7 . The Possiblity of Cooperation . New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Taylor, Michael, and Michael Laver. 1 97 3 . Government Coalitions in Western
Europe . European Journal of Political Science 1 : 205-48 .
Tirole, Jean . 1 98 8 . The Theory of Industrial Organization . Boston: MIT Press.
TrockeL Walter. 1 986. The Chain-Store Paradox Revisited . Theory and Decision .
2 1 : 1 63-79.
von Neumann, John. 1 928 . Zur Theorie de Gcsellschaftsspielc. Mathematische
Annalen 1 00: 295-320.
von Neumann , John , and Oskar Morgenstern . 1 944 . Theory of Games and Eco­
nomic Behavior. Princeton: Princeton Univeristy Press .
Wagner. Harrison R. 1 98 3 . The Theory of Games and the Problem of Interna­
tional Cooperation . American Political Science Review 77:330-46.
Wagner. Harrison . 1 99 1 . Nuclear Deterrence , Counterforce Strategies, and the
Incentive to Strike First. American Political Science Review 85:727-49 .
Weingast , Barry. 1 989. Floor Behavior in the U . S . Congress: Committee Power
under the Open Rule . American Political Science Review 83:795-8 1 5 .
Wittman , Donald . 1 989. Arms Control Verification and Other Games Involving
Imperfect Detection . American Political Science Revinv 89:923-48 .
Yarbrough , Beth v. , and Robert M . Yarbrough . 1 985 . Free Trade , Hegemony,
and the Theory of Agency. Kyklos 38: 348-64 .
Yarbrough , Beth V. , and Robert M . Yarbrough . 1 986. Reciprocity, Bilateralism,
and Economic Hostages . International Studies Quarterly 30:7-22 .

--- Sayfa 188 ---
Index
Abramson, Paul R . , 1 3
Aldrich, John H . , 1 3
Alt, James, 5 , 107, 1 44 , 1 46
ANZU S , 23 , 30-33 , 46, 1 44
Asymmetric games, 1 25
Asymmetric information , 5 , 1 27 ,
142, 1 59 . See also Incomplete in­
formation; Two-sided incomplete
information
Asymmetric Trade game , 87 , 88-89,
92 , 95 , 100, 1 02 , 1 4 1 , 1 57; with
incomplete information, 1 57-6 1 ;
N-player Asymmetric Trade game ,
1 04 . See also Matrix form games;
Two by two games
Austen-Smith , David, 5 , 1 3
Axelrod, Robert, 3-5 , 5 7 , 95
Backwards induction, 4 1 , 46, 56, 97,
98 , 1 1 6 , 142; in dynamic games of
imperfect information, 4 1 -45 , 9 1 -
92 , 1 0 1 , 1 03 ; in dynamic games of
incomplete information, 46-55 ,
1 1 6-24 , 1 26-27 , 1 29-34, 1 58-
6 1 ; in dynamic games of perfect
and complete information, 4 1 -45 ,
97 , 98 , 99; and perfect Bayesian
equilibrium, 5 1 -5 5 , 1 22-24 , 1 29-
34 , 1 58-6 1 . See also Extensive
form games; Subgame perfect equi­
librium
Banks , Jeffrey, 5 , 1 3
Bargaining, 3 , 1 3 , 1 6
Baron , David, 1 3
Bates, Robert, 5 , 1 04 , I l l , 1 54
Bayesian Nash equilibrium, 4 , 5 3 ,
1 53-57 . See also Bayes' rule; Be­
liefs; Nash equilibria; Perfect
Bayesian equilibrium
Bayes' rule , 5 1 , 54, 1 22, 1 23 , 1 30,
154, 1 59 . See also Bayesian Nash
equilibrium; Perfect Bayesian equi­
librium
Beliefs , 4, 1 7 , 48 , 5 1 , 55; and
Bayesian Nash equilibrium, 1 53-
57; and perfect Bayesian equilib­
rium, 49-55 , 1 22-23 , 1 30-3 1 ,
1 5 8-60. See also Bayes' rule; Ex­
pected values; Subjective proba­
bility
Bendor, Jonathan, 5
Best reply correspondence , 25 , 27-
28 . See also Equilibrium; Nash
equilibria
Bianco, William, 5 , 104 , I I I
Brams , Steven, 2 , 5
Browne , Eric c. , 3
Bueno de Mesquito, Bruce , 5 , 1 5 , 1 6
Calvert , Randall, 4, 5 , 107 , 1 44, 1 46
Certainty, 4, 29, 45 . See also Com­
plete information; Incomplete infor­
mation; Perfect information;
Uncertainty
Chammah , Albert , 4
Chain Store game , 92, 1 4 1 -47 . See
also Chain Store paradox
Chain Store paradox, 92, 1 4 1 , 142.
See also Chain Store game; Com­
mitment; Reputation
Chicken , 7 , 26, 3 3 , 78, 84, 85 . See
also Hybrid Chicken-Stag Hunt;
Matrix form games; Two by two
games
Coalition , 23
Collective action, 1 04 , 1 06
Commitment , 5 , 20 , 44, 1 45 , 1 47-
5 3 , 1 65
1 77

--- Sayfa 189 ---
1 78
Index
Common knowledge: and beliefs ,
1 35 ; defined, 9
Comparative politics , 1 8 , 20
Complete information, 1 8 , 1 9 , 40ɂ
4 1 , 4445 , 56, 59, 85 , 90, 97
102, 1 1 3Ƃ 1 4 , 1 36 , 1 4 1 , 1 42; de­
fined, 45 . See also Games, of
complete and perfect information;
Incomplete information
Completenes s , 8 . See also Game
Theory, assumptions ; Rational
choice
Conditionality game , 1 485 3 ; with
commitment , 1 5 1 53; reduced
form , 1 50. See also Sanction
game
Conybeare , lohn , 1 9 , 83 1 22 , 1 4 1 ,
1 57 , 1 65
Cooperative games, 23
Cox , Gary, 1 3
Crisis bargaining , 5 , 1 3
Cuban Missile Crisis , 7
D'Ambrosio, Lisa, 4
Deadlock, 8 5 . See also Matrix form
games; Two by two games
Decision node , of a game , 4, 1 1 , 43 ,
98 , 1 1 6 , 1 1 7 , 1 26, 1 29 , 1 45 , 1 50,
158. See also Decision theory; Ex­
tensive form games
Decision Theory, comparisons with
game theory, 9, 1 8 , 6 1 , 6369 ,
1 1 9
Democratic transition , 20, 1 1 4ĺ39 .
See also Political liberalization
DeSwaan , Abraham , 3
Deterrence , 5
Dion, Doug , 4
Dodd , Lawrence , 3 , 1 3 , 1 4
Dominant strategy, 35 , 36, 3 8 , 75,
76, 7 8 , 85 , 87, 1 04, 1 05 , 1 1 6 ,
1 26 , 1 59 . See also Domination;
Weak domination
Domination , 67 , 1 04 . See also Domi­
nant strategy; Weak domination
Downs , George , 5
Dynamic games, 55Ƃ59 , 83; and
complete information , 90 1 1 2 ; and
incomplete information , 1 3639.
See also Finitely repeated play; In-
finitely repeated games; Repeated
games; Sequential games
Dynamic inconsistency, 1 49. See also
Chain Store paradox
Electoral politics, 3 , 5
Enelow, James , 1 3
Entry deterrence game , l 42ĺ47 ;
Kreps and Wilson's entry deter­
rence game , 1 4245 , 1 46ĺ47; Mil­
grom and Roberts' entry deterrence
game , 1 4245 ; Trockel's entry de­
terrence game , 1 4546 . See also
Chain Store game; Extensive form
games; Incomplete information
Equilibrium, 4, 7 , I I , 1 3 , 1 9 , 24,
27 , 29 , 35 , 43 , 49 , 53 , 89 , 92 ,
1 1 7 , 1 2 1 , 1 22 , 1 3 1 , 1 34, 1 36 . See
also Bayesian Nash equilibrium;
Hybrid equilibrium; Nash equi­
libria; Perfect Bayesian equilib­
rium; Pooling equilibrium;
Sequential equilibrium; Subgame
perfect equilibrium
Expected payoff, 26 , 27 , 52, 1 0 1 ,
1 1 6. See also Beliefs; Expected
utility; Utility
Expected utility, 63 , 1 03 , 1 20. See
also Beliefs; Expected payoff; Util­
ity
Expected values, 29, 62 . See also
Beliefs
Extensive form games, 1 8 , 1 9 , 20,
23 , 3 5 , 38; compared to matrix
form , 40, 42 , 96 1 02 ; with incom­
plete information , 4555 , 1 27 ,
1 3639, 1 59; with perfect and
complete information , 90 1 1 2 . See
also Dynamic games; Sequential
games; Stackelberg games
Feasible set , 86, 9 1 , 97 , 1 1 5 , 148,
1 5 7
Fearon, lames, 5 , 1 6 1 7
Ferejohn, John , 5 , 1 3
Finitely repeated play, 88 , 9092 ,
I l l . See also Dynamic games; In­
finitely repeated games; Sequential
games
Fiorina, Morris , 1 3

--- Sayfa 190 ---
Fixed preferences, 8 . See also Game
Theory, assumptions; Rational
choice
Folk Theorem, 1 9 , 57 , 93-95 , 107 .
See also Infinitely repeated games
Formal models: advantages of, 5-8;
application of, 1 2- 1 8 , 1 66-68; as­
sumptions , 8- 10. See also Game
Theory
Fowler, Linda, 1 3
Franklin, Mark N . , 3
Games: of complete and perfect infor­
mation, 40-4 1 , 44-45 , 86, 97-
102 , 1 42-43, 1 47-50; definition,
1 , 3 , 1 2 , 1 8 , 23-24; of imperfect
information , 40-42 , 86-90, 1 0 1 ,
103 , 1 45-46, 1 50-5 1 ; of incom­
plete information, 4, 45-55 , 1 1 4-
39 , 1 43-45 , 1 53-6 1 . See also Ex­
tensive form games; Game Theory;
and specific games
Game Theory: advantages of, 5-8;
application of, 1 2- 1 8 , 1 66-68; as­
sumptions , 2, 6, 8- 1 1 , 1 3 ; com­
pared to decision theory, 65-68;
definition , I , 2; history of, 1 -5 .
See also Formal models; Games;
Rational choice
Gates, Scott, 1 04, 1 07 , 1 52
Green, Donald, 1 0
Grim trigger strategy (g-trigger),
109- 10. See also Trigger strategy,
leader trigger (i-trigger); Trigger
strategy, strategic trigger (.-trigger)
Harsanyi , John, 4, 5 , 1 1 4
Hinich, Melvin , 1 3
Holmstrom, Bengt, 1 1 0, I I I
Humes, Brian D. , 5 , 107, 1 44 , 146
Huth , Paul, 1 6
Hybrid Chicken-Stag Hunt, 1 9 , 87,
88, 92 , 95 , 100; N-player hybrid
Chicken-Stag Hunt , 1 04 . See
also Chicken; Matrix form
games; Stag Hunt; Two by two
games
Hybrid equilibrium , 1 38 . See also
Perfect Bayesian equilibrium; Pool­
ing equilibrium
Index
1 79
Imperfect information, 1 9 , 40-4 1 ,
86, 90, 9 1 , 1 0 1 , 1 05 , 1 1 3 , 1 4 1 ,
145; defined, 86. See also Asym­
metric information; Perfect infor­
mation
Incomplete information, 4, 1 8 , 1 9 ,
20, 45-46 , 5 9 , 1 1 3 , 1 1 5 , 1 1 8 ,
1 24, 1 25 , 1 27 , 1 39-46 , 1 5 3 , 1 57 ;
defined, 4 5 ; two-sided, 1 34-36.
See also Asymmetric information;
Complete information
Indifference , 1 33
Infinitely repeated games, 88, 93-95 ,
107 . See also Dynamic games; Fi­
nitely repeated play; Folk Theorem
Information, 1 1 , 1 3 , 1 9 , 40, 96 , 1 1 3 ,
1 1 8 . See also Asymmetric informa­
tion; Complete information; Imper­
fect information; Incomplete
information; Perfect information
International trade , 1 9 , 83 , 84
Iterated games, 95 , 108 . See also Dy­
namic games; Finitely repeated
play; Infinitely repeated games
Japan, 32, 55
Kalb, Bernard, 32
Keohane , Robert , 6, 57
Kiewiet, Roderick D . , 1 3
Kilgour, Marc D . , 5 , 1 6
King, Gary, 6
Krehbiel , Keith, 1 3
Kreps , David M . , 142-44 , 146
Lalman, David, 5 , 1 5 , 1 6
Lange , David, 30, 3 1
Leadership, and N-player games,
107- 1 1
Legislature , 1 , 3 , 1 3
Lohmann, Suzanne , 5
Lottery, 63, 73
Luce, Duncan R . , 2, 23
Lupia, Arthur, 5
Matrix form games, 1 8 , 20, 23-40,
74-80, 85-90, 96; with sequential
moves , 36-39 , 99- 100 . See also
Extensive form games; Games , of
imperfect information

--- Sayfa 191 ---
1 80
Index
Maynard-Smith , John , 4
McKelvey, Richard , 5
Milgrom , Paul , 142, 1 43
Miller, Gary, I I I
Misspecification , of a model , 10- 1 1
Mixed strategy, 26-30, 78-80, 86,
1 0 1 , 1 20 , 1 2 1 , 1 35-36, 1 60, 16 1 ;
and decision theory, 78-80 . See
also Nash equilibria
Models, I , 5; application of, 1 2- 1 8 ,
1 66-68; misspecification , 1 0- 1 1 ;
underspecification, 10- 1 1 . See also
Formal models; Games; Game
Theory
Mo, Jongryn, 5 , 1 4
Morgenstern , Oskar, I , 2 , 1 03
Morrow, James, 5 , I I , 1 6
Moves , 1 7 , 1 9 . See also Extensive
form games
Multiple equilibria, problems of, 98 ,
1 22
Mutually exclusive events , 69 , 70
Myerson , Roger, 5 , I I , 1 2 , 1 3
Nalebuff, Barry, 1 6
Nash equilibria, 3 , 4 , 1 2 , 1 9, 24, 3 5 ,
42 , 44 , 9 1 , 98 , 104 . See also
Bayesian Nash equilibrium; Equi­
librium; Mixed strategy; Perfect
Bayesian equilibrium; Subgame
perfect equilibrium
Nash , John , 3 , 4
Nature , 45 , 46, 63 , 9 1 , 1 1 4, 1 1 6,
1 1 8 , 1 25-38, 1 42 , 1 53-57 . See
also Incomplete information
NATO, 32
Niou , Emerson , 3, 1 3 , 1 4
Node , of a game , 4 , 1 1 , 4 1 . See also
Decision node; Deci sion Theory ;
Extensive form games
Noncooperative games , 2-4 , 1 8 , 1 03
N-player games, 3 , 85 , 93 , 1 02- 1 1 ;
N-player games vs. two player
games, 1 02-5
New Zealand, 23 , 30, 3 1 -57
OPEC , 1 44
Ordeshook , Peter, 2, 3 , 5 , 1 3 , 1 4 , 57
Outcomes , 7-9, 24
Palfrey, Thomas , 5
Pareto domination of one outcome ,
93
Pareto efficient, 95
Payoffs , 4, 9, 1 1 , 24; and N-player
games, 105-7
Perfect Bayesian equilibrium , 4, 1 9 ,
20 , 5 3 , 1 22 , 1 36 , 1 53 , 1 5 5 , 1 56 .
See also Beliefs; Equilibrium; Hy­
brid equilibrium; Pooling equilib­
rium; Subgame perfect equilibrium
Perfect information , 1 7 , 1 9, 40 , 56,
86 , 1 1 3 , 1 1 5 , 1 4 1 , 1 42 . See also
Games, of complete and perfect in­
formation; Imperfect information
Political liberalization , 20, 1 1 4-39 .
See also Democratic transition
Pooling equilibrium , 5 3 , 55 . See also
Beliefs; Hybrid equilibrium; Per­
fect Bayesian equilibrium
Powell , Robert , 5 , 1 3 , 1 4 , 1 6
Preference ordering , 8
Preferences , 8-9 . See also Game
Theory, assumptions; Rational
choice; Utility
Prisoners' Dilemma, 4, 7, 1 9 , 24 ,
3 3 , 57, 85 ; finitely repeated , 9 1 -
92 ; infinitely repeated, 95;
N-player prisoners' dilemma, 1 04,
105 . See also Matrix form games;
Two by two games
Progressive ambition , 69-78; with in­
complete information, 1 53-57 , 1 65
Przeworski , Adam , 20, 1 1 3-39, 1 65 ,
1 66
Pure strategy, 30, 78, 1 0 1 , 1 35 . See
also Mixed strategy; Trigger strat­
egy
Quinones, Sherry Bennett , 1 04 , 1 07
Raiffa, Howard, 2 , 24
Rappoport, Anatol, 4
Rasmusen, Eric, 93
Rational choice, 8- 1 0
Repeated games, 1 9, 55-59, 83 , 90-
1 1 2, 1 36-39 , 1 4 1 -42; of complete
information , 90- 1 1 2; of incomplete
information , 1 36-39. See also Dy-

--- Sayfa 192 ---
namic games; Finitely repeated
play; Infinitely repeated games
Reputation, 5 , 20, 56, 1 07 , 1 14 ,
1 24 , 1 36-39, 1 4 1 -6 1 , 1 65 . See
also Beliefs; Perfect Bayesian equi­
librium; Repeated games , of in­
complete information
Riker, William , 2 , 3 , 1 3 , 1 4
Risk, 64 , 69 , 7 1 , 73
Roberts , John, 142, 1 43
Rocke, David , 5
Rohde , David, 1 3 , 1 9 , 67-8 1 , 1 4 1 ,
1 5 7 , 1 64 , 1 65
Rosenthal , Howard , 5
Russett, Bruce, 1 6
Sanction game , 1 47-53 . See also
Conditionality game
Schlesinger, Joseph , 69
Schofield, Norman, 3
Selten, Reinhart, 4 , 92 , 1 4 1-43 ,
145
Sequential games: in extensive form,
40-42, 96- 102; in matrix form,
36-39, 99- 100. See also Dynamic
games; Extensive form games;
Games, of complete and perfect in­
formation; Stackelberg games
Sequential equilibrium, 4 , 1 7 , 146.
See also Equilibrium; Incomplete
information; Perfect Bayesian equi­
librium; Subgame perfect equilib­
rium
Shapiro, Ian, 10
Shapley, Lloyd , 2 , 3
Shepsle , Kenneth, 1 3
Shubik , Martin, 2, 5 7 , 95
Signaling , 5 , 1 3 . See also Commit-
ment; Reputation
Solution concepts , 1 2
Stackelberg games, 96- 1 02. See also
Extensive form games; Sequential
games; Stackelberg equilibria
Stackelberg equilibria, 98- 100. See
also Subgame perfect equilibria
Stag Hunt, 3 3 , 85 , 96, 1 00, 1 57 . See
also Hybrid Chicken-Stag Hunt;
Matrix form games; Two by two
games
Index
1 8 1
Strategic interaction, 1 , 7 , 9 , 1 9 ,
6 1 , 74, 83, 84 , 103, 1 1 3 , 1 36,
1 66-67
Strategy, 3, 1 2 , 85 , 87
Structure, of a game , 6, 7 , 23-25 ; of
an extensive form game, 40
Subgame perfect equilibrium, 4, 1 9 ,
42, 44, 93 , 97 , 98- 1 00 , 1 06, 1 35 ,
1 42. See also Equilibrium; Nash
equilibrium; Perfect Bayesian equi­
librium; Stackelberg equilibria
Subjective probability, 79, 1 22 . See
also Beliefs; Expected values
Symmetric game, 30, 79
Taylor, Michael, 3, 5
Taylor, Serge, 5
Threat, 92 , 1 1 0
Transitivity, 8 , 9 . See also Game
Theory, assumptions; Rational
choice
Trigger strategy, 106, 1 09- 1 1 ; grim
trigger (g-trigger), 1 08 ; leader trig­
ger (I-trigger), 1 1 0; strategic trigger
(s-trigger), 1 09 . See also N-player
games
Trockel , Walter, 1 45 , 1 50
Two by two games, 33. See also
Asymmetric trade game; Chicken;
Deadlock; Hybrid Chicken-Stag
Hunt; Prisoners' dilemma; Stag
Hunt
Two-sided incomplete information,
1 34-36. See also Asymmetric
information; Incomplete informa­
tion
Uncertainty, 4 , 1 1 3 , 1 1 8 , 1 22 , 1 24-
25 , 1 30, 1 34-35 , 1 44-46. See
also Certainty; Incomplete informa­
tion
Utility: and decision theory, 63-64;
and preferences , 9. See also Ex­
pected utility
United States , 23 , 30-59
Van Gaalen, Ronald, 5
Verba, Sydney, 6
von Neumann , John , 1 -3 , 1 03

--- Sayfa 193 ---
1 82
Index
Wagner, Harrison R . , 1 6
Weak domination , 67 . See also Dom-
ination; Dominant strategy
Weber, Robert , 5
Weingast, Barry, 5 , 1 3
Wilson, Robert, 1 42-44 , 1 46
Wittman, Donald, 5
Yarbrough, Beth, 1 08
Yarbrough , Robert M . , 1 08
Zagare , Frank, 5
Zero-sum game , 2-4

--- Sayfa 194 ---
----- Analytical Perspectives on Politics -----
Analytical Perspectives on Politic presents creative and opbisticated synthe­
ses of major areas of research in the field of political science. In each offering,
the higbest caliber authors provide clear and discriminating descriptions of the
current tate of the art and a strong-minded prescription and structure for future
work in the field.
Despite the long hi tory. hared by
game theory and political science,
many political cienti ts remain
unaware of the exciting game theo­
retic techniques that have been
developed over the year . As a result
they u e overly simple games to
illu trate complex proce
es. Games,
Illformation., and Politics i written
for political cientists who have an
interest in game theory but do not
thoroughly under tand how it can be
used to improve our understanding
of politic . To addres thi problem,
Gate, and Hume write for cholar
who have little or no training in for­
mal theory and demonstrate how
game theoretic analysi can be
applied to politic . They apply game
theoretic models to three ubfields of
political science: American politic,
c mparative politics and interna­
tional relation . They demon trate
how game theory can be applied to
each of these subfield by drawing
from three di tinct piece of
reo earch. By drawing on example
from current research projects the
author use real re earch problems­
not hypothetical questions-to
d velop their di cus ion of variou
Ann Arbor
The University of
Michigan Press
technique and to demon trate how
to apply game theoretic model to
help answer important political ques­
tions. Empha izing the proce
of
applying game theory, Gates and
Hume clear up orne common mi -
conception about game theory and
show how it can be used to improve
our under tanding of politics.
Games, Information, and Politics is
written for cholar intere ted in
under tanding how game theory i
u ed to model trategic interaction .
It will appeal to ociologi ts and
economist a well a political cien­
tists.
Scott Gates is Research Professor
and Director for the Study of Civil
War at the International Peace
Research Institute, 0 10 and is the
coauthor with John Brehm of
Working, Shirking and Sabotage:
Bureau ratic Response to a
Demo ralic Public.
Brian D. Humes is A
ociate
Profe
or of Political Science at the
University of Nebra ka-Lincoln.
ISBN 0-472-06564-5
90000
9 780472 065646