--- Sayfa 1 ---
See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/46540815
AN INTRODUCTION TO GAME THEORY AND BUSINESS STRATEGY
Article  in  Journal of Applied Corporate Finance · June 2000
DOI: 10.1111/j.1745-6622.2000.tb00056.x · Source: RePEc
CITATIONS
16
READS
27,712
3 authors, including:
Clifford W. Smith
University of Rochester
148 PUBLICATIONS   26,644 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE
Jerold L. Zimmerman
University of Rochester
88 PUBLICATIONS   18,913 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Clifford W. Smith on 05 March 2018.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

--- Sayfa 2 ---
Journal of Applied Corporate Finance

 S U M M E R 2 0 0 0
V O L U M E 1 3 . 2

An Introduction to Game Theory and Business Strategy

by James Brickley, Clifford Smith, and Jerold Zimmerman,

University of Rochester

--- Sayfa 3 ---
84
BANK OF AMERICA      JOURNAL OF APPLIED CORPORATE FINANCE
AN INTRODUCTION TO
GAME THEORY AND
BUSINESS STRATEGY
by James Brickley,
Clifford Smith, and
Jerold Zimmerman,
University of Rochester*
he Boeing Company and Airbus Industrie
(a consortium of four European firms)
manufactured most of the world’s large
commercial jetliners in the 1990s.1 In
T
*This is a shortened form of Chapter 9 in the recently published second edition
of the author’s book, Managerial Economics and Organizational Architecture
(Irwin/McGraw-Hill, 2001).
1990s was to be overtly negative toward Boeing. One
Airbus brochure depicted the Boeing 777 as an aging
stretch limousine painted like a yellow taxicab, while
the Airbus craft was pictured as a Mercedes luxury
sedan. In another ad, Airbus pointed out that the
Boeing 737 entered service in 1968, the same year
Richard Nixon first was elected President of the
United States. Perhaps not surprisingly, Boeing
produced negative advertisements of its own. In
choosing its advertising policy, Airbus presumably
had to consider whether a negative campaign was
value-maximizing given Boeing’s likely response.
Similarly, Boeing had to consider Airbus’s response
in choosing its actions.
Game theory provides a useful set of tools for
managers to use when considering the responses of
rivals in decision-making. This article describes the
basic theory and shows how managers might use
these tools in setting strategy. This analysis also
provides managers with a richer understanding of
competition within different market settings. For
example, it provides insights into why there is fierce
competition in some concentrated industries (such
as commercial aircraft), whereas in others the com-
petition is more benign. Although we focus primarily
on interactions among rival firms in product markets,
these concepts also are useful to managers when
dealing with other parties, such as suppliers, em-
ployees, or government officials.
1. Details for this example are from: A. Bryant (1997), “The $1 Trillion
Dogfight,” The New York Times (March 23) 3.1; and M. Freudenheim and J.
Tagliabue (1998), “Regulators Investigating Price Increases by Boeing and Airbus,”
The New York Times (November 27), C1.
1998 Boeing, the long-standing market leader, had
about a 60 percent market share and Airbus, about
30 percent. With just two major companies in the
market, one might expect that the firms would
cooperate regularly, avoiding competition to in-
crease prices and profits. In actuality, these compa-
nies compete quite aggressively. During 1997 and
the first part of 1998, prices of commercial jets
dropped by about 20 percent. Boeing posted a $178
million loss in 1997, and earnings at Airbus fell by 61
percent to $147 million.
Many of the world’s markets are like the
commercial aircraft industry in that there are a few
large firms who are the major players. Examples
include soft drinks (Coke and Pepsi), U.S. domes-
tic airlines (American, United, and Delta), copy
machines (Canon and Xerox), candy (Hershey
and Mars), and film (Kodak and Fuji). Even small
firms often compete with an identifiable set of
rivals and can act as the major players within a
given market area. Consider two competing gaso-
line stations in a small town.
In this type of market, managers must consider
rivals’ responses when making major decisions. For
example, part of Airbus’s marketing plan in the late

--- Sayfa 4 ---
85
VOLUME 13 NUMBER 2      SUMMER 2000
GAME THEORY
Game theory is concerned with the general
analysis of strategic interaction. It focuses on optimal
decision-making when all decision agents are as-
sumed to be rational, with each attempting to
anticipate the likely actions and reactions of its
rivals.2 Although it began as a set of methods to
analyze parlor games, this theory has evolved to the
point where it is applied to study a wide variety of
strategic interactions, ranging from politics to com-
petitive strategy. In the pages that follow, we
introduce its basic elements and apply them in the
context of managerial decision-making.
Sound managerial decision-making often requires
“putting yourself behind your rivals’ desk.” Assuming
rivals are rational and acting in their self-interest, what
decisions are they likely to make and how are they likely
to respond to your actions? A complicating factor is that
rivals’ optimal choices typically will depend on their
expectations of what you will do; their expectations in
turn depend on their assessments of your expectations
about them. This type of circularity or recursive thinking
might appear to make the overall problem completely
intractable. Yet, this situation is precisely where game
theory is most useful.
Strategic interactions can take a variety of forms
and involve many players who choose among a variety
of potential actions. In this article, we limit ourselves to
simple two-player, two-action cases. This limitation
allows us to depict strategic problems using convenient
diagrams. The fundamental intuition and concepts
developed in these basic cases readily extend to more
complicated situations. Some problems involve simul-
taneous decisions by rivals, whereas others involve
sequential choices. We begin by examining strategic
problems involving simultaneous choices. Later, we
consider sequential problems. In some cases, interac-
tion is expected to be repeated; in others, it is not.
Throughout most of this article, we focus on problems
where the interaction is not expected to be repeated.
At the end of the article we briefly consider the
implications of repeated interaction.
SIMULTANEOUS-MOVE, NONREPEATED
INTERACTION
In strategic problems that involve simulta-
neous moves, rivals must make decisions without
knowledge of the decisions made by their com-
petitors. Nonrepeated means that the interaction is
presumed to occur only once. As an example,
suppose that Boeing and Airbus are asked to
submit sealed bids on the price of ten jet airliners
to a foreign national airline. Both companies
doubt that they will compete in similar ways in the
future. Both companies can select either a high
price or a low price. If one company bids high and
the other bids low, the order goes to the low
bidder; if both companies submit the same bid,
they split the order. Each firm has the capacity to
build all ten airplanes.
Both companies privately choose their bids at
the same time. The resulting payoffs (profits ex-
pressed in millions of dollars) depend on both firms’
choices; they are displayed in Figure 1. This type of
diagram presents the potential payoffs from the
interaction in what is called strategic form (also
called normal form). Each cell presents the payoffs
for a pair of decisions. The entry on the lower right
of each cell is the profit for Airbus, and the entry on
the upper left is for Boeing.
Game Theorists Win the Nobel Prize
In 1994, John Harsanyi, John Nash, and
Reinhard Selten won the Nobel Prize for Econom-
ics “for their pioneering analysis of the theory of
non-cooperative games.” Their contributions have
had an important impact not only on theoretical
economics, but on business practice as well. Firms
hire game theorists as consultants in formulating
strategic decisions (for example, in government
auctions, corporate takeovers, pricing, labor ne-
gotiations, and competitive positioning). Several
best-selling business books have illustrated how
game theory can be used in everyday business
decisions. Game theory now is taught at most
major business schools.
2. Game theory is divided into two branches. In cooperative games, players
can negotiate binding contracts that allow them to plan and implement joint
strategies. In this article, we focus on noncooperative games, where negotiation
and enforcement of binding contracts is not possible. This type of game theory is
often useful for analyzing managerial decision making.

--- Sayfa 5 ---
86
JOURNAL OF APPLIED CORPORATE FINANCE
Dominant Strategies
A dominant strategy exists when it is optimal for
a firm to choose that strategy no matter what its rival
does. In Figure 1, both firms have a dominant
strategy—choose the low price. To illustrate, con-
sider Boeing’s position. If Airbus chooses a high
price (right column), Boeing captures the entire
order by submitting a low price. The resulting payoff
of $1 billion is higher than the payoff of $750 million
if both firms price high and split the order. If Airbus
chooses a low price (left column), Boeing is clearly
better off to price low and split the order. Its
alternative is to price high and sell no planes.
Examining the rows, the same logic holds for Airbus.
Given these strong incentives, the likely outcome is
for both firms to submit a low price. Note that the
firms would be better off if they jointly were to
submit high prices. But this outcome is unlikely
without repeated interactions. (This problem has the
same structure as the well-known prisoners’ di-
lemma—or the “rivals’ dilemma,” as we will call it
here.) As we discuss later, a “cooperative” outcome
where both firms submit high prices without explicit
collusion is more likely if their interaction is ex-
pected to be repeated.
This logic helps explain why Boeing and Air-
bus frequently compete aggressively on price. Air-
line orders frequently are measured in billions of
dollars, so each sale is important. Further, custom-
ers (normally commercial airline companies) have
economic incentives to deal with a single major
supplier of aircraft since this policy reduces the
required inventory of spare parts, technician train-
ing (maintenance personnel work only on one
make of plane), and so on.3 Thus if Boeing or
Airbus lose an order, it implies the loss of potential
future orders as well. Just as in Figure 1, the
companies have strong economic incentives to
submit low bids to capture orders.
Boeing and Airbus have particularly strong
incentives to compete on price because each firm
has the capacity to produce more output. Boeing has
stated that it wants to win two-thirds of all new orders
(slightly above its current level), whereas Airbus
wants to win about 50 percent (substantially above
its current level). These conflicting goals promote
price competition as each firm tries to take orders
from the other. If the rivals faced tighter capacity
constraints, it is likely that there would be less price
competition. For instance, in our simplified ex-
ample, a firm clearly would be reluctant to lower the
price to capture the full order if it lacked the capacity
to produce all ten planes.
Nash Equilibrium
Firms do not always have dominant strategies.
For instance, suppose in our example that the U.S.
government places pressure on the foreign country
to have its national airline purchase planes from
Boeing (governments actually have done this for
FIGURE 1
STRATEGIC FORM
In this case, Boeing and Airbus individually choose and
simultaneously submit a bid price for 10 planes. They can
submit either a high price or a low price. If one company bids
high and the other bids low, the order goes to the low bidder;
if both companies submit the same bid, they split the order. This
diagram presents the possible profits from the interaction in
strategic form (normal form). Each cell presents the payoffs of
a pair of decisions. The entry on the lower right of each cell is
the payoff for Airbus, whereas the entry on the upper left is for
Boeing. Both firms have a dominant strategy (shaded cell)—
choose a low price.
Boeing: Low Price
Boeing: Low Price
Airbus: Low Price
$500
$500
$1000
$750
$0
$0
$1000
$750
Airbus: Low Price
Airbus: High Price
Airbus: High Price
Boeing: High Price
Boeing: High Price
3. Given these considerations, our assumption that if the bids are the same,
the order is split between Boeing and Airbus should be questioned. Yet, if the buyer
flips a coin and gives all the order to the lucky bidder whenever the bids are equal,
the expected payoffs are the same as in Figure 1.

--- Sayfa 6 ---
87
VOLUME 13 NUMBER 2      SUMMER 2000
their domestic producers). The airline still splits the
order when the bids are the same and awards Boeing
the entire order if Boeing is the low bidder. But due
to this political pressure, if Boeing bids high and
loses the bid, the airline will buy four planes from
Boeing at the high price on a side deal after
purchasing the ten planes from Airbus at the low
price. Figure 2 presents this new payoff structure.
Choosing a low price is still a dominant strategy for
Airbus. Boeing, however, does not have a dominant
strategy. If Airbus prices high, it is optimal for Boeing
to price low to capture the entire order, whereas if
Airbus prices low, it is better for Boeing to price high
and make the side deal.
When dominant strategies do not exist, the con-
cept of a Nash equilibrium is useful in predicting the
outcome. A Nash equilibrium is a set of strategies (or
actions) in which each firm is doing the best it can,
given the actions of its rival. In Figure 2, the combina-
tion of a low Airbus price and a high Boeing price is
a Nash equilibrium. Neither firm would want to change
its price given the price submitted by the other firm.
A particular problem might have multiple Nash
equilibria. Nash equilibria are not necessarily the
outcomes that maximize the joint payoff of the
players. For instance, in Figure 1 the outcome where
both firms submit low prices is a Nash equilibrium.
Yet both firms would be better off if they jointly
submitted high prices.
Identifying a Nash Equilibrium. The arrow
technique4 provides a simple way to identify a Nash
equilibria in such a problem. Consider the case in
Figure 2. Start by assuming that Boeing will charge
a low price (this is in the top row). Draw an arrow
pointing to the maximum payoff that Airbus can
achieve. This payoff (labeled #1) is in the cell where
Airbus submits a low price (if the same payoff were
to occur regardless of whether Airbus submits a high
or low price, the arrow would point to both cells).
Second, move to the bottom row and assume that
Boeing submits a high price; again draw an arrow
pointing to Airbus’s higher payoff (#2). Third, as-
sume Airbus submits a low price (left column) and
draw an arrow to Boeing’s higher payoff (#3).
Stocklifting—A Dominant Strategy?
In the spring of 1998, Midwest Quality Gloves,
Inc., paid about $700,000 to Lowe’s Home Im-
provement Stores (the number-two home-center
chain behind Home Depot) for 225,000 pairs of
gloves produced by competing firm, Wells Lamont.
Midwest then sold the gloves for about $280,000
to a firm that specializes in liquidating closed-out
merchandise. The motivation for this transaction
was to clear shelf space, allowing Lowe’s to
restock the shelves with Midwest’s gloves.
This practice, known as “stocklifting,” is
increasing in popularity. Makers of everything
from bicycle chains to party napkins are lifting
truckloads of competitors’ products from large
retail chains such as Kmart and Revco drugstores.
Other stocklifting examples include cellular
phones, power adapters, leather cases, pet toys,
humidifiers, flashlights, faucets, and glue. The
stocklifted merchandise is subsequently “dumped”
for resale by faraway (sometimes foreign) retail-
ers. The purpose in each case is to clear shelf space
for the stocklifter’s products. To quote one execu-
tive involved in this practice, “buybacks are a
necessary evil in gaining market share.”
From the standpoint of the manufacturer, this
costly practice is potentially a dominant strategy.
To quote one product manager, “It costs a ton of
money, however, if you want to land a major retail
account, you’re going to have to do it.”
When competing manufacturers jointly en-
gage in this practice, they can find themselves
in a “rivals’ dilemma,” such as in our Boeing/
Airbus example: They would each be better off
if no one stocklifted. Given the private incen-
tives of each firm, however, stocklifting is
difficult to avoid. For instance, after purchasing
stocklifted products from a company, one ma-
jor liquidator makes “courtesy calls” to the
victims, encouraging them to “return the favor”
by working with his company.
Source: Y. Ono, “Where are the Gloves? They Were Stocklifted by a Rival
Producer,” The Wall Street Journal (May 15, 1998), A1.
4. This technique is described in I. Png (1997), Managerial Economics
(Blackwell: London).
Many of the world’s markets are like the commercial aircraft industry in that there
are a few large firms who are the major players. In this type of market, it is generally
important for managers to consider rivals’ responses when making major decisions.

--- Sayfa 7 ---
88
JOURNAL OF APPLIED CORPORATE FINANCE
Finally, move to the right column and assume Airbus
submits a high price; draw an arrow to Boeing’s
higher payoff (#4). If a Nash equilibrium exists,
arrows will point to the payoffs in both halves of the
cell. In this problem, the Nash equilibrium is the
shaded cell where Boeing submits a high price and
Airbus submits a low price.
Dominant strategies also can be identified by this
technique. If the firm has a dominant strategy, arrows
will point to the strategy for all actions by the rival firm.
In this example, submitting a low price is a dominant
strategy for Airbus: For each of Boeing’s possible
actions the arrows point to submitting a low price.
Management Implications. The power of a
Nash equilibrium to predict the outcome in strategic
situations stems from the fact that Nash equilibria are
self-enforcing: They are stable outcomes. For in-
stance, if Boeing can forecast Airbus’s choice (per-
haps because it understands that Airbus has a
dominant strategy), it is optimal for Boeing to choose
its equilibrium action, a high price. And Airbus has
no incentive to avoid its equilibrium choice, a low
price. Thus, even if both firms can forecast the
outcome, neither firm has an incentive to choose any
other action.
Although the idea of a Nash equilibrium is quite
useful, it is not as powerful in predicting the outcomes
of strategic interactions as the concept of a dominant
strategy. When dominant strategies exist, there are
strong private incentives to choose them regardless of
what the other player does. Thus, it is quite predictable
that rivals will choose dominant strategies. With a
Nash equilibrium, your best choice generally is
contingent on what you expect your rival to do.
In many cases it is reasonable to expect that a
Nash equilibrium will occur. This is more likely to be
true when the rivals have more experience in similar
strategic problems, have better information about
each other, or when the Nash equilibrium is what is
called a natural focal point.5 For example, consider
the problem in Figure 2. If Boeing has reasonable
information about potential payoffs and Airbus’s
FIGURE 2
NASH EQUILIBRIUM
Boeing and Airbus individually submit prices for 10 planes. They
can choose either a high price or a low price. If one company bids
high and the other bids low, the order goes to the low bidder; if
both companies make the same bid they split the order. If Boeing
loses the bid, it sells four planes at the high price through a side
deal. The arrow technique provides a simple way to identify a
Nash equilibrium. Start by assuming that Boeing will submit a low
price (the top row). Draw an arrow pointing to the maximum
payoff that Airbus can achieve. This payoff (labeled #1) is in the
cell where Airbus submits a low price (if the same payoff occurs
regardless of whether Airbus submits a high or low price, the
arrow would point to both cells). Second, move to the bottom row
and assume that Boeing submits a high price; draw an arrow
pointing to Airbus’s highest payoff (#2). Third, assume Airbus will
charge a low price (left column) and draw an arrow pointing to
Boeing’s highest payoff (#3). Fourth, move to the right column
and assume Airbus submits a high price; draw an arrow pointing
to Boeing’s highest payoff (#4). If a Nash equilibrium exists,
arrows will point to the payoffs in both halves of the cell. In this
case, the Nash equilibrium is where Boeing submits a high price
and Airbus submits a low price—shaded cell. (Note: Airbus has
a dominant strategy—submit a low price—both arrows point left.)
5. A focal point exists when there is a reasonable and obvious way to behave.
To illustrate how a Nash equilibrium could be a focal point, consider a game where
two strangers are asked to raise a hand. Both players receive a large payoff if they
stick up the same hand (both left hands or both right hands) and nothing if they
raise opposite hands. Two Nash equilibria exist: (1) both raising left hands, (2) both
raising right hands. Nonequilibrium outcomes occur when the players raise
opposite hands. The Nash equilibrium of both raising right hands is potentially a
focal point. Most people are right-handed. If one player expects that the other is
likely to raise his right hand because he is right-handed, she will have the incentive
to raise her right hand as well. Reciprocally, it is reasonable for the other player
to follow the same logic. Thus this outcome is potentially much more likely than
either the nonequilibrium outcomes or the Nash equilibrium of two left hands.
Boeing: Low Price
Airbus: Low Price
$500
#1: $500
#4:
$1000
$750
#3: $600
$0
#2: $1000
$750
Airbus: Low Price
Airbus: High Price
Airbus: High Price
Boeing: High Price
Boeing: Low Price
Boeing: High Price

--- Sayfa 8 ---
89
VOLUME 13 NUMBER 2      SUMMER 2000
lack of political power within the specific country (it
understands that there is a close working relation-
ship between the local and U.S. governments), it will
realize that Airbus has a dominant strategy to submit
a low price. Boeing correspondingly will choose a
high price—the Nash equilibrium. When rivals know
little about the setting or each other and when there
is not a natural focal point, outcomes other than Nash
equilibria (nonequilibrium outcomes) are more likely
to occur.
Competition versus Coordination
To this point, we have analyzed competitive
interaction. In each case, at least one of the firms has
an incentive to bid low to take sales from the other
and garner additional profits. This potential gain
comes at the expense of the other firm. Many
strategic situations, however, involve coordination
rather than competition.
Consider the problem in Figure 3, in which
Boeing and Airbus make simultaneous choices of
new communication systems for their planes.6 Two
technologies exist: Alpha and Beta. Both firms
benefit if they choose the same technology. A
common technology standard allows producers to
exploit scale economies and increases the likelihood
that other companies will invest to develop new
enhancements for the system because they can sell
to both companies. Similarly, companies are more
likely to develop service capabilities and stock larger
inventories of spare parts. The overall demand for
Are Nash Equilibria Likely?
Researchers have conducted many labora-
tory experiments on how people act in strategic
situations. One particular question of interest is
“Do they choose Nash Equilibria?” The evidence
suggests that the concept works relatively well in
predicting behavior in simple single-move situa-
tions—especially if the individuals have prior
experience interacting in similar ways with differ-
ent partners in the past. It appears to work less
well in more complex situations (for example,
situations that involve sophisticated mathematical
calculations) and in repeated situations (we dis-
cuss implications of repetition later in this article).
Also it often fails where coordination is required
and there are multiple equilibria, unless there is a
natural focal point.
Source: D. Davis and C. Holt (1993), Experimental Economics (Princeton
University Press: Princeton, NJ).
FIGURE 3
COORDINATION GAME
Boeing and Airbus make simultaneous choices of new
communication systems for their planes. Two technologies
exist: Alpha and Beta (payoffs in millions of dollars). Both firms
benefit if they choose the same technology. Applying the arrow
technique, we can see that there are two Nash equilibria: Alpha/
Alpha and Beta/Beta (shaded cells).
6. For example, suppose each company is working to introduce a new
intermediate-capacity plane at next year’s Paris Air Show and each views its choice
of communication technology as a critical selling point for their model. Each will
have to commit to a technology at the design phase, and each might be reluctant
to discuss such features with its rival before the new model is unveiled, possibly
becauseit would communicate other proprietary design information.
Boeing: Alpha
Airbus: Alpha
$100
$100
$50
$100
$50
$50
$50
$100
Airbus: Alpha
Airbus: Beta
Airbus: Beta
Boeing: Beta
Boeing: Alpha
Boeing: Beta
When dominant strategies do not exist, the concept of a Nash equilibrium is useful
in predicting the outcome. A Nash equilibrium is a set of strategies (or actions) in
which each firm is doing the best it can, given the actions of its rival.

--- Sayfa 9 ---
90
JOURNAL OF APPLIED CORPORATE FINANCE
planes also might be higher because airlines would
have lower costs in learning a single system.
Applying the arrow technique, we can see that
there are two Nash equilibria: Alpha/Alpha and Beta/
Beta. If precommitment communication is possible, it
is quite likely that one of these equilibria will be
reached. For instance, if both firms announce that they
will choose Alpha, there is no private incentive to
deviate from this choice. Coordination can prove more
difficult in cases where precommitment communica-
tion is costly and/or there are many players.
Some strategic interactions involve elements of
both competition and coordination. In the interactions
problem in Figure 4, Boeing and Airbus benefit from
choosing the same technology; again, there are two
equilibria. But the companies are not indifferent be-
tween the two. Boeing prefers the Alpha technology,
whereas Airbus prefers the Beta technology (the tech-
nologies are better matches for their particular aircraft
design). Coordination in this setting can be more dif-
ficult than in pure coordination problems, since the
firms would like different outcomes. Nonetheless, if
one of the firms is convinced of the choice the other
firm is going to make, it has an economic incentive to
follow suit and choose the same technology. Below we
discuss ways that firms might be able to make credible
statements regarding their upcoming choices.
Mixed Strategies
In the strategic problems we have examined
thus far, firms have chosen one specific action (for
FIGURE 4
COORDINATION/COMPETITION GAME
Boeing and Airbus must make simultaneous choices of new
communication systems for their planes. Two technologies
exist: Alpha and Beta (payoffs in millions of dollars). Both firms
benefit if they choose the same technology. Applying the arrow
technique, we can see that there are two Nash equilibria
(shaded cells): Alpha/Alpha and Beta/Beta. Boeing prefers the
Alpha/Alpha equilibrium, whereas Airbus prefers the Beta/Beta
equilibrium.
FIGURE 5
MIXED STRATEGY
Boeing and Airbus simultaneously must commit to an advertising
campaign. The advertising can either focus on the negatives of
the other company’s planes or the positive aspects of the
company’s own planes (payoffs in millions of dollars). Boeing
is the market leader and benefits when both firms choose the
same strategy. Airbus does better when it can differentiate itself
by choosing a different strategy. The arrow technique indicates
that there is no equilibrium in pure strategies. There is a unique
equilibrium in mixed strategies. In this equilibrium, each firm
randomizes between the two campaigns (choosing each with a
probability of .5).
Boeing: Alpha
Airbus: Alpha
$100
$50
$40
$50
$25
$40
$25
$100
Airbus: Alpha
Airbus: Beta
Airbus: Beta
Boeing: Beta
Boeing: Alpha
Boeing: Beta
Boeing: Negative
Campaign
$10
–$10
–$10
$10
–$10
$10
$10
–$10
Airbus
Negative Campaign
Airbus:
Positive Campaign
Airbus:
Positive Campaign
Boeing: Positive
Campaign
Boeing: Negative
Campaign
Boeing: Positive
Campaign
Airbus:
Negative Campaign

--- Sayfa 10 ---
91
VOLUME 13 NUMBER 2      SUMMER 2000
Coordination Problems with HDTV
High Definition Televisions are digital and
capable of displaying images at very high resolu-
tion. When combined with a good sound system,
HDTV can provide a theater-like experience. The
introduction of HDTV into the marketplace was
slowed by coordination problems between tele-
vision networks and manufacturers. Both groups
thought that they would benefit by the develop-
ment of this product. However, neither wanted
to be the first to commit. Network executives
were quoted as saying that they were reluctant to
move forward with plans for new programming
until the television manufacturers committed them-
selves to producing enough affordable sets to
receive it. Yet manufacturers did not want to
commit until the networks indicated that there
would be enough digital programming for con-
sumers to want to buy the sets. The situation was
summed up in 1997 by a senior executive at CBS,
“The networks are waiting to see what the TV
makers are going to do, and the TV makers are
waiting to see what the networks are going to
do.” In this situation, there are two Nash equilib-
ria: manufacturers and broadcasters both invest
or neither invests. Due to coordination problems,
firms may “get stuck” in the second equilibrium,
even though both groups prefer the first. While
the development of HDTV was slowed by coor-
dination problems, it became a commercial real-
ity by 1999. Manufacturers were selling the sets
and broadcasting companies were providing more
and more HDTV programming (the first equilib-
rium). Nonetheless, for HDTV to become a widely
adopted product, available programming had to
increase and set prices had to decline. Their
initial prices for the sets ranged from about
$5,000 to $10,000.
The coordination problems illustrated in this
example arise frequently with new technologies.
The overall value of a technology is usually higher
when there are many users (there are network
effects) and there is a common standard (for
example, consider how much less valuable DVDs
would be if there were several different incompat-
ible formats and only a small number of users of
any one type). Adopting a uniform standard can
be difficult when there are numerous players with
somewhat conflicting interests. Sometimes gov-
ernments, joint ventures among firms, and indus-
try trade groups play a constructive role in pro-
moting common standards, thereby helping to
realize a preferred equilibrium.
Source: J. Brinkley, “Networks and Set Makers in Standoff over HDTV,”
The New York Times (August 29, 1997), 5.
example, a high or low price). This type of choice is
known as a pure strategy. Sometimes it can pay to
“randomize”; for example, choose a high price with
probability p and a low price with probability (1–p).
The benefit of this so-called mixed strategy derives
from the element of surprise. For example, a foot-
ball team does not want its opposing team to
forecast its plays with 100 percent accuracy because
it will field defenses specifically designed to stop
the predicted plays. The team wants to mix up its
plays and surprise the other team. This same logic
can hold in business.
Consider the strategic problem in Figure 5
where Boeing and Airbus simultaneously must com-
mit to an advertising campaign. The advertising
might focus either on the negatives of the other
company’s planes or the positive aspects of the
company’s own planes. Boeing is the market leader
and benefits more when both firms choose the same
strategy. Airbus does better when it can differentiate
itself by choosing a different strategy. The arrow
technique indicates that there is no equilibrium in
pure strategies. If the campaigns match, Airbus
wants to change. If the campaigns do not match,
Boeing wants to change.
The problem has an equilibrium employing
mixed strategies: Both firms randomize between the
two actions with a probability of .5—they might base
their actions on a coin flip. To understand why this
is an equilibrium, consider the following logic.7 This
7. All strategic interactions with a finite number of both players and actions
have at least one Nash equilibrium in either pure or mixed strategies. In this article,
we give examples of mixed strategies and discuss the general intuition behind the
associated equilibria. More detailed discussion on how to solve for these equilibria
can be found in Dixit and Nalebuff (1991), Chapter 7.
A Nash equilibrium is more likely to occur when the rivals have more experience in
similar strategic problems, have better information about each other, or when the
Nash equilibrium is what is called a natural focal point

--- Sayfa 11 ---
92
JOURNAL OF APPLIED CORPORATE FINANCE
problem is what is called a zero-sum game: If Boeing
gains $10, Airbus loses $10 and vice versa. Thus if one
company has a positive expected payoff from their
interaction, the other must have a negative expected
payoff. If Boeing selects one of the campaigns with
a probability greater than .5, Airbus can choose the
other campaign with a probability of 1 and gain more
than half the time. For instance, suppose Boeing
chooses a positive campaign with a probability of .6,
Airbus would gain 60 percent of the time by always
choosing a negative campaign. Its expected payoff
would be .6(10) + .4(–10) = 2 > 0. Boeing’s expected
payoff would be .6(–10) + .4(10) = –2 < 0. The only
way that Boeing can assure an expected payoff of
zero is by randomizing between the two actions with
equal probabilities.8 Symmetric logic holds for Air-
bus. The outcome of both firms randomizing with a
probability of .5 is a Nash equilibrium. Neither firm
has an incentive to change its strategy given the
strategy of the other firm.
In equilibrium, a firm receives the same ex-
pected payoff regardless of which of the campaigns
it actually chooses. Thus if Boeing flips a coin that
indicates it should choose a positive campaign, there
is no reason to deviate and choose a negative cam-
paign. In either case it gets the same expected payoff
(zero). By definition, it would not be an equilibrium
if either firm had an incentive to alter its choice.
Managerial Implications
Managers often make decisions in circumstances
where the decision is not expected to be repeated
and the payoff depends on the simultaneous deci-
sions of other parties, be they rival firms, customers,
suppliers, or employees. Potential examples include
making a large investment decision to enter a new
market or industry, pricing a new product, or making
an acquisition bid for a firm.
To summarize the managerial implications of
our analysis, consider the case of Valerie Black, who
must submit the bid for Boeing in our example. Val
should perform the following calculations:
Estimate the payoffs given each of her potential
actions as well as those of her rival, Airbus.9
Examine whether she has a dominant strategy—if
so, she should employ it.
Without a dominant strategy, she should make
her best estimate of what Airbus will do and
identify her corresponding best action (which
might be a mixed strategy).
Check whether the resulting outcome is a potential
Nash equilibrium: Does the forecasted action of
Airbus appear optimal from their viewpoint, given
her proposed action? If so, her proposed action
appears reasonable; if not, Val should reexamine the
underlying assumptions of her initial forecast.
A Mixed Strategy at Wimbledon
Tennis players can serve either to an
opponent’s backhand or forehand. The receiver
can choose to move left or right in anticipation of
the serve. Both the opponent and receiver want
to mix their choices to catch the other off guard.
For example, if the server always serves to the
backhand, the receiver will know that it is best to
favor that side. The server would then want to mix
it up and serve to the opponent’s forehand. In a
mixed-strategy equilibrium, the expected payoff
to a given player is the same regardless of which
action he actually ends up taking. Thus, if the
server is mixing between serving to the receiver’s
backhand and forehand, the likelihood of win-
ning the point should be the same. To test whether
the concept of a mixed-strategy equilibrium actu-
ally explains the behavior of top tennis players,
researchers recorded the results of serves in 10
matches at Wimbledon. There, data supported
the theory—the success rates with serves to
either the forehand or backhand were virtually
the same.
Source: M. Walker and J. Wooders (1999), “Minimax Play at Wimbledon,”
working paper, University of Arizona.
8. If Boeing chooses each action with probability .5, the expected payoff is
zero independent of Airbus’s strategy. Suppose Airbus chooses the positive
campaign with probability p. The probability of Boeing matching the positive
campaign is .5p (the probability of two independent events is the product of the
individual probabilities of the events). Similarly the probability of matching a
negative campaign is .5(1–p). Thus the likelihood of Boeing winning is .5p + .5(1–
p) = .5. It correspondingly loses .5 of the time and has an expected payoff of zero.
This is true independent of the p Airbus actually chooses.
9. If she has many potential actions, she may wish to simplify the problem by
focusing on a few key possibilities. Sometimes it is not feasible to quantify the
payoffs. In these cases, managers can go through the following steps on a more
qualitative basis.

--- Sayfa 12 ---
93
VOLUME 13 NUMBER 2      SUMMER 2000
Her forecast probably should be revised if it is
based on the implicit assumption that Airbus is either
dumb or irrational (for example, Airbus is unable to
forecast a likely action on her part or incapable of
assessing what is in its own best interests). In
essence, Val should place herself behind her rival’s
desk and ask what she would do if she worked for
Airbus. She should recognize that Airbus undoubt-
edly is trying to forecast her actions, as well. Is there
some reasonable set of beliefs that Airbus might have
about her actions that would motivate the firm to
choose the action in the initial forecast—can it be
rationalized? If not Val probably should revise the
forecast. Since Val almost surely has less than perfect
information about the factors affecting Airbus’s
choice, she may misforecast what Airbus actually
does. Nonetheless, her goal is simply to do the best
she can, given her imperfect information. Sometimes
it will pay to collect additional information about a
rival to make a better-informed choice (when the
expected incremental benefits of the new informa-
tion are larger than its incremental costs).
If Val is reasonably confident that Airbus will
choose a nonequilibrium strategy (for example,
Airbus has a track record of choosing a particular
strategy in similar situations), it might be best for her
to choose a nonequilibrium strategy as well. For
instance, if she knows that Airbus will choose a
particular action, she should choose the action that
maximizes her payoff, even if the outcome is not a
Nash equilibrium. The moral here is not that Val
always should avoid nonequilibrium strategies, but
that she should think carefully before selecting one.
If Val is extremely risk averse and has little
experience either dealing with this rival or managing
in similar situations, one option is to choose a secure
strategy—a strategy that guarantees the highest
payoff given the worst possible case.10 In other
words, she forecasts the worst payoff that could arise
for each of her potential actions and chooses the
action that offers the highest payoff among the worst
payoffs. But following such a strategy generally will
not maximize the value of the firm (for example, if
the primary benefit is to guard against an unlikely
outcome) and often she could do better with addi-
tional analysis and thought.
SEQUENTIAL INTERACTIONS
Thus far, we have limited our attention to
simultaneous-move strategic problems. Yet in many
business situations managers make decisions se-
quentially. For example, consider the problem in
Figure 4 where Boeing and Airbus simultaneously
chose new communication technologies. Decisions
of this type often are made sequentially. For ex-
ample, Boeing might choose the technology in one
year, while Airbus chooses it in the next. As we shall
Failure to Consider Strategic Interactions: The Paper Industry
Bennett Stewart of Stern Stewart & Co. made
the following point in a roundtable discussion
with the CFO of International Paper:
“I’m kind of fascinated by your industry
because it does go through these cycles, and some
part of that cyclical market behavior seems to be
self-inflicted…When demand does rise, all the com-
panies tend to throw piles of money into new
capacity in attempts to maintain market share …
then you all suffer together from excess capacity.
The CFO responded:
If you’re thinking about building a new paper
facility, you’re going to base your decision on some
assumptions about economic growth—and, as the
result of globalization, the relevant growth mea-
sure today is worldwide rather than just domestic
or US growth. What we never seem to factor in,
however, is the response of our competitors. Who
else is going to build a plant or machine at the
same time?
Managers generally will make better deci-
sions if they incorporate the responses of com-
petitors into their analysis.
Source: “Stern Stewart EVA Roundtable” Journal of Applied Corporate
Finance (Summer 1994).
10. Another name for this type of strategy is maximin.
Some strategic interactions involve elements of both competition and coordination.
Coordination can prove more difficult in cases where precommitment
communication is costly and/or there are many players.

--- Sayfa 13 ---
94
JOURNAL OF APPLIED CORPORATE FINANCE
see, the equilibrium outcome of strategic interac-
tions can vary, depending on whether they occur
simultaneously or sequentially. For instance, in this
technology choice problem, there are two possible
equilibria given simultaneous choices, but only one
given sequential choices.
Extensive Form. Figure 6 displays this strategic
interaction in extensive form assuming that Boeing
moves first (for example, Boeing chooses the tech-
nology for the new model it introduces at this year’s
Paris Air Show, while Airbus will introduce its new
model next year). The extensive form depicts the
sequence of actions and the corresponding out-
comes. A node indicates a point at which a firm must
choose an action, while the branches leading from
a node display possible choices at the node. At the
first node (node 1) Boeing must choose between the
Alpha and Beta technologies. Airbus makes the next
move. Whether it is at node 2 or node 3 depends on
Boeing’s initial choice. At either node Airbus must
choose whether to adopt the Alpha or Beta technol-
ogy. The numbers at the end of the final branches
indicate the ultimate payoffs to Boeing and Airbus,
given the sequence of choices made by the two
firms. (These payoffs are the same as in Figure 4.) If
both firms choose the Alpha technology, the payoffs
are 100 for Boeing and 50 for Airbus (as in the upper
left cell of Figure 4), while if they both choose the
Beta technology the payoffs are reversed (as in the
lower-right cell). Payoffs are lower for both firms
when they choose different technologies.
Backward Induction. We analyze this extensive
form using backward induction—looking forward
to the final decision nodes and reasoning backward.
To illustrate, continue with the example in Figure 6.
Begin at the final two nodes (2 and 3). At node 2,
Airbus has an incentive to choose Alpha because it
prefers the payoff of 50 to 40. At node 3, Airbus
chooses Beta. Now move to the initial node. If
Boeing foresees how Airbus will act at the final
nodes, Boeing will see that it is in its best interests
to choose Alpha in the initial stage. If it chooses
Alpha, Airbus will do so as well and Boeing will
receive 100. In contrast if Boeing chooses Beta,
Airbus will match that choice and Boeing will receive
a final payoff of 50. Thus, the equilibrium outcome
is for Boeing to choose Alpha in the first stage with
Airbus matching that choice in the second stage.
The equilibrium strategy of a firm given sequen-
tial strategic interaction consists of a sequence of its
best actions, where the actions are taken at the
corresponding nodes. In this problem, Boeing’s
equilibrium strategy is to choose Alpha in the first
stage, whereas Airbus’s equilibrium strategy is to
choose Alpha in the second stage if Boeing chooses
Alpha and Beta if Boeing chooses Beta. The strate-
gies of the two firms are a Nash equilibrium: Neither
firm wants to change its strategy given the other
firm’s strategy.
First-Mover Advantage
In this example, Boeing has a first-mover ad-
vantage: By moving first, Boeing makes higher
profits than Airbus, who moves second. If Airbus
moves first, the advantage is reversed. Knowing
Boeing’s incentive to match the technology in the
second stage, Airbus would choose Beta in the first
round and receive higher profits. This example
illustrates that managers must consider carefully the
FIGURE 6
EXTENSIVE FORM
In this sequential game, Boeing chooses the technology first
and then Airbus makes a choice. This diagram shows the game
in extensive form. A node indicates a point at which a firm must
choose an action, whereas the branches leading from a node
indicate the possible choices. The numbers at the end indicate
the payoffs (in millions of dollars) for Boeing and Airbus,
respectively. The game is solved by backward induction. Given
the payoffs, Airbus will choose Alpha at node 2 and Beta at node
3. If Boeing forecasts these choices, it will choose Alpha at node
1. Colored lines and type indicate equilibrium choices.
Boeing
Node 1
Node 2
Node 3
α
α
α
β
β
β
Airbus
Airbus
Airbus
Airbus
Airbus
Airbus
Boeing
Boeing
Boeing
Boeing
100
100
50
50
40
40
25
25

--- Sayfa 14 ---
95
VOLUME 13 NUMBER 2      SUMMER 2000
order of moves in strategic situations. When Boeing
and Airbus make simultaneous choices, there are
two potential equilibria. In the sequential game there
is only one. The outcome, however, depends on
who moves first.
The first mover does not always have a strategic
advantage. In some situations, the follower has the
advantage. Consider a firm that cuts its development
costs by copying product innovations by pioneering
firms (or a football quarterback who gains an
advantage by observing the opponent’s defense
prior to calling a play).
Strategic Moves
Actions that are taken to influence the beliefs or
actions of the rival in favorable ways are called
strategic moves. Typically, they require individuals to
restrict their own future actions. For example, prior
to Boeing’s choice, if Airbus could make a binding
commitment to choose Beta no matter what Boeing
did, it then would be in Boeing’s interest to adopt the
Beta technology in the first year.
Credibility. Can Airbus offset Boeing’s first-
mover advantage by simply announcing that it will
adopt the Beta technology next year no matter what
Boeing does this year? Boeing would clearly be better
off to adopt the Beta technology if it really believed that
Airbus would carry out its announced plan. Yet Boeing
probably should ignore such a statement by Airbus
because it is not credible. The statement lacks credibility
specifically because it would not be in Airbus’s self-
interest to carry out its announced plan if Boeing
adopted the Alpha technology first. Airbus would be
foolish to adopt the Beta technology after Boeing
chooses the Alpha technology given its low payoff.
For a strategic move to be credible, it must consist
of a sufficient commitment to convince the rival to
change its beliefs. Merely announcing a planned future
action typically is not enough—talk is cheap. As an
example of a potentially credible action, suppose that
Airbus signs a contract with the manufacturer of the Beta
technology to pay the supplier a large sum of money
whether or not Airbus employs its technology in the
following year. This contract is legally binding and
expensive to renegotiate. Now Boeing has a substantive
reason to believe that Airbus will carry through with its
announced plan to adopt the Beta technology even if
Boeing were to choose the Alpha system. If it does not,
it still will have to pay a large sum of money to the
supplier and thus would be worse off than if it matches
Boeing by choosing the Alpha technology. If Boeing
decides this announcement is credible, Boeing should
adopt the Beta system in the first year.
Managerial Implications
Many strategic situations involve a sequence of
actions by the rivals. Examples include management
negotiations with a labor union and the dissemina-
tion of a new product within an industry.
To illustrate the management implications of
our analysis of sequential strategic interactions,
consider Helmut Mueller, the manager who must
choose the communication technology for Airbus
in the communication technology problem. Helmut
should begin by defining carefully the sequence
of moves. For example, he may have enough
information to know that Boeing will choose a
new technology this year, whereas Airbus’s pro-
duction schedule will not allow it to make a choice
until the following year. He then should work
backward to predict the likely outcome of their
interaction. Starting at the end of the process, he
will realize that he will have a strong incentive to
match Boeing’s choice in the second period.
Moving to the first node, he should place himself
behind a Boeing desk. He should realize that
Boeing is likely to understand that Helmut will
have strong incentives to match Boeing’s technol-
ogy in the second period. Given this belief,
Boeing will adopt the Alpha technology. Airbus is
First-Mover Advantage: Wal-Mart
Wal-Mart was the first company to place
large discount stores in many small towns in the
southeastern region of the United States (for
instance, in Arkansas). Even though Wal-Mart
has been quite profitable at these stores, other
companies have been reluctant to place com-
peting stores in the same towns. They realize
that each town is big enough to support only
one such store. If they did enter, they would
have to compete with Wal-Mart and both would
lose money. Thus Wal-Mart has a first-mover
advantage in these communities.
For a strategic move to be credible, it must consist of a sufficient commitment to
convince the rival to change its beliefs. Typically, it requires acompany
to restrict its own future actions.

--- Sayfa 15 ---
96
JOURNAL OF APPLIED CORPORATE FINANCE
less profitable with this outcome and thus would
prefer the joint adoption of the Beta system. As a
final step, he should analyze whether he could
make any strategic moves that would influence
the beliefs of Boeing managers and thus motivate
them to adopt the Beta technology. He must
realize that Boeing’s management is unlikely to
believe a simple announcement that Airbus will
choose the Beta technology in the future. Helmut
might conclude that a contract with the Beta
manufacturer would provide sufficient commit-
ment to alter Boeing’s beliefs and choice. After
entering this contract, it is important that Helmut
make his action known to Boeing. For instance,
Helmut might want to report the contract to the
financial press.
Strategic Behavior: NBA
There was a major labor dispute between
National Basketball Association players and
team owners in 1998. Issues included the per-
centage of revenues devoted to salaries, maxi-
mum salary caps, rookie salaries, maximum
annual raises, as well as several other items. The
players’ union had delegated negotiating au-
thority to a group of 19 players. The general
membership of the union was to vote only on
contract proposals endorsed by the negotiating
group. The key negotiator on the owner’s side
was David Stern, commissioner of the NBA.
The first half of the season was canceled by
a labor lockout as the two sides repeatedly
exchanged contract proposals. By January 1999,
the dispute had cost the league over a billion
dollars in forgone revenue and the players over
$500 million in salaries. Given the short life of
the typical player’s career (around five years)
the cost borne by the players was particularly
high. The dispute also created significant ill will
among NBA fans. At the beginning of January,
Stern informed the players that he would not
consider their “final offer,” would recommend
to the owners that they cancel the rest of the
season and would begin looking for replace-
ment players for the following year. The sea-
son, however, would be played if the players
accepted the owner’s “final” offer.
Stern’s threat to end the season was a
strategic move to motivate the players to settle
the dispute. Was this move credible? After all,
canceling the season also would impose signifi-
cant costs on the owners. Apparently the play-
ers’ negotiating group thought that the threat
had merit. Following Stern’s announcement,
the negotiating group decided to allow the full
470 members of the union to vote on the
owner’s proposal. This action was something
that Stern had wanted all along but the negoti-
ating group had refused. However, Stern did
back off on his commitment not to consider
new proposals from the union. Prior to the final
vote, a union attorney called the commissioner’s
office and indicated that the players were
prepared to vote to cancel the remainder of the
season. However, a last minute deal was still
possible if the NBA owners “gave some ground.”
After an all-night bargaining session, a deal was
reached and the labor dispute settled.
Source: S. Fatsis, “NBA, Players Reach Accord, Saving Season,” The Wall
Street Journal (January 7, 1999), A3.
It Pays to Think Sequentially
According to a story that frequently has
circulated over the Internet, two college students
drove to an out-of-town basketball game the day
before an important exam. The students drank too
much and were unprepared to take the test. Rather
than flunk the exam, they decided to tell the
teacher that a flat tire delayed their return. Being
the understanding type, the professor said, “No
problem; take the test tomorrow.” The students
arrived the next day to take the exam; they were
put into separate rooms. The first question, worth
5 points, was quite easy. But confidence turned to
apprehension as each student turned to the next
question, worth 95 points, that simply asked,
“Which tire?” If the students had thought ahead more
carefully, they would have behaved differently.

--- Sayfa 16 ---
97
VOLUME 13 NUMBER 2      SUMMER 2000
REPEATED STRATEGIC INTERACTION
Many strategic situations involve repeated inter-
action among rivals. For example, Boeing and Airbus
have many opportunities to compete against each
other to supply commercial jet aircraft. Indeed many,
if not most, companies deal with the same competi-
tors, suppliers, employees, and regulators over ex-
tended periods of time.
When interaction is expected to occur repeat-
edly, more equilibria frequently are possible. For
instance, recall the situation illustrated in Figure 1. In
this problem, Boeing and Airbus make bids to
produce ten airplanes. The dominant strategy is for
both to bid low, even though they would be better
off if both bid high—a rival’s dilemma. With repeated
interaction, the equilibrium still might consist of both
firms’ pricing low. However, other equilibria, such as
both firms’ pricing high, are possible. The basic idea
is that with repeated interaction, there is more to
consider than the short-run payoffs. The decision-
maker also has to consider the potential benefits of
establishing a long-term cooperative relationship.11
The likelihood of a “cooperative” outcome increases
if (1) the long-run gains from cooperating are larger
relative to the short-run gains from not cooperating
(assuming the other firm does), (2) it is easier for the
firms to recognize whether or not cooperation has
occurred, and (3) the expected length of the re-
peated relationship is longer. Discount rates also are
important (higher discount rates imply that the
decision maker cares more about present payoffs
relative to future payoffs).
SUMMARY
In this article we introduce the basic elements
of game theory within the context of forging busi-
ness strategy. A firm’s optimal strategy generally
depends on its forecast of the actions that will be
selected by its rivals. The primary value of game
theory stems from its focus on strategic interaction:
decision-making when all participants are presumed
rational, each attempting to anticipate likely actions
and reactions by its rivals.
In our discussion, we employ extremely simple
examples of two rivals considering only two actions.
Most business problems are much more complex.
Although technical challenges mount as the number
of rivals and the range of their potential actions
increase, some of the basic insights from this intro-
duction to game theory appear quite robust.
Understand your business setting. Identify the
relevant set of rivals and the nature of their interac-
Boeing and Airbus Accused of Price Collusion
On July 21, 1998, Boeing raised prices on its
aircraft by five percent, its first price increase in 23
years. Airbus followed with a three-percent in-
crease in September. Antitrust regulators in Wash-
ington and at the European Union in Brussels
almost immediately began separate investigations
of whether the two companies had engaged in
price fixing. Both companies vehemently denied
the allegations.
Game theory implies that a cooperative
equilibrium is possible given repeated interac-
tion without explicit communication or collu-
sion. One interpretation of the price increases
is that the two firms had moved from cutthroat
competition where both firms were losing money
to a more cooperative equilibrium. Experience
suggests, however, that cooperative equilibria
are not always easy to sustain. Consider the
difficulties experienced by OPEC in trying to
restrict output to maintain high oil prices or the
American airline industry in avoiding price
wars. It will be interesting to see if Boeing and
Airbus engage in vigorous price competition in
the future.
Source: M. Freudenheim and J. Tagliabue, “Regulators Investigating Price
Increases by Boeing and Airbus,” The New York Times (November 27, 1998),
C1.
11. Generally, it is important to have an uncertain ending date in the repeated
relationship. If there is a finite ending date, both you and your rival are likely to
realize that there is no incentive for either of you to cooperate in the last interaction.
Then both of you will have an incentive not to cooperate in the next to the last
interaction (since your reputation for cooperating will not matter in the last round).
Yet if this is true there is no incentive to cooperate in the interactions before. The
final result can be no cooperation in the first interaction. If on the other hand the
date of the final interaction is uncertain, there always can be some reason to
cooperate.
With repeated interaction, there is more to consider than the short-run payoffs.
The decision-maker also has to consider the potential benefits of establishing
a long-term cooperative relationship.

--- Sayfa 17 ---
98
JOURNAL OF APPLIED CORPORATE FINANCE
tion. What are their potential actions? What informa-
tion will they have when they choose their actions?
What are the consequences of their various actions?
Is similar interaction among these rivals likely to be
repeated either over time or across other markets?
Place yourself behind your rival’s desk. Absent
specific reasons to believe otherwise, assume that
your rival is knowledgeable, thoughtful, and pur-
poseful, and ensure that your forecast of its future
actions are consistent with that assumption.
Look forward, reason backward. Consider the
entire sequence of decisions that are likely to be
made over the course of this interaction. Look
forward to the ultimate set of potential outcomes and
then reason backward to determine your best strat-
egy. This process identifies critical choices that your
rivals face and highlights why you should under-
stand the basis for their choices.
With a first-mover advantage, move first. If the
business setting does not naturally permit you to
implement your action first, consider whether
you can credibly precommit to a particular action.
Effective precommitment, by convincing your
rivals of your future actions, can induce them to
change their actions. This logic highlights the fact
that maintaining flexibility undercuts your ability
to precommit—in this sense, flexibility can be
quite expensive.
With a second-mover advantage, avoid moving
first. Delay implementation of actions where pos-
sible. Try to reduce the predictability of your ac-
tions. Finally, if you have to implement an action,
maintain as much future flexibility to change your
actions as possible.
Repetition facilitates cooperation. With repeated
interaction among a given group of rivals, a broader
array of choices typically is appropriate. Some form
of cooperation is more likely where interaction is
expected to be repeated either over time or
across markets.
JAMES BRICKLEY
is the James Gleason Professor of Economics and Finance at the
University of Rochester’s William E. Simon Graduate School of
Business Administration.
CLIFFORD SMITH
is the Louise and Henry Epstein Professor of Finance at the
University of Rochester’s William E. Simon Graduate School of
Business Administration.
JEROLD ZIMMERMAN
is the Ronald Bittner Professor of Accounting at the University
of Rochester’s William E. Simon Graduate School of Business
Administration.

--- Sayfa 18 ---
Journal of Applied Corporate Finance (ISSN 1078-1196 [print], ISSN
1745-6622 [online]) is published quarterly on behalf of Morgan Stanley by
Blackwell Publishing, with ofﬁces at 350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148,
USA, and PO Box 1354, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2XG, UK. Call
US: (800) 835-6770, UK: +44 1865 778315; fax US: (781) 388-8232, UK:
+44 1865 471775, or e-mail: subscrip@bos.blackwellpublishing.com.
Information For Subscribers For new orders, renewals, sample copy re-
quests, claims, changes of address, and all other subscription correspon-
dence, please contact the Customer Service Department at your nearest
Blackwell ofﬁce.
Subscription Rates for Volume 17 (four issues) Institutional Premium
Rate* The Americas† $330, Rest of World £201; Commercial Company Pre-
mium Rate, The Americas $440, Rest of World £268; Individual Rate, The
Americas $95, Rest of World £70, Ð105‡; Students**, The Americas $50,
Rest of World £28, Ð42.
*Includes print plus premium online access to the current and all available
backﬁles. Print and online-only rates are also available (see below).
†Customers in Canada should add 7% GST or provide evidence of entitlement
to exemption

‡Customers in the UK should add VAT at 5%; customers in the EU should also
add VAT at 5%, or provide a VAT registration number or evidence of entitle-
ment to exemption
** Students must present a copy of their student ID card to receive this
rate.
For more information about Blackwell Publishing journals, including online ac-
cess information, terms and conditions, and other pricing options, please visit
www.blackwellpublishing.com or contact our customer service department,
tel: (800) 835-6770 or +44 1865 778315 (UK ofﬁce).
Back Issues Back issues are available from the publisher at the current single-
issue rate.
Mailing Journal of Applied Corporate Finance is mailed Standard Rate. Mail-
ing to rest of world by DHL Smart & Global Mail. Canadian mail is sent by
Canadian publications mail agreement number 40573520. Postmaster
Send all address changes to Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, Blackwell
Publishing Inc., Journals Subscription Department, 350 Main St., Malden, MA
02148-5020.
Journal of Applied Corporate Finance is available online through Synergy,
Blackwell’s online journal service which allows you to:
•  Browse tables of contents and abstracts from over 290 professional,
science, social science, and medical journals
•  Create your own Personal Homepage from which you can access your
personal subscriptions, set up e-mail table of contents alerts and run
saved searches
•   Perform detailed searches across our database of titles and save the
search criteria for future use
• Link to and from bibliographic databases such as ISI.
Sign up for free today at http://www.blackwell-synergy.com.
Disclaimer The Publisher, Morgan Stanley, its afﬁliates, and the Editor cannot
be held responsible for errors or any consequences arising from the use of
information contained in this journal. The views and opinions expressed in this
journal do not necessarily represent those of the Publisher, Morgan Stanley,
its afﬁliates, and Editor, neither does the publication of advertisements con-
stitute any endorsement by the Publisher, Morgan Stanley, its afﬁliates, and
Editor of the products advertised. No person should purchase or sell any
security or asset in reliance on any information in this journal.
Morgan Stanley is a full service ﬁnancial services company active in the securi-
ties, investment management and credit services businesses. Morgan Stanley
may have and may seek to have business relationships with any person or
company named in this journal.
Copyright © 2004 Morgan Stanley. All rights reserved. No part of this publi-
cation may be reproduced, stored or transmitted in whole or part in any form
or by any means without the prior permission in writing from the copyright
holder. Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use or for the
internal or personal use of speciﬁc clients is granted by the copyright holder
for libraries and other users of the Copyright Clearance Center (CCC), 222
Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA (www.copyright.com), provided
the appropriate fee is paid directly to the CCC. This consent does not extend
to other kinds of copying, such as copying for general distribution for advertis-
ing or promotional purposes, for creating new collective works or for resale.
Institutions with a paid subscription to this journal may make photocopies for
teaching purposes and academic course-packs free of charge provided such
copies are not resold. For all other permissions inquiries, including requests
to republish material in another work, please contact the Journals Rights and
Permissions Coordinator, Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford
OX4 2DQ. E-mail: journalsrights@oxon.blackwellpublishing.com.
View publication stats