--- Sayfa 1 ---
The Right Game: Use
Game Theory to Shape
Strategy
by Adam M. Brandenburger and Barry J. Nalebuff
Reprint 95402
Harvard Business Review

--- Sayfa 3 ---
Business is a high-stakes game. The way we ap-
proach this game is reflected in the language we use
to describe it. Business language is full of expres-
sions borrowed from the military and from sports.
Some of them are dangerously misleading. Unlike
war and sports, business is not about winning and
losing. Nor is it about how well you play the game.
Companies can succeed spectacularly without re-
quiring others to fail. And they can fail miserably
no matter how well they play if they make the mis-
take of playing the wrong game.
The essence of business success lies in making
sure you’re playing the right game. How do you
know if it’s the right game? What can you do about
it if it’s the wrong game? To help managers answer
those questions, we’ve developed a framework that
draws on the insights of game theory. After 50 years
as a mathematical construct, game theory is about
to change the game of business.
Game theory came of age in 1994, when three
pioneers in the field were awarded the Nobel Prize.
It all began in 1944, when mathematics genius John
von Neumann and economist Oskar Morgenstern
published their book Theory of Games and Eco-
nomic Behavior. Immediately heralded as one of
the greatest scientific achievements of the century,
their work provided a systematic way to under-
stand the behavior of players in situations where
their fortunes are interdependent. Von Neumann
and Morgenstern distinguished two types of games.
In the first type, rule-based games, players interact
according to specified “rules of engagement.”
These rules might come from contracts, loan
covenants, or trade agreements, for example. In the
second type, freewheeling games, players interact
without any external constraints. For example,
buyers and sellers may create value by transacting
in an unstructured fashion. Business is a complex
mix of both types of games.
PHOTOS BY CHRISTOPHER MAKOS
Copyright © 1995 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College.  All rights reserved.
HBR
J U L Y - A U G U S T 1 9 9 5
The Right Game: Use Game
Theory to Shape Strategy
by Adam M. Brandenburger and Barry J. Nalebuff
Adam M. Brandenburger is an associate professor at the
Harvard Business School in Boston, Massachusetts.
Barry J. Nalebuff is a professor at the Yale School of Man-
agement in New Haven, Connecticut. The authors’ re-
search, teaching, and consulting focus on game theory
and business strategy, and their book on the subject will
be published by Currency/Doubleday in 1996.

--- Sayfa 4 ---
For rule-based games, game theory offers the
principle, To every action, there is a reaction. But,
unlike Newton’s third law of motion, the reaction
is not programmed to be equal and opposite. To ana-
lyze how other players will react to your move, you
need to play out all the reactions (including yours)
to their actions as far ahead as possible. You have to
look forward far into the game and then reason
backward to figure out which of today’s actions will
lead you to where you want to end up.1
For freewheeling games, game theory offers the
principle, You cannot take away from the game
more than you bring to it. In business, what does
a particular player bring to the game? To find the
answer, look at the value created when everyone is
in the game, and then pluck that player out and
see how much value the remaining players can cre-
ate. The difference is the removed player’s “added
value.” In unstructured interactions, you cannot
take away more than your added value.2
Underlying both principles is a shift in perspec-
tive. Many people view games egocentrically – that
is, they focus on their own position. The primary
insight of game theory is the importance of focus-
ing on others – namely, allocentrism. To look for-
ward and reason backward, you have to put yourself
in the shoes–even in the heads–of other players. To
assess your added value, you have to ask not what
other players can bring to you but what you can
bring to other players.
Managers can profit by using these insights from
game theory to design a game that is right for their
companies. The rewards that can come from chang-
ing a game may be far greater than those from main-
taining the status quo. For example, Nintendo suc-
ceeded brilliantly in changing the video game
business by taking control of software. Sega’s sub-
sequent success required changing the game again.
Rupert Murdoch’s New York Post changed the
tabloid game by finding a convincing way to dem-
onstrate the cost of a price war without actually
launching one. BellSouth made money by changing
the takeover game between Craig McCaw and Lin
Broadcasting. Successful business strategy is about
actively shaping the game you play, not just play-
ing the game you find. We will explore how these
examples and others worked in practice, starting
with the story of how General Motors changed
the game of selling cars.
From Lose-Lose to Win-Win
In the early 1990s, the U.S. automobile industry
was locked into an all-too-familiar mode of destruc-
tive competition. End-of-year rebates and dealer
discounts were ruining the industry’s profitability.
As soon as one company used incentives to clear
excess inventory at year-end, others had to do the
same. Worse still, consumers came to expect the re-
bates. As a result, they waited for them to be offered
before buying a car, forcing manufacturers to offer
incentives earlier in the year. Was there a way out?
Would someone find an alternative to practices that
were hurting all the companies? General Motors
may have done just that.
In September 1992, General Motors and House-
hold Bank issued a new credit card that allowed
cardholders to apply 5% of their charges toward
buying or leasing a new GM car, up to $500 per year,
with a maximum of $3,500. The GM card has been
the most successful credit-card launch in history.
One month after it was introduced, there were 1.2
million accounts. Two years later, there were 8.7
million accounts–and the program is still growing.
Projections suggest that eventually some 30% of
GM’s nonfleet sales in North America will be to
cardholders.
As Hank Weed, managing director of GM’s card
program, explains, the card helps GM build share
through the “conquest” of prospective Ford buyers
and others – a traditional win-lose strategy. But
the program has engineered another, more subtle
change in the game of selling cars. It replaced other
incentives that GM had previously offered. The net
effect has been to raise the price that a noncard-
holder–someone who intends to buy a Ford, for ex-
ample – would have to pay for a GM car. The pro-
gram thus gives Ford some breathing room to raise
its prices. That allows GM, in turn, to raise its
prices without losing customers to Ford. The result
is a win-win dynamic between GM and Ford.
If the GM card is as good as it sounds, what’s
stopping other companies from copying it? Not
much, it seems. First, Ford introduced its version of
the program with Citibank. Then Volkswagen in-
troduced its variation with MBNA Corporation.
Doesn’t all this imitation put a dent in the GM pro-
gram? Not necessarily.
Imitation is the sincerest form of flattery, but in
business it is often thought to be a killer compli-
ment. Textbooks on strategy warn that if others can
GAME THEORY
58
HARVARD BUSINESS REVIEW
July-August 1995
1. In-depth discussion and applications of the principle of looking forward
and reasoning backward are provided in Thinking Strategically: The
Competitive Edge in Business, Politics, and Everyday Life, by Avinash
Dixit and Barry Nalebuff (W.W. Norton, 1991).
2. The argument is spelled out in Adam Brandenburger and Harborne Stu-
art, “Value-based Business Strategy,” which will appear in a forthcoming
issue of Journal of Economics & Management Strategy.
3. This portmanteau word can be traced to Ray Noorda, CEO of Novell,
who has used it to describe relationships in the information technology
business: “You have to cooperate and compete at the same time” (Elec-
tronic Business Buyer, December 1993).

--- Sayfa 5 ---
imitate something you do, you can’t make money
at it. Some go even further, asserting that business
strategy cannot be codified. If it could, it would be
imitated and any gains would evaporate.
Yet the proponents of this belief are mistaken
in assuming that imitation is always harmful. It’s
true that once GM’s program is widely imitated,
the company’s ability to lure customers away from
other manufacturers will be diminished. But imita-
tion also can help GM. Ford and Volkswagen offset
the cost of their credit card rebates by scaling back
other incentive programs. The result was an effec-
tive price increase for GM customers, the vast ma-
jority of whom do not participate in the Ford and
Volkswagen credit card programs. This gives GM
the option to firm up its demand or raise its prices
further. All three car companies now have a more
loyal customer base, so there is less incentive to
compete on price.
To understand the full impact of the GM card
program, you have to use game theory. You can’t
see all the ramifications of the program without
adopting an allocentric perspective. The key is to
anticipate how Ford, Volkswagen, and other auto-
makers will respond to GM’s initiative.
When you change the game, you want to come
out ahead. That’s pretty clear. But what about the
fact that GM’s strategy helped Ford? One common
mind-set – seeing business as war – says that others
have to lose in order for you to win. There may in-
deed be times when you want to opt for a win-lose
strategy. But not always. The GM example shows
that there also are times when you want to create a
win-win situation. Although it may sound surpris-
ing, sometimes the best way to succeed is to let
others, including your competitors, do well.
Looking for win-win strategies has several advan-
tages. First, because the approach is relatively un-
explored, there is greater potential for finding new
opportunities. Second, because others are not being
forced to give up ground, they may offer less resis-
tance to win-win moves, making them easier to im-
plement. Third, because win-win moves don’t force
other players to retaliate, the new game is more
sustainable. And finally, imitation of a win-win move
is beneficial, not harmful.
To encourage thinking about both cooperative
and competitive ways to change the game, we sug-
gest the term coopetition.3 It means looking for
win-win as well as win-lose opportunities. Keeping
both possibilities in mind is important because
win-lose strategies often backfire. Consider, for ex-
ample, the common – and dangerous – strategy of
lowering prices to gain market share. Although it
may provide a temporary benefit, the gains will
evaporate if others match the cuts to regain their
lost share. The result is simply to reestablish the
status quo but at lower prices – a lose-lose scenario
that leaves all the players worse off. That was the
situation in the automobile industry before GM
changed the game.
The Game of Business
Did GM intentionally plan to change the game of
selling cars in the way we have described it? Or did
the company just get lucky with a loyalty market-
ing program that turned out better than anyone had
expected? Looking back, the one thing we can say
with certainty is that the stakes in situations like
GM’s are too high to be left to chance. That’s why
we have developed a comprehensive map and a
method to help managers find strategies for chang-
ing the game.
The game of business is all about value: creat-
ing it and capturing it. Who are the participants in
this enterprise? To describe them, we introduce the
Value Net – a schematic map designed to represent
all the players in the game and the interdependen-
cies among them. (See the exhibit “Who Are the
Players in Your Company’s Value Net?”)
Interactions take place along two dimensions.
Along the vertical dimension are the company’s
customers and suppliers. Resources such as labor
and raw materials flow from the suppliers to the
company, and products and services flow from the
company to its customers. Money flows in the re-
verse direction, from customers to the company
and from the company to its suppliers. Along the
horizontal dimension are the players with whom
the company interacts but does not transact. They
are its substitutors and complementors.
HARVARD BUSINESS REVIEW
July-August 1995
59
Successful business strategy is about actively
shaping the game you play, not just playing
the game you find.

--- Sayfa 6 ---
Substitutors are alternative players from whom
customers may purchase products or to whom sup-
pliers may sell their resources. Coca-Cola and Pep-
sico are substitutors with respect to consumers be-
cause they sell rival colas. A little less obvious is
that Coca-Cola and Tyson Foods are substitutors
with respect to suppliers. That is because both
companies use carbon dioxide. Tyson uses it for
freezing chickens, and Coke uses it for carbonation.
(As they say in the cola industry, “No fizziness, no
bizziness.”)
Complementors are players from whom cus-
tomers buy complementary products or to whom
suppliers sell complementary resources. For exam-
ple, hardware and software companies are classic
complementors. Faster hardware, such as a Pen-
tium chip, increases users’ willingness to pay for
more powerful software. More powerful software,
such as the latest version of Microsoft Office, in-
creases users’ willingness to pay for faster hard-
ware. American Airlines and United Air Lines,
though substitutors with respect to passengers, are
complementors when they decide to update their
fleets. That’s because Boeing can recoup the cost of
a new plane design only if enough airlines buy it.
Since each airline effectively subsidizes the other’s
purchase of planes, the two are complementors in
this instance.
We introduce the terms substitutor and comple-
mentor because we find that the traditional busi-
ness vocabulary inhibits a full understanding of the
interdependencies that exist in business. If you call
a player a competitor, you tend to focus on compet-
ing rather than on finding opportunities for cooper-
ation. Substitutor describes the market relation-
ship without that prejudice. Complementors, often
overlooked in traditional strategic analysis, are the
natural counterparts of substitutors.
The Value Net describes the various roles of the
players. It’s possible for the same player to occupy
more than one role simultaneously. Remember that
American and United are both substitutors and
complementors. Gary Hamel and C.K. Prahalad
make this point in Competing for the Future (Har-
vard Business School Press, 1994): “On any given
day…AT&T might find Motorola to be a supplier,
a buyer, a competitor, and a partner.”
The Value Net reveals two fundamental symme-
tries in the game of business: the first between cus-
tomers and suppliers and the second between sub-
stitutors and complementors. Understanding those
symmetries can help managers come up with new
strategies for changing the game or new applica-
tions of existing strategies.
Managers understand intuitively that along the
vertical dimension of the Value Net, there is a mix-
ture of cooperation and competition. It’s coopera-
tion when suppliers, companies, and customers
come together to create value in the first place. It’s
competition when the time comes for them to di-
vide the pie.
Along the horizontal dimension, however, man-
agers tend to see only half the picture. Substitutors
are seen only as enemies. Complementors, if viewed
60
HARVARD BUSINESS REVIEW
July-August 1995
Customers
Complementors
Suppliers
Substitutors
Company
Who Are the Players in Your Company’s Value Net?

--- Sayfa 7 ---
at all, are seen only as friends. Such a perspective
overlooks another symmetry. There can be a cooper-
ative element to interactions with substitutors,
as the GM story illustrates, and a competitive
element to interactions with complementors, as
we will see.
Changing the Game
The Value Net is a map that prompts you to ex-
plore all the interdependencies in the game. Draw-
ing the Value Net for your business is therefore the
first step toward changing the game. The second
step is identifying all the elements of the game. Ac-
cording to game theory, there are five: players,
added values, rules, tactics, and scope – PARTS
for short. These five elements fully describe all
interactions, both freewheeling and rule-based. To
change the game, you have to change one or more of
these elements.
Players come first. As we saw in the Value Net,
the players are customers, suppliers, substitutors,
and complementors. None of the players are fixed.
Sometimes it’s smart to change who is playing the
game. That includes yourself.
Added values are what each player brings to the
game. There are ways to make yourself a more
valuable player–in other words, to raise your added
value. And there are ways to lower the added values
of other players.
Rules give structure to the game. In business,
there is no universal set of rules; a rule might arise
from law, custom, practicality, or contracts. In ad-
dition to using existing rules to their advantage,
players may be able to revise them or come up with
new ones.
Tactics are moves used to shape the way players
perceive the game and hence how they play. Some-
times, tactics are designed to reduce mispercep-
tions; at other times, they are designed to create or
maintain uncertainty.
Scope describes the boundaries of the game. It’s
possible for players to expand or shrink those
boundaries.
Successful business strategies begin by assessing
and then changing one or more of these elements.
PARTS does more than exhort you to think out of
the box. It provides the tools to enable you to do so.
Let’s look at each strategic lever in turn.
Changing the Players
NutraSweet, a low-calorie sweetener used in soft
drinks such as Diet Coke and Diet Pepsi, is a house-
hold name, and its swirl logo is recognized world-
wide. In fact, it’s Monsanto’s brand name for the
chemical aspartame. NutraSweet has been a very
profitable business for Monsanto, with 70% gross
margins. Such profits usually attract others to enter
the market, but NutraSweet was protected by pat-
ents in Europe until 1987 and in the United States
until 1992.
With Coke’s blessing, a challenger, the Holland
Sweetener Company, built an aspartame plant in
Europe in 1985 in anticipation of the patent expira-
tion. Ken Dooley, HSC’s vice president of market-
ing and sales, explained, “Every manufacturer likes
to have at least two sources of supply.”
As HSC attacked the European market, Mon-
santo fought back aggressively. It used deep price
cuts and contractual relationships with customers
to deny HSC a toehold in the market. HSC man-
aged to fend off the initial counterattack by appeal-
ing to the courts to enable it to gain access to cus-
tomers. Dooley considered all this just a preview
of things to come: “We are looking forward to mov-
ing the war into the United States.”
But Dooley’s war ended before it began. Just prior
to the U.S. patent expiration, both Coke and Pepsi
signed new long-term contracts with Monsanto.
When at last there was a real potential for competi-
tion between suppliers, it appeared that Coke and
Pepsi didn’t seize the opportunity. Or did they?
Neither Coke nor Pepsi ever had any real desire
to switch over to generic aspartame. Remembering
the result of the New Coke reformulation of 1985,
neither company wanted to be the first to take the
NutraSweet logo off the can and create a perception
that it was fooling around with the flavor of its
drinks. If only one switched over, the other most
certainly would have made a selling point of its ex-
clusive use of NutraSweet. After all, NutraSweet
GAME THEORY
HARVARD BUSINESS REVIEW
July-August 1995
61
None of the players are fixed. Sometimes
it’s smart to change who is playing the game.
That includes yourself.

--- Sayfa 8 ---
had already built a reputation
for safety and good taste. Even
though generic aspartame
would taste the same, con-
sumers would be unfamiliar
with the unbranded product
and see it as inferior. Another
reason not to switch was that
Monsanto had spent the previ-
ous decade marching down the
learning curve for making as-
partame–giving it a significant
cost advantage – while HSC
was still near the top.
In the end, what Coke and
Pepsi really wanted was to get
the same old NutraSweet at a
much better price. That they
accomplished. Look at Mon-
santo’s position before and af-
ter HSC entered the game.
Before, there was no good sub-
stitute for NutraSweet. Cycla-
mates had been banned, and
saccharin caused cancer in
laboratory rats. NutraSweet’s
added value was its ability to
make a safe, good-tasting low-
calorie drink possible. Stir in
a patent and things looked
very positive for Monsanto.
When HSC came along, Nutra-
Sweet’s added value was great-
ly reduced. What was left was
its brand loyalty and its manu-
facturing cost advantage.
Where did all this leave HSC? Clearly, its entry
into the market was worth a lot to Coke and Pepsi.
It would have been quite reasonable for HSC, be-
fore entering the market, to demand compensation
for its role in the form of either a fixed payment
or a guaranteed contract. But, once in, with an un-
branded product and higher production costs, it
was much more difficult for the company to make
money. Dooley was right when he said that all man-
ufacturers want a second source. The problem is,
they don’t necessarily want to do much business
with that source.
Monsanto did well to create a brand identity and
a cost advantage: It minimized the negative effects
of entry by a generic brand. Coke and Pepsi did well
to change the game by encouraging the entry of a
new player that would reduce their dependence on
NutraSweet. According to HSC, the new contracts
led to combined savings of $200 million annually
for Coke and Pepsi. As for
HSC, perhaps it was too quick
to become a player. The ques-
tion for HSC was not what it
could do for Coke and Pepsi;
the question was what Coke
and Pepsi could do for HSC.
Although it was a duopolist in
a weak position when it came
to selling aspartame, HSC was
a monopolist in a strong posi-
tion when it came to selling its
“service” to make the aspar-
tame market competitive. Per-
haps Coke and Pepsi would
have paid a higher price for
this valuable service, but only
if HSC had demanded such
payment up front.
Pay Me to Play. As the Nu-
traSweet story illustrates,
sometimes the most valuable
service you can offer is creat-
ing competition, so don’t give
it away for free. People in the
takeover game have long un-
derstood the art of getting paid
to play. The cellular phone
business was undergoing rapid
consolidation in June 1989,
when 39-year-old Craig Mc-
Caw made a bid for Lin Broad-
casting Corporation. With 50
million POPs (lingo for the
population in a coverage area)
already under his belt, McCaw
saw the acquisition of Lin’s 18 million POPs as the
best, and possibly the only, way to acquire a nation-
al cellular footprint. He bid $120 per share for Lin,
which resulted in an immediate jump in Lin’s share
price from $103.50 to $129.50. Clearly, the market
expected more action. But Lin’s CEO, Donald Pels,
didn’t care much for McCaw or his bid. Faced with
Lin’s hostile reaction, McCaw lowered his offer to
$110, and Lin sought other suitors. BellSouth, with
28 million POPs, was the natural alternative, al-
though acquiring Lin wouldn’t quite give it a na-
tional footprint.
Nevertheless, BellSouth was willing to acquire
Lin for the right price. But if it entered the fray, it
would create a bidding war and thus make it un-
likely that Lin would be sold for a reasonable price.
BellSouth knew that only one bidder could win, and
it wanted something in case that bidder was Mc-
Caw. Thus, as a condition for making a bid, Bell-
62
HARVARD BUSINESS REVIEW
July-August 1995
Neither Coke nor Pepsi
wanted to be the first to
take the NutraSweet
logo off the can
and create a
perception
that it was
fooling around
with the flavor
of its drinks.

--- Sayfa 9 ---
South got Lin’s promise of a $54 million consola-
tion prize and an additional $15 million toward ex-
penses in the event that it was outbid. BellSouth
made an offer generally valued at between $105 and
$112 per share. As expected, BellSouth was out-
bid; McCaw responded with an offer valued at $112
to $118 per share. BellSouth then raised its bid to
roughly $120 per share. In return, Lin raised Bell-
South’s expense cap to $25 million. McCaw raised
his bid to $130 and then added a few dollars more to
close the deal. At the same time, he paid BellSouth
$22.5 million to exit the game.4 At this point in the
bidding, Lin’s CEO recognized that his stock op-
tions were worth $186 million, and the now friend-
ly deal with McCaw was concluded.
So how did the various players make out? Lin got
itself an extra billion, which made its $79 million
payment to BellSouth look like a bargain. McCaw
got the national network he wanted and subse-
quently sold out to AT&T, making himself a bil-
lionaire. And BellSouth, by getting paid first to play
and then to go away, turned a weak hand into $76.5
million plus expenses.
BellSouth clearly understood that even if you
can’t make money in the game the old-fashioned
way, you can get paid to change it. Such payments
need not be made in cash; you can ask for a guaran-
teed sales contract, contributions to R&D, bid-
preparation expenses, or a last-look provision.
The examples so far show how you can change
three of the four players in the Value Net. Lin paid
to bring in an extra buyer, or customer. Coke and
Pepsi would, no doubt, have been prepared to pay
HSC handsomely to become a second supplier. And
McCaw paid to take out a rival bidder, or substitu-
tor. That leaves complementors. The next example
shows how a company can benefit from bringing
players into the complements market.
Cheap Complements. Remember that hardware
is the classic complement to software. One can’t
function without the other. Software writers won’t
produce programs unless a sufficient hardware base
exists. Yet consumers won’t purchase the hardware
until a critical mass of software exists. 3DO Com-
pany, a maker of video games, is attacking this
chicken-and-egg problem in the video-game busi-
ness by bringing players into the complements
market. To those who know 3DO‘s founder, Trip
Hawkins, this should come as no surprise: He de-
signed his own major at Harvard in strategy and
game theory.
3DO owns a 32-bit CD-ROM hardware-and-soft-
ware technology for next-generation video games.
The company plans to make money by licensing
software houses to make 3DO games and collecting
a $3 royalty fee (hence the company name). Of
course, to sell software, you first need people to buy
the hardware. But those early adopters won’t find
much software. To start the ball rolling, 3DO needs
the hardware to be cheap – the cheaper the better.
The company’s strategy is to give away the li-
cense to produce the hardware technology. This
move has induced hardware manufacturers such
as Panasonic (Matsushita), GoldStar, Sanyo, and
Toshiba to enter the game. Because all 3DO soft-
ware will run on all 3DO hardware, the hardware
manufacturers are left to compete on cost alone.
Making the hardware a commodity is just what
3DO wants: It drives down the price of the comple-
mentary product.
But not quite enough. 3DO is discovering that to
create momentum in the market, the hardware
must be sold below cost, and hardware manufactur-
ers aren’t willing to go that far. As an inducement,
3DO now offers them two shares of 3DO stock for
each machine sold. The company also has renegoti-
ated its deal with software houses up to a $6 royal-
ty, with the extra $3 earmarked to subsidize hard-
ware sales. So Hawkins is actually paying people
to play in the complements market. Is he paying
enough? Time will tell.
Creating competition in the complements mar-
ket is the flip side of coopetition. Just as substitu-
tors are usually seen only as enemies, complemen-
tors are seen only as friends. Whereas the GM story
shows the possibility of win-win opportunities
with substitutors, the 3DO example illustrates the
GAME THEORY
HARVARD BUSINESS REVIEW
July-August 1995
63
BellSouth understood that even if you can’t make
money in the game the old-fashioned way, you can
get paid to change it.
4. McCaw paid $26.5 million to Los Angeles RCC – a joint venture be-
tween McCaw and BellSouth that was 85% owned by BellSouth. Since
McCaw did not get any additional equity for his investment, it was in
essence a $22.5 million payment to BellSouth and a $4 million payment
to himself. Security laws override antitrust laws, so it’s legal for one
bidder to pay another not to be a player.

--- Sayfa 10 ---
possibility of legitimate win-lose opportunities
with complementors. Creating competition among
its complementors helped 3DO at their expense.
Changing the Added Values
Just as you shouldn’t accept the players of a game
as fixed, you shouldn’t take what they bring to the
game as fixed, either. You can change the players’
added values. Common sense tells us that there are
two options: Raise your own added value or lower
that of others.
Good basic business practices are one route to
raising added values. You can tailor your product to
customers’ needs, build a brand, use resources more
efficiently, work with your suppliers to lower their
costs, and so on. These strategies should not be un-
derestimated. But there are other, less transparent
ways to raise your added value. As an example, con-
sider Trans World Airlines’ introduction of Com-
fort Class in 1993.
Robert Cozzi, TWA’s senior vice president of
marketing, proposed removing 5 to 40 seats per
plane to give passengers in coach more legroom.
The move raised TWA’s added value; according to
J.D. Power and Associates, the company soared to
first place in customer satisfaction for long-haul
flights. This was a win for TWA and a loss for other
airlines. But elements of win-win were present as
well: With fuller planes, TWA was not about to
start a price war.
But what if other carriers copied the strategy?
Would that negate TWA’s efforts? No, because as
others copied TWA’s move, excess capacity would
be retired from an industry plagued by overcapa-
city. Passengers get more legroom, and carriers stop
flying empty seats around. Everyone wins. Cozzi
saw a way to move the industry away from the self-
defeating price competition that goes on when air-
lines try to fill up the coach cabin. This was busi-
ness strategy at its best.5
The idea of raising your own added value is natu-
ral. Less intuitive is the approach of lowering the
added value of others. To illustrate how the strategy
works, let’s begin with a simple card game.
Adam and 26 of his M.B.A. students are playing a
card game. Adam has 26 black cards, and each of the
students has one red card. Any red card coupled
with a black card gets a $100 prize (paid by the
dean). How do we expect the bargaining between
Adam and his students to proceed?
First, calculate the added values. Without Adam
and his black cards, there is no game. Thus Adam’s
added value equals the total value of the game,
which is $2,600. Each student has an added value of
$100 because without that student’s card, one less
match can be made and thus $100 is lost. The sum
of the added values is therefore $5,200–made up of
$2,600 from Adam and $100 from each of the 26
students. Alas, there is only $2,600 to be divided.
Given the symmetry of the game, it’s most likely
that everyone will end up with half of his or her
added value: Adam will buy the students’ cards for
$50 each or sell his for $50 each.
So far, nothing is surprising. Could Adam do any
better? Yes, but first he’d have to change the game.
In a public display, Adam
burns three of his black cards.
True, the pie is now smaller,
at $2,300, and so is Adam’s
added value. But the point of
this strategic move is to de-
stroy the added values of the
other players. Now no student
has any added value because
3 students are going to end up
without a match, and there-
fore no one student is essential
to the game. The total value
with 26 students is $2,300, and
the total value with 25 stu-
dents is still $2,300.
At this point, the division
will not be equal. Indeed, be-
cause no student has any added value, Adam would
be quite generous to offer a 90:10 split. Since 3 stu-
dents will end up with nothing, anyone who ends
up with $10 should consider himself or herself
lucky. For Adam, 90% of $2,300 is a lot better than
half of $2,600. Of course, his getting it depends on
the students’ not being able to get together; if they
did, that would be changing the game, too. In fact, it
GAME THEORY
64
HARVARD BUSINESS REVIEW
July-August 1995
After TWA removed seats to create more legroom in coach,
its renamed Comfort Class placed first in customer satisfaction.

--- Sayfa 11 ---
would be changing the players, as in the previous
section, and it would be an excellent strategy for
the students to adopt.
Just a card trick? No–a strategy employed by the
video-game maker Nintendo (which, it so happens,
used to produce playing cards). To see how the com-
pany lowered everyone else’s added value, we take
a tour around its Value Net. (See the exhibit “Nin-
tendo Trumped Every Player in Its Value Net.”)
Nintendo Power. Start with Nintendo’s cus-
tomers. Nintendo sold its games to a highly con-
centrated market – predominantly megaretailers
such as Toys R Us and Wal-Mart. How could Nin-
tendo combat such buyer power? By changing the
game. Nintendo did just what Adam did when he
burned the cards (although Nintendo made a lot
more money): It didn’t fill all the retailers’ orders. In
1988, Nintendo sold 33 million cartridges, but the
market could have absorbed 45 million. Poor plan-
ning? No. It’s true that the pie shrank a little as
some stores sold out of the game. But the important
point is that retailers lost added value. Even a gi-
ant like Toys R Us was in a weaker position when
not every retailer could get supplied. As Nintendo-
mania took hold, consumers queued up outside stores
and retailers clamored for more of the product.
With games in short supply, Nintendo had zapped
the buyers’ power.
The next arena of negotiations concerned the
complementors–namely, outside game developers.
What was Nintendo’s strategy? First, it developed
software in-house. The company built a security
chip into the hardware and then instituted a licens-
ing program for outside developers. The number of
licenses was restricted, and licensees were allowed
to develop only a limited number of games. Because
there were many Nintendo wanna-be programmers
and because the company could develop games in-
house, the added value of those that did get the li-
cense was lowered. Once again, Nintendo ensured
that there were fewer black cards than red. It held
all the bargaining chips.
Nintendo’s suppliers, too, had little added value.
The company used old-generation chip technol-
ogy, making its chips something of a commodity.
Another input was the leading characters in the
games. Nintendo hit the jackpot by developing
Mario. After he became a hit in his own right, the
added value of comic-book heroes licensed from
others, such as Spiderman (Marvel), and of cartoon
icons, such as Mickey Mouse (Disney), was re-
duced. In fact, Nintendo turned the tables com-
pletely, licensing Mario to appear in comic books
and on cartoon shows, cereal boxes, board games,
and toys.
Finally, there were Nintendo’s substitutors.
From a kid’s perspective, there were no good alter-
natives to a video game; the only real threat came
from alternative video-game systems. Here Ninten-
do had the game practically all to itself. Having the
largest installed base of systems allowed the com-
pany to drive down the manufacturing cost for its
hardware. And with developers keen to write for
the largest installed base, Nintendo got the best
games. This created a positive feedback loop: More
people bought Nintendo’s systems, leading to a
larger base, still lower costs, and even more games.
Nintendo locked in its lead by requiring exclusivity
from outside game developers. With few alterna-
tives to Nintendo, that was a small price for them
to pay. Potential challengers couldn’t simply take
successful games over to their platforms; they had
to start from scratch. Although large profits might
normally invite entry, no challenger could engineer
any added value. The installed base, combined with
Nintendo’s exclusivity agreements, made compet-
ing in Nintendo’s game hopeless.
What was the bottom line for Nintendo? How
much could a manufacturer of a two-bit – well,
eight-bit – game about a lugubrious plumber called
Mario really be worth? How about more than Sony
or Nissan? Between July 1990 and June 1991, Nin-
tendo’s average market value was 2.4 trillion yen,
Sony’s was 2.2 trillion yen, and Nissan’s was 2 tril-
lion yen.
The Nintendo example illustrates the impor-
tance of added value as opposed to value. There is
no doubt that cars, televisions, and VCRs create
more value in the world than do Game Boys. But it’s
HARVARD BUSINESS REVIEW
July-August 1995
65
The idea of raising your own added value
is natural. Less intuitive is the approach of lowering
the added value of others.
5. Unfortunately, the program provided little comfort to Cozzi, who re-
signed when TWA scaled it back. TWA returned to full-scale Comfort
Class in the fall of 1994.

--- Sayfa 12 ---
not enough simply to create value; profits come
from capturing value. By keeping its added value
high and everyone else’s low, Nintendo was able
to capture a giant slice of a largish pie. The name
of the enthusiasts’ monthly magazine, Nintendo
Power, summed up the situation quite nicely.
Nintendo’s success, however, brought it under
scrutiny. In late 1989, Congressman Dennis Eckart
(D-Ohio), chairman of the House Subcommittee on
Antitrust, Impact of Deregulation and Privatiza-
tion, requested that the U.S. Justice Department in-
vestigate allegations that Nintendo of America un-
fairly reduced competition. Eckart’s letter argued,
among other things, that the Christmas shortages
in 1988 were “contrived to increase consumer
prices and demand and to enhance Nintendo’s mar-
ket leverage” and that software producers had “be-
come almost entirely dependent on Nintendo’s ac-
ceptance of their games.” None of Nintendo’s
practices were found to be illegal.6
Pumping Up Profits. Protecting your added value
is as important as establishing it in the first place.
Back in the mid-1970s, Robert Taylor, CEO of Min-
netonka, had the idea for Softsoap, a liquid soap
that would be dispensed by a pump. The problem
was that it would be hard to retain any added value
once the likes of Procter & Gamble and Lever
Brothers muscled in with their brands and distribu-
tion clout. Nothing in the product could be patent-
ed. But, to his credit, Taylor realized that the hard-
est part of producing the soap was manufacturing
the little plastic pump, for which there were just
two suppliers. In a bet-the-company move, he
locked up both suppliers’ total annual production
by ordering 100 million of the pumps. Even at 12
cents apiece, this was a $12 million order – more
than Minnetonka’s net worth. Ultimately, the ma-
jor players did enter the market, but capturing the
supply of pumps gave Taylor a head start of 12 to 18
months. That advantage preserved Softsoap’s added
value during this period, allowing the company to
build brand loyalty, which continues to provide
added value to this day.
As the TWA, Nintendo, and Softsoap examples il-
lustrate, added values can be changed. By reengi-
neering them – raising your added value and lower-
ing others’–you may be able to capture a larger slice
of pie.
Game theory holds that in freewheeling interac-
tions, no player can take away more than that play-
er brings to the game, but that’s not quite the end of
the matter. First, there is no guarantee that any
player will get all its added value. Typically, the
sum of all the added values exceeds the total value
of the game. Remember that in Adam’s card game,
the total prize was only $2,600 even though the
added values of all the players initially totaled
$5,200. Second, even if you have no added value,
66
HARVARD BUSINESS REVIEW
July-August 1995
Customers
Complementors
Suppliers
Substitutors
Nintendo
Nintendo Trumped Every Player in Its Value Net
Acclaim
Electronic Arts
(software)
Ricoh, Sharp (microchips)
Marvel, Disney (game characters)
Atari,
Commodore
(hardware)
Toys R Us, Wal-Mart
6. On a separate issue, Nintendo made a settlement with the Federal
Trade Commission in which it agreed to stop requiring retailers to ad-
here to a minimum price for the game console. Further, Nintendo would
give previous buyers a $5-off coupon toward future purchases of Nin-
tendo game cartridges. Reflecting on the case, Barron’s suggested that
“the legion of trust-busting lawyers would be far more productively oc-
cupied playing Super Mario Brothers 3 than bringing cases of this kind”
(December 3, 1991).

--- Sayfa 13 ---
that doesn’t prohibit you from making money. Oth-
ers might be willing to pay you to enter or exit the
game (as with BellSouth); similarly, you might be
paid to stay out or stay in. Third, rules constrain in-
teractions among players. We will see that in games
with rules, some players may be able to capture
more than their added values.
Changing the Rules
Rules determine how the game is played by lim-
iting the possible reactions to any action. To ana-
lyze the effect of a rule, you have to look forward
and reason backward.
The simplest rule is one price to all. According to
this rule, prices are not negotiated individually
with each customer. Consequently, a company can
profitably enter a market even when it has no added
value. If a new player enters with a price lower than
the incumbent’s, the incumbent has only two effec-
tive responses: match the newcomer’s price across
the board or stand pat and give up share. By looking
forward and reasoning backward, a small newcom-
er can steer the incumbent toward accommodation
rather than retaliation.
Imagine that a new player comes in with a lim-
ited capacity – say, 10% of the market – and a
discounted price. Whether it makes any money
depends on how the incumbent responds. The
incumbent can recapture its lost market by coming
down to match the newcomer’s price, or it can give
up 10% share. For the incumbent, giving up 10%
share is usually better than sacrificing its profit
margin. In such cases, the newcomer will do all
right. But it can’t get too greedy. If it tries to take
away too much of the market, the incumbent will
choose to give up its profit margin in order to regain
share. Only when the newcomer limits its capacity
does the incumbent stand pat and the newcomer
make money. For this reason, the strategy is called
judo economics: By staying small, the newcomer
turns the incumbent’s larger size to its own benefit.
To pull off a judo strategy, the newcomer’s com-
mitment to limit its capacity must be both clear
and credible. The newcomer may be tempted to ex-
pand, but it must realize that if it does, it will give
the incumbent an incentive to retaliate.
Kiwi Is No Dodo. Kiwi International Air Lines
understands these ideas perfectly. Named for the
flightless bird, Kiwi is a 1992 start-up founded by
former Eastern Air Lines pilots who were grounded
after Eastern went bankrupt. Kiwi engineered a cost
advantage from its employee ownership and its use
of leased planes. But it had lower name recognition
and a more limited flight schedule than the major
carriers–on balance, not much, if any, added value.
So what did it do? It went for low prices and limited
capacity. According to public statements from its
then CEO, Robert Iverson, “We designed our sys-
tem to stay out of the way of large carriers and
to make sure they understand that we pose no
threat.... Kiwi intends to capture, at most, only
10% share of any one market – or no more than
four flights per day.” Because Kiwi targets business
travelers, the major airlines can’t use stay-over
and advance-purchase restrictions to lower price
selectively against it. So Kiwi benefited from the
one-price-to-all rule.
Now Kiwi, in turn, became the large player for
any newcomer to the same market. That didn’t
leave much room to be small in relation to Kiwi, so
Kiwi had to fight if someone else tried to follow
suit. According to Iverson, “[The major airlines] are
better off with us than without us.” Even though
Kiwi was Delta’s rival, by staying small and keep-
ing out other potential entrants, it managed to
bring an element of coopetition into the game.
From Delta’s perspective, Kiwi was rather like the
devil it knew.
The Kiwi story illustrates how a player can take
advantage of existing rules of the marketplace – in
this case, the one-price-to-all rule. In addition to
practicality, rules arise from custom, law, or con-
tracts. Common contract-based rules are most-
favored-nation (most-favored-customer) clauses,
take-or-pay agreements, and meet-the-competition
clauses. These rules give structure to negotiations
between buyers and sellers. Rules are particularly
useful for players in commodity-like businesses. As
an example, take the carbon dioxide industry.
Solid Profits from Gas. There are three major pro-
ducers of carbon dioxide: Airco, Liquid Carbonic,
and Air Liquide. Carbon dioxide creates enormous
value (in carbonation and freezing), but it is essen-
tially a commodity, which makes it hard for a pro-
ducer to capture any of that value. One distinguish-
ing factor, however, is that carbon dioxide is very
expensive to transport, which gives some added
value to the producer best located to serve a specific
customer. Other sources of added value are differ-
entiation through reliability, reputation, service,
and technology. Still, a producer’s added value is
usually small in relation to the total value created.
The question is, Can a producer capture more than
its added value?
In this case the answer is yes, because of the rules
of the game in the carbon dioxide industry. The pro-
ducers have a meet-the-competition clause (MCC)
in their contracts with customers. An MCC gives
the incumbent seller the right to make the last bid.
GAME THEORY
HARVARD BUSINESS REVIEW
July-August 1995
67

--- Sayfa 14 ---
The result of an MCC is that a producer can sus-
tain a higher price and thereby earn more than its
added value. Normally, an elevated price would in-
vite other producers to compete on price. In this
case, however, a challenger cannot come in and
take away business simply by undercutting the ex-
isting price. If it tried, the incumbent could then
come back with a lower price and keep the busi-
ness. The back-and-forth could go on until the price
fell to variable cost, but at that point stealing the
business wouldn’t be worth the effort. The only one
to benefit would be the buyer, who would end up
with a lower price.
Cutting price to go after an incumbent’s business
is always risky but may be justified by the gain in
business. Not so when the incumbent has an MCC:
The upside is lost and the downside remains. Low-
ering price sets a dangerous precedent and increases
the likelihood of a tit-for-tat response. The incum-
bent may retaliate by going after the challenger’s
business, and even if the challenger doesn’t lose
customers, it certainly will lose profits. Another
downside is that the challenger’s customers may
end up at a disadvantage. If the challenger supplies
Coke and the incumbent supplies Pepsi, the chal-
lenger shouldn’t help Pepsi get a lower price. Its
future is tied to Coke, and it doesn’t want to give
Pepsi any cost advantage. It might even end up
having to lower its own price to Coke without get-
ting Pepsi’s business. Finally, the challenger’s ef-
forts are misplaced: It would do better to make sure
that its existing customers are happy.
Putting in an MCC changes the game in a way
that’s clearly a win for the incumbent. Perhaps sur-
prisingly, the challenger also ends up better off.
True, it may not be able to take away market share,
but the incumbent’s higher prices set a good prece-
dent: They give the challenger some room to raise
prices to its own customers. There also is less dan-
ger that the incumbent will go after the challenger’s
share, because the incumbent, with higher profits,
now has more to lose. An MCC is a classic case of
coopetition.
As for the customers, why do they go along with
this rule? It may be traditional in their industry.
Perhaps it’s the norm. Perhaps they decide to trade
an initial price break in return for the subsequent
lock-in. Or maybe they don’t thoroughly under-
stand the rule’s implications. Whatever the reason,
MCCs do offer benefits to customers. The clauses
guarantee producers a long-term relationship if
they so choose, even in the absence of long-term
contracts. Thus producers are more willing to in-
vest in serving their customers. Finally, even if
there is no formal MCC, it’s generally accepted that
you don’t leave your current supplier without giv-
ing it a last chance to bid.
Using an MCC is a strategy that, far from being
undermined by imitation, is enhanced by it. A car-
bon dioxide producer benefits from unilateral adop-
tion of an MCC, but there is an added kicker when
other producers copy it. The MCCs allow them to
push prices up further, so they now have even more
to lose from starting a share war. As MCCs become
more widespread, everyone has less prospect of
gaining share. With even more at risk and even less
to gain, producers refrain from going after one an-
other’s customers. A moral: Players who live in
glass houses are unlikely to throw stones. So you
should be pleased when others build glass houses.
Both the significance of rules and the opportunity
to change the game by changing the rules are often
underappreciated. If negotiations in your business
take place without rules, consider how bringing in
a new rule would change the game. But be careful.
Just as you can rewrite rules and make new ones,
so, too, can others. Unlike other games, business
has no ultimate rule-making authority to settle dis-
putes. History matters. The government can make
some rules–through antitrust laws, for example. In
the end, however, the power to make rules comes
largely from power in the marketplace. While it’s
true that rules can trump added value, it is added
value that confers the power to make rules in the
first place. As they said in the old West, “A Smith &
Wesson beats a straight flush.”
Tactics: Changing Perceptions
We’ve changed the players, their added values,
and the rules. Is there anything left to change? Yes–
perceptions. There is no guarantee that everyone
GAME THEORY
68
HARVARD BUSINESS REVIEW
July-August 1995
If negotiations in your business take place without
rules, consider how bringing in a new rule would
change the game. But be careful.

--- Sayfa 15 ---
agrees on who the players are, what their added val-
ues are, and what the rules are. Nor are the implica-
tions of every move and countermove likely to be
clear. Business is mired in uncertainty. Tactics in-
fluence the way players perceive the uncertainty
and thus mold their behavior. Some tactics work by
reducing misperceptions–in other words, by lifting
the fog. Others work by creating or maintaining un-
certainty–by thickening the fog.
Here we offer two examples. The first shows how
Rupert Murdoch lifted the fog to influence how the
New York Daily News perceived the game; the sec-
ond illustrates how maintaining a fog can help ne-
gotiating parties reach an agreement.
The New York Fog. In the beginning of July 1994,
the Daily News raised its price from 40 cents to 50
cents. This seemed rather remarkable under the cir-
cumstances. Its major rival, Rupert Murdoch’s New
York Post, was test-marketing a price cut to 25
cents and had demonstrated
its effectiveness on Staten Is-
land. As the New York Times
saw it (Press Notes, July 4), it
was as if the Daily News were
daring Murdoch to follow
through with his price cut.
But, in fact, there was more
going on than the Times real-
ized. Murdoch had earlier
raised the price of the Post to
50 cents, and the Daily News
had held at 40 cents. As a
result, the Post was losing
subscribers and, with them,
advertising revenue. Whereas
Murdoch viewed the situation
as unsustainable, the Daily
News didn’t see any problem –
or at least appeared not to. A
convenient fog.
Murdoch came up with a
tactic to try to lift the fog. In-
stead of just lowering his price
back down to 40 cents, he an-
nounced his intention to lower
it to 25 cents. The people at
the Daily News doubted that
Murdoch could afford to pull it
off. Moreover, they believed
that their recent success was
due to a superior product and
not just to the dime price ad-
vantage. They were not par-
ticularly threatened by Mur-
doch’s announcement.
69
Seeing no response, Murdoch tried a second tac-
tic. He started the price reduction on Staten Island
as a test run. As a result, sales of the Post doubled–
and the fog lifted. The Daily News learned that its
readers were remarkably willing to read the Post in
order to save 15 cents. The paper’s added value was
not so large after all. Suddenly, it didn’t seem so stu-
pid for Murdoch to have lowered his price to a quar-
ter. It became clear that disastrous consequences
would befall the Daily News if Murdoch extended
his price cut throughout New York City. In London,
just such a meltdown scenario was taking place be-
tween Murdoch’s Times and Conrad Black’s Daily
Telegraph. It was in the context of all these events
that the Daily News raised its price to 50 cents.
Only the New York Times remained in a fog.
Murdoch had never wanted to lower his price to 25
cents. He never would have expected the Daily
News to stay at 40 cents had he initiated an across-
the-board cut to 25 cents. Mur-
doch’s announcement and the
test run on Staten Island were
simply tactics designed to get
the Daily News to raise its
price. With price parity, the
Post no longer would be losing
subscribers, and both papers
would be more profitable than
if they were priced at 25 cents
or even at 40 cents. Coopeti-
tion strikes again. The Post
took an initial hit in raising its
price to 50 cents, and when the
Daily News tried to be greedy
and not follow suit, Murdoch
showed it the light. When the
Daily News raised its price, it
was not daring Murdoch at all.
It was saving itself – and Mur-
doch–from a price war.
In the case of the Daily
News and the Post, the fog was
convenient to the former but
not to the latter. So Murdoch
lifted it.
Disagreeing to Agree. Some-
times, a fog is convenient to all
parties. A fee negotiation be-
tween an investment bank and
its client (a composite of sever-
al confidential negotiations)
offers a good example. The
client is a company whose
owners are forced to sell. The
investment bank has identi-
Can a
producer
capture more
than its
added value?
With the
carbon
dioxide
industry’s
meet-the-
competition
clause, it can.

--- Sayfa 16 ---
fied a potential acquirer. So far, the investment
bank has been working on good faith, and now it’s
time to sign a fee letter.
The investment bank suggests a 1% fee. The
client figures that its company will fetch $500 mil-
lion and argues that a $5 million fee would be ex-
cessive. It proposes a 0.625% fee. The investment
bankers think that the price will be closer to $250
million and that accepting the client’s proposal
would cut their expected fee from $2.5 million to
about $1.5 million.
One tactic would be to lift the fog. The invest-
ment bank could try to convince the client that a
$500 million valuation is unrealistic and that its
fear of a $5 million fee is therefore unfounded. The
problem with this tactic is that the client does not
want to hear a low valuation. Faced with such a
prospect, it might walk away from the deal and
even from the bank altogether – and then there
would be no fee.
The client’s optimism and the investment
bankers’ pessimism create an opportunity for an
agreement rather than an argument. Both sides
should agree to a 0.625% fee combined with a $2.5
million guarantee. That way, the client gets the per-
centage it wants and considers the guarantee a
throwaway. With a 0.625% fee, the guarantee kicks
in only for a sales price below $400 million, and the
client expects the price to be $100 million higher.
Because the investment bankers expected $2.5 mil-
lion under their original proposal, now that this fee
is guaranteed, they can agree to a lower percentage.
Negotiating over pure percentage fees is inher-
ently win-lose. If the fee falls from 1% to 0.625%,
the client wins and the investment bankers lose.
Going from 1% to 0.625% plus a floor is win-win –
but only when the two parties maintain different
perceptions. The fog allows for coopetition.
Changing the Scope
After players, added values, rules, and tactical
possibilities, there is nothing left to change within
the existing boundaries of the game. But no game is
an island. Games are linked across space and over
time. A game in one place can affect games else-
where, and a game today can influence games to-
morrow. You can change the scope of a game. You
can expand it by creating linkages to other games,
or you can shrink it by severing linkages. Either ap-
proach may work to your benefit.
We left Nintendo with a stock market value ex-
ceeding both Sony’s and Nissan’s, and with Mario
better known than Mickey Mouse. Sega and other
would-be rivals had failed in the 8-bit game. But
while the rest fell by the wayside, Sega didn’t give
up. It introduced a new 16-bit system to the U.S.
market. It took two years before Nintendo respond-
ed with its own 16-bit machine. By then, with the
help of its game hero, Sonic the Hedgehog, Sega had
established a secure and significant market posi-
tion. Today the two companies roughly split the 16-
bit market.
Was Sega lucky to get such a long, uncontested
period in which to establish itself? Did Nintendo
simply blow it? We think not. Nintendo’s 8-bit
franchise was still very valuable. Sega realized that
by expanding the scope, it could turn Nintendo’s
8-bit strength into a 16-bit weakness. Put yourself
in Nintendo’s shoes: Would you jump into the 16-
bit game or hold back? Had Nintendo jumped into
the game, it would have meant competition and,
hence, lower 16-bit prices. Lower prices for 16-bit
games, substitutes for 8-bit games, would have re-
duced the value created by the 8-bit games–a big hit
to Nintendo’s bottom line. Letting Sega have the
16-bit market all to itself meant that 16-bit prices
were higher than they otherwise would have been.
Higher 16-bit prices cushioned the effect of the
new-generation technology on the old. By staying
out of Sega’s way, Nintendo made a calculated
trade-off: Give up a piece of the 16-bit action in or-
der to extend the life of the 8-bit market. Ninten-
do’s decision to hold back was reasonable, given the
link between 8-bit and 16-bit games. Note that the
decision not to create competition in a substitutes
market is the mirror image of 3DO’s strategy of cre-
ating competition in a complements market.
The Traps of Strategy
Changing the game is hard. There are many po-
tential traps. Our mind-set, map, and method for
changing the game–coopetition, the Value Net, and
PARTS – are designed to help managers recognize
and avoid these traps.
The first mental trap is to think you have to ac-
cept the game you find yourself in. Just realizing
that you can change the game is crucial. There’s
more work to be done, but it’s far more rewarding to
be a game maker than a game taker.
The next trap is to think that changing the game
must come at the expense of others. Such thinking
can lead to an embattled mind-set that causes you
to miss win-win opportunities. The coopetition
mind-set – looking for both win-win and win-lose
strategies–is far more rewarding.
Another trap is to believe that you have to find
something to do that others can’t. When you do
come up with a way to change the game, accept that
GAME THEORY
70
HARVARD BUSINESS REVIEW
July-August 1995

--- Sayfa 17 ---
your actions might well be imitated. Being unique
is not a prerequisite for success. Imitation can be
healthy, as the GM card story and others illustrate.
The fourth trap is failing to see the whole game.
What you don’t see, you can’t change. In particular,
many people overlook the role of complementors.
The solution is to draw the Value Net for your busi-
ness; it will double your repertoire of strategies for
changing the game. Any strategy toward customers
has a counterpart with suppliers (and vice versa),
and any strategy with substitutors has a mirror im-
age for complementors (and vice versa).
The fifth trap is failing to think methodically
about changing the game. Using PARTS as a com-
prehensive, theory-based set of levers helps gener-
ate strategies, but that is not enough. To under-
stand the effect of any particular strategy, you need
to go beyond your own perspective. Be allocentric,
not egocentric.
For the Holland Sweetener Company, it would
have helped to recognize that Coke and Pepsi would
have paid a high price up front to make the aspar-
tame market competitive. BellSouth succeeded
with a weak hand only because it understood the
incentives of Lin and McCaw. Nintendo’s power in
the 8-bit game came from lowering everyone else’s
added value. To craft the right choice of capacity
and price, Kiwi had to put itself in the shoes of the
major airlines to ensure that they would have a
greater incentive to accommodate rather than fight
Kiwi’s entry. The effect of a meet-the-competition
clause becomes clear only after you consider how a
challenger thinks you would respond to an attempt
it might make to steal one of your customers. To
achieve his ends, Murdoch had to recognize that
the Daily News was in a fog and find a way to lift
it. By understanding how different parties perceive
the game differently, a negotiator is better able to
forge an agreement. Sega’s success depended on
the dilemma it created for Nintendo by starting a
new 16-bit game linked to the existing 8-bit game.
Finally, there is no silver bullet for changing the
game of business. It is an ongoing process. Others
will be trying to change the game, too. Sometimes
their changes will work to your benefit and some-
times not. You may need to change the game again.
There is, after all, no end to the game of changing
the game.
The authors are grateful to F. William Barnett, Putnam Coes,
Amy Guggenheim, Michael Maples, Anna Minto, Troy Paredes,
Harborne Stuart, Bart Troyer, Michael Tuchen, and Peter
Wetenhall, along with many other colleagues and students, for
their generous comments and suggestions.
Reprint 95402
HARVARD BUSINESS REVIEW
July-August 1995
71

--- Sayfa 20 ---
Harvard Business School Publishing
Customer Service - Box 230-5
60 Harvard Way
Boston, MA 02163
Telephone: U.S. and Canada (800) 545-7685
Outside U.S. and Canada: (617) 495-6117 or 495-6192
Fax: (617) 495-6985
Internet address: custserv@cchbspub.harvard.edu
Harvard Business School Management Productions videos are
produced by award winning documentary filmmakers.  You’ll find
them lively, engaging, and informative.
Please inquire about HBR’s custom service and quantity discounts.
We will print your company’s logo on the cover of reprints, collec-
tions, or books in black and white, two color, or four color.  The pro-
cess is easy, cost effective, and quick.
Telephone: (617) 495-6198 or Fax: (617) 496-8866
For permission to quote or reprint on a one-time basis:
Telephone: (800) 545-7685 or Fax: (617) 495-6985
For permission to re-publish please write or call:
Permissions Editor
Harvard Business School Publishing
Box 230-5
60 Harvard Way
Boston, MA 02163
Telephone: (617) 495-6849
HBR Subscriptions
HBR Article Reprints
HBR Index and Other Catalogs
HBS Cases
HBS Press Books
HBS Management Productions
Videos
HBR Custom Reprints
Permissions
Harvard Business Review
Harvard Business Review
U.S. and Canada
Subscription Service
P.O. Box 52623
Boulder, CO 80322-2623
Telephone: (800) 274-3214
Fax: (617) 496-8145
Outside U.S. and Canada
Tower House
Sovereign Park
Lathkill Street
Market Harborough
Leicestershire LE16 9EF
Telephone: 44-85-846-8888
Fax: 44-85-843-4958
American Express, MasterCard, VISA accepted. Billing available.