--- Sayfa 1 ---
Trustees of Princeton University

The Game Theory of International Politics
Author(s): Duncan Snidal
Source: World Politics, Vol. 38, No. 1 (Oct., 1985), pp. 25-57
Published by: Cambridge University Press
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2010350
Accessed: 22-06-2016 04:35 UTC

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
http://about.jstor.org/terms

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted
digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about
JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Cambridge University Press, Trustees of Princeton University are collaborating with JSTOR to
digitize, preserve and extend access to World Politics
This content downloaded from 175.45.185.0 on Wed, 22 Jun 2016 04:35:32 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Sayfa 2 ---
THE GAME THEORY OF
 INTERNATIONAL POLITICS
 By DUNCAN SNIDAL*
 THE application of game theory to international politics is hardly
 new, but there has been a recent increase in the popularity of the
 approach. This resurgence has been associated with new applications of
 game models to international political economy in addition to their now
 standard role in military-political strategic analysis. This is a timely
 antidote to the exclusive usage of strategic analysis to refer to military
 affairs. What is fundamental to strategic analysis is not the specific subject
 matter of military or economic issues, but a basic conception of how we
 understand politics among states. This conception of nation-states as
 interdependent, goal-seeking actors lies at the heart of strategic game
 analysis; it is applicable across different issue areas.
 The ultimate promise of game theory lies in expanding the realm of
 rational-actor models beyond the restrictive confines of the traditional
 Realist perspective to a more complex world where concern is less
 exclusively with problems of conflict and as much with problems of
 cooperation. This expansion will provide a stimulus to the ongoing
 theoretical project of integrating the military and political-economy sides
 of international politics. One important aspect of this theoretical inte-
 gration is the development of models capable of encompassing different
 issue areas that are usually treated as fundamentally disparate. Individ-
 ually, the articles in this volume advance that goal by applying game
 models across a wide range of international political, military, and eco-
 nomic issues. Collectively, the articles show the value of game theory
 in a broader theoretical enterprise: understanding different questions of
 international politics within the same theoretical framework. Thus, as
 will be elaborated upon throughout this article, the ultimate payoff of
 game theory is the use of game models to understand different aspects
 of international politics in terms of a unified theory.
 A second valuable aspect of this resurgence of interest in game theory
 * Raymond Duvall has provided a number of important ideas on how to formulate the
 argument of the paper. I have also benefited greatly from discussions with the other par-
 ticipants in this symposium, and from comments by Kenneth Oye, Robert Axelrod, and
 especially Robert Keohane. Chris Achen and John Freeman made valuable comments on
 earlier drafts, as did participants in the Program on Interdependent Political Economy
 (PIPE) Workshop at the University of Chicago.
This content downloaded from 175.45.185.0 on Wed, 22 Jun 2016 04:35:32 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Sayfa 3 ---
26 WORLD POLITICS
 is a greater concern for empirical application of the models. Earlier
 military-strategic analyses were based on deductive arguments, but re-
 mained untested beyond anecdotal embellishment. Perhaps this could
 be excused by the fortunate fact that there had been insufficient data
 on the outbreak of nuclear war as the central dependent variable. How-
 ever, relevant historical evidence on non-nuclear deterrence also has only
 recently been systematically exploited.' One virtue of recent game theory
 applications to issues of both military and political economy is its atten-
 tion to the empirical implications and evaluation of the deductive theory.
 In examining the usefulness of game theory for theorizing about inter-
 national politics, I will emphasize the requisites for this empirically
 oriented side of the game-theoretic enterprise.
 Applying game theory to a substantive body of knowledge such as
 international relations raises a host of difficult empirical questions. For
 example: Who are the relevant actors? What are the rules of the game?
 What are the choices available to each actor? What are the payoffs in
 the game? Is the issue best characterized as single-play or repeated-
 play? In analyzing any particular issue, it is impossible to answer all of
 these questions with certainty. Game theory often seems to demand
 more information than can feasibly be obtained. Ironically, it cannot
 always adequately incorporate other important available information-
 including relevant historical details about the context of interaction,
 insights into the personalities and behavior of decision makers, and
 understandings of the diplomatic or foreign policy process. These short-
 comings of game theoretic analysis have led some analysts to conclude
 that its usefulness as a theoretical guide to the empirical study of in-
 ternational politics is seriously impaired.
 This conclusion shows a misunderstanding of the power of (game)
 theory by treating it as a descriptive and not as an analytical tool. Too
 many "applications" of game theory have merely been in the spirit of
 sorting out whether the Cuban missile crisis was really Chicken or
 Prisoners' Dilemma. Such usage may be helpful for reconstructing and
 interpreting particular events, but it misinterprets the primary value of
 game theory as that of redescribing the world, and is therefore limited
 as a test of game theory. It would be a more appropriate test of a
 I Among more recent works, see Alan Alexandroff and Richard Rosecrance, "Deterrence
 in 1939," World Politics 29 (April I977), 404-24; Bruce Bueno de Mesquita, The War Trap
 (New Haven: Yale University Press, i98i); Alexander George and Richard Smoke, Deter-
 rence in American Foreign Policy (New York: Columbia University Press, 1974); Robert
 Jervis, Perception and Misperception in International Politics (Princeton: Princeton University
 Press, I976); John Mearsheimer, Conventional Deterrence (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
 Press, i983); and Glenn Snyder and Paul Diesing, Conflict Among Nations (Princeton:
 Princeton University Press, I977).
This content downloaded from 175.45.185.0 on Wed, 22 Jun 2016 04:35:32 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Sayfa 4 ---
GAME THEORY 27
 deductive theory to investigate the empirical correctness of its analytical
 predictions. This requires giving empirical content to it through its
 assumptions (e.g., about preferences and payoffs) rather than just adapt-
 ing the theory (or one of its many models) to fit some historical or
 current event.
 The distinction can be illustrated by an example of game theory used
 as a descriptive rather than an analytical tool. In Conflict Among Nations,
 which is widely regarded as an ambitious application of game theory
 to international relations, Snyder and Diesing use game models of i6
 historical cases to investigate bargaining in international crises. Their
 technique is to reconstruct the game structure underlying each crisis
 from a detailed historical analysis of events. They show a sophisticated
 awareness of the difficulty of such reconstruction and would not be
 surprised if (as often happens in this sort of analysis) others offered
 different interpretations of various crises. Such a challenge, however, is
 only a test of their skill in reconstructing a crisis in game terminology,
 and not a test of the theory itself. Indeed, because Snyder and Diesing
 use the totality of the crisis (including the outcome) to generate the
 descriptive game model, their use of game theory does not produce any
 predictions that could be empirically falsified. None of the deductive
 power of game theory is employed. Thus, their work is not an example
 of the empirical application of game theory even though it illustrates
 the purely descriptive use of game models.2
 The real power of game theory, for both empirical and theoretical
 purposes, emerges when it is used to generate new findings and un-
 derstandings rather than to reconstruct individual situations. This ob-
 jective requires treating game theory as a theory of international politics
 in terms of the goal-seeking behavior of states in an interdependent
 international system. It means that game models will not be useful in
 predicting outcomes that are largely determined by nonpurposive or
 nonsystematic behavior. If all or most cases are determined by such
 factors, then game theory will have little to say about international
 politics. If the underlying assumption of self-interested action by stra-
 tegically rational states is correct, however, and preferences, strategies,
 and payoffs can be modeled accurately, then the theory will generate
 important testable predictions.
 2 My comments are not intended as criticism of an ambitious and insightful enterprise.
 The authors' descriptive use of game theory is appropriate, given an ultimate concern with
 different models of decision making and bargaining rather than with game theory, which
 is used only in "the limited role ... [of] depicting the structure of a crisis" Snyder and
 Diesing (fn. i), 87. Nevertheless, if any analytical game theory approach were attributed to
 the work, a game theorist could reasonably object that it had been emasculated (cf. p. i82).
This content downloaded from 175.45.185.0 on Wed, 22 Jun 2016 04:35:32 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Sayfa 5 ---
28 WORLD POLITICS
 This position is based on the now widely accepted view that the
 purpose of any theory-including game theory-is not to reproduce
 reality, but to increase our understanding of fundamental processes by
 simplifying it. For this reason, it is not desirable to incorporate all of
 the details of any individual case. Simplicity and abstraction guide us
 through a morass of information to focus on more fundamental issues.
 While the simplicity of game models leads to a clarity that illuminates
 social phenomena, the deductive apparatus of game theory allows us to
 infer new understandings about international politics. The best-known
 example is Prisoners' Dilemma. Analysis in terms of this 2 x 2 game
 provides insights on issues such as GATT or SALT, which could never
 be achieved by, say, archival research alone. Expanding the analysis to
 N-person Prisoners' Dilemma and the logic of collective action explains
 why international cooperation sometimes fails even when it is in the
 interest of all states. Further investigation of the impact of states of
 different sizes and of hegemonic "leadership" (in terms of privileged
 groups) shows how various distributions of capability and interest fa-
 cilitate or impede collectively optimal outcomes.3 And changed incentives
 in dynamic games explain why cooperation has been more successful
 through GATT than through SALT, where mutual suspicions reinforce
 perceptions of substantial danger if the other side were to renege on
 cooperation.
 These are the fertile directions in which game theory can lead em-
 pirical investigation of international politics. In the first section of this
 paper, I elaborate on game theory as a theoretical approach to inter-
 national politics by contrasting it with metaphorical and other uses of
 games. This exercise lays a foundation for discussing the requisites for
 empirical application of the theory. In the second section, I discuss the
 overarching theoretical constructs in game models and their implications
 for applying the theory to specific international issues. These constructs
 raise a new set of questions that expand our understanding of particular
 issues. In the third section, I examine theoretical extensions of simple
 game models that expand the contextual richness of empirical applica-
 tions by incorporating key features of international political interactions.
 The discussion in both of these sections makes reference to the technical
 game literature, but the focus is on the empirical issues of international
 politics raised by game-theory approaches.4 In the final section, I sum-
 3Duncan Snidal, "The Limits of Hegemonic Stability Theory," International Organization
 39 (Autumn i985), 579-6I4.
 4 The articles in this volume presuppose a basic familiarity with game-theoretic approaches.
 A good introduction is Henry Hamburger, Games as Models of Social Phenomena (San
 Francisco: W.H. Freeman, 1979); Martin Shubik, Game Theory in the Social Sciences: Concepts
This content downloaded from 175.45.185.0 on Wed, 22 Jun 2016 04:35:32 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Sayfa 6 ---
GAME THEORY 29
 marize the usefulness and limits of game theory as a theory of inter-
 national politics and as a guide to empirical research.
 I. GAME THEORY AS A THEORY OF INTERNATIONAL POLITICS
 The diverse logics of applying game theory to empirical phenomena
 are highlighted by its different applications as metaphor, analogy, model,
 or theory. Even though these terms are sometimes used interchangeably,
 distinguishing among them illuminates the relation of the game approach
 to empirical evidence. These differences go well beyond hackneyed calls
 for more rigorous approaches even if some uses are inherently more
 rigorous than others. Instead, different logics in using game theory reflect
 different understandings of how to apply it empirically. Most applications
 of game theory to international politics have been in terms of metaphor
 and analogy; they are unsatisfactory guides for application in terms of
 model and theory. Since we are concerned here with empirical appli-
 cation of deductive rather than purely descriptive models, these dis-
 tinctions are important. Finally, in presenting these categories, the object
 is not to provide definitive definitions of terms, but to demonstrate the
 varying implications that the different logics hold for game-theoretic
 approaches to international politics.
 A. METAPHOR
 The use of metaphor is pervasive not only in literature, but in science
 and policy. Mechanical and biological metaphors are common in the
 social sciences. An applied example is the metaphor of "falling domi-
 noes," which has been significant in postwar U.S. foreign policy. The
 power of the metaphor rests on its loose and open-ended nature. It
 invites us to speculate and engages us in creative conjecture. No formal
 deductive apparatus is involved: an implied comparison of two entities
 is used to infer further properties or conclusions from one to the other.5
 Metaphors allow for the creative transfer of ideas across intellectual
 realms. This explains their heuristic and expository value-especially in
 exploratory stages of theory construction where their open-ended char-
 acter is amenable to innovative thinking. However, they are also highly
 susceptible to misunderstanding and misuse. Open-endedness can de-
 and Solutions (Cambridge: MIT Press, i983) provides a more advanced treatment. Two
 accessible "classics" are R. Duncan Luce and Howard Raiffa, Games and Decisions (New
 York: Wiley, 1957), and Thomas Schelling, Strategy of Conflict (Cambridge: Harvard Uni-
 versity Press, i960).
 5 Martin Landau, "On the Use of Metaphor in Political Analysis," Social Research 28
 (Autumn I96I), 33I-53.
This content downloaded from 175.45.185.0 on Wed, 22 Jun 2016 04:35:32 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Sayfa 7 ---
30 WORLD POLITICS
 volve into sloppiness or silliness if metaphorical transfer is (mis)applied
 without thorough attention to the correspondences in the properties and
 conclusions of the entities being compared. These dangers are well
 illustrated by the more "vulgar" and misleading applications of biological
 and mechanical metaphors to understanding society.
 Thus the use of metaphors in social science needs to be somewhat
 guarded; metaphorical richness must be progressively restricted by more
 precise formulations as research advances. For example, consider the
 Hobbesian state of nature as a fundamental metaphor for international
 politics. Although instructive for highlighting the security dilemma
 among states, it is misleading when it is overinterpreted to the conclusion
 that any international cooperation requires an international government
 comparable to the Hobbesian sovereign. This confusion does not arise
 from a more sophisticated specification of the metaphor, which recog-
 nizes salient differences between the two political environments (e.g.,
 states are inherently more secure in the international system than are
 individuals in the Hobbesian state of nature) that allow for decentralized
 international cooperation.6
 Increased rigor of specification is not to be confused with expression
 in a different form-specifically with mathematical as opposed to purely
 verbal statement. We do not improve a metaphor simply by translating
 it into a game matrix. Glib assertions that "Issue X is Prisoners' Di-
 lemma," or that the "Cuban missile crisis was a game of Chicken,"
 efficiently convey a metaphor, but do not make the metaphor more
 plausible or take much advantage of the power of game theory. Typically,
 such statements simply restate what we already know-perhaps em-
 bellished by means of a particular reconstruction of historical events.
 Real rigor requires tightening the correspondence between the metaphor
 and the issue at hand. Analogies and models are to some extent simply
 more controlled metaphors, although they are further distinguished by
 their respective logics of inference.7
 6 The Hobbesian (domestic) state of nature is contrasted with the current international
 situation in Charles Beitz, Political Theory and International Relations (Princeton: Princeton
 University Press, 1979). Decentralized international cooperation is dealt with from a strategic-
 actor perspective in Robert 0. Keohane, After Hegemony (Princeton: Princeton University
 Press, i984), and from a more purely game-theoretic perspective in Duncan Snidal, "In-
 terdependence, Regimes and International Cooperation" (Ph.D. diss., Yale University, i98i).
 See also the related articles in Stephen Krasner, ed., International Regimes (Ithaca, NY:
 Cornell University Press, i983).
 7Metaphors are distinguished by the looseness of their correspondence rules, but not
 necessarily by the absence of mathematical sophistication. For an example of a mathematically
 sophisticated (though ultimately nonfruitful) metaphor, recall Paul Smoker's use of the
 harmonic motion of springs as a metaphor for arms rivalry, in "The Arms Race as an Open
 and Closed System," Peace Research Society (International) Papers 7 (i967), 41-62. For a
This content downloaded from 175.45.185.0 on Wed, 22 Jun 2016 04:35:32 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Sayfa 8 ---
GAME THEORY 31
 B. ANALOGY
 The key to analogy is the special type of reasoning it invokes. On
 the basis of certain closely established resemblances between two entities,
 further similarities are inferred. If Xi represents the ith property of entity
 X, an analogy between A and B is established by demonstrating a cor-
 respondence between a number (say,j) of their properties and/or relations
 (Al-+ B ,A2 --B2 ... , A +-+ B.). On the basis of the analogy, we infer
 (tentatively) that for properties Aj Aj +2 ... (etc.) known to pertain to
 A, there exist corresponding properties B + z B2 ... (etc.) in B. This
 inferential reasoning is external to both entities and resides in the com-
 parison between them. Neither side of the analogy need contain any
 internal deductive structure (i.e., none of the properties j + I, j + 2 ...
 (etc.) can necessarily be logically derived from properties i, 2, ... ,j for
 either A or B). The logic of inference is then heavily inductive, resting
 on observed isomorphisms and, ultimately, on empirical confirmation
 of derived propositions (i.e., properties j+ Ij+ 2, ... etc.).
 Analogic inferences are tentative until empirically confirmed. A cen-
 tral task of analogic reasoning is to distinguish negative (i.e., incorrect)
 from positive (i.e., correct) analogies. Neutral analogies, not yet known
 to be correct or incorrect, are viewed agnostically until more evidence
 is available. Therefore, analogy is a guide to empirical observation that
 points out parallels between properties of different phenomena, rather
 than a deductive tool whose conclusions about the existence of those
 properties we can subscribe to without question. Its main difference
 from the metaphor is the tighter specification of correspondences be-
 tween properties and the closer evaluation of conclusions to which this
 leads.
 One fashionable way of using analogy has been to relate international
 politics to neoclassical microeconomic models. Central among these has
 been the analogy between states in the international political system and
 firms in an oligopolistic market (and, implicitly, the game-theoretic
 structure underlying that market). This analogy is constructed from a
 number of postulated empirical correspondences, including:8
 critical discussion, see Peter Busch, "Mathematical Models of Arms Races," an appendix to
 Bruce Russett, What Price Vigilance? (New Haven: Yale University Press, I970).
 8 The oligopoly analogy is widespread. The correspondences presented here can be found
 in Kenneth Waltz, Theory of International Politics (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, I979),
 esp. chap. 7. Other examples of microeconomic analogies are Robert Gilpin, War and Change
 in World Politics (New York: Cambridge University Press, i98i) and Robert 0. Keohane,
 "The Demand for International Regimes," International Organization 36 (Spring i982), 325-
 55-
This content downloaded from 175.45.185.0 on Wed, 22 Jun 2016 04:35:32 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Sayfa 9 ---
32 WORLD POLITICS
 economic marketplace international system
 firm nation-state
 firms maximize profits states maximize survival
 oligopolists great powers
 market concentration concentration of power
 price wars military wars
 both are self-help systems
 firms and states both act strategically.
 These correspondences establish the analogy that allows other inferences
 from oligopoly theory to the international system. They include the
 proposition that, since oligopolistic market concentration leads to market
 stability and fewer price wars, concentration of power in the international
 system will lead to system stability and less international conflict. The
 status of this inference is that of a hypothesis whose a priori plausibility
 depends on whether the initial correspondences are compelling. If em-
 pirically verified, the positive analogy becomes a new supporting cor-
 respondence which, in turn, buttresses the strength of the analogy as
 further implications are pursued. There may also be negative analogies,
 however, which must be identified as incorrect inferences. One example
 is the disanalogy between the role of elimination through competition
 which plays an important role in the marketplace but is inconsequential
 in the system of states. Another difference is that economic outcomes
 are evaluated primarily in terms of systemic properties such as efficiency
 rather than of the fate of individual firms, while international systems
 are evaluated fundamentally in terms of the impact they have on in-
 dividual states.
 Although analogy can be a powerful tool for conceptualizing inter-
 national politics, its limitations are apparent. Disanalogies can be rec-
 ognized but not eliminated; features of interest that have no correspond-
 ing property in the analogy cannot be analyzed. Finally, the logic of
 inference is primarily inductive, and no direct use is made of deductive
 logic. Since that is where the power of the game-theoretic approach lies,
 analogy uses only a portion of this power. A better alternative is to use
 game-theory models that directly incorporate the most salient features
 of the international system.9
 C. MODEL
 There is an even stronger concern for a tight correspondence between
 an entity and its model. Because it can be abstract and "constructed,"
 9 On the "economic approach" (of rational, maximizing behavior) versus economics as
This content downloaded from 175.45.185.0 on Wed, 22 Jun 2016 04:35:32 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Sayfa 10 ---
GAME THEORY 33
 a model can be tailored precisely to the problem under investigation.
 Its key distinguishing characteristic is a formal logic that is both de-
 ductive and internal (as opposed to the inductive and external logic of
 analogy). Using the same notation, let A be a model of B with corre-
 spondences i, 2, ... ,j established. Property Aj+k is a conclusion of the
 model if it can be deduced from some combination of A, A2, . .. , Aj.
 The corresponding property Bj+k is then asserted on the basis that it
 follows logically from the corresponding combination of B, B2, . .. , Bj.
 This differs from analogy in that no recourse is made to induction
 beyond the initial establishment of the isomorphism. Instead, the model
 simply illuminates a logical relationship among the properties of B, which
 is more expeditiously demonstrated among the corresponding relations
 in its model A.
 As a result, the model has a more closed form than the analogy. In
 an analogy, establishing correspondences Al + B1, ... , Aj + Bj does
 not guarantee that each Aj +k implies a corresponding Bj+k. Some analogic
 inferences may be incorrect (and thus set aside) without significantly
 harming the analogy-provided that sufficient correspondences are es-
 tablished and that other correct inferences pertain. By contrast, the
 internal deductive argument of a model that allows us to conclude Aj+k
 based on properties A 1 A2,. . . , Aj ofA indicates that, ifour correspondences
 are valid, then conclusion Bj+k must also apply. If empirical evaluation
 shows Bj+k does not hold, then the model itself must be reformulated.
 The result is a more closed form: negative analogies are not permitted
 to coexist alongside positive analogies. We are forced to revise and
 reconstruct the model.Io
 The compensating features of (empirically verified) models are that
 neutral analogies (i.e., untested conclusions) can be accepted until dis-
 proven, and that the logical structure of the model suggests new avenues
 of inquiry. Therefore correspondences must be tighter in a model than
 in an analogy. A wrong correspondence in an analogy need not impair
 the (external) logic of inference if sufficient other correspondences still
 analogy, see Brian Barry, Sociologists, Economists and Democracy (Chicago: University of
 Chicago Press, I978).
 1o I do not want to convey too pristine a view of how models are developed. Models are
 always constructed with an eye toward some of their inferences (what assumptions are
 needed to produce a certain conclusion). Moreover, the ceteris paribus clause is often invoked
 to deal with important correspondences that are not contained in the model. However, the
 logical structure of the model forces our theoretical assumptions and conclusions to be
 consistent and leads to other wholly unanticipated inferences. The ceteris paribus clause
 should not become a refuge from incorporating further considerations into the model; it
 should be a stimulus for its progressive refinement.
This content downloaded from 175.45.185.0 on Wed, 22 Jun 2016 04:35:32 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Sayfa 11 ---
34 WORLD POLITICS
 hold. In a model, a single wrong correspondence may disrupt the (in-
 ternal) logic of deduction and produce false conclusions. Thus, with
 stronger requirements for its correspondence rules and stronger deduc-
 tive powers, a model makes stronger claims about the world."
 Understanding and explanation is deepened by the deductive form
 of the model. The need for tightness in correspondences, and for revision
 of the model when it is inadequate, requires that our knowledge be
 more precise. Whereas in analogy it is unclear which correspondences
 (or how many) are necessary, the model clarifies which ones play a role
 in the logic of inference (i.e., those that enter into the deductive rea-
 soning). The model thus promotes parsimony and simplicity. It also
 directs us to evaluate the accuracy of the most important correspond-
 ences, and allows us to investigate how changes in correspondences
 (assumptions) might lead to different conclusions.
 Finally, models of processes or of things (i.e., of a specific empirical
 phenomenon such as a particular arms race) need to be distinguished
 from models of theories (i.e., of a general category of phenomena such
 as arms races). The former involve abstraction of an entity's properties
 to represent them in a simpler set of relations. This sort of model may
 incorporate a theory, but may also be consistent with many theories. A
 model of a theory, on the other hand, contains a set of linked law-like
 statements applicable to a range of phenomena. Game theory poses a
 healthy tension between these types of models: a game model may be
 treated as a straightforward representation of a specific phenomenon or
 as involving a broader theoretical perspective and a more general inter-
 pretation of the particular event.'2
 D. THEORY
 Since the same representation can be a model for different theories,
 interpretation of a model depends on the theory in which it is
 embedded.'3 The theory contains a deductive structure plus an inter-
 -t Models are not primarily distinguished from analogies and metaphors by mathematical
 sophistication. (See note 7.) For example, physical models and analogue machines (including
 computer simulations viewed as physical machine representations) are models that are not
 in explicit mathematical form. Mathematics is simply a particular way of expressing a model.
 It is useful in forcing us to tighten up correspondences, in exposing weaknesses in a model
 or metaphor, and in providing a powerful means of pursuing deductive implications.
 12 Again, the distinction between a theory and its model is not always clear. Mary Hesse
 argues that "almost any model or interpretation carries some surplus meaning. If, however,
 a model is used in a way that exploits this surplus meaning in prediction and explanation,
 we shall call it a theoretical model." See Hesse, "Models and Analogy in Science" in Paul
 Edwards, ed., The Encyclopedia of Philosophy (New York: Macmillan and Free Press, i967),
 354-59.
 ' For example, waves provide a model for both water motion and light; similarly, the
This content downloaded from 175.45.185.0 on Wed, 22 Jun 2016 04:35:32 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Sayfa 12 ---
GAME THEORY 35
 pretation of fundamental assumptions and theoretical constructs. This
 richer interpretive structure (as compared to the tighter correspondences
 in the model) provides for greater richness of explanation. Through it,
 the theory maintains a greater open-endedness and a surplus meaning
 which guides revision and extension of the model. A further source of
 theoretical richness lies in the multiple models that may be contained
 within a theory and that emerge according to specific parametric con-
 ditions. Through these models, seemingly different phenomena-per-
 haps varying due to contextual factors-can be understood within the
 same theoretical framework.
 Game theory viewed as a theory of intentional behavior illustrates the
 relation between a theory and its model. The assumption of rationality
 allows interpretation of solutions in terms of intentional behavior of
 actors. Specification of different political-institutional environments (e.g.,
 the capitalist market in economic oligopoly theory versus anarchic in-
 ternational society in balance-of-power theory) determines rules of the
 game that result in different interpretations of models, and ultimately
 in different models, as the rules are more explicitly introduced into the
 analysis. Alternatively, different specifications of actors' policy choices
 and/or preferences may result in different games (e.g., Chicken versus
 Prisoners' Dilemma) arising within one fundamental theoretical inter-
 pretation of the international system. A primary virtue of game theory
 as theory is the enormous diversity of models contained within it.
 For game theory to be a theory of international politics (rather than
 a general theory of strategic behavior), specific empirical assumptions
 (correspondences) are required. For example, by assuming that power-
 maximizing states are the principal actors, game theory subsumes the
 Realist position. But the game-theoretic approach is not coincident with
 Realism. While it necessarily treats actors as rational, its empirical as-
 sumptions need assert neither that the key actors are states nor that they
 maximize power. With a different specification of these assumptions,
 game theory is equally consistent with a modified structural approach.'4
 coupled differential equations which can be interpreted as a model of an arms race in
 international relations may have a very different meaning in thermodynamics. Indeed, it is
 impossible to speak of a model of something-as opposed to a purely logical and empirically
 uninterpreted model-without theory to guide us on the correspondence rules. Any empirical
 model must be embedded in a theory. However, the theoretical richness is often tightly
 circumscribed in the model. A good example is the use of the "as if' assumption to establish
 a correspondence at a purely observational level without plumbing the deeper implication
 of the observed behavior. (See note I7.)
 '4 Robert 0. Keohane, "Theory of World Politics: Structural Realism and Beyond," in
 Ada Finifter, ed., Political Science: The State of the Discipline (Washington, DC: American
 Political Science Association, i983).
This content downloaded from 175.45.185.0 on Wed, 22 Jun 2016 04:35:32 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Sayfa 13 ---
36 WORLD POLITICS
 Thus it brings contending perspectives into the same framework and
 emphasizes their different empirical assumptions.
 As a general theoretical approach to international politics, game theory
 does assume goal-seeking behavior in the absence of centralized, au-
 thoritative institutions. It thereby illuminates the fundamental issues of
 international anarchy and the implications of different configurations of
 national interests and political circumstances for international conflict
 and cooperation. At its best, it uses simplifying assumptions to expand
 our range of understanding and to provide deeper interpretations of
 international politics.
 Metaphor, analogy, model and theory are complementary in social
 scientific research; they are each appropriate at various stages. It is often
 useful to go back and forth among them. As research advances, however,
 metaphor and analogy are of increasingly limited usefulness. The greater
 rigor and deductive power of the model, together with the interpretive
 richness and open-endedness of its corresponding theoretical framework,
 make that combination ultimately more productive.'5
 International political analysis is ripe for a transition to game theory
 as a theory of international politics. Game metaphors and analogies
 already are widely used to illuminate and clarify international issues.
 To apply the deductive power of game theory directly, we must tighten
 up correspondences between empirical situations and game models, and
 separate assumptions from predictions. As we do this, the model and
 theory will provide a guide to relevant empirical evidence just as the
 evidence will provide a guide for evaluating and revising the model.
 Treated this way, game theory becomes more than just a new language
 in which to rewrite history or to restate our arguments. It becomes a
 powerful tool for expanding our understanding and for stimulating
 research. The price we pay for such power lies in the assumptions and
 work required to link the deductive logic to empirical reality. In the
 remainder of this paper, I address issues raised in using game theory,
 both as model and as theory, for the empirical investigation of inter-
 national politics.
 II. USING GAME THEORY TO BUILD THEORY
 IN INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
 Concepts of game theory provide a guide for constructing theory in
 international relations. The most fundamental concepts-strategy, stra-
 '5 Here we can agree that "perhaps every science must start with metaphor and end with
This content downloaded from 175.45.185.0 on Wed, 22 Jun 2016 04:35:32 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Sayfa 14 ---
GAME THEORY 37
 tegic rationality, preferences, and payoffs-and their implications for
 understanding international politics will be discussed in this section.
 Although I will refer mainly to simple 2 x 2 games, the discussion applies
 equally to other game models. Those will be more explicitly covered in
 the section on incorporating contextual features of international issues
 into game models.
 A. STRATEGIES
 A strategy is a complete plan for action, covering all contingencies
 including random exogenous events as well as endogenous behavior by
 others. For any but the most trivial decisions, this conception is hopelessly
 complicated and beyond the calculating power of any man, machine, or
 state bureaucracy. Although it is possible to treat strategies as simpli-
 fications of more complex decision processes, it is more fruitful to treat
 them as simplified representations of general policy stances. In trade
 policy, for example, it is meaningful to speak-on a broad level-of
 strategies of "free" versus "restricted" international trade without wor-
 rying about the myriad of nuances such as differential treatment of steel
 versus textiles, or the use of tariff versus nontariff barriers. Similarly,
 strategies of reducing military spending, of increasing international ten-
 sions, or of promoting environmental protection are each meaningful
 without supposing that someone has compiled an exact listing of how
 to pursue that policy under every conceivable contingency. The simple
 2 x 2 game pursues this to its logical extreme where only two choices
 (often too persuasively labeled "cooperate" and "not cooperate") are
 available. Although not without limitations, this assumption is a useful
 simplification for illuminating the fundamental nature of an issue area.
 The notion of a strategy is so comprehensive that it can encompass
 a wide range of phenomena. This breadth of coverage is a central
 advantage of game theory. However, the limitations of such breadth
 need to be understood to ensure that the idea of a strategy is used to
 clarify rather than to confuse. One example is how a strategy incorporates
 dynamic considerations by allowing for contingent planning through
 time in response to changing circumstances. Some of the most powerful
 game-theoretic results emerge when dynamic problems are treated as
 static choices of strategies which actors will play through time. As we
 shall find in Section III, however, dynamic considerations are sometimes
 algebra; and perhaps without the metaphor there would never have been any algebra"-
 although by the argument of this section, the word "model" should be substituted for
 "algebra." See Max Black, Models and Metaphors (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press,
 I962), 242-
This content downloaded from 175.45.185.0 on Wed, 22 Jun 2016 04:35:32 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Sayfa 15 ---
38 WORLD POLITICS
 obscured when they are subsumed under a static analysis. Even where
 this is not the case, it will be useful to distinguish simple games that
 cover a single decision-making period from sequences of simple games
 (i.e., supergames) that represent continued play over a number of periods.
 A second concern is over the relationship between having a strategy
 and behaving rationally. Here the distinction between model and theory
 is useful. We can agree with Axelrod that, viewed as a model, an
 "organism does not need a brain to employ a strategy."'"6 He demonstrates
 important results by using game models for a wide range of phenomena
 where "strategies" have little to do with planning or strategic behavior
 in the usual sense of the word. For example, game models combined
 with the assumptions of natural selection offer suggestive explanations
 for the behavior of bacteria, microbes, and other lower-order life. Similar
 analyses can be applied to economic and political processes. Thus the
 models of game theory can be useful for theories not involving rational
 actors. But, as Axelrod points out, "game-playing becomes richer" in
 the context of a theoretical understanding where strategies are related
 to intentional behavior. Explicit use of such strategic rationality in the
 theory of games captures important aspects of international politics not
 found in game models divorced from the rationality assumption.'7
 B. STRATEGIC RATIONALITY
 The cornerstone of Realism is its treatment of states as rational actors.
 This requires only that states make logically correct calculations in using
 available information to pursue well-defined goals. This assumption has
 been subjected to an onslaught of attacks from advocates of theoretical
 alternatives including bureaucratic politics, psychological models of de-
 cision making, social choice, and complex organizations. The best of
 these critiques provide significant lessons that the game-theoretic tra-
 dition needs to address-as will be discussed in the following subsection
 on the derivation of game payoffs. Nevertheless, even though claims for
 its exclusive usefulness are surely exaggerated, the value of the rationality
 6 Robert Axelrod, The Evolution of Cooperation (New York: Basic Books, i984), chap. 5.
 7 This position agrees with Milton Friedman's well-known "as if' argument on one level,
 but differs from it on another. Friedman's argument is that it does not matter if the actors
 being modeled actually make (strategic) calculations as long as they act "as if' they did.
 For him, the proof of the pudding is the accuracy of the predictions that result from the
 assumption. But if we are to understand and explain behavior in addition to predicting it,
 his argument will be insufficient. To understand state behavior in international politics, and
 to avoid post hoc reconstruction of behavior as "rational," we must pay attention to the
 nature and limits of state rationality. See Friedman, "The Methodology of Positive Eco-
 nomics," in Frank Hahn and Martin Hollis, eds., Philosophy and Economic Theory (New
 York: Oxford University Press, I979), and Mark Blaug, The Methodology of Economics (New
 York: Cambridge University Press, i980).
This content downloaded from 175.45.185.0 on Wed, 22 Jun 2016 04:35:32 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Sayfa 16 ---
GAME THEORY 39
 assumption for the study of international politics has largely withstood
 these challenges.
 The interdependence perspective, and the game-theoretic tradition
 more generally, pose a different challenge to the conception of nonstra-
 tegic rationality that dominates simplistic (but nonetheless distressingly
 common) views of Realism.'8 Rationality in this Realist world centers
 on the struggle for power in an anarchic environment. States fend for
 themselves as they pursue their contradictory interests. Because of the
 conflictual nature of this "self-help" environment, the situation is mis-
 takenly seen as zero-sum where no cooperation is possible and states
 can pursue their own best interests without regard for the interests of
 others. The game-theory perspective reveals that these circumstances
 prevail only in artificially constructed, two-player parlor games. For real
 international issues, states' interests will not be properly characterized
 by assuming such pure opposition of interests. This leads directly to a
 strategic rationality which incorporates the realization that pursuit of
 egoistic interest requires consideration of interactions of one state's
 choices with other states' choices. No state can choose its best strategy
 or attain its best outcome independent of choices made by others. The
 related substantive implication is that national policy makers need to
 pursue opportunities for cooperative interactions even as they seek to
 protect against conflictual interactions.
 Two aspects of rationality are especially important for game-theoretic
 analyses.'9 The first, common to both nonstrategic and strategic con-
 ceptions, is the ability to forgo short-run advantages for longer-run
 considerations. The second, which is the distinguishing trait of strategic
 rationality, is that actors choose courses of action based on preferences
 and expectations of how others will behave. Thus, when a state under-
 takes a certain action, it does not necessarily follow that the immediate
 result is itself a preferred end for that state. It could be a strategically
 planned means to some other objective. (An example considered below
 is the use of Tit-for-Tat strategies to elicit long-run cooperation some-
 times at short-run cost.) This possibility requires us to consider how
 each choice is interrelated with prior and subsequent choices, and to
 understand national goals independently from observed behavior.
 i8 Strains of this narrow interpretation of rationality are apparent even among the best
 proponents of Realism. See, for example, Waltz (fn. 8), 70. Sophisticated versions of Real-
 ism-and certainly those that have incorporated game-theoretic notions-have employed
 an understanding of strategic rationality. For a clear-headed discussion of narrow rationality,
 see Bueno de Mesquita (fn. I), 29-33.
 19 See Jon Elster, Ulysses and the Sirens: Studies in Rationality and Irrationality (New York:
 Cambridge University Press, I979).
This content downloaded from 175.45.185.0 on Wed, 22 Jun 2016 04:35:32 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Sayfa 17 ---
40 WORLD POLITICS
 The assumption of strategic rationality is fundamental to a game-
 theory interpretation of international politics. Individual actions and col-
 lective outcomes are understood in terms of states' strategic pursuit of
 self-interest. The development of institutional arrangements such as
 regimes is explained in terms of efforts to overcome problems of col-
 lective action by altering the "rules of the game."20 The prospects for
 further cooperation as well as the dangers of increased conflict can be
 investigated in terms of the strategic possibilities facing states. As is often
 the case in theoretical enterprises, the stronger the (rationality) assump-
 tions made, the richer the interpretation provided by game theory. Con-
 versely, if the rationality assumption is seriously circumscribed by (say)
 bureaucratic, psychological, or organizational factors, the same models
 need to be interpreted differently.
 Finally, strategic rationality lies at the heart of one of the most at-
 tractive features of game theory. By placing the rational choice of state
 policy at the forefront of the explanation, game theory allows for an
 autonomy in state choice even as it predicts and explains those choices
 deterministically through an understanding of the overall strategic in-
 teraction. Thus the game model combines purposeful behavior with a
 specification of the structure of international politics which constrains
 that behavior. It links systematic macro-theory to voluntaristic decisions.
 States have choices; but the choices they make are determined to a
 greater or lesser extent by the exigencies of international politics.2'
 C. PAYOFFS
 Rationality assumes that states pursue goals, but those goals are not
 specified. A game-theoretic perspective requires analyzing states' mo-
 tivations and how their preferences map into payoffs within a game
 model. Establishing this correspondence between an issue area and its
 game model is the toughest problem confronting successful empirical
 application of game theory. To do so, we must posit national goals that
 depend on internal values as well as on external circumstances, thereby
 incorporating other empirical and theoretical understandings of inter-
 national issues into the model.
 For an inductive derivation of payoffs, what has happened cannot
 serve as an explanation of why it happened. Simple-minded uses of the
 "revealed preference" approach, which Sen aptly labels a "robust piece
 of evasion," lead to circular reasoning from the choices made by actors
 20 See Keohane (fn. 6), and Snidal (fn. 6).
 21 Pierre Allan, Crisis Bargaining and the Arms Race (Cambridge, MA: Ballinger, i983),
 5-6, and Hahn and Hollis (fn. I7), I5.
This content downloaded from 175.45.185.0 on Wed, 22 Jun 2016 04:35:32 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Sayfa 18 ---
GAME THEORY 41
 back to their preferences.22 Except for metaphorical and purely descrip-
 tive purposes, nothing is gained by this sort of restatement of the sit-
 uation. To avoid circularity, revealed preference can be applied in a
 somewhat different way. Choices made by a state in other situations
 where it faced similar circumstances can be used to infer preferences
 (and hence payoffs) inductively. Now the evidence used to determine
 the game payoff structure is independent of the outcome. Further in-
 dependent evidence about preferences may be available in archives and
 memoirs, including statements of leaders about their objectives. Such
 sources require a careful and systematic approach to the collection of
 evidence; self-serving statements of leaders need to be ruled out, and
 biased or ad hoc collections of anecdotes in support of a postulated payoff
 structure must be avoided.
 But even the most rigorous inductive approaches are problematic for
 game models because strategic rationality casts doubt on any such inter-
 pretation of relevant evidence. Since actors sometimes forgo immediate
 interest for longer-term gain, observed action may not reflect preferences
 directly. Furthermore, the essence of strategic behavior is that a state
 may forgo individually optimal actions to collaborate with others in
 achieving mutually preferred outcomes (e.g., the observation of "co-
 operative" behavior in Prisoners' Dilemma should not lead us to the
 incorrect inference that a state's highest individual payoffs are associated
 with such behavior). Observed behavior of strategic actors is thus often
 a biased and unsatisfactory indicator of underlying interests.
 Finally, inductive procedures provide only an incomplete map of
 preferences. With regard to revealed preference, only choices actually
 made by a state are directly observed; evidence about their evaluation
 of other possible outcomes is indirect and incomplete. In terms of simple
 games, direct evidence is available on only one of the four cells. This
 paucity of information is even more striking because the 2 x 2 game is
 already a simplified representation of a much richer set of preference
 mappings. Thus, even if augmented by other sources, purely inductive
 evidence will generally be inadequate for determining the structure of
 a game matrix.
 Theoretical specification of states' preferences can provide a route out
 of this empirical quandary. Such "theories of the payoffs" necessarily
 precede the game model. They enable game theory to be constructively
 and complementarily linked to other approaches to international poli-
 tics-even, in some cases, to theories that may be viewed as alternatives
 22 Armatya Sen, "Rational Fools: A Critique of the Behavioral Foundations of Economic
 Theory," in Hahn and Hollis (fn. I7), 92; emphasis in original.
This content downloaded from 175.45.185.0 on Wed, 22 Jun 2016 04:35:32 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Sayfa 19 ---
42 WORLD POLITICS
 to rational models. The possibilities for developing a theoretical basis
 for the derivation of payoffs are best seen by considering alternative
 ways to accomplish this goal.
 When theoretical knowledge of an issue area is substantial, assessing
 states' preferences is straightforward. This knowledge provides a way
 to model a situation and derive its payoff structure. Consider the neo-
 classical theory of international trade. It provides an elaborate framework
 for deriving the payoffs determined by strategy choices which might
 include the imposition of tariffs, restrictions on capital flows, or subsi-
 dization of industries. Such strong theory allows precise specification of
 the strategic situation between states over a host of important trade
 questions. A second example is found in the literature on military spend-
 ing. Theoretical arguments about the impact of military expenditures
 among allies and rivals, combined with knowledge of prevailing inter-
 national tensions and alliances, can reveal the underlying strategic struc-
 ture of these situations.23
 But states' preferences may not always be tightly linked to objective
 understandings of an issue area. Perceptions and information processing,
 as well as organizational or bureaucratic imperatives, may change the
 relevant payoffs for decision makers. Theoretical understanding of such
 factors may illuminate additional considerations that influence states'
 decisions on foreign policy alternatives. Of course, extreme versions
 which explain behavior largely in terms of the decision process itself
 will compete with, rather than complement, game models. But less
 extreme versions which leave a role for intentional behavior will suggest
 relevant empirical factors that affect strategic behavior. For example,
 Keohane incorporates "bounded rationality" into decisions to participate
 in international regimes, while Allan uses the concept of "diplomatic
 climate" to admit cognitive considerations of past events into rational
 models. When rational action is circumscribed but not overwhelmed by
 such factors, theoretical integration of this sort will be productive.24
 Theoretical considerations are also valuable when partial information
 restricts the logical possibilities for the payoff structure. For example, if
 a situation is symmetric or if the nature of common and conflicting
 interests is understood, then the set of possible 2 x 2 games can be
 considerably reduced.25 Alternatively, substantive knowledge that an
 23 Mancur Olson and Richard Zeckhauser, "An Economic Theory of Alliances," Review
 of Economics and Statistics 48 (No. 3, i966), 226-79; Snidal (fn. 6), chaps. 5-6.
 24Keohane (fn. 6), chap. 7, and Allan (fn. 2i), chap. 4. There are limits to rational theory,
 however: it cannot always incorporate contending approaches except in a trivializing way.
 Even some issues that are internal to the theory-especially problems of preference aggre-
 gation in determining a "national interest"-are far from resolved.
 25 Russell Hardin demonstrates how to narrow the range of relevant games for deterrence
This content downloaded from 175.45.185.0 on Wed, 22 Jun 2016 04:35:32 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Sayfa 20 ---
GAME THEORY 43
 issue area is characterized by relative rather than absolute gains (for
 instance, mercantilist versus liberal trade policies), or about the way
 policy choices are interrelated across states (for instance, international
 transmission of macroeconomic policies among economically integrated
 states) will help to describe the game structure. Information about the
 general political-institutional setting for relations among states, about
 the likelihood of an issue continuing into the future, or about the number
 and relative size of the states involved-all of which are discussed
 separately below-will also help to identify the structure of strategic
 interrelationships.
 Theoretically inspired approaches to inferring payoff structures have
 several advantages over purely inductive approaches. First, by focusing
 on underlying motivations rather than on observed outcomes, prefer-
 ences are distinguished from actions, and individual interests from stra-
 tegic calculations. Theoretical approaches also provide more complete
 information on the payoffs for outcomes beyond the one that actually
 occurs (e.g., on all of the "cells" of the 2 x 2 game), which permits an
 analysis of the complete game structure. Finally, by forcing us to in-
 vestigate new questions concerning the motivations underlying the be-
 havior of states, they ensure that the analysis is not simply a redescription
 of the issue in more formal language.
 A second advantage of theoretical derivation is that it systematically
 addresses the question of changing preferences through time and/or
 changes in the institutional environment of international politics. One
 requirement of the game-theoretic approach is that actors have reason-
 ably stable preferences and behave consistently when confronted with
 comparable choices. If preferences change too quickly, the model de-
 generates to a generalized post hoc revealed-preference exercise, where
 actions are assumed to reflect prevailing fluctuations in preferences. A
 theoretical approach avoids this circular reasoning by incorporating those
 factors that affect preferences and payoffs through time (including prior
 outcomes) directly into the theory of payoffs. Such systematic treatment
 of changing preferences or evolving institutions allows for a properly
 dynamic treatment of international issues.
 But the greatest advantage of theoretical specification of payoffs is
 that it unleashes the deductive power of game theory. By combining the
 game structure defined by preferences and available strategies with game
 theory solution concepts, we are led to new inferences about the behavior
 of individual states and about the overall outcome. These (falsifiable)
 problems in "Unilateral Versus Mutual Disarmament," Philosophy and Public Affairs 12
 (Summer i983), 236-54.
This content downloaded from 175.45.185.0 on Wed, 22 Jun 2016 04:35:32 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Sayfa 21 ---
44 WORLD POLITICS
 predictions are independent of observed behavior, which provides evi-
 dence on the correctness of the assumptions and the usefulness of the
 game-theoretic approach. If the theory withstands the test, these new
 deductions expand our knowledge and understanding of international
 behavior, and the analysis moves beyond metaphor and analogy to
 models and theory.26
 A final implication of theoretical derivations for payoffs is that any
 particular application is not a test of the game-theoretic approach in
 isolation, but of game theory in combination with the particular theo-
 retical assumptions embodied in the game structure (for instance, the
 underlying motivations of actors from which the payoffs are derived).
 If a particular model is inadequate, the theory of the payoffs will be
 rejected before the game-theoretic approach itself. The general useful-
 ness of the latter will be rejected only if a more plausible payoff theory
 cannot be constructed. Even then, we will not be sure whether this
 failing is really due to our own (possibly temporary) shortcomings in
 understanding and specifying actor motivations. Nevertheless, the the-
 oretical specification of payoffs makes the game model more vulnerable
 to empirical evidence and leaves it potentially falsifiable. This condition
 qualifies it as a serious explanation and more than just a tautological
 redescription of the world. Finally, attempts to revise the theoretical
 specification in order to accommodate contradictory evidence are likely
 to lead to innovations in our understanding of international politics.
 III. THE CONTEXT OF INTERNATIONAL POLITICS AND GAME MODELS
 One common but misguided criticism of game models is that they
 are too "simple" to capture the complexity of international politics. Game
 models may not be able to capture all details of international interactions,
 but in earlier sections of this paper I have argued that simplicity actually
 enhances the power of the theory for grasping complexity. I will now
 expand that argument by looking at extensions of simple game models
 to capture key contextual factors of international politics. The theoretical
 use of game models allows us to adapt them directly to the most salient
 aspects of international politics.
 26 Examples of these deductions include those discussed above. The success of rational-
 actor approaches in other areas of political science is due to precisely this sort of approach
 (for example, the assumption that candidates maximize votes leads to conclusions about
 their behavior). For a discussion of this (and a critique of the trivializing use of revealed
 preferences by imputing utility to "citizen's duty" to explain voting), see Barry (fn. 9),
 chap. 2.
This content downloaded from 175.45.185.0 on Wed, 22 Jun 2016 04:35:32 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Sayfa 22 ---
GAME THEORY 45
 A. EXTERNAL GAME ENVIRONMENT AND INTERNATIONAL REGIMES
 The goal in specifying a game structure is to capture the essential
 features of an international situation. Some of these are assumptions
 (actors, strategies, payoffs) while others are predictions (the outcome).
 The value of a game representation depends on how successfully it
 captures significant aspects of the international environment. Game the-
 ory also allows for broader interpretations, so that features not explicitly
 entered into a model may be useful for understanding and interpreting
 it.
 The specification of actors, capabilities, and preferences defines an
 overall game model of a specific issue. Each state's strategic intercon-
 nection with others outlines "structural" constraints that determine its
 opportunities. This notion of structure is atomistic in viewing structure
 as simply the sum of the individual units and emphasizes the structure
 of individual issues rather than that of the overall international system.
 It is therefore inadequate for examining certain conceptions of world
 structures.27 Nevertheless, the international system, with its established
 patterns of practice and rules, is significant for defining the individual
 game model and for deriving conclusions from it. In this way, the
 structure of international politics modeled as the rules of the game is
 distinguished from the behavior of states within those rules. (Of course,
 the rules of the game may be altered through establishment of new
 patterns of behavior, expectations, and norms, which emerge as new
 rules in the longer term.)
 Indeed, even the definition of issues, actors, and choices depends on
 the preexisting international order. For example, separation of trading
 issues into the GATT framework, recognition of states as relevant de-
 cision makers, and acceptance of restraint from force in deciding trade
 disputes all reflect theoretical assumptions as to which aspects of the
 existing trade regime can be taken as "given" for analysis of the politics
 of international trade. The assumptions of one analysis may be the objects
 of investigation in another. Regimes are not independent of the existing
 global political structure, but are built upon it and "nested" so that the
 fabric of one provides the foundation of another. Therefore the rules
 of the existing international order define the underlying game, even as
 the game is used to pose further questions about the development of
 international regimes.
 Empirical issues concerning the emergence of regimes are related to
 27Richard Ashley, "The Poverty of Neo-Realism," International Organization 38 (Spring
 I984), 236-86.
This content downloaded from 175.45.185.0 on Wed, 22 Jun 2016 04:35:32 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Sayfa 23 ---
46 WORLD POLITICS
 theoretical issues raised by solutions within game theory. For individual
 states, these issues include the concept of maximizing self-interest (e.g.,
 maximax versus maximin strategy choices), and how this is affected by
 the norms, conventions, and expectations that emerge in the regime.
 This leads to the question of efficiency, or whether the regime enables
 states to exploit mutual interests. A third question is whether the outcome
 is se/fenforcing (i.e., a stable equilibrium) so that the regime will be
 maintained by the self-interested behavior of states without centralized
 enforcement. A final concern is the distribution of benefits and consid-
 erations offairness which affect our evaluation of a regime.
 These central questions for investigating the role of international
 institutions in promoting international cooperation provide criteria for
 predicting and evaluating behavior within the regime as well as trans-
 formation of the regime itself. This fuller interpretation of the game
 model is in terms of the theoretical assumptions of strategic rationality
 and interdependent decision making that are fundamental to game the-
 ory.
 B. PAYOFF MEASUREMENT FOR ANALYZING BARGAINING AND ASYMMETRY
 Stronger assumptions about preferences-for example, interval versus
 ordinal measurement-contain more information for deriving stronger
 conclusions from game models. The appropriate level of measurement
 depends on our knowledge of the issue as well as the particular theo-
 retical questions to be investigated. Ordinal measurement is typically
 the minimal level that provides a sufficiently clear definition of the game
 structure for fruitful game analysis, but it is not always adequate.28
 Stronger measurement is necessary for analysis of certain central ques-
 tions. Consider some key examples: the result that repetition of an issue
 facilitates cooperation is based on interval-level comparison of alternative
 streams of (discounted) payoffs through time. Cooperation through issue
 linkage, viewed in terms of "trading" assistance on one issue for assist-
 ance on another, depends on interval-level weighing of benefits gained
 in one issue against costs incurred in the other. Indeed, solutions to
 bilateral bargaining problems can be shown, in general, to depend on
 interval-level payoffs. Even a simple 2 x 2 game can be dramatically
 28 Ordinal payoffs correspond to "first," "second," and so forth. Interval measurement
 requires meaningful "units" (e.g., degrees of temperature or units of payoff) for the "distance"
 between outcomes (e.g., change in the temperature or in a state's payoff). Cardinal meas-
 urement requires a meaningful "zero" (e.g., absolute zero in temperature scales) and is
 largely irrelevant for game theory. Other levels of measurement may fall between these
 categories (e.g., partial orderings may give us interval-level comparisons between some
 outcomes, but no direct comparison between others).
This content downloaded from 175.45.185.0 on Wed, 22 Jun 2016 04:35:32 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Sayfa 24 ---
GAME THEORY 47
 altered by replacing its ordinal payoffs with interval-level payoffs that
 are consistent with the original ordinal ranking. In brief, interval-level
 payoffs will be necessary, in addition to the simple order of preferences,
 whenever intensity matters.
 Where interval-level payoffs are not available, partial information
 about intensity may still be useful. For example, the incentive to defect
 on a cooperative agreement might be known to be greater in one situation
 than in another, even if the comparison cannot be made more precise.
 The greater incentives will tend to make decentralized agreements less
 effective and decrease the prospects for cooperation. Thus, ordinal pay-
 offs can often be augmented by partial information on preference in-
 tensity.29
 Intensities of preferences differ not only for actors but across actors.
 The latter situation raises the thorny issue of "interpersonal" comparisons
 of utility, whereby relative welfare gains of states are compared. Such
 considerations are central in normative evaluation of outcomes (for in-
 stance, the distributive implications of alternative Law of the Sea pro-
 posals), and may thereby influence actions of states (such as granting
 tariff preferences to less developed countries). Interpersonal comparisons
 are also important in purely "positive" analysis, however. The ability to
 do great harm (or confer benefit) to another at a relatively low cost may
 affect a state's behavior. This is especially true for situations of asymmetry
 where one state is substantially more vulnerable than another. Less
 vulnerable states will use their position advantageously to determine the
 outcome; when both are equally vulnerable, outcomes are more likely
 to be equal.3? It is treacherous but essential to make such comparisons-
 especially where issues are extremely asymmetric. Ordinal game models
 often make issues appear symmetric (for instance, by treating a very
 large state and a very small one as equal partners in a Prisoners' Dilemma
 with the "same" ordinal preferences) even though they are extremely
 asymmetric under interpersonal comparison and interval measurement
 (if, say, the issue is vital to the small country but inconsequential to the
 large one). Since many key problems of international politics revolve
 around questions of interdependence versus dependence, this consid-
 eration is important.
 29 For example, see Robert Jervis, "Cooperation under the Security Dilemma," World
 Politics 30 (January I978), i67-2I4, at I74. Nevertheless, ordinal payoffs can carry our analysis
 very far, and econmists once (erroneously) even believed they were sufficient for virtually
 all purposes. An interesting account of how measurement is integrally related to the questions
 we are investigating is Robert Cooter and Peter Rappoport, "Were the Ordinalists Wrong
 About Welfare Economics?," Journal of Economic Literature 22 (June i984), 507-30. For a
 thoughtful but more technical discussion of these issues, see Shubik (fn. 4), chaps. 4 and 5.
 30 For examples of the impact of vulnerability, see Jervis (fn. 29), I7I-73.
This content downloaded from 175.45.185.0 on Wed, 22 Jun 2016 04:35:32 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Sayfa 25 ---
48 WORLD POLITICS
 Thus, problems of bargaining (including linkage and cooperation
 through time) and of asymmetry can be captured in game-theoretic
 models that include stronger theoretical attention to underlying pref-
 erences and stronger measurement of payoffs. Such game models also
 provide a handle on important normative questions surrounding positive
 analysis. While these various problems are difficult to deal with, they
 are not intrinsic to game theory analysis; the latter only serves to illu-
 minate some of the substantive and theoretical shortcomings in our
 understanding of international politics.
 C. ITERATED AND DYNAMIC GAMES: TWO ACTORS PLAYING THROUGH TIME
 International politics is inherently dynamic and involves interactions
 among states through time. As discussed above, a strategy can encompass
 dynamic situations within a purely static analysis (that is, where states
 choose entire future courses of action at once). But compressing all of
 these possibilities into a single choice may involve unrealistic assumptions
 about the capacity of states as decision makers, and obscure important
 aspects of international politics. To understand the impact of evolving
 international regimes, of changing expectations, of learning and ad-
 justment by states, or of changing national preferences, the concept of
 "change through time" needs to be clarified.3'
 The term "dynamic" is not as precise as its mathematical connotation
 implies, and it has many different usages. For international politics it
 emphasizes (I) the impact of states making multiple decisions through
 time, and (2) mutual adjustment among states through time. It is of
 particular importance whether new equilibrium outcomes emerge when
 the game is played through time, and whether these are stable. These
 questions (rather than the form of the game) distinguish dynamic anal-
 ysis.
 Treating international issues as dynamic is complicated by the problem
 of defining the decision-making period. Discrete time models have pre-
 dominated because they are easier to work with. The standard treatment
 has been in terms of sequential plays of iterated games where time is
 divided into decision periods corresponding to a single play of a static
 game. However, changes in "revealed" preferences or contextual factors
 between iterations should not be invoked on an ad hoc basis to define
 different game iterations or to fit different game models to an issue at
 different points in time. Instead, dynamic analysis requires theoretically
 informed understandings of time-changing empirical patterns. For ex-
 P Complications of inconsistent time preferences are ignored here. See Elster (fn. i9),
 chap. 2.
This content downloaded from 175.45.185.0 on Wed, 22 Jun 2016 04:35:32 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Sayfa 26 ---
GAME THEORY 49
 ample, superpower "succession crises" due to machinations within the
 Soviet Politburo or the American electoral process may explain system-
 atic fluctuations in the politics between them. Alternatively, past inter-
 actions may affect present behavior, perhaps by increasing interdepend-
 ence or by changing expectations and trust among nations. Incorporating
 such effects allows us to adapt a systematic sequence of static models to
 the changing circumstances of a dynamic world, but it requires stronger
 theoretical assumptions about international politics (for instance, of ex-
 ogenous factors that affect the game structure, or endogenous changes
 in expectations) than those necessary to construct the individual static
 game models.
 A further application of dynamic analysis arises when current behavior
 is affected by prospects for future play of the game. Continuation of an
 issue through time may affect a state's behavior in each "play" of the
 game and alter the (equilibrium) outcome. The power of this analysis
 is illustrated by its most exciting result to date: whereas cooperation is
 not individually rational in single-play Prisoners' Dilemma, it will be
 rational under certain (specified) conditions in the iterated Prisoners'
 Dilemma supergame.32 The reason is that states will forgo short-run
 incentives to defect when they can thereby achieve longer-run benefits
 from cooperation through time. This makes international cooperation
 possible in the absence of centralized enforcement and indicates the
 importance of dynamic analysis of international politics. It is also a prime
 example of using the deductive power of game theory to derive new
 results.
 Iteration changes not only the outcome of the game, but the underlying
 structure of the situation. Whereas in single-play Prisoners' Dilemma
 there is a dominant strategy to defect, and the actions of others are
 barely relevant, coordination with other states becomes important in the
 iterated game. For example, the Tit-for-Tat strategy (i.e., reciprocate
 the other's last move) is effective only when the other state (in a bilateral
 situation) or a sufficient number of states (in a multilateral world) have
 adopted a compatible strategy. Thus the fundamental problem facing
 the individual state is altered once the Prisoners' Dilemma game is
 iterated. However, cooperation is not always enhanced by iterated plays
 of other games. For example, prospects of continued plays of coordi-
 32 Cooperation will make sense in anticipation of, and in response to, cooperation by the
 other party. An early formulation of the impact of iterated Prisoners' Dilemma games is
 Martin Shubik, "Game Theory and the Paradox of the Prisoner's Dilemma," Journal of
 Conflict Resolution I4 (June I970), 181-93. The result is worked out formally in Michael
 Taylor, Anarchy and Cooperation (New York: Wiley, I976) and extended via tournament
 techniques in Axelrod (fn. i6).
This content downloaded from 175.45.185.0 on Wed, 22 Jun 2016 04:35:32 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Sayfa 27 ---
50 WORLD POLITICS
 nation games provide incentives to break existing cooperation agree-
 ments in order to press for an alternative coordination point that the
 players prefer. Thus, while Prisoners' Dilemma and the failure of co-
 operation is not always the proper metaphor for international relations,
 neither is iterated Prisoners' Dilemma and success in cooperation the
 proper metaphor. Individual issues need to be modeled separately to
 understand the impact of iteration.33
 It is interesting to reflect upon the Prisoners' Dilemma supergame as
 a "dynamic" game. Since it involves choosing a single strategy for playing
 the game through time (e.g., play Tit-for-Tat or play Always Defect),
 it has the formal properties of a static game. It is dynamic only in the
 sense that strategies are consciously directed toward the problem of how
 to play in an iterated series of static games. Through this, it provides a
 systematic analysis of shifts within strategies during a sequence of it-
 erated games (for example, a shift from "cooperate" to "not cooperate"
 within a Tit-for-Tat strategy). This interpretation of the supergame
 (plus the fact that it may involve a transformation of the static game as
 discussed above) gives it dynamic qualities.34
 The greater power of the supergame requires stronger assumptions
 that states compare current benefits (for instance, from not cooperating
 on the current play) with future benefits (for instance, maintaining
 cooperation through time). Such comparisons necessarily involve interval-
 level payoffs and more information about preferences (intensities as well
 as ordering) than do ordinal payoffs. Also, because payoffs from indi-
 vidual iterations are received at different points in time, states must
 compare them through "discount rates" showing their time preference
 for immediate versus future benefits. These discount rates depend on
 domestic circumstances, the situation of the state in the international
 33The coordination aspects of the two-person Prisoners' Dilemma supergame can be seen
 in the matrix of supergame strategies in Taylor (fn. 32), 39. For a discussion of the differences
 between iterated Prisoners' Dilemma and iterated Coordination, see Duncan Snidal, "Co-
 ordination Versus Prisoners' Dilemma: Implications for International Cooperation and
 Regimes," American Political Science Review (forthcoming, December i985).
 34 A further dynamic adjustment process in terms of the evolution of strategies, whereby
 more successful strategies in one period are more likely (for reasons of survival, imitation,
 or learning) to occur in subsequent periods, is added by Axelrod (fn. i6). R. Harrison
 Wagner, "Theory of Games and International Cooperation," American Political Science
 Review 77 (June i983), 330-46, provides a useful critique of the attempt to embody dynamic
 assumptions in a single 2 X 2 game through the use of sequential games that deny "players
 the opportunity to cheat (by assuming that they will cooperate condititonally) .. ." (pp. 332-
 33). However, he commits a similar error in assuming conditional behavior within the
 extensive game (p. 344). Iterated game analysis keeps the decision period much cleaner and
 less subject to artificial insertion of "conditional" cooperation that is based, in effect, on the
 ability either to predict the future or to recover from an adversary's behavior before payoffs
 accrue.
This content downloaded from 175.45.185.0 on Wed, 22 Jun 2016 04:35:32 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Sayfa 28 ---
GAME THEORY 51
 system, and uncertainty about continuation of game iteration into the
 future.35
 One important factor is the number of iterations in a game. The
 longer an issue is expected to persist, the greater the impact that future
 play will have on current choices. Similarly, the more quickly states can
 adjust their policies, the shorter the time frame of any single game, and
 hence the more iterations in any fixed period of time. This suggests that
 states may promote cooperation (in Prisoners' Dilemma) by improving
 verification in arms control, or by dividing negotiations into larger num-
 bers of smaller sequential steps. These policies will be enhanced by
 perceptions of other states as reliable partners for future cooperation,
 but diminished by incentives to take a "final move" and sacrifice future
 collaboration for immediate advantage.
 In addition to providing an insight into incentives to cooperate, it-
 erated game analysis raises questions of how states adjust to new equi-
 librium outcomes. Axelrod's work explores the evolution of cooperation
 through the natural superiority of certain strategies, especially Tit-for-
 Tat, in iterated games. However, while the evolutionary model is in-
 sightful for understanding the emergence of cooperation, evolutionary
 theory is misleading in its specification of the mechanism of adjustment.
 This is because the international system has neither the selective elim-
 ination (states are rarely eliminated even in war) nor the random varia-
 tion that evolutionary theory requires. Instead, there is rational adjust-
 ment through learning and planning of a sort that is better captured by
 game theory. Even though its model of behavior is identical (for example,
 in showing the efficacy of Tit-for-Tat), rational adaptation allows for a
 more compelling and fruitful theoretical interpretation of international
 politics and cooperation than does evolutionary theory.36
 Interpretation of dynamic games in terms of strategic rationality di-
 rects research to the incentives underlying the emergence of international
 regimes that facilitate cooperation. Interactions are understood in terms
 of the deliberate behavior of states trying to improve their welfare
 35The formal results for cooperation through time require either that the game continue
 forever or that there be uncertainty about its termination date. Luce and Raiffa (fn. 4)
 show that cooperation will not be rational if the termination date is known. Russell Hardin
 argues in Collective Action (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, i982) that since this
 is implausible, future play will provide incentives to cooperate.
 36 This is a case where the same model is a model for two different theories (e.g.,
 evolutionary and rational). Axelrod's discussion (fn. i6) recognizes the alternative interpre-
 tation of his model in terms of learning and adaptation, especially in his chapter on co-
 operation in trench warfare. Nowhere does he provide a vulgar evolutionary view of politics.
 Nevertheless, it is important to emphasize the very different interpretations of his model
 of iterated play under rational as opposed to evolutionary theory. See Elster (fn. i9), chap.
 i, and Keohane (fn. I4).
This content downloaded from 175.45.185.0 on Wed, 22 Jun 2016 04:35:32 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Sayfa 29 ---
52 WORLD POLITICS
 through cooperation. Acceptance of the rules and norms of regimes is
 interpreted in terms of maximizing behavior: regimes are effective and
 persist only as long as states find it in their interest to maintain them.
 This rational adjustment mechanism explains cooperative behavior even
 when there is no threat of elimination and when the environment of
 international politics is changing too rapidly for evolutionary adjustment
 to ensure successful adaptation. It also explains why cooperation might
 emerge on global issues where all nations are affected equally, so that
 evolutionary selection among them according to their behavior is im-
 possible. At the very least, we should hope that adjustment to cooperation
 will be rational in a world of nuclear weapons.
 D. A MULTILATERAL WORLD: N-PERSON GAMES
 Game models with more than two actors are important since many
 international issues involve larger numbers of states (for instance, five
 actors in the classic European balance of power, many participants in
 the Law of the Sea, and the "Groups" of five, ten, seventy-seven, etc.,
 in contemporary economic regimes). A consideration of N-person game-
 theory models suggests how such extensions can be helpful for some
 problems, but are of only limited usefulness for others.37
 N-person games are complicated and provide few simple "answers,"
 but a number of interrelated assumptions can simplify the analysis of
 specific situations. The first simplification pertains when the number of
 states is large, so that no state has a substantial impact on any other state.
 Each can assume that its actions are unnoticed and pursue its interests
 on the assumption that others will not react. This reduces the problem
 to narrow rationality-equivalent to the one-player "game against na-
 ture"-and poses no problems of strategic complexity. That is not to
 say that such situations are without interest or are nonproblematic:
 collective-action problems can lead to collectively suboptimal outcomes.
 37 When should a situation be treated as an N-person game? In some cases the answer
 is obvious because it is technically impossible for the actions of many states to be insulated
 from one another. For example, in conservation of fish stocks in a "commons," all states
 fishing that commons will be relevant. The "N-ness" of the problem will depend on the
 exact nature of the commons. If fish species are nonmigratory and the commons is territorially
 divided, then only territorial states (perhaps as few as one) need be involved. But if species
 are migratory and/or the commons is not divided, then any state that fishes those species
 may be a relevant actor. This determination may be complicated if states act strategically
 and misrepresent the extent of their interest in the issue, or if the number of participants
 itself is not exogenous to the regime. For example, in the construction of economic regimes
 (e.g., trading blocs), deciding the scope of membership may hinge on the expected impact
 on the regime. An overview of the technical game theory material is available in Anatol
 Rapoport, N-Person Game Theory (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, I970) and in
 Shubik (fn. 4).
This content downloaded from 175.45.185.0 on Wed, 22 Jun 2016 04:35:32 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Sayfa 30 ---
GAME THEORY 53
 The large-number assumption, however, is not always fruitful for in-
 ternational politics because issues often involve intermediate numbers
 of states with the capacity for monitoring and reacting to each others'
 actions-especially if there is the possibility of discrimination as discussed
 below.
 A related simplification is the assumption of symmetry. This pertains
 when states face similar opportunities, have similar interests, and are of
 approximately equal impact in an issue area. In such cases, the relation
 of each state to every other is roughly the same; multilateral relations
 can be understood in terms of the strategic relation of any one state to
 all of the others. Schelling's and Hardin's analyses of "k-groups," and
 many problems of public-good provision are examples.38 These sym-
 metrical models can sometimes even be modified to incorporate certain
 asymmetries within them (for instance, the introduction of different
 distributions of interest into a symmetric problem of public-good pro-
 vision).39
 A final simplification concerns the ability of states to discriminate their
 actions with respect to other states. For example, states differentiate their
 tariff schedules (e.g., common markets or the Generalized System of
 Preferences) and use military force to defend allies while threatening
 enemies. To be effective, discrimination must be linked to strategy
 choices of other states so that it can be made contingent on their behavior.
 In this respect, perfect discrimination is the opposite situation from that
 of large numbers. When discrimination is perfect, each state can adopt
 a separate policy toward every other state, and the N-person game can
 be analyzed as a set of linked two-person games. Axelrod's analysis of
 the evolution of cooperation relies on this assumption since actors are
 assumed to be capable of cooperating with some actors while not co-
 operating with others. By using the discrimination assumption, he de-
 rives a compelling account of the emergence of cooperation among "N"
 actors while relying largely on two-actor game theory.40
 Discrimination is not always a reasonable assumption. It may be
 difficult on technical grounds having to do with the nature of the issue
 or the capacities of states. For example, problems in the provision of
 38 Hardin (fn. 35); Thomas Schelling, Micromotives and Macrobehavior (New York: Norton,
 1978).
 39 Snidal (fn. 3).
 40 Axelrod's analysis has every actor playing the same strategy (e.g., Tit-for-Tat) against
 every other actor; but that may mean behaving differently vis-A-vis different states on any
 particular move (according to how they behaved on the previous turn). However, the linked
 nature of the 2 X 2 games is central to his analysis since the evolutionary survival of actors
 depends on comparisons of how each fares (on average) against all the others. Axelrod (fn.
 i6), chap. 3.
This content downloaded from 175.45.185.0 on Wed, 22 Jun 2016 04:35:32 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Sayfa 31 ---
54 WORLD POLITICS
 international public goods arise precisely because states cannot isolate
 their actions toward one state from those toward another (e.g., restraint
 in the size of fishing catches from international waters). Even if feasible,
 discrimination may be hard to enforce. Thus, discriminatory trading
 arrangements are susceptible to evasion through transshipping, and it
 is usually difficult to threaten one state militarily without making others
 nervous. Even where discrimination is technically feasible, political ar-
 rangements such as the norm of nondiscrimination in trade may make
 it impossible. In other cases, political institutions such as alliances or
 trading communities are designed to facilitate discrimination. When it
 pertains, discrimination allows analysis of N-person games in terms of
 simpler models.
 Many N-person situations will not fall under the related assumptions
 of large numbers, symmetry, or discrimination.4' What can be done to
 analyze these important situations in international politics? First, there
 are a few general conclusions from N-person game theory that can
 increase our understanding of international politics. Although N-person
 game theory often disappoints by providing a multiplicity of solutions
 instead of a single one to any particular game, this multiplicity itself
 provides insight into the nature of strategic problems.42 Differences
 among solutions highlight important aspects of the strategic structure
 for understanding politics among nations. For example, conflict between
 the criteria of efficiency (Pareto-optimality) and of maximizing national
 self-interest highlights the inherent conflict between collective and in-
 dividual rationality in the problem of collective action. Similarly, analysis
 of the existence of the "core" solution may indicate problems for co-
 operation that are likely to arise whenever there are multiple strong and
 overlapping subcoalitions in a population of states.
 Second, more specific applications of N-person game results may be
 possible through modeling specific international issues. The oligopoly
 literature has already provided inspiration for international political
 research; its rich body of theoretical and empirical knowledge undoubt-
 edly contains further insights. However, this knowledge should not be
 incorporated by analogy (as in Waltz), but by its example of how to
 4- The hardest issues to analyze will be nonsymmetric ones involving intermediate numbers
 of states with limited capacities to discriminate their actions. That category, of course, covers
 much of the ground in international politics.
 42 This problem is not unique to N-person games; it also crops up in two-person games
 (e.g., in the differences between outcomes predicted between maximax versus minimax
 strategies). While solution concepts sometimes converge in N-person games, they often do
 not, and the complexity of the strategic structure makes it harder to compare or choose
 among them than in two-person games. See Rapoport (fn. 37), and Shubik (fn. 4).
This content downloaded from 175.45.185.0 on Wed, 22 Jun 2016 04:35:32 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Sayfa 32 ---
GAME THEORY 55
 construct models and theory. Tailoring models directly to international
 politics will capture the richness of international politics better than even
 the most heroic attempts to patch up the analogy between firms and
 states. For example, the literature on balance of power contains tre-
 mendous insights on strategic interrelations among different numbers
 of states-but much of this work remains inchoate, expressed in terms
 of descriptive rules of behavior instead of a more formally articulated
 model in terms of the goals of states. Other work that takes the important
 step of attempting to model the goals of states directly fails to take into
 account the strategic interrelationship among them.43 Integration of these
 two approaches holds great potential for a more complete theoretical
 understanding of political-military relations.
 Nevertheless, there are few easy results from N-person game theory,
 and it is far from a panacea. In general, the theory will be inadequate
 if our goal is to recreate specific situations in our models. This will be
 especially true for the more complicated N-person dynamic games that
 have not been discussed here. But insofar as our goal is understanding
 general problems of international cooperation as the number of states
 increases, the simplifying assumptions and general conclusions of game
 theory will be valuable.
 IV. CONCLUSION:
 GAME THEORY AND INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION
 The ultimate criterion for evaluating game theory is whether it ex-
 pands our understanding of substantive issues such as those analyzed in
 the case studies of international cooperation in the essays that follow.
 The theory is very general and does not provide specific predictions
 without additional, auxiliary assumptions. Its usefulness therefore de-
 pends on whether it poses interesting questions about the politics of
 international issues and suggests fruitful directions for empirical elab-
 oration, rather than on whether it provides correct answers in any narrow
 sense. The case studies provide a test of the explanatory power of this
 empirical elaboration of the theory. Of course, the test is not of specific
 predictions of behavior in particular circumstances theories don't make
 those sorts of predictions-but of general explanations of behavior in
 issue areas. If explanations in particular case studies are not empirically
 compelling, it may be either because the general theoretical approach is
 43Two relevant works to build upon are Morton Kaplan, System and Process in International
 Politics (New York: Wiley, I957) and Bueno de Mesquita (fn. i).
This content downloaded from 175.45.185.0 on Wed, 22 Jun 2016 04:35:32 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Sayfa 33 ---
56 WORLD POLITICS
 deficient or because there are problems in the particular empirical elab-
 oration. Thus the test of the theory is ultimately whether the case studies,
 taken as a whole, demonstrate that a game theory approach provides
 new insights to international politics.
 Game theory as a theory of international politics has a richness that
 makes it amenable to such broad empirical application. The theoretical
 constructs are flexible and can be adapted to different substantive prob-
 lems. The tremendous variety of models contained within the theory
 allows for a systematic incorporation of the most salient contextual
 features pertaining to different issues. In the simple 2 x 2 game, this is
 reflected in the different game structures (for example, Prisoners' Di-
 lemma versus Chicken) that can be distinguished through the careful
 modeling of payoffs and of the international environment. Extensions
 to N-person and dynamic games allow other important dimensions to
 be addressed. Diverse international issues can be handled within a com-
 mon game-theoretical framework which does not suppress that diversity,
 but builds upon it to explore the implications of various contextual
 differences. In this way, the theory emphasizes the importance of context
 without becoming lost in it.
 This versatility of game models can be a vice rather than a virtue
 when used improperly. Metaphorical and analogical approaches are val-
 uable for descriptive and expository purposes, but are too flexible to
 provide falsifiable propositions. The same is true of models applied in
 a post hoc fashion. Only models embedded in theoretical arguments, and
 carefully tailored to the relevant empirical correspondences (e.g., for
 payoffs or number of iterations) in an issue area will provide interesting
 and (potentially) falsifiable empirical claims. Moreover, the deductive
 power of these models will help to keep inferences separate from as-
 sumptions even as they produce new predictions.
 It is as a theory of state behavior that games hold their greatest promise
 for understanding international relations. As a general theory, game
 theory brings the contending "interdependence" and "Realist" positions
 together in a common framework. While limited by the correctness of
 its assumptions about strategic rationality, game theory is sufficiently
 flexibile to incorporate many differing assumptions about world politics
 and individual issues. Self-interested behavior of states is not prejudged
 as necessarily leading to either cooperation or conflict. Nor is the emer-
 gence of stronger international institutions, formal or informal, seen as
 either inevitable or utopian. Instead, these conditions are simply among
 the diverse possibilities that might be predicted depending on the con-
This content downloaded from 175.45.185.0 on Wed, 22 Jun 2016 04:35:32 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

--- Sayfa 34 ---
GAME THEORY 57
 crete circumstances of different issues. The theory pushes us to fill in
 the appropriate empirical correspondence for investigating such possi-
 bilities. In this way, a "game theory of international politics" will help
 us to elucidate and renovate the broader metaphors of "Hobbesian an-
 archy" and "international organization" that have divided and obscured
 our understanding of international politics.
This content downloaded from 175.45.185.0 on Wed, 22 Jun 2016 04:35:32 UTC
All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms