--- Sayfa 2 ---
GAME THEORY
FOURTH EDITION

--- Sayfa 3 ---
GAME THEORY
FOURTH EDITION
BY
GUILLERMO OWEN
Department of Mathematics
Naval Postgraduate School
Monterey, California

United Kingdom – North America – Japan India – Malaysia – China

--- Sayfa 4 ---
Emerald Group Publishing Limited
Howard House, Wagon Lane, Bingley BD16 1WA, UK
First edition 2013
Second edition 1982
Third edition 1995
Fourth edition 2013
Copyright © 2013 Emerald Group Publishing Limited
Reprints and permission service
Contact: permissions@emeraldinsight.com
No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, transmitted in any
form or by any means electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise without
either the prior written permission of the publisher or a licence permitting restricted copying
issued in the UK by The Copyright Licensing Agency and in the USA by The Copyright
Clearance Center. Any opinions expressed in the chapters are those of the authors. Whilst
Emerald makes every effort to ensure the quality and accuracy of its content, Emerald
makes no representation implied or otherwise, as to the chapters’ suitability and application
and disclaims any warranties, express or implied, to their use.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN: 978-1-78190-507-4

--- Sayfa 5 ---
Contents
Preface
1. Definition of a Game
1.1. General Notions
1.2. Games in Extensive Form
1.3. Strategies: The Normal Form
1.4. Equilibrium n-Tuples
1.5. The Monty Hall Game
Problems
2. Two-Person Zero-Sum Games
2.1. Zero-Sum Games
2.2. The Normal Form
2.3. Mixed Strategies
2.4. The Minimax Theorem
2.5. Computation of Optimal Strategies
2.6. Symmetric Games
Problems
3. Linear Programming
3.1. Introduction
3.2. Duality
3.3. Solution of Linear Programs
3.4. The Simplex Algorithm
3.5. The Simplex Algorithm (Continued)
3.6. Examples
3.7. Constrained Games

--- Sayfa 6 ---
Problems
4. Infinite Games
4.1. Games with Countably many Strategies
4.2. Games on the Square
4.3. Games with Continuous Kernel
4.4. Concave–Convex Games
4.5. Games of Timing
4.6. Higher Dimensions
Problems
5. Multistage Games
5.1. Behavioral Strategies
5.2. Games of Exhaustion
5.3. Stochastic Games
5.4. Recursive Games
5.5. Differential Games
Problems
6. Games with Incomplete Information
6.1. Introduction: The One-Stage Signaling Model
6.2. The Multistage Model
Problems
7. Utility Theory
7.1. Ordinal Utility
7.2. Lotteries
7.3. Commodity Bundles
7.4. Absolute Utility
Problems
8. Two-Person General-Sum Games
8.1. Bimatrix Games (Noncooperative)
8.2. Perfect Equilibrium Points

--- Sayfa 7 ---
8.3. Evolutionary Stable Systems
8.4. Correlated Equilibria
Problems
9. Two-Person Cooperative Games
9.1. The Bargaining Problem
9.2. Threats
9.3. Time-Restricted Bargaining
Problems
10. n-Person Games
10.1. Noncooperative Games
10.2. Cooperative Games
10.3. Domination, Strategic Equivalence, and Normalization
10.4. The Core
10.5. Balanced Collections
Problems
11. Stable Sets
11.1. Introduction
11.2. Properties of Stable Sets
11.3. Edgeworth Market Games—An Example
11.4. A Game with No Solutions
Problems
12. Indices of Power
12.1. The Shapley Value
12.2. Multilinear Extensions
12.3. The Banzhaf–Coleman Index of Power
12.4. The Presidential Election “Game”
12.5. The Coalition Value
Problems
13. The Bargaining Set and Related Concepts

--- Sayfa 8 ---
13.1. The Bargaining Set
13.2. The Kernel
13.3. The Nucleolus
13.4. The Airport Game
Problems
14. Nonatomic Games
14.1. Games with a Continuum of Players
14.2. Values of Nonatomic Games
14.3. Internal Telephone Billing Rates — An Example
Problems
15. Games without Side Payments
15.1. Introduction
15.2. The Core
15.3. Market Games
15.4. Approaches to the Value
15.5. The Bargaining Sets
Problems
16. Spatial Games
16.1. The Core and Near-Core Solution Concepts
16.2. The Modified Power Index
Problems
17. Other Applications
17.1. Introduction
17.2. Single-Item Auctions
17.3. Mechanisms
17.4. Public Goods
17.5. Two-sided Matching
Problems
Appendix

--- Sayfa 9 ---
A.1. Convexity
A.2. Fixed Point Theorems
Bibliography
Index

--- Sayfa 10 ---
Preface
Game theory once again proves to be a dynamic field. In less than
100 years since the name was coined, it has reached the status of a
major branch of both mathematics and economics. It has also
proved quite useful in several of the social sciences. Even biology
and finance have been touched (and, I hope, improved) by game-
theoretic analysis. The field continues to expand, and so a book that
I last published in 1995 requires some modification. I am happy that
Emerald Publishers is giving me a chance to bring out a new edition.
It would be very difficult to include all the new developments in
the field. I have therefore merely added a chapter explaining some of
the most important advances in game theory. In particular, I have
tried to describe the developments that have been central to several
of the Nobel Memorial Prizes in Economics.
I also wish to thank people who have helped me, by vigorous and
stimulating discussion, to improve this book. These include Francesc
Carreras, Hélène Ferrer, Gianfranco Gambarelli, Maurice Koster,
Ines Lindner, Conrado Manuel, Gordon McCormick, Martha Saboyá,
and Juan Tejada.
Finally, I am sad to mention the deaths of some members of the
game theory community. Michael Maschler, my mentor and one of
my best friends, was instrumental in the development of the
bargaining set and related concepts. John Harsanyi, also a good
friend, was one of the first to study games with incomplete
information. I will always miss them both.
Guillermo Owen

--- Sayfa 11 ---
Chapter 1
Definition of a Game
1.1. General Notions
The general idea of a game is that with which we are familiar in the
context of parlor games. Starting from a given point, there is a
sequence of personal moves, at each of which one of the players
chooses from among several possibilities; interspersed among these
there may also be chance, or random, moves such as throwing a die
or shuffling a deck of cards.
Examples of this type of game are chess, in which there are no
chance moves (except for the determination of who shall play first),
bridge, in which chance plays a much greater part, but in which skill is
still important, and roulette, which is entirely a game of chance in
which skill plays no part.
The examples of bridge and chess help to point out another
important element of a game. In fact, in a chess game each player
knows every move that has been made so far, while in bridge a
player’s knowledge is usually very imperfect. Thus, in some games, a
player is unable to determine which of several possible moves has
actually been made, either by an opposing player, or by chance. The
practical result of this is that, when a player makes a move, he does
not know the exact position of the game, and must make his move
remembering that there are several possible actual positions.
Finally, at the end of a game, there is normally some payoff to the
players (in the form of money, prestige, or satisfaction) which
depends on the progress of the game. We may think of this as a
function which assigns a payoff to each “terminal position” of the
game.

--- Sayfa 12 ---
1.2. Games in Extensive Form
In our general idea of a game, therefore, three elements enter: (1)
alternation of moves, which can be either personal or random
(chance) moves, (2) a possible lack of knowledge, and (3) a payoff
function.
We define, first, a topological tree or game tree as a finite
collection of nodes, called vertices, connected by lines, called arcs,
so as to form a connected figure which includes no simple closed
curves. Thus it follows that, given any two vertices A and B, there is a
unique sequence of arcs and nodes joining A to B.
From this we obtain
1.2.1 Definition. Let Γ be a topological tree with a distinguished
vertex A. We say that a vertex C follows the vertex B if the sequence
of arcs joining A to C passes through B. We say C follows B
immediately if C follows B and, moreover, there is an arc joining B to
C. A vertex X is said to be terminal if no vertex follows .
1.2.2 Definition. By an n-person game in extensive form is meant
 a topological tree  with a distinguished vertex  called the starting
point of ;
 a function, called the payoff function, which assigns an n-vector to
each terminal vertex of ;
 a partition of the nonterminal vertices of  into
 sets
, called the player sets;
 a probability distribution, defined at each vertex of
, among the
immediate followers of this vertex;
 for each
 a subpartition of
 into subsets
, called
information sets, such that two vertices in the same information
set have the same number of immediate followers and no vertex
can follow another vertex in the same information set;
 for each information set
, an index set
, together with a
mapping of the set  onto the set of immediate followers of each
vertex of
.

--- Sayfa 13 ---
The elements of a game are seen here: condition  states that
there is a starting point;  gives a payoff function;  divides the moves
into chance moves
 and personal moves which correspond to the
 players
;
 defines a randomization scheme at each
chance move;  divides a player’s moves into “information sets”: he
knows in which information set he is, but not which vertex of the
information set.
1.2.3 Example. In the game of matching pennies (Figure 1.1), player
I chooses “heads” (H) or “tails” (T). Player II, not knowing player I’s
choice, also chooses “heads” or “tails.” If the two choose alike, then
player II wins a cent from player I; otherwise, player I wins a cent from
II. In the game tree shown, the vectors at the terminal vertices
represent the payoff function; the numbers near the other vertices
denote the player to whom the move corresponds. The shaded area
encloses moves in the same information set.
1.2.4 Example. The game of pure strategy, or GOPS, is played by
giving each of two players an entire suit of cards (13 cards), A third
suit is shuffled, and the cards of this third suit are then turned up, one
by one. Each time one has been turned up, each player turns up one
of his cards at will: the one who turns up the larger card “wins” the
third card. (If both turn up a card of the same denomination, neither
wins.) This continues until the three suits are exhausted. At this point,
each player totals the number of spots on the cards he has “won”; the
“score” is the difference between what the two players have.

--- Sayfa 14 ---
Figure 1.1.
With 13-card suits, this game’s tree is too large to give here;
however, we can give part of the tree of an analogous game using
three-card suits (Figure 1.2).
Figure 1.2.
There is a single chance move, the shuffle, which orders the cards
in one of the six possible ways, each having a probability of . After
this the moves correspond to the two players, I and II, until the game
ends. We have drawn parts of the game tree, including the initial
point, several branches, and four of the terminal points. The
remaining branches are similar to those we have already drawn. With
respect to information, we have

--- Sayfa 15 ---
1.2.5 Definition. Player i is said to have perfect information in  if his
information sets
 each consist of one element. The game  is said
to have perfect information if each player has perfect information in .
For example, chess and checkers have perfect information,
whereas bridge and poker do not.
1.3. Strategies: The Normal Form
The intuitive meaning of a strategy is that of a plan for playing a
game. We may think of a player as saying to himself, “If such and
such happens, I’ll act in such and such a manner.” Thus, we have
1.3.1 Definition. By a strategy for player i is meant a function which
assigns, to each of player i’s information sets
, one of the arcs
which follows a representative vertex of
.
The set of all strategies for player  will be called
.
In general, we are accustomed to the idea that a player decides
his move in a game only a few moves, at best, in advance, and quite
usually only at the moment he must make it. In practice this must be
so, for in a game such as chess or poker the number of possible
moves is so great that no one can plan for every contingency very
much in advance. From a purely theoretic point of view, however, we
can overlook this practical limitation, and assume that, even before
the game starts, each player has already decided what he will do in
each case. Thus, we are actually assuming that each player chooses
a strategy before the game starts.
Since this is so, it only remains to carry out the chance moves.
Moreover, the chance moves may all be combined into a single
move, whose result, together with the strategies chosen, determines
the outcome of the game.
Actually, what we are interested in, and what the players are
interested in, is deciding which one of the strategies is best, from the
point of view of maximizing the player’s share of the payoff (i.e.,
player  will want to maximize the
 component of the payoff
function). As, however, no one knows, except probabilistically, what
the results of the chance moves will be, it becomes natural to take the

--- Sayfa 16 ---
mathematical expectation of the payoff function, given that the
players are using a given n-tuple of strategies. Therefore, we shall
use the notation
to represent the mathematical expectation of the payoff function,
given that player  is using strategy
.
From this, it becomes possible to tabulate the function
for all possible values of
, either in the form of a relation, or by
setting up an n-
 array of n-
. (In case
, this reduces
to a matrix whose elements are pairs of real numbers.) This n-
 array is called the normal form of the game .
1.3.2 Example. In the game of matching pennies (see Example
1.2.3) each player has the two strategies, “heads” and “tails.” The
normal form of this game is the matrix
(where each row represents a strategy of player I, and each column a
strategy of player II).
1.3.3 Example. Consider the following game: An integer  is chosen
at random, with possible values 1, 2, 3, 4 (each with probability ).
Player I, without knowing the results of this move, chooses an integer
. Player II, knowing neither the result of the chance move nor I’s
choice, chooses an integer . The payoff is
i.e., the point is to guess close to .
In this game each player has four strategies: 1, 2, 3, 4, since other
integers are of little use. If, for instance, I chooses 1 and II chooses 3,

--- Sayfa 17 ---
then the payoff will be
 with probability
 with probability ,
and
 with probability
. The expected payoff, then, is
. Calculating all the values of
, we obtain
1.3.4 Definition. A game is said to be finite if its tree contains only
finitely many vertices.
Under this definition, most of our parlor games are finite. Chess,
for instance, is finite, thanks to the laws which end the game after
certain sequences of moves.
It should be seen that, in a finite game, each player has only a
finite number of strategies.
1.4. Equilibrium n-Tuples
1.4.1 Definition. Given a game
, a strategy n-
 is
said to be in equilibrium, or an equilibrium n-
, if and only if, for any
 and
.
In other words, an n-tuple of strategies is said to be in equilibrium
if no player has any positive reason for changing his strategy,
assuming that none of the other players is going to change strategies.
If, in such a case, each player knows what the others will play, then
he has reason to play the strategy which will give such an equilibrium
n-tuple, and the game becomes very stable.
1.4.2 Example. In the game with normal form

--- Sayfa 18 ---
both
 and
 are equilibrium pairs.
Unfortunately, not every game has equilibrium n-tuples. As an
example, the game of matching pennies (Example 1.3.2) has no
equilibrium pairs.
In general, if a game has no equilibrium n-tuples, we usually see
the several players trying to outguess each other, keeping their
strategies secret. This suggests (and it is indeed true) that in games
of perfect information, equilibrium n-
 exist.
To prove this statement, we must study the question of
decomposition of a game.
A game  will be said to decompose at a vertex  if there are no
information sets which include vertices from both of (a)
, and all its
followers, and (b) the remainder of the game tree. In this case, we
can distinguish the subgame,
, consisting of , and all its followers,
and the quotient game,
, which consists of all the remaining
vertices, plus
. For the quotient game,
 will be a terminal vertex;
the payoff here can be considered to be
: i.e., the payoff at this
vertex is a play of the subgame
.
Now, as we have seen, a strategy for  is a function whose domain
consists of the information sets of player . If we decompose a game
at X, then we can also decompose the strategy  into two parts:
,
obtained by restricting  to information sets in
, and
, obtained
by restricting  to
. Conversely, a strategy for
 and a strategy for
 can be combined in the obvious way to yield a strategy for the
larger game .
1.4.3 Theorem. Let
 decompose at
. For
, assign to
(considered as a terminal vertex of
) the payoff
In this case

--- Sayfa 19 ---
The proof of this theorem is clear and can be left as an exercise to
the reader. Briefly, it is only necessary to verify that, for each possible
outcome of the chance moves, the same terminal vertex is eventually
reached either in the original or in the decomposed game.
With this, we can prove.
1.4.4 Theorem. Let  decompose at
 , and let
 be such that
(a)
 is an equilibrium n-
 for
, and (b)
 is an equilibrium n-
 for
, with the payoff
 assigned to the terminal vector . Then
 is an
equilibrium n-
 for .
Proof. Let
. Because
 is an equilibrium n-
 for
, it follows that
On the other hand, by (b) we know that, if we assign the payoff
 to the vector , then
Now, the payoff (for a given set of strategies) is a weighted
average of the payoffs at some of the terminal vertices of a tree.
Hence, if the payoff to player  at a given terminal vertex ( , in this
case) is decreased, his expected payoff, for any choice of strategies,
will either remain equal or be decreased. Thus, applying Theorem
1.4.3, we find that
and so
 is an equilibrium n-
.
This is all we need to prove.
1.4.5 Theorem. Every finite n-
 game with perfect information
has an equilibrium n-
 of strategies.

--- Sayfa 20 ---
Proof. We shall define the length of a game as the largest possible
number of edges that can be passed before reaching a terminal
vertex, i.e., the largest possible number of moves before the game
ends. Clearly a finite game has finite length. The proof is by induction
on the length of the game.
If  has length 0, the theorem is trivially true. If it has length 1,
then at most one player gets to move, and he obtains equilibrium by
choosing his best alternative. If  has length , then it decomposes
(having perfect information) into several subgames of length less than
. By the induction hypothesis, each of these subgames has an
equilibrium n-
; by Theorem 1.4.4 these form an equilibrium n-
for .
1.5. The Monty Hall Game
We conclude this chapter with an example which, in the past, raised
some controversy. Based on a well-known television show (Let’s
Make a Deal), the problem caused serious discussion among
mathematicians and others who treated it as a problem in probability
theory. (See items 3, 6, 8 in the bibliography for background on the
problem and the controversy.) We will, rather, treat it as a game.
In this game, a Contestant (player I) is shown three screens.
Behind one of these screens is an expensive, brand-new automobile.
There is a goat behind each of the other two screens. It is understood
that each screen has probability  of being the “good” screen (i.e., the
one with the automobile).
Once chance has chosen the good screen, player I, in ignorance
of the results of the chance move, chooses one of the screens (call
this screen a). At this point Monty Hall, the host of the show (player
II), opens another one of the screens (call this screen b), to reveal a
goat. In doing this, Monty knows the outcome of the chance move.
Player I may then insist on screen a, or opt to switch to screen c.
In either case, he will receive whatever is behind his final choice (a or
c). It is assumed that the automobile is much more valuable than the
goat. What is the player’s best strategy?

--- Sayfa 21 ---
If we treat this as a game, the first thing we notice is that the game
is not well defined. In fact, we are told how the Contestant may act,
but we are told neither how Monty may act, nor what Monty’s payoff
will be. There would seem three possibilities.
Case 1. Monty the Dummy
Monty has no latitude in his actions. If the Contestant’s choice, screen
a, is the good screen, then Monty must open either b or c, each with
probability . If screen a is one of the two bad screens, then Monty
must open the other bad screen (whether it be b or c).
Now, Contestant has two strategies: Insist (on his original choice)
and Switch (from his original choice, a, to the remaining unopened
screen, c).
Consider his first strategy, Insist. In this case, Contestant will win if
(and only if) a was indeed the good screen. As mentioned above, this
has probability .
Consider next the strategy Switch. Then, if a is the good screen,
Contestant will lose. If, on the other hand, a is a bad screen, then
Monty will open the other bad screen. Contestant, by switching to the
remaining screen, will win. This has probability .
Thus, in this case, Contestant will do better by Switching.
Case 2. The Friendly Monty
Monty has some freedom. After player I has chosen screen a, Monty
may (but need not) open a bad screen–either b or c. If Monty does
not open a screen, then Contestant will be left with his original choice,
a. Moreover, Monty wants Contestant to win.
In this case, Contestant, with Monty’s help, is sure to win. In fact, if
the original choice, a, is good, then Monty will not open any screen,
and Contestant will have to open his choice, a. If, on the other hand,
a is a bad screen, then Monty will open the other bad screen.
Contestant, by switching, will win.
Thus, the strategy Switch will win with probability 1.
Case 3. The Unfriendly Monty

--- Sayfa 22 ---
Monty has some freedom. After player I has chosen screen a, Monty
may (but need not) open a bad screen–either b or c. If Monty does
not open a screen, then Contestant will be left with his original choice,
a. This time, however, Monty wants Contestant to lose.
In this case, Contestant, by Insisting, will win with probability .
Suppose, however, Contestant uses his other strategy, Switch. If a
is the good screen, then Monty’s best strategy is to open one of the
other screens–either b or c (both of which are bad). Contestant, by
switching to the other bad screen, will lose. If a is a bad screen, then
Monty’s best strategy is not to open any screen, and thus Contestant
will be left with his original choice. Thus Contestant will certainly lose.
In this case, then, Contestant will win with probability
 by
Insisting, and probability 0 by Switching.
So what, then, is the best strategy for Contestant? Clearly it
depends on the rules of the game, and also on Monty’s objective:
Contestant should Switch if Monty is a dummy, and also if Monty
wants him to win; he should Insist if Monty wants him to lose.
Unfortunately, Contestant is apparently not told the rules of the game,
and probably does not know what Monty wants. Perhaps Monty’s
sponsors want Contestant to win–it will be good publicity for their
products. Perhaps they want Contestant to lose–they have spent too
much money already on prizes.
Clearly Contestant needs more information. This is an example of
a game with incomplete information. We look at possible approaches
to these games in Chapter 6 of this book.
Problems
1. An infinite game, even with perfect information, need not have an
equilibrium n-
.
(a) Consider a two-person game in which the two players
alternate, and, at each move, each player chooses one of the
two digits 0 and 1. If the digit  is chosen at the th move, then
each play of the game corresponds to a number

--- Sayfa 23 ---
in the interval
. Then, player I wins one unit from player II if
, and loses one unit if
, where  is some subset of
.
(b) Each player has exactly
 strategies, which can therefore be
indexed
 respectively for
, where  is the smallest
ordinal preceded by at least
 ordinals.
(c) Let
 denote the play (or number ) obtained if the players
choose strategies  and , respectively. For each strategy  of
I, player II has
 strategies  which will give different values of
 (and similarly for each strategy  of II).
(d) A set  can be constructed (using the axiom of choice) such
that, for each
, there is a
 with
, but for each
there is a  with
.
2. Construct the normal form for the game whose tree is given in
Figure 1.3. The game starts at the vertex 0 (a random move); each
of three players has one information set containing two vertices,
with two alternatives (indexed
 and
,
 and
,
 and
,
respectively) at each vertex.

--- Sayfa 24 ---
Figure 1.3.
For exercises 3 and 4, below,

--- Sayfa 26 ---
(a) State how many strategies each player has.
(b) Give the normal form of the game.
(c) Give equilibrium points.

For exercises 5–7, below, the shaded areas should be taken to
represent information sets for the corresponding player.

--- Sayfa 28 ---
(a) State how many strategies each player has.
(b) Give the normal form of the game.

--- Sayfa 29 ---
Chapter 2
Two-Person Zero-Sum Games
2.1. Zero-Sum Games
2.1.1 Definition. A game Γ is said to be zero-sum if and only if, at
each terminal vertex, the payoff function
 satisfies
In general, a zero-sum game represents a closed system:
everything that someone wins must be lost by someone else. Most
parlor games are of the zero-sum type. Two-person zero-sum games
are sometimes called strictly competitive games.
Because of condition (2.1), the nth component of a payoff vector
is determined by the remaining
 components. In the case of a
two-person zero-sum game, we can simply give the first component
of the payoff vector; the second component is necessarily the
negative of the first. In this case, we call the first component simply
the payoff, and it is understood that the second player gives this
amount to the first player.
It will be seen that a two-person zero-sum game differs from
other games in that there is no reason for any negotiation between
the players: in fact, whoever wins, the other loses. The
meaningfulness of this will be seen from:
2.1.2 Theorem. In a two-person zero-sum game, let
 and
be two equilibrium pairs. Then

--- Sayfa 30 ---
Proof.
 is in equilibrium. Hence
On the other hand,
 is in equilibrium. Therefore
Thus
But, similarly
and these two sets of inequalities prove (2.2). Now, for any
and, for any
Thus
 is in equilibrium; similarly,
 is in equilibrium.
This theorem is not true for other games: in the game of Example
1.4.2, for instance,
 and
 are equilibrium pairs, but the
payoffs are different, and, moreover, neither
 nor
 is an
equilibrium pair.
2.2. The Normal Form

--- Sayfa 31 ---
As we have seen, the normal form of a finite zero-sum two-person
game reduces to a matrix, A, with as many rows as player I has
strategies and as many columns as player II has strategies. The
expected payoff, assuming I chooses his ith strategy and II chooses
his jth strategy, is the element
 in the ith row and jth column of the
matrix.
It will be clear that a strategy pair will be in equilibrium if, and only
if, the element
 corresponding to it is both the largest in its column
and the smallest in its row. Such an element, if it exists, is called a
saddle point (by analogy with the surface of a saddle, which curves
upward in one direction and downward in the other direction).
2.2.1 Example. The game matrix
has a saddle point in the second row and second column.
2.2.2 Example. The game matrix
has no saddle points.
Let us suppose that two players are actually engaged in a matrix
game. In choosing strategies, player I chooses, in effect, a row, i,
while player II chooses a column, j. The payoff will be the entry
.
As this is an amount which I receives from II, it is clear that player I
will be trying to maximize
, while II will be trying to minimize it.
Unfortunately, neither knows for certain what his opponent’s strategy
will be, and this knowledge is usually of importance in deciding what
strategies to use.
For instance, in the game of matching pennies (see Example
1.3.2), we may picture player I as thinking, “People usually choose
heads; hence II will expect me to choose heads and choose heads

--- Sayfa 32 ---
himself, and so I should choose tails. But perhaps II is reasoning
along the same line: he’ll expect me to choose tails, and so I’d better
choose heads. But perhaps that is II’s reasoning, so…” In this case,
player I could never reach a decision in which he could feel
confident, and the outcome would be uncertain.
Suppose, however, that we consider the game of Example 2.2.1
above. In this case, player I would probably decide to play either his
first or his second strategy, and we might hear him reasoning in this
manner: “I should use either my first or my second strategy, but if II
figures this, he will use his second strategy, so I had better use my
second strategy.” Even if II guesses I’s strategy, I still does well to
stick to it! Thus there is a tremendous difference between these two
games. In one, secrecy is important; in the other, there is no point to
it. The reason, of course, is that the second game has a saddle
point.
2.3. Mixed Strategies
The preceding analysis, though it tells us how to play matrix games
with saddle points, does not shed any light on a player’s best choice
for the vast majority of games, which contain no saddle points.
Let us suppose, now, that we are playing a game without saddle
points, such as
We cannot tell what will happen. However, let us suppose that our
opponent is not only unpredictable, but omniscient: he will guess
correctly whatever we decide. In this case, if we are player I, we will
certainly use our first strategy, with which we cannot win less than
two units, whereas with our other strategy we will win only one unit.
This certain win of at least two units is our “gain-floor” and we shall
denote it by
:

--- Sayfa 33 ---
If we were player II, we should choose, under the same
conditions, our second strategy, which would give us a “loss-ceiling”
of three units. This loss-ceiling will be denoted by
:
Thus, for matrix games, we have the idea of a gain-floor and a
loss-ceiling. It would be absurd to expect I’s gain-floor to exceed II’s
loss-ceiling. In fact, we can easily prove
The proof of this is elementary and may be left to the reader. If
equality holds in (2.5), we have a saddle point; if not, we have a
game without saddle points. For such a game, we are not certain
what will happen, but we can make one statement: player I should
not win less than ; player II should not lose more than
.
In a game without saddle points, if we allow the opponent to
know our strategy, the best we can hope for is the gain-floor
, or
the loss-ceiling
, depending on whether we are player I or II. If we
hope to do better, it must be by refusing to let our opponent know our
strategy.
This is difficult to do if we choose our strategy rationally, since
there is nothing to keep our opponent from reconstructing our
reasoning. We seem to be saying that we should choose our
strategy irrationally. But in that case what good is all our analysis?
The answer is that the strategy should be chosen at random —
hence irrationally — but the randomization scheme should be
chosen rationally. This is the idea behind mixed strategies.
2.3.1 Definition. A mixed strategy for a player is a probability
distribution on the set of his pure strategies.
In case the player has only a finite number, m, of pure strategies,
a mixed strategy reduces to an m-
,
, satisfying

--- Sayfa 34 ---
We shall use X to denote the set of all mixed strategies for player
I, and let Y represent the set of player II’s mixed strategies.
Let us suppose that players I and II are playing the matrix game
A. If I chooses the mixed strategy x, and II chooses y, then the
expected payoff will be
or, in matrix notation
As before, player I must fear that II will discover his choice of a
strategy. If this should happen, then II will certainly choose y so as to
minimize
; i.e., I’s expected gain-floor, assuming he uses x, will
be
Now,
 can be thought of as a weighted average of the expected
payoffs for I if he uses x against II’s pure strategies. Thus the
minimum will be attained by a pure strategy j:
(where
 is the jth column of the matrix A).
Hence player I should choose x so as to maximize v(x) i.e., so as
to obtain

--- Sayfa 35 ---
(One should prove that a maximum exists; however, since X is
compact and the function v(x) is continuous, there is no problem.)
Such an x is I’s maximin strategy.
Similarly, if II chooses y he will obtain the expected loss-ceiling
(where
 is the ith row of A) and he should choose y so as to obtain
Such a y is II’s minimax strategy.
Thus we obtain the two numbers  and
. These numbers are
called the values of the game to I and II, respectively.
2.4. The Minimax Theorem
It is easily proved that, for any function
 defined on any
Cartesian product
Hence we have
This is analogous to (2.5), and indeed, in this case as before, it is
only natural that I’s gain-floor cannot exceed II’s loss-ceiling. In the
previous case, however, we saw that equality only held in
exceptional cases. In this case, we shall actually prove
2.4.1 Theorem. (The Minimax Theorem)

--- Sayfa 36 ---
This theorem, the most important of game theory, has been
proved in many ways. Here we shall give the proof that was given by
von Neumann and Morgenstern. We start with two lemmas:
2.4.2 Lemma. (Theorem of the Supporting Hyperplane) Let B be a
closed convex set of points in n-
 Euclidean space, and let
 be a point not in B. Then there exist numbers
 such that
and
(Geometrically, this means that we can pass a hyperplane through x
such that B lies entirely “above” the hyperplane.)
Proof. Let z be the point in B whose distance from x is a minimum.
(Such a point exists because B is closed.) Now, let
Clearly, (2.16) holds. We must show (2.17) also holds. Now
and hence

--- Sayfa 37 ---
Therefore
Suppose now that there exists
 such that
Because B is convex, the line joining y to z must be entirely
contained in B, i.e., for all
. Now the square
of the distance from x to
 is given by
Therefore
If we evaluate this at
 (i.e.,
)
But the first term on the right is assumed less than or equal to
while the second is greater than
. Thus

--- Sayfa 38 ---
It follows that, for r close enough to zero
But this contradicts the manner in which  was chosen. Therefore,
for all
, (2.17) must hold.
2.4.3 Lemma. (Theorem of the Alternative for Matrices) Let
be an
 matrix. Then either (i) or (ii), below, must hold:
(i) The point 0 (in m-
) is contained in the convex hull of the
 points
and
(ii) There exist numbers x1,…, xm satisfying
Proof. Suppose (i) does not hold. If we apply Lemma 2.4.2, there
exist numbers p1,…, pm+1, such that

--- Sayfa 39 ---
(this means, of course, that
) and
for all y in the convex set. In particular, this will hold if y is one of the
 vectors
. Therefore
As
, it follows that
, and we can let
Hence
With these two lemmas, we are able to prove our theorem:
Proof. of Minimax Theorem Let A be a matrix game. By Lemma
2.4.3, either (i) or (ii), above, must hold.
If (i) holds, 0 is a convex linear combination of the
 vectors.
Thus, there exist s1,…, sm+n such that

--- Sayfa 40 ---
Now, if all the numbers s1,…, sn were equal to 0, it would follow
that 0 would be a convex linear combination of the m unit vectors e1,
…,em, which is obviously not possible as these are independent
vectors. Hence at least one of s1,…,sn is positive, and
. We
can then write
and we have
Thus
, and
.
Suppose, instead, that (ii) holds. Then
, and so
.
We know therefore that it is not possible to have
. Let us
suppose that we change the game A: we replace it by
, where
It should be clear that for any
,
Hence

--- Sayfa 41 ---
As it is not possible that
it is also not possible that
But k was arbitrary. Thus we cannot have
. But we have already
seen that
. Therefore
Q.E.D.
Thus, if we deal with mixed strategies, we find that I’s gain-floor is
precisely equal to II’s loss-ceiling. The common value, v, of these
two numbers is called the value of the game. We see that a strategy
x which satisfies
is optimal for the first player, in the sense that there is no strategy
which will give him a higher expectation than v against every
strategy of II. Conversely, if y satisfies
then y is optimal for the second player in the same sense. Now,
clearly

--- Sayfa 42 ---
for, if the left side in this equation were smaller, this would contradict
(2.18); if it were larger, this would contradict (2.19). Hence x and y,
besides being optimal, are also optimal against each other and
against any other optimal strategies. We shall call any pair of optimal
strategies,
, a solution to the game.
The following theorem (a somewhat stronger form of the minimax
theorem) will be useful later:
2.4.4 Theorem. In an
 matrix game A, either player II has an
optimal strategy y with
, or player I has an optimal strategy x
with
To prove 2.4.4, we give first this definition:
2.4.5 Definition. Let
, be p n-
. Then by
the convex cone generated by
, we mean the set of all
vectors x such that
for some nonnegative
.
It is easily checked that such a cone is indeed convex.
2.4.6 Lemma. (Farkas) Suppose
, are n-
 such that any
 satisfying
will also satisfy

--- Sayfa 43 ---
Then
 is in the convex cone C generated by
.
Proof. Suppose
. By Lemma 2.4.2, there exist numbers such
 such that
and
Now,
; hence
. Suppose, moreover, that
 were
negative for any
. For any positive number
. But by
making α large enough, the form
 can be made smaller
than
. It follows, then, that
but
and in particular for
. Hence if the conclusion of 2.4.6 is
false, so is its hypothesis.
Let us now proceed to prove 2.4.4. Assume first that
.
Consider the
 m-vectors

--- Sayfa 44 ---
Either
 is in the convex cone C generated by the other
points, or it is not. Suppose
. Then there exist nonnegative
numbers
 such that
and this means
We now set
It is clear that
 is an optimal strategy for II such that
.
Suppose, on the other hand,
. There exist numbers
such that

--- Sayfa 45 ---
and
By (2.22),
, and by (2.24), the  are not all zero. Hence we can
let
and it follows directly from (2.23) and (2.24) that x is an optimal
strategy for I such that
.
Suppose, now, that
. As before, we construct a matrix
 where
; the proof proceeds exactly as in Theorem
2.4.1.
2.5. Computation of Optimal Strategies
Theorem 2.4.1 (the minimax theorem) assures us that every two-
person zero-sum game will have optimal strategies. Unfortunately,
the proof given is an existence proof and does not explain how these
optimal strategies are to be computed.
Here we give methods for solving the easiest games; Chapter 3
will deal with a more general method.
2.5.1 Saddle Points. The simplest case of all occurs if a saddle
point exists, i.e., if there exists an entry
 which is both the
maximum entry in its column and the minimum entry in its row. In this
case, the pure strategies i and j, or equivalently, the mixed strategies

--- Sayfa 46 ---
x and y with
 and all other components equal to zero, will
be optimal strategies for players I and II, respectively.
2.5.2 Domination. In a matrix A, we say the ith row dominates the
kth row if
and
Similarly, we say the jth column dominates the lth column if
and
Briefly, a pure strategy (represented by its row or column) is said
to dominate a second pure strategy if the choice of the first
(dominating) strategy is at least as good as the choice of the second
(dominated) strategy, and in some cases better. It follows that a
player can always dispense with any dominated strategies and use
only the undominated strategies. The following theorem, which is
given without proof, expresses this:
2.5.3 Theorem. Let A be a matrix game, and assume that rows
 of A are dominated. Then player I has an optimal strategy x
such that
; moreover, any optimal strategy for the
game obtained by removing the dominated rows will also be an
optimal strategy for the original game.
A similar theorem will hold for column domination; the general
effect of these theorems is that any dominated rows and columns
may be discarded, allowing us to work with a smaller matrix.

--- Sayfa 47 ---
2.5.4 Example. Consider the game with matrix
It is seen that the second column dominates the fourth column. It
follows that player II will never use his fourth strategy; we can
therefore disregard it and are left with the matrix
In this matrix, we find the third row dominates the first row.
Removing this, we have
and, in this matrix, we see that the third column is dominated by the
second. Hence our matrix reduces to
and we need only look for optimal strategies to the small
 matrix
game. The next section discusses such games.
2.5.5 2×2 Games. Suppose we are given the 2×2 matrix game

--- Sayfa 48 ---
It may be that this game has a saddle point; if so, there is no
problem. Suppose, however, that the game has no saddle point. It
follows that the optimal strategies,
 and
 must have
positive components. Now, if the value of the game is v, we have
or
Now, the two terms in parentheses on the left side of (2.29) are both
less than or equal to v, since y is by hypothesis an optimal strategy.
Suppose one of them were less than v; i.e., suppose
Then, since
 and
, the left-hand term in (2.29) would be
strictly smaller than v. It follows that both the terms in parentheses in
(2.29) must equal v. Hence
Similarly, it can be seen that

--- Sayfa 49 ---
or, in matrix form
These equations, together with the equations
allow us to solve for
, and v. In fact, if A is nonsingular, we will
have
where  is the vector (1,1). We now eliminate v by noticing that the
sum of the components of x, i.e.,
, must be equal to 1; this gives
or
and
Similarly, we find

--- Sayfa 50 ---
In case A is singular, this is of course meaningless; it is easy then
to see that
and
(where
 is the adjoint of A) will give optimal strategies; note that
(2.43) and (2.44) coincide with (2.41) and (2.42) when A is
nonsingular. We also see that
where
 is the determinant of A, will give the value of the game,
whether A is singular or not. We recapitulate these laws in the
following theorem:
2.5.6 Theorem. Let A be a 2×2 matrix game. Then if A does not
have a saddle point, its unique optimal strategies and value will be
given by
where
 is the adjoint of
 the determinant of A, and J the
vector
.

--- Sayfa 51 ---
2.5.7 Example. Solve the matrix game
It is easily checked that the game has no saddle point. Now, the
adjoint of  is
and
 and
. Thus we have
It may be checked that these strategies x and y do indeed guarantee
the payoff value of .
2.5.8 2×n and m×2 Games. The simplest games to solve, after the
2×2 games, are those games in which one of the players has only
two strategies (2×n or m×2 games). We shall consider 2×n games
here; a similar analysis may be used for m×2 games.
The first player’s problem is to maximize
Now,
 and so we have
Thus v(x) is the minimum of n linear functions of the single variable
x1; these can all be plotted and their minimum v(x) is then maximized
by graphic methods.
2.5.9 Example. Consider the game with matrix

--- Sayfa 52 ---
The several functions
 are easily plotted if we notice
that they must pass through the points
 and
 (Figure 2.1).
Figure 2.1.
The heavy irregular line represents the function
. The highest
point on this line, X, is seen to be at the intersection of the lines
corresponding to the second and third columns. The abscissa at this
point is , the ordinate
. Thus we have
 and
. These
numbers could also be calculated by application of the formulas
(2.46) and (2.48) to the 2×2 matrix consisting of the second and third
columns for our game matrix. Application of (2.47) to this matrix also
yields
; it is easily checked that these are indeed the
optimal strategies and value of the game.
This covers the simplest type of games; generalizations of these
methods for other games, while possible, are generally too laborious
to be of practical use. For more general games, several schemes are
in use. The easiest one to explain is given below. We do not give a
proof of the scheme’s validity; proofs of it may be found in the
literature.
2.5.10 Solution by Fictitious. Play Let us suppose two players,
perhaps with no knowledge of game theory, decide to play a game

--- Sayfa 53 ---
many times. While they might know nothing about game theory, they
are nevertheless statistically inclined, and so keep track of the pure
strategies used by their opponent at the several plays of the game.
At each play, each player acts in such a way as to maximize his
expected return against his opponent’s observed empirical
probability distribution: if player II has used his jth strategy q j times,
player I will choose i so as to maximize
. Similarly, if player I has
played his ith strategy p i times, player II will choose j so as to
minimize
.
Now, naïve as this method of play may seem, the amazing fact is
that the empirical distributions will converge to optimal strategies.
More precisely, let
 be the number of times that player I uses his
ith strategy during the first N plays of the game. If we let
, it
is obvious that xN is a mixed strategy. This sequence of strategies,
xN, need not converge; however, lying in the compact set of mixed
strategies, it must have a convergent subsequence. The fact is that
the limit of any convergent subsequence will be an optimal strategy.
We omit the proof of this theorem, as it is much too involved for
our present purposes. Briefly, it is based on the fact that, if xN and yN
are the strategies obtained as explained above for players I and II,
respectively, the equation
will hold. This method, incidentally, is most useful in the case of very
large games (i.e., games with large numbers of pure strategies),
which are, because of their size, difficult to handle in any other way.
(See Problem 2.9 for an outline of the proof of this theorem.)
2.6. Symmetric Games
Let us conclude this chapter with a brief discussion of a special type
of game.

--- Sayfa 54 ---
2.6.1 Definition. A square matrix
 is said to be skew-
symmetric if
 for all
. A matrix game is said to be symmetric
if its matrix is skew-symmetric.
2.6.2 Theorem. The value of a symmetric game is zero. Moreover, if
x is an optimal strategy for I, then it is also optimal for II.
Proof. Let A be the game matrix, and let x be any strategy. It is easy
to see that
. Hence
Therefore,
. It follows that, for any
so that the value is nonpositive, while
so that the value is nonnegative. Hence the value is zero. If, now, x
is an optimal strategy for I, we have
But this means
and so
or

--- Sayfa 55 ---
Hence x is also optimal for II.
An iterative algorithm, somewhat related to that given in 2.34
above, has been devised for solving symmetric games. Unlike the
method of 2.34, which gives a discrete sequence of strategies, this
one relies on a continuous modification of the given strategy, which,
in the limit, will approach optimality. The method, that of von
Neumann and Brown, is, however, of very limited value (other than
as a constructive existence proof of the minimax theorem) because
the differential equations which it involves generally cannot be
solved analytically.
2.6.3 Example. Consider the game with matrix
It can be considered a generalization of the well-known children’s
game “scissors, stone, and paper.” As the matrix is skew-symmetric,
we know the value of the game must be zero. Now, it is clear that the
game has no saddle point. Nor can an optimal strategy use only two
of the pure strategies, for if, say
, and
, it is easily
seen that this mixed strategy of I gives a negative expectation
against II’s first pure strategy. Thus the optimal strategy x must have
all positive components. This is also optimal for player II, and an
argument similar to that given in 2.29 above shows that x must
satisfy the system of linear equations:
The solution to these equations is easily found: it is
. This is the
unique optimal strategy for both players.

--- Sayfa 56 ---
Problems
1. Show that, if C is any convex set, and x is any point on the
boundary of C, then there exists a vector
 such that
, and, for all
. (This is a somewhat stronger
version of the theorem of the supporting hyperplane. Use this
theorem, together with the fact that, as x is on the boundary of C,
there is a sequence of points
 which converges to x.)
2. Show that the set of optimal strategies is always closed, convex,
and bounded, and hence the convex hull of its extreme points.
3. Show that, if we treat an m×n matrix game as a point in mn-
 Euclidean space, the value of the game is a continuous
function of the game.
4. Show that the set of optimal strategies of a game is a lower
semicontinuous function of the game matrix.
5. Show that the set of m×n matrix games with unique optimal
strategies is dense and open.
6. Let x and y be extreme points of the sets of optimal strategies of a
matrix game, M, with nonzero value. Show that M has a square
nonsingular submatrix M such that
where  is the vector, all of whose components are 1, of desired
size:
(a) The product of x with any column of M that belongs to
 must
be v.

--- Sayfa 57 ---
(b) The product of y with any row of M that belongs to
 must be
v.
(c) The ith row and the jth column of M must belong to
 if
and
.
(d) Rows and columns can be added to M, subject to (a) and (b)
above, so long as they are linearly independent.
(e) If the matrix formed in this manner has linearly dependent
rows, then x is not extreme. If the columns are linearly
dependent, then y is not extreme.
7. Let
 be a skew-symmetric game matrix. Let
 be
a mixed strategy, and use the notation
Show that, for any “initial” strategy x0, the solution to the system
of differential equations
converges to an optimal strategy, in the sense that it must have
accumulation points, and any accumulation point is optimal:
(a) If x0 is a strategy, then x(t) will be a strategy for all t.
(b) The function ψ satisfies

--- Sayfa 58 ---
(c)
(d) From (b) and (c), we must have
8. Let
 be any m×n matrix, and consider the
 matrix
 defined by
Show that B is skew-symmetric and hence represents a
symmetric game. Moreover, show that if
 is an
optimal strategy for B, then the vectors x and y, defined by
and
are optimal strategies for players I and II, respectively, in A.
9. (Solutions of games by fictitious play.) Consider the following
procedure for a matrix game
. Two players play the game a
large number of times. At the first play, they may use any of their
strategies. Suppose, now, that in the first k plays, I has used his
ith strategy
 times
 while II has used his jth strategy
 times
. Then, at the
th play, I will use his
th
strategy, and II his
th strategy, where

--- Sayfa 59 ---
and
(Thus, at each play, each plays whatever is best against his
opponent’s cumulative past choices.) Show that any accumulation
point of the sequence
 is a solution of the game A.
(a) We say the th row is eligible in the interval
 if there is a
, such that
and similarly, the
th column is eligible in
 if there is a
, such that
Then, if all rows are eligible for
, we have
where
.
(b) For any
, there exists
 such that
 for all
.
Prove by induction on the size of the matrix: If A is a 1×1
matrix, this is obvious. Assume true for all submatrices  of A.
Choose
 so that
 for all . Then
 will
suffice. (Show that if some row or column is ineligible for an
interval, it may effectively be discarded for that interval,
treating only the remaining submatrix; consider intervals of the
form
 with
.)
10. Solve the following matrix games:

--- Sayfa 60 ---
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)

--- Sayfa 61 ---
Chapter 3
Linear Programming
3.1. Introduction
A linear program is, briefly, the problem of maximizing (or
minimizing) a linear function (called the objective function) subject to
linear constraints. In the most common case, the constraints are
loose inequalities, and the variables are restricted to nonnegative
values. Thus the most common form will be: find
 so as to
subject to
or, in matrix notation
subject to

--- Sayfa 62 ---
It should be pointed out that this is not the most general type of
linear program. In fact, we may be asked to minimize the objective
function, rather than to maximize it. Some of the constraints may be
equations, and some of the variables may be allowed to take on
negative values. However, it can also be pointed out that minimizing
a function is the same as maximizing its negative, that an equation
can be replaced by two opposite inequalities, and that an
unrestricted variable can be expressed as the difference of two
nonnegative variables. Thus there is no loss in generality, strictly
speaking, in considering programs such as (3.1)–(3.6).
3.1.1 Definition. The set of all points satisfying the constraints (3.2)
and (3.3) shall be called the constraint set of program (3.1)–(3.3).
The maximum of (3.1) is called the value of the program.
It may be seen that the solution of a matrix game can be reduced
to a linear program. In fact, if player I uses the strategy
 he
can assure himself of an expectation at least equal to λ, where λ is
any number such that
Thus the problem of obtaining an optimal strategy for I reduces to
the program
subject to

--- Sayfa 63 ---
Similarly, the problem for II reduces to the program
subject to
3.2. Duality
Consider the two linear programs
subject to
and
subject to

--- Sayfa 64 ---
The program (3.17)–(3.19) is said to be the dual of (3.14)–(3.16).
Moreover, if we change the signs of
, and C, (3.17)–(3.19) can
be rewritten as a maximization program
subject to
The dual of (3.20)–(3.22), as defined above, must be
subject to
But it is clear that (3.23)–(3.25) is equivalent to (3.14)–(3.16).
Hence we may state: the dual of (3.17)–(3.19) is (3.14)–(3.16).
Duality is, then, a reciprocal relation: the two programs (3.14)–(3.16)
and (3.17)–(3.19) are dual to each other.
The following theorems explain the relation between dual linear
programs.
3.2.1 Theorem. Let x and y be in the constraint sets of programs
(3.14)–(3.16) and (3.17)–(3.19), respectively. Then
Proof. We have

--- Sayfa 65 ---
3.2.2 Corollary. Suppose the vectors
 and
 are in the constraint
sets of (3.14)–(3.16) and (3.17)–(3.19), respectively, and
.
Then  and  are the solutions of the two programs.
In general, a linear program need not have a solution. One of two
things may go wrong. It may be that the constraints are inconsistent
so that the constraint set is empty, in which case the program is said
to be infeasible. Or it may be that the desired maximum (or
minimum) does not exist even if the program is feasible, since the
function may take on arbitrarily large (or small, in the case of a
minimization problem) values in the constraint set. For example, the
program
subject to
does not have a solution, as the objective function can be made
arbitrarily large. Such a program is said to be unbounded.
Let us consider the following corollary:
3.2.3 Corollary. (to 3.2.1) If the linear program (3.14)–(3.16) is
unbounded, then the dual program (3.17)–(3.19) is infeasible.
Similarly, if (3.17)–(3.19) is unbounded, then (3.14)–(3.16) is
infeasible.

--- Sayfa 66 ---
Proof. Suppose (3.17)–(3.19) is feasible, i.e., suppose y is in the
constraint set of (3.17)–(3.19). Then the objective function
 is
bounded above by
. Hence (3.14)–(3.16) is not unbounded.
The converse of Corollary 3.2.3 is not true. That is, if a program
is infeasible, it does not follow that its dual is unbounded. It may be
that both programs are infeasible.
3.2.4 Example. The dual programs
Maximize
subject to
and
Minimize
subject to
are both infeasible.
Thus, if a program is infeasible its dual may be unbounded, or it
may also be infeasible. We shall prove next that these are the only
possibilities.
3.2.5 Theorem. Let the program (3.14)–(3.16) be feasible, and
suppose the dual program (3.17)–(3.19) is infeasible. Then (3.14)–
(3.16) is unbounded.
Proof. Suppose (3.17)–(3.19) is infeasible. We consider the game
with the
 matrix

--- Sayfa 67 ---
which is obtained by adjoining the column vector
 to the matrix
.
Suppose that the value of this game is negative. Then, if
 is an optimal strategy for II, we find that
Now, if
, we have
and so, for sufficiently large , we will have
i.e., the vector
 satisfies (3.18) and (3.19), so that (3.17)–(3.19) is
feasible. If, on the other hand,
, we write
, and it
follows that y satisfies (3.18) and (3.19). Thus the value of the game
must be zero or positive.
Suppose now that the value of the game is zero; suppose also
that II has an optimal strategy s with
. Once again, if we set
, we find that y satisfies (3.18) and (3.19), contradicting the
hypothesis that (3.17)–(3.19) was infeasible.
Hence the value of the matrix game (3.27) is nonnegative.
Moreover, if the value is zero, all optimal strategies s for player II
must have
.
By Lemma 2.4.3 and Theorem 2.5.3, it follows that player I must
have a strategy
 such that

--- Sayfa 68 ---
By
hypothesis,
(3.14)–(3.16)
is
feasible.
Suppose
that
 lies in its constraint set. Then, for every positive number
α, the vector
 will also lie in the constraint set. Moreover,
and the right side of this equation can be made as large as desired
simply by increasing α. Thus (3.14)–(3.16) is unbounded.
We see thus that there are four possibilities for the dual pair of
programs (3.14)–(3.16) and (3.17)–(3.19). They can both be
infeasible, or one can be infeasible while the other is unbounded, or
both may be feasible and bounded. In this last case, the fact that the
constraint set is closed assures us that the programs will both have
solutions. The following very important theorem explains the
relationship between them in this last case.
3.2.6 Theorem. Let the two dual programs (3.14)–(3.16) and (3.17)–
(3.19) both be feasible. Then both will have solutions,
 and
,
respectively, and, moreover
i.e., both programs have the same value.
Proof. Consider the game with matrix

--- Sayfa 69 ---
where the 0’s represent matrices of suitable size, all of whose entries
are zero. The matrix M is skew-symmetric and therefore its value is
zero.
Suppose now that
 is an optimal strategy for
player I. We write:
Because of the optimality of s, and since the game has value
zero, we have
Let us suppose that
. If we set
 and
, it is clear
that
and
Now this means that
 and
 lie in the constraint sets of (3.14)–
(3.16) and (3.17)–(3.19). By Theorem 3.2.1 and its Corollary 3.2.2 it
follows that
 and
 are the solutions to the two programs and,
moreover

--- Sayfa 70 ---
Suppose, on the other hand, that none of the optimal strategies s
for player I has
. In this case, by Theorem 2.5.3, player II will
have an optimal strategy,
, whose inner product with
the last row of M is negative. Because the two players have identical
sets of optimal strategies, we must have
. If we now set
we shall have
or, equivalently
Now either the left side of (3.28) is positive or its right side is
negative. Suppose that the left side is positive. By hypothesis (3.14)–
(3.16) is feasible; suppose  lies in its constraint set. It is easily seen
that for any positive
 also lies in the constraint set, while
 can be made as large as desired simply by increasing α.
Thus (3.14)–(3.16) will be unbounded. But this means (3.17)–(3.19)
is infeasible. Similarly, if the right side of (3.28) is negative, (3.17)–
(3.19)
is
unbounded
and
(3.14)–(3.16)
is
infeasible.
This
contradiction proves the theorem.
3.3. Solution of Linear Programs
At first glance it might seem that a linear program may be solved by
the methods of the calculus, setting the partial derivatives equal to

--- Sayfa 71 ---
zero. In fact, however, the objective function is linear, so that all its
partial derivatives are constant; the solution to a linear program will
generally be found on the boundary of the constraint set. The
method which is generally used for solving linear programs is based
on the following observations:
(3.3.1) The constraint set is the intersection of several half-
spaces; since each half-space is convex, the constraint set is a
convex hyperpolyhedron.
(3.3.2) Because the constraint set is convex and the objective
function is linear, any local extremum of the function will be the
global extremum.
(3.3.3) Because the objective function is linear, the extremum will
be obtained at one of the extreme points (vertices) of the constraint
set (hyperpolyhedron).
Geometrically, the simplex method may be described as follows:
One of the vertices of the hyperpolyhedron is found (this may be
done analytically by solving a system of n equations given by the
constraints). All the edges which meet at this vertex are considered.
If the objective function cannot be improved by moving along any
one of these edges, it follows that the given vertex is a local
extremum, and hence (by Remark (3.3.2)) the global extremum. If,
on the other hand, the objective function is improved along one of
the edges, we follow this edge to the vertex which lies at its other
end and repeat the procedure. Since the objective function is
improved at each step, it follows that we cannot go through the same
vertex twice. Since there are only a finite number of vertices, this
procedure will bring us to the solution in a finite number of steps.
3.3.1 Example. We illustrate this notion with this example:
Maximize
subject to

--- Sayfa 72 ---
The constraint set is shaded in Figure 3.1. The arrow shows the
gradient of the objective function. If we start from the origin, we see
that w is increased along either of the edges that start there. We
take, say, the edge that goes to
. At
, we find that w is
increased along the edge to
. At this point, we find that w
decreases along both edges that meet here. Thus we can conclude
that
 is the solution of our program.
Figure 3.1.
3.4. The Simplex Algorithm
Let us describe algebraically the method given above.

--- Sayfa 73 ---
We introduce a schematic notation, the purpose of which is
simply to achieve a small degree of economy in symbols. Let us
suppose we are given the system of inequalities.
which,
together
with
the
usual
nonnegativity
constraints,
characterizes the constraint set of some linear program. We can
rewrite these in the form
where the
, are so-called slack variables, restricted to
take non-negative values. The constraints of (3.29) reduce now to
this system of equations, together with the nonnegativity constraints
. We propose to identify the system of equations (3.30)
with the schema
Thus each row inside the box of such a schema represents the
linear equation obtained by multiplying each entry in the row by the
term in the top row (outside the box) and corresponding column, and
setting their sum equal to the term outside the box, on the right. The
principal advantage of such a scheme, as explained previously, is
that it avoids repetition of the variables
, and thus saves

--- Sayfa 74 ---
much space. It is also possible to introduce the objective function
into the schema (3.31) by calling it, say, w, and adjoining the row
at the bottom of the schema.
If we do this, it may be seen that the schema which gives the
linear program (3.14)–(3.16) can also be used to give the dual
program (3.17)–(3.19). In fact, we can use the columns to represent
the equations of system (3.18), obtaining the double schema
which gives the two dual programs (3.14)–(3.16) and (3.17)–(3.19)
simultaneously.
Consider next the maximizing problem (3.14)–(3.16) as
represented by the rows of schema (3.33). We have a system of
equations in the
 unknowns
, and w. We can,
in general, solve for
 of these unknowns in terms of the
remaining m. The schema, of course, represents a solution for
, and w in terms of the xi, but, except in degenerate cases,
which involve the inversion of a singular matrix, we can solve for any
n+1 in terms of the other m.
Suppose that we have solved for the n+1 variables
, in
terms of the variables
, and obtain the new schema
(simplex tableau)

--- Sayfa 75 ---
where every entry in the bottom row (except possibly the right-hand
entry δ) and every entry in the right-hand column (again excepting
the bottom entry) is nonpositive. If this happens, then the tableau
(3.34) gives us the solution to program (3.14)–(3.16). In fact, if we let
all the variables
 be equal to zero, each of the variables  will
be equal to the corresponding b. But the entries
 are nonpositive.
Hence all the  will be nonnegative. Since the  are all equal to zero,
this point lies in the constraint set of (3.14)–(3.16). Moreover, the
bottom row gives us the equation
where all the
 are nonpositive. It is clear that the largest possible
value of w will be obtained by setting all the  equal to zero (since
they cannot be made smaller). Thus the solution of (3.14)–(3.16) is
obtained from (3.34) by setting
We are looking for a method which will allow us to rewrite our
system (3.33) in the form of (3.34), with nonpositive entries along the
right-hand column and bottom row (except possibly the bottom right-
hand entry δ). We give first some definitions:
3.4.1 Definition. In the simplex tableau (schema) (3.34) the
variables  are called the basic variables, while the variables  are

--- Sayfa 76 ---
called the nonbasic variables.
3.4.2 Definition. A simplex tableau will also be called a basic point.
If all the entries in the right-hand column (except possibly the bottom
entry) are nonpositive, it will be called a basic feasible point (b.f.p.). If
all the entries in the bottom row (except possibly the right-hand
entry) are nonpositive, it will be called a basic dual feasible point
(b.d.f.p.).
As already noted, when the right-hand entries are nonpositive,
we obtain a point in the constraint set of (3.14)–(3.16) by letting the
nonbasic variables vanish. This is what is meant by a b.f.p. If all the
bottom entries are nonpositive, we see that we get a point in the
constraint set of the dual program (3.17)–(3.19). This is a b.d.f.p.
Finally, if a b.f.p. is also a b.d.f.p., it is the solution to the program (as
was noted above).
Geometrically, a basic feasible point represents a vertex of the
convex hyperpolyhedron which is the constraint set of (3.14)–(3.16).
As explained before, we are interested in looking at the edges which
pass through this vertex, or, equivalently, at the vertices which lie at
the other ends of these edges. A vertex is obtained by setting m of
the variables (the nonbasic ones) equal to zero; an edge is obtained
by setting m−1 of the variables equal to zero. An edge passes
through a vertex if these m−1 variables are among the m which
correspond to the vertex. Thus two vertices lie on an edge if they
have m−1 of their nonbasic variables in common, which brings us to
the following definition:
3.4.3 Definition. Two basic points are said to be adjacent if they
represent different points in space and their sets of basic variables
differ by at most one.
It should be noticed that it is not impossible for two simplex
tableaux to represent the same point even though their basic
variables might be different. In fact, there is nothing to prevent the
entries in the right-hand column from vanishing. If some such
does vanish, the corresponding
 will vanish when the nonbasic
variables vanish. Thus we could place it among the nonbasic
variables without changing the point represented by the tableau.

--- Sayfa 77 ---
3.4.4 Pivot Steps. A pivot step is a procedure for changing the sets
of basic variables by one; i.e., it is a procedure for solving the
equations of (3.34) for
 of the , one of the , and w in terms of
the remaining m variables. Let us see how this is done.
Suppose we wish to make  a nonbasic variable, while making
a basic variable. We take the equation
and solve for
, obtaining
(assuming, of course, that
). This new equation will be the jth
row of our modified simplex tableau. To get the remaining rows, it is
necessary to substitute this value of . Thus (assuming that
) the
first equation will now be
and the other equations (except, of course, the jth equation) will be
similarly changed. To get the new tableau, we simply modify the
coefficients accordingly, and interchange the position of the two
variables  and .
The entry
, which cannot be zero, is called the pivot of the
transformation. The transformation itself is called a pivot step. We
can summarize the transformation most easily according to the
diagram

--- Sayfa 78 ---
In (3.38), p represents the pivot, q is any other entry in the pivot
row, r is any other entry in the pivot column, and s is the entry in the
row of r and the column of q. Thus, the pivot is replaced by its
reciprocal,
. The remaining entries in the pivot row are simply
divided by p, while the remaining entries in the pivot column are
divided by p and change in sign. Finally, the other entries in the
tableau are decreased by the product of the entries in the same row
and pivot column, and in the same column and pivot row, divided by
p.
3.4.5 Example. Given the simplex tableau
which represents a system of equations solved for
 in terms
of
, we wish to solve the system for
 in terms of
.
The pivot, then, will be the starred entry which lies below
 and to
the left of
. Performing the transformation given by (3.38) and
interchanging the position of  and , we obtain the tableau
It may be checked that the system of equations (3.40) is
equivalent to the system (3.39).
3.4.6 The Dual Problem. In 3.4.4, we determined the form of the
transformation which must be effected on the simplex tableau in
order that the system of equations represented by the rows of the
new tableau be equivalent to that represented by the old tableau. On
the other hand, we had mentioned above that the tableau can be

--- Sayfa 79 ---
used to represent a pair of dual programs simultaneously. It remains
to be verified, then, that the equations represented by the columns of
the tableau will also be equivalent to the old system.
The ith column of tableau (3.33) represents the linear equation
Here, of course, it is the  which are basic variables, while the  are
nonbasic. Now, let us suppose we wish to interchange the role of
and
; i.e., we wish to make
 a basic variable, while  is made
nonbasic. As before, we solve this equation for
 in terms of  and
the remaining y’s, thus obtaining
If we substitute this value of  in the remaining equations, we obtain
for the first column (assuming of course
)
and so on for the other columns. If we represent these changes
schematically, as in (3.38), we obtain the schema
But this is precisely the schema (3.38). Thus the same
transformation which preserves the (primal) problem (3.14)–(3.16)
will preserve the dual problem (3.17)–(3.19). That is, each simplex
tableau obtained by means of pivot steps will represent the pair of
dual problems simultaneously.

--- Sayfa 80 ---
3.5. The Simplex Algorithm (Continued)
We have just explained the fundamental pivot step which is the basic
tool of the simplex algorithm. What we need now, however, is a rule
to decide how to use this tool. In fact, the simplex tableau will
generally have a large number of nonzero entries which can be used
as pivots; we need a rule to tell us which of these entries should be
used as pivot.
When we refer to the geometric analogue, we note that each of
our
 variables
 can be thought of as
representing a bounding hyperplane of our constraint set, i.e., the
hyperplane in which that variable vanishes. Now the point of
intersection of m of these hyperplanes (assuming these are
independent) is a basic point of our constraint set. If all the other
variables are also nonnegative, the basic point is actually a b.f.p.;
i.e., it will lie in the constraint set.
Our choice of pivot steps will have two objectives. First, starting
from a basic point, we must move toward a b.f.p. Once we have a
b.f.p., we must try to improve (increase or decrease) our objective
function, being careful to keep at all times to b.f.p.s., until a solution
(i.e., a point where no further improvement is possible) has been
reached. We thus give two sets of rules: The first, assuming nothing,
will give us a b.f.p.; the second, assuming we start from a b.f.p., will
give us a solution. Let us call these Case I and Case II, respectively.
3.5.1. Rules for Choosing a Pivot
(3.5.1) Case I. Let
 be the lowest positive entry in the right-hand
column (excepting possibly the bottom entry). Choose any negative
entry
 in the kth row. The pivot will be in the th column. Now, for
all
 for which
 is negative, let
 be that value of  for which
this quotient is largest (i.e., closest to zero). Then
 will be our
pivot. (If there is a tie, any one of those entries which give the
maximum may be chosen.)
(3.5.2) Case II. Let
 be any positive entry in the bottom row (again,
excepting possibly the right-hand entry). The pivot will be in the th

--- Sayfa 81 ---
column. For all j for which
 is negative, let
 be that value of j
for which this quotient is greatest (i.e., closest to zero). Then
 will
be our pivot. (Again, in case of ties, we may choose as above.)
3.5.2 Proof of Convergence. We prove now that our algorithm will
actually converge in a finite number of steps. We shall make the
assumption of nondegeneracy, which means that no zeros will
appear in either the bottom row or the right-hand column (again,
excepting the right-hand bottom entry).
(3.5.3) In Case I, we shall prove that all the entries in the right-hand
column below the kth remain negative, while the kth entry itself
decreases.
We know that, for each
, the entry
 will be replaced by
We also know that
 is negative. Hence, if
, it is clear
that
.
If, on the other hand,
, we know (by our rule) that, for
Now
The term in parentheses will be nonpositive. Hence
.
Finally, we notice that
 will be replaced by
, which is, by
hypothesis, negative.
Thus for
, we see
. We also see
. As there are
only a finite number of possible simplex tableaux, we see that, if we
continue to pivot according to our rule, we shall eventually reach a

--- Sayfa 82 ---
tableau in which, for
. We then work on the next higher
row, etc., until all entries in the right-hand column are nonpositive.
(3.5.4) In Case II, we see that, by the same argument as above,
each
 will be replaced by
, where
. The bottom right-
hand entry, δ, will be replaced by
We know that
, while
. Hence
. Now, δ and  are
the values of the objective function at the two given b.f.p.s. Hence
we see that the objective function is increased. As there are only a
finite number of b.f.p.s, it follows that we shall eventually reach the
solution.
We
have
thus
seen
that
(under
the
assumption
of
nondegeneracy), if we can continue to pivot according to the rules
given in 3.5.2, the simplex algorithm will give us the solution to the
linear program in a finite number of steps. It may be, however, that
the two rules (3.5.3) and (3.5.4) will fail us. Two things could
conceivably go wrong. In Case I, it may be that a row, ending in a
positive entry, has only nonnegative entries. In Case II, it may be that
a column which has a positive entry in the bottom row has only
nonpositive entries otherwise. In either situation, it becomes
impossible to follow the rules 3.5.1. We shall see that such a
situation implies the insolubility (either because of infeasibility or
because of unboundedness) of the program.
Suppose, then, in Case I, that a row which ends in a positive
entry has only nonnegative entries. The row represents the
Now, the
 and  are all, by hypothesis, nonnegative, while
 is
positive. But this means
 must be negative. Thus the constraints
are inconsistent; i.e., the program is infeasible.

--- Sayfa 83 ---
In Case II, suppose we have a column with a positive entry in the
bottom row, but all nonpositive entries otherwise. Now, if the
coefficient
 is nonpositive, it follows from equation (3.41) that  can
be increased indefinitely without decreasing . As all the entries in
the given column (except the bottom entry) are nonpositive, it follows
that we can increase , indefinitely, keeping all the other ’s fixed at
zero, without leaving the constraint set. But, as the bottom entry in
this column is positive, this will increase the objective function
indefinitely. Hence the program is unbounded.
3.5.3 Degeneracy. In the discussion above, an explicit assumption
of nondegeneracy was made; i.e., we assumed that no zeros would
ever appear in the right-hand column (except possibly for the bottom
entry). Now, if zeros do appear, it is clear that certain strict
inequalities, which were given above, must be replaced by loose
inequalities. For example, the inequality
, which characterizes
the steps of Case II when nondegeneracy is assumed, must be
replaced by the weaker
. Now,
 means that the objective
function is increased at each step, and hence it is clear that we
cannot pass through the same b.f.p. twice. This guarantees
termination. The weaker
 allows for the possibility that we might
pivot several times, and, after all these pivots, reach the same
tableau again.
Degeneracy of the program, as characterized by the appearance
of zeros in the right-hand column, occurs when more than m of the
variables vanish simultaneously, i.e., when more than m of the
bounding hyperplanes of the constraint set pass through one point.
Thus nondegeneracy will hold if the
 bounding hyperplanes are
in general position in space. But this means that, in a degenerate
program, an arbitrarily small perturbation of the constraints will
remove the degeneracy.
A technique which is often used, then, is a perturbation
technique. If one of the rows ends in a zero, that is, if it looks like
this:

--- Sayfa 84 ---
then we replace the variable  by the variable
, to obtain the
row
where ε is assumed to be positive but very small. We proceed to
solve the modified program by the simplex algorithm. Because these
perturbations will remove any degeneracy, it follows that the
program, as modified by this finite number of perturbations, will be
solved (if it has a solution) in this manner. The solution will be a
function of the various perturbations; i.e., the value of the
will depend on the particular values given to the ε’s introduced in
these perturbations. Generally, however, they depend linearly on
these ε’s; it is merely a question of setting these equal to zero to
obtain a solution to the original (unperturbed) problem.
In fact the perturbations, which replace the constraints
 by
the weaker constraints
, tend to enlarge the constraint set. We
are interested in the extreme points of the constraint set; it is clear
that the only ones affected by this perturbation are those for which
. At each of these (and there are only a finite number) the
perturbation will increase (or decrease) the objective function by
some constant times ε. Suppose now that the solution to the
program is at an extreme point
. There is some positive number ,
such that, if
 is any other extreme point (not also a solution to the
program), then
 (where
 is the value of the
objective function at the point
). It is clear that if all the ε’s are
sufficiently small, the objective function cannot be increased by more
than  at any extreme point. It follows that
 cannot be the solution
to the perturbed problem because it was not the solution to the
unperturbed problem. Thus the solution to the perturbed problem will
always give us a solution to the unperturbed problem.

--- Sayfa 85 ---
In general the perturbation method, while useful (especially in
proving the finiteness of the simplex algorithm), is tedious, especially
since one never knows how small the ’s must be to guarantee that
the solution to the perturbed problem will solve the original problem.
In computer work, it has been found easier to instruct the computer
to work in a random manner whenever it has a choice of pivots. This
guarantees, with probability 1, that the cycling which complicates the
algorithm in such cases will be avoided (since in fact such cycling
occurs only when there is a systematic method of choosing the
pivot).
3.6. Examples
Let us now consider several examples of the solution of linear
programs by the simplex method.
3.6.1 Example.
Maximize
subject to
We form the tableau
Because all the columns have positive entries in the bottom row,
we can choose any column for our pivot. We may, for instance,

--- Sayfa 86 ---
choose the first column; the pivot will then be the starred entry. We
pivot on it to obtain the tableau
Again, we pivot on the starred entry; this gives us
Here it is clear that we have our solution:
. For this choice of
variables, the value of w is .
3.6.2 Example.
Minimize
subject to
It is easily seen that this problem is the dual of 3.6.1. If we had
written tableau (3.42) so as to incorporate both problems, and
continued as above, the last tableau would be

--- Sayfa 87 ---
Hence, the solution to 3.6.2 is
. The value of this program is
the same as 3.6.1, i.e., .
3.6.3 Example. Solve the matrix game
Solution. We write the maximizing problem in the form
Maximize λ
subject to
This gives us the tableau

--- Sayfa 88 ---
Here, we must pivot first in such a way as to put λ among the
basic variables, and 1 among the nonbasic. Unfortunately, the entry
below λ and on the same row as 1 turns out to be a zero; we need,
therefore, two pivot steps rather than one to do this.
In the following sequence, asterisks are used to denote the pivot
at each step:
We now permute rows and columns so as to make the right-hand
column correspond to the constant term, and the bottom row
correspond to the objective function, . We also change all signs in
the bottom row, obtaining the following tableau:
We proceed now according to the rules (3.5.1), until we reach a
b.f.p.:

--- Sayfa 89 ---
As we now have a b.f.p., we proceed according to the rules (3.5.2):
Tableau (3.53) gives us the solution: I’s optimal strategy is
.
The dual variables, which we had omitted in the intermediate
tableaux, tell us that II’s optimal strategy is
. The value of the
game is .

--- Sayfa 90 ---
Several observations might be made by referring to this example.
The first is that, in pivoting as we did in tableau (3.49), the two
variables,
 and
, were interchanged. But the next step
interchanged  and . We could have saved a step by interchanging
 and
 to begin with — this would have taken us from tableau
(3.49) to (3.51) in a single step. Thus we see that the rules give in
(3.5.1) will not always give the quickest results; modifications may be
made which will cut down the number of operations (and hence the
time) needed by a significant amount.
A second observation is this: Tableau (3.49) does not give us a
b.f.p. It does, however, give us a b.d.f.p. A modification of the rules
(3.5.1) may be given which will allow us to proceed, not through
b.f.p.s., but through b.d.f.p.s., until the solution is found. In other
words, our method starts with the b.d.f.p. of (3.49), but does not
make use of the fact that this is a b.d.f.p. Instead, it proceeds to give
us a b.f.p., after which it looks for the solution. If, in looking for a
b.f.p., we are careful to keep to tableaux which are also b.d.f.p.s,
then it is clear that the first b.f.p. we reach will be the solution.
The third observation is that we need not keep track of the dual
variables
 and
. In fact, each
 will necessarily be located
opposite the corresponding  of the maximizing problem; the same
holds for the  and
. Indeed, it is clear that each pivot step will
preserve these relative positions.
3.6.4 Example.
Maximize
subject to
Solution. We obtain the tableau

--- Sayfa 91 ---
Pivoting on the starred entry, we obtain the tableaux
It is clear from (3.56) that the problem is unbounded.
3.7. Constrained Games
The theory of linear programming has many applications other than
to the theory of games. While many of these are very interesting in
their own right, it is not possible, within the scope of this book, to
treat them in any detail. We give here an application which does
pertain to games.
Let us consider a game in which not all mixed strategies are
permitted. There is generally some practical reason why this should
be. Now, we assume that the mixed strategies x and y, respectively,
must be chosen from some convex hyperpolyhedron, i.e., from
constraint sets determined by linear inequalities and equations.
If the game matrix is
, then player I’s problem is to find

--- Sayfa 92 ---
where the two sets, X and Y, are determined by
and
respectively. Player II’s problem would, similarly, be to find
Consider then the expression (3.57). The expression inside the
brackets, clearly, is a function of x. More exactly, it is the value of a
linear program whose objective function has coefficients depending
on x. By the duality theorems given in 3.2 we know that if this
program is feasible and bounded (which generally does not depend
on x), then the two programs
subject to
and

--- Sayfa 93 ---
subject to
will have the same value. Thus, player I’s problem reduces to the
pure maximization problem
subject to
This problem, of course, can be solved by the usual linear
programming techniques (generally, the simplex algorithm).
In a similar way, it can be seen that player II’s problem (3.62)
reduces to the pure minimization problem
subject to

--- Sayfa 94 ---
It can be seen that (3.73)–(3.76) is the dual of (3.69)–(3.72).
Therefore, if both of these programs are feasible the two expressions
(3.57) and (3.62) will be equal, and thus the constrained game will
have a saddle point in mixed strategies.
Problems
1. Give the duals of the following linear programs:
(a) Maximize
subject to
(b) Minimize
subject to
2. Show that the program
Minimize
subject to
has value zero. (Hint: show that it is feasible; then find its dual.)

--- Sayfa 95 ---
3. Let
 be a continuous function of  and  in the unit square
. Let
 and
 be defined and continuous on
.
Show that, if
 and
 are continuous nonnegative functions
on
, such that
and
then
4. Let A be a matrix game, and let B be a matrix of the same size as
A. Letting
 be the value of A define
Show that
where
 and
 are the sets of optimal strategies for I and II,
respectively, in A.
5. A flow problem consists of a system of nodes (vertices),
numbered
, connected by arcs,
. The nodes
numbered 0 and
 are distinguished, being called, respectively,
the source and the sink. The arcs are undirected, hence
 and
are the same. Each arc has a capacity
, while each node also
has a capacity
 (Some of the arcs
 may be missing, in which

--- Sayfa 96 ---
case we say that
.) A flow is a vector
 in which the
component
 represents the amount “flowing” from node i to note
j. The flow must, of course, satisfy the obvious constraints
The value of the flow is the number
. Show that
.
By a cut is meant a collection of arcs and nodes which intersects
every chain of arcs and nodes from the source to the sink. The value
of a cut is equal to the sum of the capacities of the arcs and nodes in
the collection. Prove the max-flow min-cut theorem: The value of the
maximal flow is equal to the value of the minimal cut.
6. Maximize
subject to
7. Minimize
subject to

--- Sayfa 97 ---
8. Maximize
subject to
9. Minimize
subject to
Find a pair of optimal strategies, and the value, for the following
matrix games:
10.
11.
12.
For each of the following games, the mixed strategies are
constrained as noted.
(a) Express each of these as a pair of dual linear programs.
(b) Obtain optimal strategies, and the value.
13.

--- Sayfa 98 ---
subject to the constraints
14.
subject to the constraints

--- Sayfa 99 ---
Chapter 4
Infinite Games
4.1. Games with Countably many Strategies
Thus far we have dealt mainly with finite games, i.e., games in which
each player has a finite number of strategies. Let us consider now a
generalization to infinite games. We consider first of all games with
countably many pure strategies. These will, generally, be labeled
with the positive integers. As in the case of finite games, we shall let
 represent the expected payoff from II to I, assuming that I chooses
his
 pure strategy, while II chooses his
 pure strategy.
A mixed strategy for I, in this case, will be a sequence
satisfying
A mixed strategy for II will be a sequence
 defined
similarly. The payoff function for the mixed strategies
 will be
defined as
assuming that this series converges absolutely.
Games
with
countably
many
strategies
exhibit
several
undesirable properties which are not found among finite games. The

--- Sayfa 100 ---
difficulties are as follows: First, the series (4.3) need not converge,
and when this does not happen, it may be that the two iterated sums
and
will exist and be different. Second, the sets of mixed strategies are
not compact, and thus maxima and minima will not exist. We give
two examples to demonstrate these difficulties; it should be added
that there is very little other interest in games with countably many
strategies.
4.1.1 Example. Consider the game with payoff
. (In
essence, this games reduces to the following: each player chooses a
number; the one choosing the smaller number pays his opponent
one unit.) The game as such is ridiculous; its behavior is even worse.
Indeed, suppose x is a mixed strategy for I. We know that, given
any ε>0, there will exist some N such that
and so
If I chooses the mixed strategy x, then let II choose his Nth pure
strategy. It will be seen that the expected payoff then is

--- Sayfa 101 ---
and so
But x was arbitrary; hence
Similarly, it may be seen that
and we see that the minimax theorem (even generalized by putting
inf and sup instead of min and max) does not hold. Note also that
every row and column is dominated.
4.1.2 Example. Consider the game with payoff
. As in
Example 4.1.1, the object is to choose a large number; this is further
complicated, however, by the fact that the payoff function is not
bounded.
Consider now the strategy x, defined by
It is easily checked that this is indeed a strategy. Now for any j
Therefore

--- Sayfa 102 ---
and so it is seen that this mixed strategy
 gives an infinite
expectation for player I against any pure strategy for II. That is,
player I can assure himself of an infinite expectation, whatever II
does. But the game is symmetric, and it follows that player II can
also assure himself of an infinite expectation. Thus, we have a
pathological game. Indeed, Example 4.1.1 merely contradicts the
minimax theorem; this example seems to contradict common sense.
4.2. Games on the Square
An important type of infinite game is that in which each player has a
continuum of pure strategies, generally represented as points in the
interval [0,1]. A pure strategy for each player, then, is a real number
in this interval. The payoff is a real-valued function
 defined on
the unit square [0,1]×[0,1].
A mixed strategy, as before, is a probability distribution over the
set of pure strategies. In this case, a mixed strategy can be
represented as a cumulative distribution function, i.e., as a function
F, defined on [0,1], satisfying
If player I uses the pure strategy x, while II uses the mixed
strategy G, the expected payoff is the Stieltjes integral

--- Sayfa 103 ---
but, if II uses the pure strategy y, and I uses the mixed strategy F,
the expected payoff is
Finally, if I uses F and II uses G, we have
assuming, in each case, that these integrals exist. If they exist, of
course, we have
4.2.1 Optimal Strategies and Value. As with finite games, we can
define the two numbers
and
Two questions arise now: (1) Will
? (2) Can sup inf and inf
sup be replaced by max min and min max, respectively? If the
answer to both of these questions is in the affirmative, optimal mixed
strategies will exist; if these can be found, the game is as well
determined as the finite games are. If only the first question can be
answered in the affirmative, the game has a value (the common
value of  and
) but no optimal strategies. It will have ε-optimal
strategies, however, i.e., given any
, there exist mixed strategies,
F and G for I and II, respectively, such that

--- Sayfa 104 ---
and
for any x or y in [0,1]. Thus, although the game is not as well
determined as the finite games, the game seems to show a type of
stability.
4.3. Games with Continuous Kernel
The most obvious candidates for inspection, among games on the
square, are those in which the payoff function, A(x, y) (usually called
the kernel), is continuous. For these, optimal strategies will exist, as
we now prove.
4.3.1 Theorem. If the kernel A(x, y) is a continuous function, the
forms sup inf and inf sup may be replaced by max min and min max,
respectively.
Proof. We know that A(x, y) is continuous. Therefore, for any F, the
function
is a continuous function of y. Since the interval [0,1] is compact, it
follows that E(F, y) will attain a minimum value in that interval. Thus,
sup inf may be replaced by sup min.
By the definition of vI, given any n, there exists a distribution Fn
such that

--- Sayfa 105 ---
Now the set of all functions mapping [0,1] into itself is compact in
the topology of pointwise convergence; hence the sequence
 will contain a convergent subsequence. Let the limit of this
subsequence be F0. Since each of the functions Fn satisfies (4.11)–
(4.13), it is clear that F0 will also satisfy these three conditions. On
the other hand, F0 need not satisfy (4.14), as this is not the type of
property which is preserved in the limit. Nevertheless, we define the
function
 by
and it is easily seen that
 is a strategy. F0 and
 differ only at their
points of discontinuity but, as they are monotone functions, their
points of discontinuity form a countable set, and so, for all y
The function
 is continuous and hence uniformly continuous.
It follows that, as F0 is the limit of a subsequence of the Fn
But this limit is at least vI, for each value of y. Thus
and
 gives the desired maximum.
In a similar way, it can be shown that inf sup can be replaced by
min max.
4.3.2 Theorem. If the kernel
 is continuous, then
.

--- Sayfa 106 ---
Proof. For any integer n, consider the
 matrix
,
where
The game with matrix An has a value wn and optimal strategies
 and
, for I and II, respectively.
The function
 is continuous. Since the square is compact, it
follows that A is uniformly continuous. Thus, given
, there exists
a
 such that, if
then
Let us take n large enough so that
. Form the strategy Fn
defined by
(where [nx] is the greatest integer in nx).
For any y, let j=[ny]. It is clear that
and, since
and so

--- Sayfa 107 ---
Hence, for any y
and so
In a similar way, we can show that
These two inequalities give us
But, as
, and ε is arbitrary, it follows that
It should be remarked from the proof of Theorem 4.3.2 first, that
and second, that the strategies Fn will approximate the optimal
strategy as closely as desired. In this sense, the matrix games An
approximate the continuous game
. Now, if the kernel is very
smooth or flat, it may be that a very small value of n will be sufficient
for a good approximation. On the other hand, if the kernel is very
irregular, a good approximation will require a larger value of n. The
techniques most generally used for solving matrix games (viz,
fictitious play and the simplex method) are not generally quick
enough for handling games of size, say, 100×100. Thus, it would be
preferable to solve these games by analytic methods; unfortunately,

--- Sayfa 108 ---
none are available. Development of such a method is one of the
outstanding problems today. It would also be of interest to develop a
method to determine whether the optimal strategy F can be a step
function, i.e., whether a finite number of pure strategies will suffice,
or whether a continuous distribution should be used. The following
sections show some progress that has been made in these
directions.
4.4. Concave–Convex Games
4.4.1 Definition. A game on the square will be said to be concave–
convex if its kernel
 is concave in x for each value of y and
convex in y for each value of x.
Essentially, a concave–convex game must have a saddle-shaped
kernel. Because it is saddle shaped, it is to be expected that it will
have a saddle point in pure strategies. That this is so, under the
additional assumption of continuity, is proved as follows:
4.4.2 Theorem. Let the concave–convex game
 be continuous.
Then it will have optimal pure strategies.
Proof. Because the game is continuous, it will have optimal
strategies; let these be F and G, for I and II, respectively. Now, let
By the concavity of A, given any y, there exists some α such that
the function
attains its maximum value (keeping y fixed) at x0. Thus we have

--- Sayfa 109 ---
Now, the function By has its maximum at x0, hence the first integral in
(4.34) is at most equal to
. Thus
and it follows that x0 is at least as good as F against any y. Similarly,
y0 is at least as good as G against any x. Thus, x0 and y0 are optimal
pure strategies.
In a sense the proof of 4.4.2 is overly complicated. In fact,
Theorem 4.4.2 is concerned with pure strategies; it is hardly to be
desired that the proof should involve mixed strategies. We give,
therefore, a proof which uses only pure strategies, under the
somewhat stronger hypothesis of strict concavity and strict convexity.
Alternative Proof of 4.4.2. (Assuming Strict Concavity and
Convexity): For any value of x there exists a unique value of y
(because of strict convexity) which minimizes
. Let this value of
y be called
. Thus we have
Suppose that the function ϕ is not continuous. Say, then, that ϕ is
discontinuous at x0, and let
. There exists a sequence of
numbers,
 such that x0 is the limit of xn, but y0 is not the limit
of
. By compactness, there exists a subsequence of
, say
, such that
 converges, say, to y′, where
.
Now
and so, taking limits, and using the continuity of A

--- Sayfa 110 ---
But y0 was the unique value of y which minimized
. This
contradiction proves that ϕ must be a continuous function.
Similarly, we can define the function
 to be that value of x
which maximizes
. That is
Consider now the composite function,
. It is clearly
continuous, mapping [0, 1] into itself. By the Brouwer fixed point
theorem, there must exist some  such that
If we let
, this means
But this means  and  are in equilibrium, i.e., they are optimal pure
strategies.
4.4.3 Example. Consider the game with kernel
It is seen that
 and
, so the game is indeed concave–
convex. We see that
and, setting this equal to zero, we have

--- Sayfa 111 ---
This value of x will maximize A however, it does not always lie in the
unit interval, being negative when
. In such cases the maximum
is obtained by letting
. Thus we have
Similarly we find that
It is then easy to find the optimal strategies and the value
4.5. Games of Timing
It was mentioned before that, although continuous games always
have optimal strategies, there is no analytic method of computing
these. On the other hand, while we cannot be certain that games
with discontinuous kernels will have optimal strategies, there are
certain cases in which the discontinuities will enable us to find these
optimal strategies (if they exist) by analytic methods.
We are interested here in a type of game on the square called a
game of timing. The prototype of this game would be a game in
which each player can act only once, within a given interval of time.
The order in which the two players act is most important; this fact will
cause a discontinuity along the diagonal x=y of the square.
We consider, then, a game with kernel
, of the form

--- Sayfa 112 ---
where the function K is assumed to be defined and continuous on
the set
, L is assumed to be defined and continuous on
, and ϕ to be continuous on [0, 1].
There is no guarantee that optimal strategies will exist. However,
we can determine certain properties of the optimal strategies,
assuming that they do exist.
Let F be a mixed strategy for I. For
 we have
If  is a continuous distribution we can, of course, omit the middle
term here and have
Let us suppose that F and G are optimal strategies for I and II,
respectively, and that they are both continuous distributions. By the
optimality of F and G, we know that, if y0 is any point such that
then
where v is the value of the game. Now, if
 is positive at y, it will also
be positive for a neighborhood of y0, and so, for all y close enough to
y0, we will have
. But this means that

--- Sayfa 113 ---
and (4.47) can be rewritten in the form
(an integral equation in
 which is sometimes reasonably easy to
solve).
Suppose, then, that we are given a game with kernel of the form
(4.42). We have no guarantee that optimal strategies will exist; we
don’t even know whether these will be continuous, discrete, or partly
continuous and partly discrete distributions. It seems reasonable to
assume that the optimal strategies F and G will be continuous
distributions, with derivatives F′ and G′ which are positive in a certain
pair of intervals
 and
 respectively, and vanish outside these
intervals. We then have several relations which must hold among the
functions F, G and the numbers
. These are

--- Sayfa 114 ---
To these six relations, we must, of course, add the constraints
that F and G must be strategies and that
,
. If the
complete system admits a solution, this solution will give us the
optimal strategies as well as the value of the game. If there is no
solution we conclude that the game either does not have optimal
strategies or, if it does, these are not of the type assumed above.
Sometimes the payoff kernel is skew-symmetric; i.e., we will have
If so, an analysis similar to that in 2.6 shows that the value, if it
exists, must be zero, and the optimal strategies, if they exist, must
be the same for both players. Thus, in the formulation of (4.49)–
(4.54) we will have
,
,
, and
. Thus, the relations
given above will reduce to
This system, together with the usual constraints, will give us the
solution of the game, if such a solution exists.
4.5.1 Example. Consider the following duel. Two men, starting at
time
, walk toward each other; they will reach each other (if

--- Sayfa 115 ---
nothing intervenes) at time
. Each man has a pistol with exactly
one shot, and may fire at any time he wishes. If one hits the other,
the duel is immediately over, and the one who fired successfully is
the winner. If neither hits the other, the duel is a standoff. If both fire
simultaneously and hit each other, the duel is also considered a
standoff.
Let us make two assumptions: first, that the accuracy of a shot
increases as the players come nearer together, so that, if either
player shoots at time t, he has a probability t of hitting his opponent;
second, the duel is silent, i.e., a player does not know that his
opponent has fired (unless, of course, he is hit).
We compute, now, the kernel. If I chooses time x, and II chooses
time y, with
, then player I has a probability x of hitting his
opponent (in which case his payoff is +1). If he misses (which has
probability
) then there is probability y that he will be hit (giving
him a payoff of −1). Thus we have
The game is obviously symmetric; we will have
and
We also have
and

--- Sayfa 116 ---
Assume, now, that the optimal strategy is a continuous
distribution F, with positive derivative in an interval
. We will have
This integral equation can be transformed into a differential
equation by differentiating both sides; it gives us
or, simplifying
which has the solution
We must now find a, b, and k. Suppose
. We know that, for all
, we have
But
 is continuous in y; it follows that
We thus have
But, if
, this means

--- Sayfa 117 ---
and so
. This contradicts (4.58). Thus we must have
We saw that b=1, hence
. This gives us
which will give us
This equation has two solutions, a=1 and
. Clearly a=1 is not
possible. Thus
Now F is a strategy; hence
and this gives us
This gives us, then, the optimal strategy for either player. It is a
continuous distribution F defined by

--- Sayfa 118 ---
It may be checked directly that this is the solution.
4.5.2 Example. Let us consider again the duel given in the previous
example, with the sole exception that this time the guns are noisy;
i.e., a player knows whether his opponent shoots and misses. In
such a case, he will naturally hold his fire until time t=1, when he is
certain to hit. Therefore, if I chooses x and II chooses y, with
, we
find that I has probability x of winning and probability
 of losing.
Thus we have
We could attempt the same type of analysis as in the previous
problem. It is easily seen, however, that this game has a saddle point
in pure strategies. In fact, we have
and so  is an optimal pure strategy.
4.6. Higher Dimensions
The last four sections have all dealt with games on the square, i.e.,
games in which the pure strategies for each player form a one-
dimensional continuum. It is, of course, true that any set with the
cardinality of the continuum can be mapped into the unit interval in a
1–1 manner. Thus, any game in which each player has a set of pure
strategies with the cardinality of the continuum can be represented
as a game on the square. The difficulty with this, however, is that in
doing this many of the properties of the payoff function might be lost.

--- Sayfa 119 ---
We prefer therefore to maintain the most natural structure possible
for the strategy sets.
As before, we will have a function
, the kernel of the game,
defined on the cartesian product
 of the two sets of pure
strategies. A mixed strategy for I will be a measure μ defined on X
such that
and, similarly, a mixed strategy for II will be a measure v such that
The expected payoff is defined as
when these integrals exist. It should be noted, of course, that if
(4.79) exists, it can be replaced by either of the corresponding
iterated integrals.
Values and optimal strategies are defined for these games,
exactly as for games on the square. We give the following theorems,
easy generalizations of theorems given for games on the square.
4.6.1 Theorem. If the sets X and Y are compact, and the kernel
 is continuous, then
, and, moreover, optimal mixed
strategies will exist.
4.6.2 Theorem. If the sets X and Y are convex compact subsets of
some linear spaces, and the kernel
 is continuous, concave in x

--- Sayfa 120 ---
(for each y) and convex in y (for each x), then the game will have a
saddle point in pure strategies.
The proofs of 4.6.1 and 4.6.2 are easy generalizations of the
proofs of 4.3.1, 4.3.2, and 4.4.2. (Note that these proofs did not use
the particular structure of the sets of pure strategies, but only their
compactness and convexity.) We will not give them here.
As before, it is necessary to point out that techniques for solving
continuous games are not available, but that discontinuities will very
often give us the tool to solve such games analytically.
4.6.3 Example. Two generals, each with an equal number of forces,
must fight to take three strategic battlefields. The manner of fighting
is such that whichever side has more men at a given field will take
that field. It is assumed that the two armies are infinitely divisible,
and that the payoff is simply the number of battlefields captured.
The set X will be the set of all ordered triples
 such
that
The set Y is identical; the payoff is
Equivalently, each player chooses three nonnegative numbers
whose sum is 1. A player wins if two of his numbers are larger than
the corresponding two numbers chosen by his opponent. There will
be a standoff if a pair of corresponding numbers are equal.
We can represent the set X by the equilateral triangle in Figure
4.1.

--- Sayfa 121 ---
Figure 4.1.
It may be seen that, if a player chooses a point such as P, in the
diagram, he will defeat any point in the three areas D, E, and F, but
be defeated by any point in the three areas A, B, and C. (There will
be a standoff against points on the lines which separate these
areas.)
Let us assume that optimal strategies do exist, and that they are
continuous distributions which can be represented as the Lebesgue
integral of some function f which is positive inside some connected
set M and zero outside it.
Next, suppose that f is positive in the neighborhood of a point, P.
If
 is any other point in that neighborhood, we know (by the
symmetry of the game) that
Now, the fact that E(μ, P)=0 means that
(where σ is Lebesgue measure). Similarly

--- Sayfa 122 ---
where A′, B′, C′ are the sets of points which defeat P′.
It can be seen from Figure 4.2 that the difference between the
two sets
 and
 consists simply of the three strips
between the lines L1, L2, L3 through P parallel to the sides of the
triangle (the solid lines) and the corresponding lines through P′. If
 and
, we can see that for small ΔP the
difference between the left-hand sides of (4.78) and (4.79) must be
approximately given by
(where s is Lebesgue linear measure). Now, the expression (4.85)
must be equal to zero for all values of Δx1, Δx2, Δx2 which satisfy
This means that we must have

--- Sayfa 123 ---
Figure 4.2.
We can therefore state that the integral of f must be the same
along all lines which are parallel to the sides of the triangle and
which intersect M.
We must now determine M. Suppose first that the closure of M
does not touch the line x1=0. Let us take a point P, of minimal x1, in
the closure of M. Because it is in the closure of M, equation (4.78)
must hold. Consider the point
We have, by (4.80)
Now, the line
 clearly does not intersect the set M, as on it, the first
coordinate is smaller than the assumed minimal value of x. On the
other hand, at least one of the two lines,
 and
, must intersect M
(if ε is sufficiently small) because M is, by assumption, connected,
and not all of M can lie between the two lines L2 and L3 (as the area
between L2 and L3 is precisely the set F). It follows then that
and so
. But this would mean μ is not optimal. Thus, the
closure of the set M must touch the three sides of the triangle.
We know therefore that the minimal values of x1, x2, and x3 in the
set M must be zero. To find the maximal values, we note first of all
that, if M is connected, then every line x1=a, for a between 0 and the
maximal value r1 of x1, intersects M. But this means that the integral
of f over M is r1 k. Hence r1=1/k. Similarly, the maximal values of x2
and x3 (in M) will be r=1/k.
We then find that the set M is inscribed in the hexagon
determined by the inequalities

--- Sayfa 124 ---
which is shown in Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3.
Now let P be a point (in the closure of M) with x3=r. It can be
seen that
where
, because this expression is constant along the
line PQ. In the figure the dotted line through Q divides M into two
parts. The part of M which lies above the line consists of points
which are defeated by Q; that below the line, of points which defeat
Q. Thus, the integral of f, over this part of M, must be equal to . Now
all the lines x2=a, with a in the interval
, pass through this part;
the interval of f here, then, is
. Therefore
and so

--- Sayfa 125 ---
Thus we find that M must be a connected set, inscribed in the
hexagon
. The function f is zero outside the set M, positive in
M, and such that, for every line parallel to one of the sides of the
triangle and passing through M, the integral of f is .
These observations do not determine f or M uniquely; generally,
there are many optimal strategies. We might, for example, let M be a
circle (the hexagon is clearly regular), and let f be a function only of
the distance from the center of the circle. Then if f is chosen so that
its integral is constant over all lines in one direction, it will clearly be
the same over all lines which intersect M.
Consider, then, a circle,
. We want a function f(R) such
that, for any
, the integral
is constant. If we perform the change of variables
we have
and the integral becomes
This is constant in x; hence, we differentiate with respect to x,
and set the derivative equal to zero. The derivative is, of course, an
integral; it suffices to set the integrand equal to zero. We have thus
the differential equation

--- Sayfa 126 ---
which reduces to
and has the solution
We put this back into our problem; we must remember, however,
that the radius of the circle we are dealing with is only  unit, thus we
have
where
The constant C is evaluated by remembering that the integral along
any line must be ; this gives us
. Thus, the optimal strategy is
for points satisfying
, and 0 otherwise.
Problems
1. Let
 be the kernel of a game over the unit square. Assume K
has continuous partial derivatives up to the nth order, and that

--- Sayfa 127 ---
throughout the unit square. Show that player II has an optimal
strategy which uses not more than n/2 points (with the stipulation
that if an end-point of the interval is used, it shall count only as
half a point).
(a) Assume first
. Assume F(x) is an optimal strategy for
I, and show that any strategy optimal against F can use at most
n/2 points.
(b) Assume now that
. Let
, where
. Let
 be an optimal strategy for II in Lε then, if G0 is any limit
of the strategies Gε, G0 will be an optimal strategy for II in K.
(Similarly, if Fε is optimal for I in Lε, and F0 is a limit of Fε as ε→0,
then F0 is optimal in K.)
2. Show that, if
 is continuous and
 throughout the unit
square, then player I has an optimal mixed strategy using at most
2 points.
(a) Show that II has an optimal pure strategy
.
(b) If
 is an optimal strategy then, for any point  used in
,
.
(c) If I does not have an optimal pure strategy, then he must have
two pure strategies  and
 such that
 and
.
(d) I has an optimal mixed strategy using only  and
.
3. Let
 be the kernel of a game over the unit
square.
(a) If the two distributions
 and
 have the same moments,
i.e., if for
then F1 is optimal if and only if F2 is optimal. Similarly, if G1(y) and
G2(y) have the same moments, then G1 is optimal if and only if G2
is optimal.
(b) The moments F(i) of any distribution are in the convex hull of
the m-dimensional space curve given by the equations ri=ri.

--- Sayfa 128 ---
(c) Players I and II have optimal strategies using at most m and n
points, respectively.
(d) Give the payoff function,
 in terms of the moments F(i)
and G(j).
Show that the optimal strategies for the two players can be
computed as solutions of a set of algebraic equations.
4.The fact that a game on the square has a continuous, or even
rational, kernel does not guarantee that players have optimal
strategies using only a finite number of points.
(a) If
 is a continuous rational function, and I has an optimal
strategy using at most m points, this optimal strategy can be
obtained as the solution of a system of algebraic equations.
(b) If
 is rational, and v is transcendental, neither player has
optimal strategies which use only a finite number of points.
(c) The game with kernel
has optimal strategies
and value 4/π.
5. Even a game with a “very regular” payoff kernel need not have a
value. Consider the kernel

--- Sayfa 129 ---
(a) Whatever F(x) may be, there is some y such that
.
[Distinguish the two cases
 and
.]
(b) Whatever G(y) may be, there is some x such that
.
[Distinguish the three cases: (i)
; (ii)
 and
; (iii)
 and
.]
(c) Thus,
 and
. Show that in fact the values  and  are
attained by using strategies
 and
, respectively, where
uses only 0, , and 1, while
 uses only , , and 1. Find the
probabilities with which these points are used in
 and
.
6. Find the value and optimal strategies of the game with kernel
7. Develop a method for solving a “duel game” in which each player
has two bullets instead of one. Assume that the duel is silent so
that neither player knows whether the other has shot unless he is
hit.
8.Let
 be positive numbers satisfying the strict triangle in
equality
. Consider the following game:
Player I choose nonnegative numbers
 whose sum is 1.
Player
II
similarly
chooses
.
The
payoff
is
.
Find
optimal
strategies for this game.
9. Even a game with rational payoff may have a singular solution.
Consider the Cantor function, C(x), which satisfies the relations
(a) For any integrable function f

--- Sayfa 130 ---
(b) If  is any continuous function
(c) The function
is continuous and, in fact, rational, for
,
. (Show
this by expanding the summand and distributing.) Moreover, C(x)
and C(y) are optimal strategies for the two players, giving the
value zero.
(d) Let F(x) be any optimal strategy for player I. The function
 is an analytic function of y. Hence, it either vanishes
throughout [0, 1] or has only a finite number of zeros in [0, 1].
(e) If
 does not vanish throughout [0,1], then C(y) cannot be
optimal for II.
(f) The fact that
 throughout [0, 1] whenever F is optimal
allows us to compute its moments F(i). Hence, any two optimal
strategies have the same moments. (By a well-known theorem,
this means any two optimal strategies are identical.) Hence C is
the unique optimal strategy.
10.Obtain optimal strategies, and the value, for the game on the
square with payoff kernel
Hint: use the results of problem 2 above.
11.Modify Example 4.6.3, above, by assuming that battle field 3 is
more valuable than the others. Specifically, let the payoff function
be

--- Sayfa 132 ---
Chapter 5
Multistage Games
5.1. Behavioral Strategies
Let us consider a game with many moves. It may be a game as
simple, say, as tic-tac-toe. This game is simple enough so that even a
child can learn to master it. Yet suppose we wish to count the number
of strategies for the first player. We note (disregarding all symmetries)
that he has nine choices for the first move. Then, for any of the eight
possible replies, he will have seven choices on his second move. If
we consider only the first player’s first two moves, we find that he has
 pure strategies. Any attempt to enumerate them,
naturally, is out of the question. Even if we consider symmetries, we
find that the number of pure strategies for this game is astronomical.
And yet the game is quite trivial (in the practical sense of the word, as
opposed to chess, which is theoretically trivial but practically very
complex).
It is clear, then, that pure strategies leave something to be
desired. Let us remember the definition of a pure strategy: it is a
function, defined on the collection of a particular player’s information
sets, assigning to each information set a number between 1 and
(where  is the number of choices at the given information set). Thus
if a player has
 information sets, and  choices at each one, the
total number of pure strategies is
, which can be very large.
Going back to the example of tic-tac-toe we find that no one plays
the game by actually considering all possible pure strategies (i.e., all
possible sequences of moves from the first to the last). Rather it is
played by considering, at each move, all the possible choices for that
move only, and deciding (from experience or otherwise) which is
best.

--- Sayfa 133 ---
This, then, is the essence of simplification: take the moves one at
a time. It reduces one choice among
 possible strategies to
choices among the  possible moves at each information set. It leads
to the following definition:
5.1.1 Definition. A behavioral strategy is a collection of
 probability
distributions, one each over the set of possible choices at each
information set.
5.1.2 Example. A player is given a card from a deck of 52 cards; after
seeing his card, he has a choice of either passing or betting a fixed
amount. The total number of pure strategies is
; thus, the set of
mixed strategies will have dimension
. On the other hand, a
behavioral strategy simply gives the probability of betting (a number
between 0 and 1) with each hand. Thus the dimension of the set of
behavioral strategies is 52.
In general, then, the set of behavioral strategies is of much
smaller dimension than the set of mixed strategies. On the other
hand, it should be pointed out that under certain conditions, not all
mixed strategies can be attained by using behavioral strategies, as
can be seen by the following example:
5.1.3 Example. In the game with tree in Figure 5.1, we can label
player II’s pure strategies as LL, LR, RL, RR. A mixed strategy is a
vector
 satisfying the usual constraints; a behavioral
strategy is a pair of numbers
 satisfying only
. To the
behavioral strategy
 there corresponds the mixed strategy

--- Sayfa 134 ---
Figure 5.1.
Now, the optimal strategy for player II is (see Example 2.5.9) the
vector
 Clearly, this is not of the form (5.1). Hence, the game
does not admit a solution in terms of behavioral strategies.
In a sense, the difficulty with Example 5.1.3 is that player II does
not know, at his second move, what he did at his first move. Such a
game is said to have imperfect recall. This difficulty complicates
matters: it is not certain whether all mixed strategies are permitted. In
bridge, the two partners are treated as a single player who “forgets”
some of his previous choices. As secret arrangements are forbidden,
one partner cannot know whether the bid made by his partner was
honest or a “psychic” bid, although he may know the probability of
such a “psychic” bid.
5.2. Games of Exhaustion
We shall not enter into these difficulties here. The type of game which
we propose to study is very nearly a game of perfect information:
after a given number of moves, both players are (simultaneously)
given perfect information (which will not be forgotten) so that in a
sense the game can be recommenced from the given position. The
general pattern will be: first, player I moves; then, player II moves (in
ignorance of player I’s previous move); next, a random move is made,
after which both players are given perfect information. (This pattern

--- Sayfa 135 ---
may vary, but only slightly.) Each of these cycles will be called a stage
of the game.
In a game of exhaustion, the two players have some finite
resources, which decrease (by at least one unit) after each stage.
The game will end when one player’s resources are exhausted.
It is advisable to solve these games by working backward. The
general idea is that each stage can be treated as a separate game.
When the strategies for this stage are chosen, the payoff will be either
a true payoff (in case the multistage game terminates) or an
obligation to play a subsequent stage of the game.
Since we generally deal with expected values, it follows that we
can replace the obligation to play a game by the value of that
particular game.
5.2.1 Example. Consider the game with matrix
where the entries
 and
 represent the obligation to play two other
games with the respective matrices
If the values of
 and
 are  and  respectively, it follows that,
in expectation, the prospect of having to play these games is
equivalent to their values. Hence we may replace the matrix (5.2) with
It is now possible to solve (5.4); this will give us the optimal strategies
and value for (5.2).
For games of exhaustion, then, we start by obtaining solutions to
all games in which both players start with only one unit of resources.

--- Sayfa 136 ---
As the game must terminate in one stage only, it can be solved
directly. Using the value of this game, we can then solve all games in
which the total resources of both players are three units. These
solutions then help us to solve games with four units of resources,
then five, and so on.
In general, for games with small amounts of resources (i.e.,
games which must terminate after a short number of stages) the
values and optimal strategies can be obtained directly. For longer
games, a recurrence relation can be obtained for the value of each
stage. This recurrence relation is generally in the form of a difference
equation which may or may not be easy to solve. If the difference
equation can be solved, the values for each stage are used to give us
the optimal strategies. If the difference equation cannot be solved, it
may nevertheless be possible to obtain reasonable approximations of
the values and optimal strategies.
5.2.2 Example. (The Inspection Game) Player I (the evader) wishes
to carry out some forbidden action; there are
 time periods in which
this can be done. Player II (the inspector), who would like to prevent
this, is allowed to carry out one inspection only, in any one of these
time periods. The payoff is assumed to be
 if the forbidden action is
carried out undetected,
 if the evader is caught (as he will be if he
chooses to act at the same time that the inspector chooses to
inspect) and 0 if the evader does not act at all.
In the first time period (stage) of the game, each player has two
choices. Player I can act or not act; player II can inspect or not
inspect. If I acts and II inspects, then the game is over and the payoff
is
. If I acts and II does not inspect, the game is over and the payoff
is
. If I does not act, and II inspects, then I will be free to act in the
next time period (assuming
) and the payoff is also
. If I does
not act, and II does not inspect, then we go on to the next stage of
the game, which differs only in that there are fewer time periods left to
play. Thus, the matrix for the first stage looks like this:

--- Sayfa 137 ---
This gives us the recursive definition
Now, it is clear that
; hence the game matrix in (5.6) does not
have a saddle point. We can, therefore, apply (2.5.24) to get the
difference equation
which, together with the initial condition
defines
. We can solve this equation by the substitution
which gives us the new difference equation
This equation has the obvious solution
which gives us
Thus, (5.12) gives us the value of the game at each stage. We
can then compute the optimal strategies for each player at each
stage. In fact, the game matrix (5.4) now becomes

--- Sayfa 138 ---
and (2.46) and (2.47) give us the optimal strategies for
5.2.3 Example. (Women and Cats versus Mice and Men) In this
fanciful game, team I consists of
 women and
 cats; team II
consists of
 mice and
 men. At each stage, each team chooses a
representative. One of the two representatives chosen is eliminated,
according to the following rules: a women eliminates a man; a man
eliminates a cat; a cat eliminates a mouse; and a mouse eliminates a
woman. The game continues until one team is reduced to having only
one type of player. When a team no longer has any choice, the other
team is the obvious winner.
The game matrix, generally, will look like this
and considerations similar to those in Example 5.2.3 lead to the
recursive definition
which, together with the boundary conditions

--- Sayfa 139 ---
defines the value inductively. Unfortunately, this is a nonlinear partial
difference equation, which is not easy to solve. We can, however,
obtain certain results; for instance, if
, we have
and, by symmetry
But these equations are exactly those in Example 5.2.2. Hence
and the optimal strategies in such cases are also exactly as in 5.2.2.
5.3. Stochastic Games
These games are similar to the games treated in Section 5.2, but
differ in several important respects. Although there are only a finite
number of distinct positions, it is possible for the game to revert to a
previous position, so that the games can theoretically continue
indefinitely. Moreover, there is usually a payoff after each stage of the
game, so that, once again, an infinite payoff is theoretically possible.
There is, however, a randomization involved which assures that, for
all choices of strategies, the probability of infinite play is zero, and the
expected payoff is finite.

--- Sayfa 140 ---
Specifically, a stochastic game is a set of  “game elements” or
positions,
. Each game element is represented by an
 matrix,
whose entries are of the form
with
The entry
, given by (5.23), means that if, in the
th game
element, player I chooses his th pure strategy and player II chooses
his th pure strategy, then there will be a payoff of
 units from II and
I, plus a probability
 for
 of having to play the th game
element next, and a probability
that play will terminate. Condition (5.25) says that, at each stage,
there is always a positive probability that play will terminate. Thus, the
probability of infinite play will be zero, and all expected payoffs are
finite.
5.3.1 Definition. A strategy for player I is a collection
 of
-
vectors, for
 and all positive integers  satisfying

--- Sayfa 141 ---
A strategy will be said to be stationary if, for all , the vectors
are independent of .
A strategy for player II is a similar collection of -vectors
Briefly, the number
 is the probability that player I will use his th
strategy, assuming that, at the th stage of the game, he finds himself
playing the game element
. As the element
 may be played
several times, player I need not use the same probabilities each time
it is played. If, however, he does use the same randomized scheme
each time the game element is played, the strategy is said to be
stationary. Naturally, a stationary strategy would be preferred from the
point of view of simplicity.
Given a pair of strategies, an expected payoff can be calculated
for any
 on the assumption that the first stage of the game
will be the game element
. Thus, the expected payoff for a pair of
strategies can be though of as a -vector. As with ordinary matrix
games, this will lead to the definition of optimal strategies and a
value, the value being a -vector
.
It is clear that, if the value vector is to exist, one must be able to
replace the game element
 by the value component
. It follows
that we must have
where
 is the
 matrix
defined by
This is, of course, an implicit definition only; we must show that
there exists exactly one vector
 satisfying (5.29) and (5.30).
5.3.2 Lemma. Let
 and
 be
 matrices satisfying
for some . Then

--- Sayfa 142 ---
Proof. Let  be the value of . Let  be an optimal strategy for II in .
Then, for all
and so  gives a loss-ceiling smaller than
 in .
5.3.3 Theorem. There exists exactly one vector
 satisfying
the relations (5.29) and (5.30).
Proof. (Uniqueness) Suppose that there are two such vectors,  and
. Let  be the component for which
 is greatest, and, for
definiteness, assume
Define the two matrices
 and
 by
It is seen that
and so it follows from Lemma 5.3.2 that
But since  and  are both assumed to satisfy (5.29) and (5.30), this
means
But we had assumed
 This contradiction proves uniqueness.
Existence. We shall construct a sequence of vectors which
converges to the desired value vector. We define, inductively

--- Sayfa 143 ---
We must prove, first, that the sequence of vectors
converges, and, second, that the limit has the desired properties
(5.29) and (5.30). Let
By (5.25) (and by finiteness),
. If we let
it is easy to see (by Lemma 5.3.2) that
 and so
. It
follows that the sequence of vectors  is Cauchy sequence and so
must converge to a limit; call this limit . Define now
where
We shall see that
 for all . In fact, for any
, we can
choose  large enough so that, for all
and

--- Sayfa 144 ---
From (5.36) and Lemma 5.3.2, it is easy to see that, for all
,
; this, together with (5.37), means
for all . But  was arbitrary; hence
The second part of the proof of Theorem 5.3.3 is a constructive
proof, in that it allows us to approximate the values of the game
elements
 in a reasonably efficient manner. If we assume that the
game will continue as a stochastic game until we have played  times,
and then necessarily terminate (if it has not already done so), we
obtain a game of exhaustion (the truncated game) rather than a
stochastic game. If we solve this game of exhaustion by the methods
of Section 5.2, we obtain the values , as well as optimal strategies
for the matrix games
. The number , defined by (5.35), is such that
the probability that the game continues beyond r stages, whatever
strategies may be employed, will be at most sr. Thus, if  is large
enough so that
 is negligible, we can approximate the stochastic
game by truncating after r stages. This is precisely what our
sequence of vectors  does. Moreover, the optimal strategies
 and
 to the truncated games will converge, in the limit, to optimal
stationary strategies to the stochastic game.
5.3.4 Example. Players I and II have, together, five units. At each
stage of the game, player I chooses heads or tails, and II, in
ignorance of I’s move, makes a similar choice. If the choices match, II
pays I either three units or 1 unit, depending on whether H or T was
chosen. If the choices do not match, I pays II two units. After each
stage, a coin is tossed to determine whether the game will continue
or end; moreover, the game will terminate whenever either player is
wiped out. We make the additional stipulation that neither player can
pay more than he has.
This game can be represented by the four game elements
,
where  is the amount held by I at the beginning of a given stage, as
follows

--- Sayfa 145 ---
If we use the inductive formulas (5.32)–(5.34), we obtain, as initial
approximations to the values
and  is the value vector, correct to two decimal places. We can now
use  to determine the optimal strategies for each game element. In
fact we have

--- Sayfa 146 ---
and these matrix games have the optimal strategies
respectively. These vectors give the optimal (stationary) strategies to
the stochastic game.
5.4. Recursive Games
Recursive games, while similar to both games of exhaustion and
stochastic games, present certain complications which are not found
in the others. As with stochastic games, the game elements
(positions) may be repeated; as with games of exhaustion, the
termination probabilities at a stage may be zero. But these two facts
conspire not only to make infinite play possible, but to have a positive
probability. To keep values finite, it is, then, generally agreed that
there is a payoff only when the game terminates. There may also be
a payoff
 stipulated in case of unending play.
The principal difficulty with these games, as opposed to stochastic
games, is that approximation by truncation is not usually feasible. In
fact, since infinite play may have positive probability, there is no

--- Sayfa 147 ---
number
 such that the effects of truncation after
 steps are
negligible. Moreover, since the condition (5.25) is replaced by the
weaker condition
it follows that a system of equations similar to (5.29) and (5.30) need
not have a unique solution. Similarly a sequence of vectors , defined
as in Theorem 5.3.3, need not converge to the true value of the
game. We give as an example the recursive game with a single game
element
In this case it is clear that if we let
, then , , etc., will all
equal , while, if we let
, then , , etc., will all be equal to
.
Hence, while the sequence of values converges, it need not converge
to the true value of the game, which is, of course, the larger of the
two numbers
 and
.
To be entirely specific, a recursive game consists of a finite set of
game elements
 represented by matrices
 whose entries are of
the form
with the ’s subject to the constraints
If we now take the relations

--- Sayfa 148 ---
where
 is the matrix
, with
we find that these relations will have solutions, even though these are
not generally unique. In fact, it is not difficult to see that the function
is continuous (satisfying, indeed, a Lipschitz condition with constant
1). Moreover, if all the  are in the interval
it is not difficult to see that all the entries
, and hence the values of
the matrices
, are also in this interval. By the Brouwer fixed point
theorem, there must be a vector  such that
. Unfortunately,
there may be several such vectors, though in many interesting
applications these are unique. Generally, the value vector will be that
vector which is closest to the number
. (See Everett [5.6] and
Milnor and Shapley [5.10] for a more detailed treatment, as well as
proofs.) Finally, it should be pointed out that optimal strategies need
not exist, but only -optimal strategies. As strategies become more
nearly optimal, the expected length of the game may increase without
limit; thus there will be a discontinuity in the expectation, which will
change from  to
 as we approach a limiting strategy.
We give the following example, after Everett [5.6], to show some
of these difficulties (this is one of a type of games known as Blotto
games, after the protagonist, Colonel Blotto).
5.4.1 Example. Colonel Blotto, with three units, must capture an
enemy outpost defended by two units. He must, however, be careful,
while he attacks the enemy outpost, that the enemy does not capture

--- Sayfa 149 ---
his own camp. An attacker needs one more unit than the defending
forces to be successful; if the attacking force is not large enough, it
simply retreats to its own camp again, and the game recommences
on the following day. The payoff is
 if Blotto captures the enemy
outpost without losing his own camp, and
 if the enemy captures
Blotto’s camp. The payoff for infinite repetition is assumed to be zero.
This recursive game can be represented by a single game
element . The strategies in
 simply correspond to a division into
attacking and defending forces; thus Blotto will have four strategies,
corresponding to 0, 1, 2, and 3 attacking units, respectively, while his
opponent has three strategies. The matrix is
The value of this game can be seen to be
; Blotto’s -optimal
strategy will be of the form
. Now the smaller  is, the
larger will be the probability of victory for Blotto, and the larger the
expected length of the game will be. Thus, it seems patience is most
important here. If we let
, however, then the game might be
repeated indefinitely. Thus there is no optimal strategy for Blotto.
5.4.2 Generalizations. We can consider several generalizations of
recursive and stochastic games. One possibility would be to permit
payments in recursive games even when the games does not
terminate. The difficulty then, of course, is that the expected payoff for
a pair of strategies need not exist. It might be a divergent series,
diverging to
 or
, or else oscillating. In the first two cases we
could say the expectation is infinite, but, in the case of an oscillating
series, there is, of course, no expectation.
A second possibility would be to let the game elements
 have
infinite numbers of pure strategies. Thus, the
 may have the form of
games on the square, or even more complicated forms. Everett [5.6]
shows that these games will also have values and
-optimal

--- Sayfa 150 ---
strategies under certain reasonable conditions; the
-optimal
strategies, however, might not be stationary.
5.5. Differential Games
Another possible generalization of stochastic and recursive games is
that of games in which the time interval between stages decreases,
until, in the limit, a game is reached in which each player must make
a move at each moment of time. Because the moves are continuous,
it is natural to ask that the game elements change only slightly over
small periods of time, i.e., that the game element change
continuously. Thus, if a game element is represented as some point
in euclidean space of some dimension, the strategies are generally
though of as defining a differential motion for the point (game
element).
More precisely, we can give a definition as follows: the game
element is represented by an
-tuple
 of real numbers,
known as the state variables. At each moment  of time, player I
chooses a -tuple,
, of real numbers, subject generally to
some constraints usually of the form
 (where
 and
 are
constant). Similarly, II chooses a -tuple
. The vectors
and
 are called the control variables. The control variables then
influence the motion of the state variables, according to a system of
differential equations (called the kinematic equations)
where the
 should be treated as forward derivatives of the
 with
respect to time.
The differential game continues, according to the kinematic
equations, until termination, which is assumed to occur when the
state variables reach some closed subset
 of
-space, whose
boundary is called the terminal surface. In practical applications, this
may mean that player I is close enough to player II to catch him, or
that a specified time period has terminated (if a game is to terminate
after a specified time, then time is, of course, also a state variable).

--- Sayfa 151 ---
The payoff then may be of several forms, most common of which are
the terminal and the integral payoff, as well as combinations of these
two.
If the game begins at time
, and ends at time
 at the point
, then a terminal payoff is simply a function
,
defined on the terminal surface of the game; an integral payoff will be
of the form
The most general type of payoff which we will treat here will have the
form of a function  plus an integral such as (5.51).
5.5.1 The Main Equation. As with discrete multistage games, the
technique for solving differential games consists in replacing game
elements by their values, and then solving recurrence equations for
these values. (These equations will now be differential equations.)
Suppose then that values do exist; the value for a game which
starts at the point
 will be denoted by
. Let us
assume that I chooses the control variable
, while II chooses the
control variable , at time
. In that case, after a very small interval
 of time, we find that the state variables are approximately at the
position
, where
and (if the game has an integral payoff) there will have a total payoff
of approximately
The game will start again from the point
 given by (5.52), with a
payoff (5.53) already effected. If optimal strategies are used from the
moment
 on, the total payoff will be

--- Sayfa 152 ---
We know, however, that
(where
 is the partial derivative of  with respect to ), or
Hence, assuming that
 and
 are optimal choices of the control
variables for the time
, we have
or, letting
or, equivalently
Equation (5.54), or the equivalent (5.55), is known as the main
equation. It is generally possible, in Equation (5.55), to interchange
the order of the two operators, max and min, although in practice
there may be lower-dimensional sets (singular surfaces) on which this
is not so. Thus, pure strategies are generally sufficient; there is need
for randomization, usually, only at a finite number of points in any play
of the game.
5.5.2 The Path Equations. Once the main equation (5.54) has been
obtained, it is possible (as in games of exhaustion) to work backward
from the terminal surface by differential equations (as, before, we
worked backward by difference equations). We have, in fact

--- Sayfa 153 ---
When we differentiate the left-hand side of this with respect to
,
we obtain the sum of the terms
(where
 and
)
and
Let us consider (5.58), supposing that the constraints on the control
variables
 are constant. We know that
 will be either at an interior
point, or at an end-point, of its constraint interval. If it is at an interior
point, then
because  was chosen to maximize the parenthesis. If on the other
hand
 is at an end-point, then (except at points of singularity) it will
remain at that endpoint, and so

--- Sayfa 154 ---
We see thus that the entire term (5.58) vanishes; similarly, (5.59) will
vanish. Consider next the term (5.57). We have
and so
Call the right side of this equation
. If we add this to (5.54), and set
equal to zero, we obtain the equations
which, together with the system
are called the path equations of the differential game. These
equations, with the value of the function  as terminal conditions, are
a formal solution of the game.
It is sometimes easier to use retrograde time
 rather than
forward time  (since, in fact, we have terminal rather than initial
values for the system (5.61) and (5.62)).
5.5.3 Example. Players I and II control the motion of a point in the
euclidean plane, each imparting a velocity whose magnitude depends
on the position of the point and whose direction is entirely under the
player’s control. The velocity of the point is equal to the vector sum of
these velocities.
The game will terminate when the point reaches the -axis; the
payoff will be equal to the time needed to complete the game, plus

--- Sayfa 155 ---
the amount
, where
 is the abscissa of the point at which play
terminates.
If we let
 and
 be the magnitudes of the velocities
controlled by players I and II, respectively, we have the kinematic
equations
and the payoff
Thus we have
 for all
.
It is clear that if we have
, player I can always extend the
game indefinitely. Hence we are interested only in points in the
positive quadrant.
The main equation for this game will be
Now to maximize the first term on the left of (5.63), we must have
and to minimize the second term we must have

--- Sayfa 156 ---
If we introduce these values into (5.63), and simplify, we obtain
We also have
and when we substitute (5.64)–(5.68) in these, we obtain the path
equation
If, instead of forward time, we use retrograde time
, we
have the retrograde path equations

--- Sayfa 157 ---
where
 is the derivative of
 with respect to , etc.
We also have the initial conditions that, for
These conditions show that we must have
. This means that
none of the paths terminates at a point
If we differentiate
 with respect to , we obtain
and this equation has the solution
which give us, in turn
If we set
 we can then introduce the initial conditions that, to
solve for
 and
, we obtain
To find , we notice that we have
which (remembering
 is constant along any optimal path) gives us

--- Sayfa 158 ---
Now
 is given above, and
 can be obtained as a function of ;
this gives us
which has a solution
We solve for
 by remembering that, for
,
. We thus
have
or, equivalently
i.e., the optimal path is a circle on the -axis (see Figure 5.2). The
value
 can be obtained by solving (5.70) for ; we then solve
(5.69) for . Then
. The optimal strategies are also
computable: both players attempt to follow the tangent to the circle
(5.70). Player I (the maximizer) pushes up (away from the -axis);
player II pushes down (toward the -axis).
5.5.4 The Isotropic Rocket Escape Game. The following example is
due to Isaacs. A more complete treatment can be found in (5.8). We
give a very simple form which should, however, be sufficient to show
how most of these games can be solved.

--- Sayfa 159 ---
Figure 5.2.
A pursuer II is trying to capture an evader I. It is assumed that the
pursuer, having large mass, moves by a rocket thrust of constant
magnitude, whose direction he can control; this causes an
acceleration in his motion. The evader, on the other hand, has

--- Sayfa 160 ---
negligible inertia; he moves with a fixed velocity in any direction he
desires.
It is assumed that the game continues until capture is effected,
which in this case means the pursuer is within a certain distance  of
the evader. The payoff is simply time to capture, which the evader
naturally wishes to maximize.
We can represent a state of this game by six variables
. Four
variables are needed to represent the positions of the two players –
rectangular coordinates in the plane. Two additional state variables
are needed to represent the pursuer’s velocity (also a vector in the
plane).
The kinematic equations here are, then
where  is the (constant) magnitude of the acceleration, and
, are
the two players’ control variables.
The terminal surface  is given by
and we can parametrize it by five variables  related to the  by
The payoff, time to capture, can be treated as a pure integral
payoff, with
Applying our theory, we obtain the main equation (ME)

--- Sayfa 161 ---
Since  must be chosen to maximize this expression, we have
and similarly, as  is chosen to minimize
so that the ME reduces to
In turn, the retrograde path equations (RPEs) will take the form
so that, on any optimal path,
 will be constant, as will also
. To obtain initial values for the
, we point out that the terminal
payoff is zero; thus, on the terminal surface,
 constantly, so that
Using the chain rule for differentiation, this will give us
or

--- Sayfa 162 ---
a system of five equations in six unknowns, with solution
where  must yet be determined. We can substitute this in the ME to
obtain two solutions for ; one of these will be positive and one
negative. To determine which one we want, we note that when
— which corresponds to termination with
 — a small
increase in
 will make
 increase (it will, in effect, increase the
distance between I and II). Thus,
 when
, and we conclude
that
. Then
, and substitution of the above in the ME gives us
or
Since this must be positive, it tells us that, at termination, we must
have
: the pursuer II must have its component of
velocity, in the direction of the evader, at least equal to unity (which is
the evader’s own velocity).
We can now integrate directly. We have, for all
From these last two relations we obtain
, and the optimal
strategies
 are

--- Sayfa 163 ---
so that
Thus, under optimal play, we see that both I’s velocity and II’s
acceleration are in the same direction; capture will be effected with II
directly behind I.
The RPE now take the form
which have the solution
To see what this means, we can let
be the distance and velocity vectors. Some algebra shows that

--- Sayfa 164 ---
where
 denotes the usual pythagorean
 norm. Then the solution
of the game depends on the behavior of the quadratic
It is obvious that
, and
 for large . On the other hand,
, so that
 reaches a minimum value for positive . This
minimum value of  may or may not be positive; the condition is
.
If this minimum value of  is positive, then the pursuer can always
effect capture. To get an idea of the situation, let us suppose
.
Then for any value of
, the equation
is represented by a circle with center
 and radius
.
If we draw these circles (see Figure 5.3), we can erase those
parts of “later” circles which intersect “earlier” circles (i.e., those with
smaller ). For small values of , the radius function
 decreases,
and the circles may be seen to be inside a narrowing envelope curve.
After a while (for
) the envelope widens again, and, eventually,
the envelope disappears. The widening circles thus fill up the plane.

--- Sayfa 165 ---
Figure 5.3.
Each point, then, lies on one of these circles; when it lies on two
circles, only the “earlier” one counts. Thus the figure shows us the
time to capture, under optimal play, for given points. The optimal
strategies call for the evader to move along the radius vector, toward
the outside of the given circle. The envelope plays an important role:
for points on the outside, optimal play requires that the evader should
actually move towards the side of the pursuer; this latter will
“overrun,” and must decelerate and return to effect capture.

--- Sayfa 166 ---
In the second case, the minimum value of the function
 is
negative or zero. In this case, the two branches of the envelope curve
meet. It turns out that the evader can usually escape indefinitely; the
pursuer is too clumsy to catch him. Nevertheless, there is a small
area, directly in front of the pursuer, from which the evader cannot
escape; this area is bounded by the envelope, and should be thought
of as the “capture zone.” The rest of the plane is the “escape zone.”
Problems
1. Show that, for recursive games, the value vector is not the only
vector which satisfies the functional equation (5.29) and, moreover,
the method of successive approximations used for stochastic
games need not converge to the value vector.
Use the recursive game with two elements
2. Extend the results on recursive games to games in which there is a
payoff after each play even if the game does not terminate.
(a) A trap is a game element, or set of game elements, such that
once a play enters an element of the trap one player can force the
play to remain in the trap in such a way as to accumulate payoffs
and cause an unbounded expectation. Show that the game with
three game elements
which has traps does not have a fixed point for the value mapping
(5.29).

--- Sayfa 167 ---
(b) If a game has all nonnegative payoffs, and has no traps, it will
have a value.
(c) Even if a game has no traps, it might have no value if it has
both positive and negative payoffs. Give an example. (The value
should oscillate under the “best” strategies.)
3. Show that, if time is considered as continuous rather than discrete,
a recursive game need not have a value, even if the functional
equation (5.29) has a unique solution. Consider the game with one
game elements
where the game is played through an interval of time until it
terminates. In other words, each player chooses a time at which to
act; until that time, he has used his third pure strategy continually.
4. The study of differential games usually involves not only the path
(5.61) but also a study of so-called singular surfaces. Consider the
game played on the half-plane
, with terminal surface
and terminal payoff
Let the kinematic equations be
where the control variables
 are restricted to the interval
.
Show that the -axis is a singular surface in the sense that the
optimal paths are a family of curves which begin on the -axis.
What should be done at a point on the -axis (where two optimal
paths meet)?

--- Sayfa 168 ---
5. It seems quite reasonable to believe that any differential game with
integral or continuous terminal payoff should have solutions in
fixed strategies, except possibly on a lower-dimensional set
(singular surface). Show that this is not so.
Consider the game played on the half-plane
, with terminal
surface
, and integral payoff
, whose kinematic equations
are
and, as before,
 are restricted to the interval
. Prove that, for
any initial point
, the values in pure strategies satisfy
Hence the game has no solution in pure strategies for
 (nor
does it have any optimal paths).
6. A differential game of kind is one which can have only two possible
outcomes, say, win and loss (for player I). Thus, we can think of
the terminal surface  as divided into two sets
 and
 which are
separated by an
-dimensional manifold
. Player I tries to
bring about termination of the game in
 player II, in
.
In general, the playing space
 will be divided into two parts,
called the winning zone (WZ) and losing zone (LZ), such that, from
a point in WZ, player I can force termination in
; while from a
point in LZ, II can force termination in
. These parts are generally
separated by a surface
, which intersects  along
.
(a) On the assumption that
 is smooth, show that the normal
vector
 to
 satisfies the equation

--- Sayfa 169 ---
(where  is oriented toward the WZ). Thus obtain a system of path
equations (or retroactive path equations) for these games, similar
to (5.61).
(b) Consider the following game: Players I and II control the motion
of points  and , respectively, in the upper half-plane of
. The
two points can move in any direction, at velocities 1 and
,
respectively. The game terminates with a win for I if ever the
distance
 is less than ; it terminates with a loss for I if ever
reaches the line
.
(c) If we let
 and
 be the coordinates of
 and
respectively, and let  and
 be the control variables, give the
kinematic equations for this game; characterize the set
.
(d) Solve this game.
7. In an extensive game , let  be a (pure) strategy for player , and
let  be a vertex in ’s personal move set
. Then  is said to be
possible for
 if there exists an
-tuple of strategies
such that if  uses
 and the other players use
, then there is a
positive probability that the play will pass through vertex .
Prove that vertex
 is possible for strategy
 if and only if, at
every
 on the path from the initial vertex  to
,
 chooses
the alternative which leads to .
8. (Kuhn’s Theorem) In an extensive game , player  is said to have
imperfect recall if there are two vertices,
 and
, in the same
information set
, and a strategy
 of player , such that
 is
possible for , but  is not possible.
A game  is said to have perfect recall if no player has imperfect
recall in .
Prove that, in a game with perfect recall, behavioral strategies are
sufficient, in the sense that any mixed strategy can be obtained by
means of behavioral strategies (cf. Example 5.1.3, in which
behavioral strategies are clearly insufficient).
9. Develop optimal strategies for the game of Example 5.2.3, with
m1=4, m2=3, n1=2, and n2=4.
10. Obtain approximate values for the stochastic game

--- Sayfa 170 ---
(Hint: carry out four iterations, starting with v0=(0, 0, 0, 0).)
11. Modify Example 5.5.3 by letting the two velocity vectors be u=2y
and w=x+y. Let the game terminate when the point reaches the
line x=y, with payoff (to player I) equal to the time needed to
complete the game, plus xo
2/10, where xo is the abscissa of the
point at which play terminates.
12. Modify Example 5.5.4 by assuming that the pursuer is subject to a
“downward” acceleration equal to 0.3a: in other words, the
derivative of x4 will be a (sin ϕ–0.3) rather than a sin ϕ. Otherwise,
let all the kinematic equations and payoff functions be as in the
Example.

--- Sayfa 171 ---
Chapter 6
Games with Incomplete Information
6.1. Introduction: The One-Stage Signaling Model
In our development to now, an assumption has been made
throughout of complete information: both players (or all players, in
case of more than two players) are aware of the game which is being
played. In particular, they know what strategies are available, and
what the payoffs will be for any particular choice of strategies. In real
life, we can imagine that several things might go wrong with this
scheme:
(a) a player may be unaware of one or more of the alternatives
available at a given move;
(b) a player may be uncertain as to the payoffs associated with a
given choice of strategies;
(c) a player may be uncertain as to the probabilities associated with
the alternatives at a chance move.
Of course, it is difficult to deal with pure uncertainty, in which the
player is unaware of some alternative, or in which he knows that
something might, by chance, happen, but has no idea as to the
probability of such an event. We therefore assume that each player
has a (subjective) probability distribution as to those events for which
he lacks complete information.
In three important papers, Harsanyi [6.4] points out that it is
usually possible to reconcile the several players’ information and
subjective probability distributions by assuming that they can be
obtained as conditional distributions — based on private information
given the players — from an actual, objective distribution.

--- Sayfa 172 ---
6.1.1 Example. Players I and II are to play a game. The actual
payoff matrix of this game can be any one of eight
 matrices,
called
, depending on whether three events, ,
, and  (or their complements,
,
, and
) have occurred. (It is
possible for any combination of , , and  to occur.) In any case,
we will let I’s two choices be  or , and II’s two choices be  or .
Player I knows that  has occurred, and he assigns probabilities of
0.5 to
, 0.25 to
, 0.25 to
, and 0 to
. Player II
knows that
 has occurred, and he assigns probabilities of 0.4 to
, 0.2 to
, 0.2 to
, and 0.2 to
.
In this case, it may be assumed that there is a basic distribution
of the game, which must satisfy the conditions
It may be checked that the distribution
has the desired conditional probabilities.
Harsanyi now suggests that the game is actually part of the
following game:
(a) Chance chooses , , C or their complements, according to the
probability distribution .
(b) I is told whether  occurred, but not whether  and  occurred.
(c) II is told whether  occurred, but not whether  or  occurred.
(d) I and II, with the given information, choose
 or
,
 or
,
respectively.
As may be seen, in this somewhat complex game, each player
has two information sets ( and
 for ,
 and
 for II), two
alternatives at each information set, and hence four pure strategies.

--- Sayfa 173 ---
The resulting
 game can then be solved according to the
standard techniques.
Continuing with the example, let the several
 matrices be
In this case, some work shows that the eight
 games reduce
to the
 matrix
where strategy
 for I means he chooses
 in either information
set,
 means he chooses  in ,  in
, etc., and similarly for II in
cases  or .
It is now easy to see that this game has a saddle-point at
.
Thus, we understand that the optimal strategies are, for I (who is in
) to play , for II (who is in ) to play .
In this way, then, it is normally possible to reduce any game of
incomplete information (i.e., one or both players do not know the
actual game tree) to a game of imperfect information (both players
know the game tree but they might not know where they are on the
tree). We will assume that such a representation can be made. The
following example is in such form.

--- Sayfa 174 ---
6.1.2 Example. Each player has two alternatives,
 and
, the
choice to be made in ignorance of what the other player has chosen.
One of these two alternatives is known as the paying alternative. If
both chooses the paying alternative, then I wins (and II loses) $1. If
either, or both, choose the nonpaying alternative, then there is no
payment. The difficulty is that neither player knows which of  and
is the paying alternative; a priori, it can be either
 or
 with
probability 0.5.
We can model this game by introducing a chance move, at which
either  or  is chosen (to be the paying alternative) with probability
0.5. The normal form is given by the matrix
and it is clear that this game has the optimal strategies
, and value
.
Suppose, however, that player I knows the result of the chance
move; player II does not know. In this case, the extensive form of the
game changes in that player I’s move are now in distinct information
sets, so that he now has four pure strategies; the normal form
becomes
where I’s strategy
 means that I chooses
 if chance chose
,
and
 if chance chose
. It is clear that the second row,
,
dominates all others. Hence the game has value 0.5, with optimal
pure strategy
 for I. It does not matter what II does.
Let us suppose, next, that the game is to be played many times.
There is now an important distinction to be made, depending on
whether the chance move must be made each time that the game is

--- Sayfa 175 ---
played (so that, from trial to trial, the paying alternative changes), or
whether the chance move is made once for all time. In the first case,
the several trials of the game are quite independent, and so our
above analysis holds: at each trial, player I mimics chance’s move,
and the expected payoff is 0.5 at each trial.
In the second case, the chance move is made once for all at the
beginning of the first trial of the game. It may be easiest to imagine
that the chance move determines the type of individual that player I
is. The game will now be played several times, between the same
players. After each trial, each player is told what the other player has
done; player II is not, however, told what the payoff has been until
after the final trial (since this would tell him what chance had
chosen).
It is clear, now, that, in the first trial, player I has the same
advantage as before. The difficulty, however, from I’s point of view, is
that, if I always plays the same way (i.e., mimicking chance), then II,
who knows what I has chosen, will understand the situation; i.e., if I
repeatedly plays , it will become obvious that this is what chance
has chosen. Thus, it should be expected that, for a game played
times, the value should be less than
, but more than
.
We will return to this game in Section 6.2, below. For the
moment, we note that player I’s problem here is essentially one of
determining the extent to which his private information should be
used. Clearly this information brings some advantage, but use of the
information tends to reveal it. The problem, for player I, is to
determine whether this information is more valuable to I or to II.
Player II’s problem, a more complicated one, is that of eliciting
information from I’s actions and then using this information.
To see this as simply as possible, we may consider the following
signaling model:
 matrices,
, are given, as is a
probability vector
. This information is given to both players.
Then:
1. Chance chooses one of these matrices,
, according to the
probability distribution
.
2. Player I, knowing the value of , chooses a row,
.
(This is the signal.)

--- Sayfa 176 ---
3. Player II, knowing the value of  but in ignorance of , chooses
a column,
.
4. There is then a payoff
 from II to I.
This model reduces the problem to its simplest form. I acts with
private information; his action may (or may not) reveal this
information to II, who can then base his own action on whatever
information I’s action has revealed. Of course I is free to try to
deceive II, who uses the signal at his own risk.
6.1.3 Example. Consider the two matrices
which chance will choose with probability distribution (0.5, 0.5).
The situation is extremely clear here. In case
, row 1
dominates row 2, while column 2 dominates column 1; if
, then
row 2 dominates row 1, while column 1 dominates column 2. Thus,
player I, knowing the value of , would seem to gain an advantage
by playing
. This analysis, however, fails to take into account the
fact that player II will act after receiving I’s signal. Then II, by using
, would gain a definite advantage.
To see this, we note that, if I uses
, while II uses
, then
with probability 0.5 the payoff will be
, and with probability 0.5 it
will be
. Thus the expected payoff will be 1.5. On the other
hand, if I always uses
, then the expected payoff will be 2.5
against whatever strategy II may use. Thus the strategy
 is not
optimal for I. The point is that the private information may be
valuable to I, but it is even more valuable to II, and I is unable to take
advantage of the information without revealing it in time for II to use
it.
To compute optimal strategies for a game such as this, we note
that player I has
 pure strategies, since he can choose any of
alternatives in each of  information sets. Similarly, II has
 pure
strategies. Thus, even for as little as
, each player would
have 27 pure strategies, so that solution by means of mixed

--- Sayfa 177 ---
strategies, while possible, becomes prohibitively long even for small
games.
Instead of using mixed strategies, however, we might use
behavioral strategies. These will be vectors
 and
, with
 and
 components respectively, where
 is the probability that I will
choose row , given that chance has chosen
, while
 is the
probability that II will choose column , given that I has chosen .
The expected payoff, in terms of behavioral strategies, is now
Now, I wishes to choose  so as to maximize this expression, while II
wishes to choose  so as to minimize it, subject to the constraints
that, for each
, the -tuple
 is a probability vector,
while, for each
, the -tuple
 is a probability vector.
Let us now consider player I’s problem. To express this as a
linear program, we note that, whatever  player I chooses, he must
fear that, for each , II will choose that  which minimizes the sum
If we let  be the minimum (with respect to ) of this sum, then a
gain-floor for I will be the sum of these :
We can now express this as the program
subject to the constraints

--- Sayfa 178 ---
We consider, next, player II’s problem. His fear is that, whatever
he chooses, player I will have chosen, for each , that  which
maximizes the expression
Let
 be the maximum (with respect to ) of this expression. A
loss-ceiling for II will now be the sum of these
:
We can therefore express the second player’s problem as the
linear program
subject to the constraints
It can now be seen that the two linear programs, (6.1–6.4) and
(6.5–6.8), are dual to each other. Since they are, clearly, both
feasible, it follows that the maximum of  is equal to the minimum of
, and this is clearly the value of the game.

--- Sayfa 179 ---
6.1.4 Example. We can now return to the solution of example 6.1.3.
The maximizing problem here is
subject to
The minimizing problem is to
subject to
It is not too difficult to see that these programs have the common
value 2.5, obtained by setting

--- Sayfa 180 ---
and
respectively. We note that I’s optimal strategy calls for him to use row
2 at all times; i.e., he effectively ignores his private information, as
the use of this information would disclose it to II — who can make
better use of it than I. The optimal strategy for II is somewhat more
complicated. Essentially, it seems to say that (since I’s use of row 2
means nothing) II should use both columns with equal probability
against row 2. In response to row 1, however, II will use a defensive
strategy which almost always leads him to respond with column 2.
(Of course optimal play for I means that row 1 will never be used.)
6.1.5 Example. Once again, let us assume that chance chooses,
with probabilities  and , one of the two matrices
We have here the two programs
subject to

--- Sayfa 181 ---
and
subject to
We can, of course, proceed to solve this program directly. We
might profitably, however, attempt to simplify it first.
In the first place, we note that
 and
. Thus, if I plays
, optimal play requires that II play
, and we have
,
.
Next, knowing this much, we see that for
,
 would lead to
a payoff of at least 2, whereas
,
 would cause
 and a
payoff of 1. Thus it can never be good for I to choose
 when
,
and so
,
.
Knowing this much, we have in effect (through row and column
domination) reduced this to a game in which each player has only 2
(rather than 4) pure strategies. This game will have the matrix
which clearly has value 2.25, obtained by assigning equal
probabilities to both rows as well as to both columns. This gives the
solution to the original game, which is

--- Sayfa 182 ---
and it may be seen that these, together with
give the solution to the two linear programs.
6.2. The Multistage Model
We return now to the more complicated, multistage problem. A game
is to be repeated many times. Player I knows the true state of nature;
his actions will be made known to II. At each stage, player II, whose
information is incomplete, tries to learn from I’s previous actions.
6.2.1 Example. Let us consider once again the game of Example
6.1.2. Chance chooses one of the two matrices,
 and
, with
equal probabilities. The game is now to be repeated  times.
For
, it is reasonably easy to solve the game directly. To
simplify the solution, we note that, at the second trial, player I should
mimic chance — there is no danger in giving away information at
that time. Thus I has effectively only one choice to make, at the first
trial. Since this can depend on what chance has chosen, I has 4 pure
strategies, labeled AA, AB, BA, and BB as before.
As far as player II is concerned, we note that he can gain by
basing his choice at trial 2 on I’s choice at trial 1. On the other hand,
there is no point in making his choice at trial 2 depend on his own
choice at the first trial: we have already seen that I’s choice at trial 2
is independent of II’s choice at trial 1. Thus II has, in effect, 8
strategies, called
,
, etc., where
 means II chooses  at
trial 1, and then chooses  or  at trial 2 depending on whether I
chose  or , respectively, at trial 1.
We can now form the payoff matrix, which turns out to be

--- Sayfa 183 ---
It is not too difficult to solve this matrix game, which has value
0.75. Each player has many optimal strategies, among them
(0,0.5,0.5,0) for player I, and (0,0,0.5,0,0,0,0,0.5) for II. It should be
noted that any optimal strategy for II has to use either
 or
(meaning that he plays, at stage 2, opposite to what I played at stage
1) with positive probability, as these are the only two columns which
have entries smaller than 1 in the second row.
In theory, it is possible to compute the values
 of the game
with
 repetitions. In practice, the fact that it is to player II’s
advantage to base his strategy on what player I has done at previous
stages means that this computation will be extremely complicated
even for as few as four or five repetitions. Instead, we will try to look
for the long-run average value
which tells us what will “eventually” happen.
In the first place, we note that, if player I tries to make use of his
information by mimicking chance at each trial of the game (or at least
with substantially more than 0.5 probability), then player II will
eventually notice this and, by using the opposite choice at each trial,
decrease I’s winnings to 0 in the long run. On the other hand, we
recall that, if player I is not given information as to the outcome of the
chance move, his optimal strategy is simply to play (0.5, 0.5) at each
trial, obtaining the value 0.25. Clearly, the information which player I
has cannot hurt him (so long as II does not, also, have this
information), and we conclude that I should be able to obtain at least
a long-term average of 0.25 by choosing a long-term strategy which
does not depend on the information obtained. This will keep II from

--- Sayfa 184 ---
using I’s action to deduce something about the information I has.
Thus, we must have
Now consider player II. The point here is that II must make use of
any information which I gives by using one of the two alternatives
more frequently than the other. At the same time, II cannot be too
predictable: except in extreme cases, II must still use some
randomization. The idea is to modify the randomization periodically,
on the basis of what I has done up to that point. More specifically, we
can let
 and
 be the number of times I has used alternatives
and , respectively, in the first  trials of the game. (Note
 must
then be equal to .) Then, on the
st trial, II should choose  or
 with probability
 and
, respectively. Then, in the long run,
the average payoff will be smaller than
, for any positive
number . Thus, it will follow that
Since we had already proved the opposite inequality, it follows
that this game has the long-run average value
. We conclude
that I’s additional information, while it will definitely give him a short-
run advantage, will lose its importance in the long run, since the
value
 is the same as that in the original (one-stage) game. (Of
course, the short run may be quite lucrative; I may win large sums of
money before II manages to obtain the necessary information.)
6.2.2 Example. Let us consider the same situation but with payoffs
which are the negatives of those in Example 6.2.1. Thus, there is
probability 0.5 that the paying alternative is either
 or
. If both
players choose the paying alternative, then the payoff is
;
otherwise the payoff is 0. The game matrix now becomes

--- Sayfa 185 ---
and it is clear that this game has optimal strategies
and value
.
Once again, we shall suppose that player I knows the result of
the chance move; player II does not know. The normal form now
becomes
In this case we see that the third row,
, dominates all others.
Hence the game has value
, with optimal pure strategy
 for I.
It does not matter what II does.
So far, the analysis does not differ much from that for the
previous example. Suppose, however, that, as before, the game is to
be repeated many times, with the chance move made, once for all
times, at the beginning of the first trial. It turns out that, in this case,
player I can maintain the initial advantage for all time: even if I plays,
say, alternative  every time, thus making it clear that chance had
chosen
 (or vice versa), there is nothing that II can do to take
advantage of the information thus obtained. We conclude that, in this
case, the long-run value is
.
The reader will note that there is a definite difference between the
two examples. In 6.2.1, the additional information available to player
I gives him an initial advantage but, in the long run, use of the
information will redound to the opposing player’s advantage, so that
the long-run value is no greater than the value of the game without
this information. In 6.2.2, the additional information gives I a
permanent advantage, so that the long-run value is definitely greater
than the value without information. It is this difference in behavior
that interests us here.
Let us once again consider the game of Example 6.2.1, with the
sole modification that chance has probabilities
 and
 (rather
than  and ) of choosing  and  respectively. If so, the game with
no information will have the normal form

--- Sayfa 186 ---
We see that, for
, this game has value
with optimal strategies
.
In similar fashion, the game of Example 6.2.2, with chance
probabilities  and
, will have the normal form
and this game has value
with the same optimal strategies
.
The reader will note that the function  is concave whereas  is
convex. It turns out that this is the principal cause for the difference
in behavior in the two games.
To see why this is so, we note that, in either of these games,
player I has (at least) two alternative approaches. On the one hand,
he can ignore whatever information he is given about chance’s
move; he does this by using the strategy
, which is optimal in
. Since he is acting in this way, it is impossible for II to deduce
what chance has chosen, and I will, in expectation, receive the
amount
. Alternatively, he can make full use of the information he
receives about chance’s move. This will, in the long run, allow II to
discover what the chance move was, and thus the game will become
either
 (if chance chose
) or
 (if chance chose
). The
expected payoff is then
. Thus player I can, in effect,
choose between the two quantities

--- Sayfa 187 ---
The first of these quantities is larger if  is concave; the second is
larger if  is convex. Thus, it is to I’s advantage to ignore the
information if
 is a concave function of  ; he should use the
information if  is convex.
More generally, we begin by defining the concavification of a
function.
6.2.3 Definition. Let
 be a continuous function defined over a
compact convex set . The concavification of , notation cav , is
the minimal concave function, , such that
 over the set .
It is not obvious that such a function exists. However, we know
(see appendix) that a function is concave if and only if the area
under the graph of the function is convex. If  is not concave, we
look for the convex hull of the area under the graph of
. This
convex hull is itself the area under the graph of a new function, and
this is the desired function, cav . As an example, in the two games
discussed above, we obtained the two payoff functions
and
, defined over the closed interval [0,1]. We noted
above that  is concave; it follows that  is its own concavification,
i.e., cav
.
On the other hand,
 is not concave (it is in fact convex). The
concavification is, here, cav
, i.e., the constant function 1.
6.2.4 Example. On a less trivial note, consider the function
over the interval
. In Figure 6.1, we see that the function curves
down (i.e., the second derivative is negative, so the function is
concave) from
 to 0; from 0 to 1, however, the function curves up.
The concavification is obtained by drawing a line from point (1,1)
which will be tangent to the curve in the lower part of the graph, so
as to “fill in” the convexity in the function. (See Figure 6.2.) Some
elementary calculus show that this is the line from
 to
(1,1). This line has the equation
, as is readily verified.
The desired function is, then

--- Sayfa 188 ---
Figure 6.1..

--- Sayfa 189 ---
Figure 6.2..
The reader should check that this is indeed a concave function;
the diagram “shows” why it is minimal.
Let  and
, now, be two
 matrices. We shall use
 to
represent the game with matrix
. We use
 to represent
the multistage game in which chance chooses either
 or
 with
probability  and
, respectively; in this latter case, player I is told
of chance’s decision but II is not told. As before, it is assumed that II
is told of I’s choice at each stage. Let
 be the value of the matrix
game
, while
 is the long-run average value of
.
We will prove that, in general

--- Sayfa 190 ---
To do this, we must exhibit strategies, for each player, which will
guarantee this value. More precisely, we shall exhibit an optimal
strategy for player I, and
-optimal strategies for player II. The
development is due to Aumann and Maschler [6.2] and later to
Kohlberg [6.5].
6.2.5 Lemma. Player I has a strategy which will obtain a long-term
expectation equal to cav
 or greater.
Proof. Let cav
. We distinguish three cases:
1.
2.
3.
, where
, and ,
 are not 0
and 1 (in either order).
In case 1,
. In this case, player I effectively ignores his
information, playing whatever mixed strategy
 is optimal in the
game
. This will, of course, give at least the expectation
.
In case 2, player I uses his information, playing whatever mixed
strategy is best for either
 or
 (whichever chance has chosen).
The conditional expectation for the payoff is then either at least
 (if
chance chose ) or at least
 (if chance chose ) and therefore the
absolute expectation is at least
.
In case 3, the situation is somewhat more complicated. Let us
suppose, however, that the chance move was actually a two-step
move:
(a) First, chance chooses
 or
, with probability
 or
respectively.
(b) Second, chance chooses  or , with probabilities, conditional on
 or , given by
This is clearly equivalent to the single choice by chance, giving
with probability
. We will, however, modify the
situation by assuming that the two players are told of the outcome of

--- Sayfa 191 ---
the first step ( or ) but not that of the second step ( or ). In this
case, I can use the optimal strategies for game
 if  was chosen,
or for game
 if  was chosen. The conditionally expected payoff
would then be at least
 for , and
 for . Now, since  and
have probabilities  and
, it follows that the expected payoff will
be at least
, as desired.
Of course, in actuality, chance normally does not act in this way,
with an intermediate “signal”
 or
 prior to choosing
 or
.
However, player I, knowing
 or
, can in effect “create” such a
signal. In fact, Bayes’ theorem allows us to obtain the conditional
probabilities
Now, player I, knowing  or , can carry out an experiment which
will give outcome  or  with these conditional probabilities. Then, if
this experiment has outcome , player I will act as if he only knew ,
i.e., he will use whatever strategy is optimal in
, and continue
using this mixed strategy for as long as the game is repeated. If, on
the other hand, the experiment has outcome
, player I will act as
though he only knew , and use whatever strategy is optimal in
for as long as the game is repeated. The point of this is that player II
will be unable to learn, from I’s play, whether
 or
 has been
chosen: at most, an empirical observation of I’s strategies will enable
II to determine whether I as playing as in
 or as in
. This
gives II some information as to whether  or  has been chosen, but
no more than I wants II to have.
Conditional on case , the expected payoff will be at least equal
to
; conditional on case
, the expected payoff will be at least
. Thus the absolute expectation will be at least
,
or
.

--- Sayfa 192 ---
In any one of the three cases, then, we find that player I can
obtain an expectation of at least cav
. Thus, in any case
More generally, we might assume that chance determines, prior
to play of the game, what type of individual player I is; player I’s type
determines the payoff matrix. There are  possible types, with
probabilities

of
being
chosen
by
chance;
and,
corresponding to these, there are
 payoff matrices,
.
Let now
 be the game with matrix
, and,
as before,
 be the game in which chance chooses one of the
matrices
 with probabilities
, and player I is informed about this.
Let
 be the value of
, and let w*(p) the long-run average value
of
. Once again, we claim that
To see this, we note that, if
, then the point
 is a
convex linear combination of at most  points
; i.e., there exist
nonnegative numbers  whose sum is 1, such that
Once again we interpret chance’s choice as a two-step process
which, in step one, chooses one of
 with probabilities
,
respectively; then, having chosen
, it chooses one of
 with
probability
, respectively. Now, if both players were advised of
the outcome of step one only, they would in effect be playing the
game
, and they could both play optimally in this game, thus
obtaining the expectation
. Since this has probability
, the
absolute expectation is
.

--- Sayfa 193 ---
In fact, player I is advised of the outcome of the two-step
process, the matrix
 chosen by chance. Player I can then, by
Bayes’ formula, obtain a probability
Player I now uses a randomization mechanism which will choose
according to these probabilities. If the mechanism chooses
, I will
then act as though he had received only the signal
, rather than
the complete information
; i.e., he will use whatever mixed strategy
would be optimal in game
. Player II can gain no more
information from I’s actions than that I is acting as in
, i.e., that the
several matrices
 have probability
 of being the “true” game. The
best that II can do, then, is to play optimally in game
. The
expected payoff, as discussed above, will then be .
6.2.6 Example. Consider the game with two matrices
and prior probabilities
. The game
 is then given by
It is not too difficult to see that this game
:

(a) has a saddle-point at (row 1, column 1) for
(b) has a saddle-point at (row 2, column 1) for
(c) has a pair of mixed optimal strategies for
(d) has a saddle-point at (row 2, column 2) for
Thus the function
 is given by

--- Sayfa 194 ---
The graph of this function consists, then, of two line segments
with slopes 1 and 3 respectively, followed by a concave curve (it may
be checked that the second derivative of the curved part is always
negative), followed by another line segment with slope
. It reaches
a maximum of 2.802 at
; the curved part, moreover, has an
initial slope of 0.5 at
 and a terminal slope of
 at
.
(See Figure 6.3.) It may be seen that this function is not concave (a)
because the slope of the second line segment is greater than that of
the first, (b) because the slope of the final line segment is greater
than the terminal slope of the curved part.
Figure 6.3.

--- Sayfa 195 ---
To obtain the concavification of this function, we must “fill in” the
area in the angle between the first two line segments, by taking the
segment from (0,2) to (0.6,2.8), and also the area between the curve
and the final line segment by taking the line segment passing
through (1,2) which is tangent to the curve. (See Figure 6.4.) Some
elementary calculus show that the tangency is at
,
.
Thus the function
 is given by
Figure 6.4.
Consider now the game
, where
. We have
, which is not on the function
. Rather, the point
 can be expressed as

--- Sayfa 196 ---
We note that both (0, 2) and (0.6, 2.8) are on the function
.
Player I’s strategy, now, consists in treating the chance move as
though it were a two-step process. In step 1, chance chooses either
 or
 with probabilities 0.167 and 0.833 respectively. In step 2,
chance chooses either
 or
 with conditional probabilities
(It may be seen that this gives the desired probability 0.5 for each of
the two types.) Now, I is actually told the outcome of the second
step. He will act, however, as though he only knew the outcome of
the first step. With this information, he will then choose optimal
strategies for either game
 or
.
Of course, this two-step process is fictitious:
 and
 do not
really exist, except in player I’s mind. In reality, I is told the outcome
of step 2 (either
 or
). Player I then applies Bayes’ theorem to
obtain the probabilities
and, on the basis of these probabilities, chooses
 or
.
Player I’s actual strategy, then, is as follows:

(a) If chance chooses
, then I will make believe he was told
.
(b) If chance chooses
, then I will use a randomization mechanism
which, with probability 0.333, will tell him to make believe he was
told
, and, with probability 0.667, will tell him to make believe
that he was told
.
(c) For
, I will use the strategy which is optimal in the game
,
namely the first row. He will continue to use this through all trials
of the game.

--- Sayfa 197 ---
(d) For
, I will use the strategy which is optimal in
, namely
the second row. He will continue to use this through all trials of
the game.

The reader should see what I’s objective action will be. If chance
chooses
, then I, playing as in
, will use row 2. If, instead,
chance chooses
, then with probability 0.667, I will use row 2; with
probability 0.333, he will play as in
 and use row 1.
Against this strategy, we can also see what II’s best reply would
be. If II sees I use the first row, then II can deduce (assuming I is
following this strategy) that chance has chosen
. Then II will
choose column 1, with a consequent payoff of 2. If, on the other
hand, II sees that I uses row 2, then II concludes that I is playing in
. In this game, no matter what II plays, the expected payoff is
2.8. Thus, with probability 0.167, the expected payoff will be 2; with
probability 0.833, it will be 2.8. The marginal expectation is then
2.667 as per our theory.
We have therefore seen that player I can make use of his
information so as to obtain an expected payoff which is at least equal
to cav
 i.e.
In fact, however, we wish to prove that these two are equal. We must
therefore exhibit a strategy for player II which will keep I from
obtaining a higher long-run average than this.
We first note that we can, without loss of generality, assume that
the a priori probabilities of the several types are all positive. In fact, if
one of the types has zero probability, there is no point in including it
in the analysis since it corresponds to something which both players
know to be impossible. We next prove an auxiliary lemma.
6.2.7 Lemma. Let
, the a priori probabilities of the several
types, all be positive, and let
. Then there exist quantities
 satisfying

--- Sayfa 198 ---
and, for all probability vectors
Proof. Since cav  is a concave function, we know that the set under
the graph, i.e., the set
is a convex set. By continuity, it is also closed. We will think of
 as
a closed convex subset of the -dimensional space , which consists
of all
 satisfying
.
The point
 is on the boundary of set
, and so we can apply
Theorem 2.4.2 in its stronger form (see problem 1 of Chapter 2):
there exist numbers
, , not all 0, such that
for all points
 in
.
Now, we see that
 cannot be positive, since  can be made
arbitrarily small and this would make the right-hand side of (6.18)
smaller than the left. Hence
. On the other hand, if  were 0,
then (6.18) would take the form
where the  are not all 0. In fact, however, the  cannot even all be
equal among themselves. The reason for this is that, if they were all
equal to some common value , then the equation
 would be
an identity in space
, and could not represent a separating
hyperplane. We conclude that, in this case, some
 would be larger
than their mean, and others would be smaller.
Now, since all
, we can choose  so that
 whenever
is smaller than average, and
 whenever
 is larger than
average. This would also make the right-hand side of (6.18) smaller
than the left.

--- Sayfa 199 ---
We conclude, then, that
. The inequality (6.18) will be
preserved if we divide by any positive constant (and in particular by
), so that there is no loss of generality in assuming that that
. Thus (6.18) now becomes
We know that
, and so we can set
. The inequality
then becomes
Now, if the value of the left-hand side of (6.19) is 0, the lemma is
proved. Suppose its value is different from zero, say . If so, we
need merely replace each  by
Since both
 and  are probability vectors, this decreases both
sides of (6.19) by the amount . Thus the inequality is preserved,
and the value of the left-hand side is now 0. This proves the lemma.
We note next that, if we subtract the same quantity, , from each
of the elements in any one of the matrices
, then the optimal
strategies for the game are not changed, though the value of both
 and cav
 will be decreased by
. In fact, it may be checked
that whatever strategy guaranteed cav
 in the original game will
still guarantee the new value of this function in the new game; since
player II’s optimal strategy is based on obtaining information from I’s
actions, there will be no difference as far as this is concerned.
To simplify matters, now, we will normalize the game by, for each
, subtracting the amount  (given by Lemma 6.2.7) from each entry
 in the matrix
. As mentioned above, this does not change the
optimal strategies; the values
 and cav
 will decrease by the
total amount
. Thus, for the newly modified games, we
will have

--- Sayfa 200 ---
and, for all
We will also assume that, for all , , and ,
. Again, there is no
loss of generality in this, since it can be accomplished by dividing all
entries
 by the largest of these. (This will not change the optimality
of strategies in the game.)
The following lemma is also important:
6.2.8 Lemma. Let
 be a nonempty closed subset of the
-
dimensional Euclidean space
. For a given point , let
 be the
point in
 closest to  using the usual Euclidean metric. (In case of
ties, any such point may be taken.)
Let
,
 be a sequence of points in
, with norm not
greater than 1, and let  be the mean of
:
Suppose that, for each  such that
 is not in
,
 is on the
opposite side (from ) of the hyperplane which passes through
and is perpendicular to the line segment joining
 to
. Then
,
the distance from  to , is not greater than
, where
.
Proof. We prove this by induction on ; it is clearly true for
.
Suppose, now, that  is in . In that case, we have
We therefore have

--- Sayfa 201 ---
Now, both
 and  have norm less than or equal to 1, so the norm
of their difference is at most 2. Since
 belongs to
, the distance
from
 to
 is at most equal to the norm of
, which is not
greater than
, and this in turn is not more than
, as
desired.
Suppose, on the other hand, that  is not in
. By the induction
hypothesis, the norm of
 is not more than
. By the
hypothesis of the theorem, the angle
 is either right or
obtuse, which means that
where  represents the usual dot product. Also, as in the previous
case, the norm of
 is not more than 2. Now
and so
as desired.
6.2.9 Theorem. With the given normalization, II has a strategy to
guarantee
.
Proof. We will develop a strategy for II which will keep I’s expected
winnings down to 0 (or, rather, smaller, as a long-run average, than

--- Sayfa 202 ---
any preassigned positive number).
For this purpose, II must keep track of what I has done up to a
given moment. Suppose, then, that, at time , player I uses row
,
while II uses column
. Let
 the vector with
components
which tell us what the payoff at time  would be if the actual type
were . Finally, let
 be the mean of the , i.e.
In general, II’s problem consists in deducing, from I’s play, what
I’s true type (the chosen matrix) is. The main idea is that, if I’s
previous play would have been good in type , then this makes it
more likely that the true type is indeed . Of course I is free to
attempt to deceive II by, e.g., bluffing as in poker, but in general this
line of reasoning by II should be valid. Then II must choose a
strategy which will be good (for II) in that state. Since, however, the
state is never entirely known to II, his strategy must be good, given
I’s observed strategy, in all states. What this means is that — under
the normalization given here — II’s strategy must be such as to bring
the expected payoff below 0, or at least arbitrarily close to 0, for all
possible payoff matrices.
In line with the principle just stated, at time  II will assign, to the
several possible types, probabilities proportional to the
. More
precisely, let
Then, assuming that, for at least one ,
, define the probabilities
 by

--- Sayfa 203 ---
Now, at time
, let II choose a one-shot strategy which is
optimal in the game
. (If, for all ,
, it does not matter what
II does at time
.)
We can now apply Lemma 6.2.8. To do this, we let
 be the
nonpositive orthant of
. Then, for any point
 which is not in , we
note that
, the nearest point to
 in , is given by
It follows that
and so the plane passing through
, perpendicular to the line
joining this point to
, is
or, since  is a multiple of rT
Now,
 is an optimal strategy for the matrix game
. By
equation (6.21), we know this has value
. Thus
, the
expected value of
, the vector of payoffs for the several types,
against any choice of a row by player I, will satisfy the inequality
and will therefore lie on the side of hyperplane (6.26) opposite to
.

--- Sayfa 204 ---
Moreover, in the normalization of the game, all payoffs are
smaller than 1 in absolute value, and hence
, being a weighted
average of payoffs, is also smaller than 1 in absolute value. Thus
Lemma 6.2.8 applies.
Now, if we could replace
 by its expected value
, the
theorem would be proved. In fact, it is now necessary to apply some
results from martingale theory as well as the strong law of large
numbers. All this will tell us that, with probability 1,
 will eventually
come arbitrarily close to the set
, i.e., player I’s average winnings
will be smaller than any preassigned
 for all sufficiently large .
The details are rather technical, and the reader is referred to
Blackwell [1956] for these.
The above theorem was valid under the given normalization of
the game matrices
. More generally, we have the following
theorem:
6.2.10 Theorem. For the game
, where player I has complete
information
We dispense with the proof, as it follows directly from the
previous theorem, after reversing the normalization. Of course the
normalization is not necessary in order to compute player II’s
strategy. If we dispense with the normalization, the thing to
remember is that the quantities
 mentioned above are not the
maximum of
 and 0; rather, we have
where  is as given in Lemma 6.2.7. The posterior probabilities
are then chosen proportional to
 as before.
It may also be useful to notice that, if we let
 be the relative
frequency with which the two players have (simultaneously) chosen
row  and column  in the first  trials, then

--- Sayfa 205 ---
6.2.11 Example. Let us apply this technique to the game of Example
6.2.1.
As seen above, for a probability vector
, the game
 is
This game has value
, with optimal strategies
 for both players. As mentioned above, this value
function is concave, hence it is its own concavification, and it follows
that
In this case, player I’s optimal strategy in the game
 is the
stationary strategy
: in effect, I ignores his private information
(because this information is more valuable to II than to I).
Computation of II’s optimal strategy depends on the a priori
probabilities,
. Let us suppose
. In this case, we note
that
while, for all probability vectors
Thus we have here
.
Now, let
 be the relative frequency with which players I and II
have simultaneously chosen the th row and the th column in the
first  trials of the game. Then, by (6.28)

--- Sayfa 206 ---
At trial
, then, II assigns posterior probabilities
 proportional
to
assuming at least one of these is positive. Thus, at trial
, II
chooses a column according to an one-shot strategy which is optimal
in
, namely
Of course, if both
 and
 are smaller than 0.25, then II can
choose his column at trial
 arbitrarily.
This strategy of II will eventually bring I’s average winnings below
 for any positive , in either of the two states (types).
6.2.12 Example. Let us consider the game with the same matrices
as in the previous example, but with the a priori probabilities
.
In this case we have
. To calculate the , we note that
and
for all . Thus
 and
.
It follows from this that II’s strategy will try to bring the payoff
down to 0.111 (or below) for type 1, and to 0.444 for type 2. We will
have

--- Sayfa 207 ---
and otherwise the analysis continues as in the preceding example.
6.2.13 Example. We consider once again the game of Example
6.2.6. The two matrices (as given above) are
We have already constructed an optimal strategy for player I; we
now look at player II’s problem.
As seen above, the function
, is given by
Near
, the function  is given by
, or, setting
,
,
. It is easily checked that we have
and
Thus we have
,
.
Player II’s technique, then, consists in trying to play so as to
decrease the average payoff to 3.333 (in case chance has chosen
type 1) or 2 (in case chance has chosen type 2). Specifically, II does
this by keeping track of
, the average payoff per trial in either one
of the two cases, or, equivalently, by keeping track of
, the relative
frequency with which the two have chosen (row , column ) over the
first  trials. Then, as discussed above, II computes

--- Sayfa 208 ---
Now, if both
 and
 are 0 or less, it does not matter what II
does at trial
. If, however, one or both of the
 is positive, then
at trial
 II should choose an one-shot strategy optimal in the
game
, where
 is a probability vector whose components are
proportional to the
.
As an example, suppose that, over the first 100 trials, the two
players have chosen (row 1, column 1) 23 times, (row 1, column 2)
28 times, (row 2, column 1) 31 times, and (row 2, column 2) 18
times. In that case
Thus
,
. The corresponding (proportional) probability
vector is
, and so, on the 101st trial, II should play as in
, i.e., as in game matrix
. In other words, he should choose column
1.
The above analysis is based on the premise that, at each
repetition of the game, player II is told what row player I used. In
general, of course, the information received may be considerably
less (or more) than that. This can make the analysis much more
complicated. Readers are referred to Kohlberg [6.5] for details.
Problems
1. Solve the following games according to the one-shot signaling
model. Player I acts knowing the results of the chance move;
player II acts in knowledge of I’s move but in ignorance of the
chance move.
(a)

--- Sayfa 209 ---
(b)
,
,  and  as in part (a).
(c)
,
,  and  as in part (a).
(d)
(e)
,
,  and  as in part (d).
(f)
,
,  and  as in part (d).
2. Obtain the concavification of the following functions, over the
given domains:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
3. Let
 be a continuous function defined over a compact subset,
, of -dimensional Euclidean space. Show that, if
 is defined
over
, then a necessary and sufficient condition for  to be the
concavification of  is that
(a)  is concave
(b) for every
, there exist points
 (not
necessarily all distinct) and non-negative numbers
,
such that
(1)
(2)
(3)
(Hint: apply Theorems A.1.8–A.1.10 from the appendix to the
“area under the curve.”)
4. (a)–(f). Solve the several games in Exercise 1, above, using the
repeated games model. (Assume that I knows the outcome of the
chance move, and II is told at each repetition what action I took.)
Obtain an optimal strategy for I, and describe the optimal strategy
for II.

--- Sayfa 210 ---
Chapter 7
Utility Theory
7.1. Ordinal Utility
In the preceding six chapters we have worked on the supposition
that two players have directly opposite interests. Even when the two
players form a closed system, with one losing whatever the other
gains, it is not clear that their interests will always be directly
opposed. If one player is a rich philanthropist, while the second is
poor and deserving, it may be that the first player will prefer to let the
second win (up to a certain amount). The fact is that it is not money,
but rather the utility represented by the money, which should be
considered in such a case. Similarly, the stakes in a game may be
something that has no monetary value. Nonmonetary (say,
sentimental) reasons may make it very valuable for one player, but
practically worthless for another. It is this concept of personal value,
or personal utility, which must be studied.
Let us consider, then, the fact that a person will prefer certain
events to others, and that in other cases, he will be indifferent as to
two events. This gives us the two relations p and i. The domain of
these relations will be the set of events. Let us use
 etc., to
denote events.
7.1.1 Definition. Given any two events  and , we say  p  if  is
preferable to . We say A i B if A  B and B  A.
7.1.2 Utility Axioms. The relations p and i satisfy the following
axioms:

--- Sayfa 211 ---
1. Given any two events A and B, exactly one of the following
must hold:
(α).
(β).
(γ).
2.
 for all .
3. If
, then
4. If
 and
, then
5. If
 and
, then
6. If
 and
, then
7. If
 and
, then
Axiom 1 is also called the trichotomy law. Axioms 2, 3, and 4
mean that i is an equivalence relation. Axiom 5 (together with Axiom
1) means that p is an order relation. Finally, Axioms 6 and 7 are
sometimes described by saying that p is transitive over i.
Essentially, the Axioms 7.1.2 represent a weak linear ordering of
events, from the most desirable to the least desirable. It is usual to
say that, if someone prefers the event
 to the event
, then the
event  has more utility than , or the utility of  is greater than that
of .
Unfortunately, while this tells us that the utility of  is greater than
that of , it does not tell us how great this difference in utility is. For
certain problems, this represents no difficulty (e.g., if it is merely a
question of determining which event an individual will choose). On
the other hand, if any risk is involved, it is clear that we must have
some idea of the difference in utility between a given pair of events
(and not merely which one is preferred by an individual). If, for
instance, a person must choose between the event  and a lottery
that will give either the event
 or the event
 with equal
probabilities, and if, moreover,
, then the problem is to
determine whether the possibility of gain (in case
 happens) is
enough to offset the risk of loss (in case  should occur).
If, now, there existed some commodity (called, perhaps, utiles)
for which utility were linear (i.e., such that the utility of a certain

--- Sayfa 212 ---
quantity of utiles were directly proportional to that quantity) there
would be no difficulty. We could simply decide the size of the side-
payments (in utiles), which would induce our player to abandon  for
, and  for , respectively, and then act accordingly. Unfortunately,
we have seen that no commodity (not even money) behaves in this
manner, and thus this idea is deficient. Yet we shall show that such a
commodity can be dealt with and considered, just so long as we do
not attempt to deal with it as with other commodities, which can be
bought, sold, transferred, or destroyed.
7.2. Lotteries
We mentioned above that one of the principal cases in which we
would like to be able to deal with utiles is that of risk-taking. Now,
risk-taking depends essentially on the idea of a lottery.
7.2.1 Definition. Let  and  be any two events, and let
.
Then by
 we shall mean the lottery that has the two
possible outcomes,
 and
, with probabilities
 and
,
respectively.
In a similar way, lotteries with three or more possible outcomes
may be defined. It should be pointed out that a lottery is also an
event. Thus there may be a lottery in which one of the outcomes is
another lottery. Moreover, the combination of events by means of
lotteries obeys all the usual laws of arithmetic (and linear algebra).
We thus have the axioms
Axiom (7.1), a commutative law, has an obvious meaning.
Axioms (7.2) and (7.3), which resemble the distributive law, state that
the manner in which a lottery or sequence of lotteries is held does

--- Sayfa 213 ---
not matter: only the final probabilities of the possible outcomes
matter.
Now, in the lottery
, it is clear that it should not make
any difference if  is replaced by some  such that
. We have
thus the axioms
If
, then, for any ,
If
, then, for any
When we consider the lottery
, we see that, for
,
the lottery is identical to the event
; while for
, the lottery is
identical to . Now it seems reasonable that a very small change in
should cause only a very small change in the utility of the lottery
(whatever is meant by this). This, together with the intermediate
value theorem for continuous real-valued functions, gives us the
axiom
7.2.2 Axiom. (Continuity Axiom) Let
 and  be events such that
. Then there exists some
 such that
It should be remarked that, in Axiom 7.2.2, we must actually have
. In fact, if
 or 1, the lottery is equal to  or , respectively,
and by hypothesis
, so we cannot have a lottery equivalent
(under i) to  in either of these two cases. This can be stated as a
theorem:
7.2.3 Theorem. If
, and
then
. Moreover,  is unique.

--- Sayfa 214 ---
Proof. We have seen that  cannot then equal either 0 or 1. To show
uniqueness, suppose  is any other number in
. We may assume
 We have
, and so, since
and
, it follows that
Now we have
and thus by (7.5)
The axioms that we have given are now sufficient for the
construction of a utility function. Let us consider two cases. The first
possibility is that the individual we are dealing with may be indifferent
to any choice, i.e.,
 for any two events  and . Without asking
whether such a person might exist, we point out that this is really a
trivial case: all events have the same utility for this individual (who at
any rate seems to be a vegetable rather than a person) and he
hardly enters the framework of game theory. The second case is
dealt with in the proof of the following theorem. (It should be pointed
out that the theorem is true in both cases, not just the second.)
7.2.4 Theorem. There exists a function  mapping the set of all
events into the real numbers, such that

--- Sayfa 215 ---
for any two events  and , and any
. Moreover, the function
is unique up to a linear transformation; i.e., if there exists a second
function, , also satisfying (7.6) and (7.7), then there exist real
numbers,
, and , such that, for all
Proof (Existence). If, for all  and ,
, we can simply let
for any event. Suppose, then, that there exist two events,
 and
,
such that
. Now, by the Axioms 7.1.2, for any event , there
are five possibilities
Let us define, first of all,
 and
. We can then define
, for any event , as will be explained. The five possibilities are
treated in order.
In case (a), we have
 By the continuity axiom, there
exists
 such that
We define
In case (b) we must clearly define
In case (c), there exists
 such that

--- Sayfa 216 ---
We then define
In case (d), we will clearly have
Finally, in case (e), there exists
 such that
In this case, we define
We have thus defined a function
 for all events , and must
now show that it satisfies (7.6) and (7.7).
In fact, the proof that  does satisfy these conditions is quite
lengthy, depending on whether each of the two events,  and , lies
in case (a), (b), (c), (d), or (e). We shall prove these assuming both
are in case (c); the proofs in each of the other 14 cases are quite
similar.
Assume, then, that both
 and
 are in case (c), and that
. If, now,
, we see that both
 and
 are
equivalent (under i) to the lottery
 and hence
. If,
on the other hand,
, it is seen, as in the proof of 7.2.3, that
and so
. Similarly, if
, we see that
. This proves that
satisfies (7.2.6).
To prove (7.2.7), let
. We have

--- Sayfa 217 ---
and so, by (6.2.4)
Hence
and so
or
We must, finally, prove that
 is unique up to a linear
transformation. In fact, let  be any other function satisfying (7.6) and
(7.7). Because
, we must have
, and so we can
define
Now, suppose
. If
, we know
and so

--- Sayfa 218 ---
Similarly, for the other possibilities ((a), (b), (d), (e)), (7.8) may be
shown to hold.
We have thus shown the existence of a utility function. The fact
that this function is not unique does not detract much from it; in fact,
the difference between any two utility functions is only as to the zero
and unit of the scale — a difference quite similar to the difference
between the Celsius and Fahrenheit temperature scales. By
definition, the utility function, , is linear with lotteries (7.7). The fact
that, in a lottery with two outcomes, the first outcome may be given
any probability between 0 and 1 means that the range of the utility
function is a convex subset of the real line, i.e., an interval. There are
11 types of intervals; one of these, however, is the empty set, while
another, consisting only of a single point, clearly applies only to the
trivial case mentioned above (of an individual who is indifferent to
any choice). This still leaves, however, nine types of intervals, and
the question of which of these nine is the true utility space for a given
individual remains open.
7.3. Commodity Bundles
From an abstract point of view, utilities are assigned to all types of
events. This is as it should be, for players differentiate among all
types of events. On the other hand, from the economist’s point of
view, the natural application of utility theory is toward the possession
of commodities.
We assume a finite number, say , of basic commodities. These
commodities are held by different individuals in different quantities. It
is natural to use an -vector
 to denote the amounts of
these commodities held by an individual (or group of individuals). We
shall call such an -vector a commodity bundle. These commodity

--- Sayfa 219 ---
bundles are then treated as events: i.e., the event of holding a given
bundle. Thus a utility function will be defined on the commodity
bundles.
A caveat is in order here: we must distinguish between the lottery
which gives the bundle  with probability  and the bundle
 with
probability
, and the bundle  defined by
which is a fixed bundle and not a lottery. For instance,
 could
consist of two automobiles without tires, and
 could consist of 10
tires. Letting
, it is clear that the bundle  (one car with five tires)
is much preferable, at least for most people, to the lottery
One obvious condition that the utility function must satisfy is
monotonicity: if
, we must have
. It is also sometimes
assumed that the function  is continuous, and has continuous first-
and second-order partial derivatives (since it is monotone, at least
continuity and the first-order partials will exist almost everywhere).
The partial derivatives
 are called shadow prices (they
represent, naturally, the price in utiles that would be “fair” for the
particular commodity at the given level).
The jth commodity is said to be subject to the law of diminishing
returns if, for all
Most commodities are assumed to be subject to this law.
The ith commodity is said to be grossly substitutable for the jth
commodity if

--- Sayfa 220 ---
i.e., if a decrease in the amount of the jth commodity makes the
shadow price for the ith commodity greater. Since we usually have
, it follows that gross substitutability is a symmetric relation.
The ith and jth commodities are said to be complementary if
i.e., if an increase in the amount of one of them makes the value of
the other greater.
A commodity, say the nth, is said to be separable if its utility does
not depend on the other commodities, i.e., if there exist two
functions,
 and
 such that for all
A separable commodity is a natural one to use as a medium of
exchange. In some cases the function  is linear; if this holds for two
different persons, we say that the nth commodity is linearly
transferable between the two players. The importance of such a
case is that, if the units of utility for the two persons are suitably
chosen, a transfer of this commodity from one person to the other
will leave the total utility of the two constants. Thus the other
commodities can be divided so as to maximize this total utility; a
transfer of the nth commodity (side payment) is then used to correct
any inequity that this first process may have caused.
7.4. Absolute Utility
In the field of welfare economics, it is sometimes desired to know
whether a certain action “will help individual  more than it hurts
individual .” Now this cannot be determined simply by measuring
the increase and decrease of utility, which this action causes to the
two individuals, for we have already pointed out that the units of
utility scales are arbitrary and thus cannot be used for interpersonal
comparisons. The difficulty is that there is no absolute scale on
which to measure utilities for this purpose.

--- Sayfa 221 ---
Suppose, however, that the utility spaces of different people are
bounded intervals. Then there will be an absolute unit of utility: the
length of these intervals. We can normalize all the intervals so that
they have 0 and 1 for their upper and lower end-points. It is then
natural to compare utilities on these scales.
The problem, then, reduces to the question of whether the utility
space of an individual is bounded or not. This is, of course, an open
question. Isbell, who favors the bounded interval, suggests the
following arguments in its favor:
1. Assume that my utility space is unbounded above. Let  be the
event “nothing changes,” and let  be the event “I am boiled in oil.”
As the space is not bounded above, there must be some event
such that
But this means that
However, I can conceive of no event , which would make me prefer
the lottery
 to my present state in life. Hence, my utility space
is bounded above.
2. Assume that my utility space is not bounded below. Let  be
the event “nothing changes” and let  be the event “I win a million
dollars.” Now, if the space is not bounded below, there will be some
event  such that
But I can conceive of no such event
. Hence my utility space is
bounded below.
3. Suppose, moreover, that the utility space is not bounded
above. Then there exists a sequence of events,
 such that

--- Sayfa 222 ---
Then the lottery
will have infinite utility (the Petersburg paradox). Therefore, to avoid
this paradox, the utility space must be bounded above. Similarly, it
may be argued that the utility space is bounded below.
These are Isbell’s arguments for bounded utility; it may be argued
that the fact a person cannot conceive of an event C just described
simply means his imagination is defective, and that the Petersburg
paradox is precisely that — a paradox. The question remains open,
naturally. It can only be said that, while things would be simpler with
bounded utility scales, we can nevertheless obtain most of the
desired results without any recourse to them.
Problems
1. Complete the proof of Theorem 7.2.2.
2. (Arrow’s impossibility proof.) When only ordinal utilities are
considered (and no lotteries) there is often no way to determine
which action a group of people should take.
Consider a group of m individuals, faced with n alternatives,
. By a profile of individual preferences we mean a
function that assigns to each individual  a weak ordering of the
alternatives. By a social welfare function we mean a function  ,
which assigns an ordering (the “social” ordering) to each profile.
The following axioms seem reasonable:

  is defined for all profiles.
 Suppose that, for a given profile,
 is preferred to
 by the
function . Then
 will continue to be preferred to
 if the profile
is changed in the following way:

--- Sayfa 223 ---
(a) The relative orders of alternatives other than Aj are not
changed.
(b) In each of the individual orderings, the position of Aj is
improved.

 Let
 be a subset of
. Suppose that a profile is
modified in such a way as to leave the relative orderings of the
elements of
 unchanged. Then the social ordering, , will also
leave the relative ordering of the elements of
 unchanged.
 For each pair of alternatives,
 and
, there exists a profile
such that the social ordering prefers
 to
.
 There is no individual, , such that, for every
 and
, the
social ordering prefers
 to
 whenever  does so.

Arrow’s axioms
 are inconsistent whenever
 and
:

(a) With respect to a given function, F, a coalition S is said to be
decisive for the ordered pair (Aj, Ak) if, whenever all members
of S prefer Aj to Ak, then the social ordering does likewise. A
set is decisive if it is decisive for at least one ordered pair (Aj,
Ak).
(b) Let V be a minimal decisive set (i.e., V is decisive but no
proper subset of V is decisive). Then
.
(c) Assume V is decisive for (Aj, Ak). Let
 and let Al be any
other alternative. Then {i} is decisive for (Aj, Al), and hence, by
the minimality of V, V={i}.
(d) The set {i} is decisive for all pairs, contradicting
.
3. Assume
. Find the
 in each of the following
cases:
(a)
(b)
(c)

--- Sayfa 224 ---
4. Assume u(A)=5 and u(B)=2. Find u(C) in each of the cases of
Problem 3.
5. In a two-person situation, with three commodities, assume
Let the two players have the endowments (initial bundles) (8, 1,
18) and (2, 7, 15). Find an efficient distribution of the total amount
(10, 8, 33) available to the two players:

(a) Use Lagrange multipliers to maximize the sum of u1 and u2.
Note that this maximum does not depend on how the third
commodity (the numéraire) is divided between the two
players.
(b) Use these Lagrange multipliers to determine “fair” prices for
the first and second goods, in terms of the numéraire.
(c) Use these prices to determine a “fair” division of the third
good.

Note: This problem can also be solved without the use of
multipliers. Simply determine the prices in terms of derivatives:
the prices should be proportional to the derivatives at the
maximizing point; clearly the derivative with respect to z is equal
to 1.

--- Sayfa 225 ---
Chapter 8
Two-Person General-Sum Games
8.1. Bimatrix Games (Noncooperative)
We have so far studied, in general, only zero-sum games. In parlor
games, or in situations in which the stakes are small monetary
amounts (so that utility will be nearly linear with money), such
models are accurate enough. On the other hand, when stakes are
more complicated, as often happens in economic situations, it is not
generally true that the interests of the two players are exactly
opposed; very often, both can gain through cooperation. Such
situations are called general-sum games; they include zero-sum
games as a special case.
In general, a finite two-person general-sum game can be
expressed as a pair of
 matrices,
 and
, or
equivalently, as an
 matrix
 each of whose entries is an
ordered pair
. The entries
 and
 are the payoffs (in utilities)
to the players I and II, respectively, assuming they choose,
respectively, their ith and jth pure strategies. A game in this form is
called a bimatrix game.
It is clear that, in many cases, cooperation between the players
can work out to both players’ advantage. On the other hand, it is
possible that, even where this cooperation is mutually beneficial, it is
forbidden by the rules of the game (by, e.g., an antitrust law). We
distinguish, therefore, two cases for bimatrix games:
1. The noncooperative case, in which any type of collusion, such
as correlated strategies and side payments, is forbidden;
2. The cooperative case in which all such cooperation is
permitted.

--- Sayfa 226 ---
We shall treat, first, the noncooperative case. As in the case of
zero-sum games, we can define mixed strategies for I and II as
-
and
-vectors, respectively, with nonnegative components whose
sum is 1. We define equilibrium pairs in the obvious manner:
8.1.1 Definition. A pair of mixed strategies
 for the bimatrix
game
 is said to be in equilibrium if, for any other mixed
strategies,  and
We naturally inquire as to the existence of such pairs. The
following theorem answers the question in the affirmative.
8.1.2 Theorem. Every bimatrix game has at least one equilibrium
point.
Proof. Let  and  be any pair of mixed strategies for the bimatrix
game
. We define
and
It is clear that the transformation
 is continuous.
Moreover, it is easily seen that both
 and  are mixed strategies.
We now show that
 if and only if
 is an equilibrium
pair. In fact, if
 is an equilibrium pair, it is clear that for all

--- Sayfa 227 ---
and so
. Similarly,
 for all . Hence
 and
.
Suppose, on the other hand,
 is not an equilibrium pair. This
means either that there exists some  such that
 or that
there exists some  such that
. We shall assume the first
case holds; the proof in the second case is identical. Since
 is a
weighted average of the terms
, it follows that there must be
some  for which
, and hence some
. As the
 are
nonnegative, the sum
.
Now,
 is a weighted average (with weights
) of the terms
. We must, therefore, have
 for some  such that
.
Now, for this , we have
, and so
and so
.
In the second case we show that
. Hence
 if and
only if
 is in equilibrium.
Now, the set of all strategy pairs is a closed, bounded, convex
set, and hence the Brouwer fixed point theorem holds. As the
transformation
 is continuous, it must have a fixed point.
This fixed point will be an equilibrium pair.
We may remark that the proof of Theorem 8.1.2 can easily be
generalized to equilibrium -tuples for finite -person games. Let us
note also that the proof is an existence proof and gives us no
method of finding equilibrium pairs.
The problem of finding equilibrium pairs to bimatrix games has
been approached from different sides, and some success has been
obtained. The reader is referred to the bibliography for details and
methods. Rather than give these methods, we prefer to discuss the
difficulties with the notion of equilibrium pairs — difficulties which are
most apparent when compared with the parallel notion of optimal
strategies for zero-sum (matrix) games.
It has been pointed out (Theorem 2.1.2) that, for zero-sum
games, equilibrium pairs were both interchangeable and equivalent

--- Sayfa 228 ---
in the sense that if
 and
 are equilibrium pairs for the matrix
game , then so are
 and
 and, moreover,
. This
effectively meant that the property of belonging to an equilibrium pair
is intrinsic to the vector  (not depending on the vector , which is in
equilibrium with it), and so we consider optimal strategies rather than
equilibrium pairs. We give now an example to show that this is not so
for general-sum games.
8.1.3 Example. (The Battle of the Sexes) Consider the bimatrix
game
It is obvious that the pure strategies
 and
 are an
equilibrium pair; so are
 and
. On the other hand,
 and
 are not equilibrium pairs. Moreover, the payoffs for the
two equilibrium pairs
 and
 are distinct;
 will be preferred
by I, whereas II will prefer
. Thus it is not clear that these
equilibrium pairs are entirely stable; even if I know that II will use the
pure strategy , he may insist on using  rather than , hoping that
this will induce II to switch to . In general, it is difficult to tell what will
happen. (It should be noticed that the mixed strategies
 and
 are also an equilibrium pair.)
Even when there is only one equilibrium pair (as is often the
case), it is not clear that this equilibrium pair is exactly what we want:
8.1.4 Example. (The Prisoner’s Dilemma) Consider the game
In this game, it is easy to see that the second row dominates the
first row, while the second column dominates the first column (if we
adapt the definition of domination, given above for zero-sum games,
in the obvious manner). Hence the only equilibrium pair is given by

--- Sayfa 229 ---
the second pure strategy of each player. This gives the payoff vector
(1,1). But, if both players play “wrong,” i.e., choose the first pure
strategy, the result (5,5) is much better for both. The trouble is that
each can gain by double-crossing the other.
8.2. Perfect Equilibrium Points
We saw above the difficulties that can arise with Nash equilibria.
Because of this, some substantial work has been done toward
refining the concept, with a view to eliminating many of the less
attractive equilibria, and thus avoiding (some of) the pathologies.
The first (and perhaps the most important) such refinement, the
perfect equilibrium, is due to Selten [8.9].
8.2.1 Definition. Let
 be an
 bimatrix game. Let  and  be
strictly positive vectors, with  and  components respectively, such
that
Then the perturbed game
 is a constrained game, with payoff
matrices
 and
, where the two players are constrained to use
mixed strategies ,  which satisfy
and
respectively.
The basic idea behind the perturbed game is, simply, that since
players are not perfect, each player is liable to make mistakes,
though perhaps with very small probabilities. Thus each pure
strategy will be chosen with positive probability; the perturbation
vectors  and  give lower bounds for these probabilities.

--- Sayfa 230 ---
Now, it is not too difficult to modify the proof of Theorem 8.1.2 so
as to show that any perturbed game
 has at least one
equilibrium pair of mixed strategies. (This is Problem 7.) The
following lemma, given without proof, is also useful:
8.2.2 Lemma. Let
 be an equilibrium pair for the perturbed game
. Suppose row  is such that
Then
.
(The lemma says, essentially, that if a row is less than optimal as
a reply to the other player’s strategy, then it must be used as little as
possible. There is a similar statement concerning less-than-optimal
columns.)
8.2.3 Definition. Let
 be a bimatrix game. An equilibrium pair
 of mixed strategies to
 is a perfect equilibrium if there
exists (i) a sequence of perturbation vectors
 converging to
together with (ii) a sequence of equilibrium pairs
 to the
perturbed games
, which converges to
.
Note that the definition requires only that some sequence of
perturbed equilibria converge to
; it is not necessary that all
such sequences converge. Thus perfectness is a relatively weak
condition.
8.2.4 Theorem. Every bimatrix game has at least one perfect
equilibrium in mixed strategies.
Proof. We have already seen that each perturbed game has an
equilibrium pair of mixed strategies.
Let, now, a sequence of pairs of vectors
 be given,
converging to the pair
. For each , let
 be an equilibrium
pair of (mixed) strategies for the perturbed game
. Since
the set of all pairs of mixed strategies is compact, this sequence
must have a converging subsequence with limit
. By continuity,
this
 will be an equilibrium pair for the original (unperturbed)
game
. This is the desired perfect equilibrium.

--- Sayfa 231 ---
8.2.5 Example. Consider the bimatrix game
It is easy to see that this game has the two pure-strategy
equilibria (row 1, column 1) and (row 2, column 2). Of course, the
first of these seems rather unsatisfactory as both players use
dominated strategies; nevertheless, it satisfies the definition of
equilibrium pair.
Consider, however, the perturbed game
. It is clear that,
so long as
, then row 1 cannot be an optimal reply to , and so,
by Lemma 8.2.2, equilibrium pair
 must have
. Similarly, we
must have
. Thus the perturbed equilibrium is of the form
, and, as the perturbation vectors converge to zero,
the perturbed equilibria must converge to (0,1; 0,1), that is, to (row 2,
column 2). It follows that this is a perfect equilibrium; on the other
hand, (row 1, column 1) is nonperfect.
For this last example, the perfectness concept works rather well:
the equilibrium pair at (row 1, column 1) seems “unsatisfactory,”
giving a payoff of (0,0) and thus it seems reasonable that it should
be eliminated in favor of the other equilibrium with its payoff of (1,1).
On the other hand, consider the following example:
8.2.6 Example. In the bimatrix game
there are equilibria at (row 1, column 1) and at (row 2, column 2).
Here, the same reasoning applies as in Example 8.2.5, and we
conclude that the equilibrium at (row 2, column 2) is perfect, while
that at (row 1, column 1) is nonperfect.
In this case, the “good” equilibrium payoff (10,10) seems to be
discarded in favor of a much “poorer” (1,1). In fact, this example is
somewhat analogous to the Prisoner’s Dilemma, and is due mainly

--- Sayfa 232 ---
to the fact that the first row and column of the matrix are dominated
(albeit weakly) by the second row and column. Indeed, it is easy to
see that any equilibrium in which either player uses a dominated row
or column with positive probability will be nonperfect.
More generally, a mixed strategy
 of player I is said to be
dominated if there is another strategy,  which is at least as good as
 against all columns of matrix , and better than  against at least
one column. There is a similar definition for dominated mixed
strategy of player II. Then we have the following theorem:
8.2.7 Theorem. Let
 be an equilibrium pair of the bimatrix game
. Then
 is perfect if and only if it is undominated (i.e., neither
 nor  is dominated).
We will not prove this theorem. We will, however, make a pair of
comments. The first is that an analogous theorem for games with
three or more players turns out to be false. The second is that while
it is relatively easy to check whether a pure strategy is dominated by
another pure strategy, it is considerably more difficult to check
whether a mixed strategy is dominated. One technique for this
solves an auxiliary matrix (i.e., zero-sum) game. We refer the reader
to van Damme [8.11] for a general discussion of this problem,
including a proof of the theorem.
Instead of requiring merely that some sequence of perturbed
equilibria converge to the given equilibrium, we might require a
stronger condition:
8.2.8 Definition. An equilibrium pair
 of the bimatrix game is
strictly perfect if for every sequence of strictly positive perturbation
vectors
, which converges to (0;0), there exists a sequence
 of equilibrium pairs to the corresponding perturbed games
, which converges to
.
Clearly, any strictly perfect equilibrium is a perfect equilibrium.
Thus the concept is definitely stronger. Unfortunately, it may be too
strong, because strictly perfect equilibria need not exist. As an
example we note that the game

--- Sayfa 233 ---
has no strictly perfect equilibria. In fact, column 1 strictly dominates
the two other columns; against this column, either row is optimal.
Hence the equilibria are all those pairs (and only those pairs) in
which II uses column 1 with probability 1. It will follow that, in the
perturbed
game
,
II
must,
in
equilibrium,
use
. Now, if II makes the “mistake” (column 2) more
frequently than the other mistake (column 3), then I should use row 1
as much as possible, i.e., if
, then the equilibrium
.
If, however,
, then
. Thus, for some sequences of
perturbation vectors, the equilibria must converge to (row 1, column
1); for others, they must converge to (row 2, column 1). We conclude
that this game has no strictly perfect equilibria.
Subgame-Perfect Equilibria
A special type of equilibrium, the subgame-perfect equilibrium, refers
specifically to games in extensive form. For an explanation of this,
consider the game depicted in Figure 8.1.
Figure 8.1.

--- Sayfa 234 ---
It may be seen that if the game ever reaches position
, then I
should choose  over , since that gives him a payoff of 3 rather than
1. This would give II a payoff of 1, so II, at y, should choose  rather
than . This in turn would give I a payoff of 3, so I is definitely better
off, at
, choosing
. Thus, by the process of composition of
subgame strategies, discussed in Theorem 1.4.5, the strategies
for I and  for II are in equilibrium. This is, in effect, the equilibrium
guaranteed by Theorem 1.4.5.
Consider, however, the pair of strategies
 for I and  for II. As
mentioned above,  is always better than
, if position
 is ever
reached. However, if II uses the pure strategy ,
 will never be
reached, and so I’s use of
 is no worse than
. Hence it is not
difficult to see that the strategies
 and  are also an equilibrium
pair.
The question is whether it is reasonable for these two strategies
to be in equilibrium. Specifically, in what sense can it be considered
“good” for player I to use alternative ? A logician might point out
that the formal implication, “If play reaches position , then it is good
for I to use
,” is logically true because the antecedent (“play
reaches position ”) is here false. On the other hand, there seems to
be something wrong with a strategy that tells player I to use . Thus,
while it is true that these two strategies form an equilibrium pair (as
may be checked directly), we will consider ourselves dissatisfied with
such an equilibrium pair. We express this dissatisfaction by
introducing a new concept, the subgame-perfect equilibrium.
For this purpose, we refer the reader to the definition of
subgame, as in Section 1.4, above. Then:
8.2.9 Definition. Let  be a game in extensive form. A pair
 of
(pure) strategies is a subgame-perfect equilibrium if, wherever the
game decomposes (at a node ), the corresponding restrictions of
and  are an equilibrium pair for the subgame
.
We note in this regard that since the game decomposes trivially
at its initial node, then any subgame-perfect equilibrium is an
equilibrium. We also note that, in the game of Figure 8.1,
 is
not a subgame-perfect equilibrium since
 is not an equilibrium
pair for the subgame
.

--- Sayfa 235 ---
The obvious question is whether such equilibria always exist.
8.2.10 Theorem. Every finite game of perfect information has at
least one subgame-perfect equilibrium in pure strategies.
Proof. It is not difficult to see that the proof of Theorem 1.4.5 is
valid with the additional condition of subgame-perfectness. In fact,
the equilibrium guaranteed by that theorem will be subgame-perfect.
When information is imperfect, randomization is, as we know,
normally necessary. Unfortunately, it is not clear just how the idea of
subgame-perfectness should be generalized to mixed strategies. On
the other hand, generalization to behavioral strategies is quite
straightforward. Now, we know that even a zero-sum game need not
have equilibria (saddle-points) in behavioral strategies, let alone
subgame-perfect equilibria. Kuhn’s theorem (Problem 8 of chapter 5,
page 115) tells us that all games with perfect recall have equilibria in
behavioral strategies (in effect, with perfect recall, any probability
distribution on the outcomes attainable via mixed strategies is also
attainable via behavioral strategies). We then have the following
theorem:
8.2.11 Theorem. Any finite two-person game with perfect recall has
at least one subgame-perfect equilibrium pair of behavioral
strategies.
Proof. The proof is by induction on the number of subgames that a
game has. We omit the details, except to say that it proceeds along
the same lines as that of Theorems 1.4.5 and 8.2.10.
8.2.12 Example. Consider the game of Figure 8.2.

--- Sayfa 236 ---
Figure 8.2.
The game begins at node . As may be seen, it decomposes at
nodes , , and . We therefore look for equilibrium pairs for each of
the subgames
,
, and
.
We note that
 may be reduced to normal form, obtaining
and it is easy to see that
 is an equilibrium pair for this game,
yielding of course the payoff (5,2).
Next, subgame
 is trivial as it consists of only one move, by
player I. Clearly he should choose  there, and
 is an equilibrium
pair for this, with payoff (4,1).
We note next that
 can be reduced to the normal form

--- Sayfa 237 ---
For this game, it may be checked that
 is an
equilibrium pair, with payoff (2,3.4).
Replacing each of these subgames by the corresponding payoffs,
we then obtain the quotient game
, as seen in Figure 8.3.
Figure 8.3.
This game reduces to its normal form
It may be seen that this game has the equilibrium pair
, with payoff (3,2.41).
Composition of these equilibrium pairs will give us the equilibrium
pair of behavioral strategies:

--- Sayfa 238 ---
It is easy to check that these form an equilibrium pair. What is more,
they must be a subgame-perfect equilibrium since we specifically
built them up from equilibrium pairs for each subgame.
A natural question to ask now deals with the relation between
perfect equilibria (for games in normal form) and subgame-perfect
equilibria (for games in extensive form). Obviously, the use of a
common name for these two concepts suggests a close relation. In
fact, however, while the relation seems strong enough, it turns out
that there is no logical implication here. A subgame-perfect
equilibrium need not be perfect; a perfect equilibrium need not be
subgame-perfect.
To begin with, we note that any normal form
 game can be
represented by an undecomposable game: player 1 moves first,
choosing from among  alternatives; player 2, with no information as
to player 1’s move, then chooses among  alternatives. For such a
game, clearly, any equilibrium point is trivially subgame-perfect. But
of course many of these will fail to be perfect.
8.2.13 Example. To see that a perfect equilibrium need not be
subgame-perfect, consider the game in Figure 8.4. The game
decomposes at both nodes  and . It is clear that, at node , player
1 should choose , at node , 2 should choose f, and at , 1 should
choose . Thus
 is the only subgame-perfect equilibrium for
this game.

--- Sayfa 239 ---
Figure 8.4.
Consider, however, the normal form of the game
In this form, the pair
 is still a perfect equilibrium point, as may
be readily verified. But the third and fourth rows of this game are
identical. Hence
 is also a perfect equilibrium point, though
clearly not subgame-perfect in the extensive form. The trouble
seems to be that too much information (about the game) is lost in the
passage to the normal form, and so the imperfectness is somehow
lost in the process.
8.3. Evolutionary Stable Systems
An interesting application of game theory to biology has developed
over the last few years, namely that of an evolutionary stable
system.
Suppose the males of a certain species of birds can be divided
into two types: a bold, pugnacious type, and a mild, timid type. We
will call these, respectively, hawks and doves, though we repeat that
they are members of a single species, rather than two different
species. In fact, it is generally difficult if not impossible to distinguish
between the two types, except for their behavior when two of these
birds meet in a competitive situation.

--- Sayfa 240 ---
Suppose, then, that two such males meet in competition — in the
presence, say, of a prize, such as food, or a female, that they both
want. If one is a dove, while the other is a hawk, the hawk will
prepare for battle. The dove, as soon as he realizes what is
happening, will retreat, allowing the hawk to capture whatever prize
is at stake. We might assign a payoff of
 to the hawk, and 0 to the
dove in such case.
If two doves meet, both will ruffle their feathers, but will eventually
come to a (more or less) amicable division of goods. We might
assign a payoff of
 to each.
If two hawks meet, they will fight for the prize at stake until one of
them is near death. We can assign a payoff of
 to the winner (this
is not good as getting the prize without a fight, but better than having
to share it) and
 to the loser. Since both have (a priori) equal
probabilities of winning, the expected payoff is
 to each of the
two.
We may represent this in the form of a bimatrix game
:
It is easy to see that this game has two equilibrium points in pure
strategies, namely
 and
: The hawk gets everything
without a fight, and the dove gets nothing but avoids a dangerous
fight. There is also a third equilibrium point, in mixed strategies, in
which both sides use the strategy (.333, .667). This gives an
expected payoff of
 to each player.
Now, what meaning can we give to an equilibrium point in such a
setting? If these were humans in a dangerous setting (two
teenagers, say, playing chicken, or two national leaders engaging in
nuclear “brinkmanship”), it is easy to understand what the pure
strategy pair
 means: I has reason to believe that II is very
timid, and hence I will play very aggressively; II has reason to
believe that I is aggressive, and hence II will yield. In the case of
animals, however, we feel that the participants are not capable of
such reasoning. The pair
 would suggest that all competitive

--- Sayfa 241 ---
encounters are between a hawk and a dove; since the animals
cannot change their character to suit the adversary (especially since
the adversary types are indistinguishable prior to play), such an
interpretation is not viable.
Consider, however, the mixed strategy pair (.333, .667) for both
players. This mixed strategy can be obtained if the species as a
whole is divided into doves and hawks in a ratio of one dove for
every two hawks. In such a case, it would follow that, in a random
encounter between males of the species, each of the two
adversaries has 1/3 probability of being a dove and 2/3 of being a
hawk. The important point here is that the strategy is symmetric:
since the probabilities are the same for each of players I and II, they
can be assumed drawn from the same population.
Of course, a new question now arises. Granted that the (.333,
.667) strategy is feasible, why should it ever come into being, or be
preserved? We have just used animals’ irrationality as a reason to
discard the two (nonsymmetric) pure strategy equilibria; is this not
also reason to discard any type of equilibrium in such settings?
The exact biological answers to such a question is of course
much too complicated for a treatment here. Stripped to its essentials,
however, it resides in the Darwinian idea of evolution and survival of
the fittest, and says, in effect, that, in the long run, the gene pool of a
species will evolve so as to optimize something — usually, so as to
maximize the survival probabilities of that species in its environment.
(Note, moreover, that the species is part of its environment, in the
sense that each individual must live with the other members of the
species.) We claim that the equilibrium ratio (.333, .667) mentioned
above is optimal — a better word would be stable — in that sense.
In fact, let us assume that, over a period of many generations, a
ratio
 of doves and hawks has been reached. This is the
established gene pool. As mentioned above, the males of the
species will occasionally meet, and battle for a prize, with an
expected payoff

--- Sayfa 242 ---
To explain the stability of this arrangement, we suppose a mutant
gene tries to “invade” the species. We now distinguish two cases.
Case 1: Suppose now that a mutant gene, which gives only hawks,
is somehow mixed into the population. We represent this by the
vector
. Against a population represented by , this mutant
gene can thrive. In fact, we find its expected payoff in competition,
, is itself equal to 3.33. Thus at first the mutant gene will be able
to hold its own against the established gene pool: its survival seems
as likely as that of the other.
After a while, however, the mutant gene runs into trouble. This is
because we must think of it as competing against the established
gene pool  in an environment represented not by , but, rather, by
the population as a whole. If we assume that the mutant gene has in
fact thrived for a while, then the general population will be
represented not by
, but, rather, by a mixture  of  and
, say by
. We then find that
whereas
Thus the established gene does somewhat worse than before in
the new environment. The mutant gene, however, does even worse
than that. Consequently, the established gene will reproduce more
rapidly than the mutant gene, which will either die out or become a
negligible minority, i.e., the mutant is selected against.
Case 2: On the other hand, suppose a mutant gene appears, giving
rise only to doves. In this case the mutant gene is represented by
, and it is easily seen that
, so that, once again, the
mutant gene can hold its own against the established population.
After a while, however, the population mixture will change slightly

--- Sayfa 243 ---
due to the new genes, so that the fraction of doves increases, and
the new population mixture might be something like
. We
then have
At the same time
In this case, the mutant gene does well against the new
environment, but the established gene does even better, and so this
mutant is also selected against.
We see, then, that the gene type
 is stable in the
sense that it can expel either of the two extreme mutants (1,0) and
(0, 1). The question is whether it can expel all others, i.e., whether
there might not be some alternative  which would prove impossible
to expel.
In fact,  will be able to expel a mutant represented by any
.
For, since  and  are both mixed strategies, we must either have
 or
.Suppose
. Then
, and, in that case, the
resulting environment, , being a mixture of  and , must also have
 and
. As in case 1 above, it will be easy to see that the
first component of
 is larger than the second component of
 ,
i.e., doves do better than hawks in this environment. But the
established gene has a greater share of doves than does the mutant
gene, and it follows that the established gene will do better. Hence
the mutant gene, so long as it has
, will be selected against.
If, instead, we suppose that
, the resulting environment will
also have
. In this case, it will be seen that hawks do better than
doves in this environment. But the mutant gene has a greater share
of doves than the established gene, and so will be selected against.
In any case, we see that the established gene  can expel any
mutant invader. We say that
 is an evolutionary stable strategy
(E.S.S.).

--- Sayfa 244 ---
More generally, an evolutionary system is a bimatrix game
,
where  can be any square matrix. A genotype is any mixed strategy
 for this game. If  is an established genotype, it may be
that some different (mutant) genotype,
, will attempt to invade. If
so, the environment will be changed, slightly, from  to
,
where  is a small positive number. Then  can expel  if, for all
sufficiently small
This leads us to our definition:
8.3.1 Definition. Let
 be an evolutionary system (symmetric
matrix game). A mixed strategy  is an evolutionary stable strategy
(E.S.S.) if, for any
, there exists
 such that, for all
,
(8.1) holds.
To see how this works, we note first that, if (8.1) holds for all
small positive , then, by continuity
so that, as a strategy for player I,  is an optimal response to  (as a
strategy for II). By symmetry of the game (i.e., since
),  is an
optimal response for II against I’s choice of
, i.e., the pair of
strategies
 is in equilibrium. Thus a necessary condition for x to
be an evolutionary stable strategy is that
 be an equilibrium pair.
This condition is not, however, sufficient. To obtain a sufficient
condition, we distinguish two cases for the mutant genotype
,
depending on whether (8.2) holds with equality or with strict
inequality.
If (8.2) holds with strict inequality, then there will be no problem:
the continuity of the bilinear form guarantees that (8.1) will hold for
all sufficiently small values of .
Suppose, however, that (8.2) holds with equality. In this case, we
rewrite (8.1) as

--- Sayfa 245 ---
Since, however,
, the second terms on both sides of this
inequality cancel out, leaving
or, since
This condition will be sufficient. We thus have the following theorem:
8.3.2 Theorem. A necessary and sufficient condition for  to be an
evolutionary stable strategy for the evolutionary system
 is that

(a) the pair
 is in equilibrium
(b) if
 is a strategy such that
, then
A point to be made is that the definition of E.S.S. is a purely local
definition, which does not tell us what will happen outside a
neighborhood of the E.S.S. . It may be that, once we leave that
neighborhood, the mutant  turns out to be much more adaptable
than the established type . Once  has been reached, however, it is
impossible to leave its neighborhood, and so  will be maintained.
The following example makes this clear.
8.3.3 Example. Consider the evolutionary system
It is easy to see that both pure strategies are evolutionary stable. For
example,
, the second pure strategy, is stable because for all
 close to , the second component of
 is larger than its first
component. Thus in any environment close to , the second row is
always superior to the first row. Outside a neighborhood of
,

--- Sayfa 246 ---
however, the alternative pure strategy, (1,0), will be better. In fact,
the first row seems clearly a better strategy than the second.
Heuristically, we might feel that the second row represents an
evolutionary “wrong turn”: for this species, it would be better if all
members belonged to the first type. However, some time in the past
(when perhaps the external environment was different from the
present one), the species developed to give rise only to the second
type. Now any “first-type” member would come into an environment
consisting only of second-type animals and would have difficulty
competing against them. Thus the first type, if introduced at this time,
will simply die out. But if it were possible to introduce a large number
of first-type individuals now, they could thrive. Given this last
example, we might ask as to the existence of pure E.S.S.s. The
following is an easily verified sufficient condition:
8.3.4 Corollary. Let
 be an evolutionary system. If there is any
 such that
 for all
, then the ith row is a pure E.S.S.
We omit the proof of 8.4 as it is a direct corollary of 8.3. The
advantage of this condition is that it is easy to verify. Its drawback is
that, while sufficient, it is not necessary, and there is no easily
verifiable necessary condition.
In general, of course, we cannot expect pure E.S.S.s to exist —
bimatrix games do not in general have equilibrium points in pure
strategies. We turn instead to the question of existence of E.S.S.s in
mixed strategies.
The obvious question is whether such an E.S.S. will exist for all
evolutionary systems. This is actually two questions:
1. Will a symmetric bimatrix game (A, AT) have a symmetric
equilibrium pair (x; x)?
2. If so, will this x (or one such x, if there is more than one)
satisfy condition (8.3)?
We answer question 1 first, in the affirmative.
8.3.5 Theorem. Any symmetric bimatrix game
 has at least
one symmetric equilibrium point
.

--- Sayfa 247 ---
Proof. Consider the proof of Theorem 8.1.2. Since
, it will
follow that if the iterative process starts with
, then all
, and
so
. Thus we can think of the transformation  defined there as
a mapping of pairs
 to pairs
. The Brouwer fixed-point
theorem is applicable here also, and tells us that we will have some
pair
 in equilibrium, i.e., there exists a symmetric equilibrium pair.
The second question cannot, unfortunately, be answered in the
affirmative: there is no guarantee of existence.
We can best see this by considering the following system:
8.3.6 Example. Consider the evolutionary system
It is easy to see that, for this bimatrix game, player I’s payoff does
not depend on his choice of strategy. Hence any strategy  will be an
optimal response for I against any  of II. Similarly, any  of II will be
an optimal response against any strategy  of I. It follows that any
pair
 is in equilibrium, and so any
 is a symmetric equilibrium
pair.
However, there is no equilibrium point which has the stability
property (Condition 2 of Theorem 8.3.2). In fact, since the two rows
of matrix  are equal, we will have
for any mixed strategies  and . Thus there is no E.S.S. for this
game.
The reader may well feel that the trouble with this last example is
that it is very degenerate, i.e., it lies precisely in the fact that the rows
of matrix
 are equal. In effect, this means that the evolutionary
system treats all genotypes equally. Under the circumstances, it will
not distinguish between them, and so it can never select against any
mutant. This suggests that if the entries in the matrix
 were all

--- Sayfa 248 ---
different (something which will hold with high probability), then we
might be able to guarantee an E.S.S.
We have, in fact, the following interesting result:
8.3.7 Theorem. If  is a
 matrix such that
 and
,
then the system has at least one E.S.S.
Proof. By Corollary 8.3.4, an E.S.S. in pure strategies will exist if
 or if
. Hence we need only consider the case when
 and
.
In this case, consider the mixed strategy , given by (2.23):
or, equivalently
It is easily seen that this  is indeed a mixed strategy. Moreover, we
note that the two components of the product
 are both equal to
the quantity , given by (2.24):
It will follow that the product
 for all strategies , i.e., all
strategies of I are optimal responses to  as a strategy of II. In
particular,  is an optimal response for I against  and, by symmetry,
 is an equilibrium pair.
It remains to prove the stability condition. Suppose
 is any
strategy other than . We will have
,
, where  is
not zero. We know, moreover, that
, so that we have

--- Sayfa 249 ---
In this last expression, we know that
 and that the expression
inside the parentheses is negative. Hence
 and by
Theorem 8.3.2, it follows that  is an E.S.S.
We have thus not only proved that “almost every”
evolutionary system has an E.S.S., but also obtained a rule for
finding this E.S.S. In fact, the solution is exactly as for
 matrix
games (cf. 2.5.5, above): first we look for an E.S.S. in pure
strategies; If no such E.S.S. exists, we apply formula (8.4) which is
exactly the same as (2.23).
8.3.8 Example. Find an E.S.S. for the system
, given
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Solution:

--- Sayfa 250 ---
(a) If this were an ordinary bimatrix game, it would have equilibrium
points at (row 1, column 2) and (row 2, column 1). However, for
an evolutionary system, such points cannot be considered.
Rather, we must apply (8.4), giving us the E.S.S. (.75, .25), with
payoff 3.5.
(b) We note here that the first row dominates the second. Thus (1,0)
will be the only E.S.S. The payoff is 4.
(c) This is a version of the Prisoner’s Dilemma. The species would
do much better by choosing the first row (all doves), with a payoff
of 8. Unfortunately, the second row dominates: even though
doves do well, a hawk would thrive in their midst and eventually
drive out the doves. It follows that the only E.S.S. is (0,1), with a
payoff of 3.
(d) For this system, the first row dominates the second. This is the
only equilibrium pair, and hence the only E.S.S.
(e) Here, the second row dominates the first row, and thus the
second row is the only E.S.S.
(f) In this case, there are two E.S.S.s: each pure strategy is a stable
equilibrium point. There is an additional equilibrium point
,
where
, but this is not stable.
 and Larger Systems
For
 systems and larger, the situation can be considerably more
complicated. As a relatively simple example, consider the system
For this system, the first row and column clearly give a stable,
symmetric equilibrium, which is therefore an E.S.S. There are
equilibrium points at (row 2, column 3) and (row 3, column 2), but
these are not symmetric and hence can be disregarded. Apart from
this, however, there is a symmetric mixed strategy equilibrium at
, with payoff
, and another one at
, with payoff
.

--- Sayfa 251 ---
We check these last two for stability. For
, we note
that
. Thus the optimal responses to  are all
with
. If we restrict ourselves to such  (in effect discarding the
first row, so that we are left with a
 matrix), it is easy to see that
the proof of Theorem 8.3.5 can be carried through directly, and it
follows that  is an E.S.S.
For
, we see that
, and so all
strategies are optimal replies to . In particular,
 will be an
optimal reply. Now
 while
, and we see that  is not
stable.
In all then, the system has two E.S.S.s: the pure strategy (row 1),
and the mixed strategy (0, .333, .667). Of the other equilibrium points
of the bimatrix game, two are not symmetric and hence inapplicable,
while one is symmetric but unstable.
We note further that we cannot generalize Theorem 8.3.5 to
systems. As an example, consider the following system in which
each column has all different entries:
It is easy to see that this is a zero-sum game: it is in fact the game of
Example 2.6.3, which, as we saw there, has a unique optimal
strategy
 for both players. It will follow that
 is the
unique equilibrium pair. Since
, the value of this game is 0,
and, moreover,
. Also, for all ,
, and, by the skew-
symmetry of ,
. Thus  is not stable, and there is no E.S.S.
8.4. Correlated Equilibria
Let us consider the situation faced by two motorists as they
approach an intersection: assuming they reach the intersection
simultaneously, each one has the option of crossing without
stopping, or of yielding and allowing the other to pass. Clearly, there
is a loss of time (and utility) associated with yielding. On the other

--- Sayfa 252 ---
hand, insistence by both on crossing will lead to a large loss for both.
The game can perhaps be represented by the matrix
where, for both players, the first row or column represents crossing
without stopping, and the second, yielding. It is not difficult to see
that there are two equilibria in pure strategies, namely (row 1,
column 2), and (row 2, column 1): one yields while the other passes
without stopping. There is also an equilibrium in mixed strategies, in
which both players use (1/16,15/16), with an expected payoff of
for both players.
Now, under some circumstances (e.g., if one of the two roads is
clearly more important than the other, or if one of the vehicles is an
emergency vehicle), one or the other of the two pure strategy
equilibria seems very reasonable. In general, however, it is not clear
which of these two equilibria should be chosen and even if the
players (motorists) know which of the two is to be chosen, one of
them might feel unhappy about this. (“Why should I be the one to
yield?”) The mixed strategy equilibrium seems fair enough, but is
otherwise quite unsatisfactory. In the interest of fairness and
efficiency, then, and to avoid misunderstandings, a traffic light might
be installed.
In its simplest form, the traffic light is merely a randomization
device which, with a certain probability, tells each of the two drivers
whether to pass or stop. In a sense, this does not seem very
different from a pair of mixed strategies, except for one thing: the two
players’ probability distributions can be correlated. Thus, the traffic
light can, with probability .55, tell player 1 to cross (green light) while
player 2 yields (red light); with probability .4, it tells 1 to yield while 2
crosses; with probability 0.05, it tells both players to stop. This gives
an expected payoff of 2.7 to 1 and 1.95 to 2. Note that this would not
be possible with mixed (uncorrelated) strategies.
Of course, the two motorists are not bound to obey the traffic
light. (We assume there are no motorcycle policemen around to
enforce it.) Nevertheless, we claim that this pair of strategies

--- Sayfa 253 ---
(obeying the light, i.e., stopping on red and crossing on green, for
each player) is in equilibrium. We call this a correlated equilibrium.
To see that these two strategies are in equilibrium, we note that
since the traffic light never is green for both players, then player 2
knows, on seeing a green light, that player 1 is seeing red. Thus, if 1
is indeed stopping on red, it follows that 2 can never gain by
stopping on green.
Suppose, on the other hand, that 2 sees a red light. In this case
he cannot be certain that 1 sees a green light, but there is a rather
high (.917) probability that this is the case, and that (if 1 is crossing
on green) there will be an accident if 2 does not stop. It is easy to
calculate that 2 cannot gain by crossing on red. Thus, if 1 is obeying
the light, 2’s best response is also to obey the light.
In similar fashion, it can be seen that if 2 is obeying the light, then
it is best for 1 also to obey the light. We conclude that these two
strategies are in equilibrium.
It is important to notice, in passing, that if either one of the two
players sees a red light, this player is not certain whether both
players are seeing red. In other words, neither player has full
information as to what the traffic light is doing: each player knows
only the signal that the light has given him or her.
In general, let
 be an
 bimatrix game. A correlated mixed
strategy is an
 matrix
, such that
This correlated strategy is to be thought of as a randomization
device which, with probability
, signals I to use the ith row and II to
use the jth column. It gives no further information to either player.
The correlated strategy  is in equilibrium if, whenever player 1 is
given the signal to use , he or she cannot gain by disobeying, given
the conditional probability that this signal induces on 2’s action, and
similarly, 2 cannot gain by disobeying a signal to use .

--- Sayfa 254 ---
Now, if 1 is given the signal to use row , and uses , then
(assuming 2 is obeying the signal) 1’s expected payoff will be
whereas, if he uses , the expected payoff will be
Since I is not to gain by disobeying, it must be that for any pair of
rows,  and
In a similar way, since  is not to gain by disobeying, it must
follow that for any pair of columns,  and
This gives us the following definition:
8.4.1 Definition. A correlated equilibrium for the bimatrix game
is a correlated mixed strategy,
, which satisfies conditions (8.7)–
(8.8).
It may be noted that there are a total of
 constraints of the
form (8.7) and
 of the form (8.8). Apart from this there is (8.5).
All told, then, this is a system of
 constraints (not
counting non-negativity constraints) in
 unknowns.

--- Sayfa 255 ---
8.4.2 Example. Let us return to the example discussed above of the
two motorists at an intersection. With
, the system will have
five constraints and four variables
It is not too difficult to obtain all solutions to this system: quite
simply, both
 and
 must be no larger than the smaller of
and
. Apart from this, the four variables must be non-negative and
add up to 1. Thus, the correlated strategy given above,
,
,
,
, certainly is an equilibrium, but there are
many others. Some seem very efficient — e.g., strategies such as
or
(this latter corresponding perhaps to an intersection between a busy
route 1 and a small route 2) are both equilibria — but even a
dangerous and inefficient one, such as
(where perhaps the traffic light malfunctions sporadically) is also an
equilibrium. On the other hand, a strategy such as

--- Sayfa 256 ---
is not an equilibrium, essentially because, when player 2 is given a
green light, there is too large a probability that 1 also is receiving a
green light. Thus player 2 would be better off not crossing on green,
even if he knows that player 1 is obeying the light.
As can be seen from the example, bimatrix games can have very
large sets of correlated equilibria. (Note that the game mentioned
above had only three equilibria in (uncorrelated) mixed strategies.)
The obvious question is whether all bimatrix games have at least
one correlated equilibrium. It is not difficult to see that this must be
so.
In fact, any pair
 of mixed strategies for the two players in a
bimatrix game can be thought of as representing a joint mixed
strategy,
, i.e., it is given by
 for each  and . The
reader can easily prove that if
 is an equilibrium pair, then
is a correlated equilibrium. Since we already know (Theorem 8.1.3)
that all bimatrix games have equilibrium pairs of mixed strategies, it
follows that they also have correlated equilibria.
Apart from this, there is the question of computation. Let
 be
an
 bimatrix game. To simplify our notation, we will let
 and
be the sets of pure strategies for players 1 and 2, respectively, in
. We consider, then, the auxiliary
 matrix,
, which has one row for each pair
, and one column for
each pair
. The new matrix, , has entries
We will now consider  as a matrix game played between players I
and II (not to be confused with players 1 and 2 of the bimatrix game).
Let  be the value of this game, and let
 be an optimal mixed
strategy for player I in this game.
Now, if
, it is easy to see that  will satisfy conditions (8.7)–
(8.8), and is hence a correlated equilibrium for
. Suppose, on
the other hand, that
. In this case there is no  satisfying (8.7)–
(8.8). But we have already seen that a correlated equilibrium always

--- Sayfa 257 ---
exists. It follows that
, and hence the optimal  for game  will
always be a correlated equilibrium for
.
We note in passing that if
, then any correlated equilibrium of
 will indeed be an optimal strategy for . If, however,
 (which
is certainly possible), then optimality of the strategy
 is not
necessary: it suffices that  guarantees the gain-floor 0 for player I.
8.4.3 Example. Consider the bimatrix game of Example 8.4.2. The
auxiliary matrix game is here a
 game
(where we have used unprimed symbols to denote rows of the
original bimatrix game, and primed symbols to denote columns).
It is not difficult to see that this game has value
 obtained by
using the optimal strategies
 for I and
 for II. Then
, which is the unique optimal strategy for I, is certainly a
correlated equilibrium in
, yielding payoffs of  to each player.
However, since the value of
 is positive, there are many other
correlated equilibria (none of which are optimal strategies for I in ),
as was noted above.
8.4.4 Example. Consider the bimatrix game
In this case, we obtain the auxiliary matrix game

--- Sayfa 258 ---
It may be seen that this game has value 0, obtained by using the
optimal strategies
for player I, and
, all other
, for player II. The
optimal strategy for I is unique, and so this is the only strategy that
guarantees 0 for I, i.e., it is the only correlated equilibrium. In fact, of
course, it is really not correlated, as it corresponds to the equilibrium
pair of mixed strategies (in the bimatrix game) (0.375,0.625) for
player 1, and (0,0.8,0.2) for player 2. The expected payoffs will be
2.8 for 1 and 3.75 for 2. In this case, then, the correlation of
strategies yields nothing new. (On the other hand, this allowed us to
compute the equilibrium pair by means of linear techniques.)
Problems
1. (a) Consider a “supergame” consisting of 100 repetitions of the
“Prisoner’s Dilemma.” In the supergame, each player has a very
large number of pure strategies, each one of which decides what
to do at the nth play of the game on the basis of the supergame’s
“history,” (i.e., what has happened on the first
 plays). Show
that if two strategies are in equilibrium, use of these two strategies
will cause both players to use the “double-cross” (second)
strategy at each play of the game.
(b) Show, however, that, for
, the supergame strategy
 (“Play
the first [cooperative] strategy for the first  trials, so long as my

--- Sayfa 259 ---
opponent does likewise, and double-cross the last
 trials”) is
better in the sense that, against the opponent’s optimal response,
it gives a better payoff.
(c) Show that if the supergame consists of
 trials, where
 is a
random variable with an exponential distribution
, then
there exist equilibrium pairs which involve using the cooperative
first strategy at each play of the game.
2. It was mentioned, in Problem 2.9, that two-person constant-sum
games could be solved by the method of “fictitious play.” Show
that this method cannot be used to obtain equilibrium points of
bimatrix games by considering the game
, where
(a) Assume the players start by choosing (1,1). There will be a run
of (1,1), followed by a run of (1,3), then runs of (3,3), (3,2), (2,2),
(1,1), etc., in a cycle.
(b) Each run is at least twice as long as the previous run.
(c) The empirical strategies do not converge at all, but cycle.
Neither of the two cycles passes through
, which is the
unique equilibrium point.
3. Find equilibrium pairs for the following bimatrix games:
(a)
(b)
(c)
4. Of the equilibrium pairs obtained in Problem 3, above, determine
which are perfect equilibria. Which are strictly perfect?
5. For the following (symmetric) bimatrix games, find symmetric
equilibrium pairs. Which of these are evolutionary stable systems?
(a)

--- Sayfa 260 ---
(b)
(c)
6. Find all equilibrium pairs of correlated strategies for the games in
Problem 1 above.
7. Prove that any perturbed game
 has at least one
equilibrium pair of mixed strategies. (Hint: modify the proof of
Theorem 8.1.2.)

--- Sayfa 261 ---
Chapter 9
Two-Person Cooperative Games
9.1. The Bargaining Problem
We consider now the case of games in which cooperation between
the two players is allowed. This means that binding contracts can be
made, that correlated mixed strategies are allowed, and that utility
can be transferred from one player to the other (though not always
linearly).
There is, generally, a set of outcomes which can be obtained by
the two players by acting together. If we choose a pair of utility
functions for the two players, this set can be mapped into a subset of
two-dimensional Euclidean space
. Its image under this mapping
will be closed and bounded above (at least, the sum of the
coordinates will be bounded above). Moreover, since lotteries are
permitted (by means of correlated mixed strategies) and utility is
linear with lotteries, this image will be convex. The problem, then, is
to choose a point from this set which will satisfy both players.
Given a two-person general-sum game, then, there is a certain
subset  of
, called the feasible set. It is feasible in the sense that,
given any
, it is possible for the two players, acting together,
to obtain the utilities
 and , respectively. Generally speaking,
however, we find that the more one player gets, the less the other
player will be able to get (though this need not always be so). Now,
how much will one player be willing to give the other? How little will
he be willing to accept, as the price of his cooperation?
Though it is of course impossible to determine how a person will
act (in general, there are many personality differences to be taken
into account), we can nevertheless set a minimum to the amount that

--- Sayfa 262 ---
a player will accept for himself. This is the amount that he can obtain
by unilateral action, whatever the other player does. This is, of
course, the maximin value of the game for that player. Let us call
these two values
 and . Thus
(where  and  are taken over the sets of all mixed strategies) if the
game is a bimatrix game with matrices
.
We assume, then, that we are given a set
, together with
maximin values
. We want a rule which will assign, to such a
triple
, a “bargaining solution”:
We ask, naturally, how such a function  is to be defined. While it is
important to repeat that the outcome in any particular case will
depend on the personalities and bargaining abilities of the two
players, the following axioms seem reasonable conditions to lay on
any such function. (These axioms are those of John Nash.)
N1(Individual Rationality).
N2(Feasibility).
N3(Pareto-Optimality). If
, and
, then
.
N4(Independence of Irrelevant Alternatives). If
, and
, then
.
N5(Independence of Linear Transformations). Let  be obtained
from  by the linear transformation
Then, if
, we must have

--- Sayfa 263 ---
N6(Symmetry). Suppose  is such that
Suppose also
, and
. Then
.
Of these six axioms, N1, N2, and N3 are obvious and need no
justification. N4 states that, if a point
 is the solution to a
bargaining problem, and then the feasible set is enlarged, the
solution to the new problem will either be
 itself or one of the new
points in the set, not a point in the old, smaller set. As such (and,
also, in other contexts) it has been open to criticism. N5 is natural
enough if we assume that any utility function is as good as any other.
It is open to criticism if absolute utility (7.4) is introduced. Finally, N6
is quite acceptable if the bargaining is between two equal entities; it
may not be so acceptable if the bargaining is between unequal
entities, e.g., between one person and an entire community.
Several other axioms might be suggested for a bargaining
function; an example would be
N7(Monotonicity).If
, then
Unfortunately, N7 is not compatible with N2 and N3. Because it is
difficult to quarrel with either of these, we conclude that N7 should be
discarded (though someone might claim N7 is not very different from
N4). In general, we need consider no further axioms because of the
following remarkable theorem:
9.1.2 Theorem. There is a unique function
 defined on all
bargaining problems
 satisfying Axioms N1–N6.
In preparing the proof of this theorem, we give the following lemmas:
9.1.3 Lemma. If there are any points
 such that
then there is a unique point
 which maximizes the function
over the subset of  for which
.

--- Sayfa 264 ---
Proof. By hypothesis, this subset of
 is compact. As
 is
continuous, it must have a maximum over this set. By hypothesis
also, this maximum,
, will be positive. Suppose, then, that there
are two points
 and
 which maximize
. As
, we
cannot have
 as this would imply
. Suppose that
;
this will mean
.
As  is convex,
, where
. Now
Each of the first two terms in this last expression is equal to
.
The third term, however, is positive. But this means
, which
contradicts the maximality of
. Hence the point
 which
maximizes  is unique.
9.1.4 Lemma. Let
 and
 be as in Lemma 9.1.3. Let
Then, if
, the inequality
 will hold.
Proof. Suppose
, with
. Let
. By the
convexity of ,
 where
 and
. By
the linearity of ,
. Now,
Letting  approach zero, the last term becomes negligible. This
means that
. But this contradicts the maximality of
.
Lemma 9.1.4 says in effect that the line though
 whose slope
is the negative of the line joining
 to
 is a support for ; i.e.,
 lies entirely on or below this line.

--- Sayfa 265 ---
We can now prove Theorem 9.1.2. We shall in fact show that,
under the hypothesis of Lemma 9.1.3, the point
 which
maximizes
 must be the solution to the bargaining problem. If
this hypothesis does not hold, the problem is much simpler.
Proof of 9.1.2: Assume the hypothesis of Lemma 9.1.3 holds. Then
the point
 which maximizes
 is well defined. It clearly
satisfies Axioms N1 and N2 by construction. It satisfies N3 for, if
, but
, then
. It satisfies N4 since, if it
maximizes
 over , it will certainly maximize it also over the
smaller set
. It must satisfy N5, for, if we set
 and
, then
and so if
 maximizes
, it follows that
 maximizes
.
Finally,
 satisfies N6. In fact, suppose that  is symmetric in the
sense of N6, and
. Then
. But clearly
.
Since
 is the unique point which maximizes
, it follows that
; i.e.,
.
We know, thus, that
 satisfies Axioms N1–N6. We must now
show that it is the unique rule which satisfies these axioms. Let
be defined, then, as above. Consider the set
(see Figure 9.1). By Lemma 9.1.3,
.

--- Sayfa 266 ---
Figure 9.1..
Let  be obtained from  by the linear transformation
It is easy to see that  is simply the set
; moreover,
. Because  is symmetric, it follows by N6 that the solution
must lie on the line
; by N3, it must be the point (1,1). Inverting

--- Sayfa 267 ---
the transformation 9.3, it follows by N5 that
 must be the solution
of
. But since
, it follows that
 must be the solution
of
.
Let us suppose, now, that the hypothesis of Lemma 9.1.3 does
not hold; i.e., there are no points
 with
,
. By the
convexity of , we know that if there is any
 with
,
,
there can be no
 with
. Under these conditions, we simply
let
 be the point in  which maximizes , subject to the constraint
. Similarly, if there is
 with
, there can be no
 with
, and we let
 be the point in  which maximizes
, subject to the constraint
. It is easily checked that these
solutions satisfy the axioms; it is also easy to see that Axioms N1,
N2, N3 will allow no other solution.
Theorem 9.1.2 shows, then, that Nash’s axioms can be satisfied
by a unique scheme; we have also shown what Nash’s solution is.
According to Lemma 9.1.3, if the boundary of  is smooth (i.e., has a
tangent) at the point
, the line of constant
 is tangent to  at
that point. Now the slope of the boundary of
, at any point,
represents the rate at which utility can be transferred from one player
to the other. What Nash’s scheme tells us, in brief, is that additional
utility must be divided between the two players in a ratio equal to the
rate at which this utility can be transferred. Naturally, since utility is
not assumed to be linearly transferable, there may be only one point
at which utility is transferable at this given rate. Figure 9.2 illustrates
this.

--- Sayfa 268 ---
Figure 9.2.
In case the utility is linearly transferable, of course, the problem
becomes much simpler. In fact, we may assume (by a change of
utility scales if necessary) that the rate at which utility can be
transferred is 1:1 (i.e., player I can transfer one unit of utility to II by
giving up one unit himself). Thus
 contains all the points on or
below a certain line
 (where  is the maximum possible utility
the two players can obtain together) and above and to the right of
. (See Figure 9.3.) The corresponding Nash solution will be
, where
, and
.

--- Sayfa 269 ---
Figure 9.3..
It is easy to see that
, while
. Thus in this
case, the relative positions of the two players are maintained, while
their utilities are increased as much as possible (i.e., the excess
utility is divided evenly between the two players).
9.1.5 Example. Two men are offered $100 if they can decide how to
divide the money. The first man is assumed to be very rich, while the
second man has $100 capital in all. It is assume that the utility of a
sum of money is proportional to its logarithm. How should the money
be divided?
As the first player is very rich, we can assume that the utility of
, with
, is proportional to . As the second player has only
$100, the utility he obtains from
 will be

--- Sayfa 270 ---
(We are, of course, setting
.) Thus the set  will consist of
the convex hull of
 and the arc with equation
As this function is convex,  consists simply of the area bounded by
this curve (see Figure 9.4); of course, we are only interested in its
intersection with the positive quadrant.
Figure 9.4.
Now, we want the point in  which maximizes
, i.e., the value of
 which maximizes
When we differentiate and set equal to zero, we obtain the equation
This gives us, approximately,
; i.e., player I should get
approximately $54.40, while II gets $45.60.

--- Sayfa 271 ---
In a sense, this result seems strange: it implies that the richer
person should receive more than the poorer person, who, it might be
argued, “needs the money more.” In fact, however, this idea implies
an interpersonal comparison of utility, which is not generally allowed.
The fact is that player II’s utility for money decreases rapidly, while I’s
does not. The result is that II will be very eager to get at least
something, and can be “bargained down” by I.
9.2. Threats
A serious objection can be raised to Nash’s bargaining scheme, and
it is that it does not take threats into account. The following example
will best outline this objection.
9.2.1 Example. A worker has the choice of working, in which case
he will be paid a subsistence salary while his boss has a profit of
$10, or not working, in which case he will starve, while his boss
makes no profit. A reasonable assignment of utilities to these events
would be
 and
. The boss, however, may, if he desires,
give part of the profit to the worker, so that (assuming utility to be
linearly transferable) the set  will include all points below
,
and none other in the positive quadrant. As it is clear that
,
the Nash solution would seem to be
. This disregards,
however, the fact that the second player is in a much stronger
position than his opponent. In fact, player I cannot prevent II from
getting $10 except by taking a very difficult step; a threat to stop
work on his part would not be very believable, and as a result, he will
probably continue to work for his subsistence salary.
It is difficult to deny that an example such as this tends to weaken
Nash’s bargaining solution. Some analysis of threats is in order if we
are to correct these weaknesses. Quite generally, a threat is effective
if it is believable, and if it tends to improve the position of the
threatener vis-à-vis the person being threatened. Thus, a threat to
kill someone is generally more effective than a threat to become
angry, because the position of the killer is certainly improved vis-à-
vis his victim (though in point of fact it may be worsened in absolute

--- Sayfa 272 ---
terms) while getting angry generally does no such thing. On the
other hand, a threat to destroy the whole world, while it may possibly
improve the threatened position in regard to others (reducing them
all to equality in nothingness), is not very believable and hence not
effective.
Nash suggests the following three-step bargaining scheme:
1. Player I announces a “threat” strategy x.
2. Player II, in ignorance of x, announces a threat strategy y.
3. Players I and II bargain. If they can come to an agreement,
then that agreement take effect. If they do not come to an
agreement, then they must use their threat strategies x and y;
the payoffs to the two players will be determined in this
manner.
The question naturally arises as to the enforcement of these
threats; if one of the players makes a wild threat, he may find himself
averse to carrying out the threat later on. Some machinery may,
however, be devised for this purpose. At any rate, we assume a
player is bound to his threat in some manner or other.
In effect, what this means is that the maximum values
 and
have been replaced by the threat values
 and
. Axioms N1–
N5 are now applied, and the result is the solution
 where
 is
the point in  which maximizes
(subject, of course, to
).
A figure will probably explain the workings of this scheme best. In
Figure 9.5, a typical set  (closed, bounded, and convex) is shown.
The curve
 is the Pareto-optimal boundary of  (i.e., the subset of
 which satisfies N3). From each point on
 at which a tangent to
exists, a line is drawn whose slope is the negative of the tangent
slope. If the tangent does not exist (as at point
) two lines are
drawn, corresponding to the right and left tangents to
 at . It is
easy to see that, by the convexity of
, the lines in this family
intersect, if at all, outside of .

--- Sayfa 273 ---
Figure 9.5..
Now, suppose the threat strategies  and  give, as threat value,
a point such as , lying on one of these lines. The arbitrated (Nash)
value of the game is the point  at which this line cuts
. If, on the
other hand, the threat value is at a point such as  (lying inside the
angle made by two lines from the same point in
) then the
arbitrated value will be the point  at which these two lines meet
.
Thus player I’s aim, in choosing his threat strategy, will be to get a
point lying on the lowest possible of this family of lines; player II’s
aim is to get a point on the highest possible of these lines.
To the question that arises as to the existence of equilibrium pairs
of threat strategies, the answer can be given that they do exist. (It is,
of course, necessary to define equilibrium pairs for such games; this
is done in the obvious manner.)

--- Sayfa 274 ---
9.2.2 Theorem. Any bimatrix game has at least one equilibrium pair
of threat strategies
.
The objective of the two players in choosing their threat
strategies, however, are directly opposed. Hence it is not difficult to
prove the following theorem as well.
9.2.3 Theorem. If
 and
 are equilibrium pairs of threat
strategies, then so are
 and
. Moreover, the Nash
arbitrated payoff is the same for both
 and
.
We shall not give the proofs of Theorem 9.2.2 and 9.2.3 here;
they are left as problems, pointing out only that 9.2.2 is a
modification of 8.1.2, while 9.2.3 is a very slight modification of
Theorem 2.1.2. By Theorem 9.2.3, we see that we can actually talk
about optimal threat strategies (rather than merely equilibrium
points).
An interesting problem is that of computing optimal threat
strategies. In general, this can be complicated, since the arbitration
value corresponding to a pair of threat strategies depends not only
on the numbers
 and
, but also on the form of the Pareto-
optimal boundary of the set . Since all that is required of  is that it
be convex, there is no obvious method. In certain cases, however, it
might be a simple problem.
If, in particular, utility is linearly transferable between the two
players, the problem becomes quite simple. In fact, we can choose
the utility scales so that utility is transferable at the rate of 1:1. The
obvious adaptation of what we studied above tells us that, if  and
are the threat strategies, the arbitration value will be
where  is the maximum utility that can be obtained by the two
working together. But this means player I will be trying to maximize
, while II will be trying to minimize this same quantity. Thus,
the optimal threat strategies for the bimatrix game
 are the same

--- Sayfa 275 ---
as the optimal strategies for the matrix (zero-sum) game
, which
we know how to solve.
9.2.4 Example. Consider the bimatrix game
, given by
Assuming there is no transferable commodity, the set  is the
convex hull of the four points
 shown in Figure 9.6. The
maximin security levels are seen to be 0 for both players, obtained
by the mixed strategies
 and
 respectively. As
 is nearly
symmetric, it follows that the value, under the first Nash scheme,
must be
. On the other hand, this does not take player II’s threat
possibility into account; in fact, if II uses his first pure strategy, we
see that I really can do very little against him.

--- Sayfa 276 ---
Figure 9.6..
We should, therefore, consider the threat possibility. We see that,
on the Pareto-optimal boundary of
, utility is transferable (by
randomization) at the rate 1:1. Thus we can consider the game
:
This game has a saddle point at
. As the maximum total utility for
the two players is 5, we obtain the “arbitrated threat solution”
.

--- Sayfa 277 ---
This certainly takes II’s stronger threat possibility into account.
9.3. Time-Restricted Bargaining
An alternative approach to the bargaining problem, due to Rubinstein
[1980], consists in treating the bargaining process as a game in
extensive form. We will assume a set of feasible alternatives,
,
closed, convex, and bounded above (as in 9.1). For simplicity, we
shall assume that the conflict payoff is
. We will also make an
assumption of nondegeneracy, so that
 contains some positive
points. We might then imagine a multistep process such as the
following:
(1) Player I “makes an offer” of v, i.e., suggests a point (u, v)∈S.
(2) Player II can either accept v, in which case the bargain (u, v) will
automatically come into effect, or counteroffer u′ by suggesting
the point (u′, v′)∈S. (Presumably, this would have v′>v.)
(3) Player I can either accept u′, or make a new offer, .
(4) Player II can accept v″ or reject and counteroffer
.
(5) –
 The offers and counteroffers continue. If the two can never
agree, the payoff will be (0, 0).
The bargaining can continue in this fashion indefinitely, until
finally one of the two accepts the last offer made by the other.
Presumably the offers would increase — or at least not decrease —
at each step, so that
 and
, but even
this is not, strictly speaking, necessary.
It is not difficult to see that this game has many equilibrium pairs.
In fact, let
 be any Pareto-optimal point. Let  be a strategy on
the part of player I to offer
 at some time, and never to offer any
more, or accept any less than
. Let  be a strategy on the part of II
to offer
 (or accept
) at some time, and never to offer any more
than
, or to accept any less than
. Then
 is an equilibrium
pair. The problem is not in the lack of an equilibrium pair, but rather
in the superabundance of them!
As in Section 8.3 above, such a multiplicity of equilibria suggests
that we must look for a special type of equilibrium. Given that the
game here is in extensive form, it seems reasonable to look for a

--- Sayfa 278 ---
subgame-perfect equilibrium. Now this is a game of perfect
information; unfortunately, however, the game is not finite (the
number of steps is unbounded, and there is possibly an infinite
number of alternatives at each step). Hence Theorem 1.3.1 does not
apply, and we cannot guarantee the existence of a perfect
equilibrium pair.
Now, one of the problems with the game as described above lies
in the fact that time does not matter: a bargain during the first stage
is worth as much as the same bargain many stages later. Thus there
is no reason for either player to yield in any way, since by refusing to
yield now he or she can still hope to obtain more in the future, and in
any case the same bargain will still be available later.
In real life, however, things are not so. In a strike, the outcome
frequently hinges on the relative size of the union’s strike fund and
the firm’s capital reserves, i.e., on which of the two parties can
outwait the other. In other cases, even when the situation is not so
critical as in a strike, still each bargainer realizes that a bargain today
is worth considerably more (has greater utility) than the same
bargain many time periods in the future. We consider therefore the
same model as before, but with this modification:
Each step (offer or counteroffer) requires one period of time.
(Acceptance can be immediate.) The two players have discount
factors
 and
, per period,
. In the primal game, we will
assume that Player I makes the first offer; in the dual game, player II
makes the first offer.
It should be clear that this modification changes the character of
the game considerably. In the extreme case, with
 close to zero,
player I can offer a very small (but positive) . Player II would have to
choose between accepting  immediately, or waiting one period of
time — so that anything he can manage to obtain then must be
discounted by
. Clearly the discount factor, together with the
advantage of the first move, has strengthened I’s hand substantially.
Consider, now, the primal game. At stage 1, player I chooses a
Pareto-optimal point
 and offers
 to II. Player II now chooses
between accepting , or refusing. If II refuses, then the game moves
to stage 2, with II to make the next offer. It is not difficult to see that
stage 2 of the primal game is strategically equivalent to stage 1 of

--- Sayfa 279 ---
the dual game—the alternatives are exactly the same, and the
payoffs (except for the fact that they have all been multiplied by the
corresponding discount factor) are the same.
Assuming, then, that II did not accept the offer at stage 1, it is
now II’s turn to make an offer, say
, corresponding to the Pareto-
optimal point
. Now I can accept
, or he can refuse—
moving to stage 3, which is strategically equivalent to stage 1 of the
same (primal) game.
Since the several stages of the game are, essentially, repetitions
of either the primal or the dual game, it is possible to talk about
stationary strategies: in a stationary strategy, a player’s offer or
acceptance is independent of previous stages played. Thus, a
stationary strategy for I consists of a pair
: I will offer
whenever it is his turn to act; he will accept any offer of
 or more.
Similarly, a stationary strategy for II is a pair
. II will offer , and
accept any offer of  or more. We look, now, for a subgame-perfect
equilibrium point, in stationary strategies.
For an equilibrium, I’s offer, , should be large enough that II will
accept it, but no larger. On the other hand, II should accept
 if it is
not smaller than the discounted amount
 which he would receive
if I accepted II’s counteroffer,
, after one stage of the game. Thus
we obtain the relation
A similar consideration (for the dual game) gives us
Together with the fact that
 and
 must be Pareto-optimal
points, this gives us a system of four equations in the four unknowns.
Theorem 9.3.1 tells us that these values are what we are looking for.
9.3.1 Theorem. Any subgame-perfect equilibrium in stationary
strategies is of the form
, where
 and
 are nonnegative Pareto-optimal points satisfying (9.4) and
(9.5).

--- Sayfa 280 ---
Moreover, all such pairs are in equilibrium.
Proof. Let
 be an equilibrium pair, and let
,

,
 be the corresponding Pareto-optimal points. It
cannot be good for II to reject an offer which is larger than the
(discounted) amount he will later demand, so
. By Pareto
optimality, it follows that
.
Given that II’s strategy is
, it is best for I to offer exactly .
For, if he offers
, then II will refuse, and I will receive at most the
(discounted) amount
, which is less than
. If he offers
,
then II will accept, and I will receive
, which by Pareto optimality is
less than
. If I offers , then II will accept and I will receive
.
For equilibrium, then, it is necessary that
. Similarly, by
looking at the dual game, equilibrium requires that
. Now let
be the common value of
 and , and let  be the common value of
 and . Let
 and
 be Pareto-optimal points.
Assume, then, that at step 1, player I has offered
. II now can
choose between getting
 at stage 1 or
 at stage 2. In fact he
does accept
, and so
. But as mentioned above,
.
Thus
. In similar fashion,
. We see then that, for an
equilibrium pair, (9.4) and (9.5) must hold.
Conversely, suppose that
 and
 are Pareto-optimal
points, with nonnegative components, satisfying (9.4) and (9.5). The
discussion above shows that
 is an optimal response to
, and conversely. Thus this will be an equilibrium pair.
The question now is whether such as equilibrium pair exists. The
following answers in the affirmative.
9.3.2 Theorem. There exists a unique pair
 and
 of
positive Pareto-optimal points satisfying (9.4) and (9.5).
Proof. Let the nonnegative Pareto-optimal boundary of  be given
by the equation
Then
 is a strictly decreasing, continuous, concave function of ,
satisfying
. We note that (9.4) can be rewritten as

--- Sayfa 281 ---
and this can be combined with (9.5) into the single equation
We wish to show that (9.6) has a unique solution.
Setting
, we note that, by the nondegeneracy condition (that
 contain at least one positive point),
 is positive. Since
and
, we see that
.
Set, now,
. Then
. Since
, we see that
, and,
by the strict monotonicity of ,
. Since
, then
 is
positive, and hence
.
We see, then, that
, while
. Since  is continuous, so
is , and there must be some value of  which makes
. Call
this value
.
To show uniqueness, assume  is differentiable. Then  is also
differentiable, and we see
Now,  is concave and so
 is non-increasing; we also know
 is
strictly negative. We note
, and so, for
,
. Then, by the
monotonicity of
and, since  is negative
Thus
 for all
.
Of course,  need not be differentiable everywhere. However,  is
known to be continuous, concave, and monotone. Hence
 is
continuous and it is the difference of two concave monotone
functions. It follows that  is differentiable almost everywhere, and it
is the integral of its derivative. Since this derivative is negative for

--- Sayfa 282 ---
almost all positive , it will follow that  is also strictly monotone
decreasing, and so (8.3.3) will have exactly one solution. We will call
the points
 and
 so obtained the Rubinstein primal and
dual points.
It remains to compute the points
 and
. These
depend on the form of the Pareto-optimal boundary of
, but a
numerical computation is, in general, quite straightforward. In the
simplest case, the boundary is a straight line, and a computation is
quite simple. In fact, suppose the boundary is the line
so that the problem reduces to dividing a sum of money, with utility
(for both players) proportional to money. Then (9.6) reduces to the
equation
which has the solution
9.3.3 Example. Let the Pareto-optimal boundary of
 be the line
.
Let
 and let
. Then (for the primal game)
Thus, in the primal game, I will offer 0.286, and keep 0.714 for
himself. In the dual game, II will offer 0.643, and keep 0.357 for

--- Sayfa 283 ---
himself. As can be seen, there are two factors at work here:

(1) The first move is clearly an advantage. With the first move, I will
get 0.714; with the second move, “only” 0.643.
(2) A higher discount factor (i.e., greater patience) is also an
advantage. With the first move, I will get 0.714, while II, even with
the first move, would only get 0.357.
9.3.4 Example. We consider once again the game of example 9.1.5,
for which the Pareto-optimal boundary was given by
We will assume that both players have the same discount factor,
. Equation (9.6) then takes the form
which has the solution
Thus, in this game, player I expects to get $57.38 if he makes the
first offer, and $51.64 if he makes the second offer. This contrasts
with the Nash solution, which gives player I $54.40. In this case, with
equal discount factors, the first move gives an advantage which
amounts to approximately $3. (It would of course be smaller if the
discount factors were close to 1.)
A good question now concerns what will happen if the discount
factors are allowed to approach 1 (essentially, this is what will
happen if the length of time periods approaches zero). In that case,

--- Sayfa 284 ---
the advantage of the first move would decrease, as is indicated by
(9.4) and (9.5); i.e., we might expect that, in the limit (if the limit
exists),
 and
. What is not clear is where the limiting
point
 would be. The following theorem answers this.
9.3.5 Theorem. Let the discount factors,
 and
, both approach 1,
in such a way that the ratio
 is kept constant. Then
the Rubinstein primal and dual points will both approach the point
 which maximizes the product
 over the positive part of the set
. In particular, if
, so that
, then the Rubinstein points will
approach the Nash solution (Theorem 9.1.2).
Proof. Let
. We now have, from (9.4)
but
and so
and, multiplying by (9.5), we have
or, simply
We see, then, that the function
 has the same value at the two
points
 and
. The point which maximizes
 will be a
Pareto-optimal point, and must lie on the Pareto-optimal boundary of
, between these two points. As the discount factors approach 1,
however, the distance between the two Rubinstein points will, by

--- Sayfa 285 ---
(9.4) and (9.5), approach 0, and so the points will both be very close
to the maximizing point. In the limit,
 and
 will both
converge to the point which maximizes
.
In case
, the limit point is the point which maximizes the
product
 which is (of course) the Nash solution of Theorem 9.1.2.
A good question is as to why the two discount factors would
approach 1 in exactly the form specified in Theorem 9.3.5. In fact,
suppose that the reason the discount factors approach 1 is, not that
the two players’ time preferences for money change, but rather that
the time periods become very short. In that case, the discount
factors would be
where  is the length of the time period, and
 are factors which
depend on the two players’ time preferences. Then, as
approaches 0,
 would be constant.
A better answer to the same question is that the ratio
 need not be constant. What is needed is that this ratio
approach the limit . The proof of this, however, is somewhat
complicated as it depends on the fact that, if  is close to , then the
two points which maximize
 and
, respectively, will also be
close. The proof of this is left to the reader.
9.3.6 Example. Let us consider once again the game of Example
9.1.5 and 9.3.3, but let us now set the discount factors
where  is very small (i.e., infinitesimal). In this case, the logarithms
of the discount factors are approximately given by
,
, and so the ratio is 2. It follows that, for very small , the

--- Sayfa 286 ---
solution point will be that point which maximizes the product
,
where, as mentioned above
Some elementary calculations will then show that the maximum
is obtained at the point
,
. We see that, in this case,
the difference in discount factors works seriously to player II’s
benefit: II now receives $61.28 of the total $100, and is much better
off than before (when he received only $45.60). It does not matter
which of the two players moves first.
Problems
1. We think of a bargaining game as a noncooperative game, in
which each player’s “strategy” consists of making a demand.
Then, if the two demands
 are consistent (belong to ) the
players receive their demand; otherwise they receive their
minimax (or threat) values,
.
(a) Every point on the Pareto-optimal boundary of S is an
equilibrium pair.
(b) Assume
, and let g be the characteristic function of S
(i.e., g=1 on S and g=0 on the complement of S). Then, if the
players demand (u, v) their payoffs will be
.
(c) Let  be any non-negative function, and assume that the
payoff, in case the demands
 are made, is
. Show
that, if
 maximizes the function
, then
 is an
equilibrium pair.
(d) Let
 be a sequence of nonnegative continuous
functions which converge to
. Then, if
 is the Nash
solution (arbitrated value of the game, there exists a
sequence of points
, each one of which is an equilibrium
point of the demand game with payoff
 which
converges to
).

--- Sayfa 287 ---
2. Prove the existence of “optimal” threat strategies for the Nash
modified bargaining model (Theorems 9.2.1 and 9.2.2).
3. Let  be the set of all
 satisfying
Find the Nash bargaining solution (a) assuming the conflict payoff
is
; (b) assuming that the conflict payoff is
.
4. Let  be as in Exercise 3, above, and let the conflict payoff be
. Find the time-constrained solution to this bargaining problem
assuming the discount factors
, assuming (a)
player I makes the first offer; (b) player II makes the first offer.
5. Let  be a nonempty compact convex subset of the first quadrant
in the
 plane. For positive values of , let
 be the abscissa of
the point
 which maximizes the product
. Prove that
 is
unique, and is a continuous function of .
6. Let
 and
 both approach 1, in such a way that the ratio
 approaches the limit
. Assume the available
alternatives form the compact convex set , and let the conflict
payoff be
. Prove that, in that case, the two solutions of the
time-constrained bargaining problem converge to the point
which maximizes the product
, subject to being in the
intersection of set  and the first quadrant of the plane. (Use the
result from Problem 5 here.)

--- Sayfa 288 ---
Chapter 10
n-Person Games
10.1. Noncooperative Games
In considering -person games (where
), the same distinction
will arise as in considering two-person nonzero-sum games. That is,
cooperation among some or all of the players may be forbidden or
permitted by the rules of the game. Let us consider the first, i.e., the
noncooperative case.
In the noncooperative case, the principal question is the
existence of equilibrium n-tuples. This question is answered by the
following theorem:
10.1.1 Theorem. Any finite -person noncooperative game has at
least one equilibrium -tuple of mixed strategies.
We will not give a proof of 10.1.1 here. It may be seen, however,
that there is no difficulty in extending the proof of Theorem 8.1.2 to
this case.
Although Theorem 10.1.1 is certainly a valuable result, it may be
pointed out that all the difficulties which were observed for
equilibrium points of bimatrix games are also present here.
Moreover, the computation of equilibrium -tuples (where
) is
incomparably more difficult than the computation of equilibrium pairs.
In general, there is no great difference between the theory of
noncooperative
-person games and noncooperative two-person
general-sum games.
10.2. Cooperative Games

--- Sayfa 289 ---
Let us consider the case in which cooperation is permitted. We have
just seen that, in the noncooperative case, there is very little
difference between two-person and -person games. In fact, the -
person game is merely a generalization of the two-person case. In
cooperative games, however, we find that a new idea appears:
coalitions. In the two-person case, there is only one possible
coalition. In the -person case, there are many possible coalitions
and this means that, if a coalition is to form and remain for some
time, the different members of the coalition must reach some sort of
equilibrium or stability. It is this idea of stability that must be analyzed
in any meaningful theory.
We can see the meaning of this stability best by taking an
example. Consider the following three-person game: Players 1, 2,
and 3 are faced with the simple problem of forming a coalition. If any
two of them succeed in forming a coalition, then the third player must
pay each of them one unit. If no two-player coalition is formed, then
there is no payoff at all.
In this simple example, there is really very little to be said.
Assuming nothing about the personal relations among the three
players, any one of the three possible two-player coalitions might be
formed, and there is no way to distinguish among them. Hence the
three payoffs
,
, and
 corresponding to these
three coalitions seem to be a “natural” result, and may be considered
in some way a “solution” of the game. Alternatively, the payoff (0, 0,
0) which is the average of these three payoffs may also be thought
of as some sort of solution to the game. (We shall see later on in
what sense these are solutions.)
Let us suppose now that the game is changed slightly, so that, if
the coalition {2, 3} is formed, player 1 must pay 1.1 units to 2, and
0.9 unit to 3. This would seem to improve 2’s outlook, since he can
now gain more from the same action. However, closer analysis will
show that this is not so. In fact, the coalition {2, 3} now becomes
almost impossible to form (unless there is some external difficulty to
complicate communications between 1 and 3) since both 1 and 3
stand to gain from forming {1, 3}. Hence 2 is in a worse position than
before; in fact, one of the two possible coalitions he might join is very
unstable. He might, however, remedy this by giving 3 a side payment

--- Sayfa 290 ---
of 0.1 unit (assuming such a side payment is possible). This will
reduce the game to the previous game.
The foregoing example should serve to illustrate, first, the
importance of side payments in this game and, second, the need for
some sort of stability among the different payoffs in a solution. This
latter question will be treated later on; at first we shall deal with side
payments.
Once again, the existence of a linearly transferable commodity is
in question. Let us assume that this commodity does exist; the
theory developed on this assumption will be called the side-
payments theory.
In the side-payments theory, the utility functions for the several
players can be chosen so that the rate of transfer of utility among
any two of them is 1:1. As pointed out in the two-person case this
means that, if a subset  of the players (coalition) can obtain a total
utility , this utility can be divided among the members of  in any
way possible. Thus we will be interested in the total utility which can
be attained by any one of these coalitions.
10.2.1 Definition. For an -person game, we shall let
be the set of all players. Any nonempty subset of
 (including
itself and all the one-element subsets) is called a coalition.
10.2.2 Definition. By the characteristic function of an -person game
we mean a real-valued function  defined on the subsets of
, which
assigns to each
 the maximin value (to ) of the two-person
game played between
 and
, assuming that these two
coalitions form.
Thus
 is the amount of utility that the members of  can obtain
from the game, whatever the remaining players may do. From this
definition, it follows that
for obvious reasons. Now if  and  are disjoint coalitions, it is clear
that they can accomplish at least as much by joining forces as by
remaining separate. Hence we have the superadditivity property

--- Sayfa 291 ---
In dealing with two-person games, we have seen that we
generally dispense with the extensive form and deal only with the
normal form. This is because the normal form allows us to study
mixed strategies, which are the essence of such games, with
greatest ease. Now, the essence of
-person games is not the
randomization; rather, it is the formation of coalitions. Thus we shall
study, not the normal form, but the characteristic function. In fact the
characteristic function tells us the capacities of the different
coalitions, assuming optimal (maximin) randomization, and thus is
best suited to study coalitions. In general, we shall identify the game
with its characteristic function.
10.2.3 Definition. By an -person game in characteristic function
form is meant a real-valued function , defined on the subsets of
,
satisfying conditions (10.1) and (10.2).
Some authors have dispensed with (10.2) and studied functions
satisfying only the condition
. Very often such functions are
called improper games, whereas those which also satisfy (10.2) are
called proper games. Unless specifically stated, throughout this book
we shall deal only with proper games.
As mentioned above, the amount
 is the maximin value of the
game played between  and
. Let us suppose that the normal
form of the game is constant-sum (i.e., the sum of the utility payoffs
to all the players is always the same). The game between  and
 is then strictly competitive, and it follows, if it is finite, that the
minimax theorem holds. Thus we will have
This leads to the following definition.
10.2.4 Definition. A game (in characteristic function form) is said to
be constant-sum if, for all

--- Sayfa 292 ---
It should be noted that a game might be constant-sum in its
characteristic function form without being constant-sum in its normal
form. (It is even possible for the game to be constant-sum in its
normal form without being constant-sum in its characteristic function
form, though this cannot happen with finite games.)
Let us suppose, then, that an -person game is played. Without
inquiring into the particular coalition structure obtained, we might like
to know the possible payoff vectors. Now, assuming that some type
of understanding is arrived at, the players will have the total utility
 to divide. (In a constant-sum game, it is not necessary that an
understanding be reached for this to happen.) This can be divided in
any way at all, but it is of course clear that no player will accept less
than the minimum which he can attain for himself.
10.2.5 Definition. An imputation (for the -person game ) is a
vector
 satisfying

(i)
(ii)

We shall use the notation
 for the set of all imputations of this
game.
It might be argued that, except in the constant-sum case,
condition (i) in this definition is too strong, since it is quite likely that
the players will fail to reach any understanding, and will wind up
obtaining less than the total amount
 which they can get. While
this is a valid objection, it will be seen later on that many of our
“solution concepts” eliminate all vectors which do not satisfy this
condition.
The question now is this: Which of all the imputations will be
obtained? This is, of course, a difficult (or even impossible) problem.
There is one condition, however, in which this problem is trivial: that
is when the set
 has only one element. In this case, that unique
imputation will be the obvious result. It does not matter what
coalitions form. This gives rise to the distinction between essential
and inessential games. It is clear (by superadditivity, repeated
times) that

--- Sayfa 293 ---
Now,
 will have only one point if equality holds in (10.4). Thus we
have
10.2.6 Definition. A game  is essential if
It is inessential otherwise.
It is the essential games which are of interest to us.
10.3. Domination, Strategic Equivalence, and
Normalization
Given a game , let  and  be two imputations. Suppose the players
of the game are confronted by a choice between  and . Can we
find any criterion to determine when one of these will be chosen
rather than the other?
It is of course clear that, unless
, there will be some players
who prefer  to  (those i such that
). Because the two vectors
are imputations, however, there will also be some players who prefer
 to . Hence it is not enough merely to state that some players
prefer  to . On the other hand, it is not possible that all players will
prefer  to  (since the sum of the components of either  or  is
). What is necessary is that the players who prefer  to  be actually
strong enough to enforce the choice of .
10.3.1 Definition. Let  and  be two imputations, and let  be a
coalition. We say  dominates  through  (notation:
) if

(i)
(ii)

--- Sayfa 294 ---
We say  dominates  (notation:
) if there is any coalition  such
that
.
Thus condition (i) states that the members of  all prefer  to ;
condition (ii) states that they are capable of obtaining what  gives
them.
It is easy to see that the relation
 (for any given ) is a partial
order relation. On the other hand, the relation , while it is irreflexive,
is neither transitive nor antisymmetric (since the coalition  may be
different in different cases). This is a serious difficulty; it will certainly
complicate things for us later on.
Since we plan to analyze games by means of the domination
relation, we are naturally interested in games whose imputation sets
have the same domination structure.
10.3.2 Definition. Two -person games  and  are said to be
isomorphic if there exists a
 function  mapping
 onto
 in
such a way that, for ,
, and
,
.
It may be difficult to tell whether two games are isomorphic in this
sense. We have, however, the following criterion:
10.3.3 Definition. Two -person games  and  are said to be  -
equivalent if there exist a positive number  and  real constants
 such that, for all
Essentially, if two games are
-equivalent, we can obtain one
from the other simply by performing a linear transformation on the
utility spaces of the several players. It is easy to prove that
-
equivalent implies isomorphism:
10.3.4 Theorem. If  and  are -equivalent, they are isomorphic.
Proof. Assume  and  are
-equivalent. Consider the function,
defined on

--- Sayfa 295 ---
where  and
 are as in 10.3.3, It is easy to check that, if
,
. Moreover, if
, it is clear that
. Hence
 is the desired isomorphism.
Thus -equivalence is sufficient for isomorphism. (The converse
of this theorem is true in the restricted setting of constant-sum
games. The proof is however rather lengthy and we will therefore not
include it here. See References [10.2] and [10.6].)
It is obvious that
-equivalence is, indeed, an equivalence
relation. It is interesting to choose one particular game from each
equivalence class.
10.3.5 Definition. A game  is said to be in (0,1) normalization if

(i)
(ii)
10.3.6 Theorem. If  is an essential game, it is
-equivalent to
exactly one game in (0, 1) normalization.
Theorem 10.3.6 whose proof we omit (it is trivial), tells us that we
can choose a game in (0, 1) normalization to represent each
equivalence class of games. The advantage of choosing such a
game is that, in such a game, the value
 of a coalition tells us
directly its strength (i.e., the extra amounts which its members gain
in forming it), and that all its imputations are probability vectors.
Other types of normalization have been used in the literature of -
person games. A common normalization is
 normalization, in
which
 and
. We shall, however, deal with games in
(0,1) normalization throughout. As our interest is in essential games,
this entails no loss of generality.
The set of -person games in (0,1) normalization is the set of all
real-valued functions, , defined on the subsets of , such that

--- Sayfa 296 ---
These four conditions determine a
-dimensional convex
set. If the game is constant-sum, we have the additional condition
This gives
 new equations, so that the set of constant-sum
games has dimension
. Thus it is clear that the dimension
of the set of -person constant-sum games is the same as that of the
set of
-person games. In fact, the two sets are congruent.
Indeed, if  is an
-person game in (0,1) normalization, it may
be expanded to an -person constant-sum game  by the addition of
a new player , setting
It is easily checked that this game is constant sum.
There are two special types of games which are of interest:
10.3.7 Definition. A game  is said to be symmetric if
 depends
only on the number of elements in .
10.3.8 Definition. A game  in (0,1) normalization is said to be
simple if, for each
, we have either
 or
. A game is
simple if its (0,1) normalization is simple.
Essentially, a simple game is one in which every coalition is either
winning (value 1) or losing (value 0), with nothing in between. As
such, simple games are applicable to political science, as they
include voting “games” in elections and legislatures.
Among simple games, we distinguish a special class: the
weighted majority games:

--- Sayfa 297 ---
10.3.9 Definition. Let
 be a nonnegative vector, and let
satisfy
Then the weighted majority game
 is the simple game
defined by
10.4. The Core
Let us proceed, then, to the analysis of games in terms of the
domination relation. An obvious first idea is to study the undominated
imputations.
10.4.1 Definition. The set of all undominated imputations for a game
 is called the core. The notation for the core is
.
10.4.2 Theorem. The core of a game  is the set of all -vectors
satisfying

(a)
(b)
Proof. If we let
, condition (a) reduces to
. This,
together with condition (b), means that all such vectors are
imputations.
Let us suppose that  satisfies (a) and (b), and that
 for all
. But this, together with (a), means that

--- Sayfa 298 ---
and so it is not possible that
. Hence
.
Conversely, suppose that  does not satisfy (a) and (b). If it fails
to satisfy (b), it is not even an imputation and hence not in
.
Suppose, then, that there is some nonempty
 such that
where
. Let
It is easy to see, by superadditivity, that
. Finally, let  be the
number of elements in . Now define  by
It is easily seen that  is an imputation and, moreover,
. Hence
.
Theorem 10.4.2 shows that
 is a closed convex set (as it is
characterized by a set of loose linear inequalities). This is most
interesting, since classical economic theory usually gives the core as
“solution” to most game-theoretic problems. Any imputation in the
core is stable, in that there is no coalition with both the desire and
the power to change the outcome of the game.
Generally, of course, the core may have more than one point.
This is not a great handicap; it simply means that more than one
outcome is stable. A greater difficult with the core, however, is that it
need not exist (i.e., it may be empty).
10.4.3 Theorem. If  is an essential constant-sum game,
.

--- Sayfa 299 ---
Proof. Suppose
. For any
, we know
but, by the constant-sum property
and, since  is an imputation, we must have
. Because  is
essential, then
but this means
. The contradiction proves
 is empty.
10.4.4 Example. Player 1 (a seller) has a horse which is worthless to
him (unless he can sell it). Players 2 and 3 (buyers) value the horse
at $90 and $100, respectively.
If 1 sells the horse to 2 at a price of , he will effectively make a
profit equal to , while 2’s profit is
. The total profit of the
coalition {1, 2} is then $90. Thus
Similarly
On the other hand, a single player, or the two buyers together,
can obtain no profit. Thus
Finally, the coalition of all three players can do no better than to
assign the horse to player 3 (with, possibly, some side payments
which do not change the total amount of utility). Thus

--- Sayfa 300 ---
We see from this that the core consists of all vectors
satisfying
It may be seen that this requires
,
,
,
.
Thus
Heuristically, this says that player 3 will purchase the horse at a
price of at least $90. Player 2 (the “low bidder”) is priced out of the
market — but not before “bidding up” the price to at least $90.
10.4.5 Example. (The Assignment Game) Let
, where
and
 are disjoint sets with  elements each, say
 and
.
Player
 (the th seller),
, owns a house which he
values at ai , dollars. Player
,
 (the th buyer) wishes
to purchase a house, and values ’s house at
 dollars. Thus, a
coalition between players
 and
 can obtain a profit
For any
 or
, we will have
. For other  (which
contain both sellers and buyers),
 will be equal to the maximum
total profit generated by sales of houses among the members of ,
subject to the natural constraints that no seller can sell to more than
one buyer, and no buyer can buy from more than one seller. Thus, if
 has no more sellers than buyers, we assign buyer
 to seller ,
and the total profit is

--- Sayfa 301 ---
Then
where the maximum is taken over all such assignments. A slightly
different treatment gives us
in case  has more sellers than buyers.
For the set  in particular, we have
where the maximum is taken over all permutations
of the set
. This can also be written as
where
 is a permutation matrix, i.e., a matrix of 0’s and 1’s
such that there is exactly one in each row and column. Essentially,
we will have
 if the th buyer buys from the th seller, and
otherwise.
Consider, now, the linear program
subject to

--- Sayfa 302 ---
Clearly, every permutation matrix
 satisfies the constraints
(10.11)–(10.13). On the other hand, not every feasible
 is a
permutation matrix as some of the components might be fractional. It
can nevertheless be shown, without too much trouble, that the
extreme points of the program (10.10)–(10.13) are precisely the
permutation matrices. Since the maximum will be found at an
extreme point, we conclude that
 is the maximum of the program
(10.10)–(10.13).
Consider, next, the dual of the program (10.10)–(10.13), which is
to
subject to
Generally, there is no nonnegativity restriction on the dual
variables
, . It is not difficult to see, however, that the minimum
vector is not unique. In fact, if
 is a
minimizing vector, then for any real number , so is
, where
for all  and .
In particular, we may choose

--- Sayfa 303 ---
and then
Then all
, and, for some ,
. For every , we have
and so all
. Thus
 is a minimizing vector for (10.14)–
(10.15), with all components non-negative.
Now by duality
and so
 is an imputation for the game . We shall show that it
belongs to
.
For any , we have
where
 are distinct members of . Then
and we conclude that (
.
In some cases,
 will be the only imputation in the core. More
usually, however, the imputation is not unique. In fact, any
minimizing vector
 with nonnegative components will lie in the
core. The usual rule is that the optimal assignment of sellers to
buyers is unique; the market price, however, is not unique. There
are, however, numerous special cases which we cannot treat here.

--- Sayfa 304 ---
10.4.6 Example. (Simple Games) Let  be a simple game in (0,1)
normalization. We say player  is a veto player if
where, as usual,  is the set of all players.
Suppose, first, that  has no veto players. Then, for every
,
we have
. For an imputation  to lie in the core, we must
have
Thus
 for all , and so
 cannot be an imputation. This
contradiction proves
.
Conversely, suppose  has one or more veto players; let  be the
set of all these. Let  be such that
Now, if  is a winning coalition, we must have
, so
and it may be seen that
. Thus
, and we conclude that,
for a simple game , the core is nonempty if and only if there is at
least one veto player.
10.5. Balanced Collections

--- Sayfa 305 ---
Theorem 10.4.3 gives one case in which the core is empty. It seems
of interest to determine, more generally, those games which have
nonempty cores. It is easily seen that, for any , the set of -person
games with nonempty cores (thought of as a subset of Euclidean
space of dimension
) is a convex cone. In fact, suppose  and
have nonempty cores, with
,
. It is easily checked that,
for nonnegative scalars  and
In order to characterize this convex cone, we note that
 if
and only if the linear program
subject to
has a minimum
. For, in such a case, any minimizing
 lies
in the core. Conversely, if
, then
 satisfies (10.17) and,
moreover,
. Thus the minimum must be
.
Consider, then, the dual program to (10.16–10.17):
subject to

--- Sayfa 306 ---
Both of the programs (10.16)–(10.17) and (10.18)–(10.20) are
feasible, and so the minimum,
, must equal the maximum,
.
Thus,
 if and only if the maximum
. Or, in slightly
different words
10.5.1 Theorem. A necessary and sufficient condition for the game
to have a nonempty core is that, for every nonnegative vector
satisfying (10.19), we have
As it stands, Theorem 10.5.1 is not a very efficient tool. In fact, it
requires us to solve a linear program which is no simpler than its
dual (10.16)–(10.17). It turns out, however, that we can characterize
the extreme points of the program (10.18)–(10.20) with a rather
elegant concept: that of a balanced collection.
10.5.2 Definition. Let
 be a collection of nonempty
subsets of
. We say that
 is
-balanced (or, simply,
balanced when there is no confusion as to the specific
) if there
exist positive numbers
 such that, for each
Then
 is the balancing vector for ; the  are balancing
coefficients.
10.5.3 Examples
(a) The collection
 is clearly balanced, and in fact any partition
of
 (any collection of nonempty disjoint sets whose union is
) is
balanced. The balancing coefficients here are all 1.
(b) Let
. Then the collection

--- Sayfa 307 ---
is balanced, with balancing vector
. More generally, for any
,
the collection of all
 sets with  elements is balanced, with all
balancing coefficients equal to
.
(c) Let
. Then
is balanced, with the balancing vector
.
Essentially, a balanced collection is a “generalized partition” — as
seen from Example 10.5.3a. There are, of course, many more
-
balanced collections than partitions of
. The following properties of
balanced collections are of interest.
10.5.4 Theorem. The union of balanced collections is balanced.
Proof. Let
be balanced collections, with balancing vectors
 and
, respectively. Then
where
. For any ,
, define now
It is easy to verify that
 is a balancing vector for
.
Thus the union of two balanced collection is balanced, and, by
induction, the union of any number of balanced collections is
balanced.

--- Sayfa 308 ---
10.5.5 Lemma. Let  and  be balanced collections such that
but
. Then there exists a balanced collection  such that
but
. Moreover, the balancing vector for  is not unique.
Proof. Let
have the balancing vectors
 and
, respectively. For
, define
For small
, we see that all
. Moreover, for
and so  is a balancing vector for
. Since
 for
, we
see that  is not unique.
Now, there must be some
,
, such that
, as
otherwise, for any
, we would have
which is a contradiction.
Set, then

--- Sayfa 309 ---
Let
and set
Clearly,
 is a nonempty subcollection of , and so we have
Moreover,
 for all
, and it is easily checked that (for this
value of   is a balancing vector for the collection
. Thus
 is as
desired.
We next define a minimal balanced collection as a balanced
collection which is such that no proper subcollection is balanced.
Then
10.5.6 Theorem. Any balanced collection is the union of minimal
balanced collections.
Proof. By induction on  (the number of sets in the collection).
The theorem is clearly true when
, as the only balanced
collection with one set is
, which is clearly minimal. Suppose,
then, that it is true for all collections with
 or fewer elements. Let
 be a balanced collection with  elements.
If
 is itself minimal, then it is clearly the union of minimal
balanced collections. If
 is not minimal, then it has a proper
balanced subcollection,
, and, by Lemma 10.5.5, there exists
another proper balanced subcollection, , such that
. Since
 and
 are proper subcollections, they each have
 or fewer
elements, and thus each can be expressed as a union of minimal
balanced collections. But then
 is also the union of minimal
balanced collections.

--- Sayfa 310 ---
10.5.7 Theorem. A balanced collection has a unique balancing
vector if and only if it is minimal.
Proof. Lemma 10.5.5 tells us that the balancing vector will be unique
only for minimal balanced collections. Conversely, suppose that
has the two (distinct) balancing vectors  and . Without loss of
generality, we may assume that
 for at least one value of . As
before, choose
where
, and we see that  is a balancing vector
for
As  is a proper subcollection of , we see that  is not minimal.
We see, then, that the balanced collections are precisely the
unions of minimal balanced collections, and these in turn are those
for which the balancing vector is unique. In fact, the minimal
balanced collections correspond to the extreme points of the
program (10.18)–(10.20), as our next theorem shows:
10.5.8 Theorem. The extreme points of (10.18)–(10.20) are the
balancing vectors of the minimal balanced collections.
Proof. Let
 satisfy the constraints (10.19)–(10.20). Then it
is a balancing vector for the collection
If  is not minimal, let  be a balanced proper subcollection, with
balancing vector
. We know
 only if
, and so, for
small values of , both

--- Sayfa 311 ---
and
satisfy the constraints (10.19)–(10.20). Now,
, as
 for any
. But
and so  is not extreme in (10.18)–(10.20).
Suppose, on the other hand, that
 is a minimal balanced
collection. If  is not extreme, we can write
where
, and both  and
 satisfy (10.19)–(10.20). Because of
the nonnegativity constraints (10.20), we must have
whenever
. Thus  and  will be balancing vectors for  and
, respectively, where
and
are both subcollections of . Since  is minimal, then  and
 must
both coincide with
. But then by Theorem 10.5.7,
. This
contradiction proves that  must be extreme.
10.5.9 Corollary. A minimal
-balanced collection has at most
sets.
Proof. Let
 be a minimal balanced collection. Then its balancing
vector  is a basic feasible point of (10.18)–(10.20). As we saw in

--- Sayfa 312 ---
Chapter 3, only the basic variables (components) of
 can be
positive. But a tableau for (10.18)–(10.20) has  basic variables
(which is the number of constraints other than the nonnegativity
constraints). Thus
 has at most
 positive components,
corresponding to the  (or less) sets in .
We are now in a position to give an efficient characterization of
games with nonempty cores:
10.5.10 Theorem. A necessary and sufficient condition for the -
person game  to have a nonempty core is that, for every minimal
-
balanced collection
 with balancing vector
Proof. Necessity follows from Theorem 10.5.1 and the fact that
every balancing vector must satisfy (10.19)–(10.20). To show that
the condition is sufficient, we note that the maximum of program
(10.18)–(10.20), which is known to exist, is to be found at an
extreme point. This extreme point is the balancing vector of some
minimal balanced collection. Thus, if (10.23) holds for all such
vectors, the maximum of (10.18)–(10.20) must be less than or equal
to
.
Theorem 10.5.10 gives us a system of inequalities which must be
satisfied if a game has a nonempty core. Now for superadditive
games, the condition (10.23) will certainly hold if
 is a partition.
Thus we need concern us only with minimal balanced collections
which are not partitions.
10.5.11 Example. Let
. Apart from the partitions there is
only one minimal balanced collection, namely
with balancing vector
. Thus a three-person game  has a
nonempty core if and only if

--- Sayfa 313 ---
10.5.12 Example. Let
. The minimal
-balanced
collections, other than partitions, are

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

Apart from these collections, others can be obtained by
permutations, giving a total of 15 such collections: one of type (a),
four each of type (b) and (c), and six of type (d). Assuming the game
to be in (0,1) normalization (and superadditive), this gives us a
system of 15 inequalities:

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

By superadditivity, (d) implies (c). Thus we are left with 11
inequalities: (a), four of type (b), and six of type (d), which must be
satisfied for  to have a nonempty core.
In case  is a symmetric four-person game, with
where  is the cardinality of , these inequalities will reduce to the
single inequality
The proof of this is left as an exercise to the reader.
10.5.13 Example. Consider a “production game” or economy, with
player set
, each player holding a “bundle” of
commodities. More specifically, player  holds
 units of commodity

--- Sayfa 314 ---
,
 units of
, and
 units of
. The commodities are
worthless in themselves, except that they can be used to produce
goods
, which can then be sold at fixed market prices. We
assume a linear production process, in which one unit of
 requires
 units of
,
 units of
, and
 units of
, and can be sold for
a price of  dollars.
When a coalition  forms, its members will presumably pool their
resources (commodities) so as to maximize the market price of their
products. Thus the characteristic function is given by the linear
programs
Subject to
where
is the total amount of
 that coalition  has.
We will show that  has a nonempty core. For, let
be a balanced collection, with balancing vector
. For each
, let
be the optimizing vector for the program (10.24)–(10.26) defining
,
and let

--- Sayfa 315 ---
For each , we have
Thus
 satisfies (10.25)–(10.26) for the program defining
,
and therefore
Now
Since this is true for all balanced collections , we conclude that
the game has a nonempty core.
To find a point in the core, we proceed, as in Example 10.4.5
above, by solving the dual linear program. We leave this as an
exercise for the reader (see Problem 4).
Problems
1. An
 game is a game , with player set
, such that
whenever
. Define, for each

--- Sayfa 316 ---
Show that the conditions for an
 game  to be balanced
reduce to a single linear inequality. Give this inequality.
2. Let  be a game with player set
. For any coalition
, define
the relative game on as the restriction of the function  to the
collection
. A game is said to be totally balanced if, for each ,
the relative game on  is balanced.
(a) Show, by a counterexample, that a balanced game need not
be totally balanced.
(b) Show that the game of Example 10.5.13 is totally balanced.
3. Let
, where
 and
 are disjoint sets. Assume each
member of  has one right shoe, and each member of  has one
left shoe. Single shoes (or several shoes for the same foot) are
worthless; any pair of shoes can, however, be sold for $1. (It is
assumed that the shoes are identical except for the left-right
distinction.) Let utility be identical with money.
(a) Give the characteristic function for this game. (Hint:
 is the
number of pairs of shoes that the coalition  can form.)
(b) Let
 be the cardinalities  and , respectively. Show that, if
, the core
 consists of a single point where the
members of
 receive nothing. Similarly, if
,
 has a
single point where the members of  receive nothing.
(c) Find the core in the special case
.
4. For Example 10.5.13, show that there exist “shadow prices”
 for
the several commodities such that the point
 given
by
lies in the core of the game. (Hint: Obtain  by solving the dual
linear program.)
5. For a game  with player set
, define a preimputation as a vector
 such that

--- Sayfa 317 ---
For any , define the strong -core, denoted
, as the set of all
preimputations such that, for each coalition
(a) Show that, if
, then
.
(b) Show that there exist a minimal  such that
. This
particular
 is known as the least-core,
(c) Find the least-core for the game  with
, defined by
6. Let ,  be two games with the player set
, and suppose that for
some  and
Then, for any
In particular, prove that
.

--- Sayfa 318 ---
Chapter 11
Stable Sets
11.1. Introduction
We saw in Chapter 10 that the core—which represents a very strong
type of stability—is frequently empty. Different types of stability—not
generally as strong as that represented by the core—are therefore of
interest. The idea of stable sets was first introduced by von Neumann
and Morgenstern, who called them solutions.
In 10.2 we gave an example of a three-person game whose
characteristic function can be given most easily in the form:
We can leave the game in this form, or put it into
 normalization.
(This can be done by setting
.) The
normalization is a simple game in which two- and three-person
coalitions win and single-player coalitions lose.
For this game in
 normalization, we obtain the three
imputations:

--- Sayfa 319 ---
as a “solution.” Now, in which sense is this a solution? It is easy to
see that none of these imputations dominates any one of the others.
(It was this domination, in fact, which caused us to disallow the three
slightly altered imputations in the subsequent variant of the game.) Of
course, this is not all; any set consisting of a single imputation would
have this property. This set of imputations has also, however, the
following property: any imputation other than the
 is dominated by
one of these three imputations.
To see this, let
 be any imputation for this game. As the
game is in
 normalization, we know
 and
. Thus,
at most two of the components of  can be as large as . If this
actually happens, then both of those components must equal , while
the remaining component is zero. But this means  is one of the
. If,
then,  is any other imputation, then at most one of the components
can be as large as . At least two components, say  and , with
,
are then smaller than . But it is then clear that
 through the set
.
This gives us, then, a definition for our “solution concept”:
11.1.1 Definition. A set
 is said to be a stable set for  if

(i)
, then x  y
(ii)
, then there is some
 such that
Thus, a stable set satisfies the two conditions of internal stability
(no imputation in
 dominates another) and external stability (any
imputation outside  is dominated by some imputation in ).
Stable sets were first defined by von Neumann and Morgenstern;
they are often called solutions of the game. We do not use this name,
inasmuch as many other solution concepts have been formulated
since then.
One of the principal difficulties with stable sets is that, from their
definition, neither existence nor uniqueness is guaranteed. On the
one hand, most games possess immense collections of stable sets
(though there are a few with a unique stable set). On the other hand,
see Section 11.4 for an example of a game with no solution.

--- Sayfa 320 ---
11.1.2 Example. Let us consider once again the constant-sum three-
person game in
 normalization (and see Figure 11.1). As
mentioned above, the set
is stable. However, it is not the only stable set; if  is any number in
the interval
, it is easy to check that the set
in which the third player receives the constant , while players 1 and
2 split the remainder in all possible ways, is also stable. Internal
stability follows from the fact that two such imputations  and  differ
only in that, say,
, while
. But domination of imputations is
not possible through single-player coalitions.

--- Sayfa 321 ---
Figure 11.1.
To show that
 is externally stable, suppose  is any imputation
not in
. This means either
 or
.
If
, say
. We define  by
It is then easy to see that
 and
 through
.
If
, we know that either
 or
 (or else their sum would
be greater than 1). Say
. Then let
. It is clear that

--- Sayfa 322 ---
, and so
 through
. Clearly,
. If
, we see
similarly that
, where
.
Thus it is clear that, apart from the symmetric stable set, this
game has a family of solutions in which player 3 receives a fixed
amount  in the interval
. These are called discriminatory stable
sets; player 3 is said to be discriminated. In the set
, player 3 is
said to be totally discriminated, or excluded.
By the symmetry of the game, it is clear that there will also exist
two families of stable sets,
 and
, in which players 1 and 2,
respectively, are discriminated.
The preceding example shows that a game may possess a
bewildering multiplicity of stable sets. It is not clear how one stable
set is to be chosen from among all the sets. Nor is it clear, once a
stable set is chosen, how an imputation can be chosen from this
stable set. Von Neumann and Morgenstern suggest that stable sets
are standards of behavior, proper to a given social order. Once a
society has decided on the standard of behavior (stable set), the
individual
players’
bargaining
abilities
would
determine
the
imputation.
Unfortunately, as seen below (section 11.4) not all games have
stable set solutions. Below, we consider cases in which stable sets
exist, and special types of stable sets.
Let us consider the following theorems:
11.1.3 Theorem. Let  be a simple game in
 normalization, and let
 be a minimal winning coalition [i.e., a coalition such that
 but
 for all
]. Let
 be the set of all imputations  such
that
 for all
. Then
 is a stable set.
Proof. The proof of this theorem is the same as the proof (in Example
11.1.2) that the set
 is stable.
Theorem 11.1.3 states that every simple game has discriminatory
stable sets in which a minimal winning coalition excludes all the
others. In certain cases, it is possible that some of the discriminated
players will receive small amounts (see Example 11.1.2). The exact
values which they may receive are often quite difficult to determine;
we shall not attempt to deal with this question here.

--- Sayfa 323 ---
11.1.4 Example. (Symmetric Solutions to Three-Person Games) In
Example 11.1.3 we gave all stable set solutions to the constant-sum
three-person game. We shall see how the symmetric, three-point
stable set generalizes to a symmetric stable set for other (general-
sum) symmetric three-person games.
For a three-person game in
 normalization, the values of the
one- and three-person coalitions are known in advance; hence, it is
only the values of the two-person coalitions that remain to be fixed.
For symmetric games, these all have the same value, and thus there
is a unique parameter,
, which determines these games. This
parameter can vary throughout the interval
 for
, we have the
constant-sum game (which we have already analyzed), while for
we have a “pure bargaining game” in which every imputation belongs
to the core, so that the core is the unique stable set.
When  is large (i.e., close to 1), the players may be expected to
behave very much as in the constant-sum game. Thus, they will first
attempt to enter into a two-player coalition. Since they are bidding
against each other, they cannot ask too much of their presumptive
partner, and the “natural” result may be an agreement, between the
members of whichever coalition forms, to divide their winnings
equally.
Once a two-player coalition has been formed, its members will
bargain with the remaining player to determine the division of the
remaining
 units of utility. In this case there are no alternatives;
there is no one else to bargain with, and so the amount which the
coalition receives depends only on the bargaining abilities of the three
players. Thus we may expect to find a stable set consisting of the
three line-segments.
(see Figure 11.2). It is necessary to check whether this set is, indeed,
stable. If we do so, we find that the set is stable for

--- Sayfa 324 ---
Figure 11.2.
Internal stability is proved as follows: Since
 we know that
, and so an imputation of the form
 can only be
dominated through one of the two coalitions
 and
. But none
of the imputations given by (11.1) can dominate
 through
. For, in an imputation
 if
, then
 while in
an imputation
 we find that, if
 then
 and so the
set
 is not effective. Symmetry and similar considerations
complete the proof of internal stability.
External stability is also easily proved. Since
 we know that
any imputations will have at most two components greater than or
equal to
 with the single exception of the case
 and the
imputation
, which will in this case satisfy (11.1). Thus any
imputation which does not satisfy (11.1) will have at most two
components greater than or equal to
. Let us suppose an
imputation
 has two such components; by symmetry we may
assume these are the first two components,  and . If
, then
satisfies (11.1). If
, we may (again by symmetry) assume
, with
. Then  is dominated by the imputation
through the coalition
.

--- Sayfa 325 ---
If, however, the imputation  has one component or none as great
as
, then we may assume that both  and  are smaller than
.
Then  is dominated by
through the coalition
.
The above analysis loses its validity for
. In fact, internal
stability will be preserved, but the external stability is lost. Such
games will possess a core, consisting of all imputations
satisfying
 for all
. It may then be checked that the
union of the core and the three line-segments given in (11.1) is a
stable set (see Figure 11.3). For
, moreover, the three line-
segments will all be subsets of the core; in this case, thus, the core is
the unique stable set (see Figure 11.4).
Figure 11.3.

--- Sayfa 326 ---
Figure 11.4.
As we have seen, the set of all
 games (in normalization)
forms a compact subset of
 Euclidean space.
Applying Lebesgue measure, we can say that any full-dimensional
subset of this set is a positive fraction of the set of
 games. We
give these theorems without proof:
11.1.5 Theorem. A positive fraction of all
 games have unique
stable sets consisting of the core.
11.1.6 Theorem. A positive fraction of all
 games have stable
sets which discriminate
 players. In such sets, at least
 of the
discriminated players are excluded.
11.2. Properties of Stable Sets
In this section we study some properties of stable sets, considered
from the point of view of operations on games.
11.2.1 Strategic. Equivalence We note first of all that, under strategic
equivalence, the domination relation is preserved. Since stable sets

--- Sayfa 327 ---
are defined entirely in terms of domination, it will follow that these are
preserved under strategic equivalence.
As an example, consider the two three-person games,  and ,
defined by
and
It is easily checked that
 and  are strategically equivalent,
satisfying
where
 for all . Thus the transformation
changes stable sets of  to stable set for .
As we know,  has the stable set
whose image
is stable for . Similarly, for any
 has the stable set

--- Sayfa 328 ---
This means that  has the stable set
for any
.
Together with similar families of sets discriminating 1 and 2,
respectively, this gives all stable sets of .
11.2.2 Composition. Let  and  be two games with disjoint player
sets,
 and : we might have, e.g.,
It is easy to see how this can be made into a “composite” game
 with player set
. In fact, we can write
for any
.
Heuristically, Equation (11.1) tells us that there is no interaction
among members of the two groups
 and
. In effect, there is a
juxtaposition of the two games, no more, to form an
game. Under the circumstances, it is not surprising to find that the
following is true:
11.2.3 Theorem. If  is a stable set for , and
 is a stable set for ,
then the Cartesian product
 is a stable set for
.
In effect, Theorem 11.2.3 simply states that the two games can be
played independently of each other—there is no great surprise here.
Somewhat surprising, however, is the fact that in general there are
other stable sets—obtained from the games  and  by the notion of a
transfer: it is, under certain circumstances, possible to “transfer” a

--- Sayfa 329 ---
certain amount from
 to
, or vice versa. We explain this more
precisely, as follows.
Given a game  with player set
 and a real number , we define
 by
Thus
 coincides with
, except for the single set
, the “grand
coalition” of the game. Of course,  is not always, strictly speaking, a
game: if  is small enough, the superadditive property will be lost. We
can nevertheless think of  as an “improper” game, and so long as
we can define imputations, a core, and a domination relation among
these, just as for any (proper) game. It is therefore meaningful to talk
about cores and stable sets for the “game” .
Returning now to the game
, consider two numbers  and
such that
If  is an imputation for
, and  an imputation for
, then
 is
clearly an imputation for
. This imputation represents a transfer of
the amount
 from
 to
. Assuming that this transfer is
nonzero, the question is whether the game
 can somehow
accommodate such a transfer.
11.2.4 Definition. In the game
, if
, a transfer (from  to
) of the amount
 is admissible if and only if

(a)
(b) the core of the game  has an empty interior

--- Sayfa 330 ---
Similarly, if
, the transfer (from
 to
) of
 is
admissible if and only if

(a)
(b) the core of
 [where
] has an empty interior

In Definition 11.2.4, it is easy enough to understand condition (a):
a larger transfer is not admissible because there is simply no more
that the “benefactors”
 can give. Condition (b) is more complicated;
essentially, it seems to set a limit on the amount that the
“beneficiaries”
 can assimilate.
11.2.5 Theorem. Let
 as above, and let
 be
stable sets for  and
, respectively. Then
 is a stable set for
 if and only if the associated transfer is admissible.
Proof. Without loss of generality, we shall assume
.
Assume first that the transfer is not admissible. This is either
because (a)
 or (b) the core of  has a nonempty interior. In
case (a), the game
 will have no imputations. But then
, and also
, would be empty, and the empty set is clearly not stable for
.
Suppose, instead, that  has a core with nonempty interior. Thus,
we can find a vector
 such that
where
. Choose, now,  to satisfy
Let
, and choose  by

--- Sayfa 331 ---
Then
 is seen to be an imputation for
; moreover,
and
, so
.
If
 is a stable set, there must be vectors
, such
that
. Thus, there is some
 such that
We have, however,
so that
with strict inequality holding if
. Thus we must have
, and, moreover,
Thus
 (in ) through the coalition
. But this is a contradiction
as both  and
, which was assumed stable.
Conversely, assume that the transfer is admissible, and
 are
stable. We shall show
 is stable for
.
To prove internal stability, let
 and
, and suppose
 through the coalition
. Then

--- Sayfa 332 ---
This will mean that, either
or
Thus, either
 (in ) through
 or
 (in ) through
.
Moreover,
 and
, since
 and
. Thus,
either
 (in ) through
, or
 (in
) through
. In either
case we obtain a contradiction as
 and
 were both assumed
stable.
To prove external stability, let us suppose
 is an imputation for
, but
. There are three possibilities:

(a)
(b)
(c)

In case (a), we find that either
 or
. Without loss of
generality, we may assume
. Since  is an imputation for , there
is
 such that
 through some
. Then, letting
, it is easy to see that
 through the
coalition .
In case (b), we set
Clearly  is an imputation for
; either
 or
.
If
, we choose
, then
, and it is easy to see
that
 through the set .
If
, there is some
 such that
 (in ) through some
. Choosing
, we see that
, and

--- Sayfa 333 ---
through .
In case (c), if
, the situation is just as in case (b), with
and
 interchanged. If
, we again set
and we see  is an imputation for . As the interior of
 is empty,
there must be at least one
, such that
If
, then, choosing
, we see that
, and
 through the set .
If
, there is
 such that
 through some
; clearly
. Choosing
, we see
 through the coalition .
11.2.6 Example. Let
 and
; let  and  be given by
It is not difficult to see that  has a core with nonempty interior, for all
. The core of  is empty, and in fact
 will be empty for
.
For
 consists of a single point
, and for
will have a nonempty interior. Thus, no positive transfer from
 to
is admissible. On the other hand, a positive transfer from
 to
 is
admissible, up to an admissible maximum of twenty units.
Consider, then, a transfer of twenty units from
 to
. The game
 has a unique stable set, consisting of all imputations:

--- Sayfa 334 ---
The game
 has many stable sets, including (as we saw in
Example 11.1.6) one that consists of three lines from the edges of the
triangle
Then
 is a stable set for the five-person game
.
Another interesting property of stable sets deals with composition
of simple games.
11.2.7 Definition. Let
 be  disjoint nonempty sets of
players. Let
 be simple games in
 normalization, with
player sets
, respectively. Let  be a nonnegative game over
the set
; then the v-
 of
, denoted
is a game with player set
and characteristic function
for
.
Heuristically the compound game  represents a division into
committees
. The members of
 (the jth committee) choose an
agent to represent them; the  agents then play the game  among
themselves. A typical example here is a legislature, in which each set
 represents the voters of the
th constituency. These elect a
representative (Congressman, Member of Parliament, etc.) via a
game
 (usually a majority voting game); the representatives often
also play a voting game.

--- Sayfa 335 ---
11.2.8 Example. (The Electoral College) Let  be the 51-person
weighted majority game
. The players in  are the
states of the union. For each
 consists of the voters in the th
state;
 is a simple majority game with player set
. The idea here,
of course, is that  is a simple game with player set
consisting of all voters in the United States. A set
 is winning if
it contains a subset of the form
where
 for all
, and
. Thus, a coalition wins if it has
at least half the popular votes
 in states totaling at least 270
electoral votes
.
In some cases, we find that it is possible for some of the
subgames
 to be “improper” games: the superadditivity condition is
not strictly necessary, and we might weaken it to a monotonicity
condition:
11.2.9 Example. The United Nations Security Council consists of five
permanent members (United States, Soviet Union, Britain, France,
and China) and ten other members. Motions must be approved by
nine members, including all the permanent members. It is easy to see
that we have here the voting game
where
 is the set of permanent members, and

--- Sayfa 336 ---
where
 is the set of ten other members with
for
, and where  is given by
We note of course that
 is improper: two disjoint sets can both
be winning in
. Nevertheless,  is a proper game.
For compound simple games, the following theorem is of
importance. We shall use the notation
 to denote
imputations in
 to denote imputations in ; and
 to
denote imputations in . We shall write, moreover
to denote the vector
 given by
With this notation, we have now
11.2.10 Theorem. Let
 be as in Definition 11.2.7, with the
added proviso that  is a simple game in
 normalization.
Let
 be stable sets for
 respectively, and let

--- Sayfa 337 ---
Then
 is a stable set for the game .
We omit the proof of Theorem 11.2.10, leaving it as an exercise
for the reader. We point out merely that this proof is similar to—but
lengthier than—the proof of Theorem 11.2.5, and that superadditivity
of the games involved is not required for the proof.
11.2.11 Example. Let
, each be a three-person simple
constant-sum game, in which the two-person coalitions win. Then
 is a nine-person simple game, with 27 minimal winning
coalitions, each of four players: two from each of two of the sets
.
We can get a stable set for  by taking a stable set for each of
 and composing them. If, in particular, we take the symmetric
stable set for each of the four games, we obtain a 27-point stable set
for , each point giving  each to the members of a minimal winning
coalition, and zero to the others.
If we instead compose discriminatory stable sets to each of the
four games, then we obtain a stable set for , in which the four
members of a minimal winning coalition split most of the profits, while
two other pairs split smaller amounts, and one player receives a small
fixed amount.
There are, of course, many other possible compositions, giving
rise to many other stable sets for . Additionally, we cannot rule out
the possibility of other stable sets for , which are not composite in
nature.
11.2.12 Example. Let  be a three-person game such that
It is not too difficult to see that we may write
where
 is given by

--- Sayfa 338 ---
is given by
and
, with
It is of course to be noticed that neither
 nor
 is in
normalization. Moreover
 is improper (i.e., not superadditive) and in
fact has no imputations! Nevertheless, we will apply the composition
theorem.
The game
 has, of course, a simple imputation,
.
The game
 has no imputations; we shall, however, consider its
“pseudoimputations”
 satisfying
. It may be
seen that any set
, consisting of a single such pseudoimputation
 is stable in the usual sense.
Finally,  has a single stable set, consisting of all its imputations
. We therefore combine
where  is a fixed number. Then, for any
, the set
will be stable for the game .
Geometrically, this set is a line, joining the vertex
, to an
arbitrary point
 on the opposite side of the triangle of
imputation. But note that these are not the only stable sets.
11.3. Edgeworth Market Games—An Example
We have concerned ourselves through this chapter with some strictly
mathematical ideas. We will now apply some of these to economic

--- Sayfa 339 ---
analysis.
Let us consider the following type of two-person nonzero sum
game: Player I has  units of one commodity while player II has
units of a second commodity. Neither has any units of the other
player’s commodity. We represent this by saying that player I has the
bundle
 while II has the bundle
. Now, the two are to trade
with each other, the idea being that both can gain some utility by
changing to the bundles
 and
, where
 and
.
Games such as this were first considered by Edgeworth. He gave
a “solution” quite analogous to the von Neumann–Morgenstern stable
sets. In fact, it is a set of distributions  such that no distribution in
is preferred by both players to any other distribution in
 but, if
 is any distribution not in
, there will be some
distribution
 in  which is preferred by both players.
Finally, for any distribution in , both players have at least as much
utility as for the “initial” distribution
. Assuming infinite
divisibility of the commodities traded, this set
 will usually form a
curve, and is called the contract curve.
The contract curve is shown graphically in Figure 11.5 by a
system of indifference curves. These are such that any two points on
one of the curves which are convex downward represent the same
utility for player I, while any two points on one of the curves which are
convex upward represent the same utility for player II. The contract
curve will then be the locus of points of tangency of the curves from
the two families, restricted to keep both players’ utilities at or above
the “point of no trading.”

--- Sayfa 340 ---
Figure 11.5.
In Edgeworth’s analysis he concludes that, if the number of
players increases, then under certain plausible conditions the
contract curve will “shrink” to a single limiting point. This is the
“market price.” We give below a mathematical interpretation.
Let us consider a market consisting of a set
 of traders.
The members  of
 have initial commodity bundles
, while the
members  of
 have initial bundles
. Each player, , has a utility
function
. We assume

--- Sayfa 341 ---
Assume that the coalition  forms. The members of  will divide
their joint bundle in such a way as to maximize their total utility, and
then possibly make some side payments. We have, thus,
where
the
maximum
is
taken
over
all

such
that
, and
We shall simplify matters by assuming that all players have the
same utility function, i.e.,
Then, by the strict convexity of , the optimal distribution of goods is
obtained by distributing these equally. We assume also that each
member of
 has the same amount  of the first commodity, while
each member of
 has an amount  of the second commodity. We
can now give the characteristic function implicitly; it is given by
where
 are the number of elements in
, and
,
respectively. We shall denote a game such as this, where
 has
elements and  has  elements, by
.
We can now look at the two-person game
. The characteristic
function is
This game will have a unique stable set solution consisting of all its
imputations, i.e., of all vectors of the form
, where

--- Sayfa 342 ---
We will show now that for any  the game
 has a stable set
solution analogous to that given by (11.14)–(11.16).
11.3.1 Theorem. For any , the game
 has a stable set solution,
, consisting of all vectors  with
 for
 and
 for
,
where
 satisfies (11.14)–(11.16).
Proof. First,  is internally stable. In fact, domination must be through
a set  such that
 and
. But, for
, if
 for
some
, then
 for all
. Hence we cannot have
.
Next suppose
. There is some pair
, with
,
, such
that
. Choose
 then so that
 and
.
Then the imputation
 corresponding to
 clearly dominates
through
. Thus  is externally stable.
Of course this shows that the stable set solutions have no
tendency to “shrink” as  is increased. Such a tendency, however, is
shown by the core. We consider two cases: monopoly (the game
)
and pure competition (the game
 where both  and  are large).
11.3.2 Theorem. In the game
, the imputation
, such that
 for all
, belongs to the core. Moreover, given any
,
there exists an
 such that, if
, no imputation  with
can belong to the core.
Proof. Domination is possible only through a set  with
. As
 is
as large as possible, it follows that
.
Consider now the expression
, where
. If
we replace  by its definition (11.13), and apply Taylor’s theorem, we
see that, for any
, if
 is large enough,

--- Sayfa 343 ---
for all
. Suppose now that  is an imputation for the game
such that
. We must have some
 such that
 (since we must have
). Now, it is clear
that
and so
.
Theorem 11.3.2 describes what happens in the case of monopoly.
For the case of pure competition, we have
11.3.3 Theorem. Suppose
 and  are such that
Then for the game
, where
 and
, the imputation
is always in the core. Moreover, for any
, there exists a
 such
that, for any game
 with
, no imputation with a
component smaller than
 can belong to the core.
We skip the proof of this theorem, which is quite similar to that of
11.3.3. Equation (11.17) says that the sizes of the two sets of players,
 and
, are in “optimal ratio” (e.g., the case when the amount of
available capital is just enough to employ all the available labor). If
and
 are in any other ratio, there will be some maladjustment
(unemployment or overemployment) and some players will be
disadvantaged in the core. On the other hand, if (11.17) holds, there
will always be a core which shrinks to the single imputation, , and
our game can increase merrily in size with everybody happy.
11.4. A Game with No Solutions

--- Sayfa 344 ---
Let us consider the ten-person game , given by
and, for other
. The set of imputations here is
It will be helpful to introduce the hypercube
and also the following six vertices of :
It is easy to see that each of these imputations belongs to the core
. Thus  contains the convex hull of
. It is also easy
to check that any
 such that
will lie in . Moreover,
. Thus

--- Sayfa 345 ---
To simplify our notation, we shall assume that (unless otherwise
specified) the indices
, and  can have the three sets of values
while  and  can be
We now define the following twelve subsets of :
It is easy to see
. Moreover,
. This is because, if
, then
 and
, so that
,
and so
. Finally,
, for clearly,
 from the
definitions. If, however,
, we find that
 and so
.
We see, then, that the five sets
constitute a partition of .
11.4.1 Lemma. Every
 is dominated by some
.

--- Sayfa 346 ---
Proof.
Let
.
Then
,
and,
for
some
,
Clearly, there will be some
 such that
For this , let
where
Then
; moreover,
and so
 through
.
11.4.2 Lemma. Every
 is dominated by some
.
Proof. Let
. Then  satisfies
and either

--- Sayfa 347 ---
or
The reason for (11.19) is clear. Now, (11.20) follows from (11.18)
and
. The reason for (11.21) is that if
 and
, then
, whereas, if
, then
. The reason for
(11.22) is that, if
, then
. Thus either
 or
. Now, if
 and
, then (11.24) is necessary so that
.
Suppose, now, that (11.23) holds. Then
. If all three of
 are smaller than 1, we have
and
it
is
easy
to
find

with

and
. Thus
 through
.
Suppose, instead,
 but
. Then we have, by (11.19),
and again we can find
 such that
 through
.
Alternatively, let us suppose (11.24) holds. If we have
 and
 then it is easy to find
through
.
Suppose, however, that
, but
, and
;
then
, and so we have
as
. Then we can find  satisfying
, and also

--- Sayfa 348 ---
so that
 through
.
11.4.3 Lemma. If
, there is no
 which dominates .
Proof. It is clear that, within , there can be no domination through
,
or through any  with
. It is also clear that, throughout , and
hence throughout , no imputation can be dominated through any of
the coalitions
, where
, since, for all
, we have
.
Suppose, then, that
. For some
, we know
. Then
, but
 if
. Thus domination can only
be through some set which includes neither  nor , and the only
possibility is
. Then
but, since
 and
, while
, this means
and so
.
11.4.4 Lemma. If
, there is no
 which dominates .
Proof. Again domination can only be through
. If
, we will
have
and these inequalities cannot both hold for
. Thus, if
, we
must have
. If
 or
, we have
, and this gives
us
, etc. Thus no
 can dominate .
11.4.5 Corollary If  is a stable set solution for , then any
must be dominated by some
.

--- Sayfa 349 ---
Proof. We know
 for all games. By internal stability, no
dominated by
 can lie in
; this eliminates all
 or
. Thus we must have
Suppose
. By external stability, there must be
 which
dominates . But
. Thus
, and so
.
11.4.6 Lemma. If
, then there is no
 which dominates ,
but there is some
 which dominates  through
.
Proof. If
, it can only be dominated through
. Now if
, then
, and hence no domination is possible.
Since
 we have
and so it is possible to find
 satisfying
It suffices to choose
, where
.
11.4.7 Theorem. The game  has no stable sets.
Proof. By Corollary 11.4.5,
 is not empty. Choose
; then
. Choose
; clearly (by internal stability)
. As
 there is
, and clearly
. Choose
.
Then
. Then there is
. We have then

--- Sayfa 350 ---
and also
But this means
through
. This is a contradiction as
 both belong to .
It will be noticed that the game , as defined above, is not
superadditive. We may, however, define a game
 which is
superadditive, and whose domination structure is the same as that of
: this is given by
where the maximum is taken over all partitions
 of . Now,
as may be easily checked; thus
 and
 are the same. The
reader is invited to prove that, if
 in , then
 in
, and
conversely. Thus  and  will have the same stable sets, and in this
case,  has no stable sets.
Problems
1. (a)The core of any
 game  is always a subset of any stable
set.
(b) The core has a nonempty intersection with each face
of the simplex of imputations, whenever it is the (unique)
stable set solution of the game .
(c) A positive (full-dimensional) fraction of
 games [in
normalization] has a unique stable set solution (Theorem
11.1.5).

--- Sayfa 351 ---
2. For a game , define a semi-imputation as a vector
such that
 and
. Then, if
 is any stable set
solution to  and  is a semi-imputation but
, there exists
such that
.
3. For a game , define the number , as
Show that an imputation  which does not satisfy
 cannot
belong to the core or to any stable set.
4. Show that the symmetric stable set solution  of the three-person
game considered in 11.1.2 generalizes, as follows, to the main
simple solution of a simple game.
Let
 be a simple, constant-sum
 game in
normalization, and suppose there exists a vector
 such
that
 and
 for every minimal winning coalition . For
such a coalition, let
 be the vector defined by
, if
otherwise.
Then

is
an
imputation,
and
the
set
 is a stable set solution of , called
a main simple solution.
5. Consider the simple
 game in
 normalization in which
the winning coalitions consist of (a) player 1 and at least one other
player, (b) the set
.
(a) Find the main simple solution of this game.
(b) For
, where
, let
 consist of all the imputations
such that
. For
, let
 consist of all the
imputations such that
. In either case,
 is a stable set
solution.
(c) For
 and
, let
 consist of all the
imputations such that
. Then
 is a stable set for
, but not for
.
(d) For
 the only stable set solution which discriminates the
members of
 is the set
 mentioned in (b) above.

--- Sayfa 352 ---
6. Let  be a simple game for a denumerable infinity of players, for
which a set is winning if and only if its complement is finite. If  is in
 normalization, the set
 consists of all sequences
of nonnegative numbers such that
.
Then  has no stable set solutions. (Show that no imputation can
belong to a stable set.)
7. Let  be the simple four-person game in
 normalization with
winning coalitions
 and
. Let
 be any
closed subset of
, and let
 be the set of all vectors
 for
. Then  has a stable set solution ,
such that
, and the two sets
 are closed and disjoint
(and therefore separated).
(a) Let
. Then let
 be the set of all imputations
of the form
for all
. Show  is closed and
.
(b) Let
 consist of all those imputations in  which are dominated
by some imputation in . Then
is the desired stable set.
8. Prove Theorem 11.3.3.
9. Let  be an
 game (see Chapter 10, Problem 1). For a given
, let
 be the set of all imputations  such that
. Under
what conditions will
 be a von Neumann–Morgenstern solution
(stable set)?

--- Sayfa 353 ---
Chapter 12
Indices of Power
12.1. The Shapley Value
The fact that no general existence theorem has been given for stable
sets of -person games has led mathematicians to look for other
solution concepts. One such concept is the Shapley value.
Shapley approaches his value axiomatically. We give two
definitions first.
12.1.1 Definition. A carrier for a game  is a coalition  such that, for
any ,
.
Intuitively, Definition 12.1.1 states that any player who does not
belong to a carrier is a dummy — i.e., can contribute nothing to any
coalition.
12.1.2 Definition. Let  be an -person game, and let
 be any
permutation of the set
. Then, by
 we mean the game  such that,
for any
Effectively, the game
 is nothing other than the game , with the
roles of the players interchanged by the permutation .
With these two definitions, it is possible to give an axiomatic
treatment. We point out merely that, as games are essentially real-
valued functions, it is possible to talk of the sum of two or more
games, or of a number times a game.

--- Sayfa 354 ---
12.1.3 Axioms (Shapley). By the value of a game , we shall mean
an -vector,
, satisfying
S1. If  is any carrier of , then
S2. For any permutation , and
S3. If  and  are any games
These are Shapley’s axioms. It is a remarkable fact that these
axioms are sufficient to determine a value  uniquely, for all games.
12.1.4 Theorem. There is a unique function , defined on all games,
satisfying Axioms S1–S3.
The proof of 12.1.4 is given by the following sequence of lemmas.
12.1.5 Lemma. For any coalition , let the game
 be defined by
Then, if  is the number of players in
Proof. It is clear that  is a carrier for
, as is any superset  of . By
Axiom S2, then, it follows that

--- Sayfa 355 ---
But this means (as
 is also a possibility) that
 for
.
Now, if  is any permutation which carries  into itself, it is clear
that
. Hence, by S2,
 for any ,
. As there are
 of these terms, and their sum is 1, it follows that
 if
.
12.1.6 Corollary. If
, then
12.1.7 Lemma. If  is any game, then there exist
 real numbers
for
 such that
where
 is as in 12.1.5.
Proof. Let
(where  is the number of elements in ). We shall show that these
satisfy the lemma. In fact, if  is any coalition
Now, consider the inner parenthesis in this last expression. For every
value of  between  and , there will be
 sets  with  elements

--- Sayfa 356 ---
such that
. Hence the inner parenthesis may be replaced by
But this is precisely the binomial expansion of
. Hence this will
be zero for all
, and 1 for
. Hence we have
for all
.
We can now proceed to prove Theorem 12.1.4. In fact, Lemma
12.1.7 shows that any game can be written as a linear combination of
games
. By Lemma 12.1.5, the function  is uniquely defined for
such games. Now, some of the coefficients  are negative; however,
it is easy to see from Axiom S3 that if
, and
 are all games,
then
. By S3, then, the function  is uniquely defined
for all games . We can also give the exact form of the function . We
know that
and so
But  is defined by (12.1); substituting this here, we obtain
and so

--- Sayfa 357 ---
From (12.2) let us write
It is easy to see that, if
 and
, then
. In
fact, all the terms in the right side of (12.3) will be the same in both
cases, except that
, and so there is a change of sign
throughout. This means we will have
Now, if
, we see there are exactly
 coalitions
 with
elements such that
. Thus we have
But this is a well-known definite integral; we have, thus

--- Sayfa 358 ---
so that
Formula (12.4) gives the Shapley value, explicitly. It is then easy
to check that this expression will satisfy Axioms S1–S3. Moreover, it
can be seen that the sum of the coefficients
 is equal to 1. For the
numerator is equal to the number of permutations of
 in which  is
preceded exactly by the elements of
, while the numerator is the
total number of permutations. By superadditivity, the bracket is always
at least equal to
. Hence we see that
and so
 is always an imputation.
Apart from the axiomatic treatment, the Shapley value, as defined
by (12.4), can be given the following heuristic explanation: Suppose
the players (the elements of
) agree to meet at a specified place
and time. Naturally, because of random fluctuations, all will arrive at
different times; it is assumed, however, that all orders of arrival
(permutations of the players) have the same probability: viz.,
.
Suppose that, if a player, , arrives, and finds the members of the
coalition
 (and no others) already there, he receives the amount
, i.e., the marginal amount which he contributes to the
coalition, as payoff. Then the Shapley value
 is the expected
payoff to player  under this randomization scheme.
In case the game  is simple, the formula for the Shapley value
becomes especially simple. In fact, the term
 will always
have value 0 or 1, taking the value 1 whenever
 is a winning
coalition but
 is not. Hence we would have

--- Sayfa 359 ---
where the summation is taken over all winning coalitions  such that
 is not winning.
12.1.8 Example. Consider a corporation with four stockholders,
having respectively 10, 20, 30, and 40 shares of stock. It is assumed
that any decision can be settled by approval of stockholders holding a
simple majority of the shares. This can be treated as a simple four-
person game, in which the winning coalitions are: {2, 4}, {3, 4}, {1, 2,
3}, {1, 2, 4}, {1, 3, 4}, {2, 3, 4}, and {1, 2, 3, 4}. We would like to find
the Shapley value of this game.
To find
, we note that the only winning coalition
 such that
 is not winning, is {1, 2, 3}. Hence, as
Similarly, we find that {2, 4}, {1, 2, 3}, and {1, 2, 4} are winning
coalitions which are not winning if 2 is removed. Hence
In the same way, we find
, while
. Thus the Shapley value
is the vector
. This contrasts with the “vote vector,” which
would be
. Note that the value is the same for players 2 and 3,
even though player 3 has many more shares. This is not surprising,
since player 3 has no greater opportunity than 2 to form a winning
coalition; the game (thought of as a characteristic function) treats
these two players symmetrically.
In a similar way, it is clear that player 4’s strength is greater than
his share of the stock, while player 1’s strength is less.
12.1.9 Example. Consider a game similar to that of Example 12.1.8,
except that the players have 10, 30, 30, and 40 shares respectively. It
may be seen that any two of players 2, 3, 4 form a winning coalition,
while player 1 is a dummy: he cannot contribute anything to any
coalition. Thus the value vector is
: player 1’s shares are

--- Sayfa 360 ---
useless, while player 4’s extra shares give him no advantage over
players 2 and 3.
12.2. Multilinear Extensions
One of the principal difficulties with the Shapley value is that its
computation generally requires the sum of a very large number of
terms. Thus, even when the characteristic function is easy to define
(e.g., a weighted majority game), evaluation may require a prohibitive
amount of work. Recourse is therefore frequently had to the
multilinear extension (MLE) of the game.
As we have studied it, an
-person game (in characteristic
function form) is merely a real-valued function  whose domain is
— the set of subsets of
. However, we can also interpret
 as the set of all vectors
 whose components are either
0 or 1. Thus
is the set of all corners of the unit cube in n-dimensional space. The
function , then, is a real-valued function defined on the corners of the
cube, and it seems reasonable to try to extend it throughout the cube
There are, of course, many ways of extending the function. We
shall extend it in a manner that is linear in each variable (though not
in all variables simultaneously). This is the multilinear extension of .
12.2.1 Definition. Let  be an -person game with carrier
.
The multilinear extension of  is a function  defined by
for 0≤xi≤1, i=1,…,n.

--- Sayfa 361 ---
12.2.2 Example. Let  be the three-person simple majority game in
(0,1) normalization. Its multilinear extension is
or, equivalently
12.2.3 Example. Let  be the four-person simple game in which a
coalition  wins if (a)  has two players, and
 or (b)  has three or
four players. Then the MLE of  is
Some simplification and collection of terms gives us
To justify the name we have given the function , we shall show,
first, that
 is multilinear (i.e., linear in each
); second, that it
coincides with  where  is defined; third, that it is unique with respect
to those properties.
It is easy enough to see that
 is multilinear. For, each of the
terms

 is linear in each variable, and , as the sum of such
terms, is also linear in each variable, hence multilinear.
We show next that  is an extension of . For
, we let
 be
the -corner of the cube, i.e.,
Then

--- Sayfa 362 ---
It is easy to see that, if
, then the term in braces in (12.7)
vanishes. For, if there is some
, the corresponding
; if
there is some
, the corresponding
. In either case, at
least one of the factors vanishes, and so the entire product vanishes.
If, however,
, then the term in braces is equal to 1. Thus
and  is indeed an extension of .
To show uniqueness, we point out that a multilinear function of
variables, being a polynomial, has the form
and so depends on the
 constants
.
The equation (12.8) reduces to
so that the condition
 reduces to
This is a system of
 linear equations in the
 unknowns
. We
know that it can be solved — in fact (12.6) will give us a solution,
which after expansion reduces to (12.1) — for any choice of
. But
for a linear system, this means that the corresponding matrix of
coefficients is nonsingular, and so the system always has a unique
solution. We conclude that  has a unique MLE , given by (12.6). An
alternative form is (12.8), where the
 are given by (12.1).

--- Sayfa 363 ---
Heuristically, we can give a probabilistic interpretation to the
multilinear extension  of the game . Let us suppose that a coalition
is to be formed at random. Let  be this random coalition, and let the
event
have probability
. Assuming that the events
 are
independent, then, for any fixed
and so
so that
 can be thought of as the mathematical expectation of
,
under the given randomization scheme. Thus we might say: if each
player
 is
-committed to joining, then the coalition
 can, in
expectation, command the amount
 of utility.
We give, next, some interesting properties of MLEs.
12.2.4 Theorem. Let  and  be games with the same player set
,
and let  and  be the corresponding multilinear extensions. Then, for
any scalars  and , the game
 has the MLE
. (But note
that, strictly speaking, this need not be a game unless the scalars are
positive.)
Proof. Immediate from the definition of MLE.
12.2.5 Theorem. Let  and  be games with disjoint player sets
and
, and let
 be the von Neumann–Morgenstern sum
(composition) of these games. If  and  are the MLEs of  and ,
respectively, then the MLE of
 is the function
, whose domain
is
, defined by

--- Sayfa 364 ---
12.2.6 Theorem. Let  be a constant-sum game, and  its MLE. Then
for any
Proof. We use the probabilistic interpretation of the MLE. Then it is
not too difficult to see that
where  is a random coalition as above. For, the probability that
form, given the probabilities
, is the same as that of coalition
forming, given the probabilities . Then
Now,  is constant-sum, so that
 for all
. Thus
as desired.
The above properties of MLEs, though interesting, are rather
trivial. The following property, which is not nearly so obvious, relates
the MLE to the Shapley value, and is the real reason for studying
MLEs.
Let, now,  be the th partial derivative of . We have
Letting
 above, this will reduce to
In particular, we can set
. Then

--- Sayfa 365 ---
where  is the cardinality of . Integrating this, we obtain
or
where
 is the Shapley value of .
We have thus obtained the Shapley value in a totally different way,
by integrating the partial derivatives of
 along the main diagonal
 of the cube
.
12.2.7 Example. Consider the four-person game of Example 12.2.3,
whose MLE is
We have here
so that
and so
Similarly

--- Sayfa 366 ---
and so
Thus we will have
, and by symmetry,
. This is
then the value of .
At this point, we find that we have replaced evaluation of the sum
(12.4) by that of the sum (12.9), which contains as many terms, plus
an integration. Thus no great simplification has been made. The point
is that the MLE approach has two advantages. The first is due to the
fact that, thanks to our probabilistic interpretation, limit theorems of
probability theory (in particular, the central limit theorem) can be
applied. The second deals with the behavior of multilinear extensions
under composition of games.
To understand the first point, let us consider the equation (12.9).
The coefficient of
 is
which can be interpreted as the probability that
, where
 is a
random subset of
, whose distribution is given by the fact that,
for each
and that all of these are independent. Thus, we can write
under the corresponding randomization scheme.
Assuming, now, that  is a simple game in
 normalization, we
note that
 is equal to 1 if
 loses but
 wins, and

--- Sayfa 367 ---
vanishes otherwise. Thus
Suppose, further, that  is a weighted majority game, with symbol
. We have then
where  is the random variable
or, equivalently
where
 is a random variable, equal to
 if
 and 0 otherwise. It
is easy to see that
 has mean
 and variance
. Since the
 are independent,  has mean and variance
Now the distribution of
, which is the sum of
 random
variables, is not, in general, easy to obtain exactly. Under certain
circumstances, however (mainly, that  be large and that none of the
 have a variance considerably larger than the others),
 can be
approximated by a normal random variable. We can then conclude
that
 is approximately equal to the probability that a normal
random variable , with mean and variance given by (12.11)–(12.12),
satisfy

--- Sayfa 368 ---
(The  here is standard procedure, used whenever an integer-valued
random variable is approximated by a continuous variable.) In case
, the mean and variance take the simpler forms
Numerical integration of this probability will then yield an
approximation to the Shapley value.
An interesting example of this is treated in some detail in Section
12.4. The following example is slightly different, but also uses the
central limit theorem.
12.2.8 Example. Let  and  be disjoint sets of players with  and
elements, respectively, and let
. Each member of  has one
left-handed glove; each member of  has one right-handed glove. We
assume that a single glove is worthless, but a pair (one right-handed
and one left-handed glove) can be sold for $1. Identifying utility with
money, we have then
for any
, as this is the total number of pairs which can be formed
by the members of .
Assume, now, that
. It is easy to see that, for
will be equal to 1 if
 (where
,
) and 0 otherwise,
Thus

--- Sayfa 369 ---
where  and  are the cardinalities of the random coalitions
 and
, respectively.
Letting
, we see that  is a binomial random variable
with parameters  and , respectively, while
 is a binomial variable
with parameters
 and . Assuming  and  are large, we can
approximate them by normal variables with the same mean and
variance. Their difference  then has the mean and variance
and so we have the approximation
where  is a normal random variable with (12.15)–(12.16). This can
then be integrated (numerically) over
 to obtain the value.
In this fashion, we evaluated a game with
,
. The slight
surplus of left-handed gloves suggests that the members of  should
be at a slight advantage. In fact, the value obtained was
 for
,
 for
. Thus, the advantage to the members of  was
really more than would have been expected from the mere
comparison of the two numbers  and .
We consider, next, the behavior of MLEs under composition of
games. For simple games
 in (0,1) normalization and disjoint
carriers
, and a nonnegative game  with carrier
,
we gave in Chapter 11 the formula
for
 to define the compound game
.
Consider, however, the formula

--- Sayfa 370 ---
or, equivalently
where
 and  is the multilinear extension of . In case the
are simple, we see that
where
 is given by
and so
so that for simple games, formulas (12.4) and (12.18) coincide. The
advantage of (12.18) is that it is meaningful also for nonsimple
games, subject to the conditions that
Thus (12.18) is a generalization of (12.4).
Let ,
, be the MLE of
. Then  is a function mapping
the cube
 into the reals. In fact, because of conditions (12.20)–
(12.21), the image of  the unit interval [0, 1]. The cartesian product
is a function whose domain is
and whose image is
. The function  is given by

--- Sayfa 371 ---
where  is the restriction of the vector  to indices
.
Now , the multilinear extension of , has the domain
. We
can therefore form the composite function
defined on the cube
.
It may be seen, now, that
 is a multilinear function of the
variables ,
. For, suppose
. By hypothesis the sets
 are
disjoint, and so
,
, do not depend on . Therefore
or, using subscripts to denote differentiation
Now, since
 is multilinear, its derivative
 does not depend on
.
Since  is multilinear, its derivative  depends only on
,
, and
therefore does not depend on
. Thus
 does not depend on
,
and we conclude that  is linear in
. As this is true for each
,
we see that  is multilinear.
Since  is multilinear, it is the extension of some real-valued
function, defined on the corners of the cube. In fact, it is the extension
of the compound game .
12.2.9 Theorem. Let  be a nonnegative -person game, let
be as in (12.20)–(12.21), and let
. Let ,
 be the
MLEs of ,
, respectively, and let
. Then
 is the
multilinear extension of .
Proof. We evaluate  at the -corner,
 of the cube
. We have,
for any

--- Sayfa 372 ---
where, as before,
, and
 is the restriction of
 to indices
. We know that
, and so
or, by (12.19)
Thus  coincides with  on the corners of the cube, and is the MLE of
.
Theorem 12.2.9 tells us that composition of games corresponds to
composition of their MLEs. Since the MLE is closely related to the
Shapley value, one would hope that the value would also compose,
so that, say, we would have
 for
. In fact, this is
generally not true, though in certain special cases it may happen to
be true. To see why, in general, the value does not compose, we
remember that for
 we have
and, setting
where
Thus
whereas

--- Sayfa 373 ---
and
Thus, we see two reasons why the value does not, in general,
compose: in the first place,
 is generally not equal to
; in
the second place, even if
 is equal to  for all , the product of two
integrals is generally not equal to the integral of the product of their
two integrands.
Formula (12.23) allows us to compute the value for compound
games. The related formula,
reduces, by (12.22), to
which is also useful.
12.2.10 Example. We saw above that the United Nations Security
Council can be represented as a compound game
, where
 is a five-person simple game in which only the five-person coalition
wins,
 is an improper ten-person simple game in which any coalition
with four or more players wins, and  is a two-person simple game in
which the two-person coalition wins.
For
, we have the multilinear extension
and so

--- Sayfa 374 ---
Rather than give
 for general , we shall give
 at points
. In fact, we have, for any
where the sum is taken over all sets
, such that  loses but
 wins, and  is the cardinality of . Thus, the sum is taken over
all
 which have exactly three elements, and there are
 of these. Therefore
Finally,  has the extension
We have, then, for any
or
Since there are 10 elements in
, this leaves a total of
 for the members of
. By symmetry, each of
them receives one fifth of this, or 421/2145. Thus the game has the
value

--- Sayfa 375 ---
We conclude from this that the permanent members of the
Security Council have the lion’s share of the power.
12.2.11 Example. The Victoria Proposal suggests that Amendments
to the Canadian Constitution, to be ratified, must be approved by at
least
1. Ontario and Quebec,
2. two of the four Maritime Provinces,
3. either British Columbia, and one of the Prairie Provinces, or all
three of the Prairie Provinces.
Setting this as a simple game, we note that we have here a
natural division of the Provinces into three subsets. There are the
large provinces
the Maritime Provinces
and the Western Provinces
and we find that the game can be represented as
where
 is a two-player game in which {1, 2} is the only winning
coalition;
 is a four-player improper game in which any two-player
coalition (or larger) wins; and
 is a four-player simple game similar

--- Sayfa 376 ---
to that studied in Examples 12.2.3 and 12.2.7. Finally,  is a three-
person simple game in which only the three-person coalition wins.
For
 here, we have the MLE
so that
For
, we evaluate the MLE on the points
or
Next, for
 we have (from Example 12.2.3)
so that
and so on. Finally,  has the extension
We have then

--- Sayfa 377 ---
and, by symmetry
Next, we have
so that
and, again by symmetry
For player 7 (British Columbia), we have
Finally, for the Prairie Provinces, we will have
We therefore have the values

--- Sayfa 378 ---
12.3. The Banzhaf–Coleman Index of Power
A second index of power has been suggested by Banzhaf [12.1] and
Coleman [12.3]. Assuming
 to be a simple game [in (0,1)
normalization], a swing for player  is defined as a set
 such that
,  wins, and
 loses.
Letting  be the number of swings for player , we can then write
This is the normalized Banzhaf–Coleman index.
12.3.1 Example. Consider the four-person game of Examples 12.2.3
and 12.2.7. Player 1 has six swings, namely, the sets {1, 2}, {1, 3}, {1,
4}, {1, 2, 3}, {1, 2, 4}, and {1, 3, 4}. Player 2 has two swings, namely,
{1, 2} and {2, 3, 4). Thus
, and, by symmetry,
.
Therefore
is the normalized power index for this game. Note that, in this case, it
coincides with the Shapley value. This does not generally happen.
12.3.2 Example. Let  be the three-person simple game in which {1,
2}, {1, 3}, and {1, 2, 3} are the only winning coalitions. All of these are
swings for player 1. On the other hand, player 2 has only the swing
{1, 2}. Thus
, and
. The game, therefore, has the
normalized index

--- Sayfa 379 ---
which is clearly different from the Shapley value
To obtain a coherent theory of this index, we shall set
which coincides with our original definition of . For, if  is a simple
game, we note that
) will vanish, except when  is a swing
for player . The advantage of (12.26), of course, is that it is
meaningful for games in general (even when not simple). Let us also
set
or
A comparison of this with (12.4) shows a certain relation between
the Shapley value and the Banzhaf–Coleman index: both give
averages of player i’s marginal contributions
. The
difference lies in the weighting coefficients used: for the value, these
varied according to the size of ; for the present index, they are all
equal. It is easy to see, in any case, that there are
 terms on the
sum; thus the sum of the coefficients — all equal to
 — is indeed
unity.
An alternative form of (12.27) is
where, as usual,  is the MLE of  and  is the th partial derivative of
. The following properties of the index are of interest now.

--- Sayfa 380 ---
12.3.3 Theorem. If  and  are games with player set
, and ,  are
scalars, then
Proof. Immediate.
12.3.4 Theorem. If ,  are games with disjoint player sets
 and
and
 is the von Neumann–Morgenstern composition (sum), then,
for any
 or
Proof. This follows immediately from (12.28) and Theorem 12.2.5.
In particular,  can be a null game, so that
 is merely  with
some dummies adjoined. Thus we see that the present index is
dummy-invariant, i.e.,
 if  is obtained by the adjunction of
dummies to .
12.3.5 Theorem. If  is a dummy for , then
.
Proof. If  is a dummy, then
 for all . Thus, from (12.27),
.
12.3.6 Theorem. Let
 be games with disjoint player sets
, respectively, satisfying
,
, let
 be a
nonnegative game with player set
, and let
Then, for each
, there is a constant
 such that, if
, then
(In other words, the members of
 have a power in  which is
proportional to their power in .)

--- Sayfa 381 ---
Proof. Letting
,
 and  be the MLEs of ,
, and ,
respectively, we have
where, as always
Thus, from (12.28), we have
As  is nonnegative, all the partial derivatives of  are nonnegative.
Thus the theorem is proved, with
12.3.7 Theorem. Let
 be as in Theorem 12.3.6, and
assume, moreover, that all
 are constant-sum games. Then, if
Proof. From Theorem 12.3.6, we have
Each
 is constant-sum, and so from Theorem 12.2.6, we have
Now,
, and so
. Thus
and we have, from 12.3.7

--- Sayfa 382 ---
12.3.8 Example. Let  be the Security Council game of Example
12.2.10. We have, as before
where
 is the set of permanent members, and
 is the set of other
members.
Using the notation of 12.13, we have here
and, for all
Thus, for
and, for
We note that the power index for permanent members is about 10
times that for the other members. As against this, the Shapley value
also gave most of the power to the permanent members, but the ratio
there was much greater (about 100 to 1).

--- Sayfa 383 ---
12.3.9 Example. Again we consider the Victoria Proposal to the
Canadian Constitution. Using the notation of Example 12.2.11, we
have
Thus
and we have the power index
It is of interest to note that the Banzhaf–Coleman index assigns
greater power to the Maritime Provinces than to the Prairie Provinces.
By contrast, the Shapley value favored the Prairie Provinces more
than the Maritimes.
The above properties of the index can now be used to develop it
axiomatically. As in Section 12.1 (when we introduced the Shapley

--- Sayfa 384 ---
value), we are looking for a mapping
 which assigns to each -
person game  an -vector
. We have, then, the
following system of axioms:
B1. If  is a dummy in , then
B2. If  is a game with player set
, and  is obtained from  by
adjoining a dummy, then
B3. If  is a permutation of , and
, then
B4. If  and  are games, and  and  are positive scalars, then
B5. Let
, suppose
 are constant-sum
games. Then, for
We have, of course, proved that the Banzhaf–Coleman index
satisfies B1–B5. On the other hand, it is not the only power index to
satisfy the axioms. The null index
clearly satisfies them also. Moreover, so does the dictatorial index

--- Sayfa 385 ---
For,  clearly satisfies B1–B4. To prove B5, we note that, for any
game
where  is the MLE of . Then, if
, and
But
 for all , and so
or
We will now prove, more or less, that the Banzhaf–Coleman index
is the only nontrivial index satisfying B1–B5. An exact statement of
this will be given below, as Theorem 12.3.11. We will start by
considering, first, constant-sum games; the proof will later be
extended to general-sum games.
Essentially, Axioms B1–B5 refer to four different operations which
may be performed on games: adjunction of a dummy; permutation of
the players; linear combinations; and composition. It is of interest to
note that the space
 of constant-sum games is closed under all
these operations. This is obviously true for dummy adjunction,
permutation, and linear combinations. For composition, we give the
following lemma:
12.3.10 Lemma. If
,
 are constant-sum games, and
, then  is constant-sum.
Proof. For any
, we have, by (12.19)

--- Sayfa 386 ---
where, as before,
, and  is the MLE of . By 12.11 and the
constant-sum properties of  and  this is
so that
and  is constant-sum.
Since
 is closed under these operations, we can effectively
restrict the Axioms B1–B5 to . Then we have the following:
12.3.11 Theorem. There are only three indices which satisfy the
Axioms B1–B5 over the space of all constant-sum -person games.
These are the Banzhaf–Coleman index (12.27), the null index
(12.29), and the dictatorial index (12.30).
To prove this, we will show, broadly speaking, that there are two
fundamental games which can be used as “basic building blocks” for
the space
. These are the one-person dictator game
 and the
three-person majority game,
. These are defined as follows.
For any player , the game
 has the characteristic function
Thus,  is a dictator for the game
. All other players are
dummies.
For distinct , , and , we define
 by

--- Sayfa 387 ---
Thus , , and  are the three decision makers for the game
; any
two of these, acting together, can win, and all other players are
dummies.
We can think of
 as a one-person game, and of
 as a three-
person game. We can also, however, consider them as games with
larger sets of players, in which all but one or three of the players are
dummies. Essentially, Axioms B1–B2 tell us that it does not matter
which we do. Moreover, if we think of
 as a one-person game, or of
 as a three-person game, we might omit the subscripts when no
confusion is possible.
For these two fundamental games, we shall show that there exist
only three possibilities for an index satisfying the axioms. Now, all
constant-sum games can be obtained from
 and
 by the four
operations mentioned in the axioms; thus, the three possibilities for
and
 exhaust all possibilities for the entire space .
By B1–B3, we will have
and
where ,  are constants (to be determined) which, due to B3, do not
depend on , , or .
We have, then, the following:
12.3.12 Lemma. For the null index,
. Otherwise,
.
Proof. The first assertion is obvious. Assuming  is an index, other
than the null index, satisfying B1–B5, there must be a game  and a
player  such that
. Now let
It is clear that
. Then by B5, we must have

--- Sayfa 388 ---
and, since
, this means
.
12.3.13 Lemma. In (12.3.8),  must be either 0 or .
Proof. If
, we have the null index, and clearly
. Otherwise,
we will have
. Consider, then, the two games
We must have, by B5
Both  and  are games with player set (or carrier) {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}. It
is not too difficult to verify that
and an application of B4 gives us
which reduces to the single equation
with the two solutions
 and
.
We show, next, that any index satisfying B1–B5 is effectively
determined by the two numbers  and . We shall define the degree
of a game  as the polynomial degree of its MLE . It is clear that if
the coalition  with  players is a carrier for , then the degree of  is
not greater than . For  is a polynomial in the variables ,
, and

--- Sayfa 389 ---
the degree of a multilinear function cannot be greater than the
number of variables.
There are games for which the degree is equal to the cardinality of
the minimal carrier; for example,
 and
 have the MLEs
and
respectively, so that their degrees are 1 and 3, respectively. On the
other hand, this is not true for all games; the four-person simple game
of Example 12.2.3 has the MLE
so that its degree is 3, although its minimal carrier has four elements.
In fact, no four-person constant-sum game has a degree greater than
3 (see Problem 6).
12.3.14 Lemma. Let
 have  elements,  odd. Then there is a
constant-sum game , with carrier  and degree , such that
 is
determined entirely by  and .
Proof. By induction on . We have already proved this for
 and
 (the games are  and
, respectively). Assume, then, that this
is true for
. Let
, where  has
 elements, and let
be the corresponding game for the carrier . Let
then  has the carrier
, and the MLE
where  is as in (10.3.10), and  is the MLE of . Thus

--- Sayfa 390 ---
Since  has degree
, it follows that  has degree . By the
induction hypothesis, the two numbers  and  determine the index
on the games
, ,
, and
. Thus by B5,  and  determine the
index on the game .
12.3.15 Lemma. Any index satisfying B1–B5 is entirely determined
on  by  and .
Proof. Essentially, we shall show that the games guaranteed by
Lemma 12.3.14 form a basis for the space.
Letting
, we see that a constant-sum game  is
essentially determined by
 numbers: the numbers
 for all
which contain player 1. Thus  is contained in a Euclidean space of
dimension
. Now,
 has
 subsets, of which exactly one-half, or
, have an odd number of elements. This is best proved by noting
that the number of sets with an even number of elements, minus that
with an odd number of elements, is
or
and this is easily recognized as the binomial expansion of
,
which is 0 if
. Thus exactly half the subsets of
 have odd
cardinality.
Let
 be the odd-sized subsets of
, and let
be the corresponding games guaranteed by 12.38. We claim now that
these
 games (treated as vectors) are linearly independent. For,
suppose they satisfy a relation of the form

--- Sayfa 391 ---
where not all
. Let
 be a coalition of maximal size for which
the corresponding coefficient
. Then we can write
where, on the right-hand side, each  either has degree smaller than
 (the cardinality of
), or has degree equal to , with a carrier
 of
size  but different from
. A similar relation holds clearly among the
MLEs
Now, the function  has degree , and so the monomial
, with
a nonzero coefficient, must appear on the left-hand side of this
equation. On the other hand, the only terms of degree  on the right-
hand side are the monomials
 with
. This contradiction
proves that the games
 are linearly independent. Since there are
 of them, they span a space of dimension
, and thus form a
basis for the space
 of -person constant-sum games; i.e., every
constant-sum game can be expressed as a linear combination of
these games. By Lemma 12.3.14, the index is uniquely determined
on the basic games by  and , and so by axiom B4,  and  uniquely
determine the index throughout the entire space .
We have seen, then, that any index satisfying B1–B5 is entirely
determined, for all constant-sum games, by the numbers  and .
Now, by 12.36 and 12.37, there are only three possibilities for these
numbers. These three possibilities correspond to the three indices
discussed above:
(a)
,
 (null index),
(b)
,
 (dictatorial index),
(c)
,
 (Banzhaf–Coleman index),
which are therefore the only three indices possible.

--- Sayfa 392 ---
For general-sum games, the situation is somewhat more
complicated. In fact, we are looking for an extension to , the space
of all -person games, of the three mappings , , and  defined on
the space
. It turns out that  and  can only be extended in the
obvious unique manner; the mapping , however, has more than one
extension.
Essentially, we find that the space
 of -person games can be
built up from three fundamental games. These are the games  and
 discussed above, and also the game
 defined by
It is clear once again that, for any index satisfying B1–B5
where once again
 is a constant, independent of  or
.
Much as in the constant-sum case, we shall show that the index is
entirely determined by , , and .
12.3.16 Lemma. For any nonempty set
 with  elements, there
exists a game  with carrier  and degree  such that
 is entirely
determined by , , and .
Proof. We have already proved this for all odd values of . For
,
we have
. Then
 is the desired game, for it has the MLE
which is of degree 2.
For arbitrary even , let
 have  elements, and let
,
where  has
 elements. By 12.38, there exists a constant-sum
game  with carrier  and degree
, having the desired properties.
Now set

--- Sayfa 393 ---
Then  has the carrier
 and the MLE
where  is the MLE of . Since  has degree
, we see
, and
hence , has the degree  as desired. Since both
 and
 are
constant-sum games, we can apply B5, and we see that the index is
determined on  by the three numbers , , and .
12.3.17 Lemma. Any index satisfying B1–B5 for the space of all -
person games is uniquely determined by the three numbers , , and
.
Proof. We know that the space of -person games with player set
has the dimension
. Now
 has
 nonempty subsets
, with corresponding games
 guarantees by
Lemma 12.3.16. Much as in Lemma 12.3.15, we see that these
games form a basis for the space , and an application of B4 tells us
that the index is determined throughout the space by , , and .
It remains to determine the permissible values of
, , and .
Consider, then, the four-person games
with the indices
It can be seen that
and, applying B4, we have

--- Sayfa 394 ---
which reduces to
or
Now for
,
, this gives us
. If
 and
, we obtain
. If, however,
 and
, the equation reduces to
, and so
any value of  will work. We thus obtain the following theorem:
12.3.18 Theorem. There exists a unique extension of the null index λ
from the space  to the space , and it is the null index on . There
exists a unique extension of the Banzhaf–Coleman index  from  to
, and it is the Banzhaf–Coleman index on
. There exists a one-
parameter family of extension of the dictatorial index  from  to
,
and it includes the dictatorial index , the marginal index
and all combinations of the form
.
Proof. We have seen above that there are the following possibilities
for , , and :
(a)
,
,
;
(b)
,
,
;
(c)
,
,  arbitrary.
Case (a) gives us the null index; case (b) is the Banzhaf–Coleman
index. For case (c),
 gives us the dictatorial index, while
gives us the marginal index.
We know already that , , and  satisfy the axioms. To show that
, also satisfies B1–B5, we note that

--- Sayfa 395 ---
where  is the MLE of . The proof then proceeds as for the dictatorial
index
,
using
the
fact
that,
in
composition,
.
Strictly speaking, we should prove that all combinations
satisfy the axioms as well. We leave the details of this to the reader,
pointing out that an important element of the proof is the fact that, for
constant-sum games,  and , and all their combinations, coincide
(see Problem 8).
Let us now consider the following axiom:
B6. If
, then there is a vector
 such that,
for
We have already seen that the Banzhaf–Coleman index
satisfies B6, with
. Moreover, the null index satisfies B6
trivially, while the dictatorial index  satisfies B6 with
, and the
marginal index  satisfies B6 with
. We have, then, a final
theorem:
12.3.19 Theorem. There exist exactly four indices satisfying B1–B6
over the space of all
-person games. These are the Banzhaf–
Coleman index (12.27), the null index (12.29), the dictatorial index
(12.30), and the marginal index (12.36).
Proof. We have seen that these four indices satisfy the axioms. To
show that these are the only such indices, we must, in effect,
eliminate all values of  other than 0 or 1 for the case
,
.
Let us assume
,
 and set
where

--- Sayfa 396 ---
Here,  has the index
and so, by B6,  must have the index
where  and  are to be determined. We note that
and so by B4,
which has the solutions
,
 or 1. Thus we conclude that, for
 and
, we must have either
 or
. There are no other
possibilities, and hence the dictatorial and marginal indices are the
only possible extensions of .
12.4. The Presidential Election “Game”
The present method of choosing a president for the United States of
America presents us with a very interesting game-theoretic problem.
As is well known, the voters within each state elect “great electors,” or
members of the Electoral College, who in turn vote for the president.
It is generally assumed (though in practice there are occasional
exceptions to this rule) that all of a given state’s electors will vote for
whichever candidate is preferred by a majority of the state’s voters;
thus a very thin majority in a large state (i.e., one with a large number
of electoral votes) will more than annul large majorities in several
small states. It is clear that such a “game” is not symmetric, i.e., not
all the minimal winning coalitions are of equal size, and certain
coalitions with less than half the voters can win. What is not obvious

--- Sayfa 397 ---
is whether the game is fair (in some sense of the word), or, if unfair,
which voters the game favors. We shall analyze the game, here, from
the point of view of both the Shapley value and the Banzhaf–
Coleman index of power.
We have here, in effect, a compound simple game
where  is the Presidential Election Game (i.e., the game among all
voters in the United States),  is the Electoral College Game (i.e., the
voting game among the great electors), and
 are the state
games, i.e.,  is the game played among the voters in the th state.
Let us consider, first, the Electoral College Game . Assuming (as
we have) that all electors from a given state vote together (the unit
rule), this is a 51-person weighted majority game with the symbol
where
 is the number of electoral votes from the th state (ranging,
as of 1977, from a maximum of 45 for California to a minimum of 3 for
the smallest states and the District of Columbia).
For the th state, we will have here the Shapley value
where the summation is taken over all
 such that  loses, but
 wins. This is equivalent to saying that
and we can write this summation in the form

--- Sayfa 398 ---
where
 is the number of subsets
, having exactly
elements and exactly  electoral votes.
As may be seen, the number of terms in the sum (12.39) is not
terribly large; the principal difficulty lies in evaluating the numbers
.
To see how this can best be done, let us use the probabilistic
interpretation of the MLE
where, as we saw before
the
 being independent random variables with the possible values
 and 0, and probabilities  and
, respectively. Each such
 has
the probability-generating function
and so
 has the generating function
This is, of course, a polynomial in  and , and it is not difficult to see
that it can be written as
where the
 are as above.
To simply things somewhat, we can use the slightly different
generating function

--- Sayfa 399 ---
and then
 is simply the coefficient of
 in the expansion of
.
It is relatively straightforward, by the use of a small computer, to
expand the several products
. This allows us to calculate the
;
computation of
 then follows from equation (12.39).
To compute the Banzhaf–Coleman index for , we will have
where the
 are as above. Thus the Banzhaf–Coleman index is
somewhat easier to calculate than the Shapley value.
The above method will give us an exact computation of both the
value and the index for the game . For the game , unfortunately, the
necessary computations are clearly impractical, as the number of
players is of the order of
. Let us therefore approach this from the
point of view of multilinear extensions.
As before, we write
Rather than attempting an exact evaluation, we note that
 is
approximately normal, and has, moreover, a mean
and a variance
Thus we obtain the approximation
where
 is a normal random variable with mean (12.43) and variance
(12.44). This can also be written as

--- Sayfa 400 ---
where  is the cumulative normal distribution function
We can now integrate (12.7) (numerically) to obtain
or evaluate it at
 to obtain
Table 12.1 gives the exact values of both  and  as well as the
approximations obtained by using (12.7)–(12.47) for the value and
index, respectively. It may be seen that the error, in general, is very
small.
Table 12.1. Shapley value  and Banzhaf index  for the electoral
college game (1970 Census).

--- Sayfa 401 ---
We next consider the state games
. For a given ,
 is a
simple majority game among
 players, where
 is the number of
voters (potential rather than actual) in the th state. Thus, for
,
we have
It is not too difficult to see that, if  is the MLE of
, we have
where  is a binomial random variable with parameters
 and . We
can approximate this (with truly negligible error, if
 is large) by
assuming that
 is normally distributed, with mean
 and variance
. Thus we will obtain

--- Sayfa 402 ---
Making the substitution
this becomes
and
In particular, for
, we will have
,
, and so
By symmetry, it is not difficult to see, that, for each
and, in particular
Thus we have

--- Sayfa 403 ---
which is an important result, and also
which is not important.
We proceed, now, to an analysis of the compound game, . We
have, by (12.24)
which can most easily be evaluated by substituting , to give us
To evaluate
, we note that, as before
where
 is the sum of several independent random variables
Each
 can have the values 0 and
 with probabilities
 and
, respectively. Thus
 will have the mean and variance

--- Sayfa 404 ---
where
 is given by (12.49). Since the number of variables
 is
large, we can use the approximation
where
 is a normal variable with the mean (12.57) and variance
(12.58). This value can then be substituted in (12.56), or in the
equivalent
to obtain the value for an individual voter in the th state.
One obvious difficulty arises here, and this lies in the fact that mj,
the number of players in
, is not well known. In fact,
 is the
number of people who are eligible to vote in the th state for the
presidential election, and, quite apart from the fact that this number
changes every day, no accurate count of this is ever taken. Census
figures tell us the total population of the state, or even the total
population of voting age, while voting statistics tell us the number of
people who actually vote, but no figures are available on the potential
voters.
If we consider the expression
then it may be seen that this is homogeneous, of degree 0, in the
vector
. For, in fact, we have
Let us suppose that all the
 are multiplied by the same positive
constant ; we will then have

--- Sayfa 405 ---
and, more generally
so that, making the substitution
we have
and, as the  or
 is merely a dummy variable, we see that the
expression
is unchanged. Thus, in order to calculate this, it suffices to know, not
the exact values of the
, but only their relative ratios. As a
reasonable approximation, we shall assume that the number of
potential voters is proportional to the total population, i.e.
where
 is the population of the state, obtained from census data,
and  is a constant independent of . The actual value of  is probably
about 0.7, but is not really important, for our desire was to compute
the discrepancies in the value or power index among the voters of the
several states, and this will be independent of . In any case, we can
calculate the sum (12.56) by assuming
 (the total census
population). Then we will have, for
and, for citizens of two different states

--- Sayfa 406 ---
which does not depend on .
For the Banzhaf–Coleman index, the situation is considerably
simpler. We have, for each
and so we will have, for
or, by (12.55)
Since we have already computed
 this gives us
 directly.
Once again, we note that, if we assume
 we will have, for
voters in different states,
which is also independent of . Thus, as far as the discrepancies in
value or index are concerned, we note that we can base our
calculations directly on the census figures , without worrying about
the value of the constant . Table 12.2 gives the results obtained in
this manner for the several states, based on the 1970 population. The
discrepancies are obtained by giving the value and index for an
individual voter in each state, divided by the corresponding number of
voters in the least advantaged state (actually, the District of
Columbia). Both the value and the index suggest that a voter in
California has approximately three times as much power as a voter in
the District of Columbia — an observation which is doubtless of

--- Sayfa 407 ---
interest in the present discussion on the abolition of the Electoral
College.
Table 12.2. Shapley value  and Banzhaf–Coleman index  for the
presidential election (composed) game, for the 1970 Censusa.

--- Sayfa 408 ---
a From Owen, G. (1975). American Political Science Review, 69, 951 and Owen, G.
(1975). Naval Research Log Quarterly, 22, 749.
12.5. The Coalition Value
As we have seen, the values described above — both the Shapley
value and the Banzhaf–Coleman index of power — depend only on
the characteristic function of the game. This is quite proper if we wish
to know, in the abstract and with no further information, what an
individual player may reasonably expect to win in the game. Quite
frequently, however, there is additional information available. If
nothing else, the players’ identities are known; in many cases some
of the coalitions, while not certain, are very likely to form, while others
are seemingly out of the question due to the players’ previous
relations with each other.
In such cases, a realistic appraisal should take these prior
situations into account.
In the simplest of cases, we might imagine a partition of the set
of players into a priori unions

--- Sayfa 409 ---
where the coalitions (unions)
 are pairwise disjoint, and their union
is .
We can think of these unions as prior agreements among the
several players: perhaps they are firms. The members of each of
these unions (i.e., the owners, management, and employees of the
firms) have agreed to cooperate, and in fact they will do so in most
cases, though they are in no way forced to do so. Thus members of
each firm can always threaten to defect, and this threat must be taken
into account by the remaining members. We find, then, that a two-part
process takes place: on the one hand, the firms deal with each other
to determine how much each one receives; on the other, the
members of each firm bargain within the firm to determine how these
receipts are to be divided.
Given the partition , we can define a quotient game
 with
player set
, by
for
. Effectively, this is the game played by the firms; player  in
this game is really firm
 in the original game. In such a case,
 is
the amount that firm
 can earn in the game , acting as a coalition,
while
 is the amount that all the firms
,
, can earn (in ) by
acting together.
12.5.1 Example. Let  be the four-person game of Example 12.1.8,
where the players have 10, 20, 30, and 40 shares of stock,
respectively, with 51 shares (or more) necessary for a winning
coalition. Suppose players 1 and 2 agree to work together (perhaps
they marry each other). In this case  would be the partition {{1, 2},
{3}, {4}}. Thus  would be a 3-player game between the “unions” {1,
2}, {3}, and {4}, holding 30, 30, and 40 shares respectively. It is easily
checked that
 if
 has at least two members and 0 otherwise.
12.5.2 Example. Consider a parliament of  members; if a majority
(consisting of  members) is needed to pass a bill, then  will be a

--- Sayfa 410 ---
symmetric simple game given by
Suppose, now, that the parliament is divided into
 parties,
, with
 members, respectively. In this case  is a
weighted majority game
 as in definition 10.3.9. Here, then,
the quotient game is the game played among the parties assuming
some reasonably strong party discipline. Note that, if one of the
parties holds a majority (not an uncommon event in some countries),
then that party is a dictator, and all other parts are dummies, in game
.
12.5.3 Example. More generally, let  be a weighted majority game
, and let
 be the partition
. Then
 is the
weighted majority game
, where
 is simply the sum
.
For a given set
, and given a partition  of
, we now define
the set
The following two lemmas will be useful:
12.5.4 Lemma. Let  be a carrier for the game . Then
 is a
carrier for the game
.
Proof. Let
. It is clear that
, and, since  is a
carrier, so is
.
Let
, and let
. We know
, and so
. Thus
 is a carrier for .
12.5.5 Lemma. Let
 be the unanimity game with carrier
, as
defined in Lemma 12.1.5. Then the quotient game
 is the same
as the game
.

--- Sayfa 411 ---
We can now look for a modified value, which will be a mapping
from the space of all pairs
, where  is a game with player set
,
and  is a partition of
, into the space of -tuples of real numbers
(payoff vectors). Let us call this mapping . As in Section 12.l, we will
approach this axiomatically. The following axioms seem reasonable:
12.5.6 Axioms. The coalition value, , satisfies:
C1. If  is any carrier of , then
C2. For any
, the quantity
 depends only on
.
C3. Let  be any permutation of the set
. Then for all
C4. Let  be any permutation of
 which leaves the sets
invariant. Then
(where
 is an in 12.2).
C5. For any two games  and , and any partition
We can, perhaps, best understand these axioms by comparison
with Shapley’s axioms, A1–A3, as given in 12.2. C1 is, of course,
Axiom A1. C4 and C5 are restricted version of A2 and A3, saying in
effect that symmetry of treatment applies only within a given union
(e.g., two equivalent workers will be paid quite different salaries if one
works for a profitable firm while another works for a struggling small
business), and that the value is additive only if the same coalition
structure is kept throughout.
Axiom C2 says, more or less, that the unions (members of ) do,
in effect, play the game
 among themselves. C3 is a different

--- Sayfa 412 ---
symmetry axiom, and says that the outcome of the game depends on
the unions formed, but not on the labels given them.
As before, we are able to give a neat existence/uniqueness
theorem:
12.5.7 Theorem. There exists a unique mapping satisfying Axioms
C1–C5. This mapping is given by, for
where , , and  are the cardinalities of
, , and
, respectively,
and where
.
Proof. As with the Shapley value, the proof of uniqueness is based
on the unanimity games
,
, which, as was seen in 12.l, form a
basis (in the linear algebraic sense) for the space of all games with
player set
.
For the game
, we know  is a carrier. Hence by Axiom C1
and by the same argument as in 12.l,
 for all
.
Let  and  be two elements of
, and let  be that permutation
of
 which interchanges  and  and leaves all other elements of
unchanged. By Lemma 12.5.3,
, and so
. By
Axiom C2, it follows that
Let
 be the cardinality of
, i.e., the number of  such that
. Since all such
 receive equal shares, and all together
receive one unit, we must have

--- Sayfa 413 ---
Let  and  be two elements of
 for some . Let  be the
permutation of
 which interchanges  and  and leaves all other
elements fixed. Clearly
, and otherwise
 satisfies the
conditions of Axiom C4. Hence
.
Let , now, be the number of elements of
. Since all players
receive the same amount, and together they receive
, we find,
finally
We see, then, that there is at most one value satisfying Axioms
C1–C4 on the unanimity games
. Since these games form a basis
for the game space, then by Axiom C5 there is at most one value on
the space of all these pairs
.
To prove existence, it suffices to show that the value given by
equation (12.5.1) satisfies the axioms. We leave this straightforward
exercise to the reader.
12.5.8 Example. We consider once again the game of Example
12.5.1, using once again the partition {{1, 2), {3}, {4}}. As we saw
there, the quotient game
 is a symmetric three-person game. As
, it follows that each of the three unions receives 1/3 unit. Thus
individuals 3 and 4 each receive 1/3; individuals 1 and 2, together,
receive 1/3 unit. The question is how 1 and 2 will divide their share.
To compute
, we note that, in sum 12.5.1, there will be 8
summands, but of these, only the one corresponding to
,
will
be
different
from
zero.
For
this
term
we
have
, and so the nonzero term is
We see thus that
, and so
. Thus we
have the value for this particular game and partition: it is the vector

--- Sayfa 414 ---
. We may compare this with the value found in 12.1.8
to see how the coalition formation has affected the value. In fact, the
two members of the new coalition,
, see no change in their
expectations; rather, it is player 3 who gains at the expense of player
4. The reason for this is that, in the original game, 4 could hope to
form the winning coalition
; now, he cannot hope to win with 2’s
help unless 1 also collaborates.
An alternative approach is here possible. We can think of the
several coalitions
 as forming; if they are familiar with the
arguments for the Shapley value (and accept them as valid), then
each of them feels that it can “count on obtaining” the amount
,
its Shapley value in the quotient game. Each of these unions now
convenes to determine how it should divide its share. We may think of
the members of one of these unions, say
, as playing a reduced
game,
, in which each coalition
 bargains with its partners
 by considering what it can do with no help from
 but with
some reasonable degree of cooperation from the remaining players,
.
In that case,  may think of itself as playing an -player game, in
which  is one player, and the remaining
 unions
 are the
others players. If
 is the quotient game, we then introduce the
altered game (with player set
),
, by
In this altered game, player
 is actually union
; player ,
however, is the coalition .
12.5.9 Example. As in Example 12.5.3, let  be the weighted voting
game
. Then the quotient game
 is the voting game
. The
 altered game is the weighted voting game
. Note that  is the same for all three games.
The difference between the game  and the altered game
 is that
 is replaced by
.

--- Sayfa 415 ---
What amount, then, can  reasonably expect to obtain by playing
this game with
? This depends, naturally, on the type of solution
concept used. Assume, however, that the Shapley value is accepted
as reasonable. In this case,
 may feel that it can hope for the
amount
, the Shapley value (to player ) of this altered game.
Thus, in bargaining within the union
, coalition  will feel that it can
count on this amount.
We define, therefore, the reduced game,
, with player set
: it is
given by
The members of
, then, will bargain among themselves, feeling
that they are playing the game
. In such a case, player
 can
reasonably expect to gain the amount
. We shall call this the two-
step value.
12.5.10 Example. We consider once again the game of Example
12.5.1, with the unions {1, 2}, {3}, {4}. To compute the reduced game
, we note that (as mentioned above), the reduced game  is a
three-person game in which the three players have 30, 30, and 40
shares respectively, with 51 shares needed for a winning coalition: Its
value is
. This is the same as the altered game
.
Thus
.
Next, consider
. The altered game
 is a three-player
game in which the three players have 10, 30, and 40 shares
respectively. A winning coalition is still any coalition with 51 or more
shares. It may be seen that player 1 is a dummy in this game; its
value is
. Thus
.
Next, let
. The altered game is a 3-player game with 20, 30,
and 40 shares respectively. Since 51 shares are need to win, we see
that the last player has a veto and can win with the help of either one
of the others. The value here is
. Hence
.
Finally, let
. In the altered game
, the players have 0, 30,
and 40 shares. Clearly, 1 is a dummy. The value is, once again,

--- Sayfa 416 ---
. Therefore
.
We have thus obtained the reduced game
. It is given by
It is easy, now, to calculate the Shapley value of this game; player
2 receives 1/6, with the remaining 1/6 split evenly between the two
players. Thus
.
The other two “unions” in this example are single-player sets. The
reduced games will be 1-player games; the two players, 3, and 4,
receive the whole amount that their “unions,”
 and
, respectively,
receive in the quotient game . Thus the two-step value here is (1/12,
1/4, 1/3, 1/3).
It may be seen that in the example above, the reduced game
 is
actually a game, in the sense that it satisfies the conditions (10.1–
10.2). More interesting still, the two-step value coincides with the
coalitional value
. The obvious question is as to whether this is
always so.
12.5.11 Theorem. The reduced game function,
, defined by (12.64),
satisfies condition (10.1) but not necessarily (10.2).
Proof. To see that
, we note that, by (12.63), player  is a
dummy in game
. It follows that
. Hence
.
12.5.12 Example. To see that the reduced game need not be super-
additive, consider the voting game [4; 3, 1, 1, 1], and let
 be the
partition {{1}, {2}, {3, 4}}. Then the quotient game  is the voting game
[4; 3, 1, 2], with value
. The altered quotient game
 is the voting game [4; 3, 1, 1], as is
. This game also has
value (2/3, 1/6, 1/6). Finally,
 is the voting game [4; 3, 1, 0], with
value (1/2, 1/2, 0). Thus the reduced game
 is given by
,
. This reduced game, which is not
superadditive, has value
. Thus the two-step value is
.
Functions such as that of Example 12.5.11, which satisfy (10.1)
but not (10.2), are not, strictly speaking, games. Nevertheless, they

--- Sayfa 417 ---
will frequently appear in reductions such as this, much in the way that
imaginary numbers appear when solving algebraic equations. We will
call such functions improper games. It may be seen that most of our
solution concepts (in particular the value) do not require
superadditivity for their validity. Thus there is no problem in taking the
value of such improper games — as is, in fact, done when we
calculate the two-step value. The value of the reduced game
 in this
example is (1/12, 1/12), which is not even an imputation — but
Shapley’s axioms do not require the value to be an imputation. (Of
course, the value
 will be an imputation whenever  is a proper
game — but that is simply a consequence of the axioms.)
In general, then, even for improper games, the value can be
defined, and is in fact given by the formula (12.4).
With this in mind, we can now state the principal result of this
section:
12.5.13 Theorem. On the space of all pairs
, the two-step value
coincides with the coalitional value .
We omit the proof, as it is quite straightforward and consists
merely in substituting the reduced game into the formula (12.4).
12.5.14 Example. Let  be the weighted voting game [3; 2, 1, 1, 1],
and let
. The quotient game  is the voting game [3;
3, 1, 1], and player 1 (i.e., union {1, 2}) is a dictator here, so that
.
The altered game
 is the voting game [3; 2, 1, 1], which has
value (2/3, 1/3, 1/3), while the altered game
 the voting game [3;
1, 1, 1], with value (1/3, 1/3, 1/3). Thus the reduced game
 is given
by
. This game has value (2/3,
1/3). The two-step value is therefore (2/3, 1/3, 0, 0). It will follow that
this is also the coalitional value .
Problems
1.If  is a constant-sum game, then the Shapley value  is given by

--- Sayfa 418 ---
2. A game  is said to be convex if, for every  and
Prove that a convex game has a nonempty core, and, in fact
3. Let
 be a nonnegative vector, and define a function
 by
(a) Show that  is a convex game (see Problem 2).
(b) Find the MLE of the game . (Hint: Use the probabilistic
interpretation.)
(c) Use the MLE to compute both
 and
.
4. Compute the Shapley value and the Banzhaf–Coleman index for
the six-person weighted majority game [8; 4, 3, 3, 2, 2, 1].
5. Let
be the generalization, to arbitrary games, of the number of swings
in the game ν. (This was defined originally only for simple games.)
Show that, if
, for all , then

--- Sayfa 419 ---
where
, i.e.,  is the smallest integer larger than
.
(a) Prove first that
where  is the MLE of ν.
(b) Show that
 is maximized if
 whenever
, and
 whenever
.
(c) Prove that, in this maximizing case, equality will be obtained.
(Compute
 directly in this case.)
6. Compute both
 and
, where  is the compound simple game
and where ν is a three-person simple game in which the winning
coalitions are {1, 2}, {1, 3} and {1, 2, 3};
 is a game with carrier
{1, 2} in which {1, 2} is the only winning coalition;
 is a three-
person game with carrier {3, 4, 5} in which any coalition of two or
more players wins; and
 is a five-person game in which any
coalition of four or more players wins.
7. Prove that the degree of any constant-sum game is even. (Hint:
Assume
, let  be the MLE of , and consider the polynomial
Show that  is an even function.)
8. Show that for any real , the value
where
 and
 are the dictatorial and marginal indices,
respectively, satisfies the axioms B1–B5. (Hint: B1–B4 are easy to
verify. For B5, prove that  and , and hence  as well, coincide for
constant-sum games. This will simplify the proof.)

--- Sayfa 420 ---
9. For the game of Problem 4, above, compute the coalitional value
given the coalition structures
(a) {{1, 2}, {3, 4), {5}, {6}}
(b) {{1}, {2}, {3, 4, 5, 6}}
(c) {{1, 2}, {3, 6), {4}, {5}}
10. Prove Theorem 12.5.13. (Hint: Essentially, what is needed is to
obtain a formula for the characteristic function of the reduced game
— which is of course obtained by the use of formula (12.4). Once
this is done, a second application of (12.4) will give the desired
result.)

--- Sayfa 421 ---
Chapter 13
The Bargaining Set and Related
Concepts
13.1. The Bargaining Set
One of the difficulties with the concepts that we have previously
studied is that, in general, they do not seem to explain what happens
in any play of the game. Stable sets are given as “standards of
behavior”; the Shapley value gives some type of expectation. The
bargaining set is obtained by considering the discussion that may
actually take place during a play of the game. Thus we shall consider
the possible threats and counterthreats made by the several players.
13.1.1 Definition. By a coalition structure for an -person game we
mean a partition
of .
Heuristically, a coalition structure represents the “breaking up” of
the set
 into mutually disjoint coalitions. Suppose such a structure is
reached. We assume that each of the coalitions
 that forms will
receive the amount
 to be divided among its members. But how
will this amount be divided?
13.1.2 Definition. A payoff configuration is a pair
where
 is a coalition structure and  is an -vector satisfying

--- Sayfa 422 ---
for
.
We wish, then, to know which payoff configurations will be
reached. An obvious requirement will be that of individual rationality:
i.e., we may demand
A further possible requirement may be that no coalition
 will form if
one of its subcoalitions can obtain more than the payoff vector  gives
it. Thus
It is clear, of course, that (13.3) is stronger than (13.2). On the
other hand, the necessity for (13.3) is not as clear as that for (13.2).
Without going into the pros and cons of (13.3), we shall merely say
here that a payoff configuration satisfying (13.3) will be called
coalitionally rational (c.r.p.c.), whereas if it satisfies only (13.2) it will
be called individually rational (i.r.p.c.). We shall deal, first of all, with
c.r.p.c.’s.
Suppose, then, that some c.r.p.c. has been reached. When will
this be stable? It is clear that if the c.r.p.c. is an imputation in the core
of the game, it will be stable in the sense that no coalition has both
the power and the inclination to change it. Since, however, the core is
often empty, it follows that we cannot be as demanding as this.
Consider, e.g., the symmetric three-person game previously
treated. If the coalition
 forms, we say that the payoff vector
is quite likely. Nevertheless, either of the two players in the coalition
might demand more of the other, and threaten to join player 3 if his
demand is not met. Thus player 1 might threaten to form the coalition
, obtaining, say, the payoff
. Player 2, however, can counter
this threat by pointing out that, in such a case, he will try to form the
coalition
, offering 3 the amount , to obtain the vector
. Thus
player 2 has a counterthreat that “protects” his share of .

--- Sayfa 423 ---
To formulate this idea mathematically, we begin by defining the
idea of partners.
13.1.3 Definition. Let
 be a coalition structure, and let
 be a coalition. Then, by the partners of  in
, we mean the set
Thus the player  is a partner of
 in
 if he belongs to the same
coalition
 as some member of
. (Note that each member of
 is
also a partner of
.) The idea is that, for the members of
 to get
their share of the c.r.p.c.
, they need the consent of their
partners and nothing else.
13.1.4 Definition. Let
 be a c.r.p.c. for a game . Let  and  be
nonempty disjoint subsets of some
. Then an objection of
against  is a c.r.p.c.
, satisfying
13.1.5 Definition. Let
 be a c.r.p.c., let
,  be as in Definition
11.1.4, and let
 be an objection of
 against
. Then a
counterobjection of  against  is a c.r.p.c.
 satisfying
Briefly, the members of
, in their objection against , claim that
they can obtain more by changing to a new c.r.p.c., and that their new
partners will agree to this. The members of  can counterobject if it is

--- Sayfa 424 ---
possible for them to find a third c.r.p.c. in which they and all their
partners receive at least their original shares. If they need some of
’s partners for this, they give these players at least as much as in the
objection c.r.p.c. Note that it may be necessary for
 to use some
members of  as partners; they may not, however, use them all.
13.1.6 Definition. A c.r.p.c.
 is called stable if for every objection
of a  against an ,  has a counterobjection. The bargaining set
is the set of all stable c.r.p.c.’s.
Now, the form of the bargaining set is open to some question.
Certain modifications might, indeed, be made. For example, we might
insist that only single players be allowed to make objections, or that it
should be sufficient for one member of
 to possess a
counterobjection.
13.1.7 Definition. The bargaining set
 is the set of all c.r.p.c.’s
 such that, whenever any set  has an objection against a set ,
at least one member of  has a counterobjection.
13.1.8 Definition. The bargaining set
 is the set of all c.r.p.c.’s
 such that, if any single player, , has an objection against a set
, then  has a counterobjection against .
It is easy to see that
 and
. The relationship
between
 and
 is not clear.
One final variation might be suggested for the bargaining set. It is
that, instead of c.r.p.c.’s, we deal with i.r.p.c.’s. This will give rise to
the three sets,
,
,
, derived from
,
,
, respectively.
In contrast with the core, which is so often empty, it may be seen
that none of the bargaining sets mentioned above is empty. In fact
(assuming the game to be in (0,1) normalization) the c.r.p.c.
,
where
 and
, is obviously stable. On the
other hand, it represents complete failure to cooperate. Thus we
would like to find elements in the bargaining set for some of the more
interesting coalition structures. We have, in fact, the following
valuable result:
13.1.9 Theorem. Let  be an -person game, and let
 be any
coalition structure. Then there is at least one vector
 such that

--- Sayfa 425 ---
.
We shall assume the game is in (0,1) normalization. For a given
coalition structure,
, we shall let
 denote the set of all vectors
such that
 is an i.r.p.c. The following lemma is that of B. Peleg:
13.1.10 Lemma. Let
 be nonnegative continuous
real-valued functions defined for
. If, for each
 and
each
, there is a player
 such that
 then there exists
a point
 such that
 for
.
Proof. of Lemma For
, and
, we set
and, if
where  is the number of elements in
.
It is clear that  is a continuous function of . Moreover, we can
see that
 as ,  and
 are all non-negative. Finally, we have
and so
.
Suppose now that
. This means
. However, the
hypothesis is that, for some
,
, and so
. Hence
and so  is not fixed under this mapping. As
 is convex, however,
the Brouwer fixed point theorem applies, and so there must be some
 such that
. We have just seen that this  must satisfy
for all
.

--- Sayfa 426 ---
13.1.11 Definition. We shall say a player  is stronger than  in
if  has an objection against , which cannot be countered. We denote
this as
. We say  and  are equal, denoted
, if neither
nor
.
13.1.12 Definition. Let
 be an i.r.p.c., and let  be a coalition.
Then the excess of  is
.
13.1.13 Lemma. Let
 be an i.r.p.c. Then the relation  is acyclic.
Proof. It is clear that if  and  are in different coalitions, then
.
Suppose, then, that a coalition,
, contains the players
, and
that
. Thus player
 has an objection,
which cannot be countered, against player
 (mod ) through the
coalition
. Let
 be that coalition (among
) which has
maximal excess. Then we claim that  can counterobject against
(mod ) through the coalition
. Indeed,
 (mod ) has only the
amount
 at his disposal to form the objecting coalition; player ,
having the amount
 at his disposal, can always
counterobject unless
. Repeating this argument, we
must have
, etc. and eventually
. But
this is obviously impossible.
13.1.14 Proof of Theorem. 13.1.9 Let
 be an i.r.p.c. We shall
denote by
 the i.r.p.c., which is obtained by keeping
fixed for
, and replacing
 by
 for
, where
 and
.
Let
 be the set of points
 such that, in the i.r.p.c.
, player
 is not weaker than any other player. The set
 is
closed and contains the set
 (since, if
,  can always
counterobject as a one-player coalition). We then define the function
where
 is the coalition in
, which contains . Now,
 is easily
seen to be continuous; moreover, it is non-negative, as can be seen
by showing that if
, and
 for all
,
, then
.

--- Sayfa 427 ---
By Lemma 13.1.13, for any
 and any
, there is some
 such that  is not weaker than any
. Thus,
, and so
. Hence, by Lemma 13.1.10, there is some  such that
for all
.
Now it is clear from the fact that
that
 for all . Hence, we actually have
 for all . But this
means that there is some
, for each , such that
. But
this in turn means
 for each  and . Thus, in
, no player
is stronger than another. This means, of course, that
.
13.1.15 Example. Consider the five-person simple game in (0,1)
normalization in which the minimal winning coalitions are {1, 2}, {1, 3},
{1, 4}, {1, 5}, and {2, 3, 4, 5}. We shall consider two types of coalition
structures: one in which {1, 2} forms, and a second one in which {2, 3,
4, 5} forms.
Suppose that {1, 2} forms. It does not matter what the other
players do, but we shall assume they do not form any coalition.
Hence
. The i.r.p.c.’s. will consist of all
 where
 is a vector with
. Now, if
,
we must have
, and so player 2 can object with the imputation
. It is easy to see that 1 will have no counterobjection. If, on
the other hand,
, we find that any objection of 2 will give one of
his partners an amount less than
. Say
. Then 1 can
counterobject with
. Similarly, if
, then 1 can object with,
say,
 and 2 has no counterobjection. But if
, then any
objection  by 1 will give the players 3, 4, and 5 a total of less than .
Thus 2 can counterobject with
. Thus, for
the given
 will belong to
 and only if  satisfies

--- Sayfa 428 ---
By symmetry, similar results will hold if the coalitions {1, 3}, {1, 4},
or {1, 5} form.
Suppose, instead that the coalition {2, 3, 4, 5} forms. We must
consider all i.r.p.c.’s
 where  is a non-negative vector of sum 1
with
, and
. Suppose we have
. Then 3
can object against 2 with the imputation
 where
. It is easy to see that 2 has no counterobjection. By
symmetry, it follows that the only  such that
 for this
 is
13.2. The Kernel
Closely related to the bargaining set is the concept of the kernel. This
is mainly based on two ideas: those of excess and surplus.
13.2.1 Definition. For the -person game , let  be a coalition and
 a payoff vector (not necessarily an imputation). Then the
excess of  with respect to  is
13.2.2 Definition. For the -person game , let
 be players, and
. Then the surplus of  against  is
where the maximum is taken over all coalitions  such that
 and
.

--- Sayfa 429 ---
Thus,
 represents the most that player  could—under the best of
circumstances — hope to gain without the cooperation of .
13.2.3 Definition. Let
 be an individually rational payoff
configuration, and let
 be distinct members of some
. We
shall say  outweighs  (notation,
) if and only if
Essentially, it seems that, if
, then  can make a demand on ,
which, in some sense,  cannot contest. Thus, if
, there is a
certain instability. We now define the kernel as the set of i.r.p.c.’s for
which no such instability occurs.
13.2.4 Definition. The kernel of a game  is the set
 of all i.r.p.c.s
 such that, for
, there are no ,
 with
.
13.2.5 Example. Consider the three-person simple game in which
each two-person coalition wins. For
, it is not too difficult
to see that
 is the only payoff vector such that
. On
the other hand, if
, then
 is the only  with
.
13.2.6 Example. Consider the three-person simple game in which {1,
2}, {1, 3}, and {1, 2, 3} win. Then, for
 or
, we find
 only for
.
13.2.7 Example. Let  be the four-person simple voting game with
symbol [3;2, 1 ,1, 1]. Here, for
, we find
 only
for
. On the other hand, for
, the only point in the
kernel is given by
.
In the examples above, it may be verified directly that all the
points in the kernel also belong to the bargaining set
. In fact, this
is generally true, as the following theorem shows:
13.2.8 Theorem. For any game
.
Proof. We shall show that, if
, then
.

--- Sayfa 430 ---
Suppose, then,
 is an i.r.p.c. not in
. This means there
exist
 such that  has an objection
 against  and  has
no counterobjection. We shall show
.
Since  has no counterobjection, it is clear that
, for,
otherwise,  could always counterobject with some
 such that
 and
.
Let
; it is clear we must have
, and so
Suppose, now, that
. Then there is some
, with
,
,
such that
We claim, then, that  has a counterobjection, using the coalition
as his partners. In fact, it suffices to show that
 can afford to give at
least  to its members, at least
 to its members
. We have,
in fact,
and so
Thus
and, assuming
, this gives us

--- Sayfa 431 ---
Since
,  has a counterobjection to , in which his partners are
.
But we had assumed  had no counterobjection. This contradiction
proves that
and so
. Thus
. We conclude that
.
Thus, every i.r.p.c. in the kernel belongs to
. The converse is not,
however, true; frequently
 is a proper subset of
. As an example,
consider
the
four-person
game
of
Example
13.2.7.:
when
, we find the
 only if
; on the other
hand,
 for all  of the form
, with
.
We know, of course, that
 is nonempty; more exactly, that
given any
 there is some  with
. The obvious question is
whether the same is true of
. In fact it is, and the reader may enjoy
modifying the proof of Theorem 13.1.9 from
 to
. In the next
section, we give a more interesting proof of this statement.
13.3. The Nucleolus
Still another solution concept related to the bargaining sets is the
nucleolus.
For a given -person game  and payoff
, we define
the
-vector
 as the vector whose components are the excesses
of the  subsets
, arranged in decreasing order, i.e.
where
 are the subsets of , arranged by
As an example, in the three-person simple game  where
 if
 has two or three players and
 otherwise, the payoff vector
(.3, .5, .2) gives us the following excesses:

--- Sayfa 432 ---
and so
.
Similarly, if we set
, a similar analysis will give us
We will now order the several vectors
 by the lexicographic
order. Generally speaking, if we are given two vectors
and
, we say that  is lexicographically smaller than  if
there is some integer ,
, such that
We shall write
 for this relation, and
 if either
 or
.
In the example above, we find that
 because
,
but
.
Now, the lexicographic ordering on
 can be used to induce an
order on the payoff vectors  themselves, i.e., we shall write
if and only if
 and
if and only if
.
With this in mind, we can now define the nucleolus of a game:

--- Sayfa 433 ---
13.3.1 Definition. Let  be an -person game, and let  be a set of -
vectors (payoff vectors). Then, the nucleolus of  over the set  is the
set
 defined by
Thus the nucleolus consists of those points , which minimize the
function
 (in the lexicographic order) over the set
. Thus
depends, not only on the game  but also on the particular set
,
which has been chosen. Usually,
 is chosen to be the set of all
imputations; more generally, for a given coalition structure
,  may
be
 the set of all  satisfying conditions (13.1) and (13.2), so that
 is an i.r.p.c. Other choices may be possible for .
The question naturally arises as to whether  is empty; assuming
is nonempty, we would like to know something about its structure. In
fact, we shall see that, under very reasonable conditions,
 is
nonempty and reduces to a single point.
13.3.2 Theorem. If
 is a nonempty compact set, then
 is also
nonempty and compact.
Proof. Let us define a set
 by
and generally, a sequence
 by the inductive definition
for
.

--- Sayfa 434 ---
It is not too difficult to see that, for each ,
 is a continuous
function of . Thus, if we assume
 is compact and nonempty, it is
clear that
, which minimizes
 over
 is also compact and
nonempty. By induction, we conclude that
 is also compact and
nonempty. We now claim that
In fact, suppose
. This means there is some
,
, such that
. Let  be the smallest integer such that
. Then
. But
 for all
, and so
 for
. This means, however, that
The contradiction proves that
.
Thus, the nucleolus will be a nonempty compact set if
 is also
nonempty and compact. In fact, it is not necessary that  be compact
for, if  is merely closed and bounded above, then
 is easily seen to
be nonempty and compact. In particular, if
 is not the set of
imputations, but rather the set of vectors whose components sum to
 (without the individual rationality requirement),
 will be
nonempty and compact. From this, the induction steps will guarantee
that
 is also nonempty and compact.
We prove next, that in the most interesting cases,  reduces to a
single point. The following lemma is important.
13.3.3 Lemma. Let
,
. Then, for
In other words,  is strictly quasi-convex in the lexicographic ordering.
Proof. Let us set
. We have

--- Sayfa 435 ---
where the
,
 are two permutations of the subsets of
, ordered as follows:

(a)
(b) If
, then
(c)

Now let  be the first index such that
and let
For any , we have
so that
Now, for
, we have
 and so
For
, we see that we cannot have
for if we did, then every coalition  such that
 would also have
 moreover, at least one coalition (namely,
) would have

--- Sayfa 436 ---
while
. Thus it is not possible that
 as we
have assumed. Thus we must have
for all k≥c. In particular, we must have
since equality here is not possible; moreover, if, for any
, we have
then by our condition (b) above, we have
We see then, that, for
, we have either
or
and so
We see, thus, that, for
, we will have
. For
,
we have
. This will mean that
and so
, as desired.
This lemma allows us to prove the following:

--- Sayfa 437 ---
13.3.4 Theorem. If
 is nonempty, compact, and convex, then
consists of a single point.
Proof. We have already proved that
 is nonempty. Suppose, then,
that  and  are two distinct points of
. By convexity of
 we see
that, if
, then
also is in
. But then by Lemma 13.3.4,
, and thus
.
This contradiction proves
 has a unique element.
Since, in the compact convex case,  reduces to a single point, we
can, by a certain abuse of language, identify the set with its element,
and say that this point  is the nucleolus.
13.3.5 Example. Let  be the three-person simple majority game. If
we let  be the set of all imputations, then
is the nucleolus. If, instead,
, where
, then
is the nucleolus.
13.3.6 Example. Let  be the four-person simple game [3; 2, 1, 1, 1].
If we let  be the set of all imputations then
If on the other hand, we set
, where
, then
From the examples above, it may be seen that if  is the nucleolus for
 then
 belongs to the kernel. The obvious question is

--- Sayfa 438 ---
whether this is true in general: the answer, given by the following
theorem, is affirmative, and provides us with an alternative proof of
the nonemptiness of the kernel.
13.3.7 Theorem. For a given  and a coalition structure
, let
be the set of all -vectors satisfying (13.1)–(13.2), and let  be the
nucleolus of  over
. Then
Proof. Let us suppose
. This means there exist ,
that
. Then
Let
Then
. Let  be given by
We have, as before,
where, as always, the
 are the
 subsets of
, in order of
decreasing excess. We let
 be the first of these containing  but not
. Thus

--- Sayfa 439 ---
and for all
 we have either ,  both in
 or ,  both in
.
There is no
 such that
,
,
, as all such
 have lower
excess than
. We shall make the further assumption that, if there is
some
 with
such that either ,
 or ,
, then
.
We see, now, that
. In fact, we have, for
since, if ,
, then one term in the left-hand sum has increased by
, while another has decreased by ; the rest are all unchanged. If ,
, then the terms in the two sums coincide. Thus for
Suppose, now,
. Then there are three possibilities:
(a)
,
. In this case
and so
(b)
. In this case
(c) Either ,
 or ,
. Then
and so

--- Sayfa 440 ---
We see, then, that
 for
 and
 for
.
We conclude that we have
Moreover, it is easily seen that
, which contradicts the
hypothesis that
 is the nucleolus. The contradiction proves the
theorem.
The
following
theorem,
due
to
E.
Kohlberg,
elegantly
characterizes the nucleolus in the special case where
 is the set of
all imputations. For a given
, we define a sequence of collections
, such that
 is the collection of coalitions with maximal
excess.
 that of coalitions with the next largest excess, etc.
Mathematically, there are  numbers
such that, for all
and every
 belongs to one of the
, i.e.
We define, moreover
and, for

--- Sayfa 441 ---
Finally, we shall say that
 is the array corresponding to x.
Then
13.3.8 Theorem. A necessary and sufficient condition for
 to be
 is that, for every
, there exists a balanced collection
satisfying
Proof. In effect, the fact that some
 is balanced means that there
exist balancing coefficients , satisfying
If we let  be the reciprocal of the smallest positive , this can be
rewritten as
We think of this as a linear program with the trivial objective
function 0 to be minimized. Its dual program then has the form
subject to

--- Sayfa 442 ---
The dual program, (13.24)–(13.28), is obviously feasible, as
,
 satisfies the constraints. Thus its value is at least 0. On the
other hand, the primal program (13.21)–(13.23), if feasible, has value
0. Applying Theorem 3.2.6, we see that the balancedness of
 is
equivalent to whether program (13.24)–(13.28) has value 0. As the
are non-negative, we see that (13.24)–(13.28) has positive value if
and only if there is some feasible vector
 for which at least one
. Thus,
 is balanced if and only if, for any vector  satisfying
we also have
We therefore restate Theorem 13.3.8 in the form of a lemma.
13.3.9 Lemma. A necessary and sufficient condition for
 to be
 is that, for every , any vector
 satisfying (13.29) and (13.30)
also satisfies (13.31).
Proof. Suppose first that  is not the nucleolus
. Then there is
some
 such that
. Let, then,
Since
, we will have
 for
, and also (13.30). Now, let
 be the first coalition such that

--- Sayfa 443 ---
and assume
.
Clearly, we have
 for
, and, moreover
for all
. This will mean
and so the condition does not hold.
Suppose, next, that for some  the condition does not hold: there
exists  satisfying (13.29) and (13.30), and such that, for at least one
Set, then
hence, for small
, we find that
and
so that
.
We find, then, that, for

--- Sayfa 444 ---
with inequality holding in at least one case. Moreover, for
, we
will have
and, for sufficiently small , this is
Thus
 and
.
This proves the lemma. Since the condition in the lemma is
equivalent to that in Theorem 13.3.8, this completes a proof of the
theorem.
We have effectively characterized the nucleolus, at least over the
set of all imputations. It remains to compute it. Generally speaking,
we may assume that the set  is a convex polyhedral set, determined
by a system of linear equations and inequalities. Consider, then, the
linear program
subject to
Let
 be the minimum of this program. If this is attained at a
unique point , then  is
. Generally, however, this minimum is
attained over a certain set
. If so, there will generally be a certain
collection
 of sets such that, for all
 and

--- Sayfa 445 ---
We then solve the program
subject to
The solution of this will give us the “second-largest” excess , and
the collection
, as in (13.23). Continuing in this way, we will
eventually obtain a unique point that is the solution of a sequence of
linear programs; this is
.
13.3.10 Example. Consider the four-person game  such that
Let  be the set of all imputations. We can disregard the two sets
 and
, as their excesses are always 0 for
. Then we have the
LP
subject to

--- Sayfa 446 ---
Solution of this gives us
obtained over the set
 given by
and it may be seen that
as
 for all
 and
. As was to be expected,
 is
balanced.
The second LP, now, is
Minimize
subject to

--- Sayfa 447 ---
Some simplification (using the definition of
) reduces this to
Minimize
subject to
or more simply
Minimize
subject to

--- Sayfa 448 ---
and this gives us the solution
 with
. Thus we
have obtained
: it is
We have, moreover,
It may be seen that both
 and
 are balanced.
Moreover, any collection that contains all the three-person subsets of
 is balanced. Thus, all the sets
 are also balanced, and
the Kohlberg criterion verifies that this is indeed the nucleolus.
13.4. The Airport Game
We consider here an application of game-theoretic analysis to the
determination of airport landing fees. Essentially, our desire is to
develop a “fair” schedule of fees. We discuss here an airport, and
indeed the particular cost structure yields an especially elegant result;
nevertheless, such analysis should be applicable to the assessment
of charges for common facilities.
Generally speaking, expenses at an airport consist of two parts:
there is a variable expense, which is proportional to the number of
planes using the airport (though to be exact this expense will
generally be greater for the larger planes) and a fixed capital cost,
which must be amortized over a certain period. There is generally no
problem in allocation of the variable costs as these are directly

--- Sayfa 449 ---
incurred by the several planes; the problem lies in allocation of the
capital costs (e.g., runway and terminal construction) to the planes.
Generally, it turns out that the capital costs of the airport depend
essentially on the “largest” plane, which is to land there; this is due to
the runway. Once the runway has been built, no further capital
expense is necessary—until a new larger plane (i.e., one needing a
longer runway) is introduced.
We can now divide the planes into  types. The cost of a runway
adequate for planes of type
 is
, where we assume
Let
 be the set of landings by planes of type  and assume there
are  landings by planes of this type. Then
is the set of all landings, and, for
, we shall write
It may be seen that the cost of a runway adequate to receive all
landings in set  is
while
To obtain a set of “fair” landing fees, we shall treat this cost
structure as a game with player set
 and characteristic function

--- Sayfa 450 ---
The reader may prove that  is superadditive, so that it is a proper
game. An imputation for  is a vector  satisfying
Thus
 is a possible fee schedule, which will be just
enough to recapture the capital costs of the airport.
As a “fair” schedule, two imputations seem possible candidates:
these are the Shapley value and the nucleolus. We consider both of
these in turn.
To compute the Shapley value, let us set
and consider the  characteristic functions
 defined by
It is not too difficult to see that, if
, then
, while, if
, then
. Thus
and so
Thus, by the additivity property

--- Sayfa 451 ---
Now it is obvious that  is a game with carrier
, symmetric over that
carrier. Thus
Now, if
 then
 for all
 (and no other ) thus
and the Shapley value cost schedule is merely the negative of this, or
Alternatively, we can use the nucleolus as a fair schedule of
landing fees. To compute the nucleolus (over
, the set of all
imputations), we note first of all that the game has a nonempty core.
The imputation given by
 for one player
, for all
other players certainly belongs to the core. Thus the maximal excess
will be 0, corresponding to
 and
, and all other excesses will be
nonpositive (and, in fact, usually negative). The computation of the
nucleolus then starts by considering the LP
subject to

--- Sayfa 452 ---
By symmetry, it is not difficult to see that the optimum of this
program is obtained by letting
 be equal for all  in a given
; we
therefore set
so that  is the fee for planes of type . Letting  be the number of
players of type  in a given set , we have then
If, in particular, we set
, where
, this gives us
and, subtracting from (13.40), we have
for
. Since the minimum of  is nonpositive, this will mean
all
 are nonnegative.
Since all
 are non-negative, we see that the constraints (13.40)
are strongest when  is of the form
since every  other than
 or
 is contained in some  of this form,
with
. Thus we are finally left with the program

--- Sayfa 453 ---
subject to
Since
 for each , this give us
where
and so
Let  be the largest value of  for which this minimum is attained,
and set
Then we claim that  is indeed the value of LP (13.44)–(13.47). In
fact, it is clear that  can be made no smaller given the constraints. If,
moreover, we set

--- Sayfa 454 ---
then it is not difficult to see that these
, together with , satisfy the
constraints. Since
 can be made no smaller, this is certainly a
solution of the LP. Moreover, it is easy to see that the constraints
mean that we must have
 for
 as a condition for  to
be the nucleolus.
If
 or
, this, of course, determines the nucleolus exactly.
If
, we must still determine
 for
. This will give
us a new LP
subject to
It may be seen that this is of the same form as (13.44)–(13.47),
but with
 fewer constraints and variables. Its solution will therefore
have the form
where

--- Sayfa 455 ---
Thus we will have
where
 is the value of , which gives us the minimum defining
. In
this fashion, we eventually obtain a sequence of numbers
and a corresponding sequence of integers
given inductively by
where
and
 is the value of , which gives the minimum defining
. The
(negative) nucleolus is then given by the fee schedule
As an example, we give in Table 13.1 the total landings at
Birmingham airport (Birmingham, UK) during the year 1972. Costs
include a direct cost plus a general capital cost. The plane’s share of
the capital cost has been computed according to both the Shapley
value and the nucleolus, and the direct cost added to this to obtain

--- Sayfa 456 ---
two possible “fair” schedules of fees for the airport. These may be
compared with the actual landing fees charged.
Table 13.1. Aircraft movements, runway costs, and movement fees at
Birmingham Airport, 1968–1969.
Source: From Littlechild, S. C., & Owen, G. (1974). Management Science, 20, 371 and
Littlechild, S. C. (1974). International Journal of Game Theory, 3, 27.
Problems
1. For the weighted majority game [5; 3, 2, 2, 1], find the vectors
such that
, for each of the following choices of
:
(a) {{1, 2}, {3}, {4}}
(b) {{1}, {2, 3, 4}}
(c) {{1, 2, 4}, {3}}
(d)
2. For the game of Problem 1, find all  such that
 for each
choice
 given there.
3. Let  be the seven-person “projective game,” a simple game with
minimal winning coalitions {1, 2, 4}, {2, 3, 5}, {3, 4, 6}, {4, 5, 7}, {1,
5, 6}, {2, 6, 7}, {1, 3, 7}.
(a) Find the nucleolus of  over X, where X is the set of all
imputations.
(b) Find the set of all x such that
.

--- Sayfa 457 ---
4. For a game
, define the prekernel
 as the set of all
preimputations  (see Problem 10.5) such that
for each pair
. Show that, if  satisfies
whenever
, then the kernel and prekernel coincide, in the sense
that
 if and only if
.
5. Prove that the nucleolus
 [taken over the set
 of all
imputations] always belongs to
.
6. For a given  and a payoff vector , let
be the vector of excesses listed in decreasing order. For real , let
Prove that for all
 sufficiently small, the nucleolus  minimizes
the function
 over the set of all imputations.
7. For a game  and any pair
 of players, define a demand
function as a continuous function
 such that
suppose that the vector
 satisfies the differential equations

--- Sayfa 458 ---
(a) Prove that the sum
 is constant with respect to time.
(b) Show that if
 is an imputation, then
 will also be an
imputation for all
.
(c) Show that the function
is monotonic nondecreasing as a function of .
8. For
, define
 as the largest  such that the point
,
where
also lies in
.
Let
 be the line segment whose endpoints are
, given by
Assuming that
, prove that
 if and only if  bisects
the segment
 for every pair
. (Thus, the set
 depends,
in some sense, only on the geometric shape of the set .)

--- Sayfa 459 ---
Chapter 14
Nonatomic Games
14.1. Games with a Continuum of Players
In the attempt to apply -person game theory to economic analysis, it
becomes quite clear that small games (i.e., games with a small
number of players) are hardly adequate to represent free-market
situations. We want, for this purpose, games with such a large
number of players that any single player will have a negligible effect
on the payoffs to the other players. How large should this number
be? As large as the number of points on a line. (Generally, this line
will be the unit interval, [0,1].) This can best be defined as follows.
14.1.1 Definition. By a game for a continuum of players we shall
mean a -algebra,  of subsets of [0,1], together with a real-valued
function , defined on , satisfying

(i)
(ii)

As before, we point out that the elements of
 are called
coalitions, while the elements of [0,1] are called players.
One must tread more carefully here than in the case of finite
games. For example, the definition of (0,1) normalization must be
altered: it is not enough now to demand that
 for any point
, and
; this would be satisfied by letting  be equal,
say, to Lebesgue measure. But a measure is additive, and such a
game would therefore be inessential. Instead, we redefined (0,1)
normalization by these conditions

--- Sayfa 460 ---
A restatement of (14.3) is given by observing that, if
, we can
define the set function
where the infimum is taken over all sequences of sets
 from  such
that
. This implies that
 is an outer measure. But the
superadditivity of  means that this infimum is obtained by taking
“fine” partitions of the set , and this means that all elements of  are
measurable under . Thus  is a measure on . Now, it is easily seen
that  is the largest measure such that
. Thus (14.3) can be
replaced by
It should be pointed out that, even if  is not non-negative, a
signed measure  can be defined in a somewhat modified manner.
In general, this measure, or signed measure,  will replace the
numbers
. Thus, an imputation for the game  is defined to be
any (signed) measure  such that
If the game is in (0,1) normalization, of course, condition (14.7) is
replaced by saying simply that  must be a measure rather than a
signed measure.
The domination relation must also be redefined. In fact, to have
 through a set , the relation
 must certainly hold; it is
not possible, however, to demand that
 for all
, as this

--- Sayfa 461 ---
can certainly not hold if  is nondenumerable and all one-point sets
belong to . On the other hand, it is certainly not sufficient to demand
merely
 for
, as this might lead to the relation
. We
compromise by demand that the inequality
 must hold for all
subsets  of , which are such that
This effectively allows us to dispense with “small” (e.g., finite) sets.
With these definitions to imputation and domination, stable sets
can be defined exactly as for finite games. In general, not much is
known about stable sets for such games — just as little is known
about stable sets for, -person games, when  is large — except for
special types. In particular, stable sets will exist for simple games: if
 is a minimal winning coalition, the set of all imputations  such that
 on
 will be stable. (We assume (0,1) normalization here.)
Although little work has been done on stable sets, much work has
been done on the Shapley value of games for a continuum of
players.
Generally, the Axioms S1–S3 given in the definition of the
Shapley value in Chapter 12 can be adapted directly, mutatis
mutandis. A certain difficulty arises, however, with S2 (the symmetry
axiom); the permutations of
, which were treated there, must be
replaced by one–one measurable transformations of [0,1] into itself.
While this might not, at first sight, present any problems, we shall
see that it leads to a contradiction in certain degenerate cases.
The actual determination of the value for a particular game, of
course, presents considerable difficulty, inasmuch as the formula is
not adaptable to the infinite case.
Generally, the method used to determine the value for an
arbitrary game is to partition the interval [0,1] into subsets (not
necessarily subintervals). These subsets are then treated as single
players and the Shapley value for the corresponding finite game is
calculated. Finer and finer partitions of [0,1] are taken, and the
Shapley value
 (an additive set function rather than a vector) is
then defined as the limit of the values for these finite games (if this
limit exists).

--- Sayfa 462 ---
Let us suppose, now, that there is a measure  defined on  such
that
 depends merely on
. For example, we might have
. Then, by the symmetry axiom, if
, we would
have
. But as
 must be an additive set function, it
follows that
 must be equal to the measure
, divided by a
constant factor to ensure that
.
14.1.2 Example. Let
 be Lebesgue measure, and let
 be
given by
Now, if  is a function of  alone, then
; similarly, if  is a
function of  alone, then
. Suppose, now, that
for all
. If we write
,
, then
Now, by additivity, we must have
As
 and
 are measures, the right side of this equation is easy
to
evaluate.
In
fact,

depends
only
on
;
as
 also, then
Next,  depends only on . We have
; hence
and similarly

--- Sayfa 463 ---
Putting all these together, we obtain
as the Shapley value of  defined by (14.8). In a similar way, we can
find the Shapley value of any polynomial function of  and , and for
that matter, of any finite set of measures.
Let us suppose now, however, that  is given by
Clearly, here,  is a function of , and so we must have
. It is
easy to see, however, that
 if and only if
. Thus we will
also have
and so we must have
. This contradiction shows that the
Shapley value
 cannot exist for this game. What has happened is
that the infinite process described above does not have a limit.
14.2. Values of Nonatomic Games
Aumann and Shapley [14.2] have developed an important
generalization of the Shapley value to games with a continuum of
players.
It is assumed that the set of players is
, where  is the
interval [0,1] and  is the -field of Borel sets.
14.2.1 Definition. For any game , a null set is the complement of
any carrier. An atom is any measurable non-null set  such that, if

--- Sayfa 464 ---
with
 measurable, then either  or
 is a null set.
14.2.2 Definition. A game  is nonatomic if it has no atoms.
In what follows, we shall deal exclusively with nonatomic games.
Given a game , the value of  is a finitely additive set function
(a signed measure) defined on the Borel subsets of [0,1]. If  is an
automorphism of [0,1] (i.e., a one–one, measurable mapping of [0,1]
onto itself), then, for any , we define the game
 by
for all
. The following axioms seem reasonable.
Al. For any
A2. For any game  and automorphism
A3. For games
 and scalars
A4. If  is monotone (i.e.,
 whenever
), then
 is
also monotone.
Essentially, the first three axioms are very similar to Shapley’s
three axioms (12.1.3), though Al is actually weaker than SI. On the
other hand, A4 (the monotonicity axiom) is new. It seems, however,
quite reasonable. After all, if  is monotone, we see that any coalition
 always makes non-negative contributions to any set that it may
join; it seems only reasonable, then, that it should receive a non-
negative value (which is all that A4 requires).
Given these four axioms, we look for some value system , which
will satisfy them. Unfortunately, we find immediately that such a

--- Sayfa 465 ---
value cannot be defined for all games. For, letting  be Lebesgue
measure, consider the game  defined by
which we can call the “almost-unanimity” game. Given any two Borel
sets  and , with
there is a Lebesgue measure-preserving automorphism  such that
It is easy to see, now, that
; thus, we must have, by A2
and, as this holds for any two sets of equal Lebesgue measure, we
must have
where  is a monotone function satisfying
. Since, moreover,
 is an additive set function, we must have
Thus
 is  itself, and so
Thus the value
 must coincide with Lebesgue measure.
Suppose, however, that
 is some measure equivalent to
Lebesgue measure, e.g.,

--- Sayfa 466 ---
for any
. The two measures  and  are equivalent in the sense
that
 if and only if
. We see then that  can also be
expressed in the form
By precisely similar reasoning, we conclude that
 must
coincide with . But
, and we have reached a contradiction.
There is an evident lesson to be learned from this example,
namely, that we cannot hope to define a value  over the entire
space of all nonatomic games — not, i.e., if we wish it to satisfy our
axioms. Since the axioms seem reasonable, we conclude that we
should restrict ourselves to smaller spaces of games.
Let
be a sequence of sets in , satisfying
We call such a sequence a chain of sets. For such
 and a set
function , we write
Setting now
where the supremum is taken over all possible chains , we call
the total variation of the function . Let, now BV be the space of all

--- Sayfa 467 ---
functions of bounded variation (i.e., functions  such that
 is finite).
14.2.3 Theorem. The space BV is a Banach space with norm
.
Proof. We must show that
 is a norm, and that BV is complete in
this norm. In fact, it is easily seen that, for any function , and scalar
as, clearly,
 for all . Also, for functions  and
as again
. Finally, it is clear that, unless  is
identically zero
Thus, the total variation serves as a norm. We must next show
completeness. In fact, assume the sequence
 is Cauchy
in the variation norm. Then, it is easy to see that, for each
, the
sequence of real numbers
 is a Cauchy sequence,
and so has a limit
. We must show
. In fact, choose
 large
enough that
 for all
. Then, for any
and, taking limits as
, we have
for every Ω. Thus
and
. Finally, it is easy to check that
, and thus  is
the limit of the sequence, as desired. Thus BV is complete and forms
a Banach space.

--- Sayfa 468 ---
Given that BV is a Banach space, but that it is not possible to
define a value satisfying axioms A1–A4 on that space, we look for
closed subspaces of BV on which this can be done.
Let
 be the space of nonatomic measures  satisfying
.
It is easily seen that any power of such a measure has finite total
variation. We shall let pNA denote the closed subspace of BV, which
is spanned by powers of
 measures.
Let us suppose, next, that the set function  is monotone. In that
case, for any , it is easy to see that
and so
If a function  can be expressed as the difference of two monotone
functions
, then we have
and thus every such function has bounded variation. Conversely, we
have the following theorem:
14.2.4 Theorem. Every function of bounded variation  can be
expressed as the difference of two monotone functions  and  and,
moreover, they can be chosen so that
Proof. We shall construct the two functions  and , which we shall
call the upper variation and lower variation, respectively, of .
Let
, and let  be any sequence of sets
 satisfying
Define then

--- Sayfa 469 ---
and set
where the supremum is taken over all such sequences, . Define,
similarly
and
It is not difficult to see that, for any
and therefore
or, equivalently
The two functions  and  are the upper and lower variations of ,
respectively, and are easily seen to be monotone. Thus
Moreover, for any chain

--- Sayfa 470 ---
and so
so that
as desired.
14.2.5 Corollary. For any
where the minimum is taken over all monotone functions
,
satisfying
,
,
.
Inasmuch as the value mapping  is to be thought of as a linear
mapping from some Banach space into itself, it becomes natural to
discuss the norm of ,
, defined as
where the maximum is taken over all functions
, or even over all
with
. The following theorem is of interest:
14.2.6 Theorem. If  is a value over BV satisfying A1, A3, and A4,
then
.
Proof. Suppose that
 is monotone. Then by A4,
 is also
monotone, and so
By A1, however,
, and so

--- Sayfa 471 ---
Let, now,
. By Theorem 14.2.4. we can write
where  and  are monotone. Then we have, by A3
and, since
 and
 are monotone
or
Thus
and we conclude that
or
Since  has finite norm, it will follow that this is continuous.
Unfortunately, a certain difficulty arises. The problem is that, as we
have seen,  cannot be defined over the entire space BV. We would
therefore like to define  over some subspace
. Unfortunately,
we may find that, if we restrict ourselves to elements of , it is no
longer true that we can write

--- Sayfa 472 ---
where  and  are monotone elements of
, with
. In that
case, the proof given above of Theorem 14.2.6 will no longer be
valid. We, therefore, introduce the following definition.
14.2.7 Definition. A subspace  of BV is said to be internal if, for
every
, we have
where the infimum is taken over all monotone ,
 such that
.
14.2.8 Theorem. If  is an internal subspace of BV and  is a value
on  satisfying A1, A3, and A4, then we must have
Proof. Essentially as for (14.18).
We are now in a position to consider certain subspaces of BV.
Perhaps most obvious is the space , consisting of functions of the
form
where
 is a polynomial, and
 are measures in
.
Unfortunately,  is not closed, because the limit of polynomials need
not be a polynomial. Nevertheless, a value  satisfying the axioms
A1–A4 will be uniquely defined on .
To prove this, we use the following sequence of lemmas:
14.2.9 Lemma. If  and  are measures, then any homogeneous
polynomial of degree
 in
 and  can be written as a linear
combination of nth powers of measures.
Proof. Let us write

--- Sayfa 473 ---
where the
 are the usual factorial coefficients. Choose
distinct positive numbers
, and set
which is also a measure. We wish to write
or
This can be done by equating coefficients of
 for each ;
thus we must have
or equivalently
This is a system of
 equations in
 unknowns, and hence will
have a solution if the matrix of coefficients is nonsingular. In fact, we
have

--- Sayfa 474 ---
and the determinant of this matrix is the familiar van der Monde
determinant, which is not zero if all the  are distinct. Thus, in fact
as desired. Note, finally, that, if both  and  are in
, we can also
choose , in
: simply set
Then
 for each , and we have
as desired.
14.2.10 Lemma. Any homogeneous polynomial of degree  in the
measures
, in
, can be expressed as a linear
combination of nth powers of measures in
.
Proof. We prove by induction on . In fact, we have already proved
this for
. Assume this, then, for all numbers up to
, and let
be homogeneous of degree . We can then write
where  is a polynomial of degree  in
. By the induction
hypothesis, we have

--- Sayfa 475 ---
where each
 is a measure in
. Thus
and this is a linear combination of terms
each of which is a homogeneous polynomial of degree  in
 and
.
By the previous lemma, each of these can be expressed as a linear
combination of nth products of measures:
and so
as desired.
14.2.11 Theorem. Any polynomial of degree  in measures
in
 can be written as a linear combination of nth, or lower,
powers of measures in
.
Proof. This follows directly from (14.21) and the fact that each such
polynomial can be written as the sum of
 homogeneous
polynomials, each of degree  or lower.
We can now state the following:
14.2.12 Theorem. There exists a unique value  defined on the
space  of polynomials in
 measures.

--- Sayfa 476 ---
Proof. (Uniqueness). Let  be a measure in
, and suppose
If  and  are Borel sets with
then there exists a measurable transformation
 of
, which
transforms  into  and preserves -measure. Since
, by A2
we conclude that we must have
and we see that
 must depend only on the measure . Now,
must be an additive set function, and so we must have
for some constant . However
and so, by A1, we must have
We conclude
, and so
for any
, and any integer .
Let, now,  be any polynomial in measures
. As we saw,
this can be rewritten in the form

--- Sayfa 477 ---
where the
 are in
, and the
 are scalars. Then, by A3, we
must have
We see, thus, that there can be at most one value  satisfying
A1–A3 over the space . The question now is as to existence, i.e., it
is possible that we might write
and this might give two different values for
.
To prove that this cannot happen, we use Lyapunov’s theorem,
which states that, if
 are nonatomic measures on [0,1], then
for any
 and any ,
, there exists a set
 such that
Assume, then, that
where , is a measure in
, each
 is continuously differentiable
over [0,1], with
,
, and the  are real numbers. For a
given  and , we define sets
 and
 such that
For any ,
, we can define a set
 such that
Set, now

--- Sayfa 478 ---
so that
and we see that
Integrating with respect to  gives us
To see, now, that any two representations of the same  lead to
the same
, it suffices to prove that, for  identically 0, we
necessarily obtain
. But (14.21), in the form
clearly shows this, as the integrand obviously vanishes if
.
The above shows that the expression (14.20), as a value
, is
well defined. It remains, of course, to show that it satisfies the four
axioms, A1–A4, given for values. In fact, this is not difficult to prove,
especially if we use (14.22). This will be left as an exercise to the
reader.
We see, thus, that our axioms lead us to define a unique value
, given by either expression (14.20) or (14.22), for all games
(polynomials in
 measures).
We would like, now, to extend this value to larger spaces. One
obvious extension would be to the space of polynomials in signed
measures (i.e., additive functions, which take negative values). This
is, however, no extension at all, since, by a well-known theorem of
measure theory, any signed measure can be expressed as the

--- Sayfa 479 ---
difference of two measures (the Hahn decomposition). Thus any
polynomial in signed measures is actually a polynomial in measures.
Since  is not a closed subspace (i.e., the limit of polynomials is
not necessarily a polynomial), we might consider its closure, which is
designated pNA. This space will contain all functions of the form
where the
 and  are functions of  variables, continuously
differentiate over the cube
 and satisfying
. (In fact, it is
not even necessary that
 be defined over the entire unit cube; it
suffices that it be continuously differentiate over
, where
 is the
range of the mapping
and
 is the -vector of measures.)
It can be proved that the space pNA is internal. Thus any value
on pNA, satisfying the axioms A1–A4, must be continuous. (In fact,
by Theorem 14.2.12, its norm must be 1.) We have seen that there is
a unique value  defined on the space ; since pNA is the closure of
, it continuity tells us that there can be at most one extension of this
from  to pNA.
Suppose, then, that  is as in (14.23). Assuming that the function
 is defined over the entire cube
, let
Then
will be the desired value. Much as in the case of the space , it may
be seen that this also gives us

--- Sayfa 480 ---
14.2.13 Example. Let
 be three distinct measures on [0,1],
with
, and suppose
We have two possibilities here: we might write
or
so that  is a linear combination of powers of measures in
. Then
by (14.20)
or, simplifying
Alternatively, we can use formula (14.24), which gives us

--- Sayfa 481 ---
and so
as before.
14.2.14 Example. Let
 be as before, and let
Clearly,
. We have, by (14.24)
Thus
We might consider one further space, and this is the space
generated by functions of the form
where, as before,  is a measure in
 and
 is a function of
bounded variation, continuous at 0 and 1, and satisfying
. We
specifically forbid discontinuities at
 and
 to avoid the
problem of the “ -near-unanimity” game discussed above.
The strict mathematical development of a value  on the space
 is quite complex; readers are invited to read [14.2] for details.
Essentially, it is based on the fact that any function
 can be
expressed as the sum of a “differentiable” part
, and a “singular”
part
. The differentiable part,
, can be shown to belong to the

--- Sayfa 482 ---
space pNA, which we discussed above, while the singular part, ,
belongs to the space
, which can best be defined by saying that
it is the closed subspace of BV generated by functions of the form
where  is a signed measure in NA and  is a step-function on the
unit interval, continuous at 0 and 1, and satisfying
. We have,
then, the following theorem:
14.2.15 Theorem. There exists a unique value on the space
satisfying A1–A4.
Proof. Essentially, the proof of uniqueness is obtained by noting
that, if
 as above, then the symmetry axiom will require that
Thus, we have
by the linearity axiom. For other members of
, uniqueness is
obtained by noticing that the space
 is internal, and thus the
monotonicity axioms imply continuity. Thus there can exist at most
one value on this space. To prove existence, it is necessary to show
that the value given by (14.27) does in fact satisfy the axioms.
It remains, now, to obtain a value on the space
. To do this,
we notice that, just as any function of bounded variation (of a real
variable) can be expressed as the sum of an absolutely continuous
function and a singular function in a unique manner, so also any set
function in
 can be expressed as the sum of a function in
and one in pNA in a unique manner. Thus

--- Sayfa 483 ---
where the symbol  denotes that this is a direct sum of two vector
spaces.
Now, a unique value (satisfying the axioms) exists on each of the
two spaces pNA and
. Using
 and
 to denote these, we can
then write, for any
where  and  are the differentiable and singular parts of . Since
these are uniquely defined by , it will follow that  given by (14.27),
is well defined for all
. Moreover,  will satisfy the Axioms
A1–A4. Thus,
14.2.16 Theorem. There exists a unique value on the space
satisfying the Axioms A1–A4.
14.3. Internal Telephone Billing Rates — An
Example
As a possible application of nonatomic game theory, let us consider
the problem of allocating the costs of telephone calls made from a
certain large institution. For cost accounting purposes, it is desirable
to charge the calls to the several projects or contracts that the
institution is undertaking; this may be especially important in case of
a research institute or university, where several projects may be
going on independently of each other, and “fairness” in billing is
desired.
Given the present policy of the telephone companies, long-
distance telephone calls can be purchased in any of several ways.
The “normal” method is direct distance dialing (DDD), according to
which each call is billed individually. Individual home owners and
small companies usually obtain their long-distance calls in this
manner as it is relatively inexpensive for small users. As the number
of calls increases, however, the institution will normally find it more
economical to obtain either a direct line to a distant city (e.g.,
Washington, where it wishes contact with funding agencies) or Wide

--- Sayfa 484 ---
Area Telephone Service (WATS), which, for a sizable initial payment,
allows a certain number of calls within a given zone; calls above this
basic number are billed individually.
In reality, there are two problems here. First, the institution must
determine the system configuration, which will minimize total cost;
second, it must allocate these costs internally to the several projects
using the telephone system. The first is not, strictly speaking, a
game-theoretic problem; its solution is, however, necessary if we are
to solve the game-theoretic problem of cost allocation.
Essentially, it may be found that, for a given choice of
configuration (e.g., two WATS lines plus one direct line to another
city), total costs will depend not only on the total number (and length)
of calls made to each destination, but also on the times at which
these calls are made. This is due to the fact that, if too many calls
are made simultaneously, the WATS lines will be unable to
accommodate them all; hence, some will be routed as DDD calls,
with a consequently higher cost. Typically, we can divide the day into
24 time periods and let
 denote the total minutes of calls in time
period  to destination . Then the cost to the institution, given the th
configuration, is given by
where the function
 is absolutely continuous and piecewise, at
least, continuously differentiable.
For optimal choice of the system configuration, costs will be
and once again  will be absolutely continuous in the
 variables
,
with — at least — one-sided derivatives everywhere.
We are now in a position to allocate the costs. Given the nature
of the institution, the following seem reasonable criteria for
allocation:
1. Total billings to the several accounts should be just enough to
cover the total costs of the service.

--- Sayfa 485 ---
2. All calls to a given destination in a given time period should be
billed at the same rate, regardless of the person making them.
3. All calls should be charged at least a non-negative amount.
It may, of course, be seen that these correspond to three of the
four axioms, which characterize the value for nonatomic games. We
may therefore represent this as a nonatomic game in which each
moment of telephone call is to be treated as a player. The value of
this nonatomic game can then be obtained by the use of formula
(14.25).
Thus, if we set
then we will have
as the per-minute rate of calls to the ith destination in time period .
Thus, account  would be charged a total amount
where
 is the total length (in minutes) of calls to the ith destination
in the jth time period, chargeable to account .
Table 14.1 shows examples of these rates, to two different
destinations, over the day. As can be seen, these are relatively low
during the night hours, then increase during the day to reach a peak
when the frequency of calls is greatest.
Table 14.1. Examples of rates charges per minute of call (from Ithaca, New York) to Two
Different Destinations, by Hour of Daya.
Hour
Washington, D.C.
Syracuse, NY
12–8 a.m.
  8.4
  8.7
8–9
20.3
19.5

--- Sayfa 486 ---
Hour
Washington, D.C.
Syracuse, NY
9–10
23.0
22.3
10–11
24.1
23.1
11–12 noon
25.2
21.4
12–1 p.m.
20.8
19.1
1–2
23.3
21.0
2–3
26.8
22.6
3–4
26.1
21.9
4–5
23.5
19.7
5–11
13.4
14.2
11–12 midnight
  8.4
  8.7
aData taken from Billera, L. J., Heath, D. C., & Raanan, J. C. (1978). Operations Research,
27, 963.
Problems
1. Let  and  be two nonatomic measures such that
,
and let
Find
.
2. Let  be a function of bounded variation on the interval [0,1],
continuous at 0 and 1, and satisfying
. Let
 be the total
variation of the function  over [0,1], Prove that, if  is a measure
with
3. (Infinite market games.) Consider a situation in which each
“player” ,
, in a game has a certain quantity
 of a
commodity as initial endowment and has a utility
 for an
amount
 of this commodity. Assuming side payments are
possible, we then obtain the characteristic function

--- Sayfa 487 ---
subject to
where  is Lebesgue measure. Consider the case where
(a) Show that  can be expressed in closed form as a function of
and , defined by
     Use this closed form, together with the (14.24) and (14.25), to
compute the value
.
(b) Show that this value lies in the core of the game .
4. (The asymptotic approach.) The asymptotic approach, due to
Kannai, consists in partitioning the space  of players into a finite
collection
of disjoint measurable sets. A “quotient” game
 can then be
defined by
for every
.

--- Sayfa 488 ---
A sequence
 of partitions is said to separate points if
(a) each
 is a refinement of
; (b) given
, there is
some : such that  and  are in different elements of
.
     For
, let
, and let
 be a sequence
that separates points. Define
where the sum is taken over all  such that the sets
 are
subsets of . If this limit exists and is independent of the particular
sequence chosen, then this is the asymptotic value of on the set
.
     Prove that, if
, where  is a nonatomic measure, and
is continuously differentiable, with
, and
, then
[Hint: Show that the partitions will, for sufficiently large , satisfy
Show, then, that, if
where , ,  are the multilinear extensions (MLEs) of
.
Use the fact that continuous functions can be uniformly
approximated by polynomials.]
5. (Extensions of games.) Define a fuzzy subset of  as a function
from
 into itself. A measurable fuzzy set is a Borel-
measurable function from  to itself. Let
 be the collection of all
measurable fuzzy sets on . A fuzzy set function is a function
from
 to the reals.
     Monotonicity of fuzzy set functions is defined in the obvious
manner, i.e.,  is monotone if
 whenever
.

--- Sayfa 489 ---
Prove that there exists a unique mapping, which assigns, to
each
, a fuzzy set function  satisfying

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

whenever ,
, ,
,
, and
.
     [Hint: (a) Show that if
, where the
, are
measures, then by (l)–(3),
 where
Then show that (4) guarantees continuity of the mapping, and use
the fact that the polynomials of measures are dense in pNA, to
prove uniqueness.
(b) To show existence, let
 be a sequence of finite
approximations to the game , as described in Problem 4, and
let
 be the MLE of
. Show that, for
, the
 converge
to a function , which has the desired properties.
(c) Show, finally, that if
 is the characteristic function of the set
(i.e.,
 if
, and 0 otherwise) then
Thus  is truly an extension of .]

--- Sayfa 490 ---
Chapter 15
Games without Side Payments
15.1. Introduction
Throughout the last five chapters, we have made the implicit
assumption that utility is freely transferable among members of a
coalition. This is, in particular, possible in the presence of an “ideal
money”—i.e., a commodity whose utility is directly proportional to
quantity, and independent of any other assets, or liabilities, which a
player may have. Whatever the realism of such a situation, its
principal effect is to simplify enormously the description of the game
(in characteristic function form). In fact, a single number
 is fully
adequate to describe the coalition’s possibilities: it can obtain this
total amount in some manner, and then make side payments of
money to satisfy any complaints that its members might make.
In general, unfortunately, the situation is not this simple. Even if
money is available in large amounts (which is not always the case),
we find that the several players’ utility for money is not linear (e.g.,
the utility of the 1st dollar is much greater than that of the 1001st),
and not always independent of their other assets. In some cases,
side payments may even be forbidden (e.g., by antitrust or
antikickback laws). This being so, we must represent each coalition’s
possibilities, not by a single number, but rather by a set: the set of all
points that the coalition can obtain for its members (cf. our treatment
of the two-person bargaining game in Chapter 9).
An important concept here will be Pareto-optimality. This was
discussed, in the two-person context, in Chapter 9. More generally,
we will say that the point
 is Pareto-optimal over the set
 if there is no
 such that
, for all , with inequality holding

--- Sayfa 491 ---
for at least one value of . We will also say that  is Pareto-optimal
for the coalition  over the set , if there is no
 such that
for all
, with inequality holding for at least one
.
For any
, we shall let
 denote the set of all jointly
correlated mixed strategies for the coalition . Then, an (expected)
outcome
 will be determined by a choice of strategies
, for any partition
, of the
player set
. There are, now, two possible meanings to the
statement that “the coalition can obtain [some point] for its
members.” These correspond to the notions of -effectiveness and -
effectiveness.
15.1.1 Definition. The coalition S is -effective for the vector  if
there is a strategy
 such that, for any
15.1.2 Definition. The coalition
 is
-effective for
 if, for any
strategy
, there is some
 such that
It is easy to see that -effectiveness implies -effectiveness. The
converse, however, is not generally true. It certainly holds for finite
two-person games (this is the minimax theorem), but even for infinite
two-person games, it fails to hold. Assuming finiteness, it may be
seen that the two types of effectiveness are equivalent if utility can
be transferred linearly among members of .
Whichever definition of effectiveness is used, the set v(s) can
then be described as the set of all payoff vectors for which
 is
effective. We have then
15.1.3 Definition. An -person game without side payments is a pair
 where
 is a compact subset of
 and  is a function that
assigns to each
 a closed convex subset of
 satisfying

(i)
 is non-empty.

--- Sayfa 492 ---
(ii) If
 and
 for all
, then
.
(iii) If
, then
.
(iv)
 if and only if
 for some
.

In this definition, (ii) is a “comprehensiveness” condition: if  can
obtain , then it can a fortiori obtain the smaller amounts . Condition
(iii) is superadditivity in a new setting. Condition (iv) guarantees that
 is not too large; this, together with (iii), letting
,
guarantees that
 is not too large.
With this in mind, we can now define domination
, through
the coalition , if and only if
 for all
 and
. It is then
possible to define von Neumann–Morgenstern solutions (stable sets)
and the core of a game.
Some work has been done on stable sets: Stearns [15.15] has
proved that all three-person games have stable sets, and has
moreover catalogued all such sets. On the other hand, he has also
given a seven-person game with no stable sets (cf. the case of
games with side payments, where a 10-person game without stable
sets has been constructed).
15.1.4 Example. Three players are to decide, by majority vote, the
location of a certain facility. Each of the three wishes the facility to be
located as close as possible (in a physical sense) to his own “ideal”
location. Utility is, essentially, equal to the negative of the distance,
i.e., player ’s utility is
where
 is the location chosen for the facility and
 is player ’s
ideal location. No side payments are permitted. It is required that
 lies inside a compact convex region
; it is assumed that
 for
.
Figure 15.1 shows the situation: the points
 represent the
three players’ ideal positions, which in the general case will form a
triangle. Let us set

--- Sayfa 493 ---
as the “distance” between players  and .
Figure 15.1.
We find now that the coalition
 can of course obtain any point in
. It is clear, however, that only points in the triangle need be
considered. Consider a point such as , in Figure 15.1, outside the
triangle. If  is the perpendicular projection of  onto the nearest side

--- Sayfa 494 ---
(in this case
), it is clear that
 for
. In other
words, all three players prefer  to . Similarly, given any point
outside the triangle, there will be, in the triangle, some point that all
players prefer. On the other hand, given a point such as  in the
triangle, it may be seen that things are quite different: we cannot
move to another point without decreasing at least one player’s utility.
Thus the points in the triangle are said to be Pareto-optimal: it is
impossible to increase one player’s utility without decreasing that of
another.
We are now in a position to describe the sets v(s). For
, we find
that a point
 can be attained if, for each ,
, where
 lies in the triangle
. Moreover, by (ii) in Definition 15.1.3,
any point
 belongs to
 if
 for some such
.
Thus
 will consist of:

(a) the set H, which is the image, under transformation (15.1), of
triangle
 and
(b) all x such that
 for some
.

For the two-person coalitions, the situation is somewhat simpler.
Coalition
 can of course obtain any point
. From their
point of view, however, the points on the line segment
 are
Pareto-optimal. Now, if
 lies on the segment
, we clearly have
Thus the set
 consists of all points satisfying
Finally, a single player can enforce nothing, he can be sure only
that he will receive at least
, where
subject to
. Thus,
 consists of all points satisfying

--- Sayfa 495 ---
We might look, now, for the von Neumann–Morgenstern solutions
of this game. Letting
be the semiperimeter of the triangle, we note that the three circles
centered at
,
, and
 with radii
,
,
, respectively,
are mutually tangent, meeting at the points
, , , respectively, on
the sides of the triangle (see Figure 15.2). These three points give
the payoffs (in utility)
where the
 can be evaluated (using trigonometry) but certainly
satisfy
with equality holding only in the special case that
 lies on the line
segment
. It may be verified that these three points form a three-
point solution to the game. (In the special case that
 lies on the
segment
, then
, and the three-point
solution degenerates to a single point, which is still a solution — and,
moreover, the unique point in the core.)

--- Sayfa 496 ---
Figure 15.2.
Thus, our three-person game has a three-point solution, similar to
the symmetric solution for the three-person game of Example 11.1.2.
It will also have the analogue of the discriminatory solutions studied
there (see Figure 15.3). For, let  be any circle, centered at
 such
that (a) its radius is greater than
, and (b) it does not intersect
(though it may touch) the line segment
. Then the arc of , which
lies inside the triangle, is also a von Neumann–Morgenstern solution.
Figure 15.3.

--- Sayfa 497 ---
As can be seen, the behavior of this game is very similar to that
of the game with side payments given in Example 11.1.2. The reader
should beware: such behavior cannot generally be expected of
games without side payments.
15.2. The Core
We now study the core of games without side payments. Just as for
games with side payments, we define the core to be the set of all
undominated imputations, i.e.,
 if and only if:

(a)
,
(b) there is no
,
, and
, such that
, for all
.

Clearly, the existence (or, rather the nonemptiness) of the core
depends somehow on the relation among the several sets
, and
 in particular. For games with side payments, it was seen that this
relation can best be expressed in terms of balanced collections. For
the present games, we find that some similar results hold. We state
these in the form of a theorem:
15.2.1 Theorem. A sufficient condition for the game  to have a
nonempty core is that the inclusion
holds for any balanced collection
.
Before we attempt to prove Theorem 15.2.1, we might wish to
compare it with Theorem 10.5.10, dealing with side payments
games. The restriction to minimal balanced collections in 10.5.10 is
not important: we saw that the condition of 10.5.10 will hold for all
balanced collections if it holds for the minimal ones; the same
statement is clearly true for the condition of Theorem 15.2.1, since
increasing a collection
 will merely decrease the set
.

--- Sayfa 498 ---
More to the point is the fact that the conditions in the two
theorems are, in fact, equivalent. In fact, let  be the characteristic
function of a game with side payments, then
expresses this as a game without side payments.
Suppose, now, that
 satisfies the hypothesis of 10.5.10. Let
 be balanced, and suppose
Then
and, if  has the balancing vector
, we have
or
and so
This gives us, then

--- Sayfa 499 ---
and so
. Thus
.
Conversely, let  be a minimal balanced collection with balancing
vector  such that
We can then obtain a vector  satisfying
for each
. This can be done because, as we saw in Theorem
10.5.8, the minimal balancing vectors are extreme points of the
linear program (10.5.3)–(10.5.5). This will mean that the coefficient
matrix of the system (15.5) has linearly independent rows, and so
the system always has a solution.
Letting
 satisfy (15.5), we see that
 for each
.
However,
and so
.
We see, thus, that the condition of Theorem 15.2.1 is a direct
generalization of that in Theorem 10.5.10: in case  is a game with
side payments, the two coincide. It is of interest, however, to note
that Theorem 15.2.1 is not a full generalization of 10.5.10: in fact, for
games with side payments, the condition is both necessary and
sufficient; for games without side payments, the condition is merely
sufficient.

--- Sayfa 500 ---
Finally, we note that, if the balanced collection
 is actually a
partition, then the superadditivity condition (ii) of Definition 15.1.3 will
actually imply (15.3). Thus (15.3) need only be verified for minimal
balanced collections which are not partitions.
15.2.2 Example. We saw above that, for three-person games, the
only minimal balanced collection, other than partitions, is {{1, 2}, {1,
3}, {2, 3}}. Thus, a super additive three-person game will have a
nonempty core if
Consider, now, the game given by
It is easy to check that  is superadditive. Next, note that
belongs to each set
. But
, and so the condition of
Equation 15.3 is not satisfied. Nevertheless,  has a nonempty core:
we note that any of the points (6, 4, 0), (4, 0, 3), or (0, 4, 3) belongs
to the core. Thus the condition is not necessary.
We proceed now with the proof of Theorem 15.2.1. The proof
essentially is that given by Scarf [15.11], and is based on the notion
of a primitive set.
15.2.3 Definition. Let
 be an
 matrix,
. We say that
the
 columns of  form a primitive set if:

(a) in the submatrix , consisting of these columns, the minimal entry
in each row appears in a different column, and

--- Sayfa 501 ---
(b) there is no column j in the matrix A such that, for each i

15.2.4 Example. Consider the
 matrix
In this matrix, columns 1, 4, and 6 form a primitive set. Indeed,
the submatrix
has the minimal entry of each row (underlined) in a different column.
Moreover, there is no column of
 that is, componentwise, larger
than the column
of row minima in matrix .
It should be noted, moreover, that 1, 4, 6 is not the only primitive
set of columns; columns 1, 4, and 5 also form a primitive set, as do
also columns 1, 3, and 6.
15.2.5 Definition. For a given matrix , two primitive sets of columns
are adjacent if they have
 columns in common.
Returning to Example 15.2.4, we notice that the set {1, 3, 6} is
adjacent to {1, 4, 6}. In turn, {1, 4, 6} is adjacent to {1, 4, 5}. On the
other hand, {1, 3, 6} and {1, 4, 5} are not adjacent.

--- Sayfa 502 ---
It is, of course, clear that a given matrix  might have no primitive
sets of columns. Even if a matrix has a primitive set, there may be no
primitive set adjacent to this. Nevertheless, adjacent primitive sets
frequently exist. Assuming that a primitive set exists, we can remove
one of the columns, and see whether any of the remaining columns
in the matrix can be introduced so as to form the adjacent set. The
situation is of course very similar to that found in linear programming,
where, at each pivot-step, one of the basic variables is removed from
the basis (i.e., the set of basic variables) and replaced by one of the
non-basic variables, to form an adjacent basis, i.e., give an adjacent
basic feasible point of the program. We shall, below, see the
importance of this similarity.
Once again returning to Example 15.2.4, let us consider the
primitive set {1, 4, 6}, giving rise to the matrix
Let us suppose we wish to remove column 6 (the third column of )
from this set. Which column should be introduced to replace it? Or,
to put it another way, we wish to form an adjacent primitive set,
, where
. What choice we have for ? The reader may
verify directly that the only possible replacement is
, giving the
new primitive set {1, 4, 5}. Similarly, if we chose to remove column 4,
the only possible replacement would be column 3, giving the
primitive set {1, 3, 6}. On the other hand, if, from {1, 4, 5}, we remove
column 4, we find there is no possible replacement: no adjacent
primitive set is to be found in the “direction.”
Of course, there are matrices for which more than one
replacement may exist. In the “very degenerate” case where all
columns are equal, we find that any set of  columns is primitive, so
there is a wide choice of replacement. This, however, happens only
because of equalities among the entries, as the following lemma
shows:

--- Sayfa 503 ---
15.2.6 Lemma. Let the matrix
 be nondegenerate in the
sense that no two entries in any row are equal, and suppose
 is a primitive set. Remove the column
 from . Then
there is at most one column
, such that
 is a primitive
set, i.e.,
 has at most one replacement.
Proof. Without loss of generality, we may assume
, and
for each
In other words, the minimal entries in the rows of  are on the main
diagonal. Suppose we wish to remove column 1 from . Suppose
that ,
, is a permissible replacement for 1, giving rise to
the new primitive set
Now we cannot have
, as this would mean
 for
all , contradicting the primitiveness of . Thus, we must have
,
and this, together with the primitiveness of , means that
 for
some
. There can be only one such  (as otherwise column
would have two of the row minima in set ). Call this :
For every  other than 1 or , we will still have
and, since column  has the smallest entry in row , column  must
have the smallest in row 1

--- Sayfa 504 ---
We see, thus, that column  must have the second-smallest entry
in row 1
and is uniquely determined. Then column  must satisfy
There may, of course, be several columns satisfying these
constraints. Of all such, we must choose the one that maximizes
.
For, suppose some other column  also satisfies these constraints,
with
. In that case, we would have
for all  — contradicting the primitiveness of . Thus, the column  is
unique, as it must be the one that maximizes
, subject to (15.6)–
(15.8).
In general, then, we have the following rules:
15.2.7 Rules for Column Replacement. Let  be a primitive set of
columns for , and let
 be the column to be removed. For each
, let
 be the row whose minimal element is in column .
Let
 have the second smallest element (over ) in row
.
Consider all
 satisfying

--- Sayfa 505 ---
Among all such, choose that  which maximizes
. This is the
replacement column.
It may be, of course, that there is no column  satisfying (15.9)–
(15.11). In that case, no replacement is possible for column .
Suppose, however, that  has been chosen according to rules (15.9).
Then
is certainly a primitive set. For, condition (a) is satisfied by
construction. To prove (b), suppose there was some column
satisfying
for all . In that case, either
, which contradicts the
primitiveness of
, or
, which contradicts the
maximality of
.
At this point, the reader should notice the similarity between the
present process of choosing adjacent primitive sets and the pivot-
step of linear programming. In the present case, one of the columns
in the set  is dropped; this will give rise to a unique replacement (if
any). In pivot steps, a nonbasic variable is chosen. This will
determine (see rules 3.5.2) a basic variable to be removed from the
basis. In the nondegenerate case, where no ties are permitted, this
basic variable is uniquely determined.
In both processes, of course, it may be that the step is
impossible. This happens, in the present process, in case no column
satisfies (15.9)–(15.11); in linear programming, it will happen if there
are no positive entries in the chosen column — which means that the
constraint set is unbounded.
If we know that the constraint set is bounded, then a pivot-step is
always possible. Similarly, for the present process, there is one case
in which we can guarantee that a replacement column always exists.
A matrix
 is in normal form if, for each

--- Sayfa 506 ---
and, for each
, and each
Thus, the entries in  are bounded below by the main-diagonal
entries, and above by the off-diagonal entries of the submatrix
,
which consists of the first  columns. We have then
15.2.8 Lemma. Let  be a matrix in normal form, let  be a primitive
set of columns, and let
 be such that the
 columns in
are not all among the first
 columns of
. Then there exists a
replacement column for .
Proof. In the set , let  be the column with the second smallest
entry in row
. Clearly,
, as then it would have the smallest
entry in row
. Therefore,  cannot be from among the first
columns of the matrix — as then
 would be larger than
 for all
,
,
. Thus,
.
Now,  contains the minimal entry (in ) in some row . This
means column
, for certainly
. But, then, we find that
and this guarantees that there will be a replacement column.
Let us now consider the linear system
where  is an
 matrix,
, and  a vector
. There is,
generally, no guarantee that such a system is soluble. Suppose,
however, that  has the form

--- Sayfa 507 ---
so that its first
 columns form an identity matrix. Suppose,
moreover, that
. Then the system will have at least the solution
, for
,
 for
. Suppose, further, that all
entries
, and there is, for each , at least one  such that
.
Then the set satisfying (15.14) and (15.15) is bounded. If all these
conditions hold, we shall say that the system is in -standard form.
We have then, the following:
15.2.9 Theorem. Let  and  be
 matrices,
. Let  be in
normal form, let the system (15.14)–(15.15) be in -standard form,
and assume nondegeneracy in both cases. Then there exists a
primitive set  for the matrix , and a b.f.p.  for the system (15.14)
and (15.15), such that  is basic if and only if
.
Proof. We note first of all that any b.f.p. of (15.14) and (15.15) has
exactly  basic variables, and so the two sets have at least the same
size. For a given b.f.p. , we shall let
 be the set of all indices, ,
such that
 is nonbasic. Since there is a total of  variables in the
system and  are basic, it follows that  has
 indices.
We consider, now, objects of the form
, where  is a b.f.p.
and  is a primitive set. We shall say such an object has the label
. It is clear that we are looking for a pair
 whose label is
. We shall say two pairs
 and
 are adjacent if
As we saw before, the point
 for
;
 for
is a b.f.p. for the system. Its basic variables are
; hence
Let  be the column (in ), which maximizes
 subject to
. It is easy to see that

--- Sayfa 508 ---
is a primitive set. We have, then, an initial pair
, whose label is
Thus, the initial pair
 is “almost totally labeled,” i.e., it is
missing only the index 1. On the other hand, the label  appears
twice, once in
 and once in
. Thus we can remove  from one of
these two sets. It is not possible to remove it from
 (this being the
one case in which Lemma 15.2.8 does not apply), but it can certainly
be removed from
: we take the variable , which is nonbasic at the
b.f.p.
, and bring it into the basis i.e., obtain an adjacent b.f.p.
 for
which
 is basic. This can be done because the constraint set is
bounded. Thus we have a new pair
, adjacent to
. We
have, now
where
 was the variable, basic in
, which is nonbasic in
. The
label for
 is, then
There are now two possibilities. One is that
. If so, then
, and our process terminates:
 is as desired. If,
however,
, then
, and we still have an “almost
totally labeled” pair. In this case, it is index , which appears twice.
Since
, but
 we can remove it from
. The remaining
elements of
 are not all among
, and so there exists a
replacement column for  — call this column . Then
is a primitive set, and
 is a new pair, adjacent to
. Its label
is

--- Sayfa 509 ---
Again, there are two possibilities. If
, then
, and the
pair
 is as desired. If not, then
, and index
appears in both sets. We then remove it from
, by finding a b.f.p.
, adjacent to , for which  is basic.
Continuing in this manner, we find that we obtain a sequence of
adjacent pairs
At alternating steps, one or the other of  and  is changed while
the other is kept fixed. Since there are only a finite number of
possible pairs, one of three things will eventually happen:

(α) some pair (y; J) is fully labeled;
(β) it is impossible to take a step;
(γ) some pair will be repeated.

We will show that only (α) is possible.
To see that
 is not possible, we note that, at each step, the
resulting pair
 will be labeled at least by the set
. This is because we always perform the step so as to remove
whichever index appears twice, and so long as 1 does not appear in
 then some  appears in both  and
. Thus, until termination,
each pair
 obtained has
 as its label.
Now, if we restrict ourselves to the set of all pairs with label
, we see that each pair has at most two adjacent pairs. Indeed, there
is a unique
, and this can be removed either from
 (by
changing
 through a pivot step) or from
 (by the column

--- Sayfa 510 ---
replacement method). In either case, the replacement, if it exists, is
unique due to nondegeneracy. We can think of this, then, as a
sequence of “rooms,” each of which has at most two “doors.” The
first room of the sequence, however, the pair
, has only one
door. It is clear, then, that no repetition is possible. For, the first room
to be repeated would be entered through a third door — unless it be
, which would then be entered through a second door. This is
impossible, and so there can be no repetition.
An alternative way of explaining the above is to say that a
sequence of rooms, each of which has at most two doors, while the
first has only one door, must eventually lead to some other room with
only one door — or to the outside of the house.
We show, next, that
 can never happen — a replacement is
always possible. In fact, at each step, either  or  is to be changed.
If it is  that must be changed, then a step is always possible, given
that the constraint set for the system (15.14) and (15.15) is bounded.
Suppose, then, that it is  that must be changed.
We know that
. By Lemma 15.2.6, then, the replacement can
be carried out unless
, and  is the column to be
replaced. But there is only one primitive set  containing
,
and that is
. Hence
Since it is column  that must be replaced, then
,
with
, and since  has
 elements
But this is
—associated with the original b.f.p.
. Thus the
given pair is
. But this is impossible as it would mean a
repetition.
We see, then, that neither
 nor
 is possible. The process
must, therefore, terminate in case
: a totally labeled pair
 will
be obtained. This is the desired pair.
We are now in a position to prove Theorem 15.2.1. We shall do
this, first of all, by assuming that each of the sets
 has only a finite

--- Sayfa 511 ---
number of Pareto-optimal points. In other words, there is, for each ,
, a finite set
 such that
 if and only if there is
 with
All told, now, there will be a very large but finite number, , of
points in the several sets
. Let us then form an
 matrix .
Each column of
 consists of the coordinates of one of these
points, with the following conditions.

(1) For
, the th column is a point
.
(2) For points
, the coordinates
,
, are arbitrary. These
will simply be made very large, the only restrictions being that all
these large numbers be distinct, and that the
 arbitrary
numbers in the first n columns be larger than those in the last
 columns.
(3) There is no need to include any point y with any coordinate
smaller than
. All such may be discarded.

When this has been done, it is clear that the resulting matrix  is
in normal form. Let us, next, form a second
 matrix
 whose
entries are
where
 is the coalition associated with the jth column of . (In other
words, the jth column of  is some vector  in some set
;
 is
precisely this
.) Then the first  columns of
 form an identity
matrix, and there is at least one positive entry in each column. Thus
the system
is in -standard form. By Equation 15.11, there exists a pair
 such
that  is a b.f.p.,  is a primitive set, and  is basic for all
. But in

--- Sayfa 512 ---
that case, the sets
,
, form a minimal balanced collection for
,
with balancing vector .
Set now
We will have, of course,
 for each  and each
, and we
conclude that
 for each . Moreover,
 for each .
Under the hypothesis of Equation 15.3, we have
and so
. Let  be a Pareto-optimal point in
 such that
.
We claim that
.
Suppose
. This would mean that there was some
,
,
, and some
 such that
 for all
. There
is clearly no loss of generality in assuming that
. We note that
we must have
 for each
, and thus  is not one of those
points discarded in forming the matrix . Thus  must be a column of
. But then we would have
 for all
, and also
, for
,
because such components  are “very large,” and  cannot be very
large as
 for some  with
 (otherwise the collection would
not be balanced). This would contradict the primitiveness of the set
.
This proves the nonemptiness of the core under the finiteness
assumption mentioned above, namely, that each
 be determined
by a finite set
. In general, of course, this is not the case; in fact,
it may be seen that this will usually give rise to nonconvex sets
.
However, we can always approximate
 in this manner.
More exactly, let us set, for
as the -coordinate subspace of
, and define

--- Sayfa 513 ---
By condition (ii) of Definition 15.1.3, we can see that
where the sum of two sets means the set of all possible sums of
elements of these sets. Thus
 and
 determine each other
uniquely.
The set
, now, will be closed and bounded above, and will
have the property that, if
 and
, with
, then also
. Thus
 is determined by its Pareto-optimal points. By
taking a large number of these points, and using them as
, an
approximation to
 will be obtained (see Figure 15.4). This
approximation can be made as good as desired by taking sufficiently
many of these points. Moreover, the approximation will be from
below: the approximating set
 will be a subset of the true
.
Figure 15.4.

--- Sayfa 514 ---
Assume, then, that the hypothesis of Equation 15.3 holds. Then
we approximate the game  in this fashion, getting a sequence of
better and better approximations to the sets
,
. For each
such approximation , we have
since
, but
. Thus a sequence of points in the
cores of the approximations  will be found. Since the Pareto-optimal
subset of
 is assumed compact, this sequence will have an
accumulation point
, which lies in the core of .
15.2.10 Example. Consider the following three-person game: any
single player can obtain nothing at all, i.e.
For the two-player sets, {1, 2} can obtain the points
 and
. Coalition {1, 3} can obtain
 and
. Finally, {2, 3}
can obtain
 and
. We make no assumption as to
,
except that it must satisfy the usual superadditivity conditions, and
also
To find a point in the core, we form the two
 matrices
and

--- Sayfa 515 ---
The reader should note how  was formed: very large numbers
(ranging between 89 and 100) were assigned to players outside the
several coalitions.  is simply the incidence matrix of the players in
the several coalitions. The linear system is given by
where  is small. (This avoids degeneracy.)
We start with the initial b.f.p.
with basic variables
. As our initial primitive set, we choose
columns 2, 3, and 8 of matrix
. Note that
 is the only
possible primitive set, which includes columns 2 and 3, as column 8
maximizes
. We thus have
The index 8 appears twice: we can, therefore, make the variable
basic to obtain
We have, therefore
Now, 3 appears twice. We, therefore, remove column 3 from
,
replacing it with column 9. Then
We bring  into the basis, now, to obtain the new b.f.p.

--- Sayfa 516 ---
Now
Continuing in this fashion, we obtain
At this point, we can stop: the variable
 has finally become
nonbasic, and the pair
 is totally labeled. The balanced
collection, corresponding to columns 5, 6, and 8, is, of course, {1, 2},
{1, 3}, {2, 3}. These three columns form the matrix
and the three row minima give us the point
which, as may be checked, belongs to all these
, and hence also
to
. If, now,  is Pareto-optimal in
, it belongs to the core. If
not, there is some
,
, Pareto-optimal. This will certainly
be in the core.

--- Sayfa 517 ---
15.3. Market Games
An important class of
-person games is that dealing with
oligopolistic market situations. In the simplest case, we assume that
the  players are traders, able to deal in commodities so as to
increase their utilities. These commodities have, in themselves, no
value, other than the utility that they represent.
More precisely, we assume that there are here
 commodities,
. Each of the
 players (traders) is given an initial
endowment, i.e., player i has a commodity bundle
at the beginning of the game (trading period). Each of the players
has a personal utility function
so that
 is the utility—to player —of the bundle
.
Let  be a coalition. If this coalition forms, we assume that they
can redistribute their endowments in any way desired, i.e., they may
obtain any -tuple of bundles
satisfying
Any such -tuple of bundles will be called a feasible allocation for
.
We can now represent this as a game without side payments: for
each ,
 is the set of all
 for which there exists a feasible
allocation
 satisfying

--- Sayfa 518 ---
for each
.
Generally speaking, there is no guarantee that the sets
obtained in this manner will be convex. If they are not convex, there
are two alternatives: we can dispense with the need for convexity
(which had originally been included in the definition of a game) or we
can redefine
 to equal, not the set of all  satisfying (15.19), but
rather the convex hull of that set. Either of these alternatives leads to
unfortunate complications. There is one important case, however,
when convexity of
 is guaranteed:
15.3.1 Theorem. If the functions  are concave, the sets
 defined
by (13.3.4) are convex.
Proof. Let ,
 and
. We will have, for
where
 and
 are feasible allocations for . But then
is also a feasible allocation for , and, by concavity
and so, for each ,
Thus
, and so
 is convex.
In general, the assumption of concavity will simplify our analysis
enormously. The following theorem shows a further consequence.
15.3.2 Theorem. If the functions
 are concave, the game  has a
nonempty core.

--- Sayfa 519 ---
Proof. Let
 be a balanced collection with balancing
vector
, and assume
For each
, there is a feasible allocation
such that
Set, now, for each
,
It is not difficult to verify that
is a feasible allocation for . Now by concavity,
and, since

--- Sayfa 520 ---
this gives us
and so
. Thus, by Theorem 15.2.1, the game has a nonempty
core.
The core is, of course, an equilibrium concept: points in the core
are in equilibrium, in the sense that no coalition has both the reason
and the capacity to disrupt them. Economists are interested,
however, in a somewhat stronger notion of equilibrium — one
created by a price system.
Let us suppose that a system of prices is given for our
commodities. This is not generally meant to imply the existence of
money; rather, the ratios of these prices represent rates at which the
commodities can be interchanged. Let
be the price vector. In this case, each player will want to exchange
his initial bundle
 for a new bundle
 with greater utility. More
precisely, player  will look for a bundle  such as to
subject to
There is, of course, a question as to the existence and
uniqueness of this maximum. Assuming that all prices  are positive,
the constraint set (15.21) and (15.22) is compact, and thus continuity
of  will guarantee the existence of the maximum. Uniqueness is a
much more complicated question, but not really that important. What
is important is that, in general, the allocations
 obtained in

--- Sayfa 521 ---
this manner will not be feasible. In some cases, however, they may
be; this is the interesting case.
15.3.3 Definition. A competitive equilibrium is a pair
, where
 is a price vector, and
 is an allocation
satisfying
and such that, for each
subject to
We can see the importance of an equilibrium: a set of prices is
given. Each player then trades so as to maximize his utility, subject
to the obvious budget constraint that the total market value of his
final bundle be no greater than that of his initial endowment. If the
prices have been “properly” chosen, i.e., if they are equilibrium
prices, this process will just clear the market — there will be just
enough of each commodity to satisfy every trader’s demand, and no
more. If, on the other hand, the “wrong” set of prices is chosen, then
there will be some imbalance in the market: there will be an excess
demand for some commodities (which had been priced too low) and
an excess supply of some other commodities (which are priced too
high). The practical importance of this, for an economy based on a
free market, is easy to understand; the obvious question is whether
such an equilibrium exists.

--- Sayfa 522 ---
15.3.4 Theorem. Assume that the functions
 are continuous,
concave, and monotone nondecreasing in each variable. Then a
competitive equilibrium exists.
Proof. Let us assume first that the  are strictly concave. For a given
 such that
let
 be such as to
subject to
where
 is a larger number
By compactness, such a maximizing
 will exist, and by strict
concavity, it will be unique. Moreover, due to the monotonicity, it is
easy to see that we must have
and, moreover

--- Sayfa 523 ---
Finally, as in the proof of Theorem 4.4.2,
 depends
continuously on .
Let, now
be the access demand for
. We are looking for a  such that all the
excess demands vanish. Define
It is easy to see that
, and hence  depend continuously on
. Moreover, we will have
since
, and also
since
 and
. Thus the transformation
is a continuous mapping of the unit simplex into itself, and must
therefore have a fixed point
We claim that
 is an equilibrium price vector.
To see this, we note first of all that all
. For, suppose some
. Then, for each
, and so

--- Sayfa 524 ---
so that
We note next that it is not possible for all  to be positive, nor for
all to be negative. In fact, we have
and this vanishes since each of the parentheses in this last
expression vanishes. Inasmuch as all
, we conclude that either
all
 or some
 while some other
, and hence
.
Assume, then, that
 while
. Then
since
, but the denominator is greater than 1. We conclude that
we must have
We must next show that our constraints
, which we
introduced above to guarantee existence of a maximum, are not a
problem. In fact, for any , we know that
and, as all
, we will have, for each ,

--- Sayfa 525 ---
Suppose that the true maximum — i.e., the maximum without the
restriction
, were at some point with
. Then we would find,
by concavity, that, for all
,
but, for small values of
and this would contradict the maximality of
. Thus, we
conclude that the pair
 where
is a competitive equilibrium.
This completes the proof in case the
 are strictly concave. If
they are merely concave, we may approximate them by
where
 is small. It is easy to see that  is strictly concave, and,
moreover, it is monotone over the sets
. For each value of
, this game will have a competitive equilibrium; as
, these
equilibria will have at least one accumulation point, which is a
competitive equilibrium for the original game.
It should be noticed that, in this case, it is possible for some
. This generally represents a saturation phenomenon: beyond a
certain point, commodity
 gives no further utility to the players.
Thus it becomes, in effect, a surplus commodity, and its price
vanishes.
We prove, finally, an important relation between the two
equilibrium concepts, which we have discussed: the competitive
equilibrium always belongs to the core. The exact statement of this is
as follows:

--- Sayfa 526 ---
15.3.5 Theorem. If
 is a competitive equilibrium for a market
game, then the payoff
belongs to the core.
Proof. Suppose
. Then there is some
, and some
allocation
, feasible for , such that
for all
.
Now,
 maximizes
 subject to the constraints (15.21) and
(15.22), and so  cannot satisfy them. By feasibility, it must satisfy
, and so we must have
Summing this over all
, we have
or
but this is impossible as all
, and the parentheses cannot be
positive. This contradiction proves that
 is undominated, and
therefore belongs to the core.
15.3.6 Example. Consider a three-person game with two
commodities; initial endowments are

--- Sayfa 527 ---
Let all three players have the same utility function
It can be verified that the equilibrium price vector is
with corresponding allocation
and utility payoffs
This point certainly lies in the core of the game.
It should be noted, now, that
 is not the only point in the core of
the game. Players 1 and 2 can, respectively, obtain the amounts
 and
, respectively. They can, however, gain
nothing by trading. Thus any Pareto-optimal payoff that gives them
exactly these utilities, or slightly more, will be undominated. Thus the
equilibrium payoff is not, in general, the only point in the core; the
core is usually considerably larger.
15.4. Approaches to the Value
As seen in the previous sections, certain satisfactory results have
been obtained in generalizing the notions of stable sets and core to
games without side payments. As regards the value, results are not
nearly so pleasant.

--- Sayfa 528 ---
Generally speaking, the situation is as follows. For the side-
payments case, the Shapley value is generally a well-established
concept. For two-person games, the Nash value is also well
established. As it happens, these two coincide for two-person games
with side payments (at least in the fixed threat case). What we would
like is something that generalizes both the Nash and Shapley values
for
-person games without side payments. There seem to be
several ways of doing this; none, unfortunately, seems wholly
satisfactory.
We saw in Chapter 9 that, if the utility transformation (9.3) is
made, the Nash solution to the resulting game is obtained simply by
an equal division of the possible increments in utility, and this would
be the case even if side payments were allowed. One possible
approach, in the
-person case, is to look for some linear
transformation of utilities, which will somehow allow us to solve the
game as though it were a game with side payments.
More precisely, let  be a game without side payments. We can
transform this into a game with side payments  by setting
subject to
And
, the Shapley value of this game, can then be obtained. Now,
if this
 is feasible, i.e., if it belongs to
, it is easy to see that it
must be Pareto-optimal and, moreover, individually rational, i.e.
Unfortunately,
 is not usually feasible; it does not lie in
.
Let us now choose a “utility scale” vector

--- Sayfa 529 ---
and, in effect, “rescale” each player’s utility by a factor . We would
then obtain a new game
, given by
and obtain the value
. It may the happen that the vector
is feasible; this clearly will depend on the particular vector  chosen.
If, indeed,
, then we say this it is a value for the game .
The following theorem, given without proof, is due to Shapley:
15.4.1 Theorem. For a game  satisfying Definition 15.1.3, there
exists at least one vector
 such that
Shapley’s proof of this theorem uses a fixed point argument.
There is then, in general, no uniqueness: a game has at least one
value, but may have several such.
An alternative approach, due to Harsanyi, is based on the idea
that, for a game with side payments, the coalition  has the amount
available as a “dividend” for its members. In fact, Lemma 12.1.7
showed that
and the value is then given by

--- Sayfa 530 ---
Thus, in effect, the Shapley value divides this dividend equally
among members of ; the total value to a player is the sum of the
dividends, which he receives from the several coalitions which
include him.
For a game without side payments, let us, first of all, choose a
vector
. Then, for each
, let
We then proceed to assign dividends
 inductively to each player
from each coalition, as follows: if
, then
. Assuming that
 has been defined for all
, let us set, for
The point
 is, more or less, what the members of coalition
have already received from its proper subcoalitions. Then
 may
have some surplus — or some deficit — to make up.
Let  be given by
This  may be positive or negative; it will, however, always exist
given Definition 13.1.3. Then we set
It is easy to see, now, that , given by

--- Sayfa 531 ---
belongs to
 and is, moreover, Pareto-optimal, except in the
degenerate special case that the set
 has “vertical walls,” i.e.,
boundary points at which the surface of
 contains some line
segment parallel to one of the coordinate axes.
It may be seen, of course, that  will depend on the particular
choice of . To correspond to the Nash value, in the two-person
case, it is necessary that the hyperplane
be a support to the set
 at the point . In fact, it can be shown
that there exists at least one
 such that this holds.
The reader should note that the
 obtained here correspond,
more or less, to the reciprocals of the
 in Shapley’s process
described above. (Of course, the two procedures are different and
therefore it is not generally true that
.)
A third possible approach consists in generalizing the notion of
multi-linear extension. As in Section 15.2, let us set
For a vector
, we can then set
where
and the sum on the right side of (15.36) represents the set of all
possible sums of terms
 with
; alternatively, we have

--- Sayfa 532 ---
Then  is a point-to-set mapping and can be thought of as the
MLE of , for the no-side-payments case.
Let us suppose, now, that the Pareto-optimal surface of
 can
be characterized by some equation, i.e., suppose it is the set of all
satisfying
and suppose
 is differentiable. In that case, the system of
differential equations
is meaningful. Assuming it has a solution
, for
, it may be
seen that, for each ,
 lies on the Pareto-optimal subset of
. Thus we see that
 is Pareto-optimal in
, which
coincides with
, and is also a possible value for the game .
Unfortunately, questions relating to the existence and uniqueness of
this value remain open.
15.4.2 Example. Player 1 has a pound of coffee, player 2 has a
coffee urn, and player 3 has a pound of sugar. We assume that
player 1 likes his coffee without sugar, player 2 prefers it with sugar
— but is willing to drink it without — and that there is no use for
sugar then as a coffee sweetener.
Under these assumptions, a single player can obtain nothing at
all; neither can coalitions {1, 3} and {2, 3}. On the other hand, {1,2}
can produce a certain quantity (say, 3 gallons) of coffee brew, which
has utility 100 to player 1, or 25 to player 2. (Of course, they can
divide the coffee any way they wish.) The three players together can
obtain the same three gallons of brew, with the additional advantage
that sugar is now available for those who want it. Thus this will have

--- Sayfa 533 ---
utility of 100 units in total, which the three can divide as they wish.
The characteristic function is then
If we apply the Shapley technique, we find that, with
,
we have
which has the value (50, 50, 0). Thus
which is feasible, and thus the desired value.
Using, instead, the Harsanyi technique, we have also
.
Then, of course,
 for all one-player sets, and for
. Then
, and so
. Thus
Then
 and we will have
. Thus
and

--- Sayfa 534 ---
is the corresponding value. It is easily checked that the plane
or
, is indeed a support to
.
Finally, we may apply the MLE approach. This gives rise to a
complicated system of differential equations, but leads to the solution
Thus, the three approaches give three different “values” to the
same game. All three seem, somehow, unsatisfactory.
15.5. The Bargaining Sets
We consider, finally, the problem of generalizing the several
concepts introduced in Chapter 13: bargaining sets, kernel,
nucleolus. It turns out that both the kernel and the nucleolus are
defined through an explicit interpersonal comparison of utilities,
which while not entirely intuitive, was at least permissible so long as
there was a common unit of utility. For games without side payments,
it is difficult to see how these ideas can be generalized.
Given a coalition structure
, an i.r.p.c. is a pair
 where  is Pareto-optimal in the set
and  does not lie in the interior of any
. Similarly, a c.r.p.c. has
the additional property that
 does not lie in the interior of any
. Objections and counterobjections can be defined just
as in Section 13.1, and the several sets
, etc., are
generalized without difficulty. Unfortunately the proof of Theorem
13.1.9 does not generalize, as this seems to depend directly on a
free transferability of utility.

--- Sayfa 535 ---
15.5.1 Example. Consider the three-person game of Example 15.I.4.
For two-person coalitions, we find that the following are the only
elements of
:
corresponding to the three points
, which, as we saw above,
are the points of tangency of three mutually tangent circles centered
at the vertices of the triangle (see Figure 15.5).
Figure 15.5.
If the three-person coalition forms, we have
corresponding to the point , which is the center of a small circle,
tangent to all three of the large circles mentioned above.
15.5.2 Example. Consider the three-person game with characteristic
function

--- Sayfa 536 ---
It can be seen that, for
, the only  with
is
Similar results hold for the other coalition structures which include
a two-player coalition.
Suppose, next, that
. At least one of the three inequalities
must hold, as otherwise we would have
, and we
would have
.
Suppose that
In this case, 1 would object against 2 with
, where
and
If 2 wishes to counter-object, he must give player 3 the amount
.
But then he can receive at most , where
But
,
and
so
.
We
conclude
2
has
no
counterobjection. The same considerations hold if
 or if
. Thus, there is no
 if
.

--- Sayfa 537 ---
15.5.3 Example. Let  be a three-person game, with
In this case, we see that, for
, there are no
. In fact, there is only one Pareto-optimal point here, and
that is
Here, it is clear that 1 has an objection
 against
2, and 2 has no counterobjection.
Similar considerations hold for
 or
.
If
, there are four stable values of : these are (2, 1, 0), (0,
2, 1), (1, 0, 2), and (1,1,1). For all these, and no others,
. Note that these four points are the core of .
As can be seen from Examples 15.5.2 and 15.5.3, there is
generally speaking no guarantee that, for a given
, there will be
some
. This is unfortunate as the existence theorem —
Theorem 13.1.9 — is one of the most important in the theory of
games with side payments. The obvious question is whether the
definitions can be modified so as to obtain some existence
properties.
It we study Examples 15.5.2 and 15.5.3, we see that the
difficulties arising in the two examples are really of two different
types. The problem in Example 15.5.3 is quite simply that there are
not enough Pareto-optimal points. If, e.g., {1, 2} forms, this coalition
really has no choice; it can only obtain the payoff (1, 2, 0). But this
means that player 2 is receiving too much; he can never hope to
protect his share. The situation is quite different in Example 15.5.2:
there, the coalition
 can divide 30 utiles in any way it wishes, and
yet cannot avoid objections from some of its members.

--- Sayfa 538 ---
It is possible to avoid difficulties of the type encountered in
Example 15.5.3 by a simple expedient. Instead of insisting that, for
an i.r.p.c.
, the payoff  be Pareto-optimal in the set
, we
merely ask that it lie on the boundary of each of the sets
. If we
do this, we find that, for this example, the sets
 are no longer
empty, i.e., we will find that, for
, the point
 with
 belongs to
. Of course, an obvious question arises as to
how the point (1, 1, 0) can be stable when (1, 2, 0) is available; the
answer, perhaps, is that this type of situation is too degenerate to
give wholly satisfactory results.
Even with this modification, of course, the game of Example
15.5.2 will still have no stable i.r.p.c.s
 with
. A
modification of the bargaining set, due to Asscher, corrects this
situation. As is Section 10.1, we shall say
, for an i.r.p.c.
, if
 and  are partners in
 has an objection against , and  has no
counterobjection.
15.5.4 Definition. The i.r.p.c.
 belongs to the bargaining set
 if, for every pair ,  of partners in
, either

(a) i j or
(b)
, and there exists a chain of players
,
 such
that
It may be seen that, for games with side payments, the set
reduces to
. In fact, Lemma 13.1.3 tells us that case (b) above
cannot happen. Thus only case (a) is left: no
.
15.5.5 Theorem. Let  be an -person game and let
 be a coalition
structure. Then there is at least one  such that
.
Proof. Let us define a new relationship,
, by saying that
 if
there is some chain
,
 such that

--- Sayfa 539 ---
but no chain
,
 such that
Then it is not difficult to see that the relation
 is acyclic. It will
follow, just as in the proof of 11.1.9, that at any
, and for any
, there is some
 such that no
.
Continuing as in the proof of 13.1.9, we will assume that each
 has the form
, and let
 be the set of all vectors,
which are on the (upper) boundary of
 for each
. The proof
then generalizes directly to show that there is at least one  such
that

.
15.5.6 Example. Let us consider once again the game of Example
15.5.2, with
, see Figure 15.6.
Figure 15.6.
As we saw above, there is no  with
. In other words,
at each , there is some pair ,  with
. It is not possible (in this

--- Sayfa 540 ---
game) to have
 and
; thus, the desired points  must have a
cycle
. This will hold if the three inequalities
hold simultaneously. This will be true in the interior of a small
triangle,
with
vertices
(10.9,
11.4,7.7),
(7.7,10.9,11.4),
and
(11.4,7.7,10.9). This triangle, then is the desired set,
.
Problems
1. Consider a three-person economy with three commodities,
,
,
and
. Each of the three players has the utility function
where , , and  are the amounts of the commodities
,
, and
, respectively. Assuming that the three players have the initial
endowments
respectively, characterize the sets
 for each of the possible
coalitions
.
2. For the economy of Problem 1, find a competitive equilibrium
(prices and quantities). Verify that the corresponding imputation is
in the core of the game.
3. For the economy (market game) of Problem 1, find the  form of
the Shapley value.
4. Let  be a compact set (of alternatives). Assume each
 has a
utility function
, defined and continuous over , and that these
utility functions are such that, for any three points , , and
,
one of the following conditions holds:
(1)
 for all

--- Sayfa 541 ---
(2)
 for all
(3)
 for all

Define a simple game with player set
 over the alternative set
by giving the winning coalitions, and specifying that each winning
coalition can enforce any point of  (whereas losing coalitions can
guarantee only that the outcome will be a point in .)
Prove that, if the game is proper (i.e., the complement of any
winning coalition loses, and any subset of a losing coalition
loses), then the core
 is nonempty.

[Hint: (a) Show that, for such a game, domination is an acyclic
relation.

(b) Show that, if  is finite, there must be, by (a), an undominated
imputation.
(c) If  is infinite, show that, for any finite
, the set
is nonempty. Use the compactness of
 to show that
 is
nonempty.]
5. An -person game without side payments need not have a stable
set. Consider the simple seven-player game , where
 is the
convex hull of the five points

--- Sayfa 542 ---
and the minimal winning coalitions are {1, 3, 5}, {1, 2, 7}, {3, 4, 7},
{5, 6, 7}. Any winning coalition can enforce any imputation,
whereas the other coalitions are effective only for the imputations
in which their members receive 0. Then  has no stable set
solutions.
(a) The core of  is simply
.
(b) If
 is the segment
, then the set of imputations
undominated by  is
. If  is stable it must contain at
least one point,
, from each
.
(c) The points
 must satisfy
. Hence  contains only
one point other than  from each
. Hence  is not stable;
has no stable set solutions.
6. Let  be a game in extensive or normal form, and let  be the -
form of the characteristic function. Let
 be the core of  (also
known as the -core of ).
Define a supergame of  as an infinite sequence of repetitions of
, and define a cooperative supergame -strategy as a joint
strategy
 for the  players in the supergame (i.e., a function
defined over all information sets, for each repetition of the game).
(Note that choices on each play of the supergame can be made to
depend on the result of previous plays.)
For a supergame -strategy , let
be the expected payoff to player  in the th play of the game, and
set
The -strategy  is summable if, for each , the limit

--- Sayfa 543 ---
exists and is finite.
A summable supergame -strategy
 is a strong equilibrium -
point if there is no coalition  for which there exists a supergame
-strategy  satisfying
(a)
 (where
 represents the restriction of the function
 to points at which members of  play), and
(b) there exist numbers
 for all
 such that
Prove Aumann’s theorem: the imputation
 if and only if
 for some strong equilibrium point .

--- Sayfa 544 ---
Chapter 16
Spatial Games
16.1. The Core and Near-Core Solution Concepts
In their original development of -person games, von Neumann and
Morgenstern represented all outcomes as payoff vectors, i.e., points
in -dimensional utility space. This representation in utility space
continued even after new models for -person games, e.g., games
without side payments, were developed. This is the representation
which we have used, up to this point, in this book.
An alternative representation of outcomes in terms of policy
space is possible, however. In this model, outcomes of the games
are policies, which are assumed to lie in some low-dimensional
Euclidean space; utilities to the players are usually defined in terms
of distance from their most preferred, or ideal, points. Such a
representation is most useful when the outcomes correspond to
public goods (so that several individuals might obtain similar benefits
from the same outcome) and so have been used mainly in
connection with applications to political science. We refer the reader
to Black [16.1], Plott [16.14], Owen [16.12], Ordeshook [16.11], and
Riker and Ordeshook [16.15], for some of the earlier developments.
16.1.1 Definition. An  -person voting game is a set
 of
players, called voters, together with a collection
 of subsets of
,
the winning coalitions. All other subsets of
 are called losing
coalitions. It is assumed that

(i)
(ii)
(iii) If
, and
, then

--- Sayfa 545 ---
The game will be called proper if, for any  and
.
It will be called decisive if, for any , either  or
.
We shall, in this section, deal exclusively with proper, decisive
voting games. Some of the results given here are valid for other
voting games, but it should not be assumed that this is so in general.
16.1.2 Definition. An  -dimensional spatial game is a voting game,
together with a collection of  points
, in
-dimensional
Euclidean space
. Point
 is voter i’s ideal point. The convex hull
of the points
 is the Pareto-optimal set.
Heuristically, the situation is simple enough. The voters are to
choose among alternative policies (or candidates) by voting; a
winning coalition can enforce any point on which its members agree.
It is assumed that player  would be happiest with a policy occupying
point
; failing that, he would like a position as close as possible to
, i.e., we assume that i’s utility is a decreasing function of the
distance between the achieved outcome and
.
The points of space
 are called positions or policies. Given two
policies,  and , we define a partition of
 as follows
where
 represents the usual (Euclidean distance between two
points. The interpretation is that each voter prefers points which are
closer to his ideal point; hence,
 is the set of voters who prefer
 to ;
 is the set of voters indifferent between  and . Thus,
dominates  if
.
The core is (as always) the set of undominated policies.
The following will be an important concept:
16.1.3 Definition. Let
 be an -dimensional spatial game.
The hyperplane

--- Sayfa 546 ---
is a median hyperplane for this game if the two sets
and
are both losing coalitions.
Essentially, a median hyperplane is a hyperplane such that the
ideal points to either side of it (i.e., in the open half-spaces) form a
losing coalition. For a decisive game, this can only happen if at least
one of the ideal points lies on the hyperplane. No two median
hyperplanes can be parallel, but there is one median hyperplane in
each direction in space; i.e., given any hyperplane in space, there
will be exactly one median hyperplane parallel to this. Note also that,
for a decisive game, if each open half-space contains only a losing
coalition of ideal points, then each closed half-space contains a
winning coalition.
It is not difficult to see that, when
, so that the voters can, in
fact, be ordered along a line, there will be a point in the core,
obtained as follows.
If the linear ordering is strict (no two ideal points coincide) there
will be a voter such that the set of all voters to either side of him
forms a losing coalition. For decisive proper games, he will be
unique — the median or swing voter. If the linear ordering is not
strict, so that several voters’ ideal points coincide, the swing voter
need not be unique, but there will be a unique swing position. This
position can easily be seen to lie in the core. (Note that, since the
space here has dimension 1, the median “hyperplane” is nothing
other than the median point.)
For
, and a fortiori for greater , the core is usually empty.
We see this in Figure 16.1, where points
 and  represent the

--- Sayfa 547 ---
ideal points for voters 1, 2, and 3 respectively. (In this three-voter
game, we assume each coalition of two or more voters wins.)
Figure 16.1.
To see that the core is empty, we consider point  which does not
lie on line
. It is easy to see that , the foot of the perpendicular to
 through , is closer to both  and  than is . Thus
,
and we conclude that  dominates . But  does not lie on
, and
so  is dominated by  — the foot of the perpendicular to
 through
. In turn,  is dominated by , etc. Since no point can lie on all three
lines
, and
 simultaneously (unless
, and
 are
concurrent) we conclude that the core is empty.
In fact, it is possible for a two-dimensional array of voters to have
a non-empty core. Figure 16.2 illustrates this, for a five-voter game
(in which all coalitions of three or more voters win). The point here is
that one of the ideal points —
 in this case — is very centrally
located, at the intersection of the two line segments
 and
.
The effect of this is that every line that passes through
 is a median
line: there are at most two ideal points on each side of such a line.
Conversely, all median lines pass through
.

--- Sayfa 548 ---
Figure 16.2.
(The above analysis suggests that core points exist only in
degenerate cases, i.e., two or more coincident points, three or more
collinear points, etc. In fact that is the case for symmetric games,
where each voter has only one vote. In general weighted voting
games, however, if one voter has many votes, a core point may exist
even under nondegeneracy. The obvious example occurs when one
voter (a dictator) has more than half the votes. In such case the
dictator’s position is clearly a core point.)
16.1.4 Theorem. A necessary and sufficient condition for a spatial
game to have a nonempty core is that all median hyperplanes pass
through one same point. That point (the intersection of all median
hyperplanes) is necessarily the ideal point of at least one voter.
Moreover, this point is not only undominated; it actually dominates all
other points.
Proof. Suppose that point  does not lie on a median hyperplane,
— as is the case with  and the hyperplane (line)
 in Figure 16.1.
In this case, the point , at the foot of the normal line (perpendicular)
to
 through , must dominate , for
 contains at least all
whose ideal points lie in the closed half-space consisting of
 and
the opposite side of
 from . Since
 is a median hyperplane, that
set is a winning coalition. Thus  is not in the core.

--- Sayfa 549 ---
Conversely, suppose  lies on all median hyperplanes. Then
will dominate all other points. For, if
 is any other point, the
hyperplane through  normal to the line
 is a median hyperplane,
and so  dominates .
We do not prove one last statement in the theorem, namely that if
 lies on all median hyperplanes, it is necessarily the ideal point of at
least one player. This is left as an exercise for the reader.
We see, then, that the core is frequently empty for higher-
dimensional games. This deprives us of one of the most appealing
solution concepts. We look, then, for points which come “as close as
possible” to being in the core. Three approaches seem reasonable.

(a) The Copeland Winner: The core consists of points which are
undominated by any other. Absent such a point, we might look for
a point
 which is dominated by “as few” points as possible. This
idea was originally advanced by Copeland [16.2]. In the context
of Euclidean space, we take this “as few” to mean a set with
minimal -dimensional Lebesgue measure (i.e., area or volume).
Figure 16.3 shows the same configuration as 16.1. Three circles
are drawn, passing through , and centered at the ideal points
,
and , respectively. Now,  is dominated by all points in the interior
of the three cigar-shaped areas which are bounded by these circles.
It dominates all other points, except for a set of area 0, namely,
points on the three circular arcs. It can be shown (see Problem 6)
that the total shaded area is then
where the angles are measured in radians, and  is the area of the
triangle. This being so, it will follow without much difficulty that
 is
minimized by choosing  to be the weighted arithmetic mean, with
weights equal to the three angles, of points
, and , i.e.
where
 are the measures (in radians) of the three angles of the
triangle
; if in degrees, the denominator should be changed to

--- Sayfa 550 ---
180°. The
 obtained in this manner is the Copeland winner.
Figure 16.3.
For more than three voters, calculation of the Copeland winner
can be quite complicated, especially if the dimension  is large. The
reader is referred to Grofman et al. [16.7] and to Owen and Shapley
[16.13] for a discussion of this problem.

(b) The Yolk: As discussed above, the core point, if it exists, must lie
at the intersection of all the median hyperplanes. When there is
no such point, we might look for the point which is closest to all
such planes, in the sense of minimizing its distance from them,
i.e., a point  which gives
where
 is the (perpendicular) distance from  to hyperplane
,
and the maximum is taken over all median hyperplanes. Such an  is
the yolk center, and the ball of radius  centered at  (the smallest
ball which touches all median hyperplanes) is known as the yolk.
This concept was first introduced by McKelvey [16.8]; its principal
properties have been developed in Feld et al. [16.5].
In Figure 16.4, the same configuration of 16.1 is used once
again. The yolk here is the circle inscribed in triangle
. Its center

--- Sayfa 551 ---
— the incenter of the triangle — can be found, as is well known from
elementary Euclidean geometry, at the intersection of the three angle
bisectors.
Figure 16.4.
For more complex configurations, locating the yolk is more
complicated. We note that there are an infinite number of median
hyperplanes, one in each direction in space. However, only a finite
number of hyperplanes need be considered in searching for . Since
distance from a hyperplane is a linear function of position, it follows
that the yolk can be found by linear programming. (The problem is
that it is by no means clear which hyper-planes need to be
considered.) Readers are referred to McKelvey [16.8], Ferejohn et al.
[16.6] for details.

(c) The Minimal Response Point: We mentioned above that the core
point (if it exists) will dominate all other points. In its absence, we
might look for the point which “comes closest” to dominating all
others.

Let  be a policy, and suppose  (an alternative policy) dominates
 (or at least, suppose  does not dominate ). If the core is empty,
can certainly be dominated, by a third alternative, say, called . If

--- Sayfa 552 ---
there is such a  close to , then we can say that  “comes close” to
dominating
. If there is no such  near
, then
 is far from
dominating . We look, then, for the  closest to  (in the sense of
Euclidean distance) which dominates . In fact, there will usually be
no closest , since domination is (topologically) an open relationship.
Nevertheless, an infimal distance will exist. Let, then
We may think of
 as the position chosen by an incumbent
politician, whereas
 is that chosen by a challenger, seeking to
unseat him (or her). Then
 is the “change of position” necessary
for the incumbent to repel this challenger. Of course, the challenger
is also able to choose (alternatively, the incumbent’s opposition is
free to choose a challenger), and so we might expect that, given
will be chosen so as to maximize this
. Thus, let
be the finagle radius of position . The minimal response point is that
 which minimizes the finagle radius
, while the minimal value, ,
of
 is the minimal response distance. This point and distance,
under the names finagle point and finagle radius, respectively, were
introduced in Wuffle et al. [16.18]. Their properties have not yet been
studied in detail.
In Figure 16.5, three mutually tangent circles have been drawn,
centered at points
, and
 respectively. (The three points of
tangency are, coincidentally, the three points of tangency of the
inscribed circle (yolk) described above.) A small, fourth circle, , has
been drawn, tangent to these three circles. The center, , and radius,
, of  are the minimal response point and the minimal response
distance, respectively.

--- Sayfa 553 ---
Figure 16.5.
For other configurations, calculation of the minimal response
point is considerably more complicated: it reduces to a nonlinear
programming problem.
16.1.5 Example. To see how these points compare, consider the 3-
person voting game in which every coalition with 2 or more voters is
a winning coalition. Let the three voters’ ideal points be at
, and
, respectively. It may be seen that
this triangle has angles of
, and
; the sides are
 and
 units long.
(a) Calculation of the Copeland winner is easy enough; we need
merely apply formula (16.2), which yields
(b) To calculate the yolk, we note that the semiperimeter of the
triangle is
 units long. From elementary geometry
we know that the radius of the inscribed triangle is given by
, so in this case
. Thus the yolk is a
circle of 0.366 units radius, tangent to the three sides of the

--- Sayfa 554 ---
triangle. In particular, it must be tangent to both the coordinate
axes, and it follows that its center will be the point (0.366, 0.366).
(c) Calculating the minimal response point is slightly more
complicated. The three mutually tangent circles (as in Figure
16.5)
have
radii

and
,
respectively. Now, the condition for four circles to be mutually
tangent is that the square of the sum of the four curvatures (i.e.,
the reciprocals of the radii) be equal to twice the sum of their
squares. Hence, the small circle which is tangent to all three of
these will have a radius equal to
. This is the minimal
response distance. The minimal response point, the center of this
circle, can be obtained by noticing that it must be at distance
, and
 from the three vertices; it is in fact
the point (0.311, 0.341).
16.2. The Modified Power Index
Alternatively, we might try to define a power index for spatial games.
With no spatial considerations, of course, there are well-known
power indices (the Shapley value or Banzhaf-Coleman index) which
can be applied directly to the set
 of winning coalitions for a given
game. (We merely define
 if
, and
 otherwise.) The
idea, however, is to modify such an index so as to take account of
the geometry of the points
.
As discussed in Section 12.l, above, the Shapley value can be
obtained by taking an arbitrary permutation (ordering) of the
players, and assigning to player
 the marginal contribution
 which  makes to the coalition
 of all players who
precede him or her in the ordering. The value is then the arithmetic
mean of these  marginal contributions.
In case of a voting game, this can be simplified by introducing the
idea of a pivot:
16.2.1 Definition. Let
 be a voting game, and let
 be a strict
linear ordering of
. For
, let S (i; ) be the set of all  such that j

--- Sayfa 555 ---
i. Then,  is a pivot for this ordering if and only if S (i; ) is a losing
coalition, while S (i; )
 {i} is a winning coalition.
As a very simple example, if
 consists of all coalitions with  or
more elements, then the pivot is always the
th element in the
ordering. More generally, the pivot is the first element (in the given
ordering) to complete a winning coalition. It is not difficult to see that,
by conditions (i–iii) of Definition 16.1.1 above, every ordering
(permutation) of the set  has a unique pivot. If the game is decisive,
then the pivot for ordering
 will also be the pivot for the reverse
ordering  (where a b if and only if b a).
If, now, we define
 for every
, and
 otherwise,
we see that every permutation will have a unique player  (the pivot)
for whom the marginal contribution
 is 1. For all others,
this contribution is 0. Thus for a voting game the value
 is simply
the number of permutations for which  is a pivot, divided by . This
can be interpreted as saying that
 is the probability that  will be the
pivot, assuming a uniform probability distribution over the set of all
permutations of .
Suppose, however, that the points
 are introduced. It seems
reasonable that the geometry of these points should affect the
probabilities assigned to the various permutations. As an example,
consider a 3-person game (where
 consists of all coalitions of two
or more voters), where the ideal points are as in Figure 16.6.
Figure 16.6.

--- Sayfa 556 ---
In such a situation, since players 1 and 2 are very close together,
with 3 much further away, the two orderings 1–3–2 and 2–3–1
(corresponding to situations where 3 would agree with one of 1 and
2 against the other) would seem to be much more difficult to obtain,
and so we would be justified in assigning lower probabilities to these
two orderings than to the other four. But with the given voting rule
(any two or more players form a winning coalition), the pivot is
always the second player in any order. Thus
, the probability that 3
will be the pivot, would be considerably less than 1/3. Heuristically,
this is not unreasonable: since voters 1 and 2 have their ideal points
close together, they will tend to agree on most issues, and 3’s
opinion will usually have little effect on the outcome.
Now, how can we best develop this idea? A priori, there are many
possibilities. To choose among these, we might consider several
desiderata:
D1. If
 and
 are close together, then ceteris paribus,
permutations in which  and  are close together should have higher
probability than those in which these two players are far apart.
D2. The probabilities should be invariant under rigid motions of
the configuration of ideal points.
D3. The probabilities should be continuous functions of the ideal
points, except possibly for discontinuities when two or more of the
ideal points coincide, when three or more lie on the same line, etc.
D4. If two ideal points
 and
 coincide, the effect should be as
if the two players,  and , were consolidated into a single player.
Now, there may be many schemes which satisfy D1–D4, above.
The following is due to Shapley [1975]. First, Shapley defines issues
space as the dual,
, of the policy space (i.e., the space of linear
functional over policy space
).
Let
 be a spatial game, and let  be an issue. Then
defines an ordering of the voters, in which  precedes  if and only if
. This ordering need not be a strict order (it is quite
possible that
 for two distinct voters  and ), but, in the
great majority of cases, it will be strict. (The condition for such “ties”
is that the gradient of the functional
 be orthogonal to the line

--- Sayfa 557 ---
segment
, and, since there are only finitely many voters, such
ties will happen only in degenerate cases.)
16.2.2 Example. Consider the configuration of Figure 16.7, and let
be the linear functional given by
, where  is shown by the
arrow, and  is the usual inner product (dot product). We can project
points
 by a perpendicular projection, onto the (directed)
line , which is parallel to vector . Their images are then
. Note
that, on the line, these points are in the order
. Thus,
induces the order 2, 1, 3 on the voters.
Figure 16.7.
It is now easy to see that, if  and  are issues, with
,
then  and  induce the same order on a given set of points
. It
follows that, to obtain all the orders induced by issues, it suffices to
consider one issue in each direction of the space
.
Let
, then, be the unit sphere in
, i.e., the set of all linear
functional  with norm
. Let  be Lebesgue
-dimensional
measure on . For
, define
Then the spatial index of power  is defined by

--- Sayfa 558 ---
Equivalently, we might define
 as the probability that  is pivot,
when permutations are chosen according to a uniform distribution
over the sphere  of linear functional with unit norm.
The following is important:
16.2.3 Theorem. Assume that all ideal points
 are distinct. Then
the measure  of that subset of
 consisting of linear functional
which do not induce an ordering with a unique pivot is 0.
Proof. We know that if an ordering is strict, then it must have a
unique pivot. Hence, if  does not induce an ordering with a unique
pivot, the ordering is not strict, i.e., there are distinct voters  and
such that
. But this can only happen if the gradient of  is
orthogonal to the line
.
Since there are only
 voters, the gradient of
 must be
orthogonal to one of
 lines, i.e., it must lie in one of
linear subspaces of
, each of dimension
. Thus  must lie in
the union of
 linear subspaces of
, each of dimension
. The intersection of this union with  will have dimension
, and
therefore its
-dimensional measure is 0.
16.2.4 Corollary. For any game
Proof. This follows directly from the fact that almost every
 (i.e.,
except for a set of measure 0) gives rise to a unique pivot. Thus the
sum of the measures of the sets
 must be equal to the measure of
set
. (It should perhaps be proved that each
 is measurable; we
will dispense with this proof.)
16.2.5 Example. Consider the three-voter game represented by
Figure 16.7, where
 consists of all coalitions with two or more
voters.

--- Sayfa 559 ---
In this case, we have
. Then  is the unit “sphere” in
, i.e.,
the circumference of a circle, with measure
. Each  can be
represented by an angle, namely, the direction of its gradient.
Let the issue  have the gradient  as shown in the figure. We
saw above that this issue induces the order 2, 1, 3. Now, it is not too
difficult to see that the (necessary and sufficient) condition for  to
induce this order is that  go from left to right, and that the
perpendicular to , through
, lie inside the angle
. This angle
has measure  radians, and thus the measure of the set which
induces this order is . On the other hand, the issue
, whose
gradient is the opposite vector
, will induce the opposite order, 3,
1, 2. Thus this order is also induced by a set of measure . Now,
these are the only two orders in which voter 1 is the pivot. We
conclude that
In a similar way, we can see that
, and
, where
and  are the measures of the other two angles in the triangle. Since
, we conclude that
Since , , and  are the three angles of a triangle, their sum is ,
and we see that
as Corollary 16.2.5 said.
In general, it is interesting to see how this index measures voting
power. In a two-out-of-three majority voting game, the power
assigned to the three voters is proportional to the angles in the
triangle formed by their ideal points. Thus, in a situation such as that
of Figure 16.6, voter 3’s ideal point is very far from those of the other
two voters; the corresponding angle is consequently very small. It
follows that voter 3 has very little power there. On the other hand, in
a situation such as that of Figure 16.8, voter 2 is a “central” voter: his

--- Sayfa 560 ---
position is almost directly between that of the other two voters. The
corresponding angle is large (obtuse) and so voter 2’s power is quite
large. Heuristically, 2 seems to be in position to play off 1 and 3
against each other in such a case, forming coalitions with one or the
other with little danger that they will act together against him.
Figure 16.8.
In Example 16.2.6, we note that, given this particular voting
game, the power index depends only on the three angles of the
triangle; i.e., it will be the same for any similar triangle. This suggests
that, in general, this might be so for all voting games. In fact, the
following theorem tells us that this is indeed the case.
16.2.6 Theorem. For a given voting game
, the power index
is
invariant
under
similarity
transformations
of
the
spatial
configuration
.
Proof. Any similarity transformation of Euclidean space can be
obtained as a composition of four basic types of transformations:
translations, rotations centered at the origin, reflections in a mirror
passing through the origin, and dilatations centered at the origin. (A
dilatation is a transformation which transforms each point
 into
point
, where  is a fixed non-zero scalar.)
Under a translation, each point
 is transformed into point
, where C is a fixed vector in
. Let  be an issue. Since
 is a linear functional,
, and so  induces the same
order on the points
 as on the points
. Thus,  will be invariant
under translations.

--- Sayfa 561 ---
Under a rotation or reflection, each
 is transformed into point
, where
 is an orthogonal matrix in space
. Let, then,
be the adjoint transformation in the dual space, i.e.,
 is the issue
defined by
 for all
. Clearly,
 induces the
same order on points
 as  does on the points
. Now, in the dual
space, orthogonal transformations map
 into itself, and preserve
Lebesgue measure. Thus,
 will be invariant under rotations
centered at the origin or reflections in a mirror through the origin.
Under a dilatation, each
 is transformed into
 where  is
a nonzero scalar. If
 is an issue, it is a linear functional, and so
. Thus, if
 (a direct dilatation),
 induces the same
order on the points
 as on points
, and hence  is invariant under
this transformation. If, on the other hand,
 (an inverse dilatation),
we see that  induces the same order on the points
, as
 does
on points
. But this transformation of
 ( going into its negative
) maps  into itself and preserves Lebesgue measure. Thus  will
be invariant under any dilatation (direct or inverse) centered at the
origin.
We see that  is, then, invariant under these four basic types of
similarity transformations of the points
. Thus it must be invariant
under any composition of such transformations. But every similarity
transformation is of this type. Hence,  is invariant under all similarity
transformations.
The following theorem is also important:
16.2.7 Theorem. Let
 be an
-dimensional spatial game,
and suppose that the
 points
 are all contained in some
-
dimensional linear subspace, , of
. Then the power index
is the same for this game, whether we think of the
 as points of
or as points of .
Proof. Let
 be the dual subspace, i.e., the space of all linear
functionals  whose gradient lies in , and let
 be its orthogonal
complement, i.e., the space of all linear functionals
 such that
 for all
. Then
 is the direct sum of
 and
, i.e.,
every linear functional  can be expressed in a unique manner in the

--- Sayfa 562 ---
form
, where
 and
. Let
 be the perpendicular
projection of
 into
, i.e., if
 is as above, then
.
Now, since all
Thus, the order induced by
 is necessarily the same as that
induced by
.
Now, if
 as above, let
, the normalized form of ,
and let
. Then  induces the same order as , and so
induces the same order as . It follows that, if
 is the set of issues
in
 which induce orders with voter  as pivot, then
 is the
set of issues in  which induce orders with  as pivot.
We note, finally, that
, as a transformation of the
-sphere
 into a
-sphere
, does not preserve measure. However,
if
 is a measurable subset of
, then the ratio
,
where  is Lebesgue
-measure, is the same as the ratio
. (This can best be seen if we think of a sphere of
radius  in 3-space, If a section of such a sphere is bounded (only)
by two meridians of longitude, then the surface area of this section is
equal to
 times the angle between the two meridians, while the
part of the equator which lies inside the section is equal to  times
that same angle.) Thus, the power index  is the same regardless of
whether we consider all issues in
 or only issues in
, i.e.,
regardless of whether we treat the
 as points of
 or as points of
the subspace .
For games in characteristic function form, the Shapley value can
be thought of as a possible outcome of the game. For spatial games,
on the other hand, the power index  is not a possible outcome —
outcomes are policies. To obtain an outcome from , we define the
center of power:
16.2.8 Definition. The center of power of the spatial game
is the point

--- Sayfa 563 ---
where  is the spatial power index.
16.2.9 Example. Consider once again the 3-voter configuration of
Example 16.2.5. The power index here is given by
where , ,  are the three angles of the triangle. Thus the center of
power is
16.2.10 Example. Consider the five-voter configuration of Figure
16.2. Assume, once again, that
 consists of all coalitions with 3 or
more voters.
For this configuration, we note that P5 lies on the line segment
. Thus, for any issue ,
 cannot be smaller than both
and
. It follows that no  can induce an ordering in which voter 5
precedes both voters 1 and 3. Nor, for similar reasons, can  induce
an ordering in which 5 follows both 1 and 3. In other words, if
induces a strict ordering on the voters, 5 must lie between 1 and 3 in
that ordering.
Note, however, the
 also lies on the segment
. Thus, if
induces a strict ordering, 5 must lie between 2 and 4 in that ordering.
Thus, in any strict ordering induced by an issue, we see that
voter 5 must be preceded by exactly one of voters 1 and 3, and also
by exactly one of voters 2 and 4. In other words, 5 will necessarily be
third in any such ordering. But, for this
, the pivot in any ordering is
the third voter. It follows that 5 will be the pivot for the orderings
induced by almost all issues. Hence the power index here is
In other words, voter 5 here (due to his central position) has all
the power. The center of power is then

--- Sayfa 564 ---
It is of interest to note that, for Example 16.2.10, the center of
power
 coincides with the Copeland winner
, as given by
equation (16.2). Note also that in 16.2.11, the center of power is in
fact the unique core point. As mentioned above, the core of a
decisive spatial game, if nonempty, consists of exactly one point
which is necessarily the Copeland winner. Thus for this example
also, the center of power and the Copeland winner coincide. The
question is whether this is merely a coincidence.
In fact, the following is true:
16.2.11 Theorem. Let
 be a proper decisive -dimensional
spatial game. Suppose
 or 2. Then the Copeland winner
 is
unique, and coincides with the center of power
.
For dimension
, the theorem is merely a restatement of the
fact, mentioned above, that the position of the median (pivot) voter is
the unique core point. For
, we omit the proof of this theorem,
which is quite lengthy. An outline of the proof is given in Problem 7 at
the end of this chapter. We note, however, that the Copeland winner
is the point minimizing a function which, however, is not itself easy to
determine. Thus a direct computation of the Copeland winner can be
quite complicated. On the other hand, computation of the power
index  is relatively straightforward in many cases. If nothing else, a
numerical approximation — calculating the pivot in a reasonably
large number of directions — can be done quite quickly with
computers. Since (at least for dimension 2) the two problems are
equivalent, we can simplify the Copeland winner calculation
considerably.
16.2.12 Example. Let
, and let
 consist of all coalitions
with three or more voters, and also of coalitions  with two voters,
such that
. (We can think of voter 1 as having 2 votes, while
each of the other players has 1 vote; 3 votes are needed to win.) Let
the voters’ ideal points be at
,
,
, and
. Thus, the first three voters form an equilateral triangle;
voter 4 is at the centroid of the triangle (see Figure 16.9).

--- Sayfa 565 ---
Figure 16.9.
We note that, if the gradient of issue  goes from upper left to
lower right, and its perpendicular lies in the angle
, then
induces the order 3–1–4–2; if its perpendicular lies in the angle
,  induces 3–4–1–2 with the same perpendiculars, but from
lower right to upper left,  induces the reverse orders 2–4–3–1 and
2–1–4–3 respectively. In each of these cases, voter 1 is the pivot.
These issues cover an angle equal to twice angle
, or
.
Thus,
.
Next, note that, if the gradient of  goes from lower left to upper
right, and its perpendicular lies inside the angle
, then
induces the order 1–2–4–3. With the same perpendicular, but from
right to lower left,  induces the order 3–4–2–1. In both these cases,
2 is the pivot. Since the angle
 measures
, and 2 is a pivot in
a set measuring twice this angle, or
, we find
. By
symmetry,
 also.
Finally, since this index must assign total power 1 to all the
voters, we find
.
The center of power is, then, given by

--- Sayfa 566 ---
or
This center of power is also the Copeland winner,
.
16.2.13 Example. Let
, be as in Example 16.2.10, and let the
ideal points now be
,
,
, and
. Note that the difference is that in this example, the strong voter is at
the centroid of the triangle (in the previous example, he or she was
at one of the vertices) (see Figure 16.10).
Figure 16.10.
It is not too difficult to see that, since
 is in the interior of the
convex hull of the other three points, it is not possible for any issue
to induce an ordering in which voter 1 is either first or last, i.e., voter
1 will always be in either second or third position in the order. But
this means that voter 1 will always be the pivot. Thus, the index of
power is

--- Sayfa 567 ---
and the center of power is here point
. In fact,
 is here the unique
point in the core.
Problems
1. In two dimensions, in a 3-person majority game (any coalition of 2
or more players wins), let the three players’ ideal points be at (0,
0), (1, 3), and (3, 0).
(a) Find the yolk for this game.
(b) Find the spatial power index and the center of power.
2. In two dimensions, in a 5-person majority game (any coalition of 3
or more players wins), let the five players’ ideal points be at (0, 0),
(0, 1), (1, 2), (3, 1), and (3, 0).
(a) Find the yolk for this game.
(b) Find the spatial power index and the center of power.
3. In a spatial game, let the yolk have center 0 and radius . Show
that a sufficient condition for a point  to dominate point  is that
where  is the usual (Euclidean) distance.
4. For a decisive spatial game, show that, if the core is nonempty, it
consists of exactly one point. Moreover, in such case, the point in
the core dominates all other points in the space.
5. For a spatial game, the minimum response point is the point
which gives the minimum in
where the minimum is taken over all policies
, the maximum is
taken over all policies , and the infimum is taken over all policies
 such that
 dominates
. The distance
 is the minimum
response distance or finagle radius.

--- Sayfa 568 ---
(a) Show that, for a three-person majority game in two
dimensions, the minimal response point and minimal
response distance are respectively the center and radius of a
circle which is tangent to the three circles
,
, and
 which
are centered at the three ideal points
,
, and
,
respectively, and tangent to each other.
(b) Find the minimal response point for the game in exercise 1,
above.
6. Prove (16.1.2). (Use Figure 16.3, together with the fact that, if two
circles centered at
 and
, respectively, intersect at the two
points
 and
, then the angles
 and
 are congruent.
Then the area of the hexagon
 must be twice the area of
. Use also the fact that the area of the intersection of two sets
is equal to the sum of their areas, minus the area of their union.)
7. Prove Theorem 16.2.9
(a) For any angle
, let
, and let
 be the issue
defined by
. Then, for all but a finite number of ,
, the order induced by
 has a unique pivot. Call
this pivot,
.
(b) The orders induced by issues
 and
 have the same
pivot. Moreover
(c) Define the function
Then
 is minimized at the Copeland winner,
.
(d) The difference
 is constant. Hence
 and
 are
minimized at the same point.

--- Sayfa 569 ---
Chapter 17
Other Applications
17.1. Introduction
In this final chapter we shall consider certain applications of game
theory. We will not try to give a very rigorous, complete treatment of
these topics, but rather explain how game theory can be applied to
them.
17.2. Single-Item Auctions
Consider a situation in which an auctioneer wishes to sell an item.
There are n individuals called bidders. Each bidder i values the item
at a price θ i: this is known as her type. These types are independent
random variables, with uniform distribution over the interval [0, 1].
Each individual knows her own type, but nothing else. Bidder i sends
a message: a bid, bi. The auctioneer receives a vector b = (b1, …,
bn) of messages.
17.2.1. First-Price Sealed-Bid Auctions
In a first-price sealed-bid auction, each bidder sends her bid bi in
ignorance of the others’ bids. Once the bids are known, the high
bidder receives the item, and must pay the amount of his bid. The
payoff to bidder i is then

--- Sayfa 570 ---
Now, how should a given individual, say individual 1, bid? Clearly
she should not choose b1 >θ1 as she would thus risk a negative
payoff, and could never get a positive payoff. Now, if she makes a
bid b, the probability that she will be high bidder is equal to the
probability that all other n−1 bidders make lower bids. Of course 1
does not know how they will bid.
Assume, first, that bidders h, (other than 1) all bid their type: bh
=θh. Since the types are uniformly distributed in the unit interval, the
probability that a particular bh <b is simply b. Since the bids are
independent, the probability that bh<b for all h other than 1 will be
bn−1. Thus, the probability that 1’s bid of b will be high bid is bn−1.
Bidder 1 will then gain θ1 −b with probability bn−1 and 0
otherwise. Her expected winnings are therefore
It is straightforward now to maximize this expression: the
maximum is found at
There is one difficulty with this analysis, namely, it assumes that
all bidders other than 1 will in fact bid their types. In other words,
bidder 1 is the only one assumed to act strategically.
Assume, then, that all bidders, other than 1, make the strategic
choice bh=(n−1)θh /n. Let 1 make the bid b. Note that, if so, none of
them will bid more than (n−1)/n, and so it cannot be good for bidder
1 to bid more than this same amount.
Now, the condition bh<b is equivalent to θh <bn/(n−1). This has
probability equal to the smaller of bn/(n−1), and 1. Since this is true
for all h≠1, the probability that individual 1’s bid of b be the largest
bid is [bn/(n−1)]n−1 if b<(n−1)/n, and 1 otherwise. Thus the expected
payoff to 1, for b<(n−1)/n, becomes

--- Sayfa 571 ---
Since this is merely the positive constant [n/(n−1)]n−1 times the
previous objective function π(b), it follows that it must have its
maximum at the same point, i.e., bidder 1’s optimal reply is still
This analysis is clearly true for each one of the bidders. We find,
then, that the bids
constitute a Nash equilibrium for the bidding game.
This result depends on the probability distribution of the vector θ.
In a somewhat more general case, we will assume that the several θi
are identically distributed independent random variables. Let F(θ) be
the cumulative distribution of each one of these. We look for a
symmetric equilibrium. This should have the form of a function β:
individual h will bid bh =β(θh). It seems reasonable to assume that β
should be a monotone, strictly increasing function, so that an inverse
function β−1 will exist and also be monotone increasing.
Assume all bidders, other than 1, are using the equilibrium
strategy β. Let individual 1, with type θ, bid b. This will be the high
bid if for each the n−1 other bidders, β(θh)<b, or equivalently,
θh<β−1(b). Now the probability that these n−1 variables all be smaller
than a given θ will be the cumulative distribution function
and so the probability that 1’s bid of b be high is given by G(β−1(b))=
[F(β−1(b))]n−1. Thus, 1’s expected payoff will be

--- Sayfa 572 ---
To maximize, we differentiate. Remembering that the derivative of
β−1 is 1/β′, and letting g be the derivative of G
At the maximizing point, this derivative must be 0, and b=β(θ).
Thus
which reduces to the differential equation
This has the general solution
To find constant of integration c we note that for θ=0, any positive
bid will lead to a loss. Thus β(0)=0, and so
17.2.1 Example. Consider a first-price auction where the common
distribution for the several values θi is a beta distribution in the
interval [0, 1] with parameters (2, 2):
and let n=3. How much should a bidder offer if he values the item at
its maximum, 1? How much if he values it at 0.8?
In this case

--- Sayfa 573 ---
and
Application of (17.10) gives us
In particular, we find β(1)=0.629, and β(0.8)=0.576. Thus the bidders
will offer considerably less than their valuation of the item.
17.2.4. Second-Price Auctions
In a second-price auction, the bidding proceeds as before. Once
again, the high bidder wins the item. This time, however, the winner
must pay, not her own bid, but rather the second-highest bid.
Once again, we consider bidder 1’s strategy. We know her payoff
will be
where bh is the second-highest bid.
We claim, now, that bidder 1 should in fact bid her value: b1 =θ1 ,
as this strategy dominates all others.
In fact, consider a bid b>θ1. Let bh be the highest of the
remaining bids. Discounting the possibility of ties, there are three
possibilities: (1) bh>b>θ1; (2) b>bh>θ1; (3) b>θ1>bh. We show that, in
any one of these cases, the bidder would do at least as well (and in
some cases better) by bidding θ1 instead.
In case (1), bidder 1 is not the high bidder, so she would receive
a payoff 0 with either b or θ1.
In case (2), she would be high bidder with b, and receive the
payoff θ1−bh<0. With bid θ1 she is not the high bidder and so

--- Sayfa 574 ---
receives payoff 0.
In case (3), she is the high bidder with either bid, and so receives
the payoff θ1−bh with either b or θ1.
Thus, the bid θ1 is never worse than b, and sometimes better.
Suppose, on the other hand, that b<θ1. Once again discounting
the possibility of ties, there are three possibilities: (1) bh>θ1>b; (2)
θ1>bh>b; (3) θ1>b>bh.
In case (1), bidder 1 is not the high bidder, so she would receive
a payoff 0 with either b or θ1.
In case (2), she wins with bid θ1, and receives the payoff
θ1−bh>0. With bid b she is not the high bidder and so receives 0.
In case (3), she is the high bidder with either bid, and so receives
the payoff θ1−bh with either b or θ1.
We find, then, that with a second-price auction, the strategy of
bidding one’s value: bh =θh is a dominant strategy for all players.
Note that this does not depend on the probability distribution for the
value vector θ: the only thing required for our proof is that ties have
probability 0. This is a very strong result, as it means the bidders will
not have to carry out complicated calculations: they don’t even need
to know the distribution.
There remains the question of whether the principal — who
wishes to maximize the selling price for the object — should choose
a first-price or a second-price auction. We will consider the uniform
distribution over [0, 1].
Consider first the first-price auction. For the uniform distribution,
we find that the maximum of n variables has cumulative distribution
G(x)=xn. The density of this maximum is then g(x)=nxn−1 and it has
expected value E[max θ]=n/(n+1). Since the bid is b=(n−1)θ/n, the
expected selling price is [n/(n+1)][(n−1)/n]=(n−1)/(n+1).
Consider, next, the second-price auction. Let θh be the second-
highest type. In this case, we note that the event “θh≤x” can be
expressed as the union of the disjoint events: (1) “all θi≤x” and (2)
“one θk>x and all n−1 other θi≤x”. The probability of (1) is, as before,
xn. For (2), we note that there are here n possibilities, since the high

--- Sayfa 575 ---
bidder, k, can be any one of n. Thus, the probability of (2) is
n(1−x)xn−1. The cumulative distribution of θh is therefore
Some small calculations will then give us the expected value
E[θh]=(n−1)/(n+1). Since θh is the selling price, we find that the two
mechanisms give the same expected payoff to the principal.
We conclude that, if the seller’s utility for money is in fact equal to
the quantity of money (or, more generally, a linear function of
money), he should be indifferent between the two types of auction.
Of course there is no guarantee that seller’s utility is in fact a linear
function of money. With more complicated utility functions additional
calculations (which we will avoid here) would be necessary.
17.3. Mechanisms
Up to now, we have assumed that players play a game with well-
defined rules, and well-defined payoff functions (though in some
cases the players might not be certain as to these). In some cases,
however, the problem is to design a game so as to induce the
players to act in a certain way. We therefore consider a situation with
n+1 agents: a set N={1, 2, …, n} of players (known as individuals),
and an additional agent called the principal. This principal has an
objective function, and will be in a position to modify the individuals’
payoff functions so as to maximize (or minimize) this function. (Note
that, in the auctions described above, the principal is the seller or
auctioneer; in the case of Example 17.3.1 below, the principal is the
regulator.) We start with a very simple example, which gives us some
idea of how things may be done.
17.3.1 Example. Decoupling: Consider a service company,
delivering some type of utility to the public at large. The service can
be, e.g., water, gas, electricity. We will specifically consider an
electric service company. The players here the company and its

--- Sayfa 576 ---
customers, though there is an additional player, usually unseen: the
regulator.
In general these companies are regulated monopolies. A
regulator determines the rates that they can charge for their
services. These rates should be enough to cover both fixed and
variable costs, plus a reasonable rate of return to their investors.
Now, it is easy enough to calculate the variable costs of the service:
purchases of fuel, payments to suppliers and employees, and so
forth. What is more problematic is the calculation of payments for
fixed costs and investors’ return.
Usually, the regulator will calculate a, the variable costs per
kilowatt-hour, with little difficulty. He then calculates b, the fixed costs
authorized for depreciation on plant elements, interests paid to
bondholders, and return to stockholders, as well as c, the expected
sales (in kilowatt-hours) during a given time period. Thus he
authorizes a rate of
dollars per kilowatt-hour.
Now, if sales in the given time period are indeed equal to c
kilowatt-hours, the company will receive
dollars in the time period. Of this, ac will cover the variable costs,
while the remaining b will be equal to the income authorized to cover
fixed costs and investors’ returns.
Unfortunately, things do not always work out as planned. Actual
sales will depend not only on the rates but also on the aggregate
demand function of the remaining players (the firm’s customers), and
this is known only probabilistically. Moreover, the firm is generally
able (by advertising, say) to induce its customers to increase
consumption above the calculated amount c.
Suppose, then, that consumption is equal to d kilowatt-hours,
where d>c. In that case total receipts will be

--- Sayfa 577 ---
dollars. Thus, the firm receives ad to cover its variable costs, plus b,
its authorized returns for fixed costs, plus a last term, x(d–c), which
represents an unearned profit to the firm. Clearly it is in the firm’s
interest to increase demand.
It remains to determine the regulator’s objective function. This is
not easy to specify, but we should take into account that high
consumption will, on the one hand, cause environmental pollution,
and, on the other hand, require increased imports of fuel. It seems
reasonable, then, that other things being equal, the regulator prefers
consumption to be relatively low. Thus the regulator and the electric
company have conflicting interests: the regulator prefers low
consumption, while the firm will increase its profits with high
consumption. Since the firm can communicate with its customers —
something that the regulator is not allowed to do — it seems the firm
will succeed in increasing consumption.
There is, however, something that the regulator can in fact do: to
wit, he can modify the firm’s payoff function. This is usually done by
a technique known as decoupling.
In a decoupling mechanism, the firm’s rates are modified with
some regularity. Thus, to continue with the above example, suppose
that consumption, d, over a given time period was indeed greater
than the initial estimate, c. In this case, the firm would have received
an unearned profit k = x(d–c). If so, then for the subsequent period
the firm would be allowed, not the quantity b, but rather the quantity
b′=b−k, to cover fixed costs and returns to investors. The rate
allowed for the next time period would be
dollars per kilowatt hour, rather than a+b/c.
(Note that, if d<c, so that the firm receives less than b dollars in
the given period, then k<0, so that the regulator will allow the firm to
increase its rates for the next period.)
Thus any unearned profit in a given time period is taken back
from the firm in the subsequent period, and it is no longer in the

--- Sayfa 578 ---
firm’s interest to (induce its customers to) increase consumption.
There will no longer be a conflict between the regulator and the firm.
17.3.1. Description of Mechanisms
As mentioned above, we consider a situation with n+1 players, the
several individuals {1, 2,…, n}, and the principal. Each individual i
has a type θi which determines his utility function, his capabilities,
and such. (This θi may be a single number, a vector, or something
more complicated.) Let Θi be the set of possible types for that
individual. The individual is aware of his type (he knows what he
likes!) but does not know the other individuals’ types, knowing only
that they are determined according to a known probability
distribution. Let Θ be the cartesian product Θ1×Θ2×…×Θn. A type
profile is an n-tuple θ = (θ1,…, θn) ∈ Θ.
There are k types of assets, which are to be distributed among
the individuals. An assignment is a vector a = (a1, …, ak). An
allocation is an n-tuple x = (a1, …, an) of assignments. There is a
compact set A in n×k space, which consists of the feasible
allocations.
As an example, there may exist a vector C=(c1, c2, …, ck) of
available assets. In such case, A might consist of all non-negative
allocations (a1, …, an) such that ∑i ai = C. In some cases it may be
more complicated than that, possibly consisting only of integer-
valued assignments. There may be other types of restrictions.
A result is a pair [x, t], where x is a feasible allocation, and t=(t1,
…, tn) is a vector of monetary payments. The principal would like to
have the result be a function of the type profile θ — usually, a result
that satisfies some objective. However, the principal does not know
the types; rather, he will have to base his action on some messages
that the several individuals send.
A mechanism is a function y which assigns, to each n-tuple of
messages, a result.
At the beginning of the game, the principal promulgates the
mechanism y, i.e., the rule which will determine the allocations and

--- Sayfa 579 ---
payoffs.
Once the mechanism is known, each individual i announces a
message, mi, In many cases this is an element of Θi, though it may
be something different — possibly, something simpler. Frequently,
the individual claims that this message is indeed his type, θi. There is
however nothing to prevent the individual from lying.
Letting m = (m1, …, mn) be the profile (vector) of messages, the
mechanism y is then used to give a result
In other words, individual i will receive the assignment ai(m) and
must then pay the monetary amount ti(m). In many cases, of course,
ti < 0, so the individual actually receives some money.
The utility to a given individual is given by
Thus, the utility to an individual of a given allocation depends on his
type and assignment, but not on the other players’ types or
assignments. The value of the monetary payment is in fact equal to
the quantity of money (and independent of any assignment received.
This type of utility function is said to be quasi-linear in money (or
simply quasi-linear); money is frequently said to be the numéraire.
The advantage of this assumption lies in the fact that this allows for a
linear transfer of utility – monetary side payments are allowed. Thus
in general the principal would like to develop a mechanism that
maximizes the sum
over the set A. In other words, if all individuals can explain their utility
functions, and are truthful, the mechanism will maximize the total
[expected] utility. Any adjustments can then be made through the
side payments t. We will therefore define a social welfare function as

--- Sayfa 580 ---
a function f which assigns, to each type profile θ=(θ1, …, θn) an
allocation f (θ)=(a1 (θ), …, an (θ)) such that
Generally speaking, the maximization problem implied in the
social welfare function may be complicated, but reasonably
straightforward. In some cases it could be as easy as a linear
program. The problem, however, is that the vector θ = (θ1, …, θn) is
unknown: each individual i will deliver a message mi which he claims
is related in some way to his type θi but he may find it in his interest
to lie. Moreover the individual player may be unable to describe his
utility function properly: he knows whether he prefers one allocation
to another, but cannot give a total description of his type. The
problem faced by the principal consists in obtaining the outcome f(θ)
on the basis of the messages m = (m1, …, mn). We give one such
instance.
17.4. Public Goods
Consider a situation in which two individuals must pay for a public
good. For a level x of this good (i.e., if a sum of money x is invested),
the agent i (=1, 2) will derive utility
Where θi1 and θi2>0, and log denotes the natural logarithm.
Assuming payments of ti from the individuals, we have
We assume θ11+θ21<1 as otherwise the individuals would be willing
to pay for unbounded levels of the good.

--- Sayfa 581 ---
The optimal investment level, x*, will maximize the sum of the Ui
and thus be given by V1’+V2’=1. This gives us
which reduces to
This is the efficient level of investment. It remains to determine
the payments, t1 and t2, that the two agents must make. It seems
reasonable that they should be functions of the two types. The
problem is that each individual knows only her own type, the
regulator knows neither type, and, as mentioned above, the
individuals may find it profitable to lie about this.
Suppose, however, that the regulator asks each agent to send a
message, mi, a positive number (approximately the level of
investment that the agent would be willing to pay for). He agrees that
the level of investment will then be
and that agents 1 and 2 must then pay fees
respectively.
This determines a non-cooperative game between the two
agents. We therefore look for equilibrium strategies. From (17.20),
we have

--- Sayfa 582 ---
For m1 to be an optimal response against m2, the derivative of U1
with respect to m1 must be 0, so
or, equivalently,
For an equilibrium, m2 must also be an optimal response against m1,
and so
Adding these two equations, we obtain
and so
Thus, at equilibrium, x=m1+m2 is an efficient level of investment, and
the mechanism described by (17.23)–(17.25) will induce efficiency.
Knowing the equilibrium value of m1+m2, it is now straightforward
to solve (17.27)–(17.28) for m1 and m2, and this then allows us to
obtain the values of the ti.
It should be noticed, of course, that the two agents do not reveal
their types: they merely send a message which consists of a single
number. This of course presents a problem as, not knowing each
other’s type, the agents will find it difficult to find the equilibrium
strategies (messages). The hope is however that, if an equilibrium is

--- Sayfa 583 ---
not reached, they might have an incentive to adjust their messages
and in this way approach the equilibrium.
It is not always possible to design a mechanism that will (a)
induce the individuals involved to make truthful statements, and (b)
allow the principal to obtain a socially optimal result. Nevertheless
there are cases when this can be done. The following example
illustrates this. The reader is encouraged to read the literature for a
rigorous treatment and for other examples.
17.4.1 Example. Consider a situation in which the two agents’
utilities Vi are given by
where x is money, in thousands of dollars. In this case the efficient
level of investment is
From (17.27)–(17.28) we now obtain the equilibrium values
and then
Note that the two agents pay only a total of $889, where the total
investment is $1680. Presumably the remaining $791 would come
from the public coffers.
Finally, we have

--- Sayfa 584 ---
Thus, agent 1 pays $594 and receives a benefit which she values
at $797. Agent 2 pays $295 and receives a benefit which he values
at $671.
Suppose, next, that the two agents send messages of, for
example, m1=1.05 and m2=0.75 respectively. In that case, the total
investment will be $1800, and the two agents will have to pay fees
Their net utilities will be
Thus, they do substantially better than at equilibrium. This is
however a non-cooperative situation. Thus, we must consider
individual incentives. We assume that the partial derivatives ∂Ui /∂mi
do, in fact, represent these incentives. We have, then.
and we see that agent 1 will find it in his interest to decrease the
value of m1. Agent 2 would like to increase m2, but not by so much.
Thus, assuming each agent, i, modifies his message in proportion to
the incentive ∂Ui /∂mi, total investment will decrease.
In general, we can imagine that this type of situation will happen:
the two agents will, originally, send messages which are not efficient.

--- Sayfa 585 ---
Note, however, that if m1+m2>x*, then the sum of the two partial
derivatives, ∂U1/∂m1+∂U2/∂m2, will be negative, and so at least one,
and possibly both, of the agents will want to decrease her message.
Assuming the two agents modify their message in proportion to the
respective incentives (derivatives), the sum m1+m2 will decrease.
Conversely, if m1+m2<x*, the tendency will be for the agents to
modify their messages so that this sum increases. In either case we
can imagine the agents modifying their messages until the efficient
level, x*, is reached.
17.5. Two-sided Matching
In Example 10.4.5 we discuss the assignment game: in this game,
there are two disjoint sets of players, M and M’. The only truly
effective coalitions are one-player coalitions, and two-player
coalitions consisting of one player from each of these two sets. In
that example, the two sets consisted of sellers and buyers of houses,
respectively; each seller had only one house, and each buyer could
buy at most one house. We saw there that for such games the core
will always be nonempty, and can in fact be found in an efficient
manner by, e.g., the well-known Hungarian algorithm (Kuhn [17.10]).
Now, the assignment problem is, in effect, a linear programming
problem, and for such games, the solution to the dual problem can
be used to obtain at least one point in the core. But the linear
programming representation is due to the possibility of side
payments: the buyer gives a sum of money to the seller in exchange
for the house. But what if side payments were not allowed? Could
the core, then, be empty?
It is of course difficult to imagine — at least in our economic
system — how a market for houses could function without side
payments. There are however other types of two-sided matching
systems which might function without side payments. The most
obvious is a marriage market.
A marriage market consists of two sets, M={m1,…, mk} (the men)
and W={w1,…, wl} (the women).

--- Sayfa 586 ---
Each man, mi, has a preference relation, pi, on the set W′=W∪{0},
where “0” represents “remaining unmarried.” We write
to denote that man mi would rather marry wj than wh.
This pi is a strict linear order relation — it is transitive,
asymmetric, and complete:

(1) If wj pi wh and wh pi wr, then wj pi wr
(2) It is not possible that wj pi wh and wh pi wj
(3) For any mi and any two (distinct) wj and wh, eitherwj pi whorwh pi
wj

Additionally, for man mi, we set
These are the women he finds unacceptable: mi would prefer to be
single rather than marry any member of Di.
(Note that, by condition (3), we are explicitly ruling out the
possibility of ties. Our treatment could be modified to include these
possibilities, but we will not do so here.)
Similarly, each woman wj has a preference relation, qj, on
M′=M∪{0}. This is also transitive, asymmetric, and complete. She
also has a set Ej of unacceptable men:
A marriage assignment, now, is a one-to-one mapping μ from a
subset S⊂ Monto a subset T⊂ W. Now, μ(mi) = wj means that man
mi marries woman wj. If mi∉S, then this man remains single. In a
similar way, if woman wh ∉T, then wh remains single.
Since μ is one-to-one, two different men cannot marry the same
woman. Similarly, since μ is a function, the same man cannot marry

--- Sayfa 587 ---
two different women. On the other hand, several of the men may
remain single. Similarly, several of the women may remain single.
Note that, since μ is one-to-one, the inverse mapping μ−1 is
defined on T. We will extend μ from the set S to the set M by setting
μ(mi)=0 for mi∉S. Similarly we will extend μ−1 from T to W by setting
μ−1(wh) = 0 for wh∉T.
We will assume that each individual’s preference depends only
on his or her spouse. Thus, given two assignments λ and μ, mi
prefers λ to μ if and only if λ(mi) piμ(mi). He is indifferent between λ
and μ if and only if λ(mi)=μ(mi). (A similar statement holds for
women.)
We look now for the core of the set of all assignments. It turns
out that domination, as in Example (10.4.5) above, can only be
through one- or two-person coalitions. An assignment is dominated
via a single person if that person is married to someone he or she
dislikes. In other words, μ is dominated via the coalition {mi} if
μ(mi)∈Di, and it is dominated via {wj} if μ−1(wj)∈Ej.
We will say that an assignment is individually rational if it is not
dominated via any singleton coalition. We therefore consider only
individually rational assignments. For such assignments, domination
can only be through two-person coalitions consisting of one man and
one woman.
An assignment μ is unstable if there exists a two-person coalition
{mi, wj} such that

(1)
(2)

In other words, both this man and this woman would be happier if
married to each other than with their present spouses. The core is
the set of stable assignments.
The question then is whether there is at least one stable
assignment. In fact, the following algorithm, the deferred acceptance
method, which is due to Gale and Shapley [17.4], shows that the
core is always nonempty. There are two versions of this, one more
favorable to the men and the other to the women. We give the one

--- Sayfa 588 ---
that is more favorable to the men. We will assume that each of the
men finds at least one of the women acceptable, and each of the
women finds at least one of the men acceptable: none of the Di is
equal to W, and none of the Ej is equal to M. All individuals are
unmarried, prior to the start of the algorithm.
The algorithm consists of several stages.
Stage 1(a): Each of the men proposes marriage to his favorite
woman (the one that ranks first in his preference order).
Stage 1(b): Any woman who has received at least one proposal
from an acceptable man will accept the proposal of the man she
most prefers, among those who have proposed to her. She is then
engaged to that man. She rejects all other proposals.
Any remaining woman is said to be uncommitted. Any man
whose proposal has been rejected is uncommitted.
Stage 2(a): Any engaged man will remain engaged to that same
woman. Any uncommitted man will propose to his first choice among
those women who have not previously rejected him, assuming that
she is acceptable to him. He may not propose to any woman who
has previously rejected or jilted him. He will not propose to any
woman whom he finds unacceptable.
Stage 2(b): Any engaged woman who receives a proposal from
at least one man whom she prefers to her current fiancé will break
off her current engagement (jilt that man) and accept the proposal of
the man she most favors from among those who propose to her. She
rejects all other proposals.
Any uncommitted woman who has received at least one proposal
from an acceptable man will accept the proposal of the man she
most prefers, among those who have proposed to her. She is then
engaged to that man. She rejects all other proposals.
Any
man
whose
current
proposal
is
rejected
remains
uncommitted. Jilted men are now uncommitted.
Except as mentioned in 2(b), women will maintain their status
quo: any engaged woman remains engaged to the same man; any
uncommitted woman remains uncommitted.
Stages, 3, 4, etc. will be exactly as Stage 2. The process will
continue in this manner until each man either (a) is engaged, or (b)
has been rejected by all the women he finds acceptable.

--- Sayfa 589 ---
Since a man is not allowed to propose twice to the same woman,
and there are l women, then no man can propose more than l times.
Since there are only k men, there will be at most kl proposals. Thus,
the process will terminate after not more than kl stages. When the
process terminates, all the engaged couples proceed to get married.
All uncommitted men and women will remain single.
It remains to prove that the assignment thus obtained is stable.
First of all, the algorithm explicitly states that no man ever
proposes to any unacceptable woman, and no woman ever accepts
a proposal from an unacceptable man. Thus, the assignment
obtained is individually rational.
Suppose, then, that the assignment is unstable. There must then
be a pair (m i, wj) who prefer each other to their assigned spouses
(or unmarried status). This means, of course, that wj is acceptable to
mi. Since she is preferable to his wife, and men propose to women in
order of their preference, mi must have proposed to wj at some time.
This means that she either rejected his proposal when made, or
accepted his proposal but later jilted him. In either of these two
cases, it was because she had a proposal from some man, mh,
whom she preferred to mi. Now she is currently either married to this
mh, or married to some other man after jilting mh and possibly some
other men. However, every time she jilted a man, it was for a
preferable man. Since the preference relation is transitive, she
prefers her current husband to mi. Since the relation is asymmetric,
she does not prefer mi to her current husband.
We conclude that the current assignment is stable.
17.5.1 Example. Consider a marriage market with 4 men and 4
women. The men’s preferences are as follows:
and the women’s preferences;

--- Sayfa 590 ---
The algorithm will then proceed as follows:
Stage 1(a): m1 proposes to w1; m2 proposes to w2; m3 proposes to
w1; m4 proposes to w1
Stage 1(b): w1 accepts m4; w2 accepts m2
Current engagements: {m4, w1}, {m2, w2}
Stage 2(a): m1 proposes to w2; m3 proposes to w1
Stage 2(b): w2 accepts m3 and jilts m2
Current engagements: {m4, w1}, {m3, w2}
Stage 3(a): m1 proposes to w3; m2 proposes to w3
Stage 3(b): w3 accepts m1
Current engagements: {m4, w1}, {m3, w2}, {m1, w3}
Stage 4(a): m2 proposes to w1
Stage 4(b): w1 accepts m2 and jilts m4
Current engagements: {m2, w1}, {m3, w2}, {m1, w3}
Stage 5(a): m4 proposes to w3
Stage 5(b): no acceptances
Current engagements: {m2, w1}, {m3, w2}, {m1, w3}
Stage 6(a): m4 proposes to w4
Stage 4(b): w4 accepts m4
Current engagements: {m2, w1}, {m3, w2}, {m1, w3}, {m4, w4}.
At this point, all men are engaged. The engaged couples are now
married. We leave it to the reader to check that this is stable.
There is, of course, an alternative approach, in which, at each
stage, the women propose and it is up to the men to accept the
proposals they like. In that case, the algorithm would go as follows:

--- Sayfa 591 ---
Stage 1(a): w1 proposes to m1: w2 proposes to m3: w3 proposes to
m1: w4 proposes to m1
Stage 1(b): m1 accepts w1; m3 accepts w2
Current engagements: {m1, w1}, {m3, w2}
Stage 2(a): w3 proposes to m2: w4 proposes to m2:
Stage 2(b): m2 accepts w3
Current engagements: {m1, w1}, {m3, w2}, {m2, w3}
Stage 3(a): w4 proposes to m3
Stage 3(b): m3 rejects w4
Stage 4(a): w4 proposes to m4
Stage 4(b): m4 accepts w4
Current engagements: {m1, w1}, {m3, w2}, {m2, w3}, {m4, w4}.
The algorithm terminates here as all women are now engaged.
Once again the reader may check that this assignment is stable.
The marriage problem is one of the simplest types of matching
problems. Other types include:
1. Student-college matching
There are applicants, ai, and colleges cj. In this case, college cj
has a finite number rj of openings. Applicants will have preferences
over colleges, and colleges, over prospective students. This can be
treated much as the marriage problem. The easiest approach is to
modify the marriage problem as follows: each of the applicants is
treated as man; each of a college’s rj openings is treated as a
different woman. The algorithm described above is then carried out
as before.
Once again, the algorithm will give a stable matching, with one
proviso: the colleges’ preferences for an individual do not depend on
whether another individual has accepted. This might, however,
happen, as colleges will frequently seek diversity in their student
population, or might be looking for a football team, which would
mean that a particular quarterback is a good choice only if the

--- Sayfa 592 ---
college has not recruited another quarterback. (Other examples
might exist.) In such cases, there is no guarantee of a stable
matching.
2. The Roommate Problem
In this problem, there is only one set, M; each member i∈ M has
preferences over the remaining members of M. The problem is to
assign the individuals, two to a room.
In this case, there is no guarantee of a stable matching. In fact,
consider a case with 4 individuals. Suppose their preferences are
In this case, there is no stable matching. The reason is that
whatever player is matched with the “unlikeable” roommate, m4, will
be able to form a dominating coalition with one of the other two. If for
example the matching is { {m1, m2}, {m3, m4} }, then m2 and m3
would both be happier with each other than with their assigned
roommates. Thus the assignment is unstable. It is easy to check that
the two other possible assignments are also unstable.
Problems
1. In a first-bid auction, assume there are 4 bidders. Let the several
bidders’ types θi be independent random variables with the
common (cumulative) distribution function
Find the equilibrium bid function β(θ). How much should an
individual bid if he values the item at 0.9? If he values it at 0.2?

--- Sayfa 593 ---
2. In a first-bid auction, assume there are 5 bidders. Let the types
(values) θ have common distribution function F(θ) = √θ for θ in the
unit interval [0, 1]. Find the equilibrium bid function β(θ).
3. In a first-bid auction, assume there are 3 bidders. Let the types
(values) θ have common distribution function F(θ) = 2θ − θ2 for θ
in the unit interval [0, 1]. Find the equilibrium bid function β(θ).
4. Consider a duopoly, in which two individuals must decide how
much to produce of a certain good. The selling price of this good
is determined by the demand function
where m1 and m2 are the amounts produced by the two
individuals. Each individual has a secret technology which gives
rise to the cost function cost function
Thus individual 1’s utility is given by
with a similar utility function for individual 2.
(a) Find the equilibrium quantities and price, as a function of the
θij.
(b) Assuming θ11=1, θ12=2, θ21=2, and θ22=2, find the equilibrium
quantities and price. How much profit (utility) would each of
the producers receive?
(c) Suppose the two individuals produce m1=2 and m2=1. What
would the incentives be?
5. Modify exercise 4, above, by setting θ11=1.5, θ12=2, θ21=2.5, and
θ22=1. Let the utility functions be the same as above. What would
the equilibrium quantities and price be?
6. Modify Example 17.4.1, above, by setting

--- Sayfa 594 ---
(a) Find the equilibrium messages, m1 and m2.
(b) Suppose the messages sent are m1=0.8, m2=0.9. What would
the incentives (partial derivatives) be?
7. Consider a marriage market with five men and six women. The
men’s preferences are as follows:
and the women’s preferences are
Find two stable assignments for this marriage market.
8. Consider a marriage market with five men and five women.

the men’s preferences are as follows:

--- Sayfa 595 ---
and the women’s preferences are
Find two stable assignments for this marriage market.

--- Sayfa 596 ---
Appendix
A.1. Convexity
Throughout this book, the notion of convexity has been used
extensively. We give below some of the properties of convex
functions, though other properties have been given in the text,
notably in Chapters 2 and 4.
A.1.1 Definition. A real-valued function
, defined over a real
linear space, is said to be convex iff, for any values
 of the
independent variable, and any such  such that
The function
 is said to be strictly convex if, whenever
 and
, strict inequality holds in (A.1)
A.1.2 Definition. A function
 is said to be concave (strictly
concave) iff
 is convex (strictly convex).
The following theorem gives obvious properties of convex
functions. No proof is given.
A.1.3 Theorem. Let  and  be convex functions, and suppose that
. Then the functions
, cf, and
 are all convex.
In a similar way, if
 and  are concave, so are
, cf, and
.
It is easy to see that a linear function is both concave and
convex. Conversely, if a function is both concave and convex, it is
linear.

--- Sayfa 597 ---
A.1.4 Definition. A set
, where  is a real linear space, is said
to be convex, iff whenever
 and
, then
Thus, a set  is convex if the segment joining two points in  lies
entirely in . This compares with the idea that a function is convex if
the chord joining two points on the graph of the function lies entirely
above the surface. Thus, the set of points above the graph of a
convex function is convex (this is often given as the definition of a
convex function). This relation between convex sets and convex
functions is mirrored in the following theorem, which represents a
partial analogue of A.1.3. Its proof is trivial.
A.1.5 Theorem. Let
 be convex for
 (where  is some index
set). Then
 is also convex.
Very often we are given a nonconvex set , and we wish to apply
some theorem which holds only for convex sets. This makes it
necessary for us to associate with  a convex set
.
A.1.6 Definition. Let
 be any set. Then its convex hull
 is the
intersection of all the convex sets which contain .
By Theorem A.1.5, the convex hull of any set is convex; it is clear
that, if a set is convex, it is its own convex hull. There is, however, a
different way of defining the convex hull: i.e., in terms of convex
linear combinations.
A.1.7 Definition. Let
 be
 points in some real linear
space. The point
 will then be said to be a convex linear
combination of
 if there exist real numbers,
,
satisfying

(i)
(ii)
(iii)

--- Sayfa 598 ---
The connection between convex linear combinations and the convex
hull is shown in the following theorem.
A.1.8 Theorem. For any set
, the convex hull
 is precisely the
set
 of all points
 which are convex linear combinations of
elements of .
Proof. It is easy to see that
. Now,  is convex, for suppose
are
are both in , with
 and
 satisfying (i) and (ii) of
A.1.7. Then, if
, we can write
and the numbers
 satisfy A.1.7(i),
(ii). Hence,
, and so  is convex. It follows that
.
Conversely, let
, where
 and the  are as above.
We prove by induction on  that
. In fact, for
, and
so
. Suppose, then, that this is true for
. We may
assume, without loss of generality, that
, and so
. We
have then
where

--- Sayfa 599 ---
It is clear that
 and so, by the induction hypothesis,
. But
. By convexity, it follows that
. Hence,
. This
proves the theorem.
The idea of a convex hull enables us to assign a convex set to
any set. On the other hand, it is sometimes of interest to reduce a
convex set to some subset, whose convex hull it is.
A.1.9 Definition. Let  be a convex set, and suppose that
. We
say that  is an extreme point of  if there do not exist two points,
 in , such that
 and
The following theorem is of importance and has been used in the
text of this book.
A.1.10 Theorem. A compact convex subset
 of
-dimensional
euclidean space is the convex hull of its extreme points. Moreover,
any
 can be expressed as a convex linear combination of at
most
 extreme points of .
Proof. It is clear that the second part of the theorem implies the first.
We shall, therefore, prove only this second part. We prove it by
induction on . In fact, for
, the only compact convex sets are the
empty set
, single points, and intervals
. For
 and single
points, the theorem is trivial; for sets
, it is clear that  and  are
extreme, and every
 is a convex linear combination of  and .
Assume, then, that the theorem is true for
. It is clear that it
will hold for all
-dimensional sets, even when these are subsets
of a higher dimensional space. Let  be as in the hypothesis, and let
.
Take any line passing through . Because of compactness and
convexity, the intersection of this line and  is a closed line segment,

--- Sayfa 600 ---
with end-points  and
.
Consider the point . It is a boundary point of , and hence (see
Problem 2.l), there is a hyperplane  passing through
 such that
the set  lies entirely on or “above” (to one side of) . Clearly,  is
closed and convex, and hence
 is a compact convex set of
dimension at most
. As
, it can be expressed as a linear
combination of at most  extreme points of
.
Suppose that
, and suppose that
, with
. The set
 can be characterized by an equation
,
where  is a linear functional, and we know
 for all
. By
linearity, we must have
, and so
. This means
that, if  is extreme in
, it is extreme in .
We have thus shown that  is a convex linear combination of the
point
 and at most  extreme points of . However,
 was obtained
by taking an arbitrary line through ; this line can always be taken so
that
 is extreme. Thus  will be a linear combination of at most
extreme points of .
A.2. Fixed Point Theorems
We give below, without proof, two theorems which have been used
in the text. The proofs of these theorems are quite lengthy and can
be found in the references in the Bibliography.
A.2.1 Theorem. (The Brouwer Fixed Point Theorem) Let
 be a
compact convex subset of -dimensional euclidean space, and let
be a continuous function mapping  into itself. Then there exists at
least one
 such that
.
This theorem is a topological theorem and thus will apply to any
set topologically equivalent to such a set . (Quite often, it is stated
that  is an -simplex.) The proof in the general case is quite lengthy
and requires an extensive background in topology, though for
, it
is an easy consequence of the intermediate value theorem [it then
reduces to showing that the equation
 has a root in the

--- Sayfa 601 ---
given interval]. A generalization which is very useful in game theory
is the Kakutani fixed point theorem, given below.
A.2.2 Definition. Let  be a function with domain
 (a topological
space) and such that, for
 is a subset of some topological
space . Then,  is said to be upper semicontinuous (u.s.c.) at a
point
 if for any sequence
 converging to
, and any
sequence of points
 with
, the limit of the sequence
 (if the sequence converges) belongs to
. The function  is
upper semicontinuous if it is u.s.c. at each point of .
A.2.3 Theorem. (Kakutani) Let  be a compact convex subset of -
dimensional euclidean space, and let  be an upper semicontinuous
function which assigns to each
 closed convex subset of . Then
there is some
 such that
.

--- Sayfa 602 ---
Bibliography
General The following books contain material of general interest, as
opposed to books and papers which are more properly related to
one or another chapter of this work and which are given in chapter
bibliographies.

1. Dresher, M., L. S. Shapley, and A. W. Tucker, eds., Advances
in Game Theory, Annals of Mathematics Studies No. 52,
Princeton, New Jersey (Princeton University Press), 1964.
2. Dresher, M., A. W. Tucker, and P. Wolfe, eds., Contributions to
the Theory of Games, III, Annals of Mathematics Studies No.
39, Princeton, New Jersey (Princeton University Press), 1957.
3. Karlin, S., Mathematical Methods and Theory in Games,
Programming and Economics, Reading, Massachusetts
(Addison-Wesley), 1959.
4. Kuhn, H. W., and A. W. Tucker, eds., Contributions to the
Theory of Games, I-II, Annals of Mathematics Studies Nos.
24, 28, Princeton, New Jersey (Princeton University Press),
1950, 1953.
5. Kuhn, H. W., and A. W. Tucker, eds., Linear Inequalities and
Related Systems, Annals of Mathematics Studies No. 38,
Princeton, New Jersey (Princeton University Press), 1956.
6. Luce, R. D., and H. Raiffa, Games and Decisions, New York
(Wiley), 1957.
7. Tucker, A. W., and R. D. Luce, eds., Contributions to the
Theory of Games, IV, Annals of Mathematics Studies No. 40,
Princeton, New Jersey (Princeton University Press), 1959.
8. von Neumann, J., and O. Morgenstern, Theory of Games and
Economic Behavior, Princeton, New Jersey (Princeton
University Press), 1944, 1947.

--- Sayfa 603 ---
References 1, 2, 4, 5, and 7 above consist of many separate
papers and will be referred to, in the chapter bibliographies, as
Annals 24, Annals 28, etc.
Chapter 1
1. Berge, C., “Topological Games with Perfect Information,”
Annals 39.
2. Gale, D., and F. M. Stewart, “Infinite Games with Perfect
Information,” Annals 28.
3. Gill, R., “The Monty Hall Problem is not a Probability Puzzle
(it’s a Challenge in Mathematical Modelling),” Statistica
Neerlandica 65 (February 2011), 58–71.
4. Kuhn, H. W., “A Simplified Two-Person Poker,” Annals 24.
5. Kuhn, H. W., “Extensive Games and the Problem of
Information,” Annals 28.
6. Morgan, J. P., Chaganty, N. R., Dahiya, R. C., and Doviak, M.
J. “Let’s Make a Deal: The Player’s Dilemma,” Am. Stat. 45
(1991), 284–287.
7. Nash, J., and L. S. Shapley, “A Simple Three-Person Poker
Game,” Annals 24.
8. vos Savant, M. “Game Show Problem,” Parade (1990–1991),
retrieved
from
http://marilynvossavant.com/game-show-
problem/, December 16, 2012.
Chapter 2
1. Brown, G. W., and J. von Neumann, “Solutions of Games by
Differential Equations,” Annals 24.
2. Dresher, M., and S. Karlin, “Solutions of Convex Games as
Fixed Points,” Annals 28.
3. Farkas, J., “Theorie der Einfachen Ungleichungen,” J. Reine
Angew. Math. 124 (1902), 1–27.
4. Gale, D., H. W. Kuhn, and A. W. Tucker, “On Symmetric
Games,” Annals 24.
5. Motzkin, T. S., H. Raiffa, G. L. Thompson, and R. M. Thrall,
“The Double Description Method,” Annals 28.

--- Sayfa 604 ---
6. Robinson, J., “An Iterative Method of Solving a Game,” Ann. of
Math. 54 (1951), 296–301.
7. Shapley, L. S., and R. N. Snow, “Basic Solutions of Discrete
Games,” Annals 24.
8. Weyl, H., “Elementary Proof of a Minimax Theorem due to von
Neumann,” Annals 24.
Chapter 3
1. Dantzig, G., L. R. Ford, and D. R. Fulkerson, “A Primal-Dual
Algorithm for Linear Programs,” Annals 38.
2. Dantzig, G., and D. R. Fulkerson, “On the Max-Flow Min-Cut
Theorem of Networks,” Annals 38.
3. Gass, S. I., Linear Programming, New York (McGraw-Hill),
1958.
4. Goldman, A., and A. W. Tucker, “Theory of Linear
Programming,” Annals 38.
5. Tucker, A. W., “Dual Systems of Homogeneous Linear
Relations,” Annals 38.
6. Vajda, S., The Theory of Games and Linear Programming,
London (Methuen), New York (Wiley), 1956.
7. Wolfe, P., “Determinateness of Polyhedral Games,” Annals 38.
Chapter 4
1. Bohnenblust, H. F., S. Karlin, and L. S. Shapley, “Games with
Continuous Convex Payoff,” Annals 24.
2. Bohnenblust, H. F., S. Karlin, and L. S. Shapley, “Solutions of
Discrete Two-Person Games,” Annals 24.
3. Borel, E., “Sur les jeux où interviennent le hasard et I’habileté
des joueurs,” Eléments de la Théorie des Probabilités, 3ème
edition, Paris (Librairie Scientifique), 1924.
4. Dresher, M., S. Karlin, and L. S. Shapley, “Polynomial Games,”
Annals 24.
5. Duffin, R. J., “Infinite Programs,” Annals 38.
6. Gross, O., “A Rational Game on the Square,” Annals 39.

--- Sayfa 605 ---
7. Karlin, S., “Operator Treatment of the Minmax Principle,”
Annals 24.
8. Karlin, S., “On a Class of Games,” Annals 28.
9. Karlin, S., “Reduction of Certain Classes of Games to Integral
Equations,” Annals 28.
10. Restrepo, R., “Tactical Problems Involving Several Actions,”
Annals 39.
11. Shiffman, M., “Games of Timing,” Annals 28.
12. Sion, M., and P. Wolfe, “On a Game Without a Value,” Annals
39.
Chapter 5
1. Berkovitz, L. D., and W. H. Fleming, “On Differential Games
with Integral Payoff,” Annals 39.
2. Berkovitz, L. D., “A Variational Approach to Differential
Games,” Annals 52.
3. Berkovitz, L. D., “A Differential Game without Pure Strategy
Solutions on an Open Set,” Annals 52.
4. Blackwell, D., “Multi-Component Attrition Games,” Nav. Res.
Legist. Quart. 1 (1954), 327–332.
5. Dubins, L. E., “A Discrete Evasion Game,” Annals 39.
6. Everett, H., “Recursive Games,” Annals 39.
7. Fleming, W. H., “The Convergence Problem for Differential
Games,” Annals 52.
8. Isaacs, R., Differential Games, New York (Wiley), 1965.
9. Isbell, J., “Finitary Games,” Annals 39.
10. Kuhn, H. W., “Extensive Games and the Problem of
Information,” Annals 28.
11. Milnor, J., and L. S. Shapley, “On Games of Survival,” Annals
39.
12. Mycielski, J., “Continuous Games of Perfect Information,”
Annals 39.
13. Ryll-Nardzewski, C., “A Theory of Pursuit and Evasion,”
Annals 52.

--- Sayfa 606 ---
14. Scarf, H. E., “On Differential Games with Survival Payoff,”
Annals 39.
15. Shapley, L. S., “Stochastic Games,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 39 (1953), 327–332.
Chapter 6
1. Aumann, R. J., and M. Maschler, Repeated Games with
Incomplete Information: A Survey of Recent Results,
Princeton, New Jersey (Mathematica), 1967.
2. Aumann, R. J., and M. Maschler, Repeated Games with
Incomplete Information: The Zero-Sum Extensive Case,
Princeton, New Jersey (Mathematica), 1968.
3. Blackwell, D., “An Analog of the Minimax Theorem for Vector
Payoffs,” Pacific J. Math 6 (1956), 1–8.
4. Harsanyi, J. C., “Games with Incomplete Information Played
by Bayesian Players, I, II, III,” Management Sci. 14 (1968),
159–182, 320–332, 468–502.
5. Kohlberg, E., “Optimal Strategies in Repeated Games with
Incomplete Information,” Int. J. Game Theory 4 (1975), 7–24.
6. Mertens, J. F., and S. Zamir, “The Value of Two-Person Zero-
Sum Games with Lack of Information on Both Sides,” Int. J.
Game Theory 1 (1972), 39–64.
7. Mertens, J. F., and S. Zamir, “Minmax and Maxmin of
Repeated Games with Incomplete Information,” Int. J. Game
Theory 9 (1980), 201–215.
8. Ponssard, J. P. “A Note on the L-P Formulation of Zero-Sum
Sequential Games with Incomplete Information,” Int. J. Game
Theory 4 (1975), 1–5.
9. Ponssard, J. P., and S. Sorin, “The L-P Formulation of Finite
Zero-Sum Games with Incomplete Information,” Int. J. Game
Theory 9 (1980), 99–105.
Chapter 7
1. Arrow, K. J., Social Choice and Individual Values, Cowlen
Commission Monograph 12, New York (Wiley), 1951.

--- Sayfa 607 ---
2. Davidson, D., S. Siegel, and P. Suppes, “Some Experiments
and Related Theory on the Measurement of Utility and
Subjective Probability,” Applied Mathematics and Statistics
Laboratory, Technical Report 1, Stanford University, 1955.
3. Hausner, M., “Multi-Dimensional Utilities,” Decision Processes
(R. M. Thrall, C. H. Coombs, and R. L. Davis, eds.), New York
(Wiley), 1954.
4. Hernstein, J. N., and J. Milnor, “An Axiomatic Approach to
Measurable Utility,” Econometrica 21 (1953), 291–297.
5. Isbell, J., “Absolute Games,” Annals 40.
6. Luce, R. D., “A Probabilistic Theory of Utility,” Technical Report
14, Behavioral Models Project, Columbia University, 1956.
7. Suppes, P., and M Winet, “An Axiomatization of Utility Based
on the Notions of Utility Differences,” Management Sci. 1
(1955), 259–270.
Chapter 8
1. Aumann, R. J., “Subjectivity and Correlation in Randomized
Strategies,” J. Math. Econ 1 (1974), 67–96.
2. Harsanyi, J. C, “Approaches to the Bargaining Problem before
and after the Theory of Games: A Critical Discussion of
Zeuthen’s, Hick’s and Nash’s Theories,” Econometrica 24
(1956), 144–157.
3. Harsanyi, J. C., “Games with Randomly Disturbed Payoffs: A
New Rationale for Mixed Strategy Equilibrium Points,” Int. J.
Game Theory 2 (1973), 1–23.
4. Hart, S., D. Schmeidler, “Existence of Correlated Equilibria,”
Math. Oper. Res. 14 (1989), 18–25.
5. Lemke, C. E., “Bimatrix Equilibrium Points and Mathematical
Programming,” Management Sci. 11 (May 1965).
6. Maynard Smith, J., Evolution and the Theory of Games,
Cambridge, UK (Cambridge University Press), 1982.
7. Nash, J., “Equilibrium Points in n-Person Games,” Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 36 (1950), 48–49.

--- Sayfa 608 ---
8. Nash, J., “Non-Cooperative Games,” Ann. of Math. 54 (1951),
286–295.
9. Selten, R., “Reexamination of the Perfectness Concept for
Equilibrium Ponts in Extensive Games,” Int. J. Game Theory 4
(1975), 25–55.
10. Shapley, L. S., “Some Topics in Two-Person Games,” Annals
52.
11. van Damme, E., Stability and Perfection of Nash Equilibria,
Berlin (Springer Verlag), 1987.
Chapter 9
1. Braithwaite, R. B., Theory of Games as a Tool for the Moral
Philosopher, Cambridge (Cambridge University Press), 1955.
2. Harsanyi, J. C., “Approaches to the Bargaining Problem before
and after the Theory of Games: A Critical Discussion of
Zeuthen’s, Hick’s and Nash’s Theories,” Econometrica 24
(1956), 144–157.
3. Nash, J., “The Bargaining Problem,” Econometrica 18 (1950),
155–162.
4. Raiffa, H., “Arbitration Schemes for Generalized Two-Person
Games,” Annals 28.
5. Rubinstein, A., “Perfect Equilibrium in a Bargaining Model,”
Econometrica 50 (1982), 97–109.
6. Zeuthen, F., Problems of Monopoly and Economic Warfare,
London (G. Routledge and Sons), 1930.
Chapter 10
1. Bondareva, O. N., “Certain Applications of the Methods of
Linear Programming to the Theory of Cooperative Games,”
Problemy Kibernet. 10 (1963), 119–139.
2. McKinsey, J. C. C., “Isomorphism of Games and Strategic
Equivalence,” Annals 24.
3. Owen, G., “The Core of Linear Production Games,” Math.
Programming 9 (1975), 358–370.

--- Sayfa 609 ---
4. Shapley, L. S., “On Balanced Sets and Cores,” Naval Res.
Logist. Quart. 14 (1967), 453–460.
5. Shapley, L. S., and M. Shubik, “The Assignment Game I: The
Core,” Internal. J. Game Thy. 1 (1972), 111–130.
6. Tijs, S. H., “On S-Equivalence and Isomorphism of Games in
Characteristic Function Form,” Internal. J. Game Thy. 4
(1976), 209–210.
Chapter 11
1. Bott, R., “Symmetric Solutions to Majority Games,” Annals 28.
2. Gillies, D. B., “Solutions to General Non-Zero-Sum Games,”
Annals 40.
3. Gurk, H., and J. Isbell, “Simple Solutions,” Annals 40.
4. Kalisch, G. K., and E. D. Nering, “Countably Infinitely Many
Person Games,” Annals 40.
5. Lucas, W. R, “The Proof That a Game May Not Have a
Solution,” Trans. Am. Math. Soc. 136 (1969), 219–229.
6. Owen, G., “Tensor Composition of Non-Negative Games,”
Annals 52.
7. Owen, G., “Discriminatory Solutions of n-Person Games,”
Proc. Am. Math. Soc. 17 (1966), 653–657.
8. Shapley, L. S., “Quota Solutions of n-Person Games,” Annals
28.
9. Shapley, L. S., “A Solution Containing an Arbitrary Closed
Component,” Annals 40.
10. Shapley, L. S., “Solutions of Compound Simple Games,”
Annals 52.
11. Shubik, M., “Edgeworth Market Games,” Annals 40.
Chapter 12
1. Banzhaf, J. F., III, “Weighted Voting Doesn’t Work: A
Mathematical Analysis,” Rutgers Law Review 19 (1965), 317–
343.

--- Sayfa 610 ---
2. Banzhaf, J. F., III, “One Man, 3.312 Votes: A Mathematical
Analysis of the Electoral College,” Villanova Law Review 13
(1968), 304–332.
3. Coleman, J. S., “Control of Collectivities and the Power of a
Collectivity to Act,” Social Choice (B. Lieberman, ed.), London
(Gordon and Breach), 1971, 269–300.
4. Dubey, P., “On the Uniqueness of the Shapley Value,” Int. J.
Game Theory 4 (1975), 131–139.
5. Dubey, P., and L. S. Shapley, “Mathematical Properties of the
Banzhaf Power Index,” Math. Oper. Res. 4 (1979), 99–131.
6. Hart, S., and M. Kurz, “Endogenous Formation of Coalitions,”
Econometrica 51 (1983), 1047–1064.
7. Owen, G., “Multilinear Extensions of Games,” Management
Sci. 18 (1972), P64–P79.
8. Owen, G., “Multilinear Extensions and the Banzhaf Value,”
Naval Res. Logist. Quart. 22 (1975), 741–750.
9. Owen, G., “Evaluation of a Presidential Election Game,” Am.
Pol. Sci. Rev. 69 (1975), 947–953.
10. Owen, G., “Characterization of the Banzhaf-Coleman Index,”
SIAM J. Appl. Math. 35 (1978), 315–327.
11. Owen, G., “A Note on the Banzhaf-Coleman Axioms,” Game
Theory and Political Science (P. C. Ordeshook, ed.), New
York (New York University Press), 1978, 451–462.
12. Owen, G., “Values of Games with a priori Unions,”
Mathematical Economics and Game Theory (R. Henn and O.
Moeschlin, eds.), Berlin (Springer Verlag), 76–88.
13. Owen, G., and E. Winter, “The Multilinear Extension and the
Coalition Structure Value,” Games Econ. Behav. 4 (1992),
582–587.
14. Shapley, L. S., “A Value for n-Person Games,” Annals 28.
15. Winter, E., “A Value for Cooperative Games with Levels
Structure of Cooperation,” Int. J. Game Theory 18 (1989),
227–240.
Chapter 13

--- Sayfa 611 ---
1. Aumann, R. J., and M. Maschler, “The Bargaining Set for
Cooperative Games,” Annals 52.
2. Billera, L. J., “Global Stability in n-Person Games,” Trans. Am.
Math. Soc. 144 (1972), 45–56.
3. Kalai, G., M. Maschler, and G. Owen, “Asymptotic Stability and
Other Properties of Trajectories and Transfer Sequences
Leading to the Bargaining Set,” Int. J. Game Theory 4 (1975),
193–214.
4. Kohlberg, E., “On the Nucleolus of a Characteristic Function
Game,” SIAM J. Appl. Math. 20 (1971), 62–66.
5. Kohlberg, E., “The Nucleolus as a Solution of a Minimization
Problem,” SIAM J. Appl. Math. 21 (1972), 34–39.
6. Kopelowitz, A., “Computation of the Kernels of Simple Games
and the Nucleolus of n-Person Games,” Research Program in
Game Theory and Mathematical Economics, Dept. of
Mathematics, Hebrew University, Jerusalem, September
1967.
7. Littlechild, S. C., “A Simple Expression for the Nucleolus in a
Special Case,” Int. J. Game Theory 3 (1974), 21–30.
8. Littlechild, S. C., arid G. Owen, “A Simple Expression for the
Shapley Value in a Special Case,” Manage. Sci. 20 (1973),
370–372.
9. Maschler, M., “The Inequalities that Determine the Bargaining
Set
,”
Research
Program
in
Game
Theory
and
Mathematical
Economics,
Research
Memorandum
17,
Hebrew University, Jerusalem, January 1966.
10. Maschler, M., and M. Davis, “The Kernel of a Cooperative
Game,” Naval Res. Logist. Quart. 12 (1965), 223–259.
11. Maschler, M., and B. Peleg, “A Characterization, Existence
Proof, and Dimension Bounds for the Kernel of a Game,”
Pacific J. Math. 32 (1966), 289–328.
12. Milnor, J., “Reasonable Outcomes for n-Person Games,” RM-
916, The Rand Corporation, 1952.
13. Owen, G., “A Note on the Nucleolus,” Int. J. Game Theory 3
(1974), 101–103.

--- Sayfa 612 ---
14. Peleg, B., “On the Bargaining Set
 of m-Quota Games,”
Annals 52.
15. Peleg, B., “Existence Theorem for the Bargaining Set
,”
Bull. Am. Math. Soc. 69 (1963), 109–110.
16. Schmeidler, D., “The Nucleolus of a Characteristic Function
Game,” SIAM J. Appl. Math. 17 (1969), 1163–1170.
17. Stearns, R. E., “Convergent Transfer Schemes for n-Person
Games,” Trans. Am. Math. Soc. 134 (1968), 449–459.
Chapter 14
1. Aumann, R. J., “Markets with a Continuum of Traders,”
Econometrica 32 (1964), 443–476.
2. Aumann, R. J., and L. S. Shapley, Values of Non-Atomic
Games, Princeton, New Jersey (Princeton University Press),
1974.
3. Billera, L. J., J. Heath, and D. C. Raanan, “Internal Telephone
Billing Rates: A Novel Application of Non-Atomic Game
Theory,” Oper. Res. 27 (1978), 956–965.
4. Kannai, Y., “Values of Games with a Continuum of Players,”
Israel J. Math. 4 (1966), 54–58.
5. Milnor, J., and L. S. Shapley, “Values of Large Games II:
Oceanic Games,” RM-2699, The Rand Corporation, February
1961.
6. Neyman, A., and Y. Tauman, “The Partition Value,” Math. Oper.
Res. 4 (1979), 236–264.
Chapter 15
1. Asscher, N., “A Cardinal Bargaining Set for Games without
Side Payments,” Int. J. Game Theory 6 (1977), 87–114.
2. Aumann, R. J., “Acceptable Points in General Cooperative n-
Person Games,” Annals 40.
3. Friedman, J., Oligopoly and the Theory of Games, New York
(North-Holland), 1977.
4. Harsanyi, J. C, “A Bargaining Model for the Cooperative n-
Person Game,” Annals 40.

--- Sayfa 613 ---
5. Harsanyi, J. C., “A Simplified Bargaining Model for the n-
Person Cooperative Games,” Int. Econ. Rev. 4 (1963), 194–
220.
6. Ichiishi, T, and S. Weber, “Some Theorems on the core of a
Non-Sidepayment Game with a Measure Space of Players,”
Int. J. Game Theory 7 (1978), 95–112.
7. Isbell, J., “Absolute Games,” Annals 40.
8. Miyasawa, K., “The n-Person Bargaining Game,” Annals 52.
9. Nakamura, K., “The Core of a Simple Game with Ordinal
Preferences,” Int. J. Game Theory 4 (1975), 95–104.
10. Owen, G., “Values of Games without Side Payments,” Int. J.
Game Theory 1 (1972), 94–109.
11. Scarf, H., “The Core of An n-Person Game,” Econometrica 35
(1967), 50–69.
12. Scarf, H., The Computation of Economic Equilibria, New
Haven, Connecticut (Yale University Press), 1973.
13. Selten, R., “Valuation of n-Person Games,” Annals 52.
14. Shapley, L. S., “A Value for n-Person Games without Side
Payments,”
Proceedings
of
Conference
at
Princeton
University, April 1965.
15. Stearns, R. E., “Three-Person Cooperative Games without
Side Payments,” Annals 52.
16. Stearns, R. E., “On the Axioms for a Cooperative Game
without Side Payments,” Report 62-RL-3130E, General
Electric Laboratories, Schenectady, New York, September
1962.
Chapter 16
1. Black, D., The Theory of Committees and Elections,
Cambridge, UK (Cambridge University Press), 1958.
2. Copeland, A. H., “A Reasonable Social Welfare Function,”
Unpublished manuscript, 1951.
3. Downs, A., An Economic Theory of Democracy, New York
(Harper & Row), 1957.

--- Sayfa 614 ---
4. Enelow, J. E., and M. J. Hinich, The Spatial Theory of Voting,
Cambridge (Cambridge University Press), 1984.
5. Feld, S. L., and B. N. Grofman, “Necessary and Sufficient
Conditions for a Majority Winner in n-Dimensional Spatial
Voting Games,” Am. J. Pol. Sci. 31 (1987), 709–728.
6. Ferejohn, J. A., R. D. McKelvey, and E. Packel, “Limiting
Distributions for Continuous State Markov Models,” Social
Choice Welfare 1 (1984), 45–67.
7. Grofman, B. N., A Glazer, N. Noviello, and G. Owen, “Stability
and Centrality of Legislative Choice in the Spatial Context,”
Am. Pol. Sci. Rev. 81 (1987), 539–553.
8. McKelvey, R. D., “Covering, Dominance, and Institution-Free
Properties of Social Choice,” Am. J. Pol. Sci. 30 (1986), 283–
314.
9. McKelvey, R. D., P. Ordeshook, and M. Winer, “The
Competitive
Solution
for
n-Person
Games
without
Transferable Utility,” Am. Pol. Sci. Rev. 72 (1978), 599–615.
10. McKelvey, R. D., and R. E. Wendel, “Voting Equilibria in
Multidimensional Choice Spaces,” Math. Oper. Res. 1 (1976),
44–58.
11. Ordeshook, P., “Pareto-Optimality in Electoral Competition,”
Am. Pol. Sci. Reu. 65 (1971), 1141–1145.
12. Owen, G., “Political Games,” Naval Res. Logist. Quart. 18
(1972), 345–354.
13. Owen, G., and Shapley, L. S., “Optimal Location of
Candidates in Ideological Space,” Int. J. Game Theory 18
(1989), 339–356.
14. Plott, C. R. “A Notion of Equilibrium and its Possibility under
Majority Rule,” Am. Econ. Reu. 57 (1967), 787–806.
15. Riker, W., and P. C. Ordeshook, An Introduction to Positive
Political Theory, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey (Prentice Hall),
1973.
16. Schofield, N., “The Theory of Dynamic Games,” Rev. Econ.
Stud. 45 (1978), 575–594.
17. Shapley, L. S., “A Comparison of Power Indices and a Non-
symmetric Generalization,” Paper P-5872, Rand Corporation,

--- Sayfa 615 ---
Santa Monica, California, 1977.
18. Wuffle, A., S. L. Feld, G. Owen, and B. N. Grofman,
“Finagle’s Law and the Finagle Point,” Am. J. Pol. Sci. 33
(1989), 348–375.
Chapter 17
1. Bénoıˆt, J. P., and V. Krishna, “Multiple-Object Auctions with
Budget-Constrained Bidders,” Rev. Econ. Stud. (2001), 155–
179.
2. D’Aspremont, C., and L.-A. Gérard-Varet, “Incentives and
Incomplete Information,” J. Public Econ. (1979), 25–45.
3. Engelbrecht-Wiggans, R., P. Milgrom, and R. Weber,
“Competitive Bidding and Proprietary Information,” J. Math.
Econ. (1983), 161–169.
4. Gale, D., and L. S. Shapley, “College Admissions and the
Stability of Marriage,” American Mathematical Monthly (1962),
9–15.
5. Gale, D., and M. Sotomayor, “Some Remarks on the Stable
Matching Problem,” Discrete Applied Mathematics (1985),
223–232.
6. Granot, D. “A Note on the Roommate Problem and a Related
Revenue Allocation Problem,” Manage Sci. (1984), 633–643.
7. Hurwicz, L., and S. Reiter, Designing Economic Mechanisms,
Cambridge, UK (Cambridge University Press), 2006.
8. Knuth, D. E., Mariages Stables, Montreal: les presses de
l’université de Montréal, 1976.
9. Krishna, V., Auction Theory, Burlington, Massachusetts
(Academic Press), 2010.
10. Kuhn, H. W., “The Hungarian Method for the Assignment
Problem”, Naval Research Logistics Quarterly, 2, (1955) 83–
97.
11. Maskin, E., “Nash Equilibrium and Welfare Optimality,” Rev.
Econ. Stud. (1999), 23–38.
12. Milgrom, P. R., and R. J. Weber, “A Theory of Auctions and
Comptitive Bidding,” Econometrica (1982), 1089–1122.

--- Sayfa 616 ---
13. Milgrom, P., “Rational Expectations, Information Acquisition,
and Competitive Bidding,” Econometrica (1981), 921–943.
14. Myerson, R. B., “Optimal Auction Design,” Mathematics of
Operations Research (1981), 58–73.
15. Myerson, R., Game Theory: Analysis of Conflict, Cambridge,
Massachusetts (Harvard University Press), 1991.
16. Roth, A. M., and M. Sotomayor, Two-Sided Matching: A
Study in Game-Theoretic Modeling and Analysis, Econometric
Society Monographs, No. 18, Cambridge University Press,
1990.
17. Saari, D. G., “A Method for Constructing Message Systems
for Smooth Performance Functions,” J. Econ. Theory (1984),
249–274.
18. Williams, S. R., Communication in Mechanism Design: A
Differential Approach, Cambridge, UK (Cambridge University
Press), 2008.
Appendix
1. Bonnesen, T., and W. Fenchel, “Theorie der Konvexen
Körper,” Ergebnisse der Mathematik und Ihrer Grenzgebiete,
Vol. 3, No. 1, Berlin (Springer), 1934; New York (Chelsea),
1948.
2. Gale, D., “Convex Polyhedral Cones and Linear Inequalities,”
Activity Analysis of Production and Allocation (T. C.
Koopmans, ed.), New York (Wiley), 1951.
3. Kakutani, S., “A Generalization of Brouwer’s Fixed Point
Theorem,” Duke J. Math. 8 (1941), 457–459.
4. Weyl, A., “The Elementary Theory of Convex Polyhedra,”
Annals 24.

--- Sayfa 617 ---
Index
Absolute utility, 154
Adjacent basic points, 46, 368
Adjacent primitive sets, 363
Admissible transfer, 237
α-effectiveness, 355
a priori unions, 302
Array corresponding to x, 319
Arrow’s impossibility proof, 156
Assignment game, 215, 424
Asymptotic value, 353
Atom, 336
Automorphism, 336
Axiom of choice, 10
Balanced collection, 219–226, 319, 360–362
minimal, 222
Balancing coefficients, 220, 319
Balancing vector, 220, 361
Banzhaf-Coleman index, 273-286
Bargaining, 187-194
multistep, 198
Bargaining sets, 305–310, 388–392
Basic dual feasible point, 45
Basic feasible point, 45
Basic point, 45, 46
adjacent, 46, 368
Basic variables, 45, 46
Battle of the sexes, 161

--- Sayfa 618 ---
Behavioral strategies, 87, 115
β-effectiveness, 356
Bidders, 413
Bimatrix game, 159–262
Blotto game, 99
Bounded variation, 338
Brouwer fixed point theorem, 70, 99, 160, 436
Cantor function, 84
Carrier, 255, 298
Center of power, 408–411
Chain, 338
Chance move, 119
Characteristic function, 208
Coalition, 156, 207–209
Coalitionally rational payoff configuration, 306
Coalition structure, 305
Coalition value, 294–303
Commodity bundle, 153–154, 243, 352, 375, 382
Competitive equilibrium, 377, 392
Complementary goods, 154
Composition of games, 236, 240, 263, 267, 275, 279, 285
Concave-convex games, 69–71, 77
Concave function, 69, 128, 201, 376, 433
Concavification, 129, 134
Constant-sum game, 209, 303, 279, 304
Constrained games, 57–58, 162
Constraint set, 35
Contestant, strategies of, 8–9
Continuity axiom, 149
Continuous games, 66
Control variables, 101
Convex cone, 22
Convex functions, 69, 83, 128, 433

--- Sayfa 619 ---
Convex hull, 19, 32, 434
Convex linear combination, 132, 434
Convex n-person game, 303
Cooperative games, 187–205
Copeland winner, 398–399, 402, 409
Core, 213–219, 224–226, 252, 360–374, 396–398
Correlated strategy, 179–180
Counterobjection, 306–307
Decisive coalition, 156
Decomposition, 6
Decoupling, 419
Deferred acceptance method, 426
Degenerate linear program, 51–52
Degree of a game, 281, 304
Demand function, 332
Dictatorial index, 278
Differential games, 100–113
of kind, 115
Discriminatory stable sets, 231, 359
Domination
of imputations, 210, 334
of policies, 396
of strategies, 25, 26
Duality, 36–41, 47–48, 57, 122, 199, 217, 220
Duel
noisy, 76
silent, 74, 84
Dummy, 255, 275
Edgeworth market games, 243–247
Efficient level of investment, 421
Electoral College, 240, 287
∈-core, 227
∈-optimal strategies, 66, 99

--- Sayfa 620 ---
Equilibrium points (n-tuples), 5–7
correlated, 178–183, 179
perfect, 162
strictly perfect, 164–165
subgame-perfect, 165–169, 198–200
symmetric, 170
Essential game, 210, 214
Evolutionary stable system, 169–178
Evolutionary stable strategy, 172–173, 184
Excess, 310, 312
Excess demand, 378
Extensive form, 1, 2
Extreme point, 32, 42, 435
Farkas lemma, 22
Feasibility, 188
Feasible allocation, 375
Feasible linear program, 38
Feasible set, 187
Fictitious play, 29, 33
Finagle point, 401
Finagle radius, 401
Finite game, 5, 7
Flow problem, 60
Free market, 333
Fuzzy set, 354
Game, definition of, 2
Game for continuum of players, 333
Game of pure strategy (GOPS), 3
Games of exhaustion, 90–93, 96
Games of timing, 71
Games on the square, 65–66
continuous, 66
Game tree, 1, 5

--- Sayfa 621 ---
Game without side payments, 355–359
Genotype, 172
Gross substitutability, 154
Hungarian algorithm, 424
Ideal point, 396
Improper game, 209
Imputation, 210
Imcomplete information, 119
Independence of Irrelevant Alternatives, 188
Independence under linear transformations, 188
Individual incentives, 424
Individually rational assignment, 426
Individually rational payoff configuration, 306
Inessential game, 210
Infeasible linear program, 38
Infinite games, 63
Information set, 2
Integral payoff, 102
Internal space, 342
Isomorphic games, 211
Isotropic rocket, 107–113
Issues space, 404
Kakutani fixed point theorem, 436
Kernel (of n-person game), 310–312,388
Kernel (of 2-person game), 66–67
Kinematic equations, 101
Law of diminishing returns, 154
Least-core, 228
Lexicographic order, 313
Linearly transferable utility, 154, 196, 208
Linear program, 35–62, 121–122, 219, 225, 322

--- Sayfa 622 ---
Losing coalition, 213, 395
Lottery, 148
Lower semicontinuous, 32, 436
Lower variation, 364
Main equation, 102, 104
Main simple solution, 252
Marginal index, 285
Market games, 243–247, 352, 375–382
Marriage market, 425
Martingale, 141
Matching pennies, 2, 5, 6, 14
Matrix game, 14
Matrix in normal form, 366
Maximin strategy, 17
Maximin value, 187
Mechanisms, 417, 420
description of, 419–421
Median hyperplanes, 396
Minimal balanced collection, 222
Minimal response point, 400
Minimal response distance, 401
Minimal winning coalition, 232
Minimax strategy, 17
Minimax theorem, 17, 20, 64, 65
Mixed strategies, 15–17, 63, 65, 77, 93
Monty Hall game, 7–9
Monty the dummy (case), 8
friendly Monty (case), 8
unfriendly Monty (case), 9
Monotonicity, 188, 337
Multilinear extension, 260–273, 274, 281, 385
Multistage games, 87–101, 125–144, 183–188
Multistep bargaining, 198

--- Sayfa 623 ---
Nash axioms, 188
Nash equilibrium, 414
Nash solution, 190–191, 194, 204
(n, n–1)-game, 227
Nonatomic game, 336–352
Nonbasic variables, 45
Noncooperative games, 159–162, 207
Normal form
of game, 4, 14
matrix in, 366
Not weaker than, 309
Nucleolus, 312–313, 388
Null index, 278
Null set, 336
Numéraire, 420
Objection, 306
Objective function, 35
Optimal strategy, 22–30, 33
Optimal threat strategies, 196
Ordinal utility, 147–148
Outweigh, 310
Pareto optimalily, 188, 199–205, 355, 370, 395
Partition, 297–302
Partners, 306
Path equations, 104
Payoff, 1, 2, 3, 13
Payoff configuration, 305
coalitionally rational, 306
individually rational, 306
Perfect equilibrium, 162
Perfect information, 4, 7, 166
Perfect recall, 88, 115, 166
Personal moves, 1

--- Sayfa 624 ---
Perturbation, 51
Perturbed game, 162–163
Petersburg paradox, 155
Pivot (in linear programming), 46
rules for choosing, 48
Pivot (in spatial games), 402
Pivot steps, 46–47, 366
Player sets, 2
Policies, 395
Polynomial games, 83
Preimputation, 227, 331
Prekernel, 331
Presidential election, 286–294
Primitive set, 362–375
Principal, 417
Prisoner’s dilemma, 161
Proper game, 209
Public goods, 421–424
Pure strategy, 16, 63, 65, 87, 102
Quasi-linear function, 420
Random moves, 1
Recursive game, 98–101, 113–114
Reduced game, 300
Regulator, 418
Relative game, 227
Result, 420
Roommate problem, 429
Rubinstein points, 200–201
Saddle point, 14–15, 24
Separable commodity, 154
Shadow prices, 154, 227
Shapley value, 255–260, 326, 337, 383–384, 402

--- Sayfa 625 ---
coalitional, 294–302
nonatomic, 337–350
spatial, 402–410
Side payments, 154, 208
Signal, 120, 131
Simple game, 213, 218, 232, 240–242, 297
Simplex method (algorithm), 42, 43, 48
Simplex tableau (schema), 44–49
Single-item auctions, 413
first-price sealed-bid auctions, 413–416
second-price auctions, 416–417
Singular surfaces, 114
Slack variables, 43
Social welfare function, 156, 420
Solution (of linear programs), 42–43
Solution (of n-person games), see Stable sets
Solution (of 2-person games), 22, 29
of differential games, 102–107
by fictitious play, 29, 33
of games of timing, 71–74
of linear programming, 53–56
of multistage games, 87–101
of 2 × n and m × 2 games, 28–29
of 2 × 2 games, 28
Space BV, 338
Space bv’NA, 361
Space NA’, 339
Space P, 339
Space pNA, 339
Space s’NA, 349
Spatial game, 395
Stable sets (von Neumann-Morgenstern solutions), 229–243, 358–
359, 393
State variables, 101

--- Sayfa 626 ---
Stationary strategies, 94, 199
Strategic equivalence (S-equivalence), 211
Strategy, 4, 5
behavioral, 87–88, 115
correlated, 179
∈-optimal, 66, 100
maximin, 17
minimax, 17
mixed, 16, 63, 65
optimal, 22
pure, 16
stationary, 93, 199
threat, 194–196
Strict linear order relation, 425
Strictly concave function, 433
Strictly convex function, 433
Strictly perfect equilibrium, 164
Strictly quasi-convex function, 315
Strong equilibrium c-point, 394
Stronger than, 308
Student-college matching, 429
Subgame, 6, 165
Subgame-perfect equilibrium, 165–169, 198–199
Superadditivity, 209, 356
Supergame, 183, 393
Supporting hyperplane, 17, 137
Surplus, 310
Symmetric equilibrium, 170
Symmetric game (n-person), 213
Symmetric game (2-person), 30, 32, 73, 170, 188
Symmetry (axiom), 188
System in I-standard form, 367
Terminal payoff, 102

--- Sayfa 627 ---
Terminal surface, 102
Theorem of the alternative for matrices, 19
Threats, 194–198
Totally balanced game, 227
Total variation, 338
Transfer, 236
Trap, 113
Trichotomy, 147
Truncated game, 96
Two-sided matching, 424–429
Two-step value, 301
Type, 132
Type profile, 419
Unanimity games, 298, 299
Unbounded linear program, 38
United Nations Security Council, 241, 270, 276
Unstable assignment, 426
Upper semicontinuous, 436
Upper variation, 339
Value (of linear program), 35
Value (of 2-person game), 21
long-run average, 127
Vertex, 2, 6–7, 42
Veto player, 218–219
Victoria proposal, 271, 277
Voting game, 395
Weighted majority game, 213, 297
Winning coalition, 213, 395
Yolk, 399, 411
(0, 1)-normalization, 212
Zero-sum game, 13