--- Sayfa 3 ---
Game Theory

--- Sayfa 5 ---
GAME THEORY
Analysis of Conflict
ROGER B. MYERSON
HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS
Cambridge, Massachusetts
London, England

--- Sayfa 6 ---
Copyright © 1991 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College
All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America
First Harvard University Press paperback edition, 1997
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Myerson, Roger B.
Game theory : analysis of conflict / Roger B. Myerson.
p.
cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-674-34115-5 (cloth)
ISBN 0-674-34116-3 (pbk.)
1. Game Theory 	I. Title
H61.25.M94
1991
519.3—dc20
90-42901

--- Sayfa 7 ---
For Gina, Daniel, and Rebecca
With the hope that a better understanding of conflict
may help create a safer and more peaceful world

--- Sayfa 9 ---
Contents
Preface
xi
1 Decision-Theoretic Foundations
1
1.1
Game Theory, Rationality, and Intelligence
1.2 Basic Concepts of Decision Theory
5
1.3 Axioms
9
1.4 The Expected-Utility Maximization Theorem
12
1.5
Equivalent Representations 18
1.6 Bayesian Conditional-Probability Systems
21
1.7 Limitations of the Bayesian Model
22
1.8 Domination
26
1.9 Proofs of the Domination Theorems
31
Exercises
33
2 Basic Models
37
2.1 Games in Extensive Form 37
2.2 Strategic Form and the Normal Representation
46
2.3 Equivalence of Strategic-Form Games
51
2.4 Reduced Normal Representations
54
2.5 Elimination of Dominated Strategies
57
2.6 Multiagent Representations
61
2.7 Common Knowledge
63
2.8 Bayesian Games
67
2.9 Modeling Games with Incomplete Information
74
Exercises
83
3 Equilibria of Strategic-Form Games
88
3.1
Domination and Rationalizability
88
3.2 Nash Equilibrium
91

--- Sayfa 10 ---
viii
Contents
3.3 Computing Nash Equilibria
99
3.4 Significance of Nash Equilibria
105
3.5 The Focal-Point Effect 108
3.6 The Decision-Analytic Approach to Games
114
3.7 Evolution, Resistance, and Risk Dominance
117
3.8 Two-Person Zero-Sum Games
122
3.9
Bayesian Equilibria
127
3.10 Purification of Randomized Strategies in Equilibria
129
3.11 Auctions
132
3.12 Proof of Existence of Equilibrium 136
3.13 Infinite Strategy Sets
140
Exercises
148
4 Sequential Equilibria of Extensive-Form Games
154
4.1
Mixed Strategies and Behavioral Strategies
154
4.2
Equilibria in Behavioral Strategies
161
4.3
Sequential Rationality at Information States with Positive
Probability
163
4.4 Consistent Beliefs and Sequential Rationality at All Information
States
168
4.5 Computing Sequential Equilibria
177
4.6 Subgame-Perfect Equilibria
183
4.7 Games with Perfect Information
185
4.8 Adding Chance Events with Small Probability
187
4.9 Forward Induction
190
4.10 Voting and Binary Agendas
196
4.11 Technical Proofs
202
Exercises 208
5 Refinements of Equilibrium in Strategic Form
213
5.1
Introduction
213
5.2
Perfect Equilibria
216
5.3
Existence of Perfect and Sequential Equilibria
221
5.4
Proper Equilibria
222
5.5
Persistent Equilibria
230
5.6
Stable Sets of Equilibria
232
5.7 Generic Properties
239
5.8 Conclusions
240
Exercises
242
6 Games with Communication
244
6.1
Contracts and Correlated Strategies
244
6.2 Correlated Equilibria
249
6.3 Bayesian Games with Communication
258
6.4 Bayesian Collective-Choice Problems and Bayesian Bargaining
Problems
263

--- Sayfa 11 ---
Contents
ix
6.5 Trading Problems with Linear Utility
271
6.6 General Participation Constraints for Bayesian Games with
Contracts
281
6.7 Sender-Receiver Games
283
6.8 Acceptable and Predominant Correlated Equilibria
288
6.9 Communication in Extensive-Form and Multistage Games
294
Exercises
299
Bibliographic Note
307
7 Repeated Games
308
7.1 The Repeated Prisoners' Dilemma
308
7.2 A General Model of Repeated Games
310
7.3 Stationary Equilibria of Repeated Gaines with Complete State
Information and Discounting
317
7.4 Repeated Games with Standard Information: Examples
323
7.5 General Feasibility Theorems for Standard Repeated Games
331
7.6 Finitely Repeated Games and the Role of Initial Doubt
337
7.7 Imperfect Observability of Moves
342
7.8 Repeated Games in Large Decentralized Groups
349
7.9 Repeated Games with Incomplete Information
352
7.10 Continuous Time
361
7.11 Evolutionary Simulation of Repeated Games
364
Exercises
365
8 Bargaining and Cooperation in Two-Person Games
370
8.1 Noncooperative Foundations of Cooperative Game Theory
370
8.2 Two-Person Bargaining Problems and the Nash Bargaining
Solution
375
8.3 Interpersonal Comparisons of Weighted Utility
381
8.4 Transferable Utility
384
8.5 Rational Threats
385
8.6 Other Bargaining Solutions
390
8.7 An Alternating-Offer Bargaining Game
394
8.8 An Alternating-Offer Game with Incomplete Information
399
8.9 A Discrete Alternating-Offer Game
403
8.10 Renegotiation
408
Exercises
412
9 Coalitions in Cooperative Games
417
9.1
Introduction to Coalitional Analysis
417
9.2 Characteristic Functions with Transferable Utility
422
9.3 The Core
427
9.4 The Shapley Value
436
9.5 Values with Cooperation Structures
444
9.6 Other Solution Concepts
452
9.7 Coalitional Games with Nontransferable Utility
456

--- Sayfa 12 ---
x
Contents
9.8 Cores without Transferable Utility
462
9.9 Values without Transferable Utility
468
Exercises 478
Bibliographic Note
481
10 Cooperation under Uncertainty
483
10.1 Introduction
483
10.2 Concepts of Efficiency
485
10.3 An Example 489
10.4 Ex Post Inefficiency and Subsequent Offers
493
10.5 Computing Incentive-Efficient Mechanisms
497
10.6 Inscrutability and Durability
502
10.7 Mechanism Selection by an Informed Principal
509
10.8 Neutral Bargaining Solutions
515
10.9 Dynamic Matching Processes with Incomplete Information
526
Exercises 534
Bibliography
Index
539
553

--- Sayfa 13 ---
Preface
Game theory has a very general scope, encompassing questions that are
basic to all of the social sciences. It can offer insights into any economic,
political, or social situation that involves individuals who have different
goals or preferences. However, there is a fundamental unity and co-
herent methodology that underlies the large and growing literature on
game theory and its applications. My goal in this book is to convey both
the generality and the unity of game theory. I have tried to present
some of the most important models, solution concepts, and results of
game theory, as well as the methodological principles that have guided
game theorists to develop these models and solutions.
This book is written as a general introduction to game theory, in-
tended for both classroom use and self-study. It is based on courses that
I have taught at Northwestern University, the University of Chicago,
and the University of Paris—Dauphine. I have included here, however,
somewhat more cooperative game theory than I can actually cover in a
first course. I have tried to set an appropriate balance between non-
cooperative and cooperative game theory, recognizing the fundamental
primacy of noncooperative game theory but also the essential and com-
plementary role of the cooperative approach.
The mathematical prerequisite for this book is some prior exposure
to elementary calculus, linear algebra, and probability, at the basic un-
dergraduate level. It is not as important to know the theorems that may
be covered in such mathematics courses as it is to be familiar with the
basic ideas and notation of sets, vectors, functions, and limits. Where
more advanced mathematics is used, I have given a short, self-contained
explanation of the mathematical ideas.

--- Sayfa 14 ---
xii
Preface
In every chapter, there are some topics of a more advanced or spe-
cialized nature that may be omitted without loss of subsequent compre-
hension. I have not tried to "star" such sections or paragraphs. Instead,
I have provided cross-references to enable a reader to skim or pass over
sections that seem less interesting and to return to them if they are
needed later in other sections of interest. Page references for the im-
portant definitions are indicated in the index.
In this introductory text, I have not been able to cover every major
topic in the literature on game theory, and I have not attempted to
assemble a comprehensive bibliography. I have tried to exercise my best
judgment in deciding which topics to emphasize, which to mention
briefly, and which to omit; but any such judgment is necessarily subjec-
tive and controversial, especially in a field that has been growing and
changing as rapidly as game theory. For other perspectives and more
references to the vast literature on game theory, the reader may consult
some of the other excellent survey articles and books on game theory,
which include Aumann (1987b) and Shubik (1982).
A note of acknowledgment must begin with an expression of my debt
to Robert Aumann, John Harsanyi, John Nash, Reinhard Selten, and
Lloyd Shapley, whose writings and lectures taught and inspired all of
us who have followed them into the field of game theory. I have bene-
fited greatly from long conversations with Ehud Kalai and Robert Weber
about game theory and, specifically, about what should be covered in a
basic textbook on game theory. Discussions with Bengt Holmstrom, Paul
Milgrom, and Mark Satterthwaite have also substantially influenced the
development of this book. Myrna Wooders, Robert Marshall, Dov Mon-
derer, Gregory Pollock, Leo Simon, Michael Chwe, Gordon Green,
Akihiko Matsui, Scott Page, and Eun Soo Park read parts of the manu-
script and gave many valuable comments. In writing the book, I have
also benefited from the advice and suggestions of Lawrence Ausubel,
Raymond Deneckere, Itzhak Gilboa, Ehud Lehrer, and other colleagues
in the Managerial Economics and Decision Sciences department at
Northwestern University. The final manuscript was ably edited by Jodi
Simpson, and was proofread by Scott Page, Joseph Riney, Ricard
Torres, Guangsug Hahn, Jose Luis Ferreira, loannis Tournas, Karl
Schlag, Keuk-Ryoul Yoo, Gordon Green, and Robert Lapson. This book
and related research have been supported by fellowships from the John
Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation and the Alfred P. Sloan

--- Sayfa 15 ---
Preface
xiii
Foundation, and by grants from the National Science Foundation and
the Dispute Resolution Research Center at Northwestern University.
Last but most, I must acknowledge the steady encouragement of my
wife, my children, and my parents, all of whom expressed a continual
faith in a writing project that seemed to take forever.
Evanston, Illinois
December 1990

--- Sayfa 17 ---
Game Theory

--- Sayfa 19 ---
1
Decision-Theoretic Foundations
1.1 Game Theory, Rationality, and Intelligence
Game theory can be defined as the study of mathematical models of
conflict and cooperation between intelligent rational decision-makers.
Game theory provides general mathematical techniques for analyzing
situations in which two or more individuals make decisions that will
influence one another's welfare. As such, game theory offers insights
of fundamental importance for scholars in all branches of the social
sciences, as well as for practical decision-makers. The situations that
game theorists study are not merely recreational activities, as the term
"game" might unfortunately suggest. "Conflict analysis" or "interactive
decision theory" might be more descriptively accurate names for the
subject, but the name "game theory" seems to be here to stay.
Modern game theory may be said to begin with the work of Zermelo
(1913), Borel (1921), von Neumann (1928), and the great seminal book
of von Neumann and Morgenstern (1944). Much of the early work on
game theory was done during World War II at Princeton, in the same
intellectual community where many leaders of theoretical physics were
also working (see Morgenstern, 1976). Viewed from a broader perspec-
tive of intellectual history, this propinquity does not seem coincidental.
Much of the appeal and promise of game theory is derived from its
position in the mathematical foundations of the social sciences. In this
century, great advances in the most fundamental and theoretical
branches of the physical sciences have created a nuclear dilemma that
threatens the survival of our civilization. People seem to have learned
more about how to design physical systems for exploiting radioactive
materials than about how to create social systems for moderating human

--- Sayfa 20 ---
2
1 • Decision-Theoretic Foundations
behavior in conflict. Thus, it may be natural to hope that advances in
the most fundamental and theoretical branches of the social sciences
might be able to provide the understanding that we need to match our
great advances in the physical sciences. This hope is one of the moti-
vations that has led many mathematicians and social scientists to work
in game theory during the past 50 years. Real proof of the power of
game theory has come in recent years from a prolific development of
important applications, especially in economics.
Game theorists try to understand conflict and cooperation by studying
quantitative models and hypothetical examples. These examples may
be unrealistically simple in many respects, but this simplicity may make
the fundamental issues of conflict and cooperation easier to see in these
examples than in the vastly more complicated situations of real life. Of
course, this is the method of analysis in any field of inquiry: to pose
one's questions in the context of a simplified model in which many of
the less important details of reality are ignored. Thus, even if one is
never involved in a situation in which people's positions are as clearly
defined as those studied by game theorists, one can still come to under-
stand real competitive situations better by studying these hypothetical
examples.
In the language of game theory, a game refers to any social situation
involving two or more individuals. The individuals involved in a game
may be called the players. As stated in the definition above, there are
two basic assumptions that game theorists generally make about players:
they are rational and they are intelligent. Each of these adjectives is
used here in a technical sense that requires some explanation.
A decision-maker is rational if he makes decisions consistently in pur-
suit of his own objectives. In game theory, building on the fundamental
results of decision theory, we assume that each player's objective is to
maximize the expected value of his own payoff, which is measured in
some utility scale. The idea that a rational decision-maker should make
decisions that will maximize his expected utility payoff goes back at least
to Bernoulli (1738), but the modern justification of this idea is due to
von Neumann and Morgenstern (1947). Using remarkably weak as-
sumptions about how a rational decision-maker should behave, they
showed that for any rational decision-maker there must exist some way
of assigning utility numbers to the various possible outcomes that he
cares about, such that he would always choose the option that maximizes

--- Sayfa 21 ---
1.1 Rationality and Intelligence
3
his expected utility. We call this result the expected-utility maximization
theorem.
It should be emphasized here that the logical axioms that justify the
expected-utility maximization theorem are weak consistency assump-
tions. In derivations of this theorem, the key assumption is generally a
sure-thing or substitution axiom that may be informally paraphrased as
follows: "If a decision-maker would prefer option 1 over option 2 when
event A occurs, and he would prefer option 1 over option 2 when event
A does not occur, then he should prefer option 1 over option 2 even
before he learns whether event A will occur or not." Such an assump-
tion, together with a few technical regularity conditions, is sufficient to
guarantee that there exists some utility scale such that the decision-
maker always prefers the options that give the highest expected utility
value.
Consistent maximizing behavior can also be derived from models of
evolutionary selection. In a universe where increasing disorder is a
physical law, complex organisms (including human beings and, more
broadly speaking, social organizations) can persist only if they behave
in a way that tends to increase their probability of surviving and repro-
ducing themselves. Thus, an evolutionary-selection argument suggests
that individuals may tend to maximize the expected value of some
measure of general survival and reproductive fitness or success (see
Maynard Smith, 1982).
In general, maximizing expected utility payoff is not necessarily the
same as maximizing expected monetary payoff, because utility values
are not necessarily measured in dollars and cents. A risk-averse individ-
ual may get more incremental utility from an extra dollar when he is
poor than he would get from the same dollar were he rich. This obser-
vation suggests that, for many decision-makers, utility may be a nonlin-
ear function of monetary worth. For example, one model that is com-
monly used in decision analysis stipulates that a decision-maker's utility
payoff from getting x dollars would be u(x) = 1 — e', for some number
c that represents his index of risk aversion (see Pratt, 1964). More gener-
ally, the utility payoff of an individual may depend on many variables
besides his own monetary worth (including even the monetary worths
of other people for whom he feels some sympathy or antipathy).
When there is uncertainty, expected utilities can be defined and com-
puted only if all relevant uncertain events can be assigned probabilities,

--- Sayfa 22 ---
4
1 • Decision-Theoretic Foundations
which quantitatively measure the likelihood of each event. Ramsey
(1926) and Savage (1954) showed that, even where objective probabili-
ties cannot be assigned to some events, a rational decision-maker should
be able to assess all the subjective probability numbers that are needed
to compute these expected values.
In situations involving two or more decision-makers, however, a spe-
cial difficulty arises in the assessment of subjective probabilities. For
example, suppose that one of the factors that is unknown to some given
individual 1 is the action to be chosen by some other individual 2. To
assess the probability of each of individual 2's possible choices, individual
1 needs to understand 2's decision-making behavior, so 1 may try to
imagine himself in 2's position. In this thought experiment, 1 may
realize that 2 is trying to rationally solve a decision problem of her own
and that, to do so, she must assess the probabilities of each of l's possible
choices. Indeed, 1 may realize that 2 is probably trying to imagine
herself in l's position, to figure out what 1 will do. So the rational
solution to each individual's decision problem depends on the solution
to the other individual's problem. Neither problem can be solved with-
out understanding the solution to the other. Thus, when rational deci-
sion-makers interact, their decision problems must be analyzed together,
like a system of equations. Such analysis is the subject of game theory.
When we analyze a game, as game theorists or social scientists, we say
that a player in the game is intelligent if he knows everything that we
know about the game and he can make any inferences about the situ-
ation that we can make. In game theory, we generally assume that
players are intelligent in this sense. Thus, if we develop a theory that
describes the behavior of intelligent players in some game and we believe
that this theory is correct, then we must assume that each player in the
game will also understand this theory and its predictions.
For an example of a theory that assumes rationality but not intelli-
gence, consider price theory in economics. In the general equilibrium
model of price theory, it is assumed that every individual is a rational
utility-maximizing decision-maker, but it is not assumed that individuals
understand the whole structure of the economic model that the price
theorist is studying. In price-theoretic models, individuals only perceive
and respond to some intermediating price signals, and each individual
is supposed to believe that he can trade arbitrary amounts at these
prices, even though there may not be anyone in the economy actually
willing to make such trades with him.

--- Sayfa 23 ---
1.2 • Basic Concepts
5
Of course, the assumption that all individuals are perfectly rational
and intelligent may never be satisfied in any real-life situation. On the
other hand, we should be suspicious of theories and predictions that
are not consistent with this assumption. If a theory predicts that some
individuals will be systematically fooled or led into making costly mis-
takes, then this theory will tend to lose its validity when these individuals
learn (from experience or from a published version of the theory itself )
to better understand the situation. The importance of game theory in
the social sciences is largely derived from this fact.
1.2 Basic Concepts of Decision Theory
The logical roots of game theory are in Bayesian decision theory. In-
deed, game theory can be viewed as an extension of decision theory (to
the case of two or more decision-makers), or as its essential logical
fulfillment. Thus, to understand the fundamental ideas of game theory,
one should begin by studying decision theory. The rest of this chapter
is devoted to an introduction to the basic ideas of Bayesian decision
theory, beginning with a general derivation of the expected utility max-
imization theorem and related results.
At some point, anyone who is interested in the mathematical social
sciences should ask the question, Why should I expect that any simple
quantitative model can give a reasonable description of people's behav-
ior? The fundamental results of decision theory directly address this
question, by showing that any decision-maker who satisfies certain in-
tuitive axioms should always behave so as to maximize the mathematical
expected value of some utility function, with respect to some subjective
probability distribution. That is, any rational decision-maker's behavior
should be describable by a utility function, which gives a quantitative
characterization of his preferences for outcomes or prizes, and a subjec-
tive probability distribution, which characterizes his beliefs about all rele-
vant unknown factors. Furthermore, when new information becomes
available to such a decision-maker, his subjective probabilities should be
revised in accordance with Bayes's formula.
There is a vast literature on axiomatic derivations of the subjective
probability, expected-utility maximization, and Bayes's formula, begin-
ning with Ramsey (1926), von Neumann and Morgenstern (1947), and
Savage (1954). Other notable derivations of these results have been
offered by Herstein and Milnor (1953), Luce and Raiffa (1957), An-

--- Sayfa 24 ---
6
1 • Decision-Theoretic Foundations
scombe and Aumann (1963), and Pratt, Raiffa, and Schlaiffer (1964);
for a general overview, see Fishburn (1968). The axioms used here are
mainly borrowed from these earlier papers in the literature, and no
attempt is made to achieve a logically minimal set of axioms. (In fact, a
number of axioms presented in Section 1.3 are clearly redundant.)
Decisions under uncertainty are commonly described by one of two
models: a probability model or a state-variable model. In each case, we speak
of the decision-maker as choosing among lotteries, but the two models
differ in how a lottery is defined. In a probability model, lotteries are
probability distributions over a set of prizes. In a state-variable model,
lotteries are functions from a set of possible states into a set of prizes.
Each of these models is most appropriate for a specific class of appli-
cations.
A probability model is appropriate for describing gambles in which
the prizes will depend on events that have obvious objective probabili-
ties; we refer to such events as objective unknowns. These gambles are
the "roulette lotteries" of Anscombe and Aumann (1963) or the "risks"
of Knight (1921). For example, gambles that depend on the toss of a
fair coin, the spin of a roulette wheel, or the blind draw of a ball out
of an urn containing a known population of identically sized but dif-
ferently colored balls all could be adequately described in a probability
model. An important assumption being used here is that two objective
unknowns with the same probability are completely equivalent for de-
cision-making purposes. For example, if we describe a lottery by saying
that it "offers a prize of $100 or $0, each with probability 1/2," we are
assuming that it does not matter whether the prize is determined by
tossing a fair coin or by drawing a ball from an urn that contains 50
white and 50 black balls.
On the other hand, many events do not have obvious probabilities;
the result of a future sports event or the future course of the stock
market are good examples. We refer to such events as subjective un-
knowns. Gambles that depend on subjective unknowns correspond to
the "horse lotteries" of Anscombe and Aumann (1963) or the "uncer-
tainties" of Knight (1921). They are more readily described in a state-
variable model, because these models allow us to describe how the prize
will be determined by the unpredictable events, without our having to
specify any probabilities for these events.
Here we define our lotteries to include both the probability and the
state-variable models as special cases. That is, we study lotteries in which

--- Sayfa 25 ---
1.2 Basic Concepts
7
the prize may depend on both objective unknowns (which may be di-
rectly described by probabilities) and subjective unknowns (which must
be described by a state variable). (In the terminology of Fishburn, 1970,
we are allowing extraneous probabilities in our model.)
Let us now develop some basic notation. For any finite set Z, we let
A(Z) denote the set of probability distributions over the set Z. That is,
(1.1)
A(Z) = {q:Z
RI
q(y) = 1 and q(z)
0, Vz E Z}.
yEZ
(Following common set notation, "I" in set braces may be read as "such
that.")
Let X denote the set of possible prizes that the decision-maker could
ultimately get. Let 11 denote the set of possible states, one of which will
be the true state of the world. To simplify the mathematics, we assume
that X and 11 are both finite sets. We define a lottery to be any function
f that specifies a nonnegative real number f(xIt), for every prize x in X
and every state t in CI, such that IxEx  f(x I t) = 1 for every t in 11. Let L
denote the set of all such lotteries. That is,
L = {f:11 ---> A(X)}.
For any state t in 11 and any lottery f in L, f(.1t) denotes the probability
distribution over X designated by f in state t. That is,
./-(' I
= (f(x t)),,Ex E A(X).
Each number f(x I t) here is to be interpreted as the objective condi-
tional probability of getting prize x in lottery f if t is the true state of
the world. (Following common probability notation, "1" in parentheses
may be interpreted here to mean "given.") For this interpretation to
make sense, the state must be defined broadly enough to summarize all
subjective unknowns that might influence the prize to be received. Then,
once a state has been specified, only objective probabilities will remain,
and an objective probability distribution over the possible prizes can be
calculated for any well-defined gamble. So our formal definition of a
lottery allows us to represent any gamble in which the prize may depend
on both objective and subjective unknowns.
A prize in our sense could be any commodity bundle or resource
allocation. We are assuming that the prizes in X have been defined so
that they are mutually exclusive and exhaust the possible consequences
of the decision-maker's decisions. Furthermore, we assume that each

--- Sayfa 26 ---
8
1 Decision-Theoretic Foundations
prize in X represents a complete specification of all aspects that the
decision-maker cares about in the situation resulting from his decisions.
Thus, the decision-maker should be able to assess a preference ordering
over the set of lotteries, given any information that he might have about
the state of the world.
The information that the decision-maker might have about the true
state of the world can be described by an event, which is a nonempty
subset of a We let El, denote the set of all such events, so that
= IS I S C SZ and S
01.
For any two lotteries f and g in L and any event S in
we write
f
g iff the lottery f would be at least as desirable as g, in the opinion
of the decision-maker, if he learned that the true state of the world was
in the set S. (Here iff means "if and only if.") That is, f g iff the
decision-maker would be willing to choose the lottery f when he has to
choose between f and g and he knows only that the event S has occurred.
Given this relation we define relations (>s) and (— s) so that
f —s  g iff f

g and g f;
f >, g iff f

g and g f
That is, f
s  g means that the decision-maker would be indifferent
between f and g, if he had to choose between them after learning S;
and f >, g means that he would strictly prefer f over g in this situation.
We may write >, and — for >n, and —n, respectively. That is,
when no conditioning event is mentioned, it should be assumed that we
are referring to prior preferences before any states in ft are ruled out
by observations.
Notice the assumption here that the decision-maker would have well-
defined preferences over lotteries conditionally on any possible event
in a In some expositions of decision theory, a decision-maker's condi-
tional preferences are derived (using Bayes's formula) from the prior
preferences that he would assess before making any observations; but
such derivations cannot generate rankings of lotteries conditionally on
events that have prior probability 0. In game-theoretic contexts, this
omission is not as innocuous as it may seem. Kreps and Wilson (1982)
have shown that the characterization of a rational decision-maker's be-
liefs and preferences after he observes a zero-probability event may be
crucial in the analysis of a game.
For any number a such that 0 5- a 5_ 1, and for any two lotteries f
and g in L, of + (1 — a)g denotes the lottery in L such that

--- Sayfa 27 ---
1.3 • Axioms
9
(af + (1 — a)g)(x1t) = af(x1t) + (1 — a)g(x1t), Vx E X, Vt E
To interpret this definition, suppose that a ball is going to be drawn
from an urn in which a is the proportion of black balls and 1 — a is
the proportion of white balls. Suppose that if the ball is black then the
decision-maker will get to play lottery f and if the ball is white then the
decision-maker will get to play lottery g. Then the decision-maker's
ultimate probability of getting prize x if t is the true state is af(x I  t) +
(1 — a)g(xjt). Thus, of + (1 — a)g represents the compound lottery that
is built up from f and g by this random lottery-selection process.
For any prize x, we let [x] denote the lottery that always gives prize x
for sure. That is, for every state t,
(1.2)
[x](ylt) = 1 if y = x, [x](ylt) = 0 if y
x.
Thus, a[x] + (1 — u)[y] denotes the lottery that gives either prize x or
prize y, with probabilities a and 1 — a, respectively.
1.3 Axioms
Basic properties that a rational decision-maker's preferences may be
expected to satisfy can be presented as a list of axioms. Unless otherwise
stated, these axioms are to hold for all lotteries e, f, g, and h in L, for
all events S and T in E, and for all numbers a and 13 between 0 and 1.
Axioms 1.1A and 1.1B assert that preferences should always form a
complete transitive order over the set of lotteries.
AXIOM 1. 1A (COMPLETENESS). f g or g s  f.
AXIOM 1. 1B (TRANSITIVITY). If f zs  g and g
h then f -?-s  h.
It is straightforward to check that Axiom 1.1B implies a number of
other transitivity results, such as if f — s  g and g —s  h then f— s  h; and
if f >s  g and g h then f>, h.
Axiom 1.2 asserts that only the possible states are relevant to the
decision-maker, so, given an event S, he would be indifferent between
two lotteries that differ only in states outside S.
AXIOM 1.2 (RELEVANCE). If f(•1 t) = g(•It) Vt E S, then f —s  g.
Axiom 1.3 asserts that a higher probability of getting a better lottery
is always better.

--- Sayfa 28 ---
10
1 • Decision-Theoretic Foundations
AXIOM 1.3 (MONOTONICITY). If f >s  h and 0 5_ 13<a51, then
of + (1 — a)h >s  I3f + ( 1 — (3)h.
Building on Axiom 1.3, Axiom 1.4 asserts that -yf + (1 — y)h gets
better in a continuous manner as y increases, so any lottery that is
ranked between f and h is just as good as some randomization between
f and h.
AXIOM 1.4 (CONTINUITY). If f
g and g
h, then there exists
some number y such that 0 -y s 1 and g —s  -yf + (1 — -y)h.
The substitution axioms (also known as independence or sure-thing
axioms) are probably the most important in our system, in the sense
that they generate strong restrictions on what the decision-maker's pref-
erences must look like even without the other axioms. They should also
be very intuitive axioms. They express the idea that, if the decision-
maker must choose between two alternatives and if there are two mu-
tually exclusive events, one of which must occur, such that in each event
he would prefer the first alternative, then he must prefer the first
alternative before he learns which event occurs. (Otherwise, he would
be expressing a preference that he would be sure to want to reverse
after learning which of these events was true!) In Axioms 1.5A and
1.5B, these events are objective randomizations in a random lottery-
selection process, as discussed in the preceding section. In Axioms 1.6A
and 1.6B, these events are subjective unknowns, subsets of f/.
AXIOM 1.5A (OBJECTIVE SUBSTITUTION). If e f and g >s  h
and 0 s a
1, then ae + (1 — a)g
of + (1 — a)h.
AXIOM 1.5B (STRICT OBJECTIVE SUBSTITUTION). If e >s  f
and g
h and 0 < a 5_ 1, then ae + (1 — a)g >s  of + (1 — a)h.
AXIOM 1.6A (SUBJECTIVE SUBSTITUTION). If f g and f
g and S fl T = 0, then f'suT g.
AXIOM 1.6B (STRICT SUBJECTIVE SUBSTITUTION). If f >s  g
and f >T g and S fl T = 0, then f >suT  g.

--- Sayfa 29 ---
1.3 Axioms
11
To fully appreciate the importance of the substitution axioms, we may
find it helpful to consider the difficulties that arise in decision theory
when we try to drop them. For a simple example, suppose an individual
would prefer x over y, but he would also prefer .5[y]+ .5[z] over .5[x] +
.5[z], in violation of substitution. Suppose that w is some other prize
that he would consider better than .5[x] + .5[z] and worse than .5[y] +
.5[z]. That is,
x > y but .5[y] + .5[z] > [w] > .5[x] + .5[z].
Now consider the following situation. The decision-maker must first
decide whether to take prize w or not. If he does not take prize w, then
a coin will be tossed. If it comes up Heads, then he will get prize z; and
if it comes up Tails, then he will get a choice between prizes x and y.
What should this decision-maker do? He has three possible decision-
making strategies: (1) take w, (2) refuse w and take x if Tails, (3) refuse
w and take y if Tails. If he follows the first strategy, then he gets the
lottery [w]; if he follows the second, then he gets the lottery .5[x] +
.5[z]; and if he follows the third, then he gets the lottery .5[y] + .5[z].
Because he likes .5[y] + .5[z] best among these lotteries, the third
strategy would be best for him, so it may seem that he should refuse w.
However, if he refuses w and the coin comes up Tails, then his pref-
erences stipulate that he should choose x instead of y. So if he refuses
w, then he will actually end up with z if Heads or x if Tails. But this
lottery .5[x] + .5[z] is worse than w. So we get the contradictory conclu-
sion that he should have taken w in the first place.
Thus, if we are to talk about "rational" decision-making without sub-
stitution axioms, then we must specify whether rational decision-makers
are able to commit themselves to follow strategies that they would sub-
sequently want to change (in which case "rational" behavior would lead
to .5[y] + .5[z] in this example). If they cannot make such commitments,
then we must also specify whether they can foresee their future incon-
stancy (in which case the outcome of this example should be [w]) or not
(in which case the outcome of this example should be .5[x]+ .5[z]). If
none of these assumptions seem reasonable, then to avoid this dilemma
we must accept substitution axioms as a part of our definition of ration-
ality.
Axiom 1.7 asserts that the decision-maker is never indifferent between
all prizes. This axiom is just a regularity condition, to make sure that
there is something of interest that could happen in each state.

--- Sayfa 30 ---
12
1 Decision-Theoretic Foundations
AXIOM 1.7 (INTEREST). For every state t in S2, there exist prizes y and
z in X such that [y] >m  [z].
Axiom 1.8 is optional in our analysis, in the sense that we can state a
version of our main result with or without this axiom. It asserts that the
decision-maker has the same preference ordering over objective gam-
bles in all states of' the world. If this axiom fails, it is because the same
prize might be valued differently in different states.
AXIOM 1.8 (STATE NEUTRALITY). For any two states r and t in ft
if f(lr) = f(.It) and g(.Ir) = g(.1t) and f Z'{r}  g, then f
g.
1.4 The Expected-Utility Maximization Theorem
A conditional-probability function on 11 is any function p:!, ---> A(I),) that
specifies nonnegative conditional probabilities p(tIS) for every state t in
f2 and every event S, such that
p(tIS) = 0 if t 0 S, and
Nrls) = 1.
rES
Given any such conditional-probability function, we may write
p(RIS) =
p(rIs), VR C SZ, VS ( E.
>ER
A utility function can be any function from X x 11 into the real numbers
R. A utility function u:X x SZ —> R is state independent iff it does not
actually depend on the state, so there exists some function U:X —> R
such that u(x4) = U(x) for all x and t.
Given any such conditional-probability function p and any utility func-
tion u and given any lottery f in L and any event S in we let E p(u( f )IS)
denote the expected utility value of the prize determined by f, when
p(.IS) is the probability distribution for the true state of the world. That
is,
E p(u( f )1 S) =-
p(tIS)
u(x,t)f(x1t).
THEOREM 1.1. Axioms I.1AB, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5AB, 1.6AB, and 1.7
are jointly satisfied if and only if there exists a utility function u:X X SI —) R
and a conditional-probability function
A(1-1) such that

--- Sayfa 31 ---
1.4 • Expected-Utility Maximization Theorem
13
(1.3)
max u(x,t) = 1 and min u(x,t) = 0, bit E
sEX
xEX
(1.4)
p(R1T) = p(Rjs)p(siT), VR, VS, and VT such that
RCSCTCfland SOO;
(1.5)
f
g if and only if E p(u( f )IS)
E p(u(g)IS),
Vf,g E L, VS E
Furthermore, given these Axioms 1.1AB-1.7, Axiom 1.8 is also satisfied if and
only if conditions (1.3)—(1.5) here can be satisfied with a state-independent utility
function.
In this theorem, condition (1.3) is a normalization condition, asserting
that we can choose our utility functions to range between 0 and 1 in
every state. (Recall that X and Cl are assumed to be finite.) Condition
(1.4) is a version of Bayes's formula, which establishes how conditional
probabilities assessed in one event must be related to conditional prob-
abilities assessed in another. The most important part of the theorem
is condition (1.5), however, which asserts that the decision-maker always
prefers lotteries with higher expected utility. By condition (1.5), once
we have assessed u and p, we can predict the decision-maker's optimal
choice in any decision-making situation. He will choose the lottery with
the highest expected utility among those available to him, using his
subjective probabilities conditioned on whatever event in Cl he has ob-
served. Notice that, with X and Cl finite, there are only finitely many
utility and probability numbers to assess. Thus, the decision-maker's
preferences over all of the infinitely many lotteries in L can be com-
pletely characterized by finitely many numbers.
To apply this result in practice, we need a procedure for assessing
the utilities u(x,t) and the probabilities p(t1s), for all x, t, and S. As Raiffa
(1968) has emphasized, such procedures do exist, and they form the
basis of practical decision analysis. To define one such assessment pro-
cedure, and to prove Theorem 1.1, we begin by defining some special
lotteries, using the assumption that the decision-maker's preferences
satisfy Axioms 1.1AB-1.7.
Let a, be a lottery that gives the decision-maker one of the best prizes
in every state; and let ao  be a lottery that gives him one of the worst
prizes in every state. That is, for every state t, a1(y1t) = 1 = ao(z1t) for
some prizes y and z such that, for every x in X, y x z. Such best

--- Sayfa 32 ---
14
1 • Decision-Theoretic Foundations
and worst prizes can be found in every state because the preference
relation (....{,}) forms a transitive ordering over the finite set X.
For any event S in E•„ let bs  denote the lottery such that
bs(.1t) = a,(.1t) if t E S,
b5(.1t) = a„(•1t) if t 0 S.
That is, bs  is a "bet on S" that gives the best possible prize if S occurs
and gives the worst possible prize otherwise.
For any prize x and any state t, let c„,, be the lottery such that
r) = [x](. I r) if r = t,
c,,,(• I r) = ao • I r) if r
t.
That is, co  is the lottery that always gives the worst prize, except in state
t, when it gives prize x.
We can now define a procedure to assess the utilities and probabilities
that satisfy the theorem, given preferences that satisfy the axioms. For
each x and t, first ask the decision-maker, "For what number 13 would
you be indifferent between [x] and Ba, + (1 — 13)a, if you knew that t
was the true state of the world?" By the continuity axiom, such a number
must exist. Then let u(x,t) equal the number that he specifies, such that
[x] —{,} u(x,t)a, + (1 — u(x,t))ao.
For each t and 5, ask the decision-maker, "For what number y would
you be indifferent between b{,}  and ya, + (1 — y)ao  if you knew that
the true state was in S?" Again, such a number must exist, by the
continuity axiom. (The subjective substitution axiom guarantees that
a,
b{1} ?s a0.) Then let p(tls) equal the number that he specifies, such
that
b{,}
p(tIS)a, + (1 — p(t1S))ao.
In the proof of Theorem 1.1, we show that defining u and p in this way
does satisfy the conditions of the theorem. Thus, finitely many questions
suffice to assess the probabilities and utilities that completely character-
ize the decision-maker's preferences.
Proof of Theorem 1.1. Let p and u be as constructed above. First, we
derive condition ( 1.5) from the axioms. The relevance axiom and the
definition of u(x,t) implies that, for every state r,

--- Sayfa 33 ---
1.4 .Expected-Utility Maximization Theorem
15
u(x,t)b{, }  + (1 - u(x,t))ao.
Then subjective substitution implies that, for every event S,
s  u(x,t)b{,}  + (1 - u(x,t))ao.
Axioms 1.5A and 1.5B together imply that f
g if and only if
( 1
1 	 1
1
i) f + (1
1,—(1-
1) ao
(4-1-
1) g + (1 - 47)  %.
(Here, 111,1 denotes the number of states in the set SZ.) Notice that
(pi)f + (1
ao  = (TO /51 xx  f(xl
1
1 	1
But, by repeated application of the objective substitution axiom,
(

(
s
I
%-s
f(X10kU(X,t)b{t} + (1 — U(X,Oad
,
'Ell xEX
,E  Efix10(24x,o(p(tis)a,
xEX
+ (1 — p(tIS))aO) + ( 1 - u(x,t))ao)
(1+1-i)
f(xl t)u(x,t)p(t I S)a,
+  (1 - E E f(xjou(x,00ls)/Ifil)ao
tES1 xEX
= (Ep(U(PIS)/10ai + (1
(Ep(U(f)1S)/11/1))a0•
Similarly,
(1/InOg + (1 - (1/111j))ao
-s  (Ep(u(g)IS)/Ifil)a l  + (1 - (Ep(u(g)15')/Ifil))ao•
Thus, by transitivity, f
g if and only if

--- Sayfa 34 ---
16
1 • Decision-Theoretic Foundations
(Ep(u(f )1S)/1,111)a, + (1 — (Ep(u(f )1S)/IniDao
(Ei(it(g)1S)/ini)a l  + (1 — (Ep(u(g)IS)/ini))ao•
But by monotonicity, this final relation holds if and only if
E p(u(f)1S)
Ep(u(g)IS),
because interest and strict subjective substitution guarantee that
a, >5  ao. Thus, condition (1.5) is satisfied.
Next, we derive condition (1.4) from the axioms. For any events R
and S,
E
(IRS) bR
(1
a°
(I
b{,}
RI) 'ER
(IR'  I)E (p(ds)a, + (1 — p(ris))a)
,ER
= (
I R ' )(P(R1s)a, + (1 — P(RiS))ao)
( 1
IR
' I a'

by objective substitution. Ri is the number of states in the set R.) Then,
using Axioms 1.5A and 1.5B, we get
b,
s  p(RIS)a, + (1 — p(RIS))ao.
By the relevance axiom, bs  —, a, and, for any r not in S,
— 5  a,.
So the above formula implies (using monotonicity and interest) that
p(riS) = 0 if r S, and p(sls) = 1. Thus, p is a conditional-probability
function, as defined above.
Now, suppose that R CSC T. Using b, —s  a, again, we get
b„
p(RIS)b, + (1 — p(RIS))ao.
Furthermore, because b„, bs, and a, all give the same worst prize outside
5, relevance also implies
b„ --r\s  p(Ris)b, + (1 — p(RIS))ao.
(Here T\S = {ti t E T, t 0 S}.) So, by subjective and objective substitution,
bR
T P(R I WS + ( 1  — P(R I S))aO
p(R1s)(p(sIT)a, + (1 — p(siT))ao) + (1 — p(RIS))a()
= p(RIS)p(SIT)a, + (1 — p(Ris)p(siT))ao.

--- Sayfa 35 ---
1.4 • Expected-Utility Maximization Theorem
17
But b,
p(RIT)a, + (1 — p(RiT))ao. Also, a, >7- a0, so monotonicity
implies that p(R1T) = p(Ris)p(sIT). Thus, Bayes's formula (1.4) follows
from the axioms.
If y is the best prize and z is the worst prize in state t, then [y]
{t}  a,
and [z] a,), so that u(y,t) = 1 and u(z,t) = 0 by monotonicity. So the
range condition (1.3) is also satisfied by the utility function that we have
constructed.
If state neutrality is also given, then the decision-maker will give us
the same answer when we assess u(x,t) as when we assess u(x,r) for any
other state r (because [x] —{,} Pa, + (1 — (3)a, implies [x] pa, +
(1 — p)a(), and monotonicity and interest guarantee that his answer is
unique). So Axiom 1.8 implies that u is state-independent.
To complete the proof of the theorem, it remains to show that the
existence of functions u and p that satisfy conditions (1.3)—(1.5) in the
theorem is sufficient to imply all the axioms (using state independence
only for Axiom 1.8). If we use the basic mathematical properties of the
expected-utility formula, verification of the axioms is straightforward.
To illustrate, we show the proof of one axiom, subjective substitution,
and leave the rest as an exercise for the reader.
Suppose that f
g and f
g and S fl T = 0. By (1.5), E p(u(f)IS)
E p(u(g)1S) and E p(u( f )IT)
E p(u(g)IT). But Bayes's formula (1.4)
implies that
Ep(u(f)1S U T) =
p(tis U T)f(x1t)u(x,t)
r

= E E p(ths)p(sis U T)f(x1t)u(x,t)
/ES vEX
+
E POI nP(TIs U T)f(xlt)u(x,t)
1E7' vEX
= p(SIS U T)E p(u( f )1 S) + pals U T)E p(u( f )1S)
and
Ep(u(g)1S U T) = p(SIS U T)Ep(u(g)IS) + pals U T)Ep(u(g)IS).
So Ep(u(f)IS U T)
Ep(u(g)IS U T) and f z.sur g. •

--- Sayfa 36 ---
18
1 Decision-Theoretic Foundations
1.5 Equivalent Representations
When we drop the range condition (1.3), there can be more than one
pair of utility and conditional-probability functions that represent the
same decision-maker's preferences, in the sense of condition (1.5). Such
equivalent representations are completely indistinguishable in terms of
their decision-theoretic properties, so we should be suspicious of any
theory of economic behavior that requires distinguishing between such
equivalent representations. Thus, it may be theoretically important to
be able to recognize such equivalent representations.
Given any subjective event S, when we say that a utility function v
and a conditional-probability function q represent the preference order-
ing we mean that, for every pair of lotteries f and g, Eq(v(f)IS)
Eq(v(g)IS) if and only if f
g.
THEOREM 1.2. Let S in EI be any given subjective event. Suppose that the
decision-maker's preferences satisfy Axioms 1.1AB through 1.7, and let u and p
be utility and conditional-probability functions satisfying (1.3)—(1.5) in Theorem
1.1. Then v and q represent the preference ordering >s  if and only if there
exists a positive number A and a function B:S —> R such that
q(tIS)v(x,t) = Ap(tIS)u(x,t) + B(t), Vt E S,
Nix E X.
Proof. Suppose first that A and 13(•) exist as described in the theorem.
Then, for any lottery f,
E q(v( f )1 S) 	f(xlt)q(tIS)v(x,t)
IES xEX
=
E focloop(o)u(x,t) + B(0)
IES xEX
= AEIf(Xlop(tis)u(x,t) +
B(t)
foclo
tES xEX
tES
xEX
= AE p  (u(f)IS) +
B(t),
because E„,„ f(x I = 1. So expected v-utility with respect to q is an
increasing linear function of expected u-utility with respect to p, because
A > 0. Thus, Ea(v(f)IS)
Eg(v(g)IS) if and only if Ep(u(f)IS)
Ep(u(g)IS), and so v and q together represent the same preference
ordering over lotteries as u and p.

--- Sayfa 37 ---
1.5 • Equivalent Representations
19
Conversely, suppose now that v and q represent the same preference
ordering as u and p. Pick any prize x and state t, and let
E  q(v(cx
'
t)I S) — E  q(v(ao)IS)
X = E q(v (a 1) I S) — E q(v(ao)I S)
Then, by the linearity of the expected-value operator,
Eq(v(ka, + (1 — X)a,) I S) = E q(v(a0)1 S) + X(E q(v(a 01 S) — E q(v(a0)1 S))
= E q(v(c ,t)I S) ,
so cx,, —, Xa, + (1 — X.)a,. In the proof of Theorem 1.1, we constructed
u and p so that
c„,, - - s  u(x ,t)b{, }  + (1 — u(x ,t))ao
—s  u(x,t)(P(ti S)al + (1 — P(tIS))a,) + (1 — u(x ,t))ao
—s  POI S)u(x ,t)c t 1  + (1 — p(t1s)u(x,t))ao.
The monotonicity axiom guarantees that only one randomization be-
tween a, and a, can be just as good as c„,„ so
X = p(t1s)u(x,t).
But c,, differs from a, only in state t, where it gives prize x instead of
the worst prize, so
Eq(v(c„,)1 5) — Eq(v(ao) I S) = q(t I S) (v(x a) — min v(z,t)) .
zEX
Thus, going back to the definition of X, we get
q(t I S)(v(x a) — min v(z,t))
zEX
E q(v(a 1)1 S) — E q(v(a0)I S)
Now let
A = E q(v (a 01 S) — E q(v (601 S) ,
and let
B(t)' = q(tI S) min v(z,t).
zEX
p(tis)u(x,t) .---

--- Sayfa 38 ---
20
1 • Decision-Theoretic Foundations
Then
Ap(tIS)u(x,t) + B(t) = q(tIS)v(x,t).
Notice that A is independent of x and t and that B(t) is independent of
x. In addition, A > 0, because a, >s  a, implies Eq(v(a,)IS) >
E ,(v (a 0)1S). I
It is easy to see from Theorem 1.2 that more than one probability
distribution can represent the decision-maker's beliefs given some event
S. In fact, we can make the probability distribution q(• IS) almost any-
thing and still satisfy the equation in Theorem 1.2, as long as we make
reciprocal changes in v, to keep the left-hand side of the equation the
same. The way to eliminate this indeterminacy is to assume Axiom 1.8
and require utility functions to be state independent.
THEOREM 1.3. Let S in 5, be any given subjective event. Suppose that the
decision-maker's preferences satisfy Axioms 1.IAB through 1.8, and let u and p
be the state-independent utility function and the conditional-probability function,
respectively, that satisfy conditions (1.3)—(1.5) in Theorem 1.1. Let v be a state-
independent utility function, let q be a conditional-probability function, and
suppose that v and q represent the preference ordering Then
q(11S) =
Vt E S,
and there exist numbers A and C such that A > 0 and
v(x) = Au(x) + C, Vx E X.
(For simplicity, we can write v(x) and u(x) here, instead of v(x,t) and u(x,t),
because both functions are state independent.)
Proof. Let A = ,(v(a S) —
q(v(ao) I S), and let C = minzExv(z). Then,
from the proof of Theorem 1.2,
Ap(t1S)u(x) + q(tIS)C = q(tIS)v(x), Vx E X, Vt E S.
Summing this equation over all t in S, we get Au(x) + C = v(x). Then,
substituting this equation back, and letting x be the best prize so u(x) =
1, we get
Ap(o) + q(tIS)C = Aq(t1S) + q(tIS)C.
Because A > 0, we get p(tis) = q(tIS). I

--- Sayfa 39 ---
1.6 • Bayesian Conditional-Probability Systems
21
1.6 Bayesian Conditional-Probability Systems
We define a Bayesian conditional-probability system (or simply a conditional-
probability system) on the finite set f2 to be any conditional-probability
function p on SI that satisfies condition (1.4) (Bayes's formula). That is,
if p is a Bayesian conditional-probability system on 12, then, for every S
that is a nonempty subset of SI, p(.Is) is a probability distribution over
,i/ such that p(sIs) = 1 and
p(RIT) = p(Rls)p(sIT), VR C S, VT D S.
We let L1*(0) denote the set of all Bayesian conditional-probability sys-
tems on Cl.
For any finite set Z, we let A°(Z) denote the set of all probability
distributions on Z that assign positive probability to every element in Z,
so
(1.6)
AV) = {q E A(Z)lq(z) > 0, Vz E Z}.
Any probability distribution fi in A°(.11) generates a conditional-proba-
bility system p in A*(a) by the formula
p(tIs) —
p
(r)
if t E S,
P
rES
p(tIs) = 0 if t
S.
The conditional-probability systems that can be generated in this way
from distributions in A°(C2) do not include all of 0*(f2), but any other
Bayesian conditional-probability system in A*(f2) can be expressed as
the limit of conditional-probability systems generated in this way. This
fact is asserted by the following theorem. For the proof, see Myerson
(1986b).
THEOREM 1 . 4 .
The probability function p is a Bayesian conditional-prob-
ability system in
*(Cl)
A
if and only if there exists a sequence of probability
distributions {fik },7_, in A°(S2) such that, for every nonempty subset S of Cl and
every t in Cl,
fik(t)
PO's) = lim E fik(r)
rES
p(tIs) = 0 if tlf S.
if t E S,

--- Sayfa 40 ---
22
1 Decision-Theoretic Foundations
1.7 Limitations of the Bayesian Model
We have seen how expected-utility maximization can be derived from
axioms that seem intuitively plausible as a characterization of rational
preferences. Because of this result, mathematical social scientists have
felt confident that mathematical models of human behavior that are
based on expected-utility maximization should have a wide applicability
and relevance. This book is largely motivated by such confidence.
It is important to try to understand the range of applicability of
expected-utility maximization in real decision-making. In considering
this question, we must remember that any model of decision-making
can be used either descriptively or prescriptively. That is, we may use a
model to try to describe and predict what people will do, or we may use
a model as a guide to apply to our own (or our clients') decisions. The
predictive validity of a model can be tested by experimental or empirical
data. The prescriptive validity of a decision model is rather harder to
test; one can only ask whether a person who understands the model
would feel that he would be making a mistake if he did not make
decisions according to the model.
Theorem 1.1, which derives expected-utility maximization from in-
tuitive axioms, is a proof of the prescriptive validity of expected-utility
maximization, if any such proof is possible. Although other models of
decision-making have been proposed, few have been able to challenge
the logical appeal of expected-utility maximization for prescriptive pur-
poses.
There is, of course, a close relationship between the prescriptive and
predictive roles of any decision-making model. If a model is prescrip-
tively valid for a decision-maker, then he diverges from the model only
when he is making a mistake. People do make mistakes, but they try
not to. When a person has had sufficient time to learn about a situation
and think clearly about it, we can expect that he will make relatively
few mistakes. Thus, we can expect expected-utility maximization to be
predictively accurate in many situations.
However, experimental research on decision-making has revealed
some systematic violations of expected-utility maximization (see Allais
and Hagen, 1979; Kahneman and Tversky, 1979; and Kahneman,
Slovic, and Tversky, 1982). This research has led to suggestions of new
models of decision-making that may have greater descriptive accuracy
(see Kahneman and Tversky, 1979; and Machina, 1982). We discuss

--- Sayfa 41 ---
1.7 • Limitations of the Bayesian Model
23
here three of the best-known examples in which people often seem to
violate expected-utility maximization: one in which utility functions
seem inapplicable, one in which subjective probability seems inapplica-
ble, and one in which any economic model seems inapplicable.
Consider first a famous paradox, due to M. Allais (see Allais and
Hagen, 1979). Let X = {$12 million, $1 million, $0}, and let
= .10[$12 million] + .90[$0],
f2  = .11[$1 million] + .89[$0],
f3  = [$1 million],
f, = .10[$12 million] + .89[$1 million] + .01[$0].
Many people will express the preferences f, > f2  and f3  > f4. (Recall
that no subscript on > means that we are conditioning on D..) Such
people may feel that $12 million is substantially better than $1 million,
so the slightly higher probability of winning in f2  compared with f, is
not worth the lower prize. On the other hand, they would prefer to
take the sure $1 million in f3, rather than accept a probability .01 of
getting nothing in exchange for a probability .10 of increasing the prize
to $12 million in f,.
Such preferences cannot be accounted for by any utility function. To
prove this, notice that
.5f, + .5f3  = .05[$12 million] + .5[$1 million] + .45[$0]
= .5f2
Thus, the common preferences f, > f2  and f3  > f4  must violate the strict
objective substitution axiom.
Other paradoxes have been generated that challenge the role of
subjective probability in decision theory, starting with a classic paper by
Ellsberg (1961). For a simple example of this kind, due to Raiffa (1968),
let X = {—$100,$100}, let SZ = {A,N}, and let
bA($1001A) = 1 = bA(—$1001N),
b,(—$1001A) = 1 = bN($100IN).
That is, bA  is a $100 bet in which the decision-maker wins if A occurs,
and bN  is a $100 bet in which the decision-maker wins if N occurs.
Suppose that A represents the state in which the American League will
win the next All-Star game (in American baseball) and that N represents

--- Sayfa 42 ---
24
1 • Decision-Theoretic Foundations
the state in which the National League will win the next All-Star game.
(One of these two leagues must win the All-Star game, because the rules
of baseball do not permit ties.)
Many people who feel that they know almost nothing about American
baseball express the preferences .5[$100] + .5[—$100] > 6, and .5[$100]
+ .5[ —$100] > b„,. That is, they would strictly prefer to bet $100 on
Heads in a fair coin toss than to bet $100 on either league in the All-
Star game. Such preferences cannot be accounted for by any subjective
probability distribution over II At least one state in I/ must have prob-
ability greater than or equal to .5, and the bet on the league that wins
in that state must give expected utility that is at least as great as the bet
on the fair coin toss. To see it another way, notice that
.506, + .506, = .5[$100] + .5[—$100]
= .50(.5[$100] + .5[—$100]) + .50(.5[$100] + .5[—$100]),
so the common preferences expressed above must violate the strict
objective substitution axiom.
To illustrate the difficulty of constructing a model of decision-making
that is both predictively accurate and prescriptively appealing, Kahne-
man and Tversky (1982) have suggested the following example. In
Situation A, you are arriving at a theatrical performance, for which you
have bought a pair of tickets that cost $40. You suddenly realize that
your tickets have fallen out of your pocket and are lost. You must decide
whether to buy a second pair of tickets for $40 (there are some similar
seats still available) or simply go home. In Situation B, you are arriving
at a theatrical performance for which a pair of tickets costs $40. You
did not buy tickets in advance, but you put $40 in your pocket when
you left home. You suddenly realize that the $40 has fallen out of your
pocket and is lost. You must decide whether to buy a pair of tickets for
$40 with your charge card (which you still have) or simply go home.
As Kahneman and Tversky (1982) report, most people say that they
would simply go home in Situation A but would buy the tickets in
Situation B. However, in each of these situations, the final outcomes
resulting from the two options are, on the one hand, seeing the perfor-
mance and being out $80 and, on the other hand, missing the perfor-
mance and being out $40. Thus, it is impossible to account for such
behavior in any economic model that assumes that the levels of monetary

--- Sayfa 43 ---
1.7 • Limitations of the Bayesian Model
25
wealth and theatrical consumption are all that should matter to the
decision-maker in these situations.
Any analytical model must derive its power from simplifying assump-
tions that enable us to see different situations as analytically equivalent,
but such simplifying assumptions are always questionable. A model that
correctly predicts the common behavior in this example must draw
distinctions between situations on the basis of fine details in the order
of events that have no bearing on the final outcome. Such distinctions,
however, would probably decrease the normative appeal of the model
if it were applied for prescriptive purposes. (What would you think of
a consultant who told you that you should make a point of behaving
differently in Situations A and B?)
The explanatory power of expected-utility maximization can be ex-
tended to explain many of its apparent contradictions by the analysis
of salient perturbations. A perturbation of a given decision problem is any
other decision problem that is very similar to it (in some sense). For any
given decision problem, we say that a perturbation is salient if people
who actually face the given decision problem are likely to act as if they
think that they are in this perturbation. A particular perturbation of a
decision problem may be salient when people find the decision problem
to be hard to understand and the perturbation is more like the kind of
situations that they commonly experience. If we can predict the salient
perturbation of an individual's decision problem, then the decision that
maximizes his expected utility in this salient perturbation may be a more
accurate prediction of his behavior.
For example, let us reconsider the problem of betting on the All-Star
game. To get a decision-maker to express his preference ordering (.-11)
over fb,, 6,, .5[$100] + .5[—$100]}, we must ask him, for each pair in
this set, which bet would he choose if this pair of bet-options were
offered to him uninformatively, that is, in a manner that does not give
him any new information about the true state in I. That is, when we
ask him whether he would prefer to bet $100 on the American League
or on a fair coin toss, we are assuming that the mere fact of offering
this option to him does not change his information about the All-Star
game. However, people usually offer to make bets only when they have
some special information or beliefs. Thus, when someone who knows
little about baseball gets an offer from another person to bet on the
American League, it is usually because the other person has information
suggesting that the American League is likely to lose. In such situations,

--- Sayfa 44 ---
26
1 Decision-Theoretic Foundations
an opportunity to bet on one side of the All-Star game should (by Bayes's
formula) make someone who knows little about baseball decrease his
subjective probability of the event that this side will win, so he may well
prefer to bet on a fair coin toss. We can try to offer bets uninformatively
in controlled experiments, and we can even tell our experimental sub-
jects that the bets are being offered uninformatively, but this is so
unnatural that the experimental subjects may instead respond to the
salient perturbation in which we would only offer baseball bets that we
expected the subject to lose.
1.8 Domination
Sometimes decision-makers find subjective probabilities difficult to as-
sess. There are fundamental theoretical reasons why this should be
particularly true in games. In a game situation, the unknown environ-
ment or "state of the world" that confronts a decision-maker may in-
clude the outcome of decisions that are to be made by other people.
Thus, to assess his subjective probability distribution over this state
space, the decision-maker must think about everything that he knows
about other people's decision-making processes. To the extent that these
other people are concerned about his own decisions, his beliefs about
their behavior may be based at least in part on his beliefs about what
they believe that he will do himself. So assessing subjective probabilities
about others' behavior may require some understanding of the pre-
dicted outcome of his own decision-making process, part of which is his
probability assessment itself. The resolution of this seeming paradox is
the subject of game theory, to be developed in the subsequent chapters
of this book.
Sometimes, however, it is possible to say that some decision-options
could not possibly be optimal for a decision-maker, no matter what his
beliefs may be. In this section, before turning from decision theory to
game theory, we develop some basic results to show when such proba-
bility-independent statements can be made.
Consider a decision-maker who has a state-dependent utility function
u:X x SZ --> R and can choose any x in X. That is, let us reinterpret X
as the set of decision-options available to the decision-maker. If his
subjective probability of each state t in Si were p(t) (that is, p(t) = 0111),
Vt E 14), then the decision-maker would choose some particular y in X
only if

--- Sayfa 45 ---
1.8 Domination
27
(1.7)
E p(t)u(y,t)
E p(t)u(x,t), vx E X.
(En
tEO
Convexity is an important property of many sets that arise in math-
ematical economics. A set of vectors is convex iff, for any two vectors p
and q and any number X between 0 and 1, if p is in the set and q is in
the set then the vector Xp + (1 — X)q must also be in the set. Geomet-
rically, convexity means that, for any two points in the set, the whole
line segment between them must also be contained in the set.
THEOREM 1.5. Given u:X X
R and given y in X, the set of all p
in A(n) such that y is optimal is convex.
Proof. Suppose that y would be optimal for the decision-maker with
beliefs p and q. Let X be any number between 0 and 1, and let r =
Xp + (1 — X)q. Then for any x in X
E r(t)u(y,t) = X E p(ou(y,t) + (1 — X) E q(t)u(y,t)
tEll
t(f2
X
p(t)u(x,t) + (1 — X) E q(t)u(x,t)
rE0
(En
E r(t)u(x,t).
tES1
So y is optimal for beliefs r. I
For example, suppose X = {a,13,)/}, f = {01,02}, and the utility func-
tion u is as shown in Table 1.1. With only two states, p(01) = 1 — p(02).
The decision a is optimal for the decision-maker iff the following two
inequalities are both satisfied:
8p(01) + 1(1 — p(01))
5p(0,) + 3(1 — p(01))
8p(01) + 1(1 — p(01)) > 4p(01) + 7(1 — p(01)).
Table 1.1 Expected utility payoffs for states 0, and 02
Decision
e,
02
a
8
1
5
3
4
7

--- Sayfa 46 ---
28
1 Decision-Theoretic Foundations
The first of these inequalities asserts that the expected utility payoff
from a must be at least as much as from p, and the second asserts that
the expected utility payoff from a must be at least as much as from y.
By straightforward algebra, these inequalities imply that a is optimal
when p(01) 0.6.
Similarly, decision y would be optimal iff
4p(01) + 7(1 — p(01)) > 8p(01) + 1(1 — p(01))
4p(01) + 7(1
— P(0I)) > 5p(01) + 3(1  — PA%
and these two inequalities are both satisfied when p(01) lc 0.6. Decision
13 would be optimal iff
5p(01) + 3(1 — p(01))
8p(01) + 1(1 — p(01))
5p(01) + 3(1 — p(01)) > 4p(0 1) + 7(1 — p(0,)),
but there is no value of p(0,) that satisfies both of these inequalities.
Thus, each decision is optimal over some convex interval of probabili-
ties, except that the interval where 13 is optimal is the empty set.
Thus, even without knowing p, we can conclude that 0 cannot possibly
be the optimal decision for the decision-maker. Such a decision-option
that could never be optimal, for any set of beliefs, is said to be strongly
dominated.
Recognizing such dominated options may be helpful in the analysis
of decision problems. Notice that a would be best if the decision-maker
were sure that the state was 0,, and y would be best if the decision-
maker were sure that the state was 02, so it is easy to check that neither
a nor -y is dominated in this sense. Option 13 is a kind of intermediate
decision, in that it is neither best nor worst in either column of the
payoff table. However, such intermediate decision-options are not nec-
essarily dominated. For example, if the utility payoffs from decision 13
were changed to 6 in both states, then 13 would be the optimal decision
whenever 5/7 p(01) 1/3. On the other hand, if the payoffs from
decision 13 were changed to 3 in both states, then it would be obvious
that 13 could never be optimal, because choosing y would always be
better than choosing 13.
There is another way to see that 13 is dominated, for the original
payoff table shown above. Suppose that the decision-maker considered
the following randomized strategy for determining his decision: toss a
coin, and choose a if it comes out Heads, and choose y if it comes out

--- Sayfa 47 ---
1.8 Domination
29
Tails. We may denote this strategy by .5[a] + .5[y], because it gives a
probability of .5 to a and -y each. If the true state were 01, then this
randomized strategy would give the decision-maker an expected utility
payoff of .5 x 8 + .5 x 4 = 6, which is better than the payoff of 5 that
he would get from 13. (Recall that, because these payoffs are utilities,
higher expected values are always more preferred by the decision-
maker.) If the true state were 02, then this randomized strategy would
give an expected payoff of .5 x 1 + .5 x 7 = 4, which is better than
the payoff of 3 that he would get from 13. So no matter what the state
may be, the expected payoff from .5[a] + .5[y] is strictly higher than
the payoff from 13. Thus, we may argue that the decision-maker would
be irrational to choose 13 because, whatever his beliefs about the state
might be, he would get a higher expected payoff from the randomized
strategy .5[a] + .5[-A than from choosing 13. We may say that 13 is
strongly dominated by the randomized strategy .5[a] + .5[y].
In general, a randomized strategy is any probability distribution over
the set of decision options X. We may denote such a randomized strategy
in general by o-  = (cr(x))xEx, where o-(x) represents the probability of
choosing x. Given the utility function u:X x SZ —> R, we may say that a
decision option y in X is strongly dominated by a randomized strategy o-
in A(X) such that
(1.8)
cr(x)u(x,t) > u(y,t), Vt E
xEX
That is, y is strongly dominated by o-  if, no matter what the state might
be, o-  would always be strictly better than y under the expected-utility
criterion.
We have now used the term "strongly dominated" in two different
senses. The following theorem asserts that they are equivalent.
THEOREM 1.6. Given u:X x f/ —> R, where X and ft are nonempty finite
sets, and given any y in X, there exists a randomized strategy o-  in A(X) such
that y is strongly dominated by cr, in the sense of condition (1.8), if and only if
there does not exist any probability distribution p in A(11) such that y is optimal
in the sense of condition (1.7).
The proof is deferred to Section 1.9.
Theorem 1.6 gives us our first application of the important concept
of a randomized strategy. Notice, however, that this result itself does

--- Sayfa 48 ---
30
1 Decision-Theoretic Foundations
not assert that a rational decision-maker should necessarily use a ran-
domized strategy. It only asserts that, if we want to show that there are
no beliefs about the state in ,f/ that would justify using a particular
option y in X, we should try to find a randomized strategy that would
be better than y in every state. Such a dominating randomized strategy
would not necessarily be the best strategy for the decision-maker; it
would only be clearly better than y.
A decision option y in X is weakly dominated by a randomized strategy
o• in A(X) iff
E o(x)u(x,t)
u(y,t), Vt E ci,
xEX
and there exists at least one state s in SZ such that
E 0-(x)u(x,$) > u(y,$).
xEX
That is, y is weakly dominated by o-  if using o-  would never be worse
than y in any state and o-  would be strictly better than y in at least one
possible state. For example, suppose X = fa,13}, SZ = {01,02}, and u(•,.)
is as shown in Table 1.2. In this case 13 is weakly dominated by a (that
is, by [a], the randomized strategy that puts probability one on choosing
a). Notice that 13 would be optimal (in a tie with a) if the decision-maker
believed that 01  was the true state with probability one. However, if he
assigned any positive probability of 02, then he would not choose 13.
This observation is generalized by the following analogue of Theorem
1.6.
THEOREM 1.7. Given u:X X SZ —> R, where X and SI are nonempty finite
sets, and given any y in X, there exists a randomized strategy o in A(X) such
that y is weakly dominated by if if and only if there does not exist any probability
Table 1.2 Expected utility payoffs for states 01  and °2
Decision
01
02
a
5
3
5
1

--- Sayfa 49 ---
1.9 • Proofs of the Domination Theorems
31
distribution p in A°(n) such that y is optimal in the sense of condition (1.7).
(Recall that 0°(11) is the set of probability distributions on 12 that assign strictly
positive probability to every state in IL)
1.9 Proofs of the Domination Theorems
Theorems 1.6 and 1.7 are proved here using the duality theorem of
linear programming. A full derivation of this result can be found in
any text on linear programming (see Chvatal, 1983; or Luenberger,
1984). A statement of this theorem is presented here in Section 3.7,
following the discussion of two-person zero-sum games. Readers who
are unfamiliar with the duality theorem of linear programming should
defer reading the proofs of Theorems 1.6 and 1.7 until after reading
Section 3.8.
Proof of Theorem 1.6. Consider the following two linear programming
problems. In the first problem, the variables are 8 and (p(t))„n:
minimize 8 subject to
p(s)
0, Vs E 11,
E p(t) > 1,
tEfl
-
p(t) 	-1,

tEfl
8 + E 000,0 — u(x,t)) > o, vx E X.
tEll
In the second problem, the variables are (10,a),
maximize E1 E2 subject to ii E Rn±, E E
E o(x) = 1,
xEX
(E1,82), and (cr(x)).(x:
R2, o-  E Rx±,
1(0 + E, — E2  + E o(x)(u(y,t) — u(x,t)) = 0, Vt E
xEX
(Here R+  denotes the set of nonnegative real numbers, so R+  is the set
of vectors with nonnegative components indexed on 1/.) There exists
some p such that y is optimal if and only if there is a solution to the first
problem that has an optimal value (of 8) that is less than or equal to 0.

--- Sayfa 50 ---
32
1 Decision-Theoretic Foundations
On the other hand, there exists some randomized strategy o.  that
strongly dominates y if and only if the second problem has an optimal
value (of e E2) that is strictly greater than 0. The second problem is
the dual of the first (see Section 3.8), and the constraints of both prob-
lems can be satisfied. So the optimal values of both problems must be
equal, by the duality theorem of linear programming. Thus, y is strongly
dominated by some randomized strategy (and both problems have
strictly positive value) if and only if there is no probability distribution
in 0(12) that makes y optimal. I
Proof of Theorem 1.7. Consider the following two linear programming
problems. In the first problem, the variables are 8 and (p(t))LEO:
minimize 8 subject to
p(s) + 8
0, Vs E f/,
— E p(t)
-1,
,E11
E p(t)(u(y,t) — u(x,t)) > o, Vx E x.
LEO
In the second problem, the variables are (1(0),En, E, and (cr(x))
, xEX:
maximize —e subject to xi E Rn±,
0, r E Rx+,
E
= 1,
LEO
Ti(s) + — E
E o-(x)(u(y,t) — u(x,t)) = 0, Vs E
xEX
There exists some p in A°(,(/) such that y is optimal if and only if there
is a solution to the first problem that has an optimal value (of 8) that is
strictly less than 0. On the other hand, there exists some randomized
strategy o that weakly dominates y if and only if the second problem
has an optimal value (of —E) that is greater than or equal to 0. (The
vector o that solves the second problem may be a positive scalar multiple
of the randomized strategy that weakly dominates y.) The second prob-
lem is the dual of the first, and the constraints of both problems can be
satisfied. So the optimal values of both problems must be equal, by the
duality theorem of linear programming. Thus, y is weakly dominated

--- Sayfa 51 ---
Exercises
33
by some randomized strategy (and both problems have nonnegative
value) if and only if there is no probability distribution in .°(fl) that
makes y optimal. I
Exercises
Exercise 1.1. Suppose that the set of prizes X is a finite subset of R, the
set of real numbers, and a prize x denotes an award of x dollars. A
decision-maker says that, if he knew that the true state of the world was
in some set T, then he would weakly prefer a lottery f over another
lottery g (that is, f g) iff
min E xf(cks), min E xg(xls).
sET xEX
.sET xEX
(That is, he prefers the lottery that gives the higher expected payoff in
the worst possible state.) Which of our axioms (if any) does this pref-
erence relation violate?
Exercise 1.2. Alter Exercise 1.1 by supposing instead that f
g iff
E min {x If(x I s) > 0}
E min focig(xls) > 0}.
sET
sET
Which of our axioms (if any) does this preference relation violate?
Exercise 1.3. Show that Axiom 1.1B implies:
if f— s  g and g—s h then f —s h; and
if f >s  g and g
h then f >s  h.
Exercise 1.4. Show that Axioms 1.1A and 1.5B together imply Axiom
1.1B and Axiom 1.3.
Exercise 1.5. A decision-maker expresses the following preference or-
dering for monetary lotteries
[$600] > [$400] > 0.90[$600] + 0.10[$0]
> 0.20[$600] + 0.80[$0]
> 0.25[$400] + 0.75[$0] > [$0].

--- Sayfa 52 ---
34
1 Decision-Theoretic Foundations
Are these preferences consistent with any state-independent utility for
money? If so, show a utility function that applies. If not, show an axiom
that this preference ordering violates.
Exercise 1.6. Consider a decision-maker whose subjective probability
distribution over the set of possible states SZ is p = (p(s))„,,,. We ask him
to tell us his subjective probability distribution, but he can lie and report
any distribution in A(SZ) that he wants. To guide his reporting decision,
we plan to give him some reward Y(q,!) that will be a function of the
probability distribution q that he reports and the true state of nature .f
that will be subsequently observed.
a. Suppose that his utility for our reward is u(Y(q,$),$) = q(s), for every
q in 0(1)) and every s in SZ. Will his report q be his true subjective
probability distribution p? If not, what will he report?
b. Suppose that his utility for our reward is u(Y(q,$),$) = loge(q(s)), for
every q and s. Will his report q be his true subjective probability distri-
bution p? If not, what will he report?
Exercise 1.7. Suppose that utility payoffs depend on decisions and states
as shown in Table 1.3. Let (p(0,),p(02)) denote the decision-maker's
subjective probability distribution over SI = {01,02}.
a. Suppose first that B = 35. For what range of values of p(0 i) is a
optimal? For what range is 13 optimal? For what range is y optimal? Is
any decision strongly dominated? If so, by what randomized strategies?
b. Suppose now that B = 20. For what range of values of p(01) is a
optimal? For what range is 13 optimal? For what range is y optimal? Is
any decision strongly dominated? If so, by what randomized strategies?
c. For what range of values for the parameter B is the decision 13
strongly dominated?
Table 1.3 Expected utility payoffs for states 0, and 02
Decision
Oi
e2
a
15
90
75
55
40

--- Sayfa 53 ---
Exercises
35
Exercise 1.8. Suppose that a function W:0(0) —> R satisfies
W(p) = max E p(ou(x,t), Hp E 0(11).
xEX
Show that W is a convex function, that is,
W(Xp + (1 — X)q) XW(p) + (1 — X)W(q)
for any p and q in A(0) and any X in such that 0 < X 1.
Exercise 1.9. In this exercise, we consider some useful conditions that
are sufficient to guarantee that observing a higher signal would not lead
a decision-maker to choose a lower optimal decision.
Suppose that X and 11 are nonempty finite sets, X C R, SZ = 12, x
C R, and 112  C R. A decision-maker has utility and probability
functions u:X x SZ --> R and p:0 R that satisfy the following prop-
erties, for each x and y in X, each .5, and 1, in 0,, and each s2  and 12  in
n2:
if x > y, s, > t,, s2  > t2, and (s,,s2) 0 (t1,t2),
then u(x,s1,s2) — u(y,s1,s2) > u(x,t1,t2) — u(y,t1,t2);
if s, > t, and s2  > t2, then p(s,,s2)p(t1,t2)
p(s1,t2)p(t1,s2);
and p(s1,s2) > 0.
The condition on u asserts that the net benefit of an increase in X
increases as the components in SZ increase (that is, u has increasing
differences). By Bayes's formula, if the decision-maker observed that the
second component of the true state of the world was s2, then he would
assign conditional probability
p(s, I s2) — E P(rl,s2)
xi En'
to the event that the unknown first component of the true state was s,.
a. Show that if s, > 1, and s2  > 12  then p(s, is2)/p(t,13.2)
p(s, I t2)/p(t, I t2).
(This is called the monotone likelihood ratio property. See also Milgrom,
1981; and Milgrom and Weber, 1982.)
b. Suppose that y would be optimal in X for the decision-maker if he
observed that the second component of the true state was s2, and x
p(s1,s2)

--- Sayfa 54 ---
36
1 Decision-Theoretic Foundations
would be optimal in X for the decision-maker if he observed that the
second component of the true state was t2. That is,
E p(r, (s2)u(y,r1,s2) = max E P(ri IS2)24(Z,r1,52),
n(111
zEX riElli
E p(r1  t2)u(x,r1  42) = max E p(r1 /2)u(z,r1  ,t2).
7.1Eni
zEX rl En,
Show that if s2  > 12, then y x.

--- Sayfa 55 ---
2
Basic Models
2.1 Games in Extensive Form
The analysis of any game or conflict situation must begin with the
specification of a model that describes the game. Thus, the general form
or structure of the models that we use to describe games must be
carefully considered. A model structure that is too simple may force us
to ignore vital aspects of the real games that we want to study. A model
structure that is too complicated may hinder our analysis by obscuring
the fundamental issues. To avoid these two extremes, several different
general forms are used for representing games, the most important of
which are the extensive form and the strategic (or normal) form. The
extensive form is the most richly structured way to describe game situ-
ations. The definition of the extensive form that is now standard in
most of the literature on game theory is due to Kuhn (1953), who
modified the earlier definition used by von Neumann and Morgenstern
(1944) (see also Kreps and Wilson, 1982, for an alternative way to define
the extensive form). The strategic form and its generalization, the
Bayesian form, are conceptually simpler forms that are more convenient
for purposes of general analysis but are generally viewed as being
derived from the extensive form.
To introduce the extensive form, let us consider a simple card game
that is played by two people, whom we call "player 1" and "player 2."
(Throughout this book, we follow the convention that odd-numbered
players are male and even-numbered players are female. When players
are referred to by variables and gender is uncertain, generic male
pronouns are used.)

--- Sayfa 56 ---
38
2 • Basic Models
At the beginning of this game, players 1 and 2 each put a dollar in
the pot. Next, player 1 draws a card from a shuffled deck in which half
the cards are red (diamonds and hearts) and half are black (clubs and
spades). Player 1 looks at his card privately and decides whether to raise
or fold. If player 1 folds then he shows the card to player 2 and the
game ends; in this case, player 1 takes the money in the pot if the card
is red, but player 2 takes the money in the pot if the card is black. If
player 1 raises then he adds another dollar to the pot and player 2 must
decide whether to meet or pass. If player 2 passes, then the game ends
and player 1 takes the money in the pot. If player 2 meets, then she
also must add another dollar to the pot, and then player 1 shows the
card to player 2 and the game ends; in this case, again, player 1 takes
the money in the pot if the card is red, and player 2 takes the money
in the pot if the card is black.
Figure 2.1 is a tree diagram that shows the possible events that could
occur in this game. The tree consists of a set of branches (or line seg-
ments), each of which connects two points, which are called nodes. The
leftmost node in the tree is the root of the tree and represents the
beginning of the game. There are six nodes in the tree that are not
followed to the right by any further branches; these nodes are called
terminal nodes and represent the possible ways that the game could end.
Each possible sequence of events that could occur in the game is rep-
resented by a path of branches from the root to one of these terminal
nodes. When the game is actually played, the path that represents the
actual sequence of events that will occur is called the path of play. The
goal of game-theoretic analysis is to try to predict the path of play.
At each terminal node, Figure 2.1 shows a pair of numbers, which
represent the payoffs that players 1 and 2 would get if the path of play
Figure 2.1

--- Sayfa 57 ---
2.1 • Games in Extensive Form
39
ended at this node. For example, in one possible sequence of events,
player 1 might get a red card, player 1 might raise, and player 2 might
meet, in which case the payoffs would be +2 for player 1 and —2 for
player 2. This sequence of events is represented in Figure 2.1 by the
path from the root to the terminal node at the top right, where the
payoff vector (2,-2) is shown. In another possible sequence of events,
player 1 might get a black card and then fold; this sequence is repre-
sented in Figure 2.1 by the path from the root to the terminal node at
the bottom near the middle of the figure, where the payoffs are —1 for
player 1 and + 1 for player 2.
At each nonterminal node that is followed to the right by more than
one branch, the branches represent alternative events, of which at most
one can occur. The determination of which of these alternative events
would occur is controlled either by a player or by chance. If the event
is determined by chance, then we give the node a label "0" (zero). That
is, a nonterminal node with label "0" is a chance node, where the next
branch in the path of play would be determined by some random
mechanism, according to probabilities that are shown on the branches
that follow the chance node. In Figure 2.1, the root has label "0" because
the color of the card that player 1 draws is determined by chance.
(Player I cannot look at his card until after he draws it.) Each of the
two branches following the root has probability .5, because half of the
cards in the deck are red and half are black. A nonterminal node with
a label other than zero is a decision node, where the next branch in the
path of play would be determined by the player named by the label.
After drawing his card, player 1 decides whether to raise or fold, so the
two nodes that immediately follow the root are controlled by player 1
and have the label "1."
Figure 2.1 is not an adequate representation of our simple card game,
however. Nowhere in Figure 2.1 have we indicated the crucial fact that
player 1 knows the color of the card but player 2 does not know the
color. If you only looked at Figure 2.1, you might expect that player 2
would pass if 1 raised with a red card (because she would then prefer
payoff —1 to —2), but that player 2 would meet if 1 raised with a black
card (because she would then prefer payoff 2 to —1). However, player
2's expected behavior must be the same at these two nodes, because she
does not know the color of l's card when she chooses between meeting
and passing. On the other hand, player 1 could plan to raise with a red
card but to fold with a black card, because he can distinguish the two

--- Sayfa 58 ---
40
2 • Basic Models
nodes that he controls. To indicate each player's information when he
or she moves in this game, we need to augment the tree diagram as
shown in Figure 2.2.
In Figure 2.2, each decision node has two labels, separated by a
decimal point. To the left of the decimal point, we write the player label,
which indicates the name of the player who controls the node. To the
right of the decimal point, we write an information label, which indicates
the information state of the player when he or she moves at this node. So
the label "1.a" indicates a node where player 1 moves in information
state "a," and the label "2.0" indicates a node where player 2 moves in
information state "0." The assignment of letters and numbers to name
the various information states may be quite arbitrary. In Figure 2.2, l's
information state "a" is the state of having a red card, l's information
state "b" is the state of having a black card, and 2's information state
"0" is the state of knowing that 1 has raised. The only significance of
the information labels is to indicate sets of nodes that cannot be distin-
guished by the player who controls them. Thus, because player l's nodes
have different information labels but player 2's nodes have the same
information labels, the reader of Figure 2.2 knows that player 1 can
distinguish his two nodes when he moves, but player 2 cannot distin-
guish her two nodes when she moves. To emphasize the sets of nodes
that cannot be distinguished, we may also draw a dashed curve around
sets of nodes that have the same player and information labels.
Figure 2.2 is a complete description of our simple card game as a
game in extensive form. Notice that "red" and "black" labels on the
branches following the chance node in Figure 2.1 are omitted in Figure
Raise
2.0 Meet
2,-2
Pass
1,-1
1,-1
-2,2
Figure 2.2

--- Sayfa 59 ---
2.1 • Games in Extensive Form
41
2.2, but the labels for the other branches are retained. It is easy to see
that the actual color of the card that puts player 1 in a winning position
should not matter to the analysis of the game, so we do not need labels
on branches that represent chance events. However, move labels on
branches that represent decisions by players are an essential part of the
description of the game.
A person cannot make a meaningful choice without knowing what
the options are among which he or she must choose. Thus, when player
2 makes a decision without knowing which node she is playing at, she
cannot choose any specific branch. What she must actually choose is a
move, "Meet" or "Pass," and the next branch in the path of play will be
the branch at the current node that has this move label. To guarantee
that a player always knows the options available to him or her at any
point in the game, the sets of move labels following two nodes must be
the same if the two nodes are controlled by the same player in the same
information state. For example, the set of move labels on the branches
following 2's upper node must be the same as the set of move labels on
the branches following 2's lower node. (If we added a third branch
labeled "Punt" after her lower node but we added no such branch after
her upper node, it would mean that she could punt if and only if player
1 had a black card. But how could she exercise this option when, not
knowing the color of player l's card, she could not know whether the
option existed? To have a meaningful game, we would have to include
a "Try to punt" branch at both of 2's decision nodes, as long as they
have the same information label.) On the other hand, the move labels
on the branches following the "1.a" node do not have to match the
move labels on the branches following the "1.b" node, because player 1
can distinguish these two nodes. If the move labels did not match, player
1 would still know what his options were, because he would know at
which node he was playing.
Because moves are the actual object of choice for a player who has
two or more nodes with the same information label, the way that move
labels are assigned to branches can be very important. The interest in
this game derives from the fact that Pass is better for 2 at her upper
node but Meet is better for 2 at her lower node, and 2 does not know
which node is actually in the path of play when she decides whether to
Meet or Pass. On the other hand, if we switched the move labels at
player 2's upper node, leaving everything else the same as in Figure
2.2, then the resulting game would be completely different. The mod-

--- Sayfa 60 ---
42
2 • Basic Models
ified tree would represent a very uninteresting game in which player 2
should clearly choose Meet, because Meet would give her a payoff of
—1 against a red card and (as before) 2 against a black card, whereas
Pass would give her a payoff of —2 against a red card and —1 against
a black card.
To give a rigorous general definition of a game in the extensive form,
we need to make our terminology more precise. In the language of
mathematical graph theory, a graph is a finite set of points or nodes,
together with a set of branches, each of which connects a pair of nodes.
Set-theoretically, a branch may be identified with the set consisting of
the two nodes that it connects. Then a path is a set of branches of the
form
{{x1,x2},{x2,x3},
,{x,k_ 1,x,„}1 = {{xioxkl-
k = 1, • • ,m — 1},
where m 2 and each xk  is a different node in the graph. We may say
that such a path connects the nodes x1  and x,k. A tree is a graph in which
each pair of nodes is connected by exactly one path of branches in the
graph. A rooted tree is a tree in which one special node is designated as
the root of the tree. In this book, the root of a tree is always shown
leftmost in the diagram. When we speak of the path to a given node, we
mean the unique path that connects this node and the root. An alter-
native at a node in a rooted tree is any branch that connects it with
another node and is not in the path to this node. A node or branch x
follows another node or branch y iff y is in the path to x. A node x
immediately follows a node y iff x follows y and there is an alternative at y
that connects x and y. A terminal node in a rooted tree is a node with no
alternatives following it.
For any positive integer n, an n-person extensive-form game Fe is a rooted
tree together with functions that assign labels to every node and branch,
satisfying the following five conditions.
1. Each nonterminal node has a player label that is in the set {0,1,2,
. . . ,n}. Nodes that are assigned a player label 0 are called chance nodes.
The set {1,2, . . . ,n} represents the set of players in the game, and, for
each i in this set, the nodes with the player-label i are decision nodes that
are controlled by player i.
2. Every alternative at a chance node has a label that specifies its
probability. At each chance node, these chance probabilities of the alter-
natives are nonnegative numbers that sum to 1.

--- Sayfa 61 ---
2.1 • Games in Extensive Form
43
3. Every node that is controlled by a player has a second label that
specifies the information state that the player would have if the path of
play reached this node. When the path of play reaches a node controlled
by a player, he knows only the information state of the current node.
That is, two nodes that belong to the same player should have the same
information state if and only if the player would be unable to distinguish
between the situations represented by these nodes when either occurs
in the play of the game. In our notation, the player label and the
information label at any node are separated by a decimal point, with
the player label to the left and the information label to the right, so
"i.k" would indicate a node where player i moves with information
state k.
4. Each alternative at a node that is controlled by a player has a move
label. Furthermore, for any two nodes x and y that have the same player
label and the same information label, and for any alternative at node x,
there must be exactly one alternative at node y that has the same move
label.
5. Each terminal node has a label that specifies a vector of n numbers
(u1, . ,un) = (u,),,{,
n}. For each player i, the number 22, is interpreted
as the payoff to player i, measured in some utility scale, when this node
is the outcome of the game.
We will generally assume that extensive-form games satisfy an addi-
tional condition known as perfect recall. This condition asserts that when-
ever a player moves, he remembers all the information that he knew
earlier in the game, including all of his own past moves. This assumption
of perfect recall can be expressed formally as follows.
6. For any player i, for any nodes x, y, and z that are controlled by i,
and for any alternative b at x, if y and z have the same information state
and if y follows x and b, then there exists some node w and some
alternative c at w such that z follows w and c, w is controlled by player
w has the same information state as x, and c has the same move label
as b. (It may be that w = x and c = b, of course.) That is, if i's decision
nodes y and z are indistinguishable to him, then for any past decision
node and move that i recalls at y, there must be an indistinguishable
decision node and move that he recalls at z. (For an example of a game
without perfect recall, suppose that the node labels "2.0" were changed
to "1.0" in Figure 2.2. The resulting game would represent a rather
bizarre situation in which player 1 controls all the decision nodes, but
when he decides whether to meet or pass he cannot recall the infor-

--- Sayfa 62 ---
44
2 • Basic Models
mation that he knew earlier when he decided to raise. See also Figure
4.3 in Chapter 4.)
If no two nodes have the same information state, then we say that
the game has perfect information. That is, in a game with perfect infor-
mation, whenever a player moves, he knows the past moves of all other
players and chance, as well as his own past moves. The game in Figure
2.4 has perfect information, but the games in Figures 2.2 and 2.3 do
not have perfect information.
A strategy for a player in an extensive-form game is any rule for
determining a move at every possible information state in the game.
Mathematically, a strategy is a function that maps information states
into moves. For each player i, let S, denote the set of possible infor-
mation states for i in the game. For each information state s in S„ let
D5  denote the set of moves that would be available to player i when he
moved at a node with information state s. Then the set of strategies for
player i in the extensive-form game is X sEs,
In our simple card game, player 1 has four possible strategies. We
denote the set of strategies for player 1 in this game as
{Rr, Rf, Fr, Ff},
where we write first in upper case the initial letter of the designated
move at the 1.a node (with a red card), and second in lower case the
initial letter of the designated move at the 1.b node (with a black card).
For example, Rf denotes the strategy "Raise if the card is red, but fold
if the card is black," and Rr denotes the strategy "Raise no matter what
the color of the card may be." Notice that a strategy for player 1 is a
complete rule that specifies a move for player 1 in all possible contin-
gencies, even though only one contingency will actually arise. Player 2
has only two possible strategies, which may be denoted "M" (for "Meet
if 1 raises") and "P," because player 2 has only one possible information
state.
For two additional examples, consider Figures 2.3 and 2.4. Figure 2.3
shows a game in which player 2 must choose between L and R without
observing l's move. Against either of 2's possible moves, L or R, player
1 would be better off choosing T, so player 1 should choose T in the
game represented by Figure 2.3. When player 1 chooses T, player 2
can get payoff 2 from choosing L.
Figure 2.4 differs from 2.3 only in that player 2's two nodes have
different information labels, so 2 observes l's actual choice before she

--- Sayfa 63 ---
2.1 Games in Extensive Form
45
2,2
2.2
4,0
1,0
2.2
3,1
Figure 2.3
2,2
4,0
1,0
3,1
Figure 2.4
chooses between L and R (or e and r) in this game. Thus, player 1 has
an opportunity to influence 2's choice in this game. It would be better
for player 2 to choose L if she observed T (because 2 > 0), and it would
be better for player 2 to choose r if she observed B (because 1 > 0).
So player 1 should expect to get payoff 2 from choosing T and payoff
3 from choosing B. Thus, player 1 should choose B in the game rep-
resented by Figure 2.4. After player 1 chooses B, player 2 should
choose r and get payoff 1.
Notice that the set of strategies for player 2 is only {L,R} in Figure
2.3, whereas her set of strategies in Figure 2.4 is {Le, Lr, Re, Rr} (writing
the move at the 2.2 node first and the move at the 2.3 node second).
Thus, a change in the informational structure of the game that increases
the set of strategies for player 2 may change the optimal move for
player 1, and so may actually decrease player 2's expected payoff.
If we watched the game in Figure 2.4 played once, we would observe
player 2's move (L or R or e or r), but we would not be able to observe
2's strategy, because we would not see what she would have done at her

--- Sayfa 64 ---
46
2 • Basic Models
other information state. For example, if player I did B then player 2's
observable response would be the same (r) under both the strategy Rr
and the strategy Lr. To explain why player 1 should choose B in Figure
2.4, however, the key is to recognize that player 2 should rationally
follow the strategy Lr ("L if T, r if B"), and that player 1 should
intelligently expect this. If player 2 were expected to follow the strategy
Rr ("R if T, r if B"), then player 1 would be better off choosing T to
get payoff 4.
2.2 Strategic Form and the Normal Representation
A simpler way to represent a game is to use the strategic form. To
define a game in strategic form, we need only to specify the set of
players in the game, the set of options available to each player, and the
way that players' payoffs depend on the options that they choose.
Formally, a strategic form game is any F of the form
(2.1)
F = OV, (Ci)iEN, (Iti)iEN),
where N is a nonempty set, and, for each i in N, C, is a nonempty set
and u, is a function from X j EN C3  into the set of real numbers R. Here,
N is the set of players in the game F. For each player i, C, is the set of
strategies (or pure strategies) available to player i. When the strategic-form
game F is played, each player i must choose one of the strategies in the
set C. A strategy profile is a combination of strategies that the players in
N might choose. We let C denote the set of all possible strategy profiles,
so that
C = X Cj .

jEN
For any strategy profile c = (c),EN in C, the number u,(c) represents the
expected utility payoff that player i would get in this game if c were the
combination of strategies implemented by the players. When we study
a strategic-form game, we usually assume that the players all choose
their strategies simultaneously, so there is no element of time in the
analysis of strategic-form games.
A strategic-form game is finite if the set of players N and all the
strategy sets C, are finite. In developing the basic ideas of game theory,
we generally assume finiteness here, unless otherwise specified.
An extensive-form game is a dynamic model, in the sense that it
includes a full description of the sequence in which moves and events

--- Sayfa 65 ---
2.2 • Strategic Form
47
may occur over time in an actual play of the game. On the other hand,
a strategic-form game is a static model, in the sense that it ignores all
questions of timing and treats players as if they choose their strategies
simultaneously. Obviously, eliminating the time dimension from our
models can be a substantial conceptual simplification, if questions of
timing are not essential to our analysis. To accomplish such a simplifi-
cation, von Neumann and Morgenstern suggested a procedure for con-
structing a game in strategic form, given any extensive-form game Fe.
To illustrate this procedure, consider again the simple card game,
shown in Figure 2.2. Now suppose that players 1 and 2 know that they
are going to play this game tomorrow, but today each player is planning
his or her moves in advance. Player 1 does not know today what color
his card will be, but he can plan now what he would do with a red card,
and what he would do with a black card. That is, as we have seen, the
set of possible strategies for player 1 in this extensive-form game is
C, = {Rr, Rf, Fr, FT}, where the first letter designates his move if his
card is red (at the node labeled 1.a) and the second letter designates his
move if his card is black (at the node labeled 1.b). Player 2 does not
know today whether player 1 will raise or fold, but she can plan today
whether to meet or pass if 1 raises. So the set of strategies that player
2 can choose among today is C2  = {M,P}, where M denotes the strategy
"meet if 1 raises," and P denotes the strategy "pass if 1 raises."
Even if we knew the strategy that each player plans to use, we still
could not predict the actual outcome of the game, because we do not
know whether the card will be red or black. For example, if player 1
chooses the strategy Rf (raise if the card is red, fold if the card is black)
and player 2 chooses the strategy M, then player l's final payoff will be
either +2, if the card is red (because 1 will then raise, 2 will meet, and
1 will win), or —1, if the card is black (because 1 will then fold and lose).
However, we can compute the expected payoff to each player when
these strategies are used in the game, because we know that red and
black cards each have probability 1/2. So when player 1 plans to use the
strategy Rf and player 2 plans to use the strategy M, the expected payoff
to player 1 is
u,(Rf, M) = 2 x 1/2 + — 1 x 1/2 = 0.5.
Similarly, player 2's expected payoff from the strategy profile (Rf, M)
is
u2(Rf, M) = —2 x 1/2 + 1 x 1/2 = —0.5.

--- Sayfa 66 ---
48
2 • Basic Models
We can similarly compute the expected payoffs to each player from
each pair of strategies. The resulting expected payoffs (u1(c),u2(c)) de-
pend on the combination of strategies c = (c1,c2) in C1  X C2 according
to Table 2.1.
The strategic-form game shown in Table 2.1 is called the normal
representation of our simple card game. It describes how, at the beginning
of the game, the expected utility payoffs to each player would depend
on their strategic plans. From decision theory (Theorem 1.1 in Chapter
1), we know that a rational player should plan his strategy to maximize
his expected utility payoff. Thus, Table 2.1 represents the decision-
theoretic situation that confronts the players as they plan their strategies
at or before the beginning of the game.
In general, given any extensive-form game Fe as defined in Section
2.1, a representation of Fe in strategic form can be constructed as
follows. Let N, the set of players in the strategic-form game, be the
same as the set of players {1,2, . . . ,n} in the given extensive-form game
Fe. For any player i in N, let the set of strategies C, for player i in the
strategic-form game F be the same as the set of strategies for player i
in the extensive-form game Fe, as defined at the end of Section 2.1.
That is, any strategy c, in C, is a function that specifies a move c=(r) for
every information state r that player i could have during the game.
For any strategy profile c in C and any node x in the tree of Fe, we
define P(xlc) to be the probability that the path of play will go through
node x, when the path of play starts at the root of re and, at any decision
node in the path, the next alternative to be included in the path is
determined by the relevant player's strategy in c, and, at any chance
node in the path, the next alternative to be included in the path is
determined by the probability distribution given in Fe. (This definition
can be formalized mathematically by induction as follows. If x is the
Table 2.1 The simple card game in strategic form, the normal representation
CI
C2
Rr
0,0
1,-1
Rf
0.5,-0.5
0,0
Fr
—0.5,0.5
1,-1
Ff
0,0
0,0

--- Sayfa 67 ---
2.2 • Strategic Form
49
root of Fe, then P(xj c) = 1. If x immediately follows a chance node y,
and q is the chance probability of the branch from y to x, then P(xlc) =
gP(ylc). If x immediately follows a decision node y that belongs to player
i in the information state r, then P(x I c) = P(y I c) if cz(r) is the move label
on the alternative from y to x, and P(xIc) = 0 if ci(r) is not the move
label on the alternative from y to x.) At any terminal node x, let w,(x) be
the utility payoff to player i at node x in the game Fe. Let 0,* denote
the set of all terminal nodes of the game Fe. Then, for any strategy
profile c in C, and any i in N, let u,(c) be
u,(c) = E P(x1c)w,(x)•
xEO*
That is, u,(c) is the expected utility payoff to player i in Fe when all the
players implement the strategies designated for them by c. When F =
(N, (CA EN, (u),EN) is derived from Fe  in this way, F is called the normal
representation of F .
We have seen that Table 2.1 is the normal representation of the
extensive-form game in Figure 2.2. It may also be helpful to consider
and compare the normal representations of the extensive-form games
in Figures 2.3 and 2.4. In both games, the set of strategies for player 1
is C, = {T,13}, but the sets of strategies for player 2 are very different
in these two games. In Figure 2.3, player 2 has only one possible in-
formation state, so C2 = {L,R}. The resulting utility payoffs (u,,u2)
in normal representation of the game in Figure 2.3 are shown in
Table 2.2.
In Figure 2.4, where player 2 has two possible information states, her
set of strategies is C2 = {Le, Lr, Re, Rr}. The utility payoffs in the normal
representation of Figure 2.4 are shown in Table 2.3. Thus, the seem-
ingly minor change in information-state labels that distinguishes Figure
Table 2.2 A game in strategic form
C2
T 	 2,2
4,0
B 	 1,0
3,1

--- Sayfa 68 ---
50
2 • Basic Models
Table 2.3 A game in strategic form
Cl
C2
Le
LT
Re
Rr
T
B
2,2
1,0
2,2
3,1
4,0
1,0
4,0
3,1
2.4 from Figure 2.3 leads to a major change in the normal representa-
tion.
Von Neumann and Morgenstern argued that, in a very general sense,
the normal representation should be all that we need to study in the
analysis of any game. The essence of this argument is as follows. We
game theorists are trying to predict what rational players should do at
every possible stage in a given game. Knowing the structure of the
game, we should be able to do our analysis and compute our predictions
before the game actually begins. But if the players in the game are
intelligent, then each player should be able to do the same computations
that we can and determine his rational plan of action before the game
begins. Thus, there should be no loss of generality in assuming that all
players formulate their strategic plans simultaneously at the beginning
of the game; so the actual play of the game is then just a mechanistic
process of implementing these strategies and determining the outcome
according to the rules of the game. That is, we can assume that all
players make all substantive decisions simultaneously at the beginning
of the game, because the substantive decision of each player is supposed
to be the selection of a complete plan or strategy that specifies what
moves he would make under any possible circumstance, at any stage of
the game. Such a situation, in which players make all their strategic
decisions simultaneously and independently, is exactly described by the
normal representation of the game.
This argument for the sufficiency of the normal representation is one
of the most important ideas in game theory, although the limitations of
this argument have been reexamined in the more recent literature (see
Section 2.6 and Chapters 4 and 5).
As a corollary of this argument, the assumption that players choose
their strategies independently, in a strategic-form game, can be de-
fended as being without loss of generality. Any opportunities for corn-

--- Sayfa 69 ---
2.3 • Equivalence of Strategic-Form Games
51
munication that might cause players' decisions to not be independent
can, in principle, be explicitly represented by moves in the extensive-
form game. (Saying something is just a special kind of move.) If all
communication opportunities are included as explicit branches in the
extensive-form game, then strategy choices "at the beginning of the
game" must be made without prior communication. In the normal
representation of such an extensive-form game, each strategy for each
player includes a specification of what he should say in the communi-
cation process and how he should respond to the messages that he may
receive; and these are the strategies that players are supposed to choose
independently. (When possibilities for communication are very rich and
complex, however, it may be more convenient in practice to omit such
opportunities for communication from the structure of the game and
to account for them in our solution concept instead. This alternative
analytical approach is studied in detail in Chapter 6.)
Another implication of the argument for the sufficiency of the normal
representation arises when a theorist tries to defend a proposed general
solution concept for strategic-form games by arguing that players would
converge to this solution in a game that has been repeated many times.
Such an argument would ignore the fact that a process of "repeating a
game many times" may be viewed as a single game, in which each
repetition is one stage. This overall game can be described by an exten-
sive-form game, and by its normal representation in strategic form. If
a proposed general solution concept for strategic-form games is valid
then, we may argue, it should be applied in this situation to this overall
game, not to the repeated stages separately. (For more on repeated
games, see Chapter 7.)
2.3 Equivalence of Strategic-Form Games
From the perspective of decision theory, utility numbers have meaning
only as representations of individuals' preferences. Thus, if we change
the utility functions in a game model in such a way that the underlying
preferences represented by these functions is unchanged, then the new
game model must be considered equivalent to the old game model. It
is important to recognize when two game models are equivalent, because
our solution concepts must not make different predictions for two equiv-
alent game models that could really represent the same situation. That

--- Sayfa 70 ---
52
2 • Basic Models
is, the need to generate the same solutions for equivalent games may
be a useful criterion for identifying unsatisfactory solution theories.
From Theorem 1.3 in Chapter 1, we know that two utility functions
u(.) and /2(.) are equivalent, representing identical preferences for the
decision-maker, iff they differ by a linear transformation of the form
/2(.) = Au(.) + B, for some constants A > 0 and B. Thus, we say Jhat
two games in strategic form, r =
(u,),,N) and F =
(12,),,,), are fully equivalent iff, for every player i, there exist
numbers A, and B E  such that A, > 0 and
= A,u,(c) + B,, `dc E C.
That is, two strategic-form games with the same player set and the same
strategy sets are fully equivalent iff each player's utility function in one
game is decision-theoretically equivalent to his utility function in the
other game.
The most general way to describe (predicted or prescribed) behavior
of the players in a strategic-form game is by a probability distribution
over the set of strategy profiles C = X EN C,. Recall (from equation 1.1
in Chapter 1) that, for any finite set Z, we let A(Z) denote the set of all
probability distributions over the set Z. So A(C) denotes the set of all
probability distributions over the set of strategy profiles for the players
in F or F as above. In the game F, with utility function u„ player i would
prefer that the players behave according to a probability distribution
= (1-1(c)),Ec in A(C) (choosing each profile of strategies c with proba-
bility 11(c)) rather than according to some other probability distribution
X iff µ gives him a higher expected utility payoff than X, that is
E woui(c)
E x(oui(c).
cEC
cEC
In game F, similarly, i would prefer p. over A iff
E 1.4012,(c)
E X(c)ft,(c).
cEC
cEC
It follows from Theorem 1.3 that F and t are fully equivalent iff, for
each player i in N, for each ik in A(C), and for each X in A(C), player i
would prefer 1.1. over X in the game F if and only if he would prefer IL
over A in the game F.
Other definitions of equivalence have been proposed for strategic-
form games. One weaker definition of equivalence (under which more
pairs of games are equivalent) is called best-response equivalence. Best-

--- Sayfa 71 ---
2.3 • Equivalence of Strategic-Form Games
53
response equivalence is based on the narrower view that a player's utility
function serves only to characterize how he would choose his strategy
once his beliefs about the other players' behavior are specified. To
formally define best-response equivalence, we must first develop addi-
tional notation.
For any player i, let C_, denote the set of all possible combinations of
strategies for the players other than i; that is,
C_, = X C J•
JEN-1
(Here, N—i denotes the set of all players other than i.) Given any e_, =
(e),EN-1 in C_, and any d, in Ci, we let (e_„d,) denote the strategy profile
in C such that the i-component is d, and all other components are as
in e_,.
For any set Z and any function f:Z
R, argmaxyuf(y) denotes the
set of points in Z that maximize the function f, so
argmax f(y) = {y E Z I f(y) = max f(z)}.
yEZ
zEZ
If player i believed that some distribution
in 0(C_,) predicted the
behavior of the other players in the game, so each strategy combination
e_, in C_, would have probability Ti(e_,) of being chosen by the other
players, then player i would want to choose his own strategy in C, to
maximize his own expected utility payoff. So in game F, player i's set
of best responses to would be
argmax E
Ti(e _i)u,(e _,,d,).
d,EC,
e-,EC_,
In game F, similarly, i's best responses would be defined by replacing
the utility function u, by The games F and F are best-response equivalent
iff these best-response sets always coincide, for every player and every
possible probability distribution over the others' strategies; that is,
argmax E
d,EC,
e_,EC_,
= argmax E
Vi E N, Hq E 0(C- ).
d,EC,
e_,EC_,
For example, consider the two games shown in Tables 2.4 and 2.5.
These two games are best-response equivalent because, in each game,
each player i's best response would be to choose y, if he thought that
the other player would choose the y-strategy with probability Vs or more.
However, the two games are obviously not fully equivalent. (For ex-

--- Sayfa 72 ---
54
2 • Basic Models
Table 2.4 A game in strategic form
C2
C
x2
Y2
x,
9,9
0,8
y,
8,0
7,7
Table 2.5 A game in strategic form
C2
C,
x2
Y2
x,
1,1
0,0
Y
0,0
7,7
ample, each player prefers (x, ,x2) over (y, ,y2) in the first game but not
in the second game.) The distinction between these two equivalence
concepts depends on whether we admit that one player's preferences
over the possible strategies of another player may be meaningful and
relevant to our analysis of the game.
2.4 Reduced Normal Representations
There are some strategic-form games that we can simplify by eliminating
redundant strategies. For example, consider the extensive-form game
in Figure 2.5. Its normal representation is shown in Table 2.6.
It is not a coincidence that the payoffs in the top three rows of Table
2.6 are identical. In the given extensive-form game, if player 1 chose a1
at his 1.1 node, then the path of play could never get to his 1.3 nodes,
so the expected payoffs cannot depend on what move (among x1 , yz,
and z,) he would plan to choose if the path of play did reach a 1.3
node. Thus, the distinction between player l's strategies aixi, a,y1,  and
a,z, may seem unnecessary.
In general, given any strategic-form game F = (N, (C,),,,, (u)„,), for
any player i and any two strategies dz  and e, in C,, we may say that d,
and e, are payoff equivalent iff
= uf(c_„e,), V c
E C_1, Vj E N.

--- Sayfa 73 ---
2.4 • Reduced Normal Representations
55
0,8
6,0
Figure 2.5
Table 2.6 A game in strategic form, the normal representation of Figure 2.5
C2

Cl
x2
Y2
aixi
6,0
6,0
aci
6,0
6,0
aizi
6,0
6,0
bix,
lily,
biz,
8,0
0,8
3,4
0,8
8,0
7,0
That is, two of i's strategies d, and e, are payoff equivalent iff, no matter
what the players other than i may do, no player would ever care whether
i used strategy d, or e,. In Table 2.6, a ix, , aiy,, and a izi  are payoff
equivalent to one another.
When there are payoff-equivalent strategies, we can simplify the nor-
mal representation by merging together payoff-equivalent strategies
and replacing each such set of payoff-equivalent strategies by a single
strategy. The result of simplifying the normal representation is called
the purely reduced normal representation.

--- Sayfa 74 ---
56
2 • Basic Models
For example, we may merge and replace a,x 1, (to), and a,z, in Table
2.6 by a single strategy al•, which may be interpreted as the plan "do a,
at 1.1, move unspecified at 1.3." Then the purely reduced normal
representation is as shown in Table 2.7.
Although no two strategies are payoff equivalent in Table 2.7, there
is a sense in which the strategy b,z, is redundant. To see why, suppose
that player 1 considered choosing between the strategies al, and bl y ,

on the basis of a coin toss. The resulting randomized strategy, which
can be denoted .5[a,.] + .5[6,y1 ], would give expected-payoff allocations
.5(6,0) + .5(0,8) = (3,4) against x2,
.5(6,0) + .5(8,0) = (7,0) against Y2.
Thus, b,z, is redundant, because it is payoff equivalent to a randomized
strategy that player 1 could implement using strategies other than biz,.
In general, given any strategic-form game F = (N, (C,),,,, (u,),,N), a
randomized strategy for player i is any probability distribution over the
set of C,. Thus, A(C,) denotes the set of all randomized strategies for
player i. To emphasize the distinction from these randomized strategies,
the strategies in the set C, may also be called pure strategies. For any pure
strategy c, in C, and any randomized strategy cr, in A(C,), o-,(ci) denotes
the probability that i would choose c, if he were implementing the
randomized strategy a, in A(C,).
A strategy d, in C, is randomly redundant iff there is a probability
distribution r1  in A(C,) such that cr,(di) = 0 and
= E 	Vc_1  E C , Vj E N.
eiEC,
Table 2.7 A game in strategic form, the purely reduced normal
representation of Figure 2.5
C2

C,
x2
Y2
6,0
6,0
b1x1
8,0
0,8
blyl
0,8
8,0
3,4
7,0

--- Sayfa 75 ---
2.5 Elimination of Dominated Strategies
57
That is, di  is randomly redundant iff there is some way for player i to
randomly choose among his other strategies such that, no matter what
combination of actions might be chosen by the other players, every
player would get the same expected payoff when i uses d, as when i
randomizes in this way.
The fully reduced normal representation is derived from the purely re-
duced normal representation by eliminating all strategies that are ran-
domly redundant in the purely reduced normal representation. The
fully reduced normal representation of the extensive-form game in
Figure 2.5 is shown in Table 2.8. Unless specified otherwise, the reduced
normal representation of an extensive-form game may be taken to mean
the fully reduced normal representation.
2.5 Elimination of Dominated Strategies
Concepts of domination, defined for one-person decision problems in
Section 1.8, can also be applied to strategic-form games. Given any
strategic-form game r = (N, (C,),,,, (u,),,N), any player i in N, and any
strategy d, in Ci, di  is strongly dominated for player i iff there exists some
randomized strategy cr, in A(C) such that
u,(c_„d,) < E cri(e,)u,(c_„e,), Vc_, E C_,.
e, C,
For example, in the strategic form of our simple card game (Table 2.1),
the strategy Ff is strongly dominated for player 1 by the randomized
strategy .5[Rr] + .5[Rf].
By Theorem 1.6, d .
strongly dominated for player i if and only if
d, can never be a best response for i, no matter what he may believe
about the other players' strategies. This fact may suggest that eliminat-
Table 2.8 A game in strategic form, the fully reduced normal representation
of Figure 2.5
Cl
C2
x2
Y2
a l.
6,0
6,0
boci
8,0
0,8
biYi

0,8
8,0

--- Sayfa 76 ---
58
2 • Basic Models
ing a strongly dominated strategy for any player i should not affect the
analysis of the game, because player i would never use this strategy, and
this fact should be evident to all the other players if they are intelligent.
After one or more strongly dominated strategies have been eliminated
from a game, other strategies that were not strongly dominated in the
original game may become strongly dominated in the game that re-
mains. For example, consider the game in Table 2.9. In this game, z2  is
strongly dominated for player 2 by .5[x2] + .55,21 (the randomized
strategy that gives probability 0.5 to x2  and y2  each). None of the other
strategies for either player are strongly dominated in this game, because
each is a best response to at least one conjecture about how the other
player may behave. (Strategy a, is best for 1 against x2, bl  is best for 1
against z2, x2  is best for 2 against al , and y2  is best for 2 against bp)
However, in the game that remains after eliminating z2, b, is strongly
dominated by a, for player 1 (because 0 < 2 and 1 < 3). Furthermore,
when z2  and b1  are both eliminated, we are left with a game in which y2
is strongly dominated by x2  for player 2 (because 0 < 3). Then elimi-
nating y2  leaves only one strategy for each player in the game: a, for
player 1 and x2  for player 2. Thus, iterative elimination of strongly
dominated strategies leads to a unique prediction as to what the players
should do in this game.
This process of iterative elimination of strongly dominated strategies
may be formalized for a general strategic-form game F = (N, (C,),,N,
(u,),,N) as follows. For any player i, let C 1)  denote the set of all strategies
in C, that are not strongly dominated for i. Then let F(1)  be the strategic-
form game
ro) = (N,
(uz),N)•
(In the game ['a), each u, function is, of course, actually the restriction
of the original utility function to the new smaller domain X,,NC;1).)
Table 2.9 A game in strategic form
C
C2
x2
Y2
Z2
a,
2,3
0,0
3,0
1,6
0,1
4,2

--- Sayfa 77 ---
2.5 Elimination of Dominated Strategies
59
Then, by induction, for every positive integer k, we can define the
strategic-form game F(k)  to be
V*,  = (N, (0),
(U)
EN,
where, for each player i, 0)  is the set of all strategies in 0-  ') that are
not strongly dominated for i in the game F(")  (and ui  is reinterpreted
as the restriction of the original utility function for i to the smaller
domain X,,,,C,(k)). Clearly, for each i, C, D D D . . . , and it can
be shown that all of these sets are nonempty. Thus, since we started
with a finite game there must exist some number K such that
c(K) = c(K+1)
C(K+2) 	7
Vi E N.
Given this number K, we let F")  = F(K)  and Cr)  = 0`)  for every i in
N. The strategies in Cr)  are iteratively undominated, in the strong sense,
for player i. The game F")  may be called the residual game generated
from F by iterative strong domination.
Because all players are supposed to be rational decision-makers, in
the given strategic-form game F we may conclude that no player could
possibly use any strongly dominated strategy. That is, each player i must
be expected to choose a strategy in 0). Because all players are assumed
to be intelligent, they should know as we do that no player i will use a
strategy outside of C,(1). Thus, each player i must choose a strategy in
0), because 0)  is the set of all strategies that are best responses to
probability distributions over X j",_,Cr. But then, because each player
i is intelligent, he must also know that every player j will use a strategy
in 0), and so i must use a strategy in 0), the set of his best responses
to probability distributions over X jEN- ,C 2)  . Repeatedly using the as-
sumptions of rationality and intelligence in this way, this argument can
be extended to show that each player i must use a strategy in Cr).
For each player i, every strategy in Cr is a best response to some
probability distribution over X JEN -,C;-). In fact, these sets (cr),E,
are
the largest subsets of (C,)ZEN  respectively for which this condition holds.
Given any strategic-form game r = (N, (C,),EN, (u,),EN), any player i
in N, and any strategy d, in C„ d, is weakly dominated for player i iff there
exists some randomized strategy cri  in A(C,) such that
ui(c_i,di)< E o-i(ei)ui(c_i,ei), Vc_i  E C_i,
eiEc,
and, for at least one strategy combination c-i  in C_i,

--- Sayfa 78 ---
60
2 • Basic Models
ui(e_i ,di) < E o-i(ei)ui(e_i ,ei ).
eiEC;
It is harder to argue that eliminating a weakly dominated strategy
should not affect the analysis of the game, because weakly dominated
strategies could be best responses for a player, if he feels confident that
some strategies of other players have probability 0. (Recall Theorem
1.7.) Furthermore, there are technical difficulties with iterative elimi-
nation of weakly dominated strategies that do not arise with strong
domination. Consider, for example, the game shown in Table 2.10 (due
to Kohlberg and Mertens, 1986). If we first eliminate the strongly dom-
inated strategy z, , then we are left with a game in which y2  is weakly
dominated. On the other hand, if we first eliminate the strongly domi-
nated strategy y, from Table 2.10, then we are left with a game in which
x2  is weakly dominated. If we begin by eliminating both y, and z, from
Table 2.10, then neither of player 2's strategies would be weakly dom-
inated in the game that remains (nor would they be payoff equivalent,
in the sense of Section 2.4, because player 1's payoffs from x2  and y2
are different). Thus, which of player 2's strategies would be eliminated
by a process of iterative elimination of weakly dominated strategies
depends on the order in which we eliminate player l's dominated strat-
egies.
This order-dependence problem does not arise if we only eliminate
strongly dominated strategies. That is, if we keep eliminating strongly
dominated strategies until we have a residual game in which no strongly
dominated strategies can be found, then the residual game will be the
same no matter what order of elimination is used. Eliminating strategies
for other players can never cause a strongly dominated strategy for
player i to cease being strongly dominated, but it can cause a weakly
Table 2.10 A game in strategic form
C,
C2
X2
Y2
x,
3,2
2,2
y l

1,1
0,0
z,
0,0
1,1

--- Sayfa 79 ---
2.6 • Multiagent Representations
61
dominated strategy to cease being weakly dominated (see Gilboa, Kalai,
and Zemel, 1989).
Nevertheless, weak domination and iterative elimination of weakly
dominated strategies are useful concepts for analysis of games. In our
simple card game (Table 2.1), the fact that Fr and Ff are both weakly
dominated for player 1 is a formal expression of our natural intuition
that player 1 should not fold when he has a winning card. In Table 2.3,
iterative weak domination can first eliminate 2's strategies U, RP, and
Rr (all weakly dominated by Lr) and then eliminate l's strategy T in
the game that remains. On the other hand, in Table 2.2, iterative
(strong) domination can first eliminate l's strategy B and then elimi-
nate 2's strategy R. So iterative elimination of dominated strategies leads
to the conclusions discussed at the end of Section 2.2: that we should
expect to observe the moves T and L in the game shown in Figure 2.3,
but we should expect to observe the moves B and r in the game shown
in Figure 2.4.
2.6 Multiagent Representations
The normal representation of von Neumann and Morgenstern effec-
tively defines a mapping from games in extensive form to games in
strategic form. Another such mapping was proposed by Selten (1975);
he called it the agent-normal form. We use here a slight modification of
Selten's terminology and call this mapping the multiagent representation.
The idea behind Selten's multiagent representation is that it should not
matter if a given player in Fe were represented by a different agent in
each of his possible information states, provided that these agents all
share the same preferences and information of the original player.
Let r be any given game in extensive form, and let N denote the set
of players in Fe. For any i in N, we let Si  denote the set of information
states for player i that occur at the various nodes belonging to i in the
game. Without loss of generality (relabeling if necessary), we may as-
sume that these S, sets are disjoint, so S, n
= 0 if i j.
The set of players in the multiagent representation of this extensive-
form game is S* = UzEN- Sz• That is, in the multiagent representation of
Fe, there is one player for every possible information state of every
player in Fe itself. We may refer to the players in the multiagent rep-
resentation as temporary agents. A temporary agent r representing player
i is responsible for choosing the move that i would make when the path

--- Sayfa 80 ---
62
2 • Basic Models
of play reaches a node that is controlled by i with the information state
r. We may imagine that all of the temporary agents plan their moves
simultaneously at the beginning of the game, although some agents'
plans may never be implemented (if the path of play does not go
through the nodes with the information states for which they are re-
sponsible).
For any player i in N and information state r in S„ we let D, be the
set of move labels on the alternatives at the nodes that are controlled
by player i in the information state r. This set D, is the set of strategies
available to the temporary agent r in the multiagent representation of
Fe. The utility functions vr  for the temporary agents in the multiagent
representation are defined to coincide with the utility functions uz  of
the corresponding players in the normal representation. That is, for
any player i in N and any r in S„ we define v,: R so that, for
any (cis)„s. in X„s. D„ if (4" is the strategy profile for the normal
representation such that ci(t) = d, for every j in N and every tin S3, then
vr((c15),s9.) = u,((c),").
Together these structures (S*, ND 1 "-ES*, (VA.E3*) define the multiagent
representation of Fe. Like the normal representation, the multiagent
representation is a game in strategic form.
For example, consider the game in Figure 2.6. In the normal repre-
sentation, the set of players is N = {1,2}, the strategy sets are C1  = faiwi,
ape, biwi, biocil and C2 = {y2,z2}, and the payoffs (u1,u2) are shown in
Table 2.11. In the multiagent representation, on the other hand, the
set of players is S* = {1,2,3}, of whom agents 1 and 2 represent different
information states of the original player 1, and agent 3 represents the
original player 2. The strategy sets in the multiagent representation are
D, {a,,bi }, D2 = {WI,X1}, D3 = {y2,z2}. The payoffs (v1 ,v2,v3) in the
8,6
0,0
8,0
0,2
6,0
Figure 2.6

--- Sayfa 81 ---
2.7 • Common Knowledge 63
Table 2.11 A game in strategic form, the normal representation of Figure 2.6
C2
Y2
a1w1
5,0
1,1
a1x1

4,0
4,0
b1w1

8,3
0,1
61x1
7,3
3,0
Table 2.12 A game in strategic form, the multiagent representation of
Figure 2.6
Y2
Z2
x1
w,
x1
a1

5,5,0
4,4,0
1,1,1
4,4,0
6 1
8,8,3
7,7,3
0,0,1
3,3,0
multiagent representation are shown in Table 2.12. Of course, the first
two payoffs are the same in each cell of Table 2.12, because temporary
agents 1 and 2 both represent the original player 1, acting at different
information states in the given extensive-form game.
To appreciate some of the technical significance of the multiagent
representation, notice that the strategy a1w1  is strongly dominated (by
b1x1) for player 1 in the normal representation. Furthermore, iterative
elimination of weakly dominated strategies in the normal representation
would lead to the conclusion that player 2 should use the strategy y2
(because z2  becomes weakly dominated once the strategy a1w1  is elimi-
nated), and so player 1 should use strategy b1w1. However, no strategies
are dominated (weakly or strongly) in the multiagent representation.
(For each temporary agent, each of his two strategies is a unique best
response to some combination of strategies by the other two agents.)
Thus, a domination argument that may seem rather convincing when
we only consider the normal representation becomes more questionable
when we consider the multiagent representation.
2.7 Common Knowledge
Suppose that after player 1 has drawn a black card in our simple card
game he asks a consultant to help him decide whether to raise or fold.

--- Sayfa 82 ---
64
2 • Basic Models
Given the information that the card is black, the consultant knows that
the payoffs actually would be (-1,1) if 1 folds, (-2,2) if 1 raises and 2
meets, and (1,-1) if 1 raises and 2 passes. Thus, he might be tempted
to model this situation by the game shown in Figure 2.7.
However, Figure 2.7 would be seriously inadequate as a representa-
tion of this card game. Looking only at Figure 2.7, the consultant might
reason as follows: "Player 2 should obviously be expected to meet,
because meeting gives her a payoff of 2 whereas passing gives her a
payoff of —1. Thus, it is better for player 1 to pass and get —1, rather
than raise and get —2." The error in this reasoning is that player 2 does
not know that the payoffs are those shown in Figure 2.7. Her ignorance
about the color of l's card is crucial for understanding why she might
pass when 1 raises, and this ignorance is shown in Figure 2.2 but not
in Figure 2.7. Thus, even if the consultant actually knows the color of
the card drawn by player 1, the chance node with both possible outcomes
of the draw must be included in his model of the game, as shown in
Figure 2.2, because player 2's behavior may be influenced by her un-
certainty about the color of the card.
Following Aumann (1976), we say that a fact is common knowledge
among the players if every player knows it, every player knows that
every player knows it, and so on; so every statement of the form "(every
player knows that)*  every player knows it" is true, for k = 0,1,2, . . . .
A player's private information is any information that he has that is not
common knowledge among all the players in the game. In the simple
card game, after player 1 has drawn his card, it is common knowledge
that the path of play must have reached one of the two nodes controlled
by player 1 in Figure 2.2; the actual node that has been reached is
player 1's private information.
In general, whatever model of a game we may choose to study, the
methods of game theory compel us to assume that this model must be
Figure 2.7

--- Sayfa 83 ---
2.7 • Common Knowledge 65
common knowledge among the players. To understand why, recall our
proposed definition of game theory (from Section 1.1) as the study of
mathematical models of conflict and cooperation between intelligent
rational decision-makers. The intelligence assumption means that what-
ever we may know or understand about the game must be known or
understood by the players of the game, because they are as intelligent
as we are. Thus, the intelligence assumption implies that, whatever
model of the game we may study, we must assume that the players know
this model, too. Furthermore, because we know that the players all
know the model, the intelligent players must also know that they all
know the model. Having established this fact, we also recognize that the
intelligent players also know that they all know that they all know the
model, and so on.
Thus, to do analysis as a game theorist, the consultant to player 1
who knows that the card is actually black must disregard this informa-
tion, because it is not common knowledge among the players. To rep-
resent this game in extensive form, he must use the game as originally
shown in Figure 2.2, because Figure 2.2 shows the maximum informa-
tion about the game that is common knowledge. (In general, a larger
game tree like Figure 2.2 expresses more uncertainty, and hence less
information, about what may happen in the game than a smaller tree
like Figure 2.7.) Under these circumstances, the root of the game in
Figure 2.2 may be called a historical chance node because, at the time
when the game model is formulated and analyzed, the outcome of this
node has already occurred and is known to some (but not all) players.
The historical chance node is needed to represent the uncertainty of
player 2.
In general, a historical node is needed whenever we represent in
extensive form a situation in which the players already have different
private information. Because the extensive form begins with a single
node, this node (the root) must represent a situation at some time in
the past before the players learned their private information, so every-
thing that any player then knew about the game was common knowl-
edge. All relevant private information that the players may have now
must be accounted for in the extensive-form game by nodes and
branches representing the past events that the players may have ob-
served.
To illustrate the importance of common knowledge, I cite a well-
known fable. This story concerns a village of 100 married couples, who

--- Sayfa 84 ---
66
2 • Basic Models
were all perfect logicians but had somewhat peculiar social customs.
Every evening the men of the village would have a meeting, in a great
circle around a campfire, and each would talk about his wife. If when
the meeting began a man had any reason to hope that his wife had
always been faithful to him, then he would praise her virtue to all of
the assembled men. On the other hand, if at any time before the current
meeting he had ever gotten proof that his wife had been unfaithful,
then he would moan and wail and invoke the terrible curse of the (male)
gods on her. Furthermore, if a wife was ever unfaithful, then she and
her lover would immediately inform all of the other men in the village
except her husband. All of these traditions were common knowledge
among the people of this village.
In fact, every wife had been unfaithful to her husband. Thus, every
husband knew of every infidelity except for that of his own wife, whom
he praised every evening.
This situation endured for many years, until a traveling holy man
visited the village. After sitting through a session around the campfire
and hearing every man praise his wife, the holy man stood up in the
center of the circle of husbands and said in a loud voice, "A wife in this
village has been unfaithful." For ninety-nine evenings thereafter, the
husbands continued to meet and praise their wives, but on the hun-
dredth evening they all moaned and wailed and invoked the terrible
curse.
To understand what happened in this fable, notice first that, if there
had been only one unfaithful wife, her husband would have moaned
and wailed on the first evening after the holy man's visit, because (know-
ing of no other infidelities and knowing that he would have known of
them if they existed) he would have known immediately that the un-
faithful wife was his. Furthermore, one can show by induction that, for
any integer k between 1 and 100, if there were exactly k unfaithful
wives, then all husbands would praise their wives for k— 1 evenings after
the holy man's visit and then, on the kth evening, the k husbands of
unfaithful wives would moan and wail. Thus, on the hundredth evening,
after 99 more evenings of praise, every husband knew that there must
be 100 unfaithful wives, including his own.
Now let us ask, What did this holy man tell the husbands that they
did not already know? Every husband already knew of 99 unfaithful
wives, so that was not news to anyone. But the holy man's statement
also made it common knowledge among the men that there was an

--- Sayfa 85 ---
2.8 • Bayesian Games
67
unfaithful wife, since it was common knowledge that he announced this
to all the men. Before the holy man's announcement, every statement
of the form "(every husband knows that)k  there is an unfaithful wife"
was true for k 5_ 99, but it was not true for k = 100. For example, if we
number the husbands from 1 to 100, 1 knew that 2 knew that 3 knew
that . . . that 99 knew that 100's wife was unfaithful; but 1 did not know
that 2 knew that 3 knew that . . . that 99 knew that 100 knew that l's
wife was unfaithful. Thus, the lesson to be drawn from this fable is that
the consequences that follow if a fact is common knowledge can be very
different from the consequences that would follow if (for example) it
were merely known that everyone knew that everyone knew it.
2.8 Bayesian Games
A game with incomplete information is a game in which, at the first point
in time when the players can begin to plan their moves in the game,
some players already have private information about the game that
other players do not know. For example, our simple card game would
become a game with incomplete information if player 1 drew his card
and looked at it before he learned the actual rules of the game in which
the card was to be used. Games with incomplete information often arise
in practical situations. We often want to study situations in which the
various players currently have different private information that they
have known for a long time, and it may be unnatural to define the
beginning of the game to be some point in the distant past before they
learned their private information. Furthermore, some parts of a player's
private information may be so basic to his identity that it is not even
meaningful to talk about him planning his actions before learning this
information (e.g., information about the player's gender, native lan-
guage, and level of risk aversion). Thus, we should admit the possibility
that a player may have some private information already at the first
point in time when he begins to plan his moves in the game. The initial
private information that a player has at this point in time is called the
type of the player.
Games with incomplete information can be modeled in extensive form
by using a historical chance node to describe the random determination
of the players' types. As noted earlier, however, defining the beginning
of the game to be some time in the past, before players learned their
types, may be interpretively awkward. Furthermore, there may be se-

--- Sayfa 86 ---
68
2 • Basic Models
rious concerns that the argument in Section 2.2 for the sufficiency of
the normal representation in strategic form should not apply to games
with incomplete information. The key to that argument was the as-
sumption that each player should be able to plan his moves at or before
the point in time represented by the root of the extensive-form game.
But for a game with incomplete information, that assumption would be
simply false (because the root represents a point in time before players
learn their types, and a player's type is the private information that he
has when he begins to think about the game). Thus, Harsanyi (1967-
68) argued that a generalization of the strategic form, called the Bayes-
ian form, is needed to represent games with incomplete information.
The Bayesian form gives us a way of representing games that is almost
as simple as the strategic form (at least in comparison to the extensive
form), but which does not require us to pretend that players choose
their strategies before learning any private information.
To define a Bayesian game (or a game in Bayesian form), we must specify
a set of players N and, for each player i in N, we must specify a set of
possible actions C„ a set of possible types Ti, a probability function p,,
and a utility function u,. We let
C = X Ci, T= X Ti.
iEN
iEN
That is, C is the set of all possible profiles or combinations of actions
that the players may use in the game, and T is the set of all possible
profiles or combinations of types that the players may have in the game.
For each player i, we let T_, denote the set of all possible combinations
of types for the players other than i, that is,
T = X Tj .

jEN- i

The probability function p, in the Bayesian game must be a function
from T, into 0(T_,), the set of probability distributions over T_,. That
is, for any possible type t, in Ti, the probability function must specify a
probability distribution p,(.1t,) over the set T_„ representing what player
i would believe about the other players' types if his own type were
Thus, for any t_, in T_„ pi(t_,It,) denotes the subjective probability that
i would assign to the event that t_, is the actual profile of types for the
other players, if his own type were t,.

--- Sayfa 87 ---
2.8 Bayesian Games
69
For any player i in N, the utility function u, in the Bayesian game
must be a function from C x T into the real numbers R. That is, for
any profile of actions and types (c,t) in C x T, the function u, must
specify a number u,(c,t) that represents the payoff that player i would
get, in some von Neumann-Morgenstern utility scale, if the players'
actual types were all as in t and the players all chose their actions as
specified in c.
These structures together define a Bayesian game Fb, so we may write
(2.2)
Fb  = (N,
(
(Pi)iEN3 (Ui)iEN)•
Fb  is finite iff the sets N and C, and T, (for every i) are all finite. When
we study such a Bayesian game Fb, we assume that each player i knows
the entire structure of the game (as defined above) and his own actual
type in T, and this fact is common knowledge among all the players
in N.
To avoid confusion, we refer to the object of choice in a Bayesian
game as an "action" rather than a "strategy." Relative to some underlying
extensive-form game, an action for a player in a Bayesian game may
represent a plan that specifies a move for every contingency that the
player would consider possible after he has learned his type. On the
other hand, a strategy would normally be thought of as a complete plan
covering all contingencies that the player would consider possible, be-
fore he learns his type. Thus, a strategy for player i in the Bayesian game
Fb  is defined to be a function from his set of types T, into his set of
actions C.
As noted earlier, our simple card game becomes a game with incom-
plete information if we assume that player 1 already knows the color of
the card when the game begins. The representation of this game in
Bayesian form then has N = {1,2}, T1  = {1.a,1.13}, T2 = {2}, C1  = {R,F},
and C2 = {An The probability functions are
p2(1.a12) = .5 = p2(1.b12),
because player 2 thinks that red and black cards are equally likely and
p1(211.a) = 1 = p1(211.b),
because player 1 has no uncertainty about 2's type. The utility functions
(u1(c,t), u2(c,t)) depend on (c,t) = (ci,c241), as shown in Table 2.13.
For another example of a Bayesian game, consider the following
bargaining game, where player 1 is the seller of some object and player

--- Sayfa 88 ---
70
2 • Basic Models
Table 2.13 Expected payoffs for all types and action profiles
t, =
1.a
M
P
R
F
2,-2
1,-1
1,-1
1,-1
t, = I.b
M
P
R
F
—2,2
—1,1
1,-1
—1,1
2 is the only potential buyer. Each player knows what the object is worth
to himself but thinks that its value (in dollars) to the other player may
be any integer from 1 to 100, each with probability '/loo. In the bargain-
ing game, each player will simultaneously name a bid (in dollars) be-
tween 0 and 100 for trading the object. If the buyer's bid is greater
than or equal to the seller's bid, then they will trade the object at a price
equal to the average of their bids; otherwise no trade will occur. Let us
assume that the players are risk neutral, so that we can identify utility
payoffs with monetary profits from trading. Then this game may be
formulated as a Bayesian game as follows. The set of players is N =
{1,2}. For each player i, the set of his possible types is Ti  = {1,2, . . ,100}
(here we identify a player's type with his value for the object), and the
set of his possible actions (bids) is Ci  = {0,1,2, . . . ,100}. The probability
functions are
pi(t_ilt,) = 1/100, Vi E N, Vt = (t_„ti) E T.
The utility payoffs, for any c in C and any t in T, are
ul(c,t) = (c1  + c2)12 — t1  if c2  > c,,
u2(c,t) = t2  — (c 1  c
2)12 if c2  > cl,
ul(c,t) = 0 = u2(c,t) if c2  < c1.
Although it is easier to develop general notation for finite games, it
is often easier to analyze examples with infinite type sets than those with
large finite type sets. The only notational complication is that, in the

--- Sayfa 89 ---
2.8 • Bayesian Games
71
infinite case, the probability distributions p,(.I to must be defined on all
measurable subsets of T_„ instead of just individual elements of T_,.
(So if R_, is a subset of T_„ then we let NR_,I to denote the subjective
probability that i would assign to the event that the profile of others'
types is in R_„ if his own type were t,.) For example, consider a modified
version of the above buyer—seller game in which each player's type set
expanded to include all real numbers between 0 and 100, such that
Tl  = T2 = [0,100]. For each player i and each t, in T,, let pz(.10 be the
uniform distribution over [0,100]. Then for any two numbers x and y
such that 0 x y 100, the probability that any type t, of player i
would assign to the event that the other player's type is between x and
y would be
pfix,y] I ti) = (y — x)/100.
(Here [x,y] denotes the closed interval from x to y in the real number
line.) This game has been studied by Chatterjee and Samuelson (1983).
We say that beliefs (p,),,„, in a Bayesian game are consistent iff there
is some common prior distribution over the set of type profiles t such
that each players' beliefs given his type are just the conditional proba-
bility distribution that can be computed from the prior distribution by
Bayes's formula. That is (in the finite case), beliefs are consistent iff
there exists some probability distribution P in A(T) such that,
E P(s_„t,)
(Here (s_„t,) denotes the profile of types in T such that the i-component
is t, and all other components are as in s_,. Whenever t, t_„ and ti  appear
together in the same formula, t is the profile of types in which the
i-component is t, and all other components are as in t_„ so t = (t_„ti).)
For example, beliefs in our simple card game are consistent with the
prior distribution
P(1.a, 2) = P(1.b, 2) = .5.
Beliefs in the finite buyer—seller game described earlier are consistent
with the the prior
P(t) = 1/10000, Vt E T = {1,2, ... ,100} X 11,2, ... ,100}.
In the infinite version, beliefs are consistent with a uniform prior on
[0,100]2.
Pi(t—ilti) =
P(t)

Vt E T, Vi E N.

--- Sayfa 90 ---
72
2 • Basic Models
Most of the Bayesian games that have been studied in applied game
theory, and all of the formal examples that appear in this book, have
beliefs that are consistent with a common prior in this sense. (Indeed,
the definitions in Section 2.1 implicitly imposed a consistency require-
ment on games in extensive form, although it would be easy to define
a generalized extensive form in which a different subjective probability
distribution for each player may be specified for the set of alternatives
following each chance node.) One reason for this tendency to use con-
sistent models is that consistency simplifies the definition of the model.
The common prior on T determines all the probability functions, and
it is simpler to specify one probability distribution than many probability
functions that depend on types. Furthermore, inconsistency often seems
like a strikingly unnatural feature of a model. In a consistent model,
differences in beliefs among players can be explained by differences in
information, whereas inconsistent beliefs involve differences of opinion
that cannot be derived from any differences in observations and must
be simply assumed a priori. Nevertheless, it is possible to imagine games
with inconsistent beliefs. For example, in a sports match, if it is common
knowledge among the coaches of two teams that each believes that his
own team has a 2/3 probability of winning its next game against the other
team, then the coaches' beliefs cannot be consistent with a common
prior. In a consistent model, it can happen that each coach believes that
his team has a 2/3 probability of winning, but this difference of beliefs
cannot be common knowledge among the coaches (see Aumann, 1976).
Bayesian games contain both probability and utility functions, so
equivalence for Bayesian games is derived from Theorem 1.2 in Chapter
1. Thus, we may say that two Bayesian games (N, (CAEN, (T,),,,, (pdiEN,
(OiEN) and (N, (Cz)iEN, ((AEA(' (w,)i,N) are (fully) equivalent iff,
for every i in N, there exist functions Ai:T, --> R and Bi:T —> R such
that, for every t, in Ti, A,(t,)> 0 and
q(t_i Iti)w(c,t) = A(op(t_il ) .(c,t) +
Vc E C, Vt_i  E T_i.
That is, the Bayesian games are equivalent iff, for every possible type
of every player, the two games impute probability and utility functions
that are decision-theoretically equivalent in the sense of Theorem 1.2.
(Notice that the multiplicative constant A,(t,) depends on i's type alone,

--- Sayfa 91 ---
2.8 Bayesian Games
73
whereas the additive constant B P(t) can depend on the types of all play-
ers.)
Using this equivalence criterion, we find that any Bayesian game with
finite type sets is equivalent to a Bayesian game with consistent beliefs.
Given any game rb as defined above, we can construct such an equiv-
alent Bayesian game by letting
(2.3)
qi(t-i
=
I T_i  I and wi(c,t) = T_,I piwilotti(c,t)
for every i in N, t in T, and c in C. (Here, for any finite set X, I X I
denotes the number of elements in the set X.) Notice, in fact, that the
types are independent and uniformly distributed in the consistent prior
of the game (N, (CAEN, (T,),,,, (q,),,,,
Thus, consistency of
beliefs and independence of types cannot be a problematic assumption
in our analysis as long as we consider finite Bayesian games with general
utility functions.
Consistency and independence of types can be important, however,
if we want to restrict our attention to utility functions with special
structure. For example, we might want to assume that each player's
utility payoff depends only on his own type (this is called the private
values assumption), or we might want to assume that monetary wealth
enters into each player's utility function in a simple additively separable
way (as when we make an assumption of transferable utility). The utility
functions w, constructed in formula (2.3) may fail to satisfy these con-
ditions, even when the ui  functions do satisfy them. Thus, consistency
may be an important and useful assumption to make about rb in the
context of such additional assumptions about the utility functions. Fur-
thermore, a construction using formula (2.3) is not possible when type
sets are infinite, so consistency in infinite Bayesian games may also be a
nontrivial assumption.
Harsanyi (1967-68), following a suggestion by R. Selten, discussed a
way to represent any Bayesian game I" b  (as defined in equation (2.2))
by a game in strategic form, which we call the type-agent representation.
(Harsanyi called this the Selten game or the posterior-lottery model.) In the
type-agent representation, there is one player or agent for every possible
type of every player in the given Bayesian game. By relabeling types if
necessary, we may assume without loss of generality that the sets T, are
disjoint, so that T, = 0 if i j. Then, given the Bayesian game Ft'
as above, the set of players in the type-agent representation is

--- Sayfa 92 ---
74
2 • Basic Models
T* = U Ti.
iEN
For any i in N and any t, in Ti, the set of strategies available to agent t,
in the type-agent representation is Dt  = C. The idea is that the agent
for t, in the type-agent representation is responsible for selecting the
action that player i will use in Fb  if t, is i's actual type. In the type-agent
representation, the utility payoff to any agent ti  in Ti  is defined to be
the conditionally expected utility payoff to player i in rb given that 1, is
i's actual type. Formally, for any player i in N and any type t, in Ti, the
utility function V,: X sET. DS
R in the type-agent representation is
defined so that, for any d = (d(s))SET* in XsET*
vi,(d) = E p,(t_,Itoui((dmEN, (t)
pyENY
i_,ET_,
(Here, for any j in N — i, whenever t, and t_, appear in the same formula,
t, is the j-component of t_,.) With these definitions, the type-agent rep-
resentation (T*, (D r)rET*, (7-O
rET*) is indeed a game in strategic form and
may be viewed as a representation of the given Bayesian game.
2.9 Modeling Games with Incomplete Information
The models discussed in this chapter give us a general framework for
analyzing conflicts that arise in any economic, political, and social situ-
ation. However, there are fundamental reasons to be concerned about
the possibility of accurately describing realistic situations exactly by sim-
ple game models. In particular, practical modeling difficulties often arise
when players' beliefs are characterized by subjective probabilities, so the
question of what one player might believe about another player's sub-
jective probabilities becomes problematic.
For example, suppose that we change our simple card game into a
"trivia quiz" game, in which the outcome depends on whether player 1
knows the correct answer to some randomly selected question (e.g., "In
whose honor was America named?" or "Who wrote Theory of Games and
Economic Behavior?") rather than on the color of a card. That is, the
sequence of play is (1) both players put $1 in the pot, (2) a question is
drawn at random from a large stack and is announced to both players,
(3) player 1 can raise $1 or fold, (4) if player 1 raises then player 2 must
meet (adding $1 more of her own) or pass, and then (5) player 1

--- Sayfa 93 ---
2.9 • Modeling with Incomplete Information
75
attempts to answer the question. Player 1 wins the money if he answers
correctly or if he raises and 2 passes. Player 2 wins the money if she
does not pass and player 1 answers incorrectly.
In this game, after the question has been announced, there is basic
uncertainty about whether player 1 knows the answer to the announced
question. Bayesian decision theory tells us that player 2 must be able to
describe her beliefs about this basic uncertainty by some number Q,
between 0 and 1, that represents her subjective probability of the event
that player 1 knows the answer. In the simple card game, the probability
of a red card at the beginning of the game was objectively '/2, so it was
reasonable to assume that this number was common knowledge. In this
trivia quiz, however, it is reasonable to suppose that player 1 may have
some uncertainty about 2's subjective probability Q. Again, Bayesian
decision theory tells us that player 1 should be able to describe his
beliefs about Q by some subjective probability distribution over the
interval from 0 to 1. Furthermore, if we do not assume that l's beliefs
about Q are common knowledge, then player 2 must be able to describe
her beliefs about l's beliefs about Q by some probability distribution
over the set of all probability distributions over the interval from 0 to
1. If in turn these beliefs are not common knowledge, then player 2's
type, which includes a specification of everything that she knows that is
not common knowledge, must include a specification of a distribution
over the set of distributions over the interval from 0 to 1, which is a
point in a very complicated infinite-dimensional vector space!
It might be hoped that these beliefs about beliefs about beliefs might
be irrelevant for the fundamental problem of predicting or explaining
the players' behavior, but (as the fable in Section 2.7 illustrated) we
cannot count on such irrelevance. When player 1 does not know the
answer, he would want to raise (as a bluff) if he thought that the
probability of player 2 meeting was less than 1/3. It is reasonable to
expect that, other things being equal, player 2 should be more likely to
meet a raise if Q is lower. So the more probability that player 1 puts on
low values of Q, the less likely he is to raise if he does not know the
answer. So if 2 thinks that 1 puts high probability on low values of Q,
then 2 may take a raise by 1 as strong evidence that 1 does know the
answer, which should in turn decrease her willingness to meet a raise.
(Notice that Q is 2's prior probability that 1 knows the answer, assessed
before she learns whether 1 will raise. Her beliefs about 1 after he raises
depend by Bayes's formula both on Q and on the probability that 1

--- Sayfa 94 ---
76
2 • Basic Models
would raise if he did not know the answer.) Thus, 2's beliefs about 1's
beliefs about 2's beliefs about whether 1 knows the answer may indeed
be an important factor in determining whether 2 would meet a raise in
this game!
In general, we have the paradoxical result that, the less common
knowledge is, the larger the sets of possible types must be, because a
player's type is a summary of everything that he knows that is not
common knowledge. But these sets of possible types, as a part of the
structure of the Bayesian game, are supposed to be common knowledge
among players. Thus, to describe a situation in which many individuals
have substantial uncertainty about one another's information and be-
liefs, we may have to develop a very complicated Bayesian-game model
with large type sets and assume that this model is common knowledge
among the players.
This result begs the question, Is it possible to construct a situation for
which there are no sets of types large enough to contain all the private
information that players are supposed to have, so that no Bayesian
game could represent this situation? This question was considered by
Mertens and Zamir (1985), who built on the seminal work of Harsanyi
(1967-68). Mertens and Zamir showed, under some technical assump-
tions, that no such counterexample to the generality of the Bayesian
game model can be constructed, because a universal belief space can be
constructed that is always big enough to serve as the set of types for
each player. Unfortunately, this universal belief space is an enormously
complicated mathematical object. So practical analysis requires that
there be enough common knowledge to let us use some smaller and
more tractable sets as the sets of types in our Bayesian game. Thus,
although constructing an accurate model for any given situation may
be extremely difficult, we can at least be confident that no one will ever
be able to prove that some specific conflict situation cannot be described
by any sufficiently complicated Bayesian game.
To understand this result, suppose that there is some specific conflict
situation that we want to represent by a game in Bayesian form. Suppose
that we can interview the various players or individuals who are involved
in this situation, and that they will answer our questions honestly, as
long as we make sure that we ask meaningful questions. (Let us assume
that they are willing to be honest because they accept us as disinterested
scientific observers who will not leak any information back to anyone
else.)

--- Sayfa 95 ---
2.9 • Modeling with Incomplete Information
77
A player's type in this game must account for all the relevant private
information (information that is not common knowledge) that he now
has about the game. We define an action for a player in this game to be
any plan that specifies a move for the player in every possible future
contingency, given his current type. So we can suppose that all players
simultaneously choose actions now (when each player knows his own
type) and they then make no further decisions in the game.
There are several basic issues in a conflict situation about which
players might have different information: How many players are ac-
tually in the game? What moves or actions are feasible for each player?
How will the outcome depend on the actions chosen by the players?
And what are the players' preferences over the set of possible outcomes?
Harsanyi (1967-68) argued that all of these issues can be modeled in a
unified way. Uncertainty about whether a player is "in the game" can
be converted into uncertainty about his set of feasible actions, by allow-
ing him only one feasible action ("nonparticipation") when he is sup-
posed to be "out of the game." Uncertainty about whether a particular
action is feasible for player i can in turn be converted into uncertainty
about how outcomes depend on actions, by saying that player i will get
some very bad outcomes if he uses an action that is supposed to be
infeasible. Alternatively, whenever an action c, is supposed to be infeas-
ible for player i, we can simply identify some feasible other action d,
and suppose that the outcome from using c, in our game model is the
same as for d .
c, in our game model is reinterpreted as "Do c, if you
can, otherwise do d,"). Uncertainty about how outcomes depend on
actions and uncertainty about preferences over outcomes can be unified
by modeling each player's utility as a function directly from the set of
profiles of players' actions to the set of possible utility payoffs (repre-
senting the composition of the function from actions to outcomes with
the function from outcomes to utility payoffs). Thus, we can model all
the basic uncertainty in the game as uncertainty about how utility pay-
offs depend on profiles of actions. This uncertainty can be represented
formally by introducing an unknown parameter o into the utility func-
tions.
So let N denote the set of all players whom anyone might consider to
be involved in this situation. For each i in N, let C, denote the set of all
possible actions that anyone might believe to be feasible for player i.
Let 0 denote the set of possible values for the parameter 0. We call
0 the domain of basic uncertainty in the game. Writing C

--- Sayfa 96 ---
78
2 • Basic Models
we can describe the dependence of each player i's utility payoff
on the players' actions and the unknown parameter 0 by a function
w,:C x () —> R.
In some situations, the domain of basic uncertainty may be straight-
forward to define. In our simple card game, 0 could be identified with
the color of the randomly selected card, so we could let 0 = {Red,
Black}. In the trivia quiz, the basic uncertainty would be about whether
player 1 knows the answer, so we could let 0 = {Knows answer, Does
not know answer}. In a game of bargaining between a seller and buyer
of some object, the basic uncertainty could be about the value of the
object to each player, so 0 could be a subset of R2, where the first
component of any vector in 0 represents the value (say, in dollars) of
the object to the seller and the second component represents the value
of the object to the buyer.
In general, it is always possible to identify 0 with a subset of ItcxN,
because the only role of 0 in our analysis is to identify how each player's
expected utility should depend on C. If we make this identification,
then we can simply define each w, function so that wi(c,0) = 0i  for every
i in N, c in C, and 0 in 0. Furthermore, if we assume that C is finite,
then there is no loss of generality in assuming that players have bounded
utility functions, so 0 is a closed and bounded (compact) subset of a
finite-dimensional vector space.
To continue the construction of Mertens and Zamir's universal belief
space, we need some more sophisticated mathematics (topology and
measure theory as in Royden, 1968, and Kolmogorov and Fomin, 1970;
see also Section 3.13 in Chapter 3). Readers with less mathematics are
encouraged to skim or omit this construction (through formula 2.4
below), as nothing later in the book will depend on it.
Given any metric space Z, let LI(Z) denote the set of all probability
distributions on Z that are defined on the set of Borel-measurable
subsets of Z. We give Z the weak topology, which is defined so that, for
every bounded continuous function f:Z ---> R, the integral f„,, f(x)p(dx)
is a continuous function of p in A(Z). If Z is compact, then A(Z) is also
compact and metrizable (with the Prohorov metric). Billingsley (1968)
gives a full development of this result.
The structures (N,
0, (w,),E„,) are not sufficient to describe the
situation in question, because they do not tell us what the players' beliefs
or information about the unknown 0 might be. Bayesian decision theory
tells us that each player must have a subjective probability distribution
over 0, which we shall call his first-order beliefs. Let

--- Sayfa 97 ---
2.9 • Modeling with Incomplete Information
79
= 26(0),
so that B,' contains all possible first-order beliefs of player i.
In a game, a player's optimal decision will generally depend on what
he expects the other players to do. And what he expects the other
players to do will depend on what he thinks they believe. Thus, we must
now ask, What does player i think are the other players' first-order
beliefs? Furthermore, to describe whether player i believes that other
players' beliefs are accurate or inaccurate, we must ask, What does
player i believe about the relationship between other players' first-order
beliefs and the true value of 0? Bayesian decision theory implies that
each player i's beliefs about these questions must be describable by some
subjective probability distribution over 0 X ( X,EN_, BJI), which we may
call his second-order beliefs. Let
= A (0 x X
N  131))
jE-i
so 132 contains all possible second-order beliefs of player i.
Defined in this way, i's second-order beliefs implicitly determine his
first-order beliefs, which are just the marginal distribution over 0. That
is, for any second-order beliefs (32 in W, the first-order beliefs that
correspond to (32 may be denoted 2:V w), where
(V(h'2))(AP) = pz! C
x (
,EX
N  B!)) , VT c O.
-
Now we can inductively define, for each k in {3,4,5, . . .}, a player's
k-order beliefs to be his beliefs about the other players' (k — 1)-order
beliefs and about their relationship to the basic unknown 0. We induc-
tively define
13/,'=A(0x( X 13;-1))
JEN-2
for each player i and each positive integer k. Then player i's k-order
beliefs can be described by a point in It As before, player i's k-order
beliefs determine his (k — 1)-order beliefs (and so, by induction, his
beliefs of all lower orders), by the function (V,'-':B,k  that is
inductively defined so that, for any Pi: in 13,k  and any Ili that is a Borel-
measurable subset of 0 X ( X,EN-213,k 2),
(e-'(131,))(1v) = piit({(0,(13.11-1),EN-)1(0,(4);-2(K-1)),,,_)E

--- Sayfa 98 ---
80
2 • Basic Models
(We use here the assumption that it is common knowledge that every
player's beliefs satisfy the laws of probability.)
Then the universal belief space for player i is
00
Bi = {ft = (13,%13,
.) E X BkJRk-I  = 	 Vk
2}.
k=1
Under the assumptions that the domain of basic uncertainty 0 is a
compact metric space and the set of players N is finite, BZ is also a
compact set (with the product topology).
Any 13, in B7 induces a probability distribution over 0 x ( X,EN-,137),
and we let C.1 (3,) denote this distribution. If IP is any closed subset of
0 X  ( X JE„,_,B7), then
q,(TI 133 = urn 13','({(0,(13;.-')JEN-i)10),(13AEN-i)  E
.
k--,d
In fact, Mertens and Zamir have shown that q,(1.) is a homeomorphism
between B7 and AO x ( ><JEN-,137)). That is, player i's universal belief
space includes all possible (Borel-measurable) beliefs about the basic
uncertainty in 0 and the other players' beliefs.
Notice now that the random variable 0 cannot directly influence any
player i's behavior in the game, except to the extent that he may have
information about 0 that is reflected in his actual beliefs, which we
denote 13,. So we can integrate the basic uncertainty variable 0 out of
the probability and utility functions without losing any structures rele-
vant
 13,) on X jEN-
vant to predicting the player's behavior. For any 13, in 137, let N. ft) be
the marginal probability distribution of )37. For any
profile of beliefs 13 = (13j),EN  in X_,,NB7, let 4,(.1 () denote the conditional
distribution on 0 that player i would derive (by Bayes's formula) from
the prior distribution 133 on 0 x ( X.,EN,B7)  if i learned that every
other player's actual beliefs were as specified in the profile B. For any
profile of actions c in C and any profile 13 = (B piEN in X,ENB7, let u,(c,(3)
denote the conditionally expected value of w,(c,O), using the distribution
4,(.1 13) on 0. That is,
ppif I pi) =
x 111  1 130,d C X 137,
jEN-i
 = f
wi(c,0)900 1 13).
f

--- Sayfa 99 ---
2.9 • Modeling with Incomplete Information
81
Thus, at last we get the universal Bayesian game,
(2.4)
(N, (Ci)iEN, (Bi)iEN, 	(ui)iEN)•
By construction, each type set 137 is large enough to include all possible
states of i's beliefs about the basic unknown parameter 0 in 0 and about
all other players' information or beliefs that are relevant to this basic
unknown parameter.
As noted earlier, these universal belief spaces are so large that, in
practice, we have little hope of analyzing the situation unless some other
Bayesian-game model with smaller type spaces can be found that also
describes the conflict situation. These results about the existence of
universal belief spaces and universal Bayesian games constitute a theo-
retical proof that there should exist a Bayesian-game model that de-
scribes all the relevant structure of information and incentives in any
given situation with incomplete information, so we can be confident that
there is nothing intrinsically restrictive about the structure of the Bayes-
ian game. We can be sure that no one will ever be able to take a real-
life conflict situation and prove that it would be impossible to describe
by any Bayesian-game model.
We say that X EN R, is a belief-closed subset of X ,,N137 iff, for every
player i, R, C 137 and, for every 13, in Ri, the probability distribution
pz(.I
) assigns probability one to the set . If the profile of
players' types is in the belief-closed subset X zENR, then this fact can be
made common knowledge without affecting any player's beliefs. Thus,
belief-closed subsets correspond to events that are effectively common
knowledge when they occur.
To get a Bayesian game that is tractable for analysis, we must assume
that there is enough common knowledge about the structure of the
game so that each player's private information can be represented by a
variable that ranges over a tractably small set of possible types. In effect,
we must assume that players' types can be represented by points in some
small belief-closed subset of the players' universal belief spaces.
However, for practical modeling, it is really not very helpful to think
about types as points in universal belief space. The way that tractable
models are usually constructed in practice is to assume that each player's
private information and beliefs depend only on some random variable
that he observes and that has a suitably small range, so this random
variable may then be identified with his type. If we also assume that
these random variables and the basic unknown 0 are drawn from a joint

--- Sayfa 100 ---
82
2 • Basic Models
prior distribution that is common knowledge, then Bayes's formula will
enable us to derive each player's beliefs of all orders, as a function of
his type.
For example, to get a tractable model of the trivia quiz, we might
suppose that each player either is sure that he knows the correct answer
or is sure that he does not know and has no chance of even guessing
the answer correctly. We might then assume that each player's private
information and beliefs depend only on whether he knows the answer
or not. Notice that, if player 2 knows the answer, then she might nat-
urally think it relatively more likely that many other people also know
the answer, and so she might be relatively more pessimistic about win-
ning the bet with player 1.
So we might let T, = {al ,b,} and T2 = {a2,62}, where, for each i, a, is
the type that knows the answer and b, is the type that does not know
the answer. To generate a consistent prior distribution over these ran-
dom variables, we might suppose that the actual proportion of people
who know the answer (in the population that includes players 1 and 2)
is a random variable it drawn from a uniform distribution on the
interval from 0 to 1. From this assumption, we can derive the following
prior distribution
P(a,,a2) = V3, P(a,,b2) = V6,
P(b,,a2) = '/6, P(bi,b2) = '/3.
(For example, the probability that both know the answer is f,  71.2  cl,rr =
1/3.) In effect, each player can make Bayesian inferences about this
unknown proportion on the basis of his own type, as a statistical sample
of size 1.
In this model, the basic unknown e that affects payoffs is just player
l's type itself, so player l's first-order beliefs always put probability 1
on the true value of 0. Player 2's first-order beliefs put probability either
2/3 or 1/3 on the event that 0 = al , depending on whether player 2 knows
the answer or not. If l's type is a,, then his second-order beliefs put
probability 2/3 on the event that 2's subjective probability of al  is 2/3
(because her type is a2), and put probability '/3 on the event that 2's
subjective probability of a, is V3 (because her type is 62). On the other
hand, if l's type is 6,, then his second-order beliefs put probability '/3
on the event that 2's subjective probability of al  is 2/s, and put probability
2/3 on the event that 2's subjective probability of a, is 1/3. These and all
other beliefs of all orders can be computed by Bayes's formula from
the prior distribution P. In effect, assuming that the players' beliefs

--- Sayfa 101 ---
Exercises
83
depend on random variables with small ranges is equivalent to assuming
that, for every k, the set of possible k-order beliefs for any player i is in
a small subset of B.
However, there is no need to actually compute all these higher order
beliefs for the various types in T1  and T2. We only need to compute the
probability functions p1:T1  ----> 0(T2) and p2:T2  0(T1) that are part of
the structure of the Bayesian game. For this example, these probabilities
are
Mad al) = 2/3, Pi(b2
=
/91(a2ibi) = 1/3, P1(b21 bi) = 2/3,
P2(al I a2) = 2/3
P2(bi I a2) = 1/3
p2(al  1b2) =
3
/
1. ,
(h -
h 2) = 2A•
Of course, we must be prepared to question the assumption that this
particular model is an accurate representation of the trivia quiz, when
it is actually played by two specific people. For example, it might be
considered important to expand the T, sets to include types that are not
sure about the answer but can make good guesses that have a positive
probability of being correct. However, this kind of sensitivity analysis is
needed in any area of applied mathematical modeling. Real-life situa-
tions are almost always more complicated than any mathematical model
that we can work with, so there is a trade-off between analytical tract-
ability and modeling accuracy. As in any analytical approach to real-life
problems, the best that we can hope for is to have a class of models
sufficiently rich and flexible that, if anyone objects that our model has
neglected some important aspect of the situation we are trying to ana-
lyze, we can generate a more complicated extension of our model that
takes this aspect into account.
Exercises
Exercise 2.1. The new widget production process that firm 1 is devel-
oping is equally likely to have high or low costs. Firm 1 will learn whether
the production process has high costs or low costs at the beginning of
next quarter. Then firm 1 can choose whether to build a new plant or
not. Firm 2 will not be able to observe the costs of firm 1's new process,
but firm 2 will be able to observe whether firm 1 builds a new plant or
not. Firm 2 will subsequently decide whether to enter the widget market

--- Sayfa 102 ---
84
2 • Basic Models
against firm 1 or not. Firm 2 will make $2 million (in present discounted
value of long-run profits) from entering the widget market if firm l's
process has high costs, but firm 2 will lose $4 million from entering the
widget market if firm l's process has low costs. Lower costs in the new
process will increase firm l's profits by $4 million. Building a new plant
would add $2 million more to firm l's profits if the new process has
low costs (because conversion to the new process would be much easier
in a new plant), but building a new plant would subtract $4 million
from firm l's profits if the new process has high costs. In any event
(whether the new process has high or low costs, whether firm 1 builds
a new plant or not), firm 2's entry into the widget market would lower
firm l's profits by $6 million. (Both firms are risk neutral, so we may
identify utility with monetary profit.)
a. Describe this game in extensive form.
b. Construct the normal representation of this game in strategic form.
c. Analyze the normal representation by iterative elimination of
weakly dominated strategies.
d. Show the multiagent representation of the extensive-form game.
Does any agent have a dominated strategy in the multiagent represen-
tation?
e. Suppose now that the game starts at the point in time just after
firm 1 learns whether its costs are high or low (but before firm 1 decides
whether to build the new plant). Write down a Bayesian game with
incomplete information to describe this game.
f. Write down the type-agent representation of the Bayesian game
from (e). What is the set of players in this strategic-form game?
Exercise 2.2. Recall the simple card game introduced in Section 2.1.
Out of 52 cards in the deck, there are 20 cards that are "ten or higher"
(the tens, jacks, queens, kings, and aces). Suppose that the rules were
changed so that player 1 wins the money if he has a card that is ten or
higher or (as before) if player 2 passes following a raise. As before,
player 1 sees the card before he decides whether to raise, but now the
majority of the cards are favorable to player 2.
a. Model this game in extensive form and construct the normal rep-
resentation of this game.
b. If you were going to play this game, would you prefer to take the
role of player 1 or player 2? ( Just express your intuition. For a formal
analysis, see Exercise 4.7—in Chapter 4.)

--- Sayfa 103 ---
Exercises
85
Exercise 2.3. Suppose that the simple card game from Section 2.1 is
changed by allowing player 1, after he looks at his card, to either raise
$1.00, raise $0.75, or pass. If player 1 raises, then player 2 knows the
amount that player 1 has added and must choose either to meet the
raise by putting in the same additional amount or to pass. As before,
player 1 wins if he has a red card or if player 2 passes after a raise.
a. Model this game in extensive form.
b. Show the normal representation of this game.
c. Identify all strategies that can be iteratively eliminated by weak
domination.
Exercise 2.4. Construct the normal representation of the game shown
in Figure 2.8.
Exercise 2.5. Construct the normal representation of the game shown
in Figure 4.10 (in Chapter 4).
Exercise 2.6. Consider the strategic-form game presented in Table 2.14.
Analyze this game by iterative elimination of weakly dominated strate-
gies.
Figure 2.8

--- Sayfa 104 ---
86
2 • Basic Models
Exercise 2.7. Show that, if two Bayesian games are equivalent, then
their type-agent representations are fully equivalent.
Exercise 2.8. (A voting game from Moulin, 1983.) Players 1, 2, and 3
are voting in a committee to choose among three options, called a, 13,
and y. First, each player submits a secret vote for one of the three
options. Then the votes are opened. If any option gets two votes, then
it is the outcome of the game. Otherwise, if there is a (necessarily three-
way) tie, then player 1 (who is the chairman of the committee) will
choose the outcome. The players' payoffs depend on the outcome and
are shown in Table 2.15. Analyze this game by iterative elimination of
weakly dominated strategies.
Exercise 2.9. A nonnegative integer X is randomly determined accord-
ing to a geometric distribution with parameter 0.9. That is, for any
nonnegative integer k, and the probability that X equals k is P(X = k) =
x 0.1. Y1  and Y2  are random variables that depend on X so that
(f l  , Y2) =
+ 1) with probability 1/2,
=
+ 1, X) with probability 1/2.
Table 2.14 A game in strategic form
C,
C2
x2
Y2
Z2
x,
y,
z,
2,4
3,9
5,5
9,4
8,1
6,6
1,3
2,9
7,6
Table 2.15 Payoffs for all outcomes in a voting game
Player
Option
1
2
3
a
8
0
4
13
4
8
0
'Y
0
4
8

--- Sayfa 105 ---
Exercises
87
Player 1 observes only Y1, and player 2 observes only Y2. That is, one
of the players observes X and the other player observes X
X.
1, and each
player has an equal chance of being the one to observe X.
a. Show that, if a player i observes that Y, is not 0, then he thinks that
the probability that he has observed X itself is less than 1/2. That is, for
any k in {1,2,3, . . .}, show that P(X = 12,117, = k) < 1/2.
b. The player i who sees the higher number Y, will win $1 from the
other player. Consider the statement
Both players know that . . . both players know that each player thinks that
his probability of winning the dollar is strictly greater than 1/2.
If X actually equals 5, but it is common knowledge among the players
that each player i has only observed his own Y„ then what would be the
maximum number of times that the phrase "both players know that"
can be repeated in this sentence such that this sentence will be true?
c. If Y1  actually equals 5, but it is common knowledge among the
players that each player i has only observed his own Y„ then what is the
smallest event (the event with smallest prior probability) that is common
knowledge among the players?

--- Sayfa 106 ---
3
Equilibria of Strategic-Form Games
3.1 Domination and Rationalizability
Of the three different forms for mathematical games that were intro-
duced in the preceding chapter, the simplest conceptually is the strategic
form. Furthermore, we have seen that any game in extensive form or
Bayesian form can also be represented in strategic form (via the normal,
multiagent, or type-agent representation). Thus, it is natural for us to
begin studying solution concepts for games in strategic form.
We can denote any strategic-form game F as
F =

(N, (C,),
luzl
EN,  (u, ),EN),
where N is the set of players, C, is the set of strategies for player i, and
u,:C ---0 R is the utility payoff function for player i. Here C denotes the
set of all possible combinations or profiles of strategies that may be chosen
by the various players, when each player i chooses one of his strategies
in C,; that is,
C = X Q.
zEN
Unless otherwise specified, we shall generally assume that F is a finite
game.
The simplest kind of solution concept is one that specifies the set of
strategies that each player might reasonably be expected to use, without
making any attempt to assess the probability of the various strategies.
That is, such a solution would specify, for each player i, a set D, that is
a nonempty subset of C, and is to be interpreted as the set of strategies
that player i might actually choose.

--- Sayfa 107 ---
3.1 • Domination and Rationalizability
89
Recall our basic assumption that each player is rational, in the sense
that his goal is to maximize his expected utility payoff, and is intelligent,
in the sense that he understands the game at least as well as we do. So
if every player j is expected to choose a strategy in D3, then every player
i should understand this fact and use some strategy that is a best re-
sponse to some probability distribution over D_1, where
D_,= X D3.

jEN-
Let G,(D_,) denote the set of all strategies that are such best responses;
that is, d, E Gi(D_,) iff there exists some i
 in A(D_,) such that
E argmax E
c,EC,
d_,ED_,
(Recall that, for any set Z, A(Z) denotes the set of probability distribu-
tions over Z, and (d_„ci) denotes the strategy profile in which the
i-component is c, and all other components are as in d_ z  = (d),EN-z.) So
if player i knows that no player j would ever use a strategy outside of
D1, then player i would never use a strategy outside of G(D_,). Thus,
our solution concept should satisfy
(3.1)
D. 	Vi E N.
As in Section 2.5, let Cr)  denote the set of all of player i's strategies
that remain after iterative elimination of strongly dominated strategies.
It can be shown, as a corollary of Theorem 1.6, that
C
)  = G i(X Cr)) ,
jEN-
because each iteratively undominated strategy is a best response to some
probability distribution over the set of iteratively undominated strategies
(or else there would be more dominated strategies to eliminate). Fur-
thermore, condition (3.1) implies that each set D, must be a subset of
Cr). (The proof is to show, by induction in k, that D, C C h)  for every
player i and every positive integer k.) So, when all players are rational
and intelligent, no player can be expected to use any strategy that is
iteratively eliminated by strong domination. Thus, our first and weakest
solution concept predicts only that the outcome of the game should be
some profile of iteratively undominated strategies in X ,EN Cr).

--- Sayfa 108 ---
90
3 • Equilibria of Strategic-Form Games
We have seen examples like Table 2.2 and Table 2.9 where iterative
strong domination leads to us to predict a unique strategy profile. In
general, however, iterative strong domination is an extremely weak
solution concept. For the simple card game (Table 2.1), iterative strong
domination only tells us that player 1 should not use the strategy Ff
(always fold). It cannot even rule out the strategy Fr, because player 1
would be willing to fold with a winning card if he thought that player
2 would surely pass.
One way to eliminate more strategies is to do iterative elimination of
weakly dominated strategies. As we saw in Section 2.5, iterative elimi-
nation of weakly dominated strategies enables us to eliminate Fr in
Table 2.1 and to eliminate all strategies except B and Lr in Table 2.3.
However, the order in which weakly dominated strategies are eliminated
may matter, in general. To avoid this order problem, Samuelson (1989)
suggested that we might instead look for the largest sets (D,),E, such
that, for each player i, D, is the set of all strategies in C, that would not
be weakly dominated for player i if he knew that the other players
would only use strategy combinations in XiEN-x  Dr  However, Samuelson
showed that there exist games for which no such sets exist. One such
game is shown in Table 3.1. (If our sets exclude y,, for this example,
then they must exclude y2, but then y, cannot be excluded. If our sets
include y,, then they must include y2, but then y, must be excluded.)
In Section 2.2, we argued that there should be no loss of generality
in assuming that all players choose their strategies independently, be-
cause any possibilities for communication and coordination could be
built into the definition of a strategy. Thus, we can suppose that the
players' strategies are independent random variables. So, if our solution
concept tells us that each player j will choose his strategy in the set
and if player i is intelligent, then he should choose a strategy that is a
best response for him when the other players randomize independently
Table 3.1 A game in strategic form
C2
Y2
1,1
1,0
1,0
0,1

--- Sayfa 109 ---
3.2 Nash Equilibrium
91
over their pi  sets. Let Hi(D_,) denote the set of such best responses.
That is, di  is in Hi(D_i) iff there exist probability distributions la j/1  jEN—i
such that
cr E A(DD), Vj E N —
and
di  E argmax I ( H cr;(d;))
c,EC,
d_,ED_, 	jEN—i
So if all players are intelligent, in the sense that they understand the
game and our solution concept (DAEN  as well as we do, then our solution
concept should satisfy
(3.2)
D, C H,(D_,), Vi E N.
Bernheim (1984) and Pearce (1984) have shown that there exist sets
(DAEN  that satisfy (3.2) such that, for any other (A)JE„, that satisfies
(3.2),
Di  C
Vi E N.
The strategies in M` are called rationalizable strategies. Any rationalizable
strategy is a best response to some combination of independent ran-
domizations over rationalizable strategies by the other players; that is,
= Hi(D*_i), Vi E N.
It is straightforward to check that 14' C Cr)  in general and that IX' =
Cr)  for two-player games.
3.2 Nash Equilibrium
Given any strategic-form game r = (N, (CAEN, (u,),E,,,), a randomized
strategy for any player i is a probability distribution over C. We let t1(C,)
denote the set of all possible randomized strategies for player i. To
emphasize the distinction from randomized strategies, the strategies in
C, can be called pure strategies.
A randomized-strategy profile is any vector that specifies one randomized
strategy for each player; so the set of all randomized-strategy profiles
is X ,EN  A(Q• That is, cr is a randomized-strategy profile in X zEN A(Q)
iff, for each player i and each pure strategy c, in C„ if specifies a

--- Sayfa 110 ---
92
3 • Equilibria of Strategic-Form Games
nonnegative real number crz(c,), representing the probability that player
i would choose ci, such that
E cri(di) = 1, Vi E N.
d,ECi
We can write cr = (cri),EN, where cri  = (cri(ci)),,,c, for each i. If the players
choose their pure strategies independently, according to the random-
ized-strategy profile o, then the probability that they will choose the
NCa,1
pure-strategy profile c =
:EN is niEN Cr i(C i) , the multiplicative product
of the individual-strategy probabilities.
Bayesian decision theory tells us that, although we may be uncertain
about what profile of pure strategies will be chosen by the players when
F is played, there should exist some probability distribution over the set
of pure-strategy profiles C = X iEN Ci that quantitatively expresses our
beliefs about the players' strategy choices. Furthermore, following the
argument in Section 2.2, we can assume that the players choose their
strategies independently. Thus, our beliefs about the game should cor-
respond to some randomized-strategy profile cr in X JEN A(Ci)•
For any randomized-strategy profile o, let ui(cr) denote the expected
payoff that player i would get when the players independently choose
their pure strategies according to r. That is,
= E ( Q;(0) ui(c), Vi E N.
cEC BEN
For any Ti  in 21(C,), we let (o-__„7,) denote the randomized-strategy profile
in which the i-component is Ti  and all other components are as in a.
Thus,
= EH 0-;(5)) Ti(ci)ui(c)•
cEC
jEN—i
Using notation introduced in Section 1.2 (Equation 1.2), we let [di ]
denote the randomized strategy in A(C,) that puts probability 1 on the
pure strategy c„ Thus, using standard linear algebra notation, we may
write
cri = E
ciECi

--- Sayfa 111 ---
3.2 • Nash Equilibrium
93
If player i used the pure strategy d„ while all other players behaved
independently according to the randomized-strategy profile r, then
player i's expected payoff would be
24,,(o-_„[di]) = E
1-1 Q,(5)) u,(c_„d,),
jEN-i
 C_, = XiEN-zq.
Now suppose that our beliefs are well founded and that all players
are intelligent enough to share these beliefs. Then each player i would
want to choose the pure strategies that maximize his expected payoff,
and there should be zero probability of his choosing any strategy that
does not achieve this maximum. That is,
(3.3)
if cri( ) > 0, then c, E argmax u,(o-_„[di]).
d; E C;
A randomized-strategy profile r is a (Nash) equilibrium of F (or a strategic
equilibrium) iff it satisfies this condition (3.3) for every player i and every
c, in C, (see Nash, 1951).
Thus, a randomized-strategy profile is a Nash equilibrium iff no
player could increase his expected payoff by unilaterally deviating from
the prediction of the randomized-strategy profile. That is, o is a Nash
equilibrium of r iff
(3.4)
u,(cr)
u,(cr_„T,), Vi E N,
VT, E A(C,).
The fact that condition (3.3) (for all i and c,) is equivalent to condition
(3.4) is a consequence of the following useful lemma.
LEMMA 3. 1 . For any if in X jEN A(C;) and any player i in N,
max ui(o-_,,[di]) = max Ui(Cr_i ,Ti).
d,E C,
r, E A(C,)
Furthermore, pi  E argmax.,,E,(c,)  u,(cr_i,Ti) if and only if pi(ci) = 0 for every
ci  such that ci
argmax4(c‘  ui(o-_i,[di]).
Proof. Notice that, for any Ti  in A(Ci),
= E
diE C,

--- Sayfa 112 ---
94
3 • Equilibria of Strategic-Form Games
Thus, u,(o-_„T,) is a weighted average of the terms u,(cr_„[d,]), where the
weights Ti(di) are nonnegative and sum to 1. Such a weighted average
cannot be greater than the maximum of the terms being averaged and
is strictly less than this maximum whenever any nonmaximal term gets
positive weight. I
So the highest expected utility that player i can get against any com-
bination of other players' randomized strategies does not depend on
whether i himself uses randomized strategies or only pure strategies.
Furthermore, the optimal randomized strategies for i are just those that
assign positive probability only to his optimal pure strategies.
We can say that a pure-strategy profile c in C is an equilibrium (or,
more precisely, an equilibrium in pure strategies) iff
ui(c) > ui(c_i,di), Vi E N, Vdi  E C.
(Here (c_„d,) denotes the pure-strategy profile in C, such that the i-
component is d, and all other components are as in c = (cJ)JE„,,.) Lemma
3.1 implies that c is a Nash equilibrium in pure strategies iff the ran-
domized-strategy profile acd),,, (which puts probability 1 on c) is a
Nash equilibrium in X ,(N A(Q.
It may be helpful to compare Nash equilibrium with the strategy-
elimination concepts discussed in Section 3.1. Whereas rationalizability
and iterative dominance only specify which strategies are supposed to
be reasonable possibilities, a Nash equilibrium specifies a numerical
probability for each strategy. When we thus increase the information
that a solution specifies, we implicitly strengthen the restrictions that it
must satisfy if it is common knowledge among rational players. So, for
many games, the set of Nash equilibria may be significantly smaller than
the sets of rationalizable or iteratively undominated strategy profiles.
For example, consider the game in Table 3.2.
Table 3.2 A game in strategic form
C2

--- Sayfa 113 ---
3.2 • Nash Equilibrium
95
In this game, no strategies are dominated (weakly or strongly), and
all strategies are rationalizable. In fact, every strategy in this game is a
best response to one of the other player's strategies. There are some
who might argue that, therefore, any strategy in this game could be
rationally used by a player. For example, player 1 might choose x1
because he expects 2 to choose x2. To explain to himself why 2 should
choose x2, 1 might suppose that 2 believes that 1 is planning to use z1.
Thus, l's choice of x1  can be explained by a theory that describes the
strategies that the players will choose, their beliefs about each other's
choices, their beliefs about each other's beliefs about each other's
choices, and so on. If this theory is right, however, then at least some
of the players' beliefs must be wrong. Certainly, if player 1 plans to
choose x, because he believes that 2 believes that he will choose z,, either
player 1 or player 2 must be wrong. When, as game theorists, we try to
describe what rational players should actually do in this game, we cannot
subscribe to this theory (that player 1 should choose x1  because 2 will
believe that 1 will choose z,), because such a theory would violate our
assumption that player 2 is intelligent enough to understand everything
about the game that we do.
If player 1 believes that 2 will choose y2, however, then 1 should
choose y, , and 1 can explain to himself why 2 would choose y2  by
assuming that she understands that he will choose y,. Thus, we can
suggest that player 1 should choose y, and player 2 should choose y2  in
this game, without any need to suppose that either player is making an
error or lacks our intelligence. In fact, ([y,],[y2]) is the unique equilib-
rium of this game. Thus, the theory that player 1 will choose y, for sure
and player 2 will choose y2  for sure is the only theory about the players'
behavior that specifies probabilities for all pure-strategy profiles and
that could be understood by all players without invalidating itself.
We can now state the general existence theorem of Nash (1951). The
proof is presented in Section 3.12.
THEOREM 3.1. Given any finite game F in strategic form, there exists at
least one equilibrium in X iEN LI(Cd•
Randomized strategies are needed to prove this existence theorem,
because many games have no equilibria in pure strategies. For example,
recall the simple card game from Chapter 2. Its normal representation
is shown in Table 3.3.

--- Sayfa 114 ---
96
3 • Equilibria of Strategic-Form Games
Table 3.3 The simple card game in strategic form
C2
C1
Rr
0,0
1,-1
Rf
0.5,-0.5
0,0
Fr
—0.5,0.5
1,-1
Ff
0,0
0,0
It is straightforward to verify that there are no equilibria in pure
strategies for this game. ( Just check all eight possibilities.) Thus, there
must be an equilibrium that uses properly randomized strategies. To
find this equilibrium, notice first that the pure strategy Ff is strongly
dominated and Fr is weakly dominated in this game. It can be shown
that any equilibrium of the residual game generated by iterative elimi-
nation of weakly or strongly dominated strategies is also an equilibrium
of the original game. Thus, we can expect to find an equilibrium that
involves randomization between Rr and Rf and between M and P.
So let q[Rr] + (1 — q)[Rf] and s[M] + (1 — s)[P] denote the equilibrium
strategies for players 1 and 2, where q and s are some numbers between
0 and 1. That is, let q denote the probability that player 1 would raise
even with a losing card, and let s denote the probability that player 2
would meet if 1 raised. Player 1 would be willing to randomize between
Rr and Rf only if Rr and Rf give him the same expected utility against
s[M] + (1 — s)[P], so
Os + 1(1 — s) = 0.5s + 0(1 — s),
which implies that s = 2A. Thus, player 2's strategy in the equilibrium
must be 2/3[M] + 1/4[P] to make player 1 willing to randomize between
[Rr] and [Rf]. Similarly, to make player 2 willing to randomize between
M and P, M and P must give her the same expected utility against q[Rr]
+ (1 — q)[Rf], so
Oq + —0.5(1 — q) = —1q + 0(1 — q),
which implies that q = '/3. Thus, the equilibrium must be
(1/4[Rr] + 2/3[Rf ], 2/3[M] + 1/3[P]).
That is, player 1 raises for sure when he has a winning (red) card, 1
raises with probability 1/3 when he has a losing (black) card, and player

--- Sayfa 115 ---
3.2 • Nash Equilibrium
97
2 meets with probability 2/3 when she sees 1 raise in this equilibrium. In
fact, this randomized-strategy profile is the unique equilibrium of the
simple card game.
The expected utility payoffs from the unique equilibrium are 1/3 for
player 1 and — 1/3 for player 2. This fact suggests that (when payoffs are
in dollars) a risk-neutral person who can refuse to play this game should
be willing to take the unfavorable role of player 2 in this game for a
preplay bribe of $0.34, but not for any amount of money less than $0.33
(assuming that the bribe is offered before the color of l's card is deter-
mined).
Two general observations about Nash equilibria are now in order. A
game may have equilibria that are inefficient, and a game may have
multiple equilibria.
An outcome of a game is (weakly) Pareto efficient iff there is no other
outcome that would make all players better off. For an example of
equilibria that are not efficient, consider the game in Table 3.4, known
as the Prisoners' Dilemma. The story behind this game (taken from Luce
and Raiffa, 1957) may be described as follows. The two players are
accused of conspiring in two crimes, one minor crime for which their
guilt can be proved without any confession, and one major crime for
which they can be convicted only if at least one confesses. The prose-
cutor promises that, if exactly one confesses, the confessor will go free
now but the other will go to jail for 6 years. If both confess, then they
both go to jail for 5 years. If neither confesses then they will both go to
jail for only 1 year. So each player i has two possible strategies: to
confess ( f) or to not confess (g). The payoffs, measured in the number
of years of freedom that the player will enjoy over the next 6 years, are
as shown in Table 3.4.
In this game, ([fi ],[f2]) is the unique Nash equilibrium. (In fact, f1
and f2  are the only strategies that are not strongly dominated.) However,
the outcome resulting from (f,,f2) is the only outcome of the game that
Table 3.4 Prisoners' Dilemma game in strategic form

--- Sayfa 116 ---
98
3 • Equilibria of Strategic-Form Games
is not Pareto efficient. Thus, if Nash equilibria can be interpreted as
describing how rational players should play a game, then rational in-
dividuals should expect to all do relatively badly in this game. This
example has been very influential as a simple illustration of how people's
rational pursuit of their individual best interests can lead to outcomes
that are bad for all of them.
For an example of a game with multiple equilibria, consider the game
shown in Table 3.5, known as the Battle of the Sexes. The story behind
this game (again, taken from Luce and Raiffa, 1957) is that players 1
and 2 are husband and wife, respectively, and that they are deciding
where to go on Saturday afternoon. Each f, strategy represents going
to the football match, whereas s, represents going to the shopping center.
Neither spouse would derive any pleasure from being without the other,
but the husband would prefer meeting at the football match, whereas
the wife would prefer meeting at the shopping center.
There are three equilibria of this game: ([ fl ],[ f2]), which gives the
payoffs allocation (3,1) to players 1 and 2, respectively; as1],[s2]), which
gives the payoff allocation (1,3); and
(.75ffi  + .25[s I ] , .25[ f21 + .75[s2]),
which gives each player an expected payoff of 0.75. In the first equilib-
rium, the players both go to the football match, which is player l's
favorite outcome. In the second equilibrium, the players both go to the
shopping center, which is player 2's favorite outcome. So each player
prefers a different equilibrium.
In the third equilibrium, the players behave in a random and un-
coordinated manner, which neither player can unilaterally improve on.
Each player is uncertain about where the other player will go, and gets
the same expected payoff (.75 x 1 = .25 x 3) from going either way.
The third equilibrium is worse for both players than either of the other
two equilibria, so it is also an inefficient equilibrium.
Table 3.5 Battle of the Sexes game in strategic form
C2
C,
J2
S2
3,1
0,0
s1
0,0
1,3

--- Sayfa 117 ---
3.3 • Computing Nash Equilibria
99
3.3 Computing Nash Equilibria
In a Nash equilibrium, if two different pure strategies of player i both
have positive probability, then they must both give him the same ex-
pected payoff in the equilibrium, because otherwise he would never use
the strategy that gave him a lower expected payoff. That is, in equilib-
rium, a player must be indifferent between any of his strategies that
have positive probability in his randomized strategy.
Thus, the set of strategies that have positive probability is an impor-
tant qualitative aspect of an equilibrium. In general, the support of a
randomized-strategy profile o in X iEN A(C2) is the set of all pure-strategy
profiles in C that would have positive probability if the players chose
their strategies according to cr. That is, the support of o is the set
X {c, E C, I cr(c,) > 0}.
iEN
For example, consider again the Battle of the Sexes game. The sup-
port of the a fi b{ fd) equilibrium is obviously { f1} x {f2}. In this equi-
librium, each player i strictly prefers using the f strategy to the s,
strategy, given that the other player is expected to go to the football
match. Similarly, the support of the as,],[s2]) equilibrium is {s,} x {s2};
and in this equilibrium each player i strictly prefers s, to f,, given that
the other player is expected to go shopping.
As we have seen, this game also has a third equilibrium with support
{
x {f2,s2 }. In an equilibrium with this support, each player i must
be indifferent between f and s,, given the anticipated behavior of the
other player. Notice that player 2's expected payoff against player l's
randomized strategy o-, depends on her pure strategy choice as follows:
u2(a ,[ f2]) = lcr,(fi) + 0o-,(s,) if 2 chooses f2,
u2(o-, ,[s2]) = Ocr,(f,) + 3o-,(s1) if 2 chooses
So for player 2 to be willing to choose either f2  or s2, each with positive
probability, these two expected payoffs must be equal. That is, we must
have o-,(f,) = 3o-,(s,). This equation, together with the probability equa-
tion o-,(f,) + o-,(s,) = 1, implies that o-,(f,) = .75 and cri(si) = .25.
Notice that we have just derived player l's randomized strategy from
the condition that player 2 should be willing to randomize between her
pure strategies in the support. Similarly, to make player 1 willing to

--- Sayfa 118 ---
100 3. Equilibria of Strategic-Form Games
choose either f, or .5.1, each with positive probability, we must have
30-2(f2)
00.2(S2) = OCr2(f2)
10.2(52),
which implies that o2(f2) = .25 and o 2(s2) = .75. Thus, the equilibrium
with support { f,,s,} x {f2,s2 } must be
(c 1 ,o 2) = (.75[f1 ] + .25[s1], .25[f2] + .75[s2]).
We now describe a general procedure for finding equilibria of any
finite strategic-form game F = (N, (CAEN, (uz)i,N)• Although there are
infinitely many randomized-strategy profiles, there are only finitely
many subsets of C that can be supports of equilibria. So we can search
for equilibria of F by sequentially considering various guesses as to what
the support may be and looking for equilibria with each guessed sup-
port.
For each player i, let Di  be some nonempty subset of player i's strategy
set C,, which will represent our current guess as to which strategies of
player i have positive probability in equilibrium. If there is an equilib-
rium o with support X ,EN Di, then there must exist numbers 1
(co i,tEN
such that the following equations are satisfied:
(3.5)
E I 1-1 QA)) ui(c_ z,di) = coz, Vi E N, Vdi  E Di,
c_iEC_i jEN—i
(3.6)
01(e1) = 0, Vi E N, Ve, E
(3.7)
E cr(c,) = 1, Vi E N.
c,ED,
Condition (3.5) asserts that each player must get the same payoff, de-
noted by co„ from choosing any of his pure strategies that have positive
probability under cr,. Conditions (3.6) and (3.7) follow from the as-
sumption that cr is a randomized-strategy profile with support X ,EN D.
Condition (3.6) asserts that i's pure strategies outside of D, get zero
probability, and condition (3.7) asserts that the probabilities of pure
strategies in D, sum to 1. Conditions (3.5)—(3.7) together imply that co,
is player i's expected payoff under r, because
ui(cr) = E cri(di)ui(cr_o[dip =
d;E C;
These conditions (3.5)—(3.7) give us E,EN 	+ 1) equations in the
same number of unknowns (the probabilities cri(c,) and the payoffs coi).

--- Sayfa 119 ---
3.3 • Computing Nash Equilibria 101
(Here I C, I denotes the number of pure strategies in the set C,.) Thus,
we can hope to be able to solve these equations. For two-player games,
these equations are all linear in a and co; but (3.5) becomes nonlinear
in a when there are more than two players, so the task of solving these
equations may be quite difficult.
Let us assume, however, that we can find all solutions to conditions
(3.5)—(3.7), given the guessed support X iEN  D. These solutions do not
necessarily give us equilibria of F, because there are three difficulties
that may arise. First, no solutions may exist. Second, a solution may fail
to be a randomized-strategy profile, if some of the a(c,) numbers are
negative. So we must require
(3.8)
cri(d,)
0, Vi E N, Vd, E D.
Third, a solution that satisfies (3.5)—(3.8) may fail to be an equilibrium
if some player i has some other pure strategy outside of D, that would
be better for him against than any strategy in Di. So we must also
require
(3.9) 	E
H cri(ci)) u,(c_„e,), Vi E N, Ve, E
c_,EC_, JEN-1
If we find a solution (o-,w) to equations (3.5)—(3.7) that also satisfies the
inequalities (3.8) and (3.9), then a is a Nash equilibrium of F, and co, is
the expected payoff to player i in this equilibrium.
On the other hand, if there is no solution that satisfies (3.5)—(3.9),
then there is no equilibrium with support X iEN D,. To find an equilib-
rium, we must guess other supports and repeat this procedure. Nash's
existence theorem guarantees that there will be at least one support
X iEN D, for which conditions (3.5)—(3.9) can be satisfied.
To illustrate this procedure, consider the game in Table 3.6. We can
begin by looking for nonrandomized equilibria, that is, equilibria where
Table 3.6 A game in strategic form
C1
C2
T
B
7,2
2,7
2,7
7,2
3,6
4,5

--- Sayfa 120 ---
102 3 • Equilibria of Strategic-Form Games
the support includes just one strategy for each player. If player 1 were
expected to choose T for sure, then player 2 would want to choose M,
but B would be player l's best response to M. Thus, there is no equilib-
rium in which player 1 chooses T for sure. If player 1 were expected
to choose B for sure, then player 2 would want to choose L, but T
would be player l's best response to L. Thus, there is no equilibrium in
which player 1 chooses B for sure. So there are no nonrandomized
equilibria of this game. Any equilibrium of this game must include both
of player l's strategies T and B in the support.
Similarly, there is no equilibrium for which the support includes only
one strategy for player 2, because player 1 has a unique best response
to each of player 2's three strategies (T to L, B to M or R), and we have
seen that player 1 must be willing to randomize between T and B in
any equilibrium. Thus, in any equilibrium of this game, player 1 must
give positive probability to both T and B, and player 2 must give positive
probability to at least two of her three strategies. There are four differ-
ent supports of this kind for us to try.
As a first guess, let us try the support {T,B} x {L,M,R}. That is, let
us guess that both of player l's strategies and all three of player 2's
strategies will get positive probability in the randomized-strategy profile
u. To make player 1 willing to choose randomly between T and B, he
must get the same expected payoff from both strategies, so we need
= 7o-2(L) + 2Q2(M) + 3o2(R) = 2o-2(L) + 7u2(M) + 4u2(R).
To make player 2 willing to choose randomly among L and M and R,
she must get the same expected payoff from all three strategies, so we
need
(02 = 2crI(T)
7a2(B) = 7ocri(T)
art(B) = 6cr1(T)
5cr1(B).
In addition, o-  must satisfy the two probability equations
cr,(T) + r1(B) = 1, o-2(L) + o2(M) + v2(R) = 1.
So our seven unknowns (r1(T), cri(B), o 2(L), cr2(M), o-2(R), w1 , w2) must
satisfy a system of seven equations. Unfortunately, given the probability
equations, 20-1(T) + 7v2(B) = 7o-1(T) + 2o-1(B) implies that o-,(T) =
cf,(B) = 1/2, whereas 7o-,(T) + 20-1(B) = 6v1(T) + 5u1(B) implies that
o-,(T) = 3o 1(B). Thus, there is no solution to this system of equations,
and so there is no equilibrium of this game with support {T,B} x
{L,M,R}.

--- Sayfa 121 ---
3.3 • Computing Nash Equilibria 103
As a second guess, let us try the support {T,B} x {M,R}. That is, let
us assume that o-2(L) = 0, but every other strategy may be chosen with
positive probability. With this support, the probability equations are
Q1(T) + vi(B) = 1, Q2(M) + (72(R) = 1.
To make player 1 indifferent between T and B, so that he should be
willing to choose randomly between T and B, we need
co, = 20-2(M) + 3o-2(R) = 7cr2(M) + 4cr2(R).
To make player 2 indifferent between M and R, we need
co2  = 7o-,(T) + 2o-,(B) = 6cr1(T) + 5o 1(B).
(Eliminating L from the support has eliminated one unknown, by setting
Q2(L) equal to 0, but has also eliminated one indifference equation,
because it is no longer necessary that player 2 be indifferent between L
and her other strategies.) These equations have a unique solution in cr,
and it is
02(M) =
1/4, 0-2(R) = 5/4, a 1(T) = 3/4, Q1(B) = 1/4.
But player 2 cannot have a negative probability of choosing M. Thus,
there is no equilibrium with support {T,B} x {M,R}.
As a third guess, let us try the support {T,B} x {L,M}. That is, let us
assume that o-2(R) = 0, but every other strategy may be chosen with
positive probability. With this support, the probability equations are
if (T) + cr1(13) = 1, g2(1--) + 0-2(M) = 1.
To make player 1 indifferent between T and B, so that he should be
willing to choose randomly between T and B, we need
co, = 7a 2(L) + 2o-2(M) = 20-2(L) + 70-2(M).
To make player 2 indifferent between L and M, we need
co2  = 2o-,(T) + 7o-,(B) = 7o-,(T) + 2o-1(B).
These equations have a unique solution, and it is
Q2(L) = .5 = 472(M),
0-1(T) =
= crl(B), (-01 = W2 = 4.5.
Now we have a solution, and it gives us no negative probabilities; so
things look good so far. But is this solution an equilibrium? There is
one more thing to check. We have made sure that player 2 is indifferent

--- Sayfa 122 ---
104 3 • Equilibria of Strategic-Form Games
between L and M in this solution, but we have not yet checked whether
player 2 actually prefers these two strategies to the strategy R that she
is giving zero probability. When player 1 chooses T with probability .5,
the expected payoff to player 2 from her strategy R would be 6 x .5 +
5 x .5 = 5.5, but the expected payoff to player 2 from her strategy L
or M would be oh = 4.5. So player 2 would not really be willing to
choose randomly between L and M when player 1 is expected to choose
T with probability .5, because she would prefer to choose R instead.
Thus, the solution is not an equilibrium, and so there is no equilibrium
with support {T,B} x {L,M}.
As our fourth (and last possible) guess, let us try the support
{T,B} x {L,R}. That is, let us assume that o-2(M) = 0, but every other
strategy may be chosen with positive probability. With this support, the
probability equations are
o-,(T) + o-,(B) = 1, o-2(L) + o-2(R) = 1.
To make player 1 indifferent between T and B, we need
= 7o2(L) + 3a 2(R) = 2o-2(L) + 4cr2(R).
To make player 2 indifferent between L and R, we need
(02 = 2cr1(T)
7cr1(B) = 6ff1(T)
5o 1(B).
These equations have a unique solution, and it is
o-2(L) = 1/6, Q2(R) = 5/6, cr,(T) = 1/3, 431(B) = 2/3,
= 32/3, W2  = 51/2.
This solution does not give us any negative probabilities. Furthermore,
when player 1 behaves according to this solution, the expected payoff
to player 2 from choosing M would be
u2(cr, ,[M]) = 7 x 1/3 + 2 x 2/3 = 11/3
W2 = 16/3.
Thus, player 2 would indeed be willing to choose randomly between L
and R, and she would not choose M. So the randomized-strategy profile
(1/2[T] + 2/3[B], 1/2[L] + 5/6[R])
is the unique equilibrium of this game. In this equilibrium, the expected
payoff to player 1 is 32/3, and the expected payoff to player 2 is 51/2.

--- Sayfa 123 ---
3.4 • Significance of Nash Equilibria 105
For games with many players and large strategy sets, the algorithm
presented here may become unworkable, as the number of possible
supports becomes intractably large and the indifference equations (3.5)
become nonlinear in r. For such games, more sophisticated algorithms,
such as those of Scarf (1973) and Wilson (1971), may be needed to find
equilibria.
3.4 Significance of Nash Equilibria
Nash's (1951) concept of equilibrium is probably the most important
solution concept in game theory. The general argument for the impor-
tance of this concept may be summarized as follows. Suppose that we
are acting either as theorists, trying to predict the players' behavior in
a given game, or as social planners, trying to prescribe the players'
behavior. If we specify which (possibly randomized) strategies should
be used by the players and if the players understand this specification
also (recall that they know everything that we know about the game),
then we must either specify an equilibrium or impute irrational behavior
to some players. If we do not specify an equilibrium, then some player
could gain by changing his strategy to something other than what we
have specified for him. Thus, a nonequilibrium specification would be
a self-denying prophecy if all the players believed it.
This argument uses the assumption that the players in a strategic-
form game choose their strategies independently, so one player's change
of strategy cannot cause a change by any other players. As we argued
in Section 2.2, this independence assumption is without loss of gener-
ality. If there are rounds of communication between the players, then
the set of strategies for each player can be redefined to include all plans
for what to say in these rounds of communication and what moves to
choose as a function of the messages received. That is, in principle, any
opportunities for communication can be written into the extensive form
of the game and thus can be subsumed in the definition of pure strat-
egies in the normal representation. Thus, there is no loss of generality
in assuming that the players have no opportunities to communicate
before choosing their strategies in the game. (However, other analytical
approaches that do not use this assumption may also be valuable; see
Chapter 6.)

--- Sayfa 124 ---
106 3 • Equilibria of Strategic-Form Games
Aumann and Maschler (1972) reexamined the argument for Nash
equilibrium as a solution concept for games like the example in Table
3.7. The unique equilibrium of this game is
(.75[T] + .25[B], .5[L] + .5[R]).
It has been suggested that player 1 might prefer to choose T and player
2 might prefer to choose L (each with probability 1), because these
strategies are optimal responses to the equilibrium strategies and they
guarantee each player his expected equilibrium payoff of 0. But if such
behavior were correctly anticipated, then player 1 would be irrational
not to choose B in this game, because it is his unique best response to
L. Thus, a theory that predicts the actions T and L in this game would
destroy its own validity, because ([T],[L]) is not a Nash equilibrium.
Notice that we have not directly argued that intelligent rational play-
ers must use equilibrium strategies in a game. When asked why players
in a game should behave as in some Nash equilibrium, my favorite
response is to ask "Why not?" and to let the challenger specify what he
thinks the players should do. If this specification is not a Nash equilib-
rium, then (as above) we can show that it would destroy its own validity
if the players believed it to be an accurate description of each other's
behavior.
Notice, however, that this argument only implies that any outcome
which is not an equilibrium would necessarily be unreasonable as a
description of how decision-makers should behave; it does not imply
that any particular equilibrium must be a reasonable prediction in any
particular situation. In effect, the concept of Nash equilibrium imposes
a constraint on social planners and theorists, in that they cannot pre-
scribe or predict nonequilibrium behavior.
To put this argument in a more general framework, it may be helpful
to introduce here some terminology for the evaluation of solution con-
Table 3.7 A game in strategic form
C2
T
0,0
0,-1
B
1,0
—1,3

--- Sayfa 125 ---
3.4 • Significance of Nash Equilibria 107
cepts. In general, a solution concept is any rule for specifying predictions
as to how players might be expected to behave in any given game.
However, when we represent a real conflict situation by a mathematical
model (in any of the three forms introduced in Chapter 2), we must
suppress or omit many "non—game-theoretic" details of the actual situ-
ation, which we may call environmental variables. For example, in the
strategic form, there is no indication of any player's height, weight,
socioeconomic status, or nationality. We cannot a priori rule out the
possibility that the outcome of the game might depend in some way on
such environmental variables. So we should allow that a solution concept
may specify more than one prediction for any given game, where the
selection among these predictions in a specific real situation may depend
on the environment.
Thus, a solution concept can be viewed as a mapping that determines,
for every mathematical game F in some domain, a set (1)(F) that is a
subset of some range R of mathematical descriptions as to how the
players might behave. For example, the domain can be the set of all
games in strategic form, and the range R can be the set of all randomized
strategy profiles. The goal of game-theoretic analysis is to generate a
solution concept that has the following two properties.
1. For any game F, for each prediction IT in the solution set cl)(F),
there exist environments where IT would be an accurate predic-
tion of how rational intelligent players would behave in the
game F.
2. For any game F, for any Tr in the range R that is not in the
solution set CF), there is no environment where -rr would be an
accurate prediction of how rational intelligent players would be-
have in the game F.
Any solution concept that satisfies these two properties can be called an
exact solution. That is, an exact solution concept should include all pre-
dictions that might be considered reasonable in at least some situations
represented by the given mathematical game and should exclude all
predictions that could never be considered reasonable.
Unfortunately, finding an exact solution concept may be very difficult,
so we should also be interested in solution concepts that satisfy one of
these two properties. Let us say that a lower solution is any solution
concept that satisfies property (1) above and an upper solution is any

--- Sayfa 126 ---
108 3 • Equilibria of Strategic-Form Games
solution concept that satisfies property (2) above. That is, a lower solu-
tion excludes all unreasonable predictions but may also exclude some
reasonable predictions. An upper solution includes all reasonable pre-
dictions but may also include some unreasonable predictions. In these
terms, it may be best to think of Nash equilibrium as an upper solution
rather than as an exact solution, because being a Nash equilibrium is
only a necessary condition for a theory to be a good prediction of the
behavior of intelligent rational players.
3.5 The Focal-Point Effect
As the Battle of the Sexes game in Table 3.5 shows, a game may have
more than one equilibrium. Indeed, it is easy to construct games in
which the set of equilibria is quite large. In Chapters 4 and 5, we show
that some natural refinements of the Nash equilibrium concept may
eliminate some equilibria for some games, but even these refinements
still allow a wide multiplicity of equilibria to occur in many games.
When a game has multiple equilibria, the constraint imposed by the
concept of Nash equilibrium on social planners and theorists becomes
weaker. We know that any one of these equilibria, if it were expected
by all players, could become a self-fulfilling prophecy. For example, in
the Battle of the Sexes game, suppose that (for some reason) players 1
and 2 expected each other to implement the (fl  ,f2) equilibrium. Then
each player would expect to maximize his own payoff by fulfilling this
expectation. Player 2 would prefer the (s1,s2) equilibrium, but choosing
s2  instead of f2  would reduce her payoff from 1 to 0, given that she
expects player 1 to choose
Thus, to understand games with multiple equilibria, we must ask what
might cause the players in a game to expect each other to implement
some specific equilibrium. This question was considered in detail by
Schelling (1960). Schelling argued that, in a game with multiple equilib-
ria, anything that tends to focus the players' attention on one equilib-
rium may make them all expect it and hence fulfill it, like a self-fulfilling
prophecy. Schelling called this phenomenon the focal-point effect. That
is, a focal equilibrium is an equilibrium that has some property that
conspicuously distinguishes it from all the other equilibria. According
to the focal-point effect, if there is one focal equilibrium in a game,
then we should expect to observe that equilibrium.

--- Sayfa 127 ---
3.5 The Focal-Point Effect 109
For example, suppose that players 1 and 2 in the Battle of the Sexes
game are a husband and wife who live in a society where women have
traditionally deferred to their husbands in such situations. Then, even
if this couple feels no compulsion to conform to this tradition, this
tradition makes the (f1,f2) equilibrium more focal and hence more likely
to be implemented. Because of this sexist tradition, the wife will expect
that her husband will presume that he should choose f1 , so she will
reluctantly choose f2; and the husband will expect his wife to choose f2,
so f, is better than s, for him. (Remember that we are assuming here
that the two players make their choices independently and simulta-
neously.)
In some situations, even seemingly trivial aspects of the way that a
game is presented could determine the focal equilibrium that the play-
ers implement. Suppose, for example, that there is no strong cultural
bias toward any equilibrium in the Battle of the Sexes game, but the
players learned the structure of the game from Table 3.8 instead of
from Table 3.5. Although the asterisks and boldface in Table 3.8 have
no role in the mathematical definition of this game, they tend to focus
the players' attention on the (s,,s2) equilibrium, so rational players in
this game would be likely to play (s 1 ,s2) in this case.
Similarly, (s,,s2) may become the focal equilibrium if it is perceived to
be the status quo, as it may if the players in the Battle of the Sexes are
already at the shopping center, even though costs of going to the football
match would be negligible.
Another way that the players could become focused on one equilib-
rium is by some process of preplay communication. For example, if the
day before the Battle of the Sexes game, player 1 told player 2, "Let's
meet at the football match," we might well expect them to play (f,,f2).
Of course, such preplay communication could also be modeled as a
part of the game (as we remarked earlier). To see what we get when we
Table 3.8 Battle of the Sexes game in strategic form, with emphasis
C2
Cl
f2
S2
3,1
0,0
si
0,0
* 1,3 *

--- Sayfa 128 ---
110 3 • Equilibria of Strategic-Form Games
do so, suppose (for simplicity) that the only possible "preplay" com-
munication is that player 1 can say either "Let's meet at the football
match" or "Let's meet at the shopping center" to player 2 on Friday,
and then each player must simultaneously decide whether to go to
football or to the shopping center on Saturday. Player l's statement on
Friday is not assumed to bind his Saturday decision; he can go shopping
on Saturday even if he suggested football on Friday. We can model the
interaction between the players during both Friday and Saturday as an
extensive-form game. In the reduced normal representation of this
game, player l's strategy set can be written
C, = IFfi, Fsi, Sfi, Ss,}.
Here the capitalized first letter denotes the option that he suggests on
Friday, and the second letter denotes the move that he then makes on
Saturday after making this suggestion. (In the reduced normal repre-
sentation, we suppress the irrelevant specification of what move player
1 would choose on Saturday if he remembered making the statement
that his strategy does not specify for Friday.) Player 2's strategy set may
be written
C2 = {f2f2, f2S2 , S2 f2 , 5252},
where we list first the decision that she would make if 1 suggested
football and second the decision that she would make if 1 suggested
shopping. The reduced normal representation of this game is shown in
Table 3.9. For each equilibrium of the original Battle of the Sexes game,
there are equilibria of this game that give the same allocation of ex-
pected payoffs. For example, (Sf,,s2 f2) is an equilibrium of Table 3.9
and gives payoffs (3,1). In this equilibrium, player 1 says, "Let's meet
at the shopping center," and then goes to the football match, and player
Table 3.9 Battle of the Sexes game with communication, in strategic form
C2
CI
f2f2
f2S2
S2f2
5262
Ff,
3,1
3,1
0,0
0,0
Fs,
0,0
0,0
1,3
1,3
Sf1
3,1
0,0
3,1
0,0
Ss 1
0,0
1,3
0,0
1,3

--- Sayfa 129 ---
3.5 • The Focal-Point Effect 111
2 goes to the football match but would have gone shopping if player 1
had suggested football. Another equilibrium is (Fs1,s2s2), which gives
payoffs (1,3). In this equilibrium, player 1 suggests football but actually
goes shopping, and player 2 would go shopping no matter what player
1 suggests. However, the obvious focal equilibrium of this game is
(Ff,,f2s2), in which player 1 says, "Let's meet at the football match," and
then goes to the football match, and player 2 would try to meet player
1 wherever he suggested. This last equilibrium is the unique equilibrium
in which player l's statement on Friday is interpreted according to its
literal meaning. So the players' shared understanding of language,
which is part of their cultural heritage, may make focal the equilibrium
of Table 3.9 in which player 1 can effectively select among the (f,,f2)
and (s1,s2) equilibria of Table 3.5. (See Farrell, 1988, and Myerson,
1989, for a general formal development of this idea.)
In general, when such preplay communication possibilities exist, we
say that an individual is a focal arbitrator if he can determine the focal
equilibrium in a game by publicly suggesting to the players that they
should all implement this equilibrium. Even though this suggestion may
have no binding force, if each player believes that every other player
will accept the arbitrator's suggestion, then each player will find it best
to do as the arbitrator suggests, provided the arbitrator's suggestion is
an equilibrium. Thus, a game with a large set of equilibria is a game in
which an arbitrator or social planner can substantially influence players'
behavior.
The focal equilibrium of a game can also be determined by intrinsic
properties of the utility payoffs. For example, consider the Divide the
Dollars game, in which there are two players who can each make a
demand for some amount of money between $0 and $100. If their
demands sum to $100 or less, then each gets his demand, otherwise
both get $0. That is, in this game the pure strategy sets are
C1 = C2 =
E RIO 5- x 5- 1001 = [0,100],
and the payoff functions are
u,(c1,c2) = 0 if cl  + c2  > 100,
= c, if c, + C2 LC- 100.
For any number x between 0 and 100, the pure strategy pair
(x, 100 — x) is an equilibrium in which the players will get to divide the

--- Sayfa 130 ---
112 3 • Equilibria of Strategic-Form Games
$100 for sure. There is also an equilibrium, (100,100), in which each
player is sure to get a payoff of 0. Furthermore, there are many ran-
domized equilibria in which the probability of dividing the available
$100 may be quite small; for example, ((1/99)[1] + (98/90[99], (1/20[1] +
(98/99)[99]) is an equilibrium in which each player gets an expected payoff
of 1. In this game, an impartial arbitrator would probably suggest that
the players should implement the (50,50) equilibrium, because it is
Pareto efficient and equitable for the two players. But this fact may
make the (50,50) equilibrium focal even when such an impartial arbi-
trator is not actually present. That is, because both players know that
(50,50) is the efficient and equitable equilibrium that an impartial ar-
bitrator would be most likely to suggest, (50,50) has a strong intrinsic
focal property even when no arbitrator is present. Thus, welfare prop-
erties of equity and efficiency may determine the focal equilibrium in a
game.
A focal equilibrium might also be determined in some games by
properties of the strategies themselves. For example, the game in Table
3.10 has three equilibria, but only one of these is in pure (unrandom-
ized) strategies. It can be argued that the players in the game might
therefore be more likely to focus on this pure-strategy equilibrium
(y,,y2) than on the other two equilibria that involve some randomization.
In repeated games (see Chapter 7), simplicity or stationarity of the
strategies in an equilibrium may make that equilibrium more focal, other
things being equal.
Notice that the focal-point effect cannot lead intelligent rational play-
ers to implement a strategy profile that is not an equilibrium. For
example, suppose that a focal arbitrator for the players in Table 3.11
recommended that the players play (yox2). He might even reinforce his
recommendation by arguments about the efficiency and equity of the
Table 3.10 A game in strategic form
C2

C,
X2
Y2
z2
x,
yI
3,0
0,0
0,0
1,1
0,3
0,0
z,
0,3
0,0
3,0

--- Sayfa 131 ---
3.5 • The Focal-Point Effect 113
Table 3.11 A game in strategic form
C2

Cl
x2
Y2
xl
5,1
0,0
Yi
4,4
1,5
(4,4) payoff allocation that these strategies generate. But this recom-
mendation could not be a self-fulfilling prophecy. If player 1 believed
that player 2 would do x2  as the arbitrator recommends, then player 1
would prefer to do x, instead of y,. With intelligent rational players, a
focal factor can be effective only if it points to an equilibrium.
When different factors tend to focus attention on different equilibria,
the question of which equilibrium would be focused on and played by
real individuals in a given situation can be answered only with reference
to the psychology of human perception and the cultural background of
the players. From a game-theoretic perspective, cultural norms can be
defined to be the rules that a society uses to determine focal equilibria
in game situations. There may be some situations where people of a
given culture might look to equity principles to determine a focal equi-
librium (e.g., in bargaining between people of equal and independent
status), other situations where a specific individual might be understood
to be an effective focal arbitrator (e.g., a supervisor in a job conflict),
and yet other situations where traditional modes of behavior determine
equilibria that no one's suggestions or arguments can overturn. There
may be a culture (or local subcultures) where a tradition of doing what
the wife wants on weekends is so strong that even in the game with
preplay communication, where the husband gets to tell the wife on
Friday what he thinks they should do, the focal equilibrium that is
played may be (Fs,,s2s2), where the husband suggests that they should
meet at the football match but his suggestion is ignored. (Such cultural
norms can be studied by experimental games; for example, see Roth
and Schoumaker, 1983; Roth, 1985; Cooper, DeJong, Forsythe, and
Ross, 1989, 1990; and van Huyck, Battalio, and Beil, 1990.)
Thus, the focal-point effect defines both an essential limit on the
ability of mathematical game theory to predict people's behavior in real
conflict situations and an important agenda for research in social psy-

--- Sayfa 132 ---
114 3 Equilibria of Strategic-Form Games
chology and cultural anthropology. It should not be surprising that
game theory cannot provide a complete theory of human behavior
without complementary theories from other disciplines. On the other
hand, the focal-point effect of game theory can offer a useful perspec-
tive on the role of culture and perception. In particular, game theory
can predict that cultural norms may be less important in situations where
the set of equilibria is small.
3.6 The Decision-Analytic Approach to Games
In game-theoretic analysis, we try to understand the behavior of all of
the players in a game, assuming that they are all rational and intelligent
individuals. Raiffa (1982) and Kadane and Larkey (1982) have advo-
cated an alternative decision-analytic approach to the study of games,
when our task is to advise some particular player i (the client) as to what
strategy he should use in a given game. Player i's optimal strategy should
maximize his expected payoff with respect to his subjective probability
distribution over the possible strategies of the other players. The deci-
sion-analytic approach to player i's decision problem is first to assess some
subjective probability distribution to summarize i's beliefs about what
strategies will be used by the other players and then to select a strategy
for i that maximizes his expected payoff with respect to these beliefs.
That is, the decision-analytic approach to i's problem is to try to predict
the behavior of the players other than i first and then to solve i's decision
problem last. In contrast, the usual game-theoretic approach is to ana-
lyze and solve the decision problems of all players together, like a system
of simultaneous equations in several unknowns.
A fundamental difficulty may make the decision-analytic approach
impossible to implement, however. To assess his subjective probability
distribution over the other players' strategies, player i may feel that he
should try to imagine himself in their situations. When he does so, he
may realize that the other players cannot determine their optimal strat-
egies until they have assessed their subjective probability distributions
over i's possible strategies. Thus, player i may realize that he cannot
predict his opponents' behavior until he understands what an intelligent
person would expect him rationally to do, which is, of course, the
problem that he started with. This difficulty would force i to abandon
the decision-analytic approach and instead to undertake a game-theo-

--- Sayfa 133 ---
3.6 • The Decision-Analytic Approach 115
retic approach, in which he tries to solve all players' decision problems
simultaneously.
Even if the decision-analytic approach is feasible for player i, there
still is a role for Nash equilibrium analysis in his thinking. After follow-
ing the decision-analytic approach, player i would be well advised at
least to make note of whether his predicted strategies for the other
players, together with the strategy that he has chosen for himself, form
an equilibrium of the game. If they do not form an equilibrium, then
there must be some other player who is not making an optimal strategy
choice, according to these predictions and plans. Player i should ask
himself why this person might make this mistake. For example, is there
something that i knows that this other player does not? Or is this a
common mistake that naive decision-makers often make? If player i can
find such an explanation, then he may feel confident using his selected
strategy. On the other hand, if he cannot find any such explanation,
then he should probably think further about how the other players
might react if they understood his current plans, and he should consider
revising his predictions and plans accordingly.
For an example in which the decision-analytic approach may seem
much more promising than equilibrium analysis, Raiffa has suggested
the following Dollar Auction game. There are two risk-neutral players,
each of whom must choose a bid that can be any real number between
0 and 1. The high bidder pays the amount of his bid and then wins $1.
(In case of a tie, each has a probability 0.5 of winning and buying the
dollar for his bid.) Thus, the strategy sets are C1  = C2 =
E RIO Ls
x
11, and the utility functions are
uz(c1,c2) = 0 	if i
argmax
1E0,21
= 1 — c,
if
= argmax ci,
J(0,21
= (1 — c,)I2 if c1  = c2.
In the unique equilibrium of this game, both players bid 1 for sure,
so each player gets a net payoff of 0. Notice that bidding 1 is actually a
weakly dominated strategy for each player, because it is the only bid
that cannot give him a positive payoff (and no bid ever gives a negative
payoff ). Thus, it is hard to see how these equilibrium strategies can be
recommended to players in this game. If we were advising player 1 how
to play this game, surely we would do better trying to follow the decision-

--- Sayfa 134 ---
116 3 • Equilibria of Strategic-Form Games
analytic approach. As long as he assigns some positive probability to the
event that player 2 will bid lower than $1, player 1 will find that his
optimal bid is less than $1.
Properties of equilibria that seem unreasonable often are rather un-
stable, in the sense that these properties may disappear if the game is
perturbed slightly. Indeed, the unique equilibrium of the Dollar Auction
would change significantly with some small perturbations of the game.
Suppose, for example, that we changed the rules of the game by stip-
ulating that, for each player j, there is an independent probability .1
that j's bid will be determined, not by a rational intelligent decision-
maker, but by a naive agent who chooses the bid from a uniform
distribution over the interval from 0 to 1. Let us then interpret it,(c1,c2)
as the conditionally expected payoff that i would get in this perturbed
game given that player i's bid is not being determined by such a naive
agent and given that, for each player j, c, is the bid that player j would
make if his bid were not being otherwise determined by such a naive
agent. Then the utility functions in this perturbed game are
121(c1,c2) = .1c,(1 — c)
if i
argmax
jE{1,2}
= .1c,(1 — c) + .9(1 — c)
if {i} = argmaxci,
j(0.2)
= .1c1(1 — c) + .9(1 — c)/2 if c1  = c2.
There is an equilibrium of this perturbed game in which each player
randomly chooses a bid from the interval between 0.5 and 0.975 in such
a way that, for any number x in this interval, the cumulative probability
of his bidding below x is (.025 + .1x2  — . lx)/(.9(1 — x)). The median bid
for a player under this distribution is 0.954; so the bids tend to be high,
but they are lower than 1.
Of course, this equilibrium depended on the particular way that we
perturbed the original Dollar Auction game. One way to get around
this difficulty is to combine some element of the decision-analytic ap-
proach with the game-theoretic approach. The difficulty with the deci-
sion-analytic approach arises when player 1 recognizes that player 2 is
sophisticated enough to be thinking intelligently about l's own decision
problem. So, as consultants for player 1 in a real Dollar Auction game,
we could ask him first, if he were told that player 2 was an especially
"naive" decision-maker, then what conditional probability distribution

--- Sayfa 135 ---
3.7 • Evolution, Resistance, Risk Dominance 117
would he assess to describe his beliefs about the bid that such a naive
decision-maker would submit; and we could ask him next to assess his
subjective probability of the event that player 2 is in fact so naive. That
is, after admitting that the assumption that player 2 is rational and
intelligent may be inaccurate, we could ask player 1 both to assess the
probability that this assumption is inaccurate and to describe how he
would expect 2 to behave if it were inaccurate. Assuming that player 2,
when she is not naive, would have similar perceptions of player 1, we
could then use these answers to construct a perturbed version of the
Dollar Auction similar to that of the preceding paragraph, but using
the naive bid distribution and probability of naivety that he assessed. It
might then be reasonable to recommend to player 1 that he implement
his equilibrium strategy of this perturbed game.
3.7 Evolution, Resistance, and Risk Dominance
Axelrod (1984) tried to identify good strategies for games by a kind of
biological evolutionary criterion (see also Maynard Smith, 1982). We
can describe Axelrod's procedure as follows. First, for each player i in
the game, choose a list or set L, of randomized strategies that may seem
promising or interesting for some reason, so
L, C A(Ci).
Then, for each player i and each strategy c, in L„ suppose that there is
a given number of "i-animals" that are instinctively programmed to
behave according to this a, strategy whenever they play the game. We
call this the first-generation population. Now, we can create a sequence of
generations by induction as follows. Each i-animal must play the game
many times; and each time, he is in the role of player i while the role
of every other player j in the game is filled by a j-animal drawn inde-
pendently and at random from the population of j-animals in the cur-
rent generation. So, letting q,k(cr,) denote the proportion of
j-animals in the generation k who are programmed to use cri, we find
that the expected payoff to an i-animal programmed to use a, is
— 	 —k
u,k  (crz) = u,(cr „a), where Uk  = (cTr;),,, and
Cr j(C)
E 9k(0)43-;(0, Vj E N, Vci  E C.
crj E Li

--- Sayfa 136 ---
118 3 • Equilibria of Strategic-Form Games
Then each animal in generation k will have a number of children in the
next generation k+ 1 that is proportional to this expected payoff. That
is,
+ I
qki  (cr) =
ei (r,)27/,(T,)
r,EL,
(To avoid difficulties, suppose that all payoffs are positive numbers.) So
once q, ' (o) has been specified for each i and each o, in L„ we can then
compute the evolution of this imaginary ecological system and see which
strategies will tend to dominate the population in the long run, after
many generations. (Axelrod actually only looked at symmetric two-
person games, but the above is a natural generalization of his procedure
to arbitrary strategic-form games.)
The potential significance of such analysis comes from the fact that
people actually are the result of a long evolutionary process, and the
payoffs in many games of interest might be supposed to have some
relationship to the outcomes that would make for reproductive fitness
of our ancestors during this process. On the other hand, the outcome
of any such evolutionary simulation may be very dependent on the
assumptions about the distribution of strategies used in the first gen-
eration. In Axelrod's work, even strategies that did quite poorly could
be crucial to determining which strategy reproduced best. To the extent
that the outcome may depend on the assumed presence in the first
generation of animals that play dominated or otherwise foolish strate-
gies, one may argue that the outcome of this evolutionary simulation is
not relevant to the players' decision problems, when it is common knowl-
edge that all players are intelligent and rational.
Furthermore, for any Nash equilibrium cr, if almost all of the first-
generation i-animals are programmed to use the equilibrium strategy
ff„ for all i, then no animal programmed to play any other strategy can
do significantly better. Given any game F in strategic form and any
equilibria if and T in X /EN A(C), we may say that the resistance of if
against T is the largest number X such that 0 X 1 and
+ (1 — X)cr,),
ui(Oer;
 + (1 — X)crAEN-i,T), Vi E N.
That is, the resistance of an equilibrium if against another equilibrium
T is the maximal fraction of Ti-programmed animals that could be put

--- Sayfa 137 ---
3.7 • Evolution, Resistance, Risk Dominance 119
into a population of o-z-programmed animals, for all i, such that the Tc
programmed animals would have no reproductive advantage over the
o-z-programmed animals for any i, according to Axelrod's evolutionary
story. Thus defined, the resistance can provide a crude measure of the
relative evolutionary stability of one equilibrium in comparison with
another. (The crudeness of the resistance index can become evident in
games with many players, where the near indifference of one minor
player, whose strategies may be of no consequence to any other players,
can lower an equilibrium's "resistance," when it is measured this way.)
Harsanyi and Selten (1988) have sought to develop a procedure to
identify, for every finite game in strategic form, a unique equilibrium
to be considered as the solution to the game. The Harsanyi-Selten
solution can be thought of as the limit of an evolutionary process that
has some similarities to Axelrod's. However, Harsanyi and Selten offer
a sophisticated criterion for defining the initial distributions of strategies
in a way that avoids arbitrariness or dependence on irrelevant aspects
of the game. Also, the evolutionary process that Harsanyi and Selten
use, called the tracing procedure, is better interpreted as describing the
evolution of tentative plans considered over time by a fixed set of
rational intelligent players rather than the reproductive evolution of
an ecological system of instinctual animals. The reader is referred to
Harsanyi and Selten (1988) for the precise definition of their solution
concept.
In the development of their solution concept, Harsanyi and Selten
define a risk dominance relation between equilibria. They develop this
concept axiomatically for the special case of pure-strategy equilibria of
two-player games in which each player has two pure strategies. In this
case, one equilibrium c risk dominates another equilibrium d iff the
resistance of c against d is greater than the resistance of d against c. (In
the more general case, Harsanyi and Selten's definition of risk domi-
nance cannot be simply stated in terms of resistances and is not axi-
omatically derived.)
Consider the example shown in Table 3.12, due to Aumann. Among
the two pure-strategy equilibria, the resistance of (y1,y2) against (x1,x2)
is 7/8, whereas the resistance of (x1,x2) against (y1,y2) is only 1/8, so (y,,y2)
risk-dominates (x1,x2). In effect, the range of randomized strategies for
which 3,1  and y2  are optimal is wider than that for x1  and x2. Furthermore,
the randomized equilibrium of this game has a resistance of 0 against
either pure-strategy equilibrium.

--- Sayfa 138 ---
120 3 • Equilibria of Strategic-Form Games
Just as welfare properties of equity and efficiency might determine
the equilibrium that players focus on, so also resistance numbers and
risk dominance relations could also determine the focal equilibrium in
a game. The game in Table 3.12 is particularly interesting because the
property of Pareto-efficiency could tend to make the (xi,x2) equilibrium
focal, whereas the property of risk dominance could tend to make the
(yi,y2) equilibrium focal. A tradition of being concerned with one prop-
erty or the other could determine which equilibrium is focal in any
particular situation.
Harsanyi and Selten offer an interesting theoretical argument for risk
dominance. They suggest that, for ideally rational players, the deter-
mination of the focal equilibrium should not depend on transformations
of the game that leave the best-response correspondences unchanged.
As shown in Section 2.3, the game in Table 3.12 is best-response equiv-
alent (but not fully equivalent) to the game in Table 2.5, where (y,,y2)
is both Pareto efficient and risk dominant.
A tendency toward Pareto-efficiency in games can be derived from
other biological evolutionary models where matching in the population
is characterized by a kind of viscosity (in the sense of Hamilton, 1964,
and Pollock, 1989). For example, let us modify the evolutionary story
that was described earlier by supposing that the animals who play the
game live in herds and that each animal lives in the same herd as its
ancestors and is much more likely to play against a member of its own
herd than against a member of another herd. Suppose that these ani-
mals are playing the game in Table 3.12. Within any given herd, the
animals who play y, would tend to multiply faster, unless the initial
proportion of animals in the herd who play x, is larger than 7/8. So we
may anticipate that, after many generations, almost all of the animals
within any given herd would be playing the same equilibrium strategy,
and the majority of herds (including all those where the proportions of
Table 3.12 A game in strategic form
Cl
C2
x2
Y2
x,
Yi
9,9
8,0
0,8
7,7

--- Sayfa 139 ---
3.7 • Evolution, Resistance, Risk Dominance 121
animals in the initial population who play xi  and yi  are approximately
equal) would converge to the risk-dominant equilibrium (y,,y2). In the
long run, however, the herds that do converge to the Pareto-efficient
equilibrium (x1,x2) would tend to increase in size faster than the herds
that converge to (y1,y2). Thus, in the long run, viscosity in the matching
process may tend to create a population where most individuals play
the efficient equilibrium (x1,x2).
In general, biological games differ from economic games in that the
choice of strategy is at the genetic level, rather than at the level of
individual cognitive choice. Thus, a strategy in a biological game is
chosen (through mutation) by a genotype or subspecies. This distinction
is important because members of one subspecies can meet and play
games against each other. Even when a subspecies is an infinitesimal
fraction of the overall species population, members of the subspecies
may meet each other with a positive frequency, because kin groups do
not disperse uniformly over the entire range of the species.
So suppose that, when two individuals of some given species meet,
they play a game F = ({1,2}, C1, C2, u1,  u2) that is symmetric, in the sense
that
C, = C2  and ui(a,P) = u2((3,a), Va E C1, V13  E C1.
(Here, an individual's payoff represents some contribution to the indi-
vidual's reproductive fitness.) Let us represent the relative frequency of
interactions within small subspecies by some viscosity parameter 8, such
that 0 < 8 < 1. Then we may say that Cr is a 6-viscous equilibrium of F
iff o-  is a randomized-strategy profile that is symmetric, in the sense that
cr = (cr,,cr) where o-, E i(C1), and, for each pure strategy c, in CI,
if o1(c1) > 0 then c, E argmax u,([ei ], (1 — 8)o-, + 6[e1]).
e 1  EC1
That is, the only pure strategies that are used by a positive fraction of
the population cr, are those that would be optimal for a subspecies if,
whenever an individual in the subspecies plays this game, the probability
is 8 that its opponent is drawn from the same subspecies, and otherwise
its opponent is drawn at random from the overall species population.
For example, when 8 > 7/9, the symmetric game with payoffs as in Table
3.12 has a unique 8-viscous equilibrium that yields the Pareto-efficient
outcome (9,9).

--- Sayfa 140 ---
122 3 Equilibria of Strategic-Form Games
As the viscosity parameter 8 goes to zero, 8-viscous equilibria must
approach Nash equilibria. For some symmetric two-player games, how-
ever, there exist symmetric Nash equilibria that cannot be approached
by any such sequence of 8-viscous equilibria. (See Myerson, Pollock, and
Swinkels, 1991.)
The concept of an evolutionary stable strategy is an important solution
concept in biological game theory. (See Maynard Smith, 1982.) For a
symmetric two-player game F as described above, a randomized strategy
Q1 is called an evolutionary stable strategy iff (o-,,cri) is a symmetric Nash
equilibrium of the game and, for each randomized strategy T1, if
T1
cr, then there exists some 8 between 0 and 1 such that
ut(r,, (1 — 8)o-1  + 8T,) < u,(cr, , (1 — 8)cr1  + 8T1).
That is, the equilibrium strategy Q1  should be strictly better than any
alternative strategy T1  when there is a small positive probability of meet-
ing an individual who is using the alternative strategy T1.
Some symmetric two-player games have no evolutionary stable strat-
egies. For example, consider a symmetric two-player game where C1  =
C2 = {x,y,z},
ul(x,x) = u,(y,y) = u,(z,z) = 1,
u,(x,y) = u,(y,z) = ul(z,x) = 3,
ul(y,x) = u,(z,y) = ul(x,z) = —3,
and u2(c,,c2) = u,(c2,c1) for every c, and c2  in C1. This game has a unique
Nash equilibrium (o-,,o-,) such that Q1 = (1/2)[x] + (1/2)[y] + (1/2)[z], but
the definition of evolutionary stability would be violated for this equi-
librium by letting T 1  = [X], for example. It has been argued that this
game may represent an inherently unstable situation. Notice, however,
that the Nash equilibrium of this game is a 8-viscous equilibrium for
any positive 8.
3.8 Two-Person Zero-Sum Games
Much of the early work in game theory was on two-person zero-sum
games. A two-person zero-sum game in strategic form is any F of the form
F = (11,21, C1, C2, Ul , u2) such that
u2(c1 ,c2) = —u i(ci,c2), Vc1  E C1, Vc2  E C2.

--- Sayfa 141 ---
3.8 Two-Person Zero-Sum Games 123
Two-person zero-sum games describe situations in which two individuals
are in pure opposition to each other, where one's gain is always the
other's loss. In these games, because u2  = —u1, we could equivalently
say that player 2's objective is to minimize the expected payoff to player
1. The card game shown in Table 3.3 is an example of a two-person
zero-sum game. The following theorem summarizes some of the im-
portant mathematical properties of such games.
THEOREM 3.2. (cr i,cr2) is an equilibrium of a finite two-person zero-sum
game ({l,2}, C1, C2, u1, —u1) if and only if
Q1 E argmax min u,(T1,T2)
ri E AMC])
T2 E A(C2)
and
Q2 E argmin max u,(7,0-2).
T2EA(C2) 	TI EA(CI)
Furthermore, if (cry,cr2) is an equilibrium of this game, then
ul(o-i,cr2) = max
min u1(T1,T2) = min
max ul(r1,T2).
TI EA(Ci) T2E A(C2)
T2E A(C2) "r EA(CI)
Proof. Suppose first that (o),o2) is an equilibrium. Then
ul(cr i,o 2) = max u,(T,,cr2)
max
min til(T1,T2)
TIE A(CI)
EA(CI) T2EA(C2)
and
u1(c 1 ,o-2) = min u1(o-1,T2) Ls. min
max u,(1-1 0-2).
T2 E A(C2)
T2 E A(C2)
Ti  EA(C1)
(In each of the two lines above, the equality follows from the definition
of an equilibrium and the inequality follows from the fact that, if f(x)
g(x) for every x, then max f
max g and min g
min f) But
max
min u1(T,,T2)
min u,(o-1,T2)
T1 EA(CI)
T2 E A(C2)
T2EA(C2)
and
min
max ul(r1,T2)
max u1 (T1 ,cr2).
i-2(Ac(:2) ,IEA(ci)
,r,EA(c,)

--- Sayfa 142 ---
124 3 • Equilibria of Strategic-Form Games
Thus, all of these expressions are equal, a result that implies the three
equalities in the last line of the theorem. The two inclusions in the
theorem follow from the fact that
min u1(cr1,T2) = max
min u, (r,,T2)
T2EA(C2)
T I "(CI) T2(  A(C2)
and
max u,(T1,o-2) = min
max u,(T,,T2).
T1 A(CI)
T2EA(C2)
TI A(CI)
Now suppose, conversely, that cr, and 0-2  satisfy the two inclusions in
the theorem. Because we know that there exists an equilibrium of the
game, by Theorem 3.1, the last equality in the theorem (the equality
between max—min and min—max) still holds. Thus,
u,(cr1,cr2) a min u1(0 1,72) = max u1(r1,cr2) > u1(o 1,cr2);
T2EA(C2)
Ti EA(CI)
so all of these expressions are equal, and (o-,,o-2) is an equilibrium of
the two-person zero-sum game. I
Thus, all equilibria of a two-person zero-sum game give the same
expected payoff to player 1. That is, although there may be more than
one equilibrium for such a game, both players are indifferent between
all the equilibria.
To appreciate the significance of the equality between the max—min
and the min—max stated in Theorem 3.2, notice that the proof of this
result relied on the existence of an equilibrium. Without randomized
strategies, the existence of an equilibrium cannot be guaranteed and
the equality may fail. For example, when we allow only pure strategies
in the card game (Table 3.3), we get
min (max u,(c1 ,c2)) = min {0.5, 1} = 0.5 0 O.
c2EC2 	ciEc,
Throughout this chapter, we have assumed that the players in a
strategic-form game choose their strategies simultaneously and inde-
pendently, so a change of plans by one player cannot affect the strategy
max ( 	 )
min u,(c,,c2) = max {0, 0, —0.5, 0} = 0,
ci Ec ,
c2(c 2

--- Sayfa 143 ---
3.8 • Two-Person Zero-Sum Games 125
chosen by the other player. Suppose for a moment, however, that player
1 is afraid that, whatever randomized strategy he might choose, 2 would
be able to discover that he had chosen this and would respond in the
way that is worst for 1. Under this assumption, if player 1 chose the
randomized strategy Ti in A(C,), then his expected payoff would be
(T ,,T2). Theorem 3.2 asserts that player l's equilibrium strat-
egy in a two-person zero-sum game also maximizes 1's expected payoff
under this pessimistic assumption. Because it maximizes his minimum
expected payoff, an equilibrium strategy for player 1 in a two-person
zero-sum game may be called a maximin strategy for player 1. Similarly,
any equilibrium strategy for player 2 in a two-person zero-sum game is
a minimax strategy against player 1.
There is a close connection between the theory of two-person zero-
sum games and the concept of duality in optimization theory. To see
why, consider the optimization problem
(3.10)
minimize f(x), subject to gk(x)
0, Vk E {1,2, . . .
xER"
where f(.), g1(.), . . . ,g„,(.) are functions from R"  to R. This problem is
equivalent to the problem
(3.11)
minimize ( maximum f(x) — E ykgk(x)) .
xER" 	 yERT
k=1
(Here ir is the set of all vectors y = (y l, . . . ,y„) such that y
0, . . . ,
y„, 0.) To see that these two problems are equivalent, notice that the
objective function being minimized in (3.11) is equal to f(x) if x satisfies
the constraints of (3.10) (where y = (0, . . . ,0) achieves the maximum),
and is equal to +co if any of the constraints are violated. By reversing
the order of maximization and minimization, we can construct the dual
of this optimization problem, which is
(
(3.12)
maximize minimum f(x) — E ykgk(x) .
yERT 	 xER"
k=1
Classic results in optimization theory show that, with some additional
assumptions, the optimal values of an optimization problem and its dual
are equal (see Geoffrion, 1971). These results can be understood as
generalizations of the equality between max—min and min—max in Theo-
rem 3.2. The most important special case of duality theory is the case
of linear programming problems.
m

--- Sayfa 144 ---
126 3 Equilibria of Strategic-Form Games
Linear programming problems are optimization problems in which the
objective function is linear and all constraint functions are affine (that
is, linear plus a constant). That is, to make (3.10) a linear programming
problem, we let
11
f(x) = E c,x,,
and
1= I
g,(x) = E ak,x, — 6,, Vk E 11„ml,
1= I
where, the numbers aki, 6,, and c, are given parameters. Then the
optimization problem (3.10) becomes
(3.13)
minimize E CIXi
xER"
1=1
11
subject to E akix,
6,, Vk E {1, . . ,m}.
/=1
The dual problem (3.12) can then be written
(3.14)
maximize (minimum E (ci
 — E ykaki)x1  + ± ykb,)
yERT
xER"
1=1 	k=1
k=1
which is equivalent to the problem
(3.15)
maximize E ykbk
yERT
k=1
subject to E ykaki = C,, VIE {1, .
,n}.
k= I
(The objective function being maximized in (3.14) would equal —00 if
any constraints in (3.15) were violated, because the components of x in
(3.14) can be positive or negative.) Notice that (3.15) has one decision
variable (h) for each constraint in (3.13), and (3.15) has one constraint
for each decision variable (x/) in (3.13). In (3.13) the constraints are
inequalities and the variables can be any real numbers, whereas in (3.15)
the constraints are equalities and the variables are required to be non-
negative.
The proof of the following version of the duality theorem can be
found in any book on linear programming (see, for example, Chvatal,
1983).

--- Sayfa 145 ---
3.9 Bayesian Equilibria 127
DUALITY THEOREM OF LINEAR PROGRAMMING. Suppose that
there exists at least one vector X' in R"  such that
aki fei
bk, Vk E {1, . . . ,m},
1=1
and there exists at least one nonnegative vector Si in R, such that
ykakl = c1,
V/ E {1,
,n}.
k=1
Then the optimization problems (3.13) and (3.15) both have optimal solutions,
and at these optimal solutions the values of the objective functions El 1 CiXi and
Ekm=1 ykbk are equal.
3.9 Bayesian Equilibria
For a Bayesian game with incomplete information, Harsanyi (1967-68)
defined a Bayesian equilibrium to be any Nash equilibrium of the type-
agent representation in strategic form (as defined in Section 2.8). That
is, a Bayesian equilibrium specifies an action or randomized strategy for
each type of each player, such that each type of each player would be
maximizing his own expected utility when he knows his own given type
but does not know the other players' types. Notice that, in a Bayesian
equilibrium, a player's action can depend on his own type but not on
the types of the other players. (By definition, a player's type is supposed
to subsume all of his private information at the beginning of the game,
when he chooses his action.) We must specify what every possible type
of every player would do, not just the actual types, because otherwise
we could not define the expected utility payoff for a player who does
not know the other players' actual types.
To formally state the definition of a Bayesian equilibrium, let Fb  be
a Bayesian game as defined in Section 2.8, so
rb = or, (cji,„,, 	(u),,N).
A randomized-strategy profile for the Bayesian game Fb  is any o-  in the set
X ieN X tiETA(C ), that is, any o such that
ct = ((cri(ciiti)) ciEci) tiE T E N
o-i(ci  I ti)
0, Vci  E Ci, Vti  E Ti ,
Vi E N, and

--- Sayfa 146 ---
128 3 • Equilibria of Strategic-Form Games
E cr,(ci I
= 1, Ht;  E T1, Vi E N.
c,EC,
In such a randomized-strategy profile o-, the number o-z(c;  I I,) represents
the conditional probability that player i would use action c, if his type
were t1. In the randomized-strategy profile o, the randomized strategy
for type t, of player i is
cr,(.11,) = (cr,(c,11,)),,EC,•
A Bayesian equilibrium of the game Fb  is any randomized-strategy
profile cr such that, for every player i in N and every type 1, in T„
cr,(• I t,) E argmax
pi(t_ 210 E
H o-j  (ci  I tj)) TXc)24,,(c, t)
E A(C,)
cEC JEN—z
For a simple, two-player example, suppose that C1  = {x,,y1}, C2 =
{x2,y2}, T1  = {1.0} (so player 1 has only one possible type and no private
information), T2 = {2.1, 2.2}, p,(2.111.0) = .6, p1(2.2I 1.0) = .4, and the
utility payoffs (u,,u2) depend on the actions and player 2's type as in
Table 3.13.
In this game, y2  is a strongly dominated action for type 2.1, and x2  is
a strongly dominated action for type 2.2, so 2.1 must choose x2  and 2.2
must choose y2  in a Bayesian equilibrium. Player 1 wants to get either
(x,,x2) or (y,,y2) to be the outcome of the game, and he thinks that 2.1
is more likely than 2.2. Thus, the unique Bayesian equilibrium of this
game is
cr,(•11.0) = [x1], o-2(.I 2.1) = [x2], u2(.12.2) — [y2].
This example illustrates the danger of analyzing each matrix sepa-
rately, as if it were a game with complete information. If it were common
Table 3.13 Expected payoffs for all types and action profiles in a Bayesian
game
12  = 2.1
t2  = 2.2
C2
C2
C,
x2
Y2
C1
X2
Y2
y,
1,2
0,4
0,1
1,3
x,
y,
1,3
0,1
0,4
1,2

--- Sayfa 147 ---
3.10 • Purification of Randomized Strategies 129
knowledge that player 2's type was 2.1, then the players would be in
the matrix on the left in Table 3.13, in which the unique equilibrium is
(x,,x2). If it were common knowledge that player 2's type was 2.2, then
the players would be in the matrix on the right in Table 3.13, in which
the unique equilibrium is (y,,y2). Thus, if we only looked at the full-
information Nash equilibria of these two matrices, then we might make
the prediction, "the outcome of the game will be (x,,x2) if 2's type is 2.1
and will be (y,,y2) if 2's type is 2.2."
This prediction would be absurd, however, for the actual Bayesian
game in which player 1 does not initially know player 2's type. Notice
first that this prediction ascribes two different actions to player 1, de-
pending on 2's type (x, if 2.1, and y, if 2.2). So player 1 could not
behave as predicted unless he received some information from player
2. That is, this prediction would be impossible to fulfill unless some
kind of communication between the players is added to the structure
of the game. Now notice that player 2 prefers (y,,y2) over (x,,x2) if her
type is 2.1, and she prefers (x,,x2) over (y,,y2) if her type is 2.2. Thus,
even if communication between the players were allowed, player 2
would not be willing to communicate the information that is necessary
to fulfill this prediction, because it would always give her the outcome
that she prefers less. She would prefer to manipulate her communica-
tions to get the outcomes (y,,y2) if 2.1 and (x,,x2) if 2.2. Games with
communication are discussed in detail in Chapter 6.
3.10 Purification of Randomized Strategies in Equilibria
Equilibria in randomized strategies sometimes seem difficult to inter-
pret. Consider again the example in Table 3.7. The unique equilibrium
of this game is (.75[T] + .25[B], .5[L] + .5[R]). But the necessity for
player 1 to randomly choose among T and B with probabilities .75 and
.25, respectively, might not seem to coincide with any compulsion that
people experience in real life. Of course, if player 1 thinks that player
2 is equally likely to choose either L or R, then player 1 is willing to
randomize in any way between T and B. But what could make player
1 actually want to use the exact probabilities .75 and .25 in his random-
ization?
Harsanyi (1973) showed that Nash equilibria that involve randomized
strategies can be interpreted as limits of Bayesian equilibria in which
each player is (almost) always choosing his uniquely optimal action (see

--- Sayfa 148 ---
130 3 • Equilibria of Strategic-Form Games
also Milgrom and Weber, 1985). Harsanyi's idea is to modify the game
slightly so that each player has some minor private information about
his own payoffs. For example, suppose that the game in Table 3.7 were
modified slightly, to a game with incomplete information (Table 3.14).
Here a is some given number such that 0 < e < 1, and a and 13 are
independent and identically distributed random variables, each drawn
from a uniform distribution over the interval from 0 to 1. When the
game is played, player 1 knows the value of a but not 13, and player 2
knows the value of 13 but not a. If a is 0, then Table 3.14 becomes the
same as Table 3.7, so let us think of e as some very small positive number
(say, .0001). Then a and 15 represent minor factors that have a small
influence on the players' payoffs when T or L is chosen.
Given e, there is an essentially unique Bayesian equilibrium for this
game. Player 1 chooses T if he observes a greater than (2 + E)/(8 + 62),
and he chooses B otherwise. Player 2 chooses L if she observes 13 greater
than (4 — E)/(8 + 62), and she chooses R otherwise. That is, the
Bayesian equilibrium a satisfies
cr,(.1a) = [T] if a > (2 + 6)/(8 + 62),
o-,(.1•5t) = [B] if a < (2 + E)/(8 + 82),
and
a2(.1) = [L] if (3 > (4 — 8)48 + E2),
1:72(.1 (3) = [R] if 13 < (4 — E)/(8 + 82).
(0-1(• I a) and o-2(.113) can be chosen arbitrarily in the zero-probability
events that a = (2 + E)/(8 + 82) or 11 = (4 — e)/(8 + 62)) When player
2 uses the equilibrium strategy o-2  in this game, player 1 would be
indifferent between T and B only if a = (2 + E)/(8 + 62); otherwise his
expected utility is uniquely maximized by the action designated for him
by cr,(.16t). Similarly, when player 1 uses the equilibrium strategy cr, in
Table 3.14 Payoffs for all strategy profiles
C2
C,
T
Ea,60
ea,-1
B
—1,3

--- Sayfa 149 ---
3.10 • Purification of Randomized Strategies 131
this game, player 2 would be indifferent between L and R only if 13 =
(4 — s)/(8 + s2); otherwise her expected utility is uniquely maximized
by the action designated for her by cr2(.14 Thus, each player's expected
behavior makes the other player almost indifferent between his two
actions; so the minor factor that he observes independently can deter-
mine the unique optimal action for him. Notice that, as s goes to 0, this
equilibrium converges to the unique equilibrium of the game in Table
3.7, in which player 1 chooses T with probability .75, and player 2
chooses L with probability .50.
To see how the Bayesian equilibrium for Table 3.14 is computed,
notice first that T becomes better for player 1 as a increases, and L
becomes better for player 2 as 13 increases. Thus, there should exist
some numbers p and q such that player 1 chooses T if a is greater than
p and chooses B if a is less than p, and player 2 chooses L if 15 is greater
than q and chooses R if 15 is less than q. Then, from l's perspective, the
probability that 2 will choose L is 1 — q. To make player 1 indifferent
between T and B at the critical value of & = p, we need
ep = (1)(1 — q) + (-1)q.
Similarly, to make player 2 indifferent between L and R at the critical
value of p = q, we need
sq = (-1)(1 — p) + (3)p.
The solution to these two equations is p = (2 + s)/(8 + E2) and q =
(4 — e)/(8 + 62).
In general, when we study an equilibrium that involves randomized
strategies, we can interpret each player's randomization as depending
on minor factors that have been omitted from the description of the
game. When a game has no equilibrium in pure strategies, we should
expect that a player's optimal strategy may be determined by some
minor factors that he observes independently of the other players.
It may be interesting to compare this conclusion with the focal-point
effect. In games with multiple equilibria, factors that have little or no
impact on payoffs but are conspicuously observed by all the players may
have a significant impact on the outcome of the game by determining
the focal equilibrium. Thus, the theory of randomized equilibria iden-
tifies situations where minor private information may be decisive, and
the focal-point effect identifies situations where minor public informa-
tion may be decisive.

--- Sayfa 150 ---
132 3 • Equilibria of Strategic-Form Games
3.11 Auctions
The concept of Bayesian equilibrium is important in the analysis of
auctions (see, for example, Milgrom, 1985, 1987; Milgrom and Weber,
1982; McAfee and McMillan, 1987; and Wilson, 1987). We consider
here some simple introductory examples.
Consider first an example where the players are n bidders in an
auction for a single indivisible object. Each player knows privately how
much the object would be worth to him, if he won the auction. Suppose
that there is some positive number M and some increasing differentiable
function F(•) such that each player considers the values of the object to
the other n — 1 players to be independent random variables drawn
from the interval [0,M] with cumulative distribution F. (So F(v) is the
probability that any given player has a value for the object that is less
than v.) In the auction, each player i simultaneously submits a sealed
bid b,, which must be a nonnegative number. The object is delivered to
the player whose bid is highest, and this player must pay the amount
of his bid. No other player pays anything. Thus, letting b = (61, . . ,b,,)
denote the profile of bids and letting v = (v1, . . . ,v,,) denote the profile
of values of the object to the n players, the expected payoff to player i is
u,(b,v) = v, — b, if
= argmax
J({1,
,n)
= 0
if i
argmax
JE{1
n}
This is a Bayesian game where each player's type is his value for the
object. We now show how to find a Bayesian equilibrium in which every
player chooses his bid according to some function 13 that is differentiable
and increasing.
In the equilibrium, player i expects the other players to be choosing
bids between 0 and [3(M), so player i would never want to submit a bid
higher than I3(M). Suppose that, when i's value is actually vz, he submits
a bid equal to 13(w). Another player j will submit a bid that is less than
13(w) iff j's value satisfies WO < 13(w,), which happens iff v
j  < w1,
because 13 is increasing. So the probability that the bid 13(w) will win the
auction is F(wi)n-
 1, because the types of the other n — 1 players are
independently distributed according to F. Thus, the expected payoff to
player i from bidding 13(w2) with value v, would be
(z)
13(w))F(wz)n-1.

--- Sayfa 151 ---
3.11 Auctions 133
However, by the definition of an equilibrium, the optimal bid for i with
value v, should be 13(4 So the derivative of this expected payoff with
respect to w, should equal 0 when w, equals v,. That is,
0 = (v, — 13(v,))F(vi)(n — 1)F(vi)n-2  — 13'(v,)F(v,)' 1.
This differential equation implies that, for any x in [0,M]
13(x)F(x)n-1  = f y(n — 1)F(y)n- 2F i(y)dy.
This and other related results have been derived by Vickrey (1961) and
Ortega-Reichert (1968). In the case where the types are uniformly dis-
tributed, so that F(y) = y/M for any y in [0,M], this formula implies
r3(v,) = (1 — 1/n)v„ Vv, E [0,M].
Notice that the margin of profit that each player allows himself in his
bid decreases as the number of bidders increases.
This game is an example of an auction with independent private values,
in the sense that each bidder knows privately the actual value of the
object to himself and considers the others' values to be independent
random variables. In many auctions, however, the value of the object
would be the same to all bidders, although the bidders may have dif-
ferent estimates of this value, because they may have different private
information about its quality. Such auctions are called common value
auctions. For example, auctions for oil drilling rights on a given tract
of land may be common value auctions, where the common value is the
value of the oil under the land, about which the bidders may have
different information and different estimates.
Consider now a simple example of a two-bidder auction for a single
object with an unknown common value. This object has a monetary
value that depends on three independent random variables, go, g,, and
x2, each of which is drawn from a uniform distribution on the interval
from 0 to 1. The bidder who gets the object will ultimately derive
benefits from owning it that are worth Aogo  + A,x1  + A2g2, where Ao,
A1, and A2 are given nonnegative constants that are commonly known
by the bidders. At the time of the auction, player 1 has observed go  and
gi, but does not know g2; and player 2 has observed go  and g2, but does
not know g,. So player l's type is (go,g,), and 2's type is (go,g2).
In the auction, the players simultaneously submit sealed bids c1  and
c2  that are nonnegative numbers. The high bidder wins the object and

--- Sayfa 152 ---
134 3 Equilibria of Strategic-Form Games
pays the amount of his bid, and the low bidder pays nothing. In case
of a tie, each player has a .5 probability of getting the object at the price
of his bid. We assume that both players have risk-neutral utility for
money. Thus, the utility payoff function for player i is (let j denote the
player other than i)
Ui(CI,C2,(go,g1),(go,g2)) = Aogo
Algi
A2g2
Ci
if c. > c.
p

= (A0  X-0  + A I R, + A2g2
ci)/2 if ci  = c3,
= 0
if ci  < cf.
There is a unique linear Bayesian equilibrium of this game, in which
player l's bid is
Aogo  + 0.5(A, + A2)'Z1
and player 2's bid is
Aogo  + 0.5(A, + A2)x2•
To prove that this strategy profile is an equilibrium, suppose that player
1 expects 2 to use this strategy, but 1 is considering some other bid b,
given the values go  = x0  and g, = x, that he has observed. Such a bid
would win the object for 1 if
b > Aoxo  + 0.5(A, + A2)g2,
that is, if
2(b — A0R0)/(A, + A2) > g2.
So, given l's information, a bid of b will win him the object with prob-
ability Y(b), where
Y(b) = 2(b — A0x0)/(A, + A2),
when this number Y(b) is between 0 and 1. Player 1 should not use any
bid b that makes Y(b) greater than 1, because such a bid would be larger
than necessary to win the object for sure; and he should not use any
bid that makes Y(b) less than 0, because such a bid would be sure to
lose. Then, given l's type (go,g,), the conditionally expected payoff for
player 1, when 1 submits a bid of b and 2 implements her equilibrium
strategy, is

--- Sayfa 153 ---
3.11 Auctions
135
f
Y(b)
O

(Aoxo  + Ai x, + A2y2
0642
= Y(b)(Aoxo  + Aix, + A2Y(b)12 — b).
To interpret this formula, notice that Aoxo  + A,x, + A2Y(b)/2 would be
the conditionally expected value of the object, given both that player
l's type is (xo,x,) and that player 1 could win the object by bidding b.
Substituting the definition of Y(b) into this formula and choosing b to
maximize this expected payoff for 1, we get
b = Aoxo  + 0.5(A, + A2)x,
Substituting this value of b into the definition of Y(b), we get Y(b) = x1 ;
so this bid satisfies our requirement that 0
Y(b)
1, for every xo  and
x1  between 0 and 1.
A similar argument shows that player 2's optimal bid is as specified
by her equilibrium strategy, given that player 1 is expected to follow his
equilibrium strategy.
Suppose, for example, that Ao  = A, = A2 = 100, and go  = 0 and
= 0.01. Then l's equilibrium strategy tells him to submit a bid of 1.
This bid may seem surprisingly low. After all, the expected value of g2
is 0.5, so the expected monetary value of the object in the auction given
l's current information is 100 x 0 + 100 x 0.01 + 100 x 0.5 = 51.
Why is player 1 submitting a bid that is less than 2% of the expected
value of the object to him? To understand why player 1 must bid so
conservatively, notice what would happen if he submitted a bid of 50
instead. It might seem that this bid would give player 1 a positive
expected profit, because his bid is lower than the expected value of the
object to him and is high enough to have a substantial probability of
winning. But according to our formulas above, l's expected utility pay-
off from this bid is —12 (because Y(50) = .5). Bidder 1 would expect
such serious losses from a bid of 50 because, if l's bid of 50 were to win
the auction, then 2's equilibrium bid of 100g2  would be not greater than
50; so x2  would have to be between 0 and 0.50. Thus, the conditionally
expected value of the object, given l's information at the time of the
auction and the additional information that a bid of 50 would win the
auction, is 100 x 0.01 + 100 x 0.5/2 = 26. So a bid of 50 would give
player 1 a probability .5 of buying an object for 50 that would have an
expected value of 26 when he gets to buy it at this price, so that l's
expected profit is indeed 0.5(26 — 50) = —12 < 0.

--- Sayfa 154 ---
136 3 • Equilibria of Strategic-Form Games
Thus, when computing the expected profit from a particular bid in
an auction, it is important that the bidder estimate the value of the
object by its conditionally expected value given his current information
and the additional information that could be inferred if this bid won the auction.
This conditionally expected value is often significantly less than the
expected value of the object given the bidder's information at the time
that he submits the bid. This fact is called the winner's curse.
Now consider the case in which Ao  = A, = E and A2 = 100 - E, where
E is some very small positive number. In this case, player l's equilibrium
strategy is to bid e 0  + 50i,, and player 2's equilibrium strategy is to
bid ao  + 50x-2. Thus, even though go  and g, have the same small effect
on the value of the object, g, has a much greater effect on player l's
optimal bid, because g, is information that he knows privately, indepen-
dently of anything that player 2 knows, whereas go  is public information.
As E goes to 0, this game converges to one in which player 2 knows the
value of the object, and player 1 only knows that this value was drawn
from a uniform distribution over the interval from 0 to 100. The limit
of the Bayesian equilibria (in the sense of Milgrom and Weber, 1985),
as e goes to 0, is a randomized equilibrium in which the informed player
2 bids one-half of the value of the object and player 1 submits a bid
drawn from a uniform distribution over the interval from 0 to 50 and
based on minor factors that are independent of anything 2 can observe
at the time of the auction.
3.12 Proof of Existence of Equilibrium
The Kakutani (1941) fixed-point theorem is a useful mathematical tool
for proving existence of many solution concepts in game theory includ-
ing Nash equilibrium. To state the Kakutani fixed-point theorem, we
must first develop some terminology. (For a more thorough introduction
to these mathematical concepts, see Debreu, 1959, pp. 1-27.)
For any finite set M, RM  is the set of all vectors of the form x =
(x„,),„,,,, such that, for each m in M, the m-component xm  is a real number
in R. When it is more convenient, we can also interpret RM  equivalently
as the set of all functions from M into the real numbers R, in which
case the m-component of x in RM  can be written x(m) instead of xm. RM
is a finite-dimensional vector space.
Let S be a subset of the finite-dimensional vector space Rm. S is convex
iff, for every two vectors x and y and every number X such that 0 X

--- Sayfa 155 ---
3.12 • Proof of Existence of Equilibrium 137
1, if x E S and y E S, then Xx + (1 — X)y E S. (Here x = (x„,)„,,
y = (y,„)„,,,, and Xx + (1 — X)y = (Xx„z  + (1 — X)y„)„,04.) S is closed iff,
for every convergent sequence of vectors (x( j));:i, if x(j) E S for every
j, then limi_cox( j) E S. (A subset of RM  is open iff its complement is
closed.) S is bounded iff there exists some positive number K such that,
for every vector x in S, EmEmixml
K.
A point-to-set correspondence G:X —>—> Y is any mapping that specifies,
for every point x in X, a set G(x) that is a subset of Y. Suppose that X
and Y are any metric spaces, so the concepts of convergence and limit
have been defined for sequences of points in X and in Y. A correspon-
dence G:X -->--> Y is upper-hemicontinuous iff, for every sequence
(x(j),y(j));i, if x(j) E X and y(j) E G(x(j)) for every j, and the sequence
(x(j)); converges to some point x, and the sequence (y( j))7=, converges
to some point y, then y E G(x). Thus, G:X -->--> Y is upper-hemicontin-
uous iff the set {(x,y) x E X, y E G(x)} is a closed subset of X x Y.
Notice that most of the length of the definition of upper-hemicontin-
uity comes from the three hypotheses, which have the effect of limiting
the cases in which the conclusion E G(x)) is required to hold. Thus,
this definition is really rather weak. In particular, if g:X —> Y is a
continuous function from X to Y and G(x) = {g(x)} for every x in X, then
G:X —>—> Y is an upper-hemicontinuous point-to-set correspondence. So
upper-hemicontinuous correspondences can be viewed as a generaliza-
tion of continuous functions.
A fixed point of a correspondence F:S
S is any x in S such that
x E F(x).
KAKUTANI FIXED-POINT THEOREM.
Let S be any nonempty, con
vex, bounded, and closed subset of a finite-dimensional vector space. Let
F:S —>--> S be any upper-hemicontinuous point-to-set correspondence such that,
for every x in S, F(x) is a nonempty convex subset of S. Then there exists some
5-c in S such that x E F(x).
Proofs of the Kakutani fixed-point theorem and other related theo-
rems can be found in Burger (1963), Franklin (1980), and Border
(1985). Scarf (1973) provides a constructive proof by developing an
algorithm for computing the fixed point whose existence is implied by
the theorem. (For a generalization of the Kakutani fixed-point theorem,
see Glicksberg, 1952.)

--- Sayfa 156 ---
138 3 • Equilibria of Strategic-Form Games
To understand the role of the various assumptions in the Kakutani
fixed-point theorem, let
S = [0,1] = fx E RIO 5 X 5 1},
and let F1:S -->—> S be
F,(x) = {1} if 0
x
0.5,
= {0} if 0.5 < x
1.
Then F1  has no fixed points, and it satisfies all of the assumptions of
the Kakutani fixed-point theorem except for upper-hemicontinuity, be-
cause the set {(x,y)lx E S, y E F1(x)} is not a closed set at (0.5, 0). To
satisfy upper-hemicontinuity, we must extend this correspondence to
F2:S —>--> S, where
F2(x) = {1} if 0
x < 0.5,
=- {O,1} if x = 0.5,
= {0} if 0.5 < x
1.
F2 also has no fixed points, and it satisfies all of the assumptions of the
Kakutani fixed-point theorem except convex-valuedness, because
F2(0.5) is not a convex set. To satisfy convex-valuedness, we must extend
the correspondence to F3:S --->--> S, where
F3(x) = {1}
if 0
x < 0.5,
= [0,1] if x = 0.5,
= {0}
if 0.5 < x
1.
This correspondence F3 satisfies all the assumptions of the Kakutani
fixed-point theorem and has a fixed point, because 0.5 E F3(0.5).
We can now prove the general existence theorem for Nash equilibria
of finite games.
Proof of Theorem 3.1. Let F be any finite game in strategic form, where
F = (N
,
(CAEN,
/Let

The set of randomized-strategy profiles X EisA(Ci) is a nonempty, con-
vex, closed, and bounded subset of a finite-dimensional vector space.

--- Sayfa 157 ---
3.12 • Proof of Existence of Equilibrium 139
(This set satisfies the above definition of boundedness with K = INS,
and it is a subset of RM, where M = U C
- ?EN -?•)
For any u in X iEN  A(C) and any player j in N, let
R,(o-_,) = argmax u,(cr„,T„).
,-JEA(c.,)
That is, R,(a_,) is the set of j's best responses in A(C,) to the combination
of independently randomized strategies cr_, for the other players. By
Lemma 3.1 in Section 3.2, RJ(cr _ j) is the set of all probability distributions
p, over C, such that
p,(c„) = 0 for every c3  such that c„
argmax u,(cr,,[d,]).
d, E c,
Thus, Ri(o-__,) is convex, because it is a subset of A(C3) that is defined by
a collection of linear equalities. Furthermore, R,(o-_,) is nonempty, be-
cause it includes [c3] for every c, in argmaxvc  u,(o-_,,[c/„]), which is
nonempty.
Let R: X zE N z(C,) ---- X  ?EN A(C) be the point-to-set correspondence
such that
R(o) = X 	Vo E X A(C,).
JEN
iEN
That is, T E R(r) iff T, E R,(o-_,) for every j in N. For each o, R(r) is
nonempty and convex, because it is the Cartesian product of nonempty
convex sets.
To show that R is upper-hemicontinuous, suppose that (o-k)/7_ and
(Tk)k-1 are convergent sequences,
o-k  E X
Vk E {1,2,3, . . . },
iEN
Tk  E R(rk), Vk E {1,2,3, . . . },
Tr = lim o-k, and
k-z=
= lim Tk.
To prove upper-hemicontinuity, we need to show that these conditions
imply that T- is in R(rr). These conditions imply that, for every player j
in N and every p, in A(C,),

--- Sayfa 158 ---
140 3 • Equilibria of Strategic-Form Games

u
'
(cr
T
k
UJ -
(0-
k
1' p1'
 )
Vk E {1,2,3, . . .
-
By continuity of the expected utility function on X iEN
this in
turn implies that, for every j in N and p;
 in A(C;),
u3(cTr_3,p)).
So 7r.;
 E RO-_;) for every j in N, and so T E R(U). Thus, R: X JEN A(C1)
—>—> X zEN A(Ci) is an upper-hemicontinuous correspondence.
By the Kakutani fixed-point theorem, there exists some randomized-
strategy profile o-  in X 2EN
(Ci) such that if E R(cr). That is, o.;
 E R;(cr_;)
for every j in N, and so G.  is a Nash equilibrium of F. I
3.13 Infinite Strategy Sets
We have mainly emphasized finite games, to minimize mathematical
difficulties as we explore the fundamental principles of game-theoretic
analysis. In this section, however, we broaden our scope to consider a
more general class of games, in which players may have infinitely many
strategies. In particular, we want to include the possibility that the set
of pure strategies for a player may be a bounded interval on the real
number line, such as [0,1]. (This set includes all rational and irrational
numbers between 0 and 1, so it is an uncountably infinite set.)
To state results in greater generality, all results in this section are
based only on the assumption that, for each player i, the strategy set C,
is a compact metric space. A compact metric space is a general mathematical
structure for representing infinite sets that can be well approximated
by large finite sets. One important fact is that, in a compact metric space,
any infinite sequence has a convergent subsequence. The reader who is
unfamiliar with metric spaces is referred to any mathematics text on
real analysis, for example Royden (1968) or Kolmogorov and Fomin
(1970). Any closed and bounded subset of a finite-dimensional vector
space is an example of a compact metric space. More specifically, any
closed and bounded interval of real numbers is an example of a compact
metric space, where the distance between two points x and y is Ix — 3' I
We will not need to refer to any examples more complicated than these.
(For completeness, we summarize the basic definitions here. A metric
space is a set M together with a function 8:M x M --> R, which defines
the distance 6(x,y) between any two points x and y in the set and which
satisfies the following properties, for every x, y, and z in M:

--- Sayfa 159 ---
3.13 Infinite Strategy Sets
141
8(x,y) = 8(y,x) > 0,
8(x,y) = 0 iff x = y,
8(x,y) + 8(y,z)
8(x,z).
In a metric space, a point y is the limit of a sequence of points
(x(k))/% 1  iff the distance 8(x(k),y) goes to 0 as k goes to infinity. An open
ball of radius e around a point x, denoted B(x,e), is the set of all points
in the metric space that have a distance less than e from x; that is,
B(x,e)- ly18(x,y) < E}.
A set S is an open subset of a metric space M iff, for every x in S, there
is some positive number e such that B(x,e) C S. A metric space M
is compact iff every collection of open sets that covers M, in the sense
that their union includes all of M, has a finite subcollection that also
covers M.)
Let N denote the finite set of players,
N = {1,2,
,n}.
For each player i in N, let C, be a compact metric space that denotes
the set of all pure strategies available to player i. As usual, let C =
X ,EN C, = C1 X • • • X C,,. As a finite Cartesian product of compact
metric spaces, C is also a compact metric space (with 8(c, 'e) = /,EN 8(coei)).
When there are infinitely many actions in the set C„ a randomized
strategy for player i can no longer be described by just listing the
probability of each individual action. For example, suppose that C, is
the interval [0,1]. If player i selected his action from a uniform distri-
bution over the interval [0,1], then each individual action in [0,1] would
have zero probability; but the same would be true if he selected his
action from a uniform distribution over the interval from 0.5 to 1. To
describe a probability distribution over Ci, we must list the probabilities
of subsets of C,. Unfortunately, for technical reasons, it may be math-
ematically impossible to consistently assign probabilities to all subsets of
an infinite set, so some weak restriction is needed on the class of subsets
whose probabilities can be meaningfully defined. These are called the
measurable sets. Here, we let the measurable subsets of C and of each set
C, be the smallest class of subsets that includes all open subsets, all closed
subsets, and al! finite or countably infinite unions and intersections of
sets in the class. These are the Borel subsets (and they include virtually

--- Sayfa 160 ---
142 3 • Equilibria of Strategic-Form Games
all subsets that could be defined without the use of very sophisticated
mathematics). Let @, denote the set of such measurable or Borel subsets
of C,.
Let A(C1) denote the set of probability distributions over C,. That is,
o E A(C,) iff a is a function that assigns a nonnegative number cr(Q)
to each Q that is a Borel subset of C, aa(C,) = 1, and, for any countable
collection (Qk)k-_, of pairwise-disjoint Borel subsets of C,,
Qk 1 =
Cr z(Qk).
k=1 	 k=1
We define convergence for randomized strategies by assigning the
weak topology to A(C,). This topology is such that a sequence (a,k)k-_, of
probability distributions in A(C,) converges to a probability distribution
cr, iff, for every bounded continuous function f:C,—> R,
lim  f
f(c)clo-,(c) =
f(ci)dcr,(c).
c,E C,
c,EC,
This equation asserts that, if el,' is a random strategy drawn from C,
according to the r distribution, and e, is a random strategy drawn
according to the r distribution, then the expected value of f(e',') must
converge to the expected value of f(e) as k goes to infinity. With this
topology, the set of probability distributions in A(C,) is itself a compact
metric space (with a suitably defined distance function, called the
Prohorov metric; see Billingsley, 1968).
A function g:C --> R is (Borel) measurable iff, for every number x in R,
the set {c E CI g(c)
x} is a Borel subset of C. A function g:C —> R is
bounded iff there exists some number K such that I g(c)I
K for every
c in C. To be able to define expected utilities, we must require that
players' utility functions are measurable and bounded in this sense.
Let u = (u1, . . . ,u„) and u = (21, . . . ,U„) be any two profiles of utility
functions defined on C, such that, for each i in N, ui:C ---> R and
—> R are bounded measurable functions, to be interpreted as pos-
sible payoff functions for player i. We may define the distance between
the utility-function profiles u and is to be
max sup I u,(c) — ii,(c) I .
LEN
cEC
(The supremum, or sup, of a set of numbers or values of a function is
the least upper bound of the set. If a maximum exists in the set, then

--- Sayfa 161 ---
3.13 Infinite Strategy Sets
143
the supremum and the maximum are the same.) As usual, we may
extend any utility function to the set of all randomized-strategy profiles
XJEN so
u,(u) = f
• • •
u,(c)dcri(c,) . . . do-,,(c„),
HQ E X A(C,),
cn EC,,
c i ECi
JEN
where if = (cr,, . . . ,cr,,) and c = (c,, . . . ,c,,).
The utility-function profiles u and u each complete the definition of
a game in strategic form, denoted by F and F respectively. That is,
F = (N, (Ci)iEN, (u0K/s/), i =
(Ci)Krsr, (10K/sr).
If a = (cr,),EN  is an equilibrium of F, then if is, of course, not neces-
sarily an equilibrium of F. Even if u and ft are very close, the equilibria
of F and F may be very far apart. For example, if there is only
one player, C, [0,1], ul(c,) = Eci, and il,(c,) = —eci, where E is any
small positive number, then the unique equilibrium of F is 1 and the
unique equilibrium of F is 0, even though the distance between u and
is is only 2E.
However, if u and it are very close, there is a sense in which the
equilibria of F are "almost" equilibria of F. For any nonnegative number
E, Radner (1980) defined an e-equilibrium (or an e-approximate equi-
librium) of any strategic-form game to be a combination of randomized
strategies such that no player could expect to gain more than e by
switching to any of his feasible strategies, instead of following the ran-
domized strategy specified for him. That is, a is an E-equilibrium of
F iff
Ui(Cf_i,{Ci]) 	 )
E, Vi E N, Vci  E Ci.
Obviously, when E = 0, an E-equilibrium is just a Nash equilibrium in
the usual sense. The following result, due to Fudenberg and Levine
(1986), shows that such E-equilibria have a kind of continuity across
games.
THEOREM 3.3. Let F and 1" be as above. Let a be the distance between
the utility function profiles u and it, and suppose that a is an c-equilibrium of
F. Then a is an (E
2a)-equilibrium of F.

--- Sayfa 162 ---
144 3 • Equilibria of Strategic-Form Games
Proof For any player i and any action ci,
ui(cr_i,[ci]) — ui(o)
= (ui(o-_,[cd) — 	 + (Ui(o_i,[ci]) — iii(cr)) +
(iii(cr) — ui(r))
Lca+e+a=--  2a+ E. I
For any game with continuous utility functions, the 6-equilibrium con-
cept also satisfies a related form of continuity, as stated by the following
theorem.
THEOREM 3.4.
Suppose that u,:C
R is continuous, for every player i
in N. Let (a-k)k—_, be a convergent sequence of randomized-strategy profiles in
X iEN  LUC), and let (Ek)k-_, be a convergent sequence of nonnegative numbers
such that, for every k, ak  is an Ek-equilibrium of F. Let (Tr =limy, ak  and
let e =
Ek. Then (Ti-  is an T-equilibrium of F. In particular, if F equals
0, then "ci.  is an equilibrium of F.
Proof. For any player i and any ci  in Ci,
ui(off_,,[c,]) — N(Y) = lim (u,(o-k_i,[c,]) — Iii(Crk))
lim ek  = T. I
It is important to be able to relate infinite games to the conceptually
simpler class of finite games. A function f from C, into a finite set Dt is
(Borel) measurable iff, for every b, in Di, {c, E C,I f,(c,) = b,} is a Borel-
measurable set. We may say that the game F is essentially finite iff there
exists some finite strategic-form game F* = (N, (D,),,N, (v,),,N) and
measurable functions (f,:C,—> D-)IEN  such that,
CIAO = v,(fi(c1), . . . ,f,z(cn)), Vi E N, Vc E C.
The following finite-approximation theorem can be easily proved, using
the fact that the sets of strategies are compact.
THEOREM 3.5. Let a be any strictly positive real number. Suppose that,
for every player i, the utility function u,:C --0 R is continuous on the compact

--- Sayfa 163 ---
3.13 • Infinite Strategy Sets
145
domain C. Then there exists an essentially finite game I- = (N,(ui)iE N)

such that the distance between u and u is less than a.
These results enable us to prove that there exists an equilibrium of F
in randomized strategies, if the utility functions (u,)," are continuous.
The existence theorem for finite games immediately implies that a
randomized equilibrium exists for any essentially finite game. Then
Theorems 3.5 and 3.3 imply that there exists a 2a-equilibrium of F, for
any positive number a. By compactness of X ,„ z(C,), any sequence of
randomized-strategy profiles has a convergent subsequence. Thus, let-
ting a = 8,/2 and letting e, -+ 0, we can construct a convergent sequence
of randomized-strategy profiles that satisfies the hypotheses of Theorem
3.4, with -8-  = 0. Then the limit (Tr is a Nash equilibrium of F in random-
ized strategies.
Simon and Zame (1990) have applied a similar line of argument to
prove a more general equilibrium existence theorem for games in which
the utility functions may be discontinuous (see also Dasgupta and Mas-
kin, 1986). However, Simon and Zame's formulation uses a weaker
concept of a game, in which a range of possible payoff allocations may
be allowed for some combinations of actions. Such a modification of the
concept of a game is needed because, for strategic-form games as con-
ventionally defined, equilibria need not exist when payoff functions are
discontinuous. For a simple example, let N = {1}, C, = [0,1], ul(c,) =
c1  if cl  < 0.5, iii(c,) = 0 if c,
0.5. Then player 1 wants to choose the
highest number that is strictly less than 0.5, but no such number exists.
In a sense, the problem is that we chose the wrong way to define the
payoff at the point of discontinuity. If we just changed the payoff there
and let u1(0.5) = 0.5, then an equilibrium would exist.
Following Simon and Zame (1990), a game with an endogenous-sharing
rule, or an endogenous-sharing game is any
rs = (N,
U),
where N and (C,),„ are as above, and U:C
RN  is a correspondence
that specifies a set of utility payoff allocations in RN  for every combi-
nation of players' strategies. That is, for any c in C, if w E U(c) then
w = (w,)," is one possible allocation of utility to the players that could
occur if they chose the strategy profile c. Suppose that N is finite and
each C, is a compact subset of a metric space, and U is bounded (that
is, there exists some number K such that, for every c in C, every w in

--- Sayfa 164 ---
146 3 • Equilibria of Strategic-Form Games
U(c), and every i in N, lw,i
K). Suppose also that U:C --->—* RN  is
upper-hemicontinuous and, for each c in C, U(c) is a nonempty convex
subset of RN. Using these assumptions, Simon and Zame (1990) have
proved the following general existence theorem.
THEOREM 3 . 6 .
Let FS be an endogenous-sharing game as defined above.
Then there exists some profile of utility functions (ili)iEN  such that each
—>
R is a measurable function,
,(c), . . . , ii,„(c)) E U(c) for every c in C, and the
resulting strategic form game (N, (Ci)i EN ,  (1.i)zEN) has at least one Nash equilib-
rium in X ,EN A(C,).
If each function u,:C --> R is continuous, then letting
U(c) = {(u,(c), . . . 	Vc E C,
defines a correspondence U(•) that satisfies all of the properties that we
have assumed.
More generally, for any profile of bounded utility functions u =
(u,), E N, where some u,:C R may be discontinuous, there exists a unique
minimal correspondence U:C
RN  such that U is upper-hemicontin-
uous and, for every c in C, U(c) is a convex set that includes the vector
(u,(c)),,,,. When U is this minimal correspondence, U(c) is the set of all
limits of expected utility allocations that can be achieved by randomizing
over strategy profiles that are arbitrarily close to c. To be more precise,
let B(c,E) denote the set of all strategy profiles e such that, for every
player i, the distance between e, and c, is less than E. Then, for any c in
C, a payoff vector w is in U(c) iff, for every positive number E, there
exists some probability distributionµ over the set B(c,e) such that, for
every player i,
w, —ui(e)dix(e)
f.EB( r,e)
Applying Theorem 3.6 to this minimal correspondence U, we find that,
for any profile of discontinuous utility functions u, there exists some
profile of utility functions ft such that u differs from u only at points of
discontinuity and an equilibrium of the resulting game F exists.
For example, consider a two-player game where C, = [0,1], C2 =
[0,1/4],
c E.

--- Sayfa 165 ---
3.13 • Infinite Strategy Sets
147
u1(ci,c2) = 1 — u2(c1,c2) = (c, + c2)/2
if c1  < C2,
= 1/2
if c1  = c2,
= 1 — (c1  + c2)/2 if c1  > c2.
(This game is a modified version of a classic example of Hotelling,
1929.) Following Simon and Zame, we can interpret this game by sup-
posing that the players are two psychiatrists choosing where to locate
their offices on a long road, represented by the interval from 0 to 1.
The portion of the road represented by the interval from 0 to 1/4 is in
Oregon, and the portion represented by the interval from 1/4 to 1 is in
California. Player 1 is licensed to practice in both California and Oregon,
but player 2 is licensed to practice only in Oregon. Patients are distrib-
uted uniformly along this road, each patient will go to the psychiatrist
whose office is closer. The payoff to each psychiatrist is the fraction of
the patients that go to him.
The payoff function for this game is discontinuous when the players
choose the same point in the interval [0,1/4] (that is, when they locate
across the road from each other in Oregon). We have, quite naturally,
assumed that they share the patients equally in this case. However, there
is no equilibrium of this game when we define payoffs at the disconti-
nuity in this way. To see why, notice that player 1 can guarantee himself
a payoff arbitrarily close to 3/4 by choosing c1  slightly larger than 1/4, and
player 2 can guarantee herself a payoff of at least 1/4 by choosing c2
equal to 1/4. However, when c, and c2  both equal 1/4, player l's payoff
drops to '/2 in this model.
The smallest upper-hemicontinuous convex-valued endogenous-shar-
ing rule U that contains the given profile of utility functions u is
U(c,,c2) = {((c1  + c2)/2, 1 — (c, + c2)12)} if c1  < c2,
U(c,,c2) = {(a, 1 — a) c1  Ls a :5_ 1 — c1} if c1  = c2,
U(c1,c2) = {(1 — (c1  + c2)/2, (c1  + c2)/2)} if c1  > c2.
To get an equilibrium, we may use any selection u such that
26,('/4,1/4) = 3/4,
2 ( 1/4, 1/4) = 1/4.
The resulting game has an equilibrium (in pure strategies) at (c1,c2)
= (1/4,1/4), with payoffs (3/4,1/4). That is, to get an equilibrium, we must
adjust the payoff functions at the points of discontinuity so that, when
both players locate at the California—Oregon border, player 1 gets all
the California patients and player 2 gets all the Oregon patients.

--- Sayfa 166 ---
148 3 • Equilibria of Strategic-Form Games
If we approximated the original game by a finite game in which ci
and c2  are required to be integer multiples of 1/K, where K is any large
positive integer that is divisible by 4, then there would be an equilibrium
in pure strategies at (1/4 + 1/K, 1/4), with payoffs (3/4 — 1/(2K), 1/4 +
1/(2K)). As K goes to infinity, this equilibrium and payoff allocation
converge to the equilibrium and payoff allocation that we got for F.
Exercises
Exercise 3.1. Suppose that ri is derived from F by eliminating pure
strategies that are strongly dominated in F. Show that a is an equilibrium
of F if and only if a is an equilibrium of F'. (NOTE: If Ci  is a subset of
C„ then any probability distribution pi  in A(Ci) may be identified with
the probability distribution in ii(Ci) that gives the same probabilities as
p, to the pure strategies in Ci, and gives probability 0 to the pure
strategies that are in Ci  but not in C,.)
Exercise 3.2. Suppose that F2  is derived from F by eliminating pure
strategies that are weakly dominated in F. Show that, if a is an equilib-
rium of F2, then a-  is an equilibrium of F.
Exercise 3.3. For each of the following two-player games, find all equi-
libria. As usual, player 1 chooses the row and player 2 chooses the
column. (HINT: Each game here has an odd number of equilibria.)
a.
X2
Y2
x,
2,1
1,2
1,5
2,1
b.
X2
Y2
x,
3,7
6,6
y,
2,2
7,3
c.
X2
Y2
x,
7,3
6,6
2,2
3,7
d.
X2 	Y2 	Z2
x,
0,4
5,6
8,7
Y1
2,9
6,5
5,1

--- Sayfa 167 ---
Exercises 149
e.
X2
Y2
z2
x1
0,0
5,4
4,5
y1
4,5
0,0
5,4
z1
5,4
4,5
0,0
Exercise 3.4. Find all equilibria of the three-player game (due to B.
O'Neill) shown in Table 3.15, where C, = {x„y,} for each i in {1,2,3}.
That is, each player gets 0 unless exactly one player i chooses y„ in
which case this player i gets 5, the player before i in the 1—>2—>3—÷1
cycle gets 6, and the player after i in this cycle gets 4. (HINTS: Notice
the cyclical symmetry of this game. The number of equilibria is even,
which is rather unusual.)
Exercise 3.5. a. Consider a Bayesian game with incomplete information
in which player 1 may be either type a or type 13, where type a has
probability .9 and type 13 has probability .1 (as assessed by player 2).
Player 2 has no private information. Depending on player l's types, the
payoffs to the two players depend on their actions in C, = {x,,y,} and
C2 = {x2,y2} as shown in Table 3.16. Show that there exists a Bayesian
equilibrium in which player 2 chooses x2.
b. (A version of the electronic mail game of Rubinstein, 1989.) Now
suppose that the information structure is altered by the following pre-
play communication process. If player 1 is type 13, then he sends no
letter to player 2. Otherwise, player 1 sends to player 2 a letter saying,
"I am not type p." Thereafter, each time either player receives a message
from the other, he sends back a letter saying, "This is to confirm the
receipt of your most recent letter." Suppose that every letter has a
probability VI o of being lost in the mail, and the players continue
exchanging letters until one is lost. Thus, when player 1 chooses his
Table 3.15 A three-player game in strategic form
C2 and C3
x3
y3
Cl
X2
Y2
x2
Y2
xl
0,0,0
6,5,4
4,6,5
0,0,0
yl
5,4,6
0,0,0
0,0,0
0,0,0

--- Sayfa 168 ---
150 3 Equilibria of Strategic-Form Games
Table 3.16 Expected payoffs for all types and action profiles in a Bayesian
game
t, = a
C2
C1
X2
Y2
xi
2,2
—2,0
0,-2
0,0
t, = p
C2
C1
X2
Y2
x,
0,2
1,0
Yi
1,-2
2,0
action in fx,,y11, he knows whether he is 13 or a; and if he is a, then
he also knows how many letters he got from player 2. When player 2
chooses her action in {x2,y2}, she knows how many letters she got
from player 1.
After the players have stopped sending letters, what probability would
player 2 assign to the event that a letter sent by player 1 was lost in the
mail (so the total number of letters sent by 1 and 2 together is odd)?
If player 1 is not type p, then what probability would player 1 assign
to the event that a letter sent by player 1 was lost in the mail?
Show that there is no Bayesian equilibrium of this game in which
player 2 ever chooses x2.
Exercise 3.6. Consider the perturbed version of the Battle of the Sexes
game shown in Table 3.17. Here 0 < e < 1, and t, and 12  are indepen-
dent random variables drawn from a uniform distribution over the
interval [0,1]. Each player i observes only t, before choosing his action
in C, = { f,, .s,}. Find three Bayesian equilibria of this game. (HINT: There
is an equilibrium in which each player i has some types that choose s,
and some other types that choose f,.)
Exercise 3.7. Consider a first-price sealed-bid auction between two bid-
ders with independent private values for the object being sold. Before

--- Sayfa 169 ---
Exercises
151
Table 3.17 A perturbed version of the Battle of the Sexes game
C2
Cl
f2
S2
fl
3 + E t , 1
et1, Et2
si
0, 0
1, 3 + et2
this auction, each bidder i (for i = 1,2) observes a random variable t,
that is independently drawn from a uniform distribution over the in-
terval [0,1]. Then the value of the object to bidder i is v, = t, + 0.5.
Each bidder i submits a sealed bid b, that can be any nonnegative
number, and his payoff is
ui(b1,b241,t2) = (ti  + 0.5) — bi
if b, > b_1,
= 0
if bi  < b_i,
= ((ti  + 0.5) — 012 if b1  = b2.
Find an equilibrium in which each bidder uses a strategy of the form
bi  = at, + 13. In this equilibrium, what is the conditionally expected
payoff to bidder i, given his type t,?
Exercise 3.8. Now consider a first-price sealed-bid auction between two
bidders with a common value for the object being sold. As in Exercise
3.7, before this auction, each bidder i (for i = 1,2) observes a random
variable t, that is independently drawn from a uniform distribution over
the interval from 0 to 1, but in this situation the actual value of the
object to each bidder i is v, = t1  + t2. Thus, given only his own infor-
mation t„ the expected value of the object to bidder i is t, + 0.5, as in
Exercise 3.7. In the auction, each bidder i submits a sealed bid b, that
can be any nonnegative number, and his payoff is
ui(b1,b2,t1,t2) = (ti  + t2) — bi
if b, > b_i,
= 0
if bi  < b_i,
= ((t1 + t2)
0/2 if b1  = b2.
Find an equilibrium in which each bidder uses a strategy of the form
b, = at, + 13. In this equilibrium, what is the conditionally expected
payoff to bidder i, given his type 4? Show that, for each value of t„ the

--- Sayfa 170 ---
152 3 Equilibria of Strategic-Form Games
equilibrium bid in this auction is lower than the equilibrium bid in the
private-values example in Exercise 3.7.
Exercise 3.9. a. Verify the equilibrium of the perturbed game described
in Section 3.6.
b. How would the equilibrium change if it were common knowledge
that player 1 is an intelligent rational decision-maker but that there is
still a probability .1 that player 2 may be replaced by a naive agent who
would choose a bid according to the uniform distribution on the interval
[0,1]?
Exercise 3.10.
Let N = {1, . . . ,n} be a fixed set of players, and let C1,
. . . ,Cn  be fixed finite strategy sets for the n players. For any sequence
of games (Fk)k-_1, where each Fk  = (N, (C,),,N, (4,,N), and for any F =
(N, (C,),EN, (u,),"), we may say that lime a  Fk  = F iff, for every i in N
and every c in C,
74(c) = u,(c). For any such game F, let E(F)
denote the set of all Nash equilibria of F, and let D(F) denote the set of
all Nash equilibria of F that assign zero probability to all weakly domi-
nated pure strategies.
a. Is E(.) upper-hemicontinuous? Justify your answer by a proof or a
counterexample.
b. Is
upper-hemicontinuous? Justify your answer by a proof or a
counterexample.
Exercise 3.11. Let F be a two-person zero-sum game in strategic form.
Show that {a, I o.  is an equilibrium of F} is a convex subset of the set of
randomized strategies for player 1.
Exercise 3.12. Suppose that Y and Z are nonempty compact (closed and
bounded) convex subsets of finite-dimensional vector spaces. Let g:Y X
Z --> R be a continuous function such that, for every z in Z, g(•,z) is an
affine function on Y. That is, for any z in Z, and any x and y in Y, and
any X between 0 and 1,
g(Xx + (1 - X)y,z)
Xg(x,z) + (1 - X)g(y,z).
For any z in Z, let F(z) = argmaxy,y g(y,z). Prove that F:Z -->—> Y is
upper-hemicontinuous and nonempty-convex-valued. (HINT: The image
of a compact set under a continuous function is a compact set; and a
compact subset of the real number line is closed and bounded.)

--- Sayfa 171 ---
Exercises 153
Exercise 3.13. Let F be the two-person game in which the pure strategy
sets are C1  = C2 = [0,1], and the utility function of each player i is
ui(c1,c2) = c1c2  — 0.1(c,)2. For any number E such that 0 < e < 1/2, let
be the game in which the strategy sets are the same as in r, but the
utility function of each player i is iii(c1,c2) = ui(maxle,c11, max{e,c2}). (In
effect, all strategies between 0 and e are rounded up to e.)
a. Show that (0,0) and (1,1) are the only equilibria of F.
b. Show that (1,1) is the unique equilibrium of rE.
c. Show that (0,0) is an 8-equilibrium of PE.
d. Show that the distance between the utility-function profiles (u1,u2)
and (u,022), as defined in Section 3.13, is less than E.
Exercise 3.14. A strong Nash equilibrium is a Nash equilibrium such that
there is no nonempty set of players who could all gain by deviating
together to some other combination of strategies that is jointly feasible
for them, when the other players who are not in this set are expected
to stay with their equilibrium strategies. (See Aumann, 1959, and Bern-
heim, Peleg, and Whinston, 1987.) Here, to formalize this definition,
we can say that a randomized strategy profile cr is a strong Nash equi-
librium iff, for each randomized strategy profile T that is different from
cr, there exists some player i such that T,
a and u,(T) ui(cr).
a. Show an example of a game that has strong Nash equilibria and
show another example of a game that does not have any strong Nash
equilibria. (HINT: It suffices to consider some of the examples in Sec-
tion 3.2.)
b. Recall the game in Exercise 3.4. Show that, for each equilibrium
of this game, there exists a set of two or three players who could all do
better by changing their strategies in such a way that the new strategy
profile (including the original equilibrium strategy of the player who is
outside this set, if it contains only two players) is still an equilibrium.

--- Sayfa 172 ---
4
Sequential Equilibria of
Extensive-Form Games
4.1 Mixed Strategies and Behavioral Strategies
Since the work of Selten (1975) and Kreps and Wilson (1982), there has
been an increasing appreciation of the importance of studying equilibria
of games in extensive form, not just in strategic form. Analysis of
equilibria in behavioral strategies and of sequential equilibria of an extensive-
form game can provide insights beyond those generated by analysis of
equilibria of any one representation of the game in strategic form.
Before we can define these two solution concepts for extensive-form
games, however, we need to formulate the more basic concepts of ran-
domized strategies for extensive-form games.
We begin by recalling some notation developed in Chapter 2.
Throughout this chapter, we let re denote an extensive-form game as
defined in Section 2.1. The set of players in re is N. For any player i in
N, we let S, denote the set of all possible information states for player i
in re. We assume that players' information states are labeled such that
S, and S, are disjoint sets whenever i 0 j, and we let S* denote the union
of all these sets; that is
s* = U si.
iEN
For any player i and any information state s in Si, we let Y, denote the
set of nodes belonging to player i with information state s, and we let
Ds  denote the set of all moves available to i at information state s. That
is, Ds  is the set of all move-labels of alternative branches following any
node in Y.,. A (pure) strategy for a player in Fe is a function that specifies
a move for the player at each of his possible information states in the

--- Sayfa 173 ---
4.1 • Mixed and Behavioral Strategies 155
game. We let Ci  denote the set of such pure strategies for any player i
in Fe, so
Ci  = X D5.
sES;
In Chapter 3 we defined randomized-strategy profiles and equilibria
for strategic-form games. In Chapter 2 we defined two different ways
of representing an extensive-form game by a strategic-form game: the
normal representation and the multiagent representation. These two
representations give us two different ways to define randomized-strat-
egy profiles for any given extensive-form game F.  A mixed-strategy profile
of re is defined to be any randomized-strategy profile for the normal
representation of Fe. That is, the set of mixed-strategy profiles of Fe is
X A(C).
iEN
A behavioral-strategy profile of Fe is defined to be any randomized-strategy
profile for the multiagent representation of F.  Thus, the set of behav-
ioral-strategy profiles of re is
X A(/),) = X X 0(D5).
sES*
iEN sES;
In the language of Section 2.1, a mixed-strategy profile specifies, for
each player, a probability distribution over his set of overall strategies
for playing Fe, whereas a behavioral-strategy profile specifies a proba-
bility distribution over the set of possible moves for each possible infor-
mation state of each player. A behavioral-strategy profile can also be
called a scenario for the game, because it specifies a probability for every
alternative branch at every decision node in the game tree.
In general, if cr is a behavioral-strategy profile in X JEN X sES, A(Ds),
then we can write
(Cji)iEN = (Cri.$)sES,,iEN

--- Sayfa 174 ---
156 4 • Sequential Equilibria
where ai  =
E X A(D)
sES,
and ai, = (cri s(ds))d,ED, E A(DS).
Here the number o-,..,(c/s) can be called a move probability because it denotes
the conditional probability (under scenario a) that player i would choose
move 4, if the path of play reached a node that is controlled by player
i with information state s. Any a, in X ,Es,A (Ds), which specifies a prob-
ability for every possible move at every possible information state of
player i, is called a behavioral strategy for player i.
On the other hand, a mixed strategy for player i is any Ti  in A(C,) that
specifies a probability Ti(c,) for every (nonrandomized) plan ci  that player
i could use to determine his moves at every information state.
To appreciate the distinction between mixed strategies and behavioral
strategies, consider the extensive-form game in Figure 4.1. The normal
representation of this game (which is also the reduced normal repre-
sentation, because there are no redundant strategies) is shown in Table
4.1
For any numbers a and 13 between 0 and 1/2, the mixed-strategy profile
(a[wCi] 	+ (.5  — 01.)[wiz1] + (.5  — ot)PelYil,
P[w2Y2]
P[x2z2] + (.5  — P)[lv2z2i
(.5
P)Lx2Y21)
is an equilibrium of this normal representation in strategic form. How-
ever, all of these mixed-strategy profiles should be considered equivalent
in the context of the original extensive-form game. In all of them, each
player plans at each of his information states to use each of his two
possible moves with probability 0.5. The only differences among these
equilibria arise from the different ways that a player can correlate his
planned moves at different information states. Because each player will
actually move at only one of his two information states when the game
is played, the correlation between the move that he chooses at one
information state and the move that he would have chosen at any other
information state has no significance. All that matters are the marginal
distributions over moves that the randomized strategies generate at the
various information states. Furthermore, these marginal distributions
are all that are needed to describe a behavioral-strategy profile for the
extensive-form game. That is, all of these mixed-strategy profiles cor-
respond to the behavioral-strategy profile

--- Sayfa 175 ---
2,0
2.3
X2 •0,2
2.3
0,2
2,0
2 4
Y2
4,2
2,4
2,4
4.1 • Mixed and Behavioral Strategies 157
4,2
Figure 4.1
Table 4.1 A game in strategic form, the normal representation of Figure 4.1
C2
Cl
W2 Y2
W2Z2
x2 y2
X222
wiYi
3,1
2,2
2,2
1,3
wiz'
2,2
3,1
1,3
2,2
xiyi
2,2
1,3
3,1
2,2
xiz,
1,3
2,2
2,2
3,1
(.5[w1] + .5[x1], .5[yi] + 0.5k1l, .5[w2] + .5[x2], •5[Y2] + .5[z2]).
Formally defining equivalence relationships between mixed-strategy
profiles and behavioral-strategy profiles requires some technical care.
For example, consider the game in Figure 4.2, and consider the mixed
strategy .5[a1y1] + .5[bizi] for player 1. It might at first seem that this
mixed strategy should correspond to the behavioral strategy (.5[a1] +
.5[b1], .5[y1] + .5[z1]) for player 1, but this would be wrong. The only
way that player 1 would plan to use z, at a 1.3 node under the mixed

--- Sayfa 176 ---
3,2
2.2
0,5
2.2
158 4 • Sequential Equilibria
3,2
Figure 4.2
strategy .5[a,yi] + .5[b,zi] is if he chooses the pure strategy biz', in which
case the path of play could not possibly reach a 1.3 node. In fact, under
the mixed strategy .5[a,y i] + .5[bizi], player 1 would choose y, with
conditional probability 1 if the path of play reached a 1.3 node, because
al)), is the only strategy that has positive probability and is compatible
with information state 3 of player 1. So the behavioral strategy for
player 1 that corresponds to .5[aiy 1] + .5[bizi] is (.5[a1] + .5[bi], [y1]).
In general, for any player i, any pure strategy ci  in Ci, and any
information state s in Si, we say that s and ci  are compatible iff there exists
at least one combination of pure strategies for the other players such
that a node at which player i moves with information state s could occur
with positive probability when i implements strategy ci. That is, s and ci
are compatible iff there exists some c_z = MEN-i in C-i = XjEN-i Cj
such that
E p(xk) > 0,
where c = (c_i,ci) and P(•I •) is as defined in Section 2.2. We let C:1'(s)
denote the set of all pure strategies in C, that are compatible with i's
information state s. For any Ti in 0(C,) and any s in Si, we say that s is
compatible with Ti iff there exists some ci  in C',K(s) such that TAO > 0.
For any s in Si  and any cl, in Ds, let CP*(d„s) denote the set of pure
strategies that are compatible with s and designate cl, as i's move at
information state s. That is,
Cnds,$) = {ci. E CNs)lci(s) = ds}.

--- Sayfa 177 ---
4.1 • Mixed and Behavioral Strategies 159
For example, in the game in Figure 4.2, Cr(3) = faih, aizil and
Cr*(YD3) = {a1y1}.

A behavioral strategy cr, =i.s,1  sE S, for player i is a behavioral repre-
sentation of a mixed strategy Ti in A(C,) iff, for every s in Si  and every d,
in D,,
(4.1) 	 E
Ti(e)) =
E
Tz(C,)•
e,ECf(s)
c,ECT*(4s)
That is, a, is a behavioral representation of Ti iff, for every move d, at
every information state s in Si  that is compatible with Ti, cr,.,(d„) is the
conditional probability that i would plan to choose d, at s given that he
chose a pure strategy that is compatible with s. It is straightforward to
check that any randomized strategy'r, in A(C,) has at least one behavioral
representation in X sEs, A(Ds)• If some information state s in Si  is not
compatible with Ti, then any probability distribution cri.J.) in 0(D5) would
satisfy condition (4.1), because both sides are 0. Thus, Ti can have more
than one behavioral representation. A behavioral-strategy profile a =
(cr,),,N  is a behavioral representation of a mixed-strategy profile T in
X iEN  A(C,) iff, for every player i, cr, is a behavioral representation of Ti.
Given any behavioral strategy o-, = (az.$)sEs, in X sES, A(Ds), the mixed
representation of cr, is defined to be Ti in A(C,) such that
Ti(c,) = 11 cri.s(c,(s)), vc, E
sES,
That is, the mixed representation of a behavioral strategy cr, is the mixed
strategy in A(C,) in which i's planned move at each information state s
has the marginal probability distribution cr, s  and is determined inde-
pendently of his moves at all other information states. The mixed
representation of a behavioral-strategy profile a = (cr,),,, is the mixed-
strategy profile T such that, for every player i, Ti is the mixed represen-
tation of u,. It is straightforward to show that, if Ti is the mixed repre-
sentation of a behavioral strategy a, for player i, then a, is a behavioral
representation of Ti.
Two mixed strategies in A(C,) are behaviorally equivalent iff they share
a common behavioral representation. Thus, in the example in Figure
4.1, player l's mixed strategies .5[zv1y1] + .5[x,z1] and .5[w1z1] +
are behaviorally equivalent, because both have the behavioral represen-
tation (.5[w1] + .5[x1], .5[h] + .5[z1]), for which the mixed representa-
tion is .25[w1y1] + .25[x1z1] + .25[1v1zi] + .25[x1y1]. Similarly, in the game

--- Sayfa 178 ---
2.2
1.3
160 4 Sequential Equilibria
in Figure 4.2, .5[a
+ .5[biz1] and .5[a1y1] + .5[b1y1] are behaviorally
equivalent, because both have the behavioral representation (.5[w1] +
.5[x1], [YI]),  for which .5[aiY1] + .5[b1Y1] is the mixed representation.
Two mixed strategy profiles 'T and T in X IEN A(Cz) are behaviorally
equivalent iff, for every player i, T, and 7, are behaviorally equivalent.
We say that two mixed strategies 7, and p, in 41(C,) are payoff equivalent
iff, for every player j and every 7_, in X 1EN -z 0(C1),
where
isfs utility function in the normal representation of Fe. That
is, T, and p, are payoff equivalent if no player's expected utility depends
on which of these two randomized strategies is used by player i.
The following theorem, due to Kuhn (1953), is proved in Section
4.11.
THEOREM 4.1. If Fe is a game with perfect recall (see Section 2.1), then
any two mixed strategies in A(C,) that are behaviorally equivalent are also payoff
equivalent.
Figure 4.3 shows that the technical assumption of perfect recall is
needed to prove Kuhn's Theorem. This game does not have perfect
recall, because player 1 at information state 3 cannot recall whether he
chose x1  or yi  at his information state 1. Player l's mixed strategies
Figure 4.3

--- Sayfa 179 ---
4.2 • Equilibria in Behavioral Strategies 161
.5[x,x3] + .5[y,y3] and .5[x,y3] + .5[y,x3] are behaviorally equivalent,
because they have the same behavioral representation (.5[x1] + .5[y,],
.5[x3] + .5[y3]). However, .5[xix3] + .5[3,03] and .5[x,y3] + .5[y,x3] are
not payoff equivalent; against [x2], for example, .5[x,x3] + .5[y03] gives
player 1 an expected payoff of 0, but .5[x,y3] + .5[y,x3] gives player 1
an expected payoff of —1.
4.2 Equilibria in Behavioral Strategies
If we defined an equilibrium of an extensive-form game to be an equi-
librium of its normal representation in strategic form, then games like
Figure 4.1 would have an enormous multiplicity of equilibria that are
all behaviorally equivalent.
To avoid this problem, we might consider defining an equilibrium of
an extensive-form game to be an equilibrium of its multiagent repre-
sentation, but such a definition could create a more serious problem of
nonsensical equilibria in which a player fails to coordinate his moves
across different information states. For example, ([6.,],[w2],[zi]) is an
equilibrium of the multiagent representation of Figure 4.2. In this
equilibrium, given that player 2 is expected to choose w2, the agent for
l's first information state anticipates that switching from b, to a, would
reduce his payoff from 2 to 0, because the agent for l's last information
state is planning to do z1. Furthermore, given the expectation that l's
first agent will choose b1, l's last agent figures that his planned move
would never be carried out and so planning to choose z, is as good as
planning to choose y,. However, if player 1 really expected player 2 to
choose w2, then player l's actual best response would be to choose a, at
his first information state and y, at his last information state. The
nonsensical equilibria arise in the multiagent representation because the
possibility of a coordinated change that involves more than one infor-
mation state is not considered.
To avoid both of these problems, a (Nash) equilibrium of an extensive-
form game, or an equilibrium in behavioral strategies, is defined to be any
equilibrium cr of the multiagent representation such that the mixed
representation of o- is also an equilibrium of the normal representation.
That is, an equilibrium of Fe is defined to be a behavioral strategy
profile that both is an equilibrium of the multiagent representation and
corresponds to an equilibrium of the normal representation. Thus, for

--- Sayfa 180 ---
162 4 • Sequential Equilibria
example, the unique equilibrium in behavioral strategies of the game
in Figure 4.1 is
(.5[w1] +
.5[Y I] + .5[z11, .5[w2]  + .5[x2], .5[Y2]
.5[z2]),
and the unique equilibrium of the extensive-form game in Figure 4.2
is
(.5[a + .5[b1l, .5[w2]  + .5[x21, [Y ID.
Let Fe be an extensive-form game with perfect recall, and let F be its
normal representation in strategic form. By Kuhn's Theorem, if T is a
Nash equilibrium of F, and 7 is any other mixed-strategy profile that is
behaviorally equivalent to T, then t is also a Nash equilibrium of F
(because switching any player's strategy in an equilibrium to a payoff-
equivalent strategy will not violate the property of being an equilibrium).
So for any behavioral-strategy profile a, the mixed representation of a
is an equilibrium of F if and only if every mixed-strategy profile that
has a as a behavioral representation is an equilibrium of F.
The following theorem tells us that, to find an equilibrium of Fe, it
suffices to find an equilibrium of the normal representation of Fe,
because any equilibrium of the normal representation corresponds to
an equilibrium of the multiagent representation. The proof is in Section
4.11.
THEOREM 4.2. If Fe is an extensive-form game with perfect recall and T
is an equilibrium of the normal representation of Fe, then any behavioral rep-
resentation of T is an equilibrium of the multiagent representation of re.
Theorem 4.2, together with the existence theorem for strategic-form
games (Theorem 3.1), immediately implies the following general exis-
tence theorem for extensive-form games.
THEOREM 4.3. For any extensive-form game Fe with perfect recall, a Nash
equilibrium in behavioral strategies exists.
The perfect recall assumption is needed for this existence theorem.
For example, the game without perfect recall in Figure 4.3 does not
have any equilibrium in behavioral strategies. The unique equilibrium
of the normal representation in strategic form is (.5[x,x3] + .5[y03],
.5[x2] + .5[y2]), which gives each player an expected payoff of 0, but

--- Sayfa 181 ---
4.3 Sequential Rationality 163
this is not the mixed representation of any equilibrium of the multiagent
representation. The behavioral representation of this mixed-strategy
profile is (.5[xj + .5[y1], .5[x2] + .5[y2], .5[x3] + .5[y3]), which happens
to be an equilibrium of the multiagent representation, but it gives player
1 an expected payoff of — 1/2, instead of 0. Such games without perfect
recall are highly counterintuitive and have few (if any) real applications,
so the nonexistence of equilibria in behavioral strategies for such games
is not problematic. This example is discussed here mainly to illustrate
the importance of the perfect recall assumption.
4.3 Sequential Rationality at Information States with Positive
Probability
We say that a strategy for player i is sequentially rational for player i at
information state s in S, if i would actually want to do what this strategy
specifies for him at s when information state s actually occurred.
In Section 2.2, we justified the procedure of studying an extensive-
form game through its normal representation in strategic form, by
assuming that at the beginning of the game each player chooses an
expected-utility-maximizing strategy that tells him what to do at every
possible information state and thereafter he mechanically applies this
strategy throughout the game. This prior-planning assumption was the-
oretically convenient, but it is artificial and unrealistic in most circum-
stances. So let us now drop the prior-planning assumption and ask
whether equilibrium strategies are sequentially rational.
For any extensive-form game re, the given structure of the game
specifies a chance probability for every branch immediately following a
chance node. A behavioral-strategy profile a specifies a move probability
for every branch immediately following a decision node, where o,..,(m)
is the move probability of a branch with move label m immediately
following a node controlled by player i with information state s.
For any behavioral-strategy profile cr and any two nodes x and y, if y
follows x then let P(y o-,x) denote the multiplicative product of all the
chance probabilities and move probabilities specified by cr for the
branches on the path from x to y. If y does not follow x, then let 13(ylcr,x)
= 0. So P(y I o.,x) is the conditional probability that the path of play
would go through y after x if all players chose their moves according
to scenario a-  and if the play of the game started at x.
Let f denote the set of all terminal nodes in the game Fe, and let

--- Sayfa 182 ---
164 4 • Sequential Equilibria
Uz(cr Ix) =
T3(y I cr,x)wi(y),
yE0
where zuz(y) denotes the payoff to player i at terminal node y. That is,
Uz(o-  Ix) is the expected utility payoff to player i if the play of the game
began in node x (instead of the root) and all players thereafter chose
their moves as specified by a. Notice that Uz(crlx) depends only on the
components of cr that are applied at nodes that follow the node x in the
tree.
Suppose that player i has an information state s that occurs at only
one node x, so Y5  = {x}. Then the behavioral-strategy profile a is se-
quentially rational for i at s iff
a;., E argmax Ui(o-_
)
s.x,.
ps  E (DO
(Here (a_,,p,) is the behavioral strategy that differs from a only in that
player i would behave according to ps  at state s.) That is, a is sequentially
rational for i at state s iff cri., would maximize player i's expected utility
when the node x occurred in the game, if player i anticipated that all
moves after x would be determined according to a.
Sequential rationality is somewhat more subtle to define at informa-
tion states that occur at more than one node. At such an information
state, a player's expected utility would depend on his beliefs about which
of the possible nodes had actually occurred in the path of play. So these
beliefs may have an important role in our analysis.
For any information state s of any player i, a belief-probability distri-
bution for i at s is a probability distribution over Y„ the set of nodes
labeled "i.s." That is, for any s in Si, a belief-probability distribution for
i at s is a vector irz., in 0(Y5). If we assert that iris  is player i's belief-
probability distribution at state s, then we mean that, for each node x
in Y„ Trz.,(x) would be the conditional probability that i would assign to
the event that he was making a move at node x, when he knew that he
was making a move at some node in Ys.
A beliefs vector is any vector 'Tr = (Tr 1
z.$)z(N.,Es, in the set X iEN X sES, A(I')
= X „s. A(Ys). That is, a beliefs vector specifies a belief-probability
distribution for each information state of each player.
Given a beliefs vector Tr, which specifies IT, as player i's belief-prob-
ability distribution at an information state s in Si, a behavioral-strategy
profile a is sequentially rational for i at s with beliefs IT iff

--- Sayfa 183 ---
4.3 • Sequential Rationality 165
(4.2)
o E argmax E
.s,P51x)•
ps  E A(Ds) x E Y,
That is, a is sequentially rational for player i at state s iff cr, s  would
maximize player i's expected payoff when a node in Y, occurred in the
path of play, given the belief probabilities that i would assign to the
various nodes in Ys  when he learned that one of them had occurred,
and assuming that all moves after this node would be determined ac-
cording to Cr.
Equivalently (by Lemma 3.1), Cr is sequentially rational for player i at
his information state s with beliefs IT iff, for any move ds  in Ds,
if o- s(ds) > 0, then ds  E argmax E Tr, s(x)U,(o-  „[es]lx).
es EDs
xEYs
For any move es  in Ds, where s E Si, player i's conditionally expected
payoff
E Tri  s(x)Ui(o-_ i.„ [es] I  x)
xEY,
is the sequential value of the move es  for player i at state s, relative to the
scenario if and beliefs Tr. Thus, if Q is not sequentially rational for i at
s with 7, then there must exist some move bs  in Ds  such that the move
probability o-,s(bs) is strictly positive but the sequential value of bs  for i
at s (relative to Q and Tr) is strictly less than the sequential value of some
other move that is also available to i at s. Any such move bs  is an irrational
move in the scenario o-, with beliefs Tr.
The above definition of sequential rationality begs the question (first
addressed by Kreps and Wilson, 1982) of how should a rational intel-
ligent player determine his belief probabilities? Belief probabilities are
conditional probabilities given information that may become available
to a player during the play of the game. Thus, these belief probabilities
must be related by Bayes's formula to what this player would believe at
the beginning of the game.
For any node y and any behavioral-strategy profile cr, we let P(y I cr)
denote the probability that the path of play, starting at the root, will
reach node y when all players choose their moves according to the
scenario Cr. That is, P(y I 0') = I cr,x°), where x°  denotes the root or
initial node of the tree, so P(y I Cr) is the multiplicative product of all the
chance probabilities and move probabilities specified by a for the

--- Sayfa 184 ---
166 4 • Sequential Equilibria
branches on the path from the root to y. We refer to P(y I a) as the prior
probability of node y under the scenario a.
Now suppose that a is a behavioral-strategy profile that describes the
behavior that an intelligent individual would anticipate in the play of
Fe. Then, by Bayes's formula, for any player i and any information state
s in S i, player i's belief-probability distribution iri.s  at state s should satisfy
the following equation, for every node x in Y5:
(4.3)
1T,s(x) E P (Yiu) = TAxl Cr).
yEY,
That is, the conditional probability of node x given state s multiplied by
the total prior probability of the i.s nodes must equal the prior proba-
bility of node x, under the scenario a. We say that a beliefs vector 'rr is
weakly consistent with a scenario o-  iff IT satisfies condition (4.3), for every
player i, every information state s in S„ and every node x in Ys.
If the probability of the path of play going through a node in Y5  is
strictly positive, so that
(4.4)
E P(y I cr) > 0,
yE Y,

then equation (4.3) completely characterizes i's belief probabilities at s,
because it is equivalent to
(4.5)
•Trz s(x) —
P(x16)
V x E Y.
PO iff)
yE
On the other hand, if condition (4.4) is violated, then state s has zero
probability under a, or s is said to be off the path of a. Unfortunately,
equation (4.3) cannot be used to compute the belief probabilities at an
information state s that has zero probability in the scenario a, because
both sides of the equation would be 0 no matter what Tr,s(x) may be.
At information states that can occur with positive probability in an
equilibrium, the equilibrium strategies are always sequentially rational.
THEOREM 4.4. Suppose that a is an equilibrium in behavioral strategies
of an extensive-form game with perfect recall. Let s be an information state in
Si  that occurs with positive probability under a, so condition (4.4) is satisfied.
Let IT be a beliefs vector that is weakly consistent with a. Then a is sequential
rational for player i at state s with beliefs IT.

--- Sayfa 185 ---
4.3 • Sequential Rationality 167
The proof of Theorem 4.4 is given in Section 4.11. This theorem
should not be surprising because, as we saw in Chapter 1, Bayes's
formula itself can be derived using an axiom that optimal decisions after
observing an event should be consistent with optimal contingent plans
that a decision-maker would formulate before observing this event.
Thus, without the prior planning assumption, equilibrium strategies are
still rational to implement at all information states that have positive
probability.
To illustrate these ideas, consider again the simple card game dis-
cussed in Section 2.1. In Section 3.2, we showed that the unique equi-
librium of this game is
(TI,T2)
(1/2[Rd + 2/3[Rf], 2/3[M] + 1/2[P]).
In behavioral strategies, this equilibrium is
(Q, cr 1 b, Q2.0) =
+ 2/3[f], 2/3[M] + 1/2{PD.
That is, player 1 should raise for sure at 1.a, when he has a red card;
player 1 should raise with probability 1/3 and fold with probability 2/3 at
1.b, when he has a black card; and player 2 should meet with probability
2/3 and pass with probability 1/3, when she has seen player 1 raise.
To verify sequential rationality, we must check whether each player
would actually be willing to implement these equilibrium strategies when
his moves are not planned in advance. It is easy to see that player 1
should raise when he holds a winning red card, since he has nothing to
gain by folding. When player 1 raises with a black card, he gets +1 if
player 2 passes, and he gets —2 if player 2 meets. Thus, under the
assumption that player 2 would implement her equilibrium strategy and
meet with probability 2/3, the sequential value of raising for player 1 at
1.b is —2 X 2/3 + 1 x 1/3 = —1. On the other hand, when player 1 folds
with a black card, he gets a payoff of —1 also, so player 1 should be
willing to randomize between raising and folding when he has a black
card, as his equilibrium strategy specifies.
The decision problem for player 2 is a bit more subtle at the two
nodes labeled 2.0. If she passes, then she gets —1 at either node. If she
raises, then she gets —2 at her upper node (where player 1 has a red
card), but she gets +2 at her lower node (where player 1 has a black
card). So her optimal move depends on her belief probabilities for these
two nodes. To compute these probabilities, we apply Bayes's formula.
Let ac, denote her upper node and let bo  denote her lower node. Under

--- Sayfa 186 ---
168 4 • Sequential Equilibria
the behavioral equilibrium r, the probability of reaching the upper
node is
P(ao I
= .5  x cri a(R) = .5  x 1  = .5,
and the probability of her lower node is
P(b° kr) = .5  x cri b(r) = .5 X
= 1/6.
Thus, the conditional probabilities of the two nodes given that player 1
has raised are
.5
0
Ir2.o(ao) = .5  + y6  = 0.75, ,
1
1r2.o(bo) = (.5
+
/6
 1/6) = 0.25.
With these belief probabilities, the sequential value of meeting for player
2 at her state 0, after player 1 raises, is .75 x (-2) + .25 x 2 = —1. On
the other hand, if player 2 passes after a raise, then her sequential value
is —1, which would be her payoff for sure. So the beliefs Tr2.0  do indeed
make player 2 willing to randomize between meeting and passing, as
her equilibrium strategy specifies.
When we exhibit an equilibrium diagrammatically on an extensive-
form game, we should show both the move probabilities of the behav-
ioral-strategy profile and the belief probabilities of a beliefs vector that
is consistent with the equilibrium. To facilitate reading, let us follow the
convention of writing move probabilities in parentheses and belief prob-
abilities in angle brackets ("<.>"). In Figure 4.4, we show the equilib-
rium and consistent beliefs of our simple card game in extensive form.
At each branch that immediately follows a player's decision node, we
show the move probability (a component of the behavioral-strategy
profile o) in parentheses. At each decision node, we show the belief
probability (a component of the beliefs vector IT) in angle brackets.
4.4 Consistent Beliefs and Sequential Rationality at All
Information States
Theorem 4.4 looks like a complete resolution of the question of se-
quential rationality, but in fact it is not. It says nothing about behavior
at information states that have zero probability in equilibrium. To guar-

--- Sayfa 187 ---
4.4 • Consistent Beliefs
169
i.a
R
(1)
1/2
<1>J
(0)
(1/3)
1/2
(2/3)
2.0
<.25>
M (2/3)
(1/3)
	• 2,2
Figure 4.4
antee sequential rationality at all information states, including states
with zero probability, we must refine our concept of equilibrium in a
substantial and important way.
At first, it might seem that rational behavior at states of zero proba-
bility might be a minor technical issue of little interest. After all, if
something will almost surely not occur, why worry about it? The prob-
lem is that the probability of an information state is determined endog-
enously by the equilibrium itself. If we allow that players might behave
irrationally in an event that endogenously gets zero probability, then we
might find that such an event gets zero probability only because players
are taking pains to ensure they never create a situation in which some-
one would behave so irrationally. That is, such a possibility of irrational
behavior can have a major impact on players' behavior at states that
occur with positive probability. Thus, if we want to study the behavior
of rational intelligent players who do not make binding prior plans, we
must be careful to apply the criterion of sequential rationality to behav-
ior at all information states, not just at the states of positive probability.
Notice that a player's expected payoff, as evaluated at the beginning
of the game, is not affected at all by the move that he plans to use at
an information state that is supposed to occur in equilibrium with zero
probability. Thus, in formulating a strategy that maximizes his expected
payoff given only what he knows at the beginning of the game, there
is no restriction at all on what moves a player might plan to use at
information states that are supposed to have zero probability. For ex-

--- Sayfa 188 ---
170 4 • Sequential Equilibria
ample, in the game in Figure 4.5, suppose that player 1 is expected to
choose yi. Then player 2 would expect a payoff of 9 no matter what
strategy she planned to use. Thus, the strategy to choose y2  if she gets
a chance to move would be as good as any other strategy for player 2,
by the criterion of maximizing 2's expected utility given her information
at the beginning of the game. Because 1 prefers to choose yi  if 2 is
planning to choose y2,
1],[y2]) is a Nash equilibrium of this game.
However, it would be irrational for player 2 to choose y2  if she actually
got the opportunity to move, because it gives her a payoff of 2 when
she could get 3 by choosing x2. Thus, ffyi],[y2]) is not sequentially
rational at player 2's node, even though it satisfies the definition of a
Nash equilibrium for this game. (The other equilibrium of this game
ax1],[x2]) is sequentially rational, however.)
The unreasonable equilibrium in Figure 4.5 involves a weakly domi-
nated strategy (y2), but it is easy to construct similar examples in which
no strategies are weakly dominated. For example, consider Figure 4.6.
No pure strategies are weakly dominated in this game, and ([yi], [y2],
.5[x3] + .5[y3], [y4]) is an equilibrium in behavioral strategies, but there
is no consistent beliefs vector that would make this equilibrium sequen-
tially rational for player 3. The move x3  is irrational for player 3 in this
scenario, because player 4 would be expected to choose y, after player
3 moves, so the sequential value of x3  would be less than the sequential
value of y3  for player 3 (0 < 2).
In general, a weak sequential equilibrium of Fe is any (cr,7r) such that cr
is a behavioral-strategy profile in X „s.A(Ds), IT is a beliefs vector in
X scs.A(Y5), o-  is sequentially rational for every player at every infor-
mation state with beliefs 7r, and it is weakly consistent with r. (This
term has been used by Hillas, 1987.) That is, (o-,71-) is a weak sequential
equilibrium iff it satisfies conditions (4.2) and (4.3) for every player i
2,3
0,2
1,9
Figure 4.5

--- Sayfa 189 ---
4.4 • Consistent Beliefs
171
0,0,2,0
0,5,0,2
0,1,0,2
0,2,2,0
Figure 4.6
1.1
<1>
(0)
(1)
X2
12.2 s ‘
(0)
Y2
(1)
1,9,0,0
2,3,0,0
X4
4.4 	,
(0)
<1> ; 	 Y4
(1)
3.3
<1/2>
3.3
<1/2>

)
x3
(1/2)
Y3
(1/2)
X3
(1/2)
y3
(1/2)
Figure 4.7
and every information state s. We say that a behavioral-strategy profile
is a weak sequential-equilibrium scenario iff there exists some beliefs vector
'r such that (o-,ir) is a weak sequential equilibrium.
So the concept of weak sequential equilibrium can exclude some
unreasonable equilibria. As we have seen,
[y2], .5[x3] + .5[y3], [y4])
is an equilibrium of the game in Figure 4.6, but it is not a weak sequen-
tial-equilibrium scenario. However, it is easy to construct other games
in which equally unreasonable equilibria are not excluded by the concept
of weak sequential equilibrium.
For example, consider Figure 4.7, which is derived from Figure 4.6
by just switching the order in which players 3 and 4 make their moves.
Because neither player observes the other's move, the order should not
0,0,2,0
0,1,0,2
0,5,0,2
0,2,2,0

--- Sayfa 190 ---
172 4 • Sequential Equilibria
matter, and indeed these two extensive-form games have the same
representations (normal or multiagent) in strategic form. The behav-
ioral-strategy profile ([y1], [y2], .5[x3] + .5[h], [y4]) is a weak sequential-
equilibrium scenario of the game in Figure 4.7. To make this scenario
a weak sequential equilibrium, we let the belief probabilities for the two
decision nodes of player 3 both equal 1/2, as shown in the figure. Such
beliefs are weakly consistent with this scenario because both of the 3.3
nodes have prior probabilities equal to 0 under this scenario (because
both 3.3 nodes follow the x1  branch, which has move probability 0); so
Bayes's formula (4.3) cannot be used to determine the belief probabili-
ties ir3.3(x). When player 3 thinks that his two decision nodes are equally
likely, he is willing to randomize between x3  and y3, each of which would
give him a conditionally expected payoff of 1/2 x 2 + 1/2 x 0 = 1, when
he knows only that some 3.3 node has been reached by the path of play.
So (working backward through Figure 4.7), player 4 would be willing
to choose y4  at her 4.4 node if she expected player 3 to randomly choose
x3  and y3  with equal probability; player 2 would be willing to choose y2
at her 2.2 node if she expected players 3 and 4 to follow this scenario
thereafter (because 1/2 x 5 + 1/2 x 2 > 3); and player 1 would prefer to
choose y, if he expected player 2 to choose y2.
The problem with this weak sequential equilibrium is that the belief
probabilities specified for player 3 are unreasonable. If player 3 intel-
ligently understood the given scenario ([y,], [y2], .5[x3] + .5[y3], [y4]),
then he would expect player 4 to choose y4  if the path of play reached
the 4.4 node; so he would believe that the path of play would have to
be at the lower 3.3 node, with belief probability 1, if a 3.3 decision node
were reached by the path of play. (With such beliefs, .5[x3] + .5[y3]
would not be sequentially rational for player 3, because x3  would be an
irrational move.) To develop a more sophisticated equilibrium concept
that excludes such scenarios, we need some stronger concept of consis-
tency for determining belief probabilities when all nodes with an infor-
mation state have zero probability under a given scenario. It is not
enough to simply say that any belief probabilities is are "consistent"
when zero prior probabilities make both sides of equation (4.3) equal
to O.
To formulate a stronger definition of consistency of beliefs, let us try
to think more systematically about the problem of how beliefs should
be defined for all information states. We begin by making one simpli-
fying assumption about the game Fe (to be relaxed in Section 4.8). Let

--- Sayfa 191 ---
4.4 • Consistent Beliefs 173
us assume that every branch that immediately follows a chance node is
assigned a chance probability in re that is strictly positive.
With this assumption, any behavioral-strategy profile o that assigns a
strictly positive move probability to every move at every information
state will generate a strictly positive prior probability P(y I 0") for every
node y in the tree. The set of all behavioral-strategy profiles in which
all move probabilities are positive is X,,s*A°(Ds). (Recall the definition
of A°  in equation 1.6.) So if a E X sEs*A°(D,), then P(y cr) > 0 for every
node y, and there is a unique beliefs vector 'rr that satisfies Bayes's
formula (4.3) or (4.5). Let lf°  denote the set of all pairs (a,7) such that
E X sEs-A°(Ds) and Tr satisfies Bayes's formula (4.5) for every player i
and every information state s in Si.
Given the extensive-form game re, any stronger definition of "con-
sistent" beliefs can be characterized mathematically by a set IP such that
c  (
sESX A(Ds)) x ( X A(Y5)),
*
sES*
where qi denotes the set of all pairs (crjr) such that the beliefs vector 'rr
is consistent with the scenario a. If consistency is supposed to be about
satisfying all the implications of Bayes's formula, then ‘It°  should be a
subset of this set IP. That is, if (crjr) is in ke, then the beliefs vector IT
should be considered consistent with if in any stronger sense, because
Bayes's formula would allow no other beliefs vector with the scenario a
in X scs.Y(Ds). For natural technical reasons, we can also suppose that
this set IP should be a closed subset of ( X sEs*A(D)) x  ( X sEs*A(Y$)), so
that scenario-belief pairs that can be arbitrarily closely approximated by
consistent pairs are themselves consistent. (For example, the set of pairs
(crjr) such that IT is weakly consistent with a is a closed set, and it
contains II/0  as a subset.) Thus, the strongest reasonable definition of
consistency that we can consider is to let IP be the smallest closed set
that contains ‘11°.
So, following Kreps and Wilson (1982), we say that a beliefs vector Tr
is fully consistent with a behavioral-strategy profile a in the game re iff
there exists some sequence (6-k)/7=1 such that
(4.6)
Qk  E X A°(Ds), Vk E {1,2,3, . . . },
sES*
(4.7)
o-is(cls) = lim es(ds), Vi E N, Vs E S,, Vds  E Ds,

--- Sayfa 192 ---
174 4 • Sequential Equilibria
P(x I erk)
(4.8)
.
s(x) =

, Vs E S*, Vx E Ys.
k-'`' 	Polak)
yE
That is, ir is fully consistent with o-  iff there exist behavioral-strategy
profiles that are arbitrarily close to a and that assign strictly positive
probability to every move, such that the beliefs vectors that satisfy
Bayes's formula for these strictly positive behavioral-strategy profiles
are arbitrarily close to it With this definition of full consistency, if we
let II/ denote the set of all pairs (cror) such that 71- is fully consistent with
then the set IP is exactly the smallest closed subset of ( X,Es.A(Ds)) x
( X sEs.A( 15)) that contains 111°. It is easy to show that full consistency
implies weak consistency; that is, if it is fully consistent with Q, then it
is also weakly consistent with cr. Hereafter, when we refer to beliefs
being consistent with a scenario, we always mean that they are fully
consistent, unless indicated otherwise.
Recall from Section 1.6 that, when the number of possible states is
finite, all Bayesian conditional-probability systems can be characterized
as limits of conditional-probability systems that are generated by se-
quences of probability distributions in which all events have positive
probability, just as conditions (4.6)—(4.8) require. The only additional
feature in (4.6)—(4.8) is that the sequences of probability distributions
are required to treat the moves at different information states as sto-
chastically independent random variables, to express the assumption
that players choose their strategies without communication. It can be
shown that, for any behavioral-strategy profile a- in X $Es.A(Ds), there
exists at least one beliefs vector that is fully consistent with cr, although
there may exist more than one fully consistent beliefs vector when Q is
not in X sEs.Y(D5).
To illustrate the implications of full consistency, consider the game
in Figure 4.8, and consider the scenario ([z1],[y2],[y3]), which is an equi-
librium of this game. If we perturb this scenario slightly so that all move
probabilities are positive, then we get a scenario
(60[X1] + 61[y1] + (1
E0
EI)[z11, E2[X2]
(1
E2)[Y2],
63[X3] + (1
E3)b)31)
as shown in parentheses in Figure 4.8, where ro, ci, 82, and Es are very
small positive numbers. Then Bayes's formula (4.5) implies that the
belief probabilities shown in Figure 4.8 must satisfy

--- Sayfa 193 ---
i 2.2
2
< 0 >
(62)
Y2
3.3
4.4 • Consistent Beliefs
175
(1-6,3-Ei )
x, 	<a > ' 0-62)
(Es)
I 2.2
x2
(E2)
< 1-a >
Y2
'--___--
(1-62 )
1,4,4
4,2,2
(63)
(1-6 3)
0,0,0
x3
• 0,0,3
(63)
Ii3
(1-E 3)
0,1,1
2,2,2
(6 3)
y3
(1-6 3)
2,3,0
x3
(63)
	•2,0,0
)13
•
•

 3.3
x
<1>
3.3
<8>
3.
< c >
)
1.1
Yi
<1>
(El) )
(1-63)
Figure 4.8
Eo

Ot =
Eo + E1
P = 0 0
0
60E2

.0.2 +
_,_
'0 \ „
' - 62) + 6162  + 6 1
E2)
82 60
= 	 = 62a,
60 + 61
60(1  — 62)
1' — 6062  + 80(1 — 62) + 61 62  + 61(1 — 62)
= (1 — 62)a,
8 =
6162

6062 + 60(1  -
62) + 6162 + 61(1  -
62)
0,1,1
62 61

=
60 4- 61
= 62(1 — a),
6062 + 60(1  -
62) + 61 62 + 61(1  -
62)
= (1  -
62)(1  -
a).
As these positive numbers E0, E 1,  62, and 63 go to 0, these consistent
beliefs must satisfy
Ei(1 - 62)
=

--- Sayfa 194 ---
176 4 • Sequential Equilibria
0 = o, ,y = a, 8 = 0, t = 1 — a,
where a may be any number in the interval [0,1]. So there is a one-
parameter family of beliefs vectors that are fully consistent with the
scenario az,],[y2],[y3])• The belief probability a, which is the conditional
probability that player 2 would assign to the event that player 1 chose
x, if the path of play reached a decision node controlled by player 2
(which is a zero-probability event under this scenario), can be any num-
ber between 0 and 1. However, full consistency implies that the sum of
belief probabilities 13 + y, which is the conditional probability that player
3 would assign to the event that player 1 chose x1  if the path of play
reached a decision node controlled by player 3, must be equal to this
same number a. That is, players 2 and 3 must agree about the condi-
tional probability of x1, conditional on z1  not being chosen. Also, the
sum of belief probabilities 13 + 8, which is the conditional probability
that player 3 would assign to the event that player 2 chose x2  if the path
of play reached a decision node controlled by player 3, must equal 0,
because the move probability of x2  is 0 in this scenario.
As defined by Kreps and Wilson (1982), a sequential equilibrium
(or a full sequential equilibrium) of Fe is any (cr,Tr) in ( X scs• A(DS)) x
( X,Es. A(Y5)) such that the beliefs vector Tr is fully consistent with a and,
with beliefs IT, the scenario a is sequentially rational for every player at
every information state. We can say that a behavioral-strategy profile a
is a sequential-equilibrium scenario, or that a can be extended to a sequential
equilibrium, iff there exists some IT such that (cr,Tr) is a sequential
equilibrium.
The unique sequential equilibrium of our simple card game is shown
in Figure 4.4. For the game in Figure 4.5, the unique sequential-equi-
librium scenario is ax,],[x2]). For the games in Figures 4.6 and 4.7, the
unique sequential-equilibrium scenario is ([x1], [x2], .5[x3] + .5[y3], .5[x4]
+ .5[y4]); to extend this scenario to a sequential equilibrium, we assign
belief probabilities 1/2 to each of player 4's nodes in Figure 4.6, or to
each of player 3's nodes in Figure 4.7. For the game in Figure 4.8, the
unique sequential-equilibrium scenario is qx1],[x2],[x3]).
To see why the equilibrium az1],[y2],[y3]) cannot be extended to a
sequential equilibrium of Figure 4.8, recall that full consistency with
this scenario would require that the belief probabilities shown in the
figure must satisfy 13 = 8 = 0, y = a, and C = 1 — a. Given that player
3 would choose y3  at information state 3, player 2's expected payoff at

--- Sayfa 195 ---
4.5 Computing Sequential Equilibria 177
information state 2 (with these belief probabilities) would be Oa +
3(1 — a) if she chose x2, or would be la + 1(1 — a) = 1 if she chose
y2. So choosing y2  would be sequentially rational for player 2 at infor-
mation state 2 iff Oa + 3(1 — a) < 1, so a
2/3. On the other hand,
with these belief probabilities, player 3's expected payoff at information
state 3 would be 213 + 3y + 28 + = 3a if he chose x3, or would be
013 + ly + 08 + 1 = 1 if he chose y3. So choosing y3  would be
sequentially rational for player 3 at information state 3 iff 1 3a, so a
1/3. Thus (because a cannot be both less than 1/3 and greater than 2/3),
there is no way to assign belief probabilities that are fully consistent with
azi],[y2],[y3]) and make qz,],[y2],[y3]) sequentially rational for both play-
ers 2 and 3.
We can now state two basic theorems that are necessary to confirm
that this definition of sequential equilibrium is a reasonable one.
THEOREM 4.5. If (a,'rr) is a sequential equilibrium of an extensive-form
game with perfect recall, then v is an equilibrium in behavioral strategies.
THEOREM 4.6. For any finite extensive-form game, the set of sequential
equilibria is nonempty.
The proof of Theorem 4.5 is deferred to Section 4.11. The proof of
Theorem 4.6 is given in Chapter 5, after our development of the con-
cept of perfect equilibrium.
To illustrate Theorem 4.5, recall the example in Figure 4.2. The
scenario qb,],[w2],[z,]) is an equilibrium of the multiagent representation
of this game, but it is not an equilibrium in behavioral strategies. With
this scenario, fully consistent beliefs must assign belief probability 1 to
the upper 1.3 node that follows w2. With such beliefs, however, z, would
be an irrational move for player 1 at information state 3. Thus,
ab1],[w2],[z ID is not a sequential-equilibrium scenario, so Theorem 4.5
is satisfied. (Notice that this argument requires full consistency. In fact,
abl],[w2],[zi]) is a weak sequential-equilibrium scenario.)
4.5 Computing Sequential Equilibria
Consider the game shown in Figure 4.9, adapted from Rosenthal (1981).
This game can be interpreted as follows. After the upper chance event,
which occurs with probability .95, the players alternate choosing be-

--- Sayfa 196 ---
93
(E)
2.4
94
<1>
(c)
• 8,8
178 4 • Sequential Equilibria
2.2
92
<1>
(Y) <8>
f2
(1-y)
0,0 	-1,5) 	4,4 	3,9
05
1.1
91
/ 1.3
93
(13)
(E)
	• 8,8
(1-p)
fi
(1-E)
0,0
4,4
Figure 4.9
tween generous (gk, for k = 1,2,3,4) and selfish ( fk) actions until someone
is selfish or until both have been generous twice. Each player loses $1
each time he is generous, but gains $5 each time the other player is
generous. Everything is the same after the lower chance event, which
occurs with probability .05, except that 2 is then incapable of being
selfish (perhaps because she is the kind of person whose natural integrity
would compel her to reciprocate any act of generosity). Player 1 does
not directly observe the chance outcome.
The move probabilities and belief probabilities that make up a se-
quential equilibrium are shown in Figure 4.9 in parentheses and angle
brackets. To characterize the beliefs, let a denote the probability that
player 1 would assign to the event that player 2 is capable of selfishness
at the beginning of the game, and let 8 denote the probability that 1
would assign to the event that 2 is capable of selfishness if he had
observed her being generous once. To characterize the behavioral strat-
egies, let 13 be the probability that 1 would be generous in his first move;
let -y be the probability that 2 would be generous in her first move, if
she is capable of selfishness; let e be the probability that 1 would be
generous in his second move; and let t be the probability that 2 would
be generous at her second move, if she is capable of selfishness. We
now show how to solve for these variables, to find a sequential equilib-
rium of this game.
Two of these variables are easy to determine. Obviously, a = .95,
because that is the probability of the upper alternative at the chance
95
1.1
<a>
1.3
(1-0
(1-c)

--- Sayfa 197 ---
4.5 • Computing Sequential Equilibria 179
node, the outcome of which is unobservable to player 1. Also, it is easy
to see that = 0, because player 2 would have no incentive to be
generous at the last move of the game, if she is capable of selfishness.
To organize the task of solving for the other components of the
sequential equilibrium, we use the concept of support, introduced in
Section 3.3. At any information state, the support of a sequential equi-
librium is the set of moves that are used with positive probability at this
information state, according to the behavioral-strategy profile in the
sequential equilibrium. We select any information state and try to guess
what might be the support of the sequential equilibrium at this state.
Working with this guess, we can either construct a sequential equilib-
rium or show that none exists with this support and so go on to try
another guess.
It is often best to work through games like this backward. We already
know what player 2 would do at information state 4, so let us consider
now player l's information state 3, where he makes his second move.
There are three possible supports to consider: {g3}, {f3}, and {g3,f3}.
Because 4 = 0, player 1's expected payoff (or sequential value) from
choosing g3  at state 3 is 38 + 8(1-8); whereas player l's expected payoff
from choosing f3  at state 3 is 48 + 4(1-8) = 4. By Bayes's formula (4.5),
.9513y
19y
8 — .9513y + .0513
19y +1
Even if 13 = 0, full consistency requires that 8 = 19y/(19y + 1), because
this equation would hold for any perturbed behavioral strategies in
which 13 was strictly positive.
Let us try first the hypothesis that the support of the sequential
equilibrium at l's state 3 is {g3}; so E = 1. Then sequential rationality
for player 1 at state 3 requires that 38 + 8(1-8)
4. This inequality
implies that 0.8
8 = 19.y/(19y + 1); so y 5_ 4/19. But € = 1 implies
that player 2's expected payoff from choosing g2  at state 2 (her first
move) would be 9, whereas her expected payoff from choosing f2  at
state 2 would be 5. Thus, sequential rationality for player 2 at state 2
requires that y = 1, when s = 1. Since y = 1 and y 5_ 4/19 cannot both
be satisfied, there can be no sequential equilibrium in which the support
at l's state 3 is {g3}.
Let us try next the hypothesis that the support of the sequential
equilibrium at 1's state 3 is {f3}; so r = 0. Then sequential rationality
for player 1 at state 3 requires that 38 + 8(1-8) 4. This inequality

--- Sayfa 198 ---
180 4 • Sequential Equilibria
implies that 0.8
8 = 19-y/(19.y + 1); so y a 4/19. But E = 0 implies
that player 2's expected payoff from choosing g2  at state 2 would be 4,
whereas her expected payoff from choosing f2  at state 2 would be 5.
Thus, sequential rationality for player 2 at state 2 requires that y = 0
when E = 0. Because y = 0 and -y a 4/19 cannot both be satisfied, there
can be no sequential equilibrium in which the support at l's state 3 is
{f3}.
The only remaining possibility is that the support of the sequential
equilibrium at state 3 is {g3,f3}; so 0 < E < 1. Then sequential rationality
for player 1 at state 3 requires that 38 + 8(1 — 8) = 4, or else player 1
would not be willing to randomize between g3  and f3. With consistent
beliefs, this implies that 0.8 = 8 = 19-y/(19-y + 1); so -y = 4/19. Thus,
player 2 must be expected to randomize between g2  and f2  at state 2
(her first move). Player 2's expected payoff from choosing g2  at state 2
is 9E + 4(1—E), whereas her expected payoff from choosing f2  at state
2 is 5. Thus, sequential rationality for player 2 at state 2 requires that
5 = 9E + 4(1—E); so E = 0.2. It only remains now to determine l's move
at state 1. If he chooses s1, then he gets 0; but if he chooses gl, then his
expected payoff is
.95 x (4/19) x .2 x 3 + .95 x(4/19) x .8 x 4 + .95 x (15/19)
x (-1) + .05 x .2 x 8 + .05 x .8 x 4 = 0.25,
when a = .95, -y = 4/19, E = .2, and = 0. Because 0.25 > 0, sequential
rationality for player 1 at state 1 requires that 13 = 1. That is, in the
unique sequential equilibrium of this game, player 1 should be generous
at his first move.
Consider now the scenario afii,[f2],[L],[f4]),  in which each player
would always be selfish at any information state; so [3 = y = E = t = 0.
If the chance node and the nodes and branches following the lower
.05-probability branch were eliminated from this game, then this would
be the unique sequential-equilibrium scenario. That is, if it were com-
mon knowledge that player 2 would choose between selfishness and
generosity only on the basis of her own expected payoffs, then no player
would ever be generous in a sequential equilibrium. Furthermore,
([fl ],[f2],[f3],[f4]) is an equilibrium in behavioral strategies of the actual
game given in Figure 4.9 and can even be extended to a weak sequential
equilibrium of this game, but it cannot be extended to a full sequential
equilibrium of this game. For example, we could make this scenario a

--- Sayfa 199 ---
4.5 • Computing Sequential Equilibria 181
weak sequential equilibrium, satisfying sequential rationality at all in-
formation states, by letting the belief probabilities a and 8 both equal
.95. However, the belief probability 8 = .95 would not be consistent (in
the full sense) with this scenario because, if player 2 would be expected
to be selfish at state 2 (y = 0), then player 1 would infer at state 3, after
he chose generosity and did not get a selfish response from player 2,
that player 2 must be incapable of selfishness, so 8 must equal 0. But
with 8 = 0, selfishness (f3) would be an irrational move for player 1 at
state 3, because he would expect generosity (g3) to get him a payoff of
8, with probability 1 — 8 = 1.
This example illustrates the fact that small initial doubts may have a
major impact on rational players' behavior in multistage games. If player
1 had no doubt about player 2's capacity for selfishness, then perpetual
selfishness would be the unique sequential equilibrium. But when it is
common knowledge at the beginning of the game that player 1 assigns
even a small positive probability of .05 to the event that player 2 may
be the kind of person whose natural integrity would compel her to
reciprocate any act of generosity, then player 1 must be generous at
least once with probability 1 in the unique sequential equilibrium. The
essential idea is that, even if player 2 does not have such natural integ-
rity, she still might reciprocate generosity so as to encourage player 1
to assign a higher probability to the event that she may continue to be
generous in the future. Her incentive to do so, however, depends on
the assumption that player 1 may have at least some initial uncertainty
about player 2's type in this regard. The crucial role of such small initial
uncertainties in long-term relationships has been studied in other ex-
amples of economic importance (see Kreps, Milgrom, Roberts, and
Wilson, 1982).
For a second example, consider the game in Figure 4.10. To char-
acterize the sequential equilibria of this game, let a denote the belief
probability that player 2 would assign in information state 3 to the
upper 2.3 node, which follows player l's x1  move. With these beliefs at
information state 3, player 2's conditionally expected payoff would be
8a + 0(1 — a) if she chose e3, 7a + 7(1 — a) = 7 if she chose f3, or 6a
+ 9(1 — a) = 9 — 3a if she chose g3. So move e3  would be optimal for
player 2 at state 3 when both 8a > 7 and 8a 9 — 3a, that is, when a
7/s. Move f3  would be optimal for 2 when both 7 8a and 7 9 —
3a, that is, when 2/3
7/8. Move g3  would be optimal for 2 when
both 9 — 3a > 8a and 9 —3a 7, that is, when a
2A. Notice that

--- Sayfa 200 ---
182 4 • Sequential Equilibria
Figure 4.10
there is no value of a for which e3  and g3  both would be optimal for
player 2 at state 3, so the only possible supports at information state 3
for a sequential equilibrium are {e3}, {f3}, {g3}, {e3,f3}, and {f3,g3}. We
consider these possibilities in this order.
If player 2 were to use e3  for sure at state 3, then player 1 would
want to choose x1  at state 1 and x2  at state 2. Then consistency with
ax,],[x2]) would require that a = 1/2, but e3  would be irrational for 2 at
state 3 if a = 1/2 (because g3  would be better for her). So there is no
sequential equilibrium with support {e3} at state 3.
If player 2 were to use f3  for sure at state 3, then player 1 would want
to choose y, at state 1 and y2  at state 2. Then consistency with ay,],[y2])
would impose no restriction on the belief probability a, because 2.3
nodes would have prior probability 0. However, sequential rationality
for player 2 at information state 3 would require 2/3 Vs, or else
player 2 would not be willing to choose f3. So the behavioral-strategy
profile ay,],[y2],[f3]) with any beliefs vector such that 2/3 s a
7/8
together form a sequential equilibrium.
If player 2 were to use g3  for sure at state 3, then player 1 would
want to choose x, at state 1 and y2  at state 2. Then consistency with
([x1],[y2]) would require that a = 1, in which case g3  would be an
irrational move for player 2 at state 3 (e3  would be better for her). So
there is no sequential equilibrium with support {g3} at state 3.
For a randomization between e3  and f3  to be sequentially rational for
player 2 at state 3, the belief probability a must equal 7/8 (so that 8a =
7). There are two ways to construct a sequentially rational scenario, in

--- Sayfa 201 ---
4.6 Subgame-Perfect Equilibria 183
which player 2 randomizes between e3  and f3, and with which such
beliefs would be consistent. One way is to have player 1 choose yi  at
state 1 and y2  at state 2; then the 2.3 nodes have zero probability. To
make such moves rational for player 1, the move probability of e3  cannot
be greater than 1/4, or else x, would be better than yi  for player 1 at
state 1. So, for any 13 such that 0 5- 13 5- 1/4 , the behavioral-strategy
profile ([y1], [y2], (3[e3] + (1 — f3)[f3]) with the belief probability a =
7/8 together form a sequential equilibrium.
The other way to make a = 7/8 consistent is to have player 1 randomize
at state 2. To make player 1 willing to randomize between x2  and y2  at
state 2, when player 2 is expected to randomize between e3  and f3  at
state 3, the move probability of e3  must be exactly 2/3. With this random-
ized strategy for player 2, player 1 would want to choose x, for sure at
state 1. Then a = 7/8 is consistent if the move probability of x2  at state
2 is 1/7. So the behavioral-strategy profile ([x1], ('/7)[x2]
(6/7)[y2], (2/3)[e3]
+ (1/2)[f3]) with the belief probability a = 7/8 together form a sequential
equilibrium.
For player 2 to randomize f3  and g3, the belief probability a must
equal 2/3 (so 7 = 6a + 9(1 — a)). If player 2 would randomize between
f3  and g3, then player 1 would want to choose y2  at state 2. So the only
way to make a = 2/3 consistent is to have player 1 also choose yi  at state
1; then the 2.3 nodes have zero prior probability. Player 1 will be willing
to choose y at state 1 if player 2 uses a strategy (1 — y)[ f3] + -y[g3]
where y '/3 (so 0 —1(1 — y) + 2-y). So, for any y such that 0 y
'A, the behavioral-strategy profile ayd, [y2], (1 — y)[f3] + y[g3]) with
the belief probability a = 2A together form a sequential equilibrium of
the game in Figure 4.10.
4.6 Subgame-Perfect Equilibria
A concept of subgame-perfect equilibrium was defined for extensive-
form games by Selten (1965, 1975, 1978). This concept is older and
weaker than the concept of sequential equilibrium, but it still has some
important applications (especially for games with infinite pure-strategy
sets, for which a definition of sequential equilibrium has not yet been
formalized).
For any node x in Fe, let F(x) be the set of all nodes and branches
that follow x, including the node x itself. The node x is a subroot if, for
every s in S*, either Y. fl F(x) = 0 or Ys  C F(x). That is, if x is a subroot,

--- Sayfa 202 ---
184 4 • Sequential Equilibria
then any player who moves at x or thereafter will know that the node x
has occurred. A subgame of cc is any game that can be derived from Fe
by deleting all nodes and branches that do not follow some subroot x
and making that node x the root of the subgame.
Let F be a subgame that begins at a subroot x in Fe. If the node x
occurred in the play of the game re, then it would be common knowl-
edge among the players who move thereafter that they were playing in
the subgame that begins at x. That is, a game theorist who was modeling
this game after node x occurred could describe the commonly known
structure of the situation by the extensive-form game r: and could try
to predict players' behavior just by analyzing this game. Rational behav-
ior for the players in re at node x and thereafter must also appear
rational when viewed within the context of the subgame l,x. Thus, Selten
(1965, 1975) defined a subgame-perfect equilibrium of re to be any equi-
librium in behavioral strategies of re such that, for every subgame of
r, the restriction of these behavioral strategies to this subgame is also
an equilibrium in behavioral strategies of the subgame.
To understand why we only consider subgames, recall Figure 2.7
(Chapter 2). This figure shows part of the extensive-form representation
of our simple card game, the portion that follows the 1.b node, where
player 1 moves with a black card. In any equilibrium of the game in
Figure 2.7, the move probability of a raise by player 1 would have to
be 0, because player 2 would do better by meeting a raise. On the other
hand, a raise by player 1 in state b has move probability V3 in the unique
equilibrium of the simple card game, as shown in Figure 4.4. However,
the sequential-equilibrium scenario of the simple card game is a
subgame-perfect equilibrium. The portion of the game tree that follows
the 1.b node is not a subgame, because player 2's information state 0
occurs at two nodes, of which only one is included in Figure 2.7. Indeed,
as we discussed in Section 2.7, there is no reason to suppose that a
solution for Figure 4.4 should apply to the game in Figure 2.7, because
Figure 2.7 represents a game in which player 2 knows that l's card is
black, whereas 2's uncertainty about the color of l's card is crucial to
the analysis of the simple card game in Figure 4.4. Thus, in the defi-
nition of subgame-perfect equilibria, we only require that an equilibrium
should remain an equilibrium when it is restricted to a subgame, which
represents a portion of the game that would be common knowledge if
it occurred.
It is straightforward to check that, if (ff,Tr) is any sequential equilib-
rium of Fe, then Q is a subgame-perfect equilibrium of Fe. On the other

--- Sayfa 203 ---
4.7 • Games with Perfect Information 185
2,3,0
0,2,0
Figure 4.11
hand, the set of subgame-perfect equilibria may be much larger than
the set of sequential-equilibrium scenarios.
For the simple example in Figure 4.5, the equilibrium ([y1],[y2]) is not
subgame perfect, because its restriction to the subgame beginning at
player 2's node is [y2], which is not an equilibrium of this subgame. On
the other hand, consider Figure 4.11, which differs from Figure 4.5
only by the addition of a dummy player 3, who has no nontrivial
information or strategic alternatives. For this game, there are no proper
subgames (other than the terminal nodes, considered as one-node
subgames, and the original game itself), so ([y1],[y2],[z3]) is a subgame-
perfect equilibrium of Figure 4.11. The concept of sequential equilib-
rium is not sensitive to the addition of such a dummy, however; and
([y1],[y2],[z3]) is not a sequential-equilibrium scenario of Figure 4.11.
4.7 Games with Perfect Information
A game with perfect information is any extensive-form game in which
each information state of each player occurs at exactly one decision
node. That is, Fe is a game with perfect information iff, for every player
i and every information state s in Si, the set Y. (the set of nodes labeled
"is" in Fe) contains exactly one node. Such games with perfect infor-
mation represent situations in which individuals move one at a time
(never simultaneously) and, whenever a player moves, he knows every-
thing that every player observed and did at every past decision node.
Many recreational games, such as chess and checkers, are games with
perfect information. (Most card games, on the other hand, do not have
perfect information.)

--- Sayfa 204 ---
186 4 • Sequential Equilibria
If Fe is a game with perfect information, then a beliefs vector IT is in
X sEs. A(Y5) iff
s(x) = 1 for every s in S* and x in Y, (because, with
perfect information, x E Y5  implies that Y5  = {x}). That is, the only
possible beliefs vector IT is the vector of all ones.
With perfect information, every decision node in the game is a sub-
root, so every subgame-perfect equilibrium is a sequential-equilibrium
scenario. That is, the concepts of subgame-perfect equilibrium and
sequential equilibrium coincide for games with perfect information.
Given any extensive-form game Fe, we can generate a game that
differs from Fe only in the payoffs by choosing payoff functions in
RNXO, where I/ is the set of terminal nodes in F.  We may say that a
property holds for all generic games with perfect information iff, for every
extensive-form game Fe with perfect information, there is an open and
dense set of payoff functions in RN xn  that generate games, differing
from Fe only in the payoffs, which all satisfy this property. (A set is
dense in RN'cl  iff every vector in RNxil  is the limit of some sequence of
vectors in this set.)
Zermelo (1913) showed that a game with perfect information must
have a sequential equilibrium in pure strategies, without randomization.
Furthermore, a game with perfect information "almost always" has a
unique sequential equilibrium, as the following version of Zermelo's
theorem asserts. (The proof is in Section 4.11. Note that we are assum-
ing that an extensive-form game has a finite number of nodes.)
THEOREM 4.7. If re is an extensive form game with perfect information,
then there exists at least one sequential equilibrium of Fe in pure strategies (so
every move probability is either 0 or 1). Furthermore, for all generic games with
perfect information, there is exactly one sequential equilibrium.
With rules against repeating any situation more than a fixed number
of times, so that it can be finitely described in extensive form, chess is
an example of a game with perfect information to which Theorem 4.7
can be applied. So there exists an equilibrium in pure strategies of chess.
Then, because chess is a two-person zero-sum game, we can apply
Theorem 3.2 to show that exactly one of the following three statements
must be true for chess. Either (1) there is a pure strategy for the white
player that can guarantee that white will win, no matter what black does;
or (2) there is a pure strategy for the black player that can guarantee
that black will win, no matter what white does; or (3) each player has a

--- Sayfa 205 ---
4.8 Adding Chance Events 187
Table 4.2 A game in strategic form
Gz
X2
Y2
x,
2,1
3,2
Yi
1,4
4,3
pure strategy that will guarantee himself at least a stalemate, no matter
what the other player does. From a game-theoretic point of view, it is
just a question of (astronomically complex!) computation to determine
which of these statements is true for chess and to characterize the
equilibrium strategies.
Given any strategic-form game
=
(6z),N, (uz)z,N), a Stackelberg
solution of F is defined to be any subgame-perfect equilibrium of an
extensive-form game with perfect information that is derived from F
by putting the players in some order and making each player i choose
a move in C, after observing the moves of all players who precede him
in this order. The player who goes first in the order is called the
Stackelberg leader. In general, there are many Stackelberg solutions for
any given strategic-form game, one for each way of ordering the players,
but Theorem 4.7 guarantees that each ordering has at least one Stack-
elberg solution in pure strategies.
For example, consider the two-player game in Table 4.2. In the
Stackelberg solution when player 1 is the leader, player 2's strategy is
to choose y2  if player 1 chooses x1  and to choose x2  if player 1 chooses
yi; so player 1's strategy is to choose x1, so that the expected payoff
allocation is (3,2). In the Stackelberg solution, when player 2 is the
leader, player l's strategy is to choose x, if player 2 chooses x2  and to
choose yi  if player 2 chooses y2; so player 2's strategy is to choose y2, so
that the expected payoff allocation is (4,3). It is not necessarily an
advantage to be a Stackelberg leader. For this game, player 2 would
prefer to be a Stackelberg leader, but player 1 would prefer that player
2 be a Stackelberg leader rather than lead himself.
4.8 Adding Chance Events with Small Probability
Recall again the simple example in Figure 4.5. In this game, ([y,],[y2])
is an equilibrium but cannot be extended to a sequential equilibrium.

--- Sayfa 206 ---
188 4 Sequential Equilibria
This fact is robust, in the sense that it remains true for all games derived
from Figure 4.3 by small perturbations in the payoffs (as long as no
terminal payoff is changed by more than 0.5). However, as Fudenberg,
Kreps, and Levine (1988) have shown, the set of sequential equilibria
may change very dramatically when the game is perturbed or trans-
formed by adding chance events with arbitrarily low probability.
For example, let e be any small positive number and consider Figure
4.12. In this example ([y 1],[y2]) can be extended to a sequential equilib-
rium, with the beliefs vector in which player 2 assigns probability 1 to
the lower 2.2 node if she gets an opportunity to move. Thus, by adding
a small probability event in which players' moves do not matter, we can
transform the game in Figure 4.5 into a game in which all equilibria
are sequential. In general, transformations of this form can be used to
enlarge the set of sequential equilibria of any game so that it will include
any or all of the equilibria of the original game.
Thus, the concept of sequential equilibrium is very sensitive to the
inclusion of new low-probability chance events in the structure of the
game. This sensitivity occurs because the concept of sequential equilib-
rium requires that players' beliefs after events of zero probability should
be restricted to those that are consistent with the given structure of the
game. Adding new branches to the game tree, even if they are chance
events with very low probability, may significantly enlarge the set of
beliefs that can pass this consistency test.
To put this another way, when we model a conflict situation as a game
in extensive form, we might, for simplicity, omit from our model some
possible chance events that seem to have very small probability. When
we make this modeling omission, we should be aware that it may have
a major impact on the set of sequential equilibria. Omitting a small-
2,3
0,2
0,0
Figure 4.12

--- Sayfa 207 ---
4.8 Adding Chance Events 189
probability chance event is equivalent (under the solution concept of
sequential equilibrium) to assuming that players would never revise their
beliefs to assign a significant probability to this event, as long as there
was any other way to explain their observations within the remaining
structure of the game (i.e., by inferring that other players had made
irrational mistakes).
Throughout this chapter we have assumed that every alternative is
assigned strictly positive probability at each chance node. In light of the
above remarks, it might be worth considering briefly how sequential
equilibria should be defined when this assumption is dropped. For
example, in Figure 4.12, when e = 0, should we admit ([31,],[y2]) with
belief probability 1 on the lower 2.2 node as a sequential equilibrium?
If we do, then we are treating Figure 4.12 with e = 0 as a different
game from Figure 4.5, although they differ only by a zero-probability
chance event. On the other hand, if we do not, then we have a lower-
discontinuity in the set of sequential equilibria as e goes to 0.
One natural way to extend the set of sequential equilibria to games
with zero-probability alternatives at chance nodes may be defined as
follows. First, revise the game by making "chance" another player who
gets payoff 0 at every terminal node, and let every chance node be
assigned a different information state. (So "chance" has perfect infor-
mation whenever it moves.) Then a sequential equilibrium of the orig-
inal game may be defined to be any sequential equilibrium of this revised
game in which chance's behavioral strategy is to randomize according
to the probabilities given at each chance node in the original game.
With this definition, it can be shown that, when we specify everything
about an extensive-form game except its terminal payoffs and the
chance probabilities, then the set of sequential equilibria will depend
upper-hemicontinuously on these payoffs and the chance probabilities.
So Gyi],[y2]) with belief probability 1 on the lower 2.2 node is a
sequential equilibrium of Figure 4.12 even when e = 0. This distinction
between Figure 4.12 with e = 0 and Figure 4.5 can be justified by
distinguishing between an impossible event and a zero-probability event. A
chance event is not impossible if a rational individual might infer that
this event had positive probability after some players made moves that
supposedly had zero probability. In Figure 4.12 with e = 0, the event
that player 2 may have an opportunity to make a payoff-irrelevant move
is a zero-probability event but is not impossible, whereas it is an impos-
sible event in the game described by Figure 4.5.

--- Sayfa 208 ---
190 4 Sequential Equilibria
0,2
2,0
,9
Figure 4.13
This distinction between impossible events and zero-probability pos-
sible events is actually fundamental to the whole concept of sequential
equilibrium. To see why, consider the simple example in Figure 4.13.
The unique sequential-equilibrium scenario of this game is ([yl],[y2]).
There are other equilibria where player 2 may use a randomized strat-
egy (as long as the move probability of x2  is not more than 1/2), but there
is no equilibrium in which player 1 uses x, with positive probability.
Thus, if we accept sequential equilibrium or Nash equilibrium as an
upper solution concept, then we must conclude that the event of player
1 choosing x, has zero probability. But can we go on to conclude that it
is an impossible event? That is, can we assert that the statement "player
1 chooses x, in this game" is definitely false? If so, then the statement
"if player 1 chooses x, in this game then player 2 will choose x2" would
be true, because (by the basic rules of logic) any implication is true if
its hypothesis is false. However, player 1 would rationally choose x, if
his doing so would imply that player 2 would choose x2. (See Bicchieri,
1989, for related examples and philosophical discussion.)
To avoid this logical contradiction, we must allow that, before player
1 chooses his move, the event that he will irrationally choose x, is not
impossible but is merely a zero-probability possible event. In general,
before any rational player moves, we must suppose that the event that
he will make an irrational mistake is a possible event that has zero
probability. Building on this idea, further refinements of the equilibrium
concept are developed in Chapter 5 by first considering perturbed
games where the probability of such irrational mistakes is small but
positive and then taking the limit as these mistake probabilities go to 0.
4.9 Forward Induction
Sequential rationality and subgame-perfectness are backward induction
principles for the analysis of extensive-form games, because they require

--- Sayfa 209 ---
a
5,1
0,0
0,0
4,0
X2
y
x
4.9 Forward Induction 191
that any predictions that can be made about the behavior of players at
the end of a game are supposed to be anticipated by the players earlier
in the game. In contrast, Kohlberg and Mertens (1986) have suggested
a different kind of forward induction principle that may also be used in
the analysis of extensive-form games.
A forward induction principle would assert that the behavior of ra-
tional intelligent players in a subgame may depend on the options that
were available to them in the earlier part of the game, before the
subgame. For example, consider the game in Figure 4.14. This game
has three sequential-equilibrium scenarios: ([a1],[y1],[y2]),
.8[x1] +
.2[Yi], (%)[x2] + (5/s)[Y2]), and ab
iMx21). However, a forward-induc-
tion argument may eliminate the first two of these equilibria. Among
the three equilibria of the subgame beginning at the 1.1 node, there is
only one equilibrium that would give player 1 a payoff that is not less
than he could have gotten by choosing a1  before the subgame. So,
Kohlberg and Mertens suggest, player 2 should infer that player 1 would
only have chosen b1  and caused the subgame to occur if he were ex-
pecting to play the (x1,x2) equilibrium in the subgame; therefore, player
2 should play x2  (her unique best response to x1) in the subgame. If
player 2 can be expected to reason this way, then player 1 should use
the strategy b1x1.
An essential element of this argument is that other players may make
inferences about the move at the 1.1 node from the fact that the person
deciding between x1  and y, is the same person who just chose b1  over
a,. Thus, to analytically formulate such forward-induction arguments
in general, we should consider the normal representation, rather than
the multiagent representation. When we do so for this example, we find
3,4
Figure 4.14

--- Sayfa 210 ---
192 4 • Sequential Equilibria
that b1y1  is a strongly dominated strategy for player 1 in the normal
representation, because it can only give him less than the payoff that
he could have gotten from al. There are no dominated strategies in the
multiagent representation of this game.
Unfortunately, some natural forward-induction arguments may be
incompatible with other natural backward-induction arguments. For
example, consider the game in Figure 4.15. What should player 2 be
expected to do at the 2.2 decision node? A forward-induction argument
might suggest that, because b iyi  is a weakly dominated strategy for
player 1, player 2 would expect player 1 to choose x1  at state 3 if he
chose b 1  at state 1; so player 2 should choose a2. On the other hand,
backward induction determines a unique subgame-perfect equilibrium
Ga1],[b2],[h],[y2]) in which player 2 would choose b2  at the 2.2 node. In
fact, the reduced normal representation (in Table 4.3) of this game is
an example of a game in which iterative elimination of weakly domi-
nated strategies can lead to different results, depending on the order
of elimination. Backward induction in the extensive-form game corre-
sponds in the normal representation to iteratively eliminating weakly
9,0
0,1
1,0
1,8
Figure 4.15
Table 4.3 A game in strategic form, the reduced normal representation of
Figure 4.15
C1
C2

ar
b2x2
b2y2
al •
2,0
2,0
2,0
bpc,
2,7
9,0
0,1
b1y1
2,7
1,0
1,8

--- Sayfa 211 ---
4.9 • Forward Induction 193
dominated strategies in the order: first b2x2  for player 2, then b ix, for
player 1, then a2• for player 2, and then b,y, for player 1, leaving the
equilibrium (a1.,b2y2). Forward induction corresponds to iteratively elim-
inating weakly dominated strategies in the order: first bin for player 1,
then b2x2  and b2y2  for player 2, leaving the equilibria (a 1.,a2.) and
(bix,,a2•).
A number of examples where forward-induction arguments lead to
striking conclusions have been discussed by Glazer and Weiss (1990),
van Damme (1989), and Ben-Porath and Dekel (1987). Much of this
discussion uses Kohlberg and Mertens's (1986) concept of stable sets of
equilibria (see Section 5.6), but some examples can be analyzed using
just iterative elimination of weakly dominated strategies.
For example, van Damme (1989) suggested the following variation of
the Battle of the Sexes game (Table 3.5): before either player decides
whether to go to the shopping center or the football match, player 1
has the opportunity to publicly burn one dollar (or something worth
one unit of his utility). This game is shown in extensive form in Figure
4.16, where b1  denotes the move of burning a dollar, and al  denotes
the move of not burning a dollar. Then (suppressing the irrelevant
move for player 1 if he did not do as his strategy specifies in the first
stage, and naming player 2's strategies so that the move that 2 will use
0,3
Figure 4.16

--- Sayfa 212 ---
194 4 • Sequential Equilibria
if 1 does not burn a dollar comes first), we can write the purely reduced
normal representation of this game as shown in Table 4.4.
This game has many Nash equilibria, both in extensive and strategic
form. However, iterative elimination of weakly dominated strategies in
the normal representation eliminates all equilibria except (al  fi, f2 f2), the
best equilibrium for player 1. The strategy b1s1  is strongly dominated
for player 1. But once this strategy is eliminated, f2s2  and s2s2  become
weakly dominated for player 2. Once these strategies are eliminated,
ais I  becomes strongly dominated for player 1. Then, when a,,s, is also
eliminated, s2f2  becomes weakly dominated for player 2. Eliminating
s2f2  leaves only the strategy f2f2  for player 2, for which al  f2  is the unique
best response for player 1.
The first two steps of this iterative elimination correspond to the
following forward-induction argument. If player 1 burned a dollar, then
player 2 would search for a rational explanation of his action. Burning
a dollar could only be optimal for player 1 if he thought that this move
would steer player 2 to go to the football match (in the strategy s2f2), in
which case player 1 could only benefit by going to the football match
himself, following the strategy b1 f1. So, after eliminating the strategy
b1s1, player 2 would have to take the burning of a dollar as a signal that
player 1 will go to the football match. But if player 1 knows that player
2 would interpret the burning of the dollar according to this forward-
induction argument, then it would be irrational for player 1 to not burn
the dollar and go shopping; so player 2 should not expect player 1 to
go shopping even if he does not burn the dollar.
This conclusion, that player 1's unused option to publicly burn a
dollar enables him to get the outcome that he likes best, is so remarkable
that it may call into question the validity, as a solution concept, of
iterative elimination of weakly dominated strategies in the normal rep-
Table 4.4 Battle of the Sexes game with option to burn a dollar for player 1,
in strategic form
C2
C I
f2f2
f2s2
S2f2
s252
a1f 1
3,1
3,1
0,0
0,0
aisi
0,0
0,0
1,3
1,3
b 1 f 1
2,1
—1,0
2,1
—1,0
bisi
—1,0
0,3
—1,0
0,3

--- Sayfa 213 ---
4.9 Forward Induction 195
resentation. For comparison, let us consider the equilibrium (apsi,s2s2),
which is best for player 2 and which this forward-induction argument
eliminates.
This equilibrium (a1s,,s2s2) corresponds to a sequential equilibrium of
the extensive-form game, in which player 2 would go shopping whether
player 1 burned a dollar or not; so player 1 goes shopping without
burning a dollar, but player 1 would go shopping also even if he did
burn a dollar. In the context of this sequential equilibrium, if player 1
burned a dollar, then this move would just be interpreted by player 2
as an irrational mistake, with no intrinsic meaning or significance for
predicting l's future behavior. In any sequential equilibrium, each
player implicitly applies the conservative assumption that the other
players will behave rationally in the future, with probability 1, even
when they have made mistakes in the past. So, in this sequential equi-
librium, player 2 may still expect player 1 to go shopping with her, even
if he has burned a dollar, because (si,s2) is an equilibrium in the re-
maining subgame. Of course, if 2 would respond to 1's burning move
this way, then burning a dollar would indeed be an irrational and
meaningless mistake for player 1, and it has zero probability in this
equilibrium; so this equilibrium is sequentially rational.
At any given point in the game, forward induction stipulates that a
player should adopt beliefs about other players' strategies so that their
observed earlier moves would be rational, if any such beliefs exist. So
the forward-induction argument against the (a,s,,s2s2) is that, if player
1 did burn a dollar, then player 2 would try to find some rational
explanation for his observed behavior, and the only possible explanation
would be that he burned the dollar in an effort to get her to go to the
football match, as happens under the equilibrium (b, f,,s2  f2). However,
a second application of forward induction would also eliminate such an
equilibrium; because if player 1 made the mistake of not burning the
dollar in the (b, f,,s2  f2) equilibrium, then player 2 would have to explain
this behavior by supposing that he was not burning because he expected
her to go to the football match without any burning, as a part of an
equilibrium like (a, f,, f2  f2). Thus, we must question the basic assumption
that player 2 should be able to explain or rationalize player l's behavior
in all parts of the game. Although al  and b1  can each be rationalized by
various subgame-perfect equilibria of this game, in every subgame-
perfect equilibrium there is at least one zero-probability move by player
1 (a1  or b1) that would have to be interpreted by player 2 as an irrational
mistake if it occurred.

--- Sayfa 214 ---
196 4 • Sequential Equilibria
4.10 Voting and Binary Agendas
The analysis of sequential voting games is an important area of appli-
cation for the ideas of subgame-perfectness and iterative elimination of
weakly dominated strategies. In this section, we give a brief introduction
to some basic results in the analysis of voting and agendas. No results
from this section are used elsewhere in this book, so this section may
be skipped without loss of continuity.
For a simple introductory example, suppose that a committee con-
sisting of nine individuals must choose one of four options, which are
numbered 1, 2, 3, and 4. Three of the individuals think that 1 is the
best option, 2 is second-best, 4 is third-best, and 3 is worst. Another
three of the individuals think that 2 is the best option, 3 is second-best,
4 is third-best, and 1 is worst. Another three of the individuals think
that 3 is the best option, 1 is second-best, 4 is third-best, and 2 is worst.
Suppose that, within this committee, any question must be decided
by a majority vote. For any two options a and 13, let us say that a can
beat 13 and write a > 13 iff a majority of the committee would prefer a
over 13. Thus, for this example,
1 > 2, 2 > 3, 3 > 1, 1 > 4, 2 > 4, 3 > 4.
Notice that option 4 can be beaten by each of the other options; but
options 1, 2, and 3 form a cycle in which each can be beaten by one of
the other two.
Now suppose that the chairman of the committee plans to organize
the committee's decision-making process by asking for votes on a se-
quence of questions, each of which has two possible responses. We
assume that the chairman's plan for asking questions, called his agenda,
is common knowledge among the individuals in the committee at the
beginning of the meeting.
For example, the agenda might be as follows. The first question will
be whether to eliminate 1 or 2 from the list of feasible options under
consideration. Then, if a denotes the option in { 1,2} that was not
eliminated at the first stage, the second question will be whether to
eliminate this option a or option 3. Then the third and final question
will be to choose between option 4 and the other remaining option (a
or 3).
Let us suppose that the individuals' preferences are common knowl-
edge. With this agenda, the individual voters should recognize that the

--- Sayfa 215 ---
4.10 • Voting and Binary Agendas 197
option that survives the second stage will beat option 4 at the third stage
and thus will be the finally chosen option. So if the second vote is
between options 2 and 3, then option 3 will be eliminated and option 2
will be chosen, because 2 > 3. If the second vote is between 1 and 3,
then 1 will be eliminated and 3 will be chosen, because 3 > 1. Thus, if
1 is eliminated at the first stage, then the second vote will be between 2
and 3; so 2 will be chosen. But if 2 is eliminated at the first stage, then
the second vote will be between 1 and 3; so 3 will be chosen. Because 2
> 3, the majority should vote at the first stage to eliminate option 1, so
the finally chosen option will be option 2 (rather than option 3). Notice
that a majority of the individuals vote to eliminate 1 rather than 2 at
the first stage, in spite of the fact that a majority prefers 1 over 2,
because we are assuming that the voters are sophisticated or intelligent
enough to understand that eliminating 2 would lead to 3 being the
ultimate outcome, not 1.
This result, that the committee will choose option 2, depends crucially
on the particular agenda. For example, if the order in which options
are to be considered is reversed (so that the first question is whether to
eliminate 4 or 3, the second question is whether to eliminate 2 or the
survivor from the first vote, and the third question is whether to choose
1 or the survivor of the second vote), then the finally chosen outcome
from sophisticated voting will be option 3. There are other agendas
under which option 1 would be the finally chosen outcome. However,
with the given preferences, there is no agenda that would lead to the
final choice of option 4, because any other option would beat 4 at the
last stage.
Let us now define a general model of voting in committee. Let K
denote a nonempty finite set of social options, among which a committee
must ultimately choose one. We write a > 13 iff there is a majority that
prefers a over 13. Suppose that the number of individuals in the com-
mittee is odd, and each individual has a strict preference ordering over
the options in K. So for any pair of different options a and 13 in K,
either a > 13 or 13 > a, but not both.
(Notice that this majority preference relation > is not necessarily a
transitive ordering, as the above example illustrates.) We assume that
this majority preference relation is common knowledge among all the
individuals in the committee.

--- Sayfa 216 ---
198 4 • Sequential Equilibria
A binary agenda for K can be defined (using the graph-theoretic ter-
minology of Section 2.1) to be a finite rooted tree together with a
function G that assigns a nonempty set G(x) to each node in the tree,
such that the following three properties are satisfied. First, letting xo
denote the root of the tree, G(x0) must equal K. Second, each nonter-
minal node x must be immediately followed by exactly two nodes in the
tree; and if y and z denote the two nodes that immediately follow node
x, then G(x) = G(y) U G(z). (The sets G(y) and G(z) do not have to be
disjoint.) Third, for each terminal node w, G(w) must be a set that
consists of exactly one option in K.
Successive votes of the committee will determine a path through such
an agenda tree starting at the root. When the path reaches a node x,
G(x) denotes the set of options that are still under consideration for
choice by the committee. If y and z are the nodes that immediately
follow node x, then the next question to be decided by a vote at node x
is, "Should the set of options under consideration now be reduced to
G(y) or G(z)?" We require that the union of G(y) and G(z) must equal
G(x), because this question should not be phrased in such a way as to
automatically eliminate some options; options can be eliminated from
consideration only as a result of a majority vote. A succession of votes
continues until a terminal node is reached, where only one option
remains under consideration. We assume that the agenda planned by
the chairman of the committee must be common knowledge among all
the individuals in the committee at the start of the voting process.
A sophisticated voting solution for such an agenda is a mapping 4  that
selects an option 4:1)(x) for each node x in the agenda tree, such that the
following two properties are satisfied. First, for any node x, 4(x) E G(x).
Second, for any nonterminal node x, if y and z denote the two nodes
that immediately follow x, and 44)(y) > 4(z) or 4)(y) = 4(z), then 4(x) =
4(y). That is, a sophisticated voting solution tells us which option 4)(x)
would be ultimately chosen if the voting began at node x in the agenda.
At each round of voting, a majority will vote to move to the immediately
following node that has the solution they prefer.
Given the majority preference relation >, there is a unique sophisti-
cated voting solution to any such binary agenda. We can easily construct
this sophisticated voting solution 4  by working backward through the
tree, starting with the terminal nodes (where G(x) = {4)(x)}) and using
the fact that, if y and z immediately follow x, then 4(x) must be the
option that a majority prefers among {4)(y),4)(z)}. The option that is

--- Sayfa 217 ---
4.10 • Voting and Binary Agendas 199
selected by the sophisticated voting solution at the root of the agenda
tree is the sophisticated outcome of the agenda.
Suppose that the individuals in the committee all vote simultaneously
and independently on any question that is put to them, after everyone
has learned the results of all previous votes. Thus, each node in a binary
agenda actually represents a whole set of nodes in an underlying exten-
sive-form game. In this game, each individual player has a different
information state for each node x in the agenda tree, and he has two
possible moves at this information state, where each move is a vote for
one of the two alternatives that immediately follow node x in the agenda
tree. The next move after node x in the agenda tree will be to the
alternative designated by a majority of the voters.
With this identification, it is straightforward to show that a sophisti-
cated voting solution corresponds to a subgame-perfect (and sequential)
equilibrium of the underlying extensive-form game. However, there are
other subgame-perfect equilibria as well. In the above example, there
is a subgame-perfect equilibrium in which every player always votes for
option 1. Given that the other eight individuals are all expected to vote
for option 1, each individual cannot change the outcome by his own
vote; so voting for 1 would be an optimal move for him even if 1 is his
least-preferred option!
However, it can be shown (see Farquharson, 1969; Moulin, 1979) that
all equilibria other than the sophisticated voting solution can be elimi-
nated by iterative elimination of weakly dominated strategies, in both
the normal and multiagent representations. To see why, suppose first
that x is a nonterminal node that is immediately followed by terminal
nodes y and z, where G(y) = {a} and G(z) = 113). Consider an individual
who strictly prefers a over p. If his vote at x would make a difference
in the outcome, then voting for (3 could only make him worse off, by
changing the outcome from a to (3. So any strategy in which he would
vote for 13 at node x would be weakly dominated by a strategy in which
he would vote for a at node x (leaving all other moves the same). When
all such weakly dominated strategies are eliminated, the result at node
x must be to choose the alternative (1)(x) in la,(31 that is preferred by a
majority, because every individual must vote at x for the option in {a,131
that he actually prefers. But then, for the purposes of analyzing the
game that remains, we can treat node x as if it were a terminal node
where the option (1)(x) is chosen, and the argument continues by back-
ward induction.

--- Sayfa 218 ---
200 4 • Sequential Equilibria
Given the majority preference relation > on K, the top cycle of K (or
the Condorcet set) is defined to be the smallest set K* such that K* is a
nonempty subset of K and, for every a in K* and every 13 in K \ K*,
a > 13 (see Miller, 1977, 1980). Equivalently, an option a is in the top
cycle K* iff, for every option 13 in K, if 13 0 a, then there exists some
finite sequence of options (y . . . ,y,,,) such that
ym = 13, a > y,, and
> ,6+1 ,
Vj E {1, .
,m-1}.
We refer to such a sequence (y1, . . . ,-y„) as a chain from a to 13. That
is, a chain from a to 13 is a finite sequence of options in K such that a
can beat the first option in the sequence, (3 is the last option in the
sequence, and each option in the sequence can beat the next option in
the sequence. (If a can beat (3 itself, then this definition can be satisfied
by letting m equal 1.) Thus, for the example discussed at the beginning
of this section, options 1, 2, and 3 are in the top cycle, but option 4 is
not. In this example, option 1 can beat options 2 and 4 directly, and
there is a chain of length two (2,3) from option 1 to option 3.
The sophisticated voting solution is unique, once the agenda is spec-
ified, but there is a wide range of possible agendas that could be imple-
mented. In fact, the set of sophisticated outcomes of all possible binary
agendas is exactly the top cycle. That is, we have the following theorem,
due to Miller (1977) (see also Moulin, 1986, 1988).
THEOREM 4.8. Given the set of options K and the majority preference
relation >, for any option a in K, there exists a binary agenda for which a is
the sophisticated outcome if and only if a is in the top cycle of K.
Proof. We show first that the sophisticated outcome of a binary
agenda must be in the top cycle. If a node x is immediately followed by
nodes y and z, and (1)(y) is in the top cycle, then (I)(x) must be in the top
cycle, because if (1)(x) is not equal to ci)(y), then (1)(x) = 4)(z) > 4)(y), which
is possible only if (1)(z) is also in the top cycle. (Recall that any option in
the top cycle can beat any option that is not in the top cycle.) Thus, if
4(y) is in the top cycle, then the sophisticated voting solution must select
an option in the top cycle at every node that precedes y in the agenda
tree. Furthermore, there must exist at least one terminal node that is
assigned to an outcome in the top cycle, because the top cycle is a
nonempty subset of K and K is the set of options under consideration

--- Sayfa 219 ---
4.10 • Voting and Binary Agendas 201
at the root. Thus, the sophisticated outcome at the root of the agenda
must be in the top cycle.
We now prove that any option in the top cycle is the sophisticated
outcome of some binary agenda, using induction in the number of
options in the set under consideration. If there are only two options,
then the result holds trivially, because the top cycle just consists of the
option that is preferred by a majority. So suppose inductively that the
theorem holds when there are 1 or fewer options under consideration,
and let K be any set of 1 + 1 options. Let a be any option in the top
cycle of K. Let us define the distance from a to any other option (3 to be
the length of the shortest chain from a to (3. (If a itself can beat (3, then
the distance from a to (3 is one.) Let 13 be any option whose distance
from a is maximal, among all options in K other than a. Let (y,, . . . ,.y„z)
be a chain of minimal length from a to 13, such that
a > yi > • • • > Yn = R.
Let xo  denote the root of our agenda tree, and let yo  and zo  denote the
two nodes that immediately follow xo. We must have K = G(x0) = G(yo)
U G(zo). Let
G(Y0) = K \ {13}, G(zo) = {yi, • • • ,Y.}.
Then G(yo) U G(zo) equals K because y„, = 13. Option a must still be in
the top cycle of K\ {131, because there is no option whose shortest chain
from a includes 0 (because there is no option in K whose distance from
a is greater than (3). Thus, by induction, using the fact that K \ {13} is a
set with only 1 members, we know that there exists an agenda such that
the sophisticated voting solution at yo  is 41(yo) = a. Because .y, is in the
top cycle of {y1, . . . ,-y„,} and m < 1 (due to the fact that { y i, . . . ,y„,} C
K \ {a}), the induction hypothesis also implies that we can choose the
agenda so that the sophisticated voting solution at zo  is Czo) = yi. Thus,
the sophisticated outcome of the overall agenda is (1)(x0) = a, because
a > yr
I
Smaller sets of options can be generated as sophisticated outcomes if
we restrict the class of binary agendas, for example, to agendas in which
at most one option is eliminated at a time (see Miller, 1980; Shepsle and
Weingast, 1984; Moulin, 1986, 1988).

--- Sayfa 220 ---
202 4 • Sequential Equilibria
4.11 Technical Proofs
Proof of Theorem 4.1. For any node x in Fe, let p(x) denote the product
of all of the probabilities assigned to alternatives at chance nodes that
are on the path from the root to node x. (If there are no such chance
nodes, then let p(x) equal 1.) For each player i, let Bi(x) denote the set
of all strategies for i where he is planning to make all the moves nec-
essary for the play of the game to reach node x. That is, 13,(x) is the
subset of CZ  such that c, E Bi(x) iff, for any information state s in S, and
any move ds  in D„ if there is any branch on the path from the root to
node x that is an alternative with move-label d, at a decision node that
belongs to player i with information state s, then cz(s) must equal dr. Let
B(x) = X,EN Bi(x).
With these definitions, it can be shown that, for any node x and any
strategy combination c in C,
P(xlc) = p(x) if c E B(x),
P(x1c) = 0
if c B(x).
(This result can be proved from the definition of P in Section 2.2 by
induction. It is clearly true if x is the root. So one can show that, if it
holds for node x, then it holds for all nodes that immediately follow x.)
Let T be a mixed-strategy profile in X :EN 0(C,), and let cr be a behav-
ioral-strategy profile in X iEN X sES, A(Ds) that is a behavioral represen-
tation of T. For any node x, let P(x I T) be the probability of reaching
node x in the play of the game when all players randomize according
to T; that is,
= E (n Ti(c,)) P(x1c) = p(x) H
E Ti(c))
cEC
iEN
iEN ciEBi(x)
We now prove that, for any node x,
(4.9)
P(x I
= P(x I cr).
(Recall from Section 4.3 that /5(x I cr) is the multiplicative product of all
chance probabilities and move probabilities specified by o.  on the path
from the root to node x.)
Equation (4.9) is clearly true if x is the root, because both sides are
equal to 1. Now, suppose inductively that P(y
= 75(Y I a) is true at node

--- Sayfa 221 ---
4.11 • Technical Proofs 203
y, and let x be a node that immediately follows y. We need to show that
(4.9) holds under this assumption.
First suppose that y is a chance node and the alternative branch from
y to x has probability q. By definition of P, P(x I o) = q P(ylo-). Also,
P(x I = E (H Ti(ci)) ,P(x I c)
cEC
iEN
= E ( n Ti(o) gpolo = osoiT).
cEC iEN
So (4.9) holds in this case.
Now suppose that y is a node belonging to player j with information
state r, and the alternative branch from y to x has move-label dr. By
definition of P, P(xj cr) = 47,,,(c/r) o-). Notice that p(x) = p(y) and, for
any player i other than j, Bi(x) = B,(y). Furthermore, because Fe has
perfect recall, BB(y) = C;4'(r) and BB(x) = Ci**(dr,r). Thus,
P(xJT)  = p(x) H
E T i(Ci))
iEN
ciEl3i(x)
= p(y) Cr j.,(C4) H
E Ti(ci))
iEN
ciE13;(y)
= Cr j.,-(dr) 13(y1T)
because
0, „No E TA)) = E
T,(c,)•
c,E Or)
E
(d„r)
So (4.9) holds in this case as well.
Thus, by induction, (4.9) holds for every node x. By (4.9), the prob-
ability distribution over outcomes of the game depends only on the
behavioral representations of the players' mixed strategies. Thus, the
expected payoffs generated by behaviorally equivalent strategies must
be the same.
For any player i and any behavioral-strategy profile if in X zEN X s ES,
A(D), let us define vi(Q) to be the expected payoff to player i when
every player j uses his behavioral strategy tri. Then
vi(a) = E /5(x I 0-)wi(x),

--- Sayfa 222 ---
204 4 Sequential Equilibria
where SI denotes the set of terminal nodes in re and wi(x) denotes i's
payoff at any terminal node x. For any mixed-strategy profile T in X ;EN
A(C,), the expected payoff uz(r) in the normal representation satisfies
uz(T) = E f(xlT)w,(x).
xEfi
Thus, we can write the conclusion of this proof as follows: if a is a
behavioral representation of T, then uz(r) = vz(cr). I
Proof of Theorem 4.2. Let T be an equilibrium of the normal repre-
sentation of re and let a be a behavioral representation of T. If, contrary
to the theorem, a is not an equilibrium of the multiagent representation
of Fe, then there exists some player i, some state r in Si, and some pr  in
A(Dr) such that
vz(a_z.r,pr) > vz(u),
where 14: X sES* A(D) —> R is the utility function for each agent for
player i in the multiagent representation of Fe. Let Xi  be the mixed
representation of i's behavioral strategy that differs from az  = (
E S,
by substituting pr  for air. Then, by the proof of Theorem 4.1 (which
uses the assumption of perfect recall),
uz(r_„X) = vt(cr_,,,pr) > vi(Q) = uz(T),
which contradicts the assumption that T is an equilibrium of the normal
representation. So a must be an equilibrium of the multiagent repre-
sentation. I
Proof of Theorem 4.4. For any s in S*, let X(s) denote the set of all
terminal nodes that do not follow any node in Y. For any player i, any
state s in Si, any pr  in A(DS), and any behavioral-strategy profile a, i's
utility function in the multiagent representation satisfies the following
equation
= E
E P(xla_i.„ps)wi(x),
yEY,
xEX(s)
where wz(x) denotes the payoff to player i at node x. However, for any
y in Ys,15(ylcr_, s,ps) = P(y I cr), because the probability of the node y

--- Sayfa 223 ---
4.11 Technical Proofs 205
occurring depends only on the moves at information states that occur
before i's state s; so it does not depend on the behavior of player i at
state s. Also, for any node x in X(s), P(x I o-_,s,(3) = P(x I cr), because there
are no alternatives chosen by i with state s on the path to such a node
x. So when IT is weakly consistent with o-,
ocr_i s,ps) =
P(y I cr) Ncr-i.,,P, I y) + E P(x I c)lv,(x)
yEY,
xEX(s)
= E
,(Y)Ncr—,,,P,IY))(E 15 (Zig))
yEY,
xEY,
+ E 1)(x I )1v,(x).
xEX(s)
So if Ez,y,P(z I cr) > 0 but Q is not sequentially rational for i at s, then
there exists some p5  such that vi(cr_i.„ps) > = vi(cr), which is
impossible if a.  is an equilibrium in behavioral strategies. I
Proof of Theorem 4.5. Suppose that (crjr) is a sequential equilibrium,
but a• is not an equilibrium in behavioral strategies. Then there exists
some behavioral strategy 0, in X sEs,A(Ds) such that
v,(cr_ 2,0) > v,(cr).
Let us choose 0, such that the above inequality is satisfied and such that,
for any other behavioral strategy 4)„ if vi(cr_„41,) > v,(cr), then
IfsES,1(1)„ cr,s1I I Is ES, I (ks  0 o-, s} .
Let r be an information state for player i such that 0,„ cr,„ and, for
every s in S, such that nodes in Y, follow nodes in Yr, = cr,.5. (Such
an r can be found because, by the perfect-recall assumption, states in S,
can be ordered in such a way that "later" states never occur before
"earlier" states.) Let Oi  be any behavioral strategy for player i such that
= Ors  for every s other than r in S.
Because 6, 5  = 0,5  = a, for every s in S, that occurs in nodes that
follow nodes in Yr, U,(cr_ bed)) =
,,ez rlY) for every y in Yr. Also,
Nx
= T3(x I cr-,,0,) for every node x in X(r) or in Yr, because no
nodes in Yr  occur on the path from the root to such nodes x. (For nodes
In Yr, this result relies on perfect recall, which implies that no infor-
mation state can occur twice on a path from the root.) Thus,
= E
+ E 15(X10._00)Wi(X).
yEY,
xEX(r)

--- Sayfa 224 ---
206 4 • Sequential Equilibria
By perfect recall, the information states of player i and moves con-
trolled by player i that occur on the path from the root to a node y in
Y, must be the same for every node y in Yr. Thus, for any node y in Yr,
the ratio
PO I P)
E P(z I P)
zE Y,
does not depend on i's behavioral strategy pi, as long as the denominator
is nonzero, because p, contributes the same multiplicative factors to
P(y1 p) as to 15(z I p) for every other node z in Yr. So the fully consistent
belief probabilities for player i at nodes in Y, do not depend on player
i's behavioral strategy, and so
PO cr-bei) = 	 F'(z I g_i3Oi)), Vy E Y,.
This implies that
= E
AY)Ui(cr-i ,,ei.rlY)) E 15(Z I Cr_i3Oi))
yE Y,
z Y,
+ E 15(x o-_„0,)w,(x).
xE X(r)
By definition of a sequential equilibrium, this formula is maximized by
letting 0„ = u, r. But then v,(o-_„0,) > vi(u) and j{sES,10„, # cr„}I <
{sE S=1 0,, 0  cf,,}1, which violates the way that 0, was constructed. So no
such 0, exists, and a is an equilibrium in behavioral strategies. I
Proof of Theorem 4.7. Given that Fe has perfect information, a behav-
ioral-strategy profile a-  (with the beliefs vector of all l's) is a sequential
equilibrium of re iff, for each player i in N and each state s in Si,
(4.10)
o, s  E argmax U,(u_i.,,Psix), where {x} =
p,EA(D,)
By Lemma 3.1, (4.10) would be satisfied if
(4.11)
cr„, = [C, where cis  E argmax
{x} =
e E D

--- Sayfa 225 ---
4.11 • Technical Proofs 207
Notice that, in (4.10) and (4.11), U,(o-_,.„ps  Ix) and Ui(cr_i.„[es] I x) depend
only on the components of cr for moves at nodes that follow node x.
For any node x, let i(x) be the number of decision nodes in the
subgame beginning at node x. For any s in S*, let i(s) = t,(x) where
Ys  = {x}.
Suppose first that t,(s) = 1. Then Us(cr_i.ss. os,x) 1 depends only on ps,
because there are no decision nodes after x. So argmaxe ,,,,U,(cr_i.s,[es] I x)
is independent of o; so we can begin our construction of the nonran-
domized equilibrium a by letting o satisfy (4.11).
Now suppose inductively that, for some number k, r r  has been de-
fined at all j and r such that r E S, and i,(r) < k, and suppose (4.11) is
satisfied for all s such that i(s) < k. Then, for any (i,s,x) such that s E
Si, {x} = Ys, and 1,(x) = k, Ui(cr_i.s,[es]lx) is well defined for every es  in Ds;
so we can construct cri.s  to satisfy (4.11) for this (i,s,x) as well.
Thus, arguing by induction on k in the preceding paragraph, we can
construct o-  so that (4.11) is satisfied at all i and s such that i E N and
s E Si. Such a behavioral-strategy profile r is then a sequential equilib-
rium in pure (unrandomized) strategies.
Now let us consider choosing some vector of payoffs in RN'n  to
generate a game Fe that differs from Fe only in the payoffs. For any
player i, any node x, and any pure-strategy profile d in X s(s.ps, let
U,(dix) denote the conditionally expected payoff to player i in the game
Fe, if the play of the game started at node x and everyone implemented
the move specified by d at every node thereafter. If {x} = Y„ s E S„ d E
D = X rEs.Dr, and ds  e
s  E Ds, then the difference Ui(dix) — Ui(d_ z.,,eslx)
is a nonconstant linear function of the terminal payoffs in Fe. Any
nonconstant linear function is not equal to 0 on a dense open set. The
intersection of finitely many open dense sets is also open and dense.
Thus, there is an open dense set of payoff vectors in RNxn  such that
the game re will satisfy
(4.12)
U,(d Ix) 0 Us(d_,.s,e,lx),
Vi E N, Vs E Si, Vd E D, Ves  E Ds \ {d.j.
Now, suppose that condition (4.12) is satisfied. Then there is only one
sequential equilibrium of Fe, which must therefore be in pure strategies
(since we know that at least one sequential equilibrium in pure strategies
exists). To see why this is so, suppose that cc has two distinct sequential
equilibria, cr and 6.. Let x be a decision node where player i moves with

--- Sayfa 226 ---
208 4 • Sequential Equilibria
information state s such that either 	 or ols  assigns positive
probability to more than one move in Ds. Furthermore, we can select
this node x so that, at every decision node that follows x, cr and CI-  select
the same move without randomization. Then, by (4.12), no two moves
at x would give player i the same expected payoff, when cr or ofi-  is
implemented thereafter. That is, for any two moves ds  and es  in D„
=
r -i.s,[ds] I x) 	Le slIx) =
r
This result implies that there is some move cis  such that
argmax Oi(o-_i  „[ejlx) = argmax
5,[ejlx) = {(1,};
e,ED,
e,EDs
so we must have cr,, =
s  = [di]. This contradiction of the way that x
was defined implies that there cannot be two distinct sequential equilib-
ria of Fe when condition (4.12) is satisfied. I
Exercises
Exercise 4.1. Consider the extensive-form game and the scenario shown
in Figure 4.17.
a. Compute belief probabilities that are consistent with this scenario.
b. For each player, at each of his information states, compute the
sequential value of each of his possible moves, relative to this scenario
with these consistent beliefs.
Figure 4.17

--- Sayfa 227 ---
Exercises 209
c. Identify all irrational moves in this scenario with these consistent
beliefs. That is, for each information state of each player, identify every
move that has a positive move probability in this scenario but does not
maximize the sequential value for this player at this information state.
d. Find a sequential equilibrium of this game.
Exercise 4.2. Consider the game in Exercise 2.1 (Chapter 2).
a. Show that the normal representation of this game has two pure-
strategy equilibria. Show that each of these Nash equilibria corresponds
to a sequential equilibrium of the extensive-form game.
b. For each of the sequential equilibria that you found in (a), char-
acterize the connected component of the set of all sequential equilibria
in which it lies. That is, for each sequential equilibrium that you iden-
tified in (a), show all other sequential equilibria that could be constructed
by continuously varying the move probabilities and belief probabilities
without leaving the set of sequential equilibria.
Exercise 4.3. Consider the game shown in Figure 4.18.
a. Let x = 1. Find the three pure-strategy equilibria of this game.
b. Suppose that 7r is a beliefs vector that is fully consistent with some
behavioral-strategy vector r for this game. Let a denote the lower node
in Y2, where player 2 has information state 2 and player 1 has chosen
Figure 4.18

--- Sayfa 228 ---
210 4 • Sequential Equilibria
a. Let 13 denote the lower node in Y3, where player 2 has information
state 3 and player 1 has chosen b. Show that there is a formula for
expressing 7r2.3((3) in terms of Tr2 2(a).
c. With x = 1, show that two of the three pure-strategy equilibria
from part (a) are (full) sequential-equilibrium scenarios, but the other
equilibrium is not. Characterize all beliefs vectors that would make this
other equilibrium sequentially rational, and show that they are weakly
consistent with it but are not fully consistent. (So it is a weak sequential-
equilibrium scenario.)
d. What is the lowest value of x such that all three pure-strategy
equilibria are (full) sequential equilibria? For the equilibrium that was
not sequential in part (c), show the fully consistent beliefs that make it
a sequential equilibrium at this new value of x.
Exercise 4.4.
In Exercise 2.3 (Chapter 2), we considered a revised ver-
sion of the simple card game in which player 1, after looking at his
card, can raise $1.00, raise $0.75, or pass. Show that this game has
sequential equilibria in which the probability of a $0.75 raise is 0. In
such a sequential equilibrium, what probability would player 2 assign to
the event that player 1 has a red (winning) card if he raised $0.75?
Exercise 4.5. Find all the sequential equilibria of the game in Figure
2.8 (Exercise 2.4 in Chapter 2). Be sure to specify all move probabilities
and all belief probabilities for each sequential equilibrium.
Exercise 4.6. Find all the sequential equilibria of the game shown in
Figure 4.19. (This game differs from Figure 2.8 only in that the payoffs
after the z, branch have been changed from (2,6) to (7,6).)
Exercise 4.7. Consider the game shown in Figure 4.20.
a. Find the unique subgame-perfect equilibrium of this game.
b. Now revise the game by eliminating player l's "g" move at infor-
mation state 3. Find the unique subgame-perfect equilibrium of this
revised game.
Exercise 4.8. Recall the revised card game described in Exercise 2.2
(Chapter 2), where player 1's card is winning for him iff it is a 10 or
higher. Find the unique sequential equilibrium of this game. Before the

--- Sayfa 229 ---
Exercises 211
7,6
Figure 4.19
8,3
5,4
5,4
Figure 4.20

--- Sayfa 230 ---
212 4 • Sequential Equilibria
card is drawn, what is the expected payoff for each player, if they play
according to this equilibrium?
Exercise 4.9. (A game adapted from Fudenberg and Kreps, 1988.)
Consider the game shown in Figure 4.21.
a. Show that this game has a unique equilibrium in behavioral strat-
egies, in which the probability that player 3 moves (because player 1
does x1  or player 2 does x2) is 1. (HINT: Even if the probability of player
3 moving were 0, an equilibrium is defined to include a specification of
the conditional probability that player 3 would choose x3  if he moved.
The other two players, being intelligent, are supposed to know this
conditional probability. Thus, in equilibrium, players 1 and 2 are sup-
posed to agree about what player 3 would do if he moved.)
b. Now, consider instead the (nonequilibrium) case where players 1
and 2 might disagree and have different beliefs about what player 3
would do if he moved. Show that different beliefs about player 3's
strategy might induce players 1 and 2 to rationally behave in such a
way that the probability of player 3 moving is 0.
3,1,0
3.
0,1,2
1,0,2
1,3,0
Figure 4.21
1 ,1 ,9

--- Sayfa 231 ---
5
Refinements of Equilibrium
in Strategic Form
5.1 Introduction
We have seen that any extensive-form game can be represented in
strategic form, using the normal representation, the reduced normal
representation, or the multiagent representation. These representations
raised the hope that we might be able to develop all the principles of
game-theoretic analysis in the context of the conceptually simpler stra-
tegic form. However, it is easy to construct extensive-form games that
are the same in strategic form (under any representation) but have
different sets of sequential equilibria. For example, ([yi],[y2]) is not a
sequential-equilibrium scenario of the game in Figure 4.5, but it is a
sequential-equilibrium scenario of the game in Figure 5.1, and both
games have the same normal representation in strategic form, which is
also the reduced normal and multiagent representation. Thus, if se-
quential equilibrium is accepted as an exact solution that characterizes
rational behavior, then games must be analyzed in the extensive form,
instead of the strategic form.
However, the sequential equilibrium shown in Figure 5.1 involves the
use by player 2 of a strategy y, that is weakly dominated in the strategic-
form game. Thus, it is questionable whether ([y i],[y2]) should be con-
sidered a reasonable pair of strategies for rational and intelligent players
to choose in this game, even though it satisfies the definition of a
sequential equilibrium. That is, sequential equilibrium may still be too
weak to serve as an exact characterization of rational behavior in games.
To more accurately characterize rationality in games, we can look for
other ways to refine the concept of equilibrium for games in extensive
or strategic form.

--- Sayfa 232 ---
214 5 • Refinements of Equilibrium
2,3
X2
(0)
2.2
Y2
<0>
xi
0,2
(1)
(0)
Yt
(1)
x2 	1,9
(0)
<1>
Y2
(1)
1,9
Figure 5.1
4,4
6,6
3,0
0,0
2,2
Figure 5.2
Consider the games shown in Figures 5.2 and 5.3, suggested by Kohl-
berg and Mertens (1986). These two games have the same purely re-
duced normal representation (up to a relabeling of the strategies). The
game in Figure 5.2 has a sequential equilibrium in which player 1 uses
move al  with probability 1. However, there is no such sequential (or
even subgame-perfect) equilibrium of the game in Figure 5.3. The
difference between the two games is that, in Figure 5.3, player 2 knows
that player l's choice between x1  and y I  could only be made in a situation

--- Sayfa 233 ---
5.1 • Introduction 215
6,6
2.2
x
3,0
0,0
2,2
2.2
Figure 5.3
where a, was no longer an available option for him. Thus, in any
sequential equilibrium of the game in Figure 5.3, player 2 must be
confident that, if player 1 chose x, or y,, he would choose the move that
was better for him, and that is surely x,. So player 2 must assign prob-
ability 1 to her upper node (following x1) in any sequential equilibrium
of the game in Figure 5.3; so she should choose x2  and player 1 should
choose b, and x1. Nonetheless, because these two games have the same
purely reduced normal representation, arguments that they should have
the same set of solutions have substantial intuitive appeal.
The natural way to avoid distinguishing between games like those in
Figures 5.2 and 5.3, or in Figures 4.5 and 5.1, is to develop refinements
of the Nash equilibrium concept that can be applied directly to the
strategic form. By developing a solution theory that is based on such a
refinement and then applying it to extensive-form games via one of the
representations that we have studied (normal, purely reduced normal,
fully reduced normal, or multiagent) we can guarantee that extensive-
form games that share the same strategic-form representation (in the
designated sense) will have the same solutions.
It may be helpful to make a list of some of the properties that would
be theoretically desirable. from a refinement of the Nash equilibrium
concept. The refined equilibrium concept should select a nonempty set
of equilibria for any finite game, because it is hard to take a solution
concept seriously if it is sometimes empty. (What is supposed to happen
in games that have no solutions?) When our intuition seems to clearly
identify one equilibrium of a game as being unreasonable, in some sense,
then the refined equilibrium concept should formalize our intuition and

--- Sayfa 234 ---
216 5 • Refinements of Equilibrium
exclude this equilibrium. For example, an equilibrium in which some
player chooses a dominated strategy with positive probability may nat-
urally be considered unreasonable. In an extensive-form game, an equi-
librium that cannot be extended by any beliefs vector to a sequential
equilibrium may be considered unreasonable. When we work on solu-
tion concepts for the strategic form, this criterion suggests that, once
we have selected some way of representing extensive-form games in
strategic form (multiagent, normal, etc.), then, for any given game in
strategic form, our refined solution concept should select only equilibria
that correspond to sequential equilibria in all of the extensive-form
games that the given strategic-form game represents. Selten (1975)
defined a concept of perfect equilibrium that has all of these properties
when we use the multiagent representation to map extensive-form
games into strategic form.
5.2 Perfect Equilibria
Let F = (N, (Ci),,,, (u),,,) be any finite game in strategic form. A
randomized-strategy profile cr in X iEN  A(C,) is a perfect equilibrium of F
iff there exists a sequence (6-k),7_1  such that
(5.1)
erk E
zio(c
Vk E 11,2,3, . .
iEN
(5.2)
lim 6:(c1) = cri(ci), Vi E N, Vci  E Ci, and
(5.3)
Qi E argmax 	 Vi E N.
E (C,)
(Here o = (cr),EN, erk  = (dik)zEN, ak-, = (61),EN-,-) Condition (5.1) asserts
that every pure strategy of every player gets strictly positive probability
in each ak  . (Recall the definition of L°(.) in Section 1.6.) Condition (5.2)
asserts that, for large k, ak  is a randomized-strategy profile that is very
close to cr in all components. Condition (5.3) asserts that every player's
strategy in cr is a best response to the other players' strategies in each
a".
It is easy to show that any perfect equilibrium of F is indeed a Nash
equilibrium of F. This condition holds because the best-response cor-

--- Sayfa 235 ---
5.2 • Perfect Equilibria 217
respondence is upper-hemicontinuous (as shown in the proof of Theo-
rem 3.1), so conditions (5.2) and (5.3) imply that
o-, E argmax uz(o-_„Tz), Vi E N.
r, E A(C,)
In a Nash equilibrium, each player's equilibrium strategy is a best
response to the other players' equilibrium strategies. In a perfect equi-
librium, there must also be arbitrarily small perturbations of all players'
strategies such that every pure strategy gets strictly positive probability
and each player's equilibrium strategy is still a best response to the other
players' perturbed strategies. Thus, in a perfect equilibrium, the opti-
mality of a player's strategy choice does not depend on an assumption
that some pure strategies are getting zero probability in the equilibrium.
The close logical relationship between perfect and sequential equilib-
ria can be seen by comparing conditions (5.1)-(5.3) with conditions (4.2)
and (4.6)-(4.8) in Chapter 4. In both solution concepts, the equilibrium
cr is tested by a comparison with some perturbed strategies in which
every move or pure strategy gets positive probability. In the definition
of sequential equilibrium, the perturbed strategies are used to generate
beliefs at events of zero probability (by conditions 4.6-4.8), and these
beliefs are then applied in the sequential-rationality or optimality con-
dition (4.2). In the definition of perfect equilibrium, the perturbed
strategies are used directly in the optimality condition (5.3). In fact,
when r is the multiagent representation of re, condition (5.3) is a
stronger requirement than conditions (4.2) and (4.8) together. Thus, as
the following theorem asserts, every perfect equilibrium of the multi-
agent representation of re corresponds to a sequential equilibrium of
re.
THEOREM 5. 1. Suppose that re is an extensive form game with perfect
recall and cr is a perfect equilibrium of the multiagent representation of re. Then
there exists a vector of belief probabilities ir such that (o-Jr) is a sequential
equilibrium of re.
Proof. In this proof, we use the notation developed in Chapter 4. Let
i be any player in re and let s be any information state in S,. Let X(s)
denote the set of all terminal nodes that do not follow any node in Y5.
Let (er k)k-__ , be a sequence of behavioral-strategy profiles in X r E S. A°(Dr)
that satisfy the conditions (5.1)-(5.3) of a perfect equilibrium for o

--- Sayfa 236 ---
218 5 • Refinements of Equilibrium
(when F is the multiagent representation of re). For any k and any node
y in Y„ let
fri(y)=
P(Ylak)
E F(zIer-,

)
z(rs
Notice that P(y I ifrk) > 0 for every y in Y5, so EzEyy(z I ak) > 0, because
k
o-  assigns positive probability to all combinations of pure strategies and
because every alternative at every chance node is assumed to have
positive probability in the game Fe. Let
75(y) = urn frsk(y)•
Then by (5.1) and (5.2), .rr is a beliefs vector that is fully consistent
with ff.
For any terminal node x, we let w,(x) denote the payoff to i at node
x. We let v5(.) denote the utility function of i's agent for state s in the
multiagent representation, as defined in Section 2.6. When this agent
uses the randomized strategy ps  in A(DS) against the strategies specified
by o-k  for all other agents, his expected payoff is
= E P(ylak_i„oui(e_i,,psly) + E 15(xlak-i.s,ps)wi(x).
yEY,.
xEX(s)
However, for any y in Y„ P(y I 6-k_, „Ps) = P(y le), because the probability
of the node y occurring depends only on the strategies of agents who
may move before state s occurs; so it does not depend on the behavior
of player i at state s. Thus,
Vs( 45. k-- i.s >Ps)
= E P(ylo-*)u,(61L.,psly) + E TAXI d k)W,(X)
yE Y,
EX(s)
= 1
ir`Ay)u,(6'Lis,pdy))(E P(zio-k)) + E .75(xieek)w,(x).
\yEY,
zE Y,
xEX(s)
The fact that (d-k)Z= , supports cr as a perfect equilibrium of the multi-
agent representation of re implies that

--- Sayfa 237 ---
5.2 • Perfect Equilibria 219
E argmax vs(6-„ „p5),
1),E A(13:)
which in turn implies that
crs  E argmax E
sk(y)U,(erk_,,,psly),
A(D,) y E
because these two objectives differ by a strictly increasing affine trans-
formation whose coefficients are independent of ps. Then, by upper-
hemicontinuity of the best-response mapping,
cr,. E argmax E 71-5(y)Uz(cr_,s,p5 ly)•
ps EA(D,)
YE Y,
This inclusion is the sequential-rationality condition for sequential equi-
librium, so (o-,71-) is a sequential equilibrium of Fe. I
Selten (1975) defined a perfect equilibrium of an extensive-form game
to be any perfect equilibrium of its multiagent representation. In con-
trast, recall that a Nash equilibrium of an extensive-form game is de-
fined to be any Nash equilibrium of its multiagent representation for
which the mixed representation is also a Nash equilibrium of the normal
representation. Figure 4.2 was used to illustrate an argument for not
using the multiagent representation alone to define Nash equilibria of
extensive-form games, and it is helpful to see why this argument does
not apply to the concept of perfect equilibrium. Recall that the multi-
agent representation of Figure 4.2 has a Nash equilibrium at
([1),],[w2],[z,]) that is rather perverse and should not be considered to
be an equilibrium of the given extensive-form game. This perverse
equilibrium would not be a perfect equilibrium of the multiagent rep-
resentation, however. To see why, suppose that, for large k,
= El[al]
+ (1 — E,)[bi] and let Q1.2 = (1 — e2)[z02] + e2[x2], where e,(k) and EA)
are small positive numbers (each less than 0.5). When we perturb [1)1]
and [w2] to 6- , and a2 2, respectively, the unique best response for l's
agent at state 3 would be y,, not z1, because the probability of (a,,w2)
occurring is positive and much larger than the probability of (a,,x2). In
fact, the unique perfect equilibrium of the multiagent representation
of this game is (.5[a,] + .5[1,1], .5[w2] + .5[x2], [y1]). This behavioral-
strategy profile, with belief probabilities 1/2 at each of the 2.2 and 1.3
nodes, is also the unique sequential equilibrium of this game.

--- Sayfa 238 ---
220 5 • Refinements of Equilibrium
On the other hand, perfect equilibria of the normal representation
may not correspond to sequential equilibria. To see why, consider again
the example in Figure 5.3, for which the normal representation is shown
in Table 5.1. The strategy profile qa1x1],[y2]) is a perfect equilibrium of
this normal representation in strategic form, even though it does not
correspond to a sequential equilibrium of the extensive-form game in
Figure 5.3. To show that act 1x1],[y2]) is a perfect equilibrium of Table
5.1, consider the perturbed randomized-strategy profile
erk  = ((1 — E)[a1x 1] + .1E[a1y1] + 	+
*21 + (1 — 6)5'2%
where e = 1/(k + 2). When e
, [a1x 1 ] is a best response to e[x2] +
(1 — E)[Y21 for player 1, because 4 6E + 3(1 — 6). On the other hand,
when the probability of b1y1  is positive and more than three times larger
than the probability of b,x,, then y2  is the best response for player 2. So
this sequence {ak}k=1  satisfies (5.1)—(5.3) for aa1x1],[y2]) as a perfect
equilibrium of the normal representation.
However, there is no perfect equilibrium of the multiagent represen-
tation of Figure 5.3 in which 1 chooses a1  or 2 chooses y2  with positive
probability. In the multiagent representation, given any behavioral-strat-
egy profile in which l's agent for the 1.0 node assigns any positive
probability to the move 61, x1  must be the best unique response for l's
agent at the 1.1 node. So the perfect equilibrium strategy of l's agent
for the 1.1 node must be [x1]. Thus, the perturbed behavioral-strategy
profiles erk  that support a perfect equilibrium of the multiagent repre-
sentation must satisfy (x ) = 1 and lim,„ 01.1(y1) = 0. So
under a", when k is large, the probability of the moves (b1,x 1) occur-
ring must be positive and much larger than the probability of the
Table 5.1 A game in strategic form, the normal representation of Figure 5.3
C2
C 1
X2
Y2
owe!
4,4
4,4
a1y1
4,4
4,4
biz,
6,6
3,0
601
0,0
2,2

--- Sayfa 239 ---
5.3 • Existence of Perfect Equilibria 221
moves (b,,y,) occurring. (These probabilities are 6.1.0(61
x and

1.,( ,) _nd
61 0(1,06-1 ,(y,), respectively.) So for all large k, x2  is player 2's unique
best response to 6-k, and the perfect equilibrium strategy of 2's agent
must be [x2]. This result in turn implies that  2.2
(x
= 1 and
link k— 6'1'2.200 = 0. So for all large k, the best response to Crk  for l's
agent at the 1.0 node must be b1, a response that gives him a payoff
close to 6 when x1  and x2  have high probability. Thus, the unique perfect
equilibrium of the multiagent representation is ([6,],[xl ],[x2]).
5.3 Existence of Perfect and Sequential Equilibria
THEOREM 5 . 2 . For any finite game in strategic form, there exists at least
one perfect equilibrium.
Proof Let F = (N, (C,),,,,(u,),,N) be any finite game in strategic form.
Let A be any randomized-strategy profile in X z EN A°(Ci). (For example,
we could let X,(c,) = 1/ CZ for every i and every c, in C2.) For any number
k such that k 1, we define a mapping 8k: X ZEN A(C) X ZEN A°(Ci)
such that
8k(Q) = T iff, Vi and Vci, ,(c,) = (1 — (11k))cri(c,) + (1/k)X,(c).
Similarly, for any c in X iEN C,, we define 8k(c) such that
8k(C) = T iff, Vi, Ti  =
(11k))[c2] + (1/k)X,.
For any c in X iEN C„ we let
0c) = u2(8k(c)).
, •
Let fsk  = 	 (11 )EN  1
Then Fk  is a finite game in strategic form. To interpret this game,
suppose that each player has an independent probability 1/k of irration-
ally trembling or losing rational control of his actions. Suppose also that,
if player i trembled, then his behavior would be randomly determined,
according to the randomized strategy X„ no matter what rational choices
he might have wanted to make. Thus, if the randomized strategy cr, in
0(C,) would describe player i's behavior when he is not trembling, then
8k(c- ) would describe his behavior before it is learned whether he is
trembling or not. When such trembling is introduced into the game F,
the result is the game Fk. Of course, as k becomes very large, the

--- Sayfa 240 ---
222 5 • Refinements of Equilibrium
probability of anyone trembling becomes very small, and the game fk
becomes a slight perturbation of the game F.
Let Cr k  be a Nash equilibrium of F", which exists by Theorem 3.1.
Choosing a subsequence if necessary, we assume that {o-k} is a convergent
sequence in the compact set X ,E, A(C,). Choosing a further subsequence
if necessary, we can also assume that, for every player i, the set of pure
strategies in C, that get zero probability in a" is the same for all k. (This
can be done because there are only finitely many subsets of Ct.) Let
a = limes x  ak. For each k, let Qk  = 6k(o-k). Then
Crk  E X A°(C,), Vk;
zEN
11111 Qk = lim o-k  = a;
k_,.
k—z•se
and, for any k, any player i, and any ci  in Ci,
if ci  argmax u,(erk_„[di]) = argmax
d,EC,
d,EC,
then o-k, (ci) = 0; and o-i(c,) = 0.
This last condition implies that, for all k,
Qi E argmax
T, E 4(C,)
Thus, a satisfies the conditions (5.1)—(5.3) for a perfect equilibrium. I
Theorems 5.1 and 5.2 immediately imply Theorem 4.6, the existence
theorem for sequential equilibria.
5.4 Proper Equilibria
Because the concept of perfect equilibrium is applied to extensive-form
games via the multiagent repreentation, it still distinguishes between
the games in Figures 5.2 and 5.3, which have the same purely reduced
normal representation. Specifically, Ga1],[y2]) and ([x1],[x2]) are both
perfect equilibria of the multiagent representation of Figure 5.2, but
ab,],[x,],[x2]) is the unique perfect equilibrium of the multiagent rep-
resentation of Figure 5.3. To avoid distinguishing between such games
and yet stay within the set of sequential equilibria, we need a solution

--- Sayfa 241 ---
5.4 • Proper Equilibria
223
concept that identifies equilibria that can always be extended to sequen-
tial equilibria, even when we apply the solution concept to the normal
representation. Proper equilibria, which form a subset of the perfect
equilibria, are such a solution concept.
We begin with an equivalent characterization of perfect equilibria.
Given a finite game F = (N, (C,),EN, (u,),EN) in strategic form, and given
any positive number E, a randomized-strategy profile if is an e-perfect
equilibrium iff
E X Y(C,)
:EN
and, for each player i and each pure strategy c, in C,,
if c,
argmax u,(a_„[e,]), then a ( ,) < e.
e,EC,
It can be shown that a randomized-strategy profile Tr is a perfect equi-
librium of F iff there exists a sequence (e(k),6 k)k_1  such that,
lim e(k) = 0, lim
=
Vi E N, Vci  E C,,
and, for every k, etk  is an e(k)-perfect equilibrium.
This characterization of perfect equilibria can be used to motivate an
analogous but stronger concept of equilibrium. We say that a random-
ized-strategy profile Q is an c-proper equilibrium iff
E X [1.°(C,)
:EN
(so all pure strategies get strictly positive probability) and, for every
player i and every pair of two pure strategies c, and e, in C„
if u,(o-_„[c,]) < u,(c r_Je,D, then o-,(c,)
e cr,(e)•
We then say that a randomized-strategy profile Zr-  is a proper equilibrium
iff there exists a sequence (e(k),crk)k-_, such that
lim e(k) = 0, lim
= Tri(ci), Vi E N, Vci  E Ci,
and, for every k, ak  is an e(k)-proper equilibrium.
Thus, a perfect equilibrium is an equilibrium that can be approxi-
mated by randomized-strategy profiles in which every pure strategy is

--- Sayfa 242 ---
224 5 • Refinements of Equilibrium
assigned positive probability, but any pure strategy that would be a
mistake for a player is assigned an arbitrarily small probability. A proper
equilibrium is an equilibrium that can be approximated by randomized-
strategy profiles in which every pure strategy is assigned positive prob-
ability, but any pure strategy that would be a mistake for a player is
assigned much less probability (by a multiplicative factor arbitrarily close
to 0) than any other pure strategy that would be either a best response
or a less costly mistake for him. It is straightforward to show that any
proper equilibrium is a perfect equilibrium.
THEOREM 5.3. For any finite game in strategic form, the set of proper
equilibria is a nonempty subset of the set of perfect equilibria.
Proof A full proof of existence is given in Myerson (1978a), but I
sketch here a more intuitive argument due to Kohlberg and Mertens
(1986). Given I' = (N, (u,),,,,), for each positive number E less
than 1, let F E  be a game in which each player i in N has a pure strategy
set that is the set of all strict orderings of C, and for which the outcome
is determined as follows. After the players choose their orderings, a
pure strategy in C, for each player i is independently selected according
to the probability distribution in which the first strategy in i's chosen
order has the highest probability and each of i's subsequent strategies
has probability E times the probability of the strategy that immediately
precedes it in the ordering. Then each player's payoff in FE  is his
expected payoff in F from the pure-strategy profile in C that is randomly
selected in this way.
By Theorem 3.1, we can find an equilibrium in randomized strategies
of FE, for any E. For each e, let oft' be the randomized-strategy profile
in X ,EN  A°(Q) such that, for each strategy c, of each player i, 61(0 is
the probability of c, being selected for i in FE  when the players follow
the equilibrium of F E  that we found. It can be shown that &C is an
e-proper equilibrium of F. By compactness of X A(C,), we can find
a subsequence of (ek))7_, that converges to some randomized-strategy
profile cr and such that e(k) --> 0 as k co. Then o is a proper equilib-
rium. I
Just as perfect equilibria can be viewed as a way of identifying se-
quential equilibria in the multiagent representation, so proper equilibria
can be used to identify sequential equilibria in the normal representa-

--- Sayfa 243 ---
5.4 • Proper Equilibria 225
tion. The following result, analogous to Theorem 5.1, has been proved
by Kohlberg and Mertens (1986) and van Damme (1984).
THEOREM 5.4. Suppose that re is an extensive-form game with perfect
recall and T is a proper equilibrium of the normal representation of Fe. Then
there exists a vector of belief probabilities Tr and a behavioral-strategy profile o
such that (o-,Tr) is a sequential equilibrium of re and o is a behavioral repre-
sentation of T.
Proof Let (tk, E(k)),7_, be chosen so that each t k  is an e(k)-proper
equilibrium of the normal representation of Fe, lin'', tk  = 'T, and
E(k) = 0. For each k, every node in re has positive probability
under t k, because every pure-strategy profile has positive probability,
so i-k  has a unique behavioral representation ak, and there is a unique
beliefs vector Ilk  that is consistent with ak. Choosing a subsequence if
necessary, we can guarantee (because the sets of behavioral-strategy
profiles and beliefs vectors are compact) that there exists a behavioral-
strategy profile o and a beliefs vector IT such that limp „o  tik  = o-  and
limp „ .fr k  = Tr. Then o is a behavioral representation of T, and Tr is fully
consistent with o.. Choosing a further subsequence if necessary, we can
assume also that, for each player i and each pair of strategies b, and c,
in C„ if there is any k in the sequence such that ut(tk_„[b,]) > u,(1-k_„[c,]),
then uz(tk_„[b,]) > u,(i.k_„[cd) for every k. (Notice there are only finitely
many ways to order the players' strategy sets, so at least one must occur
infinitely often in the sequence.)
For each player i and each information state s in 5„ let C;'`(s) denote
the set of strategies that are compatible with state s and let ANs) denote
the set of strategies in CNs) that maximize i's expected payoff against
tk_,. (By the construction of the (i-k),7_, sequence, this set of maximizers
is independent of k.) That is,
A,*(s) = argmax U0k_JC,1).
c,E Cl(s)
By E-properness,
I .fki(bi)
lim 	 =1.
ti:(C)
c,( C1(5)

--- Sayfa 244 ---
226 5 Refinements of Equilibrium
So by equation (4.1), if cr,s(c/s) > 0 in the limiting behavioral represen-
tation o, then there must exist some strategy 6, in C, such that b, E
ANs) and b,(s) = ds.
Using perfect recall and the fact that each state s has positive prior
probability under each we can show that a strategy in CNs) that
achieves the maximum of 14,(th_,,[ci]) over all c, in CNs) must also achieve
the maximum of Exusirk,s(x)U,(6k_Jc,] I x) over all c, in CNs). (Recall sim-
ilar arguments in the proofs of Theorems 5.1 and 4.4.) So
11;''(s) = argmax E frk, s(x)(1,(5-k_
).
c,ECI(s)
By continuity of the objective, this equation implies
A7(s) C argmax E
Tr, s(x)U,(cr _,,[c,]Ix).
,,ECI(s)
x E Y,
We need to show that the behavioral-strategy profile o is sequentially
rational with beliefs it. So suppose that, contrary to the theorem, there
is some information state s of some player i, and some move ds  in Ds
such that
o-, c(c15) > 0 but d,
argmax E ,(x)U ,(
s,[es]jx)•
e,ED,
xEY,
By perfect recall (which induces a partial order on each player's infor-
mation states), we can choose the state s so that there is no such failure
of sequential rationality at any information state of player i that could
occur after s in the game. (That is, we pick s as close as possible to the
end of the game among all information states at which sequential
rationality fails.) However, because o-, s(ds) > 0, there exists some strat-
egy b,
b,(s) = d5  and b, E argmax E
x)-
,,EC1(s)
xE Y,
Thus, using move d, would not be optimal for player i at state s if he
planned to use the behavioral strategy o-, at all subsequent information
states, but using cis  would be optimal for player i at state s if he planned
to use the strategy b, at all subsequent information states. However, this
result implies a contradiction of our assumption that the behavioral-
strategy profile cr is sequentially rational for player i (with the consistent

--- Sayfa 245 ---
5.4 • Proper Equilibria 227
beliefs Tr) at all information states after s. So there cannot be any infor-
mation state where sequential rationality fails. I
For example, in the game shown in Table 5.1, the strategy profile
6-  = ((1 — E)[aix,] + .16[aly,] + .1E[bixi] + .86[b,yi],
E[x2] + (1 — e)[y2]),
is 6-perfect, for any E less than 1/3. So, as we have seen, accix,],[y2]) (the
limit of 6-' as E —+ 0) is a perfect equilibrium of this game, even though
it does not correspond to any sequential equilibrium of the game in
Figure 5.3. However, d is not an 6-proper equilibrium. The strategy
b,y, would be a worse mistake than b,x, for player 1 against 6.2, because
OE + 2(1 — E) < 66 + 3(1 — E). Thus, 6-properness requires that the
ratio 6-,(biy,)16,(b,x,) must not be more than E, whereas this ratio of
probabilities is 8 in 6-.
In fact, for any E less than 1, the probability assigned to biyi  must be
less than the probability assigned to bixi  in an 6-proper equilibrium, so
x2  must be a best response for player 2. So player 2 must use x2  for sure
in any proper equilibrium; and player 1 must use bix,, which is his best
response to x2. Thus, the unique proper equilibrium of the strategic-
form game in Table 5.1 is (b,x,,x2). It can be justified as a proper
equilibrium by 6-proper equilibria of the form
((1 — E — .562)[biXi] + .5e2[1) o 1] + .5e[aix 1 ] + .5g[a iy 1 ],
(1  — 6 )[X2] + E[Y2])•
This proper equilibrium corresponds to the unique sequential equilib-
rium of the extensive-form game in Figure 5.3.
Similarly, the unique proper equilibrium of the normal representation
of the game in Figure 5.2 (which differs from Table 5.1 only in that
player l's two payoff-equivalent strategies are merged into one and the
labels of his three pure strategies are changed to a, x,, and y,) is
([xi ],[x2]). In general, adding or eliminating a player's pure strategy that
is payoff equivalent (for all players) to another pure strategy of the
same player makes no essential change in the set of proper equilibria.
However, adding a pure strategy that is randomly redundant may
change the set of proper equilibria. For example, consider the games
in Tables 5.2 and 5.3, which we also considered in Section 2.4. The
strategy biz, in Table 5.2 is randomly redundant, because it is payoff

--- Sayfa 246 ---
228 5 • Refinements of Equilibrium
Table 5.2 A game in strategic form, the purely reduced representation of
Figure 2.5
C2
C,
x2
Y2
al •
6,0
6,0
boci
8,0
0,8
boi
0,8
8,0
bi.z 1
3,4
7,0
Table 5.3 A game in strategic form, the fully reduced normal representation
of Figure 2.5
 Cl
C2
x2
Y2
a l.
6,0
6,0
bix,
8,0
0,8
b1y1
0,8
8,0
equivalent to the randomized strategy .5[a1.] + .5[b1y1]. So Table 5.3
differs from Table 5.2 only by the elimination of a randomly redundant
strategy. However, the proper equilibria of these two games are differ-
ent. The unique proper equilibrium of Table 5.2 is ([a1.], (7/12)[x2] +
(5/12)[y2]), but the unique proper equilibrium of Table 5.3 is ([a1.], .5[x2]
+ .5[y2]). So eliminating a randomly redundant strategy for player 1
changes the unique proper equilibrium strategy for player 2.
To understand why player 2 must randomize differently proper equi-
libria of these two games, notice first that a,• is a best response for player
1 only if the probability of x2  is between 1/4 and 3/4. So to justify a proper
equilibrium in which player 1 uses al•, player 2 must be willing to
randomize between x2  and y2  in any c-proper equilibrium & that ap-
proximates the proper equilibrium. For Table 5.2, this willingness im-
plies that
(5.4)
8d,(b1y,) + 46-,(b1zi) = 86,(b,x1)•
So bloc, must be tied for second best for player 1 (after a•) with either
b1y1  or b,z, (or else one side of this equation would have to be of order

--- Sayfa 247 ---
5.4 • Proper Equilibria 229
e times the other side). For Table 5.3, without biz', the corresponding
equation is
861(biY1) = 861(bix1)•
Thus, player 2 must use .5[x2] + .5[y2] in Table 5.3, so that player 1
will be willing to assign comparable probabilities to b1y1  and bixi ; so
Table 5.3 has E-proper equilibria of the form
((1 — E)[ai• + .5E[b,x1] + 	.5[x2] + .5[Y2])•
But if player 2 used .5[x2] + .5[Y2] in Table 5.2, then b1z1  would be
better for player 1 than either b1x1  or biyi  (because 3/2 + 7/2 >
8/2 ) ,
and so di(bizi) would have to be much larger than eti(bixi) in an E-
proper equilibrium so that equation (5.4) could not be satisfied. For
player 1 to be willing to satisfy (5.4) in an E-proper equilibrium, player
2 must make player 1 indifferent between bix, and biz, by using
(7/12)[x2] + (5/12)[y2]. So, for example, Table 5.2 has E-proper equilibria
of the form
((1
E
2e2/3)[a1• + ((e + E2)/3)[b1x1] + (E2/3)[b1h]
+ (2E/3)[b1z1], (7/12)[x2] + (3/12)[y2]).
Why should the addition of a randomly redundant strategy for player
1 change player 2's rational behavior? Kohlberg and Mertens (1986)
showed that this lack of invariance is an inevitable consequence of
Theorem 5.4. In particular, Table 5.2 is the purely reduced normal
representation of the extensive-form game in Figure 5.4, whereas Table
5.3 is the purely reduced normal representation of the extensive-form
game in Figure 5.5. Each of these two extensive-form games has a
unique subgame-perfect and sequential equilibrium, shown in Figures
5.4 and 5.5. In particular, subgame-perfectness requires that player 2
use (7/12)[x2] + (5/12)[y2] in Figure 5.4 but .5[x2] + .5[y2] in Figure 5.5.
(In each figure, the subgame beginning with player 2's decision node
has a unique equilibrium, but these equilibria are different.) So the
sensitivity of proper equilibria to the addition of randomly redundant
strategies is an inevitable result of the fact that two extensive-form games
that have the same fully reduced normal representation may have dis-
joint sets of sequential-equilibrium scenarios.

--- Sayfa 248 ---
6,0
230 5 • Refinements of Equilibrium
Figure 5.5
6,0
a1

(1)
x,
(1/2)
8,0
xi
(1/2)
0,8
(1/2)
0,8
8,0
Figure 5.4
1.1
<1> )
b1

(0)
X
1.3
<1/2>
<1/2>
5.5 Persistent Equilibria
Consider again, in Table 5.4, the Battle of the Sexes game that we saw
in Chapter 3. This game has three equilibria: ([ fill f2]), qs1],[s2]), and
(.75[ f1] + .25[s11, .25[s2] + .75[f2]). All three of these equilibria are
perfect and proper.
The randomized equilibrium of this game is worse for both players
than either of the pure-strategy equilibria. It represents a lack of co-
ordination that neither player can unilaterally overcome. In a game like

--- Sayfa 249 ---
5.5 Persistent Equilibria 231
Table 5.4 Battle of the Sexes game in strategic form
C2
Cl
f2
S2
3,1
0,0
si
0,0
1,3
this, as Schelling (1960) has argued, both players should be groping for
some focal factor that would steer them away from this equilibrium and
toward ([fl],[f2]) or as i],[s2]). Thus, the randomized equilibrium may
seem unstable or unreasonable as a solution to this game. Kalai and
Samet (1984) developed a concept of persistent equilibrium that ex-
cludes this randomized equilibrium for this example.
Given F = (N, (C,),,,, (u),,,), a finite game in strategic form, a retract
is a set 0 of the form 0 = X zEN 0, such that, for every i, 0, is a
nonempty closed convex subset of A(C,). For any positive number E, a
randomized-strategy profile a is in the e-neighborhood of a set of ran-
domized-strategy profiles 0 iff there exists some Q in 0 such that
— cri(c,) I < E, Vi E N, Vci  E C.
A retract 0 is absorbing iff there is some positive number e such that,
for every randomized-strategy profile a in the E-neighborhood of 0,
there exists some p in 0 such that
p, E argmax 	 Vi E N.
Ti E (C)
That is, a retract is absorbing if, for any randomized-strategy profile
that is sufficiently close to the retract, there is a best response for each
player such that the randomized-strategy profile composed of these best
responses is in the retract. In a sense, then, if we only assumed that
players would use strategies that were close to an absorbing retract, then
rational responses could lead the players into the retract.
A persistent retract is a minimal absorbing retract. That is, a retract is
persistent iff it is absorbing and there does not exist any other absorbing
retract 0 = X zENez such that 0, C 0, for every i. A persistent equilibrium
is any equilibrium that is contained in a persistent retract.

--- Sayfa 250 ---
232 5 • Refinements of Equilibrium
Table 5.5 A three-player game in strategic form
C2 and C3
Cl
X3
Y3
X2
Y2
X2
Y2
x,
Y1
1,1,1
0,0,0
0,0,0
0,0,0
0,0,0
0,0,0
0,0,0
1,1,0
Kalai and Samet (1984) have proved the following general existence
theorem.
THEOREM 5.5. For any finite game in strategic form, the set of persistent
equilibria is nonempty, and it includes at least one proper equilibrium.
In the Battle of the Sexes game, there are three absorbing retracts:
{[ f1]} x {[f2]}, {[sI]} X {[s2]}, and A({fi,s,}) x 0({f2,s2}). Thus {[fd} x
{[f2]} and {[si]} x {[s2]1 are the only persistent retracts; so a f1],[ f2]) and
([51],[s2]) are the only persistent equilibria.
Kalai and Samet (1984) also discuss the three-player game shown in
Table 5.5, where C, = {x„y,} for each player i.
The equilibrium (x1,x2,x3) is perfect, proper and persistent. (Perfect-
ness and properness always coincide for games in which no player has
more than two pure strategies.) However, there is another, less intuitive
equilibrium (y,,y2,x3) that is also perfect and proper but is not persistent.
(Notice that
(.5E[x1] + (1 — .5E)[y1], .5E[x2] + (1 — .5E)[y2], (1 — E)[x3] + E[y3])
is E-perfect and E-proper.) Iterative elimination of weakly dominated
strategies also eliminates the (y1,y2,x3) equilibrium.
5.6 Stable Sets of Equilibria
Kohlberg and Mertens (1986) sought to develop a solution theory for
strategic-form games that, when applied to extensive-form games via
their fully reduced normal representations, would always identify equi-
libria that could be extended (with appropriate beliefs vectors) to se-
quential equilibria. However, as the games in Figures 5.4 and 5.5 illus-

--- Sayfa 251 ---
5.6 • Stable Sets of Equilibria 233
trate, two games can have the same fully reduced normal representation
and yet have sets of sequential equilibria that are disjoint (when pro-
jected into the set of randomized-strategy profiles of the reduced normal
representation). Thus Kohlberg and Mertens broadened their scope to
consider sets of equilibria, rather than individual equilibria, as candi-
dates for "solutions" to a game.
Let F = (N, (C,),,,, to
(
	be a finite game in strategic form. For any
vector e in RN  such that
0 < ei
1, Vi E N,
and for any randomized strategy profile X. in
X IEN A°(C,), let
8e,x: X z EN A(C) —> X xEN A°(C,) be defined by
8,,x(v) = d iff, Vi E N, di  = (1 — ei)cri  + eiXi.
Let fe,x  = (N, (C,),,„,, (Ui(8 e,X(H)))iEN)•  That is, Ped, is the perturbation of
F in which each player i has an independent probability e, of accidentally
implementing the randomized strategy X. We can say that a set 0 is
prestable iff it is a closed subset of the set of equilibria of F and, for any
positive number 60, there exists some positive number e1  such that, for
any e in RN  and any X in X :EN A°(C,), if 0 < e, < si for every player i,
then there exists at least one Nash equilibrium of t„,, that is in an so-
neighborhood of 0. That is, a prestable set contains at least one equi-
librium of F that is close to an equilibrium of every perturbed game
re,„, for every e with sufficiently small components and every X that
assigns positive probability to all pure strategies. Kohlberg and Mertens
(1986) then define a stable set of equilibria of F to be any prestable set
that contains no other prestable subsets. That is, a stable set is a minimal
prestable set.
In proving the existence of perfect equilibria, we constructed a perfect
equilibrium that was a limit of equilibria of games of the form fe,,,
(where e = (1/k, . . . ,1/k) and k --> 00). However, a stable set of equilibria
must contain limits of equilibria of all sequences of games of this form
when the components of the e vectors are going to 0.
Kohlberg and Mertens have proved the following two theorems.
THEOREM 5.6. For any finite strategic-form game F, there is at least one
connected set of equilibria that contains a stable subset.

--- Sayfa 252 ---
234 5 • Refinements of Equilibrium
THEOREM 5.7. If 0 is any stable set of the game F, then 0 contains a
stable set of any game that can be obtained from F by eliminating any pure
strategy that is weakly dominated or that is an inferior response (that is, not a
best response) to every equilibrium in 0.
Kohlberg and Mertens (1986) show an example of an extensive-form
game with a unique sequential equilibrium and a stable set of its reduced
normal representation that does not contain the unique sequential equi-
librium. However, they also defined a concept of fully stable sets of
equilibria, which may be larger than stable sets and which always contain
proper equilibria that correspond to sequential equilibria in every ex-
tensive-form game that has F as its normal or reduced normal repre-
sentation. However, fully stable sets of equilibria can include equilibria
that assign positive probability to weakly dominated strategies.
To appreciate the power of Theorems 5.6 and 5.7, consider the
extensive-form game in Figure 4.10. The normal representation of this
game is in Table 5.6. The set of equilibria of this strategic-form game
has two connected components. First, there is a connected set consisting
of the single equilibrium
((1/7)[x,x2] + (%)Exi Y21, (2/3)[e3] + (1/2)[h])•
Second, there is a connected set consisting of equilibria of the form
([yi Y2], R[es] + (1 — 13 — y)[f3] + y[g3]),  where 413 + 3y < 1.
(This second connected set contains the union of the equilibria gener-
ated in three separate cases considered in Section 4.5.) Using Theorem
5.7, we can show that this second connected set of equilibria does not
contain any stable subset. For every equilibrium in this second set, it is
never a best response for player 1 to choose x2  at his 1.2 decision node.
Table 5.6 A game in strategic form, the normal representation of Figure 4.10
C2

C,
e3
f3
g3
XIX2
2.0,4.0
—1.5,7.0
0.5,7.5
x1Y2
1.5,4.0
—0.5,3.5
1.0,3.0
y/x2

0.5,0
—1.0,3.5
—0.5,4.5
Y,Y2
0,0
0,0
0,0

--- Sayfa 253 ---
5.6 • Stable Sets of Equilibria 235
(On the other hand, there are equilibria in this set where choosing x1
at 1.1 would be a best response.) So any stable subset of the second
connected set must contain a stable subset of the game where the strat-
egies x1x2  and y1x2  for player 1 are eliminated, by Theorem 5.7. (Weak
domination alone could eliminate y1x2  but not x1x2.) However, when
these two strategies are eliminated, the strategies f3  and g3  are weakly
dominated for player 2 in the game that remains; so another application
of Theorem 5.7 implies that a stable subset of the second connected set
must contain a stable set of the game where the strategies x1x2, y ,x2, f3,
and g3  are all eliminated. But eliminating these strategies eliminates all
of the equilibria in the second connected set (and the empty set is not
stable!), so there can be no stable subset of the second connected set of
equilibria. Then, by the existence theorem for stable sets, the first con-
nected set, consisting of just one equilibrium, must be a stable set.
For another example, consider the Beer-Quiche game of Cho and Kreps
(1987). In this two-player game, player l's type may be "surly" or
"wimpy," with probabilities .9 or .1, respectively. Knowing his type,
player 1 enters a tavern and must order either beer or quiche. He
prefers beer if he is surly, but he prefers quiche if he is wimpy. Player
2 does not know l's type but, after seeing what player 1 has ordered,
player 2 must decide whether to fight with player 1 or just leave him
alone and go away. Player 2's payoff is 0 if she goes away, +1 if she
fights and player 1 is wimpy, or —1 if she fights and player 1 is surly.
Player l's payoff is the sum x + y, where x = 1 if he orders the item
that he prefers between beer and quiche, and x = 0 otherwise, and y =
2 if he does not fight with player 2, and y = 0 otherwise. This game
has two connected sets of sequential equilibria.
In one set of equilibria, shown in Figure 5.6, player 1 always orders
beer, no matter what his type is; player 2 does not fight when he orders
beer; but player 2 would fight with a probability p that is at least 1/2 if
player 1 ordered quiche. To make such a scenario a sequential equilib-
rium, player 2's belief probability a of the event that player 1 is wimpy
after he orders quiche must be at least 1/2. Formally, the parameters a
and 13 must satisfy the following conditions:
either 1/2
a:5_ 1 and 13 = 1, or a= 1/2 and 1/2
13 < 1.
In the other set of equilibria, shown in Figure 5.7, player 1 always
orders quiche, no matter what his type is; and player 2 does not fight
when he orders quiche, but player 2 would fight with a probability 13

--- Sayfa 254 ---
236 5 • Refinements of Equilibrium
Figure 5.6
Figure 5.7

--- Sayfa 255 ---
5.6 • Stable Sets of Equilibria 237
that is at least 1/2 if player 1 ordered beer. To make such a scenario a
sequential equilibrium, player 2's belief probability a of the event that
player 1 is wimpy after he orders beer must be at least 1/2. Again, the
parameters a and 13 must satisfy the conditions:
either 1/2 a<_1 and 13 = 1, or a = 1/2 and 1/2
13 < 1.
There may seem to be something counterintuitive about the equilibria
in Figure 5.7, where player 1 orders quiche even if he is surly. These
equilibria rely on the supposition that ordering beer would be taken as
evidence of wimpiness, but a wimpy type would be less inclined to order
beer than a surly type. In particular, the set of randomized strategies
for player 2 against which ordering beer would be optimal for the wimpy
type of player 1 is a strict subset of the set of strategies for player 2
against which ordering beer would be optimal for the surly type of
player 1. Thus, it is natural to suppose that the belief probability that
player 2 would assign to the event that player 1 is wimpy should not be
larger when player 1 has ordered beer than when he has ordered
quiche. This criterion eliminates the sequential equilibria in Figure 5.7
and leaves only the sequential equilibria in Figure 5.6, where player 1
orders beer. We can formalize this intuition by using Theorem 5.7 to
show that there is no stable subset of the equilibria where player 1 buys
quiche.
Consider first the normal representation, shown in Table 5.7. Here
player l's information state 1 is the surly type, l's state 2 is the wimpy
type, player 2's state 3 is the state of having seen beer ordered, and 2's
state 4 is the state of having seen quiche ordered. We can verify that
the counterintuitive equilibrium a1q2],[f3g4]) is perfect and proper,
because it can be approximated by E-proper equilibria in which the
Table 5.7 Beer-Quiche game in strategic form, the normal representation
C2
Cl
f3f4
f3 g4
g3f4
g3 g4
6162
0.9,-0.8
0.9,-0.8
2.9,0
2.9,0
blq2
1.0,-0.8
1.2,-0.9
2.8,0.1
3.0,0
0,-0.8
1.8,0.1
0.2,-0.9
2.0,0
q1112
0.1,-0.8
2.1,0
0.1,-0.8
2.1,0

--- Sayfa 256 ---
238 5 • Refinements of Equilibrium
probability of q,b2  is small but much greater than the probabilities of
b ,q2  and bib2. However, the strategy q,b2  (order quiche if surly, or-
der beer if wimpy) is strongly dominated for player 1 (by (1/2)[biq2] +
(8/9)[q ,q 2], which has the same probability .1 of ordering beer but orders
it only when surly). After q,b2  is eliminated, f3  f, and f3g4  and g,ge, are
all weakly dominated by gs  f, for player 2, and bib2  is the unique best
response for player 1 to g3  f4. So all equilibria except (b,b2,g3  f4) can be
eliminated by iterative elimination of weakly dominated strategies.
Thus, by Theorem 5.7, any stable set of equilibria must include this
equilibrium, in which player 1 always drinks beer and player 2 goes
away when he drinks beer, but player 2 would fight if player 1 ordered
quiche.
In the multiagent representation, there are no weakly dominated
strategies, but Theorem 5.7 can still be applied to show that there is no
stable set of the equilibria where player 1 orders quiche. In the set of
equilibria where player 1 orders quiche, there is one equilibrium (with
= 1/2 and 13 = 1/2) where ordering beer would be a best response for
the surly agent 1.1, but there are no equilibria where ordering beer
would be a best response for the wimpy agent 1.2. So a stable set of
equilibria in which player 1 orders quiche would necessarily have a
nonempty subset in the modified game where we eliminate b2, the
wimpy agent's option to order beer. Then buying beer would be proof
of surliness in this modified game; so f3, fighting when beer is ordered,
would be weakly dominated for agent 2.3. But when f3  is eliminated,
the surly agent would never choose to buy quiche in any equilibrium of
the game that remains. So by Theorem 5.7, the multiagent represen-
tation of the original game has no stable subset of the equilibria where
player 1 always orders quiche.
This argument does not eliminate the equilibria in Figure 5.6, where
player 1 orders beer, because only move that is never a best response
to these equilibria is q l, quiche for the surly type. (Quiche for the wimpy
type is a best response when 13 = 1/2.) Eliminating the option of buying
quiche for the surly type guarantees that player 2 would want to fight
if player 1 bought quiche, but that still leaves the equilibrium in which
= 1.
Cho and Kreps (1987) and Banks and Sobel (1987) have developed
other solution criteria related to Kohlberg-Mertens stability, with appli-
cations to signaling games of economic interest.

--- Sayfa 257 ---
5.7 • Generic Properties 239
5.7 Generic Properties
Once we specify a finite set of players N and finite pure-strategy sets C,
for every player i, the set of possible payoff functions (u,)i", is RN'
c,
where C = X zEN C1. This set RN'c  is a finite-dimensional vector space.
We can say that a property is satisfied for all generic games in strategic
form iff, for every nonempty finite N and (C,),EN, there is an open and
dense set of payoff functions (u,),E, in RNx c  that generate games (N,
(C,),EN, (u,),(N) that all satisfy this property. On the other hand, we can
say that the property holds for some generic games in strategic form iff there
exist some nonempty finite sets N and (C,),,, and a nonempty open set
of payoff functions in RNx c  that generate games that satisfy this prop-
erty. That is, if a property is satisfied for some generic games, then
there exists a game that satisfies the property robustly, in the sense that
any sufficiently small perturbation of the payoffs would generate a new
game that also satisfies the property. If a property is satisfied for all
generic games, then small perturbations of the payoffs in any game can
generate a new game that satisfies this property robustly, even if the
original game does not. (For further discussion of genericity, see Mas-
Colell, 1985, pages 316-319.)
Given any extensive-form game Fe, we can generate a game that
differs from Fe only in the payoffs by choosing payoff functions in
RN'n, where ,1), is the set of terminal nodes and N is the set of players
in Fe. We may say that a property holds for all generic games in extensive
form iff, for every extensive-form game Fe, there exists an open and
dense set of payoff functions in RNxn  that generate games, differing
from Fe only in the payoffs, that all satisfy this property. A property
holds for some generic games in extensive form iff there exists some exten-
sive-form game Fe and a nonempty open set of payoff functions in
RN'n  that generate games, differing from Fe only in the payoffs, that
all satisfy this property.
Van Damme (1987) has shown (see his Theorems 2.4.7, 2.5.5, and
2.6.1) that, for all generic games in strategic form, all equilibria are
perfect and proper. This result might at first seem to suggest that
perfectness and properness usually have no power to eliminate unrea-
sonable equilibria. However, for some generic games in extensive form,
there exist nonempty sets of imperfect and improper equilibria of both
the normal and multiagent representations. For example, recall the

--- Sayfa 258 ---
240 5 • Refinements of Equilibrium
game in Figure 4.5; ([3,1],[y2]) is an imperfect and improper equilibrium
of the normal representation of every game that can be derived from
Figure 4.5 by changing payoffs by less than ±-0.5. To understand how
this distinction between strategic-form genericity and extensive-form
genericity can arise, notice that, for all generic games in strategic form,
no two payoffs are identical. But player 2 gets from (y1,x2) the same
payoff she gets from (y 1,y2) in the normal representation of every game
that is generated from Figure 4.5 by changing the terminal payoffs.
Thus, the essential significance and power of the equilibrium refine-
ments like perfectness and properness is really evident only when we
apply them to games in extensive form, even though these refinements
are defined in terms of games in strategic form. On the other hand, for
some generic games in strategic form, persistent equilibria can be guar-
anteed to exclude at least one equilibrium. For example, after any small
perturbation of payoffs in the Battle of the Sexes game in Table 5.4
(with every payoff changed by less than -±0.5), there will exist a ran-
domized equilibrium that is not persistent.
5.8 Conclusions
The discussion in the preceding two chapters indicates only a part of
the rich literature on refinements of Nash equilibrium (see also Mc-
Lennan, 1985; Reny, 1987; Fudenberg and Tirole, 1988; Farrell, 1988;
Grossman and Perry, 1986; Okuno-Fujiwara, PostIPwaite, and Mailath,
1991; and Kohlberg, 1989). There are a variety of questions that we
can use to evaluate these various refinements. Does the proposed solu-
tion concept satisfy a general existence theorem? Is the set of solutions
invariant when we transform a game in a way that seems irrelevant?
Does the solution concept exclude all equilibria that seem intuitively
unreasonable? Does it include all the equilibria that seem intuitively
reasonable? Does the intrinsic logic of the solution concept seem com-
pelling as a characterization of rational behavior?
Unfortunately, we now have no solution concept for which an un-
qualified "Yes" can be given in answer to all of these questions. For
example, we have no compelling argument to prove that rational intel-
ligent players could not possibly behave according to an equilibrium
that is not proper; nor do we have any convincing argument that every
proper equilibrium must be considered as a possible way that rational
intelligent players might behave in a game. Thus, it is hard to argue

--- Sayfa 259 ---
5.8 • Conclusions 241
that proper equilibria should be accepted as either an upper solution
or as a lower solution, in the sense of Section 3.4. The basic rationale
for considering perturbed models with small probabilities of mistakes,
as we do when we test for perfectness and properness, is that they give
us a way to check that the justification of an equilibrium does not depend
on the (unreasonable) assumption that players completely ignore the
possible outcomes of the game that have zero probability in the equilib-
rium. Thus, we can only argue that testing for perfectness and proper-
ness of equilibria is a useful way to formalize part of our intuitive criteria
about how rational intelligent players might behave in a game. Similar
comments can be made about other solution concepts in the literature.
On the basis of the logical derivation of the concept of sequential
equilibrium, one can reasonably argue that sequential equilibrium might
be an upper solution for extensive-form games, so being a sequential
equilibrium might be a necessary (even if not sufficient) condition for
a reasonable characterization of rational intelligent behavior. However,
the case for requiring full consistency, as defined in Section 4.4, was not
completely compelling, so there might be some other reasonable con-
sistency requirement that allows more beliefs vectors than full consis-
tency but less than weak consistency. Such intermediate consistency
conditions have been used by Fudenberg and Tirole (1988) in their
definition of perfect Bayesian equilibrium.
We should draw a distinction between refinements of Nash equilibrium
and criteria for selection among the set of equilibria. A refinement of
Nash equilibrium is a solution concept that is intended to offer a more
accurate characterization of rational intelligent behavior in games. How-
ever, the ultimate refinement that exactly characterizes rational behavior
can still include multiple equilibria for many games (e.g., the Battle of
the Sexes). That is, a game can have many different equilibria such that,
if players in some given culture or environment expected each other to
behave according to any one of these equilibria, then they could ration-
ally and intelligently fulfill these expectations.
A selection criterion is then any objective standard, defined in terms
of the given structure of the mathematical game, that can be used to
determine the focal equilibrium that everyone expects. As such, a selec-
tion criterion would only be valid if there is something in the cultural
environment of the players that would predispose them to focus atten-
tion on this selection criterion. Equity and efficiency criteria of coop-
erative game theory can be understood as such selection criteria. Other

--- Sayfa 260 ---
242 5 • Refinements of Equilibrium
solution concepts that have been offered are based on the assumption
that players share a rich natural language for communication (Farrell,
1988; Myerson, 1989); and these solution concepts also can be consid-
ered as equilibrium-selection criteria, rather than as equilibrium refine-
ments that are supposed to be valid whenever players are rational and
intelligent.
Exercises
Exercise 5.1. Consider the two-person game in strategic form shown in
Table 5.8.
a. Find all Nash equilibria of this game. Which of these equilibria are
(trembling-hand) perfect? Which of these equilibria are proper?
b. Show that player l's strategy bg is randomly redundant.
c. Consider now the reduced game after the redundant strategy bg
has been eliminated. Which equilibria of this reduced game are perfect?
Which equilibria of this reduced game are proper?
d. Interpret the answers to parts (a) and (c) in terms of Exercise 4.7
(Chapter 4).
Exercise 5.2. Consider the two-person game in strategic form shown in
Table 5.9.
a. Characterize the set of all Nash equilibria of this game.
b. Show that (.5[x1] + .5[z1], [x2]) is not a perfect equilibrium of this
game.
c. Which Nash equilibria are perfect?
d. Find a proper equilibrium of this game.
Table 5.8 A game in strategic form
C2
Cl
c
d
a.
5,4
5,4
be
8,3
1,9
bf
3,6
7,2
bg
4,5
6,3

--- Sayfa 261 ---
Exercises
243
Table 5.9 A game in strategic form
CI
C2
X2
Y2
Z2
xi
Yi
z1
1,2
1,1
1,2
3,0
2,2
0,3
0,3
2,0
3,0
Exercise 5.3. Consider the game shown in Figure 4.19.
a. Show that the set of equilibria in which player 1 would choose z1
at his information state 2 does not contain any stable subset.
b. Explain why your argument in part (a) would not apply to the
game in Figure 2.8.

--- Sayfa 262 ---
6
Games with Communication
6.1 Contracts and Correlated Strategies
There are many games, like the Prisoners' Dilemma (Table 3.4), in
which the Nash equilibria yield very low payoffs for the players, relative
to other nonequilibrium outcomes. In such situations, the players would
want to transform the game, if possible, to extend the set of equilibria
to include better outcomes. Players might seek to transform a game by
trying to communicate with each other and coordinate their moves,
perhaps even by formulating contractual agreements. (Another way to
extend the set of equilibria, creating a long-term relationship or re-
peated game, is studied in Chapter 7.)
We argued in Chapter 2 that there is no loss of generality in assuming
that each player chooses his strategy simultaneously and independently.
In principle, we argued, anything that a player can do to communicate
and coordinate with other players could be described by moves in an
extensive-form game, so planning these communication moves would
become part of his strategy choice itself.
Although this perspective can be fully general in principle, it is not
necessarily the most fruitful way to think about all games. There are
many situations where the possibilities for communication are so rich
that to follow this modeling program rigorously would require us to
consider enormously complicated games. For example, to formally
model player l's opportunity to say just one word to player 2, player 1
must have a move and player 2 must have an information state for
every word in the dictionary! In such situations, it might be more useful
to leave communication and coordination possibilities out of our explicit
game model. If we do so, then we must instead use solution concepts

--- Sayfa 263 ---
6.1 • Contracts and Correlated Strategies 245
that express an assumption that players have implicit communication
opportunities, in addition to the strategic options explicitly described in
the game model. In this chapter we investigate such solution concepts
and show that they can indeed offer important analytical insights into
many situations.
Let us begin by considering the most extreme kind of implicit-coor-
dination assumption: that players can not only communicate with each
other but can even sign jointly binding contracts to coordinate their
strategies. Consider the example in Table 6.1 (a modified version of the
Prisoners' Dilemma). In this game, the unique equilibrium is (y,,y2),
which gives a payoff allocation of (1,1). Now suppose that some lawyer
or other outside intervener presented the two players with a contract
that says: "We, the undersigned, promise to choose x, and x2  if this
contract is signed by both players. If it is signed by only one player,
then he or she will choose y, or y2." The option for each player i to sign
the contract can be introduced into the game description, as the strategy
s„ shown in Table 6.2. This transformed game has an equilibrium at
(s,,s2), which is the unique perfect equilibrium and gives the payoff
allocation (2,2).
Even better expected payoffs could be achieved if the contract com-
mitted the players to a correlated or jointly randomized strategy. For
Table 6.1 A game in strategic form
C2
x2
Y2
Yi
2,2
6,0
0,6
1,1
Table 6.2 A game in strategic form, including one contract-signing strategy
for each player
C1
C2
X2
Y2
S2
xl
y
si
2,2
6,0
6,0
0,6
1,1
1,1
0,6
1,1
2,2

--- Sayfa 264 ---
246 6 Games with Communication
example, another contract might specify that, if both players sign the
contract, then a coin will be tossed after which occurs they will imple-
ment (x,,y2) if Heads and (y1,x2) if Tails. Then the expected payoff
allocation when both players sign this second contract is (3,3). Assuming
that the players must make their signing decisions independently and
that each player can sign only one contract, and letting S, denote player
i's option to sign the second contract, the transformed game becomes
as shown in Table 6.3. In this game, there are three perfect equilibria:
one at (s 1,s2), one at (S1,S2), and a third where each player i randomizes
between s, and s, (with probabilities 2/3 and Vs, respectively).
In realistic situations where players can sign contracts, there are usu-
ally a very wide range of contracts that could be considered. Further-
more, in such situations, contract-signing is usually only the last move
in a potentially long bargaining process. If we were to try to list all
strategies for bargaining and signing contracts as explicit options in a
strategic-form game, it would become unmanageably complicated. So, as
noted earlier, a fruitful analytical approach is to take the contract-
signing options out of the explicit structure of the game and instead
express the impact of these options by developing a new solution con-
cept that takes them into account.
So let us introduce the concept of a game with contracts. When we
say that a given game is with contracts, we mean that, in addition to the
options that are given to the players in the formal structure of the game,
the players also have very wide options to bargain with each other and
to sign contracts, where each contract binds the players who sign it to
some correlated strategy that may depend on the set of players who
sign. After saying that a game is with contracts, we can then leave the
Table 6.3 A game in strategic form, including two contract-signing strategies
for each player
C2
C I
x2
Y2
S2
S2
x,
2,2
0,6
0,6
0,6
Yi
6,0
1,1
1,1
1,1
s,
gi
6,0
6,0
1,1
1,1
2,2
1,1
1,1
3,3

--- Sayfa 265 ---
6.1 • Contracts and Correlated Strategies 247
actual structure of these contract-signing options implicit and take them
into account by an appropriate solution concept.
Formally, given any strategic-form game F = (N, (C,),EN, (u,),EN), a
correlated strategy for a set of players is any probability distribution over
the set of possible combinations of pure strategies that these players can
choose in F. That is, given any S C N, a correlated strategy for S is any
probability distribution in A(Cs), where
Cs  = X Ci.
iE s
In this notation, we also can write
C = CN, and C_, = C,_,.
A set of players S might implement a correlated strategy Ts  by having
a trustworthy mediator (or a computer with a random-number gener-
ator) randomly designate a profile of pure strategies in Cs  in such a way
that the probability of designating any cs  = (c)
z, E S in Cs  is Ts(cs). Then
the mediator would tell each player i in S to implement the strategy c,
that is the i-component of the designated profile cs.
Given any correlated strategy in A(C) for all players, for each i, let
U,(R) denote the expected payoff to player i when p. is implemented in
the game F. That is,
U1(1.1,) =
11(C)11,(C)•
cE C
Let U(p.) = (U,(1)),E, denote the expected payoff allocation to the
players in N that would result from implementing Here, we define
an allocation to be any vector that specifies a payoff for each player.
With this notation, a contract can be represented mathematically by
any vector T = (T S)SCN in X scNA(Cs). For any such contract T, Ts rep-
resents the correlated strategy that would be implemented by the players
in S if S were the set of players to sign the contract. So for any allocation
in the set
{U(R) I µ E A(C)},
there exists a contract such that, if the players all signed this contract,
then they would get this expected payoff allocation. This set of possible
expected payoff allocations is a closed and convex subset of RN.

--- Sayfa 266 ---
248 6 • Games with Communication
However, not all such contracts could actually be signed by everyone
in an equilibrium of the implicit contract-signing game. For example,
in the game shown in Table 6.1, player 1 would refuse to sign a contract
that committed the players to implement (xi,y2). Such a contract would
give him a payoff of 0 if player 2 signed it, but player 1 could guarantee
himself a payoff of 1 by signing nothing and choosing yi.
For any player i, the minimax value (or security level) for player i in
game F is
(6.1)
v, = min
(max E TN_AcNjuz(c,„_,,c)).
A(CN—,)
c, E C, cN—,ECN—,
That is, the minimax value for player i is the best expected payoff that
player i could get against the worst (for him) correlated strategy that
the other players could use against him. A minimax strategy against player
i is any correlated strategy in A(CN_,) that achieves the minimum in
(6.1). The theory of two-person zero-sum games (Section 3.8) tells us
that the minimax value also satisfies
v, = max ( min I TACjit,(CN,, C))
E A(C,)
cN—,E CN —, C,EC,
So player i has a randomized strategy that achieves the above maximum
and guarantees him an expected payoff that is not less than his minimax
value, no matter what the other players may do.
We may say that a correlated strategy 11 in A(C) for the set of all
players is individually rational iff
(6.2)
U,(p.)
vi, Vi E N.
The inequalities in condition (6.2) are called participation constraints or
individual-rationality constraints on the correlated strategy
Suppose now that players make their decisions about which contract
to sign independently. For any such individually rational correlated
strategy li,, there exists a contract 'T with TN = µ such that all players
signing this contract is an equilibrium of the implicit contract-signing
game. To prove this fact, for each player i, let TN_, be a minimax strategy
against player i. Then no player could do better than his minimax value
if he were the only player to not sign the contract. Thus, each player
would want to sign if he expected all other players to sign. (If condition
6.2 is satisfied with all strict inequalities, then this equilibrium of the
contract-signing game is also perfect, proper, and persistent.)

--- Sayfa 267 ---
6.2 • Correlated Equilibria 249
Figure 6.1
Conversely, no equilibrium of any contract-signing game can generate
an expected payoff allocation in which some player gets strictly less than
his minimax value, because he could then do better by signing nothing
and using the strategy that guarantees him his minimax value. So
IU(R) I µ E A(C) and U,(1.1)
v„ Vi E
is exactly the set of payoff allocations that can be achieved in equilibria
of the implicit contract-signing game, when every player i has the option
to sign nothing and choose an action in G. This set of all possible
expected payoff allocations that are individually rational is also closed
and convex.
For the game in Table 6.1, the set of possible expected payoff allo-
cations is the closed convex set that has extreme points (0,6), (6,0), and
(1,1). (The allocation (2,2) is in the interior of this set.) The set of
possible expected payoff allocations satisfying individual rationality is
the smaller triangle with extreme points (corners) at (1,1), (5,1), and
(1,5), as shown in Figure 6.1.
6.2 Correlated Equilibria
There are many situations in which players cannot commit themselves
to binding contracts. Players' strategies might be unobservable to the
legal enforcers of contracts; or sanctions to guarantee compliance with
contracts might be inadequate; or some players' strategies might involve
inalienable rights (such as the inalienable right of a worker to quit a

--- Sayfa 268 ---
250 6 • Games with Communication
job). In such situations, it might still be possible for the players to
communicate and coordinate with each other. We say that a game is
with communication if, in addition to the strategy options explicitly spec-
ified in the structure of the game, the players have a very wide range
of implicit options to communicate with each other. Aumann (1974)
showed that the solutions for games with communication may have
remarkable properties, even without contracts.
Consider the example in Table 6.4. Without communication, there
are three equilibria of this game: (x,,x2), which gives the payoff alloca-
tion (5,1); (y,,y2), which gives the payoff allocation (1,5); and a random-
ized equilibrium, which gives the expected payoff allocation (2.5,2.5).
The best symmetric payoff allocation (4,4) cannot be achieved by the
players without binding contracts, because (y1,x2) is not an equilibrium.
However, even without contracts, communication can allow the players
to achieve an expected payoff allocation that is better for both than
(2.5,2.5). For example, the players might plan to toss a coin and choose
(x,,x2) if Heads occurs or (y,,y2) if Tails occurs, and thus implement the
correlated strategy 0.5[x1,x2] + 0.5[y,,y2]. Even though the coin toss has
no binding force on the players, such a plan is self-enforcing, in the sense
that neither player could gain by unilaterally deviating from this plan.
With the help of a mediator (that is, a person or machine that can help
the players communicate and share information), there is a self-enforc-
ing plan that generates an even better expected payoff allocation
(31/2, 31/2). To be specific, suppose that a mediator randomly recom-
mends strategies to the two players in such a way that each of the pairs
(x1,x2), (Y02), and (Y1,x2) is recommended with probability 1/3. Suppose
also that each player learns only his own recommended strategy from
the mediator. Then, even though the mediator's recommendation has
no binding force, there is a Nash equilibrium of the transformed game
with mediated communication in which both players plan to always obey
Table 6.4 A game in strategic form
C2
C 1
X2
Y2
x,
5,1
0,0
Yi
4,4
1,5

--- Sayfa 269 ---
6.2 • Correlated Equilibria 251
the mediator's recommendations. If player 1 heard a recommendation
"y," from the mediator, then he would think that player 2 was told to
do x2  or y2  with equal probability, in which case his expected payoff
from y, would be as good as from x1  (2.5 from either strategy). If player
1 heard a recommendation "x," from the mediator, then he would know
that player 2 was told to do x2, in which case his best response is x1. So
player 1 would always be willing to obey the mediator if he expected
player 2 to obey the mediator, and a similar argument applies to player
2. That is, the players can reach a self-enforcing understanding to each
obey the mediator's recommendation when he plans to randomize in
this way. Randomizing between (x,,x2), (y1,y2), and (y,,x2) with equal
probability gives the expected payoff allocation
1/2(5,1) + 1/2(4,4) + 1/2(1,5) = (31/2, 31/2).
Notice that the implementation of this correlated strategy 1/2[x 1,x2] +
1/2[y,,y2] + 1/2[yi,x2] without contracts required that each player get
different partial information about the outcome of the mediator's ran-
domization. If player 1 knew when player 2 was told to choose x2, then
player 1 would be unwilling to choose y, when it was also recommended
to him. So this correlated strategy could not be implemented without
some kind of mediation or noisy communication. With only direct un-
mediated communication in which all players observe anyone's state-
ments or the outcomes of any randomizations, the only self-enforcing
plans that the players could implement without contracts would be
randomizations among the Nash equilibria of the original game (without
communication), like the correlated strategy .5[x,,x2] + .5[y ,,y2] that we
discussed earlier. (However, Barany, 1987, and Forges, 1990, have
shown that, in any strategic-form and Bayesian game with four or more
players, a system of direct unmediated communication between pairs
of players can simulate any centralized communication system with a
mediator, provided the communication between any pair of players is
not directly observable by the other players.)
Consider now what the players could do if they had a bent coin for
which player 1 thought that the probability of Heads was 0.9 while
player 2 thought that the probability of Heads was 0.1, and these as-
sessments were common knowledge. With this coin, it would be possible
to give each player an expected payoff of 4.6 by the following self-
enforcing plan: toss the coin and then implement the (x,,x2) equilibrium
if Heads occurs, and implement the (y1,y2) equilibrium otherwise.

--- Sayfa 270 ---
252 6 • Games with Communication
However, the players' beliefs about this coin would be inconsistent, in
the sense of Section 2.8. That is, there is no way to define a prior
probability distribution for the outcome of the coin toss and two other
random variables such that player 1's beliefs are derived by Bayes's
formula from the prior and his observation of one of the random
variables, player 2's beliefs are derived by Bayes's formula from the
prior and her observation of the other random variable, and their beliefs
about the probability of Heads are common knowledge. (See Aumann,
1976, for a general proof of this fact.)
The existence of such a coin, about which the players have inconsis-
tent beliefs, would be very remarkable and extraordinary. With such a
coin, the players could make bets with each other that would have
arbitrarily large positive expected monetary value to both! Thus, as a
pragmatic convention, let us insist that the existence of any random
variables about which the players may have such inconsistent beliefs
should be explicitly listed in the structure of the game and should not
be swept into the implicit meaning of the phrase "game with commu-
nication." (These random variables could be explicitly modeled either
by a Bayesian game with beliefs that are not consistent with any common
prior or by a game in generalized extensive-form, where a distinct
subjective probability distribution for each player could be assigned to
the set of alternatives at each chance node.) Similarly (but more ob-
viously), any player's opportunities to observe random variables that
affect payoffs must be explicitly modeled in the game. Thus, when we
say that a particular game is played "with communication," we mean
that players and mediators have wide but implicit opportunities to ob-
serve and exchange information about payoff-irrelevant random vari-
ables that are all sampled from objective probability distributions about
which everyone agrees.
In general, for any finite strategic-form game F = (N, (C,),EN, (u,),(N),
a mediator who was trying to help coordinate the players' actions would
(at least) need to let each player i know which strategy in C, was rec-
ommended for him. When the mediator can communicate separately
and confidentially with each player, however, no player would have to
be told the recommendations for any other players. Without contracts,
player i would then be free to choose any strategy in Ci, after hearing
the mediator's recommendation. So in the game with mediated com-
munication, each player i would actually have an enlarged set of com-
munication strategies that would include all mappings from C, into C„

--- Sayfa 271 ---
6.2 • Correlated Equilibria 253
each of which represents a possible rule for choosing an element of C,
as a function of the mediator's recommendation in C,.
Now, suppose that it is common knowledge that the mediator will
determine his recommendations according to the probability distribu-
tion p. in A(C); so p,(c) denotes -the probability that any given pure-
strategy profile c = (c,),,N  would be recommended by the mediator.
Then it would be an equilibrium for all players to obey the mediator's
recommendations iff
(6.3)
uj(i)
E woui(c_i,8,(0), Vi E N, V8,:C, —> C,
cEC
(where UAW is as defined in Section 6.1). Following Aumann (1974,
1987a), we say that p. is a correlated equilibrium of F iff p, E AMC) and p,
satisfies condition (6.3). That is, a correlated equilibrium is any corre-
lated strategy for the players in F that could be self-enforcingly imple-
mented with the help of a mediator who can make nonbinding confi-
dential recommendations to each player.
It can be shown that condition (6.3) is equivalent to the following
system of inequalities:
(6.4)
E pL(c)(u,(c) — 	0, Vi E N, Vc, E Ci, Ve, E C,.
c_,EC_,
(Here c = (c_„c,).) To interpret this inequality, notice that, given any c„
dividing the left-hand side by would make it equal to the
difference between player i's conditionally expected payoff from obey-
ing the mediator's recommendation and his conditionally expected pay-
off from using the action e„ given that the mediator has recommended
c„ when all other players are expected to obey the mediator's recom-
mendations. Thus, condition (6.4) asserts that no player i could expect
to increase his expected payoff by using some disobedient action e, after
getting any recommendation c, from the mediator. These inequalities
(6.3) and (6.4) can be called strategic incentive constraints, because they
represent the mathematical inequalities that a mediator's correlated
strategy must satisfy to guarantee that all players could rationally obey
his recommendations.
The set of correlated equilibria is a compact and convex set, for any
finite game in strategic form. Furthermore, it can be characterized by
a finite collection of linear inequalities, because a vector p. in RN  is a

--- Sayfa 272 ---
254 6 • Games with Communication
correlated equilibrium iff it satisfies the strategic incentive constraints
(6.3 or 6.4) and the following probability constraints
ii(e) = 1 and ti.(c)
0, Vc E C.
eEC
Thus, for example, if we want to find the correlated equilibrium that
maximizes the sum of the players' expected payoffs in F, we have a
problem of maximizing a linear objective (E,,,,U,(1.1.)) subject to linear
constraints. This is a linear programming problem, which can be solved
by any one of many widely available computer programs.
For the game in Table 6.4, the problem of finding the correlated
equilibrium that maximizes the expected sum of the players' payoffs
can be formulated as follows:
maximize 611(x1,x2) + OR(x1,y2) + 811(y,,x2) + 6p,(y,,y2)
subject to
(5 — 4)1,(x,,x2) + (0 — 1)ti,(x1,y2) > 0,
(4  — 5)11(Y1,x2) + (1  — 0)1-1(Yi,Y2)
0,
(1 — 0)11(xl,x2) + (4 — 5)1.4y,,x2) > 0,
(0  —
1)I1(xi,Y2) + (5  — 4)1-1.(Y1,Y2) > 0,
1 (x1,x2)
1-1-(x1,Y2)
1-4Y1,x2)
P.(Y1,Y2) = 1,
R(x,,x2)
0, ii(x1,y2) > 0, ii(y,,x2)
0, and
P-(Y 1,Y2) > O.
Using standard techniques of Lagrangean analysis (see Theorem 2 of
Myerson, 1985a) or the simplex algorithm for linear programming, we
can show that the optimal solution to this problem is the correlated
equilibrium where
1.(x1,x2) = 	= tgy1,y2) = 1/3 and 11(xl,y2) = 0.
That is, among all correlated equilibria, 1/3[x1,x2] + 1/3[yi,y2] +
1/3[y,,x2] maximizes the sum of the players' expected payoffs. So the
strategic incentive constraints imply that the players' expected sum of
payoffs cannot be higher than 31/2 + 31/2 = 62A.
(This result can also be derived by elementary methods that exploit
the symmetry of the example. If (i is any correlated equilibrium of this
game and p..(x1,x2) = il(yi,y2) = •511(xi,x2) -51 (y1,Y2), = I1(x1,Y2),
and 1.1.(y1,x2) = il(y1,x2), thenµ is also a correlated equilibrium and

--- Sayfa 273 ---
6.2 • Correlated Equilibria 255
generates the same expected sum of players' payoffs as 11 does. So there
is no loss of generality in considering only correlated equilibria such
that p.,(xi,x2) = p.(yi,y2)• With this condition, the objective is to maximize
1211(y,,y2) + 8p,(yi,x2), while the probability constraints and the second
strategic incentive constraint imply that 1 — 21.4y1,y2) > 1.4y,,x2) and
11(y142) > WY' ,x2). But the maximum of
121 (y142) + 8m1n1P-(y1,Y2), 1  — 21 (y142)}
is 62/3, achieved when igyi,y2) = 1/3.)
It may be natural to ask why we have been focusing our attention on
mediated communication systems in which it is rational for all players
to obey the mediator. The reason for this focus is that such communi-
cation systems can simulate any equilibrium of any game that can be
generated from any given strategic-form game by adding any commu-
nication system. To see why, let us try to formalize a general framework
for describing communication systems that might be added to a given
strategic-form game F as above. Given any communication system, let
R, denote the set of all strategies that player i could use to determine
the reports that he sends out into the communication system, and let
M, denote the set of all messages that player i could receive from the
communication system. For any r = ( ) in R
- = X iEN R2 and any m =
(7/,),EN  in M = X LE A, M2, let v(m1r) denote the conditional probability
that m would be the messages received by the various players if each
player i were sending reports according to ri. This function v:R —* 1(M)
is our basic mathematical characterization of the communication system.
(If all communication is directly between players, without noise or me-
diation, then every player's message would be composed directly of
other players' reports to him, and so v(. r) would always put probability
1 on some vector m; but noisy communication or randomized mediation
allows 0 < v(m j r) < 1.)
Given such a communication system, the set of pure communication
strategies that player i can use for determining the reports that he sends
and the action in Ci  that he ultimately implements (as a function of the
messages he receives) is
B, = {(7-„8,) I r, E R„ Sz:M, —> Ci}.
Player i's expected payoff depends on the communication strategies of
all players according to the function rl„ where

--- Sayfa 274 ---
256 6 • Games with Communication
iii((r),8);EN) = Em  v(n r)ui((k(mpiEN)•
mE
Thus, the communication system v:R —> (M) generates a communication
game ry, where
F. = (AT, (Bi),N, (u,),,N)•
This game r,, is the appropriate game in strategic form to describe the
structure of decision-making and payoffs when the game r has been
transformed by allowing the players to communicate through the com-
munication system v before choosing their ultimate payoff-relevant ac-
tions. To characterize rational behavior by the players in the game with
communication, we should look among the equilibria of ri,.
However, any equilibrium of ri, is equivalent to a correlated equilib-
rium of r as defined by the strategic incentive constraints (6.3). To see
why, let a = (a.,),,,„ be any equilibrium in randomized strategies of this
game ry. Let ;.t, be the correlated strategy defined by
= E
E
cri(ri,8)) v(rnir), Vc E C,
fr,$)cs mEs--1(0
Li
iEN
where we use the notation:
B = X B,; (r,8) = ((ri,8,),,N); and
:EN
8- 1(0 = fin E Mi 8i(mi) = ci, Vi E N}.
That is, the probability of any outcome c in C under the correlated
strategy p, is just the probability that the players would ultimately choose
this outcome after participating in the communication system v, when
every player determines his plan for sending reports and choosing
actions according to a. So p, effectively simulates the outcome that
results from the equilibrium a in the communication game r„. Because
p. is just simulating the outcomes from using strategies a in ry, if some
player i could have gained by disobeying the mediator's recommenda-
tions under R, when all other players are expected to obey, then he also
could have gained by similarly disobeying the recommendations of his
own strategy a, when applied against a_, in r„. More precisely, if con-
dition (6.3) were violated for some i and Si, then player i could gain by
switching from a-, to Cr, against in r„, where

--- Sayfa 275 ---
6.2 • Correlated Equilibria 257
=
E o-i(r ,ti), V(ri,•y) E Bi, and
Z (5, ,-y ,)
= Iti I 8i(ti(M)) = 'YAM), Hm, E
This conclusion would violate the assumption that a is an equilibrium.
So p. must satisfy the strategic incentive constraints (6.3), or else a could
not be an equilibrium of F,,.
Thus, any equilibrium of any communication game that can be gen-
erated from a strategic-form game r by adding a system for preplay
communication must be equivalent to a correlated equilibrium satisfying
the strategic incentive constraints (6.3) or (6.4). This fact is known as
the revelation principle for strategic-form games.
For any communication system v, there may be many equilibria of
the communication game r„, and these equilibria may be equivalent to
different correlated equilibria. In particular, for any equilibrium s:Tr of
the original game r, there are equilibria of the communication game
F„ in which every player i chooses a strategy in C, according to
independently of the reports that he sends or the messages that he
receives. (Such an equilibrium a of F„ can be constructed as follows: if
6,(mi) = ci  for all mi  in Mt, then cri(r„6,) = sTri(c,)/ I R, I for every r, in R,;
and if 6,(m) 0 8,(irsti) for some m, and rh„ then cri(r„8,) = 0.) That is,
adding a communication system does not eliminate any of the equilibria
of the original game, because there are always equilibria of the com-
munication game in which reports and messages are treated as having
no meaning and hence are ignored by all players. (Recall also the
discussion of Table 3.9 in Chapter 3.) Such equilibria of the commu-
nication game are called babbling equilibria.
The set of correlated equilibria of a strategic-form game r has simple
and tractable mathematical structure, because it is closed and convex
and is characterized by a finite system of linear inequalities. On the
other hand, the set of Nash equilibria of F, or of any specific commu-
nication game that can be generated from F, does not generally have
any such simplicity of structure. So the set of correlated equilibria, which
characterizes the union of the sets of equilibria of all communication
games that can be generated from F, may be easier to analyze than the
set of equilibria of any one of these games. This observation demon-
strates the analytical power of the revelation principle. That is, the
general conceptual approach of accounting for communication possi-

--- Sayfa 276 ---
258 6 • Games with Communication
bilities in the solution concept, rather than in the explicit game model,
not only simplifies our game models but also generates solutions that
are much easier to analyze.
6.3 Bayesian Games with Communication
The revelation principle for strategic-form games asserts that any equi-
librium of any communication system can be simulated by a communi-
cation system in which the only communication is from a central me-
diator to the players, without any communication from the players to
the mediator. The one-way nature of this communication should not be
surprising, because the players have no private information to tell the
mediator about, within the structure of the strategic-form game. More
generally, however, players in Bayesian games might have private in-
formation about their types, and two-way communication would then
allow the players' actions to depend on each other's types, as well as on
extraneous random variables like coin tosses. Thus, in Bayesian games
with communication, there might be a need for players to talk as well
as to listen in mediated communication systems (see Forges, 1986).
Let Fb  = (N, (C)iEN,  (T)iEN, (ui)i(N), be a finite Bayesian game
with incomplete information, as defined in Section 2.8. Let us suppose
now that Fb  is a game with communication; so the players have wide
opportunities to communicate, after each player i learns his type in Ti
but before he chooses his action in Ci.
Consider mediated communication systems of the following form:
first, each player is asked to confidentially report his type to the media-
tor; then, after getting these reports, the mediator confidentially rec-
ommends an action to each player. The mediator's recommendations
depend on the players' reports in either a deterministic or a random
fashion. For any c = (c)
in C
in
= X (NCI and any t = (ti)zEN in T =
X ,ENTi, let p.(c t) denote the conditional probability that the mediator
would recommend to each player i that he should use action c„ if each
player j reported his type to be t1. Obviously, these numbers il(c I t) must
satisfy the following probability constraints
(6.5)
p,(c I t) = 1 and ti(dlt)
0, Vd E C, Vt E T.
cEC
In general, any such function
---> A(C) is called a mediation plan or
mechanism for the game Fb  with communication.

--- Sayfa 277 ---
6.3 • Bayesian Games with Communication 259
If every player reports his type honestly to the mediator and obeys
the recommendations of the mediator, then the expected utility for type
t, of player i from the plan p. would be
uX1110=
pp_i lt,*(clouz(c,o,
t_,ET_, cEC
where T_, = X JEN_,T, and t = (t_„t,).
We must recognize, however, that each player could lie about his type
or disobey the mediator's recommendation. That is, we assume here
that the players' types are not verifiable by the mediator and that the
choice of an action in C, can be controlled only by player i. Thus, a
mediation plan p, induces a communication game F in which each
player must select his type report and his plan for choosing an action
in C, as a function of the mediator's recommendation. Formally rb, is
itself a Bayesian game, of the form
r„ =
(NJ.,
(Pi),EN, (To.)
where, for each player i,
B, = {(si,8,)Isi  E Ti, 8,:C,
and 27ci:( XJE NBJ) x T ---> R is defined by the equation
Tospzo„N,0 = E OcIMEN)U,(0j(CAEN,i).
cEC
A strategy (s„8) in B, represents a plan for player i to report s, to the
mediator and then to choose his action in C, as a function of the
mediator's recommendation according to Si; so he would choose 8(c) if
the mediator recommended c,. The action that player i chooses cannot
depend on the type-reports or recommended actions of any other
player, because each player communicates with the mediator separately
and confidentially.
Suppose, for example, that the true type of player i were t, but that
he used the strategy (s„8,) in the communication game F. If all other
players were honest and obedient to the mediator, then i's expected
utility payoff would be
= E E pi(t_iiti)wcIt_„Si)Ui((C-08i(C)),t).
t_,ET_, cEC

--- Sayfa 278 ---
260 6 • Games with Communication
(Here (t_„si) is the type profile in T that differs from t = (t_„ti) only in
that the i-component is s, instead of ta. Similarly, (c_„Si(c,)) is the action
profile in C that differs from c only in that the i-component is 8(ci)
instead of cz.)
Bayesian equilibrium (defined in Section 3.9) is still an appropriate
solution concept for a Bayesian game with communication, except that
we must now consider the Bayesian equilibria of the induced commu-
nication game rb,, rather than just the Bayesian equilibria of r. We say
that a mediation plan p, is incentive compatible iff it is a Bayesian equilib-
rium for all players to report their types honestly and to obey the
mediator's recommendations when he uses the mediation plan R. Thus,
t.t, is incentive compatible iff it satisfies the following general incentive
constraints:
(6.6)
U j(ilti)
Vi E N, Vti  E Ti, Hsi  E T1, V8i:Ci
C.
If the mediator uses an incentive-compatible mediation plan and each
player communicates independently and confidentially with the media-
tor, then no player could gain by being the only one to lie to the mediator
or disobey his recommendations. Conversely, we cannot expect rational
and intelligent players to all participate honestly and obediently in a
mediation plan unless it is incentive compatible.
In general, there can be many different Bayesian equilibria of a
communication game Fb,, even if p, is incentive compatible. Further-
more, as in the preceding section, we could consider more general
communication systems, in which the reports that player i can send and
the messages that player i might receive are respectively in some arbi-
trary sets R, and Mi, not necessarily T, and C. However, given any
general communication system and any Bayesian equilibrium of the
induced communication game, there exists an equivalent incentive-com-
patible mediation plan, in which every type of every player gets the
same expected utility as he would get in the given Bayesian equilibrium
of the induced communication game. In this sense, there is no loss of
generality in assuming that the players communicate with each other
through a mediator who first asks each player to reveal all of his private
information and who then reveals to each player only the minimum
information needed to guide his action, in such a way that no player
has any incentive to lie or disobey. This result is the revelation principle
for general Bayesian games.

--- Sayfa 279 ---
6.3 Bayesian Games with Communication 261
The formal proof of the revelation principle for Bayesian games is
almost the same as for strategic-form games. Given a general commu-
nication system v:R ---> ti(M) and communication strategy sets as
defined in Section 6.2, a Bayesian equilibrium of the induced commu-
nication game would then be a vector if that specifies, for each i in N,
each (r„8,) in B,, and each t, in Ti, a number cr,(r,,8,14) that represents
the probability that i would report r, and choose his final action accord-
ing to 8, (as a function of the message that he receives) if his actual type
were t,. If if is such a Bayesian equilibrium of the communication game
induced by the communication system v, then we can construct an
equivalent incentive-compatible mediation plan 11 by letting
µ(c t) =
E (110-fri,8,10) v(mir), Vc E C, Vt E T.
(r,8)EB mE8-'(c)
iEN
(See Myerson, 1982.)
This construction can be described more intuitively as follows. The
mediator first asks each player to (simultaneously and confidentially)
reveal his type. Next the mediator computes (or simulates) the reports
that would have been sent by the players, with these revealed types,
under the given equilibrium. He computes the recommendations or
messages that would have been received by the players, as a function
of these reports, under the given communication system or mechanism.
Then he computes the actions that would have been chosen by the
players, as a function of these messages and the revealed types in the
given equilibrium. Finally, the mediator tells each player to do the action
computed for him at the last step. Thus, the constructed mediation plan
simulates the given equilibrium of the given communication system. To
verify that this constructed mediation plan is incentive compatible, no-
tice that any type of any player who could gain by lying to the mediator
or disobeying his recommendations under the constructed mediation
plan (when everyone else is honest and obedient) could also gain by
similarly lying to himself before implementing his equilibrium strategy
or disobeying his own recommendations to himself after implementing
his equilibrium strategy in the given communication game; but the
definition of a Bayesian equilibrium implies that such gains are not
possible.
Thus, incentive-compatible mediation plans are the appropriate gen-
eralization of the concept of correlated equilibria for Bayesian games
with communication. We can synonymously use the terms communication

--- Sayfa 280 ---
262 6 • Games with Communication
equilibrium or generalized correlated equilibrium to refer to any incentive-
compatible mediation plan of a Bayesian game.
(Notice, however, that the set of incentive-compatible mediation plans
is not equal to the set of correlated equilibria of the type-agent repre-
sentation of Fb  in strategic form, introduced in Section 2.8. The cor-
related equilibria of the type-agent representation have no clear inter-
pretation in terms of the given Bayesian game with communication,
unless one makes the unnatural assumption that a mediator can send
each player a message that depends on his actual type while the players
can send no reports to the mediator at all!)
Like the set of correlated equilibria, the set of incentive-compatible
mediation plans is a closed convex set, characterized by a finite system
of inequalities (6.5 and 6.6) that are linear in p.. On the other hand, it
is generally a difficult problem to characterize the set of Bayesian equi-
libria of any given Bayesian game. Thus, by the revelation principle, it
may be easier to characterize the set of all equilibria of all games that
can be induced from rb with communication than it is to compute the
set of equilibria of Fb  or of any one communication game induced
from F b.
For example, consider again the two-player Bayesian game from Ta-
ble 3.13 in Chapter 3. Suppose that the two players can communicate,
either directly or through some mediator, or via some tatonnement
(groping) process, before they choose their actions in C1  and C2. In the
induced communication game, could there ever be a Bayesian equilib-
rium giving the outcomes (x,,x2) if player 2 is type 2.1 and (y,,y2) if
player 2 is type 2.2, as naive analysis of the two matrices in Table 3.13
would suggest? The answer is "No," by the revelation principle. If there
were such a communication game, then there would be an incentive-
compatible mediation plan achieving the same outcomes. But this would
be the plan satisfying
p..(x1,x211.0,2.1) = 1,
p(y,,y211.0,2.2) = 1,
which is not incentive compatible, because player 2 could gain by lying
about his type. In fact, there is only one incentive-compatible mediation
plan for this example, and it is p-,, defined by
V.(x,,x211.0,2.1) = 1, 17(x1,y211.0,2.2) = 1.
That is, this game has a unique communication equilibrium, which is
equivalent to the unique Bayesian equilibrium of the game without
communication that we found in Section 3.9. (This analysis assumes

--- Sayfa 281 ---
6.4 Bayesian Collective-Choice Problems 263
that player 2 cannot choose her action and show it verifiably to player
1 before he chooses his action. She can say whatever she likes to player
1 about her intended action before they actually choose, but there is
nothing to prevent her from choosing an action different from the one
she promised if she has an incentive to do so.)
In the insurance industry, the inability to get individuals to reveal
unfavorable information about their chances of loss is known as adverse
selection, and the inability to get fully insured individuals to exert efforts
against their insured losses is known as moral hazard. This terminology
can be naturally extended to more general game-theoretic models. The
need to give players an incentive to report information honestly can be
called adverse selection. The need to give players an incentive to imple-
ment recommended actions can be called moral hazard. (See Rasmusen,
1989, for a survey of economic games involving adverse selection and
moral hazard.) In this sense, we can say that the general incentive
constraints (6.6) are a general mathematical characterization of the ef-
fect of adverse selection and moral hazard in Bayesian games.
We can also ask how these incentive constraints might be relaxed if
there is a regulator (or contract-enforcer) to eliminate moral hazard, or
an auditor to eliminate adverse selection. The participation constraints
(6.2) characterize what players in a strategic-form game can achieve
when they bargain over contracts without adverse-selection or moral-
hazard problems. The strategic incentive constraints (6.3) characterize
what players can achieve with rational communication in a case where
there is a moral-hazard problem but no adverse selection. The next case
to consider is that of adverse selection without moral hazard, in Bayesian
collective-choice problems.
6.4 Bayesian Collective-Choice Problems and Bayesian
Bargaining Problems
A Bayesian collective-choice problem differs from a Bayesian game in
that we are given a set of possible outcomes that are jointly feasible for
the players together, rather than a set of actions or strategies for each
player separately. That is, a Bayesian collective-choice problem is any I'
such that
= (IV, D, (T)
biEN,  (Pi)iEN,
where D is the nonempty set of possible outcomes or social options. The
other components (N, (Ti)iEN, (Pi)iEN, (ui)iEN) of the Bayesian collective-

--- Sayfa 282 ---
264 6 • Games with Communication
choice problem have the same interpretation and the same mathematical
structure as in the Bayesian game V)  (as defined in Section 2.8), except
that each utility function ui  is now a function from D x T into R (where
T = X,ENT„ as before).
A collective-choice plan or mechanism for rc is any function µ:T --* A(D).
That is, for every choice d in D and every possible profile of types t in
T, a mechanism p, specifies the probability WO) that d would be the
chosen outcome if t were the combination of types reported by the
players. So the components of p. must satisfy the probability constraints
E [Olt) = 1, Welt) 0, He E D, Vt E T.
dED
The expected payoff for type tz  of player i if all players report honestly
is
= E
E Pi( _ilt,)µ(dIt)ui(d,t);
LiE
dED
and the expected payoff for type ti  of player i if he reports s, while the
other players are honest is
u,*(11,silti) = E
E pi(t_
, s
i(d , t).
dED
The mechanism 11 is incentive compatible iff honest reporting by all players
is a Bayesian equilibrium of the game induced by That is,µ is
incentive compatible iff it satisfies the following informational incentive
constraints:
(6.7)
U,(1.Llt,)
Vi E N, Vt, E T„ Vs, E T2.
These definitions are the same as those given in the preceding section,
except that there is no longer any question of players disobeying rec-
ommended actions. With this simplification, the revelation principle
applies equally to Bayesian collective-choice problems and to Bayesian
games. That is, any equilibrium of reporting strategies in any game
that could be generated from rc by a rule for choosing outcomes as a
function of players' reports must be equivalent to some incentive-com-
patible mechanism that satisfies condition (6.7).
The Bayesian collective-choice problem I' subsumes a Bayesian game
rb iff rb can be written in the form

--- Sayfa 283 ---
6.4 Bayesian Collective-Choice Problems 265
=
(6i)iEN, (Ti)iEN, (MEN, (iii)i(nr),
where (letting C = X iEN6i) there exists some function g:6 —> D such that
12i(c,t) = ui(g(c),t), Vi E N, Vc E 6, Vt E T.
That is, rc subsumes any Bayesian game that has the same sets of players
and types as rc, has the same probability functions as rc, and has payoff
functions that can be derived from the payoff functions in I' by spec-
ifying an outcome in the collective-choice problem for every profile of
actions in the Bayesian game. If II is an incentive-compatible mechanism
for a Bayesian game F"  (in the sense of 6.6), rt. is subsumed by the
Bayesian collective-choice problem rc, and
11(d =
11(c 0, Vd E D, Vt E T
cEcl(d)
(where el(d) = {c E C Ig(c) = d}), thenµ must be an incentive-compat-
ible mechanism for I' as well (in the sense of 6.7). In this sense, the
incentive-compatible mechanisms of a Bayesian collective-choice prob-
lem F subsume or include the incentive-compatible mechanisms of all
the Bayesian games that are subsumed by r, when outcomes can de-
pend on players' actions in any arbitrary way.
For example, consider a bargaining game where player 1 is the seller
and player 2 is a potential buyer of a single individual object. The object
is worth $10 to player 2, but it might be worth any amount between $0
and $9 to player 1. Player 1's type is the value of the object to him.
Player 2 has no private information. Suppose that an outcome is a pair
(k,y), where k is the number of months during which the players bargain
before trading, and y is the price (in dollars) at which the object is
ultimately sold. Let the cost of time be described by a discount factor of
0.99 per month. So the utility payoffs (in present discounted value)
from an outcome (k,y) are
ui(k,y,t) = (0.99k)(y — t), u2(k,y,t) = (0.99k)(10 — y),
where t is the dollar value of the object to player 1.
With this collective-choice structure, suppose that the players are
involved in some bargaining game that has an equilibrium with the
following structure: if the value of the object is $0 to the seller, then
trade occurs immediately (with no delay, k = 0) at price $5, otherwise
trade occurs after some delay but always at the "fair" price that is

--- Sayfa 284 ---
266 6 • Games with Communication
halfway between the seller's value and the buyer's value. Without know-
ing anything more about the rules of the bargaining game, we can tell
how long it must take for the two players to trade when the seller's
value is $9, because any equilibrium of the bargaining game must cor-
respond to an incentive-compatible mechanism of the collective-choice
problem that subsumes it.
So let K(t) denote the number of months by which trading will be
delayed in this mechanism if the value of the object to the seller is t.
The price depends on the value of the object to the seller according to
the formula Y(t) = (10 + t)I2 in this mechanism (because we are given
that the price is always halfway between the seller's and buyer's values).
The informational incentive constraints for the seller imply that
(0.99K(`))
=
sE[
(102 t
(5  (10 + s
mx (0.
99K)) 	 t), Vt E [0,9].
2
0
a
9]
2
So for any t in the interval [0,9], if KO is differentiable, then
+
0 = ( as) ((o.00")) (Io
2  s  t
))

= (0.99"))(loge(0.99)(10 — t)K'(t) + 1)/2.
So K'(t) = —1/((10 — Ologe(0.99)). Given that K(0) = 0, this differential
equation has a unique solution, which satisfies
0.99")  = 1 — 1/10.
For the highest value of t = 9, the delay in bargaining must be K(9) =
loge(0.10)/loge(0.99) = 229.1. So the maximum delay before trading
must be 229.1 months, or about 19 years, in any equilibrium of this
game where the price always equalizes the buyer's and seller's gains
from trade.
In many situations, a mechanism cannot be implemented without the
prior consent or agreement of the players, so a feasible mechanism must
also satisfy some participation constraints. To characterize such partic-
ipation constraints, our model must specify what will happen if such
agreement does not occur. The simplest way to do this is to specify one
designated outcome d* in D, called the disagreement outcome, that will
occur if the players fail to agree on a mechanism. (More general models
of disagreement are discussed in Section 6.6.) A Bayesian collective-
choice problem together with specification of such a disagreement out-
come d* is called a Bayesian bargaining problem.
s=t

--- Sayfa 285 ---
6.4 • Bayesian Collective-Choice Problems 267
A mechanism p. for such a Bayesian bargaining problem is individually
rational iff it satisfies the following participation constraints:
(6.8)
(Mil, I t2) > E Pz(t-zIt,)u,(d*,t), Vi E N, Vt, E T,.
t_,ET_,
That is, each player, knowing his type, would agree to participate in the
mechanism p, only if IL is at least as good for him as the disagreement
outcome. There is no loss of generality in assuming that the players will
agree on a mechanism that satisfies condition (6.8) for all types. Given
any equilibrium of a mechanism-selection game in which some players
would sometimes insist on the disagreement outcome, there is an equiv-
alent individually rational mechanism that would choose the disagree-
ment outcome whenever one or more players would insist on it in the
given equilibrium of the mechanism-selection game. Thus, we say that
a mechanism p, is feasible for a Bayesian bargaining problem iff it is
incentive compatible and individually rational, in the sense of conditions
(6.7) and (6.8).
It is common to choose utility payoff scales so that every player's
payoff from the disagreement outcome is always 0, that is,
u,(d*,t) = 0, Vi E N, Vt E T.
With such payoff scales, the participation constraints (6.8) reduce to
IMP- 	Vi E N, Vt,E T,.
For a simple example, consider a trading situation involving one seller
(player 1) and one potential buyer (player 2) of some divisible commod-
ity. The seller has one unit available, and he knows its quality, which
may be either good (type 1.a) or bad (type 1.b). If it is of good quality,
then it is worth $40 per unit to the seller and $50 per unit to the buyer.
If it is of bad quality, then it is worth $20 to the seller and $30 to the
buyer. The buyer thinks that the probability of good quality is .2. Sup-
pose that the buyer cannot verify any claims that the seller might make
about the quality, and the seller cannot offer any quality-contingent
warranties when he sells the object.
To formulate this example as a Bayesian collective-choice problem,
we let T, = {1.a, 1 .b} and T2 = {2.0} (so the buyer's type can be ignored),
and we represent the player's beliefs by letting
p2(1.a12.0) = .2, p2(1.bI2.0) = .8, pi(2.01/1) = 1, Vt,.

--- Sayfa 286 ---
268 6 • Games with Communication
The set of possible outcomes is
D = {(q,y)10
q5-  1, y E R},
where, for each (q,y) in D, q represents the amount of the commodity
that the seller delivers to the buyer and y represents the amount of
money that the buyer pays to the seller. (For an indivisible object, q
could be reinterpreted as the probability that the buyer gets the object.)
The utility functions are
ul((q,y), (1.a,2.0)) = y — 40q,
u2((q,y), (1.a,2.0)) = 50q — y,
11,0q,y), (1.b,2.0)) = y — 20q,
u2((q,y), (1.b,2.0)) = 30q — y.
Because of the convexity of D and the linearity of the utility functions,
we can restrict our attention to deterministic trading mechanisms, that is,
functions from T to D, instead of functions from T to A(D). (Any
mechanism ii:T -- A(D) would be essentially equivalent to the deter-
ministic mechanism (Q,Y):T --> D, where
Q(t) = 1
q dii(q,ylt), Y(t) =
y dp,(q,y1 0.)
(q,y)ED
(q,y)ED
So let (Q(•),Y(•)) be a mechanism for determining the outcome as a
function of the seller's type, where Q(t) and Y(t) denote respectively the
expected quantity sold to the buyer and the expected cash payment
from the buyer to the seller when the seller's type is t. Because the seller
has only one unit of the commodity to sell, this mechanism must satisfy
0
Q(1.a)
1, 0 5_ Q(1.b) -_ 1.
The expected utilities from this mechanism for each type of each player
are
U 1(Q,Y I 1.a) = Y(1.a) — 40Q(1.a),
Ui(Q,Y11.b) = Y(1.b) — 20Q(1.b),
U2(Q, Y12.0) = .2(50Q(1.a) — Y(1.a)) + .8(30Q(1.b) — Y(1.b)).
The informational incentive constraints are
Y(1.a) — 40Q(1.a) _.. Y(1.b) — 40Q(1.b),

--- Sayfa 287 ---
6.4 .Bayesian Collective-Choice Problems 269
Y(1.b) — 20 Q(1.b)
Y(1.a) — 20Q(1.a).
Suppose that each player has the right to not trade, so the disagreement
outcome is (q,y) = (0,0). Then the participation constraints are
Y(1.a) — 40Q(1.a)
0,
Y(1.b) — 20Q(1.b)
0,
.2(50Q(1 .a) — Y(1.a)) + .8(30Q(1.b) — Y(1.b))
0.
The commodity is always worth more to the buyer than to the seller
in this example, but there is no incentive-compatible and individually
rational trading mechanism under which the buyer always gets all of
the commodity. In any such mechanism, we would have Q(1.a) =
Q(1.b) = 1; but then the seller's participation constraints and the infor-
mational incentive constraints would require 40 5- Y(1.a) = Y(1.b), a
result that would imply
U2(Q,Y12.0) 5_ .2 x 50 + .8 x 30 — 40 = —6 < 0.
Thus, there must be a positive probability that the seller keeps some of
the commodity in this example, as an unavoidable cost of the incentive
constraints.
Many general conclusions about feasible trading mechanisms can be
proved for this example, by analyzing the above constraints. From the
informational incentive constraints we get
40(Q(1 .b) — Q(1.a))
Y(1.b) — Y(1.a)
20(Q(1.b) — Q(1.a)),
SO
Q(1.b)
Q(1.a).
That is, the good-quality seller must sell less than the bad-quality seller,
as a way of signaling his need for a higher price. The bad-quality seller
cannot expect lower gains from trade than the good-quality seller ex-
pects, because
Ul(Q,Y11.b) — Ul(Q,Y11.a)
= (Y(1.b) — 20Q(1.b)) — (Y(1.a) — 20Q(1.a)) + 20Q(1.a)
0.
Expected gains are bounded above by the inequality
(6.9)
0.3 U1(Q,Y11.a) + 0.7 U1(Q,Y1 1.b) + U2(Q,Y12.0)
8.

--- Sayfa 288 ---
270 6 • Games with Communication
To prove this inequality, check that
3U,(Q, Yi 1.a) + 71/1(Q,Y11.b) + 10U2(Q,Y12.0)
= 80Q(1.b) + ((Y(1.a) — 20 Q(1.a)) — (Y(1.b) — 20 Q(1.b))
and recall that Q(1.b)
1.
We say that an incentive-compatible mechanism is incentive efficient iff
there is no other incentive-compatible mechanism that would give a
higher expected payoff to at least one type of one player without giving
a lower expected payoff to some other type of some player. Thus, for
this example, an incentive-compatible mechanism must be incentive
efficient if
0.3U,(Q,Y11.a) + 0.7U1(Q, Y1 1.b) + U2(Q, YI 2.0) = 8.
For a specific example of a feasible trading mechanism, suppose that
we want to stipulate that the price of the commodity should be $25 per
unit if it is of bad quality and $45 per unit if it is of good quality. (These
numbers are the averages of the values to the buyer and seller in each
case.) If everything is sold in the bad-quality case, then we have
Q(1.b) = 1, Y(1.b) = 25,
and Y(1.a) = 45Q(1.a). For incentive-compatibility, then, 25 — 20 a
(45 — 20)Q(1.a), so Q(1.a) 0.2. So let us complete the trading mech-
anism by specifying
Q(1.a) = 0.2, Y(1.b) = 45 x 0.2 = 9.
This mechanism is feasible (incentive compatible and individually ra-
tional), and it gives expected payoffs
U1Q,Y11.a) = 1, U,(Q,Iii 1.b) = 5, U2(Q,Y12.0) = 4.2.
Notice that 0.3 x 1 + 0.7 x 5 + 4.2 = 8, so condition (6.9) is satisfied
with equality. Thus, even though most of the good-quality commodity
would not be sold under this trading mechanism, it is incentive efficient.
That is, there is no feasible mechanism that would increase the expected
payoff for the buyer and both types of the seller.
It may be somewhat upsetting to discover that there must be a positive
probability that the seller keeps some of the commodity in this example.
After all, if both players know that the commodity is always worth more
to the buyer than to the seller, why do they not keep bargaining as long

--- Sayfa 289 ---
6.5 • Trading Problems with Linear Utility 271
as the seller has anything to sell? To understand the answer to this
question, we must consider a more elaborate model, in which trade can
occur at different points in time and there is some cost of waiting to
trade. (If there were no cost of waiting, then there would be no incentive
for the players to ever stop bargaining at any point in time and actually
trade.) In such a model, it is possible to create mechanisms in which the
buyer is sure to buy all of the seller's commodity eventually, but costs of
delay of trade will replace the costs of failure to (fully) trade in these mech-
anisms. For example, if the players use a discount factor of 0.99 per
month to discount future profits, then there is an incentive-compatible
mechanism for the above example in which the seller sells his entire
supply for $25 immediately if his type is 1.b, or he sells his entire supply
for $45 after a delay of 160.14 months if his type is 1.a. Notice that
0.99160 14 = 0.2, so
(25 — 20) = 5 	(0.9916o.14)(45 — 20),
(0.99160 14)(45 — 40) = 1,
.8(30 — 25) + .2(0.9916014)(50 — 45) = 4.2;
so this mechanism gives the same allocation of expected (present-dis-
counted) utility payoffs as the feasible trading mechanism without delay
discussed above. In general, if the players use a common discount factor
to measure costs of delay, then the set of expected utility allocations
that are achievable by incentive-compatible mechanisms cannot be en-
larged by allowing delay of trade. This result is proved and discussed
further in Section 10.4 of Chapter 10.
6.5 Trading Problems with Linear Utility
A powerful general characterization of incentive-compatible mecha-
nisms can be derived when each player's type set is an interval of the
real number line, each player's utility is linear in his own type, and types
are independent. So let us consider a Bayesian collective-choice problem
or Bayesian bargaining problem in which the set of players is N = {1,2,
. . . and each player i has a type that is a real number in the interval
between two given parameters L(i) and M(i), so
= [L(i),M(i)].

--- Sayfa 290 ---
272 6 • Games with Communication
For each i, let f, be a continuous positive probability density function
on the interval [L(i),M(i)], and suppose that every other player j thinks
that player i's type is a random variable that has probability density fi
and is independent of all other players' types. Let the set of social choice
options D be a convex subset of RN  x RN, with an element of D denoted
(4,Y) = ((qi)EN, (YLN) = (91, ••• ,97i, Y1, • • • ,y.).
In such an outcome (q,y), q, may be interpreted as the net quantity of
some commodity that is delivered to player i, and y, may be interpreted
as the net monetary payment that player i makes to others. Then sup-
pose that each player has utility that is linear in his trades q, and y„ and
the type of player i is his monetary value for a unit of the commodity,
SO
ui(q,y,t) =
— yi, Vi E N, Vt E T, V(q,y) E D.
So we are assuming, in this section, that the players have independent
private values for the commodity being traded.
Because utility is linear, we can again restrict our attention to deter-
ministic mechanisms, mapping from T into D, without loss of generality.
So let us denote a mechanism by a pair (Q,Y) such that, for any t in T,
(Q,Y )(t) = (Q(t),Y(t)) = (Q,(t), . . . ,Qn(t), Y i(t), . . . ,Y n(t)) E D.
Any random mechanism 1.1.:T —> A(D) would be essentially equivalent to
the deterministic mechanism (Q,Y) where, for every z and t,
Q,(t) =
q, digq,y1t), Y,(t) =
y, 6111(9,Yit).
(q,y)ED
(q,y)ED
That is, Q(t) and Y(t) are respectively the expected quantity of the
commodity delivered to i and i's expected net monetary payment to
others, when t is the profile of reported types. Whether honest or lying,
each player's expected payoff under the random mechanismµ could
be expressed in terms of (Q,Y), so it suffices to consider only (Q,Y).
Given any mechanism (Q, Y):T —> D and any type t, of player i, let
(2;(t;) =
t
Q=(t) 	.6(0) dt-i,
ET_; 	jEN-i
z(ti) = f
Yi(t)
fp)) dt_i•
BEN-i

--- Sayfa 291 ---
6.5 • Trading Problems with Linear Utility 273
(Here t = (t_„ti), as usual.) That is, ,,(t2) and FA) respectively denote
the expected quantity of the commodity to be delivered to player i and
the expected monetary payment to be made by player i, when he reports
his type to be t, and all other players report their types honestly to the
mechanism (Q,Y). So if everyone participates honestly, then the ex-
pected utility payoff to type t, of player i under mechanism (Q,Y) would
be
Ui(Q, ti) = Qi(tz)1, — K(ti).
On the other hand, if player i's type was 4 but he dishonestly reported
some other type s„ while everyone else followed the strategy of partic-
ipating honestly, then the expected payoff to player i would be
UP(Q, Y,si  I ti) = Qi(si)ti  —
So the informational incentive constraints that an incentive-compatible
mechanism (Q,Y) must satisfy are
U,(Q, YI it) = Q2(ti)ti — Yi(ti)
Vi E N, Vti  E Ti, Vsi  E Ti.
Rewriting these constraints with the roles of ti  and s, reversed, we can
easily show that they imply
Ot(ti)(ti
st) > Ui(Q,YI
Y I Si) 	—
These inequalities imply that -0(ti) is a nondecreasing (and so Riemann
integrable) function of ti  and that
(6.10)
Ui(Q,Y I  t,) = Ui(Q,Y I  Oi) +
e,
Vi E N, Vti  E T„ VO, E T,.
Then, before player i's type ti  is determined, the expected value of PA(ti)
is
m(t)
(6.11)
Yi(ti)f(ti)dti
L(i)
M(i)
=
(Qi(ti)ti  — Ui(Q,Y I ti))fi(ti)dti
L(i)

--- Sayfa 292 ---
274 6 • Games with Communication
= LA4(i)

0)  (
—Qi(ti)ti
Ui(Q,17 Oi)
Qi(si)dsiVi(ti)dti
=Lmo:i)
i(Q,Y I i)
• "
Qi(t)4(4, ) (II f;(0) dt1  • • • dt„ — Ui(Q,Y I 0)
A4(n)
m(1)
f L(n) 	ILO)
jEN
where
fmco
fi(s)dsi
= ti
.f(ti)
if ti  > 0i,
L,
f(s)ds,
fLO)

t liz(tiA) = ti
f(t)
if ti  < Oz.
Equations (6.10) and (6.11) have many important applications. The
rest of this section is devoted to a short survey of some simple examples
of particular economic interest, to illustrate the power of these equa-
tions.
For example, suppose that the players are bidders in an auction for
a single individual object and that the type of each bidder is his value
for the object. In this case, we may reinterpret QP) as the probability
that player i will get the object (and thus still as his expected quantity
of objects received) when the reported type profile is t. For each player
i, suppose that the minimum possible value L(i) is 0, and suppose that
a player whose true value for the object is 0 will not pay anything in
the auction, so
U,(Q,YI 0) = 0.
(That is, the individual-rationality constraint is satisfied with equality
for the lowest possible type, 0.) Then (6.11) with
0i  = L(i) = 0
implies that the total expected revenue to the auctioneer is
n IMO)
(6.12)
E
Y i(t)f(t)dti
i=1 0

--- Sayfa 293 ---
6.5 Trading Problems with Linear Utility 275
c o
Lmo)
)
Qz(oti(t„o)) llf;( 0dt,
dt„.
J(N

This equation implies that the auctioneer's expected revenue depends
only on the Q functions, which describe how the probability of each
player getting the object depends on the players' (reported) types. For
example, any mechanism that always delivers the object to the bidder
whose true value for the object is highest must have
Qi(t) = 1 if {i} = argmax
jEN
Q,(t) = 0 if i
argmax ti;
J EN
so all such mechanisms must give the same expected revenue to the
seller. (The set of type profiles where two or more players are in a tie
for the highest type has Lebesque measure 0, so the integral in equation
(6.12) does not depend on who gets the object in case of ties.) Notice
that, for any equilibrium of any auction game such that (1) the object
is always delivered to the highest bidder and (2) there is an increasing
function b:R R such that each bidder in equilibrium will submit a
bid b(tz) if his value is t„ the equivalent incentive-compatible mechanism
(under the revelation principle) is one in which the object is always
delivered to the player with the highest true value for the object. Thus,
all such equilibria of all such auction games must have the same expected
revenue to the auctioneer. This result explains many of the revenue-
equivalence results for equilibria of various auction games (first-price
auctions, second-price auctions, etc.) that have been known since Or-
tega-Reichert (1968) (see Milgrom, 1987, or McAfee and McMillan,
1987).
Suppose now that we want to find an incentive-compatible mechanism
that maximizes the expected revenue to the auctioneer. Suppose we can
find an incentive-compatible individually rational mechanism under
which, for any type profile t, the object is always delivered to a player
for whom the quantity 4;,(t„0) is maximal, provided this maximum is
nonnegative, and otherwise the auctioneer keeps the object. Then, un-
der this mechanism, the probabilities
Q(t) ttsi(ti3O)
(Qi(t))ieN  maximize

--- Sayfa 294 ---
276 6 • Games with Communication
subject to
E (2,(t) 5_ 1, WO > 0, Vj,
i=1
for every t, and so this mechanism maximizes the auctioneer's expected
revenue among all possible incentive-compatible individually rational
mechanisms.
For example, consider the case where there are two bidders, player
l's type is drawn from the uniform distribution on [0,1], and player 2's
type is drawn from the uniform distribution on [0,2]. Then
x,,(11,0) = t — ( 1 — ti) = 2t, — 1
412(t2,0) — 12 — (2 — 12) = 212  — 2.
We want to deliver the object to player 1 if 2t, — 1 > max{2t2  — 2, 0},
that is, if
t,
max{t2  — 0.5, 0.5}.
Similarly, we want to deliver the object to player 2 if 2t2  — 2 >
max{2t, — 1, 0}, that is, if
12
max{t, + 0.5, 1}.
If t, < 0.5 and 12  < 1, then we want the auctioneer to keep the object.
One way to implement this delivery plan incentive compatibly is to
specify that, given the type reports of the two players, the player (if
any) who gets the object under this plan will pay the infimum of all
reports that he could have made and still gotten the object, given the
report of the other player. For example, if the types are t, = 0.8 and
t2  = 0.9, then player 1 gets the object and pays 0.5, even though player
2 actually has the higher value for the object. This mechanism maxi-
mizes the auctioneer's expected revenue among all incentive-compatible
individually rational mechanisms, even though it may sometimes deliver
the object to the player with the lower value for it, or may even not
deliver the object to any bidder at all. The discrimination against player
2 when her reported value exceeds player l's reported value by less
than 0.5 serves in this optimal auction mechanism to encourage player
2 to honestly report higher types that may have to pay as much as 1.5
for the object. For more on optimal auctions, see Myerson (1981a).

--- Sayfa 295 ---
6.5 • Trading Problems with Linear Utility 277
Equations (6.10) and (6.11) can also be applied to bilateral trading
problems. Suppose that player 1 is the seller and player 2 is the only
potential buyer of a single indivisible object. Because player 1 has the
only object and any transfer from one player is necessarily a transfer to
the other player in bilateral trading, the set of possible outcomes is
D = {(q1,q2,y1,y2)I q2  = —q, E [0,1] and y2  = —yi  E R}.
So in any mechanism (Q,Y), we must have
Q2(t) = —Q 1(t) E [0,1] and Y2(t) = —Y1(t), Vt.
For each player i, let 0, be the type least willing to trade, so
01  = M(1), 02  = L(2).
Then equation (6.11) implies
(6.13)
0 = 	 (Y2(t) + Y1  (t))fi(t I)f2(t2)dtidt2
=  j
rM(2)
rM(1)
Y2(t2)f2(t2)dt2 	Y1(t1)f1(t1)dt1
L(2)
L(1)
M(2) i-M(1)
(22(t4202,L(2))
40101,A4(1)))f101)f2(t2)dtldt2
1L(2)
L(1)
U1(Q,Y1M(1))
U2(Q,YIL(2))
This and other related results have been studied by Myerson and Sat-
terthwaite (1983).
For example, suppose that the seller and buyer both have values for
the object that are independent random variables drawn from the in-
terval [0,1]. (This example was first considered by Chatterjee and Sam-
uelson, 1983.) Then
401,MM) = 411(t1,1) = tl  + t1  =
412(t2,142)) — 412(t2,0)
t2
(1 — t2) = 2t2 — 1.
Substituting these formulas into (6.13), with ic(tj = 1 for the uniform
distribution, we see that any incentive-compatible mechanism
must satisfy
L 0
f
 2(t2  — t1 — 1/2)Q2(ti,t2)dtidt2 = U1(Q,171 1) + U2(Q, 11 0).
M(2) fM(1)
fL(2)
L(1)
(Q,Y)

--- Sayfa 296 ---
278 6 • Games with Communication
When players have the right to not trade, the participation constraints
imply that each U,(Q,Yltz) must be nonnegative for any individually
rational mechanism. So this equation implies that, conditionally on trade
occurring in an incentive-compatible individually rational mechanism,
the expected difference between the buyer's value and the seller's value
must be at least '/2.
A trading mechanism is ex post efficient if it always allocates all of the
commodities being traded to the individuals who value them most
highly. That is, for ex post efficiency in a bilateral trading problem with
one object, the buyer should get the object whenever it is worth more
to her than to the seller.
For this bilateral trading example in which the player's private values
are independently drawn from the uniform distribution on the interval
[0,1], conditionally on the buyer's value being higher than the seller's,
the expected difference between the two values would be only Vs. (It
can be shown by calculus that
1-1  f
t2
(t2  — ti  — 1/2)dt,dt2  = 0.)
Thus, because V3 < 1/2, there is no ex post efficient incentive-compatible
individually rational mechanism for this example. By the revelation
principle, any equilibrium of any trading game must be equivalent to
some incentive-compatible individually rational mechanism. So when
the traders can lie about their types and can choose to not trade, there
is no way to design a trading game for this example such that, in
equilibrium, trade occurs whenever the object is actually worth more to
the buyer than to the seller. This impossibility result has been proved
for more general distributions by Myerson and Satterthwaite (1983).
It may be helpful to see how this failure of ex post efficiency occurs
in the context of a specific trading game. So suppose that the players
simultaneously submit bids, and the buyer gets the object for a price
equal to the average of their bids if her bid is higher than the seller's,
but otherwise no trade occurs. Chatterjee and Samuelson (1983) showed
that this game has an equilibrium in which the seller bids min{2t1/3 +
1/4, t 1 } and the buyer bids max{2t2/3 + '/12, t2}. This equilibrium of this
game is equivalent to the incentive-compatible individually rational
mechanism
Q2(t) = 1 if 212/3 + 1/12 > 2t,/3 + 1/4, that is, t2  > t, + 1/4,

--- Sayfa 297 ---
6.5 Trading Problems with Linear Utility 279
Q2(t) = 0 if t2  < ti  + 1/4,
Y2(t) = Q2(0(2t2/3
1/12
2t113 + 1/4)12
= Q2(t)(t1
t2
0.5)/3.
So trade will not occur if the buyer's value exceeds the seller's value by
less than 1/4. This differential is needed because, with any given value
for the object, the seller would submit a higher bid than the buyer
would submit with the same value, because of the seller's incentive to
try to increase the price and the buyer's incentive to try to decrease the
price. Leininger, Linhart and Radner (1989) have shown that this game
has other equilibria, which are equivalent to other incentive-compatible
individually rational mechanisms, but none can guarantee that the buyer
gets the object whenever it is worth more to her.
There are a variety of factors that can improve the prospects for
achieving ex post efficiency in other situations. We consider here two
such factors: large numbers of traders, and uncertainty about the di-
rection of trade.
Gresik and Satterthwaite (1989) have studied a general class of models
with many buyers and sellers, who have independent private values for
the commodity being traded. They have shown that incentive-compat-
ible individually rational mechanisms can be constructed that are arbi-
trarily close (in a certain technical sense) to ex post efficiency if the
number of buyers and sellers is sufficiently large. This result suggests
that large Bayesian trading problems where the traders have indepen-
dent private values may be well approximated by the classical general
equilibrium model of economic theory, in which ex post efficiency is
always achieved. To see how this might be so, suppose that there are
Ni  sellers, N2 buyers, each seller has an initial endowment of one unit
of the commodity, each trader can consume at most one unit of the
commodity, and the traders have independent private values for the
commodity that are each drawn from the uniform distribution on the
interval [0,1]. Consider a mechanism in which buyers and sellers can
only trade at some prespecified price x. By the law of large numbers, if
Ni  and N2 are large, then, with probability close to 1, the fraction of
the N 1  sellers who are willing to sell at this price is close to x, and the
fraction of the N2 buyers who are willing to buy at this price is close to
(1 — x). So let us choose x such that Nix = N2(1 — x), and match for
trading as many buyer—seller pairs as we can among those who offer to

--- Sayfa 298 ---
280 6 • Games with Communication
trade at this price. Any mutually beneficial trade that could occur after
the operation of this mechanism would necessarily involve a player
whose offer to trade at price x was turned down (due to a shortage of
players offering to trade from the other side of the market). If N1  and
N2 are large, then, with probability almost 1, the number of such traders
will be a very small fraction of the total number of traders.
Cramton, Gibbons, and Klemperer (1987) have shown that uncer-
tainty about the direction of trade (that is, uncertainty about whether
any given player will be a net buyer or a net seller of the commodity)
can help make ex post efficient mechanisms feasible. For example,
suppose as before that players 1 and 2 are the only traders, each player
has linear utility for money and the commodity, and their private values
for a unit of the commodity are independent random variables drawn
from the uniform distribution on the interval [0,1]. Now, however,
suppose that each player has an initial endowment of one unit of a
given commodity. So everything is the same as in the preceding example,
except that now the set of possible outcomes is
D = {(q1,q2,y1,y2)1q2  = —q1  E [-1,1] and y2  = —yi  E R}.
There are incentive-compatible individually rational mechanisms for
this example that guarantee that the player who has the higher private
value for the commodity will buy all of the other player's supply. For
instance, consider the game where the players simultaneously submit
sealed bids, and the player with the higher bid buys the other's supply
for the average of their two bids. This game has an equilibrium in which
each player i submits a bid of 2t,/3 + 1/4 when his true value is t,. So this
equilibrium is equivalent to the mechanism (Q,Y) where
—Q1(t) = Q2(t) = 1 if 212/3 +
> 2t1 /3 + 1/6, that is, t2  > t1,
— Q 1(0 = Q2(1) = —1 if 12  < t1,
—Y1(t) = Y2(t) = Q2(t)(2t2/3 + 1/4 + 2t1/3 + 1/4)/2
= Q2(0(t1
t2
1/2)/3,
which is incentive compatible, individually rational, and ex post efficient.
In this equilibrium, each player may bid either higher or lower than
his true value, depending on whether it is lower or higher than 1/2, that
is, depending on whether he is more likely to sell or buy in the ultimate
transaction. In the terminology of Lewis and Sappington (1989), a play-

--- Sayfa 299 ---
6.6 • General Participation Constraints 281
er's uncertainty about whether he will ultimately buy or sell creates
countervailing incentives that may reduce his incentive to lie in trading
games and so may decrease the cost of satisfying informational incentive
constraints.
6.6 General Participation Constraints for Bayesian Games with
Contracts
Any given Bayesian game rb = (N,(C,),EN,(T,).EN, (Pz),EN, (u,),,N) can be
subsumed by a Bayesian collective-choice problem rc as defined in
Section 6.4, when the set of outcomes is identified with the set of profiles
of actions, that is,
D = C = X
iEN
However, the set of incentive-compatible mechanisms of rc (in the sense
of condition 6.7) is larger than the set of incentive-compatible mecha-
nisms of rb (in the sense of condition 6.6), because we ignore moral
hazard in the Bayesian collective-choice problem. In effect, the general
incentive constraints (6.6) that define incentive compatibility for Bayes-
ian games are based on an assumption that each player i has an in-
alienable right to control his action in C, himself. Let us now investigate
what happens when we change this assumption and suppose instead
that this right is alienable. That is, player i can choose to sign a contract
that delegates control of his action in C, to some agent or regulator,
who will exercise control according to the mechanism specified by the
contract. However, player i also has the option to refuse to sign any
such contract and control his action himself.
If player i refused to participate in a mechanism
then the other
players' actions could still depend on each others' types according to
some plan T_,:T_,
A(C_,) that may be specified by the contract for
this contingency. Of course, without any report from player i, this plan
cannot depend on i's actual type in T. On the other hand, each player
already knows his type at the beginning of the game, when he makes
his participation decision. Thus, if it would be an equilibrium for all
players to sign a contract that would implement the mechanism
--->
A(C) when everyone signs, then p, must satisfy the following general
participation constraints:

--- Sayfa 300 ---
282 6 • Games with Communication
(6.14)
Vi E N, 	---> A(C_i) such that, Vti  E Ti,
U i(p.lti) > max E
E
ciECi t_1ET_1 c_iEC_i
(Here "3" means "there exists.") We may say that p. is individually rational
iff it satisfies these participation constraints. Notice that we are assuming
that each player already knows his type when he decides whether to
participate in the mechanism.
Conversely, suppose that a mechanism p.:T —> 11(C) satisfies the par-
ticipation constraints (6.14) and the informational incentive constraints
(6.7). Suppose that, when a player signs a delegation contract, he must
make a confidential report about his type (to be used only in imple-
menting the contract); and suppose that each player must make his
signing decision and his report simultaneously with and independently
of every other player. (Perhaps each player sits in a separate room with
a copy of the contract and a type-report form.) Finally, suppose that
the contract specifies that µ:T ---> A(C) would be implemented if everyone
signs it and, for each player i, the threat that satisfies (6.14) would
be implemented if i were the only player who did not sign. Then it
would be an equilibrium for every type of every player to sign the
contract and report honestly. Under this equilibrium, because each
player is sure that all other players are signing when he signs the
delegation contract and reports his type, potential gains from lying or
not participating under the terms of some would not affect his
incentives when he actually signs the contract and makes his report.
There is really no loss of generality in assuming that the players will
all sign a contract to jointly regulate their actions and then make reports
about their types. For example, suppose that, in some equilibrium of a
contract-signing game, there is a positive probability that some type t,
of some player i would refuse to sign the delegation contract that
everyone else is signing. Then this type t, of player i would be willing
to sign a revised version of the contract that specified that, if after
signing he reported this type, then the other players would do whatever
the original contract specified for them when he did not sign, and that
he must do whatever he would have wanted to do after not signing the
original contract with this type. Once a player has signed a delegation
contract, there is no loss of generality in assuming that he must make
some report about his type, because subsequent silence could be inter-
preted as being synonymous with some specified report under the terms
of the contract.

--- Sayfa 301 ---
6.7 • Sender—Receiver Games 283
Thus, for a Bayesian game Fb  with contracts but without verifiable
types (that is, without moral hazard but with adverse selection), a feasible
mechanism p..:T —> A(C) is one that satisfies the informational incentive
constraints (6.7) and the general participation constraints (6.14). It can
be shown that the set of all mechanisms that satisfy (6.14) is convex, so
the set of such feasible mechanisms is convex.
6.7 Sender—Receiver Games
Sender—receiver games are a special class of Bayesian games with com-
munication that have been studied, to gain insights into the problems
of communication, since Crawford and Sobel (1982). A sender—receiver
game is a two-player Bayesian game with communication in which player
1 (the sender) has private information but no choice of actions, and
player 2 (the receiver) has a choice of actions but no private information.
Thus, sender—receiver games provide a particularly simple class of ex-
amples in which both moral hazard and adverse selection are involved.
A general sender—receiver game can be characterized by specifying
(T,,C2,p,u,,u2), where T, is the set of player l's possible types, C2 is the
set of player 2's possible actions, p is a probability distribution over Ti
that represents player 2's beliefs about player l's type, and u1  :C2  x T, --->
R and u2:C2  x T, ---> R are utility functions for player 1 and player 2,
respectively. A sender—receiver game is finite iff T, and C2 are both
finite sets.
A mediation plan or mechanism for the sender—receiver game as char-
acterized above is any function A(C2). If such a plan 11 were
implemented honestly and obediently by the players, then the expected
payoff to player 2 would be
U2\µ) = E E 01)11(C21t1)U2(C2,t1)
€1ET1 c2(C2
and the conditionally expected payoff to player 1 if he knew that his
type was t, would be
u1(1'1,1t,) = E P*21 )
)•
c2 E C2
The general incentive constraints (6.6) can be simplified in sender—
receiver games. Because player 1 controls no actions, the incentive
constraints on player 1 reduce to purely informational incentive con-
straints similar to condition (6.7). On the other hand, because player 2

--- Sayfa 302 ---
284 6 • Games with Communication
has no private information, the incentive constraints on player 2 reduce
to purely strategic incentive constraints similar to condition (6.4). Thus,
a mediation plan p. is incentive compatible for the sender—receiver game
iff
(6.15)
E ii(c2 it1)ul(c2,0 > E 1.4c2 ls1)u,(c2,t1), Vt1  E T1, Vs, E T1,
,2EC2
c2E C2
and
(6.16)
E p0,02(c2,0 — u2(e2,t1))11(c2I ti) a-  0, Vc2  E C2, Ve2 E C2.
( T1
The informational incentive constraints (6.15) assert that player 1
should not expect to gain by claiming that his type is .5, when it is
actually t,, if he expects player 2 to obey the mediator's recommenda-
tions. The strategic incentive constraints (6.16) assert that player 2
should not expect to gain by choosing action e2  when the mediator
recommends c2  to her, if she believes that player 1 was honest with the
mediator.
For example, consider a sender—receiver game, due to Farrell (1988),
with C2 = {x2,y2,z2} and T1  = 11.a,1.131, p(1.a) = .5 = p(1.b), and utility
payoffs (u,,u2) that depend on player l's type and player 2's action as
given in Table 6.5.
Suppose first that there is no mediation, but that player 1 can send
player 2 any message drawn from some large alphabet or vocabulary
and that player 2 will be sure to observe player l's message without any
error or noise. Under this assumption, Farrell (1988) has shown that,
in any equilibrium of the induced communication game, player 2 will
choose action y2  after any message that player 1 may send with positive
probability. To see why, notice that player 2 is indifferent between
Table 6.5 Payoffs in a sender—receiver game
Type of
player 1
C2
x2
Y2
Z2
1.a
2,3
0,2
—1,0
1.b
1,0
2,2
0,3

--- Sayfa 303 ---
6.7 • Sender—Receiver Games 285
choosing x2  and z2  only if she assesses a probability of l.a of exactly .5,
but with this assessment she prefers y2. Thus, there is no message that
can generate beliefs that would make player 2 willing to randomize
between x2  and z2. For each message that player 1 could send, depending
on what player 2 would infer from receiving this message, player 2
might respond either by choosing x2  for sure, by randomizing between
x2  and y2, by choosing y2  for sure, by randomizing between y2  and z2, or
by choosing z2  for sure. Notice that, when player 1's type is 1.a, he is
not indifferent between any two different responses among these pos-
sibilities, because he strictly prefers x2  over y2  and y2  over z2. Thus, in
an equilibrium of the induced communication game, if player 1 had at
least two messages (call them "a" and "13") that may be sent with positive
probability and to which player 2 would respond differently, then type
l.a would be willing to send only one of these messages (say, "a"); so
the other message ("(3") would be sent with positive probability only by
type 1.b. But then, player 2's best response to this other message C(3")
would be z2, which is the worst outcome for type 1.b of player 1; so
type 1.b would not send it with positive probability either. This contra-
diction implies that player 2 must use the same response to every mes-
sage that player 1 sends with positive probability. Furthermore, this
response must be y2, because y2  is player 2's unique best action given
her beliefs before she receives any message.
Thus, as long as the players are restricted to perfectly reliable noiseless
communication channels, no substantive communication can occur be-
tween players 1 and 2 in any equilibrium of this game; see Forges (1985,
1988) for generalizations of this impossibility result. However, substan-
tive communication can occur when noisy communication channels are
used. For example, suppose player 1 has a carrier pigeon that he could
send to player 2, but the probability of the pigeon arriving, if sent, is
only 1/2. Then there is an equilibrium of the induced communication
game in which player 2 chooses x2  if the pigeon arrives, player 2 chooses
y2  if the pigeon does not arrive, player 1 sends the pigeon if his type is
1.a, and player 1 does not send the pigeon if his type is 1.b. Because of
the noise in the communication channel (the possibility of the pigeon
getting lost), if player 2 got the message "no pigeon arrives," then she
would assign a probability 1/3 (= .5 x 1/(.5 x 1 + .5 x 1/2)) to the event
that player 1's type was l.a (and he sent a pigeon that got lost); so player
2 would be willing to choose y2, which is better than x2  for type 1.b of
player 1. In effect, the noise in the communication channel gives type

--- Sayfa 304 ---
286 6-Games with Communication
1.b some protection from exposure when he does not imitate type 1.a,
so it reduces the incentive of 1.b to imitate l.a.
Thus, with a noisy communication channel, there can be an equilib-
rium in which both players get higher expected payoffs than they can
get in any equilibrium with direct noiseless communication. By analyzing
the incentive constraints (6.15) and (6.16), we can find other mediation
plans µ:T, --> 0(C2) in which they both do even better. The informational
incentive constraints (6.15) on player 1 are
21-4x21 1.a) — 1.L(z21 1.a) .- 21-*211.b) — 11,(z21 1.b),
V*21 1.b) + 21 (y211.b) -'-1-1 (x21 1-a) + 211(Y21 1.a),
and the strategic incentive constraints (6.16) on player 2 are
0.511(x21 1.a) — 11(x2 I1.b)
0,
1.511,(x211.a) — 1.51.(x211.b)
0,
—0.5p.,(y211.a) + il(y211.b)
0,
1.(y211.a) — 0.5µ(y21 1.b)
0,
—1.511.(z21 1.a) + 1.5R(z211.b) .._- 0,
—11,(z211.a) + 0.511,(z21 1.b)
0.
(The last of these constraints, for example, asserts that player 2 should
not expect to gain by choosing y2  when z2  is recommended.) To be a
mediation plan, il, must also satisfy the probability constraints
1.4x211.a) + 1.4y211.a) + µ(z21  1.a) = 1,
ii(x211.b) + p.,(y211.b) + R(z211.b) = 1,
and all p.,(c2 Iti) _?... 0.
If, for example, we maximize the expected payoff to type l.a of
player 1
Ui(p.11.a) = 2R(x211.a) — 1.(z211.a)
subject to these constraints, then we get the mediation plan
1-(x21 1.a) = 0.8, µ(y21 1.a) = 0.2, µ(z21  l.a) = 0,

--- Sayfa 305 ---
6.7 • Sender—Receiver Games 287
1.4x211.b) = 0.4, p.(y211.b) = 0.4, 11,(z211.b) = 0.2.
Honest reporting by player 1 and obedient action by player 2 is an
equilibrium when a noisy communication channel or mediator generates
recommended-action messages for player 2 as a random function of
the type reports sent by player 1 according to this plan R. Furthermore,
no equilibrium of any communication game induced by any communi-
cation channel could give a higher expected payoff to type 1.a of player
1 than the expected payoff of U1(11,1 1.a) = 1.6 that he gets from this
plan.
On the other hand, the mechanism that maximizes player 2's expected
payoff is
1 (x211.a) = 2/3,
11(y211.a) = 1/3,
ii(z211.a) = 0,
1-4x2i 1.b) = 0,
11,(y211.b) = 2/3,
1.b) = 1/2.
This gives expected payoffs
U1(111.a) = 11/2, U1(111 1-b) = 1 1/3 , U2(µ) = 21/2.
Once we have a complete characterization of the set of all incentive-
compatible mediation plans, the next natural question is: Which media-
tion plans or mechanisms should we actually expect to be selected and
used by the players? That is, if one or more of the players has the
power to choose among all incentive-compatible mechanisms, which
mechanisms should we expect to observe?
To avoid questions of equity in bargaining (which will be considered
in Chapter 8 and thereafter), let us here consider only cases where the
power to select the mediator or design the communication channel
belongs to just one of the players. To begin with, suppose that player 2
can select the mediation plan. To be more specific, suppose that player
2 will first select a mediator and direct him to implement some incentive-
compatible mediation plan; then player 1 can either accept this mediator
and communicate with 2 thereafter only through him, or 1 can reject
this mediator and thereafter have no further communication with 2.
It is natural to expect that player 2 will use her power to select a
mediator who will implement the incentive-compatible mediation plan
that is best for player 2. This plan is worse than y2  for player 1 if his
type is 1.b, so some might think that, if player l's type is 1.b, then he
should reject player 2's proposed mediator and refuse to communicate

--- Sayfa 306 ---
288 6 • Games with Communication
further. However, there is an equilibrium of this mediator-selection
game in which player 1 always accepts player 2's proposal, no matter
what his type is. In this equilibrium, if 1 rejected 2's mediator, then 2
might reasonably infer that l's type was 1.b, in which case 2's rational
choice would be z2  instead of y2, and z2  is the worst possible outcome
for both of l's types.
Unfortunately, there is another sequential equilibrium of this media-
tor-selection game in which player 1 always rejects player 2's mediator,
no matter what mediation plan she selects. In this equilibrium, player
2 infers nothing about 1 if he rejects the mediator and so she does y2;
but if he accepted the mediator, then she would infer (in this zero-
probability event) that player 1 is type 1.b and she would choose z2  no
matter what the mediator subsequently recommended.
Now consider the mediator-selection game in which the informed
player 1 can select the mediator and choose the mediation plan that will
be implemented, with the only restriction that player 1 must make the
selection after he already knows his own type, and player 2 must know
what mediation plan has been selected by player 1. For any incentive-
compatible mediation plan R, there is an equilibrium in which 1 chooses
rx for sure, no matter what his type is, and they thereafter play honestly
and obediently whenµ is implemented. In this equilibrium, if any
mediation plan other thanµ were selected, then 2 would infer from l's
surprising selection that his type was 1.b (she might think "only 1.b
would deviate from p.."), and therefore she would choose z2  no matter
what the mediator might subsequently recommend. Thus, concepts like
sequential equilibrium cannot determine the outcome of such a media-
tor-selection game beyond what we already knew from the revelation
principle.
To get a more definite prediction about what mediation plans or
mechanisms are likely to be selected by the players, we need to make
some assumptions that go beyond traditional noncooperative game the-
ory. An introduction to the theory of cooperative mechanism selection
is given in Chapter 10.
6.8 Acceptable and Predominant Correlated Equilibria
In this section, we consider the question of what should be the analogue
to the concept of perfect equilibrium for strategic-form games with
communication. (The treatment here follows Myerson, 1986a.)

--- Sayfa 307 ---
6.8 • Acceptable Correlated Equilibria 289
The key idea behind the concept of perfect equilibrium is that players
should take some account of all possible outcomes of the games, because
there is at least some infinitesimal chance of any outcome occurring,
perhaps due to the possibility that some players might make mistakes
or "tremble" to some irrational move. However, to preserve the as-
sumption of players' rationality, the probability of any player trembling
is always assumed to be infinitesimal at most.
Given a finite game F
(N, (C,),EN , (uji,N) in strategic form and any
positive number E, an e-correlated strategy is any probability distribution
in A(C x (Us,,Cs)) such that
(6.17)
El(c,es) > (1 — E) E 11(C,esuti}),
e,EC,
VC E C, Vi E N, VS C N — i, Ves  E Cs,
and
(6.18)
if ii(c,es) > 0, then ii(c,esu{,}) > 0,
Vc E C, Vi E N, VS C N — i, V es,{,}  E
Here the i-component of esu{, }  is ei, and all other components of esu{,}
together form es. As before, we use the notation Cs  = X 1EN Ci, where
Co  = {0}, and C = CN.
In such an r-correlated strategy 1, we interpret -q(c,es) as the proba-
bility that a mediator will recommend the strategies in c = (c),EN to the
various players and all players not in S will then choose their strategies
rationally, but the players in S will all tremble and accidentally implement
the strategies in es  = (e,),Es. Condition (6.18) asserts that every strategy
e, must have positive probability of being chosen by player i as a result
of a tremble, given any combination of mediator's recommendations
and trembles by the other players. Condition (6.17) asserts that, given
any combination of mediator's recommendations and trembles by other
players, the conditional probability of player i trembling is not greater
than E. Thus, in any limit of e-correlated strategies, as E goes to 0, the
conditional probability of any player i trembling would always be 0,
independently of any given information about the mediator's recom-
mendations and other players' trembles. Stronger forms of indepen-
dence of trembles are not required, because F is a game with commu-
nication.

--- Sayfa 308 ---
290 6 • Games with Communication
Notice that, if ri is an E-correlated strategy and g > E, then q is also
an i-correlated strategy.
An E.-correlated equilibrium is defined to be any E-correlated strategy
that satisfies the following incentive constraints:
E
E E li(c,ou,(c_s,es) — ui(c_(„1,),,esui,o) > 0,
e_,ECN_, SCN—t esECs
Vi E N, Vc, E C,, Vei  E Ci.
That is, player i should not expect to gain by using strategy ez  when he
is told to use cz  and he is not irrationally trembling.
An acceptable correlated equilibrium of F is any p, in zi(C) such that there
exists some sequence (Ek,-rik)k_ I  such that, Ek > 0 and ilk  is an Ercorrelated
equilibrium for each k, and
lim Ek = 0, and lira Tik(c,0) = R(c), Vc E C.
k—.d
That is, an acceptable correlated equilibrium is any limit of E-correlated
equilibria as E goes to 0. (Here ii(c,0) is the probability that the mediator
recommends c and all players choose rationally.) We can think of an
acceptable correlated equilibrium as a correlated equilibrium in which
obedient behavior by every player could still be rational when each
player has an infinitesimal probability of trembling to any strategy.
We say that cz  is an acceptable strategy for player i iff, for every positive
number E, there exists some E-correlated equilibrium i
 such that
E
Ti (c,0) > 0.
That is, cz  is acceptable iff it can be used rationally by player i when the
probabilities of trembling are arbitrarily small. Let Ez  denote the set of
acceptable strategies for player i in the game r, and let E = X ,ENE,•
Myerson (1986a) showed that the set Ez  is always nonempty.
Let R(F) denote the game that is derived from F by eliminating all
unacceptable strategies; that is,
R(F) = (N, (Ei)iEN, (u)i(N)•
(The utility functions in R(F) are just the restrictions of the utility
functions in F to the domain E C C.) This game R(F) is called the
acceptable residue of F.

--- Sayfa 309 ---
6.8 • Acceptable Correlated Equilibria 291
Any correlated strategy in Li(E), for the game R(F), can also be inter-
preted as a correlated strategy in A(C) for the game F, simply by as-
signing probability 0 to every combination of strategies in CAE. Con-
versely, if p. is in A(C) and E„, ii(e) = 1, then p. can also be interpreted
as a correlated strategy in A(E), for the game R(F), simply by ignoring
the zero components for strategy profiles that are not in E.
With this notation, we can state the main theorem on acceptable
correlated equilibria. (For the proof, see Myerson, 1986a.)
THEOREM 6.1. The set of acceptable correlated equilibria of the finite
strategic-form game F is a nonempty subset of the set of correlated equilibria of
F. If ti, is any correlated equilibrium of r, then p, is an acceptable correlated
equilibrium if and only if
E ii(c) = 1.
cEE
Furthermore, the set of acceptable correlated equilibria of r exactly coincides with
the set of correlated equilibria of R(F) (reinterpreted as correlated strategies in
A(C)).
Thus, to characterize the acceptable correlated equilibria of F, it
suffices to identify and eliminate all unacceptable strategies of all play-
ers. (For computational procedures to identify unacceptable strategies,
see Myerson, 1986a.) Then the correlated equilibria of the residual
game that remains are the acceptable correlated equilibria of the original
game. It can be shown that all weakly dominated strategies are unac-
ceptable, but some unacceptable strategies may also be undominated.
For example, in Table 6.6, there are no dominated strategies, but yl, z1 ,
y2, and z2  are all unacceptable.
Table 6.6 A game in strategic form
C1
W2
x2
Y2
Z2
iv,
x1
2,2
1,1
1,1
1,1
0,0
2,0
0,0
2,0
Yi
0,0
0,2
3,0
0,3
zi
0,0
0,2
0,3
3,0

--- Sayfa 310 ---
292 6 • Games with Communication
There might be some strategies in Ez  that are unacceptable in the
context of the acceptable residue R(F), even though they are acceptable
in r. This situation might occur because 6-correlated strategies for the
game R(F) do not include any trembles outside of the strategy sets
Thus, we consider the acceptable residue of the acceptable res-
idue of F;  that is, R2(F) = R(R(F)). Continuing inductively, we define
RH- 1(n= R(Rk(F)), for k = 2,3,4, . . . .
Taking an acceptable residue of a game means eliminating any unac-
ceptable strategies in the game, and r itself has only finitely many
strategies for each player. Thus, there must exist some K such that
RK(F)  = RK+i(F)  = RK+2(F)  _ 	= R.(F).
Let
denote the strategy set for each player i in R-(F). We call R-(r)
the predominant residue of r, and the strategies in E7 are the iteratively
acceptable or (weakly) predominant strategies of player i in F. We say that
is a predominant correlated equilibrium of F iff it is a correlated equilib-
rium of F and
E 11(e) = 1, where E-  = X E.
cEE'
xEN
That is, a predominant correlated equilibrium is a correlated equilib-
rium in which all players are always told to use their predominant
strategies. It is straightforward to show that the set of predominant
equilibria is nonempty and includes at least one Nash equilibrium that
can be implemented without communication (see Myerson, 1986a).
In Table 6.6, the strategies w1, x 1, w2, x2  are all acceptable strategies,
but only w1  and w2  are predominant. Thus, the only predominant
equilibrium is (w1,w2). The equilibrium at (x1,x2) is acceptable but not
predominant.
There may exist acceptable and predominant correlated equilibria
that can be implemented without communication (so that they are also
Nash equilibria) but are not perfect equilibria. For example, consider
the three-player game in Table 6.7, where C, = fx„yil for i = 1,2,3.
Both (x1,x2,y3) and (y1,x2,x3) are pure-strategy Nash equilibria in this
game. Of these, (x1,x2,y3) is a perfect equilibrium. But (y1,x2,x3) is not
perfect, because, when the players tremble independently with small
positive probabilities from the strategies (y1,x2,x3), the probability that
player 1 trembles to x1  while player 3 stays at x5  is much larger than the

--- Sayfa 311 ---
6.8 • Acceptable Correlated Equilibria 293
Table 6.7 A three-player game in strategic form
C2 and C3
C,
X3
Y3
x2
Y2
X2
Y2
X 1
Yi
1,1,1
3,2,2
4,4,0
3,2,2
1,1,1
0,0,0
0,0,4
0,0,0
probability that player 1 trembles to x, and player 3 trembles to y3.
Knowing this, player 2 would expect to do better by switching from x2
to y2. However, all strategies are acceptable in this game, so all equilibria
are acceptable and predominant, including (y,,x2,x3).
To see why all strategies are acceptable and (y,,x2,x3) is an acceptable
equilibrium, let 6 be some very small positive number and consider the
following mediation plan. With probability 1 — 6 — 63, the mediator
recommends the strategies (y,,x2,x3); with probability e, the mediator
recommends (x,,x2,y3); and with probability 63, the mediator recom-
mends (x,,y2,x3). As usual, we assume that each player is only told the
mediator's recommendation for himself. To complete the description
of an 62-correlated strategy, let us suppose that every player trembles
independently with probability 62  (given any recommendations by the
mediator) and, whenever a player trembles, he is equally likely to use
either of his strategies. For any sufficiently small 6, this is an e2-corre-
lated equilibrium, and it approaches the equilibrium (y,,x2,x3) as 6 gets
small.
To check that player 2 is willing to use strategy x2  when the mediator
recommends it in this 62-correlated equilibrium, consider what she
would believe about the other players when she gets this recommen-
dation. The most likely way that she could get this recommendation is
when player 1 is told to do y, and player 3 is told to do x3  and nobody
is trembling, but in this case player 2 is indifferent between her strate-
gies. The next most likely way that she could get this recommendation,
which happens with prior probability e, is when player 2 is told to use
x, and player 3 is told to use y3  and nobody is trembling; and in this
case she strictly prefers to obey the recommendation to use x2. All other
events have prior probabilities of order e2  or less, so player 2 is willing
to obey a recommendation to choose x2.

--- Sayfa 312 ---
294 6 • Games with Communication
6.9 Communication in Extensive-Form and Multistage Games
The analysis of extensive-form games may also be significantly different
when players can communicate with each other and with a mediator.
For example, consider the games in Figures 6.2 and 6.3.
Like the games in Figures 5.2 and 5.3, the games in Figures 6.2 and
6.3 have the same reduced normal representations. Kohlberg and Mer-
2,2
1,5
Figure 6.2
Yi
2,2
5,1
x2
: 2.2 I
Y2
0,0
0,0
1,5
Figure 6.3

--- Sayfa 313 ---
6.9 • Extensive-Form and Multistage Games 295
tens (1986) have argued that these games should be considered as
analytically equivalent. As games with communication, however, they
are very different.
In Figure 6.2, the move y is strongly dominated by a, for player 1
at the 1.1 node. Thus, even with communication, player 1 would never
rationally choose y, in Figure 6.2.
On the other hand, consider the following plan that could be imple-
mented by a mediator in Figure 6.3. First, advise player 1 to choose b,
at his node 1.0. Then, after player 1 has chosen b,, toss a coin. If the
coin comes up Heads, then advise player 1 to choose x, and advise
player 2 to choose x2; if the coin comes up Tails, then advise player 1
to choose y, and player 2 to choose y2. When this mediation plan is
implemented for the game in Figure 6.3, the probability of player 1
choosing y is 1/2, and it is an equilibrium for both players to plan to
obey the mediator's recommendation. At any point in time, if player 2
is expected to obey the mediator, then player 1 would expect to do
strictly worse by disobeying. In particular, player l's expected payoff
from obeying the recommendation to choose b, at 1.0 is .5 x 5 + .5 x
1 = 3, whereas his expected payoff from a, would be only 2.
The key to implementing this mediation plan is that player 1 must
not learn whether x, or y will be recommended for him until it is too
late for him to select a,. In Figure 6.3, there is a point in time (after
the 1.0 node but before the 1.1 node) when x, and y, are still available
to player 1 but a, is not; however, in Figure 6.2 there is no such point
in time. If all communication had to occur before the beginning of the
game, then this distinction would not matter. However, under the as-
sumption that the players can communicate with each other and with a
mediator at any point in time, Figure 6.3 has a strictly larger set of
incentive-compatible mediation plans than does Figure 6.2, even though
these games have the same purely reduced normal representations.
Thus, if we want to study extensive-form games as games with com-
munication, the normal representation is not adequate to characterize
the set of correlated equilibria or incentive-compatible mediation plans.
If we want to assume that, in addition to the given explicit structure of
an extensive-form game, the players have implicit opportunities to com-
municate after they learn private information about their type or infor-
mation state, then none of the representations in strategic form that we
studied in Chapter 2 are adequate to characterize the incentive-com-
patible mediation plans or communication equilibria of the given game.

--- Sayfa 314 ---
296 6 • Games with Communication
(To see the inadequacy of the multiagent representation, consider any
sender—receiver game, when the sender's communication possibilities
are not included in the explicit structure of the game. In the multiagent
or type-agent representation, the agents for the sender have no explicit
strategy options, and their access to information is not represented. So,
except for the receiver's one agent, all agents appear to be dummies.)
Thus, there is a conceptual trade-off between the revelation principle
and the generality of the strategic form. If we want to allow commu-
nication opportunities to remain implicit at the modeling stage of our
analysis, then we get a mathematically simpler solution concept, because
(by the revelation principle) communication equilibria can be character-
ized by a set of linear incentive constraints. However, if we want to
study the game in strategic form, then all communication opportunities
must be made an explicit part of the structure of the extensive-form
game before we construct the normal or multiagent representation.
Myerson (1986b) studied communication in games that are given in
multistage form, which is a modification of the extensive form defined by
Kuhn (1953). (The multistage form actually resembles more closely the
definition of the extensive form used by von Neumann and Morgen-
stern, 1944.) A multistage game is any game of the form
1-m  = (N, K,
z)kic
itz)(N, (pk)k_i),
where K is the number of stages in the game; N is the set of players;
C,k  is the set of moves or actions available to player i at the end of stage
k; T,k  is the set of signals or new information that player i could learn
at the beginning of stage k; pk specifies a probability distribution over
X zEN T I:, the set of combinations of players' signals at stage k, as a
function of the past history of actions and signals (in X ki=i X ,(N (C X
Tf)); and u, specifies player i's utility payoff as a function of all actions
and signals (in X K 1  XJEN (cij x Ti)). That is, a multistage game differs
from an extensive-form game in that the players' moves are ordered in
discrete stages, and we must specify what a player knows at each stage
even if he has no alternative moves (that is, even if I Cikl = 1). Any
extensive-form game in which players move in a prespecified order can
be represented as a multistage game in the obvious way. (That is, we
can identify each player's move with a distinct stage. At each stage k,
we specify that a nonmoving player i has no new information and so
n = 1, unless he moved in the preceding stage, in which case his
new information is his recollection of his recent move and Tk  =

--- Sayfa 315 ---
6.9 • Extensive-Form and Multistage Games 297
For multistage games, the revelation principle asserts that any equi-
librium of any communication game that can be induced from rm by
adding a communication structure is equivalent to some mediation plan
of the following form: (1) At the beginning of each stage, the players
confidentially report their new information to the mediator. (2) The
mediator then determines the recommended actions for the players at
this stage, as a function of all reports received at this and all earlier
stages, by applying some randomly selected feedback rule. (3) The
mediator tells each player confidentially the action that is recommended
for him. (4) When all players know the probability distribution that the
mediator used to select his feedback rule, it is an equilibrium of the
induced communication game for all players to always report their
information honestly and choose their actions obediently as the media-
tor recommends. The distributions over feedback rules that satisfy this
incentive-compatibility condition (4) can be characterized by a collection
of linear incentive constraints that assert that no player can expect to
gain by switching to any manipulative strategy of lying and disobedience,
when all other players are expected to be honest and obedient.
Intuitively, the general revelation principle asserts that there is no
loss of generality in assuming that, at every stage, the players commu-
nicate only with a central mediator to whom they reveal everything they
have learned, but who in turn reveals to each player only the minimal
information that the player needs to determine his current action at
this stage. As the game in Figure 6.3 showed, it may be essential that
the mediator should not tell a player what move will be recommended
for him at a particular stage before that stage is reached. In general,
revealing more information to players makes it harder to prevent them
from finding ways to gain by lying or disobeying recommendations.
The possibility of communication, even if it only occurs with infini-
tesimal probability, can significantly affect our belief-consistency criteria
for multistage games and games in extensive form. Even equilibria that
are not subgame-perfect may become sequentially rational when com-
munication is allowed. For example, recall the game in Figure 4.6. For
this game, ([y [y2], .5[x3] + .5[y3], [yed) is a Nash equilibrium, but it is
not a subgame-perfect equilibrium, because player 3 should prefer to
choose y3, in the subgame beginning at his node, when he knows that
player 4 would choose ye,. The unique subgame-perfect equilibrium of
this game is ([x1], [x2], .5[x3] + .5[y3], .5[x4] + .5[3,4]), which gives the
payoff allocation (2,3,0,0).

--- Sayfa 316 ---
2.2
(0)
xl
0,0,2,0
-
x4
(0)
2,3,0,0
4
0,5,0,2
x4 0
0,1,0,2
(0)
y4
X2
1.1
(0)
0,2,2,0
y4
<.5>
0,2,2,0
0,0,2,0
X4(1)
< 5>
Y4
(0)
0,5,0,2
.7
x4
0,1,0,2
(1)
<1>
Yi
(0)
1,9,0,0
298 6 • Games with Communication
However, ([yi],  [y21, .5[x3] + .5[y3],  [y4]) can be extended to a sequential
equilibrium if we allow even an infinitesimal probability that the players
might be able to communicate. To see how, consider Figure 6.4, where
E is a very small positive number. The game in Figure 6.4 differs from
the game in Figure 4.6 only in that players 1, 2, and 4 may observe
some payoff-irrelevant signal that occurs with probability e. According
to the sequential equilibrium shown in Figure 6.4, if players 1, 2, and
4 observe this signal, then they will plan to choose the actions (x1,x2,x4);
otherwise, with probability 1 — e, they will plan to choose the actions
(yi,y2,y4). Player 3 can have an opportunity to move only if at least one
player made a mistake. Thus, player 3 may consistently believe that, if
he gets to move, then, with equal probability, either the signal was not
Figure 6.4

--- Sayfa 317 ---
Exercises 299
observed and player 1 made a mistake choosing x1  at 1.1, or the signal
was observed and player 2 made a mistake choosing y2  at 2.6. These
beliefs can be justified, no matter how small E may be, by supposing
that player 1 is much less likely to make a mistake than player 2. With
these beliefs, player 3 would be willing to randomize between x3  and y3
as specified in the equilibrium, because he believes that it is equally
likely that player 4 may be about to choose x4  (at 4.7) or y4  (at 4.4). This
sequential equilibrium coincides with the equilibrium ([y1], [y2], .5[x3] +
[y4]) on the upper chance event, which happens almost surely as
E goes to 0.
We observed in Section 4.8 that adding small-probability chance
events may significantly change the set of sequential equilibria of a game.
Notice, however, that the new chance event added in Figure 6.4 has the
special property of not altering the structure of players' alternatives and
payoffs given in Figure 4.6. That is, the additional chance event is payoff
irrelevant, in the sense that its only effect is to create a second copy of
the original game tree, which some players can distinguish and others
cannot. (The chance event in Figure 4.12 was not payoff irrelevant in
this sense.) The assumption that a game is "with communication" implies
that such payoff-irrelevant chance events can be considered to be part
of the implicit structure of the game, even if they are not explicitly
shown.
Thus, the possibility of communication may weaken our notions of
sequential rationality. Myerson (1986b) defined a concept of sequential
rationality for multistage games with communication and showed that
(like acceptability for strategic-form games with communication) it can
be characterized by eliminating some unreasonable actions that satisfy
a kind of generalized domination criterion.
Exercises
Exercise 6.1. Consider the game in strategic form shown in Table 6.8.
a. Find the correlated equilibrium that maximizes the expected sum
of the two players' payoffs.
b. Find the correlated equilibrium that minimizes the expected sum
of the two players' payoffs.
Exercise 6.2. The two-person game shown in Table 6.9 has a unique
Nash equilibrium (see Moulin and Vial, 1978) in which each player's
expected payoff is 3.

--- Sayfa 318 ---
300 6 • Games with Communication
Table 6.8 A game in strategic form
C2
C1
a2
b2
a1
4,4
1,6
b,
6,1
—3,-3
Table 6.9 A game in strategic form
C2
C1
X2
Y2
Z2
x1
0,0
5,4
4,5
Y1
4,5
0,0
5,4
z1
5,4
4,5
0,0
a. Show that this game has correlated equilibria in which both players
get expected payoffs strictly larger than 4.
b. Find the correlated equilibrium that maximizes' the expected pay-
off for player 1.
Exercise 6.3. Players 1 and 2 are, respectively, seller and buyer for a
single indivisible object. The value of the object may be $0 or $80 for
player 1, and may be $20 or $100 for player 2. Ex ante, all four possible
combinations of these values are considered to be equally likely. When
the players meet to bargain, each player knows his own private value
for the object and believes that the other player's private value could
be either of the two possible numbers, each with probability 1/2. We let
the type of each player be his private value for the object, so T1  =
{0, 80}, T2 = {20, 100}. Letting t = (11,t2) denote the pair of players'
types, the payoffs (net gains from trade) to the two players would be
u1((l,y),E) = y — t1  and u2((l,y),0 = t2
y
if the object were sold to the buyer for y dollars, and the payoffs would
be
u1((0,0),t) = 0 = u2((0s),t)

--- Sayfa 319 ---
Exercises 301
if no trade occurred. No-trade (0,0) is the disagreement outcome in the
bargaining problem. Assume that there is no question of delay of trade;
the object must be sold today or never.
Let us represent a mechanism for this Bayesian bargaining problem
by a pair of functions Q:T X T2 -> [0,1] and Y:TI  X T2
R, where
Q(t) is the probability that the object will be sold to the buyer and Y(t)
is the expected net payment from the buyer to the seller if t is the pair
of types reported by the players to a mediator.
a. Write down the four informational incentive constraints and the
four participation constraints that an incentive-compatible individually
rational mechanism must satisfy.
b. The probability that the object is worth more to the buyer than to
the seller is 3/4. Show that, in any incentive-compatible individually ra-
tional mechanism, the probability that the object will be sold to the
buyer cannot be greater than 2/3. (HINT: For any positive numbers a and
13, the probability of trade cannot be larger than
(1/4)(Q(0,100) + Q(0,20) + Q(80,100) + Q(80,20))
+ 13U1(Q,Y180) + PU2(Q,Y120)
+ a(U,(Q,Y10) — U'(Q,Y,80I0))
+ a(U2(Q,YI 100) — U2(Q,Y,201100)).
To simplify this formula, try letting 13 = 2a and a = Vim.)
Exercise 6.4. Player 1 is the plaintiff and player 2 is the defendant in
a lawsuit for breach of contract. The expected in-court settlement, to
be paid by player 2 to player 1 if they go to court, depends on the
strength of both sides' cases as shown in Table 6.10. In addition, if they
go to court, then each side must pay trial costs of $10,000. So, for
example, if both cases are strong and they go to court, then the expected
total cost to player 2 is $90,000, but the expected net benefit to player
1 is only $70,000. Each player knows whether his own case is weak or
strong, and each side believes that the other side is equally likely to be
weak or strong. Assume that both players are risk neutral. The players
could avoid these trial costs by settling out of court. However, in pretrial
bargaining, there is nothing to prevent a player from lying about the
strength of his case, if he has an incentive to do so. Going to court is
the disagreement outcome in any pretrial bargaining.

--- Sayfa 320 ---
Strong
$80,000
$16,000
Settlement based on strength
of player 2's case
Weak
$144,000
$80,000
Strength of
player l's
case
Strong
Weak
302 6 • Games with Communication
Table 6.10 Expected in-court settlement for player 1, depending on the
strengths of the cases for both sides
a. Suppose that you have been asked to mediate the pretrial bargain-
ing between these two players. Create an incentive-compatible mediation
plan that has the following properties: (1) if they settle out of court,
then player 2 will pay player 1 an amount equal to the expected in-
court settlement, given their reports to you about the strength or weak-
ness of their cases; (2) if both report to you that they are weak, then
they settle out of court with probability 1; and (3) if one side reports
that it is weak and the other reports that it is strong, then they settle
out of court with a probability q that does not depend on which side
reported weakness. Make q as large as possible without violating any
informational incentive constraints. (HINT: When you compute expected
payoffs, do not forget the net payoff from going to court. Player 1
expects to get money from player 2 even if they do not agree to settle
out of court!)
b. Imagine that player 1, knowing that his case is actually strong, gets
the following advice from his lawyer. "Given that our case is strong, our
expected in-court settlement would be 0.5 x 80,000 + 0.5 x 144,000 =
$112,000. So let us tell player 2 that our case is strong and offer to
settle out of court for this amount." Show that, even if player 2 were to
believe player 1's claim about the strength of l's case, it would be a
mistake for player 1 to make an offer to settle for $112,000 when his
case is strong.
Exercise 6.5. Show that the set of mechanisms p that satisfy the general
participation constraints (6.14) is convex.
Exercise 6.6. Consider the following generalization of the model in
Section 6.5. As before, each player j's type is a random variable that is
independent of all other players' types and is drawn from the interval

--- Sayfa 321 ---
Exercises 303
Tj  = [L(j),M(j)] according to the continuous positive probability density
functionf,. Let D denote the set of possible outcomes. Suppose that, for
some player i, there exist functions qz:D —> R and y,:D x T_, —> R such
that player i's payoff function can be written
ut(c,t) = q,(c)t, — y,(c,t_,), He E D, V t = (t_„ti) E T.
That is, i's payoff is linear in his type t„ with coefficient qi(c).
Given any random mechanism 1.1,:T —> A(D), let
Q.(t) =q,(c)dp,(cit)
cED
04) = f
Qi(t)(
4(0) dt_i.
f
JEN—i
That is, Q,(ti) is the expected value of qi(c) for the chosen outcome c,
when player i's type is ti  and all players will participate honestly in the
mechanism 11.
Show that, if p. is incentive compatible, then Q, is a nondecreasing
function and player i's type-contingent expected payoff underµ satisfies
condition (6.10),
_
Ui(pdti) = Ui(1110,) + f  Qi(si)dsi, Vti  E Ti, VOi  E Ti.
Exercise 6.7. Recall the auction situation with independent private val-
ues that was described in Exercise 3.7 (Chapter 3). Show that, even if
we changed the auction rules, for any incentive-compatible mechanism
g, in which the object is always sold to the bidder with the higher type
and a bidder of type zero has zero expected gains, the conditionally
expected payoff to bidder i, given his type t„ must be 0.5(02.
Exercise 6.8. Recall the auction situation with common values and in-
dependent types that was described in Exercise 3.8 (Chapter 3). Show
that, even if we changed the auction rules, for any incentive-compatible
mechanismµ in which the object is always sold to the bidder with the
higher type and a bidder of type zero has zero expected gains, the
conditionally expected payoff to bidder i, given his type t„ must be
0.5(02. (HINT: You may use the results of Exercise 6.6.)

--- Sayfa 322 ---
304 6 • Games with Communication
Exercise 6.9. (An example due to Forges, 1985.) Consider a sender—
receiver game with C2 = {x2,y2,z2}, T, = {1.a, 1.b}, p(1.a) = .5 = p(l.b),
and utility payoffs (u1,u2) that depend on player l's type and player 2's
action as shown in Table 6.11.
a. Show that, as long as the players are restricted to perfectly reliable
noiseless communication channels, no substantive communication can
occur between players 1 and 2 in any equilibrium of this game, so the
expected payoff to type l.a of player 1 must be 0.
b. Now suppose that a mediator can introduce some randomness or
noise into the communication channel. Write down the constraints that
characterize an incentive-compatible mediation plan v., and show that
there exists an incentive-compatible mediation plan in which type l.a
of player 1 would get an expected payoff of U1(µ1 1.a) = 5.
Exercise 6.10. Player 1 is the seller of a single indivisible object, and
player 2 is the only potential buyer. Depending on the quality of the
object, its value to player 1 can be any number between L and M (where
L < M). Player 1 knows the quality, so we can identify his type t, with
this value. Player 2 does not know the quality, but the object actually
would be worth g(t,) to player 2 if it were worth t, to player 1. Thus,
letting q = 1 if player 2 buys the object, letting q = 0 if player 1 keeps
the object, and letting y denote the net payment from player 2 to player
1, we can write the players' payoff functions as u1((q,y),t1) = y — t,q,
u2((q,y),t1) = g(t1)q
— y. The disagreement outcome is no trade (0,0).
Player 2 has no private information and assesses a subjective probability
distribution for l's type that has a continuous positive probability density
function f, on the interval [L,M]. For any number r in [L,M], let F1(r) =
f Lr  fl(s)ds denote the cumulative probability distribution corresponding
to f1(.).
a. Consider a mechanism (Q,Y) in which, when player l's type is ti,
the probability of player 2 buying the object is Q(t1) and the expected
Table 6.11 Payoffs in a sender—receiver game
Type of
player 1
C2
x2
Y2
Z2
l.a
6,6
0,4
9,0
1.b
6,0
9,4
0,6

--- Sayfa 323 ---
Exercises 305
payment from player 2 to player 1 is Y(11). Show that, if (Q,Y) is incentive
compatible and individually rational, then Q(t,) is a nonincreasing func-
tion of t,, and
Y(t,)
t,Q(t,) + J M  Q(s)ds, Vt, E [L,M];
so player 2's expected payoff must satisfy
U2(Q,Y) < f M  (g(t,) — t, — F l(t 1)1  f (t 1))Q(t')fM Odt 1 •
(HINT: Notice that q and Q(t,) in this model correspond to —q, and
—Q,(t i) in the notation of Section 6.5. See also Myerson, 1985b.)
b. (The lemon problem of Akerlof, 1970.) Suppose now that the distri-
bution of possible seller's types is uniform on the interval [0,1], and the
object is always worth 50 percent more to the buyer than to the seller,
SO
L = 0, M = 1, f,(t,) = 1, and g(ti) = 1.5t 1, Ht, E [0,1].
Show that an incentive-compatible individually rational mechanism must
have Q(11) = 0 for every positive t l. (Thus, the probability of trade
occurring must be 0, even though the object would always be worth
more to the buyer than to the seller.)
c. Suppose that the distribution of seller's possible types is uniform
on the interval [L,M], and the buyer's value is linear in the seller's value,
so there exist parameters A and B such that
fi(ti) = 11(M — L) and g(11) = At, + B, Vt i  E [L,M].
Suppose that player 2 (the buyer) can specify any first and final offer
price R. Player 1 will accept the offer and sell at this price if his value
is less than R, but player 1 will reject the offer and keep the object if
his value is greater than R. As a function of the parameters L, M, A,
and B, what is the optimal offer price R for the buyer? (It can be shown
that, without loss of generality, we can assume that R is in the interval
[L,M].)
Show that no other incentive-compatible individually rational mech-
anism can offer a higher expected payoff to player 2 than what she gets
from her optimal first and final offer price. (Recall that Q(t 1) must be a
nonincreasing function of t,. Notice also that F,(t 1)1f,(t,) = t 1  — L for
any t, in [L,M].)

--- Sayfa 324 ---
306 6 • Games with Communication
For the special case in part (b), where L = 0, M = 1, A = 1.5, and
B = 0, you should get an optimal offer price of R = 0. Explain why no
higher offer price would be better for the buyer, with reference to the
winner's curse that was discussed in Section 3.11.
Exercise 6.11. Consider the extensive-form game shown in Figure 6.5.
a. Find two pure-strategy equilibria and show that only one of them
is a sequential-equilibrium scenario (see Selten, 1975; Binmore, 1987-
88).
b. Let e be an arbitrarily small positive number. Suppose that there
is a payoff-irrelevant event that has a probability e of occurring before
this game is played and that, if it occurred, would be observed by players
1 and 3 but not by player 2. Show the extensive-form game where this
event is taken into account and show that this revised game has a
sequential equilibrium in which, if the e-probability event does not
occur, the players behave according to the equilibrium that, by your
answer to part (a), was not a sequential-equilibrium scenario of the
original game.
3.3
3.3 ;
0,0,0
0,0,1
3,2,2
4,4,0
Figure 6.5

--- Sayfa 325 ---
Bibliographic Note 307
Bibliographic Note
The term incentive compatibility was first used by Hurwicz (1972). In this
book, this term is used in a somewhat different sense, called Bayesian
incentive compatibility by d'Aspremont and Gerard-Varet (1979).
Gibbard (1973) first expressed the revelation principle for a non-
Bayesian dominant-strategy solution concept. The revelation principle
for Bayesian equilibria of games with incomplete information was de-
veloped by Dasgupta, Hammond, and Maskin (1979); Harris and Town-
send (1981); Holmstrom (1977); Myerson (1979); and Rosenthal (1978).
Other general formulations of the revelation principle were developed
by Myerson (1982, 1986b) for Bayesian games with moral hazard and
for multistage games.

--- Sayfa 326 ---
7
Repeated Games
7.1 The Repeated Prisoners' Dilemma
People may behave quite differently toward those with whom they
expect to have a long-term relationship than toward those with whom
they expect no future interaction. To understand how rational and
intelligent behavior may be affected by the structure of a long-term
relationship, we study repeated games.
In a repeated game, there is an infinite sequence of rounds, or points
in time, at which players may get information and choose moves. That
is, a repeated game has an infinite time horizon, unlike the finite game
trees that were considered in Chapter 2. In a repeated game, because
no move is necessarily the last, a player must always consider the effect
that his current move might have on the moves and information of
other players in the future. Such considerations may lead players to be
more cooperative, or more belligerent, in a repeated game than they
would be in a finite game in which they know when their relationship
will end.
To introduce the study of repeated games, let us begin with a well-
known example, the repeated Prisoners' Dilemma (Table 7.1). Here g,
is i's generous move, and f is i's selfish move. As we saw in Chapter 3,
(f,,f2) is the only equilibrium of this game. Now let us consider what
happens if players 1 and 2 expect to repeatedly play this game with
each other every day, for a long time.
For example, suppose that the number of times that the game will be
played is a random variable, unknown to the players until the game
stops, and that this random stopping time is a geometric distribution
with expected value 100. That is, the probability of play continuing for

--- Sayfa 327 ---
7.1 • The Repeated Prisoners' Dilemma 309
Table 7.1 Prisoners' Dilemma game
D2
g2
12
gi
5,5
0,6
f,
6,0
1,1
exactly k rounds is (.99*-1) x .01. Thus, after each round of play, the
probability that players 1 and 2 will meet and play again is .99; and at
any time when they are still playing, the expected number of further
rounds of play is 100. In this repeated game, generous behavior can be
supported in equilibrium. Consider, for example, the strategy of playing
g, every day until someone plays f, or f2, and thereafter playing f. If
both players plan to use this strategy, then, at any time in the game
each player will get an expected total future payoff of
E (99k-')(01)(5k) = 500,
k= 1
as long as no one has deviated and chosen f. But if either player i
deviated from this strategy and chose f on some particular day, then
his expected total future payoff from this day onward would be
6 + E (.99k-  ')(.01)(1k) = 105.
k=2
On the other hand, if anyone has ever played f, or f2, then it is easy to
see that neither player could gain by choosing g, when the other player
is expected to follow this strategy and so always choose the selfish move
hereafter. Thus, at any point in time, with any history of past moves,
neither player can expect to gain by any unilateral deviation from this
strategy.
The key to this generous equilibrium is that, whenever the players
meet, they believe that there is a very high probability that they will
play again; so the hope of inducing future generous behavior by the
other player can give each player an incentive to be generous. We could
not construct such an equilibrium if the players knew in advance when
the game would end. For example, if it were common knowledge that
the game would be played for exactly 100 rounds, then the resulting

--- Sayfa 328 ---
310 7 • Repeated Games
100-round game would have a unique sequential equilibrium, with both
always playing (f,,f2) at every round. At the last (100th) round, a gen-
erous move cannot induce any future generosity by the other player
(because there is no future), so there is no reason for either player to
be generous. So the players should choose (f,,f2) at the 100th round,
no matter what the prior history might be. Thus, at the 99th round,
the players must know that their moves will have no impact on the
100th-round moves, so they should play (f,,f2) on the 99th round as
well. Working backward through the game, it is straightforward to verify
by induction that the unique sequential-equilibrium scenario is indeed
to play f, and f2  at every round.
Thus, rational behavior in a repeated game with a potentially infinite
time horizon may be very different from rational behavior in the cor-
responding game in which the number of rounds is arbitrarily large but
finite. So the study of repeated games requires us to use a model that
goes beyond the finite extensive form.
7.2. A General Model of Repeated Games
A wide range of models of repeated games have been studied in the
game-theory literature. The following model (used by Mertens, Sorin,
and Zamir, 1989) provides a general conceptual structure that can in-
clude most of these models as special cases. Let N be the nonempty set
of players. Let O be a nonempty set, denoting the set of possible states
of nature. For each player i in N, let the nonempty sets D, and S, denote
respectively the set of moves that player i can choose and the set of signals
that player i may receive, at each round of the game. We use the notation
D= X Di, S --= X Si .

iEN
iEN
Given these sets, we must specify an initial distribution q in A(S x 0), a
transition function p:D x 0 ---> A(S x 0), and, for every player i, a payoff
function ui:D x 0 —> R. These structures
rr  =
0, (Di, Si, ui)iEN, 9, p)
complete the specification of a general repeated game.
The interpretation of such a general repeated game is as follows. The
game is played in an infinite sequence of rounds numbered 1,2,3,. . . .
At each round, some state in 0 is the (current) state of nature. Each player

--- Sayfa 329 ---
7.2 • A General Model 311
i's new information about the state of nature is summarized by a signal
in S, that he receives at the beginning of the round. As a function of
the signals that he has received in the current round and in all previous
rounds, each player i must choose a move in D. The probability that 0'
is the state of nature at the first round and that each player i receives
the signal s,' at the beginning of the first round is q(s1,01). (Here we use
the notation sk  = (si:),EN•) At any round k, if the current state of nature
is 0k  and the moves of the players are dk  = AzEN in D, then u,(dk,Ok) is
the round-k payoff to each player i, andp(sk+1 0k+' Id
k,Ok) is the condi-
tional probability that the signals and the state of nature at round k+ 1
will be (sk+1 0k+  I). Notice that this probability is independent of the
states and moves at rounds 1 through k-1 and the signals at rounds 1
through k.
We say that payoffs are bounded in the repeated game F' iff there
exists some positive number 1/ such that,
I u#40)1
We say that a state 0 in 0 is absorbing iff
E ms,old,o) = 1, Vd E D.
sES
Thus, if an absorbing state 0 is the current state of nature at round k,
then 0 will be the state of nature at all rounds after k.
To describe the infinitely repeated Prisoners' Dilemma in the preced-
ing section in the general repeated-game form, let N = {1,2}, O = {0,1},
D, = {f,,g,}, and S, = O U (D1  x D2). Then, for each i in N and d in D,
let u,(d,l) be as shown in Table 7.1, let uz(d,O) = 0, and let
q(1,1,1) = 1,
p(d,d,11(1,1) = 0.99, p(0,0,0jd, 1) = 0.01, and
p(0,0,01d,O) = 1.
Here, state 1 means that the active play is continuing, and state 0 means
that active play has stopped. The equation q(1,1,1) = 1 means that, with
probability 1, at round 1 players 1 and 2 will each receive a signal "1"
and the state of nature will be 1. At each subsequent round k+1, if the
state of nature is 1, then each player will get a signal telling him the
pair of moves chosen in the preceding round. The state 0 is absorbing.
In a general repeated game, we assume that each player at each round
k recalls all the signals that he has gotten in rounds 1 through k. To
Vi E N, Vd E D, VO E O.

--- Sayfa 330 ---
312 7 • Repeated Games
assure that he recalls his own past moves, it then suffices to let one
component of his signal in each round equal his own move from the
preceding round. Thus, the set of all pure strategies C, for player i in the
general repeated game F' is
Ci  = {ci  = (c/S=. 1 1c/::(Si)k  --> Di, Vkl.
(Here (Si)" denotes the k-fold Cartesian product of the set Si.) The set
of behavioral strategies Bi  for player i is similarly
Bi  =
= (c6;:=1 1
:(Si)k  -->
Vkl.
That is, for any k and any history of signals (s1! , . . . ,s1:) in (Si)", a
behavioral strategy cri  must specify a probability distribution °Ns:,
. . . ,$) in A(Di), which describes how i would randomly determine his
move at round k if he had observed this sequence of signals. We let C =
and B = X iEN Bi•
X ; E N Ci
Given any behavioral strategy profile a = ( 1
in B, let Pk(d,0 I o-)
Ncri,i(N
- ,
denote the probability that, at round k, ek  will be the current state of
nature and d will be the profile of moves chosen by the players, if every
player i uses his behavioral strategy cri  at all rounds. To make this
definition formally precise, we can inductively define
(. I a), Q2(. I a),
. . . , and 1)1(.1o), P2(.1o), . . . by the following equations
Q1(s1,01 1
= q(s1,01),
Qk+ 1 (51 •
I Q)  = E E  Qk (.5 1
,sk
Cri
EN
04 E0 dED
di l si  • • ,s,k) p(sk+ 1 ,ok+ 1 I ok),
0-1:(
I  ,
Pk(d,eklcr) =
E
,sk,o*Icr)
(s1,
sh)
lEN
(So Qk(sl, . . . ,sk,Ok  I (r) is the probability that, at round k, (s', . . . ,sk) will
be the history of profiles of signals received by the various players and
ek  will be the current state of nature, if every player i uses the behavioral
strategy c•1.)
In the analysis of finite games in extensive form, we have assumed
that each player's objective is to maximize the expected value of a utility
payoff that he gets at the end of the game. For repeated games, to allow
an infinite time horizon, we must drop this assumption that all payoffs
come at the end of the game. Instead, we suppose that players get

--- Sayfa 331 ---
7.2 A General Model 313
payoffs at each round of the game. That is, the payoff outcome to a
player in a repeated game is an infinite sequence of payoffs. To describe
players' objectives, we must specify some criterion for ranking such
payoff sequences.
In the example described above, there was an absorbing state in which
the players' payoffs are always 0, and the expected number of rounds
until arrival at this absorbing state is always finite. For such examples,
we can use the sum-of-payoffs criterion to determine players' objectives.
That is, we can define each player's objective to be to maximize the
expected sum of payoffs that he receives at all rounds of the game.
With the sum-of-payoffs criterion, we can define an equilibrium to be
a behavioral strategy profile r such that, for every player i in N and
every behavioral strategy a, in B„
CC
CC
E E Pk(61,01c)ui(d>0) > E E E Pk(d,0 I cr_„O- )u,(d,0).
k=1 dED 0E0
k=1 dED 0E0
Unfortunately, if there is no absorbing state with zero payoffs for which
the expected time of arrival is finite, then the expected sum of payoffs
may be infinite for all behavioral strategy profiles, so this sum-of-payoffs
criterion cannot be applied.
For any number 8 such that 0 < 8 < 1, the 8-discounted average of a
sequence of payoffs (w,(1), w,(2),w,(3), . . .) is
CC
(1 — 8) E
(In this chapter, superscripts are used both as indexes and as exponents.
Where there is danger of confusion, we put the base in parentheses
when the superscript denotes exponentiation. Thus, for example, (8)3  =
8 x 8 x 8.) Notice that, if w,(k) is equal to a constant, independent of
k, then this 8-discounted average is equal to the same constant, because
(1 - 8) E (8)k-1  = 1.
k=1
The number 8 is called the discount factor in this expression. For any
general repeated game, if the payoffs are bounded, then the 8-dis-
counted average of each player's sequence of payoffs is a finite number
and is bounded in absolute value by the same number that bounds
payoffs. So we can more generally apply the 8-discounted average cri-
terion and assume that each player's objective is to maximize the ex-

--- Sayfa 332 ---
314 7 • Repeated Games
pected 6-discounted average of his sequence of payoffs. (See Epstein,
1983, for an axiomatic derivation of the 8-discounted average criterion
and generalizations.) With the 8-discounted average criterion, a behav-
ioral strategy profile if is an equilibrium iff, for every player i and every
behavioral strategy d,,
(1 — 8) E E E Pk(d,0 I cr)(8)k-lu,(d,O)
k=1 dED 0E0
— 	E E E Pk(d,ola_ ,Cr,)(8)k-lui(d,0).
Given a sequence of payoffs (wA)),7_, and a discount factor 8, let
1742,8) denote the 8-discounted average of the (sub)sequence of payoffs
that begins at round 2. That is,
CO
W,(2,8) =-- (1 — 8) E (s)k-izvi(k+i).
k=1
Then the following useful recursion equation holds:
CO
(7.1)
(1 — 8) E (8)k-'w,(k) = (1 — 8)w1(1) +611(2,6).
k=1
That is, the 8-discounted average of a sequence of payoffs beginning at
round 1 is the weighted average of the payoff at round 1, with weight
(1 — 8), and the 8-discounted average of the sequence of payoffs begin-
ning at round 2, with weight 6.
In the example above, with a geometrically distributed stopping time
(arrival time at the absorbing state with zero payoffs), the probability
that the players will still be playing for nonzero payoffs at round k is
(6)k- I, when 8 = .99. Thus, this example is essentially equivalent to an
infinitely repeated Prisoners' Dilemma game with no stopping (no ab-
sorbing state "0") but with the .99-discounted average criterion.
In general, the discount factor 8 represents a measure of the patience
or long-term perspective of the players. If 8 is close to 0, then a 8-
discounted average criterion puts most weight on the payoffs that play-
ers get in the first few rounds of the repeated game, and so is more
appropriate for players who are impatient or mainly concerned about
their current and near-future payoffs. As 8 approaches 1, the ratio of
the weights given to the payoffs in any two rounds in the 8-discounted
average converges to 1; that is, for any k and 1,

--- Sayfa 333 ---
7.2 • A General Model 315
liM (1 --6)(8)k—  — 1.
6--,1 (1 — 8)(8)1-1
So if 8 is close to 1, then the 8-discounted average criterion approximates
a patient criterion in which players are not significantly less concerned
with their payoffs in any given future round than with their payoffs in
the current round.
Another criterion for ranking payoff sequences is the limit of average
payoffs. According to this criterion, one sequence of payoffs w =
(w,(1),wX2), . . .) for player i would be preferred by i over another
sequence of payoffs 11.) = (i.b,(1),/b,(2), . . .) iff
M
M
E w,(k) 	E 1.11 j(k)
k=1
k=1
lim
lim
M—,co
A difficulty with this criterion is that these limits may fail to exist, even
when payoffs are bounded. When such limits fail to exist, one option is
to weaken the criterion and rank (w,(1),w,(2), . . .) over (th,(1),ev,(2), . . .)
iff
liminf
M—oo
M E wi(k)
k=1
limsup
M
E zbi(k)
k = 1
M
M
(The liminf, or limit-infimum, of a sequence is the lowest number that is
a limit of some convergent subsequence. The limsup, or limit-supremum,
is the highest number that is a limit of some convergent subsequence.)
Another option is to use the overtaking criterion, according to which a
sequence of payoffs (w,(1),w,(2), . . .) is ranked over another sequence
(zb,(1),/b,(2), . . .) iff
M
liminf E (w,(k) — r.1),(k)) > 0.
k
Under each of these criteria, however, some payoff sequences may be
incomparable. Furthermore, the limit-supremum and limit-infimum are
nonlinear operations that do not commute with the expected value
operator. A technical way of avoiding these difficulties is to use Banach
limits to evaluate payoff sequences in repeated games. The last four
paragraphs of this section give a brief introduction to this advanced
topic, which is not used subsequently in this book.

--- Sayfa 334 ---
316 7 • Repeated Games
Let 4,o  denote the set of bounded sequences of real numbers. A Banach
limit is defined to be a linear operator L:L --> R such that, for any
sequences w = (w(1),w(2), . . . ) and x = (x(1),x(2), . . .) in L,
L(aw (3x) = aL(w) + I3L(x), Va E R, VP E R;
limsup w(k) L(w) > liminf w(k);
if w(k+1) = x(k) Vk E {1,2,3, . . .}, then L(w) = L(x).
The existence of Banach limits can be proved by using the Hahn-Banach
theorem (see Royden, 1968, pp. 186-192), but this proof is noncon-
structive. Furthermore, there are many Banach limits, which may lead
to different rankings of payoff sequences.
Using ideas from nonstandard analysis (see, for example, Hurd and
Loeb, 1985), we can show how to define a class of Banach limits directly
from the limit of average payoffs criterion. A filter on a set I is defined
to be any nonempty collection 9-,  of subsets of I such that
if A , E ?I,  and A2 E 9-,, then A , fl A2 E
if A I  E 5,  and Al  C A2 C I, then A2 E 9-,, and
0
An ultrafilter on I is any filter 5. on I such that, for any A that is a subset
of I, if A 0 g then / \ A E That is, among any pair of complementary
subsets of I, one subset must be in the ultrafilter. If I is an infinite set,
then an ultrafilter 9-,  on I is free iff it contains no finite subsets of I.
Now, let I be the set of positive integers. The existence of free ul-
trafilters on I can be guaranteed by an axiom of choice, because defining
a free ultrafilter requires infinitely many choices. Any finite set of in-
tegers must be excluded from a free ultrafilter, and any set that contains
all but finitely many of the positive integers in I must be included in a
free ultrafilter. But for any pair of infinite complementary subsets of I,
such as the even numbers and the odd numbers, we must pick one of
the two sets to be in our free ultrafilter.
Given any free ultrafilter PI,  on the set of positive integers, we can
define a Banach limit L9.4•) such that, for any w in L, Lg(w) = z iff, for
every positive number r,
{MI Z
w(k) I M z + el E 9,-.
k=1

--- Sayfa 335 ---
7.3 Stationary Equilibria 317
It can be shown that, once a free ultrafilter 5",  is fixed, this limit 4(w)
is uniquely defined for every bounded sequence w, and the operator
R satisfies all the conditions of a Banach limit. Thus, this concept
of filter-limits enables us to define a player's overall payoff in an infi-
nitely repeated game to be the limit of the average payoffs that he gets
in finitely repeated versions of the game; and in making this definition,
we do not need to worry about the existence of limits. In effect, a free
ultrafilter defines a rule for selecting a convergent subsequence for any
bounded sequence that fails to converge.
7.3 Stationary Equilibria of Repeated Games with Complete State
Information and Discounting
A general repeated game has complete state information iff, at every round,
every player knows the current state of nature. That is, for every player
i in N and every signal s, in S„ there exists some state to(s) in 0 such
that, for every 0 and 0 in 0, every d in D, and every s _, in X,EN_,S,,
Ms:6  I d,0) = 0 if 0
(.0 (s,);
so the signal s, can never occur unless the current state is (...)(s). (Here
s = (s_„s,).)
In a repeated game with complete state information, a behavioral
strategy is stationary iff the move probabilities depend only on the cur-
rent state. That is, a behavioral strategy cr, is stationary iff there exists
some T,:0 -3 A(D,) such that, for each k and each history of signals
. . . ,s,k) in (S,)k,
Crik( •Ii
S , . . . ,Si) = Ti(• 1(0(Sik))•
Because T, completely characterizes a-, when the above equation holds,
we may also refer to any such function T,:0 --> A(D) as a stationary
strategy for player i. Here TAd,10) denotes the probability, at each round
when 0 is the state of nature, that player i would choose move d,. We
say that a profile of stationary strategies T = (T,),EN is an equilibrium iff
the corresponding behavioral strategies as above) form an equi-
librium. For any profile of stationary strategies 'T, we can also write
Ti(0) = (Ti(di  I 0))diED;  and T(0) = (T;(0));EN  E X il(D).
jEN

--- Sayfa 336 ---
318 7 • Repeated Games
Given a profile of stationary strategies T as above, let v,(0) denote the
expected 3-discounted average payoff for player i in the repeated game
if the players plan to always use these stationary strategies and, at round
1, the initial state of nature is 0. Let v, = (v,(0))„0. If every player plans
to implement the stationary strategies T at every round except that, at
round 1 only, player i plans to choose move d„ and if the current state
of nature at round 1 is 0, then the expected 8-discounted average payoff
for player i is
Y,(T,d1,v„0,8) =
E
7010))
- 8)uo,e) + 8 E E P(s,t1d,o)vi(t)).
d_,ED_, JEN—:
t EC) sES
(Here D_, =
d, = (d,),EN-,, and d = (d_,,d,).) This formula is
derived from the basic recursion equation (7.1). When all players use
stationary strategies, the conditionally expected 8-discounted average of
the sequence of payoffs beginning at round 2, given that was the state
of nature at round 2, is the same as what the conditionally expected 8-
discounted average of the sequence of payoffs beginning at round 1
would be, if t were the given state of nature at round 1. The expected
8-discounted average payoffs, when er is used at every round, must
satisfy
(7.2)
vi(0) = E 	„0,8), VO E 0.
d,ED,
When 0 8 < 1, the system of equations (7.2) always has at most one
bounded solution in v„ given T. (To prove uniqueness, suppose to the
contrary that v, and 'I), are two different solutions to the system of
equations (7.2). Because the components of the probability distributions
p(• id,O) and 7,•• 0) must sum to 1, (7.2) and the definition of Y, would
imply that
0 < max I vi(0) — Di(0)
OE®
max max I Yi(T,d„v„0,8) — Yi(T,41)„0,8) I
0E0
diED,
8 max I vi(t)
Da(g)1 < max I vi(t)
tE0
tE0

--- Sayfa 337 ---
7.3 • Stationary Equilibria 319
which is impossible.) Thus, for any profile of stationary strategies T, the
expected 8-discounted average payoff for player i in the repeated game,
starting at each state, can always be found by solving (7.2).
For a profile of stationary strategies T to be an equilibrium of a
repeated game with complete state information, no player should expect
to do better by deviating to some other move at some round in some
state 0 that could ever occur in the game. This requirement implies that
(7.3)
vi(0) = max Yi(T,d„vz,0,8), VO E 0.
d; ED;
For each player i, to make (7.3) a necessary condition for an equilibrium,
we should restrict the range of 0 to be the set of all states that may
occur with positive probability when the players use the strategies T.
However, for an equilibrium that is sequentially rational in all states,
condition (7.3) is necessary as stated, with 0 ranging over all of 0.
As an application of fundamental results from dynamic programming
(see, e.g., Blackwell, 1965; Howard, 1960), it can be shown that, if no
player could ever expect to gain by deviating at one round alone from
a stationary profile of strategies T, then no player would ever want to
deviate from this profile of strategies to any more complicated strategy.
That is, we have the following theorem.
THEOREM 7.1. Given a repeated game with complete state information
and bounded payoffs, and given a profile of stationary strategies T, if there exists
a bounded vector v = (v,(0))„®,,,N  such that conditions (7.2) and (7.3) are
satisfied for every player i, then T is an equilibrium of the repeated game with
the 8-discounted average payoff criterion. In this equilibrium, v,(0) is the expected
8-discounted average payoff for player i in the repeated game when the initial
state of nature is 0.
Proof Suppose, contrary to the theorem, that T and v satisfy condi-
tions (7.2) and (7.3) for every player i, but T is not an equilibrium. Then
there exists some positive number E and some strategy o, (which is not
necessarily stationary) for some player i such that player i's expected 8-
discounted average payoff would increase by more than e if i changed
from T, to 0-, while all other players followed the strategies in T. For any
K, let (Ili` denote the strategy that coincides with o, at all rounds before
round K and coincides with the stationary strategy T, at round K and
thereafter.

--- Sayfa 338 ---
320 7 • Repeated Games
Now compare strategies 61,`and ol(±1  for player i, when the other
players are expected to follow T. Player i's expected payoffs at all rounds
before round K are the same for these two strategies. Furthermore, i's
behavior will coincide with Ti  at round K+1 and thereafter. So if the
state of nature at round K+ 1 were 1, then v,(t) would be the expected
8-discounted average of i's sequence of payoffs beginning at round K+ 1.
Thus, if the state at round K were 0 and player i chose move d„ then
the expected 8-discounted average of i's sequence of payoffs beginning
at round K would be Ya(T,4v„0,8), as defined above. But conditions
(7.2) and (7.3) imply that
T,(d,10) > 0 only if d, E argmax K(r,e,„0,8).
e,(D,
That is, at the one round where di,' and 6/, ±1  differ, 61<  always chooses
an optimal move for player i. So dic, must be at least as good as erfc+1
for player i against .1-_„ for any positive number K. By induction, there-
fore, no strategy O can be better than erzi, which is identical to Ti, for
player i against
Now choose K such that S/(8)/C-1 < r/2, where Si is the bound on
payoffs. Then the expected 8-discounted average of i's sequence of
payoffs (beginning at round 1) when he uses cannot differ by more
than 6/2 from the expected 8-discounted average of i's sequence of
payoffs when he uses cr„ because the two strategies do not differ until
round K. By our choice of e, this fact implies that c7K, is better than T,
for i against T_,. This contradiction proves the theorem. I
To make the most use of Theorem 7.1, we should recognize that
many strategies that do not at first appear stationary may become sta-
tionary when we consider an equivalent model that has a larger state
space. For example, recall from Section 7.1 the strategy where player i
in the repeated Prisoners' Dilemma game plays g, until someone plays
fi  at some round, and thereafter plays f,. This strategy is not stationary
as long as there is only one state that represents "active play continuing,"
as formulated in the model proposed in Section 7.2. However, we can
consider an equivalent game that includes two states la and lb in (),
where la represents "active play continuing and no one has ever chosen
fi  or f2" and lb represents "active play continuing and someone has
chosen f, or f2  at some time in the past." In this model, la would be
the initial state, a transition from la to lb would occur whenever the

--- Sayfa 339 ---
7.3 • Stationary Equilibria 321
moves are not (g,,g2), a transition from lb to la would never occur,
and payoffs would be the same in both states la and lb. In this model,
the strategy described above would be stationary, with
Ti(g,I la) = 1, T,(fil lb) = 1.
In this elaborated-state model, Theorem 7.1 can be applied to show
that it is an equilibrium for both players to apply this strategy, if 8 is
not too small. When both players implement this strategy, conditions
(7.2) and (7.3) for each player i become
v,(1 a) = (1 — 8)5 + 8(.99v,(1 a) + .01v,(0))
(1 — 8)6 + 8(.99v,(1b) + .01v,(0)),
v,(1b) = (1 — 8)1 + 84.99v,(1b) + .01v,(0))
(1 — 8)0 + 8(.99v,(1b) + .01v,(0)),
v,(0) = (1 — 8)0 + 81),(0).
For example, the first inequality asserts that, in state la, being generous
(getting payoff 5) this round and so staying in state la next round with
probability .99 (unless the transition to state 0 occurs, which has prob-
ability .01), is not worse for player i than being selfish (getting payoff
6) this round and so going to state lb next round with probability .99.
The unique solution of the three equations is
v 1a — 5(1 — 8)
(
)
,
1 —.998
v,(1b) =
1 — 8
1 — .998
v,(0) = 0,
and the inequalities are satisfied if 8
20/99.
In general, suppose the definition of a "state of nature" has been
elaborated sufficiently such that, in a given behavioral strategy profile,
all players' strategies are stationary. If no player in any one state could
expect to gain by deviating from his given strategy at just one round,
then the behavioral strategy profile is an equilibrium (i.e., no player
could ever expect to gain by planning to deviate over many different
rounds).
For an interesting example, consider the following game, called the
Big Match, due to Blackwell and Ferguson (1968). Let N = {1,2}, 0 =

--- Sayfa 340 ---
322 7 • Repeated Games
{0,1,2}, D, = {Xi ,Y1}, D2 = {x2,y2}, S1 = S2  = (DI  X D2) U 0. In this
game, the initial state is state 1, and each player's initial signal confirms
this, so q(1,1,1) = 1. As long as the game is in state 1, the payoffs
(u,(d,1), u2(d,1)) are as shown in Table 7.2. The state of nature stays at
1 until player 1 chooses y i  , and then the state changes either to state 0,
if player 2 chose x2  at the round where player 1 first chose yi, or to
state 2, if player 2 chose y2  at the round where player 1 first chose y, .
States 0 and 2 are absorbing, and the payoffs in these states are always
the same as at the last round in state 1, so
ul(d,O) = 0, u2(d,O) = 0, ul(d,2) = 2, u2(d,2) = —2. Vd E D.
As long as the game stays in state 1, the players observe each other's
past moves, so
p(d,d,11(1,1) = 1 if d, = xl ,
while
p(0,0,01(y,,x2),1) = 1, p(2,2,21(y,,y2),1) = 1, and
p(O,o,old,o) = 1, p(2,2,21d,2) = 1, Vd E D.
The interest in this game derives from the fact that player 2 wants to
avoid being caught at y2  in the round where player 1 first chooses yi ;
but if player 2 avoids this trap by always choosing x2, then player 1 can
beat her just as badly by always choosing x,. To find a stationary equi-
librium of the Big Match with a 8-discounted average criterion, let a =
T,(x,11),
= T2(x211). It is easy to see that there is no pure-strategy
equilibrium, so we can assume that 0 < a < 1 and 0 < 13 < 1. Now, let
z = v,(1) denote the 8-discounted average payoff to player 1 in this
game. Because it is a zero-sum game, the 8-discounted average payoff
to player 2 in this game must be —z. If player 1 chooses y, in round 1,
Table 7.2 Payoffs in the Big Match, for all move profiles, at any round when
yi  has not been previously chosen
D2
Di
x2
Y2
xi
2,-2
0,0
Yi
0,0
2,-2

--- Sayfa 341 ---
7.4 • Standard Repeated Games 323
then either he gets 0 forever, with probability 13, or he gets 2 forever,
with probability 1 — 13. If player 1 chooses x, in round 1, he gets a
current expected payoff of 20 + 0(1 — 13), and thereafter the game
continues in state 1 at round 2. So equations (7.2) and (7.3) imply that
z = 013 + 2(1 — 13) = (1 — 8)213 + 8z.
Thus, /3 = 1/2, and z = 1. Similarly, to make player 2 willing to randomize
between x2  and y2, we must have
—z = a((1 — 8)(-2) + 8(—z)) + (1 — a)(0)
= a((1 — 8)(0) + 8(—z)) + (1 — a)(-2);
so a = 1/(2 — 8). Notice that, as 8 approaches 1, player 1's equilibrium
strategy approaches the strategy in which he always chooses x, ; but that
cannot be an equilibrium because player 2 would respond to it by always
choosing y2.
Blackwell and Ferguson (1968) studied the Big Match under the limit
of average payoffs criterion and showed that, in this two-person zero-
sum game, player 1's minimax value is +1 and player 2's minimax value
(or security level) is —1, just as it was under the discounted average
payoff criterion. Player 2 can guarantee that player 1 cannot expect
more than + 1 by randomizing between x, and y2, each with probability
1/2, at every round while the state of nature is 1. However, there is no
equilibrium under the limit of average payoffs because player 1 has no
minimax strategy against player 2. Blackwell and Ferguson showed that,
for any positive integer M, player 1 can guarantee himself an expected
limit of average payoffs that is not lower than M/(M + 1) (so player 2's
limit of average payoffs is not more than —M/(M + 1)) by using the
following strategy: at each round, choose y, with probability 1/(1 + M +
x* — y*)2, where x* is the number of times that player 2 has chosen x2
in the past and y* is the number of times that player 2 has chosen y2  in
the past.
7.4 Repeated Games with Standard Information: Examples
A repeated game with standard information, or a standard repeated game (also
sometimes called a supergame), is a repeated game in which there is only
one possible state of nature and the players know all of each other's
past moves. That is, in a standard repeated game I 01 = 1, S, = X I END,
for every i, and

--- Sayfa 342 ---
324 7 • Repeated Games
P(d, • . 4,01d,O) = 1, Vd E D.
Repeated games with standard information represent situations in
which a group of individuals face exactly the same competitive situation
infinitely often and always have complete information about each other's
past behavior. Thus, the standard information structure maximizes the
players' abilities to respond to each other.
The stationary equilibria of a standard repeated game are just the
equilibria of the corresponding one-round game, repeated in every
round. However, the nonstationary equilibria of standard repeated
games are generally much larger sets, because of the players' abilities
to respond to each other and punish each other's deviations from any
supposed equilibrium path. In fact, under weak assumptions, almost
any feasible payoff allocation that gives each player at least his minimax
value can be achieved in an equilibrium of a standard repeated game.
A general statement of this result is developed and proved in the next
section; in this section, we develop the basic intuition behind this im-
portant result by detailed consideration of two examples.
To illustrate the analysis of standard repeated games, consider the
repeated game of Chicken, where the payoffs to players 1 and 2 are as
shown in Table 7.3. Each player i has two moves to choose between at
each round: the "cautious" move az  and the "bold" move b,. Each player
would most prefer to be bold while the other is cautious, but for both
to be bold is the worst possible outcome for both. The best symmetric
outcome is when both are cautious.
If the players play this game only once, then there are three Nash
equilibria of this game, one giving payoffs (6,1), one giving payoffs
(1,6), and one randomized equilibrium giving expected payoffs (3,3).
When communication is allowed, there is a correlated equilibrium of
this game in which the probability of (a,,a2) is equal to .5 and the
expected payoff allocation is (3.75,3.75), but no higher symmetric ex-
Table 7.3 Payoffs at any round, for all move profiles, in the repeated game
of Chicken
D2
D,
a2
b2
a,
4,4
1,6
b,
6,1
—3,-3

--- Sayfa 343 ---
7.4 • Standard Repeated Games 325
pected payoff allocation can be achieved in a correlated equilibrium of
the one-round game. In particular, (a,,a2) is not an equilibrium of the
one-round game, because each player i would prefer to be bold (choose
b,) if he expected the other player to be cautious (choose a_ 1).
Suppose now that this game is repeated infinitely, with standard
information, and each player uses a 8-discounted average payoff crite-
rion, for some number 8 that is between 0 and 1. A strategy for a player
in the repeated game is a rule for determining his move at every round
as a function of the history of moves that have been used at every
preceding round. For example, one celebrated strategy for repeated
games like this one (or the repeated Prisoners' Dilemma) is the strategy
called tit-for-tat. Under the tit-for-tat strategy, a player chooses his cau-
tious move in the first round, and thereafter chooses the same move as
his opponent chose in the preceding round.
If both players follow the tit-for-tat strategy, then the actual outcome
will be (a,,a2) in every round, giving each player a discounted average
payoff of 4. However, tit-for-tat should not be confused with the strategy
"always choose as," under which a player would choose a, at every round
no matter what happened in the past. To see why, suppose first that
player 1 is following the strategy of "play a, at every round." Then
player 2's best response is to always play b2  and get a discounted average
payoff of 6. On the other hand, if player 1 is following the tit-for-tat
strategy and the discount factor 8 is close to 1, then player 2 will never
want to choose 62, because she will lose more from player 1's reprisal
next round than she will gain from choosing 62  in this round. Thus,
the part of a strategy that specifies how to punish unexpected behav-
ior by the opponent may be very important, even if such punishments
are not carried out in equilibrium.
Let us check to see how large 8 has to be for tit-for-tat to deter bold
behavior by one's opponent. Suppose that player 1 is implementing the
tit-for-tat strategy and that player 2 is considering whether to be bold
at the first round and thereafter go back to being cautious. If she does
so, her payoff will be 6 in the first round, 1 in the second round, and
4 at every round thereafter, so her 8-discounted average payoff is
CO
(1 — 8)(6 + 18 + E 48k-1) = 6 — 58 + 382.
k=3
On the other hand, if she is always cautious against player l's tit-for-
tat, she will get the discounted average payoff of 4. So, to deter player
2 from being bold, we need

--- Sayfa 344 ---
326 7 • Repeated Games
4 (1 — 8)(6 + 18+ E 48k-1),
k=3
or 8
2/3. In fact, if 8
2A, then neither player can gain by being the
first to deviate from the tit-for-tat strategy, if the other is expected to
always use tit-for-tat; so tit-for-tat is an equilibrium.
Although it is an equilibrium for both players to use the tit-for-tat
strategy, the equilibrium is not subgame perfect. To be a subgame-
perfect equilibrium, the players must always choose sequentially rational
moves, even after histories of moves that have zero probability under
the given strategies. Consider the situation that would be faced by player
1 at the second round if player 2 accidentally chose b2  at the first round.
Under the assumption that both players will follow tit-for-tat hereafter,
the outcome will be (b,,a2) in every even-numbered round and (a ,,b2)
in every odd-numbered round; and the discounted average payoff to
player 1 will be
(1 — 8)(1 + 68 + 182  + 683  + . . .) = (1 + 68)1(1 + 8).
On the other hand, if player 1 deviates from tit-for-tat by choosing al
at round 2 and both players then follow tit-for-tat thereafter, then the
outcome will be (al,a2) at every round after round 1; so the discounted
average payoff to player 1 will be
(1 — 8)(1 + 48 + 482  + 483  + . . .) = 1 + 38.
With some straightforward algebra, it can be shown that
1 + 38 > (1 + 68)1(1 + 8) when 8 > 2/3.
Furthermore, for any 8, either player could gain from unilaterally de-
viating from the tit-for-tat strategy after both players chose (b,,b2),
because alternating between payoffs 1 and 6 is better than always getting
—3. So it would be irrational for a player to implement the punishment
move in tit-for-tat if the other player is also expected to implement tit-
for-tat hereafter. That is, the scenario in which both play tit-for-tat is
not a subgame-perfect equilibrium.
There is a way to modify tit-for-tat to get around this difficulty,
however. Consider the following strategy for player i: at each round, i
chooses az  unless the other player has in the past chosen b_z  strictly more
times than i has chosen b ., in which case i chooses bz. We call this strategy
getting-even. It can be shown that, as long as 8 is greater than 2/3, it is a

--- Sayfa 345 ---
7.4 Standard Repeated Games 327
subgame-perfect equilibrium for both players to follow the getting-even
strategy. For example, if player 2 deviates from the strategy and chooses
b2  at round 1 but is expected to apply the strategy thereafter, then it is
rational for player 1 to retaliate and choose b1  at round 2. Player 1
expects that player 2, under the getting-even strategy, will treat player
1's retaliatory b, as a justified response; so player 2 should not reply
with a counterretaliatory b2  in the third round. The condition 8
2/3 is
needed only to guarantee that neither player wants to choose b, when
the number of past bold moves is equal for the two players.
The distinction between tit-for-tat and getting-even is very fine, be-
cause they differ only after a mistake has been made. Let ri(k) denote
the number of rounds at which player i chooses b, before round k. If
player 1 applies the getting-even strategy correctly, then, no matter
what strategy player 2 uses, at any round k, r2(k) — r1(k) will always
equal either 0 or 1 and will equal 1 if and only if player 2 chose b2  last
round. Thus, according to the getting-even strategy, player 1 will choose
b1  if and only if player 2 chose b, in the preceding round. The distinction
between the two strategies becomes evident only in cases where player
1 himself has made some accidental deviation from his own strategy but
then goes back to implementing it.
Neither tit-for-tat nor getting-even can be sustained bilaterally as an
equilibrium of this game if 8 < 2A. However, as long as 8 .4, there
are other subgame-perfect equilibria of this repeated game that achieve
the outcome (a1ia2) in every round with probability 1.
When both players are supposed to choose a, in equilibrium, player
1 can deter player 2 from choosing b2  only if he has a credible threat
of some retaliation or punishment that would impose in the future a
greater cost (in terms of the discounted average) than player 2 would
gain from getting 6 instead of 4 in the current round. As the discount
factor becomes smaller, however, losses in later payoffs matter less in
comparison with gains in current payoffs, so it becomes harder to deter
deviations to 62. To devise a strategy that deters such deviations for the
lowest possible discount factor, we need to find the credible threat that
is most costly to player 2.
At worst, player 2 could guarantee herself a payoff of + 1 per round,
by choosing a2  every round. So the discounted average payoff to player
2 while she is being punished for deviating could not be lower than 1.
Such a payoff would actually be achieved if player 1 chose b1  and player
2 chose a2  forever after the first time that player 2 chose b2. Further-

--- Sayfa 346 ---
328 7 • Repeated Games
more, it would be rational for player I to choose b, forever and player
2 to choose a2  forever if each expected the other to do so. Thus, the
worst credible punishment against player 2 would be for player 1 to
choose b, forever while player 2 responds by choosing a2.
Consider the following grim strategy for player i: if there have been
any past rounds where one player was bold while the other player was
cautious (outcome (b,,a2) or (a,,b2)) and, at the first such round, i was
the cautious player, then i chooses b, now and hereafter; otherwise i
chooses a,. That is, under the grim strategy, i plays cooperatively (that
is, "cautiously") until his opponent deviates and is bold, in which case i
punishes by being bold forever. As long as 8 .4, it is a subgame-
perfect equilibrium for both players to follow the grim strategy.
Such infinite unforgiving punishment may seem rather extreme. So
we might be interested in finding other strategies that, like tit-for-tat,
have only one-round punishments and can sustain (a,,a2) forever as the
actual outcome in a subgame-perfect equilibrium when the discount
factor is smaller than 2/3. Such a strategy does exist. We call it mutual
punishment, and it can be described for player i as follows: i chooses a,
if it is the first round, or if the moves were (a,,a2) or (b,,b2) last round;
i chooses b, if the moves were (b,,a2) or (a,,b2) last round. If both players
are supposed to be following this strategy but one player deviates in a
particular round, then in the next round the players are supposed to
choose (b,,b2), which is the worst possible outcome for both of them
(hence the name "mutual punishment"). If player 2 is following this
strategy correctly and player 1 deviates to choose b,, then player 2 will
choose b2  in retaliation the next round and will continue to do so until
player 1 again chooses bl. The idea is that player 2 punishes player l's
deviation until player 1 participates in his own punishment or bares his
chest to the lash.
To check whether it is a subgame-perfect equilibrium for both players
to follow the mutual-punishment strategy, we must consider two possible
deviations: choosing b, when the strategy calls for a„ and choosing a,
when the strategy calls for b,. If the strategy calls for a, but player i
deviates for one round while the other player follows the strategy, then
i will get payoff +6 this round and —3 the next, whereas he would have
gotten +4 in both rounds by not deviating. Because the next round is
discounted by an extra factor of 8, the deviation is deterred if 4 + 48
6 + —38, that is, if 8
2/7. On the other hand, if the strategy calls for
b, but i deviates for one round while the other player follows the strategy,
then i will get payoff +1 this round and —3 the next, whereas he would

--- Sayfa 347 ---
7.4 • Standard Repeated Games 329
have gotten —3 in this round and +4 in the next by not deviating. So
this deviation is deterred if —3 + 48 1 + —38, that is, if 8
4/7. Thus,
it is a subgame-perfect equilibrium for both players to follow the mutual-
punishment strategy as long as the discount factor is at least 4/7.
Thus far, we have been discussing only equilibria in which the actual
outcome is always the cooperative (a ,,a2) at every round, unless someone
makes a mistake or deviates from the equilibrium. There are many
other equilibria to this repeated game, however. Any equilibrium of the
original one-round game would be (when repeated) an equilibrium of
the repeated game. For example, there is an equilibrium in which player
1 always chooses b, and player 2 always chooses a2. This is the best
equilibrium for player 1 and the worst for player 2.
There are also equilibria of the repeated game that have very bad
welfare properties and are close to being worst for both players. Fur-
thermore, some of these bad equilibria have a natural or logical appeal
that may, in some cases, make them the focal equilibria that people
actually implement. To see the logic that leads to these bad equilibria,
notice that the getting-even and grim equilibria both have the property
that the player who was more bold earlier is supposed to be less bold
later. Some people might suppose that the opposite principle is more
logical: that the player who has been more bold in the past should be
the player who is expected to be more bold in the future.
So consider a strategy, which we call the q-positional strategy, that may
be defined for each player i as follows: i chooses b, if i has chosen b,
strictly more times than the other player has chosen b_,; i chooses a, if
the other player has chosen b_, strictly more times than i has chosen b,;
and if b, and b_, have been chosen the same number of times, then i
chooses b, now with probability q and chooses a, now with probability
1 — q. The intuitive rationale for this strategy is that the player who has
established a stronger reputation for boldness can be bold in the future,
whereas the player who has had a more cautious pattern of behavior
should conform to the cautious image that he has created. When neither
player has the more bold reputation, then they may independently
randomize between bold and cautious in some way.
Given any value of the discount factor 8 between 0 and 1, there is a
value of q such that it is a subgame-perfect equilibrium for both players
to follow the q-positional strategy. To compute this q, notice first that,
although there are no alternative states of nature intrinsically defined
in this repeated game, the players' positional strategies are defined in
terms of an implicit state: the difference between the number of past

--- Sayfa 348 ---
330 7 • Repeated Games
rounds in which player 1 played b1  and the number of past rounds in
which player 2 played b2. At any round, if this implicit state is positive
and both players follow the q-positional strategy, then the payoffs will
be (6,1) at every round from now on. Similarly, if the implicit state is
negative, then the payoffs will be (1,6) at every round from now on.
Let z denote the expected 8-discounted average payoff expected by each
player (the same for both, by symmetry) when the implicit state is 0 at
the first round (as, of course, it actually is) and both apply the
q-positional strategy. Then player 1 is willing to randomize between b,
and al  when the implicit state is 0 if and only if
q((1 — S)(-3) + Sz) + (1 — q)((1 — S)(6) + S(6))
= q((1 — S)(1) + 8(1)) + (1 — q)((1 — S)(4) + Sz) = z.
These equalities assert that, when player 2's probability of being bold is
q, player 1's expected 8-discounted average payoff in the truncated
game is the same, whether he is bold (first expression) or cautious
(second expression) in the first round, and is in fact equal to z (as our
definition of z requires). Given 8, these two equations can be solved for
q and z. The results are shown in Table 7.4. Thus, if the players have
long-term objectives, so S is close to 1, then the positional equilibrium
gives each player an expected 8-discounted average payoff that is only
slightly better than the minimum that he could guarantee himself in
the worst equilibrium. In effect, the incentive to establish a reputation
for boldness pushes the two players into a war of attrition that is close to
the worst possible equilibrium for both.
The various equilibria discussed here may be taken as examples of
the kinds of behavior that can develop in long-term relationships. When
people in long-term relationships perceive that their current behavior
will have an influence on each other's future behavior, they may ration-
Table 7.4 Expected 8-discounted average payoffs (z) and initial boldness
probabilities (q) for four discount factors (8), in positional
equilibrium of repeated Chicken
S
.99
.992063
1.0024
.90
.925
1.024
.667
.767
1.273
.40
.582
1.903

--- Sayfa 349 ---
7.5 • General Feasibility Theorems 331
Table 7.5 Payoffs at any round, for all move profiles, in a repeated game
D2
D1
a2
b2
al
8,8
1,2
b,
2,1
0,0
ally become more cooperative (as in the getting-even equilibrium) or
more belligerent (as in the positional equilibrium), depending on the
kind of linkage that is expected between present and future behavior.
Qualitatively, the more cooperative equilibria seem to involve a kind of
reciprocal linkage (e.g., "expect me tomorrow to do what you do today"),
whereas the more belligerent equilibria seem to involve a kind of ex-
trapolative linkage ("expect me tomorrow to do what I do today").
For a simple example in which repeated-game equilibria may be worse
for both players than any equilibrium of the corresponding one-round
game, consider the game in Table 7.5. It is easy to see that the unique
equilibrium of the one-round game is (al,a2), which gives payoffs (8,8).
For the repeated game, however, consider the following scenario: if the
total number of past rounds when (a,,a2) occurred is even, then player
1 chooses a, and player 2 chooses b2; if the total number of past rounds
when (a,,a2) occurred is odd, then player 1 chooses b, and player 2
chooses a2. When the players implement these strategies, (a,,a2) never
occurs; so (a,,b2) is the outcome at every round (because 0 is even) and
payoffs are (1,2). This scenario is a subgame-perfect equilibrium if 8
6/7. For example, if player 2 deviated from this scenario by choosing a2
at round 1, then her discounted average payoff would be
(1 — 8)(8 + 18 + 182  + 183  + . . .) = 8 — 78.
Notice that 2
8 — 78 if 8
6/7.
7.5 General Feasibility Theorems for Standard Repeated Games
The general intuition that we take from the examples in the preceding
section is that, in standard repeated games, when players are sufficiently
patient, almost any feasible payoff allocation that gives each player at
least his minimax security level can be realized in an equilibrium of the
repeated game. That is, the payoff allocations that are feasible in equi-

--- Sayfa 350 ---
332 7 • Repeated Games
libria in a standard repeated game may generally coincide with the
payoffs that are feasible in the corresponding one-round game with
contracts, as studied in Section 6.1. In fact, general feasibility theorems
that express this intuition have been formulated and proved under a
variety of weak technical assumptions. In the game-theory literature,
these feasibility theorems have been referred to as folk theorems, because
some weak feasibility theorems were understood or believed by many
game theorists, as a part of an oral folk tradition, before any rigorous
statements were published. We use here the phrase general feasibility
theorem in place of "folk theorem," because naming a theorem for the
fact that it was once unpublished conveys no useful information to the
uninitiated reader.
Rubinstein (1979) proved a general feasibility theorem for subgame-
perfect equilibria of standard repeated games with the overtaking cri-
terion. Fudenberg and Maskin (1986) proved a general feasibility theo-
rem for subgame-perfect equilibria of standard repeated games with
discounting. We state and prove here a version of Fudenberg and
Maskin's result, using correlated equilibria instead of Nash equilibria.
To strengthen the result, we assume here that there is a mediator or
correlating device that, at each round, makes only public announce-
ments that are commonly observed by all players. (That is, there is no
confidential private communication with individual players.)
A correlated strategy for this game is then any p- = (ilk)k-_, such that,
for each k, p..k  is a function from (D)2k-2  into A(D). (Here (D)m denotes
the m-fold Cartesian product of D, where D = X ,,,D, is the set of
possible profiles of moves at each round.) For any k and any
. 	 . ,e) in (D)2k-  ', the number ilk(ckidl  , .
c1  , . ,ck-l ) denotes the conditional probability that Ck  = E N would
be the profile of moves that would be recommended to the players at
round k, by the mediator, if the history of recommendations in previous
rounds was (c'
) and if the history of past moves was
(d1 9.
,ce-1)  . For each k, let Pk(dk  111) be the probability that dk  will be
the profile of moves implemented at round k if recommendations are
generated according to the correlated strategy 11 and everyone always
obeys these recommendations. To make this formally precise, we can
inductively define
Q.k(d
ce111)  _

--- Sayfa 351 ---
7.5 • General Feasibility Theorems 333
where Q' (d') = 1.0(d1), and then let
Pk  (di'
=
E
QV, • • • (t ill)
(d1 .

When recommended moves at each round are publicly announced, a
manipulative strategy for player i is any e = (ek)k-_, where, for each k, ek  is
a function from (D)2k-' to D,. Here ek(dt, .,dk
. . ,ck) represents
the move that player i chooses at round k, according to the strategy e,
if
) is the history of past moves actually chosen by the
players before round k and (c', . ,ck) is the history of recommended
moves at all rounds up through round k. Let P,k(dk  I µ, e) be the probability
that dk  is the profile of moves that actually will be chosen by the players
at round k, if recommended moves are determined according to
every player except i always obeys the recommendations, but player i
uses the manipulative strategy e. To make this definition formally pre-
cise, we let
Q,1  (d' ,c' I
= pL(c1)
if (11  = (c1_„ei(c 1)),
Q:(cl1,c1 111,e) = 0
if d'
(c1„el  (c1)),
and inductively define, for all k > 1,
(2.1,'(d 1  ,
.
, dk  , c l  ,
. 	= 0
if dk
(ck
ek(d1,
,dk-1,c1,
• 'Ck)),
,dk,c1, 	 =
,ck-1) Qk-1(d1 	,dk-1  ,C I
*
,ck— 11 14 e)
if dk = (ck i,ek(d1,
,dk-
 1, c  ,
ck)),
and then let
e(ce I
=
Oc11  ,
ofe ,c1  , . ,ck  I e)•
(d1  ,, d*- 1  ,c1
ck) D2h-
To describe expected 8-discounted average payoffs, let
U,(11,8) = (1 - 8) E (6)k-  E Pk(dkouz(d),
k=1 	dED
CO
U,*(11,e,8) = (1 - 8) E (8)k-1  E e(clip,,e)u,(d).
k=1 	dED

--- Sayfa 352 ---
334 7 • Repeated Games
The correlated strategy p, is a publicly correlated equilibrium of the stan-
dard repeated game with the 8-discounted average payoff criterion iff,
for every player i and every manipulative strategy e for player i,
U(R,8)
For any k and any (d', . ,dk,c1, . . ,ck) in (D)2k, we define
pA(c11,
,dk,c1, . . ,ck) such that p,\(c/1, . ,dk,c1, . . ,ck) 	 iff,
for every m and every (d1, . .
e,,
, cm) in D2'1,
iim(cm I
e',
	em- 1)
= linz+k(cmidi
'd"`-1 c'
Thus, if a mediator is using the correlated strategy p., then
pN(di, . . ,dk,c1, . . ,ck) is the correlated strategy that he would be using
in the subgame that follows a history of recommendations (c1, . . ,ck)
and of actual moves (d1, . . ,dk). A publicly correlated equilibriumµ is
subgame perfect iff, for every k and every (d',
,dk,c1, ,c) in (D)2k,
the correlated strategy pA(di, . . ,dk,c1, . . ,ck) is also a publicly corre-
lated equilibrium.
Let f.), be the minimax value for player i in the one-round game, when
only pure strategies are considered. That is,
(7.4)
=
min max u,(d).
d_,E x
d,ED,
Let F denote the set of expected payoff allocations that could be
achieved by correlated strategies in the corresponding one-round game.
That is, x = (x,),,„, is in F iff there exists some r1  in A(D) such that
xi  = E Ti(d)ui(d), Vi E N.
dED
Then we may state the following general feasibility theorem, due to
Fudenberg and Maskin (1986).
THEOREM 7.2. For any standard repeated game with bounded payoffs, let
x be any vector in F such that the set F fl {zERNI Di 5- ; Vi EN} has a
nonempty interior relative to RN. Then there exists some number 8 such that
0 < 6 < 1 and, for every 8 such that S 5_ 8 < 1, there exists a correlated
strategy p, such thatµ is a subgame-perfect publicly correlated equilibrium of
the repeated game with the 8-discounted average payoff criterion and
Ui(p,,8) =
Vi E N.

--- Sayfa 353 ---
7.5 • General Feasibility Theorems 335
Proof. Because payoffs are bounded, there exists some number 12
such that, for every i and d,
< ui(d)< a The assumption that F fl
{z E RN  I
; < x, ViEN} has a nonempty interior relative to RN  implies
that there exists some y in F and some positive number E such that
< yi  — E < yi  _ xi, Vi E N,
and, for every j in N, the vector (y_pyi— 6) is also in F.
The construction of correlated strategy .t is best described in terms
of 2 INI + 1 modes of behavior: an initial mode and, for each player i,
a mode that we call "harsh punishment against i" and a mode that we
call "mild punishment against i." In the initial mode, the mediator
recommends moves at each round that are determined according to a
probability distribution in A(D) such that each player j gets the expected
payoff When the mode is harsh punishment against i, the mediator
recommends that all players other than i should use minimax strategy
against player i that achieves the minimum in the above definition of I),
(7.4), and that player i should use his best response. When the state is
mild punishment against i, the mediator recommends moves at each
round that are determined according to a probability distribution in
(D) such that player i gets the expected payoff y, — E and every other
player j gets expected payoff y3.
The mediator stays in the initial mode until some round at which
exactly one player disobeys his recommendation. After any round at
which one and only one player disobeys the mediator's recommenda-
tion, the mediator plans to make recommendations in the mode of harsh
punishment against this player at each of the next K rounds and then
to make recommendations in the mode of mild punishment against this
player at every round thereafter. These plans will only be changed after
a round at which a single player disobeys the recommendations, in which
case the preceding sentence determines the new plan for the mediator.
At any round, if player i disobeys the mediator and no other players
ever disobey, then i's 8-discounted average future payoff is not more
than
(1 — 8)(D, + (VT), +
+ (WI), + (S)"+ 1(y;  —
+
(8)K+2(y — 6)  +
.) _
— 8)11  +
(8)K+1)Dz
(8)K+1(y, — 6).
When the mode is harsh punishment against i, player i cannot gain by
unilaterally disobeying, because in the current round his recommended
move is his best response to the minimax strategy being used by the

--- Sayfa 354 ---
336 7 • Repeated Games
other players and disobedience will only delay the time when his
planned expected payoff increases from v, to y, — e. Player i does better
in the initial mode and in the mode of mild punishment against some
other player than in the mode of mild punishment against himself,
because x, y, > y, — E. So, to verify that 11 is a subgame-perfect publicly
correlated equilibrium, it suffices to verify that player i would not want
to deviate when the mode is either mild punishment against himself or
harsh punishment against some other player.
When the mode is mild punishment against i, the expected 8-dis-
counted average of future payoffs to i is y, — e, if no one disobeys.
When the mode is harsh punishment against some other player, the
expected 8-discounted average of future payoffs is not less than
(1 — 8)(_n — (8)11-1 	(8).._ In  + (6)Kyz
(8),,
.)
= -(1(1 - of) + Ofyi.
So II is a subgame-perfect correlated equilibrium if, for every player i,
(7.5)
y,
e
(1
8)(1 + (8
(8)1(+1)11, + (8)K+1(y, — e),
and
(7.6)
-(1(1 - (8)I<)
(8)KY, >(1
8)n + (8  — (8)K+1)v,
(8)K+1(y,
6).
Inequality (7.5) is satisfied when
y, — e — A
1 — 8
_
- 1  _ (8)K+1
The left-hand side of this inequality is strictly positive and the right-
hand side converges to 1/(K + 1) as 8 converges to 1. Let us pick K so
that
Y,
6  —  >  1

—
K+ 1
Then there exists some a such that (7.5) is satisfied whenever 8 8 <
1. Notice also that, as 8 converges to 1 with K fixed, the left-hand side
of (7.6) converges to y, and the right-hand side converges to y, — E. So
there must exist some 8 such that, whenever gs 8 < 1, (7.6) is satisfied
as well as (7.5). I

--- Sayfa 355 ---
7.6 • Finitely Repeated Games 337
Notice that a player i may get less than his own minimax value at
rounds where he is helping to force some other player j down to j's
minimax value, because the act of punishing might hurt the punisher
even more than the person being punished. Thus, punishment against
a player after he deviates from the equilibrium would not be credible
unless the punishers were given some incentive to carry out the punish-
ment. In the equilibrium described in the proof, punishers are rewarded
for their efforts in the harsh punishment mode by not being the object
of the mild punishment that follows. The assumption that F fl
{z E RN  I i 5- ;
Vi EN} has a nonempty interior, relative to RN, means
that there is enough independence between the different players' pay-
offs, so any one player can be mildly punished without pushing any
other players down to their mild-punishment payoff levels.
The pure-strategy minimax value zi„ defined in equation (7.4), is
generally higher than the randomized-strategy minimax value v, that
was defined in Section 6.1 (equation 6.1). Using the assumption that a
mediator can pass recommendations confidentially to the various players
(so, at each round, no player knows the currently recommended moves
for the other players), we can prove a revised version of Theorem 7.2,
in which is replaced by v, and the word "publicly" is deleted. The
only change in the proof is that, in the mode of harsh punishment
against i, the mediator recommends to the players other than i that they
choose moves that are randomly chosen according to a correlated strat-
egy that achieves the minimum in equation (6.1), but the recommended
moves for the players other than i are concealed from player i himself.
7.6 Finitely Repeated Games and the Role of Initial Doubt
As noted in Section 7.1, there is a striking contrast between the finitely
repeated Prisoners' Dilemma game and the infinitely repeated version
of that game. If the Prisoners' Dilemma game is repeated only finitely
many times and the finite upper bound on the number of repetitions
is common knowledge to the players at the beginning of the game, then
the unique equilibrium is for both players to always play selfishly; so
their average payoff allocation must be (1,1). But if there is an infinite
time horizon and the players' discount factor is close to 1, then any
feasible payoff allocation that gives each player more than his minimax
value 1 can be achieved in a subgame-perfect equilibrium.

--- Sayfa 356 ---
338 7 • Repeated Games
This striking difference between an infinitely repeated game and a
long finitely repeated game is actually rather special to the Prisoners'
Dilemma, however. Benoit and Krishna (1985) showed that if a strategic-
form game has multiple equilibria (when it is not repeated) that give
two or more different payoffs to each player, then any payoff allocation
vector x that satisfies the conditions of Theorem 7.2 is arbitrarily close
to vectors that can be achieved as average payoff allocations in subgame-
perfect equilibria of sufficiently long finitely repeated versions of this
game.
For example, consider the game shown in Table 7.6. Without repe-
tition, there are three equilibria of this game, giving payoff allocations
(1,6), (6,1), and (3,3). The minimax value for each player is 0. To
approximate the Pareto-efficient allocation (4,4) in a finitely repeated
game, consider the following equilibrium. Each player i plays a, as long
as both have done so, until the last two rounds. If both players have
always played (a1,a2) before the last two rounds, then at the last two
rounds they play the randomized equilibrium that gives expected pay-
offs (3,3) at each round. On the other hand, if either player ever deviates
from (ai,a2) in a round before the last two rounds, then the players
thereafter play the equilibrium that gives payoff 1 at each round to the
player who deviated first. (If both deviate first at the same round, then
let us say that the players act as if player 1 deviated first.) It is a subgame-
perfect equilibrium, with the sum-of-payoffs criterion, for both players
to behave according to this scenario in the K-round finitely repeated
game, for any positive integer K. Furthermore, this equilibrium gives
an expected average payoff per round of ((K — 2)4 + 6)/K, which
converges to 4 as K goes to infinity.
Table 7.6 Payoffs at any round, for all move profiles, in a finitely repeated
game
D2
D I
a2
b2
a,
b1
4,4
6,1
1,6
—3,-3
0,5
—4,-4
x1
5,0
—4,-4
—5,-5

--- Sayfa 357 ---
7.6 • Finitely Repeated Games 339
There are also equilibria of this finitely repeated game that are worse
for both players than any equilibrium of the one-round game (but, of
course, are not worse than the minimax values). For example, consider
the following scenario, when the game is played 7K + M times, for any
positive integers K and M, where 2
M
8. The players implement a
seven-round cycle of (b1,b2) for four rounds and then (a,,a2) for three
rounds, until someone deviates or until the last M rounds of the game.
Notice that this cycle gives each player an average payoff of 0 per round.
If no one ever deviates from this cycle then, during the last M rounds,
they play the randomized equilibrium that gives expected payoff allo-
cation (3,3) at each round. If any player deviates from the seven-round
cycle of (b1,b2) and (a,,a2), then, as "punishment" for the player i who
deviated first (where, if both deviate first at the same round, we may
let i equal 1), the punished player i chooses a, thereafter and the other
(punishing) player j chooses x, in every round except the last round,
when he chooses k. Under this punishment scheme, the punished player
i gets 0 at every round, except the last, when he gets 1. To give the
punishing player j an incentive to use his move x, (which is dominated
in the unrepeated game), we must stipulate that if the punishing player
j ever chose b, when he was supposed to be choosing x1, then the
punishment against i would be terminated and they would switch to
playing thereafter according to the equilibrium (b„a„), in which the
formerly punishing player j gets 1 and the formerly punished player i
gets 6. This scenario is a subgame-perfect equilibrium of the finitely
repeated game with the sum-of-payoffs criterion, and it gives each
player an expected average payoff per round that converges to the
minimax value 0, as K goes to infinity.
In the infinitely repeated Prisoners' Dilemma game (see Table 7.1),
one might think that the equilibrium in which both players always
choose their selfish moves ( f,,f2) is somehow "more rational" than the
other equilibria, because it is the only equilibrium that corresponds to
a sequential equilibrium of finitely repeated versions of the game. How-
ever, Kreps, Milgrom, Roberts, and Wilson (1982) have shown that there
are other ways of constructing finitely repeated versions of the Prisoners'
Dilemma which also have unique equilibria that converge to very dif-
ferent equilibria of the infinitely repeated game, as the finite number
of repetitions goes to infinity. Their basic idea is to consider finitely
repeated games in which there is a small probability of an alternative

--- Sayfa 358 ---
340 7 • Repeated Games
state about which some players have incomplete information. They show
that, in games that are repeated a large but finite number of times, small
initial doubts about the state of the game may radically affect the set of
sequential equilibria.
Kreps, Milgrom, Roberts, and Wilson (1982) considered a finitely
repeated Prisoners' Dilemma game with the sum-of-payoffs criterion,
in which there is a small probability E that player 2 is not really a rational
player but is instead a machine that always plays tit-for-tat. Player 1
cannot know that player 2 is not such a machine until she actually
deviates from tit-for-tat. Kreps et al. showed that there exists some finite
number M(E), depending on E but not on the number of rounds in the
game, such that, in every sequential equilibrium, with probability 1,
both players will use their generous moves (g,,g2) at every round before
the last M(E) rounds. The essential idea is that, even if player 2 is not a
tit-for-tat machine, she has an incentive to cultivate player l's doubt,
because he would always be generous before the last round were he to
assign a sufficiently high probability to the event that she is a tit-for-tat
machine. In any sequential equilibrium, if player 2 ever deviates from
the tit-for-tat strategy, then both players will play selfishly (fi,f2) at every
round thereafter because, in any subgame, it will be common knowledge
that player 2 is rational. So, to preserve player 1's doubt, player 2 always
acts like a tit-for-tat machine until the last M(E) moves; so player 1
always is generous before the last M(E) moves. Before the last M(E)
rounds, because player 2 is expected to play tit-for-tat no matter what,
player 1 learns nothing about her type, and so continues to assign
probability E to the chance that player 2 is a tit-for-tat machine. During
the last M(E) rounds, player 2 may randomly deviate from the tit-for-
tat strategy, if she is not a machine; so the belief probability that player
1 would assign to her being a machine if she has not deviated from tit-
for-tat will increase above E during these last rounds. In a sequential
equilibrium, player 2's random deviation probabilities must be just large
enough so that player 1's consistent beliefs will make him willing to
randomize between g, and f, in a way such that the rational player 2,
if not a machine, would indeed be willing to randomize between con-
tinuing to play tit-for-tat and deviating. To make player 1 willing to
randomize in the second-to-last round, for example, his belief proba-
bility of the event that player 2 is a machine must be 1/5 in the second-
to-last round (for the payoffs given in Table 7.1), if she has not previ-
ously deviated from tit-for-tat.

--- Sayfa 359 ---
7.6 Finitely Repeated Games 341
The details of the proofs and the construction of the sequential equi-
libria in Kreps, Milgrom, Roberts, and Wilson (1982) is quite compli-
cated, but similar results can be more easily derived for the example
shown in Figure 4.9 (Chapter 4). In this example, the option of being
generous (g) or selfish (ft) alternates between players 1 and 2 until
some player is selfish or the finite number of rounds are completed.
Any selfish move ends the game (or puts the game in an absorbing state
where all payoffs are 0), but a generous move gives —1 (a loss of 1) to
the player who is being generous and gives +5 to the other player. Let
us number the players so that it is player 2 who would make the last
move if both were always generous. As discussed in Section 4.5, if it is
common knowledge that both players are rational, then every player
would be selfish at every node in the unique sequential equilibrium of
any finitely repeated version of this game (because the player at the last
move would surely be selfish, so the other player at the second-to-last
move would have no incentive to be generous, and so on). Rosenthal
(1981), who first studied this game, suggested that there may be some-
thing wrong with game-theoretic analysis if it leads to the conclusion
that players should always be selfish in such a game. However, let us
consider instead a modified version of the game in which there is a
small probability E that player 2 is actually a machine that is always
generous (as long as active play continues, which means both have always
been generous in the past), but player 1 cannot observe whether player
2 is a rational player or a machine (until she is selfish and stops the
active play). Suppose that 1/5"4  < E < 1/5M 1, for some integer M. Then
there is a unique sequential equilibrium in which both players are always
generous until after player l's Mth move from the end of the tree (that
is, until player i has less than M possible moves remaining). Thereafter,
player 1 is selfish with move probability 0.8, and player 2 randomizes
in such a way that, for every k less than M, player l's consistent belief
probability of player 2 being a generous machine is V5k  at player l's kth
move from the end of the tree. The uniqueness of this sequential
equilibrium is proved in Section 4.5 for the case of E = 0.05.
We say that a strategy for a player in a finitely repeated game is
attractive if, as with tit-for-tat in the Prisoners' Dilemma, introducing a
small positive probability of the player being a machine that uses this
strategy would substantially change the set of sequential equilibria of
the game, by giving this player an incentive to imitate the machine and
cultivate the other players' doubts even when he is not the machine.

--- Sayfa 360 ---
342 7 • Repeated Games
Not every strategy is attractive, because not every way of perturbing the
game with small initial doubt would have such an impact on the set of
equilibria. For example, if we supposed instead that player 1 assigned
a small positive probability only to the event that player 2 was a machine
that always played the generous move, then the unique sequential equi-
librium in any finitely repeated version of the Prisoners' Dilemma would
be for each player to always be selfish (except, of course, that 2 must
be generous if she is a machine). Player 1's best response to the always-
generous strategy is to always be selfish; so player 2 has no reason to
want to cultivate player l's belief that she is going to play like an always-
generous machine. So always-generous (and, similarly, always-selfish) is
not an attractive strategy in the repeated Prisoners' Dilemma.
Thus, when we study games that are repeated a large but finite
number of times, the set of expected average payoff allocations that are
achievable in sequential equilibria may or may not be smaller than the
set that is achievable in equilibria of the corresponding infinitely re-
peated game; but if it is smaller, then it may be quite sensitive to
perturbations involving small probability events. Fudenberg and Maskin
(1986) have shown, under some weak assumptions, that any payoff
allocation that is achievable in the infinitely repeated game according
to Theorem 7.2 may also be approximately achievable as the expected
average payoff allocation in a sequential equilibrium of a long finitely
repeated version of the game with small-probability perturbations.
7.7 Imperfect Observability of Moves
The general feasibility theorems discussed in Section 7.5 hold for re-
peated games in which there is only one possible state of nature and
the players can observe all of each other's past moves. When all moves
are perfectly observable, the players can threaten to punish each other's
deviations from an equilibrium and be confident that, in equilibrium,
these threats will have zero probability of actually being carried out.
When such perfect observability is not assumed, however, punishment
threats that deter selfish behavior may actually have to be carried out
with positive probability in equilibrium, because a player may appear to
have deviated to his selfish move even if he has not. So threats in an
equilibrium may have a positive expected cost of being carried out, as
well as the expected benefit of deterring selfish behavior. Finding the

--- Sayfa 361 ---
7.7 Imperfect Observability of Moves 343
best equilibria for the players may require a trade-off or balancing
between these costs and benefits.
To illustrate this trade-off, let us consider now a class of infinitely
repeated games, with discounting and only one possible state of nature,
in which players cannot observe each other's moves. The ideas presented
in this section have been developed by Abreu (1986); Abreu, Pearce,
and Stacchetti (1986); Radner, Myerson, and Maskin (1986); and Abreu,
Milgrom, and Pearce (1988). The specific example discussed here is due
to Abreu, Milgrom, and Pearce (1988).
Consider the problem of five players, in N = {1,2,3,4,5}, who are
working independently to prevent some kinds of unfortunate accidents
from occurring. At each point in time, each player must choose an
effort level, which is a number between 0 and 1. In any short interval
of time, the probability of an accident occurring is proportional to the
length of the interval and a decreasing function of the players' effort
levels. Each player loses one unit of payoff every time an accident occurs,
and he must also pay an effort cost per unit time that depends only on
his own effort level. The players cannot observe one anothers' effort
levels, but everyone can observe the accidents whenever they occur.
Also, to simplify our analysis, suppose that the players can use publicly
observable random variables to correlate their strategies before each
round, so they can implement publicly correlated equilibria.
If we think of this game as actually being played in real continuous
time, then we have a problem, because we only know how to analyze
repeated game models in which time is a discrete variable, measured in
"rounds" (see Section 7.10). So we must let each round denote some
interval of time of positive duration, say e years (where e may be much
less than 1). Ideally, this length of time e should be the length of time
that it takes an individual to rethink or change his actions. Let us carry
e as a parameter in our analysis, so that we can study the effect of
changing the length of time represented by a round in our discrete-
time model.
Let us suppose that, if e = (e)„, denotes the profile of effort levels
in [0,1]5  that are chosen by the five players, then the probability of an
accident occurring in a round of length E is e(6 — E,,Ne,), and the cost
to player i of exerting effort at level e, for one round is E(e, + (e1)2)/2.
Thus, i's effort cost is increasing and convex in his effort, and is pro-
portional to the length of the interval that we are considering to be a
"round." To assure that the accident probability is less than 1, we shall

--- Sayfa 362 ---
344 7 • Repeated Games
assume that E
. We assume that all players use an expected dis-
counted average payoff criterion to determine their optimal strategies
in the repeated game. The discount factor 8 per round should depend
on the length of a round, according to some decreasing exponential
function that approaches 1 as the length approaches 0, so let us suppose
that the discount factor per round is 8 = .1' (so a 5- 1/6 implies 8 >
.681).
Because an accident costs each player one unit of payoff, the expected
payoff to each player i, in a round where e denotes the profile of efforts,
is
( 6 - E ej
e(ez
2
(ez)2)
J EN
J
This expected payoff is maximized over e, by letting e, = 1/2, so the
unique stationary equilibrium is for all players to choose effort 1/2. When
the players all choose any common effort level c, the expected payoff
to each player is e(4.5c — 6 — 0.5c2), which is increasing in c over the
interval from 0 to 1. So the players would like to give one another some
incentive to increase his or her effort above the stationary equilibrium
level of 1/2.
Because the players can observe accidents but cannot observe one
anothers' efforts, the only way to give one another an incentive to
increase his or her effort is to threaten that some punishment may occur
when there is an accident. Notice that the probability of an accident
depends symmetrically on everyone's effort and is positive even when
everyone chooses the maximum effort level 1. So when an accident
occurs, there is no way to tell who, if anyone, was not exerting enough
effort. Furthermore, the only way to punish (or reward) anyone in this
game is by reducing (or increasing) effort to change the probability of
accidents, which affects everyone equally. So, at each round in an equi-
librium, we can expect all players rationally to be choosing the same
effort level; that is, we can expect equilibria to be symmetric with respect
to the players. So let us assume symmetry and see how to compute the
best and the worst symmetric publicly correlated equilibria of this re-
peated game with imperfect monitoring.
Let y denote the expected discounted average payoff to each player
in the best symmetric publicly correlated equilibrium, and let z denote
the expected discounted average payoff to each player in the worst
symmetric publicly correlated equilibrium. Now consider what happens

--- Sayfa 363 ---
7.7 Imperfect Observability of Moves 345
in the first round of the best symmetric equilibrium. Each player will
choose some effort level b. It can be shown that, because of the strict
concavity of the cost-of-effort function, players will not randomize their
effort choices at any round. Then there will either be an accident or
not. The players' behavior at any future round may depend on whether
or not there was an accident at round 1, but it cannot depend otherwise
on their individual effort choices, which are not commonly observed.
So let x1  denote the expected discounted average of the sequence of
payoffs to each player beginning at round 2 if there is an accident at
round 1, and let x2  denote the expected discounted average of the
sequence of payoffs to each player beginning at round 2 if there is no
accident at round 1. No matter what happens at round 1, the intrinsic
structure of the game is the same from round 2 on as from round 1
on, so x1  and x2  must be expected discounted averages of payoff se-
quences from some symmetric publicly correlated equilibrium of the
original game. Thus, by definition of y and z, we must have
(7.7)
y
x,
z and y
x2
z.
In fact, any expected discounted average payoff x. that satisfies (7.7)
can be achieved by publicly randomizing between playing according to
the best equilibrium (with probability (x, — z)/(y — z)) and the worst
(with probability (y — x3)/(y — z)). The basic recursion formula for y in
terms of x, and x2  is
(7.8)
y = r(6 — 5b)((1 — 8)(-1 — (b + b2)12) + 8x1)
+ (1 — e(6 — 5b))((1 — 8)( —(b + b2)/2) + 8x2),
For each player i to be willing to choose the effort level b when the
others are doing so in the first round, we must have
(7.9)
b E argmax (e(6 — 4b — ej((1— 8)(-1 — (ei + (e,)2)/2) + &el)
e,E[0,1]
+ (1 — e(6 — 4b — 0((1 — 8)(—(e, + (e32)/2) + Bx2)).
Thus, given z, y (which is the best equilibrium's discounted average
payoff) must be the largest number that can satisfy equation (7.8) when
x,, x2, and b satisfy the constraints (7.7) and (7.9).
By a similar argument, given y, z must be the lowest number that
satisfies

--- Sayfa 364 ---
346 7 • Repeated Games
(7.10)
z = E(6 — 5c)((1 — 8)(-1 — (c + c2)/2) + Sx3)
+ (1 — E(6 — 5c))((1 — 8)(—(c
where c, x3, and x4  satisfy the constraints
+ c2)/2) + Ski),
(7.11)
c E argmax (E(6 — 4c — 6((1 — 8)(-1 — (e, + (ei)2)/2) + 8x3)
e,E[0,1)
(1
r(6 — 4c — e3)((1 — S)(—(e=  + (ei)2)12) + 8x4)),
(7.12)
y
x3
z, and y
z.
Equivalently, the best and worst symmetric payoffs y and z can be
computed by maximizing the difference y — z over all (y, z, b, c, x 1, x2,
x3, x4) that satisfy (7.7)—(7.12).
For each xi, let 9, = (x3  — z)/(y — z). Then the structure of the best
and worst publicly correlated equilibria in this repeated game can be
implemented using a correlated strategy that can be described in terms
of just two possible modes of behavior at each round: a reward mode
and a punishment mode. The players begin the best equilibrium at
round 1 in reward mode, and they begin the worst equilibrium in
punishment mode. At any round when the players are in reward mode,
each player chooses some high effort level b. At the end of any round
when the players are in reward mode, if there is an accident, then they
will switch to punishment mode next round with probability 1 — q1
(using some publicly observable random variable, like sunspots); and if
there is no accident, then they will switch to punishment mode with
probability 1 — q2; and otherwise they will stay in reward mode next
round. At any round when the players are in punishment mode, each
player chooses some relatively low effort level c. At the end of any
round when the players are in punishment mode, if there is an accident,
then they will switch to reward mode next round with probability q3;
and if there is no accident, then they will switch to reward mode with
probability q4; and otherwise they will stay in punishment mode next
round. Other, more complicated equilibria could be devised, in which
the players must keep track of the number and timing of all past
accidents, but they cannot generate higher or lower expected payoffs.
It is not hard to see that the solution must have q2  = 1 and so x2  =
y. That is, to most effectively encourage high efforts in reward mode,
the players should plan to switch into punishment mode only if there
is an accident. Similarly, to most effectively encourage low efforts in
punishment mode, the players should plan to switch back to reward

--- Sayfa 365 ---
7.7 • Imperfect Observability of Moves 347
mode only if there is an accident, so a solution must have q4  = 0 and
x4  = z. Furthermore, the switch probabilities 1 — q, and q3  after accidents
should be chosen as low as possible, given the other variables, so the
first-order optimality conditions for the maximizations in (7.9) and
(7.11) will be satisfied even if the maximum occurs at the boundary of
the interval [0,1]. That is, we can set 0 equal to the derivative with
respect to e, when e, equals its maximizing value in (7.9) and (7.11); then
solving for q, and q3, we get
1
_ (1 — 8)(b — 1/2)
q1
8(y — z)
_ (1 — 8)(1/2 — c)
q3  -
8(y — z)
Substituting back into (7.8) and (7.10) and simplifying, we get
y = e(4.5b2  — 4b — 3), z = e(4.5c2  — 4c — 3).
Then, when 8 = .1E and E 5- 0.158, it can be shown that y — z is
maximized subject to these constraints by letting b = 1 and c = 4/9, so
all players choose their maximum possible effort levels in reward mode
and choose effort levels below the stationary equilibrium (1/2) in punish-
ment mode. When E = 0.158, this solution is implemented by switching
to punishment mode with probability 1 after an accident in reward
mode and by switching to reward mode with probability .111 after an
accident in punishment mode. When we break up time into rounds of
shorter duration (say, E = 0.001), the solution remains essentially the
same, except that these switch probabilities become slightly smaller
(1 — q, = .83 and q3  = .092).
Now, following Abreu, Milgrom, and Pearce (1988), let us consider a
related problem, in which the five players are exerting efforts to increase
the probability of making some desirable sales (rather than to reduce
the probability of undesirable accidents). To keep the range of possible
event probabilities the same (e to 6e), let us suppose that the probability
of a sale in any round depends on the current efforts (e,),,, according
to the formula
E  (1 + E es) .
IEN
As in the previous example, each player's effort e, must be chosen from
the interval [0,1], and costs him E(e, + (ez)2)/2 in each round. We assume

--- Sayfa 366 ---
348 7 • Repeated Games
that every player gets an incremental payoff of +1 from each sale and
that sales can be observed by everyone, but players cannot observe one
anothers' effort levels.
The equations (7.13)—(7.17) that characterize the best (y) and the
worst (z) expected discounted average payoffs that can be achieved in
symmetric publicly correlated equilibria are, analogous to (7.7)—(7.12),
(7.13)
y
xi
z, y
x2
z, y
xs
z, y
x4
z,
(7.14)
y = E(1 + 5b)((1 — 8)(1 — (b + b2)/2) + 8x1)
+ (1 — e(1 + 56))((1 — 8)(—(b + b2)12) + 8x2),
(7.15)
b E argmax (E(1 + 46 + e,)((1 — 8)(1 — (e, + (e1)2)/2) + 8x1)
e,E[0,1]
+ (1 — E(1 + 46 + e,))((1 — 8)(—(e, + (e,)2)/2) + 8x2)),
(7.16)
z = e(1 + 5c)((1 — 8)(1 — (c + c2)12) + 8x3)
+ (1 — e(1 + 5c))((1 — 8)(—(c + c2)/2) +
(7.17)
c E argmax (e(1 + 4c + ei)((1 — 8)(1 — (e, + (e,)2)/2) + 8x3)
e,E[0,1]
+ (1 — e(1 + 4c+ e,))((1 — 8)(—(e, + (e)2)/2) + 8x4)).
These conditions can be analyzed similarly to (7.7)—(7.12). The main
difference in the analysis is that, to maximize y — z here, the probabilities
of switching after sales should be set equal to 0, so that x1  = y and x3  =
z. That is, to most effectively encourage effort in reward mode, the
players should never switch from reward mode to punishment mode
when there is a sale; and to most effectively discourage effort in pun-
ishment mode, the players should never switch from punishment mode
to reward mode when there is a sale.
When 8 = .1E and E < 1/6, there is no solution to these equations with
y > z. The unique solution has y = z and b = c = 1/2. That is, the only
equilibrium is the stationary equilibrium in which all players always
choose effort level 1/2, independently of the past history.
By contrasting these two examples, Abreu, Milgrom, and Pearce
(1988) have offered important insights into the design of incentive
systems in repeated games with imperfect monitoring of actions. In
each example, switches between the best reward mode and the worst
punishment mode should occur only when there is bad news: when an

--- Sayfa 367 ---
7.8 . Large Decentralized Groups 349
accident occurs in the first example, and when no sale occurs in the
second example. However, bad news conveys much less information
about the unobservable effort levels in the second example than in the
first example. For any pair of possible values of an unobservable variable
and any observable event, the likelihood ratio is defined to be the condi-
tional probability of this event given one of the two possible values of
the unobservable variable divided by the conditional probability of the
event given the other possible value. Statisticians have shown that the
informativeness of the event about the unobservable variable can be
measured, in a sense, by the extent to which these likelihood ratios
differ from 1. In the second example, for any two possible effort profiles
e and e, the likelihood ratio in the event of bad news (no sale) is
1
E (1 +
:EN  e
z)
1 — E (1
E
zEN
which is always close to 1 if E is small. In the first example, however,
the likelihood ratio for e and e in the event of bad news (an accident) is
E (6 — E
iEN

E (6 — E ei)
iEN
which is independent of E and different from 1 as long as E,,,ve, 0
IzE/Vez • Thus, effective collusion is possible in the first example but not
in the second, because bad news conveys significant information about
the players' unobservable effort levels only in the first (avoiding acci-
dents) example. Good news (making sales) can convey significant infor-
mation about effort levels in the second example; but this information
is of no help to the players because, under an optimal incentive system,
they should only switch modes when there is bad news.
7.8 Repeated Games in Large Decentralized Groups
The general feasibility theorem (Theorem 7.2) can be interpreted as a
statement about the power of social norms in small groups, such as
families, partnerships, and cliques. According to the general feasibility
theorem, if the individuals in a group know one another well, can

--- Sayfa 368 ---
350 7 • Repeated Games
observe one anothers' behaviors, and anticipate a continuing relation-
ship with one another, then social norms can sustain any pattern of
group behavior, provided it makes each individual better off than he
would be without the group. When we go from small groups into larger
social structures, however, the assumption that everyone can observe
everyone else may cease to hold, and general feasibility can fail. Thus,
the anonymity and privacy of a large society may reduce the set of
equilibria and exclude cooperative patterns of behavior.
For an example that illustrates this problem, we consider here a
simplified version of a game studied by Milgrom, North, and Weingast
(1989). In this repeated game, the set of players is {1,2, . . . ,2n}, for
some integer n. At every round, the players are matched into pairs to
play the Prisoners' Dilemma. When two players are matched together
at round k, their payoffs for this round depend on their moves, gen-
erous (g,) or selfish (f), according to Table 7.1. At round 1, each player
i in {1,2, . . . ,n} is matched with player n + i. At each subsequent round
k, player 1 is matched with the player who was matched with player n
at round k — 1, and each player i in {2, . . . ,n} is matched with the
player who was matched with player i — 1 at round k — 1. So two players
who are matched at round k will not be matched again until round k +
n. At any round, each player knows his own past moves and the past
moves that other players chose when they were matched with him, but
he cannot observe what other players have done when they were not
matched with him. The players evaluate their payoff sequences accord-
ing to a 8-discounted average criterion.
Let us now ask, for what values of n and 8 does there exist an
equilibrium in which all players will be generous (choose g,) at all rounds
with probability 1 (that is, unless someone deviates from the equilib-
rium). To deter any player i from being selfish against any player j at
round k, player i must anticipate that his selfishness now would cause
players matched with him to behave selfishly at some subsequent rounds.
Because player j is the only player who actually observes player i's
selfishness, one obvious punishment scheme is to suppose that, if i is
selfish against j at round k, then i and j will be selfish against each other
whenever they are are matched in the future. However, because they
are matched at only 1 out of every n rounds, this punishment scheme
will deter player i from the initial selfishness only if
CO
(6 — 5) + E (1 - 5)8'n 5- 0.
1=1

--- Sayfa 369 ---
7.8 Large Decentralized Groups 351
That is, the effect on i's discounted average payoff by increasing his
payoff from 5 to 6 at this round must be more than counterbalanced
by the decrease in his payoff from 5 to 1 every time he is matched with
j in the future. This inequality holds iff
8n
.
Other punishment schemes could be designed, but there are limits
imposed by the information structure. There is no way that the players
who are matched with i during rounds k + 1 to k + n could have any
information that depends on player i's behavior at round k, so i cannot
be punished for a deviation at round k until round k + n + 1 at the
earliest. However, there is a punishment scheme that would drive player
i to his minimax value at every round beginning with round k + n + 1.
Suppose that each player uses the strategy of being generous at every
round until he observes someone being selfish, and thereafter he is
selfish at every round (as in the contagious scenarios studied by Kandori,
1988). If i deviated from this scenario by being selfish against j at round
k, then j would switch to selfishness with all his subsequent partners and
so would indirectly induce everyone to behave selfishly by round k + n
+ 1; and so player i would be confronted with selfish behavior at round
k + n + 1 and every round thereafter. Under this scenario, if player i
were selfish at any round, then it would be best for him to be selfish at
all rounds thereafter (because he cannot make his punishment any
worse); so the initial selfish deviation can be deterred iff
E (6 — 5)8'-1  + E
- 5)81-
0.
1=1
1=n+ 1
This inequality also holds iff 8n
1/5; so even the most extreme threat
cannot increase the range of parameters in which cooperation can be
sustained. Thus, for any given 8, if the number of players 2n is bigger
than 2log(5)/log(1/8), then even the most extreme punishment scheme
(dissolution of all cooperation in the whole society) cannot deter a player
from deviating to selfish behavior. This model illustrates how generous
or cooperative behavior that can be sustained in small groups may break
down in a large decentralized group.
Milgrom, North, and Weingast (1989) show how cooperation may be
sustained with arbitrarily large numbers of players if the information
structure is changed by adding a central mediator who (acting like a
simple judicial system) keeps a list of any players who have violated the
cooperative norm. For this example, a player would get onto the me-

--- Sayfa 370 ---
352 7 • Repeated Games
diator's list if he were ever selfish when matched with a player who was
not on the list. At each round, the mediator just tells each pair of
matched players whether either of them is on the list. If 8 Vs, then
this game has an equilibrium in which each player is always generous,
unless (after some accidental deviation) he is on the list or is matched
with someone on the list, in which case he would be selfish.
7.9 Repeated Games with Incomplete Information
In the study of Bayesian games with incomplete information, the play-
ers' beliefs about each other's types are assumed to be exogenously
given. In many real-life situations, individuals' beliefs about each other
are derived from long past experience interacting with each other. In
such cases, some information structures may be more likely to arise than
others. That is, there may be some things about himself that an individ-
ual tends to reveal to others who are involved in long-term relationships
with him, and other things that he tends to conceal. Speaking roughly,
we might expect that an individual would generally try to let others
know about his strengths, but would try to maintain uncertainty about
his weaknesses. The study of repeated games with incomplete infor-
mation provides a framework for formalizing and studying hypotheses
such as this.
Aumann and Maschler (1966) introduced the study of repeated games
with incomplete information. In most of the literature on these games,
the following structures are assumed. There are two or more possible
states of nature. The actual state of nature is determined according to
some given probability distribution at the beginning of round 1. For
each player, there is some function of the state of nature, which we call
the player's type, that the player learns at the beginning of round 1.
Thereafter, the state of nature remains constant throughout the game.
After learning his own type at round 1, each player thereafter observes
only the moves of the players at the preceding rounds. Payoffs to each
player at each round may depend on the state of nature as well as their
current moves. To the extent that a player's payoff may depend on the
state of nature that is unknown to him, a player will not know the actual
payoff that he has gotten at any past round. Each player's objective is
to maximize the expected value, given his information, of some measure
of his long-term average payoff (say, a limit of average payoffs, or a
limit of 8-discounted average payoffs as 8 approaches 1, or some other

--- Sayfa 371 ---
7.9 Incomplete Information 353
criterion, as discussed in Section 7.2). To date, most work on repeated
games with incomplete information has been devoted to the special case
of two-person zero-sum games (for a notable exception, see Hart,
1985a).
We consider here a classic example of a repeated two-person zero-
sum game with incomplete information, due to Aumann and Maschler
(1966). For each player i in {1,2}, the set of possible moves at each
round is Di  = {az,b,}. The state of nature, a constant throughout all
rounds of the repeated game, could be either a or 13. The payoffs to
the players 1 and 2 depend on the moves and the state of nature as
shown in Table 7.7. Let q denote the prior probability that the actual
state of nature is a; this parameter q is common knowledge among the
players. At the beginning of round 1, one of the two players learns
which state is the actual state of nature. Thus, there are two versions of
this game that we will consider. In version 1, player 1 knows the state
but player 2 does not. In version 2, player 2 knows the state, but player
1 does not. In both versions, the players can observe all of each other's
past moves, and the uninformed player can use these observations to
try to make inferences about the state of nature.
Let us first consider version 1, in which only player 1 knows the state
(and this fact is common knowledge). The analysis of this game is easy.
If player 1 knows that the state of nature is a, then he should always
Table 7.7 Payoffs at any round, for all move profiles and states of nature, in
a repeated game with incomplete information
State = a
D2
D,
a2
b2
al
—1,1
0,0
b,
0,0
0,0
State = 13
D2
a2
b2
al
0,0
0,0
0,0
—1,1

--- Sayfa 372 ---
354 7 • Repeated Games
choose b,, to guarantee himself his best possible payoff of 0. Similarly,
if the state of nature is 13, then player 1 should always choose a,. When
player 1 follows this strategy, player 2 will of course be able to infer
player l's type from his actions: a if 1 chooses b1, 13 if 1 chooses al.
Once player 2 has learned what the state is, from player l's move at
round 1, player 2 may well use her weakly undominated move of a2  if
the state is a, b2  if the state is 13, but player 1 will still get his optimum
payoff of 0. So it does no harm for player 1 to reveal his information
in this game.
Let us next consider version 2, in which only player 2 knows the state.
To have some hope of getting payoffs higher than 0, player 2 must try
to prevent player 1 from guessing the state. One way for player 2 to do
so is to avoid using her information about the state and act as she would
have if neither player knew the state. If neither player knew the state
of nature, then they would both care only about their expected payoffs,
given only that the probability of state a is q. These expected payoffs
are shown in Table 7.8.
As a strategic-form game, Table 7.8 has a unique equilibrium
— q)[al ] + q[bd, (1 — q)[a2] + q[b2]). The expected payoffs in this
equilibrium are —q(1 — q) for player 1, and q(1 — q) for player 2. So,
in version 2 of the repeated game, where player 2 knows the state, she
can guarantee that her expected payoff (given prior information only)
will be q(1 — q) if she uses the strategy of choosing, at each round, a2
with probability 1 — q, and b2  with probability q, independently of her
information about the state and all previous moves. Aumann and
Maschler (1966) showed that this nonrevealing stationary strategy is
essentially the best that player 2 can do in this game.
Thus, in version 1 of this game, the informed player (1) should use
his information about the state and reveal it; but in version 2 of this
game, the informed player (2) should ignore her information about the
Table 7.8 Expected payoffs for all move profiles
D2
DI
a2
b2
a,
0,0
b,
0,0
q — 1,1 — q

--- Sayfa 373 ---
7.9 Incomplete Information 355
state, to conceal it. Notice also that player
equilibrium payoff in the
game shown in Table 7.8 is a convex function of q, whereas player 2's
equilibrium payoff in Table 7.8 is a concave function of q. (Let X be a
convex subset of some vector space, and let f:X —> R be any real-valued
function on X. Then f is concave iff,
f(Xx + (1 — X)y) > Xf(x) + (1 — X)f(y),
Vx E X, Vy E X, VX E [0,1].
On the other hand, f is convex iff
f(Xx + (1 — X)y)
Xf(x) + (1 — X)f(y),
Vx E X, Vy E X, VX E [0,1].)
Aumann and Maschler showed that, in general, the convexity or con-
cavity of this equilibrium-payoff function can tell us whether an in-
formed player should reveal or conceal his information in a repeated
two-person zero-sum game with incomplete information.
To state Aumann and Maschler's result more precisely, consider the
following general model of a repeated two-person zero-sum game with
one-sided incomplete information. The set of players is N = {1,2}. The
set of possible states of nature and the sets of possible moves for players
1 and 2 are nonempty finite sets, denoted by 0, D1, and D2, respectively.
The payoff to player 1 at each round depends on the state of nature
and the moves of both players according to the function ul:D, X D2 X
0
R. The payoff to player 2 is just the opposite of player l's payoff;
that is, u2(d,,d2,13) = —u1(d1,d2,0). The actual state of nature is constant
and determined before round 1 according to an initial probability dis-
tribution Q in 0(0). At round 1, player 1 learns the actual state of
nature, and player 2 gets no informative signal. So player 1 is the
informed player, and player 2 is uninformed (knowing only the distribution
Q). At every round after round 1, both players observe the moves
chosen at the preceding round.
Let K be some positive integer. Suppose that each player in this
repeated two-person zero-sum game with one-sided incomplete infor-
mation simply applied the criterion of maximizing his or her expected
average payoff received during the first K rounds. With this criterion,
our infinitely repeated game could be modeled as a finite two-person
zero-sum game in extensive form, where each player moves just K times
and the terminal payoff is the average of the payoffs in the K rounds.

--- Sayfa 374 ---
356 7 • Repeated Games
Let v1(K) denote the expected payoff to player 1 in an equilibrium of
this K-round game.
Now consider the one-round game in which neither player knows the
state and their payoffs depend on their moves in D1  X D2 according to
the formula
14(d1,d2)= E q(0)u,(di,d2,0),
0E0
where q is some probability distribution in A(0). Let w1(q) denote the
expected payoff to player 1 in any equilibrium, and let T1(. q) =
(T1(c1114))d,EDI  denote an equilibrium strategy in z(D1) for player 1, in
this one-round two-person zero-sum game.
Let
:A(0) ---> R be the concave hull of the function w1:A(0) --> R.
That is, wr is the lowest concave function on A(0) such that wr(q)
w1(q) for every q in 0(0). It can be shown that, for any q in A(0), there
exists a finite collection of probability distributions r1, . . .
each of
which is in 0(0), and nonnegative numbers X1, . . . ,XJ  such that
(7.18)
E= 1, E Xir;  = q, and E X1w1(r3) = wr(q)•
j=1 	j=1
3=1
In fact, an equivalent way to define the concave hull is to let wf(q) be
the highest number that can satisfy (7.18) for some distributions r1,
. . . and nonnegative numbers X1, . . .
Let r1, . .
be distributions in 0(0) and let Xi, . . ,X, be nonnegative
numbers that satisfy condition (7.18) when q = Q. Now consider the
following strategy for player 1 in the repeated game where player 1
knows the actual state of nature and player 2 only knows the distribution
Q out of which the state of nature is drawn: at round 1, after learning
the actual state, player 1 randomly chooses a number between 1 and J,
such that X,r,(0)/Q(0) is the conditional probability of his choosing j given
that the actual state is 0; thereafter, given his chosen number j, player
1 chooses his move at each round independently according to the dis-
tribution T,(.I ri) (choosing each move d1  with probability Ti(di
So the unconditional probability of player 1 choosing number j is
E,E0Q(0)(X,r,(0)/Q(0)) = X,. Notice that, given only that j is the number
chosen by player 1, the conditional probability that any 0 is the actual
state is Q(0)(X,r,(0)/Q(0))/X, = r3(0). So, if we knew only that player 1 was
implementing the randomized strategy Ti(. kJ) at each round, then we
would infer that the distribution over the unknown state was 5, and we

--- Sayfa 375 ---
7.9 • Incomplete Information 357
would assess an expected payoff for player 1 of wi(5) at each round.
Thus, before player 1 learns the actual state and chooses his number,
his expected payoff under this strategy must be at least I,J= =
wr(Q). So this strategy guarantees player 1 an expected payoff of wr
(Q) at every round in the repeated game.
When player 1 implements this strategy, if T 1 ('
0 T 1 (. I TO whenever
h 0 j, then player 2 will eventually be able to infer which number j was
chosen by player 1. But 2 will never be able to infer anything more
about the state of nature by observing l's moves, because player 1 acts
as if he has forgotten the state and remembers only his chosen number.
So, after observing player 1 implement this strategy for a long time,
player 2's posterior probability distribution for the unknown state of
nature should converge to 7-3.
When the players only care about the average of their payoffs at the
first K rounds, this strategy may not be optimal for player 1, because
he might have an incentive to use more of his information about the
state toward the end of these K rounds, when the information thereby
revealed to player 2 cannot hurt player 1 as much as it might earlier.
However, as the horizon K goes to infinity, this strategy is asymptotically
optimal. This theorem is the main result of Aumann and Maschler
(1968) and can be stated as follows.
THEOREM 7.3.
lim v1(K) = wr(Q).
The full proof can also be found in Sorin (1980). Here, we only sketch
the proof. What we need to do is show that player 2 has a strategy that
will guarantee that player 1 cannot, in the long run, get an expected
average payoff that is better than wr(Q). To show this, we must first
present an important theorem of Blackwell (1956).
For any set Z that is a closed convex subset of R®, and for any point
Y = (Ye)e.® in Re, there exists a unique point (y) = (Wy))0€0  in Z that
minimizes the distance to y, that is,
1/2
{t(y)} = argmin
E (ze — ye)2) •
zEZ
0E0
The distance from Z to y is defined to be this minimum distance.

--- Sayfa 376 ---
358 7 • Repeated Games
We can extend the function u1(.) to A(D1) x L(D2) x 0 in the usual
way, such that
ui (Pi ,P2,0) = L.i
E P1(d1)p2(d2)u1(611,d2,0)•
cliEDI d2ED2
A behavioral strategy for player 2 in the repeated game is a sequence
Q2 = (Q2)k=1, where o-21  E A(D2) and, for each k greater than 1, u2 is a
function from (D)k-1  into 0(D2). So o-2(d2i  cl , . . . ,ch-1) is the probability
that, under the strategy u2, player 2 would choose move d2  at round k
if c1, . . . ,ck-1  were the history of moves of both players at rounds 1
through k— 1. (Here each c1  = (cli,c12).) After learning the actual state of
nature, player 1 should choose a behavioral strategy that is defined
similarly. Once a behavioral strategy for each player is specified, the
moves that will be actually carried out by each player at each round
become random variables, with well-defined probability distributions
that depend on the behavioral strategies. (The formal construction of
these probability distributions is described in Section 7.2.) Let dk denote
the random variable that is the move that player i will actually carry out
at round k, in a realization of these behavioral strategies, and let tiki(0)
= u1(dk1,dk2,0). Player 2 does not know the actual state, but after playing
round k of the game she will know what payoff player 1 would have
gotten for each possible state at that round. That is, player 2's knowledge
about player l's realized payoff at round k will be described by the
vector
ui =
We refer to itk, as the realized payoff vector to player 1 at round k. Let gk
denote the average of the first k realized payoff vectors to player 1.
That is, iek  = (4)„0  and
k
E fir(o)
-k

Xe =
k
The following important theorem has been proved by Blackwell
(1956).
THEOREM 7 . 4 .
Let Z be any subset of R®  that is closed and convex. Suppose
that, for every q in R0,

--- Sayfa 377 ---
7.9 Incomplete Information 359
min max
q(0)u,(pi,p2,0) < supremum E q(0)ye.
p2EA(D2) PiEA(DI) 0E0
yEZ
0E0
Then player 2 has some behavioral strategy cr2  in the repeated game such that,
for any strategy that player 1 may use, with probability 1, the distance from Z
to gk  will converge to 0 as k goes to infinity.
This theorem is known as Blackwell's approachability theorem. When the
conclusion of the theorem holds, then we say that the set Z is approachable
by player 2.
Suppose now that the hypothesis of Theorem 7.4 is satisfied. Without
giving the full details of the proof, we can easily describe a strategy for
player 2 that satisfies the conclusion of Theorem 7.4. At round 1, and
at any round k when Rk-1  is in Z, let player 2 choose her move according
to any arbitrary distribution over D2. At any round k when gk-1  is not
in Z, let player 2 choose her move according to any distribution that is
in the set
argmin max E (x' - 63(x
1))111(P1,P2,0),
p2EA(D2) PIEA(Di) 0E0
where k(jek-1) is the point in Z that is closest to Rk-  I. Blackwell (1956)
showed that, when player 2 uses such a strategy, the limit of the distance
from Z to the average realized payoff vectors must converge to 0, no
matter what behavioral strategy player 1 uses.
To appreciate the full power of Blackwell's approachability theorem,
let us now consider instead the case where the hypothesis of the theorem
is not satisfied. Then there exists some q such that
sup E q(0)ye  < min max E q(0)ui(p,,p2,0)
yEZ 0E0
p2EA(D2) plEA(M) 0E0
= max min E q(0)ui(p1,p2,0)•
PIEA(DI) p2EA(D2) 0E0
That is, there is some q in R0  and some pi  in A(Di) such that,
E 9(0)u (P ,P2,0) > sup E q(0)ye, Vp2  E 0(D2).
0E0
yEZ 0E0
So if player 1 simply uses the stationary strategy of applying the ran-
domized strategy pi  to determine his move independently at every
round, then he can guarantee that, with probability 1,
liminf E 0)4> sup E q(0)y,.
0E0
yEZ 0E0

--- Sayfa 378 ---
360 7 Repeated Games
So if the hypothesis of the theorem is not satisfied, then player 1 has a
behavioral strategy that guarantees that the limit-infimum of the dis-
tance from Z to zk  must be strictly positive, no matter what behavioral
strategy player 2 uses. In this case, we say that the set Z is excludable by
player 1. Thus, Blackwell's approachability theorem asserts that any
closed convex subset of R®  is either excludable by player 1 or approach-
able by player 2. (It is easy to see that a set cannot be both excludable
by 1 and approachable by 2!)
Using Blackwell's approachability theorem, we can now sketch the
rest of the proof of Theorem 7.3. Because 40 is a concave function,
there exists some vector z in R®  such that
E Q(0)ze  = wt (Q), and E q(0)ze  w t(q), Vq E A(0).
0E0
0E®
That is, z is the vector of coefficients of a linear function on 0(0) that
is tangent to zur(.) at Q. Let Z = {y E R®  ye < ze, VO E 0}.
We now show that this set Z satisfies the hypothesis of Theorem 7.4,
so it is approachable by player 2. If q has any negative components,
then the supremum in the hypothesis is +co, so the inequality is trivially
satisfied for any p2. If q is the zero vector, then the inequality is also
trivially satisfied, with 0 on both sides. For any nonnegative vector q,
the inequality can be satisfied iff it can be satisfied for (l!EeE®  qe)q,  which
is in A(0), because both sides of the inequality are linear in q. But if q
is any vector in 0(0), then
sup E q(0)ye  = E q(e)ze'— wt(q) a w1(q)
yEZ 0E®
0E®
= min max E q(0)111(p1  ,p2,0).
p2EA(D2) PlEA(DI) 0E0
So this set Z satisfies the hypothesis of Theorem 7.4.
Now, to see why player 1 cannot expect to do substantially better than
wf(Q) in the long run, as Theorem 7.3 asserts, suppose that player 2
uses her strategy for approaching this set Z. Then, with probability 1,
the limit supremum of each gt, as k goes to infinity, must be less than
or equal to ze. So (using the fact that payoffs are bounded, so events of
infinitesimal probability cannot substantially affect the expected payoff
in any state), the limit-supremum, as k goes to infinity, of the expected
value of 10E42(0)54 must be less than or equal to E0E0Q(0)ze  = wr(Q).

--- Sayfa 379 ---
7.10 • Continuous Time 361
7.10 Continuous Time
Although real physical time seems to be a continuous variable, virtually
all tractable game-theoretic models have assumed that players can make
decisions only at some discrete countable sequence of points in time.
To see, at a basic level, why continuous-time models have been diffi-
cult to work with, consider a naive attempt to define a continuous-time
version of the repeated Prisoners' Dilemma game. For each nonnegative
real number t, each player i must decide at time t whether to be generous
(gi) or selfish ( f,) at time t. Let e,(t) denote the move chosen by player i
at time t. Each player knows all past moves, so player i can implement
a strategy in which e,(t) is some (possibly random) function of the history
of past moves ((e,(s),e2(s)),,,,,. The objective of each player i is to
maximize the expected value of some integral of his payoffs at each
point in time, say,
J
8 ui(ei(t),e2(t))dt,
o
where 0 < 8 s 1.
This model may seem to be a well-defined game, but in fact it is not.
For one thing, the integral may not be defined, if the history of moves
has too many discontinuities. So some strategies that create too many
discontinuities, such as "at each point in time randomize independently
between being generous and selfish, each with probability 1/2," might
have to be ruled out.
But there are other deep problems even with strategies that seem to
guarantee that the path of payoffs will be integrable. For example,
consider the strategy "be generous unless there exists some interval of
positive length in the past during which the other player has been selfish,
in which case be selfish." A player who implements such a strategy can
change his move at most once, and his move will depend continuously
on time at all other points in time. But when will he change his move?
Suppose that both players decide to implement this strategy. Let K be
any arbitrary nonnegative real number, and consider the outcome path
(ei(t),e2(t)) = (gi,g2) if t
K,
(ei(t),e2(t)) = (fl,f2) if t > K.

--- Sayfa 380 ---
362 7 • Repeated Games
At any point in time, each player is choosing the move designated by
this strategy, given the history of past moves. So, for any K, such an
outcome path would seem to be a consistent realization of these strate-
gies. The problem is that, in continuous time, the players can change
from generosity to selfishness without there being any first point in time
when someone was selfish. To have a well-defined game, either we must
somehow restrict the set of possible strategies for each player, to rule
out strategies such as this one, or we must find a more sophisticated
rule to define the realized outcome path for all pairs of possible strat-
egies. Either way, this seems to be a difficult research problem. (See
Anderson, 1983; Fudenberg and Tirole, 1984; Kalai and Stanford,
1985; Simon, 1987; Simon and Stinchcombe, 1989; and Bergin, 1987,
for recent work in this direction.)
So the general approach in game theory is to work with discrete-time
models. That is, we break up the continuous time line into a countable
sequence of intervals, each called a "round" (or "period" or "stage"),
and assume that each player can choose a new move only at the begin-
ning of a round. Such a model may reasonably describe a real situation
if the length of a round is chosen to be the approximate length of time
that it takes each player to respond to new information and change his
behavior. To the extent that players can think and react very quickly,
however, we are interested in the limit as the length of each round goes
to O.
Simon and Stinchcombe (1989) have probed the question of whether
such short-period discrete-time models might nonetheless create artifi-
cial phenomena that could not exist in the real continuous-time world.
For example, consider the following two-player game. Each player must
decide at what time in R, he wishes to enter a new market. His payoff
is —81  if he is the first to enter and he does so at time t, —28' if the other
player is the first to enter and does so at time t, and —38t  if both players
enter simultaneously at time t, where 0 < 8 < 1. We can describe this
game by a discrete-time model in which the length of each round is
some small positive number r, so that the beginning of round k will
occur at "real" time r(k— 1). At the beginning of each round, when he
decides whether to enter now or not, each player is assumed to know
the decisions of both players (to enter or not) at all past rounds.
Consider the following scenario, which is a subgame-perfect equilib-
rium of the discrete-time model of this game. Player 1 plans to enter at
round 1, while player 2 plans not to enter at round 1. If player 1 did

--- Sayfa 381 ---
7.10 • Continuous Time 363
not enter at round 1, then player 2 would enter at round 2 and player
1 would not enter at round 2. Similarly, at every subsequent round, if
no one has previously entered, then player 1 would enter and player 2
would not if the round number is odd, but player 2 would enter and
player 1 would not if the round number is even. In this equilibrium,
player 1 is deterred from delaying his entry at time 0 (round 1) by the
fear that, if he did not do so, player 2 would enter at the first subsequent
opportunity (round 2, at time e). Similarly, player 2 would be deterred
from delaying her entry after player 1 had failed to enter at time 0 by
the fear that, if she failed to enter at her first opportunity after time 0,
then player 1 would enter for sure at his first opportunity thereafter.
Notice, however, that the logic of this equilibrium depends in an essen-
tial way on the artificial assumption that time is divided into discrete
rounds. In continuous time, there is no "first opportunity" for someone
to enter after another has failed to do so. Thus, we might sometimes
want to scrutinize some equilibria of our discrete-time models, to see
whether they actually correspond to behavior that would also make
sense in continuous time.
The discrete-time model of this game also has symmetric stationary
subgame-perfect equilibria in which both players randomize between
entering and not at each round until someone enters. To compute these,
let q denote the probability that each player would enter at any round
when no one has yet entered. At round k, if no one has previously
entered and player 2 is expected to use this strategy, then player 1
would be indifferent between entering at round k (time e(k —1)) or at
round k+ 1 (time de) iff
q(-38E('-") + (1 — q)(—E1E('-')) =
q(-28°-I)) + (1 — q)q(-38sk) + (1 — q)2(
This quadratic equation has two roots
8E ± (82E + 88E
8)1/2
=
4
both of which are in the interval between 0 and 1 when r is small.
Consider now the equilibrium corresponding to the larger of the two
roots. As r goes to 0, q converges to '/2. That is, at each round, each
player plans independently to enter with probability close to 1/2 if no
one has entered previously. At each round when no one has yet entered,

--- Sayfa 382 ---
364 7 • Repeated Games
then the following four events each have probability approximately
equal to 1/4: player 1 enters alone, player 2 enters alone, both players
enter, and neither player enters. For any time t such that t > 0, the
probability that no one will have entered by time t is approximately
(1/4)" (because there are about de rounds before time t), which goes to
0 as e —> 0 and q ----> 1/2. Thus, in real time, the limit of the outcomes of
this equilibrium is that someone will enter for sure at (or infinitesimally
close to) time 0, and the following three events are equally likely: player
1 enters first alone, player 2 enters first alone, and both players enter
first simultaneously. That is, in the limit, each player is entering at time
0 with marginal probability 2/3, and the probability of both entering at
time 0 is '/3. Because 1/3 0 (2/3)2, it might seem that such behavior would
require correlation between the players at time 0; but we have seen that
this is in fact the limit of behavior in a discrete-time model in which the
players are behaving independently at every point in time, given their
shared information about the past. Thus, if we do study continuous-
time models, it may be inappropriate to assume that players' behavioral
strategies must be stochastically independent at every point in time,
even if there is no communication between players.
7.11 Evolutionary Simulation of Repeated Games
Axelrod (1984) used a version of the repeated Prisoners' Dilemma in
his work on evolutionary simulation, discussed earlier in Section 3.7. In
his results, the strategy of tit-for-tat had more long-run reproductive
success than almost any other strategy. This result has a striking quali-
tative similarity to the results of Kreps, Milgrom, Roberts, and Wilson
(1982) on the attractiveness of tit-for-tat in a finitely repeated Prisoners'
Dilemma. On the basis of his simulations, Axelrod has argued that
cooperative reciprocating behavior should be expected to spontaneously
evolve in many social and ecological systems.
Of course, it is hard to know whether other initial distributions might
have favored some other strategy in an evolutionary simulation like
Axelrod's. The concept of resistance, defined in Section 3.7, offers an-
other way to derive and test such conclusions. Consider, for example,
the version of the repeated Prisoners' Dilemma given in Table 7.1, with
a 8-discounted average payoff criterion. Let us compare the equilibrium
in which both players play tit-for-tat with the equilibrium in which both
players play selfish-always. In the tit-for-tat equilibrium, both players

--- Sayfa 383 ---
Exercises 365
get 8-discounted average payoffs of 4. In the selfish-always equilibrium,
both players get 8-discounted average payoffs of 1. When one player
uses tit-for-tat and the other uses selfish-always, their 8-discounted av-
erage payoffs are 8 and 6 — 58, respectively. The resistance of the
selfish-always equilibrium against tit-for-tat is the highest number X such
that
(1 — X)(1) + X(6 — 58)
(1 — X)(8) + X(4).
This number is (1
— 8)1(48 — 1), which goes to 0 as 6 approaches 1.
That is, in a repeated Prisoners' Dilemma game with a very long-run
discounted average criterion, the resistance of the selfish-always equilib-
rium against the tit-for-tat strategy is almost 0, whereas the resistance
of the tit-for-tat equilibrium against the selfish-always strategy is al-
most 1.
It is not clear to what extent these results generalize to other repeated
games, however. From Section 7.4, recall the repeated Chicken game
(in Table 7.3) with a 8-discounted average payoff criterion. It can be
shown that, as 8 goes to 1, the resistance of the (very belligerent) q-
positional equilibrium of this repeated game against the tit-for-tat (or
getting-even) strategy converges to 4/11, not 0. So it may be harder for
tit-for-tat cooperation to evolve in an ecological system where the indi-
viduals play repeated Chicken, instead of the repeated Prisoners' Di-
lemma.
Exercises
Exercise 7.1. Consider a repeated game with complete state information
in which the set of players, the set of possible states of nature, and the
set of possible moves for each player are all finite sets. Show by a fixed-
point argument that there exists a stationary equilibrium T and a value
vector v that satisfy conditions (7.2) and (7.3).
Exercise 7.2. Consider a repeated game with standard information,
where each player maximizes his expected 8-discounted average payoff,
for some 8 that is close to but less than 1. Payoffs at each round depend
on the players' moves as shown in Table 7.9. Consider the following
scenario. At the first round, and at each round where the outcome of
the preceding round was (x,,x2) or (y,,y2), the players independently
randomize, each player i choosing y, with probability q or ; with prob-

--- Sayfa 384 ---
366 7 • Repeated Games
Table 7.9 Payoffs at any round, for all move profiles, in a repeated game
D2
D i
x2
Y2
x,
2,2
0,6
Y1
6,0
1,1
ability 1 — q. At each round where the outcome of the preceding round
was (xl,y2), the players choose yl  and x2. At each round where the
outcome of the preceding round was (y1,x2), the players choose x1  and
Y2*
Write a system of equations that determine the probability q that
makes this scenario a subgame-perfect equilibrium, once 8 is specified,
as long as 8 is not too small. Show that these equations have a solution
where q = .664183 when 8 = .9. What is the smallest discount factor 8
such that the q determined by these equations will be a subgame-perfect
equilibrium?
Exercise 7.3. For the repeated game with standard information de-
scribed in Table 7.5, with discount factor 8 = .99, construct a subgame-
perfect equilibrium in which the expected discounted average payoff
to each player, at the beginning of the game, is approximately
1.0007009118 or less.
Exercise 7.4. (A war of attrition game.) Two small grocery stores on the
same block are feeling the effects of a large supermarket that was
recently constructed a half-mile away. As long as both remain in busi-
ness, each will lose $1000 per month. On the first day of every month,
when the monthly rent for the stores is due, each grocer who is still in
business must independently decide whether to stay in business for
another month or to quit. If one grocer quits, then the grocer who
remains will make $500 per month profit thereafter. Assume that, once
a grocer quits, his or her lease will be taken by some other merchant
(not a grocer), so he or she will not be able to reopen a grocery store
in this block, even if the other grocer also quits. Each grocer wants to
maximize the expected discounted average value of his or her monthly
profits, using a discount factor per month of 8 = .99.

--- Sayfa 385 ---
Exercises 367
a. Find an equilibrium of this situation in which both grocers ran-
domize between staying and quitting every month until at least one
grocer quits.
b. Discuss another way that the grocers might handle this situation,
with reference to other equilibria of this game.
c. Suppose now that grocer 1 has a slightly larger store than grocer
2. As long as both stores remain in business, grocer 1 loses $1200 per
month and grocer 2 loses $900 per month. If grocer 1 had the only
grocery store on the block, he would earn $700 profit per month. If
grocer 2 had the only grocery store on the block, she would earn $400
per month. Find an equilibrium of this situation in which both grocers
randomize between staying and quitting every month, until somebody
actually quits. In this equilibrium, which grocer is more likely to quit
first?
Exercise 7.5. Consider a two-person zero-sum game with incomplete
information in which the payoffs depend on the actions and the state
as given in Table 7.10. Let q denote the probability of state a.
a. Suppose first that this game is played only once, neither player
knows the state, and both agree on q, the probability of a. Draw a graph
that shows, as a function of the parameter q, player l's expected payoff
wi(q) in equilibrium.
Table 7.10 Payoffs at any round, for all move profiles and states of nature,
in a repeated game with incomplete information
State = a
D2
D,
a2
b2
al
2,-2
0,0
bi
2,-2
1,-1
State = 13
D2
DI
a2
b2
a,
0,0
1,-1
b,
0,0
0,0

--- Sayfa 386 ---
368 7 • Repeated Games
b. Draw a graph that shows the concave hull wf of the function zul
that you plotted in part (a). Check that wt(1/2) = 3/4 > w1(1/2).
c. Now consider an infinitely repeated game in which the state of
nature is the same at every round, and each of the two possible states
has probability 1/2 of being the actual state of nature. Suppose that only
player 1 observes the state of nature at the start of the game. Player 2
observes player l's moves but cannot directly observe the state or any
payoff that depends on the state. (Suppose player 2's payoffs are going
into a blind trust.) Describe a strategy for player 1 that guarantees that
the ex ante expected payoff to player 1 at every round will be at least
3/4, no matter what strategy player 2 may use. (The ex ante expected
value is the expected value that would be assessed before the state of
nature is determined at the beginning of the game.)
Exercise 7.6.
Let u2:D1  x D2  —* R denote the payoff function for player
2 at each round of a two-player repeated game with standard infor-
mation. Here, for each player i, D, is the finite set of possible moves at
each round for player i. Suppose that 0 0 D1. Let 0 = D1  U {0}, and
let
Z = {y E
IY0 >
You2(0,c2), Vc2 E D2}.
OED1

For any (c1,c2) in D1  x D2, and any 0 in 0, let
we(c1,c2) = 1
if 0 = ci,
0
if 0 E Di  but 0
cl,
= u2(c1,c2) if 0 = 0.
We can write w(c1,c2) = (we(c1,c2))0(0. When the repeated game is played,
let ce,' denote the move that player i actually chooses at round k, and let
k
E w(2),cr2")
k
m=1

X
a. Show that, if xk  E Z, then
k
k
E u2(, if2) > E u2( ,c2), vc2 E D2.
m=1
m=1
k

--- Sayfa 387 ---
Exercises 369
b. Show that, for any pi  in A(D,), there exists some p2  in 0(D2) such
that w(p1,p2) E Z, where
w(p1,p2) = E E p1(c1)p2(c2)w(c1,c2)•
„EDI  c2ED2
c. Show that, for any q in R®,
min max E gewe(p1,p2)--s sup E goo,
p2EA(D2) PIELVD1) 0E0
yEZ 0E0
and so, by Theorem 7.4, Z is approachable by player 2. Thus, player 2
can guarantee that the limit of her average payoffs will not be below
the optimum that she could have gotten if she knew in advance the
relative frequency of each of player l's moves. (HINT: Use (b) and
Theorem 3.2. See also Luce and Raiffa, 1957, pages 481-483.)

--- Sayfa 388 ---
8
Bargaining and Cooperation in
Two-Person Games
8.1 Noncooperative Foundations of Cooperative Game Theory
The concept of cooperation is important in game theory but is somewhat
subtle. The term cooperate means "to act together, with a common pur-
pose." We might suppose that, for a coalition of two or more individuals
to act together with a common purpose, the individuals would have to
set aside their separate utility functions and create something completely
new—a collective utility function for determining their collective behav-
ior. However, such a conceptual approach is difficult to work with,
because all we really have to work with in game theory is our assumption
that each player is an intelligent and rational decision-maker, whose
behavior is ultimately derived from the goal of maximizing his own
expected utility payoff. So we need some model of cooperative behavior
that does not abandon the individual decision-theoretic foundations of
game theory.
Nash (1951) proposed that cooperation between players can be stud-
ied by using the same basic concept of Nash equilibrium that underlies
all the areas of noncooperative game theory we have studied in the
preceding chapters. He argued that cooperative actions are the result
of some process of bargaining among the "cooperating" players, and in
this bargaining process each player should be expected to behave ac-
cording to some bargaining strategy that satisfies the same personal
utility-maximization criterion as in any other game situation. That is, in
any real situation, if we look carefully at what people can do to reach
an agreement on a joint cooperative strategy, in principle we should be
able to model it as a game in extensive (or strategic or Bayesian) form

--- Sayfa 389 ---
8.1 • Noncooperative Foundations 371
and then predict the outcome by analyzing the set of equilibria of this
game.
We may define a cooperative transformation to be any mapping Alf such
that, if F is a game (in extensive, strategic, or Bayesian form), then IP'(F)
is another game (more complicated, perhaps, but still in extensive,
strategic, or Bayesian form) that represents the situation existing when,
in addition to the given strategic options specified in F, each player has
some wide range of options for bargaining with the other players to
jointly plan cooperative strategies. This idea was introduced in Chapter
6, where we discussed the concept of transforming a game by adding
contract-signing or communication options for the players. In situations
where the natural structure of individual options would only admit
equilibria that are bad for all players (as in the Prisoners' Dilemma), the
players may have a strong incentive to try to transform the structure of
the game by adding communication or contract-signing options that
give each player some degree of control over the natural decision do-
main of other players. Such cooperative transformations may change a
game with dismal equilibria, like the Prisoners' Dilemma or the game
shown in Table 6.1, into a game with equilibria that are better for all
of the players, like the games shown in Tables 6.2 and 6.3. Nash's program
for cooperative game theory is to define cooperative solution concepts
such that a cooperative solution for any given game is a Nash equilib-
rium of some cooperative transformation of the game.
Unfortunately, there is good reason to believe that, if we do a careful
job of describing all the things that players can do when they bargain
or sign contracts with each other, then we may get a game that has a
very large set of equilibria; so Nash's program by itself may fail to
determine a unique cooperative solution. Indeed, we saw in Section 6.1
that any individually rational correlated strategy is the equilibrium out-
come of a contract-signing game in which all possible contracts (as
defined mathematically in Section 6.1) are available to the players. Thus,
to get tighter cooperative solution concepts, some theory of cooperative
equilibrium selection is needed.
Recall from Section 3.5 that the general response to the problem of
multiple equilibria in a game is Schelling's (1960) focal-point effect. This
theory asserts that, in a game with multiple equilibria, anything that
tends to focus the players' attention on one particular equilibrium, in a
way that is commonly recognized, tends to make this the equilibrium
that the players will expect and thus actually implement. The focal

--- Sayfa 390 ---
372 8 • Bargaining in Two-Person Games
equilibrium could be determined by any of a wide range of possible
factors, including environmental factors and cultural traditions (which
fall beyond the scope of analysis in mathematical game theory), special
mathematical properties of the various equilibria, and preplay state-
ments made by the players or an outside arbitrator. One possible inter-
pretation of the assumption that the players in a game can cooperate
effectively is that they can use preplay communication to coordinate their
expectations on a focal equilibrium that has good welfare properties for
some or all of them. Thus, the foundations of cooperative game theory
rest, at least in part, on the role of arbitration, negotiation, and welfare
properties in determining the focal equilibrium in a game with multiple
equilibria.
Recall that a focal arbitrator is an individual who can determine the
focal equilibrium in a game by publicly suggesting to the players that
they should all implement this equilibrium. For example, in the Battle
of the Sexes game (Table 3.5), an arbitrator might announce, "On the
basis of many considerations, including a fair coin toss, I have decided
to advocate the (si,s2) equilibrium. I urge you to play it." Even though
this suggestion may have no binding force, if each player believes that
every other player will accept the arbitrator's suggestion, then each
player will find it best to do as the arbitrator suggests, provided the
arbitrator's suggestion is an equilibrium. To become an effective arbi-
trator, an individual must be able to communicate with all the players,
before the game, in some language that they all understand and that is
rich enough to describe any equilibrium. Also, it must be common
knowledge among the players that, because of this individual's prestige
or authority, all players will attend to and focus on whatever equilibrium
he announces. (For example, in the Battle of the Sexes game between
a husband and wife, perhaps the wife's father might be well positioned
to arbitrate in many situations.)
An impartial arbitrator should try to base his selection on some kind
of objective principles. Thus, we might ask what equilibrium would an
ideal impartial arbitrator select, in any given game, if his selection should
be based on principles that treat the players symmetrically and should
depend only on the decision-theoretically relevant structure of the game
(so that he would select the same equilibria for two games that are
decision-theoretically equivalent in some sense, as discussed in Section
2.3). That is, we can try to develop a normative theory of impartial
arbitration for games.

--- Sayfa 391 ---
8.1 • Noncooperative Foundations 373
For example, recall (from Section 3.5) the Divide the Dollars game, in
which there are two players who can each make a demand for some
amount of money. Each player will get his demand if the two demands
sum to $100 or less, but each will get $0 if the demands sum to strictly
more than $100. There are infinitely many equilibria of this game, but
an impartial arbitrator would probably suggest that the players should
implement the (50,50) equilibrium, because it is Pareto efficient and
equitable for the two players. But this fact may make (50,50) the focal
equilibrium that the players expect and thus implement, even when
such an impartial arbitrator is not actually present. That is, because
both players know that (50,50) is the efficient and equitable equilibrium
that an impartial arbitrator would be most likely to suggest, (50,50) has
a strong intrinsic focal property even when there is no arbitrator. In
general, whenever the players can identify a unique equilibrium that an
impartial arbitrator would select, this equilibrium may become focal just
because it has this special property. That is, the welfare properties of
equity and efficiency may determine the focal equilibrium in any game,
whether there is an arbitrator or not.
If a focal arbitrator is himself a player in the game, then we call him
the principal of the game. If one player is the principal in a game with
complete information, the focal equilibrium would be an equilibrium
that gives the highest possible expected payoff to this principal. For
example, if player 1 is the principal in the Battle of the Sexes game,
obviously he should simply announce to player 2 that he intends to
choose fi  and expects her to choose f2.
Another possibility is that a focal equilibrium could be determined by
some process of preplay communication between the players in which
two or more players have some opportunity to make statements in favor
of one equilibrium or another. Any process of preplay communication
between players that serves to influence the selection of a focal equilib-
rium in a game may be called focal negotiation.
Developing a formal model of focal negotiation seems to be a very
difficult problem. If player 1 has an opportunity to say, "I think that
we should play the (fl,f2) equilibrium," to player 2 at some time before
the Battle of the Sexes game is played, then this situation could be
described by an extensive-form game in which his opportunity to say
this is represented by an explicit move at some early decision node. But
any such game model will have babbling equilibria (like those discussed
in Sections 3.5 and 6.2) in which these statements are ignored, and each

--- Sayfa 392 ---
374 8 • Bargaining in Two-Person Games
player i ultimately makes his or her choice in {f,s,} according to some
equilibrium of the original game (even according to the Pareto-inferior
randomized equilibrium) independently of anyone's negotiation state-
ment. So the effectiveness of preplay statements in focal negotiation or
arbitration can only be derived from some (cooperative) assumption
that goes beyond the basic definition of equilibrium, to rule out these
babbling equilibria. Farrell (1988) and Myerson (1989) have proposed
that such effectiveness can be built into our analysis by assuming that
negotiation and arbitration statements have commonly understood lit-
eral meanings and that any statement that passes some formal credibility
test should always be interpreted according to its literal meaning. How-
ever, such assumptions are technically complicated and can be applied
only in models that specify all details about when each player can make
a negotiation statement.
One way to lay the foundations for a theory of negotiated outcomes
in games, without having to model the details of the negotiation process,
is to use the following assumption, which we call the equity hypothesis:
The outcomes of effective negotiations in which the players have equal
opportunity to participate should be the same as the recommendations
that would be made by an impartial arbitrator who knows the information
that is common knowledge among the players during the negotiations.
That is, according to the equity hypothesis, the predictions of a positive
theory of cooperative games in which the players have equal negotiating
ability should coincide with the prescriptions of a normative theory of
impartial arbitration.
We justify the equity hypothesis as follows. On the one hand, an
impartial arbitrator should not steer the players to something that could
be worse for some players than the outcome they would have negotiated
without him, if this outcome is known. A player who did worse in
arbitration than he would have in fair negotiations would have justifiable
complaint against the arbitrator. On the other hand, if it is obvious what
an impartial arbitrator would have suggested, then the most persuasive
argument in negotiations may be to settle on this equilibrium. Fisher
and Ury (1981) advise negotiators that arguments based on objective
and equitable standards are the most effective in real negotiations. Thus,
we can expect a close relationship or equivalence between our theories
of impartial arbitration and symmetric effective negotiation. In negoti-

--- Sayfa 393 ---
8.2 • The Nash Bargaining Solution 375
ation, just as in arbitration, a focal equilibrium may be determined or
selected on the basis of welfare properties like equity and efficiency.
Because we have not yet rigorously defined "symmetric effective ne-
gotiation" or "impartial arbitration" for general games, this equity hy-
pothesis cannot now be posed as a formal theorem. It is instead an
assertion about the relationship between these two intuitive concepts,
both of which we want to formalize. The power of the equity hypothesis
comes from the fact that it allows us to carry any restrictions that we
can make on one concept over to the other. In the case of the Divide
the Dollars game, where we feel that we understand what an impartial
arbitrator should do, the equity hypothesis implies that giving the play-
ers broad opportunities to negotiate with each other on an equal basis,
before playing the game, should tend to focus them on the (50,50)
equilibrium. (Thus—to show a testable implication of this theory—we
can predict that preplay communication should decrease the observed
variance in realized outcomes, relative to the case where the players
have no preplay communication, when this game is played by subjects
in experimental laboratories.)
8.2 Two-Person Bargaining Problems and the Nash Bargaining
Solution
Much of bargaining theory has followed from the remarkable seminal
work of Nash (1950, 1953). Nash's formulation of a two-person bar-
gaining problem is based on the following implicit assumption. When
two players negotiate or an impartial arbitrator arbitrates, the payoff
allocations that the two players ultimately get should depend only on
the payoffs they would expect if negotiation or arbitration were to fail
to reach a settlement and on the set of payoff allocations that are jointly
feasible for the two players in the process of negotiation or arbitration.
To justify this assumption, notice that concepts of equity (in the sense
that "my gains from our agreement should be commensurate with your
gains") generally involve some comparison with what the individuals
would get without agreement, and concepts of efficiency generally in-
volve only a comparison with the other feasible allocations.
Thus, we define a two-person bargaining problem to consist of a pair
(F,v) where F is a closed convex subset of R2, v = (v1,v2) is a vector in
R2, and the set

--- Sayfa 394 ---
376 8 • Bargaining in Two-Person Games
F fl {(xi,x2)Ixi
v1  and x2
v2}
is nonempty and bounded. Here F represents the set of feasible payoff
allocations or the feasible set, and v represents the disagreement payoff
allocation or the disagreement point. The assumption that F is convex can
be justified by assuming that players can agree to jointly randomized
strategies, so that, if the utility allocations x = (x1,x2) and y = (y1,y2)
are feasible and 0 0 1, then the expected utility allocation Ox +
(1 — 0)y can be achieved by planning to implement x with probability 0
and y otherwise. Closure of F is a natural topological requirement. The
nonemptiness and boundedness condition asserts that some feasible
allocation is at least as good as disagreement for both players, but
unbounded gains over the disagreement point are not possible. We say
that a two-person bargaining problem (F ,v) is essential iff there exists at
least one allocation y in F that is strictly better for both players than the
disagreement allocation v (i.e., yi > v1  and y2  > v2).
To interpret these structures, we need to be able to specify how they
would be derived in the context of some given two-person strategic-
form game F = ({1,2},CI,C2,u1,u2). Two possibilities for F can be sug-
gested, depending on whether the players' strategies can be regulated
by binding contracts. If such contracts are possible, then we should let
(8.1)
F = {(ui(p),u2(11))111 E A(C)}, where u,(11) =
li(c)u,(c).
cEC
If there is moral hazard in this game, so strategies cannot be regulated
by contracts, then we should let
(8.2)
F = {(12,(1),u2(11))1 1.L is a correlated equilibrium of F}.
To determine the disagreement point v, there are three possible
alternatives. One is to let v, be the minimax value for player i, so
vi  = min max u1(cri,cr2) and
..2(Acc2) cr,(A(co
v2  = min max u2(o-Dcr2)•
cri A(C1) (72( A(C2)
Another possibility would be to let (crl,cr2) be some focal equilibrium of
F and let v1  = u,(cr1,cr2) for each player i. A third possibility is to derive
v from some "rational threats," to be defined in Section 8.5, where we
also discuss criteria for determining which way for deriving v would
make the most sense in any given situation.

--- Sayfa 395 ---
8.2 • The Nash Bargaining Solution 377
A comprehensive theory of negotiation or arbitration would ideally
allow us to identify, for any such two-person bargaining problem (F,v),
some allocation vector in R2, which we denote by 4)(F,v), that would be
selected as a result of negotiation or arbitration in a situation where F
is the set of feasible allocations and v is the disagreement allocation.
Thus, our problem of developing a theory of negotiation or arbitration
may be considered as a problem of finding some appropriate solution
function 4) from the set of all two-person bargaining problems into R2,
the set of payoff allocations.
Nash approached this problem axiomatically. That is, he generated a
list of properties that a reasonable bargaining solution function ought
to satisfy.
To list Nash's axioms, we let 4,(F,v) denote the i-component of 4)(F,v),
so
4i(F,v) = (4)1(F,v),4)2(F,v))•
Also, for any two vectors x and y in R2, we can write
x y iff x1  > y1  and x2  y
2, and
x > y iff x1  > y1  and x2  > y2.
That is, we can write an inequality between two vectors iff the inequality
is satisfied by each pair of corresponding components in the two vectors.
For any two-person bargaining problem (F,v), the axioms for Nash's
bargaining solution can now be written as follows.
AXIOM 8.1 (STRONG EFFICIENCY).
4)(F,v) is an allocation in F,
and, for any x in F, if x 4)(F,v), then x = 4)(F,v).
AXIOM 8.2 (INDIVIDUAL RATIONALITY). 4)(F,v)
V.
AXIOM 8.3 (SCALE COVARIANCE). For any numbers X1, X2, y 1, and
-y2  such that X1  > 0 and X2 > 0, if
G = {(X1x1 + y1,  X2x2  + •y2) I (x1,x2) E
and w = (X1v1 +
X2v2  + y2),
then
4)(G,w) = (X14)1(F,v) + yl, X24)2(F,v) + )/2).

--- Sayfa 396 ---
378 8 • Bargaining in Two-Person Games
AXIOM 8.4 (INDEPENDENCE OF IRRELEVANT ALTERNA
TIVES). For any closed convex set G, if G C F and 4(F, v) E G, then
CG,v) = 4(F,v).
AXIOM 8.5 (SYMMETRY). If v1  = v2  and {(x2,x1)1(x1,x2) E
= F,
then 41(F,v) = 412 (F,v).
Axiom 8.1 asserts that the solution to any two-person bargaining
problem should be feasible and Pareto efficient. That is, there should
be no other feasible allocation that is better than the solution for one
player and not worse than the solution for the other player. In general,
given a feasible set F, we say that a point x in F is strongly (Pareto) efficient
iff there is no other point y in F such that y x and y, > xi  for at least
one player i. In contrast, we also say that a point x in F is weakly (Pareto)
efficient iff there is no point y in F such that y > x.
Axiom 8.2 asserts that neither player should get less in the bargaining
solution than he could get in disagreement. We say that an allocation x
in F is individually rational iff x v.
Axiom 8.3 asserts that if a two-person bargaining problem (G,v) can
be derived from a bargaining problem (F,v) by increasing affine utility
transformations, which (by Theorem 1.3) will not affect any decision-
theoretic properties of the utility functions, then the solution of (G,v)
should be derivable from the solution of (F,v) by the same transfor-
mation. That is, if we change the way we measure utility when we
construct a two-person bargaining problem to represent some real sit-
uation but keep our new utility scales decision-theoretically equivalent
to the old ones, then the bargaining solution in utility-allocation space
should change in the same way, so that it still corresponds to the same
real outcome.
Axiom 8.4 asserts that eliminating feasible alternatives (other than
the disagreement point) that would not have been chosen should not
affect the solution. If an arbitrator were to choose a solution by maxi-
mizing some aggregate measure of social gain (so {(4)(F,v)} =
argmaxXEFM(x,v), where M(x,v) is his measure of the social gain from
choosing allocation x instead of v), then Axiom 8.4 would always be
satisfied.
Axiom 8.5 asserts that, if the positions of players 1 and 2 are com-
pletely symmetric in the bargaining problem, then the solution should
also treat them symmetrically.

--- Sayfa 397 ---
8.2 • The Nash Bargaining Solution 379
Nash's remarkable result is that there is exactly one bargaining solu-
tion, called the Nash bargaining solution, that satisfies these axioms.
THEOREM 8. 1. There is a unique solution function (1)(.,.) that satisfies
Axioms 8.1 through 8.5 above. This solution function satisfies, for every two-
person bargaining problem (F,v),
,(F,v) E argmax (x1  — v1)(x2  -
xEF,xa-v
Proof For now, let (F,v) be any essential two-person bargaining prob-
lem, so there exists some y in F such that y, > x, and y2  > x2.
Let x be the unique point in F that achieves the maximum of the
function (x1  — v1)(x2  — v2), called the Nash product, over all x in F such
that x v. This point must satisfy x > v, to achieve the strictly positive
values of the Nash product that are possible in F. This maximizing point
x is unique, given F and v, because maximizing the Nash product is
then equivalent to maximizing its logarithm, which is a strictly concave
function of x.
Let X, = 1/(x, — v,) and -y =
— v,), for each i. Define a function
L:R2
R2  such that
L(y) = (X1y1
X2Y2
-Y2),
and let G = {L(y)ty E
For any y in R2, if z = L(y), then z1z2
X1X2(y1  — v1)(y2  — v2), and X1X2  is a positive constant. Thus, because x
maximizes the Nash product over F, L(x) must maximize the product
z1z2  over all z in G. But L(x) = (1,1), and the hyperbola {z E R21z1z2  =
2} has slope —1 at the point (1,1). Thus, the line {z I z1  + z2  = 2}, which
has slope —1 and goes through (1,1), must be above and tangent to the
convex set G at (1,1). Let E = {z E R2 I z, + z2  2}. Then G C E.
To satisfy Axioms 8.1 and 8.5 (efficiency and symmetry), we must
have
4•(E,(0,0)) =- (1,1).
Then, to satisfy Axiom 8.4 (independence of irrelevant alternatives), we
need
4)(G,(0,0)) =-- (1,1).

--- Sayfa 398 ---
380 8 • Bargaining in Two-Person Games
Then Axiom 8.3 (scale covariance) requires that L(4)(F,v)) = (1)(G,(0,0)),
so
4)(F,v) = x.
Thus, to satisfy the axioms, 4) must select the allocation that maximizes
the Nash product, among all individually rational allocations in F.
Now, suppose instead that (F,v) is inessential, in the sense that there
is no point y in F such that y > v. By convexity of F, there must then
be at least one player i such that, for every y in F, if y v, then y, = v,.
(If we could find y and z in F such that y v, z v, y, > v, and z2  >
v2, then .5y + .5z would be a point in F that was strictly better than v
for both players.) Let x be the allocation in F that is best for the player
other than i, subject to the constraint that x, = v,. Then this vector x is
the unique point that is strongly Pareto efficient in F and individually
rational relative to v. Thus, to satisfy Axioms 8.1 and 8.2, we must have
4)(F,v) = x. Obviously x achieves the maximum value of the Nash prod-
uct, which is 0 for all individually rational allocations in this inessential
bargaining problem.
We have thus shown that the five axioms can be satisfied by only one
solution function (I), which always selects the unique strongly efficient
allocation that maximizes the Nash product over all feasible individually
rational allocations. It only remains to show that this solution function
4 does indeed satisfy all of the axioms, a result that is straightforward
to verify and is left as an exercise. I
A weaker version of the efficiency axiom could be written as follows.
AXIOM 8.1' (WEAK EFFICIENCY). 4)(F, v) E F, and there does not
exist any y in F such that y > 4)(F,v).
In the above proof, replacing the strong efficiency axiom by the weak
efficiency axiom would make no difference in the case of an essential
two-person bargaining problem. Furthermore, the individual rationality
axiom was also not used in the argument for the essential case. Thus,
any solution function that satisfies Axioms 8.1', 8.3, 8.4, and 8.5 must
coincide with the Nash bargaining solution for all essential two-person
bargaining problems.

--- Sayfa 399 ---
8.3 Interpersonal Comparisons 381
8.3 Interpersonal Comparisons of Weighted Utility
In real bargaining situations, people often make interpersonal compar-
isons of utility, and they generally do so in two different ways. One way
is in applying a principle of equal gains, as when a person argues, "You
should do this for me because I am doing more for you." For any two-
person bargaining problem (F,v), we define the egalitarian solution to be
the unique point x in F that is weakly efficient in F and satisfies the
equal-gains condition
X1 - V1 = X2 - V2.
If individuals in negotiation or arbitration are guided by the equal-gains
principle, then the outcome should be the egalitarian solution.
Another way of making interpersonal comparisons in bargaining is
in applying a principle of greatest good, as when a person argues, "You
should do this for me because it helps me more than it will hurt you."
For any two-person bargaining problem, we define a utilitarian solution
to be any solution function that selects, for every two-person bargaining
problem (F,v), an allocation x such that
x1  + x2  = max (y + y2).
yEF
If individuals in negotiation or arbitration are guided by the greatest-
good principle, then the outcome should be a utilitarian solution. (Here,
"utilitarian" is used in the classical sense of Bentham and Mill.)
The scale-covariance axiom is based on an assumption that only the
individual decision-theoretic properties of the utility scales should mat-
ter, and interpersonal comparisons of utility have no decision-theoretic
significance as long as no player can be asked to decide between being
himself or someone else. Thus, it is not surprising that the egalitarian
solution and the utilitarian solutions violate the axiom of scale covari-
ance. Given any numbers X1, X2, -1,  1, and .-Y2 such that X1  > 0 and A2 >
0, let
L(y) = (X1y1
X2Y2 + "Y2),
Vy E R2.
Given any two-person bargaining problem (F,v), let
L(F) = {L(y)Iy E

--- Sayfa 400 ---
382 8 • Bargaining in Two-Person Games
Then the egalitarian solution of (L(F),L(v)) is L(x), where x is the unique
weakly efficient point in F such that
A1(x1 — v1) = A2(x2 — v2),
which we refer to as the A-egalitarian solution of (F,v). The egalitarian
solution does not satisfy scale covariance because the A-egalitarian so-
lution is generally different from the simple egalitarian (or (1,1)-egali-
tarian) solution. Similarly, a utilitarian solution of (L(F),L(v)) must be
some point L(z), where z is a point in F such that
A1z1  + A2z2  = max (A1y,
X2Y2)•
yEF

We refer to any such point z as a A-utilitarian solution of (F,v). Egalitarian
solutions fail to satisfy scale covariance because a A-utilitarian solution
is generally not a simple utilitarian (or (1,1)-utilitarian) solution.
Thus, to accommodate scale covariance, we must admit that the equal-
gains and greatest-good principles each suggest a whole family of bar-
gaining solutions, the A-egalitarian and the A-utilitarian solutions. Each
of these solutions corresponds to an application of either the equal-
gains principle or the greatest-good principle when the payoffs of dif-
ferent players are compared in some A-weighted utility scales (in which
each player i's utility is multiplied by a positive number A,) that are
decision-theoretically equivalent to the originally given utility scales. As
A l  increases and A2 decreases, the A-egalitarian solutions trace out the
individually rational, weakly efficient frontier, moving in the direction
of decreasing payoff to player 1. Also, as A l  increases and A2 decreases,
the A-utilitarian solutions trace out the entire weakly efficient frontier,
moving in the direction of increasing payoff to player 1.
Thus, when people want to use interpersonal comparisons of utility
in bargaining, there are generally two questions that must be answered:
Which of the many decision-theoretically equivalent utility scales for the
players should be considered interpersonally comparable? Should the
comparisons be used in the equal-gains or greatest-good sense? How-
ever, for any essential two-person bargaining problem, there exists an
answer to the first question that will make the second question unnec-
essary. That is, for any essential (F,v), there exists a vector A = (X1,X2)
such that A > (0,0) and the A-egalitarian solution of (F,v) is also a A-
utilitarian solution of (F,v). Numbers Al  and A2 that satisfy this property
are called natural scale factors for (F,v). The allocation in F that is both

--- Sayfa 401 ---
8.3 Interpersonal Comparisons 383
X-egalitarian and X-utilitarian in terms of these natural scale factors is
the Nash bargaining solution. This result shows that the Nash bargain-
ing solution can be viewed as a natural synthesis of the equal-gains and
greatest-good principles.
THEOREM 8.2. Let (F, v) be an essential two-person bargaining problem,
and let x be an allocation vector such that x E F and x v. Then x is the Nash
bargaining solution for (F, v) if and only if there exist strictly positive numbers
X1  and X2 such that
— Xivi  = X2x2 — X2v2  and
X,x, + X2x2  = max 	 v
(X 1,1
k2Y2)•
yEF
Proof. Let H(x,v) denote the hyperbola
H(x,v) = {y E R2 I(y, — vi)(Y2 — v2) = (x1  — vi)(x2  — v2)}.
The allocation x is the Nash bargaining solution of (F,v) iff the hyper-
bola H(x,v) is tangent to F at x. But, the slope of the hyperbola H(x,v)
at x is —(x2  — v2)/(x1  — vi), so H(x,v) is tangent at x to the line
{y E R2IX1y1
X2Y2 =
X2x2}
for any two positive numbers X1  and A2 such that
(8.3)
Xi(x, — v1) = X2(x2  — v2).
Thus, x is the Nash bargaining solution of (F,v) iff F is tangent at x to
a line of the form {y E R21 + X2y2  = X,x, + X2x2}, for some (X1,X2)
satisfying (8.3). I
For a simple example, let v = (0,0), and let
F = 1(y02)10 5- yi < 30, 0 < y2  (30 — you2}.
(F,v) may be interpreted as representing a situation in which the players
can divide $30 in any way on which they agree, or get $0 each if they
cannot agree, and player 1 is risk neutral (has linear utility for money),
but player 2 is risk averse, with a utility scale that is proportional to the
square root of the monetary value of his gains. To find the Nash
bargaining solution, notice that

--- Sayfa 402 ---
384 8 • Bargaining in Two-Person Games
d
,Yil5u
y 01/2)  = (30
y1)1/2
2(30  y1 y 1/2

0 = (c-/37
implies that yi  = 20. So the Nash bargaining solution is the utility
allocation (20,101/2) = (20,3.162), which corresponds to a monetary
allocation of $20 for player 1 and only $10 for the risk-averse player 2.
Thus, the risk-averse player is under some disadvantage, according to
the Nash bargaining solution. (For generalizations of this result, see
Roth, 1979.)
Natural scale factors for this problem are X I  = 1 and X2  = 401/2  =
6.325. If we let player 2's utility for a monetary gain of K dollars be
6.325K'12  instead of K112  (a decision-theoretically irrelevant change),
while player l's utility is still measured in the same units as money, then
the representation of this bargaining problem becomes (G,(0,0)), where
G = {(y02)10 5- Yi
30, 0 5- y2  6.325(30 — yo1/2}.
In this representation, the Nash bargaining solution (20,20), which still
corresponds to a monetary allocation of $20 for player 1 and $10 for
player 2, is both the egalitarian and utilitarian solution.
8.4 Transferable Utility
Transferable utility is an important assumption which can guarantee
that the given scale factors in a game will also be the natural scale factors
for the Nash bargaining solution.
Given any strategic-form game r = (N,(C)i,,,(u,),(,), to say that r is
a game with transferable utility is to say that, in addition to the strategy
options listed in Ci, each player i has the option to give any amount of
money to any other player, or even to simply destroy money, and each
unit of net monetary outflow or loss decreases i's utility payoff by one
unit. That is, saying that a situation can be represented by the game r
with transferable utility is equivalent to saying that it can be represented
by the game
=
where, for each i,
= Ci  x le and

--- Sayfa 403 ---
8.5 • Rational Threats 385
=
+ E (xi(i) - xio) -
J5'
Here oc, = (xj(k))"; for any k 0 j, xj(k) represents the quantity of money
given by player j to player k; and xj(j) denotes the amount of money
destroyed by j but not given to any other player. The linear dependence
of i2, on the transfers oc, expresses an implicit assumption of risk neu-
trality, which is always assumed when we say that there is transferable
utility in a game. (So the example in the preceding section is not a game
with transferable utility.)
If (F ,v) is a two-person bargaining problem derived from a game with
transferable utility, then the feasible set F must be of the form
(8.4)
F= fy E R2 iYi + Y2
v12},
for some number v12  that represents the maximum transferable wealth
that the players can jointly achieve. If F is derived under the assumption
that the players' strategies can be regulated by binding contracts, then
we can let
(8.5)
v12 = max (u1(11) + u2(11))•
E A(C)
Thus, when there is transferable utility, a two-person bargaining prob-
lem can be fully characterized by three numbers: v1, the disagreement
payoff to player 1; v2, the disagreement payoff to player 2; and v12, the
total transferable wealth available to the players if they cooperate. To
satisfy the conditions of Theorem 8.2 when (8.4) is satisfied, we must
have X1  = X2, or else max,EF( XIY1  + X2y2) would be positive infinity. So
the conditions for 4(F,v) from Theorem 8.2 become
41(F,v) — vi  = 42(F,v) — v2  and (1)1(F,v) + 42(F,v) = v12.
Solving these equations, we get the following general formulas for the
Nash bargaining solution of a game with transferable utility:
(8.6)
(1)1(F, v) = VI2
2
VI
V2
4:1)2(F, V) = V12 + V
2
2
VI
8.5 Rational Threats
Notice (in equation 8.6, for example) that the payoff to player 1 in the
Nash bargaining solution increases as the disagreement payoff to player

--- Sayfa 404 ---
386 8 • Bargaining in Two-Person Games
2 decreases. That is, a possibility of hurting player 2 in the event of
disagreement may actually help player 1 if a cooperative agreement is
reached. So the prospect of reaching a cooperative agreement, which
will depend on a disagreement point, may give players an incentive to
behave more antagonistically before the agreement is determined, as
each player tries to create a more favorable disagreement point. This
chilling effect may be formalized by Nash's (1953) theory of rational
threats.
To present this theory, we let F = ({1,2}, C1, C2, u1, u2) be any finite
game in strategic form, and let F be the feasible set derived from F
either by (8.1) (in the case with binding contracts but without nontrans-
ferable utility), or by (8.4) and (8.5) (in the case with binding contracts
and transferable utility). Suppose that, before entering into the process
of arbitration or negotiation with the other player, each player i must
choose a threat T, that is a randomized strategy in A(Ci). Suppose also
that, if the players failed to reach a cooperative agreement, then each
player would be committed independently to carry out the threat that
he has chosen. Then, once the threats (T1,T2) are chosen, the disagree-
ment point in the two-person bargaining problem should be (u, (T,,T2),
u2(T,,T2)). Let w,(T1,T2) denote the payoff that player i gets in the Nash
bargaining solution with this disagreement point, that is,
471,72) = (1),(F, (u1(T1,T2), u2(T1,T2)))•
Suppose now that the players expect that they will ultimately reach a
cooperative agreement that will depend on the disagreement point ac-
cording to the Nash bargaining solution. Then the players should not
be concerned about carrying out their threats but should instead eval-
uate their threats only in terms of their impact on the final cooperative
agreement. So each player i should want to choose his threat T, so as to
maximize w,(T,,T2), given the other player's expected threat. Thus, we
say that (71,T2) form a pair of rational threats iff
w1(TI,T2) > w1(cr1,T2), Val  E A(C1), and
w2(T1,T2) > w2(71,0.2), Vcr2 E A(C2).
That is, rational threats form an equilibrium of the following threat game
F* = ({1,2}, 0(C1), 0(C2), w1, w2).
Existence of rational threats can be proved by an argument using the
Kakutani fixed-point theorem.

--- Sayfa 405 ---
8.5 • Rational Threats 387
Figure 8.1 shows how a typical feasible set F can be partitioned by
rays or half-lines, such that, for each point z in F, the Nash bargaining
solution of (F,z) is the upper endpoint of the ray that goes through z.
By Theorem 8.2, the slope of each of these rays is equal in magnitude
but opposite in sign to the slope of a tangent line to F at the upper
endpoint of the line segment. In the threat game, player 1 wants to
choose his threat T1  so as to put the disagreement point (u1(T1,T2),
u2(T1,T2)) on the lowest and rightmost possible ray in Figure 8.1, whereas
player 2 wants to choose her threat T2 so as to put the disagreement
point on the highest and leftmost possible ray.
When there is transferable utility, the analysis of the threat game
becomes simpler. The efficient frontier of F becomes a line of slope —1,
so the rays described above become parallel lines of slope 1. By (8.6),
the payoffs in the threat game are
wi(Ti,T2)
W2(T ,T2)
V12
V12
+ u1(T1,T2) — u2(T1,T2)
2
+ u2(T1,T2) — u1(T1,T2)
2
where v12  is as defined in equation (8.5). Because v12  is a constant,
maximizing w ,(T,,T2) is equivalent to maximizing u1(T1,T2) — u2(T1,T2),
and maximizing w2(T1,T2) is equivalent to maximizing u2(T1,T2) —
u1(T1,T2). Thus, when is a game with transferable utility, T1 and T2 are
rational threats for players 1 and 2, respectively, iff (T1,T2) is an equilib-
rium of the two-person zero-sum game
F** = ({1,2}, 0(C1), A(C2), ul — u2, u2 — u1).
U2
U1
Figure 8.1

--- Sayfa 406 ---
388 8 • Bargaining in Two-Person Games
We may call F** the difference game derived from F, because the payoff
to each player in r** is the difference between his own payoff and the
other player's payoff in F.
In this chapter, we have considered three different ways to determine
a disagreement point for any given two-person strategic-form game r:
by an equilibrium of r, by the minimax values, and by rational threats.
To compare these in the context of an example, let r be the strategic-
form game shown in Table 8.1, with transferable utility. The maximum
total payoff achievable in this game is v12  = 10.
This game has a unique noncooperative equilibrium at (61,62). If we
take the payoff at this equilibrium to be the disagreement point, we get
v = (0,10), so the Nash bargaining solution is 4(F,v) = (0,10).
Suppose next that we determine the disagreement point by minimax
values. The minimax value for player 1 is v1  = 0, which is achieved
when player 2 chooses an offensive threat 62  and player 1 chooses a
defensive response of b,. The minimax value for player 2 is v2  = 1,
which is achieved when player 2 chooses b2  as an optimal defensive
strategy while player 1 chooses a, as an optimal offensive threat against
b2. Then, with disagreement point (0,1), the Nash bargaining solution
is (1)(F,v) = (4.5,5.5).
In the threat game F* derived from F, the payoffs (w1,w2) to all
combinations of pure strategies are as shown in Table 8.2. The unique
Table 8.1 A game in strategic form, with transferable utility
C2
C1
a2
b2
a,
10,0
—5,1
b,
0,-5
0,10
Table 8.2 The threat game derived from the game in Table 8.1
C2
C,
a2
b2
10,0
2,8
bl
7.5,2.5
0,10

--- Sayfa 407 ---
8.5 • Rational Threats 389
equilibrium of this threat game is (a,,b2), which leads to the disagree-
ment point v = (-5,1) (read from Table 8.1), so the Nash bargaining
solution with rational threats is 4)(F,v) = (2,8) (read from Table 8.2).
Each of these three theories of threats and disagreement suggested
that player 2 would choose b2  in any disagreement, because a2  is dom-
inated by b2  both with respect to 2's defensive objective of maximizing
u2  and with respect to 2's offensive objective criterion of minimizing u,.
The differences between the three theories arise in their specifications
of player l's disagreement behavior. In the noncooperative-equilibrium
theory of disagreement points, it is assumed that player l's behavior in
the event of disagreement would be determined by his purely defensive
objective of maximizing /41; so he would choose b, and let player 2 get
her maximum possible payoff. In the minimax theory, player 1 is sup-
posed to be able to choose two threats: an offensive threat (a,) for
determining v2  and a defensive threat (b1) for determining v1. In the
rational-threats theory, player 1 must choose a single threat that must
serve both offensive and defensive purposes simultaneously, so he
chooses al  because it maximizes an objective ((10 + u, — u2)/2, or simply
u, — u2) that is a synthesis of his offensive and defensive criteria.
Thus, the equilibrium theory of disagreement is appropriate in situ-
ations where the players could not commit themselves to any planned
strategies in the event of disagreement, until a disagreement actually
occurs. The rational-threats theory is appropriate in situations where
each player can, before the negotiation or arbitration process (when this
process is expected to have virtually no chance of leading to a disagree-
ment), commit himself to a single planned strategy that he would carry
out in the event of disagreement, no matter whose final rejection may
have caused the disagreement. The minimax-values theory is appropri-
ate in situations where each player can, before the negotiation or arbi-
tration process, commit himself to two planned strategies, one defensive
and one offensive, that he would carry out in the event of disagreement,
depending on how the disagreement was caused. To interpret these
offensive and defensive threats, let us suppose that a player would
implement his planned defensive strategy if the final disagreement oc-
curred after he himself rejected the last offer in the negotiation or
arbitration process (so the disagreement would be, in a sense, his fault);
but he would implement his offensive strategy if final disagreement
occurred after the last offer was rejected by the other player.

--- Sayfa 408 ---
390 8 • Bargaining in Two-Person Games
8.6 Other Bargaining Solutions
The symmetry axiom was used in the proof of Theorem 8.1 only to
show that, when E = {z E R21z, + z2  2}, the solution of the two-
person bargaining problem (E,(0,0)) must be (1,1). Let us now drop the
symmetry axiom and suppose instead that the solution of (E,(0,0)) is
some efficient point (a,(3) such that a > 0 and 13 > 0. Then an argument
similar to the proof of Theorem 8.1 can be used to show that the solution
to any essential two-person bargaining problem must be the point that
maximizes the following generalized Nash product over all individually
rational points x in F:
(8.7)
(x, — vi)a(x2  — v2)p.
(To modify the proof, let X, = a/(x, — 1/1), X2 = 13/(X2 - v2), let each
-y, = — Xiv„ and use the fact that the curve {z1(z,)a(z2)13  = a"13'31 in R2
has slope —1 at the point (a,(3).)
Thus, we say that a bargaining solution function ii  is a nonsymmetric
Nash bargaining solution iff there exist positive numbers a and 13 such
that, for any two-person bargaining problem (F,v), ,(F,v) is a point that
is individually rational and strongly efficient in F and that maximizes
the generalized Nash product (8.7) over all such points. To see how
such nonsymmetric Nash bargaining solutions might be used in practice,
suppose that player 1 is the head of a family of 4 and player 2 is a
single individual, and an arbitrator feels that the appropriate solution
to a simple Divide the Dollars game with transferable utility would be
to give 4/5 of the available money to player 1 and '/5 to player 2 (to
equalize their per capita income). If this arbitrator wants to satisfy all
the Nash axioms other than symmetry, then he should use the nonsym-
metric Nash bargaining solution with a/I3 = 4 (see Kalai, 1977).
Several other bargaining solution concepts have been proposed, using
other systems of axioms (see Roth, 1979). To introduce some of these,
we need to restrict our attention to a somewhat narrower class of two-
person bargaining problems. Let us say that a two-person bargaining
problem (F,v), as defined in Section 8.2, is regular iff F is essential (that
is, fy E F ly > 0 0) and, for any vector y in F,
if y, > v,, then 3z E F such that v,
z, < y, and z2  > y2,
if y2  > v2, then 3I E F such that v2  z
2  < y2  and z, > y,.

--- Sayfa 409 ---
8.6 . Other Bargaining Solutions 391
That is, in a regular problem, there is a feasible allocation that is strictly
better than the disagreement point for each player; and whenever a
player is getting strictly more than his disagreement payoff, there is
something that he could do that would reduce his own expected payoff
and strictly increase the other player's expected payoff. We say that a
two-person bargaining problem (F,v) itself is individually rational iff the
feasible set F only includes individually rational allocations, that is,
F
{y E R2 ly
v}.
For any regular two-person bargaining problem (F,v), let mz(F,v) de-
note the maximum payoff that player i can get in any feasible individ-
ually rational allocation, so
mi(F,v) = max yz.
yEF,yav
For any number z1  such that v, < z1
m1(F,v), let h2(z1,F) denote the
highest payoff that player 2 can get in a feasible allocation when player
1 gets z,. That is,
h2(z1,F) = max {y2l  (z1,y2) E
Similarly, let h1(z2,F) be the highest payoff that player 1 can get in F
when 2 gets z2, for any z2  such that v2  < z2  m2(F,v).
Kalai and Smorodinsky (1975) suggested a kind of monotonicity ax-
iom, as an alternative to the controversial independence of irrelevant
alternatives axiom. They suggested that, if the range of individually
rational payoffs that player 1 can get in (F,v) is the same as in (G,v)
and, for any feasible individually rational payoff to player 1, the best
that player 2 could get is not less in (F,v) than in (G,v), then player 2
should not do worse in (F,v) than in (G,v). Formally, this axiom may be
stated as follows.
AXIOM 8.6
(INDIVIDUAL MONOTONICITY). If m1(G,v) =
m1(F,v) and h2(zi,G) s h2(zi,F) for every z1  such that v1  5- z1
m1(F,v),
then 4i2(G,v)
02(F,v). Similarly, if m2(G,v) = m2(F,v) and h1(z2,G)
hi(z2,F) for every z2  such that v2 5_ z2
m2(F,v), then
1(G, v)
(1)1(F,v).
Kalai and Smorodinsky showed that there is a unique bargaining
solution for regular two-person bargaining problems that satisfies Ax-
ioms 8.1, 8.3, 8.5, and 8.6 (strong efficiency, scale covariance, symmetry,

--- Sayfa 410 ---
392 8 • Bargaining in Two-Person Games
and individual monotonicity). For any regular bargaining problem (F,v),
this Kalai-Smorodinsky solution is the unique efficient point x in F such
that
X2 - V2  = m2(F,v)  — v2
xl  — v1
m1(F,v) — vi
Given any sequence of two-person bargaining problems (F(k),v(k))/7= 1,
we can write
(F(k),v(k)) = (F,v) iff v = limk_,,, v(k) in R2  and F is
the set of limits in R2  of all convergent sequences (y(k))17- 1 such that
y(k) E F(k) for every k. (This topology for closed sets is called Hausdorff
convergence.) We say that a bargaining solution function (I) is continuous
iff, for any sequence of two-person bargaining problems (F(k),v(k))/7_ 1,
if lim (F(k),v(k)) =
then lim 4(F(k),v(k)) = 41)(F,T)).
For any two bargaining problems (F,v) and (G,w) and any number a
between 0 and 1, we write
otF + (1 — a)G = {ay + (1 — a)zly E F, z E G}, and
a(F,v) + (1 — a)(G,w) = (aF + (1 — a)G, ay + (1 — a)z).
To interpret this two-person bargaining problem, suppose that the bar-
gaining problem that players 1 and 2 will face tomorrow depends on
whether it will rain tonight or not. If it rains, which will occur with
probability a, then tomorrow's bargaining problem will be (F,v), oth-
erwise it will be (G,w). If players 1 and 2 bargain today over conditional
plans, they can achieve any expected payoff of the form ay + (1 — a)z,
where y E F and z E G, by agreeing to the plan "implement y if it rains
and z if it does not rain." Thus, if the players bargain over plans today,
their problem is a(F,v) + (1 — a)(G,w). In such circumstances, they will
both want to bargain today over plans, rather than wait and bargain
tomorrow, if their bargaining solution function (I) is concave, in the sense
that
cl)(a(F,v) + (1 — a)(G,w))
ai:1)(F,v) + (1 — a)4(G,w)
for any (F,v) and (G,w) and any a in [0,1].

--- Sayfa 411 ---
8.6 Other Bargaining Solutions 393
Concave solution functions include X-egalitarian and X-utilitarian so-
lutions discussed in the preceding section (see Myerson, 1981b). How-
ever, Perles and Maschler (1981) have proved that there is a solution
function for regular individually rational two-person bargaining prob-
lems that is concave, continuous, and satisfies the axioms of strong
efficiency, scale covariance, and symmetry. If h,(•,F) and h2(•,F) are
differentiable functions, then this Perles-Maschler solution selects the
unique efficient point x in F such that
1v1  , ,_14(z,,F))112dz, =
x2
—h1(z2,F))112dz2.
v2

Raiffa (see Luce and Raiffa, 1957, pages 136-137) discussed bargain-
ing solution concepts that are closely related to the Kalai-Smorodinsky
solution. Given any regular two-person bargaining problem (F,v), we
inductively define a sequence of allocation vectors (w(k))k_,, where each
w(k) = (w,(k),w2(k)) E R2, such that w(1) = v and, for every positive
integer k,
w(k + 1) = 1/2(111(w2(k),F), w2(k)) + 1/261(k), h2(wi(k),F))•
It can be shown that this sequence is nondecreasing componentwise and
converges to some w* that is an efficient allocation vector in F. This
limit w* is Raiffa's sequential bargaining solution of (F,v).
Raiffa's sequential bargaining solution may be justified along the lines
of Nash's program, by analyzing a specific model of the bargaining
process in which the players can make offers in up to k rounds, where
k is some (large) number. At each round, a player is selected at random
to make an offer, which can be any point in F. After getting this offer,
the other player can either accept or reject it. The first offer that is
accepted is the payoff allocation that the players get in the game. If no
offer is accepted at any of the k rounds, then the players get the
disagreement payoff allocation v. At each round, each player has prob-
ability 1/2 of being the one to make an offer, independently of the past
history of the game.
This game has a unique subgame-perfect equilibrium in which the
first-round offer is accepted, and the expected payoff to each player i
is w,(k + 1). In this equilibrium, at the lth round from the end, for any
l in {1,2, . . . ,k}, each player i would accept any offer that gives him at
least wg) (because that would be his expected payoff in the subgame
consisting of the last 1 — 1 rounds if no offer were accepted before),

--- Sayfa 412 ---
394 8 • Bargaining in Two-Person Games
and so player 1 would make the offer (hi(w2(/),F), w2(/)), and player 2
would make the offer (wi(l), h2(w,(/),F)). Thus, Raiffa's sequential bar-
gaining solution is the limit of the expected outcome of this game in
equilibrium, as the number of possible offers goes to infinity.
8.7 An Alternating-Offer Bargaining Game
Stahl (1972) and Rubinstein (1982) considered a somewhat different
model of bargaining, in which the players alternate making offers until
one is accepted. Rubinstein considered a general model in which there
is no finite bound on the number of offers that may be made but in
which each player has some cost of time, so his payoff depends on both
the offer accepted and the number of the round in which this acceptance
took place. Rubinstein elegantly characterized the subgame-perfect
equilibria of these alternating-offer bargaining games for a wide class
of cost-of-time formulas and showed that the subgame-perfect equilib-
rium is unique when each player's cost of time is given by some discount
factor 8. Binmore (see Binmore and Dasgupta, 1987, chap. 4) showed
that, with the 8-discounting cost-of-time formula, if the per-round dis-
count factor 8 is close to 1, then the outcome of the unique subgame-
perfect equilibrium is close to the Nash bargaining solution.
In this section, we present a special case of these results. However,
instead of assuming discounting or making some other assumptions
about players' trade-offs between prizes received at different points in
time, we assume here that the cost of delay in bargaining is derived
from an exogenous positive probability, after each round, that the bar-
gaining process may permanently terminate in disagreement if no offer
has yet been accepted.
Let (F,v) be any regular two-person bargaining problem, and let p1
and p2  be numbers such that 0 < p1  < 1 and 0 < p2  < 1. In our
alternating-offer bargaining game, player 1 makes an offer in every
odd-numbered round, and player 2 makes an offer in every even-
numbered round, beginning in round 1 and continuing until some offer
is accepted or the game ends in disagreement. At each round, after one
player makes the offer, the other player can either accept or reject. At
any round when player 1 makes the offer and player 2 rejects it, there
is a probability p1  that the bargaining will then end in a state of dis-
agreement in which player 2 will get payoff v2  and player 1 will get
some payoff w, such that w1  < m1(F). Similarly, in any round when

--- Sayfa 413 ---
8.7 • An Alternating-Offer Game 395
player 2 makes the offer and player 1 rejects it, there is a probability p2
that the bargaining will then end in a disagreement in which player 1
will get payoff v,, and player 2 will get some payoff w2  such that w2
m2(F). An offer can be any payoff allocation in the feasible set F. When
an offer is accepted, the game ends in agreement and the players get
the payoffs specified in the accepted offer. (Notice that the players get
payoffs at only one round in this game, when either an offer is accepted
or bargaining ends in disagreement.)
THEOREM 8 . 3 . The above alternating-offer game has a unique subgame-
perfect equilibrium in which player 1 plans to always offer some allocation x,
player 2 plans to always offer some allocation 37, player 1 would accept any offer
that gives him at least y,, and player 2 would accept any offer that would give
her at least Fc2. Thus, in equilibrium, the game will end in an agreement on Fc at
round 1. These vectors Fc and -5P are strongly efficient allocations in F and satisfy
yl = (1  — p2)(x1 — v1) + v1  and x2 = (1
P1)02 - v2) + v2.
Proof. Notice first that all subgames that begin at an odd round
(player 1 offers first) must have the same set of subgame-perfect equi-
libria as the original game. Similarly, all subgames that begin at an even
round (player 2 offers first) must have the same set of subgame-perfect
equilibria. Let x1  be the supremum and let x, be the infimum of the set
of all possible expected payoffs that player 1 could get in a subgame-
perfect equilibrium of any subgame in which player 1 offers first. Sim-
ilarly, let y2  be the supremum and let j32 be the infimum of the set of all
possible expected payoffs that player 2 could get in a subgame-perfect
equilibrium of any subgame in which player 2 offers first.
In any subgame-perfect equilibrium of this game, player 2 would
always accept any offer giving her more than (1 — p1)y2  + piv2  at an
odd-numbered round, because this payoff is the best that she could
possibly expect when she rejects an offer from player 1. Thus, player
1 cannot do worse in any subgame-perfect equilibrium where he offers
first than h,((1 — PI)Y2 + p,v2, F). Furthermore, for any positive number
E, there is a subgame-perfect equilibrium in which player 2 would expect
to get within e of her best payoff y2  in any subgame beginning at round
2; so she could guarantee herself at least (1 — Pi)(Y2
e) + piv2  at
round 1. Player 1 would expect not more than h1((1
P1)(Y2
r)
p,v2, F) in this equilibrium. (Because 1/)
m,(F) for each i, the expected

--- Sayfa 414 ---
396 8 • Bargaining in Two-Person Games
utility allocation in any equilibrium cannot be above the efficient frontier
of the convex set F.) Thus, the infimum of player l's expected payoffs
over all subgame-perfect equilibria when he offers first is
(8.8)
x, = h1((1 — 102
P1V2, F).
A similar argument, using the fact that player 1 would surely accept
any offer giving him more than (1 — p2)x1  + p2v1  at any even-numbered
round, can be used to show that
(8.9)
92 = h2((1 - p2)x1 + p2v1, F)•
On the other hand, player 2 would never accept any offer giving her
less than (1 — p1)92  + p1v2  at an odd-numbered round, because this
payoff is the least she could expect to get by rejecting the current offer
in a subgame-perfect equilibrium; so player 1 could never do better
than h1((1 — p1)92  + p1v2, F). Furthermore, for any positive e, there
exists a subgame-perfect equilibrium in which player 2 would expect to
get within e of 92  in any subgame beginning at round 2, so she would
accept any offer giving her (1 — p1)(92  + e) + p1v2  at round 1; and
player 1 would get at least h1((1 — P1)(92 + 6) + p1v2, F) in this equilib-
rium. So the supremum of all payoffs that player 1 could get in an
equilibrium when he moves first is
(8.10)
x1  = h1((1
p1)92 + p1v2, F).
A similar argument, using the fact that player 1 would never accept any
offer giving him less than (1 — p2)x1  + p2v1  at any even-numbered
round, can be used to show that
(8.11)
y2  = h2((1 — p2)5c1  + p2v1, F).
Let us complete the definition of vectors x, 52, y, and 9 in R2  by letting
x2  = h2(x1,F), x2 = h2(RI,F), y, = h1(y2,F), and 91 = hi(92,F),
so these vectors are all on the efficient frontier of F. Regularity and
(8.8)—(8.11) then imply that
(8.12)
= (1  — P 0)12 + p1v2,
(8.13)
91 = (1  — P2)0c1 + p2v1,
(8.14)
x2  = (1 - p1)92 + P1v2,
(8.15)
Yi = ( 1  — POR + p2v1•

--- Sayfa 415 ---
8.7 An Alternating-Offer Game 397
To verify these equations, notice that regularity implies that any weakly
efficient individually rational vector in F is also strongly efficient. This
fact in turn implies that, for any allocation z that is individually rational
and efficient in F, if 2,
v, and z2  = h2(21,F), then 2, = z1; and if 22
v2  and z1  = h1(I2,F), then 22  = z2.
There is a unique pair of vectors Fc and 5 such that Fc and 5 are
individually rational and efficient in F, and
yl = (1 — p2)(5c1  — v1) + v1  and x2 = (1 - p,)(52  — v2) + v2.
To show this, notice that these conditions are equivalent to
xl — Si = P2071 -
P1(3-C2 - v2)
/2 	x2- 1
p,
As we increase RI  from v1  to mi(F,v), x2  decreases from m2(F,v) to v2, so
the right-hand side of (8.17) decreases monotonically to O. On the other
hand, as we increase RI  from v1  to m1(F,v), the right-hand side of (8.16)
increases monotonically from 0. Furthermore, given that Fc and 5 are on
the efficient frontier of the convex set F, when we increase both Fc, and
— 5,, the difference 52  — x2 must increase monotonically as well and
must be 0 when RI  — 5, is 0. So when we require that x and 5 be efficient
in F and satisfy (8.16), the left-hand side of (8.17) increases monotoni-
cally from 0 as RI  increases from v1  to m1(F,v). Thus, using continuity
of these conditions, we can guarantee the existence and uniqueness of
the solutions x and 5 on the individually rational efficient frontier of F.
Thus, conditions (8.12) and (8.15) imply that x = Fc and y = 5. Con-
ditions (8.13) and (8.14) similarly imply that x = x and S,  = 5. Thus, in
every subgame-perfect equilibrium, player 1 must get expected payoff
RI  in all subgames that begin with player 1 making the offer, and player
2 must get expected payoff 332 in all subgames that begin with player 2
making the offer. By the way that ac and 5 are constructed, it is straight-
forward to check that the strategies described in Theorem 8.3 form the
only subgame-perfect equilibrium with this property. (CHECK: In any
equilibrium where 2 expected to get 3)-2 in the subgame starting in the
second round, if 1 offered 2 more than x2, then she would accept but
he would get less than R I  himself, whereas if he offered her less than
x2, then she would reject him and he would expect at best (1 p1)51
ply', which is strictly less than RI.) I
(8.16)
(8.17)

--- Sayfa 416 ---
398 8 • Bargaining in Two-Person Games
In this game, the parameter p, is a measure of player i's power of
commitment, because it is the probability that any offer he makes may, if
rejected, be final. The analysis of this alternating-offer bargaining game
suggests that bargainers can be expected to reach an agreement in which
their relative shares depend crucially on their relative powers of com-
mitment even if the absolute level of each player's power of
commitment p, is quite low. To see how this conclusion would follow
from Theorem 8.3, let a, 13, and e be positive numbers, and suppose
that
1 - p, = (1 — 0" and 1 — P2 = (1
E)a.
So if E is small, then p, - ea and p2  = ell The conditions in Theorem
8.3 then imply that
(RI
vir(R2 — v2)13  = (RI — vl)'  U2 — v2)13(1
ErP
= (y-1
VI)a(5'2
V2)p.
Thus, Fc and y are two intersections of the efficient frontier of F with
one isoquant of the generalized Nash product (8.7), so the nonsymme-
tric Nash bargaining solution with parameters a and (3 must be between
X and 5i. Furthermore, if we let r go to 0, holding a and 13 fixed, then
p, and p2  go to 0, so (by 8.16 and 8.17) the differences x, — y, and
5-C2 must go to 0. Thus, as E goes to 0, holding a and 13 fixed, the outcome
of the unique subgame-perfect equilibrium of this alternating-offer bar-
gaining game converges to the nonsymmetric Nash bargaining solution
with parameters a and 0, where a/r3 = p1/p2.
For example, in a two-person bargaining problem with transferable
utility, if p, = .004 and p2  = .001, then the unique subgame-perfect
equilibrium of this alternating-offer bargaining game will lead to an
outcome in which player 1 will get approximately 4/5 of the transferable
gains above the disagreement outcome (more accurately, 80.064% when
1 offers first, or 79.984% in a subgame when 2 offers first), and player
2 will only get about 1/5.
This analysis suggests that a good bargainer should try to create the
perception that there is a relatively high probability that bargaining may
terminate in disagreement whenever one of his offers is rejected,
whereas there is a relatively low probability that bargaining may ter-
minate in disagreement when he rejects someone else's offer. Notice,
however, that at no time in this subgame-perfect equilibrium does either

--- Sayfa 417 ---
8.8 • Alternating Offers with Incomplete Information 399
player actually want to terminate the bargaining process in disagreement
after his offer is rejected; he is always better off waiting to receive the
new offer from the other player. Thus, in this model, increasing pz
means encouraging the belief that player i might irrationally walk out
and terminate the bargaining process when his latest offer is rejected.
In practical terms, a good bargainer may try to raise his own apparent
power of commitment by making offers firmly, with an appearance of
finality, while he may try to lower the other player's power of commit-
ment by making rejections politely and amicably.
8.8 An Alternating-Offer Game with Incomplete Information
In the preceding section, it was assumed to be common knowledge that
the players are rational utility maximizers with disagreement payoffs v,
and v2. This assumption implies that player 1 could never convince
anyone that there are some offers that would be impossible for him to
accept even though they would be better for him than v. However, in
real bargaining, people often try to convince each other that they could
never accept any offer outside of some range. To understand the im-
portance of such tactics, we must drop the assumption of complete
information.
Given a regular two-person bargaining problem (F,v), let us again
consider the alternating-offer bargaining game that we analyzed in the
preceding section, but let us introduce a second possible type for player
1. Let r be any efficient allocation vector in F such that r, > v, and r2  >
v2, and suppose that there is some reason to suspect that player 1 might
have some kind of irrational commitment that compels him to insist on
this allocation r. To be specific, suppose that there is a small but strictly
positive probability q that player 1 might have been replaced (before
the game began) by a robot or agent who mechanically implements the
following r-insistent strategy for player i: at odd rounds he always offers
r, and at even rounds he accepts an offer y if and only if y,
r,. Also,
to simplify our analysis, suppose that disagreement payoffs are 0 in the
alternating-offer game,. so
0 = v, = v2  = w, = w2.
THEOREM 8.4. In any equilibrium of the alternating-offer game with
incomplete information, as described above, there exists some number J(F, v, r, q),

--- Sayfa 418 ---
400 8 • Bargaining in Two-Person Games
(which does not depend on p, or p2) such that, if player 1 follows the r-insistent
strategy, then player 2 is sure to offer r or accept r within the first J(F,v,r,q)
rounds. Thus, the expected payoff to player 1 in equilibrium cannot be less than
r1(1 — max{ p1,p2})-). If p1 and p2  are small, then this lower bound on
l's expected equilibrium payoff is close to r1.
Proof Let 8 = (1 — p1)(1 - p2). Because 0 < r2  < m2(F,v) and p1, p2,
and q are all positive, we can choose positive integers K and I large
enough so that
K
0.5r2
8 < 	and
m2 (F ,v)
(1
0.5r2   )1
m2(F,v) < q.

Now consider player 2's position at any round where player 1 has
offered r and has always previously behaved according to the r-insistent
strategy, and player 2 is following some strategy c2  that has positive
probability in an equilibrium of the alternating-offer game. Notice that
this event has positive probability, because q > 0, so c2  must be sequen-
tially rational for player 2 given the information available to her at this
round. (Recall Theorem 4.4.) Suppose that, under c2, player 2 plans to
withstand the r-insistent strategy, by neither accepting r nor making an
offer in which player 1 gets at least r1, during the next 2K rounds. Let
Tr denote the probability that player 1 (by rational choice according to
his equilibrium strategy, or as a robot) will not observably deviate from
the r-insistent strategy during the next 2K rounds if the bargaining
game does not end in disagreement during this period. Player 2 can
get payoff r2  by accepting r now, but if she rejects and avoids r for the
next 2K rounds then her expected payoff cannot be more than
m2(F,v)(1 — Tr(1 — 8K)),
because there is a probability of at least Tr(1 — 8K) that bargaining will
end in disagreement during the next 2K rounds. Thus, sequential ra-
tionality of 2's strategy at this round implies that
0.5r2
r2  m2(F,v)
))
( 1 — Tr (1
m2 (P ,v)
SO

--- Sayfa 419 ---
8.8 • Alternating Offers with Incomplete Information 401
Tr -. 1
0.5r2
m2(F, v)
By repeating this argument I times, assuming that player 2 would con-
tinue to withstand l's r-insistent strategy throughout the first 2KI
rounds, the probability that 1 will not deviate from the r-insistent strat-
egy during the first 2KI rounds, if the bargaining does not end in
disagreement during this period, could not be greater than (1 —
0.5r2/m2(F,v))1. However, this probability is less than q, by definition of
I, so there cannot be any strategy that player 2 uses with positive prob-
ability in equilibrium under which she would withstand l's r-insistent
strategy for more than 2KI rounds.
The above argument does not prove the theorem, because K and I
depend on p, and p2, but it does prove that, in any equilibrium, there
is some finite number L such that player 2 would not withstand the r-
insistent strategy for more than L rounds. That is, as long as player 1
is always observed to follow the r-insistent strategy, then player 2 is sure
to accept r or offer something that is at least as good as r for player 1
by round L. If L were an even number, then player 2 would be willing
to accept r at round L — 1, so we can assume without loss of generality
that L is odd and player 1 offers at round L.
Now let us work backward from round L. At any even-numbered
round L + 1 — 2k, where k 1, if player 1 has not deviated from the
r-insistent strategy, then he knows that he can get at least r,(1 —
pok-ic -
1 p2)k by following the r-insistent strategy, so he will not accept
any offer from player 2 that gives him less. Similarly, player 1 will not
make his first deviation from the r-insistent strategy at any odd-num-
bered round L — 2k unless his expected payoff from doing so is at least
r1(1 — pl)*(1 - pok. Thus, if player 1 makes his first deviation from the
r-insistent strategy at round L + 1 — 2k or L — 2k, then player 2's
expected payoff when this deviation occurs cannot be more than
h2(ri8k, F).
By regularity, there exists some line that has negative slope and is
tangent to F at r. So let A and B be positive numbers such that A —
Br'  = r2  and A — By,
y2  for every y in F. Let M be a positive integer
such that M > 2A/(A — Br,) = 2A/r2.
For any positive integer k, consider player 2's position at round L —
2Mk when player 1 has never deviated from the r-insistent strategy and
has just made an offer of r to player 2. Suppose that player 2 is following

--- Sayfa 420 ---
402 8 • Bargaining in Two-Person Games
a pure strategy c2  that has positive probability in equilibrium and under
which she would withstand the r-insistent strategy, by neither accepting
r nor making an offer in which player 1 gets at least r1, in all rounds
before round L. Let E denote the probability that player 1 (either by
rational choice or as a robot) will not deviate from the r-insistent strategy
against c2  during the next 2(M — 1)k rounds at least (that is, at least
until round L — 2k) if the bargaining game does not end in disagreement
during this period. Then player 2's conditionally expected payoff cannot
be greater than
(1 — t)( A — Bri8mk) + Ow-  "k(A — Bri8k).
(In the (1 — 0-probability event that player 1 does deviate from the r-
insistent strategy before round L — 2k, he would not do so for an
expected payoff of less than r18mk, even if he deviated in the next round
(L + 1 — 2Mk); so player 2 could not expect to do better than A —
Br,8mk. In the t-probability event that player 1 will not deviate from the
r-insistent strategy before round L — 2k, there is a probability of only
8(m-1)k  that the bargaining game will not terminate in disagreement
during this period; and thereafter player 1 would not deviate for less
than rie, giving player 2 not more than A — Brie.) Thus, for continuing
with c2  (instead of accepting r at round L — 2Mk) to be optimal for
player 2 in this situation (as it must be, because this situation could
occur in the equilibrium with positive probability), we must have
A — Br1  5- ( 1 - )(A — Briamk) + t 8(m- 1)k(A — Bri8k);
SO
t  , (Br, ) (  1 — 8mk   )
— A j
1 — 8(m-1)k  j •
Using some basic calculus (including l'Hospital's rule), it can be shown
that, whenever 0 < S < 1, the right-hand side of this inequality is never
more than BriM/((M — 1)A); and this quantity is less than 1 — 1/(M —
1), because M is greater than 2A/(A — Br1). Sot < 1 — 1/(M — 1).
Applying this argument H times, with k =
can see that the probability that player 1 will not deviate from the r-
insistent strategy for more than 2MH  rounds, if player 2 neither accepts
nor offers r and the game does not end in disagreement during this
period, cannot be greater than (1 — 1/(M — 1))11. Now let H be a positive
integer large enough so that
1 ,m,m2,  . . . ,mH-1, we

--- Sayfa 421 ---
8.9 • A Discrete Alternating-Offer Game 403
1  y
< q,
M — 1
and let J(F,v,r,q) = 2MH. Given that the probability that player 1 is an
r-insistent robot is q, there cannot be any equilibrium in which player 2
would withstand the r-insistent strategy for more thanJ(F,v,r,q) rounds.
Notice that our construction of M, H, and J did not depend on the
value of 8 or pi  or p2. I
When p, and p2  are both small, Theorem 8.4 gives insights into
bargaining that contrast sharply with the insights generated by Theorem
8.3. Theorem 8.3 suggests that the ratio of the players' powers of
commitment pi /p2  may be critical to determining the relative shares of
players 1 and 2 in a cooperative agreement. However, Theorem 8.4
suggests that, if player 1 can create some doubt (in player 2's mind)
about whether he might have some irrational commitment to an allo-
cation r, then he can expect to get an agreement that is close to r or
better than r for himself, no matter what the ratio pi /p2  may be.
More generally, a comparison of Theorems 8.3 and 8.4 should lead
us to expect that other small structural perturbations (e.g., assuming
that both players have small positive probabilities of independently
being replaced by robots or agents who would irrationally insist on some
allocation) could make other large changes in the set of equilibria of
our alternating-offer game. In the next section, we consider one such
perturbation in which, when pi  and p2  are small, almost any individually
rational allocation can be achieved in equilibrium.
8.9 A Discrete Alternating-Offer Game
Let F0  be a finite subset of the feasible set F, in a regular two-person
bargaining problem (F,v). We can think of Fo  as being a very large
subset. Given any positive number e, we can say that F0  is 6-dense in F
iff, for each y in F there exists some j3 in F0  such that iy, — y,1 e for
both i = 1,2.
Suppose now that the alternating-offer bargaining game from Section
8.7 (where there was no incomplete information) is changed only by
requiring that all offers must be in the set Fo. For example, if utility is
measured in dollars, but allocations that split pennies cannot be offered,
then the players might be constrained to make their offers in the set

--- Sayfa 422 ---
404 8 • Bargaining in Two-Person Games
F0, when Fo  is the set of all vectors y = (y„y2) in F such that y, and y2
are both integer multiples of 1/100.
In addition to this assumption, let us again make the restriction that
disagreement payoffs are 0, so 0 = v1  = v2  = w1 = w2.
For each player i, let t(i) = (t1(i),t2(0) be the individually rational
allocation that is optimal for player i in F0. If there is more than one
such optimal allocation for player i, then let t(i) be the allocation that is
best for the player other than i among these allocations that are optimal
for i. That is, among the allocation vectors that are strongly efficient
within the set Fo  (when Fo  is considered to be the feasible set), t(1) is
the best allocation for player 1, and t(2) is the best allocation for player
2. Thus,
t(i) E argmax y„
yEFo,y(0,0)
and, when j i,
if z E Fo  and z, > t,(i), then z, < t,(i).
When Fo  is a large set, then t1(2) and t2(1) should be small numbers,
close to the disagreement payoff of 0.
Suppose that p1  and p2  are small enough to allow the following two
conditions to hold.
(8.18)
Vz E F0, if z2  > t2(1), then z1  < (1 — p2)t1(1).
(8.19)
Vz E F0, if z1 > t1(2), then z2  < (1 — p1)t2(2).
Given our assumption that Fo  is a finite set, there must exist strictly
positive values of p1  and p2  that do satisfy these conditions.
THEOREM 8.5. Under the above assumptions, for any allocation x in F0

such that x1  > t1(2) and x2  > t2(1), there exists a subgame-perfect equilibrium
of the alternating-offer game (with offers required to be in F0) in which player
1 offers x and player 2 accepts it at round 1.
Proof (See also van Damme, Selten, and Winter, 1990.) Consider first
the special case of x = t(1). There is a subgame-perfect equilibrium in
which player 1 would always offer t(1) and accept only an offer that
gives him t1(1) or more, and player 2 would also offer t(1) and accept

--- Sayfa 423 ---
8.9 • A Discrete Alternating-Offer Game 405
any offer that gives her t2(1) or more. We call this the 2-submissive
equilibrium.
To verify that the 2-submissive equilibrium is a subgame-perfect equi-
librium, notice that, at any round where player 2 makes the offer, player
1 expects to be able to offer t(1) and get it accepted if the play continues
until the next round. Thus, player 1 should be willing to accept an offer
from player 2 only if it gives him (1 — pow) or more. By (8.18), there
is no such allocation that would be better for player 2 than t(1). Thus,
player 2 cannot expect to do better than to offer t(1) at any even-
numbered round and to accept t(1) at any odd-numbered round. When
player 1 makes his offer, t(1) is clearly optimal for him, because it is the
best individually rational offer that can be made and player 2 is expected
to accept it, in this equilibrium.
Similarly, there is a subgame-perfect equilibrium, called the 1-submis-
sive equilibrium, in which both players would always offer t(2), which
each would always accept, but neither would accept any offer that gives
him or her less than t(2).
Now let x be any allocation in Fo  such that x1  -_ t,(2) and x2
t2(1).
Consider the following strategy for a player: as long as no one has ever
made an offer different from x, offer x and accept x when offered; but
if anyone has ever made an offer different from x, play according to
the i-submissive equilibrium, where i is the first player to have made an
offer different from x. When both players follow this strategy, the
outcome will be an agreement on x at the first round, and this pair of
strategies forms a subgame-perfect equilibrium. For example, suppose
player 1 made the first offer different from x, by offering some other
vector y in Fo. In the subgame that begins after his deviant offer, player
1 would get an expected payoff of t1(2)(1 — p1) if y2  < t2(2), and he
would get an expected payoff of yi  if y2 t
2(2). Notice, however, that
y2
t2(2) implies that y, -_ t1(2), by definition of t(2). I
The allocations that can occur in equilibrium according to this theo-
rem include all of the allocations that are strongly efficient within the
finite feasible set Fo  (in the sense that there is no other allocation in F,
that is better for one player and not worse for the other). However,
very inefficient allocations can also be equilibrium outcomes, including
any allocations in Fo  as low as (t1(2),t2(1)), which may be close to the
disagreement allocation (0,0).

--- Sayfa 424 ---
406 8 • Bargaining in Two-Person Games
Even if Fo  only included efficient allocations, there generally exist
randomized equilibria of this game in which both players get low ex-
pected payoffs. Let us add the weak assumption that t,(1) > t,(2) and
t2(2) > t1(1). Then conditions (8.18) and (8.19) imply that
(1 - p2)t1(1) > t,(2) and (1 — p1)t2(2) > t2(1).
So there exist numbers s, and s2, each between 0 and 1, such that
t2(1) = (1 — p1)(s1t2(2) + (1 — 3.0(1 — p2)t2(0),
t1(2) = (1 — p2)(s2t1(1) + (1 — s2)(1 — p1)t1(2))•
Now consider the following equilibrium. If player 1 has always offered
t(1) and player 2 has always offered t(2), then each player i always offers
t(i) at the rounds when he makes offers, and, at each round where he
receives the other player j's offer t(j) he randomizes, accepting it with
probability s, and rejecting it with probability 1 — s,. If any player i has
ever deviated from offering t(i), then the players behave as in the i-
submissive equilibrium, where player i is the first player to have made
such a deviant offer.
It can be verified that these strategies form a subgame-perfect equi-
librium. At the first round, where player 1 makes the first offer, player
l's expected payoff under this equilibrium is t1(2)/(1 — p2) and player
2's expected payoff is t2(1), so the expected payoff allocation is very
close to the worst equilibrium allocation for both players, (t,(2),t2(1)).
This equilibrium may be called a standoff equilibrium, because each player
is always making his most selfish offer, which has, at any round, only a
low probability of being accepted. Neither player i could gain by making
an offer that is less selfish than t(i), because the other player j would
then reject this offer in the expectation that i would soon concede even
more and accept t(j) in the next round. In this logic, this standoff
equilibrium is in some ways similar to the positional equilibrium of the
repeated game discussed in Section 7.4.
Under the assumptions of Theorem 8.5, virtually any individually
rational offer could be accepted in some equilibrium. This result sug-
gests that the focal-point effect may be the crucial determinant of the
outcome of the bargaining process. In his original work on the focal-
point effect, Schelling (1960) actually included a discussion of equilibria
that are very similar to those that we constructed in our proof of
Theorem 8.5. Schelling argued that, once the players focus on any one

--- Sayfa 425 ---
8.9 • A Discrete Alternating-Offer Game 407
particular allocation (whether for reasons of historical tradition, quali-
tative prominence, or apparent equity and efficiency under some cri-
terion), each player in the bargaining game may be afraid to offer
anything that makes the other player better off than in this allocation,
because the other player might interpret such a concession as an invitation
to take everything. Schelling argued, for example, that the back-and-
forth fighting in the Korean War had to end with a truce along the
relatively narrow waist of the country, because it was the one line that
either side could withdraw to without giving the other side the impres-
sion that it was willing to be pushed out of Korea entirely. International
borders, once established, are rarely renegotiated for the same reason.
If we ceded a small piece of our country, then we might give our
neighbors the impression that they could take as much as they want. So
we must hold the line at the existing border, lest we be unable to
convincingly hold a line anywhere.
Theorem 8.5 has implications about good tactics in negotiations and
bargaining that complement and contrast with the implications of Theo-
rems 8.3 and 8.4. Theorem 8.3 emphasizes the importance of devel-
oping a perceived power of commitment or potential finality of one's
offers in general. Theorem 8.4 emphasizes the importance of encour-
aging the belief that one may be irrationally committed to a specific
allocation (that is favorable to oneself ). Theorem 8.5 emphasizes the
importance of the focal-point effect in negotiating the equilibrium that
will be played. For example, the incomplete-information model of Theo-
rem 8.4 suggests that a player might try to achieve a particular allocation
by announcing, in preliminary negotiations, that he will have to insist
on this allocation, and by trying to seem fanatical or unreasonable when
making this announcement. In contrast, the discrete model of Theorem
8.5 suggests that the player might instead achieve a particular allocation
by first describing some objective criterion according to which this al-
location is in some sense the most natural or reasonable one, and then
arguing that neither bargainer could offer concessions beyond this ob-
viously reasonable allocation without giving the impression that he
would give everything away.
The uniqueness of the equilibria in the models of Theorems 8.3 and
8.4 contrasts strikingly with the ubiquity of the equilibria in Theorem
8.5. However, given any small positive number r, if F0  is E-dense in F,
then all of the equilibria in Theorem 8.5 correspond to c-equilibria of
the game in Theorem 8.3. Thus, in comparison with Theorem 8.3,

--- Sayfa 426 ---
408 8 • Bargaining in Two-Person Games
Theorem 8.5 shows that we should beware of placing too much signif-
icance on the uniqueness of an equilibrium in a game that has a large
set of e-equilibria, all of which may be equilibria of games that differ
only slightly from the given game and that might be equally good as
models of any given real situation.
On the other hand, from the point of view of Theorem 8.5, the
models of Theorem 8.3 and 8.4 might be interpreted as criteria that
can determine the focal equilibrium that gets played. In general, when
players are involved in some given game that has a very large set of
equilibria, if there is some obvious or salient perturbation of the game
that has only one equilibrium, then the players might naturally focus
on playing the equilibrium of the given game that is closest to the
equilibrium of the salient perturbation. Thus, for example, suppose
that two risk-neutral players are bargaining over how to divide $30.00
in an alternating-offer game with p1  = p2  = .0001, but they can only
make offers in which both payoffs are integer multiples of $.01. Then
conditions (8.18) and (8.19) are satisfied, so any individually rational
outcome is an equilibrium of this discrete alternating-offer game. How-
ever, the players might naturally compare their situation to the corre-
sponding continuous alternating-offer game, in which the restriction of
offers to integer multiples of $.01 is dropped. Among the possible offers
in the discrete alternating-offer game, (15.00,15.00) is closest to the
unique equilibrium outcome of this continuous alternating-offer game;
and this fact may make focal an equilibrium in which this allocation is
the outcome in the discrete game that is actually being played.
(The preceding three sections are only an introduction to the analysis
of sequential-offer bargaining games, on which there is a large and
growing literature. See also Sobel and Takahashi, 1983; Fudenberg,
Levine, and Tirole, 1985; Binmore, Rubinstein, and Wolinsky, 1986;
Sutton, 1986; Rubinstein, 1987; and Ausubel and Deneckere, 1989.)
8.10 Renegotiation
The analysis in the preceding section illustrates that it may be difficult
or impossible to derive, from the noncooperative analysis of a realistic
bargaining game, the simple conclusion that players will achieve an
efficient utility allocation. However, there are many situations in which
it may be reasonable to assume that players will, through negotiation
statements like "Let's play this equilibrium, which is better for both of

--- Sayfa 427 ---
8.10 Renegotiation 409
us," be able to coordinate their focal expectations on a Pareto-efficient
equilibrium. So if Pareto efficiency cannot be derived from noncoop-
erative analysis, then it may be reasonable to make efficiency a funda-
mental assumption in the analysis of any game model of a situation
where the players have ample opportunities to negotiate effectively in
a rich common language at the beginning of the game. That is, if players
can negotiate effectively at the beginning of an extensive-form game,
but only at the beginning, then we can assume that the equilibrium that
is actually played will be one that is at least weakly efficient within the
sequential equilibrium set, in the sense that there is no sequential equi-
librium that gives higher expected payoffs for all players.
However, the impact of negotiations may be somewhat different if
players can negotiate effectively at more than one point in time during
a game. We should not expect that intelligent players at the beginning
of the game could persuade themselves, through some negotiation pro-
cess, to focus on playing one equilibrium if, at some later stage in the
game, a similar negotiation process would lead them to focus on some
different equilibrium. The players should not be able to negotiate to an
equilibrium that would be renegotiated later. A variety of definitions of
renegotiation-proof equilibria and related concepts have been offered by
Bernheim, Peleg, and Whinston (1987); Bernheim and Ray (1989);
Farrell and Maskin (1987); Pearce (1987); and Benoit and Krishna
(1989). As an introduction to this subject, we consider here a simple
example studied by Benoit and Krishna (Table 8.3).
This is a two-person game played as follows in K rounds, where K is
some given positive integer. At each round, knowing all past moves of
both players, each player i must choose a move in the set laz,b„c„cld.
The incremental contributions to the payoffs of players 1 and 2, re-
Table 8.3 Payoffs at any round, for all move profiles, in a finitely repeated
game
l's
moves
a2
b2
c2
d2
2's moves
a1
0,0
2,4
0,0
6,0
bi
4,2
0,0
0,0
0,0
c1
0,0
0,0
3,3
0,0
d1
0,6
0,0
0,0
5,5

--- Sayfa 428 ---
410 8 Bargaining in Two-Person Games
spectively, depend on their moves according to Table 8.3. The payoff
to each player in the game is the sum of the incremental contributions
to his payoff in all K rounds.
There exist sequential equilibria of this game in which each player's
expected total payoff is 5K — 2 (which corresponds to an average of
5 — 2/K per round). In one such equilibrium, the players are supposed
to do (di,d2) at every round until the last round and (c,,c2) at the last
round, unless someone deviates from his d, move before the last round;
if anyone does deviate from (di,d2) before the last round, then the
players are supposed thereafter to do (a1,b2) if player 1 deviated first,
or (b,,a2) if player 2 deviated first, or (c,,c2) if both deviated first si-
multaneously. We call this the grim equilibrium. This equilibrium is
subgame-perfect and sequential, because no player could ever gain by
unilaterally deviating from his equilibrium strategy, as long as the other
player is expected to follow his equilibrium strategy.
Suppose now that the players can effectively renegotiate the equilib-
rium at the beginning of each round. Consider the situation that would
arise at the next round after some player made an initial deviation from
the (d,,d2) moves prescribed by the equilibrium. Let J denote the num-
ber of rounds remaining in the game, and suppose that J
2 and the
deviator was player 1. In the subgame that remains to be played, ac-
cording to the grim equilibrium for the original K-round game, player
1's total payoff will be 2] and player 2's payoff will be 4J. But both
players could do better and get 5J — 2 in this subgame if they renego-
tiated and played instead according to the restarted grim equilibrium
for the J-round game that remains, ignoring the past K — J rounds!
That is, either player would have an incentive to make the following
negotiation speech, if it would be heeded.
A mistake has just been made. We have been expecting to go into a
punishment mode after such a mistake, and such punishment might even
be justified, but it will not do either of us any good now. Let us forgive the
errors of the past and go back to doing d1  and d2. But let us also consider
ourselves fully warned now that future deviations will not be so equally
forgiven. Whoever makes the next deviation in the future should expect
that he really will get only 2 at every round thereafter.
If the players can renegotiate the equilibrium in this way, then the grim
equilibrium may not be credible, because each player would expect to
be able to avoid punishment of any deviation before the second-to-last

--- Sayfa 429 ---
8.10 • Renegotiation 411
round by such renegotiation. That is, the grim equilibrium is not Pareto
efficient in some subgames, even though it is Pareto efficient in the
game overall, and as a result it is not renegotiation proof.
Renegotiation-proof equilibria for such two-person finitely repeated
games (with complete state information and perfectly observable moves)
may be defined by induction as follows. In any one-round game, a
renegotiation-proof equilibrium is an equilibrium such that no other
equilibrium would be, in this one-round game, as good or better for
both players and strictly better for at least one player. In any kround
game, a renegotiation-proof equilibrium is a subgame-perfect equilib-
rium such that it is renegotiation proof in all (J — 1)-round subgames
(beginning at the second round of the kround game), and there is no
other subgame-perfect equilibrium that is renegotiation proof in all
(J — 1)-round subgames and that is, in the J-round game, as good or
better for both players and strictly better for at least one player.
If the failure of the grim equilibrium to be renegotiation proof implies
any kind of irrationality, it may be a cooperative or collective irrationality,
but not an individual irrationality. In the context of the grim equilibrium
(or in any other sequential equilibrium), neither player could ever ex-
pect to increase his expected payoff by unilaterally changing his own
strategy in any subgame. For intelligent players, the act of renegotiating
an equilibrium must be an essentially cooperative act, in which both
players simultaneously change the strategies that they plan to use.
In this example, for any even number K, there is an essentially unique
renegotiation-proof equilibrium, with the following structure. At every
even-numbered round, the players are supposed to choose (d,,d2). At
every odd-numbered round, the players are supposed to choose (c,,c2)
if the moves were (d,,d2) at the preceding round, (b,,a2) if the moves
were (d,,a2) at the preceding round, (a,,b2) if the moves were (a,,d2) at
the preceding round, and some pair in {(c,,c2), (b,,a2), (a,,b2)} following
any other possible history of past moves. In this equilibrium, with prob-
ability 1, the incremental payoffs will therefore be (5,5) at every even
round and (3,3) at every odd round, for a total payoff of 4K for each
player in the overall game (an average of 4 per round).
Benoit and Krishna (1989) proved this result by induction. In a one-
round game, (c,,c2), (b,,a2), and (a,,b2) are the only equilibria that are
Pareto efficient within the set of all equilibria. In a two-round game,
there is no equilibrium that is better for either player than the equilibria
sketched above, in which each player gets an expected payoff of 5 +

--- Sayfa 430 ---
412 8 Bargaining in Two-Person Games
3 = 8. Thus, (8,8) is the unique payoff allocation that can be generated
by a renegotiation-proof equilibrium of a two-round subgame. Now as-
sume inductively that, given any even number K such that K
4,
(4(K — 2), 4(K — 2)) is the unique payoff allocation that can be generated
in a renegotiation-proof equilibrium of a (K — 2)-round game. Thus,
in a renegotiation-proof equilibrium of a K-round game, the players
cannot expect their moves at the first two rounds to have any impact
on their payoffs in the last K — 2 rounds. Therefore, the analysis of
the first two rounds of a K-round game must be the same as the analysis
of a two-round game. Subject to the constraint that the expected payoff
for each player must be 4(K — 2) in any (K — 2)-round subgame, no
equilibrium is better for either player in the K-round game than an
equilibrium in which they play (d,,d2) in the first round and (c,,c2) in
the second round, unless someone profitably deviated in the first round,
in which case he should be punished by the one-round equilibrium in
which he gets 2 in the second round. In such an equilibrium, both
players get an expected total payoff of 4K.
Notice that, for this example, there exist subgame-perfect equilibria
(such as the grim equilibrium described earlier) that are strictly better
for both players than any renegotiation-proof equilibrium. So this ex-
ample shows that the opportunity to renegotiate at later rounds of a
game may reduce the set of equilibria that can be negotiated at earlier
rounds, in a way that may hurt both players. That is, both players may
be hurt in a game by a constraint that their behavior should be collec-
tively rational in all subgames.
Exercises
Exercise 8.1. John and Mary are discussing whether to go to the ballet,
to the boxing match, or to stay home tonight. They have a random-
number generator, and they can agree to let their decision depend on
its output in any way, so as to create a lottery with any probability
distribution over the three possible outcomes (go to the ballet, go to
boxing, or stay home). If they cannot agree, they will stay home. John
wants to go to the boxing match, and he is indifferent between going
to the ballet and staying home. For Mary, going to the ballet would be
best, staying home would be worst, and she would be indifferent be-
tween going to the boxing match or taking a lottery with probability 1/4

--- Sayfa 431 ---
Exercises 413
of going to the ballet and probability 3/4 of staying home. They both
satisfy the axioms of von Neumann-Morgenstern utility theory.
a. Describe this situation by a two-person bargaining problem (F,v)
and compute its Nash bargaining solution. How should they implement
the Nash bargaining solution?
b. The above description of this situation does not specify a specific
two-person bargaining problem, as defined in Section 8.2. Which axi-
omatic properties of the Nash bargaining solution permitted you to
answer part (a) anyway?
c. Find natural utility scales for John and Mary in which the egali-
tarian and utilitarian solutions both coincide with the Nash bargaining
solution.
d. If the television set were broken, the prospect of staying home
would become much worse for John. To be specific, John would be
indifferent between going to the ballet and a lottery with probability 2/3
of going to boxing and probability '/s of staying home with a broken
television set. A broken television set would not affect Mary's prefer-
ences. If Mary breaks the television set, her brother (who is a television
repairman, and who is coming for breakfast tomorrow) will fix it for
free. How would breaking the television set change the probability of
going to the ballet in the Nash bargaining solution?
Exercise 8.2. Suppose that 4  is a solution concept for two-person bar-
gaining problems with bounded feasible sets, and (I) does not actually
depend on the disagreement point. That is, (I)(F,v) = (I)(F,w) for any
feasible set F that is a closed, convex, and bounded subset of R2, and
for any two disagreement points v and w. Suppose also that (I) satisfies
Axioms 8.1, 8.3, and 8.4 (strong efficiency, scale covariance, and inde-
pendence of irrelevant alternatives) from Section 8.2. Show that either
(I) must always select the best strongly efficient allocation for player 1,
or 4  must always select the best strongly efficient allocation for player
2. (This result is related to many general results in social choice theory;
see Arrow, 1951; Sen, 1970.)
Exercise 8.3. Suppose that x E F, y E F, x1  = v1, y2  = v2, and .5x + .5y
is a strongly efficient allocation in F. Show that .5x + .5y is the Nash
bargaining solution of (F,v).

--- Sayfa 432 ---
414 8 • Bargaining in Two-Person Games
Exercise 8.4. Suppose that player 1 has made a demand for an alloca-
tion x in F, and player 2 has made a demand for an allocation y in F,
where x, > y, and y2  > x2  > v2. For each player i, let qz  be the highest
probability such that player i would be willing to accept a lottery with
probability qi  of giving the disagreement point v and probability 1 — q,
of giving the allocation vector that i demanded, when the alternative
would be to accept the allocation vector that the other player demanded.
Show that, if player demand is the Nash bargaining solution of (F,v)
and player 2's demand is any other vector in F, then q, > q2. (See
Harsanyi, 1956.)
Exercise 8.5. Consider the strategic-form game shown in Table 8.4 as
a cooperative game with transferable utility.
a. Find the unique noncooperative equilibrium outcome. If this out-
come is the disagreement point, then what is the Nash bargaining so-
lution?
b. Calculate the minimax value for each player. If the minimax values
are the disagreement payoffs for each player, then what is the Nash
bargaining solution?
c. Calculate the rational threats for players 1 and 2, as defined in
Section 8.5. Show the resulting disagreement point in utility allocation
space and compute the resulting Nash bargaining solution.
d. In the rational-threats model that we considered in Section 8.5,
there was no chance of threats actually being carried out. Let us consider
now a more elaborate model of a three-stage bargaining process, in
which threats may be carried out.
At the first stage of the bargaining process, each player i indepen-
dently chooses a probability q, (or an agreeability index) in the interval
[0,1]. At the second stage, after these probabilities q, and q2  have been
revealed publicly to both players, each player i independently chooses
Table 8.4 A game in strategic form, with transferable utility
C2
Cl
x2
Y2
Z2
10,0
7,1
—4,-4
yl
0,10
4,0
—5,-5

--- Sayfa 433 ---
Exercises 415
a threat strategy c, in C,. At the third stage, either agreement or dis-
agreement occurs, and the probability of agreement is q1q2. If disagree-
ment occurs, then each player i must carry out his chosen threat strategy
c, and they get the resulting payoffs (as specified above in the original
strategic-form game). If agreement occurs, then the players get the
Nash bargaining solution of this game, where the disagreement point
is the payoff allocation that they would get if both carried out their
chosen threat strategies.
Find a subgame-perfect equilibrium of this three-stage bargaining
game in which the probability of agreement is positive.
Exercise 8.6. Suppose that the alternating-offer game of Section 8.7 is
played with feasible set F = {(x 1,x2)Ix + x2  v
12}, disagreement payoffs
(v ,,v2), and termination probabilities (p1,p2), where v12  > v1  + v2. As a
function of these parameters (v12, v1, v2, p1,  p2), what is the general
formula for the offer that player 1 would always make and the offer
that player 2 would always make in the subgame-perfect equilibrium?
Exercise 8.7. (Analysis of arbitration, following Crawford, 1979, 1981.)
Players 1 and 2 have taken their bargaining problem to an arbitrator.
The set of feasible utility allocations for players 1 and 2
F = {(xi,x2)12x + x2  < 150 and x1  + 2x2  < 150}.
Thus, for example, (75,0), (50,50), and (0,75) are strongly efficient
allocations in F. In arbitration, each player must independently specify
an offer, which is an allocation in F, and the arbitrator will then select
one of these two offers. Unfortunately, the arbitrator has strange cri-
teria and will select the offer for which the quantity (x1)2  + (x2)2  is lower.
If this quantity is the same for both players' offers, then the arbitrator
will randomize, choosing either offer with probability 1/2.
a. Suppose first that no further bargaining is allowed after the arbi-
trator's selection, so the offer selected by the arbitrator will be the
realized payoff allocation for the players. (This is called final-offer arbi-
tration.) Find an equilibrium of this game.
b. Suppose now that, after the arbitrator's selection is announced,
the player whose offer has been selected by the arbitrator can propose
one subsequent offer in F. Then the other player (whose offer was not
selected) can choose between the offer selected by the arbitrator and
the subsequent offer, and the offer that he then chooses will be the

--- Sayfa 434 ---
416 8 • Bargaining in Two-Person Games
realized payoff allocation for the players. Find a subgame-perfect equi-
librium of this game. In this equilibrium, what is the expected payoff
for each player?
c. Now suppose that, after the arbitrator's selection is announced, the
player whose offer has not been selected by the arbitrator can propose
one subsequent offer in F. Then the player whose offer was selected by
the arbitrator can choose between the offer selected by the arbitrator
and the subsequent offer, and the offer that he then chooses will be the
realized payoff allocation for the players. Find a subgame-perfect equi-
librium of this game. In this equilibrium, what is the expected payoff
for each player?

--- Sayfa 435 ---
9
Coalitions in Cooperative Games
9.1 Introduction to Coalitional Analysis
In the preceding chapter, we considered bargaining and cooperation
only in two-player games. It may at first seem easy to generalize the
definition of a bargaining problem and the Nash bargaining solution to
games with more than two players. Let N = {1,2, . . . ,n} be the set of
players, and let F be a closed and convex subset of RN, representing
the set of feasible payoff allocations that the players can get if they all
work together. Let (v1, . . . ,v„) be the disagreement payoff allocation
that the players would expect if they did not cooperate, and suppose
that {y E Fly, v„ Vi E N} is a nonempty bounded set. Then the pair
(F,(v 1, . . . ,vn)) may be called an n-person bargaining problem.
Given any such feasible set F that is a subset on RN, we say that x is
weakly (Pareto) efficient in F iff x E F and there is no other vector y in F
such that y, > x, for every i in N. We say that an allocation x is strongly
(Pareto) efficient in F iff x E F and there is no other vector y in F such
that y,
x, for every i in N and y, > x, for at least one j in N.
Suppose also that (F,(v 1, . . . ,vn)) is essential, in the sense that there
exists some y in F such that y, > v, for every i. Then the Nash bargaining
solution for such an n-person bargaining problem (F,v) can be defined
to be the unique strongly efficient vector x that maximizes the Nash
product
H (xi  -
V)
iEN

--- Sayfa 436 ---
418 9 • Coalitions in Cooperative Games
over all vectors x in F such that x,
vi  for all i. It is not hard to show
that this bargaining solution can be derived from generalized versions
of Nash's axioms.
However, this n-person Nash bargaining solution is not widely used
for the analysis of cooperative games when n is greater than 2 because
it completely ignores the possibility of cooperation among subsets of
the players. Any nonempty subset of the set of players may be called a
coalition. A general theory of cooperative games with more than two
players must include a theory of coalitional analysis that goes beyond
this simple model of an n-person bargaining problem.
For an introduction to the problems of coalitional analysis in coop-
erative games with more than two players, consider the following two
examples, given as games in strategic form. In each game, the set of
players is N = {1,2,3} and the set of strategy options for each player i
is
C, = {(xi,x2,x3) E R31x, + x2  + x3  < 300 and, Vj,
0}.
That is, in both games, each player can propose a payoff allocation for
the three players such that no player's payoff is negative and the sum
of their payoffs does not exceed 300. In Example 9.1, the players get 0
unless all three players propose the same allocation, in which case they
get this allocation. That is, we let
u, (c,,c2,c3) = x, if c1  = c2  = c3  = (xi,x2,x3),
u,(ci,c2,c3) = 0 if 6.,
ck  for some j and k.
In Example 9.2, the players get 0 unless player 1 and 2 propose the same
allocation, in which case they get this allocation. That is, we let
2
U, (C1,C2,C3) = X,
2
U, (CI,C2,C3) = 0
if c, = c2  = (x,,x2,x3),
if c1
c2.
In both of these games, the players can jointly achieve any allocation
in which their payoffs are nonnegative and sum to 300 or less, and the
minimax value that each player can guarantee himself is 0. That is, we
could describe this game as a three-person bargaining problem by letting.
F = {(xl,x2,x3) E R31x, + x2  + x3
300 and, Vj, x1  _ 0} and
(v,,v2,v3) = (0,0,0).

--- Sayfa 437 ---
9.1 Introduction to Coalitional Analysis 419
With this feasible set and disagreement allocation, the 3-person Nash
bargaining solution discussed above would select the allocation
(100,100,100) for both of these games, and indeed this might be a
reasonable outcome for Example 9.1. However, the allocation
(100,100,100) should seem quite unreasonable for Example 9.2. In
Example 9.2, players 1 and 2 can together determine the payoff allo-
cation, without any help from player 3. Thus, we might expect players
1 and 2 simply to divide the available payoff between themselves. If 1
and 2 ignored 3 and acted as if they were in a two-player cooperative
game, then the Nash bargaining solution would specify that they should
divide equally between themselves the maximum total payoff that they
can get, giving nothing to 3; so the outcome would be the payoff
allocation (150,150,0).
Before we completely dismiss (100,100,100) as an unreasonable pre-
diction for Example 9.2, let us carefully examine the assumptions im-
plicit in this rejection. Given that the players must choose their proposals
simultaneously, it would be an equilibrium for both players 1 and 2 to
propose (100,100,100), just as it would be an equilibrium for them both
to propose (150,150,0). Even if we add the possibility of costless non-
binding preplay communication, there is still an equilibrium in which
players 1 and 2 both expect each other to ignore anything that might
be said (including statements such as, "Let us cut out player 3 and
propose (150,150,0), " because each interprets the other's statements as
meaningless babble rather than English), and both choose the final
proposal (100,100,100). If player 3 has any influence in such matters,
he would certainly want to promote such mutual misunderstanding
between players 1 and 2, so that they might focus on such an equilib-
rium. Thus, the key assumption that we need to dismiss (100,100,100)
as an unreasonable outcome for Example 9.2 is that players 1 and 2
can negotiate effectively, to focus themselves on an equilibrium that
they prefer, before choosing their strategies in C, and C2.
In general, when we say that the members of a coalition of players
can negotiate effectively, we mean that, if there were a feasible change in
the strategies of the members of the coalition that would benefit them
all, then they would agree to actually make such a change, unless it
contradicted agreements that some members of the coalition might have
made with other players outside this coalition, in the context of some
other equally effective coalition. The key assumption that distinguishes
cooperative game theory from noncooperative game theory is this as-

--- Sayfa 438 ---
420 9 • Coalitions in Cooperative Games
sumption that players can negotiate effectively. The n-person Nash
bargaining solution might be relevant if the only coalition that can
negotiate effectively is the grand coalition that includes all the players in
N together. Instead, however, we shall assume in most of this chapter
(except in Section 9.5) that all coalitions can negotiate effectively.
Thus, in cooperative games involving three or more players, we must
also take into account the possibility that some subset of the players
might form a cooperative coalition without the other players. In Ex-
ample 9.1, no coalition that is smaller than {1,2,3} can guarantee more
than 0 to its members, but in Example 9.2 the coalition 11,21 could
guarantee its members any payoff allocation that they could get in
11,2,31. The n-person bargaining problem is an inadequate represen-
tation of a cooperative game with more than two players because it
suppresses all information about the power of multiplayer coalitions
other than the grand coalition N.
Cooperative game theory is greatly complicated by the possibility of
competition between overlapping coalitions. For example, consider now
Example 9.3, which differs from the previous examples in that the play-
ers get 0 unless there is some pair of players ({l,2}, {2,3}, or {1,3}) who
propose the same allocation, in which case they get this allocation. That
is, we let
U, (C1,C2,C3) = OC,
if c3  = c, = (x1,x2,x3) for some j
k,
U,3  (CI,C2,C3) = 0
if c 1
c2
c3
c1.
When we assume that every coalition can negotiate effectively, the
analysis of this game can become rather complicated. Because the three
players have symmetric roles in this game and can get up to a total
payoff of 300 by acting cooperatively, it may be quite reasonable to
predict that the outcome of this game should be the allocation
(100,100,100). However, players 1 and 2 could do better if, negotiating
effectively in the {1,2} coalition, they agreed instead to both propose
the allocation (150,150,0). If this were the expected outcome of the
game, however, player 3 would be very eager to persuade one other
player to form instead an effective coalition with him. Rather than see
(150,150,0) be the outcome of the game, player 3 would be willing to
negotiate an agreement with player 2 to both propose (0,225,75), for
example. But if (0,225,75) were the expected outcome in the absence
of further negotiations, then player 1 would be willing to negotiate an

--- Sayfa 439 ---
9.1 • Introduction to Coalitional Analysis 421
agreement with player 3 to both propose an allocation that is better for
both of them, such as (113,0,187). Indeed, at any equilibrium of this
game, there is always at least one pair of players who could both do
strictly better by jointly agreeing to change their two strategies. That is,
there is always an incentive for two players who are getting less than
everything to cut out the third player and divide his payoff between
themselves. At some point, the process of coalitional negotiation must
stop.
One way to explain how such coalitional negotiations might stop is to
assume that, after a player has negotiated an agreement as a part of a
coalition, he cannot later negotiate a different agreement with another
coalition that does not contain all the members of the first coalition.
Under this assumption, if the grand coalition {1,2,3} negotiated the
agreement (100,100,100) before any two-player coalition could negoti-
ate separately, then no two-player coalition could thereafter overturn
this agreement by negotiating against the third player. On the other
hand, if the coalition {1,2} were the first coalition to negotiate and they
agreed to (150,150,0), then player 3 would be unable to increase his
payoff by negotiating with player 2 or player 1 separately. Thus, under
this assumption, the order in which coalitions can meet and negotiate
may crucially determine the outcome of the game, and the advantage
is to coalitions that negotiate earlier.
The alternative is to assume that negotiated agreements are only
tentative and nonbinding; so a player who negotiates sequentially in
various coalitions can nullify his earlier agreements and reach a differ-
ent agreement with a coalition that negotiates later. This assumption
also implies that the outcome of the game can depend on the order in
which the various coalitions may negotiate, or on the rules by which this
order may be determined. However, this assumption gives an advantage
to coalitions that get to negotiate later, because no coalition can expect
to implement an agreement that would be renegotiated by another
coalition later. For example, if the players were expected to meet in
negotiations in the exogenously given order {1,2} first, {2,3} second,
{1,3} third, and {1,2,3} last, then the outcome of the game would have
to give a payoff of 0 to player 2. Any agreement by an earlier coalition
to give players 1 and 3 a total payoff less than 300 would be overturned
by players 1 and 3 when they negotiate, and player 2 would not be able
to get them to deviate from this agreement in the {1,2,3} coalition. For
another example, suppose player 1 believed that, if he ever negotiated

--- Sayfa 440 ---
422 9 • Coalitions in Cooperative Games
an agreement with player 2 in the coalition {1,2}, then player 3 would
thereafter get an opportunity to negotiate with player 2 in the coalition
{2,3}. In this case, player 1 might rationally refuse to negotiate with
player 2 for the allocation (150,150,0) against an earlier agreement on
(100,100,100), because such negotiations would in turn stimulate fur-
ther negotiations between 2 and 3 that could result in player 1 ultimately
getting a payoff of 0.
In most real situations where individuals can negotiate in various
coalitions, the potential structure of these coalitional negotiations is
more complicated than any rule we could hope to analyze. That is, any
tractable rule for specifying which set of players can meet to negotiate
at each point in time (possibly as a function of the earlier history of the
negotiation process) is bound to be unrealistic in practice. Thus, there
is a need for theories of cooperative games that can give us some sense
of what to expect from the balance of power among all the possible
coalitions without specifying such an ordering of the 2' — 1 different
coalitions. On the other hand, the fact that such an ordering may be
quite important tells us to be prepared to find some difficulties in the
interpretation or application of any such order-independent theory.
9.2 Characteristic Functions with Transferable Utility
Because interactions among 2" — 1 different coalitions in an n-player
game can be so complex, the simplifying assumption of transferable utility
is often used in cooperative game theory. That is, as discussed in Section
8.4, there is often assumed to be a commodity—called money—that
players can freely transfer among themselves, such that any player's
utility payoff increases one unit for every unit of money that he gets.
With transferable utility, the cooperative possibilities of a game can
be described by a characteristic function v that assigns a number v(S) to
every coalition S. Here v(S) is called the worth of coalition S, and it
represents the total amount of transferable utility that the members of
S could earn without any help from the players outside of S. In any
characteristic function, we always let
v(0) = 0,
where 0 denotes the empty set. A characteristic function can also be
called a game in coalitional form or a coalitional game.
In Example 9.1, the characteristic function is

--- Sayfa 441 ---
9.2 • Characteristic Functions 423
v({1,2,3}) = 300, v({1,2}) = v({1,3}) = v({2,3}) = 0, and
v({1}) = v({2}) = v({3}) = 0.
In Example 9.2, the characteristic function is
v({1,2,3}) = 300 = v({1,2}), v({1,3}) = v({2,3}) = 0, and
v({1}) = v({2}) = v({3}) = 0.
In Example 9.3, the characteristic function is
v({1,2,3}) = 300 = v({1,2}) = v({1,3}) = v({2,3}) and
v({1}) = v({2}) = v({3}) = 0.
Notice that, under the assumption of transferable utility, specifying a
single number for each coalition is sufficient to describe what allocations
of utility can be achieved by the members of the coalition. Thus, in-
specting the characteristic function for Example 9.3, we can see that, in
this game, the three players together or any pair of players who coop-
erate can divide 300 units of payoff (say, "dollars") among themselves
in any way that might be mutually agreeable, but each player alone can
guarantee himself only 0.
In Chapter 8 (Sections 8.2 and 8.5), we considered three different
ways of deriving a disagreement point from a two-person strategic-form
game: by minimax values, noncooperative equilibria, and rational
threats. Each of these ideas can be generalized to provide a way of
deriving a characteristic function from a n-person strategic-form game.
Given a game in strategic form F = (N, (C,),EN, (u),,N) with transfer-
able utility, von Neumann and Morgenstern (1944) suggested that the
characteristic function should be defined by
(9.1)
v(S) =
min
max E uz(crs,criv,$)•
amsEA(Cms) vs E  A(CS) =ES
Here, N\S denotes the set of all players in N who are not in the coalition
S. For any coalition T, CT = XJET Co  so i(CT) is the set of correlated
strategies available to coalition T. We let uz(o-s,cr,,$) denote player i's
expected payoff, before transfers of money, when the correlated strat-
egies us  and o
are independently implemented; that is,
uz(0-sATA,$) = E
E crs(cs)ums(cms)ui(cs,c/v\s)•
csEcs  cpAsEcms

--- Sayfa 442 ---
424 9 Coalitions in Cooperative Games
Thus, (9.1) asserts that v(S) is the maximum sum of utility payoffs that
the members of coalition S can guarantee themselves against the best
offensive threat by the complementary coalition N\S. If (9.1) is satisfied,
then we say that v is the minimax representation in coalitional form of the
strategic-form game F with transferable utility.
Characteristic functions can also be derived by assuming that comple-
mentary coalitions would play an essentially defensive pair of equilib-
rium strategies against each other. That is, we say that v is a defensive-
equilibrium representation in coalitional form of the strategic-form game
F with transferable utility iff, for every pair of complementary coalitions
S and N \S, there exist strategies Qs  and rrms  such that
Trs  E argmax ui(crs,&,,$),
asEA(Cs) iES
rrms  E argmax E to:Trs,o-N,$),
0„,„E AWN
JEN\S
v(S) =
li,(Trs,(TrAr\s), and v(N\S) = E 7.d,(0-s,ams)•
iES
JEMS
Harsanyi (1963) proposed that characteristic functions can be derived
by a generalization of Nash's rational-threats criterion. We say that v is
a rational-threats representation in coalitional form of the strategic-form
game F with transferable utility iff, for every pair of complementary
coalitions S and N\S, there exist strategies rrs  and (TrARs  such that
rrs  E argmax \E  ui(crs,crN\s) — E u.,(crs,u-N\s) ,
asEA(Cs)
IES
JEN\S
Urms  E argmax
E Uj(Us,(Tiv\s)
Ui(as,(YN\s) 1,
s E Cz(Cms) jEMS
iES
v(S) = E z(Ts,Erms), and v(N\S) = E
5,Fr ms).
2 ES
JE/V\S
As discussed in Section 8.5, the distinctions between these three ways
of representing a strategic-form game in coalitional form can be inter-
preted in terms of alternative assumptions about the ability of coalitions
to commit themselves to offensive and defensive threats. For example,
the minimax representation in coalitional form implicitly assumes that
a coalition S should be concerned that N\S would attack S offensively
if the members of S decided to cooperate with each other but without

--- Sayfa 443 ---
9.2 Characteristic Functions 425
the players in N\S. However, offensively minimizing the sum of payoffs
to the players in S would generally not be in the best interests of the
players in N\S, who really want to maximize their own payoffs. To
justify an assumption that the members of N\S might act offensively
against S, we need to assume that, at a time when it is expected that all
players will ultimately cooperate together as a part of the grand coalition
N and the players are negotiating over the possible divisions of the
worth v(N), the players in N\S can jointly commit themselves to an
offensive threat that would be carried out only in the unexpected event
that the players in S break off negotiations with the players in N\S.
During these negotiations, the members of MS should want the mem-
bers of S to fear that failing to reach an agreement would stimulate an
offensive attack of MS against S, because such fear would make the
members of S more eager to avoid a disagreement with the members
of MS and thus more willing to concede a larger share of v(N) to the
members of MS.
Notice that, in all three representations discussed above, the worth of
the grand coalition is the same, and can be written
v(N) = max
22,(cN).
CNECN  :EN
For example, consider a three-player game with transferable utility
in which C, = {a„b,} for each i in {1,2,3}, and the payoffs (u1,u2,u3)
depend on the three players' strategies as shown in Table 9.1. Here a,
can be interpreted as a "generous" strategy and b, as a "selfish" strategy.
In the minimax representation, each coalition S gets the most that it
could guarantee itself if the players in the complementary coalition were
selfish. Thus, the minimax representation in coalitional form is
v(11,2,31) = 12, v({1,2}) = v({1,3}) = v({2,3}) = 4, and
v({1}) = v({2}) = v({3}) = 1.
Table 9.1 A three-player game in strategic form, with transferable utility
Cl
C2 X C3
a2,a3
62,a3
a2,b3
62,63
al
bi
4,4,4
5,2,2
2,5,2
3,3,0
2,2,5
3,0,3
0,3,3
1,1,1

--- Sayfa 444 ---
426 9 • Coalitions in Cooperative Games
The members of a two-player coalition could actually increase the sum
of their payoffs by both being generous, so the defensive-equilibrium
representation can be calculated by supposing that, if the players acted
in two complementary coalitions, a single player alone would be selfish,
but two players in a coalition together would be generous. Thus, the
defensive-equilibrium representation of this game in coalitional form is
v({1,2,3}) = 12, v({1,2}) = v({1,3}) = v({2,3}) = 4, and
v({1}) = v({2}) = v({3}) = 5.
Notice that this representation imputes an advantage to a player who
acts selfishly alone against a generous two-player coalition. When both
offensive and defensive considerations are taken into account, the ra-
tional-threats criterion would have all coalitions smaller than N choose
selfishness in this game. Thus, the rational-threats representation of this
game in coalitional form is
v({1,2,3}) = 12, v({1,2}) = v({1,3})
v({2,3}) = 2, and
v({1}) = v({2}) =- v({3}) = 1.
If all three of these representations in coalitional form coincide, then
we can say that the game has orthogonal coalitions. Games with orthogonal
coalitions often arise in economic situations, where the worst thing that
one coalition can do against another is refuse to trade with it. For
example, consider the following class of pure trading games. Let M
denote a finite set of commodities. For each player i and each commodity
k, let wk(i) denote the amount of commodity k that i initially has to trade.
Let Ui(x(i)) denote the (transferable) utility that player i would derive
from consuming a bundle x(i) = (Xk(i))kEm • A strategy for player i is any
specification of how much of each commodity he will deliver, out of his
initial endowment, to each other player. For such a game, under any of
the above-defined representations, the worth of any coalition S is
v(S) = max {
u1(x(i))1
x(i) =
0)(01 •
iES
iES 	iES
We say that a characteristic function v is superadditive iff, for every
pair of coalitions S and T,
if S T = 0, then v(S U T) v(S) + v(T).

--- Sayfa 445 ---
9.3 The Core 427
It can be shown that, if v is the minimax representation of a strategic-
form game, then v must be superadditive. The defensive-equilibrium
and rational-threats representations are not necessarily superadditive.
For any game v in coalitional form, we can define the superadditive
cover of v to be the superadditive game w in coalitional form with lowest
possible worths for all coalitions such that w(S) v(S) for every coalition
S. A partition of any set S is a collection of nonempty sets {T1, . . . ,Tk }
such that
UT2 U...UTk =S and, Vj, Vlj,
n T1  = 0.
Let P(S) denote the set of all partitions of S. Then the superadditive
cover w of the game v in coalitional form satisfies the equation
W(S) = max { E v(7,)1{T 1, . . . ,T1,} E 9)(S)} , VS C N.
J= 1
That is, the worth of a coalition in the superadditive cover is the max-
imum worth that the coalition could achieve by breaking up into a set
of smaller disjoint coalitions. The concept of superadditive cover gives
us a way to define a superadditive game corresponding to any game in
coalitional form.
Once a representation in coalitional form has been specified, we can
try to predict the outcome of bargaining among the players. Such an
analysis is usually based on the assumption that the players will form
the grand coalition and divide the worth v(N) among themselves after
some bargaining process, but that the allocation resulting from a focal
equilibrium of this bargaining process will depend on the power struc-
ture rather than on the details of how bargaining proceeds. A player's
power is his ability to help or hurt any set of players by agreeing to
cooperate with them or refusing to do so. Thus, a characteristic function
is a summary description of the power structure of a game.
9.3 The Core
Let v = (v(S)),„ be any game in coalitional form with transferable
utility, where the set of players is N = {1,2, . . . ,n}. A payoff allocation is
any vector x = (x,),,, in le, where each component x, is interpreted as
the utility payoff to player i.
We say that an allocation y is feasible for a coalition S iff

--- Sayfa 446 ---
428 9 • Coalitions in Cooperative Games
E 3), C  v(S),
iES
and so the players in S can achieve their components of this allocation
by dividing among themselves the worth v(S) that they can get by
cooperating together. When we say that an allocation is feasible without
reference to any particular coalition, we mean that it is feasible for the
grand coalition N.
We say that a coalition S can improve on an allocation x iff v(S) >
E,Esx,. That is, S can improve on x iff there exists some allocation y such
that y is feasible for S and the players in S all get strictly higher payoff
in y than in x.
An allocation x is in the core of v iff x is feasible and no coalition can
improve on x. That is, x is in the core iff
E xi  = v(N) and E xi  v(S), vs c N .
iEN
iES
Thus, if a feasible allocation x is not in the core, then there is some
coalition S such that the players in S could all do strictly better than in
x by cooperating together and dividing the worth v(S) among them-
selves.
Given a strategic-form game F with transferable utility, if we plan to
apply the core as our solution concept, then the minimax representation
in coalitional form is probably the appropriate way to derive a charac-
teristic function from r. When v is the minimax representation, the
inequality FiES xi

< v(S) is necessary and sufficient to imply that the
players in S can guarantee themselves payoffs that are strictly better
than in x, no matter what the other players in N\S do.
The core is a very appealing solution concept, in view of our assump-
tion that any coalition can negotiate effectively. For Example 9.1, in
which the players can get 300 only if they all cooperate, the core is
{x E R3 I x, + x2  + x3  = 300, x, > 0, x2  > 0, x3  > 0}.
That is, the core treats the three players symmetrically in this game and
includes all individually rational Pareto-efficient allocations.
For Example 9.2, in which players 1 and 2 can get 300 together
without player 3, the core is
{x E R31 x, + x2  = 300, x, > 0, x2
0, x3  = 0}.

--- Sayfa 447 ---
9.3 The Core 429
So the weakness of player 3 in this game is reflected in the core, where
he always gets 0.
Unfortunately, the core may be empty, as it is for Example 9.3, which
may be called the three-person majority game. In this game, the worth
available to the grand coalition can also be achieved by any two players.
Thus, when any player i gets a positive payoff in a feasible allocation,
the other two players must get less than the worth (300) that they could
get by themselves. The emptiness of the core may help to explain why
the dynamics of coalitional negotiations seemed so important and yet
so complicated for this example. No matter what allocation may ulti-
mately occur, there is always a coalition that could gain if it could get
one more final opportunity to negotiate effectively against this alloca-
tion.
There are also some games in which the core is nonempty but may
seem rather extreme. For example, consider a game in which there are
2,000,001 players, among whom 1,000,000 players can each supply one
left glove, and the other 1,000,001 players can each supply one right
glove. Let NL  denote the set of left-glove suppliers and let NR denote
the set of right-glove suppliers. The worth of each coalition is defined
to be the number of matched pairs (one left glove and one right glove)
that it can make. That is,
v(S) = min{ S fl NL
fl NR I }.
(Here, for any coalition T, ITI denotes the number of players in T.)
The core of this game consists of the unique allocation x such that
xi  = 1 if i E NL, xi  = 0 if j E NR
To see why this is the only allocation in the core, suppose that some
right-glove supplier has positive payoff in a feasible allocation. Then
the total payoff to the other 2,000,000 players must be less than
1,000,000, which they could improve on by making 1,000,000 matched
pairs among themselves without this one right-glove supplier. To inter-
pret the unique core allocation economically, we might say that, because
right gloves are in excess supply, they have a market price of 0. However,
the sensitivity of this result is quite dramatic. If we added just two more
left-glove suppliers, the unique core allocation would switch to the al-
location in which every left-glove supplier gets payoff 0 and every right-
glove supplier gets payoff 1.

--- Sayfa 448 ---
430 9 • Coalitions in Cooperative Games
This instability of the core for large games can be mitigated by con-
sidering E-cores. For any number E, an allocation x is in the E-core, or
the E-approximate core, of the coalitional game v iff
E = v(N) and E
v(S) — Els', vsc N.
iEN
iES
That is, if x is in the E-core then no coalition S would be able to guarantee
all its members more than E above what they get in x. For this left glove—
right glove game, an allocation x is in the E-core iff
minfx, I i E NL} + minfx, I j E NR}
1 — 2E.
That is, the worst-off left-glove supplier and the worst-off right-glove
supplier together must get at least 1 — 2E. So with 1,000,000 left-glove
suppliers and 1,000,001 right-glove suppliers, if E > 0.0000005 then,
for any number a such that 0 1, the allocation x such that
xi  = 1 — a,
= a/1.000001, Vi E NL, Vj E NR,
is in the E-core.
Although the logical appeal of the core is self-evident, its possible
emptiness forces us to critically question its significance. In fact, given
a game v and a feasible allocation x that is not in the core of v, we
cannot conclude that the players could not cooperatively agree to the
allocation x. If a coalition can make binding agreements that its members
cannot subsequently break without the consent of all others in the
coalition, then the existence of a coalition that can improve on x may
be irrelevant, because some players in S could be prevented from acting
as members of this coalition by their previous binding agreements with
other coalitions. On the other hand, if coalitions cannot make binding
agreements, then the members of a coalition S that can improve on x
might nonetheless abstain from negotiating against this allocation, be-
cause they may fear that whatever improvement they might agree on
might itself be overturned by subsequent negotiations by other coali-
tions, with the ultimate result of making some members of S worse off
than in x.
Furthermore, even if an allocation x is in the core of v and coalitional
agreements are binding, there may still be some forms of coalitional
bargaining under which an attempt to achieve x might be blocked by
some coalition. For example, suppose that N = {1,2,3} and

--- Sayfa 449 ---
9.3 • The Core 431
v({1,2,3}) = 9, v({1,2}) = v({1,3}) = v({2,3}) = 6,
and
v({1}) = v({2}) = v({3}) = 0.
Suppose that a lawyer offers to help the players by promising to give
them the core allocation (3,3,3) if they will all sign a contract to give
him power of attorney, to act on their behalf in all coalitional bargaining.
Suppose that a second lawyer announces that, if the three players all
sign power of attorney over to him, then they will get the noncore
allocation (4,4,1). Suppose furthermore that each lawyer announces
that, if only two players sign with him, then they will each get a payoff
of 3 whereas the other player will get 0. Given these two lawyers' offers,
there is an equilibrium of the implicit contract-signing game in which
all players sign with the first attorney and get the core allocation (3,3,3).
However, there is also an equilibrium in which the three players all sign
with the second lawyer and get (4,4,1). The problem is that in the
noncooperative contract-signing game each player's decision is not be-
tween the options "get allocation (3,3,3)" and "sign with second lawyer"
but between "sign with first lawyer (who might give (3,3,3) but might
give 0)" and "sign with second lawyer." Because the first lawyer cannot
guarantee (3,3,3) unless everyone signs with him, the second lawyer can
block the (3,3,3) allocation in equilibrium.
Thus, the logical appeal of the core is based implicitly on assumptions
that, when a coalition S contemplates blocking an allocation x by nego-
tiating for some alternative allocation y that is feasible for them, (1) they
are not prevented from doing so by prior agreements, (2) their agree-
ment on such an alternative allocation y would be final, and (3) if they
do not agree as a coalition on this alternative y, then they really will get
the allocation x.
Although such assumptions may seem questionable in the context of
cooperative games with small numbers of players, they are rather close
in spirit to the kinds of assumptions made in the analysis of large
competitive markets. In economic theory, it is generally assumed that
any small set of individuals perceive that the general market equilibrium
offers them terms of trade that are fixed independently of their own
trading decisions, although they may be free to negotiate other terms
of trade among themselves. Building on this insight, Debreu and Scarf
(1963) and Aumann (1964) proved a classical conjecture of Edgeworth
(1881) that, for large market games, the core is essentially equivalent to
the set of competitive (Walrasian) equilibria. Furthermore, Kaneko and

--- Sayfa 450 ---
432 9 • Coalitions in Cooperative Games
Wooders (1982), Wooders (1983), and Wooders and Zame (1984) have
proved that, in a certain sense, all large games have nonempty approx-
imate cores.
To understand these core existence theorems, we begin with a general
characterization of games in which the core is nonempty; this charac-
terization is due to Bondereva (1963) and Shapley (1967) and is based
on duality theory of linear programming. Consider the problem of
finding the least amount of transferable utility that is necessary for an
allocation that no coalition can improve on. This problem is a linear
programming problem and can be formulated as follows:
(9.2)
minimize E x, subject to E xi  v(S), vs C N.
xERN
iEN
iES
(The optimal solutions to this linear programming problem are called
the balanced aspirations for the players in v, and they coincide with the
core when it is nonempty; see Cross, 1967, Albers, 1979, and Bennett,
1983.) We let L(N) denote the set of all coalitions among the players in
N, so
L(N) = ISIS C N and S
01.
Then the dual of this linear programming problem, as defined in Sec-
tion 3.8, can be written:
(9.3)
maximize E ii,(S)v(s) subject to E 11,(S) = 1, vi E N.
µE RV )  SCN
SD{:}
It is not difficult to show that the constraints of these two linear pro-
gramming problems can be satisfied by some appropriate vectors x and
1i. Thus, by the duality theorem of linear programming, there exist
optimal solutions to both problems and the optimal values of their
objective functions are equal. That is, for any given game v in coalitional
form, there exists an allocation x in RN  and a vector in RL(N)  such that
(9.4)
ii(S) 0 and E
v(S), VS C N,
iES
(9.5)
E p.(S) = 1, Vi E N,
sQ{i}
(9.6)
E µ(S)v(S) = E xi.
SCN
iEN

--- Sayfa 451 ---
9.3 • The Core 433
For example, if v is as given in Example 9.3 (the three-player majority
game with maximal worth 300), then these conditions are satisfied when
x = (150,150,150), p({1,2}) = 1.({1,3}) = 1.1({2,3}) = 1/2,
and all other R(S) = 0.
A coalitional game v on the set of players N is balanced iff, for any p.
in 11`,4N),
ifµ satisfies (9.5) then E i(S)v(S)
v(N).
SCN
The fact that the optimal solutions to the linear programming problems
(9.2) and (9.3) have the same optimal values of the objective functions
implies that a game v has a nonempty core if and only if it is balanced.
To interpret this result, we need to use some additional facts about
linear programming. If a linear programming problem has an optimal
solution, then it must have an optimal solution that is an extreme point
or corner of the set of vectors that satisfy the constraints. There are
finitely many of these extreme points. If the coefficients in the con-
straints are rational numbers, then the components of each extreme
point are all rational numbers (see Chvatal, 1983).
Notice that the constraints of the dual problem (9.3) depend only on
the set of players N, not on the game v. Thus, given N, there is a finite
set of rational vectors—the corners of the feasible set—such that, for
any coalitional game v on N, one of these vectors is an optimal solution
of the dual problem (9.3). Let K be the lowest common denominator of
the components of these vectors. Then, for any coalitional game v on
the set of players N, there exists some 1.1, such that vi is an optimal
solution of the dual problem (9.3), and, for every coalition S, KR(S) is
a nonnegative integer. Let q(S) = K.t(S), for each S. Then (9.5) and
(9.6) can be rewritten:
(9.7) 	n(S) = K, Vi E N,
sDli)
(9.8)
E Ti(S)v(S) = K
x2.
SCN
iEN
Of course, K itself is a positive integer. So suppose that we replicate
the original game K times. That is, consider a large game in which, for
every player in the original game v, there are K different individuals

--- Sayfa 452 ---
434 9 • Coalitions in Cooperative Games
who are identical to this individual in their ability to form coalitions.
We can formally define the K-fold replicated game v' that is generated by
v as follows. Let the new set of players be
N' = N x {1,2, .
,K}.
We say that a subset S' of N' is a replicated version of a subset S of N iff,
for every i in N, the set 1/1(i,/) E S'} has one member if i E S, and has
no members if i 0 S. For any subset S' of N', if S' is a replicated version
of some subset S of N, then let w(S') = v(S), and otherwise let w(S') =
minzEN  v({i}). Then let the K-fold replicated game v' be the superadditive
cover of this coalitional game w on the set of players N'.
Condition (9.7) asserts that we can make a partition of N' in which,
for each subset S of N, there are 1(S) replicated versions of the coalition
S. (Recall that T,(S) is a nonnegative integer.) Such a partition of N'
would use exactly the K copies ((i,l) E N', for 1 = 1, . . ,K) of each
player i in N. Condition (9.8) asserts that such a partition of the players
in N' will generate a total transferable worth that is large enough to
give each player (i,l) in N' the payoff x,. Finally, (9.4) asserts that this
payoff allocation cannot be improved on by any coalition S' in the
coalitional game v' on N', because x cannot be improved on by any
coalition S in the coalitional game v on N. That is, the core of the K-
fold replicated game v' on the set of players N' must be nonempty. This
argument proves the following theorem, which is due to Kaneko and
Wooders (1982).
THEOREM 9.1. Given the finite set N, there exists a positive integer K such
that, for any game v in coalitional form with transferable utility on the player
set N, the core of the K-fold replicated game that is generated by v is nonempty.
For example, let v be Example 9.3, the three-person majority game
where any pair of players has worth 300. Then the K-fold replicated
game has a nonempty core whenever K is even. With an even total
number of players, every player can be matched into a two-person
coalition with another player and get payoff 150, which no coalition can
improve on. On the other hand, suppose that K is odd. Then the K-
fold replicated game has an empty core, because if we try to partition
the 3K players into pairs, then we must have one unpaired player left
over. However, with 3K players, it is possible to form (3K — 1)/2 disjoint
pairs, each worth 300, and then transfer utility to achieve the allocation

--- Sayfa 453 ---
9.3 • The Core 435
in which each player gets (300(3K — 1)/2)/3K = 150 — 50/K. For any
positive number E, this allocation is in the E-core when K
50/E. So the
e-core of the K-fold replicated game is nonempty whenever K is suffi-
ciently large.
The following theorem, which extends this result to general games
in coalitional form, has been proved by Kaneko and Wooders (1982).
THEOREM 9.2. For any coalitional game v with transferable utility on the
finite set N and for any positive number E, there exists an integer K* such that,
for every k that is greater than K*, the E-core of the k-fold replicated game that
is generated by v is nonempty.
(I give here only a sketch of the proof. The idea is to let K* be a large
multiple of the number K from Theorem 9.1. Then all but a small
fraction of the players can be grouped into disjoint coalitions of size K,
where they can get core allocations, which become E-core allocations
after each player pays a small tax of E. This small tax on everyone can
then be used to finance an E-core allocation for the remaining small
fraction of the players.)
In a large replicated game, any player has a large number of twins
who are perfect substitutes for himself in any coalition. However, this
property is not sufficient to guarantee nonemptiness of approximate
cores. For a counterexample, consider a game in which there are 3K
players, and the worth of any coalition S is
v(S) = 2K if 1 S
2K,
v(S) = 0 if 151 < 2K.
For any K, no matter how large, the core of this game is empty.
The maximum individual contribution in a coalitional game v is the
maximum amount that a single player can increase the worth of any
coalition, that is,
max{v(S) — v(S — 01S C N, i E S}.
The maximum individual contribution of the K-fold replicated game
that is generated by v is the same as the maximum individual contri-
bution of the game v itself, so it stays constant as K increases. However,
in the above game with an empty core, the maximum individual con-
tribution is 2K, which diverges to infinity as K gets large. Wooders and

--- Sayfa 454 ---
436 9 • Coalitions in Cooperative Games
Zame (1984) have shown that, in a general class of games with bounded
maximum individual contributions, approximate cores of large games
are nonempty.
The duality conditions (9.4), (9.5), and (9.6) can also be directly in-
terpreted in terms of a dynamic matching process that players continually
enter and leave over time. In this process, N is reinterpreted as the set
of classes of players, and each player who enters the process belongs to
exactly one class in N (e.g., the class of left-glove suppliers). Suppose
that, for each i in N, one new player of class i enters the matching
process during each unit of time (say, each day). Suppose also that every
player must be matched or assigned to a coalition that contains at most
one player of each class, after which he leaves the matching process. A
player may wait to be matched, so the players in a coalition may have
entered the matching process at different times. Whenever an S coalition
(that is, a coalition containing exactly one player from each class in the
set S) is formed, it generates v(S) units of transferable utility that can
be divided among its members in any way.
For each S such that S C N, let 11.(S) denote the average number of S
coalitions that are formed per unit time in this matching process. For
every i in N, to match all class-i players in the long run,µ must satisfy
EsD{z} I-L(S) = 1. Thus, the existence of a solution to conditions (9.4)-
(9.6) implies that there exists a way to match all the players in this
process such that the expected allocation of payoffs to the various classes
of players cannot be improved on by any coalition.
9.4 The Shapley Value
The core of a coalitional game may be empty or quite large, a situation
that makes the core difficult to apply as a predictive theory. The best
that we could hope for would be to derive a theory that predicts, for
each game in coalitional form, a unique expected payoff allocation for
the players. That is, we would like to identify some mapping 4):IIL(N)  —›
RN  such that, when the players in N play any coalitional game v, the
expected payoff to each player i would be cl)(v). Here we use the notation
4)(v) = (42(v)),EN•
Shapley (1953) approached this problem axiomatically. That is, he
asked what kinds of properties we might expect such a solution concept
to satisfy, and he characterized the mappings If) that satisfy these prop-
erties.

--- Sayfa 455 ---
9.4 • The Shapley Value 437
A permutation of the set of players N is any function 77:N ---> N such
that, for every j in N, there exists exactly one i in N such that 7r(i) = j
(that is, 7r:N --> N is one-to-one and onto). Given any such permutation
Tr and any coalitional game v, let 'Try be the coalitional game such that
.Trvair(i)I i E
= v(S), VS C N.
That is, the role of any player i in v is essentially the same as the role
of the player Tr(i) in 7rv. Shapley's first axiom asserts that only the role
of a player in the game should matter, not his specific names or label
in the set N.
AXIOM 9.1 (SYMMETRY). For any v in RL(N), any permutation 77:N --->
N, and any player i in N, 4),(,)(7rv) = 41(v).
We say that a coalition R is a carrier of a coalitional game v iff
(9.9)
v(S fl R) = v(S), VS C N.
If R is a carrier of v, then all the players who are not in R are called
dummies in v, because their entry into any coalition cannot change its
worth. Notice that (9.9) and the convention v(25) = 0 imply that, if R is
a carrier and i
R, then v({i}) = 0. Shapley's second axiom asserts that
the players in a carrier set should divide their joint worth (which equals
the worth of the grand coalition) among themselves, allocating nothing
to the dummies.
AXIOM 9.2 (CARRIER). For any v in RL(N)  and any coalition R, if R
is a carrier of v, then E,,, 4)(v) = v(R).
In place of Shapley's third axiom—additivity—we consider here a
closely related linearity axiom. For any two coalitional games v and w
on the player set N and any number p that is between 0 and 1, let pv +
(1 – p)w denote the coalitional game such that, for each coalition S,
(pv + (1 – p)w)(S) = pv(S) + (1 – p)w(S).
To interpret this game, suppose that the players in N will play tomorrow
either the coalitional game v or the game w, depending on some random
event that will be observable tomorrow (say, v if it rains tomorrow and
w if it does not). Suppose that p is the probability that tomorrow's game
will be v, and 1 – p is the probability that tomorrow's game will be w.

--- Sayfa 456 ---
438 9 • Coalitions in Cooperative Games
If the players bargain and negotiate today, planning their strategies for
tomorrow's moves in advance, then the situation that they face today
can be represented by the coalitional game pv + (1 — p)w, because
planned cooperative behavior by any coalition S would earn an expected
worth of pv(S) + (1 — p)w(S). According to the function 4), if the players
bargain today, then the expected payoff to player i should be 4)(pv +
(1 — p)w); but if the players bargain tomorrow, then i's expected payoff
should be p4t.,(v) + (1 — p)4),(w). The linearity axiom asserts that the
expected payoff to each player should not depend on whether the
players bargain about their coalitional strategies today (before the res-
olution of uncertainty) or tomorrow (after the resolution of uncertainty).
AXIOM 9.3 (LINEARITY). For any two coalitional games v and w in
RL(N),  any number p such that 0
p
1, and any player i in N,
(1)0v + ( 1  1410 = P 'JO + (1  -
01)2(4
Remarkably, Shapley showed that there is a unique mapping 4)--
called the Shapley value—that satisfies these three axioms.
THEOREM 9.3. There is exactly one function (1):RL(N)  --> RN  that satisfies
Axioms 9.1, 9.2, and 9.3 above. This function satisfies the following equation,
for every i in N and every v in le:
z(v) =
ISMNI
!SI —  1)!  (v(S U {i}) — v(S)).
 SCN-z
IN II

(Here, for any positive integer k,k!=lx2x...xk, and 0! = 1.)
The formula in Theorem 9.3 can be interpreted as follows. Suppose
that we plan to assemble the grand coalition in a room, but the door to
the room is only large enough for one player to enter at a time, so the
players randomly line up in a queue at the door. There are INI ! dif-
ferent ways that the players might be ordered in this queue. For any
set S that does not contain player i, there are IS I!( IN — ISI — 1)!
different ways to order the players so that S is the set of players who
are ahead of player i in the queue. Thus, if the various orderings are
equally likely, I SI !( INI — I S I — 1)!/INI ! is the probability that, when
player i enters the room, he will find the coalition S there ahead of him.
If i finds S ahead of him when he enters, then his marginal contribution
to the worth of the coalition in the room when he enters is v(S U {i}) —

--- Sayfa 457 ---
9.4 The Shapley Value 439
v(S). Thus, under this story of randomly ordered entry, the Shapley
value of any player is his expected marginal contribution when he
enters.
If v is superadditive, then the Shapley value must be individually
rational, in the sense that
44)i(v)
v({i}), bpi E N.
To verify this fact, notice that superadditivity implies that
v(S U {i})
v(S) +
VS C N —
so i's marginal contribution to any coalition is never less than v({i}).
Proof of Theorem 9.3. Given the random order interpretation, it is
straightforward to verify that the formula in the theorem satisfies the
three axioms. The formula is linear in v and treats the various players
symmetrically. (In the formula for 41)„ all that matters about a coalition
is whether it contains i and the number of players that it contains.)
Furthermore, for any ordering, the scheme of paying of marginal con-
tributions guarantees that the total payoff v(N) will be divided among
the players and dummies will get 0; so any carrier R must get v(N),
which equals v(R).
We now show that there can exist at most one function that satisfies
the three axioms. The carrier axiom implies that 44),(0) = 0 for every
player i, where 0 is the coalitional game that assigns worth 0 to every
coalition. This fact, together with Axiom 9.3, implies that (1) must be a
linear mapping from RL(N)  to RN. (Axiom 9.3 by itself actually only
asserts that (I) must be an affine mapping.) Notice that RL(N), the set of
coalitional games on N, is a (21NI  — 1)-dimensional vector space.
For any coalition R, let wR  be the coalitional game that is defined so
that
(9.10)
wR(S) = 1 if R C S, wR(S) = 0 otherwise.
That is, a coalition has worth 1 in w, if it contains all the players in R,
but it has worth 0 in wR  if it does not contain all the players in R. (We
call wR  the simple R-carrier game.) By the carrier axiom, we must have
E (I)i(wR) = 1, and 4);(wR) = 0, Vj R,
iER

--- Sayfa 458 ---
440 9 • Coalitions in Cooperative Games
because R and R U
are both carriers of wR. By the symmetry axiom,
all players in R must get the same payoff. So
(9.11)
4),(wR) = 1/IR , Vi E R; and 4;•j(wR) = 0, Vj 0 R.
There are 2 I  '
I  — 1 such games wR, one for each coalition R. Fur-
thermore, these games are linearly independent in the vector space
RL(N). To prove linear independence, we must show that the equation
ER E L(N) et RW R = 0 implies that all aR  equal 0. If not, let S be any coalition
of minimal size such that as  0 0; then we get
0 =
aRwR(S) = E aR  =
REL(N)
RCS
0
which is a contradiction. So {wR  IR E L(N)} is a basis for RL(N), because
it is linearly independent and contains as many vectors as the dimension
of the space. But a linear mapping is completely determined by what it
does on a basis of the domain. Thus, there is a unique linear mapping
(1):RL(N)  ---> RN  that satisfies (9.11) for every game wR. I
The Shapley value is a powerful tool for evaluating the power struc-
ture in a coalitional game. For Example 9.1, where all three players
must agree to get $300, the Shapley value is (100,100,100). For Example
9.2, where only players 1 and 2 need to agree to get $300, the Shapley
value is (150,150,0). For Example 9.3, where any pair of players can
divide $300, the Shapley value is (100,100,100), by symmetry.
In the left glove—right glove game with 2,000,001 players, including
one extra right-glove supplier, the Shapley value of any right-glove
supplier is the probability that, in the randomly ordered entry process,
the players who enter before him will include more left-glove suppliers
than right-glove suppliers. This probability is very close to .5. Aumann
(1987b) has calculated that the Shapley value of this game gives .499557
to each right-glove supplier and .500443 to each left-glove supplier. So
the Shapley value shows just a slight disadvantage for the right-glove
suppliers in this game. This conclusion may seem quite reasonable,
because the excess supply of right gloves is so small in relation to the
whole market.
For another interesting game, consider the apex game (due to
Maschler). In this game, N = {1,2,3,4,5},
v(S) = 1 if 1 E S and 151
2,
v(S) = 1 if I S I
4,

--- Sayfa 459 ---
9.4 The Shapley Value 441
and v(S) = 0 otherwise. In this game, we call player 1 the big player,
and the other four, small players. The big player with any one or more
of the small players can earn a worth of 1, and the four small players
can together also earn a worth of 1. The core of this game is empty. In
the randomly ordered entry process, the big player will have a marginal
contribution of 1 unless he enters first or last, which happens with
probability 2/5, so 4,(v) = 3/5. By symmetry, the four small players must
get the same values. By the carrier axiom, the values of all five players
must sum to 1. Thus, the Shapley value of this game is
cl)(v) = (3/5, Vio,
The formula for the Shapley value can be equivalently written
(9.12)
v I R N I — I RI — 1)1  (v(N R) — v(R)).
(MO =
RCN—
I NI!
So the value of each player depends only on the differences between
the worths of complementary coalitions. For each pair of complemen-
tary coalitions, S and N\S, the values of the players in N\S increase as
v(N\S) — v(S) increases, and the values of the players in S increase as
v(S) — v(N\S) increases.
This result has implications for the analysis of cooperative games with
transferable utility in strategic form. Given a strategic-form game F as
above, suppose that each coalition S must choose a threat us  in A(C5),
and these threats will determine a characteristic function by the formula
v(S) =
u,(crs,o-ms),
and v(N\S) = E u (cr.s  o-  1
, N\s,•
iES
'EMS
Suppose that the Shapley value (1)(v) is the expected payoff allocation
that the players will ultimately get, as a result of some bargaining process
in which all of these coalitional threats are taken into account. Then
each member of coalition S should want to choose as  to maximize
v(S) — v(N\S) = E u,(crs,cr„„s) — E Iii (Crs,0" At\s)
iES
JENNS
while each member of N\S should want to choose g iv-vs to minimize this
difference. Thus, as Harsanyi (1963) has argued, the rational-threats
representation (discussed in Section 9.2) may be the appropriate way to

--- Sayfa 460 ---
442 9 • Coalitions in Cooperative Games
derive a game in coalitional form from a game in strategic form when
the Shapley value is being used to determine the outcome. (For a sys-
tematic analysis of more general systems of threats and values, see
Myerson, 1978b.) With this representation, the ultimate payoff to each
player i in the cooperative game will be
k--‘

(9.13)
IR
— RI —  1)!  8(Nvi,R),
2,
RCN—i
where 8(N\R,R) equals
max
min
E u,(crN,R,crR) — E uk(crN\R,crR)
crnAR E
(CN\R) crRE (CR) JEN\R
kER
Aumann and Shapley (1974) extended the theory of the Shapley value
to games with infinitely many players. In this work, they used a variety
of approaches, defining values both axiomatically and by taking the
limit of large finite games. Their results are both mathematically elegant
and rich in economic intuition. To avoid the measure-theoretic prereq-
uisites of their work, we can only offer here a sketch of their results for
a small subset of the range of games that they considered. (For a study
of noncooperative equilibria of games with infinitely many players, see
Schmeidler, 1973.)
Let H be a finite set, representing the set of classes of players, and
suppose that there are infinitely many players of each class. Let us
describe coalitions here by the fraction of the players of each class who
are in the coalition. So we can say that r =h,1hEH  is a fractional coalition
iff r is in the set [0,1]", where each component rh  is interpreted as the
fraction of all class-h players who are in the coalition. When we interpret
our infinite-player model as an approximation of a very large finite-
player game, then rh  can also be interpreted as the number of class-h
players in the coalition divided by the total number of class-h players in
the game. Then an infinite game in coalitional form can be represented
by a function f:[0,1]" —> R where, for each r in [0,1]H, f(r) denotes the
worth of a fractional coalition r in the game. We require f(0) = 0, where
0 is the vector in which all components are 0. We also assume here that
the function f•) is continuous on [0,1]" and, for each h in H, the partial
derivative of f(r) with respect to rh, denoted by f;,(r) or (afiarh)(r), is
nonnegative and continuous at every r such that rh  > 0. (So f satisfies
the hypotheses of Proposition 10.17 of Aumann and Shapley, 1974.)

--- Sayfa 461 ---
9.4 The Shapley Value 443
Let 1 denote the vector in [0,1]N  in which all components are 1. For
any number a, al then denotes the vector in which all components are
a. The set {al 0 < a < 1} is called the main diagonal of the set [0,1r.
In a large finite game, when the players form coalitions according to
the model of randomly ordered entry described above, the set of players
who precede any specific player should be, with high probability, a
statistically large sample randomly drawn from the overall population.
(Only if the player is one of the first few to enter would the sample fail
to be "statistically large." The key idea from basic statistics that we are
applying here is that the statistical properties of a sample depend on
the size of the sample but not on the size of the population from which
it is drawn.) Thus, by the law of large numbers, the relative numbers
of the various classes in the sample that precedes the player should,
with very high probability, be very close to the same as the relative
numbers of these classes in the set of all players in the game. That is,
the fractional coalition that precedes any given player in the coalition-
formation process is very likely to be close to the main diagonal, when
the game is large.
When a class-h player enters a fractional coalition r, his marginal
contribution is proportional to f /,' (r), the partial derivative of f(r) with
respect to rh. Because the coalition that precedes any player is almost
surely on (or almost on) the main diagonal in large games but might be
drawn from anywhere on this diagonal according to the uniform dis-
tribution, the value of the class-h players in the game f should be
(9.14) 	th(al)da.
0
Actually, (9.14) should be interpreted not as the value of a single class-
h player but as the total value or sum of the values of all class-h players
in the game f. By symmetry, each class-h player must get an equal share
of the value in (9.14). That is, if the infinite game f is an approximation
to some large finite game in which there are K players of each class,
then the value of each class-h player in the large finite game should be
approximately equal to the quantity in (9.14) divided by K.
We say that f is 1-homogeneous iff, for every r in [0,1]H  and every a in
[0,1], f(ar) = af(r), so the worth of a coalition is proportional to its size
(when the ratios between the numbers of different classes of players are
kept constant). If f is 1-homogeneous, then its partial derivatives are
constant along the main diagonal. Thus, if f is 1-homogeneous, then

--- Sayfa 462 ---
444 9 • Coalitions in Cooperative Games
the value of the class-h players is just f',(1), their marginal contribution
in the grand coalition. If we add the assumption that f is also concave,
then it can be shown that this value allocation is also the unique point
in the core. (A vector x in RH  represents an allocation in the core of f
iff IhElf rhxh f(r) for every r in [0,1]H.) Thus, there is a wide and
important class of games with infinitely many players in which the core
and the value coincide.
9.5 Values with Cooperation Structures
In the Shapley value, the payoff for any player i depends on the worth
of every possible coalition. For any coalitional game v with transferable
utility, where N is the set of players, all 2INI — 1 coalitional worths enter
into the formula for •1),(v), and the coefficient of any v(S) depends only
on the number of players in S and on whether i is in S. There are some
situations, however, in which such symmetric treatment of all coalitions
may be unrealistic. In general, we use the term cooperation structure to
refer to any mathematical structure that describes which coalitions
(within the set of all 2INI — 1 possible coalitions) can negotiate or
coordinate effectively in a coalitional game.
There may be exogenous factors that make some coalitions intrinsi-
cally more important than others. Geographical, sociological, or even
linguistic barriers may make some coalitions easier to form than others.
For example, if a firm is viewed as a game played by the various
managers and workers, the coalition of all managers and workers whose
first names begin with "R" is unlikely to be able to cooperate or negotiate
effectively, whereas the coalition of all workers who work together in a
particular building is likely to be able to cooperate.
The relatively greater effectiveness of some coalitions may also arise
as an endogenous consequence of players' decisions. For example, in a
three-player majority game like Example 9.3 (where any two players
can achieve the same worth as all three players together), two players
may have strong incentive to form an effective coalition together and
to refuse to negotiate separately with the third player. On the other
hand, in a three-player unanimity game like Example 9.1 (where only
the grand coalition can earn a positive worth), there would probably be
much less incentive for players to form such exclusive negotiation agree-
ments.

--- Sayfa 463 ---
9.5 • Values with Cooperation Structures 445
Thus, we need a theory to offer answers to two questions. First, if
some coalitions can be more effective than others, how should the
outcome of any given coalitional game depend on the cooperation struc-
ture? Second, if the cooperation structure can be influenced by exclusive
negotiation agreements among the players, what kinds of cooperation
structures should we expect to observe, in any given coalitional game?
Clearly, the second question of predicting endogenous cooperation
structures can be understood only after we have some answer to the
first question of how expected payoffs might depend on the cooperation
structure. Thus, most of this section is devoted to the first question. I
describe several ways that the Shapley value has been extended to
depend on the cooperation structure.
Cooperation structures can be most simply described if we assume
that each player will belong to one active or effective coalition. Under
this assumption, the cooperation structure in a game can be described
by a partition of the set of all players N. Then, given any coalitional
game v on the set of players N, for each player i and each coalition S
that contains i, we need to specify the payoff that player i would get if
S were the active coalition to which he belonged. Harsanyi (1963) and
Aumann and Dreze (1974) suggested that this payoff should be the
Shapley value of player i in the coalitional game v restricted to subsets
of S, which we denote 4),(v,S). That is, we let
(9.15)
itoi(v,S) = 2,
(v(T U
— v(T)).
TCS-i
!SI!
TI — 1)!

Of course, 4,(v,N) = 4,(v).
Myerson (1980) has shown that this coalitional value 4:1) is the unique
solution to the following system of equations:
(9.16)
I 4),(v,$) = v(S), VS C N;
i ES
(9.17)
44),(v,S) — 4,(v,S —j) = 4j(v,S)— 4 3(S-0, VS C N, Vi E S, Vj E S.
(When S is any set, then we let S — i denote the set differing from S by
the removal of i, so S — i = S\{i}.) Condition (9.16) asserts that the total
payoff to the members of an active coalition S should be the worth of
that coalition. Condition (9.17) asserts that, for any two members of an
active coalition S, the amounts that each player would gain or lose by
the other's withdrawal from the coalition should be equal. We can view

--- Sayfa 464 ---
446 9 • Coalitions in Cooperative Games
(9.16) as an efficiency condition and (9.17) as an equity or balanced-
contributions condition.
If the contributions that are equated in (9.17) are all nonnegative,
then we can suppose that players will all welcome one another into
coalitions and that restricted-negotiation agreements should therefore
be unlikely. For instance, in Example 9.1 we have
•fli(v,S) = 100 if IS 1 = 3, 4,=(v, S) = 0 if IS 1
2.
On the other hand, if some contributions 41,(v,S) — (1),(v,S — j) are
negative, then there may be some tendency for players to try to exclude
one another and form active coalitions that are smaller than N. For
instance, in Example 9.2,
4),(v,S) = 100 if IS 1 = 3,
(1),(v,S) = 150 if 1S1 = 2,
4,(v,S) = 0
if IS 1 = 1;
so 1),(v,N) — .4),(v,N — j) = —50 for any two players i andij.
Myerson (1977) suggested that cooperation structures can be de-
scribed by graphs in which the nodes correspond to the players and the
branches or links represent communication links or friendship relation-
ships between pairs of players. So let L2(N) denote the set of all pairs
of players; that is,
L2(N) =
E N,j E N,
Then any subset of L2(N) can be called a graph on the set of players or
a graphical cooperation structure. For any such graph G, any coalition S,
and any players i and j in S, we can say that i and j are connected by G
within S iff i = j or there exists some {h,,h2,
.
,hk } such that
. ,hk} C S, h, = i, hk  = j, and {1//,h1+,} E G for every 1. Let SIG
denote the partition of S into the sets of players who are connected by
G within S, so
SIG = {{ili and j are connected by G within S}1 j E S}.
We say that S is internally connected by G iff SIG = {S}. That is, S is
internally connected iff its members could communicate with one an-
other through a telephone system that only had lines between players
who are paired in G and are both in S. Given any graphical cooperation

--- Sayfa 465 ---
9.5 • Values with Cooperation Structures 447
structure, we can think of the internally connected coalitions as the set
of coalitions that can negotiate effectively.
Given any coalitional game v on the set of players N, an allocation
rule for v should then specify a payoff tPi(v,G) for every player i and
every graphical cooperation structure G. A fair allocation rule is defined
to be any such function that satisfies the following equations:
(9.18)
E ti,z(v,G) = v(S), VG C L2(N), VS E NIG,
iES
(9.19)
qr,(v,G) — 11,,(v,G — {i,/}) = 41,,(v,G) — 45(v,G —
VG C L2(N), V{i,j} E G.
Condition (9.18) is an efficiency condition, asserting that each maximal
internally connected coalition will divide its worth among its members.
Condition (9.19) is an equity condition, asserting that any two players
should gain or lose equally by creating a link between themselves.
Myerson (1977) proved that there exists a unique fair allocation rule
for any coalitional game v. Furthermore, if we let L2(S) denote the
graph consisting of all pairs of players in S, we have
ttri(v,L2(S)) = 4),(v,S), VS C N, Vi E S.
Thus, for the complete graph L2(N) that includes all pairs of players,
the fair allocation rule coincides with the Shapley value
tlJz(v,L2(N)) = cl),(v)•
More generally, if we let vIG denote the coalitional game such that
(v/G)(S) = E v(R), VS C N,
RESIG
then the fair allocation rule for v satisfies the equation
(9.20)
tliz(v,G) = 4i(vIG).
If v is superadditive, then both sides of (9.19) are nonnegative; that
is,
(9.21)
li,(v,G) — 111,(v,G — {i,j})
0, VG C L2(N), V{i,j} E G.
So in superadditive games, a player can never lose by forming links with
other players. For instance, in Example 9.3, the fair allocation rule is
shown in Table 9.2. (To illustrate how these allocations are computed,

--- Sayfa 466 ---
448 9 Coalitions in Cooperative Games
Table 9.2 The fair allocation rule for Example 9.3
G
(411(v,G), 4i2(v,G), 413(v ,G))
0
{{1,2}}
{{1,3}}
{{2,3}}
(0, 0, 0)
(150, 150, 0)
(150, 0, 150)
(0, 150, 150)
{{1,2},
{{l,2},
{{1,3},
{{1,2},
{1,3}}
{2,3}}
{2,3}}
{1,3}, {2,3}}
(200, 50, 50)
(50, 200, 50)
(50, 50, 200)
(100, 100, 100)
consider the fair allocation for {{1,2},{1,3}}-. Given the other allocations
above, it must satisfy
{{1,2},{1,3}1) - 150 =
{{1,2},11,311) - 0,
{{1,2},{1,3}}) - 150 = 1153(v, {{1,2},{1,3}}) - 0, and
th(v, {{1,2},{1,3}})
*2(z),  {{1,2},{1,3}})
+ 4,3(v, {{1,2},{1,3}}) = 300.
Thus, 31,1(v, {{1,2},{1,3}}) - 300 = 300, so player 1 gets 200 when he
is the only player linked to both other players.) Now consider a link-
formation process in which each player independently writes down a
list of the players with whom he wants to form a link, and the payoff
allocation is the fair allocation above for the graph that contains a link
for every pair of players who have named each other. In this game, the
unique perfect equilibrium is for every player to name all other players,
so that the outcome will be the Shapley value.
Aumann and Myerson (1988) considered a different model of en-
dogenous link formation. In their model, pairs of players sequentially
decide whether to form links, but all such links must be formed publicly,
and the process of link formation does not stop until every pair of
unlinked players has had another opportunity to form a link after the
last link was formed. For Example 9.3, the graphical cooperation struc-
ture {{1,2}} could be the result of a subgame-perfect equilibrium in
such a link-formation game. In this equilibrium, after the {1,2} link has
been formed, player 1 would understand that, if he formed a link with
player 3, then player 2 would subsequently form a link with player 3 as

--- Sayfa 467 ---
9.5 • Values with Cooperation Structures 449
well, so l's initial gains (200 — 150) by forming a link with player 3
would be followed by greater losses (100 — 200).
Consider the apex game discussed in Section 9.4 above. For this game,
4)1(v,{1,2}) = (1)2(v,{1,2}) = 1/2 = tIgi(v,{{1,2}1) = *2(v,{{1,2}})-
That is, under either of the extended values defined above, when the
big player forms a coalition with one small player, they divide their
worth equally. This result may seem unreasonable, because the big
player has more outside options than the small player. Essentially, the
problem is that the fair allocation rule ignores the impact of any coalition
that is not internally connected by the graphical cooperation structure.
Owen (1977) proposed a different value concept for games with coop-
eration structures that does take some unconnected coalitions into ac-
count (see also Hart and Kurz, 1983).
We say that 6,1,  is a nested coalition structure iff 9; is a subset of L(N) and
VS E
VT E
if S fl T 0, then S C T or T C S.
In Owen's model, a cooperation structure is described by such a nested
set of active coalitions, which Owen calls unions. That is, each player
can belong to several active coalitions, but the active coalitions to which
he belongs must be ranked by inclusion.
A nested coalition structure ?IP can also be viewed as a nested family
of partitions. For any coalition S and any player i in S, let ?,(S) denote
the largest coalition R such that
R E
i E R, and R C S (that is, R C S and R 0 S),
if any such coalition exists; otherwise, let .5,(S) =
Let 9^.(S) denote
the partition of S into such sets; that is,
= {97,(S)1 i E S} •
Then Ff,  divides the set of players N into the partition 5.(N), and each
coalition S in this partition is subdivided byF-
.4,  into the partition 5.(S),
and so on.
For any nested coalition structure 97., any coalitional game v, and any
player i, the Owen value assigns a payoff denoted by Oi(v,5). This value
is linear in the game, so 0,(0,g,) = 0 and
Oi(pv + (1 — p)w,
= pO,(v,?) + (1 — p)13,(w,5)

--- Sayfa 468 ---
450 9 • Coalitions in Cooperative Games
for any coalitional games v and w and any number p between 0 and 1.
To complete the specification of the Owen value for all games, then, it
suffices to define the Owen value for the simple carrier games (which
form a linear basis of le(N)).
So let R be any coalition, and let wR  be the simple R-carrier game
defined by (9.10). The Owen value of w, allocates the whole worth of
the grand coalition to the members of the carrier R and gives 0 to every
dummy player outside of R; that is,
(9.22)
/ 02(wR,5-.) = 1 and 0,(wR,FP) = 0, Vj E NCR.
iER
The allocation within the carrier R is defined by the following condition
(9.23)
VQ E U {N}, VS E Fi*(Q), VT E FP.(Q),
if SIIRO0 and TnR00,
then E 0z(wR,9;) = E 0,(wR,5)•
iES
JET
Conditions (9.22) and (9.23) determine a unique value 0(wR,6,4-.) =
(0,(wR,)),EN, for every coalition R and every nested coalition struc-
ture
The Owen value is based on an assumption that each union in the
nested coalition structure ?-4' appoints an agent to conduct all negotia-
tions between members of the union and players who are not in the
union. Thus, from the perspective of players not in the union, the
union will behave like a single player. (Any one-player coalition would
be represented by player i as the agent for himself.) We may suppose
that, after these agents are appointed, the agents who represent coali-
tions in .5.(N) will meet and bargain to divide among themselves the
worth of the grand coalition N. Then, for each union Q that was rep-
resented in the previous round of bargaining, the agents for the coali-
tions in 9-..(Q) will meet and bargain to divide among themselves the
value obtained by the agent for Q in the previous stage of bargaining.
This process continues until all unions in Y. have allocated their payoffs
down to the level of individuals (one-player coalitions). Condition (9.23)
asserts that, at any stage in this process, when agents meet to divide the
transferable utility that is available to them collectively (either because

--- Sayfa 469 ---
9.5 • Values with Cooperation Structures 451
they together form N or some union in g that has completed its external
bargaining), any two agents who represent players in the carrier R
should get the same shares of the available utility. Such agents should
get equal shares because each such agent has an equal ability to reduce
the worth of any larger coalition to 0, by withdrawing the players that
he represents. An implicit assumption used here is that agents for
different unions have equal bargaining ability, independent of the size
of the union that they represent.
The Owen value can be equivalently described by a story of randomly
ordered entry of players into the coalition-formation process. Given a
nested coalition structure g, let us define an 5",-permissible ordering of the
players to be any strict ordering of N such that, for any union S in g
and any two players i and j who are both in S, all players who come
between i and j in the ordering must also be in S. Now suppose that we
randomly select one of the g-permissible orderings, such that every i--
permissible ordering has an equal chance of being selected. Let S(i)
denote the set of all players who will precede player i in this ordering.
Then the Owen value for player i is the expected value of v(S(i) U {i}) —
v(S(i)).
For the apex game with the nested coalition structure g = {{1,2}},
the Owen value gives 0 to players 3, 4, and 5, value 1/4 to player 2, and
value 3/4 to player 1. (To check this, notice that, among the g-permissible
orderings, player 2 has a marginal contribution of 1 in only two order-
ings. One is the ordering where the union {1,2} comes first among the
coalitions in g.(N), which occurs with probability 1/0.(N) = 1/4, and
player 2 comes second in {1 ,2}, which has an independent probability
1/2. The second is the ordering where the union {1,2} comes last among
the coalitions in 9-,.(N), which occurs with probability 1/4, and player 2
comes first in {1,2}, which has an independent probability 1/2. Thus,
player 2 has a marginal contribution of 1 in two orderings that have a
combined probability of 1/4; otherwise player 2 has a marginal contri-
bution of 0.) Thus, unlike the fair allocation rule of Myerson (1977),
the Owen value allows player 1 to get some benefit from his stronger
power to form winning coalitions with players 3, 4, and 5, even when
he has formed a union with player 2. However, if the nested coalition
structure were changed to {{1,2},{3,4,5}}, then the Owen value would
give 1/2 to each of players 1 and 2, because they would have the same
marginal contribution to the union of the other players.

--- Sayfa 470 ---
452 9 • Coalitions in Cooperative Games
9.6 Other Solution Concepts
The core and the Shapley value are only two of many solution concepts
for coalitional games with transferable utility that have been studied by
game theorists. To describe some of the other solution concepts that
have been studied, we should first consider some basic definitions.
Throughout this section, let v be a coalitional game with transferable
utility and let N be the set of all players.
For any two allocations x and y in RN  and any coalition S, we can
write
x >s  y iff x, > y,, Vi E S.
That is, x >s  y iff x is strictly preferred to y by all the members of
coalition S. Similarly, we can write
x >S  y iff x, > yi, Vi E S.
For any partition Q of the set of players, let I(Q) denote the set of all
payoff allocations in which every player gets at least what he could get
by himself and every coalition in the partition is dividing its worth
among its members. That is,
I(Q) = {x E RN  I x, 	Vi E N, and
E = v(R), VR EQ}.

J ER
Any allocation in I({N}) is called an imputation.
For any coalition S and any allocation x, let
e(S,x) = v(S) — E
zEs
This quantity e(S,x) is called the excess of S at x and is the net transferable
worth that S would have left after paying x, to each member i. Notice,
e(S,x)
0 if and only if coalition S could by itself achieve its share of
the allocation x.
The first solutions studied by von Neumann and Morgenstern (1944)
are now known as stable sets. A stable set is any set of imputations Z such
that the following two properties hold:
(9.24)
bey E I({N}), if y 0 Z, then 3x E Z and 3S E L(N)
such that e(S,x)
0 and x >s  y.

--- Sayfa 471 ---
9.6 . Other Solution Concepts 453
(9.25)
Vy E Z, Vx E Z, VS E L(N), if x >s  y, then e(S,x) < 0.
The idea behind these conditions is as follows. We are supposed to think
of a stable set as the set of allocations that the players consider to be
possible outcomes of the game, without knowing which one will ulti-
mately be chosen. Condition (9.24) asserts that, if any other imputation
y is proposed, then there is at least one coalition S that could block the
adoption of y by insisting on getting their share of some possible out-
come in Z that is feasible for them. Condition (9.25) asserts that nothing
in Z itself can be blocked in this way by another possible outcome in Z.
For Example 9.3 (a version of the three-person majority game), there
are many stable sets. The set {(150,150,0),(150,0,150),(0,150,150)} is a
stable set. Also, for any player i and any number a such that 0 <
150, the set {x E I({N})lx, = a} is a stable set. Thus, although the core
of this game is empty, every imputation is in at least one stable set.
However, Lucas (1969) showed that some games have no stable sets.
Aumann and Maschler (1964) introduced the concept of the bargain-
ing set, offering several alternative definitions, of which we discuss here
one version (known as MY). The idea behind the bargaining set is that
a player might not make an objection to a proposed payoff allocation
if he feared that his objection might prompt a counterobjection by
another player.
An objection by a player i against another player j and a payoff allo-
cation x is a pair (y,S) such that
y E RN, S C N, i E S, j
S, e(S,y) = 0, and y >s  x.
That is, the players in S can jointly achieve their share of y, which is
strictly better for them all, including player i, than the allocation x. A
counterobjection to i's objection (y,S) against j and x is any pair (z, T) such
that
z E RN, TCN,jET,i0T,
Tns
0, e(T,z) = 0, z
x, and z 'rrls Y.
That is, in the counterobjection, player j can form a coalition T that
takes away some of i's partners in the objection (but not i himself) and
makes them at least as well off as in the objection; thus, j can restore
himself and the other members of T to payoffs at least as good as they
had in x.

--- Sayfa 472 ---
454 9 • Coalitions in Cooperative Games
The bargaining set is defined relative to a partition of the players. So
let Q denote any partition of N. An allocation x is in the bargaining set
of v, relative to the partition Q, iff x E I(Q) and, for any coalition R in
Q and any two players i and j who are in R, there exists a counterob-
jection to any objection by i against j and x. It is straightforward to
check that the core is a (possibly empty) subset of the bargaining set of
v relative to {N}. Peleg (1963) proved that, for any partition Q, if 1(Q)
is nonempty (as it must be if v is superadditive) then the bargaining set
of v relative to Q is nonempty.
For example, the bargaining set of the apex game with the parti-
tion {{1,2,3,4,5}} (all players together in the grand coalition) is
{(1 — 4a,a,a,a,a)11/23 _5 a 5- 1/21. If any small player i got less than
another small player j, then i would have an objection with the big
player 1 that j could not counter. If the small players all got some
amount more than 1/7, then player 1 would have an objection
((3/7,4/7,0,0,0),11,21) that player 3 could not counter. If the small players
all got some amount less than '/13, so that player 1 got more than 9/13,
then player 2 would have an objection ((0,1/43,4/13,4/13,4/13),12,3,4,51) that
player 1 could not counter.
With the partition {{1,2},{3},{4},{5}}, on the other hand, the bargain-
ing set of the apex game becomes {(1—a,a,0,0,0)11/4 :5 a
1/2}.
Davis and Maschler (1965) defined the kernel of v, relative to the
partition Q, to be the set of all allocations x such that x E I(Q) and, for
any coalition T in Q and any two players i and j in T,
max
e(S,x) =
max
e(T,x).
SCN-J,1ES
TCN-z,JET
That is, if players i and j are in the same coalition in the partition Q,
then the highest excess that i can make in a coalition without j is equal
to the highest excess that j can make in a coalition without i. The kernel
is always a nonempty subset of the bargaining set. For example, the
kernel of the apex game with the partition -C1,2,3,4,511 = {N} is
{(3/7,  1/2,  1/2,  1/2,  1/2) . The kernel of the apex game with the partition
{{1,2},{3},{4},{5}} is 1(1/2,1/2,0,0,0)1.
For any allocation x, let tk(x) be the kth largest excess generated by
any coalition at x. That is,
11S E L(N)le(S,x)
tk(x)}1
k,
1{S E L(N)le(S,x) > k(x)}1< k.

--- Sayfa 473 ---
9.6 Other Solution Concepts 455
Thus, x is in the core iff 1(x)
0.
Let A(1) be the set of all imputations that minimize S1. That is,
A(1) = argmin 1(x).
xemND
If the core is nonempty, then A(1) must be a subset of the core. Now,
inductively define A(k), for all k = 2,3, . . ,2INI — 1, by the equation
A(k) = argmin k(x).
xEA(k-1)
Schmeidler (1969) showed that A(21N1  — 1) must consist of a single
point, which he called the nucleolus of v. The nucleolus is in the kernel
and the bargaining set of v with the partition {N}, and it is in the core
of v if the core is nonempty. For example, the nucleolus of the apex
game is (3/7,1/2,1/2,1/2,1/2).
It is helpful to categorize cooperative solution concepts by the out-
comes that they designate for the simple two-player game where
N = {1,2}, v({1}) = v({2}) = 0, v({1,2}) = 1.
If a solution concept is derived only from the criterion of averting
coalitional objections, then the "solution" for this game should be the
set of all imputations, {(a,1—a)I 0  a 1}. Such unobjectionable solution
concepts include the core, the bargaining set (relative to {N}), and the
stable sets. On the other hand, if a solution concept is also based on
some consideration of equity between players (as well as efficiency), then
the "solution" for this game should be the allocation (1/2,1/2). Such equi-
table solution concepts include the Shapley value, the nucleolus, and the
kernel (relative to {N}).
In Chapter 8 we discussed Nash's argument that cooperative games
should be analyzed by computing equilibria of a fully specified model
of the bargaining process. As a criticism of the existing literature in
cooperative game theory, this argument may be more relevant to the
unobjectionable solution concepts than to the equitable solution con-
cepts. The unobjectionable solutions are supposed to include all the
payoff allocations that the players would accept without forming coali-
tions to demand reallocation, so it does seem reasonable to ask for a
full description of the strategic process by which players form coalitions
and make demands. (Whatever this process is, it has some Nash equi-

--- Sayfa 474 ---
456 9 • Coalitions in Cooperative Games
libria, by the general existence theorem, so the core cannot be generally
identified with the set of equilibria of a bargaining process.)
On the other hand, the equitable solutions can be defended against
Nash's argument. Like the Nash bargaining solution, the Shapley value
and other equitable solutions can be interpreted as arbitration guide-
lines, or as determinants of focal equilibria in bargaining. We only need
to assume that the unspecified bargaining process has a sufficiently large
set of equilibria and that the focal equilibrium will be determined by its
properties of equity and efficiency. Here we use "equity" to mean that
each player's gains from cooperating with others should be commen-
surate (in some sense) with what his cooperation contributes to other
players. So equitable solutions should depend on the power structure
that is summarized by the representation of the game in coalitional
form.
9.7 Coalitional Games with Nontransferable Utility
So far in this chapter, we have considered only cooperative games with
transferable utility, or TU games. Let us now consider games without
transferable utility, which may be called NTU (or nontransferable utility)
games for short. A generalized concept of coalitional form for NTU
games was developed by Aumann and Peleg (1960).
An NTU coalitional game (or a game in NTU coalitional form) on the set
of players N is any mapping V•) on the domain L(N) such that, for any
coalition S,
(9.26)
V(S) is a nonempty closed convex subset of Rs,
and
(9.27)
{x I x E V(S) and x, v„ Vi E S} is a bounded subset of Rs,
where
(9.28)
v, = max-Cy, E V({il)} < oo, Vi E N.
Here, V(S) represents the set of expected payoff allocations that the
members of coalition S could guarantee for themselves (in some sense)
if they acted cooperatively. Closedness and convexity (9.26) of V(S) are
natural technical conditions. In particular, convexity may follow from
an assumption that members of a cooperative coalition can use jointly
randomized strategies. Condition (9.28) asserts that the maximum pay-

--- Sayfa 475 ---
9.7 . Nontransferable Utility 457
off that any player can guarantee himself alone is finite. Condition (9.27)
asserts that a coalition cannot offer unbounded payoffs to any player,
unless it gives less to some other player in the coalition than he could
get alone.
We say that V is compactly generated iff there exists some set SI that is
a closed and bounded (i.e., compact) subset of RN  such that, for each
coalition S and each allocation x in V(S), there exists some allocation y
in SZ such that (y,)," is a vector in V(S) and xi  5- y, for every player i in
S. We say that V is comprehensive iff, for each coalition S and each vector
z in Rs, if there exists some vector x such that x E V(S) and z, xi  for
every i in S, then z E V(S).
An NTU coalitional game V is superadditive iff, for any two coalitions
S and T,
if S fl T = 0, then
V(S U T) D E Rs' I (x,),(s E V(S), (x,),(7- E V(T)}.
So superadditivity means that S U T can give its members any allocations
that they could get in the disjoint coalitions S and T separately.
The NTU coalitional form is a generalization of the coalitional form
with transferable utility. Any TU coalitional game v in RL(N)  is equivalent
to the NTU coalitional game such that
(9.29)
V(S) = tx E Rs  I
xi  5 v(S)} .
iES
When condition (9.29) holds, V is a superadditive NTU coalitional game
iff v is a superadditive coalitional game with transferable utility. How-
ever, V cannot be compactly generated if it satisfies (9.29) for some v in
RL(N).
Two-person bargaining problems may also be viewed as a special class
of NTU coalitional games. That is, when N = {1,2}, an NTU coalitional
game V may be identified with a two-person bargaining problem
(F,(v,,v2)) where v, and v2  are as specified in (9.28) and F = V(11,21).
Let F = (N,(C,)„,(u,),(,) be any finite game in strategic form, without
transferable utility. Aumann and Peleg (1960) suggested two ways that
such a game might be represented in NTU coalitional form.
An allocation vector x in Rs  is assurable in F for coalition S iff there
exists some joint correlated strategy as  in A(Cs) such that, for every
strategy cr,,, in A(C,$),

--- Sayfa 476 ---
458 9 • Coalitions in Cooperative Games
(9.30)
ui(as,crms) > xi, Vi E S.
That is, x is assurable for S iff the players in S can guarantee that they
all get at least as much as in x, when they must announce their joint
correlated strategy before the joint correlated strategy of the players in
N\S is chosen. The assurable representation of r is the NTU coalitional
game V' such that
Va(S) = {x E Rs  I x is assurable in F for S}, VS E L(N).
An allocation vector x in Rs  is unpreventable in r for coalition S iff,
for each strategy crms  in A(C,$) that the complementary coalition could
use, there exists some strategy us  in A(Cs) that satisfies condition (9.30).
That is, x is unpreventable for S iff the players in S could guarantee
that they all get at least as much as in x, when they can choose their
joint correlated strategy after the joint correlated strategy of the players
in N\S is announced. The unpreventable representation of r is the NTU
coalitional game V° such that
V°(S) = {x E Rs  Ix is unpreventable in r for S}, VS E L(N).
It is straightforward to verify that V' and V° both satisfy the condi-
tions of closedness, convexity, and boundedness that are required of an
NTU coalitional game. Aumann (1961) showed that V' and V° are both
superadditive, and they are both compactly generated (with, for ex-
ample, SI equal to the set of all x such that Ix,' max,E, I ui(c)I for
every i) and comprehensive. Aumann (1959, 1967) and Mertens (1980)
have shown that the unpreventable representation V° has some concep-
tual advantages over V" in the study of repeated games.
Clearly, Va(S) C V°(S) for any coalition S. For a simple example where
the assurable and unpreventable representations differ, consider the
coalition {2,3} in the three-player game shown in Table 9.3, where the
pure strategy set for each player i is = la„b21.
Table 9.3 A three-player game in strategic form
Cl
C2 X C3
a2,a3
b2,a3
a2,b3
b2,63
a,
b,
1,2,2
1,1,3
0,5,0
0,0,5
2,3,0
2,0,3
1,3,1
1,2,2

--- Sayfa 477 ---
9.7 • Nontransferable Utility 459
If player 1 chose a1, then the coalition {2,3} could not guarantee more
than 2 utility units to player 3, even if it could move after player 1.
Similarly, if player 1 chose b1, then the coalition {2,3} could not guar-
antee more than 2 to player 2. After player 1 announced any random-
ized strategy o-1, the coalition {2,3} could guarantee at least 2 to each of
its members by letting cr{2,3}(a2,a3) = a1(a1) and cr{2,3}(62,b3) = o-,(bi)•
Thus, the unpreventable set for coalition {2,3} is
1/13(12,31) = {(x2,x3)1x2
2, x3
2}.
Now consider the case where coalition {2,3} must announce o{")  first,
before player 1 chooses a,. No matter what a{2,3}  might be, the worst
outcome for player 2 would be if player 1 chose b1, and the worst
outcome for player 3 would be if player 1 chose a1. So choosing o-{2,3}
can only guarantee an allocation x for {2,3} if
x2  5 lof  2,302, as) + Ocr{2,3}(b2,a3) + 0o{2,3}(a2,63) + 2o-{2,3}(b2,b3),
x3  5 2o-{2,3}(a2,a3) + Ocr{2,3}(62,a3) + Ocr{2,3}(a2,b3) + lo-{2,3}(62,63)•
(The coefficients in the first inequality are 2's payoffs when 1 chooses
b1, and the coefficients in the second inequality are 3's payoffs when 1
chooses a1.) Thus, the assurable set for coalition {2,3} is
Va({2,3}) — {(x2,x3)Ix2  5 2, x3  5 2, x2  + x3  5 3},
which has extreme points at (2,1) and (1,2).
Since we have invested so much in the study of TU games in coali-
tional form, it will be analytically helpful to have ways to generate TU
coalitional games that might correspond (in some sense) to a given NTU
coalitional game. One obvious way to generate such a game is to let the
worth of each coalition be the maximum sum of payoffs that it can
achieve for its members, that is,
v(S) = max E X,.
xE V(S) iES
However, this TU coalitional game is not an adequate representation
of the NTU game V when utility is not really transferable, because it
contains no information about the distribution of payoffs among the
players. For example, consider the two-player NTU game where
V({il) = Ix, Ix, 5 01 , for i = 1,2,
V({1,2}) = {(xl,x2)12x1  + x2  5 0, x1  :5 0, x2  5- 2}.

--- Sayfa 478 ---
460 9 Coalitions in Cooperative Games
Because (-1,2) E V({1,2}), we would get v({1,2}) = 1, but the {1,2}
coalition could not really do anything with this worth because it could
be achieved only by forcing player 1 to accept less than he could get on
his own. If utility is not transferable, then there is no way for player 2
to make such a sacrifice worthwhile for player 1.
There is a way, however, in which an NTU coalitional game can be
adequately represented by a family of TU coalitional games, which we
now consider. Here, the symbol RN+  denotes the set of all vectors in RN
in which all components are nonnegative, and RN„ denotes the set of
all vectors in RN  in which all components are strictly positive.
Recall from Chapters 1 and 2 that no decision-theoretic properties of
a game are transformed if we change to measuring a player's payoffs
in some scale that is derived by multiplying his given utility scale by a
positive constant or weighting factor. Thus, a natural generalization of
the assumption of transferable utility is the assumption of transferable
X-weighted utility, where X = (X,),E, is any vector in We
We say that X-
weighted utility is transferable iff there exists some freely transferable
(and disposable) currency such that, for each player i, the utility payoff
to i would be increased by X, for every additional unit of this currency
that i gets. If we alter the situation represented by an NTU coalitional
game V by allowing transferable X-weighted utility, then the feasible set
of each coalition S would become
y E Rs  E X,y, max E
.
iES 	 xEV(S) iES
So given any positive vector X in RN„, and any compactly generated
NTU coalitional game V, we define a TU coalitional game vx  by
(9.31)
vA(S) = max E Aix„
E L(N).
xEV(S) :ES
That is, vs(S) is the highest sum of X-weighted payoffs that coalition S
could achieve by any allocation that is feasible for it. As a coalitional
game, vx  characterizes the situation that would exist if A-weighted pay-
offs were transferable. This coalitional game vX  is called the A-transfer
game generated by V.
The following theorem shows that the family of all A-transfer games
generated by V together contain essentially all the information in the
structure of V itself.

--- Sayfa 479 ---
9.7 Nontransferable Utility 461
THEOREM 9.4. Let V be any compactly generated and comprehensive NTU
coalitional game. For any coalition S and any vector y in Rs, y E V(S) if and
only if, for every X in RN,,
E Xiy, < vx(S),
iES
where vx  denotes the X-transfer game generated by V.
Proof. If y is in V(S), then the maximization in (9.31) includes the case
of x = y, so the inequality in the theorem follows.
The converse step requires the separating hyperplane theorem (see, for
example, Rockafellar, 1970). The separating hyperplane theorem as-
serts that, for any closed convex subset Z of any finite dimensional
vector space Rs, and for any vector y in Rs, y
Z if and only if there
exists some vector y in Rs  such that
sup
yizi < E yzy
zEZ iES 	 iES
So suppose now that y is not in V(S). The separating hyperplane
theorem immediately implies that there exists some y in Rs  such that
sup
yde, <
-y,y,.
xE V(S) iES 	 iES
By comprehensiveness, if y had any negative component y„ then the
supremum here would be +co, because the component xi  can be made
arbitrarily far below 0, so the inequality could not be satisfied. Thus, -y
must be in R. This conclusion implies that the term "sup(remum)"
here may be replaced by "max(imum)." because V is compactly gener-
ated (so the maximum exists in the set).
For any positive number E, let X,(E) = y, + E for every i, and notice
that X(E) = (X,(6))1 ES E Rs+4.• We now show that, for some sufficiently
small E,
max E Xi(e)x, < E Xi(
xEV(S) iES
iES
so the inequality in the theorem cannot be satisfied for all X in Rs++
when y 0 V(S). If not, then for every E there exists some vector z(e) in
the closed and bounded set 1-2. (that compactly generates V) such that
the vector (;(E )),Es  is in V(S) and

--- Sayfa 480 ---
462 9 • Coalitions in Cooperative Games
E xi(Ozz(6)
xi(c)yi.
iES
iES
By compactness of fl, there exists a sequence of possible values for E,
converging to 0, and there exists a vector i such that limE_,0  z(e) = I.
But then (i,),Es  is a vector in V(S) and
E YiYi,
iES 	 iES
which contradicts the way that y was constructed. I
9.8 Cores without Transferable Utility
Given an NTU coalitional game V on the set of players N, the core of V
may be defined as the set of all allocation vectors x in RN  such that
x E V(N) and, for any coalition S and any allocation y in Rs,
if y, > x„ Vi E S, then y
V(S).
That is, x is in the core iff it is feasible for the grand coalition N, and
no coalition has a feasible vector that is strictly better for all its members
(see Scarf, 1967).
By taking into account the possibility of randomization among coali-
tions, we can generate a second concept of a core for NTU games. This
solution concept is known as the inner core and has great theoretical
importance (see Qin, 1989).
In Section 9.3, we argued that the appeal of the core relied on an
implicit assumption that, when players in a set S are offered a chance
to form a blocking coalition against an allocation x, the players expect
that they will really get the allocation x if any player in S refuses to join
the blocking coalition. That is, the proposed blocking coalition S is
assumed to be final, and no other coalition will subsequently block x if
S does not. Maintaining this assumption, we now broaden our scope to
consider blocking coalitions that are organized by a mediator who uses
a randomized strategy.
To describe the plan of such a mediator, let a randomized blocking plan
be any pair (1,Y) such that 1 is a probability distribution on the set of
coalitions, so -q E A(L(N)), and Y is a function on L(N) that satisfies the
feasibility condition
(9.32)
Y(S) E V(S), VS E L(N).

--- Sayfa 481 ---
9.8 • Cores without Transferable Utility 463
Here 1(S) represents the probability that the mediator will make S a
blocking coalition S, and Y(S) = (Y,(S))zE S represents the allocation that
the members of S would take for themselves if they formed a blocking
coalition together. Given such a randomized blocking plan (1,Y), sup-
pose that the mediator first chooses, randomly according to 1, the
blocking coalition that he will attempt to form, and then he invites each
member of this coalition separately to participate in the blocking coali-
tion. Suppose that each player i knows only the plan (1,Y), but not the
actual blocking coalition, when the mediator invites him to participate.
Then, conditional on being invited to participate in the blocking coali-
tion, the expected payoff to player i if everyone accepts the mediator's
invitation is
E Ti(S)Y i(S)
sD{i}

E Ti (s)
sD(i)
Suppose also that, if any member of his blocking coalition refuses to
participate in it, then the coalition cannot act and no further blocking
against x will be attempted. Thus, there is an equilibrium in which every
player would be willing to accept the mediator's invitation iff, for any
player i who has a positive probability of being invited by the mediator,
i's conditionally expected payoff when he is invited to participate is at
least x‘. This condition holds iff
(9.33)
E i(S)Yi(S)
E 1(s)xi, Vi E N.
sD{i}
sD{i}
We say that a randomized blocking plan (1,Y) is viable against x iff it
satisfies (9.33). An allocation x in RN  is strongly inhibitive for the game V
iff there does not exist any viable randomized blocking plan against it.
That is, an allocation is strongly inhibitive iff it could not be blocked by
any random one-stage coalition-formation plan.
The following theorem asserts that any strongly inhibitive allocation
for the NTU coalitional game V corresponds to a X-weighted payoff
allocation that cannot be blocked in the X-transfer game generated by
V, for some X.

--- Sayfa 482 ---
464 9 • Coalitions in Cooperative Games
THEOREM 9.5. Suppose V is a compactly generated NTU coalitional game.
An allocation x is strongly inhibitive for V if and only if there exists some vector
X in RN„ such that
E X,x, > vK(S), VS E L(N),
zES
where vx  denotes the X-transfer game generated by V.
Proof. Let Z(x) be the subset of RN  such that z E Z(x) iff there exists
some randomized blocking plan (1,Y) such that
(9.34)
;
E .9(S)(Yi(S) — xi), Vi E N.
SJ{i}
It is straightforward to show that Z(x) is closed, when V is compactly
generated. Furthermore, Z(x) is convex. To show convexity, let z and
be any two vectors in Z(x), and let p be a number between 0 and 1.
Suppose that (r),Y) verifies (9.34) for z, and (i),Y) verifies the same
condition for 1. To verify that pz + (1 — p)z is in Z(x), it suffices to
consider the randomized blocking plan (j, Y) such that, for any coali-
tion S
TO) = PTI(S) + ( 1  — P)*S),
F(S)Y(S) = kil(s)y(s) + ( 1 — oys)iks).
Such a plan (74,P) exists, because each V(S) is convex.
The allocation x is strongly inhibitive iff the zero vector in RN  is not
in Z(x). Thus, by the separating hyperplane theorem, x is strongly in-
hibitive iff there exists some vector X in RN  such that,
sup E xi;
 < 0.
zEZ(x) iEN
We know that X.
	be negative, for any i, because reducing the
component z, toward —00 would never take the vector z out of the set
Z(x) but would increase I," Xzz, to +00 if X had any negative compo-
nents. Thus, the vector X satisfies this condition iff, for every random-
ized blocking plan (1, Y),
E x, E Ti(s)(71(s) — xi) < 0.
iEN
SJ{i}

--- Sayfa 483 ---
9.8 • Cores without Transferable Utility 465
This inequality can be rewritten
E -q (S) E xy,(s) — x,) < 0.
SEL(N) 	iES
But this condition can be satisfied for every randomized blocking plan
Y) iff
max E
— x,) < 0, VS E L(N).
yEV(S) iES
So x is strongly inhibitive iff there exists some X in RN such that
vx(S) — E x,x, < 0, VS E L(N).
iES
This condition could not be satisfied when S = {i} if ki  were 0, so X
must be in RN . •
We say that x is inhibitive iff there exists some sequence of strongly
inhibitive allocations that converge to x. That is, an allocation is inhibitive
iff, by perturbing the allocation an arbitrarily small amount, we could
get an allocation against which there is no viable randomized blocking
plan. Thus, if an inhibitive allocation can be blocked, it can only be a
knife-edge phenomenon, with at least one player willing to veto the
blocking coalition and insist on x.
The inner core of V is the set of all inhibitive allocations in V(N). It is
straightforward to verify that the inner core is a subset of the core. By
Theorem 9.5, the inner core has a natural interpretation in terms of
the X-transfer games in coalitional form generated by V. In particular,
x is in the inner core of V iff x E V(N) and, for each positive number e,
there exists some vector X in RN„ such that the allocation vector
(X,(x, + 8))z" is in the core of the TU coalitional game vx'€, that is
defined by the equations
vx'(N) = vX(N) + e (
Xi) , and vx'E(S) = vx(S), VS
N,
:EN

where vX  is the X-transfer game generated by V.

--- Sayfa 484 ---
466 9 • Coalitions in Cooperative Games
Consider the three-player game V such that
V(11,2,31) = tx1 E xi
9, VS E L(N)} ,
iES
V({1,2}) = {(Xi ,X2) I Xi + 9x2 5- 9, x1 5- 9, x2  5_ 1},
V({2,3}) — {(x2,x3) I x2  + 9x3
9, x2
9, .X3
1 },
V({1,3}) = {(x,,x3)I x3  + 9x, 5_ 9, x3  5 9, x, < 1},
V({il) = {(x,) I x, 5_ 0},
for i = 1,2,3.
This game is compactly generated and superadditive. Furthermore, its
core is nonempty, including the allocation (3,3,3), for example. How-
ever, its inner core is empty. To see why (3,3,3) is not in the inner core,
consider the randomized blocking plan (1,Y) such that
1,21) = i({2,3}) = 11(11,31) = 1/3,
Y({1,2}) = (9,0), Y({2,3}) = (9,0), Y({1,3}) = (0,9).
Conditional on his being invited to participate in the randomized block-
ing coalition, a player would have an expected payoff of 4.5, which is
strictly better than what he gets in (3,3,3).
As we saw in Section 9.3, there is a sense in which large games tend
to have nonempty cores if only small coalitions matter. To formalize
this proposition for the inner core, let us temporarily reinterpret N as
a set of classes of players, rather than as the set of players itself. As at
the end of Section 9.3, consider a dynamic matching process in which, for
each i in N, new individuals of class i enter the matching process at
some positive birth rate p,. Every individual who enters the matching
process is to be assigned to some coalition with at most one player of
each class, and he leaves the matching process in this coalition. Suppose
that V(S) describes the set of payoff allocations that players in a coalition
can get if S is the set of classes of the players in the coalition.
To characterize the output of such a dynamic matching process, a
matching plan is any pair (11,Y) such that Y(.) satisfies the feasibility
condition (9.32), i. is in RI:,_(N), and .t satisfies the following balance
condition:
(9.35)
E 11(s) = p1, Vi E N.
sD{i)
For any S in L(N) and any i in S, Y,(S) denotes the expected payoff that
a class-i player would get in this matching process if he were assigned
to a coalition where the set of classes represented is S, and ii(S) denotes

--- Sayfa 485 ---
9.8 • Cores without Transferable Utility 467
the rate at which such S coalitions are being formed in the matching
process. The balance condition (9.35) asserts that the rate at which class-
i players are assigned into coalitions to leave the matching process must
equal the rate at which class-i players enter the matching process. The
expected payoff to a class-i player in this matching plan is then
ii(S)Y,(S)
sD{2}
p,
The following theorem asserts that inhibitive allocations can always
be achieved when the game V is infinitely replicated and turned into
such a dynamic matching process.
THEOREM 9.6. Suppose that V is compactly generated and p E RN„ . Then
there exists some matching plan (II, Y ), satisfying feasibility (9.32) and balance
(9.35), such that the vector
E  p.(s)Y,(s)

sD{z}
pi
)iEN
is an inhibitive allocation for V.
Proof. Let fl be the closed and bounded set within which V can be
compactly generated. Let b be a number big enough so that
+ p, + 1 < b,
Vx E SZ, Vi E N.
If x is an allocation vector that is not strongly inhibitive, then define
the set f(x) such that y E f(x) iff there exists some randomized blocking
plan (1,Y) such that (i, Y) is viable against x and
y, = x, +
1-1(S), Vi E N.
sD{i}
Now define a correspondence g:[—b,b]N  —>—> [—b,b]N  as follows. If x
is strongly inhibitive, then let g(x) = {x — p}. If x is not inhibitive, then
let g(x) = f(x). Finally, if y is inhibitive but not strongly inhibitive, then
let f(x) be the smallest convex set that contains both {x — p} and f(x) as
subsets. It can be verified that the range of g on [—b,br is contained in
[—b,b]N. If x, < —b + p, for any i, then x is not inhibitive, because v,
—b + p„ sol(fil) = 1 and y({il) = v, would characterize a viable blocking
plan (recall equation 9.28); and so any y in g(x) must be in f(x) and must
satisfy x, y,
x, + 1. On the other hand, if x, > b — 1 for some i, then
there cannot be any viable blocking plan (1,Y) against x such that

--- Sayfa 486 ---
468 9 • Coalitions in Cooperative Games
Es,{0 n(S) is  positive, so any y in g(x) must have y, ;. Furthermore, it
can be checked that g(x) is always a nonempty convex set and is upper-
hemicontinuous.
Thus, by the Kakutani fixed-point theorem, there exists some x such
that x E g(x). Such an x must be inhibitive but not strongly inhibitive,
and there must exist some viable blocking plan (q, Y) against x such that
the vector
E TO)
sD{i}
)iEN
is proportional to p. That is, there must exist some positive number q
such that Esp{,}  i(S) = qp, for every player i. So let f.L(S) = T(S)/q for
every S in L(N). Then (Ix, Y) is a matching plan that satisfies the balance
condition (9.35), and, by the viability condition (9.33),
E  p.(s)ii(s)
sD{i}
Pi
> xi, Vi E N.
But if x is inhibitive, then any vector that is higher in all components is
also inhibitive. So the vector of expected payoffs (Esj{,}R(S)Yi(S)/Pi)iEN
is inhibitive. I
9.9 Values without Transferable Utility
Just as the inner core of an NTU coalitional game V can be defined in
terms of the cores of (slight perturbations of) the X-transfer games
generated by V, so NTU versions of the Shapley value and other solution
concepts can be defined in terms of these X-transfer games (see Shapley,
1969).
The Shapley NTU value can be defined for NTU coalitional games
as follows. Let V be an NTU coalitional game, and suppose that V is
compactly generated. For any X in RN„, let be the X-transfer game
generated by V. The Shapley value 4(vx) must be interpreted as an
allocation of X-weighted utility, because the coalitional worths in vx  are
sums of X-weighted utilities for the players. Thus, we must divide each
component of 4(vx) by the corresponding component of X, to compute
the allocation of payoffs in the original utility scales that corresponds
to this allocation of K-weighted utility. Let EF(V,X) = (43,(V,X)),EN  be the
allocation vector computed in this way, so

--- Sayfa 487 ---
9.9 • Values without Transferable Utility 469
4),(V X) = (1)`x(vx)
Vi E N, VX E
It can be shown that, if V is compactly generated, then vX  and t(V,X)
depend continuously on X in RN„. Furthermore, for any X,
(9.36)
E x,4),(v,x) = sup E x‘x„
iEN
xEV(N) iEN
and if V is superadditive, then
(9.37)
',(V,X)
vi, Vi E N.
Let
(13 * ( V ) denote the subset of RN  that is the closure of
{(13.(V,X)I X ERN„}. That is, x E t*(V) iff there exists some sequence
(X(k))17_, such that x = (13(V,X(k)). (Taking this closure will be
essential to proving the existence theorem below.)
If the Shapley value of a TU coalitional game is considered to be a fair
and reasonable solution, then any feasible allocation x in V(N) that equals
(13.(V,X) for some X in RN„ might similarly be considered as a fair solution
to V, by a kind of "independence of irrelevant alternatives” argument.
That is, an impartial arbitrator might reason as follows: "The players
would have bargained to x if they believed that transfers of X-weighted
utility were possible; so the players should be willing to stay with x
(which is feasible without transfers) even when such transfers are not
possible." By extension, we can apply this argument to any feasible
allocation that is in 1*(V) and so is arbitrarily close to allocations that
would be fair by such X-transfer standards. Finally, we might argue that,
if an allocation x would be a reasonable solution if it were feasible, then
any feasible allocation that is better than x for all players should be
considered to be a reasonable solution. Thus, we define a Shapley NTU
value of V to be any allocation y such that y E V(N) and there exists some
vector x such that x E 4*(V) and x, y, for every i in N. That is, the set
of Shapley NTU values is
V(N) fl {x + zix E 431)*(V), z ERN} •
Under this definition, a sufficient condition for x to be a Shapley
NTU value of V is that there exists some X in RN„ such that
(i)i(z/t)
x =
and x E V(N).
Xi ) EN

--- Sayfa 488 ---
470 9 • Coalitions in Cooperative Games
When this condition is satisfied, we refer to X as the vector of natu-
ral scale factors (or natural utility weights) supporting the Shapley NTU
value x.
Remarkably, the Shapley NTU value generalizes both the Shapley
value and the Nash bargaining solution. If V is equivalent to a TU
coalitional game v, in the sense of equation (9.29), then the supremum
in (9.36) will be finite only when X is a positive scalar multiple of the
vector of all ones (1,1, . . . ,1); so the original Shapley value 4D(v) will be
the only vector in (I)*(V) and the unique Shapley NTU value of V. On
the other hand, if V is equivalent to an essential two-person bargaining
problem (F,(v,,v2)), in the sense that N = {1,2}, v, and v2  are as defined
in (9.28), and F = V({1,2}), then by Theorem 8.2 the Nash bargaining
solution of (F,(v,,v2)) will be the unique Shapley NTU value of V.
An NTU coalitional game may have more than one Shapley NTU
value, but a general existence theorem can be proved.
THEOREM 9. 7 . Suppose that V is compactly generated and superadditive.
Then there exists at least one Shapley NTU value of V.
Proof. Actually, we only need to consider utility-weight vectors X
where the components sum to 1. Let E be any small positive number
less than 1/IN I , and let
AE(N) = {X E RNI E Xi = 1, x,
E, Vj E
.
iEN
Let fl be a closed, convex, and bounded subset of RN  such that, for any
x in V(N) there exists some y in II fl V(N) such that y, xi  for all i.
For any pair (X,y), define the set L(X,y) such that (p.,x) E fe(X,y) iff
x E argmax E x,z„
zEWW(N) iEN
E DE(N),
and, for each player i,
if (13i(V,X) — yi  < max (4);(V,X) — y;), then [Li  = E.
jEN
It can be verified that the correspondence fe:AE(N) x (11 fl V(N)) -->—>
AE(N) x (Si fl V(N)) is upper-hemicontinuous and nonempty convex-

--- Sayfa 489 ---
9.9 • Values without Transferable Utility 471
valued, so it satisfies all of the conditions of the Kakutani fixed-point
theorem. Thus, there exists some (X(e),y(s)) such that
(X(c),y(c)) E MX(E),Y(E))•
Let S = argmax,EN  (0.,(V,X(E)) — x(E)). Using (9.36) yields
o = E x,(6)(4),(v,x) — yz(E))
iEN
=
— I N\S I E) max (0j(17,X(E))
Yj(6))
jEN
+ E E(op,x(e)) — yi(E)).
iEN\S
So, using (9.37) yields
c max10,(yi(E)
vi)}
jEN
iEN 	1 — INIE
A sequence (ek),7=, can be found such that
ek  = 0 and (Y(Ek))k=1
is a convergent sequence with some limit 5,  in the closed and bounded
set n fl V(N). Along this sequence, the right-hand side of the above
inequality converges to 0. Thus, a subsequence can be found along
which, for each player j, the numbers (1),(V,X(ek)) also converge to some
limit such that vj  35,. So the allocation 7c is in (1)*(V), and the
feasible allocation y is a Shapley NTU value of V. I
Aumann (1985) derived the Shapley NTU value from a set of axioms
similar to the axioms for the Shapley value (in the TU case) and for the
Nash bargaining solution. We present here a modified version of his
derivation.
Let a+V(N) be the upper boundary of the closed convex set V(N), that
is, the set of all weakly Pareto-efficient allocations in V(N). Because V(N)
is convex, it can be shown that, for any allocation x in a+  V(N), there
exists at least one vector X in A(N) such that
(9.38)
x E argmax E ky•
yE V(N) jEN
Such a vector X is called a supporting vector for V(N) at x. (The general
existence of nonzero supporting vectors for a convex set at any point
on its boundary is known as the supporting hyperplane theorem. This result

--- Sayfa 490 ---
472 9 • Coalitions in Cooperative Games
is a straightforward corollary of the separating hyperplane theorem.)
Geometrically, the supporting vector X that satisfies (9.38) is orthogonal
to a tangent plane to V(N) at x. If there is a corner of V(N) at x, then
there may be many such supporting vectors in A(N) for V(N) at x.
Aumann's smoothness condition rules out the possibility of such corners.
In addition, he uses a condition that all weakly Pareto-efficient alloca-
tions are also strongly Pareto efficient. We can subsume these two as-
sumptions by saying that V(N) is positively smooth iff, for every x in a +V(N),
there exists a unique supporting vector X in Y(N) that satisfies condition
(9.38). (Recall from Section 1.6 that °(N) = A(N) (.1
For any two NTU coalitional games V and W, and any number p
between 0 and 1, let pV + (1 -- p)w be defined so that, for any coalition
S, (pV + — p)w)(s) is the closure in Rs  of the set
{py + (1 — p)z ly E V(S), z E W(S)}.
For any vector X in RN++, let XV denote the NTU coalitional game such
that
(XV)(S) = {(a0z)zEsiY E V(S)},
VS E L(N).
Let 'P(.) be a mapping that determines a set of "solutions" T(V) for
any NTU coalitional game V. We can then consider the following ax-
ioms.
AXIOM 9.4 (EFFICIENCY). For any NTU coalitional game V,
T(V) C a ± v(N).
AXIOM 9.5 (SCALE COVARIANCE). For any X inRN±±  and any NTU
coalitional game V, T(XV) = {(X,x,),E„,lx E T(V)}.
AXIOM 9.6 (EXTENSION OF SHAPLEY VALUE). If V is equivalent
to a TU coalitional game v, in the sense of (9.29), then Ilf(V) = {4(v)}.
AXIOM 9.7 (CONDITIONAL LINEARITY). Suppose that V and W
are positively smooth NTU coalitional games, p is a number between 0 and 1,
pV + (1 — p)W satisfies the conditions (9.26)—(9.28) of a NTU coalitional
game, y E T(V), z E ‘If(W), and py + (1 — p)z E (3±(pV + (1 — p)W)(N).
Then py + (1 — p)z E 4,(pv + (1 — p)W).

--- Sayfa 491 ---
9.9 • Values without Transferable Utility 473
Conditional linearity is a weaker version of a natural generalization
of the linearity axiom for the Shapley value in the TU case. (Actually,
Aumann used a conditional additivity axiom that is slightly simpler.
Here we use linearity instead of additivity to be more consistent with
Section 9.4.) Axiom 9.7 asserts that, if randomizing between the solu-
tions of V and W is efficient in pV + (1 — p)W, then it is a solution of
pV + (1 — p)W. It can be shown that these four axioms are satisfied
when Ilf(V) denotes the set of Shapley NTU values of V. (Without the
positive smoothness condition, however, the Shapley NTU value would
not satisfy conditional linearity.)
THEOREM 9.8. Suppose that TO satisfies the above four axioms. Let V
be any positively smooth NTU coalitional game, and let x be any allocation in
gf(V). Then x is a Shapley NTU value of V.
Proof Let X be the unique supporting vector in ii°(N) for V(N) at x.
By scale covariance, (X,x,),„ is in 4'(XV). For each coalition S, let
W(S) = tz E Rs1I; :5 vx(S)},
:ES
where vx  is the X-transfer game generated by V. By extension of the
Shapley value, 111(W) = 1.4)(vx)}. It can be shown that
.5(W) + .5W = W.
Furthermore, .5(X,x,)," + .54(vx) E a+w(N), because >,EN  k,x, =
So conditional additivity implies that
.5(X,x)1EN
.54 (v'') = (1)(vx);
and so x, = 4,(vx)/X, for every player i. Thus, x is a Shapley NTU
value. I
Other definitions of NTU values have been suggested by Harsanyi
(1963) and Owen (1972). The Harsanyi NTU value may be described
as follows. Suppose that V is a comprehensive NTU coalitional game.
For any S, let
a+V(S) = {x E V(S)I Vy E Rs, if y, > xi  Vi E S, then y V(S)}.
An allocation x is a Harsanyi NTU value if there exists some vector X
in RN„ and some function X(.) such that

--- Sayfa 492 ---
474 9 • Coalitions in Cooperative Games
X(S) = (X,(S)),Es  E a,v(s), VS E L(N),
X,X,(S) — XiX,(S—j) = XA(S) — 	 VS E L(N),
Vi E S, Vj E S,
x = X(N) E argmax E ?tor,.
yEV(N) :EN
(The original definition by Harsanyi, 1963, was somewhat more com-
plicated, but this formulation is equivalent; see Myerson, 1980.) The
Harsanyi NTU value also generalizes both the TU Shapley value and
the two-player Nash bargaining solution, and it has been axiomatically
derived by Hart (1985b).
For example, consider the Banker Game from Owen (1972), where
V({il) = {(x)lx
0}, for i = 1,2,3,
V({1,2}) = {(x,,x2)lx, + 4x2  5_ 100, x,
100},
V({1,3}) = {(x,,x3)1X1  5- 0, x3  5- 0},
V({2,3}) = {(x2,x3)IX2  5- 0, x3  5 0},
V({1,2,3}) = {(X I ,X2,X3)1X1
+ x3 5- 100}.
The idea is that player 1 can get $100 with the help of player 2. To
reward player 2, player 1 can send him money; but without player 3,
there is a 75% chance of losing the money that is sent. Player 3 is a
banker who can prevent such loss in transactions. How much should
player 1 pay to player 2 for his help and to player 3 for his banking
services?
The unique Shapley NTU value for this game is (50,50,0), supported
by the natural scale factors X = (1,1,1). With these weights,
vx(11,21) = 100 = vx({1,2,3}),
because (100,0) is feasible for the coalition {1,2}, and every other coali-
tion S gets vX(S) = 0; so 4(vx) = (50,50,0) E V(N).
The unique Harsanyi NTU value is (40,40,20), supported by X =
(1,1,1) and
X,({i}) = 0, for i = 1,2,3,
X1({1,2}) = X2({1,2}) = 20,
Xi({1,3}) = X2({1,3}) = 0,
X2({2,3}) = X3({2,3}) = 0,
X1(11,2,31) = 40 = X2({1,2,3}), X3({1,2,3}) = 20.

--- Sayfa 493 ---
9.9 • ITalues without Transferable Utility 475
The Harsanyi NTU value gives less to players 1 and 2, because it takes
account of the fact that the {1,2} coalition could achieve the maximal
sum of payoffs only by choosing an allocation that would be rather
unfair to player 2. If the {1,2} coalition were constrained to choose a
feasible allocation that gave them equal gains in X-weighted utility over
what each could get alone, then they would have to settle for a sum of
payoffs of at most 40. The Owen NTU value also gives the banker a
positive payoff and gives more to player 1 than to player 2.
There is a possible rationale for the Shapley NTU value giving 0 to
the banker. Getting 0, player 3 is indifferent between accepting the
outcome specified by the Shapley NTU value or not, so it is not unrea-
sonable to assume that he will probably accept it. (Think of his payoff
in the Shapley NTU value as positive but infinitesimal, whereas his cost
of providing banking services is 0.) So suppose that there is only some
small probability q that player 3 will refuse to accept his NTU-value
allocation and will break up the grand coalition. As long as q 1/2 ,
players 1 and 2 can accommodate this possibility with no loss of expected
utility to either of them and no reduction in player 3's payoff when he
cooperates. They can simply plan to choose (100,0) if player 3 rejects
the grand coalition, and (100 — 50/(1 — q) , 50/(1 — q) , 0) if player 3
agrees to cooperate.
Now let i equal I or 2, and suppose instead that there is a small
probability q that player i would reject the Shapley NTU value (even
though it is better for him than what he could get alone) and break up
the grand coalition. In this case, the expected payoffs to the other two
players could not sum to more than 50(1 — q) without reducing player
i's payoff in the case of agreement. That is, a low-probability threat by
either player 1 or player 2 would cause real losses in the expected
payoffs of the other players, and in a symmetric manner; but such a
threat by player 3 would have no effect on expected payoffs if it were
anticipated correctly. In this sense, players 1 and 2 have equal bargain-
ing power and player 3 has none, so (50,50,0) may be a reasonable
bargaining solution.
In general, let x be an efficient payoff allocation for the grand coali-
tion, suppose that X in RN„ is a supporting vector for V(N) at x, and
suppose that V is positively smooth. Then, to a first-order approxima-
tion, small transfers of X-weighted utility are feasible near x for the
players in the grand coalition. That is, for any sufficiently small number
r, if player z allowed his payoff to be reduced from x , to x, — e/X„ then
the payoff of any other player j could be increased from to x, + e/XJ,

--- Sayfa 494 ---
476 9 • Coalitions in Cooperative Games
minus some "transactions cost" that is very small in proportion to 6,
without affecting any other player's payoff or leaving the feasible set
V(N).
Now suppose that the players are expected to accept the allocation x
almost surely, except that, with some small probability, a smaller coali-
tion S might have to choose something feasible for themselves. Suppose
also that the plans for what S would do in this case can be agreed on
by the members of S before they learn whether the grand coalition will
cooperate or not. In such a situation, the promise of a small transfer of
X-weighted utility in the likely event that N cooperates would be worth
a much larger transfer of X-weighted utility in the unlikely event that S
has to act alone. Thus, when the members of coalition S decide what to
do if they must act alone, X-weighted utility is effectively transferable
among themselves, where the medium of exchange is a promise to make
a small feasible reallocation away from x (without affecting the payoffs
to players in N\S) in the much more likely event that x is accepted. By
this argument, it may be appropriate to analyze this bargaining game
as if X-weighted utility were transferable for any coalition S. If such
analysis confirms the initial assumption that x would be a reasonable
outcome to the bargaining process when the grand coalition N coop-
erates (i.e., if Xx, = 4),(vx) for every i), then it is reasonable to argue
that x should be a cooperative solution for the NTU game V. In this
sense, the Shapley NTU values are reasonable cooperative solutions
for V.
Roth (1980) and Shafer (1980) have studied other games where Sha-
pley NTU values appear counterintuitive. For example, consider the
following NTU coalitional game, due to Roth (1980).
Vail) = {(x,)1x, 5. 0}, for i = 1,2,3,
V({1,2}) = {(x,,x2)1x1  5_ 1/2, x2  5 1/2},
V({1,3}) = {(x, ,x3) Ixi  5
1/4, x3  5 3/4},
V({2,3}) — {(x2,x3) X 2 < 1/4, x3 < 3/4},
V({1,2,3})
{(xl,x2,x3)1x, + x2  + x3  5 1, x1  < 1/2, x2  5
1/2}.
For this game, the unique Shapley NTU value is (13,1/2,1/2), supported
by the natural scale factors X = (1,1,1).
Roth argued that the only reasonable cooperative outcome for this
game is (1/2,1/2,0), because 1/2 is the best payoff that player 1 or player 2
could get in any coalition, and they can both get 1/2 without any help

--- Sayfa 495 ---
9.9 • Values without Transferable Utility 477
from player 3. Thus, there seems to be no reason for any disagreement
between players 1 and 2, and no reason for either to bargain with player
3. Notice that this argument depends on the fact that there is a corner
in V({1,2,3}) at (1/2,1/2,0), so this argument applies because this game
violates the smoothness assumption in Theorem 9.8.
One possible response to the difficulty with the Shapley NTU value
in this example is to study NTU values with cooperation structures and
theories about how such cooperation structures might be endogenously
determined. For this game, a reasonable theory of endogenous coop-
eration structure should specify that players 1 and 2 would cooperate
together without player 3.
There are alternative ways to define Shapley NTU values for strategic-
form games directly, without working through the NTU coalitional
form. Let F = (N, (Ci)i,,, (ui),,N) be any finite game in strategic form.
For any vector X in RN++, let the X-rescaled version of F be
k*r = (N, (Ci)iEN, (Xiui),(N)•
That is, X*F differs from F only in that the utility function of each
player i is multiplied by X. Let wx  denote the representation in coali-
tional form that we would compute for the strategic-form game X*F
with transferable utility, according to any one of the definitions given
in Section 9.2. For example, using the minimax representation gives us
wx(S) =
min
max I kiui(crs,cr,,$)•
0,„sE A(Cms)
EA(Cs) i E S
Then let
(1),(F,X) = (Mwx)  , Vi E N.
Then, as before, let d*(F) denote the closure in RN  of the set
{4)(r,x)1 X E11",_1+}.
Then we can say that x is a Shapley NTU value of F iff there exists
some joint strategy crN  in A(CN) and there exists some allocation y in
d*(F) such that
x, = u,(aN)> y„ Vi E N.
The general existence of Shapley NTU values for finite strategic-form
games can be proved, using conditions similar to (9.36) and (9.37), as
in the proof of Theorem 9.7.

--- Sayfa 496 ---
478 9 • Coalitions in Cooperative Games
Exercises
Exercise 9.1. Consider the following four-person game in coalitional
form, with transferable utility.
v({i}) = 0, Vi E {1,2,3,4},
v({1,2}) = v({1,3}) = v({2,4}) = v({3,4}) = 1,
v({1,4}) = v({2,3}) = 0,
v({2,3,4}) = v({1,3,4}) = v({1,2,4}) = 1,
v({1,2,3}) = 2 = v({1,2,3,4}).
(Notice that the worth of each coalition except {1,2,3} is equal to the
number of disjoint pairs that consist of one player from {1,4} and one
player from {2,3} that can be formed among the coalition's members.)
a. Show that the core of this game consists of a single allocation vector.
b. Compute the Shapley value of this game. (Notice the symmetry
between players 2 and 3.)
c. Suppose that the worth of {1,2-,3} were changed to v({1,2,3}) = 1.
Characterize the core of the new game, and show that all of the new
allocations in the core are strictly better for player 1 than the single
allocation in the core of the original game.
d. Compute the Shapley value of the new game from (c).
Exercise 9.2. Prove that, if v is the minimax representation of a stra-
tegic-form game, then v must be superadditive.
Exercise 9.3. Suppose that there are three firms producing the same
product. Firm 1 is a small firm and can produce either zero units or
one unit per day. Firms 2 and 3 are large firms, and each can produce
either two or three units per day. The market price P depends on the
total daily output, according to the formula
P = 8 — (c1  + c2  + cs),
where c, is the daily output of firm i. The transferable payoff to firm i
is its daily revenue Pc,.
a. Model this game in strategic form.
b. Calculate the minimax representation in coalitional form of this
game with transferable utility. Calculate the Shapley value of this coali-
tional game and check whether it is in the core.

--- Sayfa 497 ---
Exercises 479
c. Calculate the rational-threats representation in coalitional form of
this game with transferable utility. Is this coalitional game superadditive?
Calculate the Shapley value of this coalitional game. Is this Shapley
value individually rational, in the sense that each player i gets at least
the worth of his one-person coalition v({i})?
d. What are the defensive-equilibrium representations in coalitional
form of this game with transferable utility?
Exercise 9.4. A simple game is a game in coalitional form, with transfer-
able utility, such that v(N) = 1, where N is the grand coalition of all
players, v({i}) = 0 for every player i in N, and, for each other coalition
S, v(S) equals either 0 or 1. Player i is a veto player for a simple game v
iff
v(S) = 0, VSCN—i.

Show that the core of any simple game can be characterized in terms
of its set of veto players. (HINT: Your characterization should imply that
the core is empty if there are no veto players.)
Exercise 9.5. The Executive Council of a major international organi-
zation has five members. Countries 1 and 2 are big countries; and
countries 3, 4, and 5 are small countries. The Executive Council can
approve an action on any issue relating to international security pro-
vided both big countries and at least one small country vote for the
proposed action. The power structure on this Council may be described
mathematically by a coalitional game in which any coalition that can
approve an action (by the votes of its members alone) has worth 1, and
any coalition that cannot approve an action has worth 0.
a. What is the core of this game?
b. What is the Shapley value of this game?
c. Suppose that the three small countries form closer relations among
themselves in the Executive Council, so there is an effective nested
coalition structure {{1},{2},{3,4,5}1. What is the Owen value of this
game with this coalition structure? Does the union help the small coun-
tries, according to the Owen value?
d. Compute the Owen value of this game with the nested coalition
structure {{1,2},{3,4,5}}. If the small countries form a union, do the
big countries gain by also forming a union, according to the Owen
value?

--- Sayfa 498 ---
480 9 • Coalitions in Cooperative Games
Exercise 9.6. Consider a three-person coalitional game with transferable
utility in which v({1}) = v({2}) = v({3}) = 0, v({1,2}) = 8, v({1,3}) =
v({2,3}) = 5, v({1,2,3}) = 9.
a. Find the Shapley value and the core of this game.
b. Compute the fair allocation rule 4, for this game, and verify that
it satisfies condition (9.21).
Exercise 9.7. Three cities are building a district water system to utilize
an existing reservoir. All cities must be connected to the reservoir by a
network of pipes. The costs of laying a pipeline (in millions of dollars)
between each pair of cities, and between each city and the reservoir, are
as follows.
Cost of pipeline to site 2
Site 1
City 1
City 2
City 3
Reservoir
18
21
27
City 1
15
12
City 2
24
Based on these costs, the cheapest way to build the system is to build a
pipeline from the reservoir to City 1, and then to build pipelines from
City 1 to City 2 and from City 1 to City 3, for a total cost of 18 + 15 +
12 = 45. The game-theoretic problem is to determine how this cost
should be divided among the cities, viewed as players in a game.
a. Model this problem as a three-person game in coalitional form
with transferable utility, where the players are the cities, and the worth
of each coalition S is minus the cost of the cheapest pipeline system that
would connect only the cities in S to the reservoir. For example,
v(11,2,31) = —45.
b. It has been proposed that each city should pay for the pipeline
flowing into it, regardless of whether other cities also use this pipeline.
This would lead to the allocation (-18, —15, —12). (All payoffs are
negative, because they represent costs that must be paid.) Show that
this allocation is in the core.
c. Compute the Shapley value of this game. Is it in the core?
d. Express this game as a linear combination of the simple carrier
games, defined by equation (9.10).
Exercise 9.8. Given a finite strategic-form game r = (N, (C,),,,, (u,),,N),
let the NTU coalitional games V' and V° be respectively the assurable
representation of F and the unpreventable representation of F.

--- Sayfa 499 ---
Bibliographic Note 481
a. Show that, for any coalition S, 11'(S) and VP(S) are convex sets.
b. Prove that V' is superadditive.
c. Prove that VP is superadditive. (HINT: You may use the Kakutani
fixed-point theorem.)
Exercise 9.9. Suppose that, in the conditional linearity axiom discussed
in Section 9.9, we dropped the requirement that V and W be positively
smooth. Construct an example to show that the Shapley NTU value
would not satisfy this stronger axiom.
Exercise 9.10. Consider the strategic-form game in Table 9.3, without
transferable utility.
a. For this game, complete the construction of the assurable repre-
sentation V" and the unpreventable representation VP in NTU coalition
form.
b. Show that the allocation (1,2,2) is in the core of V' and VP but is
not in the inner core of V" or VP. To prove that it is not in the inner
core, find a randomized blocking plan such that each player's condi-
tionally expected payoff, when invited to join a blocking coalition, is
strictly greater than what he gets in (1,2,2). (HINT: It can be done by
assigning positive probabilities to the coalitions {1,2,3}, {1,2}, and {1,3}.)
c. Compute Shapley NTU values for V' and V.
d. As suggested at the end of Section 9.9, let wx  denote the minimax
representation of the X-rescaled version of the strategic-form game in
Table 9.3. Letting X, -= X2 = X3 = 1, compute the TU coalitional game
wx, and show that its Shapley value 4(wA) is feasible for the players in
the original game without transferable utility.
Exercise 9.11. Characterize the core and the inner core of the Banker
Game, from Section 9.9. Find a randomized blocking plan that would
be viable against the allocation (41,41,21), and thus show that the Har-
sanyi NTU value (40,40,20) is not inhibitive for this game.
Bibliographic Note
Owen (1982) and Lucas (1972) survey a wide range of solution concepts
for games in characteristic function or coalitional form. In the past
decade or so, most interest in this area has been focused on the Shapley
value and closely related solution concepts: see Kalai and Samet (1985,

--- Sayfa 500 ---
482 9 • Coalitions in Cooperative Games
1987), Hart and Mas-Colell (1989), Young (1985), and the survey vol-
ume of Roth (1988). Bennett (1983) has studied solution concepts that
are more closely related to the core.
Lucas and Thrall (1963) defined a generalized coalitional form, called
partition function form, in which the worth of a coalition may depend on
how the other players are assigned to coalitions (see also Myerson,
1978b).
For applications of cooperative game theory to the study of voting,
see Shapley and Shubik (1954), Peleg (1984), and Moulin (1988). Values
of nonatomic games have been applied to cost allocation problems by
Billera, Heath, and Ranaan (1978) and others; see Tauman (1988).

--- Sayfa 501 ---
10
Cooperation under Uncertainty
10.1 Introduction
In this chapter we consider the elements of a theory of cooperative
games with incomplete information. Adding incomplete information
raises many new conceptual questions for cooperative game theory. In
particular, to understand cooperative games with incomplete informa-
tion, we will need to consider not only questions of how different players
should compromise with each other but also questions of how a single
player should compromise between the goals of his true type and the
goals of his other possible types, to maintain an inscrutable facade in
negotiations.
In this chapter, to simplify the analysis, we consider Bayesian collec-
tive-choice problems and Bayesian bargaining problems, but we do not
attempt a general treatment of Bayesian games with general incentive
constraints (as formulated in Section 6.3). Recall from Section 6.4 that
a Bayesian collective-choice problem may be written in the form
(10.1)
(N, C, (Ti);EN , 	 1
lb
—i,ieN, (ui),(N),
where N is the set of players, C is the set of possible outcomes or options
that the players can jointly choose among, pi  is the probability function
that represents player i's beliefs about other players' types as a function
of his own type, and ui  is player i's utility payoff function.
To simplify formulas, we assume in most of this chapter (except in
Section 10.6) that the players' beliefs are consistent with some prior
probability distribution in z(T) under which the players' types are in-
dependent random variables. (Recall T = X iENT;•) That is, we assume
that for every player i there exists a probability distribution p in A(Ti),

--- Sayfa 502 ---
484 10 • Cooperation under Uncertainty
such that /3,(t,) is the prior marginal probability that player i's type will
be t, and
(10.2)
Not,) = H pp,), vi E N, Vt_, E T_„ Vt, E T,.
jEN-i
(As usual, we let T = XiEN-1 7,,
= MEN-, and pxt_,Itz) is the
probability that player i would assign to the event that t was the profile
of all players' types when he knows only that his own type is 1,.) In the
prior probability distribution itself, the probability that some t in T will
be the true combination of types for the players is
P(t) = H PP).
iEN
We assume here that all types have positive probability, so
> 0, Vi E N, Vt, E T.
In Section 2.8, it was shown that any finite Bayesian game is equivalent
to a Bayesian game that satisfies this condition of consistency with an
independent prior distribution.
A mediation plan or mechanism for the Bayesian collective-choice prob-
lem (10.1) is any function R:T —> A(C). We assume that players' types
are not verifiable by a mediator, so an incentive-compatible mechanism
must satisfy the following informational incentive constraints:
(10.3)
Ui(111 ti)
UNI-L>si I ti), Vi E N, Vt, E Ti, Vsi  E Ti,
where
(10.4)
Uj(ilt,) = E E
p;(0) ,t(cloui(c,t),
t_,ET_, cEC jEN—i
(10.5)
U,*(11,s,lt ) = E E (
p,(0) igclt_„si)u,(c,t).
[_,ET_;  cEC jEN—:
As defined in Section 6.4, a Bayesian bargaining problem r3  is a Bayesian
collective-choice problem together with a specification of the disagree-
ment outcome d* that will occur if the players fail to agree on a mech-
anism. With the independent prior assumption, we can write
(10.6)
F = (N, C, d*, (7,)iEN, (PLN,  (WiEN)•

--- Sayfa 503 ---
10.2 • Concepts of Efficiency 485
For most applications, it is convenient to define utility scales so that the
disagreement outcome always gives zero payoffs
(10.7)
u,(d* ,t) = 0, Vi E N, bit E T,
and we shall apply this convention throughout this chapter. Thus, a
mechanism R. is said to be individually rational iff it satisfies the partici-
pation (or individual-rationality) constraints
(10.8)
Ui(p. I ti)
0, Vi E N, Vti  E Ti,
so no type of any player would expect to do worse under p. than in the
disagreement outcome.
For a Bayesian bargaining problem, we say that a mechanism is incen-
tive feasible iff it is both incentive-compatible and individually rational,
in the sense of conditions (10.3) and (10.8). For a Bayesian collective-
choice problem, where there are no participation constraints, we use
"incentive feasibility" and "incentive compatibility" synonymously, so a
mechanism is incentive feasible for a Bayesian collective-choice problem
iff it satisfies condition (10.3).
10.2 Concepts of Efficiency
The concept of Pareto efficiency is central in cooperative game theory.
To develop a theory of cooperation under uncertainty, the first step
must be to extend the definition of Pareto efficiency to games with
incomplete information.
A game theorist or a mediator who analyzes the Pareto efficiency of
behavior in a game with incomplete information must use the perspec-
tive of an outsider, so he cannot base his analysis on the players' private
information. An outsider may be able to say how the outcome will
depend on the players' types, but he cannot generally predict the actual
outcome without knowing the players' actual types. That is, he can know
the mechanism but not its outcome. Thus, Holmstrom and Myerson
(1983) argued that the concept of efficiency for games with incomplete
information should be applied to mechanisms, rather than to outcomes,
and the criteria for determining whether a particular mechanismµ is
efficient should depend only on the commonly known structure of the
game, not on the privately known types of the individual players.

--- Sayfa 504 ---
486 10 Cooperation under Uncertainty
Thus, a definition of Pareto efficiency in a Bayesian collective-choice
problem or a Bayesian bargaining problem must look something like
this:
A mechanism is efficient iff no other feasible mechanism can be found
that might make some other individuals better off and would certainly not
make other individuals worse off.
However, this definition is ambiguous in several ways. In particular, we
must specify what information is to be considered when determining
whether an individual is "better off" or "worse off."
One possibility is to say that an individual is made worse off by a
change that decreases his expected utility payoff as would be computed
before his own type or any other individuals' types are specified. This
standard is called the ex ante welfare criterion. Thus, we say that a mech-
anism v is ex ante Pareto superior to another mechanismµ iff
E E P(t)v(clou,(c,t)
E E P(t)i(clouz(c,o, Vi E N,
LET tEC
LET rEC
and this inequality is strict for at least one player in N. Notice that
E E P(01-46.11)uz(c,t) = E P,(t)u,(iltz).
LET rEC
t, E T,
Another possibility is to say that an individual is made worse off by a
change that decreases his conditionally expected utility, given his own
type (but not given the type of any other individuals). An outside
observer, who does not know any individual's type, would then say that
a player i "would certainly not be made worse off (by some change of
mechanism)" in this sense if this conditionally expected utility will not
be decreased (by the change) for any possible type of player i. This
standard is called the interim welfare criterion, because it evaluates each
player's welfare after he learns his own type but before he learns any
other player's type. Thus, we say that a mechanism v is interim Pareto
superior to another mechanism iff
Uz(vit)
Uhl,  I t,), Vi E N, Vt, E
and this inequality is strict for at least one type of one player in N.
Yet another possibility is to say that an individual is made worse off
by a change that decreases his conditionally expected utility, given the
types of all individuals. An outside observer would then say that a player

--- Sayfa 505 ---
10.2 • Concepts of Efficiency 487
"would certainly not be made worse off" in this sense if his conditionally
expected utility would not be decreased for any possible combination
of types for all the players. This standard is called the ex post welfare
criterion, because it uses the information that would be available after
all individuals have revealed their types. Thus, we say that a mechanism
v is ex post Pareto superior to another mechanism R iff
E v(cioui(c,t)
E wciou,(c,t), Vi E N, Vt E T,
rEC
rEC
and this inequality is strict for at least one player in N and at least one
possible combination of types t in T such that p(t) > 0.
Another ambiguity in the above verbal definition of efficiency is in
the term "feasible." One sense of this term, which can be called classical
feasibility, is to consider that any function from T to A(C), selecting a
randomized joint strategy for each possible combination of the players'
types, is feasible. However, the revelation principle implies that a mech-
anism cannot be implemented, by any equilibrium of a communication
game induced by any communication system, unless the mechanism is
incentive compatible (and, where relevant, individually rational). Thus,
it is appropriate to recognize the unavoidability of incentive constraints
by defining the "feasible" mechanisms to be the incentive-feasible mech-
anisms (that is, the incentive-compatible mechanisms for a Bayesian
collective-choice problem, or the incentive-compatible individually ra-
tional mechanisms for a Bayesian bargaining problem).
Given any concept of feasibility, the three welfare criteria (ex ante,
interim, ex post) give rise to three different concepts of efficiency. For
any set of mechanisms F (to be interpreted as the set of "feasible"
mechanisms in some sense), we say that a mechanism i is ex ante efficient
in the set F iff R is in F and there exists no other mechanism v that is
in F and is ex ante Pareto superior to R. Similarly, R is interim efficient
in F iff R is in F and there exists no other mechanism v that is in F and
is interim Pareto superior to R; and 1.1. is ex post efficient in F iff R is in
F and there exists no other mechanism v that is in F and is ex post
Pareto superior to R.
If v is interim Pareto superior to R, then v is also ex ante Pareto
superior to R. Similarly, if v is ex post Pareto superior to R, then v is
also interim Pareto superior to R. Thus, for any given set F, the set of
ex ante efficient mechanisms in F is a subset of the set of interim efficient

--- Sayfa 506 ---
488 10 • Cooperation under Uncertainty
mechanisms in F, which is in turn a subset of the set of ex post efficient
mechanisms in F.
The distinction between these different concepts of efficiency can be
represented by restrictions on a class of social welfare functions that
one might consider. Suppose that C and T are finite sets, and suppose
that F is a set of mechanisms defined by a finite number of linear
constraints (so F is geometrically a convex polyhedron in a finite-di-
mensional vector space). Then (by the supporting hyperplane theorem)
a mechanism is ex post efficient in F iff it is an optimal solution to an
optimization problem of the form
(10.9)
maximize
p(t)
wcit) E xxoui(c,o,
tET
cEC 	 1EN
where the utility weight X,(t) is a positive number for each player i and
each combination of types t. If we require that the utility weights for
each player depend only on the player's own type, then we get the
interim efficient mechanisms. That is, an interim efficient mechanism
in F is any mechanism that is an optimal solution to an optimization
problem of the form
(10.10) maximize E p(t) E wcit) E xxou,(c,t),
E F
tET
cEC 	 zEN
where X,(ti) is a positive number for each player i and each type
Finally, if we require that the utility weight for each player is indepen-
dent of his type, then we get the ex ante efficient mechanisms. That is,
an ex ante efficient mechanism in F is any mechanism that is any optimal
solution to an optimization problem of the form
(10.11)
maximize
p(t) E µ(c t) E xy,(c,o,
tET
cEC 	 iEN
where X, is a positive number for each player i.
When we say that there is incomplete information in a game, we mean
that each player knows his own type but does not know anyone else's
type at the beginning of the game, when plans and strategies are first
chosen. Thus, each player is actually concerned with his own condition-
ally expected payoff, given his own true type, at this initial decision-
making stage. Holmstrom and Myerson (1983) have argued that, to take
proper account of such players' concerns, as well as the restrictions
implied by the revelation principle, the most appropriate concept of

--- Sayfa 507 ---
10.3 • An Example 489
efficiency for Bayesian games with incomplete information is interim
efficiency in the set of incentive-feasible mechanisms. Because of the
importance of this concept, it has been given the shorter alternative
name of incentive efficiency. That is, an incentive-efficient mechanism is
an incentive-feasible mechanism p. such that no other incentive-feasible
mechanism is interim Pareto superior to 11.. If a mechanism 11 is incentive
efficient in this sense, then a mediator who does not know any player's
actual type could not propose any other incentive-compatible mecha-
nism that every player is sure to prefer.
The ex post welfare criterion evaluates the expected payoffs that
would be attributed to the players by someone who knew all of their
types. If a mediator knew everyone's type, then he would not need to
be concerned with informational incentive constraints, so the ex post
welfare criterion seems logically connected to the classical feasibility
concept. Thus, when we say that a mechanism is ex post efficient, without
mentioning any specific feasible set, we mean that the mechanism is ex
post efficient in the set of all functions from T to A(C).
10.3 An Example
To illustrate these ideas, consider a trading problem discussed in Section
6.4. In this example, which we call Example 10.1, player 1 is the only
seller and player 2 is the only buyer of some divisible commodity. Player
1 has one unit available, and he knows whether it is of good quality (in
which case his type is "1.a") or of bad quality (in which case his type is
"1.b"). If it is good quality, then it is worth $40 per unit to the seller
and $50 per unit to the buyer. If it is bad quality, then it is worth $20
per unit to the seller and $30 per unit to the buyer. The buyer has no
private information, so her unique type may be called "2.0"; and she is
known to believe that the probability of good quality is .2. We suppose
that the buyer cannot verify any claims the seller might make about the
quality, that it is not possible for the seller to offer any quality-contingent
warranties, and that these two players do not expect to make any further
transactions in the future. To formulate this as a Bayesian game, we let
C = C, x C2 = [0,1] x R+, where C, = [0,1] represents the set of
possible quantities of the commodity that player 1 can deliver to player
2 and C2 = R, represents the set of possible quantities of money that
player 2 can pay to player 1. Payoffs to each player are defined to be
his net dollar gains from trade, as in Section 6.4. The disagreement

--- Sayfa 508 ---
490 10 • Cooperation under Uncertainty
outcome in this Bayesian bargaining problem is d* = (0,0), where player
2 gets none of the commodity and pays nothing. That is, each player
could guarantee himself a payoff of 0 by refusing to trade.
Because of the linearity of the utility functions and the convexity of
C, we can restrict our attention to deterministic trading mechanisms,
that is, functions from T to C, instead of functions from T to A(C). So,
as in Section 6.4, we can represent a mechanism by a pair (Q(•),Y(•)),
where, for each t, in T,, if l's reported type is t,, then Q(t,) is the
quantity of the commodity that player 1 delivers to 2 and Y(ti) is the
quantity of money that player 2 pays to 1, under the terms of the
mechanism. In this notation, the expected utilities for each type of each
player are then
U, (Q, Yll.a) = Y(1.a) — 40Q(1.a),
U,(Q,Y11.b) = Y(1.b) — 20Q(1.b),
U2(Q,Y12.0) = .2(50Q(1.a) — Y(1.a)) + .8(30Q(1.b) — Y(1.b)).
In this Bayesian bargaining problem, a mechanism is incentive feasible
iff it is incentive compatible and individually rational, because player 1
can lie about his type and either player can refuse to trade. The infor-
mational incentive constraints are
(10.12)
Ui(Q, Yll.a)
Ut(Q,Y,l.b11.a) = Y(1.b) — 40Q(1.b),
(10.13)
U,(Q,Y11.b) _?._ Ur(Q,Y,La11.b) = Y(1.a) — 20Q(1.a),
and the individual-rationality (or participation) constraints are
(10.14)
Ui(Q, Y11.a)
0, U,(Q,Y11.b)
0, U2(Q,Y12.0) _. 0.
We showed in Section 6.4 that, if (Q,Y) is any incentive-compatible
mechanism for this game, then
(10.15)
.3U,(Q,Y11.a) + .7U,(Q,Y11.b) + U2(Q,Y12.0) 5_ 8.
Thus, any mechanism that satisfies
(10.16)
.3U,(Q,Y11.a) + .7U,(Q,Y11.b) + U2(Q,Y12.0) = 8
must be incentive efficient.
For example, consider the following two mechanisms, which we call
(Q1,Y1) and (Q2, y2).
QI(1.a) = .2, Y1(1.a) = 9, Q'(l.b) = 1, Y1(1.b) = 25,

--- Sayfa 509 ---
10.3 • An Example 491
Q2(1.a) = .25, Y2(1.a) = 10.20, Q2(1.b) = 1, Y2(1.b) = 25.20.
In mechanism (Q',Y'), player 1 sells .2 units of the commodity to player
2 at a price 9/.2 = $45 per unit if the quality is good, and he sells one
unit to the buyer at a price of $25 if the quality is bad. In mechanism
(Q2, Y2), player 1 sells .25 units of the commodity to player 2 at a price
10.20/.25 = $40.80 per unit if the quality is good, and he sells one unit
to the buyer at a price of $25.20 if the quality is bad. It has been shown
in Section 6.4 that mechanism (Q',Y') is incentive compatible. To show
that mechanism (Q2,Y2) is incentive compatible, notice that, when the
quality is bad, the seller gets a profit of $25.20 - $20 = $5.20 if he is
honest; and he would get an expected profit of .25 x ($40.80 - $20)
= $5.20 if he lied. So he has no incentive to lie about the quality of his
commodity.
The type-contingent expected payoffs for these mechanisms are
Ui(Q1,1/1 11.a) = .2 x (45 - 40) = 1,
Ui((21,Y1 11.b) = 25 - 20 = 5,
U2(Q1,Y1 12.0) = .2 x (.2 x (50 - 45)) + .8 x (30 - 25) = 4.2,
ui(Q2,  y2 I La) _
 .25 x (40.8 - 40) = 0.2,
ui(Q293,211.b) = 25.2 - 20 = 5.2,
U2(Q2,Y212.0) = .2 x (.25 x (50 - 40.8)) + .8 x (30 - 25.2)
4.3.
The ex ante expected payoff for player 1 is the same in (Q',Y') and
(Q2,Y2), because
.2 x 1 + .8 x 5 = 4.2 = .2 x 0.2 + .8 x 5.2.
Thus, because U2(Q2,Y212.0) > U2(Q1 ,Y1 12.0), (Q2,Y2) is ex ante Pareto
superior to (Q',Y'). However, because Ul(Q2,Y211.a) < Ul  (Q1,Y111.a),
neither of these mechanisms is interim Pareto superior to the other. In
fact, (Q', Y') and (Q2,Y2) both satisfy equation (10.16), so both are in-
centive efficient.
To understand why the interim welfare criterion is so important,
suppose that the two players expect to implement the mechanism
(Q',Y') unless they both agree to change to some other mechanism.
Imagine now that some mediator offers to help them implement the ex
ante superior mechanism (Q2,Y2) instead. Should they both agree to

--- Sayfa 510 ---
492 10 Cooperation under Uncertainty
make this change? Obviously player 1 would not agree to the change if
his type were 1.a. So, to make matters more interesting, suppose that,
unknown to player 2 and the mediator, player l's type is actually 1.b.
Then both players actually prefer (Q2,Y2) over (Q1, Y1), because
U1(Q2,Y211.b) > U1(Q1,Y1 1 1.b) and
U2(Q2, Y212.0) > U2(01,17112.0).
However, this agreement of privately known preferences cannot be
translated into an actual agreement to change from (Q' Y') to (Q22 y2).
Player 2 should recognize that player 1 would agree to change from
(Q1, Y1) to (Q2,Y2) only if his type were 1.b. When player l's type is 1.b,
player 2 would get payoff 30 — 25 = 5 in (Q1, Y1), which is better than
the payoff 30 — 25.20 = 4.8 that she would get in (Q2, Y2). Thus, player
2 should recognize that player 1 would agree to the change only if the
change would be disadvantageous to player 2. (This effect is an example
of the winner's curse in bidding and bargaining.) So player 2 should
reject the change from (Q',Y') to (Q2,Y2), even though (Q2,Y2) is ex
ante Pareto superior and appears to be strictly better than (Q',Y') for
player 2 given her current information.
An agreement to change from (Q1, Y') to (Q2,Y2) could be reached if
player 2 believed that player 1 agreed to the change before learning his
own type (at the ex ante stage). But if this game is to be played only
once and player 2 knows that player 1 knows his type before he bargains
over the mechanism, then player 2 should reject any proposal to change
from (Q1, Y1) to (Q2,Y2) that requires player l's approval to be effective,
because she should recognize that player 1 will not use the ex ante
welfare criterion in his own decision-making.
A similar argument against change can be made if the players ex-
pected to implement the incentive-efficient mechanism (Q2,Y2) unless
they unanimously agreed to some other incentive-compatible mecha-
nism. In this case, player 2 should reject any proposal to change to
(Q' Y'), because she should recognize that player 1 will also accept the
proposed change only if his type is 1.a, but then (Q2,Y2) would be better
than (Q',Y') for player 2.
It can be shown that, if a mechanism (Q,Y) is ex ante efficient in the
set of all incentive-feasible mechanisms for this Bayesian bargaining
problem, then player l's expected payoff when the quality is good

--- Sayfa 511 ---
10.4 • Ex Post Inefficiency 493
(U ,(Q,Y Il.a)) must equal 0. To see why, recall condition (10.15), which
implies that (Q,Y) must satisfy
.3U1(Q,Y11.a) + .7U,(Q,Y11.b)
8 — U2(Q,Y12.0).
The ex ante expected payoff to player 1 is
.2U1(Q,Y1 1.a) + .8U1(Q,Y11.b);
and this quantity could be increased, without changing U2(Q,Y12.0) or
violating the above constraint, by decreasing U1(Q,Y11.a) to 0 and in-
creasing U1(Q,Y11.b) by 3/7 times the decrease in U,(Q,Y11.a).
In fact, a mechanism is ex ante efficient in the set of all incentive-
feasible mechanisms iff it is of the following form:
Q(1.a) = z/20 — 1, Y(1.a) = 40(z/20 — 1),
Q(1.b) = 1, Y(1.b) = z,
where 20
z
313/7. In all of these mechanisms, however, the seller
with a good quality commodity (type 1.a) can only sell the commodity
at a price of $40 per unit, so he cannot get a positive profit. If in fact
he knows that his quality is good, it is hard to see why he should
participate in any such mechanism. He would have nothing to lose if
instead he made an offer to sell some quantity for a price that is strictly
higher than $40 per unit, which would at least give him some chance
of making a positive profit.
There are no incentive-feasible mechanisms for this example that are
ex post efficient (in the set of all mechanisms). To satisfy ex post effi-
ciency, player 1 must sell his entire supply of the commodity to player
2, no matter what his type is, because the commodity is always worth
more to 2 than to 1. But then, for incentive compatibility, the expected
price cannot depend on his type. Individual rationality for type 1.b
would then require that price to be at least $40; but such a price would
require that individual rationality be violated for player 2, because she
would expect to lose by paying more than $34 = 0.2 x 50 + 0.8 x 30.
10.4 Ex Post Inefficiency and Subsequent Offers
The impossibility of ex post efficiency in this example implies that, no
matter what mechanism is being implemented, there is a positive prob-
ability that player 1 will end up holding a positive amount of the corn-

--- Sayfa 512 ---
494 10 • Cooperation under Uncertainty
modity, even though it is worth more to player 2. This result may be
somewhat disturbing, if we suppose that the players can always make
another offer to buy or sell more of the commodity. For example,
suppose that the players implement mechanism (Q1, Y1) and player 1
sells .2 units for $45 x .2 = $9. After this outcome, by Bayes's rule,
player 2 should believe that player l's type is l.a with probability 1. So
if player 1 followed the outcome of (Q1, Y1) by a subsequent offer to sell
his remaining .8 units of the commodity for $45 x .8 = $36, it might
seem that player 2 should be willing to accept, because she is convinced
that the quality is good.
Of course, if player 1 believed at the beginning of the mechanism
that such a subsequent offer would be accepted, then he would want to
pretend that his type was l.a in the mechanism even if it were 1.b,
because selling one unit for $45 (with a slight delay for the sale of the
last .8 units) would surely be better than selling one unit for $25! To
deter such behavior, it is necessary that, when player 1 reports his type
to the mediator implementing the mechanism (Q',Y1), player 1 must
believe that no such additional offer would be accepted. However, player
2's actual behavior after the mechanism has no way of changing player
l's beliefs at the beginning of the mechanism, so player 2 should not
be concerned about destroying the incentive compatibility of the preced-
ing mechanism when she considers accepting a subsequent offer.
To understand how opportunities for subsequent offers can affect
the analysis of this example, we need to consider an explicit model of
trading over time, including a specification of the cost of waiting. To
be specific, suppose that there are infinitely many points in time, or
rounds, numbered 1,2,3, . . . , at which the players may trade. Suppose
also that a profit of x dollars at round k would be worth x8" at round
1, where 8 is a discount factor such that 0 < 8 < 1. Given any equilibrium
of a sequential-offer bargaining game, let 4k(t,) be the expected quantity
of the commodity that will be traded at round k if player l's type is t,,
and let be the expected payment from player 2 to player 1 at
round k if l's type is t 1. Then let
Q(11) = E 4k(ti)8k-1, Y(t1) =
k=1
k=1
It can be shown that expected payoffs for the players in this multiround
game depend on Q and Y, with this interpretation, exactly as in the
original one-round game considered in Section 10.3. For example, if

--- Sayfa 513 ---
10.4 Ex Post Inefficiency 495
player 1's type is 1.b and he uses his correct equilibrium strategy for
this type, then his expected discounted payoff in equilibrium is
Ok(l.b) — 204k(l.b))8k- = Y(1.b) — 20Q(1.b);
k=1
but if he followed the equilibrium trading strategy of type 1.a when his
type is really 1.b, then his expected discounted payoff would be
E ok(1.a) — 204k(1.a)) 8k-1 = Y(1.a) — 20Q(1.a).
k=
So an equilibrium of the sequential-offer bargaining game must satisfy
Y(1.b) — 20Q(1.b) > Y(1.a) — 20Q(1.a),
as well as the other informational incentive constraint and individual
rationality constraints that we got in the original one-round version of
the game. Thus, if we take waiting costs into account along with costs
of failing to trade, for any equilibrium of a discounted sequential-offer
game, there must exist an incentive-feasible mechanism (Q,Y) for the
original one-round game that gives the same expected payoff to each
type of each player.
This conclusion leaves us with the question, Might the set of incentive-
feasible mechanisms actually be reduced by the assumption that players
1 and 2 have an inalienable right to keep offering to trade any amount
of the commodity that player 1 might still hold? In effect, the players'
right to keep bargaining could create a moral-hazard problem that
constrains the set of incentive-compatible mechanisms, because of the
need to give each player an incentive to never trade more than the
quantity stipulated in the mechanism. However, there are reasonable
models of sequential-offer bargaining games in which these moral-haz-
ard constraints do not significantly reduce the set of feasible mecha-
nisms; so any mechanism (Q,Y) that satisfies (10.12)—(10.14) can in fact
be implemented by an equilibrium of a sequential-offer bargaining
game with mediated communication, an unbounded time horizon, and
discounting (see Ausubel and Deneckere, 1989).
One way to derive such a general feasibility result is to assume, as we
did in Section 8.9, that offers must be in some (large) finite set and the
discount factor is close to 1. For example, suppose that price offers
must be in integer multiples of $0.01 and that the discount factor is 8
> .999. (This discount factor may seem quite large, but remember that

--- Sayfa 514 ---
496 10 • Cooperation under Uncertainty
a "round" is supposed to represent the length of time necessary for a
player to formulate and present a new offer after the most recent one
has been rejected. A large discount factor corresponds to the fact that
waiting such a short time interval is not very costly.) Then, after the
mediator has implemented the mechanism (Q,Y) and all trades stipu-
lated by the mechanism have been completed at round . 1, trading at
future rounds can be prevented if the players follow a standoff equilibrium
in their bargaining at all subsequent rounds. In this standoff equilib-
rium, player 1 always offers to sell his remaining supply at a price of
$50 per unit, and player 2 always offers to buy the remaining supply
at a price of $20 per unit. If player 2 ever deviates from this standoff
behavior by offering any price higher than $20 at any round, then
player 1 will expect that player 2 will submissively accept the $50 offer
at the next round, so 1 will reject 2's offer (because even 49.99 — 40 is
less than (50 — 40)8). If player 1 ever deviates from this standoff
behavior by offering any price lower than $50, then player 2 will infer
from this surprise that player l's type is 1.b (such an inference is Bayes
consistent even if she assigned zero probability to type 1.b before the
deviation, because the deviation was a zero-probability event), and she
will expect that player 1 will submissively accept the $20 offer at the
next round; so 2 will reject l's offer.
With two-sided incomplete information, such standoff equilibria can
be sustained even when offers that split pennies arbitrarily are allowed
and the players have inalienable opportunities to alternate offers. For
example, suppose that we perturb Example 10.1 slightly by supposing
that there is a very small positive probability that player 2 might be type
"2.1," in which case the value of the commodity to her would be $100
per unit. Suppose that a mediator implements at round 1 an incentive-
feasible mechanism in which player 1 only retains some of his supply if
he is type 1.a and player 2 is type 2.0. In the event that player 1 still
holds some of his supply at round 2, after the mechanism has been
implemented, there is a standoff equilibrium in which player 1 always
offers to sell his remaining supply at a price of $70 per unit and player
2 always offers to buy the remaining supply at a price of $25, and
neither ever accepts (because 70 > 50 and 25 < 40). If player 1 ever
offered any price less than $70, then player 2 would infer from this
zero-probability event that player 1 was actually type 1.b and would
play thereafter as in the equilibrium of the alternating-offer game de-
scribed in Section 8.7 for the complete-information bargaining game

--- Sayfa 515 ---
10.5 • Computing Incentive-Efficient Mechanisms 497
where the commodity is worth $20 per unit to 1 and $30 per unit to 2.
In this equilibrium, player 2 always offers a price close to $25 and
expects 1 to accept it. On the other hand, if player 2 ever offered any
price higher than $25, then player 1 would infer from this zero-prob-
ability event that player 2 was actually type 2.1 and would play thereafter
as in the equilibrium for the complete-information bargaining game
where the commodity is worth $40 per unit to 1 and $100 per unit to
2; in this equilibrium, player 1 always offers a price close to $70 and
expects 2 to accept it. So neither player could gain from deviating from
the standoff offers of $70 and $25 when their types are actually 1.a and
2.0, and trade after the mediation at round 1 would never occur.
10.5 Computing Incentive-Efficient Mechanisms
Consider now a Bayesian collective-choice problem or a Bayesian bar-
gaining problem (like that in Section 10.1) in which the type sets and
outcome sets are all finite. Under the finiteness assumption, the set of
incentive-compatible mechanisms is a convex polyhedron. Thus, by the
supporting hyperplane theorem, an incentive-feasible mechanismµ is
incentive-efficient iff there exist some positive numbers X,(t,) for each
type t, of each player i such that fl is an optimal solution to the opti-
mization problem
maximize
X,(01/,(1.0,)
iEN t,ET,
subject to U,(1.0,)
UNR,s,1 t,), Vi E N, Vt, E Tz, Vs, E T.
This optimization problem is equivalent to (10.10), when F is the set of
incentive-compatible mechanisms. Furthermore, this optimization prob-
lem is a linear programming problem, because the objective and con-
straints are all linear in R., including the probability constraints
E [L(clt) = 1 and WO) 0, Vd E C, Vt E T,
cEC
which are implicit in the restriction that 11 is a function from T to A(C).
For such optimization problems, a Lagrangean function can be formed
by multiplying constraint functions by variables called Lagrange multi-
pliers and adding them into the objective function. (Essentially the same
construction is used in the general definition of a dual problem in
Section 3.8.) Let ot,(s,Iti) denote the Lagrange multiplier for the con-

--- Sayfa 516 ---
498 10 Cooperation under Uncertainty
straint that asserts that player i should not expect to gain by reporting
type s, when his actual type is t,. Then the Lagrangean function can be
written
+ E E ai(siltz)(U,(1-1,14)
UNII>siltz)).
iEN t,ET,
iEN 1,ET,
To simplify this expression, let
(10.17)
v,(c,t,X,a) = (0.i(ti) + E a,(s,iti))u,(c,t)
;ET,
—
Oti((idS)Iii(C,(t_i,S))))1A(ti).
s,ET,
This quantity v,(c,t,X,a) is called the virtual utility payoff to player i from
outcome c, when the type profile is t, with respect to the utility weights
and the Lagrange multipliers a. Then the above Lagrangean function
is equal to
E p(t)E 11(clo
vz(c,t,X,a)•
tET
cEC 	iEN
Standard results in optimization theory (using the duality theorem of
linear programming) then imply the following theorem.
THEOREM 10.1. Suppose that p. is an incentive feasible mechanism. Then
1.t is incentive efficient if and only if there exist vectors
= (Xi(ti)),EN,,ET, and a
such that
Xi(ti) > 0, Vi E N, Vti  E Ti,
ai(silt,) > 0, Vi E N, Vs, E Ti, Vti  E
— UN[L,sil ti)) = 0, Vi E N, Vsi E Ti, Vti  E Ti,
and
E wcioE v,(c,t,X,a) = max E oc,t,x,a), Vt E T.
cEC 	iEN
cEC iEN
To interpret these conditions, we need to develop some terminology.
If A and a satisfy the conditions in Theorem 10.1 forµ and a,(s,it,) >
0, then we say that type ti  jeopardizes type s,. The condition

--- Sayfa 517 ---
10.5 • Computing Incentive-Efficient Mechanisms 499
a,(s,1 t,)(U,(111,) — Ut(pi,s,1 ti)) = 0
in Theorem 10.1 asserts that 1, can only jeopardize s, in the mechanism
if the constraint that player i should not be tempted to pretend that
his type is s, when it really is t, is a binding constraint for the mecha-
nism IA,.
Equation (10.17) defines the virtual utility for any type t, of player i
to be a positive multiple of his actual utility minus a weighted sum of
the utility payoffs for the types that jeopardize 4. Thus, the virtual
utility of t, differs qualitatively from the actual utility of t, in that it
exaggerates the difference from types that jeopardize t,.
The condition
E p,(clt)E v,(c,t,x,a) = max E V z(C,i,X,01)
cEC 	,EN
rEC zEN
in Theorem 10.1 asserts that the incentive-efficient mechanismµ must
put positive probability only on outcomes that maximize the sum of the
players' virtual utilities, for every joint state of the players' information.
That is, if the players got transferable payoffs in the virtual utility scales
with respect to X and a, then the mechanismµ would be ex post
efficient.
Consider the example from Section 10.3. Referring to condition
(10.15), we may try the parameters
X i(1.a) = 0.3, X1(1.b) = 0.7, X2(2.0) = 1,
a l(1.al 1.b) = 0.1, a1(l.b11.a) = 0.
As in Section 6.4, let q denote the amount of the commodity that the
seller delivers to the buyer and let y denote the amount of money that
the buyer pays to the seller. The actual utility functions are
(10.18)
ui((q,y),l.a) = y — 40q,
(10.19)
u2((q,y),1.a) = 50q — y,
(10.20)
ul((q,y),1.b) = y — 20q,
(10.21)
u2((900,1.b) = 30q — y.
(We suppress the dependence on player 2's constant type 2.0.) The
virtual utility payoffs for player 1 are then
0.3(y — 40q) — 0.1(y — 20q)
v,((q,y), 1 .a,X,a)
2
= y — 50q,

--- Sayfa 518 ---
500 10 • Cooperation under Uncertainty
v,((q,y),I.b,X,a) = (0.7 + 0.1)
.8(y — 20q)
y — 20q,
v2((q,y),t,,X,a) = u2((q,y),t i,X,a), Vti  E T1.
Thus, the only difference between virtual utility and actual utility with
these parameters is that the seller has a virtual valuation of $50 for each
unit of the commodity, instead of an actual valuation of $40. That is,
because the bad type 1.b jeopardizes the good type 1.a, the good type's
virtual valuation ($50) differs from its actual valuation ($40) in a way
that exaggerates the difference from the bad type's actual valuation
($20) for the commodity.
By Theorem 10.1, p, is incentive efficient if it always maximizes the
sum of the players' virtual utilities and has a binding incentive constraint
whenever one type jeopardizes another in a. When l's type is 1.a, the
sum of the virtual utilities is
vi((q,y),1.a,X,a) + v2((q,y),1.a,X,a) = (y — 50q) + (50q — y) = 0,
so any outcome would maximize this sum. When l's type is 1.b, the sum
of virtual utilities is
v,((q,y),1.b,X,a) + v2((q,y),1.b,X,a) = (y — 20q) + (30q — y) = 10q,
so virtual ex post efficiency requires that the quantity sold should be
the maximum possible, that is, q = 1. Because a,(1.a11.b) > 0 but
al(l.b I 1.a) = 0, the only binding incentive constraint that we require is
Ui(Q,Y11.b) = Ur(Q,Y,l.al 1.b).
Thus, an incentive-feasible mechanism for this example is incentive
efficient if it satisfies the following two properties: the seller delivers all
of his supply of the commodity to the buyer when the seller's type is
1.b (bad-quality supplier), and the seller with type 1.b would be indif-
ferent between being honest about his type and dishonestly reporting
type 1.a.
Notice that both mechanisms (Q1,Y1) and (Q2,Y2) in Section 10.3
satisfy these two properties. In fact, it can be shown that all of the
incentive-efficient mechanisms satisfy these two properties, because the
same X and a satisfy Theorem 10.1 for all incentive-efficient mecha-
nisms in this simple example.
In general, the virtual utility formula (10.17) can give insights into
the problem of finding good signals in any situation where people have

--- Sayfa 519 ---
10.5 • Computing Incentive-Efficient Mechanisms 501
difficulty trusting each other's claims about unverifiable private infor-
mation. For example, consider a labor market (as presented in Spence,
1973) where there are high-ability and low-ability workers, and each
worker knows what his ability type is, but the ability of any given worker
is not directly observable by the prospective employers. We can expect
that a worker's low-ability type would jeopardize his high-ability type in
negotiations with an employer; that is, an employer may have difficulty
preventing a low-ability worker from claiming to have high ability. So
the virtual utility of a high-ability worker should exaggerate the differ-
ence from a low-ability worker. Suppose that there is some useless
educational process, which contributes nothing to a worker's productive
skills and would be mildly unpleasant for a high-ability worker but
would be extremely painful for a low-ability worker. Then a high-ability
worker may get positive virtual utility from this education, because the
large negative payoff that this education would generate for a low-
ability worker has a negative coefficient in the linear formula for the
high-ability type's virtual utility. Thus, as in Spence's (1973) labor-mar-
ket equilibria, an incentive-efficient mechanism may force a high-ability
worker to go through this costly and unproductive educational process
(from which he gains only virtual utility), as a signal before he can be
hired at a high wage.
On the other hand, it seems unlikely that a high-ability worker would
be tempted to claim that he had low ability in such a labor market, so
we can expect that a low-ability type would not be jeopardized. There-
fore, a low-ability worker's virtual utility would be just some positive
multiple of his real utility. Thus, an incentive-efficient mechanism
should be ex post efficient (in terms of real utility, as well as virtual
utility) when it places a low-ability worker, and the low-ability worker
should not be made to suffer any such unproductive educational ex-
periences.
In general, a good signal for a type 1, of player i is any observable
activity that would be more costly for the other types s, that jeopardize
t, than for type t, itself and so can increase the virtual utility of type
(Here the coefficients X(t) and ot,(t,Isz) determine the weighted utility
scales for such intertype comparisons.) Of course, an ideal signal for
type t, would be some activity that would be costless for type t, but would
be impossible (that is, infinitely costly) for any other type s, of player i.
However, if such an ideal signal existed, then the coefficient apb,)
would be equal to 0 and the constraint that "type s, should not be

--- Sayfa 520 ---
502 10 Cooperation under Uncertainty
tempted to claim to be 1," could be effectively dropped from the list of
informational incentive constraints, because player i would have a cost-
less way to prove that his type was t,, not s,.
10.6 Inscrutability and Durability
Having established by the revelation principle that a mediator or social
planner can restrict his attention to incentive-compatible mechanisms,
which form a mathematically simple set, we can naturally suppose that
intelligent players in a cooperative game with incomplete information
would themselves bargain over the set of incentive-compatible mecha-
nisms. By the definition of a game with incomplete information, each
player privately knows his type already, at the time when fundamental
economic plans and decisions are made. Thus, a theory of cooperative
games with incomplete information should be a theory of mechanism
selection by individuals who have private information.
During any process of bargaining over mechanisms, if the players
reach a unanimous agreement to change from some mechanism p., to
another mechanism v, then, at the moment when the agreement is
reached, it must be common knowledge among the players that they all
prefer to change from 11, to v. Such unanimity for change can be com-
mon knowledge when the players know only their own types if and only
ifµ is not incentive efficient. We formally state this result below as
Theorem 10.2 (due to Holmstrom and Myerson, 1983).
To state Theorem 10.2 nontrivially, we must drop for now the as-
sumption that players' types are independent random variables. Instead,
let us suppose only that their type-conditional beliefs are consis-
tent with some common prior probability distribution p on T, so
=
Vt E T, Vi E N,
where we suppose that
pi(ti) = E
, Vi E N, Vti  E Ti.
s_,ET_i
For any set R that is a subset of T, we can let R, denote the set of all
types in T, that could occur when the combination of players' types is
in R; that is,

--- Sayfa 521 ---
10.6 • Inscrutability and Durability 503
R, = fr,Ir E RI.
We say that R is a common-knowledge event iff R is a nonempty subset of
T and, for every player i, every r, in R„ and every t_, in T_„
if (t_,,r,)
R, then p,(t_jr,) = 0.
That is, whenever the profile of players' types is in the common-knowl-
edge event R, every player assigns zero probability to all profiles of
types outside of R. (This condition implies that, for any t in T, if there
is at least one player i for whom t, E R E  and at least one player j for
whom 1,
R), then p(t) = pz(t_,Itz) 1),(0 = 0; so pp_ J10 = polo) = 0.)
We say that v is interim superior to tt within R iff
ui(vin) > uj(Ii,jri), Vi E N, Hr;  E
with a strict inequality for at least one player i and type ri  in R.
THEOREM 10.2. A incentive feasiblemechanism 1.1, is incentive efficient if
and only if there does not exist any other incentive-compatible mechanism v that
is interim superior to p. within some common-knowledge event R.
Proof. If p. is not incentive efficient, then some other incentive-com-
patible mechanism v is interim superior to p, within T, which is itself a
common-knowledge event.
Conversely, suppose that there exists some incentive-compatible
mechanism v that is interim superior to IL within a common-knowledge
event R. Let 11  be the mechanism defined such that
ri(clt) = v(cl t) if t E X R„
,EN
ri(c1 t) = 11(HO if t
X R.
,EN
Then is interim Pareto superior to tA, (in all of T) because
Ukri I
= U,(1• ti) if t,
R,,
= Ui(v I ri) > IMP,  I ri) if ri  E Ri.
Furthermore, it is straightforward to show that ,r1 is incentive feasible.
If r, E R, and t, E R„ then
UNT1,tilri) = O'(vailri)
Ui(viri) =

--- Sayfa 522 ---
504 10 • Cooperation under Uncertainty
If r, E Ri  and ti  R
i, then
UNThtil ri) = U, (11,tiI ri) — Ui(RI
Ui(11 ri).
If si  R
i, then
ti si) =
si) 15- Ui(1.1.1 si) = Ui(rl si),
because type si  would expect every other player j to report a type not
in R3. Soµ is not incentive efficient. I
Theorem 10.2 asserts that, if u, is incentive efficient, then the players
cannot reach a unanimous common-knowledge agreement to change
fromµ to some other incentive-compatible mechanism without chang-
ing some player's beliefs about other players' types. That is, a unanimous
agreement to change away from an incentive-efficient mechanism may
be possible, but only after some communication process in which some
player has revealed substantive information about his type to some other
player.
When we consider a mechanism-selection game, in which individuals
can bargain over mechanisms, there should be no loss of generality in
restricting our attention to equilibria in which there is one incentive-
feasible mechanism that is selected with probability 1, independently of
anyone's type. This proposition, called the inscrutability principle, can be
justified by viewing the mechanism-selection process itself as a com-
munication game induced from the original Bayesian game or collective-
choice problem and by applying the revelation principle. For example,
suppose that there is an equilibrium of the mechanism-selection game
in which some mechanism v would be selected if the profile of players'
types were in some set A (where A C T), and some other mechanism
would be selected otherwise. Then there should exist an equivalent
equilibrium of the mechanism-selection game in which the players al-
ways select a mechanism i, which coincides with mechanism v when the
players report (to the mediator who implements TO a profile of types in
A and which coincides with IL when they report a profile of types that
is not in A; that is,
1•10 = v(• t) if t E A,
T1(' I t) =
t) if t
A.
In effect, any information that the players could have revealed during
the mechanism-selection process can be revealed instead to the mediator

--- Sayfa 523 ---
10.6 • Inscrutability and Durability 505
after the mechanism has been selected, and the mediator can use this
information in the same way that it would have been used in the mech-
anism-selection process. Thus, when the players bargain over mecha-
nisms, they can agree to share information during the implementation
of the mechanism without sharing any information during the mecha-
nism-selection process.
However, Theorem 10.2 and the inscrutability principle do not imply
that the possibility of revealing information during a mechanism-selec-
tion process is irrelevant. There may be some incentive-feasible mech-
anisms that we should expect not to be selected by the players in such
a process, precisely because some players would choose to reveal infor-
mation about their types rather than let these mechanisms be selected.
For example, consider the following Bayesian collective-choice problem,
due to Holmstrom and Myerson (1983). There are two players in N =
{1,2}, T1  -= {1.a,l.b}, T2 = 12.a,2.131, and
1/4 = p(1.a,2.a) = p(1.a,2.b) = p(1.b,2.a) = p(1.b,2.b).
The set of possible outcomes or social choices is C = {x,y,z}, and each
player's utility for these options depends on his type according to Table
10.1. The incentive-efficient mechanism that maximizes the ex ante
expected sum of the two players' payoffs is ti such that
pi(x11.a,2.a) = 1, 11(y 1 1.a,2.b) = 1,
pi(z I 1.b,2.a) = 1,
11(y I 1.b,2.b) = 1.
That is, a mediator implementing this mechanism would choose x if the
reported types are l.a and 2.a, z if the reported types are 1.b and 2.a,
and y if player 2 reports type 2.b. (Choosing y when the reported types
are l.a and 2.b serves here to deter player 2 from reporting 2.b when
her type is 2.a.) However, Holmstrom and Myerson argued that such a
mechanism would not be chosen in a mechanism-selection game that is
played when player 1 already knows his type. When player l's type is
Table 10.1 Payoffs to each type of each player, for all social choice options
Option
1.a
1.b
2.a
2.b
x
2
0
2
2
Y
1
4
1
1
z
0
9
0
—8

--- Sayfa 524 ---
506 10 . Cooperation under Uncertainty
1.a, he could do better by proposing the mechanism that always chooses
x, and 2 would always want to accept this proposal. That is, because 1
would have no incentive to conceal his type from 2 in a mechanism-
selection game if his type were 1.a (when his interests would have no
conflict with 2's), we should not expect the individuals in a mechanism-
selection game to inscrutably agree to an incentive-efficient mechanism
like the one above that implicitly puts so much weight on the payoff for
type 1.b.
Some economists, following Coase (1960), have argued that we should
expect to observe efficient allocations in any economic situation where
there is complete information and bargaining costs are small. According
to this argument, often called the Coase theorem, an inefficient allocation
of resources could not endure, because someone could suggest an al-
ternative allocation that would make everyone better off and everyone
would agree to this alternative. (NOTE: Informational incentive con-
straints may be a source of some of the "bargaining costs" that are
discussed in this literature.) As we have seen in Sections 8.9 and 10.4,
this argument may not be valid when there is a range of Pareto-superior
alternatives over which individuals can bargain, because agreement
about which alternative to choose may be stalled in a standoff equilib-
rium, in which each individual insists on an alternative that is most
favorable to himself. However, if the players are considering only one
alternative to the status quo and if that alternative is Pareto superior to
the status quo, then a unanimous agreement to change from the status
quo to the alternative should be assured, at least in the case of complete
information.
Before trying to extend the Coase theorem to games with incomplete
information, let us formalize this result for the complete information
case. Suppose that there is a given subset of RN  that represents the set
of feasible payoff allocations for the players in N. Consider the following
voting game between a given status quo and a given alternative, each
of which is a feasible payoff allocation. In this voting game, the players
vote simultaneously for either the status quo or the alternative. After
the vote, the alternative will be implemented if all players vote for it,
but the status quo will be implemented if one or more players votes for
it. That is, we suppose that a change from the status quo to the alter-
native will be implemented if and only if there is unanimous agreement
for it.
In such a voting game, there is always an equilibrium in which every-
one votes for the status quo, regardless of his preferences, because each

--- Sayfa 525 ---
10.6 • Inscrutability and Durability 507
player anticipates that his vote cannot change the outcome. Such a trivial
equilibrium can be eliminated by several natural restrictions or refine-
ments of the equilibrium set. The weakest such restriction is that every
player who would strictly prefer the alternative to the status quo (if
everyone else were voting for the alternative) should himself vote for
the alternative; let us say that an equilibrium of this voting game is
active iff it satisfies this property. Then a feasible allocation w is Pareto
efficient (in the weak sense) if and only if, when w is the status quo, for
each alternative in the feasible set, this voting game has an active equi-
librium in which at least one player is sure to vote for the status quo w.
Things become more complicated when we try to extend this positive
characterization of efficiency to the case of incomplete information.
With incomplete information, the status quo and alternative are gen-
erally mechanisms, rather than simple allocations. The voting game
must be defined to include, not only the voting decision of each player,
but also the decision that each player must make about his report to
the mediator in the subsequent implementation of the mechanism that
wins the vote. The result of the vote may convey information to the
players about one anothers' types, so we cannot generally assume that
honest reporting would necessarily be equilibrium behavior when the
mechanism is implemented after the vote, even if this mechanism would
be incentive compatible in terms of the information available to the
players before the vote. (For the example in Table 10.1, if the above
mechanism 11, is implemented as the status quo, after a vote against the
alternative of choosing x for sure, then player 2 will believe player 1's
type must be 1.b, because only 1.b would have voted for the status quo.
Then player 2 will want to report type 2.b even if her type is 2.a.) So a
sequential equilibrium of the voting game must include a specification
of what each player would believe about the other players' types if he
voted for the alternative and it won unanimous endorsement in the
vote. These beliefs must be consistent with the equilibrium voting strat-
egies. Also, the players' reporting strategies must be sequentially rational
given these beliefs. (We assume here that, after the vote, the players
learn which of the two mechanisms is to be implemented, but they learn
nothing else about each other's votes.)
Holmstrom and Myerson (1983) say that an incentive-compatible
mechanism is durable iff, when it is the status quo, for each alternative
mechanism, there exists an active sequential equilibrium of this voting
game in which, for every possible profile of types, at least one player is
sure to vote for the status quo, which will then be implemented with all

--- Sayfa 526 ---
508 10 Cooperation under Uncertainty
players reporting honestly. Holmstrom and Myerson have shown that
durable incentive-efficient mechanisms always exist, for any finite
Bayesian collective-choice problem. Furthermore, when only one player
has private information, all incentive-efficient mechanisms are durable.
For example, recall the two incentive-efficient mechanisms (Q1,0
and ((2,2, Y2) for Example 10.1, in which only player 1 has private infor-
mation. It was shown in Section 10.3 that, if either one of these mech-
anisms is the status quo and the other is the alternative, then the infor-
mation that player 1 would vote for a change from status quo to
alternative should make player 2 expect to lose from the change. Thus,
player 2 would always vote for whichever of these two incentive-efficient
mechanisms is the status quo.
However, when two or more players have private information, there
may also exist incentive-efficient mechanisms that are not durable. For
the example in Table 10.1, the mechanismµ discussed above is incentive
efficient but is not durable. Furthermore, some durable mechanisms
may not be incentive efficient. For example, suppose that there are two
players in N = {1,2}, T1  = {1.a,1.13}, T2 = 12.a,2.131, C = {x,y}, 1/4 =
p(1.a,2.a) = p(1.a,2.b) = p(1.b,2.a) = p(1.b,2.b), and, for each player i,
uz(x,t) = 2, Vt E T,
uz(y,t) = 3 if t = (1.a,2.a) or t = (1.b,2.b),
u,(y,t) = 0 if t = (1.a,2.b) or t = (1.b,2.a).
Let -9 be the mechanism such that -9(x1t) = 1 for all t. Then -1-1 is not
incentive efficient but is durable. The players would both gain by choos-
ing y when their types are the same; but in the voting game with any
alternative mechanism, there is always an active sequential equilibrium
in which the players all vote for m independently of their types, and
they would report (babble) independently of their true types if the
alternative were approved. (There is no constant mechanism in which
the outcome does not depend on the players' types that the players
would prefer to m)
This discussion of durability suggests that the positive interpretation
of efficiency, which is expressed by the Coase theorem, may be less
applicable to games with incomplete information. However, the concept
of durability is limited by the assumption that only one alternative to
the status quo will be considered, with no story about how this unique
alternative is to be specified. (See also Crawford, 1985.) Furthermore,

--- Sayfa 527 ---
10.7 • Mechanism Selection 509
the above example with a durable but inefficient mechanism also has a
unique incentive-efficient mechanism that is durable and that is likely
to be the focal equilibrium outcome in a situation where the players can
negotiate effectively. In general, a positive interpretation of efficiency
may be simply derived from an assumption that incentive efficiency is
one determinant of the focal equilibrium of the mechanism-selection
process. That is, in a process of bargaining over mechanisms, it may be
a focal equilibrium for everyone to inscrutably endorse some specific
mechanism on the basis of its incentive efficiency and its equity (in some
sense) for all types of all players. Such equity considerations should
disqualify mechanisms such as the nondurable mechanism pi, for the
example in Table 10.1, which gives too little to type l.a and too much
to type 1.b. We consider some efforts to develop such a theory of equity
in the next two sections.
10.7 Mechanism Selection by an Informed Principal
To develop a theory of bargaining over mechanisms in a game with
incomplete information, it is best to start with the simplest case in which
one player, whom we call the principal, has all of the negotiating ability.
After all, if we cannot understand what mechanism a player would
choose when it is wholly his own choice, then we cannot hope to un-
derstand what mechanism a player should negotiate for in a mechanism-
selection process where he must bargain and compromise with others.
(Recall the discussion in Section 6.7.)
Let us consider Example 10.2, which differs from Example 10.1 in
Section 10.3 only in that the probability of the good type l.a is changed
to .9 (instead of .2). Thus, in this Bayesian bargaining problem, the
expected payoff to player 2 from a mechanism (Q,Y) is
U2(Q , Y12.0) = .9(50 Q(1.a) — Y(1.a)) + .1(30 Q(1.b) — Y(1.b)).
Except for this change, the basic formulas and constraints that charac-
terize the incentive-feasible mechanisms are the same as for Example
10.1
Suppose that player 1 is the principal and that he knows his type
when he selects the mechanism. Among all the feasible mechanisms,
the following maximizes both U,(Q,1111.a) and Ui(Q,Y11.b):
Q3(1.a) = 1, Y3(1.a) = 48, Q3(1.b) = 1, Y3(1.b) = 48.

--- Sayfa 528 ---
510 10 • Cooperation under Uncertainty
That is, the best incentive-feasible mechanism for player 1, no matter
what his type may be, is to simply offer to sell his unit of the commodity
to player 2 for $48, which is the expected value of the commodity to
her (.9 x 50 + .1 x 30 = 48). This mechanism gives expected payoffs
U1(Q3,Y311.a) = 8, U1(Q3,Y311.b) = 28, U2(Q3,Y3I2.0) = 0.
Thus, it seems clear that player 1 should select this mechanism (Q3,Y3)
in this modified example if he is the principal.
Before we move on from this conclusion, we should examine its logical
foundations more closely, however, by carefully analyzing the mecha-
nism-selection process as a noncooperative game. In this game, player
1, knowing his type, selects a mechanism to be implemented by a me-
diator. Players 1 and 2 then decide whether to participate in this mech-
anism, by signing a contract to accept the outcome that will be specified
by the mediator as a function of player l's type report, or to take the
no-trade option and get payoff 0. If both agree to participate, then
player 1 reports his type to the mediator (with the possibility of lying)
and the mediator implements the trade specified by the mechanism for
this report. There is a sequential equilibrium of this mechanism-selec-
tion game in which player 1 always selects (Q3,Y3) and the players
subsequently participate honestly in this mechanism.
However, there are other sequential equilibria of this game. For ex-
ample, consider the following mechanism
Q4(1.a) = 1/3, Y4(1.a) = 50/3, Q4(1.b) = 1, Y4(1.b) = 30,
which gives
U,(Q4,Y4 I 1.a) = 31/2, U1(Q4,Y 411.b) = 10, U2(Q4,Y 4 I 2.0) = 0.
In this mechanism, player 1 has the options either to sell his entire
supply of one unit for a price of $30 or to sell 1/3 unit at a price of $50
per unit; and he chooses the former when his type is 1.b (30 — 20
1/2(50 — 20)) and the latter when his type is 1.a. Among the set of all
incentive-feasible mechanisms that have the property that player 2 never
pays a price higher than her actual value for the commodity, this mech-
anism is the best mechanism for both types of player 1. There is another
sequential equilibrium of the mechanism-selection game in which player
1 always selects (Q4, Y 4) and the players subsequently participate honestly
in this mechanism. If player 1 proposed any other mechanism in which
player 2 would expect to pay a price higher than her true value against

--- Sayfa 529 ---
10.7 • Mechanism Selection 511
at least one type of player 1, then (in this sequential equilibrium) player
2 would infer from this surprising proposal that player l's type was the
type against which she would pay more than her true value; so she
would refuse to participate. For example, if player 1 proposed (Q3, Y3)
in this sequential equilibrium, then player 2 would believe that his type
was 1.b; so she would refuse to participate (because 30 — 48 < 0).
Notice, however, that (Q4, Y 4) is not incentive-efficient, because (Q3, Y3)
is interim Pareto superior to it.
So to get incentive efficiency as a result of a mechanism-selection
process, we need some further assumptions, like those of cooperative
game theory. In particular, we need to assume that a player who selects
an incentive-feasible mechanism also has some ability to negotiate for
both the inscrutable equilibrium of the mechanism-selection game and
the honest participation equilibrium in the implementation of the mech-
anism itself. That is, we need to assume that the principal can supple-
ment his selection of a mechanism with a negotiation statement of the
following form:
You should not infer anything about my type from the fact that I am
selecting this mechanism, because I would have proposed it no matter what
my type was. Notice that, given that no one is making any such inferences,
it is an equilibrium for everyone to participate honestly in this mechanism.
So let us all plan to participate honestly in this mechanism.
We then need to assume that, if this statement passes some kind of
credibility test, then all players will believe it and participate honestly in
the mechanism. (See Farrell, 1988; Grossman and Perry, 1986; and
Myerson, 1989; for general discussions of such credibility tests.)
Now let us consider again the original Example 10.1, in which the
probability of the good type 1.a is .2. Among all incentive-feasible mech-
anisms for this example, the one that maximizes player 2's expected
payoff is
Q5(1.a) = 0, Y5(1.a) = 0, Q5(1.b) = 1, Y5(1.b) = 20,
which gives
Ui(Q5,Y51l.a) = 0, Ui(Q5,Y511.b) = 0, U2(Q5, Y512.0) = 8.
That is, in player 2's best mechanism, player 1 sells his whole supply
for $20 if the quality is bad (type 1.b), and there is no trade if the
quality is good (type 1.a). Notice that this mechanism always gives payoff

--- Sayfa 530 ---
512 10 • Cooperation under Uncertainty
0 to player 1 and is incentive efficient. Even though there is a probability
.2 that player 2 will not buy a commodity that is always worth more to
her than to the seller, this is the best incentive-feasible mechanism for
player 2. Thus, if player 2 has all of the negotiating ability, then we
should expect her to negotiate for this mechanism, in which she essen-
tially makes a take-it-or-leave-it offer of $20 for the commodity.
Things become more complicated when we assume that player 1 is
the principal in Example 10.1, because the feasible mechanism that is
best for player 1 (in the sense of maximizing his expected payoff given
his true type) depends on what his type is. For the good type (1.a), the
best feasible mechanism is
Q6(1.a) = 0, Y6(1.a) = 8, Q6(1.b) = 1, Y6(1.b) = 28,
which gives
u1(Q6,  y611.a) = 8, Ul(Q6,Y611.b) = 8, U2(Q6,Y6 I 2.0) = 0.
In this mechanism, player 2 pays a nonrefundable fee of $8 to player
1 in exchange for the right to then make a take-it-or-leave-it offer to
buy one unit of the commodity for an additional payment of $20 (if 1
accepts the offer). On the other hand, the best incentive-feasible mech-
anism for type 1.b of player 1 is
Q7(1.a) = 4/7, Y7(1.a) = 40 x 4/7 = 22.86,
(27(1.b) = 1, Y7(1.b) = 31.43,
which gives
U1(Q7,Y711.a) = 0, U1(Q7,Y711.b) = 11.43, U1(Q7,Y7 I2.0) = 0.
In this mechanism player 2 buys 4/7 units of the commodity at the price
of $40 per unit if player l's type is 1.a, and player 2 buys one unit of
the commodity for $31.43 if player l's type is 1.b. In this mechanism,
the losses that player 2 would get if l's type is 1.b just cancel in expected
value the gains that player 2 would get if l's type is l.a.
Naive analysis of mechanism selection by player 1 might suggest that
player 1 would select the mechanism (Q6, Y6) if he is type 1.a and (Q7, Y7)
if he is type 1.b. But then player 2, being intelligent, would know player
l's type as soon as he chooses the mechanism. So if player 1 chose
(Q6,Y6), then player 2 would infer that 1 was type l.a, so she would
refuse to participate in the mechanism (anticipating that 1 would pocket

--- Sayfa 531 ---
10.7 • Mechanism Selection 513
the $8 fee and reject the offer to sell for $20). The mechanism (Q6,Y6)
satisfied the participation constraint only when it was assumed that both
types of player 1 would choose it.
Similarly, participating in (Q7, Y7) ceases to be rational for player 2 if
she understands the fact that this mechanism would be selected only if
player l's type is 1.b. Another way to see this difficulty is to apply the
inscrutability principle and observe that this naive theory is equivalent
to the theory that player 1 would inscrutably select the mechanism that
coincides with (Q6,Y6) if he is type 1.a and (Q7, Y7) if he is type 1.b. This
inscrutable equivalent mechanism is
Q8(1.a) = 0, Y8(1.a) = 8, Q8(l.b) = 1, Y8(1.b) = 31.43,
which gives
U1(Q8,Y811.a) = 8, U,(Q8,Y811.b) = 11.43,
U2(Q8, Y812.0) =- —2.74,
so it is not individually rational for player 2.
So no matter what the type of player 1 may be, he cannot implement
the feasible mechanism that is best for him unless player 2 believes that
both types would have selected the same mechanism. Because these are
different mechanisms for the different types, and because player 2 is
assumed to be intelligent, player 1 must sometimes select a mechanism
other than the feasible mechanism that he actually most prefers. That
is, player 1 must make some compromise between what he really wants
and what he might have wanted if his type had been different, in order
to select the mechanism inscrutably.
In general, to understand mechanism selection by a principal with
private information, we need a theory of how he should make such an
inscrutable intertype compromise. This is a difficult problem, but there is a
class of situations where a strong solution to the informed principal's
problem can be defined.
Given any Bayesian collective-choice problem or Bayesian bargaining
problem where one player i is specified as the principal, we say that a
mechanism is a safe proposal for the principal iff it is incentive feasible
and it would remain incentive feasible even if all the players knew the
principal's true type, no matter what that type may be. We say that a
mechanism ii is interim inferior for the principal to some other mechanism
v iff there is at least one type of the principal who would expect a higher

--- Sayfa 532 ---
514 10 • Cooperation under Uncertainty
payoff in v than in
(in the sense that U,(v ti) > U,(1.11 t,)) and there
does not exist any type of the principal who would expect a lower payoff
in v than in A mechanism is a strong solution for the principal iff it is
safe for the principal and is not interim inferior for the principal to any
other incentive-feasible mechanism.
Many Bayesian games have no strong solution. For the modified
Example 10.2 discussed at the beginning of this section, the best safe
mechanism for player 1 is (Q4,Y 4), which is interim inferior to (Q3,Y3)
for him. So there is no strong solution for player 1 in Example 10.2
(even though there is a mechanism that is best for both types of play-
er 1).
In Example 10.1 (where (Q3,Y3) is not incentive feasible), player l's
best safe mechanism (Q4,Y4) is not interim inferior to any other incen-
tive-feasible mechanism for player 1. (Notice that .3 x 31/2 + .7 x 10 =
8, so (Q4,Y 4) satisfies the incentive-efficiency condition (10.16) with
U2(Q4,Y4 I 2.0) = 0.) So (Q4,Y4), in which player 1 has the option to
either sell his entire supply of one unit for a price of $30 or sell 1/3 unit
at a price of $50 per unit, is a strong solution for player 1 in Example
10.1.
Myerson (1983) argued that, when such a strong solution exists, it is
the most reasonable solution to the principal's mechanism-selection
problem. No matter what the other players might infer about the prin-
cipal's type when he selects his strong solution, they would still be willing
to participate honestly in theµ mechanism, because it is safe. On the
other hand, suppose that 11 is a strong solution for the principal, but
suppose that he actually selected some other mechanism v that would
(if implemented with honest participation by all players) be better than
p. for at least one of his types. Let Sz(v,R) denote the set of the principal's
types that would prefer v to that is
S,(v,11) = {t, E TIU,(vIt,) > U,(iltz)},
where i is the principal. If the principal had been expected to select p.,
then the other players might naturally infer from his selection of v that
his type was in S,(v,p.). However, if they calculate their new beliefs by
Bayes's rule on the basis of this inference, then in the game with these
new beliefs the mechanism v must violate at least one informational
incentive constraint or participation constraint. If v were incentive fea-
sible for the game with these new beliefs, then the mechanism i1  defined
such that, for each c in C,

--- Sayfa 533 ---
10.8 • Neutral Bargaining Solutions 515
iri(c I t) = v(c1t) if t, E
71(cl t) = 11.(cl t) if t,
S,(v,p..),
would be incentive feasible for the game with the original beliefs, and
would be interim inferior to for the principal; but this result would
contradict the fact that 1.1. is not interim inferior for the principal to any
other incentive-feasible mechanism. Thus, any other mechanism v
would be rendered infeasible (either not incentive compatible or not
individually rational) as soon as the other players infer that the principal
prefers v to the strong solution.
Furthermore, all strong solutions must be essentially equivalent for
the principal, in the sense that, if i is the principal and 11 and are
both strong solutions for him, then U,(111t,) must equal U,(til I t) for
every type t, in T,. If not, then by the preceding argument would
not be incentive feasible if the other players inferred that player i's type
was in the nonempty set {t, E
> U,(Rit,)}, which would con-
tradict the assumption that
is safe for player i.
Myerson (1983) axiomatically derived a neutral optimum solution con-
cept for mechanism selection by an informed principal. An incentive-
efficient neutral optimum always exists, for any given principal player.
If a strong solution exists, then it is a neutral optimum. Furthermore,
a neutral optimum is durable and is not interim inferior to any other
incentive-compatible mechanism for the principal. In Example 10.1,
(Q4, Y 4) is the unique strong solution and neutral optimum for player
1. In the modified Example 10.2, where player 1 has no strong solution,
(Q3,Y3) is the unique neutral optimum for player 1. We omit here the
formal definition of a neutral optimum (see Myerson, 1983), and instead
we develop next a closely related solution concept for mechanism selec-
tion by two players who have equal negotiating ability.
10.8 Neutral Bargaining Solutions
Harsanyi and Selten (1972) first studied the question of how to define
a generalization of the Nash bargaining solution that can be applied to
games with incomplete information. Myerson (1984a,b) developed gen-
eralizations of both the Nash bargaining solution and the Shapley NTU
value for games with incomplete information. In this section, we con-
sider this generalization of the Nash bargaining solution, called the

--- Sayfa 534 ---
516 10 Cooperation under Uncertainty
neutral bargaining solution, for two-player Bayesian bargaining prob-
lems of the form
ro = ({ l,21, C, d*, T1, T2, 1)1, TJ2, u1, u2),
as defined in Section 10.1.
The neutral bargaining solution can be derived from two axioms.
One of these axioms asserts something about what the solution should
look like for a class of problems that are fairly straightforward to un-
derstand (like Nash's symmetry axiom), and the other axiom asserts
something about how the solutions to different games should be related
(like Nash's independence of irrelevant alternatives axiom).
AXIOM 10.1 (RANDOM DICTATORSHIP). Suppose that there exist
two outcomes b' and b2  in C such that
u2(b',t) = 0 and u1(b2,t) = 0, Vt E T,
and the mechanisms [b'], [b2], and .5[b'] + .5[b2] are all incentive efficient.
(Here [b'] is the mechanism that always chooses b', and .5[b'] + .5[b2] is the
mechanism that always gives probability .5 to each of b' and b2, no matter what
types are reported.) Then 5[bl + .5[b2] is a bargaining solution for F.
AXIOM 10.2 (EXTENSIONS). Suppose that 11 is an incentive-efficient
mechanism for a Bayesian bargaining problem F13, where
= ({1,2}, C, d*, T 1, T2, plr p2,  Ul, u2).
Suppose also that, for each positive number e, there exists a Bayesian bargaining
problem F13(e) and a bargaining solution for MO such that
f 3(r) = ({1,2}, C, d*, T1, T2, p,, p2,  221, u2),
D C,
ft,(c,t) = ui(c,t), Vi E {1,2}, Vc E C, Vt E T, and
Ui(p. I t,)
0,(Ti t,) — E, Vi E {1,2}, Vt, E T.
Thenµ must be a bargaining solution for F. (Here 0,(119 is the expected payoff
to type t, of player i from the mechanism in the game row.)

--- Sayfa 535 ---
10.8 • Neutral Bargaining Solutions 517
Suppose, as stated in the hypotheses of Axiom 10.1, that [b'] is an
incentive-efficient mechanism that always gives player 2 the worst payoff
that she can guarantee herself. Then [b'] cannot be interim inferior to
any other incentive-feasible mechanism for player 1. Furthermore, there
obviously can never be any difficulty satisfying informational incentive
constraints for a mechanism that always selects the same outcome, so
[61 must be a safe mechanism for player 1. Thus, the hypotheses of
Axiom 10.1 imply that [b'] is a strong solution for player 1. Similarly,
[b2] is a strong solution for player 2. So F13  is an example in which we
can confidently predict what mechanism each player would select if he
were the principal.
Assuming the hypotheses of Axiom 10.1, suppose that we gave each
player a probability .5 of acting as the principal and selecting the mech-
anism dictatorially. Then the overall result of this random dictatorship
process would be to implement .5[b'] + .5[b2], which is also given to be
incentive efficient. Because the random dictatorship is clearly equitable
to the two players and it is efficient, it has a fair claim to being a
bargaining solution.
Of course, the hypotheses of Axiom 10.1 are quite restrictive and are
likely to be satisfied by relatively few games, but that just means that
this axiom is very weak. Only when it is clear what a random dictatorship
scheme would lead to and only when it is also efficient, do we then
argue that the random-dictatorship mechanism should be a bargaining
solution.
To appreciate how restrictive these hypotheses are, consider a two-
person bargaining problem (F,(0,0)) (with complete information) as de-
fined in Chapter 8. In such a complete-information context, the hy-
potheses of Axiom 10.1 imply that the allocation .5(h,(0,F),0) +
.5(0,h2(0,F)) is Pareto efficient in F; but that can happen only if the
individually rational Pareto frontier of F is a straight line and its mid-
point .5(h,(0,F),0) + .5(0,h2(0,F)) is then the Nash bargaining solution.
(Here h, is as defined in Section 8.6.)
Axiom 10.2 is related to Nash's independence of irrelevant alterna-
tives axiom, together with a kind of upper-hemicontinuity condition. If
1"1 (e) satisfies the hypotheses of Axiom 10.2, then Fr3(e) differs from F
only in that FP(6) contains some possible outcomes that are not in F‘3;
so we say that FP(e) is an extension of V. However, in spite of the fact
that the mechanism p, does not use any of these additional outcomes (it

--- Sayfa 536 ---
518 10 • Cooperation under Uncertainty
is feasible for the more restricted game F'3), it is almost interim Pareto
superior to a bargaining solution for the extension rP(E). Axiom 10.2
asserts that if there are ways to extend the Bayesian bargaining problem
V' such that the incentive-efficient mechanismµ is interim Pareto su-
perior to a bargaining solution of the extension, or comes arbitrarily
close to being interim Pareto superior to a bargaining solution of the
extension, thenµ must be a bargaining solution itself.
There are many bargaining solution concepts that satisfy these two
axioms. For example, both axioms would be satisfied by letting the set
of "bargaining solutions" be the set of all incentive-efficient mechanisms.
A neutral bargaining solution is defined to be any mechanism that is a
solution for every bargaining solution concept that satisfies these two
axioms. Myerson (1984a) proved that the neutral bargaining solutions
themselves satisfy the two axioms, and the set of neutral bargaining
solutions is nonempty for any finite two-player Bayesian bargaining
problem. The following characterization theorem is also proved by
Myerson (1984a).
THEOREM 10.3. A mechanism 1.1. is a neutral bargaining solution for a
finite two-player Bayesian bargaining problem if and only if for each positive
number E, there exist vectors X, a, and w (which may depend on E) such that
(10.22)
((Xi(ti) + E ot z(sz Iti)) wz(ti) — E (oils) wi(si))Ipi(ti)
siET;
siET;
= E
vi(c,t,X,a)/2, Vi E N, Vti  E Ti;
t_,ET_i
c(C jE{1,2}
Xi(ti) > 0 and ai(si l
0, Vi E N, Hsi  E Ti, Vti  E Ti;
and Ui(i.titi)
wi(ti) — e, Vi E N, Vti  E Ti.
(In this two-player context, we let —i denote the player other than i; and v3(.) is
the virtual utility function defined in Section 10.5.)
Proof. Given any vector X of positive utility weights and any vector a
of nonnegative Lagrange multipliers, consider an extension FI3  in which
6 = C U {b',b2},
iti(b2,0 = 0 = 222(bi,o, Ht E T,

--- Sayfa 537 ---
10.8 • Neutral Bargaining Solutions 519
((x i(to + E 01,(s, Ito) fti(bi,t) — E ot,(ti  s1) 121(bl  ,(s,,t2)))1p 1(ti)
s, ET'
.51 ET!
= max E
Vt E T,
,EC .7E{1,2}
((x2(t2) +
et2(S2 I t2)) 12202,
E 01.2(t21s2) ii202,(ti,s2)))///2(t2)
s2(7.2
s2ET2
= max E v,(c,/,x,a), Vt E T.
cEC jE{1,2}
Then the mechanisms [b'], [b2], and .5[b'] + .5[1)21 all are incentive-
efficient for F13, because they satisfy the conditions of Theorem 10.1
with X and a. Thus, to satisfy the random-dictatorship axiom, .5[b'] +
.5[b2] must be a bargaining solution for FP. Furthermore, the system of
equations (10.22) in the theorem can then be satisfied by letting
wi(ti) = li,(.5[b1] + .5[b2] I  ti) = E

t_,ET_, 	2
It can be shown (see Lemma 1 of Myerson, 1983) that, for any X and
a that satisfy the positivity and nonnegativity conditions in Theorem
10.3, the system of equations (10.22) has a unique solution w =
(W1(0)t,ET,,zEN • Thus, any such solution must correspond to the allocation
of interim expected payoffs to the players in a bargaining solution of
an extension of FP. So the extensions axiom implies that any incentive-
efficient mechanism ti that satisfies the conditions of Theorem 10.3
must be a bargaining solution of F.
To complete the proof, it remains to show that the set of all incentive-
efficient mechanisms p, for which the conditions in Theorem 10.3 can
be satisfied is a solution set that itself satisfies the two axioms. The
technical details of this argument can be found in Myerson (1984a). I
Notice that the vectors X, a, and w may depend on the positive number
E in Theorem 10.3. However, if we can find X, a, and w that satisfy the
conditions of this theorem for the case of s = 0 (as is possible in many
examples) then the same X, a, and w will satisfy Theorem 10.3 for every
positive E. Furthermore, it can be shown that such X and a will also
satisfy the incentive-efficiency conditions in Theorem 10.1 for the mech-
anism R.
To interpret the conditions in Theorem 10.3, consider the (X,a) virtual
bargaining problem, a fictitious game that differs from FP in the following

--- Sayfa 538 ---
520 10 • Cooperation under Uncertainty
three ways. First, the players' types are verifiable (as if, for example,
each player has an identity card that says what his type is, which he can
be asked to show to prove that he is not lying about his type), so there
are no informational incentive constraints. Second, each player's payoffs
are in the virtual utility scales vi(•,•,X,a) with respect to X and a, instead
of uz(.,.). Third, these virtual utility payoffs are transferable among the
players.
For the (X,a) virtual bargaining problem, it is easy to identify a mech-
anism that would be both equitable and efficient in almost any reason-
able sense of these terms: for any combination of types, the outcome in
C should be one that maximizes the sum of the players' transferable
virtual-utility payoffs (for efficiency), and transfers should then be used
to allocate this transferable payoff equally among the players (for eq-
uity). (Notice that each player's virtual-utility payoff in the disagreement
outcome is always 0, by (10.7) and (10.17).) Because types are verifiable,
there would be no incentive constraints to prevent an arbitrator or
mediator from implementing such an equitable and efficient mechanism
for the (X,a) virtual bargaining problem.
Thus, considerations of equity and efficiency in the (X,a) virtual bar-
gaining problem lead to a mechanism in which the expected payoff to
player i when his type is tz  is
v (c,t,X,a)
iL_,(t_,)max 2,
t_,ET
cEC 1E{1,2}
2
By definition of virtual utility (10.17), the system of equations (10.22)
asserts that, for each player i, the vector (wi(t,)),,T  is the allocation of
expected utility payoffs for the possible types of player i that corre-
sponds to these equitable and efficient expected virtual-utility payoffs
in the (X,a) virtual bargaining problem. Thus, any allocation vector
W = (lei(ti))t,E T,,iE {1,2}
that satisfies (10.22) for some positive X and some nonnegative a can
be called virtually equitable for
So Theorem 10.3 asserts that a neutral bargaining solution is an
incentive-efficient mechanism that generates type-contingent expected
utilities that are equal to or interim Pareto superior to a limit of virtually
equitable utility allocations. That is, Theorem 10.3 suggests that, in
negotiation or arbitration, players may make interpersonal equity com-
parisons in virtual utility terms, rather than in actual utility terms. When

--- Sayfa 539 ---
10.8 • Neutral Bargaining Solutions 521
we first introduced virtual utility in Section 10.4, it was offered only as
a convenient way of characterizing incentive-efficient mechanisms.
Theorem 10.3 suggests that virtual utility scales can be used for char-
acterizing equity as well as efficiency in bargaining problems with in-
complete information.
To put it less formally, Theorem 10.3 suggests the following theory
about bargaining with incomplete information, which we call the virtual
utility hypothesis: in response to the pressure that a player feels from
other players' distrust of any statements that he could make about his
type, he might bargain as if he wanted to maximize some virtual utility
scale that differs from his actual utility scale in a way that exaggerates
the difference from the false types that jeopardize his true type. When
he argues about the equity and efficiency of proposed mechanisms, his
bargaining behavior may be characterized by such virtual-utility exag-
geration.
Consider again Example 10.1. The neutral bargaining solution for
this example is
Q9(1.a) = 1/6, Y9(1.a) = 50/6, Q9(1.b) = 1, Y9(1.b) = 25,
which gives
U,(Q9,Y911.a) = 1.67, U,(Q9,Y911.b) = 5, U2(Q9,Y9 I2.0) = 4.
The conditions in Theorem 10.3 can be satisfied for all E by the same
X and a that we used for this example in Section 10.4,
X.,(1.a) = 0.3, X,(1.b) = 0.7, X2(2.0) = 1,
a,(1.all.b) = 0.1, ai(1.1311.a) = 0.
With these parameters, the only difference between virtual utility and
actual utility is that $50 is the virtual value of the commodity to player
1 when his type is 1.a (instead of the actual value of $40). So the
maximum sum of virtual-utility payoffs is 0 (= 50 — 50) when player 1
is type 1.a, and 10 (= 30 — 20) when player 1 is type 1.b. The virtual-
equity equations (10.22) then become
0.3 w,(1.a) — 0.1 w,(1.b)  _ 0
.2
2'
(0.7 + 0.1) w,(1.b)  _ 10
.8 	 2

--- Sayfa 540 ---
522 10 • Cooperation under Uncertainty
10
0
W2(2.0) = .8 6-) + .2 (i)
which have the unique solution
w,(l.a) = 12A, wi(l.b) = 5, w,(2.0) = 4.
In this neutral bargaining solution, player 1 sells 'A of his supply at
a price of $50 per unit when his type is l.a and sells all of his supply at
a price of $25 per unit when his type is 1.b. It is interesting to compare
this mechanism to the first mechanism that we discussed in Section 10.3,
(Q',Y'), in which player 1 sells 1/5 of his supply at a price of $45 per
unit when his type is l.a and sells all of his supply at a price of $25 per
unit when his type is 1.b. The mechanism (Q',Y') is the unique incentive-
efficient mechanism in which the commodity is always sold at a price
per unit that is halfway between its value to the seller and its value to
,y1
m
the buyer; so (Q' , Y' ) might seem to be equitable and efficient in a
natural intuitive sense. However, (Q',Y') is not equitable (or even indi-
vidually rational) in the (X,a) virtual bargaining problem, because it has
player 1 selling some of his supply for a price of $45 per unit when his
type is l.a and the virtual value of the commodity to him is $50. To
satisfy virtual equity in the (X,a) virtual bargaining problem, the selling
price must be $50 per unit when l's type is l.a, as it is in (Q9,Y9).
The neutral bargaining solution (Q9, Y9) can be directly interpreted
in terms of the logic of the random-dictatorship axiom. In Section 10.6,
we argued that, if player 1 were the principal who could dictatorially
choose the mechanism, he would choose (Q4, Y 4), in which player 1 sells
'A of his supply at a price of $50 per unit when his type is l.a and sells
all of his supply at a price of $30 per unit when his type is 1.b. If player
2 were the principal or dictator, she would choose the mechanism
(Q5, Y5), in which player 1 sells nothing when his type is 1.a and sells all
of his supply at a price of $20 per unit when his type is 1.b. A .50—.50
randomization between these two dictatorial mechanisms has, for each
of the two possible types of player 1, the same expected quantity sold
and the same expected cash payment as (Q9,Y9); that is, for each t, in
T 1,
Q9(1,) = .5(24(t,) + .5Q5(1,) and Y9(t,) = .5Y4(t,) + .5Y5(ti).
So the neutral bargaining solution is essentially equivalent to a random-
dictator mechanism for this example.

--- Sayfa 541 ---
10.8 • Neutral Bargaining Solutions 523
When player l's type is 1.a, he is in a position that can be described
as surprisingly strong: "surprising" because the probability of this type
is rather small; and "strong" because his willingness to trade at any
given price is never greater than it would have been had his type been
different. When player 1 is in such a surprisingly strong position, the
terms of trade (the price per unit traded) in the neutral bargaining
solution (which is based on the assumption that players 1 and 2 have
equal negotiating ability) are similar to the terms of trade that would
occur if player 1 were the principal (with all the negotiating ability),
except that the expected quantity of trade is less. This property of
neutral bargaining solutions has been observed in other examples (see
Myerson, 1985b) and has been called arrogance of strength.
To better understand why such arrogance of strength might be rea-
sonable to expect, it helps to think further about the question of inscrut-
able intertype compromise that arises in the theory of bargaining with
incomplete information. Any theory that specifies an incentive-efficient
mechanism for this example must implicitly make some trade-off or
compromise between the two possible types of player 1, if only because
there are many incentive-efficient mechanisms that all give the same
expected payoff to player 2 but differ in the expected payoffs that they
give to 1.a and 1.b. For example, compare (Q9,Y9) to
0(1.a) = 4/19, Y1°(1.a) = 45 x 4/19,
Qio()

A). = 1, Y1°(1.b) = 25.26,
which gives
"Qio;yioi La) = 1.05, U1(0,Y1°11.b) = 5.26,
u2(Q10;yloi 2.0)  = 4;
so it is worse than (Q9,Y9) for 1.a but better than (Q9,Y9) for 1.b. Imagine
that the players are bargaining over the selection of a mediator and
that they have two candidates for the job, of whom one promises to
implement (Q9,Y9) and the other promises to implement (Q10,Y1°).
Player 2 is initially indifferent between these two candidates, but if
player 2 knew which mediator was actually preferred by player 1,
then player 2 would prefer the other. So it might seem that neither type
of player 1 would dare to express his true preference between these
two mediators, lest player 2 then insist on the other mechanism.

--- Sayfa 542 ---
524 10 Cooperation under Uncertainty
However, this argument disregards the fact that the strong type l.a
could benefit greatly in bargaining from revealing his type to player 2,
when the possibility of other mechanisms is considered. After all, in the
complete information game where player 2 knows that player 1 is type
l.a, the Nash bargaining solution would be for player 1 to sell his entire
supply for $45. So, if player 1 is type l.a, he could confidently argue
for hiring the (Q9, Y9) mediator and add boldly, "And if you infer from
my preference for (Q9, Y9) that my type is 1.a, then you should dispense
with both of these mediators and just buy my whole supply for $45,
which would be better for you and just as good for me when I am l.a!"
To maintain inscrutability then, player 1 would have to make the same
argument if he were type 1.b. That is, because player 1 would actually
be very eager to reveal information about his type if he were 1.a, and
only l.b really would have some incentive to conceal his type in bar-
gaining, the inscrutable intertype compromise between the strong type
l.a and the weak type 1.b tends to get resolved in favor of the strong
type.
In Example 10.2, the type 1.a has probability .9, so the strong type
would not be "surprising" and there is no arrogance of strength. (To
be more precise, we can say that the strong type l.a ceases to be "sur-
prising" when the probability of l.a becomes high enough that player
2 prefers the mechanism in which trade occurs for sure at $40 over the
mechanism in which trade occurs at $20 but only when player l's type
is l.b.) The neutral bargaining solution for Example 10.2 is
QH(1.a) = 1, Yll(1.a) = 44, Q11(1.b) = 1, Y11(1.b) = 44,
(that is, all of the commodity is always sold at a price of $44), which
gives
U,(Q",Y" 11.a) = 4, Ul(Q11,1111 1 1.b) = 24,
U2(Q11,Y1112.0) = 4.
The virtual equity conditions of Theorem 10.3 are satisfied in Ex-
ample 10.2 by giving essentially zero weight to the unlikely weak type
1.b of player 1. To be specific, the conditions of Theorem 10.3 can be
satisfied for any positive r by letting
= 1 — 0.1E, X,(1.b) = 0.1E, X2(2.0) = 1,
= 0.1 — 0.1E, a,(1.1311.a) = 0.

--- Sayfa 543 ---
(1 — 0.1E)40 — (0.1 — 0.16)20
9
— 422/9 — 6 22/9.
10.8 • Neutral Bargaining Solutions 525
With these parameters, the virtual utility payoffs differ from actual
utility payoffs only in that the virtual value of the commodity for player
1 when his type is l.a is
So the maximum possible sum of virtual utility payoffs is
50 — (422/9 — E 22/9) = 77/9 + E 2 2/9 .
when player l's type is l.a and is 30 — 20 = 10 when player l's type is
1.b. So the virtual equity equations can be written:
(1 — 0.1E)w,(1.a) — (0.1 — 0.1E)w,(1.b)  = (77/9 + 6 22/9)/2,
.9
(0.1E + (0.1 — 0.1E))w,(1.b)  _ 10
.1
— 2
w2(2.0) = .9(77/9 + E 22/9)/2 + .1(10/2).
The unique solution to these equations is
5E
w,(1.a) = 4 + 0.
, w,(1.b) = 5, w2(2.0) = 4 + E.
1 — 0.1E
As E goes to 0, these solutions converge to the limiting allocation
w,(1.a) = 4, w,(1.b) = 5, w2(2.0) = 4,
The neutral bargaining solution is interim Pareto superior to this lim-
iting allocation.
Using the virtual utility hypothesis, Myerson (1984b) has proposed a
solution concept for multiplayer cooperative games with incomplete
information that generalizes both the neutral bargaining solution (in
the two-player case) and the Shapley NTU value (in the complete in-
formation case). In the definition of this generalized NTU value, ficti-
tious transfers of virtual utility with respect to some parameters X and
a have the same role that fictitious transfers of X-weighted utility have
in the definition of the Shapley NTU value for games with complete
information (see Section 9.9). Notice that, if each player has only one
possible type, then the a parameters drop out of the definition of virtual
utility (10.17), which then reduces to simple X-weighted utility.

--- Sayfa 544 ---
526 10 • Cooperation under Uncertainty
10.9 Dynamic Matching Processes with Incomplete Information
The development of the inner core in Section 9.8 can be generalized to
games with incomplete information. The most convenient way to do so
is in terms of a model of a game that is replicated to a dynamic matching
process, for which we can prove an existence theorem that generalizes
Theorem 9.6.
As in Chapter 9, let L(N) be the set of all coalitions or nonempty
subsets of N. For any coalition S, let Ts  = X :ES Ti  denote the set of all
possible type profiles for the players in S, and let Cs  denote the set of
all jointly feasible actions that the players in S can choose if they act
cooperatively. Suppose that, if a coalition S with type profile is  in Ts
cooperatively chooses action cs  in Cs, then the payoff to each player i is
u,(cs,ts). We are assuming here that the payoffs to the players in S do
not depend on the types and actions of players outside of the coalitions.
(We call this an orthogonal coalitions assumption, like the condition dis-
cussed in Section 9.2.)
When we study a dynamic matching process, the set N is reinterpreted,
not as the set of players, but as the set of outwardly distinguishable
classes of players. For each i in N, the set T, is the set of possible privately
known types of class-i players. That is, we assume that each player can
be described by his class i in N and his type t, in Ti, and that his class is
publicly observable and verifiable but his type is privately known and
directly observable only to himself. Let us assume that each player can
join only one coalition, from which he derives his utility payoff. We say
that a player exits from the matching system when he is assigned to a
coalition. The function of the matching process is to assign each player
into some coalition with some combination of types that will choose
some action. Between the point in time when a player enters the match-
ing process and the point in time when he exits in a coalition, he is
waiting and available to be matched.
Let us first consider a picture of the dynamic matching process at one
point in time. Suppose that the waiting population is quite large, and
let f,(t,) denote the proportion of class-i type-ti  individuals in the waiting
population at this point in time. Let w,(t,) denote the expected payoff
that class-i type-t, individuals anticipate from staying in the matching
process, if it operates according to some established matching plan
(which we will consider in more detail later). We can write
w =
f = ( fi(ti))iEN,tiET„

--- Sayfa 545 ---
10.9 Dynamic Matching Processes 527
and we refer to this pair of vectors as the waiting-population character-
istics.
Now suppose that a mediator wants to compete with this established
matching plan and assign some currently waiting individuals to blocking
coalitions. His blocking plan may be described by a vector 10 of the form
— (1r1s(cs,ts))sEL(N),,,Ecs,esETs,
where -qs(csas) denotes the number of blocking coalitions that he would
form (if he successfully implemented this blocking plan) that would
have type profile is  and would choose joint action cs, divided by the
total number of waiting individuals at this point in time. Thus, under
this blocking plan, the probability that a class-i type-ti  individual would
be assigned to a blocking coalition with types profile is  and that will
choose joint action cs  is
Ils(cs,ts)
.f(tz)
(As usual, t, is understood here to be the i-component of ts. The other
components of is  may be denoted ts_„ so we can write is  = (ts_i,t,).)
We say that i1  is a viable blocking plan, relative to the waiting-population
characteristics (w,f), iff -9 satisfies the following conditions, for every i
in N, every t, in T„ and every r, in T,:
(10.23)
E E
E  ris(cs,ts)  < 1;
spfil (SECS
fi(ti)
(10.24)
E E
E
(u
i(cs' ts) — wi(o) ls(cs,ts)
o;
SD{i} csECs ts_,ETs_,
fi(ti)
(10.25)
E E
E  (ui(cs,ts) — wi(0)1s(cs,ts)
Sp(i)
E Cs ts—,ETs—,
fi(ti)
E E
E
(ui(cs,ts) — wi(o) Tis(cs,ts_i,ri))
SD(i) (SEC'S ts_,ETs_,
Dr
 i)
(10.26)
Ils(c.s,ts)
0, VS E L(N), Vcs  E Cs, Vts E Ts;
(10.27) 	E
ifis(cs,ts) > 0.
SEL(N) (SECS (sErs
Condition (10.23) asserts that the total probability of being assigned to
a blocking coalition cannot be greater than 1 for any type of individual.
The inequality can be strict in (10.23), because some individuals may be

--- Sayfa 546 ---
528 10 • Cooperation under Uncertainty
left unassigned by the blocking mediator and instead may simply con-
tinue waiting for an assignment in the established matching plan. Con-
dition (10.24), an individual-rationality constraint, asserts that no indi-
vidual should expect to do worse under this blocking plan than if he
continues to wait. Condition (10.25), an informational incentive con-
straint, asserts that no individual could increase his expected gain under
the blocking plan by lying about his type. Conditions (10.26) and (10.27)
assert that the relative numbers of the various kinds of coalitions must
be nonnegative and not all 0. Notice that these constraints are well
defined only if each fz(t,) number is nonzero.
We can say that the waiting-population characteristics (w,f) are strongly
inhibitive iff f(t,) > 0 for every i and t„ and there does not exist any
viable blocking plan relative to (w,f). The following theorem extends
Theorem 9.5 from the case of complete information.
THEOREM 10.4. Waiting-population characteristics (w,f) are strongly in-
hibitive if and only if there exist vectors X and a such that
Xi(ti)
0 and ai(ri  I ti)
0, Vi E N, Vri  E Ti, Vti  E Ti;
E (0,i(t) + E ai(ri  I ti)) wi(ti) — E ai(ti  I ri) wi(ri))/f(ti)
iES
E
r,
> E ((x,(ti) + E
ti)) ui(cs,ts)
iES
r, E
— E cti(ti l ri) ui(cs,(ts- , )))/f(ti),
E T,
VS E L(N), Vcs  E Cs, Vts  E Ts.
Proof. Notice first that (w,f) is strongly inhibitive iff there does not
exist any -9 that satisfies (10.24)—(10.27), because a sufficiently small
scalar multiple of any solution to these conditions would satisfy (10.23)
as well. So consider the linear programming problem to maximize the
formula in (10.27) subject to the constraints (10.24)—(10.26). The con-
straints in this problem always have a feasible solution (by letting i
equal the zero vector), and any positive multiple of a feasible solution
would also be a feasible solution. So this linear programming problem
either has optimal value 0, if (w,f) is strongly inhibitive, or it has an
optimal value of +co, if (w,f) is not strongly inhibitive. By the duality
theorem of linear programming, this linear programming problem has
a finite optimal solution iff the dual of this problem has a feasible

--- Sayfa 547 ---
10.9 Dynamic Matching Processes 529
solution. So (w,f) is strongly inhibitive iff the dual has a feasible solution.
Letting X be the vector of dual variables for the individual-rationality
constraints (10.24) and letting a be the vector of dual variables for the
incentive constraints (10.25), it is a straightforward exercise to show that
a solution to the constraints of the dual problem exists iff there is a
solution (X,a) to the conditions in Theorem 10.4. I
Theorem 10.4 has a straightforward interpretation in terms of the
virtual utility hypothesis. It asserts that waiting-population characteris-
tics are strongly inhibitive iff there are virtual utility scales in which the
total virtual-utility worth of every coalition that could be formed by a
blocking agent would be less than the sum of virtual utility payoffs that
its members could get in the established matching plan.
We say that waiting-population characteristics (w,f) are inhibitive iff
there exists some sequence of strongly inhibitive vectors that converge
to (w,f ). That is, the characteristics of a waiting population are inhibitive
iff, by perturbing the expected payoffs of some types and the relative
numbers of individuals of the various types by arbitrarily small amounts,
we could get waiting-population characteristics that would allow no
viable randomized blocking plan. Thus, if a viable blocking plan is
possible relative to an inhibitive waiting population, it can only be an
unstable knife-edge phenomenon, with at least one type of player willing
to upset the blocking plan in an essential way by refusing to participate
or by lying about his type.
We must now complete the description of the dynamic matching
process and the matching plans that could be established for assigning
individuals into coalitions. Suppose that players of all types and all
classes enter (or are "born") into the matching process at some constant
rates. To complete the description of the dynamic matching process,
we must specify, for each class i in N and each type t, in Ti, a positive
number p,(t,) that represents the birth rate of players with type t, in class
i. So the elements of a general dynamic matching process are
(10.28)
(N, (Cs)sa,(N), (Ti)iEN, (u)i€N, (Pi)iEN)•
We assume here that the sets N, Cs, and Ti  are all nonempty finite sets,
for all i and S.
A matching plan may be described by a vector
FA = (P'S(COS))cs E Cs,ts E Ts,SEL(N),

--- Sayfa 548 ---
530 10 Cooperation under Uncertainty
where each number Rs(cs,ts) represents the rate (per unit time) at which
S coalitions are forming in which the type profile is is  and the joint
action is cs. To clear the market in the long run, the rate at which
players of each class and type are entering the matching system must
equal the rate at which they exit the matching process in all kinds of
coalitions. Thus, a matching plan must satisfy the following balance
condition:
(10.29)
E E
E
ii(cs,ts) = pi(ti), Vi E N, Vti  E Ti.
SD{i} c's (Cs is-, E Ts_i
The expected payoff to a class-i type-t, player in such a matching plan
is
= 	E
ti(cs,ts) ui(cs,ts)
 E E
s,{i} csEC:s ts-iErs-, 	Pi(ti)
if he and everyone else participates honestly in the plan. On the other
hand, if such a player systematically pretended that his type was r,
instead of t, (he cannot lie about his class), then his expected payoff
would be
= 	 E  w(cs,(ts—i,riNi(cs,ts)
 E E
sD{i} cs ECs ts-,ETs-; 	 Pi(r)
Thus, we say that a matching plan ix is incentive compatible iff it satisfies
the informational incentive constraints
(10.30)
U;(11 I ti) 	 ti), Vi E N, Vti  E T1, Hr;  E Ti.
In a stationary matching process, the expected number of type-ti
individuals who are waiting and available at any point in time is equal
to the product of MO times the expected waiting time for type-ti  indi-
viduals. Because different types may have different expected waiting
times, the proportions f(t,), in the waiting population do not have to be
proportional to the birth rates pz(ti). Thus, we say that a matching plan
is competitively sustainable iff it satisfies balance (10.29) and incentive-
compatibility (10.30) and there exists some inhibitive waiting-population
characteristics (w,f) such that
(10.31)
Ui(LL I ti) = wi(ti), Vi E N, Vti  E Ti.

--- Sayfa 549 ---
10.9 • Dynamic Matching Processes 531
The following existence theorem for competitively sustainable plans
generalizes Theorem 9.6. The proof, using a fixed-point argument, is
given by Myerson (1988) (for a somewhat more general model).
THEOREM 10.5. At least one competitively sustainable matching plan must
exist, for any dynamic matching process as in (10.28).
Competitively sustainable plans can be interpreted as a general model
of stationary market equilibria in many economic applications. For ex-
ample, let us consider the dynamic matching processes that correspond
to Examples 10.1 and 10.2, and let us identify the commodity with the
seller's labor. Suppose that there are many sellers (class-1 players) and
many buyers (class-2 players) who enter into the matching process or
market during any unit interval of time. Each seller has a supply of one
unit of labor to sell, and he either knows that his type is 1.a and he has
high ability, or his type is 1.6 and he has low ability. As before, sellers
with high ability have labor that is worth $40 per unit to themselves
and $50 per unit to a buyer, but sellers with low ability have labor that
is worth $20 per unit to themselves and $30 per unit to a buyer. Suppose
that each buyer can buy labor from at most one seller, and each seller
may sell all or part of his supply to at most one buyer, who will not be
able to directly observe the seller's ability level until after the transaction
is over.
Let us suppose that the birth rate of buyers is higher than the birth
rate of sellers,
P2(2.0) > pi(l.a) + p,(1.b).
For this example, there is a competitively sustainable matching plan in
which every low-ability seller sells all of his labor supply at a price of
$30, every high-ability seller sells '/3 of his labor supply at a price of $50
per unit (for total payment $50/3), and some excess buyers exit without
trading. To formalize this result, we let C{ 1,2} = {(q,y)10 5_ q 5 1, y
0}
and C{,} = C{2} = {(0,0)}. Let the utility functions be as in (10.18)-
(10.21). Then the competitively sustainable plan p may be written
11{1,2}((1/3,50/3),(1.a,2.0)) = p, (1.a),
11{,,2}((1,30),(1.b,2.0)) =
1 (00,0),2.0) = P2(2.0) — (pi(l.a)
P1(1.b)),

--- Sayfa 550 ---
532 10 Cooperation under Uncertainty
which gives
Ul(p,11.a) = 10/3, U,(p,11.b) = 10, U2(1112.0) = 0.
This plan p, is essentially a translation of the seller's best safe mechanism
(Q4,Y 4) from Examples 10.1 and 10.2 into the context of the dynamic
matching process. To verify that this plan 11 is competitively sustainable,
it suffices to recall that, in Example 10.1, the mechanism (Q4,  y4) is
incentive-efficient and gives the same interim expected payoff alloca-
tion. Thus, for any positive r, the conditions for strong inhibitiveness
in Theorem 10.4 can be satisfied by letting
w,(1.a) =
f,(1.a) =
X1(1.a) =
10/3,
w,(1.b) = 10,
w2(2.0)
0.1,
f,(1.b) = 0.4,
f2(2.0) = 0.5,
0.15,
X1(1.b) = 0.35,
X2(2.0)
= 8,
= 0.5,
a,(1.al Lb) = 0.05, a,(1.131 1.a) = 0.
That is, p, can be sustained by waiting-population characteristics that
replicate the situation in Example 10.1, by having 80% of the sellers be
type 1.b and only 20% be type 1.a (f,(1.a)/(f,(1.a) + f,(1.13)) = 0.2).
The fact that buyers get zero profits in the competitively sustainable
plan is a consequence of the excess of buyers over sellers born in each
generation.
Suppose that p,(1.a)/p,(1.b) = 9; so there are many more high-ability
sellers than low-ability sellers born in each generation. The above dem-
onstration that this planµ is competitively sustainable includes this case.
In particular, the sustaining waiting population with four times more
low-ability sellers than high-ability sellers will be created if low-ability
sellers wait and search 28 times longer than high-ability sellers in the
dynamic matching process. This effect is reminiscent of Gresham's law
in classical monetary theory, which asserts that "the bad (money) cir-
culates more than the good."
However, with p,(1.a)/p,(1.b) = 9, there are other incentive-compat-
ible matching plans that are better for all types than this competitively
sustainable matching plan. For example, let v be the matching plan in
which every seller sells all of his labor for $47, so
vo,2,01,47),(1.a,2.0)) =
v{1,2}((1,47),(1.b,2.0)) = p,(1.b),
v{2}((0,0),2.0) = p2(2.0) — (p,(1.a) + p,(1.b)),

--- Sayfa 551 ---
10.9 • Dynamic Matching Processes 533
U,(v 1.a) = 7,
Ui(v I 1.b) = 27,
0 < U2(v 12.0) = (3p,(1.a) — 17p,(1.b))/p2(2.0)
1.
Unfortunately, although this plan v is Pareto superior to the compet-
itively sustainable plan v is not competitively sustainable itself. The
essential problem is that the high payoff that type-1 .b players get in v
actually makes it easier to create viable blocking plans, because it makes
it easier for a blocking mediator to exclude low-ability sellers from
blocking coalitions and to ask them instead to continue waiting for the
high payoff that they can expect in the matching plan v. For any type
distribution f and any vectorth sufficiently close to the expected payoff
vector (U,(vil.a),U,(v I 1 .b), U2(vI2.0)) generated by v, there is a viable
blocking plan relative to (77),f ) in which high-ability sellers sell 0.9 units
of labor to buyers at a price of $48.50 per unit (for a total payment of
$43.65), and all low-ability sellers stay out of the blocking coalitions and
continue to wait to be matched in v. Notice that
0.9(48.50 — 40) = 7.65 > 7,
0.9(48.50 — 20) = 25.65 < 27,
0.9(50 — 48.5) = 1.35 > 1,
so the high-ability sellers do better in such a blocking coalition than in
v, the low-ability sellers would do worse in such a blocking coalition
than in v, and the buyers expect to do better in such a blocking coalition
than in v.
Thus, a competitively sustainable plan can fail to be incentive-efficient
in dynamic matching processes with incomplete information. In terms
of Theorem 10.4, this inefficiency can occur because, when a "bad" type
jeopardizes a "good" type, increasing the payoff to the bad type de-
creases the corresponding virtual utility for the good type and therefore
makes it harder to satisfy the conditions for an inhibitive waiting pop-
ulation. This inefficiency result is closely related to other results in
economic theory about the failures of markets with adverse selection
(see the seminal papers of Spence, 1973; Rothschild and Stiglitz, 1976;
and Wilson, 1977). Our general existence theorem for competitively
sustainable plans relies on the possibility of having bad types wait longer
than good types; so a blocking mediator at any point in time would
have to recruit from a population with mostly bad-type individuals, even

--- Sayfa 552 ---
534 10. Cooperation under Uncertainty
if the birth rate of bad types is relatively small. If we could impose the
restriction that the distribution of types in the waiting population f must
be proportional to the birth rates p, then we could guarantee that
sustainable plans would be Pareto efficient among all incentive-compat-
ible matching plans. Myerson (1988) has shown that existence of sus-
tainable plans with this restriction can be generally guaranteed only if
the equality in condition (10.31) is weakened to an inequality
wi(t,),
but this weakened condition is hard to interpret economically.
Exercises
Exercise 10.1. For the example in Table 10.1, let II. be  the mechanism
such that
1.4x11.a,2.a) = 1,
p(y I 1.a,2.b) = 1,
p.(z I 1.b,2.a) = 1, p.(y 1.b,2.b) = 1,
and all other p.(cl t) are 0. Use Theorem 10.1 to prove that this mech-
anism p, is incentive efficient. In your proof, let the utility weights be
X,(1.a) = X,(1.b) X2(2.a) = X2(2.b) = 1. (HINT: The second-to-last
condition in the theorem implies that all but one of the Lagrange
multipliers a,(s,Iti) must be 0.)
Exercise 10.2. Recall the Bayesian bargaining problem from Exercise
6.3 (Chapter 6). Player 1 is the seller of a single indivisible object, and
player 2 is the only potential buyer. The value of the object is $0 or $80
for player 1 and $20 or $100 for player 2. Ex ante, all four possible
combinations of these values are considered to be equally likely. When
the players meet to bargain, each player knows his own private value
for the object and believes that the other player's private value could
be either of the two possible numbers, each with probability '/2. We let
the type of each player be his private value for the object, so T, = {0,
80}, T2 = {20, 100}, and
1)1(0) = p,(80) = 1/2, P2(100) = p2(20) = 1/2.
The expected payoffs to the two players depend on their types t =
(ti,t2), the expected payment y from player 2 to player 1, and the

--- Sayfa 553 ---
Exercises 535
probability q that the object is delivered to player 2, according to the
formula
u1((q,y),t) = y — t1q, u2((q,y),t) = t2q — y.
No-trade (q = 0, y = 0) is the disagreement outcome in this bargaining
problem. We can represent a mechanism for this Bayesian bargaining
problem by a pair of functions Q:T1  x T2
[0,1] and Y:T1  x T2
R,
where Q(t) is the probability that the object will be sold to player 2 and
Y(t) is the expected net payment from player 2 to player 1 if t is the
pair of types reported by the players to a mediator.
a. Although Q(t) must be in the interval [0,1], Y(t) can be any real
number in R. Show that
max
E vAq,y), tA,a)
(q,y)( [OM x R iE {1,2}
is finite only if there is some positive constant K such that
Xi(ti) +
E (ai(si I ti) —
ISi))
= K, Vi E {1,2}, Vt, E T,.
b. In buyer—seller bargaining, there is usually no difficulty in pre-
venting buyers from overstating their values or preventing sellers from
understating their values. Thus, we can suppose that
a2(100120) = 0 and a1(0180) = 0.
Furthermore, without loss of generality, we can let the constant K equal
1. (Changing K just requires a proportional change in all parameters.)
With these assumptions, the equations from part (a) become
X1(0) + c11(80 1 0) = X1(80) — a1(8010) = 1/2,
X2(100) + a2(201100) = X2(20) — a2(201100) = 1/2.
With these equations, express Ez(0,21 v,((q,y),t,X,a) as a function of q,
ci1(801 0), and a2(201100), for each of the four possible type profiles t in
T1  x T2.
c. Consider a class of mechanisms (Q,Y) that depend on two param-
eters r and z as follows: Q(80,20) = 0 = Y(80,20), Q(0,100) = 1,
Y(0,100) = 50, Q(0,20) = Q(80,100) = r, Y(0,20) = rz, Y(80,100) =
r(100 — z). Suppose that z 5- 20 and r = 50/(100 — 2z). Show that every
siET,-t1

--- Sayfa 554 ---
536 10 • Cooperation under Uncertainty
mechanism in this class is incentive efficient, by identifying vectors X
and a as in part (b) that satisfy the incentive-efficiency conditions in
Theorem 10.1 for all these mechanisms. (HINT: If 1,0,21  v,((q,y),t,X,a) =
0 for all (q,y), then any mechanism will satisfy the condition of maxi-
mizing the sum of virtual utilities for this profile of types t.) Why are
the conditions z 20 and r = 50/(100 — 2z) needed?
d. Within the class of mechanisms described in (c), show how the
interim expected payoff U,(Q,Y10 for each type t, of each player i
depends on the parameter z. For each player, which types prefer mech-
anisms with higher z? Which types prefer mechanisms with lower z?
Among the mechanisms in this class, which mechanism maximizes the
sum of the players' ex ante expected gains from trade? Show that this
mechanism also maximizes the probability of the object being sold,
among all incentive-compatible individually rational mechanisms. (Re-
call part (b) of Exercise 6.3.)
e. Using X and a from part (c), find the solution w to the system of
equations (10.22) in Theorem 10.3. Use this solution to show that the
mechanism from part (c) with z = 0 and r = 1/2 is a neutral bargaining
solution for this Bayesian bargaining problem.
f. Suppose that, after tossing a coin, if the coin comes up Heads, then
we will let player 1 make a first and final offer to sell at any price he
might specify; and if the coin comes up Tails, then we will let player 2
make a first and final offer to buy at any price that she might specify.
The loser of the coin toss will accept the winner's offer iff it gives the
loser nonnegative gains from trade. What would be the optimal offer
for each player, as a function of his or her type, if he or she won the
coin toss? Compare this equilibrium of this game to the neutral bar-
gaining solution that you found in part (e).

--- Sayfa 555 ---
Bibliography • Index

--- Sayfa 557 ---
Bibliography
Abreu, D. 1986. "Extremal Equilibrium of Oligopolistic Supergames." Journal
of Economic Theory 39:191-225.
Abreu, D., P. Milgrom, and D. Pearce. 1988. "Information and Timing in
Repeated Partnerships." Stanford University discussion paper.
Abreu, D., D. Pearce, and E. Stacchetti. 1986. "Optimal Cartel Equilibria with
Imperfect Monitoring." Journal of Economic Theory 39:251-269.
Akerlof, G. 1970. "The Market for Lemons: Qualitative Uncertainty and the
Market Mechanism." Quarterly Journal of Economics 84:488-500.
Albers, W. 1979. "Core- and Kernel-Variants Based on Imputations and De-
mand Profiles." In 0. Moeschin and D. Pallaschke, eds., Game Theory and
Related Topics. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Allais, M., and 0. Hagen, eds. 1979. Expected Utility Hypothesis and the Allais
Paradox. Boston: Reidel.
Anderson, R. 1983. "Quick-Response Equilibrium." Discussion Paper No. 323,
Center for Research in Management Science, University of California,
Berkeley.
Anscombe, F. J., and R. J. Aumann. 1963. "A Definition of Subjective Prob-
ability." Annals of Mathematical Statistics 34:199-205.
Arrow, K. 1951. Social Choice and Individual Values. New York: Wiley.
Aumann, R. J. 1959. "Acceptable Points in General Cooperative n-Person
Games." In H. W. Kuhn and R. D. Luce, eds., Contributions to the Theory
of Games IV, pp. 287-324. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Aumann, R. J. 1961. "The Core of a Cooperative Game Without Side Pay-
ments." Transactions of the American Mathematical Society 98:539-552.
Aumann, R. J. 1964. "Markets with a Continuum of Traders." Econometrica
32:39-50.
Aumann, R. J. 1967. "A Survey of Cooperative Games Without Side Payments."
In M. Shubik, ed., Essays in Mathematical Economics, pp. 3-27. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Aumann, R. J. 1974. "Subjectivity and Correlation in Randomized Strategies."
Journal of Mathematical Economics 1:67-96.
Aumann, R. J. 1976. "Agreeing to Disagree." Annals of Statistics 4:1236-39.

--- Sayfa 558 ---
540 Bibliography
Aumann, R. J. 1985. "An Axiomatization of the Non-Transferable Utility
Value." Econometrica 53:599-612.
Aumann, R. J. 1987a. "Correlated Equilibria as an Expression of Bayesian
Rationality." Econometrica 55:1-18.
Aumann, R. J. 1987b. "Game Theory." In J. Eatwell, M. Milgate, and P. New-
man, eds., The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, pp. 460-482. Lon-
don: Macmillan.
Aumann, R. J., and J. H. Dreze. 1974. "Cooperative Games with Coalition
Structures." International Journal of Game Theory 3:217-238.
Aumann, R. J., and M. Maschler. 1964. "The Bargaining Set for Cooperative
Games." In M. Dresher, L. S. Shapley, and A. W. Tucker, eds., Advances
in Game Theory, pp. 443-447. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Aumann, R. J., and M. Maschler. 1966. "Game Theoretic Aspects of Gradual
Disarmament." Chapter 5 in Report to the U.S. Arms Control and Disar-
mament Agency ST-80. Princeton: Mathematica, Inc.
Aumann, R. J., and M. Maschler. 1968. "Repeated Games with Incomplete
Information: the Zero Sum Extensive Case." Chapter 2 in Report to the
U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency ST-143. Princeton: Mathema-
tica, Inc.
Aumann, R. J., and M. Maschler. 1972. "Some Thoughts on the Minimax
Principle." Management Science 18(pt. 2):54-63.
Aumann, R. J., and R. B. Myerson. 1988. "Endogenous Formation of Links
Between Players and of Coalitions: An Application of the Shapley
Value." In A. E. Roth, ed., The Shapley Value, pp. 175-191. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Aumann, R. J., and B. Peleg. 1960. "Von Neumann-Morgenstern Solutions to
Cooperative Games Without Sidepayments." Bulletin of the American
Mathematical Society 66:173-179.
Aumann, R. J., and L. S. Shapley. 1974. Values of Nonatomic Games. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Ausubel, L. M., and R. J. Deneckere. 1989. "A Direct Mechanism Characteri-
zation of Sequential Bargaining with One-Sided Incomplete Informa-
tion." Journal of Economic Theory 48:18-46.
Axelrod, R. 1984. The Evolution of Cooperation. New York: Basic Books.
Banks, J. S., and J. Sobel. 1987. "Equilibrium Selection in Signaling Games."
Econometrica 55:647-662.
Barany, I. 1987. "Fair Distribution Protocols or How the Players Replace For-
tune." CORE discussion paper 8718, University Catholique de Louvain.
To appear in Mathematics of Operations Research.
Bennett, E. 1983. "The Aspiration Approach to Predicting Coalition Formation
and Payoff Distribution in Sidepayment Games." International Journal of
Game Theory 12:1-28.
Benoit, J. P., and V. Krishna. 1985. "Finitely Repeated Games." Econometrica
53:905-922.
Benoit, J. P., and V. Krishna. 1989. "Renegotiation in Finitely Repeated Games."
Harvard Business School working paper.

--- Sayfa 559 ---
Bibliography 541
Ben-Porath, E., and E. Dekel. 1987. "Signaling Future Actions and the Potential
for Sacrifice." Stanford University research paper.
Bergin, J. 1987. "Continuous Time Repeated Games of Complete Information."
Queen's University working paper, Kingston, Ontario.
Bernheim, B. D. 1984. "Rationalizable Strategic Behavior." Econometrica
52:1007-28.
Bernheim, B. D., B. Peleg, and M. D. Whinston. 1987. "Coalition-Proof Nash
Equilibria I: Concepts." Journal of Economic Theory 42:1-12.
Bernheim, B. D., and D. Ray. 1989. "Collective Dynamic Consistency in Re-
peated Games." Games and Economic Behavior 1:295-326.
Bernoulli, D. 1738. "Exposition of a New Theory of the Measurement of Risk."
English translation in Econometrica 22(1954):23-36.
Bicchieri, C. 1989. "Self-Refuting Theories of Strategic Interaction: A Paradox
of Common Knowledge." Erkenntnis 30:69-85.
Billera, L. J., D. C. Heath, and J. Ranaan. 1978. "Internal Telephone Billing
Rates-A Novel Application of Non-Atomic Game Theory." Operations
Research 26:956-965.
Billingsley, P. 1968. Convergence of Probability Measures. New York: Wiley.
Binmore, K. 1987-88. "Modeling Rational Players." Economics and Philosophy
3:179-214; 4:9-55.
Binmore, K., and P. Dasgupta. 1987. The Economics of Bargaining. Oxford: Basil
Blackwell.
Binmore, K., A. Rubinstein, and A. Wolinsky. 1986. "The Nash Bargaining
Solution in Economic Modeling." Rand Journal of Economics 17:176-188.
Blackwell, D. 1956. "An Analogue of the Minimax Theorem for Vector Payoffs."
Pacific Journal of Mathematics 6:1-8.
Blackwell, D. 1965. "Discounted Dynamic Programming." Annals of Mathematical
Statistics 36:226-235.
Blackwell, D., and T. S. Ferguson. 1968. "The Big Match." Annals of Mathematical
Statistics 39:159-163.
Bondereva, 0. N. 1963. "Some Applications of Linear Programming Methods
to the Theory of Cooperative Games" (in Russian). Problemy Kibernetiki
10:119-139.
Border, K. C. 1985. Fixed Point Theorems with Applications to Economics and Game
Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Borel, E. 1921. "La Theorie du Jeu et les Equations Integrales a Noyau Syme-
trique ." Comptes Rendus de l'Academie des Sciences 173:1304-1308.
Burger, E. 1963. Introduction to the Theory of Games. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:
Prentice-Hall.
Chatterjee, K., and W. Samuelson. 1983. "Bargaining under Incomplete Infor-
mation." Operations Research 31:835-851.
Cho, I.-K., and D. Kreps. 1987. "Signaling Games and Stable Equilibria." Quar-
terly Journal of Economics 102:179-221.
Chvatal, V. 1983. Linear Programming. New York: W. H. Freeman.
Coase, R. H. 1960. "The Problem of Social Cost." Journal of Law and Economics
3:1-44.

--- Sayfa 560 ---
542 Bibliography
Cooper, R., D. DeJong, R. Forsythe, and T. Ross. 1989. "Communication in the
Battle of the Sexes Game." In Rand Journal of Economics 20:568-
585.
Cooper, R., D. DeJong, R. Forsythe, and T. Ross. 1990. "Selection Criteria in
Coordination Games: Some Experimental Results." American Economic
Review 80:218-233.
Cramton, P., R. Gibbons, and P. Klemperer. 1987. "Dissolving a Partnership
Efficiently." Econometrica 55:615-632.
Crawford, V. 1979. "On Compulsory-Arbitration Schemes." Journal of Political
Economy 87:131-159.
Crawford, V. 1981. "Arbitration and Conflict Resolution in Labor-Management
Bargaining." American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 71:205-
210.
Crawford, V. 1985. "Efficient and Durable Decision Rules: A Reformulation."
Econometrica 53:817-835.
Crawford, V., and J. Sobel. 1982. "Strategic Information Transmission." Econ-
ometrica 50:579-594.
Cross, J. 1967. "Some Theoretic Characteristics of Economic and Political Co-
alitions."Journal of Conflict Resolution 11:184-195.
Dasgupta, P., and E. Maskin. 1986. "The Existence of Equilibrium in Discontin-
uous Economic Games." Review of Economic Studies 53:1-41.
Dasgupta, P., P. Hammond, and E. Maskin. 1979. "The Implementation of
Social Choice Rules: Some Results on Incentive Compatibility." Review
of Economic Studies 46:185-216.
D'Aspremont, C., and L.-A. Gerard-Varet. 1979. "Incentives and Incomplete
Information." Journal of Public Economics 11:25-45.
Davis, M., and M. Maschler. 1965. "The Kernel of a Cooperative Game." Naval
Research Logistics Quarterly 12:223-259.
Debreu, G. 1959. Theory of Value. New York: Wiley.
Debreu, G., and H. Scarf. 1963. "A Limit Theorem on the Core of an Economy."
International Economic Review 4:235-246.
Edgeworth, F. Y. 1881. Mathematical Psychics. London: Kegan Paul.
Ellsberg, D. 1961. "Risk, Ambiguity, and the Savage Axioms." Quarterly Journal
of Economics 75:643-669.
Epstein, L. G. 1983. "Stationary Cardinal Utility and Optimal Growth under
Uncertainty." Journal of Economic Theory 31:133-152.
Farquharson, R. 1969. Theory of voting. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Farrell, J. 1988. "Meaning and Credibility in Cheap-Talk Games." Games and
Economic Behavior 5:514-531, 1993.
Farrell, J., and E. Maskin. 1989. "Renegotiation in Repeated Games." Games and
Economic Behavior 1:327-360.
Fishburn, P. C. 1968. "Utility Theory." Management Science 14:335-378.
Fishburn, P. C. 1970. Utility Theory for Decision-Making. New York: Wiley.
Fisher, R., and W. Ury. 1981. Getting to Yes: Negotiating Agreement Without Giving
In. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

--- Sayfa 561 ---
Bibliography 543
Forges, F. 1985. "Correlated Equilibria in a Class of Repeated Games with
Incomplete Information." International Journal of Game Theory 14:129-
150.
Forges, F. 1986. "An Approach to Communication Equilibrium." Econometrica
54:1375-85.
Forges, F. 1988. "Non-zero Sum Repeated Games and Information Transmis-
sion." CORE Working Paper 8825, University Catholique de Louvain.
Forges, F. 1990. "Universal Mechanisms." Econometrica 58:1341-1364.
Franklin, J. 1980. Methods of Mathematical Economics. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Fudenberg, D., and D. M. Kreps. 1988. "A Theory of Learning, Experimen-
tation, and Equilibrium in Games." M.I.T. and Stanford University
working paper.
Fudenberg, D., D. M. Kreps, and D. K. Levine. 1988. "On the Robustness of
Equilibrium Refinements." Journal of Economic Theory 44:354-380.
Fudenberg, D., and D. K. Levine. 1986. "Limit Games and Limit Equilibria."
Journal of Economic Theory 38:261-279.
Fudenberg, D., D. Levine, and J. Tirole. 1985. "Infinite Horizon Models of
Bargaining." In A. E. Roth, ed., Game-Theoretic Models of Bargaining, pp.
73-98. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Fudenberg, D., and E. Maskin. 1986. "The Folk Theorem in Repeated Games
with Discounting and Incomplete Information." Econometrica 54:533-
554.
Fudenberg, D., and J. Tirole. 1984. "Preemption and Rent Equalization in the
Adoption of a New Technology." Review of Economic Studies 52:383-401.
Fudenberg, D., and J. Tirole. 1988. "Perfect Bayesian and Sequential Equilib-
ria." To appear in Journal of Economic Theory.
Geoffrion, A. M. 1971. "Duality in Nonlinear Programming: A Simplified Ap-
plications-Oriented Development." SIAM Review 13:1-37.
Gibbard, A. 1973. "Manipulation of Voting Schemes: A General Result." Econ-
ometrica 41:587-601.
Gilboa, I., E. Kalai, and E. Zemel. 1989. "On the Order of Eliminating Domi-
nated Strategies." To appear in Operations Research Letters.
Glazer, J., and A. Weiss. 1990. "Pricing and Coordination: Strategically Stable
Equilibria." Games and Economic Behavior 2:118-128.
Glicksberg, I. 1952. "A Further Generalization of the Kakutani Fixed Point
Theorem with Application to Nash Equilibrium Points." Proceedings of
the American Mathematical Society 3:170-174.
Gresik, T. A., and M. A. Satterthwaite. 1989. "The Rate at Which a Simple
Market Converges to Efficiency as the Number of Traders Increases:
An Asymptotic Result for Optimal Trading Mechanisms." Journal of
Economic Theory 48:304-332.
Grossman, S., and M. Perry. 1986. "Perfect Sequential Equilibrium." Journal of
Economic Theory 39:97-119.
Hamilton, W. D. 1964. "The Genetical Evolution of Social Behavior." Journal of
Theoretical Biology 7:1-52.

--- Sayfa 562 ---
544 Bibliography
Harris, M., and R. M. Townsend. 1981. "Resource Allocation under Asymmetric
Information." Econometrica 49:1477-99.
Harsanyi, J. C. 1956. "Approaches to the Bargaining Problems Before and
After the Theory of Games: A Critical Discussion of Zeuthen's, Hick's,
and Nash's Theories." Econometrica 24:144-157.
Harsanyi, J. C. 1963. "A Simplified Bargaining Model for the n-Person Coop-
erative Game." International Economic Review 4:194-220.
Harsanyi, J. C. 1967-68. "Games with Incomplete Information Played by `Baye-
sian' Players." Management Science 14:159-182, 320-334, 486-502.
Harsanyi, J. C. 1973. "Games with Randomly Disturbed Payoffs: A New Ra-
tionale for Mixed-Strategy Equilibrium Points." International Journal of
Game Theory 2:1-23.
Harsanyi, J. C., and R. Selten. 1972. "A Generalized Nash Solution for Two-
Person Bargaining Games with Incomplete Information." Management
Science 18:80-106.
Harsanyi, J. C., and R. Selten. 1988. A General Theory of Equilibrium Selection in
Games. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Hart, S. 1985a. "Nonzero-Sum Two-Person Repeated Games with Incomplete
Information." Mathematics of Operations Research 10:117-153.
Hart, S. 1985b. "An Axiomatization of Harsanyi's Nontransferable Utility So-
lution." Econometrica 53:1295-1313.
Hart, S., and M. Kurz. 1983. "Endogenous Formation of Coalitions." Econo-
metrica 51:1047-64.
Hart, S., and A. Mas-Colell. 1989. "Potential, Value, and Consistency." Econo-
metrica 57:589-614.
Herstein, I., and J. Milnor. 1953. "An Axiomatic Approach to Measurable
Utility." Econometrica 21:291-297.
Hillas, J. 1987. "Sequential Equilibria and Stable Sets of Beliefs." I.M.S.S.S.
Technical Report No. 518, Stanford University.
Holmstrom, B. 1977. "On Incentives and Control in Organizations." Ph.D.
dissertation, Stanford University.
Holmstrom, B., and R. B. Myerson. 1983. "Efficient and Durable Decision Rules
with Incomplete Information." Econometrica 51:1799-1819.
Hotelling, H. 1929. "The Stability of Competition." Economic Journal 39:41-57.
Howard, R. 1960. Dynamic Programming and Markov Processes. New York: Wiley.
Hurd, A. E., and P. A. Loeb. 1985. An Introduction to Nonstandard Analysis.
Orlando: Academic Press.
Hurwicz, L. 1972. "On Informationally Decentralized Systems." In R. Radner
and B. McGuire, eds., Decision and Organization, pp. 297-336. Amster-
dam: North-Holland.
Kadane, J., and P. D. Larkey. 1982. "Subjective Probability and the Theory of
Games." Management Science 28:113-120.
Kahneman, D., and A. Tversky. 1979. "Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Deci-
sion under Risk." Econometrica 47:263-291.
Kahneman, D., and A. Tversky. 1982. "The Psychology of Preferences." Scientific
American 246(1):160-170.

--- Sayfa 563 ---
Bibliography 545
Kahneman, D., P. Slovic, and A. Tversky, eds. 1982. Judgment under Uncertainty:
Heuristics and Biases. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kakutani, S. 1941. "A Generalization of Brouwer's Fixed Point Theorem." Duke
Mathematical Journal 8:457-458.
Kalai, E. 1977. "Nonsymmetric Nash Solutions and Replications of Two-Person
Bargaining." International Journal of Game Theory 65:129-133.
Kalai, E., and D. Samet. 1984. "Persistent Equilibria." International Journal of
Game Theory 13:129-144.
Kalai, E., and D. Samet. 1985. "Monotonic Solutions to General Cooperative
Games." Econometrica 53:307-327.
Kalai, E., and D. Samet. 1987. "On Weighted Shapley Values." International
Journal of Game Theory 16:205-222.
Kalai, E., and M. Smorodinsky. 1975. "Other Solutions to Nash's Bargaining
Problem." Econometrica 45:513-518.
Kalai, E., and W. Stanford. 1985. "Conjectural Variations Strategies in Accel-
erated Cournot Games." International Journal of Industrial Organization
3:133-152.
Kandori, M. 1988. "Social Norms and Community Enforcement." University of
Pennsylvania working paper.
Kaneko, M., and M. H. Wooders. 1982. "Cores of Partitioning Games." Mathe-
matical Social Sciences 3:313-327.
Kohlberg, E. 1989. "Refinement of Nash Equilibrium: The Main Ideas." Har-
vard Business School working paper.
Kohlberg, E., and J.-F. Mertens. 1986. "On the Strategic Stability of Equilibria."
Econometrica 54:1003-37.
Kolmogorov, A. N., and S. V. Fomin. 1970. Introductory Real Analysis. New York:
Dover.
Knight, F. H. 1921. Risk, Uncertainty and Profit. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Kreps, D., and R. Wilson. 1982. "Sequential Equilibria." Econometrica 50:863-
894.
Kreps, D., P. Milgrom, J. Roberts, and R. Wilson. 1982. "Rational Cooperation
in the Finitely-Repeated Prisoners' Dilemma." Journal of Economic Theory
27:245-252.
Kuhn, H. W. 1953. "Extensive Games and the Problem of Information." In
H. W. Kuhn and A. W. Tucker, eds., Contributions to the Theory of Games
I, pp. 193-216. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Leininger, W., P. B. Linhart, and R. Radner. 1989. "Equilibria of the Sealed-
Bid Mechanism for Bargaining with Incomplete Information," Journal
of Economic Theory 48:63-106.
Lewis, T. R., and D. E. M. Sappington. 1989. "Countervailing Incentives in
Agency Problems." Journal of Economic Theory 49:294-313.
Lucas, W. F. 1969. "The Proof That a Game May Not Have a Solution."
Transactions of the American Mathematical Society 137:219-229.
Lucas, W. F. 1972. "An Overview of the Mathematical Theory of Games."
Management Science 18:3-19.

--- Sayfa 564 ---
546 Bibliography
Lucas, W. F., and R. M. Thrall. 1963. "n-Person Games in Partition Function
Form." Naval Research Logistics Quarterly 10:281-298.
Luce, R. D., and H. Raiffa. 1957. Games and Decisions. New York: Wiley.
Luenberger, D. G. 1984. Linear and Nonlinear Programming, 2nd Ed. Reading,
Mass.: Addison-Wesley.
Machina, M. 1982. "Expected Utility without the Independence Axiom." Econ-
ometrica 50:277-323.
Mas-Colell, A. 1985. The Theory of General Equilibrium: A Differentiable Approach.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Maynard Smith, J. 1982. Evolution and the Theory of Games. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
McAfee, R. P., and J. McMillan. 1987. "Auctions and Bidding." Journal of
Economic Literature 25:699-738.
McLennan, A. 1985. "Justifiable Beliefs in a Sequential Equilibrium." Econo-
metrica 53:889-904.
Mertens, J.-F. 1980. "A Note on the Characteristic Function of Supergames."
International Journal of Game Theory 9:189-190.
Mertens, J.-F., S. Sorin, and S. Zamir. 1989. Repeated Games. Forthcoming.
Mertens, J.-F., and S. Zamir. 1985. "Formulation of Bayesian Analysis for Games
with Incomplete Information." International Journal of Game Theory 14:1-
29.
Milgrom, P. 1981. "Good News and Bad News: Representation Theorems and
Applications." Bell Journal of Economics 12:380-391.
Milgrom, P. 1985. "The Economics of Competitive Bidding: A Selective Survey."
In L. Hurwicz, D. Schmeidler, and H. Sonnenschein, eds., Social Goals
and Social Organization, pp. 261-289. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Milgrom, P. 1987. "Auction Theory." In T. Bewley, ed., Advances in Economic
Theory: Fifth World Congress, pp. 1-32. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Milgrom, P., D. C. North, and B. R. Weingast. 1989. "The Role of Institutions
in the Revival of Trade. Part I: The Medieval Law Merchant." Stanford
University discussion paper. To appear in Economics and Politics.
Milgrom, P., and R. J. Weber. 1982. "A Theory of Auctions and Competitive
Bidding." Econometrica 50: 1089-1122.
Milgrom, P., and R. J. Weber. 1985. "Distributional Strategies for Games with
Incomplete Information." Mathematics of Operations Research 10:619-632.
Miller, N. 1977. "Graph Theoretical Approaches to the Theory of Voting."
American Journal of Political Science 21:769-803.
Miller, N. 1980. "A New Solution Set for Tournaments and Majority Voting:
Further Graphical Approaches to the Theory of Voting." American Jour-
nal of Political Science 24:68-96.
Morgenstern, 0. 1976. "The Collaboration between Oskar Morgenstern and
John von Neumann on the Theory of Games." Journal of Economic Lit-
erature 14:805-816.

--- Sayfa 565 ---
Bibliography 547
Moulin, H. 1979. "Dominance Solvable Voting Schemes." Econometrica 47:1337-
51.
Moulin, H. 1983. The Strategy of Social Choice. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Moulin, H. 1986. "Choosing from a Tournament." Social Choice and Welfare
3:271-291.
Moulin, H. 1988. Axioms of Cooperative Decision Making. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Moulin, H., and J.-P. Vial. 1978. "Strategically Zero-Sum Games: The Class
Whose Completely Mixed Equilibria Cannot Be Improved Upon." Inter-
national Journal of Game Theory 7:201-221.
Myerson, R. B. 1977. "Graphs and Cooperation in Games." Mathematics of
Operations Research 2:225-229.
Myerson, R. B. 1978a. "Refinements of the Nash Equilibrium Concept." Inter-
national Journal of Game Theory 7:73-80.
Myerson, R. B. 1978b. "Threat Equilibria and Fair Settlements in Cooperative
Games." Mathematics of Operations Research 3:265-274.
Myerson, R. B. 1979. "Incentive-Compatibility and the Bargaining Problem."
Econometrica 47:61-73.
Myerson, R. B. 1980. "Conference Structures and Fair Allocation Rules." Inter-
national Journal of Game Theory 9:169-182.
Myerson, R. B. 1981a. "Optimal Auction Design." Mathematics of Operations
Research 6:58-73.
Myerson, R. B. 1981b. "Utilitarianism, Egalitarianism, and the Timing Effect
in Social Choice Problems." Econometrica 49:883-897.
Myerson, R. B. 1982. "Optimal Coordination Mechanisms in Generalized Prin-
cipal-Agent Problems." Journal of Mathematical Economics 10:67-81.
Myerson, R. B. 1983. "Mechanism Design by an Informed Principal." Econo-
metrica 51:1767-97.
Myerson, R. B. 1984a. "Two-Person Bargaining Problems with Incomplete
Information." Econometrica 52:461-487.
Myerson, R. B. 1984b. "Cooperative Games with Incomplete Information."
International Journal of Game Theory 13:69-96.
Myerson, R. B. 1985a. "Bayesian Equilibrium and Incentive Compatibility." In
L. Hurwitz, D. Schmeidler, and H. Sonnenschein, eds., Social Goals and
Social Organization, pp. 229-259. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Myerson, R. B. 1985b. "Analysis of Two Bargaining Problems with Incomplete
Information." In A. E. Roth, ed., Game-Theoretic Models of Bargaining,
pp. 115-147. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Myerson, R. B. 1986a. "Acceptable and Predominant Correlated Equilibria."
International Journal of Game Theory 15:133-154.
Myerson, R. B. 1986b. "Multistage Games with Communication." Econometrica
54:323-358.
Myerson, R. B. 1986c. "An Introduction to Game Theory." In S. Reiter, ed.,
Studies in Mathematical Economics, pp. 1-61. Washington, D.C.: The Math-
ematical Association of America.

--- Sayfa 566 ---
548 Bibliography
Myerson, R. B. 1988. "Sustainable Matching Plans with Adverse Selection."
Northwestern University discussion paper. To appear in Games and Eco-
nomic Behavior.
Myerson, R. B. 1989. "Credible Negotiation Statements and Coherent Plans."
Journal of Economic Theory 48:264-303.
Myerson, R. B., and M. A. Satterthwaite. 1983. "Efficient Mechanisms for
Bilateral Trading." Journal of Economic Theory 29:265-281.
Myerson, R. B., G. B. Pollock, and J. M. Swinkels. 1991. "Viscous Population
Equilibria." To appear in Games and Economic Behavior.
Nash, J. F. 1950. "The Bargaining Problem." Econometrica 18:155-162.
Nash, J. F. 1951. "Noncooperative Games." Annals of Mathematics 54:289-295.
Nash, J. F. 1953. "Two-Person Cooperative Games." Econometrica 21:128-140.
Okuno-Fujiwara, M., A. Postlewaite, and G. Mailath. 1991. "On Belief-Based
Refinements in Signaling Games." Univ. of Penn. working paper.
Ortega-Reichert, A. 1968. "Models for Competitive Bidding under Uncer-
tainty." Department of Operations Research Technical Report No. 8
(Ph.D. dissertation), Stanford University.
Owen, G. 1972. "A Value for Non-Transferable Utility Games." International
Journal of Game Theory 1:95-109.
Owen, G. 1977. "Values of Games with A Priori Unions." In R. Hein and 0.
Moeschlin, eds., Essays in Mathematical Economics and Game Theory, pp.
76-88. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Owen, G. 1982. Game Theory, 2nd Ed. New York: Academic Press.
Pearce, D. G. 1984. "Rationalizable Strategic Behavior and the Problem of
Perfection." Econometrica 52:1029-50.
Pearce, D. G. 1987. "Renegotiation-proof Equilibria: Collective Rationality and
Intertemporal Cooperation." Yale University discussion paper.
Peleg, B. 1963. "Existence Theorem for the Bargaining Set MV." Bulletin of the
American Mathematical Society 69:109-110.
Peleg, B. 1984. Game Theoretic Analysis of Voting in Committees. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Perles, M. A., and M. Maschler. 1981. "The Super-Additive Solution for the
Nash Bargaining Game." International Journal of Game Theory 10:163-
193.
Pollock, G. B. 1989. "Evolutionary Stability of Reciprocity in a Viscous Lattice."
Social Networks 11:175-212.
Pratt, J. W. 1964. "Risk Aversion in the Small and in the Large." Econometrica
32:122-136.
Pratt, J. W., H. Raiffa, and R. Schlaiffer. 1964. "The Foundations of Decisions
under Uncertainty: An Elementary Exposition." American Statistical As-
sociation Journal 59:353-375.
Qin, C. Z. 1989. "Strongly and Weakly Inhibitive Sets and the XE-Inner Core."
Economics working paper, University of Iowa.
Radner, R. 1980. "Collusive Behavior in Oligopolies with Long but Finite Lives."
Journal of Economic Theory 22:136-156.

--- Sayfa 567 ---
Bibliography 549
Radner, R., R. Myerson, and E. Maskin. 1986. "An Example of a Repeated
Partnership Game with Discounting and Uniformly Inefficient Equilib-
ria." Review of Economic Studies 53:59-70.
Raiffa, H. 1968. Decision Analysis. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.
Raiff a, H. 1982. The Art and Science of Negotiation. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press.
Ramsey, F. P. 1926. "Truth and Probability." Reprinted in H. E. Kyburg, Jr.
and H. E. Smokier, eds., 1964, Studies in Subjective Probability, pp. 62-92.
New York: Wiley.
Rasmusen, E. 1989. Games and Information: An Introduction to Game Theory. Ox-
ford: Basil Blackwell.
Reny, P. J. 1987. "Explicable Equilibria." University of Western Ontario working
paper.
Rockafellar, R. T. 1970. Convex Analysis. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Rosenthal, R. 1978. "Arbitration of Two-Party Disputes under Uncertainty."
Review of Economic Studies 45:595-604.
Rosenthal, R. 1981. "Games of Perfect Information, Predatory Pricing, and the
Chain-Store Paradox." Journal of Economic Theory 25:92-100.
Roth, A. E. 1979. Axiomatic Models of Bargaining. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Roth, A. E. 1980. "Values for Games Without Side-Payments: Some Difficulties
with Current Concepts." Econometrica 48:457-465.
Roth, A. E. 1985. "Toward a Focal-Point Theory of Bargaining." In A. E. Roth,
ed., Game-Theoretic Models of Bargaining, pp. 259-268. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Roth, A. E. 1988. The Shapley Value: Essays in Honor of Lloyd S. Shapley. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Roth, A. E., and F. Schoumaker. 1983. "Expectations and Reputations in Bar-
gaining." American Economic Review 73:362-372.
Rothschild, M., and J. Stiglitz. 1976. "Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance
Markets: An Essay on the Economics of Imperfect Information." Quar-
terly Journal of Economics 90:629-649.
Royden, H. 1968. Real Analysis. New York: Macmillan.
Rubinstein, A. 1979. "Equilibrium in Supergames with the Overtaking Crite-
rion."Journal of Economic Theory 21:1-9.
Rubinstein, A. 1982. "Perfect Equilibrium in a Bargaining Model." Econometrica
50:97-109.
Rubinstein, A. 1987. "A Sequential Strategic Theory of Bargaining." In T.
Bewley, ed., Advances in Economic Theory: Fifth World Congress, pp. 197-
224. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rubinstein, A. 1989. "The Electronic Mail Game: Strategic Behavior under
Almost Common Knowledge." American Economic Review 79:385-391.
Samuelson, L. 1989. "Dominated Strategies and Common Knowledge." Penn-
sylvania State University working paper.
Savage, L. J. 1954. The Foundations of Statistics. New York: Wiley.
Scarf, H. E. 1967. "The Core of an n-Person Game." Econometrica 35:50-69.

--- Sayfa 568 ---
550 Bibliography
Scarf, H. E. 1973. The Computation of Economic Equilibria. New Haven, Conn.:
Yale University Press.
Schelling, T. C. 1960. The Strategy of Conflict. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Uni-
versity Press.
Schmeidler, D. 1969. "The Nucleolus of a Characteristic Function Game." SIAM
Journal of Applied Mathematics 17:1163-70.
Schmeidler, D. 1973. "Equilibrium Points of Nonatomic Games." Journal of
Statistical Physics 7:295-300.
Selten, R. 1965. "Spieltheoretische Behandlung eines Oligopolmodells mit
Nachfragetragheit." Zeitschrift fuer die gesampte Staatswissenschaft 121:301-
324,667-689.
Selten, R. 1975. "Reexamination of the Perfectness Concept for Equilibrium
Points in Extensive Games." International Journal of Game Theory 4:25-
55.
Selten, R. 1978. "The Chain-Store Paradox." Theory and Decision 9:127-159.
Sen, A. K. 1970. Collective Choice and Social Welfare. San Francisco: Holden-Day.
Shafer, W. 1980. "On the Existence and Interpretation of Value Allocations."
Econometrica 48:467-477.
Shapley, L. S. 1953. "A Value for n-Person Games." In H. Kuhn and A. W.
Tucker, eds., Contributions to the Theory of Games II, pp. 307-317. Prince-
ton: Princeton University Press.
Shapley, L. S. 1967. "On Balanced Sets and Cores." Naval Research Logistics
Quarterly 14:453-460.
Shapley, L. S. 1969. "Utility Comparison and the Theory of Games." In La
Decision, Editions du CNRS, Paris, pp. 251-263. Reprinted in A. E. Roth,
ed., 1988. The Shapley Value, pp. 307-319. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Shapley, L. S., and M. Shubik. 1954. "A Method for Evaluating the Distribution
of Power in a Committee System." American Political Science Review
48:787-792.
Shepsle, K., and B. Weingast. 1984. "Uncovered Sets and Sophisticated Voting
Outcomes with Implications for Agenda Institutions." American Journal
of Political Science 28:49-74.
Shubik, M. 1982. Game Theory in the Social Sciences: Concepts and Solutions. Cam-
bridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Simon, L. K. 1987. "Basic Timing Games." University of California, Berkeley,
working paper.
Simon, L. K., and M. B. Stinchcombe. 1989. "Extensive Form Games in Con-
tinuous Time: Pure Strategies." Econometrica 57:1171-1214.
Simon, L. K., and W. R. Zame. 1990. "Discontinuous Games and Endogenous
Sharing Rules." Econometrica 58:861-872.
Sobel, J., and I. Takahashi. 1983. "A Multistage Model of Bargaining." Review
of Economic Studies 50:411-426.
Sorin, S. 1980. "An Introduction to Two-Person Zero Sum Repeated Games
with Incomplete Information." I.M.S.S.S. Technical Report No. 312,
Stanford University.

--- Sayfa 569 ---
Bibliography 551
Spence, M. 1973. "Job Market Signaling." Quarterly Journal of Economics 87:355-
374.
Stahl, I. 1972. Bargaining Theory. Stockholm: Stockholm School of Economics.
Sutton, J. 1986. "Noncooperative Bargaining Theory: An Introduction." Review
of Economic Studies 53:709-724.
Tauman, Y. 1988. "The Aumann-Shapley Prices: A Survey." In A. E. Roth, ed.,
The Shapley Value, pp. 279-304. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Thrall, R. M., and W. F. Lucas. 1963. "n-Person Games in Partition Function
Form." Naval Research Logistics Quarterly 10:281-298.
van Damme, E. 1984. "A Relation between Perfect Equilibria in Extensive Form
Games and Proper Equilibria in Normal Form Games." International
Journal of Game Theory 13:1-13.
van Damme, E. 1987. Stability and Perfection of Nash Equilibria. Berlin: Springer-
Verlag.
van Damme, E. 1989. "Stable Equilibria and Forward Induction." Journal of
Economic Theory 48:476-496.
van Damme, E., R. Selten, and E. Winter. 1990. "Alternating Bid Bargaining
with a Smallest Money Unit." Games and Economic Behavior 2:188-201.
van Huyck, J. B., R. C. Battalio, and R. 0. Beil. 1990. "Tacit Coordination
Games, Strategic Uncertainty, and Coordination Failure." American Eco-
nomic Review 80:234-248.
Vickrey, W. 1961. "Counterspeculation, Auctions, and Competitive Sealed
Tenders." Journal of Finance 16:8-37.
von Neumann, J. 1928. "Zur Theorie der Gesellschaftsspiele." Mathematische
Annalen 100:295-320. English translation in R. D. Luce and A. W.
Tucker, eds., Contributions to the Theory of Games IV (1959), pp. 13-42.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
von Neumann, J., and 0. Morgenstern. 1944. Theory of Games and Economic
Behavior. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Second Ed., 1947.
Wilson, C. 1977. "A Model of Insurance Markets with Incomplete Information."
Journal of Economic Theory 16:167-207.
Wilson, R. 1971. "Computing Equilibria of n-Person Games." SIAM Journal of
Applied Mathematics 21:80-87.
Wilson, R. 1987. "Game Theoretic Analyses of Trading Processes." In T. Bewley,
ed., Advances in Economic Theory: Fifth World Congress, pp. 33-70. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wooders, M. H. 1983. "The Epsilon Core of a Large Replica Game." Journal of
Mathematical Economics 11:277-300.
Wooders, M. H., and W. R. Zame. 1984. "Approximate Cores of Large Games."
Econometrica 52:1327-50.
Young, H. P. 1985. "Producer Incentives in Cost Allocation." Econometrica
53:757-765.
Zermelo, E. 1913. "Uber eine Anwendung der Mengenlehre auf die Theorie
des Schachspiels." Proceedings Fifth International Congress of Mathematicians
2:501-504.

--- Sayfa 571 ---
Index
Italic page numbers indicate page on which term is defined.
Abreu, D. D., 343, 347, 348
Absorbing retract, 231
Absorbing state of nature, 311
Acceptable correlated equilibrium, 290
Acceptable residue, 290
Acceptable strategy, 290
iteratively, 292
Accident-prevention five-player game,
343-347
Action, 127
in game with incomplete information,
77
set, notation for, 68
Active equilibrium, 507
Additivity axiom, 437
Adverse selection, 263, 283
Agenda, 196
binary, 196-201, 198
Agent-normal form, 61
Agreeability index, 414
Akerlof, G., 305
Albers, W., 432
Allais, M., 22, 23
Allocation, 247. See also Disagreement
payoff allocation; Fair allocation rule;
Feasible allocation; Payoff allocation
vector
assurable, 457-458
individually rational, 378
inhibitive, 465
strongly inhibitive, 463
strongly Pareto efficient, 378
unpreventable, 458
virtually equitable, 520
weakly Pareto efficient, 378
Alternative, 42, 43
Anderson, R., 362
Anscombe, F. J., 5, 6
Apex game, 440-441, 449, 451, 454
Approachable set, 359
E-Approximate core, 430
E-Approximate equilibrium, 143
Arbitration, 469
analysis of, 415
final-offer, 415
focal, 111
guidelines, 456
impartial, 372
Argmax, 53
Arrogance of strength, 523
Arrow, K., 413
Assurable allocation vector, 457-458
Assurable representation, 458
Attractive strategy, 341
Attrition, war of, 330, 366
Auction, 132-136, 274
with common values, 133
with independent private values, 133
Aumann, R. J., 6, 64, 72, 106, 119, 153,
250, 252, 253, 352, 353, 354, 355,
357, 431, 442, 445, 448, 453, 456,
457, 458, 471, 473
Ausubel, L. M., 408, 495
Axelrod, R., 117, 364
Axioms
for Nash's bargaining solution, 377-378
for neutral bargaining solution, 516
for Shapley NTU value, 472
for Shapley value, 437-438
for utility maximization, 9-12

--- Sayfa 572 ---
554 Index
Babbling equilibrium, 257, 373-374,419
Backward induction, 190-191
Balance condition, 466,530
Balanced aspirations, 432
Balanced coalitional game, 433
Balanced contributions, 446
Banach limit, 316
Banker Game, 474-476,481
Banks, J. S., 238
Barany, I., 251
Bargaining, in two-person game, 370-416
Bargaining costs, 506
Bargaining game
continuous alternating offer: with com-
plete information, 394-399; with in-
complete information, 399-403
discrete alternating offer, 403-408
random offer, 393
Bargaining problem. See also Bayesian
bargaining problem
individually rational, 391
inessential, 380
Nash solution for, 375-380
n-person, 417
regular two-person, 390-391
two-person, 375-380
Bargaining set, 454, 455
Battalio, R. C., 113
Battle of the Sexes, 98, 230-231,240,372
burning-a-dollar variation, 193-195
focal-point effect in, 108-111
support of equilibrium, 99
Bayesian bargaining problem, 263, 266,
484
example, 489-493
extension, 517-518
with linear utility, 271-281
Bayesian collective-choice problem, 263—
271,483,505-506
with disagreement outcome, 266-267
with linear utility, 271-281
Bayesian conditional-probability system,
21
Bayesian decision theory
basic concepts of, 5-9
limitations of, 22-26
Bayesian equilibrium, 127-131
in auctions, 132-136
perfect, 241
Bayesian form, 37
Bayesian game, 67-74,68, 127
with communication, 258-263
consistency in, 71-74
with contracts, general participation
constraints for, 281-283
equivalence of, 72-73
finite, 69
infinite, 73
randomized-strategy profile, 127-128
revelation principle for, 260-261, 307
type-agent representation, 73
universal, 81
Bayesian incentive compatibility, 307
Bayes's formula, 13,165
Beating another option, in voting, 196
Beer-Quiche game, 235-238
Behaviorally equivalent strategies, 159
Behavioral representation, 159, 225-227
Behavioral strategy, 156
in general repeated game, 312
stationary, 317
Behavioral-strategy equilibrium, 154,161,
314
Behavioral-strategy profile, 155
with all positive move probabilities, 173
relationship to mixed-strategy profile,
156-158
as weak sequential-equilibrium scenario,
171
Beil, R. O., 113
Belief-closed subset, 81
Belief-probability distribution, 164, 165,
168
Beliefs
consistency of, 71,166,168-177
first-order, 78-79
inconsistent, 252
k-order, 79, 83
second-order, 79, 82
Beliefs vector, 164
fully consistent, 173
weakly consistent, 166
Bennett, E., 432,482
Benoit, J. P., 338,409,411
Ben-Porath, E., 193
Bergin, J., 362
Bernheim, B. D., 91,153,409
Bernoulli, D., 2
Best response, 53, 60,89
Best-response equivalence, 52-53
Betting on All-Star game, 24,25-26
Bicchieri, C., 190

--- Sayfa 573 ---
Index 555
Big Match, 321-323
Big player, 441, 449
Billera, L. J., 482
Billingsley, P., 78
Binmore, K., 306, 394, 408
Biological game, 117-122
Blackwell, D., 319, 321, 323, 357, 358
Blackwell's approachability theorem, 358-
360
Blocking coalition, 527
Blocking plan, viable, 527
Bold strategy, 328
Bondereva, 0. N., 432
Border, K. C., 137
Borel, E., 1
Borel measurable function, 142
Borel measurable set, 141-142, 144
Bounded function, 142
Boundedness condition, 456
Bounded payoffs, 311
Bounded set, 137
Branch, 38, 43
Burger, E., 137
Buyer-seller game, 70-71, 78, 265-271,
277-280. See also Example 10.1
Card game, simple
and common knowledge, 63-65
consistent beliefs in, 71
dominated strategies, 61
equilibria of, 95-96
in extensive form, 37-46
with incomplete information, 67, 69
modeling uncertainty in, 78
normal representation, 49, 95-96
sequential rationality in, 167-168
in strategic form, 47-49
strategy elimination, 90
subgame-perfect equilibrium, 184-185
unique sequential equilibrium, 176-177
Carrier, 437
Carrier axiom, 437
Carrier game, 439, 450
Cautious strategy, 328
Chain, 200
Chance, represented as player, 189
Chance event with small probability
effects of, 187-190
payoff irrelevant, 299
Chance node, 39, 42, 163, 173
historical, 65, 67
Chance probability, 42-43, 163
Characteristic function, 422-427
superadditive, 426
Chatterjee, K., 71, 277, 278
Checkers, 185
Chess, 185, 186
Chicken, 324-331, 365
Chilling effect, 386
Cho, I.-K., 235, 238
Chvatal, V., 31, 433
Classical feasibility, 487
Class of players, 436, 442, 466, 526
Client, 114
Closedness condition, 456
Closed set, 137
Coalition, 418
blocking, 527
carrier, 437
and cooperation structure, 444
fractional, 442
grand, 420
internally connected, 446
orthogonal, 426
Coalitional analysis, introduction to, 417-
422
Coalitional form, 422-427
for NTU game, 456
Coalitional game, 422
balanced, 433
compactly generated, 457
comprehensive, 457
with nontransferable utility, 456-462
superadditive, 457
with transferable utility, 417-456
Coalitional value, 445
Coase, R. H., 506
Coase theorem, 506, 508
Coin toss, 6, 11, 28-29, 246, 250, 251-
252, 295
Collective-choice plan or mechanism, 264
Collective irrationality, 411
Commitment, irrational, 399-403
power of, 398
Common knowledge, 63-67, 64, 76, 81-82
Common-knowledge event, 503
Common prior distribution, 71
Common value, 133, 151
Communication, 51, 105, 109-111. See
also Preplay communication
games with, 244-307
noisy, 255-256, 285

--- Sayfa 574 ---
556 Index
Communication equilibrium, 261-262
Communication game, 250, 256
Communication strategy set, 261
Communication system
description of, 255-256
general, notation for, 261
mediated, 250-255,258
Compactly generated coalitional game,
457
Compact metric space, 140, 141, 152
Compatible state and strategy, 158
Competition, 420
Competitively sustainable matching plan,
530
Competitive Walrasian equilibrium, 431
Completeness axiom, 9
Complete state information, 317-323
Comprehensive set, 457
Concave function, 355, 392
Concave hull, 356
Conditional linearity axiom, 472
Conditional-probability function, 12
Conditional-probability system, 21
Condorcet set, 200
Conflict situation, 188
Connectedness, 42, 446
Consistency
in Bayesian game, 71-74
full, 172-183,241
Consistency condition, 484
Consistent beliefs, 71, 173
at all information states, 168-177
Contagious scenario, 351
Continuity axiom, 10
Continuity theorem, 143-144
Continuous solution function, 392
Continuous time, 361-364
Contract, 244-249,376. See also Delega-
tion contract
game with, 246
notation for, 247
Contract-signing game, 429-431
Convergence, 137
Convex function, 355
Convexity, 27,136-137, 456
Cooper, R., 113
Cooperation, 350-351,370
effective, 372
equilibrium selection, 371
in two-person game, 370-416
under uncertainty, 483-536
Cooperation structure, 444, 449
graphical, 446
values with, 444-451
Cooperative game. See Coalitional game
Cooperative game theory, foundations,
370-375
Cooperative irrationality, 411
Cooperative transformation, 371
Core, 427-436,428, 455. See also Inner
core
of NTU coalitional game, 462
e-Core, 430
Correlated equilibrium, 249-258,253,
288-293. See also Publicly correlated
equilibrium
acceptable, 290
generalized, 262
predominant, 292
symmetric, 344
e-Correlated equilibrium, 290
Correlated strategy, 244-249,247
for repeated games with communica-
tion, 332
e-Correlated strategy, 289
Correspondence, 137
minimal, 146
Costs
of delay of trade, 271
of failure to trade, 271
of time, 265,271,394,494
Counterobjection, 453
Countervailing incentives, 281
Cramton, P., 280
Crawford, V., 283,415,508
Credibility test, 511
Cross, J., 432
Cultural norm, 112
Dasgupta, P., 145,307,394
d'Aspremont, C., 307
Davis, M., 454
Debreu, G., 136,431
Decision-analytic approach, 114-117
Decision-maker. See Player
Decision node, 39, 42, 163
Decision-option. See Strategy
Decision theory. See Bayesian decision
theory
Defensive-equilibrium representation, 424
Defensive threat, 389,424
DeJong, D., 113

--- Sayfa 575 ---
Index 557
Dekel, E., 193
Delegation contract, 282
AO, 21, 173, 216
Deneckere, R. J., 408, 495
Dense set, 186
E-Dense set, 403
Deterministic-trading mechanism, 268,
490
Dictatorship. See Random dictatorship
axiom
Difference game, 388
Disagreement outcome, 266, 484
Disagreement payoff allocation (or point),
376, 385-386, 388, 404
8-Discounted average, 313
Discount factor, 265, 271, 313-315, 317-
323, 325, 394, 494, 495
Disobedient action, 253
Distance, 140-141, 142, 201
minimum, 357
Divide the Dollars game, 111-112, 373,
375, 390-393, 418-422, 423, 428,
433, 434-435, 440, 444
Dollar Auction, 115-117
Dominated strategy, iterative elimination
of, 57-61, 89-90, 192-194
Domination, 26-31, 57-61
and rationalizability, 88-91
Drawing balls, 6
Dreze, J. H., 445
Dual, 125
Duality, 125-126
Duality theorem of linear programming,
31, 127
Dummy, 437
Durability, 502-509, 507
Dynamic matching process, 436, 466,
526-534
Edgeworth, F. Y., 431
Efficiency, 97, 112, 120, 373, 378, 409,
417, 445-446, 447. See also Ex post
efficiency; Incentive efficiency; Pareto
efficiency
concepts of, 485-489
positive interpretation of, 508-509
Efficiency axiom, 377, 380, 472
Effort profile, 343
Egalitarian solution, 381
X-Egalitarian solution, 382
Electronic mail game, 149-150
Ellsberg, D., 23
Endogenous-sharing game, 145
Environmental variable, 107
Epstein, L., 314
Equal gains, 381
Equilibrium. See also Correlated equilib-
rium; Nash equilibrium; Perfect equi-
librium; Persistent equilibrium;
Proper equilibrium; Sequential equi-
librium; Subgame-perfect equilibrium
in behavioral strategies, 161-162
focal, 108, 120
inefficient, 97
multiple, 97, 98, 108
nonrandomized, 101-102
perturbation of, 116-117
proof of existence, 136-140
in pure strategies, 94
of repeated game, 314
stable sets, 232-238
e-Equilibrium, 143, 407-408
Equitable solution concept, 455
Equity, 112, 373, 446, 447, 456
Equity hypothesis, 374
Equivalence
of Bayesian games, 72-73
best-response, 52-53
of conditional-probability function, 18-
20
of preference ordering representations,
18-20
of strategic-form games, 51-54
Essential bargaining problem, 376-380
Essentially finite game, 144
Event, 8
Evolution, 3, 117-122
Evolutionary stable strategy, 122
Exact solution, 107
Example 9.1, 418, 420, 428, 440, 444, 446
Example 9.2, 418, 428-429
Example 9.3, 420, 429, 433, 434, 440,
444, 447-448, 453
Example 10.1, 489, 508, 511-515, 531
Example 10.2, 509-515, 524, 531
Ex ante efficiency, 487
Ex ante Pareto superiority, 486
Ex ante welfare criterion, 486
Excess, 452
Excludable set, 360
Existence theorem
for finite games, 145

--- Sayfa 576 ---
558 Index
Existence theorem (continued)
of Nash equilibria, 95, 138-140, 145,
146, 162
of perfect equilibria, 221
of persistent equilibria, 232
of proper equilibrium, 224
of sequential equilibria, 177, 222
Exit, 526
Expected utility maximization theorem, 3
applicability, 22
proof, 14-17
statement of, 12-13
Expected utility payoff, notation for, 49
Expected utility value of prize, notation
for, 12
Ex post efficiency, 278, 487, 489
Ex post inefficiency, 493-497
Ex post Pareto superiority, 487
Ex post welfare criterion, 487
Extension, 517-518
Extension of scenario to sequential equi-
librium, 176
Extension of Shapley value axiom, 472
Extensions axiom, 516
Extensive-form game, 37-46
with communication, 294-299
definition, 42-43
equilibria in behavioral strategies, 154-
163
generic properties, 239-240
with incomplete information, 67-74
multiagent representation of, 61-63
normal representation of, 49
notation for, 154
n-person, 42
with perfect information, 185-187
sequential equilibria, 154-161
subgame-perfect equilibrium, 183-185
Fair allocation rule, 447, 451
Farquharson, R., :99
Farrell, J., 111, 240, 242, 284, 374, 409,
511
Feasibility, 462-463, 487
Feasibility theorem, general, 332
Feasible allocation
for coalition, 427-428
set, 376
without reference to coalition, 428
Feasible mechanism, 267
Ferguson, T. S., 321, 323
Filter, 316
Final-offer arbitration, 415
Finite-approximation theorem, 144-145
Finite-dimensional vector space, 239
Finite game, 46, 69
First-generation population, 117
First-order belief, 78-79
Fishburn, P. C., 6, 7
Fisher, R., 374
Fixed point, 137
Focal arbitrator, 111, 372
Focal equilibrium, 108, 120, 372, 408,
456
Focal negotiation, 373
Focal-point effect, 108-114, 131-132,
371, 406, 407
Folk theorem. See General feasibility
theorem
Follows, 42
Fomin, S. V., 78, 140
Forges, F., 251, 258, 285, 304
Forsythe, R., 113
Forward induction, 190-195, 191
Fractional coalition, 442
Franklin, J., 137
Free ultrafilter, 316
Fudenberg, D., 143, 188, 212, 240, 241,
332, 334, 342, 362, 408
Full consistency, 172-183, 173, 241
Full sequential equilibrium, 176
Fully equivalent games, 52, 72
Fully reduced normal representation,
57
Fully stable set of equilibria, 234
Gamble, 6
Game, 2. See also Bargaining problem;
Bayesian game; Coalitional game; Ex-
tensive-form game; Repeated game;
Strategic-form game; Two-person
zero-sum game
with communication, 244-307, 250, 256
with endogenous sharing rule, 145
essentially finite, 144
finite, 46, 69
with incomplete information, 67-74
infinite, 140-148
representations of, 37
residual, 59

--- Sayfa 577 ---
Index 559
Game theory, 1, 65
General feasibility theorem, 332, 334
Generalized Nash product, 390
Genericity, 186, 239-240
Generous-selfish game, 177-183
Geoffrion, A. M., 125
Gerard-Varet, L.-A., 307
Getting-even, 326-327
Gibbard, A., 307
Gibbons, R., 280
Gilboa, I., 61
Glazer, J., 193
Glicksberg, I., 137
Grand coalition, 420
Graph, 43, 446
Graphical cooperation structure, 446
Greatest good, 381
Gresham's law, 532
Gresik, T. A., 279
Grim equilibrium, 410
Grim strategy, 328
Grossman, S., 240, 511
Hagen, 0., 22, 23
Hahn-Banach theorem, 316
Hamilton, W. D., 120
Hammond, P., 307
Harris, M., 307
Harsanyi, J. C., 68, 73, 76, 77, 119, 127,
129, 413, 424, 441, 445, 473, 474,
515
Harsanyi NTU value, 473, 474-475
Hart, S., 353, 449, 474, 482
Hausdorff convergence, 392
Heath, D. C., 482
Herstein, 1., 5
Hillas, J., 170
Historical chance node, 65, 67
Holmstrom, B., 307, 485, 488, 502, 505,
507
1-Homogeneous function, 443
Horse lottery, 6
Hotelling, H., 147
Howard, R., 319
Hurd, A. E., 316
Hurwicz, L., 307
i.k, 43
Immediately follows, 42
Impartial arbitration, 372
Impossible event, 189
Improves on, 428
Imputation, 452
Inalienable right, 249
Incentive compatibility, 260-261, 262,
264, 281, 307, 484, 530
for sender-receiver game, 284
Incentive constraint
general, 260
informational, 264, 273, 284, 484, 490,
506, 527
strategic, 253, 284
Incentive efficiency, 270, 489, 497-502
Incentive-feasible mechanism, 485, 489,
490-493
Incomplete information, 67
modeling games with, 74-83
Inconsistent belief, 252
Increasing differences, 35
Independence assumption, 50, 105
Independence axiom. See Substitution
axioms
Independence of irrelevant alternatives
axiom, 378
Independent prior assumption, 484
Independent private value, 133, 272
Individual best interest, 98
Individual monotonicity axiom, 391
Individual rationality, 248, 267, 274, 282,
377, 378, 391, 485, 490, 527
Inefficient equilibrium, 97
Inessential bargaining problem, 380
Infimum, 395
Infinite game, 71, 73, 140-148
Infinite strategy set, 140-148
Infinite time horizon, 308
Information. See also Common knowl-
edge; Incomplete information; Pre-
play communication; Private informa-
tion
minor, 131
perfect, 185
standard, 323-331
unverifiable private, 501
Informational incentive constraint, 264,
273, 284, 484, 490, 506, 527
Information state, 40, 43
labels for, 40
off the path, 166
with positive probability, 163-168

--- Sayfa 578 ---
560 Index
Information state (continued)
set, notation for, 154
with zero probability, 168-169
Informed player, 355
Inhibitive allocation, 465
Inhibitive waiting-population characteris-
tics, 529
Initial distribution, 310
Initial doubt, small, 337-342, 340
Inner core, 462, 465, 466, 526
Inscrutability, 502-509, 513
Inscrutability principle, 504
Inscrutable intertype compromise, 513,
523
Insistent strategy, 399-400
Insurance, 263
Intelligence assumption, 59, 65, 89
Intelligent player, 4
Interest axiom, 12
Interim efficient mechanism, 487
Interim inferior mechanism for principal,
513
Interim Pareto superiority, 486
within an event, 503
Interim welfare criterion, 486
Internally connected coalition, 446
Interpersonal comparisons of utility, 381-
384
Irrationality, 165, 169, 194, 224, 399-403,
407, 411
Irrational move, 165
Irrelevant alternatives, independence of,
378
i.s, 164, 185
Iterative elimination of dominated strate-
gies. See Strategy elimination
Iteratively acceptable strategy, 292
Iteratively undominated strategy, 59
Jeopardizes, 498-499
Kadane, J., 114
Kahneman, D., 22, 24
Kakutani, S., 136
Kakutani fixed-point theorem, 137
Kalai, E., 61, 231, 232, 362, 390, 391, 481
Kandori, M., 351
Kaneko, M., 431, 434, 435
Kernel, 454, 455
K-fold replicated game, 434
Klemperer, P., 280
Knife-edge phenomenon, 465
Knight, F. H., 6
Kohlberg, E., 60, 191, 193, 214, 224, 225,
229, 232, 233, 234, 240, 294-295
Kohlberg-Mertens stability, 233, 238
Kolmogorov, A. N., 78, 140
k-order belief, 79
Kreps, D. M., 8, 37, 154, 165, 173, 176,
181, 188, 212, 235, 238, 339, 340,
341, 364
Krishna, V., 338, 409, 411
Kuhn, H. W., 37, 160
Kuhn's Theorem, 160
Kurz, M., 449
Labor market problem, 501-502
Lagrangean function, 498
Lagrange multiplier, 498
Larkey, P. D., 114
Lawsuit for breach of contract game, 301-
302
Left glove-right glove game, 429-431,
440
Leininger, W., 279
Lemma 3.1, 93
Lemon problem, 305
Levine, D. K., 143, 188, 408
Lewis, T. R., 280
Likelihood ratio, 349
Limit, 137
Limit-infimum (liminf ), 315
Limit of average payoffs, 315
Limit-supremum (limsup), 315
Linearity axiom, 438
Linear programming, 31, 126-127
Linhart, P. B., 279
Link-formation process, 448
Loeb, P. A., 316
Lottery, 6, 7
Lower solution, 107
Lucas, W. F., 453, 481, 482
Luce, R. D., 5, 97, 98, 369, 393
Luenberger, D. G., 31
Lying, 261, 510
Machina, M., 22
Mailath, G., 240
Main diagonal, 442
Manipulative strategy, 333

--- Sayfa 579 ---
Index 561
Marginal contribution, 443
Maschler, M., 106, 352, 353, 354, 355,
357, 393, 440, 453, 454
Mas-Colell, A., 239, 482
Maskin, E., 145, 307, 332, 334, 342, 343,
409
Matching plan, 466, 529
competitively sustainable, 530
incentive compatible, 530
Matching process, dynamic, 436, 466
Maximin strategy, 125
Maximization condition, 456, 460
Maximum, 142-143
Maximum individual contribution, 435
Maynard Smith, J., 3, 117, 122
McAfee, R. P., 132, 275
McLennan, A., 240
McMillan, J., 132, 275
Measurable function, 142
Measurable set, 141, 144
Mechanism, 258, 264, 268, 283, 484, 490.
See also Mediation plan or mechanism
Mechanism-selection game, 503-505
Mediation plan or mechanism, 258
for Bayesian collective-choice problem,
484
ex ante efficient, 487
ex ante Pareto superior, 486
ex post efficient, 487
ex post Pareto superior, 486
incentive compatible, 260-261
incentive-feasible, 485
individually rational, 485
interim efficient, 487
interim Pareto superior, 486
selection by players, 287-288
for sender-receiver game, 283
Mediator, 250, 252, 462
Mediator-selection game, 287-288
Mertens, J.-F., 60, 76, 78, 191, 193, 214,
224, 225, 229, 232, 233, 234, 294-
295, 310, 458
Metric space, 140
compact, 141
Milgrom, P., 35, 130, 132, 136, 181, 275,
339, 340, 341, 343, 347, 348, 350,
351, 364
Miller, N., 200, 201
Milnor, J., 5
Minimal correspondence, 146
Minimax representation, 424
Minimax strategy, 125, 248
Minimax value, 248, 376
Minimax-value theory, 388-389
Mistake, 194, 224
Mixed representation, 159
Mixed strategy, 156
behaviorally equivalent, 159
payoff equivalent, 160
Mixed-strategy profile, 155
relationship to behavioral-strategy pro-
file, 156-158
Monetary payoff, 3
Money, 422
Monotone likelihood ratio property, 35
Monotonicity axiom, 10, 391
Moral hazard, 263, 283, 376
Morgenstern, 0., 1, 2, 5, 37, 47, 50, 61,
69, 296, 423, 452
Moulin, H., 86, 199, 200, 201, 299, 482
Move, 41
imperfect observability of, 342-349
label for, 41, 43
set, notation for, 154, 310
Move probability, 156, 163
notation for, 168
Multiagent representation, 61-63
and perfect equilibria, 216-221
of sender-receiver game, 296
sequential equilibria in, 224-225
strategy profile, 156
Multiple equilibria, 97, 98, 108
Multistage game, 294-299, 296
Mutual punishment, 328
Nash, J. F., 93, 95, 105, 370, 375, 386
Nash bargaining solution, 379, 383, 456,
474, 515
axioms for, 377-378
of game with transferable utility, 384-
385
nonsymmetric, 390
Nash equilibrium, 91-98, 93
and Bayesian equilibria, 127
computation of, 99-105
of extensive-form game, 161- 162, 219
general existence theorem, 95, 138-140
refinements, 215-216, 241
significance of, 105-108
strong, 153

--- Sayfa 580 ---
562 Index
Nash product, 379
generalized, 390
Nash's program for cooperative game the-
ory, 371
Natural scale factor or utility weight, 382,
469, 470. See also Weighted utility
Negotiates effectively, 419
Negotiation, focal, 373
e-Neighborhood, 231
Nested coalition structure, 449
Neutral bargaining solution, 515-525, 518
Neutral optimum for principal, 515
Node, 38, 154. See also Chance node; De-
cision node; Nonterminal node; Ter-
minal node
Noisy communication, 255-256, 285
Nonparticipation, 77
Nonsymmetric Nash bargaining solution,
390
Nonterminal node, 39
Nontransferable utility, 456-462
Normal form, 37
Normalization condition. See Range condi-
tion
Normal representation, 49
fully reduced, 57
purely reduced, 55
reduced, 54-57
sequential equilibria in, 225
of simple card game, 49
strategy profile, 156
sufficiency of, 50-51
North, D. C., 350, 351
n-person bargaining problem, 417
NTU. See Nontransferable utility
NTU coalitional form, 456
NTU game, 456
Nucleolus, 455
Objection, 453
Objective substitution axiom, 10
Objective unknown, 6
Offensive threat, 389, 424
Off-the-path information state, 166
Okuno-Fujiwara, M., 240
O'Neill, B., 149
Open ball, 141
Open set, 137, 141
Optimization problem, 488, 497
Optimization theory, 125-126
Option. See Outcome
Ortega-Reichert, A., 133, 275
Orthogonal coalitions assumption, 426,
526
Outcome, 263, 483
Overtaking criterion, 315, 332
Owen, G., 449, 473, 476, 481
Owen NTU value, 475
Owen value, 449-451
Pareto efficiency, 97, 120, 378, 417. See
also Efficiency
in game with incomplete information,
485
Participation constraint, 248, 267, 281-
282, 490. See also Individual rational-
ity
general, for Bayesian games with con-
tracts, 281-283
Partition, 427
Partition function form, 482
Path, 43
of play, 38-39
Payoff, 38-39
consistency and type dependence, 73
notation for, 43, 164
weighted, 460
Payoff allocation vector, 427
realized, 358
Payoff-equivalent strategies, 54-55, 160
Payoff function, 310
Payoff irrelevant chance event, 299
Payoff outcome, to player in repeated
game, 313
Pearce, D. G., 91, 343, 347, 348, 409
Peleg, B., 153, 409, 454, 456, 457, 482
Perfect Bayesian equilibrium, 241
Perfect equilibrium, 232
existence of, 221-222
of extensive-form game, 219
relationship to sequential equilibrium,
216-221
of strategic-form game, 216-221
e-Perfect equilibrium, 223
Perfect information, 44, 185
Perfect recall, 43
Period, 362
Perles, M. A., 393
9-Permissible ordering, 451
Permutation, 437

--- Sayfa 581 ---
Index 563
Perry, M., 240, 511
Persistent equilibrium, 230-232, 231
Persistent retract, 231
Perturbation, salient, 25
Player, 2
connected by G within, 446
even-numbered, 37
informed, 355
odd-numbered, 37
power, 427
randomly ordered entry, 439, 440, 451
set, notation for, 42, 53, 61, 68, 154
type, 67
uninformed, 355
Player label, 40, 42
Pollock, G. B., 120, 122
Population, first-generation, 117
Positional equilibrium, 329-331, 406
Positively smooth allocation set, 472
Posterior-lottery model, 73
Postlewaite, A., 240
Power of commitment, 398, 407
Power of player, 427
Pratt, J. W., 3, 6
Predominant correlated equilibrium, 292
Predominant residue, 292
Predominant strategy, 292
Preference axioms, 9-12
Preference ordering, 8-12, 196-197
equivalent representations of, 18-20
Preplay communication, 109-113. See also
Communication; Information
Prestable set of equilibria, 233
Price-theoretic model, 4
Principal, 373, 509
mechanism selection by, 509-515
Prior-planning assumption, 50, 163
Prior probability, 166
Prisoners' Dilemma, 97, 244
continuous-time version, 361-362
and evolutionary simulation, 364-365
finitely repeated, 337-342
infinitely repeated, 308-310, 311, 314,
320, 337, 339, 365
modified version, 245
Private information, 64, 67, 77, 81-82,
127
Private value, 150
Private values assumption, 73
Prize, 7-8, 9
Probability, assessment, 13
Probability constraint, 254, 258, 286
Probability distribution
in infinite case, 71
notation for, 7, 89
of player's behavior, 52
Probability function, in Bayesian game, 68
Probability model, 6
Profile. See Strategy profile
Prohorov metric, 78, 142
Proper equilibrium, 222-230, 223, 232
e-Proper equilibrium, 223
Psychiatrists' office game, 147-148
Publicly correlated equilibrium, 334
subgame perfect, 334
Punishment, 325, 327-328, 342-343
harsh and mild, 335-337
mutual, 328
Purely reduced normal representation,
55
Pure strategy, 46, 56, 91, 154-155
in general repeated game, 312
randomly redundant, 227-228
Pure-strategy profile, 94
Pure trading game, 426
Qin, C. Z., 462
q-positional strategy, 329
Quiche. See Beer-Quiche game
R, 31
Radner, R., 143, 279, 343
Raiffa, H., 5, 6, 13, 23, 97, 98, 114, 115,
369, 393, 394
Ramsey, R. P., 4, 5
Ranaan, J., 482
Random dictatorship axiom, 516
Randomized blocking plan, 462
viable, 463
Randomized strategy, 29, 56, 91, 127
purification of, 129-131
Randomized-strategy profile, 91-92, 155
for Bayesian game, 127-128
Randomly ordered entry, 439, 440, 451
Randomly redundant strategy, 56
Range condition, 13
Rasmusen, E., 263
Rationality assumption, 59, 89
Rationalizability, and domination, 88-91
Rationalizable strategy, 91, 95

--- Sayfa 582 ---
564 Index
Rational player, 2
Rational threat, 376, 385-390, 386
Rational-threats representation, 424, 441-
442
Ray, D., 409
Realized payoff vector, 358
Recursion equation, 314, 318
Regularity condition, 12
Regular two-person bargaining problem,
390-391
Regulator, 263
Relevance axiom, 9
Renegotiation, 408-412
Renegotiation-proof equilibrium, 409-
410, 411
Reny, P. J., 240
Repeated game, 51, 308-369
with complete state information and
discounting, stationary equilibria,
317-323
continuous-time versions, 361-364
discrete-time versions, 362-363
evolutionary simulation, 364-365
general model, 310-317
with imperfect monitoring, 342-349
with incomplete information, 352-360
in large decentralized groups, 349-352
standard, general feasibility theorems
for, 331-337
with standard information, 323-331
Replicated game, 434
Replicated version of coalition, 434
Representation of preferences, 18-19
K-Rescaled version, 477
Residual game, 59
Resistance, 118, 364
Retract, 231
absorbing, 231
persistent, 231
Revelation principle
for general Bayesian games, 260-261,
307
for multistage games, 296-298
for strategic-form games, 257, 258,
296-298, 307
Revenue-equivalence, 275
r-insistent strategy, 399-400
Risk, 6
Risk aversion, 383-384
index of, 3
Risk dominance, 119
Risk neutrality, 383
Roberts, J., 181, 339, 340, 341, 364
Robustness, 239
Rockafellar, R. T., 461
Root, 38, 42, 65, 68
Rooted tree, 42
Rosenthal, R., 177, 307, 341
Ross, T., 113
Roth, A. E., 113, 384, 390, 476, 482
Rothschild, M., 533
Roulette lottery, 6
Round, 308, 343, 362, 496
Royden, H., 78, 140, 316
Rubinstein, A., 149, 332, 394, 408
Safe mechanism, 513
Salient perturbation, 25
Samet, D., 231, 232, 481
Samuelson, L., 90
Samuelson, W., 71, 277, 278
Sappington, D. E. M., 280
Satterthwaite, M. A., 277, 278, 279
Savage, L. J., 4, 5
Scale covariance axiom, 377, 472
Scarf, H. E., 105, 137, 431, 462
Scenario, 155
extended to sequential equilibria, 176
sequential-equilibrium, 176
Schelling, T. C., 108, 231, 371, 406
Schlaiffer, R., 6
Schmeidler, D., 442, 455
Schoumaker, F., 113
S coalition, 436
Second-order belief, 79, 82
Security level, 248
Selection criterion, 241
Self-enforcing plan, 250
Selfish-generous game. See Generous-self-
ish game
Seller-buyer game. See Buyer-seller game
Selten, R., 61, 73, 119, 132, 183, 216, 219,
306, 404, 515
Selten game, 73
Sen, A. K., 413
Sender-receiver game, 283-288
multiagent representation, 296
Separating hyperplane theorem, 461, 464
Sequence ranking, 313
Sequential equilibrium, 154, 176

--- Sayfa 583 ---
Index 565
computation of, 177-183
existence of, 221-222
full, 176
in game with perfect information, 186
of multistage game, 298
relationship to perfect equilibrium,
216-221
support, 179-180
weak, 170
Sequential-equilibrium scenario, 176
Sequentially rational strategy, 163, 164-165
Sequential-offer bargaining game, 393-
408, 494
Sequential rationality
at all information states, 168-177
at information states with positive prob-
ability, 163-168
for multistage games with communica-
tion, 299
Sequential value, 165
Shafer, W., 476
Shapley, L. S., 432, 436, 442, 468, 482
Shapley value, 436-448, 438, 439, 455
NTU version, 468-477, 469
TU version, 469, 474
Shepsle, K., 201
Shubik, M., 482
Signal, 310, 311
Simon, L. K., 145, 147, 362
Simple carrier game, 439
Simple game, 479
Simultaneity assumption, 50
Slovic, P., 22
Small player, 441, 449
Smoothness condition, 472
Smorodinsky, M., 391
Sobel, J., 238, 283, 408
Social norm, power of, 349-350
Social option, 263
Solution concept. See also Bargaining set;
Core; Kernel; Nucleolus; Shapley
value; Stable set; Value
for coalitional games with transferable
utility, 455-456
equitable, 455
exact, 107
lower, 107
unobjectionable, 455
upper, 107-108
Solution function, 377
Sophisticated outcome, 199
Sophisticated voting solution, 198
Sorin, S., 310, 357
Spence, M., 501, 533
Stable set
of Kohlberg and Mertens, 233
of von Neumann and Morgenstern,
452, 455
Stacchetti, E., 343
Stackelberg leader, 187
Stackelberg solution, 187
Stage, 362
Stahl, I., 394
Standard information, 323-331
Standard repeated game, 323
Standoff equilibrium, 406, 496, 506
Stanford, W., 362
State, 7, 9
State independence, 20
State independent utility function, 12
State neutrality axiom, 12
State of nature, 310, 321
current, 310
State-variable model, 6
Stationary matching process, 530
Stationary strategy, 317
Stiglitz, J., 533
Stinchcombe, M. B., 362
Strategic equilibrium, 93
Strategic-form game, 37, 46-51, 88. See
also Multiagent representation; Nor-
mal representation; Type-agent rep-
resentation
assurable representation of, 458
and Bayesian form, 37, 73-74
equilibria of, 88-153, 213-243
equivalence of, 51-54
generic properties, 239-240
iterative elimination of dominated strat-
egies, 58-61
Nash equilibrium of, 93
procedure for finding equilibria, 100-
105
randomized strategy for, 91
reduced normal representation of, 54-
57
k-rescaled version, 477
revelation principle for, 257, 258, 296-
298, 307
Stackelberg solution, 187

--- Sayfa 584 ---
566 Index
Strategic-form game (continued)
with transferable utility, 384-385
un preventable representation of, 458
Strategic incentive constraint, 253, 284
Strategy. See also Behavioral strategy;
Mixed strategy; Pure strategy; Ran-
domized strategy
acceptable, 290
attractive, 341
in Bayesian game, 69
in extensive-form game, 44
iterative elimination of, see Strategy
elimination
iteratively undominated, 59
manipulative, 333
payoff-equivalent, 54-55, 160
randomly redundant, 56
rationalizable, 91, 95
in strategic-form game, 46
strongly dominated, 28, 29, 31-32, 57,
89-90
weakly dominated, 30, 32-33, 59, 90,
192-194
Strategy elimination, 57-61, 89-90, 192-
194, 291, 299
Strategy profile, 46, 88, 156. See also Be-
havioral-strategy profile; Mixed-strat-
egy profile; Pure-strategy profile;
Randomized-strategy profile; Scenario
notation for, 52, 89
Strategy set
in multiagent representation, 62-63
notation for, 44-45, 46, 47
Strict substitution axiom, 10
violations of, 23-24
Strong efficiency axiom, 377
Strongly dominated strategy, 28, 29, 31-
32, 57
iterative elimination of, 89-90
Strongly inhibitive allocation, 463
Strongly inhibitive waiting-population
characteristics, 528
Strong Nash equilibrium, 153
Strong Pareto efficiency, 378, 417
Strong solution for principal, 513
Subgame, 184- 185
Subgame-perfect equilibrium, 183-185,
184
in game with perfect information, 186
of multistage game, 297
publicly correlated, 334
symmetric stationary, 363
Subjective probability distribution, 5
Subjective substitution axiom, 10
Subjective unknown, 6, 7
Submissive equilibrium, 405
Subroot, 183-184, 186
Subsequent offer, 493-497
Substitution axioms, 3, 9-11
Subsumes, 264-265
Sum-of-payoffs criterion, 313, 338, 340
Sup. See Supremum
Superadditive cover, 427
Superadditivity, 426, 447, 457
Supergame, 323
Support, 99, 179
Supporting hyperplane theorem, 471
Supporting vector, 471
Supremum, 142-143, 395
Sure-thing axiom, 3. See also Substitution
axioms
Sutton, J., 408
Swinkels, J. M., 122
Symmetric equilibria, 344
Symmetric game, 121-122
Symmetry axiom, 378, 437
Takahashi, I., 408
Tauman, Y., 482
Temporary agent, 61-62
Terminal node, 38, 42
label, 43
set, notation for, 49, 163-164, 186
Theater tickets decision, 24-25
Thrall, R. M., 482
Threat game, 386
Three-person majority game, 420, 429.
See also Example 9.3
Three-person unanimity game. See Exam-
ple 9.1
Three-player game, 292
of B. O'Neill, 149
with transferable utility, 425-426
Three-player A.-transfer game, 466
Time horizon, infinite, 308
Tirole, J., 240, 241, 362, 408
Tit-for-tat, 325-326, 340, 364-365
Top cycle, 200-201
Townsend, R. M., 307
Tracing procedure, 119

--- Sayfa 585 ---
Index 567
Trading problem. See also Bargaining
game; Buyer-seller game
bilateral, 277
with linear utility, 271-281
under uncertainty, 489-493
Transferable utility, 73, 384-385,422
Transferable A-weighted utility, 460
A-Transfer game, 460
Transition function, 310
Transitivity axiom, 9
Tree, 38-43,42
and common knowledge, 65
Trembling, 221-222,289,293
Trivia quiz game, 74-76,82-83
modeling uncertainty in, 78
TU game, 417-456
Tversky, A., 22,24
$12 million prize paradox (Allais), 23
Two-person bargaining problem, 375-376
Two-person zero-sum game, 122-127,
353
Type, 67, 526
comparisons of, 500-502
in cooperation game under uncertainty,
483-484
independence of, 73
and information, 77
and private information, 127
in repeated games with incomplete in-
formation, 352
set, notation for, 68
and unknown parameter, 82
Type-agent representation, 73, 127
correlated equilibria of, 262
Type-conditional belief, 502
Ultrafilter, 316
Uncertainty, 3-4,6
about direction of trade, 280
initial, effect of, 181-183
modeling of, 77-84
Uninformed player, 355
Union, 449
Universal Bayesian game, 81
Universal belief space, 76, 78-81,80
Unknown
objective, 6
subjective, 6, 7
Unknown parameter, 77
and type, 82
Unobjectionable solution concept, 455
Unpreventable allocation vector, 458
Unpreventable representation, 458
Upper-hemicontinuous correspondence,
137, 140
Upper solution, 107-108
Ury, W., 374
Utilitarian solution, 381
A-Utilitarian solution, 382
Utility, 2-3. See also Transferable utility;
Weighted utility
assessment, 13
Utility function, 5, 12
Utility payoff, 46
Utility scale, von Neumann-Morgenstern,
69
Utility weight. See Weighted utility
Value. See also Owen value; Shapley value
independent private, 272
with transferable utility, 427-451
types of, 133
without transferable utility, 468-477
Van Damme, E., 193,225,239,404
Van Huyck, J. B., 113
Veto player, 479
Viable blocking plan, 463, 527
Vial, J.-P., 299
Vickrey, W., 133
Village of 100 Couples fable, 66-67
Virtual bargaining problem, 519-520
Virtually equitable allocation vector, 520
Virtual utility hypothesis, 521
Virtual utility payoff, 498-501, 520
Viscosity, 120
parameter, 121
8-Viscous equilibrium, 121, 122
Von Neumann, J., 1,2,5,37,47,50,61,
69,296,423,452
Voting game
with incomplete information, 506-507
of Moulin, 86
Voting in committee, 196-201
Voting solution, sophisticated, 198
Waiting-population characteristics, 527-
534
inhibitive, 529
strongly inhibitive, 528
War of attrition, 330, 366

--- Sayfa 586 ---
568 Index
Weak efficiency axiom, 380
Weakly consistent beliefs vector, 166
Weakly dominated strategy, 30, 32-33, 59
iterative elimination of, 90, 192-194
Weakly predominant strategy, 292
Weak Pareto efficiency, 97, 378, 417
Weak sequential equilibrium, 170
Weak sequential-equilibrium scenario, 171
Weak topology, 142
Weber, R. J., 35, 130, 132, 136
Weighted utility, 381-384
for coalitional games, 460, 463, 468-
477
with incomplete information, 488, 498,
501, 506, 518, 524-525
natural scale factor, 382, 469, 470
Weingast, B. R., 201, 350, 351
Weiss, A., 193
Welfare criterion, ex post, 487
Whinston, M. D., 153, 409
Wilson, C., 533
Wilson, R., 8, 37, 105, 132, 154, 165, 173,
176, 181, 339, 340, 341, 364
Winner's curse, 136, 492
Winter, E., 404
Wolinsky, A., 408
Wooders, M. H., 432, 434, 435
Worth, 422, 439
Young, H. P., 482
Zame, W. R., 145, 147, 432, 436
Zamir, S., 76, 78, 310
Zemel, E., 61
Zermelo, E., 1, 186
Zermelo's theorem, 186
Zero-probability event, 189