--- Sayfa 1 ---
GAMES, game theory and
artificial intelligence
John T. Hanley
US Naval War College, Newport, Rhode Island, USA
Abstract
Purpose – The purpose of this paper is to illustrate how game theoretic solution concepts inform what classes
of problems will be amenable to artificial intelligence and machine learning (AI/ML), and how to evolve the
interaction between human and artificial intelligence.
Design/methodology/approach – The approach addresses the development of operational gaming to
support planning and decision making. It then provides a succinct summary of game theory for those designing
and using games, with an emphasis on information conditions and solution concepts. It addresses how
experimentation demonstrates where human decisions differ from game theoretic solution concepts and how
games have been used to develop AI/ML. It concludes by suggesting what classes of problems will be amenable
to AI/ML, and which will not. It goes on to propose a method for evolving human/artificial intelligence.
Findings – Game theoretic solution concepts inform classes of problems where AI/ML ’solutions’ will be
suspect. The complexity of the subject requires a campaign of learning.
Originality/value – Though games have been essential to the development of AI/ML, practitioners have yet
to employ game theory to understand its limitations.
Keywords Game theory, Games, Artificial intelligence
Paper type Conceptual paper
Introduction
Playing games is a natural activity for humans and other animals to make sense of, explore,
experiment and adapt to their environment [1]. The lusory play-mood of games encourages
players to project imagination beyond their current physical circumstances, thus promoting
creativity and innovation. Going beyond the physical to the metaphysical, from prehistory
on, games have played roles in ritual, and animal bones have been used for both divination
and early games of chance. The ancient Egyptians played chess-like board games using dice,
presumably abstractions representing battle as were used by all advanced ancient societies
(David, 1998).
With the exception of cards coming from ninth century China to Europe around 1,350
(David, 1998), games in different societies remained more similar than different until the
Scientific Revolution in the seventeenth century where diplomat-scientist-philosopher-
mathematician Gottfried Wilhelm (von) Leibniz combined the manipulation of symbols in
language and games as a basis for logical truth, and wrote a paper anticipating computer
languages. Leibniz sought to bring similar logical processes to his war game designs. He
proposed a “German military system” in which:
Newly invented war game, colonels and captains, also other commanders practice it instead of the
chessboard and card game, and come to greater science, speed and invention [emphasized in original];
one could represent with certain game pieces certain battles and skirmishes, also the position of the
forces, and the lay of the land, both at one’s discretion and from history, for example if one wanted to
play the Battle of L€utzen, the skirmish with the French at Eisisheim and other historical events;
JDAL
5,2
114
John T. Hanley. © In accordance with section 105 of the US Copyright Act, this work has been produced
by a US government employee and shall be considered a public domain work, as copyright protection is
not available. Published in Journal of Defense Analytics and Logistics. Published by Emerald Publishing
Limited.
The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available on Emerald Insight at:
https://www.emerald.com/insight/2399-6439.htm
Received 6 October 2021
Revised 26 October 2021
Accepted 26 October 2021
Journal of Defense Analytics and
Logistics
Vol. 5 No. 2, 2021
pp. 114-130
Emerald Publishing Limited
2399-6439
DOI 10.1108/JDAL-10-2021-0011

--- Sayfa 2 ---
thereby on would often find what others missed and how we could gain wisdom from the losses of
our forerunners (von Hilgers, 2012, p. 28)
The Prussian Kriegsakademie, founded by General Gerhard von Scharnhorst in 1801,
eventually established such a system and adopted the von Reiswitzs’ Kriegspiel adopted
in 1824.
Contemporaneously, patrician and merchant Christopher Weikhmann developed the
chess-like Newly Invented Great King’s Game as an means to derive a “state and war council,”
whereby “the most necessary political and military axiomata, rules and ways of playing . . .
without great effort and the reading of many books, are shown and presented as if in a
compendio” to those who studied the game diligently [2]. Leibnitz’s and Weikhmann’s efforts
were the first to make abstract gaming used for entertainment and improving strategic
intuition into games for operational planning and decisions.
Scharnhorst’s approach to military science and Prussian successes in the 1886 war
against Austria and 1870–1871 war against France led to widespread adoption of their
processes as war colleges and gaming proliferated among major military powers. Before First
World War, a British political game contributed to the formation of the Triple Entante
between the UK, France and Russia. Gaming demonstrated the weaknesses in the German
war plans in the west and the Russian war plans in the east. The gaming and exercises
conducted by the Germans between the World Wars laid the foundations for the rapid
expansion of Wehrmacht beyond the limits set in the treaty ending First World War and their
victories early in Second World War. In 1940, Soviet gaming again demonstrated weaknesses
in their plans, but they were too slow to reorganize and adapt. Similarly, early Japanese
victories in Second World War followed the course of their games. US Navy gaming and
exercises led to a deep appreciation of the upcoming war in the Pacific, contributing to
winning the war (Hanley, 1992).
War gaming did not have the same salience immediately following Second World War as
US and Soviet war colleges turned to harvesting the lessons of the war and German and
Japanese forces were restricted in their activities. However, business and government policy
makers found operational gaming “a powerful method for simultaneously mastering
complexity, enhancing communication, stimulating creativity, and contributing to consensus
and a commitment to action (Duke and Geurts, 2004).” The mathematics of Operations
Research developed and employed during Second World War displaced much of the US
military analytic effort that had gone into war gaming, and accelerated with the development
of computers. However, during the 1980s war gaming at the Naval War College and fleet
exercises played a similar role in the development and implementation of the Maritime
Strategy as it had during the interwar years (Hanley, 2014, pp. 11–29).
In addition to mathematical programming for optimization and stochastic processes that
formed the core of the Operations Research discipline, game theory and computer science
further developed during Second World War. Twentieth century mathematicians studied
ways to play chess better. This led to John von Neumann proving a saddle-point minimax
strategy as the best solution for two-person zero-sum games in 1928, and with Oskar
Morgenstern publishing a comprehensive Theory of Games and Economic Behavior in 1944
extending the theory to cooperative and non-cooperative games other than constant sum, and
with more than two people.
Computer advances and Alan Turing’s writings on “thinking machines” led to a
conference at Dartmouth College in 1956 where the term artificial intelligence (AI) was coined.
Early work on AI explored neural nets and machine learning. By 1959, Arthur Samuel had
developed a machine that could beat him at checkers using game theory as the basis for
rational choice and employing novel techniques (Holland, 1998). Since then, game theory has
played a major role in machine learning and electronic commercial games. Artificial
Game theory
and artificial
intelligence
115

--- Sayfa 3 ---
intelligence has gone through several waves of enthusiasm and disappointment (Richbourg,
2018). With recent successes in machine learning with algorithms that can beat humans at Go
and the Department of Defense’s interest in AI, another wave is cresting. AI is finding many
uses in areas from designing drugs to robots to social control in China and will have many
commercial successes. However, game theory is key to understanding the kinds of problems
having well founded solution concepts, and where to expect problems in AI used to inform
decisions in situations involving paradoxes and dilemmas in competition and cooperation.
A game theory primer for gamers
Game theory provides an “elaborate mathematical development centered solely in the social
sciences (Luce and Raiffa, 1957).” It begins with utility theory to provide an approach for
quantifying the value of known, certain outcomes for each individual [3].
Types of games
Reflecting their interest in economic and social coalitions, von Neumann and Morgenstern
distinguished between “inessential” games in which coalitions and side-payments between
partners play no role, and “essential” games where they do. Inessential games include two-
person, zero-sum games where one person gains what the other loses and two-person, non-
zero-sum non-cooperative games where the sum of the outcomes for the players is not zero,
making them not strictly competitive, and where mutual gain is always a possibility, but no
pre-play communication between players is permitted. In repeated plays of the second type,
observing the other player’s choices provides a means for signaling within the game, but no
other messages may be sent.
Essential games include two-person cooperative games where pre-play messages are
transmitted without distortion, all agreements are binding and enforceable by the rules of the
game, and a player’s evaluations of the outcomes are not affected by the pre-play
negotiations; and n-person games where going beyond two people allows for the formation of
coalitions [4]. Where assumptions about pre-play negotiations or other communications not
affecting the evaluation of outcomes are too strong, one can revise the formulation of the
game to explicitly include negotiations and communications, though coding written and
verbal language, expressions and behavior are a challenge for any quantitative method.
Information conditions
The information that each player, and umpires, have performs a determinative role in game
theory to the point that changing the information conditions changes the game. The
information conditions address what information is available to each player at every stage of
the game, what is the role of a player being informed about the other player’s strategy, and
about the entire theory of the game (von Neumann and Morgenstern, 2004, p. 47).
Complete information. To “divide the difficulties” of assuming otherwise, von Neumann
and Morgenstern assumed that the subjects under consideration “are completely informed
about the physical characteristics of the situation in which they operate and are able to
perform all statistical, mathematical, etc. operations which this knowledge makes possible
(von Neumann and Morgenstern, 2004, p. 30).” Incomplete information is where this
assumption does not apply.
Perfect information. Where at every point of time during the play of a game each player
with a decision to make knows all of the previous moves of the other players when making a
move. Chess is an example of a game with perfect information (von Neumann and
Morgenstern, 2004, p. 51). Simultaneous moves where previous moves are known provides
“almost perfect” information. Lacking perfect information, players need to randomize their
JDAL
5,2
116

--- Sayfa 4 ---
decisions to achieve the best outcomes (von Neumann and Morgenstern, 2004, pp. 183–184;
Shubik, 1982, p. 37).
Imperfect recall. In games like Bridge players decide upon their bids not knowing the
contents of their partner’s hand. Games involving teams representing a player may not know
of moves other teammates have made or the information on which those moves were based. In
games with imperfect recall, players may need to make a random choice of strategy at the
beginning of play, so that the actions of their agents will be properly correlated. In games with
perfect recall, randomizing decisions can be deferred until actual decision points are reached.
Mixed strategies of this kind with on-the-spot randomizations are called “behavioral
strategies” in the literature, and are far easier to work with, both in theory and practice, than
general mixed strategies (Shubik, 1982, pp. 37–38). Imperfect recall leads to “direct” signaling
in Bridge as opposed to “inverted signaling,” or bluffing, in Poker (von Neumann and
Morgenstern, 2004, p. 54).
Game theory primarily treats exogenous uncertainty from random processes as “nature’s
moves.” For calculation, it treats the associated probabilities as known. Decision theories
make greater distinctions between decisions under “risk” where probabilities are known, and
uncertainty where the probabilities are more subjective (Luce and Raiffa, 1957).
Game-theoretic forms
The theory provides for three forms to represent a game: extensive, strategic (or normal) form
and the characteristic function. The first level of application of game theoretic analysis is in
the selection of which way to represent the game.
Extensive form. Modeling games in extensive form captures the timing of the players’
moves relative to relevant events and representations of what the players knew about other’s
choices when they selected their move. Figure 1 illustrates two simple games in extensive
form involving players Red (R) and Blue (B) making sequential moves in 1a, where Blue
knows Red’s choice when making its move, and “simultaneous” moves in 1b, where both
Figure 1.
Games in extensive
(tree) form
Game theory
and artificial
intelligence
117

--- Sayfa 5 ---
sides select their move without knowing the other’s choice [5]. For simplicity, these games
represent Red having three and Blue having two alternatives, one “branch” representing each
alternative. A move involves choosing one of the possible alternatives.
A strategy in game theory means a complete description of how a player intends to play a
game, from the beginning to the end. “The test of completeness of a strategy is whether it
provides for all contingencies that can arise, so that a secretary or agent or programmed
computer could play the game on behalf of the original player, without having to return for
instructions (Shubik, 1982, p. 34).” In policy making and the military the term course of action
(COA) represents following one path down the game tree. COA is used below to avoid
confusion with other concepts of strategy.
The alternatives are numbered and the outcomes indicated with subscripts relating to the
player’s choice of that alternative; e.g. OIJ indicates the outcome should Red select COA i and
Blue select its COA j. The payoffs to Red and Blue are indicated similarly by Rij and Bij
respectively. The payoffs are the value (utility) of the outcome to each player [6]. Should the
value of all outcomes be equal and opposite for Red and Blue (i.e. Rij 5 Bij for all Red COAs i
and Blue COAs j), the game would be zero-sum. In general, though some situations, such as
winning or losing a duel, may be usefully modeled as a zero-sum game, the more
considerations involved in the outcome, the less valuable modeling the game as zero-sum is
likely to be.
Figure 1b also illustrates two ways for representing simultaneous moves, and the
information available to players when they chose their next move. The bubble (ellipse)
around the positions at which Blue selects its move indicates that Blue does not know which
move Red has selected when it makes its choice. The set of points enclosed is called an
information set (Shubik, 1982, p. 42). For simultaneous moves the information set consists of
one point. The lower figure is an alternative representation of Blue with one information set
that shows it is the equivalent of the players choosing simultaneously among their
alternatives.
In a game with more than two players, the sequence of player alternatives and moves is
represented adding to the detail above. Nature and game adjudicator decisions are treated
similarly to a player, representing their adjudications as moves in the game.
The positional form is a variant of the extensive form useful for reducing redundancy in
the many games such a Checkers, Chess or Go where pieces can reach the same physical
positions through various sequences of moves and the history of the game is not relevant to
the play. A directed graph, network structure, allowing different lines of play to merge is one
way to capture the moves in such a game. Since the positions of the pieces are used to evaluate
future moves in machine learning and artificial intelligence, the positional form may save
computations. This form resembles a flow diagram for a computer program. As with
computers, loops can result in moves of infinite duration. Chance and simultaneous moves
can be treated as before, but all nodes with multiple incoming edges are assumed to have the
same information. Most positional games in the literature have perfect or almost perfect
information. Also, players may make a different choice when re-arriving at a node,
complicating the enumeration of strategies. “Stationary strategies’ are where the player uses
selects the same alternative at each opportunity to move. In games like Monopoly arriving at a
position leads to a “spot payment,” which when summed up leads to ruin or survival. The
chance events associated with the roll of dice make the game stochastic (Shubik, 1982,
pp. 48–57).
Strategic form. If the focus of the analysis is on strategy and payoffs, representing a game
in strategic form may be more useful than the extensive form. A two-person game in strategic
form (also called the normal form) is represented as a two-dimensional matrix. Each player
represents a dimension, requiring games with three players to be drawn as cubes, and games
JDAL
5,2
118

--- Sayfa 6 ---
with more than three players being even more challenging to illustrate. Figure 2 illustrates the
same games as Figure 1, but in strategic form.
Going to the strategic from the extensive form loses many details of the move sequence
and information structure. However, the strategic form of these simple games shows the
importance of intelligence of the other players move. Blue has many more COAs available
when acting with knowledge of Red’s COA than without that knowledge. Here the strategies,
or COAs, available to Blue going from the simultaneous to the sequential game go from
selecting either COA 1 or 2 to selecting among eight along the lines of (1,1); (1,2); (1,3), which
means Blue selects 1 if Red selects 1; Blue selects 2 if Red selects 1; Blue selects 3 if Red selects
1, etc. In general, the number of Blue’s strategies is the number of its alternatives raised to the
power of number information sets at the point of choice. Transitioning from a multi-move
game in extensive form to one in strategic form requires careful book keeping. Accounting for
all of the combinations of possible COAs in games with many moves is daunting and
produces very large matrices.
Characteristic function. In considering cooperation among more than two players in his
original work on game theory in 1928, Von Neumann formulated the notion of a characteristic
function that assigns a value to every coalition that can be formed in a game [7]. Table 1
illustrates such a game with three players. V(i) indicates the value that player i could achieve
acting alone. V(ij) indicates the value that players i and j could achieve acting together in a
coalition. V(123) indicates the value that all three players could receive if they all participated
in a coalition. The characteristic function is a pre-solution, as matters of how the players
should share the gains from a coalition require further analysis. This form leaves behind all
V(1) 5 1
V(2) 5 1
V(3) 5 2
V(12) 5 4
V(13) 5 4
V(23) 5 7
V(123) 5 11
Figure 2.
Game in strategic, or
normal, form
Table 1.
Game in
characteristic form
Game theory
and artificial
intelligence
119

--- Sayfa 7 ---
questions of tactics, information and physical transactions to deal with essential features of n-
person problems. This form must be modified or abandoned when addressing strategic with
coalitional questions (Shubik, 1982, p. 129).
Solution concepts. In introducing their theory of games and economic behavior, von
Neumann and Morgenstern devoted careful attention to their meaning of a solution concept
(von Neumann and Morgenstern, 2004, pp. 31–45). Game theoretic solution concepts involve
mathematically complete principles of “rational behavior” for the participants in a social
economy to derive general characteristics of that behavior. To allow mathematical treatment,
“rational behavior” involves maximizing individual “utility,” as formulated for the theory.
The definition of a solution:
must be precise and exhaustive in order to make a mathematical treatment possible. The construct
must not be unduly complicated, so that the mathematical treatment can be brought beyond the mere
formalism to the point where it yields complete numerical results. Similarity to reality is needed to
make the operation significant. And this similarity must usually be restricted to a few traits deemed
“essential” pro tempore – since otherwise the above requirements would conflict with each other.
Recognizing the difficulty of finding principles valid in all situations, they sought to find
solutions for some special cases.
The concept of a solution “is plausibly a set of rules for each participant which tell him how
to behave in every situation that may conceivably arise.” These rules account for the
irrational conduct on the part of others in the sense that irrational conduct produces less
utility for that participant than rational behavior would have. Using utility, the solution
summarizes how much the participant under consideration could get by behaving
“rationally,” recognizing that more could be obtained if other participants behaved
irrationally.
Ideally, the game would lead to a solution that had just one set of payoffs [8]. In his 1928
paper von Neumann proved that two-person, zero-sum games have a saddle-point where the
minimizing the maximum (the minimax) that one player receives equals maximizing the
minimum (the max-min) that the other player receives. Realizing this point may require
randomizing between two strategies rather than adopting a single strategy. But this solution
only occurs in two-person zero-sum games.
Moving on to two-person variable sum, then to more than two people (which allows
cooperation against the third party – leads to multiple sets, and sets of sets, of feasible payoffs
for each player) [9]. A dominant strategy is where one player can achieve their goals no matter
what other players do presents an obvious choice. However, that rarely occurs. Nash
equilibria, named after John Nash, where no player can improve their position given the other
players’ choices is another common aspect of a solution, but multiple equilibria in a game is
not uncommon [10]. In general, though concepts for solutions to all types of games exist, as
one moves from two-person, zero-sum games the possible solutions are not unique and
additional rules for what constitutes a solution must be added, which limits the solution to
cases where that set of rules applies [11].
To summarize, game theory solutions are mathematical constructs. Game theoretic
solutions deduce the set of outcomes that are consistent with the embedded assumptions
about individual and group behavior (Shubik, 1975, p. 91). “As long as the logic is sound, a
solution cannot be wrong per se. However, a solution can be irrelevant in the sense that it fails
to provide reasonable normative advice and is of little use in predicting behavior (Shubik,
1975, p. 276).” Game theorists understand that “multi-person games cannot be properly
analyzed or solved until adequate information is provided about the social climate – in
particular, about the possibilities for communication, compensation, commitment, and trust.
Given this sociological information, one can proceed to the selection of a suitable solution
concept (Shubik, 1982, p. 24).” An accurate criticism of game-theoretic solutions, as with other
JDAL
5,2
120

--- Sayfa 8 ---
mathematical models, is that this may not be possible without far more detailed knowledge
than is usually available, and then the solution applies only to the narrow set of conditions
modeled.
Experimentation provides some insight into the relevance of various solution concepts.
Game theory provides a theoretical framework for extending experimental psychology to
interpersonal and social relations. The theory provides constructs that sharpen concepts of
“conflict and co-operation, trust and suspicion, power of bargaining, balance of bargaining
advantage, and equity . . . (Rapoport, 1960, p. 214)” Experiments identify actual norms of
behavior. “The game theory is extremely useful in setting up the game, but the running of the
game is our means to explore behavior (Shubik, 1975, p. 92).”
Experimenting with games and results
Designing and using games in the study of game theory and social behavior dates from the
early 1950s. At Princeton graduate students including John Nash, Lloyd Shapley and Martin
Shubik informally discussed the use of games in the study of game theory and devised “so
long sucker” to illustrate the vital roles of coalition formation and double-crossing [12].
Shubik also created the “dollar auction” as a demonstration of escalation. In this game both
the winning bidder and the second highest bidder have to pay their bids for the dollar. The
game is a way for instructors to make some money on the side while teaching game theory.
The scope of experimentation includes attempts to directly verify the worth of various
game-theoretic solution concepts for relatively abstract games; social psychological
experimentation; the study of behavioral characteristics of individuals in loosely structure
games; the analysis of human factors; logistics and military research for large operational
games, and the investigation of social factors and basic learning procedures in the study of
the effectiveness of gaming for teaching (Shubik, 1975, pp. 209–210). Experimental gaming
has been used with success in psychology and economics, and to a lesser extent in
organizational theory and political science (Shubik, 1975, p. 10).
Classic 2 3 2 non-constant-sum games. Because 2 3 2 games are relatively few in number
and can be used to illustrate several of the paradoxes involving the relationship between
individual isolated and interactive behavior, they are frequently used in experimentation [13].
Some of the 2 3 2 games have been given names. Classic among these games are the
Prisoners’ Dilemma, the Battle of the Sexes and the game of Chicken.
Prisoner’s Dilemma is a game where two completely rational individuals might not
cooperate, even though cooperation would produce a better outcome. The story that goes
with the game is that two members of a criminal gang are arrested and imprisoned. The
prisoners are separated with no means of communicating with the other. The prosecutors
lack sufficient evidence to convict the pair on the principal charge, but they have enough to
convict both on a lesser charge. Simultaneously the prosecutors offer each prisoner a bargain.
Each prisoner is given the opportunity to either betray the other by testifying that the other
committed the crime, or to cooperate with the other by remaining silent. The possible
outcomes are:
(1)
If R and B each betray the other, each of them serves two years in prison
(2)
If R betrays B but B remains silent, R will be set free and B will serve three years in
prison (and vice versa)
(3)
If A and B both remain silent, both of them will serve only one year in prison (on the
lesser charge)
In strategic form the matrix is as shown in Table 2 with representative payoffs.
Game theory
and artificial
intelligence
121

--- Sayfa 9 ---
The game demonstrates where choosing what is individually rational provides other than
what may be considered a socially rational outcome. The only non-cooperative equilibrium
for the Prisoner’s Dilemma is for both to betray each other, since that is the least bad outcome
given that neither knows what the other will do. The prisoners would be better off with
cooperation.
In the Battle of the Sexes a man and a woman must agree on one of two possible activities
(such as which movie to see) where their preferences differ. If they do not agree, they do
neither activity, but are unhappy with each other. Table 3 shows a payoff matrix of the value
to them for going to her movie, his movie or disagreeing and not going out.
In the Game of Chicken two hot-rodders drive towards each other on a collision course. If
they stay on course, they both crash. If one veers and the other stays on course the later
“wins” and the former is chicken. If both veer their mutual shame cancels out. Table 4 shows
representative payoffs.
Control and context. The participants in the experiments are individuals, often students,
“who come equipped with social conditioning, language and memory of individual
experience. When they come to an experiment their memories and conditioning cannot be
wiped out.” In their work on game theory Shapley and Shubik suggested that the condition of
“external symmetry” be made explicit in game models (Shubik, 1982, p. 16). This condition
indicates that unless explicitly modeled otherwise, all aspects of the players are assumed to be
the same. In fact, they never are. At best the experimenter can suggest that as a first order
approximation the individuals are sufficiently similar. When little in the way of context is
provided, the influence of differences in wording instructions is magnified.
Von Neumann began his explorations into game theory by illustrating a completely
rational solution to a zero-sum game. Thus, from experimental data on zero-sum games one
can draw conclusions about how the actual behavior of people departs from rationality in a
completely competitive situation. However, “Even at the level of two-person zero-sum games
context and professional training appear to be relevant. An early PhD thesis of Simon (1967)
utilized business school and military science majors playing a two-person, zero-sum game
with three scenarios for the quantitatively same game. One scenario was based on business,
one was military and one was abstract. Different results were obtained in all instances.” That
B Remains silent
B betrays R
R remains silent
1, 1
3, 0
R betrays B
0, 3
2, 2
Choose her movie
Choose his movie
Choose her movie
2, 1
1, 1
Choose his movie
1, 1
1, 2
Stay on course
Veer
Stay on course
10, 10
5, 5
Veer
5, 5
0, 0
Table 2.
Prisoner’s Dilemma
payoff matrix
Table 3.
Battle of the Sexes
payoff matrix
Table 4.
Game of Chicken
payoff matrix
JDAL
5,2
122

--- Sayfa 10 ---
said, “The pure strategy saddle point when it exists provides a reasonably good prediction of
how people behave (Shubik, 1975, p. 245)”
An extensive literature exists on cooperation in repeated plays of the Prisoner’s Dilemma.
Other experiments used different communication conditions (no communication,
communication, reversible decision and non-simultaneous decisions) and three orientations
(cooperative emphasizing joint maximization, individualistic where each player was told to
look out for himself, competitive where each player was made to feel that he played against
the other). Results of the experimentation demonstrated the value of communication and
performing a trusting act in achieving cooperation, though betrayal continued to occur in all
communication conditions. Players’ orientations also significantly affected their choices, as
did the presence of an “obnoxious” person present as an observer (Rappaport, pp. 218–222).
One set of experiments involved showing students the payoff matrices of the three
classical games without descriptions of the choices and having them assign the three names
to the matrices. There appears to be some support that “numbers tell a story” for the Battle of
the Sexes but little for the Prisoner’s Dilemma or the Game of Chicken. After the students
were told of the names of the games, they for the most part agreed that the names were
“reasonable.” But the percentage of correct guesses indicated at best a fairly weak association
(Shubik, 2001b, p. 10). Experiments changing the name of the Prisoner’s Dilemma have
produced different levels of cooperation and betrayal.
Interpersonal comparison. The three games above have symmetric payoffs for the players.
Experiments routinely demonstrate that payoffs that are not symmetric, though strategically
equivalent in having the same equilibrium point (such as multiplying one player’s payoffs by
100), affects choice as players compare their payoffs to others rather than choosing what
strategy guarantees their best outcome (Shubik, 2001b, p. 11). Choosing based upon the
difference in payoffs changes a two-person, non-zero-sum game into zero-sum.
Tacit communications. Recognizing the limitations of the assumptions of game theory and
focused on situations involving mixed motivations for competition and cooperation, Thomas
Schelling sought to extend game theory into a theory of interdependent decision. He
experimented with situations where the players had common or differing interests, and where
they could not communicate or could explicitly bargain. He found that even without
communication people could “often concert their intentions or expectations with others if
each knew the other was trying to do the same (Schelling, 1960, p. 57).” Schelling concluded
that in situations where collaboration is advantageous, even where conflict of interest is also
present but where direct bargaining is impossible, tacit agreements will take place, provided
the two parties can seize on some prominent, preferably unique feature of the situation, which
one has reason to believe the other will also seize upon. Also, significantly, the impossibility of
explicit bargaining precludes quantitative compromises, typical of the results of haggling.
Even with explicit bargaining, the “solutions” that people arrive at involve some special
feature of the situation, such as status quo ante. Rather than a continuous range of
possibilities from most to least advantageous for either side, people are better able to
recognize qualitative rather than quantitative differences that are lumpy and discrete.
Using game theory, repeating a 2 3 2 game once produces an 8 3 8 matrix of strategies.
The size of the matrix grows dramatically with each repetition of play. Providing the players
with a large matrix of strategies to decide on their course of action is not the same as having
them repeatedly play the game, where their play provides a form of tacit communication [14].
Recent research shows that human’s ability to detect patterns stems in part from the
brain’s goal to represent things in the simplest way possible, balancing accuracy with
simplicity when making decisions. Errors in making sense of patterns are essential to getting
a glimpse of the bigger picture, as when looking closely at a pointillist painting, and then
stepping back to get a sense of the overall structure (Lynn et al., 2020). This theme of
balancing the level of detail to arrive at an appropriate scale for identifying patterns is a
Game theory
and artificial
intelligence
123

--- Sayfa 11 ---
common theme in language, play, gaming, mathematics and studying emergence in complex
adaptive systems.
Cooperative games and coalitions. Three-person nonconstant-sum games provide many
ways to form coalitions and divide the proceeds of coalitions that are formed. The
characteristic function describes the value of each possible coalition and feasible divisions of
the proceeds. Game theory provides many possible solutions for dividing the proceeds,
making these games a rich source for experimenting with the merit of the various solutions. In
general, when the set of feasible divisions is large, players select a feasible solution. The
smaller this set, the less often players select a feasible solution (Shubik, 1975, pp. 262–
269, 2001b).
Some implications for game design, observation and analysis
Game theory can be employed at high-church, low-church and folk levels [15]. High-church
game theory is found in publications such as Mathematics of Operations Research. Low-
church game theory employs simplified features of game theory to explore the logic of
particular contingencies. Folk-level game theory is at the level of the narratives that go with
these classic 2 3 2 non-constant-sum games that allow win-win and lose-lose solutions.
All three have had impact. But it is the third which has caught the imagination of the
public. These classical games suggest that game designers, controllers and analysts should
employ folk-level game theory to address fundamental features of narrative used in the
scenario framing the contingency under study. Is it a situation where trust is required to
accomplish the best outcomes for the players? Is it a case where cooperation is required,
recognizing that one party will accept the other obtaining a greater gain, or both will lose
possible gains? Is it a situation where not losing means dying? One test of rational play is
whether the players choose to accept worse outcomes rather than make the required
compromises.
Of course, one must have the information to understand what the player considers a worse
outcome. Many examples of individuals selecting other than “objectively” rational behavior
exist. One recent example is young Koreans choosing shibal biyong “fuck-it expense” as a
means to vent their frustration with their future prospects, a trend that applies to other
nation’s millennials (Kim, 2019).
Artificial intelligence and games
Continuing his work in set theory, von Neumann’s development of game theory followed
Ernest Zermelo, Emile Borel and others’ efforts seeking mathematical approaches for
determining a method of play better than all others in chess and other games without any
reference to psychology (Leonard, 2010). As the speed of computations has increased,
computers have been used to experiment on better ways of playing games. One prominent
view defines artificial intelligence as “the study and construction of rational agents,” thus
establishing the connection to game theory when multiple agents are involved (Norvig and
Russell, 2003).
Working on the Defense Calculator in 1952, John Holland and his colleague Arthur Samuel
found that the computer opened possibilities for exploring models far beyond what could be
done with pencil, paper and an adding machine (Holland, 1998). They aimed to write
programs that could learn as their calculations explored alternatives, that would allow them
to tell the computer what to do without telling it how to do it. Holland attacked the problem
through the metaphor of neural nets while Samuel developed a technique he named Machine
Learning. Following the work of von Neuman and others on chess, they chose to look at board
games; in this case Checkers.
JDAL
5,2
124

--- Sayfa 12 ---
Rather than following the neural net approach of trying to understand how humans make
decisions, Samuel chose to focus on winning strategies. The novelty of his approach was in
identifying and assigning weights to features of the game (e.g. pieces ahead, kings,
penetration), anticipating the opponent’s moves, looking ahead several moves to adjust the
weights assigned to match a future state of the game and work towards a minimax outcome,
minimizing the maximum damage that the opponent can inflict. Bootstrapping by having the
checkersplayer play against itself was an additional technique. By 1959 he had produced a
program that could beat him at checkers. Though computational capacities and speeds have
increased geometrically consistent with Moore’s Law, Samuels technique provides the
foundations for current Machine Learning.
Computer competitions have determined better schemes for playing an iterated Prisoner’s
Dilemma and test ideas for teamwork in general agent systems (Anon, 2004). Building on the
success of IBM’s Deep Blue, programs on commercial software now can defeat even the most
talented human chess players. Recently, Google’s AlphaZero has outperformed both humans
and other programs in playing the games of Go, Chess and Shogi (a Japanese form of chess) as
efforts to apply machine learning to a broader range of subjects have accelerated. Unlike
previous prototypes like AlphaGo, the program iterates using the rules of the game rather
than attempting to mimic natural, human game play. However, changing the rules mid-game
flummoxes the program (Wu, 2018).
To address games where no best strategy exists, such as rock-paper-scissors, imperfect
information, actions that pay off only after many moves, continuous play rather than
alternate turns and a large action space, AlphaStar took on the challenge of playing StarCraft
II. Beginning with strategies derived from human play and using a set of reinforcement
learning techniques, Long-Short Term Memory and other techniques, AlphaStar was able to
defeat top human players. Like Samuel’s checkersplayer, AlphaStar discards risky strategies
to find approaches that are least likely to go wrong, thus improving the safety and robustness
of the AI. The final AlphaStar agent employs a Nash distribution of the most effective
mixture of strategies discovered. The intent is to apply these techniques to the “fundamental
problem of making complex predictions over very long sequences of data appears in many
real world challenges, such as weather prediction, climate modelling, language
understanding and more (The AlphaStar Team, 2019).”
Multi-agent artificial intelligence (AI) systems, imitation and reinforcement learning and
adversary training in Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) compute minimax solutions
for zero-sum games and Nash equilibria for non-zero-sum games (Ippolito, 2019). Such
developments have led to a growing literature in “algorithmic game theory” addressing
topics such as game playing, social choice, and mechanism design. Recent directions in
mechanism design address resistance to manipulations enabled by anonymous Internet
connection (Elkind and Leyton-Brown, 2010). Designing auctions employs inverse game
theory where the game is designed around the behavior of rational participants.
Artificial intelligence is an essential aspect of commercial video games. Rather than
attempting to beat the human player, the objective for this AI is to provide virtual competition
in a way that enhances a player’s experience. To do this in a way that players do not notice,
the AI must provide proper reactions to specific stimuli. One of the most widely used
techniques is call the Finite State Machine (FSM) algorithm. The game designer anticipates all
the possible situations that an AI could encounter, and then specifies a future state as a
reaction to each situation. Thus, the AI reacts to the human with pre-programmed behavior.
Many successful games such as Battle Field, Call of Duty, Tomb Raider and Super Mario use
FSM AI. In using this technique, the game designer is essentially using the game-theoretic
extensive form to program the game. This technique provides predictability.
Other games, such as Civilization where players compete to develop a city in competition
with an AI doing the same thing, uses a Monte Carlo Search Tree (MCST) algorithm that
Game theory
and artificial
intelligence
125

--- Sayfa 13 ---
randomizes among possible responses to overcome the repeatability aspect of FSM and make
the game more enjoyable. Deep Blue used MCST to consider possible moves and the
opponent’s responses through several iterations, select the most promising and then repeat
the process following the opponent’s move. Essentially, this approach randomizes among
possible responses when the set becomes too large to anticipate. Video game developers are
cautious when randomizing as the play of the game to avoid unexpected AI behaviors that
could impair the experience of a human player (Lou, 2017). A technique used in Alien:
Isolation adds another level of a Director AI whose job is to keep the game enjoyable, and an
Alien AI as the virtual opponent. The Director controls the information that the Alien has
about the human player to affect the Alien’s behavior. Some games are incorporating neural
nets, GANs and other techniques to allow the AI and the player to learn through
iterative play.
This work transfers to the real world as games like Grand Theft Auto have been used for
instrumental purposes to provide a safe and realistic environment for testing self-driving car
algorithms (Shummon Maass, 2019). Also, Assassin’s Creed has been used to develop scenes
to help train AI algorithms, and Minecraft has been used to conduct research into machine
learning. As massive-multiplayer online role-playing video games become a prolific source
for “big data,” both video gaming and AI development will contribute to each other
(Rue, 2019).
Summary of experimental results
Game theory provided structure for behavioral scientists to frame questions and experiments
related to the underlying assumptions. Also, experimentation using games allowed game
theorists to understand better the relevance of solution concepts and factors to consider in
improving them, leading to better applications of game theory.
“The success of game theory in supplying the language for the study of information and
providing the basic concept of strategy has led to our understanding the limitations implicit
in the model of the fully informed rational individual decision-maker. The vistas opened up
by the formalization of the concepts of player, information set, strategy space, and extensive
form led us into experimental and operational gaming, simulation and artificial intelligence
(Shubik, 2001a).” Experimentation demonstrated the need to account for individuals with
limited capacity, optimizing locally in many special contexts where expertise and
learning count.
Game theory has been useful in AI to identify what decisions are “rational.” Players in
experimental games tend to use the saddle point in two-person zero-sum games where it
occurs in pure strategies, and to select a feasible distribution of proceeds in cooperative
games if the core of feasible solutions is large enough. However, game-theoretic solutions are
not a good predictor of human decisions in many two-person, non-constant-sum games
(Shubik, 1975, p. 169, 2000). The absence of reliable game theoretic solutions for rational
decision and rational action in mixed motive situations (e.g. minimizing collateral or
unintended damage while pursuing a military mission) should suggest cautions when using
AI in autonomous weapons.
Another approach is to introduce behavioral considerations explicitly. “In a given
population sample one can expect that some will resort to “tacit communication” when such is
called for; some will not. In a mixed motive game, some will behave cooperatively, some
competitively. In a coalition game, coalitions will form and will persist, winnings will be
divided in ascertainable ways, even though classical game theory has very little to say
specifically about such situations. Thus, we may expect to learn something about behavior
in situations of strategic conflict which is outside the scope of game theory in the present
state. Nevertheless, game theory is distinctly suggestive for interpreting and systematizing
JDAL
5,2
126

--- Sayfa 14 ---
the results (Rapoport, 1960, p. 214).” When the results of gaming experiments are not
adequate approximations of game theoretic solutions the first step is to go back to game
theory and extend the solution concept. Thus, experimentation has been used to validate
hypotheses, to generate new ones, to generate new theory, and for the employment and
enjoyment of academics. Challenges such as interpersonal comparison of utility and social
choice exposed by game theory also inform limitations of artificial intelligence.
In summary:
it is almost impossible to extend the normative theory of games, because the criteria of rationality
become confused by the clash between individual and group norms and because “equilibria” are
either nonexistent or not very relevant to the players. On the contrary, an empirical (descriptive)
approach to bargaining situations (including coalition formation) seems full of promise. . . . All these
questions related to theory construction based on experimental evidence. It cannot be emphasized
too strongly that classical game theory is not based on experimental evidence. It represents an
attempt to build a normative theory on a foundation of strategic logic. We have also seen how such a
foundation becomes difficult if not impossible to erect without invoking specific norms of behavior.
These norms are not logical but arbitrary and can be exceedingly varied. From this point on,
therefore, there can be no single game theory but only a great variety of such theories, each based on
different norms. Here the experimental scientist should naturally take over to explore the norms
actually operating in human affairs. (Rapoport, 1960, pp. 224–225)
AI seeks to provide rational decision and rational action. Though game theory is inadequate,
rational decision and rational action is in the eye of the beholder absent meeting the criteria
for game theoretic solutions. Though AI has been successful in inessential games, whether it
can extend to essential games is an open question.
SO, what to do?
Return to the origins of military science; a campaign of learning. Just as Scharnhorst
instituted rigorous study of quantitative and qualitative techniques, critical analysis of
military history augmented by intellectual exercises such as staff rides to project how forces
would be used in a particular terrain and circumstance; followed by gaming to explore
concepts against active opponents on a map, followed by field exercises to experiment and
evaluate the concepts in situations using actual forces in a campaign of learning, the
Department of Defense should employ a campaign of learning in developing and deploying
AI-enabled systems. Getting prototypes from the laboratory, into operational contexts and
games employing the AI algorithms, and then into exercises and operations in the context of
learning is a scheme for rapid concept and technology development while avoiding
unintended consequences.
More broadly, military gamers and gaming centers will need to become more proficient in
employing electronic games similar to commercial games. Much can be learned from manual
games. However, if the US military wants to lead, it will need to move beyond nineteenth
century techniques and incorporate twentieth century advances in computers and game,
chaos and complexity theories.
Recently, the Department of the Navy initiated an education for seapower initiative to
enhance the intellectual capability of the Navy and Marine Corps team, stating that it “will be
the primary military differentiator between our nation and its adversaries and the true
foundation of any credible deterrent to war (Secretary of the Navy, 2020).” It then cut budgets
for its educational institutions. Funding for artificial intelligence (AI) has increased. AI can
solve specific problems for which it has been trained. It can explore alternatives within the
rules encoded in its algorithms. However, it cannot imagine. It has no subconscious intuition.
It cannot conduct critical inquiry and encompass intangible aspects of a situation and
reframe an approach to wicked problem. In short, it has no coup d’œil, no real talent, no
genius. Investing in AI and machine learning at the expense of a campaign of learning that
Game theory
and artificial
intelligence
127

--- Sayfa 15 ---
provides individuals and organizations with the talent and adaptive capacity they need to
meet complex challenges and conceive of opportunities in those challenges is a dangerous
mistake.
Notes
1. Brian Arthur attributed this phrase to John Holland during a presentation to the International
Conference on Complex Systems, 29 July 2020.
2. Also see Sayre (1910). Map Maneuvers and Tactical Rides. Third edition. Ft. Leavenworth: The
Army Service Schools Press, p. 6.
3. Individual decision making where risk is present where the probability distributions for alternative
outcomes are known, or uncertainty where the probability distributions are unknown require
extensions to von Neumann’s and Morgenstern’s utility theory; Luce and Raiffa, p. 13.
4. Luce and Raiffa devotes a chapter to each of these topics, along with critiques.
5. Game theory generally assumes that each player knows the other the other players’ possible courses
of action and evaluation of outcomes, which rarely occurs in actual circumstances. Some work has
been done on evaluating games with misperceptions. The analysis is challenging enough, and may
be sufficient for the purposes of the model without going to this level. The purpose of the analysis
determines the level of complexity required (Shubik, 1982, Chapter 1).
6. von Neumann and Morgenstern include a method for expressing the utility of an outcome to an
individual player as a specific quantity. However, this method is difficult to employ, and is made
conceptually and practically much more difficult when attempting to quantify a single utility for
multiple players representing different organizations or groups of individuals (Shubik, 1982,
Chapter 5).
7. von Neumann (1928). “Zur theorie der Gesellschaftespiele.” Mathematische Annalen 100: pp. 295–
320; Luce and Raiffa; (Shubik, 1975). Games for Society, Business and War: Towards a Theory of
Gaming. New York: Elsevier; (Shubik, 1982); and von Neumann and Morgenstern are all excellent
sources for discussion of the characteristic function and critiques of its use.
8. Economics calls the set of payoffs an imputation (Shubik, 1982, p. 111).
9. The mathematics of game theory involves set theory more than other forms of mathematics (von
Neumann and Morgenstern, 2004, pp. 60–73).
10. Formally, an equilibrium point is “a vector of strategies such that no one player, regarding the
others as committed to their choices, can improve his lot.” John Nash formulated this solution
concept in his doctoral dissertation, so it is commonly called the Nash equilibrium (Shubik, 1982,
p. 240).
11. Shubik (1982, pp. 365–366) provides useful table summarizing solutions and their characteristics.
12. Nash and Shapley received Nobel prizes in economics for their uses of game theory.
13. There are 78 strategically different 2 3 2 games with no ties in individual preferences (Shubik, 1975,
Chapter 11).
14. The repeated Prisoner’s Dilemma has multiple equilibrium points, all of which are rational solutions
(Shubik, 1982, p. 259).
15. Martin Shubik refined these terms to high-church, low-church, and conversational game theory in
Shubik (2002). “Game Theory and Operations Research.” Research Gate. January. Accessed May 18,
2021. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/242932751_Game_Theory_And_Operations_
Research_Research
References
Anon (2004), “New tack wins Prisoner’s dilemma”, [Online], available at: https://www.wired.com/2004/
10/new-tack-wins-prisoners-dilemma/ (accessed 26 February 2020).
JDAL
5,2
128

--- Sayfa 16 ---
David, F.N. (1998), Games, Gods and Gambling, Dover Pubilcations, Mineola, NY.
Duke, R.D. and Geurts, J.L. (2004), Policy Games for Strategic Management: Pathways into the
Unknown, Dutch University Press, Amsterdam.
Elkind, E. and Leyton-Brown, K. (2010), “Algorithmic game theory”, [Online], available at: www.aaai.
org/ojs/index.php/aimagazine/article/download/2310/2176 (accessed 27 February 2020).
Hanley, J.T.J. (1992), On Wargaming: A Critique of Strategic Operational Gaming, UMI, Ann
Arbor, MI.
Hanley, J.T.J. (2014), “Creating the 1980s Maritime strategy and implications for today”, Naval War
College Review, Vol. 67 No. 2, pp. 11-29.
Holland, J.H. (1998), Emergence, Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Reading, MA.
Ippolito, P.P. (2019), “Game theory in artificial intelligence”, [Online], available at: https://
towardsdatascience.com/game-theory-in-artificial-intelligence-57a7937e1b88 (accessed 27
February 2020).
Kim, J. (2019), “Why Young Koreans Love to Splurge: sometimes blowing your paycheck can be a
rational choice”, [Online], available at: https://foreignpolicy.com/2019/07/04/why-young-
koreans-love-to-splurge-shibal-biyong-millennial-fuck-it-expense/ (accessed 4 June 2021).
Leonard, R. (2010), Von Neumann, Morgenstern, and the Creation of Game Theory: from Chess to
Social Science, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1900-1960.
Lou, H. (2017), “AI in video games: toward a more intelligent game”, [Online], available at: http://sitn.
hms.harvard.edu/flash/2017/ai-video-games-toward-intelligent-game (accessed 28
February 2020).
Luce, R.D. and Raiffa, H. (1957), Games and Decisions, John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Lynn, C.W., Kahn, A.E., Nyema, N. and Bassett, D.S. (2020), “Abstract representations of events arise
from mental errors in learning and memory”, Nature Communications, Vol. 11 No. 1, p. 2313.
Norvig, P. and Russell, S.J. (2003), Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, ed, Prentice Hall,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Rapoport, A. (1960), Fights, Games, and Debates, The University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor.
Richbourg, R.F. (2018), Deep Learning: Measure Twice, Cut once, Institute for Defense Analyses,
Alexandria.
Rue, N. (2019), “Artificial intelligence & game development: recent trends”, [Online], available at:
https://becominghuman.ai/artificial-intelligence-game-development-recent-trends-
a08a67769a63?gi56e3dfe8de1c7 (accessed 28 February 2020).
Sayre, F. (1910), Map Maneuvers and Tactical Rides, ed, The Army Service Schoos Press,
FtLeavenworth.
Schelling, Thomas C. (1960), The Strategy of Conflict, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Secretary of the Navy (2020), Education for Seapower Strategy 2020, Department of the Navy,
Washington DC.
Shubik, M. (1975), Games for Society, Business and War: towards a Theory of Gaming, Elsevier,
New York.
Shubik, M. (1982), Game Theory in the Social Sciences: Concepts and Solutions, The MIT Press,
Cambridge(MA).
Shubik, M. (2000), Game Theory: Some Observations, Yale School of Management, New
Haven, CT.
Shubik, M. (2001a), Game Theory and Operations Research: Some Musings 50 Years Later, Yale
School of Management, New Haven, CT.
Shubik, M. (2001b), The Uses of Teaching Games in Game Theory Classes and Some Experimental
Games, Yale University, New Haven.
Game theory
and artificial
intelligence
129

--- Sayfa 17 ---
Shubik, M. (2002), Game Theory and Operations Research, [Online], Yale School of Organization and
Management, New Haven, CT, available at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/
242932751_Game_Theory_And_Operations_Research_Research (accessed 18 May 2021).
Shummon Maass, L.E. (2019), Artificial Intelligence in Video Games: an Overview fo How Video Game
A.I. Has Developed over Time and Current Uses in Games Today, [Online], Towards Data
Science, available at: https://towardsdatascience.com/artificial-intelligence-in-video-games-
3e2566d59c22 (accessed 28 February 2020).
Simon, R.I. (1967), “The effects of different encodings on complex problem solving”, Ph.D. dissertation,
Yale University.
The AlphaStar Team (2019), “AlphaStar: mastering the real-time strategy game StarCraft II”, [Online],
available at: https://deepmind.com/blog/article/alphastar-mastering-real-time-strategy-game-
starcraft-ii (accessed 25 August 2020).
von Hilgers, P. (2012), War Games: A History of War on Paper, MIT University Press,
Cambridge, MA.
von Neumann, J. (1928), “Zur theorie der Gesellschaftespiele”, Mathematische Annalen, Vol. 100,
pp. 295-320.
von Neumann, J. and Morgenstern, O. (2004), Theory of Games and Economic Behavior: Sixtieth
Anniversary, Edition, Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Wu, K.J. (2018), “Google’s new AI is a master of games, but how does it compare to the human Mind?”,
[Online], available at: https://www.smithsonianmag.com/innovation/google-ai-deepminds-
alphazero-games-chess-and-go180970981/ (accessed 26 February 2020).
Further reading
Statt, N. (2019), “How artificial intelligence will revolutionize the way video games are developed and
played”, [Online], available at: https://www.theverge.com/2019/3/6/18222203/video-game-ai-
future-procedural-generation-deep-learning (accessed 28 February 2020).
Corresponding author
John T. Hanley can be contacted at: jhanleyd71@aol.com
For instructions on how to order reprints of this article, please visit our website:
www.emeraldgrouppublishing.com/licensing/reprints.htm
Or contact us for further details: permissions@emeraldinsight.com
JDAL
5,2
130