--- Sayfa 1 ---
A Course in Game Theory
Electronic version of “A Course in Game Theory” by
Martin J. Osborne and Ariel Rubinstein (ISBN 0-262-65040-1)
Copyright c⃝1994 Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any
form by any electronic or mechanical means (including photocopying,
recording, or information storage and retrieval) without permission in
writing from the publisher.
This ﬁle is made freely available with permission of MIT Press. It is
for your personal use only. You are not permitted to transfer it to
anyone else, to copy it, to include any part of it in any other ﬁle, or to
make it available on any website (whether or not password-protected).
Version: 2012-9-24.

--- Sayfa 3 ---
A Course in Game Theory
Martin J. Osborne
Ariel Rubinstein
The MIT Press
Cambridge, Massachusetts
London, England

--- Sayfa 4 ---
Copyright c⃝1994 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form by any
electronic or mechanical means (including photocopying, recording, or information
storage and retrieval) without permission in writing from the publisher.
This book was typeset by the authors, who are greatly indebted to Donald Knuth
(the creator of TEX), Leslie Lamport (the creator of LATEX), and Eberhard Mattes
(the creator of emTEX) for generously putting superlative software in the public
domain. Camera-ready copy was produced by Type 2000, Mill Valley, California,
and the book was printed and bound by The Maple-Vail Book Manufacturing
Group, Binghamton, New York.
Osborne, Martin J.
A course in game theory/Martin J. Osborne, Ariel Rubinstein.
p.
cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-262-15041-7.—ISBN 0-262-65040-1 (pbk.)
1. Game Theory.
I. Rubinstein, Ariel.
II. Title.
HB144.O733 1994
658.4’0353–dc20
94-8308
CIP

--- Sayfa 5 ---
Contents
Preface
xi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Game Theory
1
1.2
Games and Solutions
2
1.3
Game Theory and the Theory of Competitive Equilibrium
3
1.4
Rational Behavior
4
1.5
The Steady State and Deductive Interpretations
5
1.6
Bounded Rationality
6
1.7
Terminology and Notation
6
Notes
8
I
Strategic Games
9
2
Nash Equilibrium
11
2.1
Strategic Games
11
2.2
Nash Equilibrium
14
2.3
Examples
15
2.4
Existence of a Nash Equilibrium
19
2.5
Strictly Competitive Games
21
2.6
Bayesian Games: Strategic Games with Imperfect
Information
24
Notes
29

--- Sayfa 6 ---
vi
Contents
3
Mixed, Correlated, and Evolutionary Equilibrium
31
3.1
Mixed Strategy Nash Equilibrium
31
3.2
Interpretations of Mixed Strategy Nash Equilibrium
37
3.3
Correlated Equilibrium
44
3.4
Evolutionary Equilibrium
48
Notes
51
4
Rationalizability and Iterated Elimination of Dominated
Actions
53
4.1
Rationalizability
53
4.2
Iterated Elimination of Strictly Dominated Actions
58
4.3
Iterated Elimination of Weakly Dominated Actions
62
Notes
64
5
Knowledge and Equilibrium
67
5.1
A Model of Knowledge
67
5.2
Common Knowledge
73
5.3
Can People Agree to Disagree?
75
5.4
Knowledge and Solution Concepts
76
5.5
The Electronic Mail Game
81
Notes
84
II
Extensive Games with Perfect Information
87
6
Extensive Games with Perfect Information
89
6.1
Extensive Games with Perfect Information
89
6.2
Subgame Perfect Equilibrium
97
6.3
Two Extensions of the Deﬁnition of a Game
101
6.4
The Interpretation of a Strategy
103
6.5
Two Notable Finite Horizon Games
105
6.6
Iterated Elimination of Weakly Dominated Strategies
108
Notes
114
7
Bargaining Games
117
7.1
Bargaining and Game Theory
117
7.2
A Bargaining Game of Alternating Oﬀers
118
7.3
Subgame Perfect Equilibrium
121
7.4
Variations and Extensions
127
Notes
131

--- Sayfa 7 ---
Contents
vii
8
Repeated Games
133
8.1
The Basic Idea
133
8.2
Inﬁnitely Repeated Games vs. Finitely Repeated Games
134
8.3
Inﬁnitely Repeated Games: Deﬁnitions
136
8.4
Strategies as Machines
140
8.5
Trigger Strategies: Nash Folk Theorems
143
8.6
Punishing for a Limited Length of Time: A Perfect Folk
Theorem for the Limit of Means Criterion
146
8.7
Punishing the Punisher: A Perfect Folk Theorem for the
Overtaking Criterion
149
8.8
Rewarding Players Who Punish: A Perfect Folk Theorem for
the Discounting Criterion
150
8.9
The Structure of Subgame Perfect Equilibria Under the
Discounting Criterion
153
8.10 Finitely Repeated Games
155
Notes
160
9
Complexity Considerations in Repeated Games
163
9.1
Introduction
163
9.2
Complexity and the Machine Game
164
9.3
The Structure of the Equilibria of a Machine Game
168
9.4
The Case of Lexicographic Preferences
172
Notes
175
10
Implementation Theory
177
10.1 Introduction
177
10.2 The Implementation Problem
178
10.3 Implementation in Dominant Strategies
180
10.4 Nash Implementation
185
10.5 Subgame Perfect Equilibrium Implementation
191
Notes
195

--- Sayfa 8 ---
viii
Contents
III
Extensive Games with Imperfect
Information
197
11
Extensive Games with Imperfect Information
199
11.1 Extensive Games with Imperfect Information
199
11.2 Principles for the Equivalence of Extensive Games
204
11.3 Framing Eﬀects and the Equivalence of Extensive
Games
209
11.4 Mixed and Behavioral Strategies
212
11.5 Nash Equilibrium
216
Notes
217
12
Sequential Equilibrium
219
12.1 Strategies and Beliefs
219
12.2 Sequential Equilibrium
222
12.3 Games with Observable Actions: Perfect Bayesian
Equilibrium
231
12.4 Reﬁnements of Sequential Equilibrium
243
12.5 Trembling Hand Perfect Equilibrium
246
Notes
254
IV
Coalitional Games
255
13
The Core
257
13.1 Coalitional Games with Transferable Payoﬀ
257
13.2 The Core
258
13.3 Nonemptiness of the Core
262
13.4 Markets with Transferable Payoﬀ
263
13.5 Coalitional Games without Transferable Payoﬀ
268
13.6 Exchange Economies
269
Notes
274
14
Stable Sets, the Bargaining Set, and the Shapley
Value
277
14.1 Two Approaches
277
14.2 The Stable Sets of von Neumann and Morgenstern
278
14.3 The Bargaining Set, Kernel, and Nucleolus
281
14.4 The Shapley Value
289
Notes
297

--- Sayfa 9 ---
Contents
ix
15
The Nash Solution
299
15.1 Bargaining Problems
299
15.2 The Nash Solution: Deﬁnition and Characterization
301
15.3 An Axiomatic Deﬁnition
305
15.4 The Nash Solution and the Bargaining Game of Alternating
Oﬀers
310
15.5 An Exact Implementation of the Nash Solution
311
Notes
312
List of Results
313
References
321
Index
341

--- Sayfa 11 ---
Preface
This book presents some of the main ideas of game theory. It is designed
to serve as a textbook for a one-semester graduate course consisting of
about 28 meetings each of 90 minutes.
The topics that we cover are those that we personally would include
in such a one-semester course. We do not pretend to provide a complete
reference book on game theory and do not necessarily regard the topics
that we exclude as unimportant. Our selection inevitably reﬂects our
own preferences and interests. (Were we to start writing the book now
we would probably add two chapters, one on experimental game theory
and one on learning and evolution.)
We emphasize the foundations of the theory and the interpretation of
the main concepts. Our style is to give precise deﬁnitions and full proofs
of results, sacriﬁcing generality and limiting the scope of the material
when necessary to most easily achieve these goals.
We have made a serious eﬀort to give credit for all the concepts,
results, examples, and exercises (see the “Notes” at the end of each
chapter). We regret any errors and encourage you to draw our attention
to them.
Structure of the Book
The book consists of four parts; in each part we study a group of related
models. The chart on the next page summarizes the interactions among
the chapters.
A basic course could consist of Chapters 2, 3, 6, 11, 12,
and 13.

--- Sayfa 12 ---
xii
Preface
2: Nash equilibrium
3: Mixed equilibrium
4: Rationalizability
5: Knowledge
6: Extensive, perfect info.
7: Bargaining
8: Repeated games
9: Complexity
10: Implementation
11: Extensive, imperfect info.
12: Sequential equilibrium
13: Core
14: Stable sets, barg. set
15: Nash barg. solution
Part I: Strategic games
Part II: Extensive games with perfect information
Part III: Extensive games with imperfect information
Part IV: Coalitional games
.............................?

*
.............-
...............j
?
..
?
..
?

>

:
..................~
?
..
-
..............:
The main interactions between the chapters. The areas of the boxes in which the
names of the chapters appear are proportional to the lengths of the chapters.
A
solid arrow connecting two boxes indicates that one chapter depends on the other; a
dotted arrow indicates that only the main ideas of one chapter are used in the other.
A basic course could consist of the six chapters in heavy boxes.

--- Sayfa 13 ---
Preface
xiii
Exercises
Many of the exercises are challenging; we often use exercises to state
subsidiary results. Instructors will probably want to assign additional
straightforward problems and adjust (by giving hints) the level of our ex-
ercises to make it appropriate for their students. Solutions are available
to instructors on the web site for the book (see page xv).
Disagreements Between the Authors
We see no reason why a jointly authored book should reﬂect a uniform
view. At several points, as in the following note, we brieﬂy discuss issues
about which we disagree.
A Note on Personal Pronouns
We disagree about how to handle English third-person singular pro-
nouns.
ar argues that we should use a “neutral” pronoun and agrees to the
use of “he”, with the understanding that this refers to both men and
women.
Continuous reminders of the he/she issue simply divert the
reader’s attention from the main issues. Language is extremely impor-
tant in shaping our thinking, but in academic material it is not useful
to wave it as a ﬂag, as is common in some circles.
mjo argues that no language is “neutral”. In particular, there is a
wealth of evidence, both from experiments and from analyses of lan-
guage use, that “he” is not generally perceived to encompass both fe-
males and males. To quote the American Heritage Dictionary (third
edition, page 831), “Thus he is not really a gender-neutral pronoun;
rather it refers to a male who is to be taken as the representative mem-
ber of the group referred to by its antecedent. The traditional usage,
then, is not simply a grammatical convention; it also suggests a par-
ticular pattern of thought.”
Further, the use of “he” to refer to an
individual of unspeciﬁed sex did not even arise naturally, but was im-
posed as a rule by (male) prescriptive grammarians in the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries who were upset by the widespread use of “they” as
a singular pronoun and decided that, since in their opinion men were
more important than women, “he” should be used. The use of “he” to
refer to a generic individual thus both has its origins in sexist attitudes
and promotes such attitudes. There is no neat solution to the problem,
especially in a book such as this in which there are so many references

--- Sayfa 14 ---
xiv
Preface
to generic individuals. “They” has many merits as a singular pronoun,
although its use can lead to ambiguities (and complaints from editors).
My preference is to use “she” for all individuals.
Obviously this us-
age is not gender-neutral, but its use for a few decades, after a couple
of centuries in which “he” has dominated, seems likely only to help to
eliminate sexist ways of thought. If such usage diverts some readers’
attentions from the subjects discussed in this book and leads them to
contemplate sexism in the use of language, which is surely an issue at
least as signiﬁcant as the minutiae of sequential equilibrium, then an
increase in social welfare will have been achieved. (Whether or not this
book qualiﬁes as “academic material”, I see no reason why its readers
should be treated diﬀerently from those of any other material.)
To conclude, we both feel strongly on this issue; we both regard the
compromise that we have reached as highly unsatisfactory. When re-
ferring to speciﬁc individuals, we sometimes use “he” and sometimes
“she”. For example, in two-player games we treat player 1 as female
and player 2 as male. We use “he” for generic individuals.
Acknowledgements
This book is an outgrowth of courses we have taught and discussions
we have had with many friends and colleagues. Some of the material in
Chapters 5, 8, and 9 is based on parts of a draft of a book on models of
bounded rationality by ar.
mjo I had the privilege of being educated in game theory by Robert
Aumann, Sergiu Hart, Mordecai Kurz, and Robert Wilson at Stanford
University.
It is a great pleasure to acknowledge my debt to them.
Discussions over the years with Jean-Pierre Benoˆıt, Haruo Imai, Vijay
Krishna, and Carolyn Pitchik have improved my understanding of many
topics. I completed my work on the book during a visit to the Depart-
ment of Economics at the University of Canterbury, New Zealand; I am
grateful to the members of the department for their generous hospital-
ity. I am grateful also to the Social Science and Humanities Research
Council of Canada and the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research
Council of Canada for ﬁnancially supporting my research in game theory
over the last six years.
ar I have used parts of this book in courses at the London School
of Economics (1987 and 1988), The Hebrew University (1989), Tel Aviv
University (1990), and Princeton University (1992). The hospitality and
collegiality of the London School of Economics, Princeton University,

--- Sayfa 15 ---
Preface
xv
and Tel Aviv University are gratefully appreciated. Special thanks are
due to my friend Asher Wolinsky for endless illuminating conversations.
Part of my work on the book was supported by the United States–Israel
Binational Science Foundation (grant number 1011-341).
We are grateful to Pierpaolo Battigalli, Takako Fujiwara, Wulong Gu,
Abhinay Muthoo, Michele Piccione, and Doron Sonsino for making very
detailed comments on drafts of the book, comments that led us to sub-
stantially improve the accuracy and readability of the text.
We are
grateful also to Dilip Abreu, Jean-Pierre Benoˆıt, Larry Blume, In-Koo
Cho, Eddie Dekel, Faruk Gul, Vijay Krishna, Bart Lipman, Bentley
MacLeod, Sylvain Sorin, Ran Spiegler, and Arthur Sweetman for giving
us advice and pointing out improvements. Finally, we thank Wulong Gu
and Arthur Sweetman, who provided us with outstanding assistance in
completing the book: Wulong worked on the exercises, correcting our
solutions and providing many of his own, and Arthur constructed the
index.
On the technical side we thank Ed Sznyter for cajoling the ever
recalcitrant TEX to execute our numbering scheme.
It was a great pleasure to deal with Terry Vaughn of The MIT Press;
his encouragement in the early stages of the project was important in
motivating us to write the book.
Martin J. Osborne
martin.osborne@utoronto.ca
http://www.economics.utoronto.ca/osborne/
Department of Economics, University of Toronto
150 St. George Street, Toronto, Canada, M5S 3G7
Ariel Rubinstein
rariel@post.tau.ac.il
http://arielrubinstein.tau.ac.il
Department of Economics, Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv, Israel, 69978
Department of Economics, New York University
New York, NY 10003, USA
We maintain a web site for the book. A link to this site is provided on
The MIT Press page for the book,
http://mitpress.mit.edu/book-home.tcl?isbn=0262650401
The URL of our site is currently
http://www.economics.utoronto.ca/osborne/cgt

--- Sayfa 17 ---
1
Introduction
1.1
Game Theory
Game theory is a bag of analytical tools designed to help us understand
the phenomena that we observe when decision-makers interact. The ba-
sic assumptions that underlie the theory are that decision-makers pursue
well-deﬁned exogenous objectives (they are rational) and take into ac-
count their knowledge or expectations of other decision-makers’ behavior
(they reason strategically).
The models of game theory are highly abstract representations of
classes of real-life situations. Their abstractness allows them to be used
to study a wide range of phenomena. For example, the theory of Nash
equilibrium (Chapter 2) has been used to study oligopolistic and politi-
cal competition. The theory of mixed strategy equilibrium (Chapter 3)
has been used to explain the distributions of tongue length in bees and
tube length in ﬂowers. The theory of repeated games (Chapter 8) has
been used to illuminate social phenomena like threats and promises. The
theory of the core (Chapter 13) reveals a sense in which the outcome
of trading under a price system is stable in an economy that contains
many agents.
The boundary between pure and applied game theory is vague; some
developments in the pure theory were motivated by issues that arose
in applications. Nevertheless we believe that such a line can be drawn.
Though we hope that this book appeals to those who are interested in
applications, we stay almost entirely in the territory of “pure” theory.
The art of applying an abstract model to a real-life situation should be
the subject of another tome.
Game theory uses mathematics to express its ideas formally. However,
the game theoretical ideas that we discuss are not inherently mathemat-

--- Sayfa 18 ---
2
Chapter 1. Introduction
ical; in principle a book could be written that had essentially the same
content as this one and was devoid of mathematics. A mathematical
formulation makes it easy to deﬁne concepts precisely, to verify the con-
sistency of ideas, and to explore the implications of assumptions. Con-
sequently our style is formal: we state deﬁnitions and results precisely,
interspersing them with motivations and interpretations of the concepts.
The use of mathematical models creates independent mathematical
interest. In this book, however, we treat game theory not as a branch
of mathematics but as a social science whose aim is to understand the
behavior of interacting decision-makers; we do not elaborate on points of
mathematical interest. From our point of view the mathematical results
are interesting only if they are conﬁrmed by intuition.
1.2
Games and Solutions
A game is a description of strategic interaction that includes the con-
straints on the actions that the players can take and the players’ in-
terests, but does not specify the actions that the players do take. A
solution is a systematic description of the outcomes that may emerge in
a family of games. Game theory suggests reasonable solutions for classes
of games and examines their properties.
We study four groups of game theoretic models, indicated by the titles
of the four parts of the book: strategic games (Part I), extensive games
with and without perfect information (Parts II and III), and coalitional
games (Part IV). We now explain some of the dimensions on which this
division is based.
Noncooperative and Cooperative Games
In all game theoretic models the basic entity is a player. A player may be
interpreted as an individual or as a group of individuals making a deci-
sion. Once we deﬁne the set of players, we may distinguish between two
types of models: those in which the sets of possible actions of individual
players are primitives (Parts I, II, and III) and those in which the sets
of possible joint actions of groups of players are primitives (Part IV).
Sometimes models of the ﬁrst type are referred to as “noncooperative”,
while those of the second type are referred to as “cooperative” (though
these terms do not express well the diﬀerences between the models).
The numbers of pages that we devote to each of these branches of
the theory reﬂect the fact that in recent years most research has been

--- Sayfa 19 ---
1.3 Game Theory and the Theory of Competitive Equilibrium
3
devoted to noncooperative games; it does not express our evaluation of
the relative importance of the two branches. In particular, we do not
share the view of some authors that noncooperative models are more
“basic” than cooperative ones; in our opinion, neither group of models
is more “basic” than the other.
Strategic Games and Extensive Games
In Part I we discuss the concept of a strategic game and in Parts II
and III the concept of an extensive game. A strategic game is a model
of a situation in which each player chooses his plan of action once and
for all, and all players’ decisions are made simultaneously (that is, when
choosing a plan of action each player is not informed of the plan of action
chosen by any other player). By contrast, the model of an extensive game
speciﬁes the possible orders of events; each player can consider his plan
of action not only at the beginning of the game but also whenever he
has to make a decision.
Games with Perfect and Imperfect Information
The third distinction that we make is between the models in Parts II
and III. In the models in Part II the participants are fully informed
about each others’ moves, while in the models in Part III they may be
imperfectly informed. The former models have ﬁrmer foundations. The
latter were developed intensively only in the 1980s; we put less emphasis
on them not because they are less realistic or important but because they
are less mature.
1.3
Game Theory and the Theory of Competitive
Equilibrium
To clarify further the nature of game theory, we now contrast it with the
theory of competitive equilibrium that is used in economics. Game theo-
retic reasoning takes into account the attempts by each decision-maker to
obtain, prior to making his decision, information about the other play-
ers’ behavior, while competitive reasoning assumes that each agent is
interested only in some environmental parameters (such as prices), even
though these parameters are determined by the actions of all agents.
To illustrate the diﬀerence between the theories, consider an envi-
ronment in which the level of some activity (like ﬁshing) of each agent
depends on the level of pollution, which in turn depends on the levels of

--- Sayfa 20 ---
4
Chapter 1. Introduction
the agents’ activities. In a competitive analysis of this situation we look
for a level of pollution consistent with the actions that the agents take
when each of them regards this level as given. By contrast, in a game
theoretic analysis of the situation we require that each agent’s action
be optimal given the agent’s expectation of the pollution created by the
combination of his action and all the other agents’ actions.
1.4
Rational Behavior
The models we study assume that each decision-maker is “rational” in
the sense that he is aware of his alternatives, forms expectations about
any unknowns, has clear preferences, and chooses his action deliberately
after some process of optimization. In the absence of uncertainty the
following elements constitute a model of rational choice.
• A set A of actions from which the decision-maker makes a choice.
• A set C of possible consequences of these actions.
• A consequence function g: A →C that associates a consequence
with each action.
• A preference relation
(a complete transitive reﬂexive binary rela-
tion) ≿on the set C.
Sometimes the decision-maker’s preferences are speciﬁed by giving a
utility function U: C →R, which deﬁnes a preference relation ≿by the
condition x ≿y if and only if U(x) ≥U(y).
Given any set B ⊆A of actions that are feasible in some particular
case, a rational decision-maker chooses an action a∗that is feasible
(belongs to B) and optimal in the sense that g(a∗) ≿g(a) for all a ∈B;
alternatively he solves the problem maxa∈B U(g(a)).
An assumption
upon which the usefulness of this model of decision-making depends is
that the individual uses the same preference relation when choosing from
diﬀerent sets B.
In the models we study, individuals often have to make decisions under
conditions of uncertainty. The players may be
• uncertain about the objective parameters of the environment
• imperfectly informed about events that happen in the game
• uncertain about actions of the other players that are not determin-
istic
• uncertain about the reasoning of the other players.

--- Sayfa 21 ---
1.5 The Steady State and Deductive Interpretations
5
To model decision-making under uncertainty, almost all game theory
uses the theories of von Neumann and Morgenstern (1944) and of Sav-
age (1972). That is, if the consequence function is stochastic and known
to the decision-maker (i.e. for each a ∈A the consequence g(a) is a lot-
tery (probability distribution) on C) then the decision-maker is assumed
to behave as if he maximizes the expected value of a (von Neumann–
Morgenstern utility) function that attaches a number to each conse-
quence. If the stochastic connection between actions and consequences
is not given, the decision-maker is assumed to behave as if he has in mind
a (subjective) probability distribution that determines the consequence
of any action. In this case the decision-maker is assumed to behave as
if he has in mind a “state space” Ω, a probability measure over Ω, a
function g: A × Ω→C, and a utility function u: C →R; he is assumed
to choose an action a that maximizes the expected value of u(g(a, ω))
with respect to the probability measure.
We do not discuss the assumptions that underlie the theory of a ratio-
nal decision-maker. However, we do point out that these assumptions are
under perpetual attack by experimental psychologists, who constantly
point out severe limits to its application.
1.5
The Steady State and Deductive Interpretations
There are two conﬂicting interpretations of solutions for strategic and
extensive games. The steady state (or, as Binmore (1987/88) calls it,
evolutive) interpretation is closely related to that which is standard in
economics. Game theory, like other sciences, deals with regularities. As
Carnap (1966, p. 3) writes, “The observations we make in everyday life
as well as the more systematic observations of science reveal certain rep-
etitions or regularities in the world. . . . The laws of science are nothing
more than statements expressing these regularities as precisely as possi-
ble.” The steady state interpretation treats a game as a model designed
to explain some regularity observed in a family of similar situations.
Each participant “knows” the equilibrium and tests the optimality of
his behavior given this knowledge, which he has acquired from his long
experience. The deductive (or, as Binmore calls it, eductive) interpreta-
tion, by contrast, treats a game in isolation, as a “one-shot” event, and
attempts to infer the restrictions that rationality imposes on the out-
come; it assumes that each player deduces how the other players will be-
have simply from principles of rationality. We try to avoid the confusion
between the two interpretations that frequently arises in game theory.

--- Sayfa 22 ---
6
Chapter 1. Introduction
1.6
Bounded Rationality
When we talk in real life about games we often focus on the asymmetry
between individuals in their abilities. For example, some players may
have a clearer perception of a situation or have a greater ability to ana-
lyze it. These diﬀerences, which are so critical in life, are missing from
game theory in its current form.
To illustrate the consequences of this fact, consider the game of chess.
In an actual play of chess the players may diﬀer in their knowledge
of the legal moves and in their analytical abilities. In contrast, when
chess is modeled using current game theory it is assumed that the play-
ers’ knowledge of the rules of the game is perfect and their ability to
analyze it is ideal.
Results we prove in Chapters 2 and 6 (Proposi-
tions 22.2 and 99.2) imply that chess is a trivial game for “rational”
players: an algorithm exists that can be used to “solve” the game. This
algorithm deﬁnes a pair of strategies, one for each player, that leads
to an “equilibrium” outcome with the property that a player who fol-
lows his strategy can be sure that the outcome will be at least as good
as the equilibrium outcome no matter what strategy the other player
uses.
The existence of such strategies suggests that chess is uninter-
esting because it has only one possible outcome.
Nevertheless, chess
remains a very popular and interesting game. Its equilibrium outcome
is yet to be calculated; currently it is impossible to do so using the algo-
rithm. Even if White, for example, is shown one day to have a winning
strategy, it may not be possible for a human being to implement that
strategy. Thus while the abstract model of chess allows us to deduce
a signiﬁcant fact about the game, at the same time it omits the most
important determinant of the outcome of an actual play of chess: the
players’ “abilities”.
Modeling asymmetries in abilities and in perceptions of a situation
by diﬀerent players is a fascinating challenge for future research, which
models of “bounded rationality” have begun to tackle.
1.7
Terminology and Notation
We presume little familiarity with mathematical results, but throughout
use deductive reasoning. Our notation and mathematical deﬁnitions are
standard, but to avoid ambiguities we list some of them here.
We denote the set of real numbers by R, the set of nonnegative real
numbers by R+, the set of vectors of n real numbers by Rn, and the set of

--- Sayfa 23 ---
1.7 Terminology and Notation
7
vectors of n nonnegative real numbers by Rn
+. For x ∈Rn and y ∈Rn
we use x ≥y to mean xi ≥yi for i = 1, . . . , n and x > y to mean
xi > yi for i = 1, . . . , n. We say that a function f: R →R is increasing
if f(x) > f(y) whenever x > y and is nondecreasing if f(x) ≥f(y)
whenever x > y. A function f: R →R is concave if f(αx + (1 −α)x′) ≥
αf(x) + (1 −α)f(x′) for all x ∈R, all x′ ∈R, and all α ∈[0, 1]. Given a
function f: X →R we denote by arg maxx∈X f(x) the set of maximizers
of f; for any Y ⊆X we denote by f(Y ) the set {f(x): x ∈Y }.
Throughout we use N to denote the set of players.
We refer to a
collection of values of some variable, one for each player, as a proﬁle;
we denote such a proﬁle by (xi)i∈N, or, if the qualiﬁer “i ∈N” is clear,
simply (xi). For any proﬁle x = (xj)j∈N and any i ∈N we let x−i be
the list (xj)j∈N\{i} of elements of the proﬁle x for all players except i.
Given a list x−i = (xj)j∈N\{i} and an element xi we denote by (x−i, xi)
the proﬁle (xi)i∈N. If Xi is a set for each i ∈N then we denote by X−i
the set ×j∈N\{i}Xj.
A binary relation ≿on a set A is complete if a ≿b or b ≿a for every
a ∈A and b ∈A, reﬂexive if a ≿a for every a ∈A, and transitive if
a ≿c whenever a ≿b and b ≿c. A preference relation is a complete
reﬂexive transitive binary relation. If a ≿b but not b ≿a then we write
a ≻b; if a ≿b and b ≿a then we write a ∼b. A preference relation
≿on A is continuous if a ≿b whenever there are sequences (ak)k and
(bk)k in A that converge to a and b respectively for which ak ≿bk for
all k. A preference relation ≿on Rn is quasi-concave if for every b ∈Rn
the set {a ∈Rn: a ≿b} is convex; it is strictly quasi-concave if every
such set is strictly convex.
Let X be a set. We denote by |X| the number of members of X. A
partition of X is a collection of disjoint subsets of X whose union is X.
Let N be a ﬁnite set and let X ⊆RN be a set. Then x ∈X is Pareto
eﬃcient if there is no y ∈X for which yi > xi for all i ∈N; x ∈X is
strongly Pareto eﬃcient if there is no y ∈X for which yi ≥xi for all
i ∈N and yi > xi for some i ∈N.
A probability measure µ on a ﬁnite (or countable) set X is an additive
function that associates a nonnegative real number with every subset of
X (that is, µ(B ∪C) = µ(B)+µ(C) whenever B and C are disjoint) and
satisﬁes µ(X) = 1. In some cases we work with probability measures
over spaces that are not necessarily ﬁnite. If you are unfamiliar with
such measures, little is lost by restricting attention to the ﬁnite case;
for a deﬁnition of more general measures see, for example, Chung (1974,
Ch. 2).

--- Sayfa 24 ---
8
Chapter 1. Introduction
Notes
Von Neumann and Morgenstern (1944) is the classic work in game the-
ory. Luce and Raiﬀa (1957) is an early textbook; although now out-of-
date, it contains superb discussions of the basic concepts in the theory.
Schelling (1960) provides a verbal discussion of some of the main ideas
of the theory.
A number of recent books cover much of the material in this book,
at approximately the same level: Shubik (1982), Moulin (1986), Fried-
man (1990), Kreps (1990a, Part III), Fudenberg and Tirole (1991a), My-
erson (1991), van Damme (1991), and Binmore (1992). Gibbons (1992)
is a more elementary introduction to the subject.
Aumann (1985b) contains a discussion of the aims and achievements
of game theory, and Aumann (1987b) is an account of game theory from
a historical perspective. Binmore (1987/88) is a critical discussion of
game theory that makes the distinction between the steady state and
deductive interpretations.
Kreps (1990b) is a reﬂective discussion of
many issues in game theory.
For an exposition of the theory of rational choice see Kreps (1988).

--- Sayfa 25 ---
I
Strategic Games
In this part we study a model of strategic interaction known as a strategic
game, or, in the terminology of von Neumann and Morgenstern (1944),
a “game in normal form”. This model speciﬁes for each player a set of
possible actions and a preference ordering over the set of possible action
proﬁles.
In Chapter 2 we discuss Nash equilibrium, the most widely used solu-
tion concept for strategic games. In Chapter 3 we consider the closely re-
lated solutions of mixed strategy equilibrium and correlated equilibrium,
in which the players’ actions are not necessarily deterministic.
Nash
equilibrium is a steady state solution concept in which each player’s de-
cision depends on knowledge of the equilibrium. In Chapter 4 we study
the deductive solution concepts of rationalizability and iterated elimina-
tion of dominated actions, in which the players are not assumed to know
the equilibrium. Chapter 5 describes a model of knowledge that allows
us to examine formally the assumptions that underlie the solutions that
we have deﬁned.

--- Sayfa 27 ---
2
Nash Equilibrium
Nash equilibrium is one of the most basic concepts in game theory. In
this chapter we describe it in the context of a strategic game and in the
related context of a Bayesian game.
2.1
Strategic Games
2.1.1
Deﬁnition
A strategic game is a model of interactive decision-making in which each
decision-maker chooses his plan of action once and for all, and these
choices are made simultaneously. The model consists of a ﬁnite set N of
players and, for each player i, a set Ai of actions and a preference relation
on the set of action proﬁles. We refer to an action proﬁle a = (aj)j∈N
as an outcome, and denote the set ×j∈NAj of outcomes by A.
The
requirement that the preferences of each player i be deﬁned over A,
rather than Ai, is the feature that distinguishes a strategic game from a
decision problem: each player may care not only about his own action
but also about the actions taken by the other players. To summarize,
our deﬁnition is the following.
▶Definition 11.1 A strategic game consists of
• a ﬁnite set N (the set of players)
• for each player i ∈N a nonempty set Ai (the set of actions available
to player i)
• for each player i ∈N a preference relation ≿i on A = ×j∈NAj (the
preference relation of player i).
If the set Ai of actions of every player i is ﬁnite then the game is ﬁnite.

--- Sayfa 28 ---
12
Chapter 2.
Nash Equilibrium
The high level of abstraction of this model allows it to be applied to a
wide variety of situations. A player may be an individual human being
or any other decision-making entity like a government, a board of direc-
tors, the leadership of a revolutionary movement, or even a ﬂower or an
animal. The model places no restrictions on the set of actions available
to a player, which may, for example, contain just a few elements or be a
huge set containing complicated plans that cover a variety of contingen-
cies. However, the range of application of the model is limited by the
requirement that we associate with each player a preference relation. A
player’s preference relation may simply reﬂect the player’s feelings about
the possible outcomes or, in the case of an organism that does not act
consciously, the chances of its reproductive success.
The fact that the model is so abstract is a merit to the extent that
it allows applications in a wide range of situations, but is a drawback
to the extent that the implications of the model cannot depend on any
speciﬁc features of a situation.
Indeed, very few conclusions can be
reached about the outcome of a game at this level of abstraction; one
needs to be much more speciﬁc to derive interesting results.
In some situations the players’ preferences are most naturally deﬁned
not over action proﬁles but over their consequences. When modeling an
oligopoly, for example, we may take the set of players to be a set of ﬁrms
and the set of actions of each ﬁrm to be the set of prices; but we may
wish to model the assumption that each ﬁrm cares only about its proﬁt,
not about the proﬁle of prices that generates that proﬁt. To do so we
introduce a set C of consequences, a function g: A →C that associates
consequences with action proﬁles, and a proﬁle (≿∗
i ) of preference rela-
tions over C. Then the preference relation ≿i of each player i in the
strategic game is deﬁned as follows: a ≿i b if and only if g(a) ≿∗
i g(b).
Sometimes we wish to model a situation in which the consequence
of an action proﬁle is aﬀected by an exogenous random variable whose
realization is not known to the players before they take their actions.
We can model such a situation as a strategic game by introducing a set
C of consequences, a probability space Ω, and a function g: A × Ω→C
with the interpretation that g(a, ω) is the consequence when the action
proﬁle is a ∈A and the realization of the random variable is ω ∈Ω. A
proﬁle of actions induces a lottery on C; for each player i a preference
relation ≿∗
i must be speciﬁed over the set of all such lotteries. Player i’s
preference relation in the strategic game is deﬁned as follows: a ≿i b
if and only if the lottery over C induced by g(a, ·) is at least as good
according to ≿∗
i as the lottery induced by g(b, ·).

--- Sayfa 29 ---
2.1 Strategic Games
13
L
R
T
w1, w2
x1, x2
B
y1, y2
z1, z2
Figure 13.1 A convenient representation of a two-player strategic game in which
each player has two actions.
Under a wide range of circumstances the preference relation ≿i of
player i in a strategic game can be represented by a payoﬀfunction
ui: A →R (also called a utility function), in the sense that ui(a) ≥ui(b)
whenever a ≿i b. We refer to values of such a function as payoﬀs (or
utilities). Frequently we specify a player’s preference relation by giving
a payoﬀfunction that represents it. In such a case we denote the game
by ⟨N, (Ai), (ui)⟩rather than ⟨N, (Ai), (≿i)⟩.
A ﬁnite strategic game in which there are two players can be described
conveniently in a table like that in Figure 13.1. One player’s actions are
identiﬁed with the rows and the other player’s with the columns. The
two numbers in the box formed by row r and column c are the players’
payoﬀs when the row player chooses r and the column player chooses
c, the ﬁrst component being the payoﬀof the row player. Thus in the
game in Figure 13.1 the set of actions of the row player is {T, B} and
that of the column player is {L, R}, and for example the row player’s
payoﬀfrom the outcome (T, L) is w1 and the column player’s payoﬀis
w2. If the players’ names are “1” and “2” then the convention is that
the row player is player 1 and the column player is player 2.
2.1.2
Comments on Interpretation
A common interpretation of a strategic game is that it is a model of an
event that occurs only once; each player knows the details of the game
and the fact that all the players are “rational” (see Section 1.4), and the
players choose their actions simultaneously and independently. Under
this interpretation each player is unaware, when choosing his action, of
the choices being made by the other players; there is no information
(except the primitives of the model) on which a player can base his
expectation of the other players’ behavior.
Another interpretation, which we adopt through most of this book, is
that a player can form his expectation of the other players’ behavior on

--- Sayfa 30 ---
14
Chapter 2.
Nash Equilibrium
the basis of information about the way that the game or a similar game
was played in the past (see Section 1.5). A sequence of plays of the game
can be modeled by a strategic game only if there are no strategic links
between the plays. That is, an individual who plays the game many
times must be concerned only with his instantaneous payoﬀand ignore
the eﬀects of his current action on the other players’ future behavior.
In this interpretation it is thus appropriate to model a situation as a
strategic game only in the absence of an intertemporal strategic link
between occurrences of the interaction. (The model of a repeated game
discussed in Chapter 8 deals with series of strategic interactions in which
such intertemporal links do exist.)
When referring to the actions of the players in a strategic game as
“simultaneous” we do not necessarily mean that these actions are taken
at the same point in time.
One situation that can be modeled as a
strategic game is the following. The players are at diﬀerent locations,
in front of terminals.
First the players’ possible actions and payoﬀs
are described publicly (so that they are common knowledge among the
players). Then each player chooses an action by sending a message to a
central computer; the players are informed of their payoﬀs when all the
messages have been received. However, the model of a strategic game is
much more widely applicable than this example suggests. For a situation
to be modeled as a strategic game it is important only that the players
make decisions independently, no player being informed of the choice of
any other player prior to making his own decision.
2.2
Nash Equilibrium
The most commonly used solution concept in game theory is that of
Nash equilibrium. This notion captures a steady state of the play of a
strategic game in which each player holds the correct expectation about
the other players’ behavior and acts rationally. It does not attempt to
examine the process by which a steady state is reached.
▶Definition 14.1 A Nash equilibrium of a strategic game ⟨N, (Ai),
(≿i)⟩is a proﬁle a∗∈A of actions with the property that for every
player i ∈N we have
(a∗
−i, a∗
i ) ≿i (a∗
−i, ai) for all ai ∈Ai.
Thus for a∗to be a Nash equilibrium it must be that no player i has
an action yielding an outcome that he prefers to that generated when

--- Sayfa 31 ---
2.3 Examples
15
he chooses a∗
i , given that every other player j chooses his equilibrium
action a∗
j. Brieﬂy, no player can proﬁtably deviate, given the actions of
the other players.
The following restatement of the deﬁnition is sometimes useful. For
any a−i ∈A−i deﬁne Bi(a−i) to be the set of player i’s best actions
given a−i:
Bi(a−i) = {ai ∈Ai: (a−i, ai) ≿i (a−i, a′
i) for all a′
i ∈Ai}.
(15.1)
We call the set-valued function Bi the best-response function of
player i. A Nash equilibrium is a proﬁle a∗of actions for which
a∗
i ∈Bi(a∗
−i) for all i ∈N.
(15.2)
This alternative formulation of the deﬁnition points us to a (not nec-
essarily eﬃcient) method of ﬁnding Nash equilibria: ﬁrst calculate the
best response function of each player, then ﬁnd a proﬁle a∗of actions for
which a∗
i ∈Bi(a∗
−i) for all i ∈N. If the functions Bi are singleton-valued
then the second step entails solving |N| equations in the |N| unknowns
(a∗
i )i∈N.
2.3
Examples
The following classical games represent a variety of strategic situations.
The games are very simple: in each game there are just two players
and each player has only two possible actions. Nevertheless, each game
captures the essence of a type of strategic interaction that is frequently
present in more complex situations.
⋄Example 15.3 (Bach or Stravinsky? (BoS)) Two people wish to go out
together to a concert of music by either Bach or Stravinsky. Their main
concern is to go out together, but one person prefers Bach and the other
person prefers Stravinsky. Representing the individuals’ preferences by
payoﬀfunctions, we have the game in Figure 16.1.
This game is often referred to as the “Battle of the Sexes”; for the
standard story behind it see Luce and Raiﬀa (1957, pp. 90–91). For
consistency with this nomenclature we call the game “BoS”. BoS models
a situation in which players wish to coordinate their behavior, but have
conﬂicting interests. The game has two Nash equilibria: (Bach, Bach)
and (Stravinsky, Stravinsky). That is, there are two steady states: one
in which both players always choose Bach and one in which they always
choose Stravinsky.

--- Sayfa 32 ---
16
Chapter 2.
Nash Equilibrium
Bach
Stravinsky
Bach
2, 1
0, 0
Stravinsky
0, 0
1, 2
Figure 16.1 Bach or Stravinsky? (BoS) (Example 15.3).
Mozart
Mahler
Mozart
2, 2
0, 0
Mahler
0, 0
1, 1
Figure 16.2 A coordination game (Example 16.1).
⋄Example 16.1 (A coordination game) As in BoS, two people wish to go
out together, but in this case they agree on the more desirable concert.
A game that captures this situation is given in Figure 16.2.
Like BoS, the game has two Nash equilibria: (Mozart, Mozart) and
(Mahler, Mahler). In contrast to BoS, the players have a mutual interest
in reaching one of these equilibria, namely (Mozart, Mozart); however,
the notion of Nash equilibrium does not rule out a steady state in which
the outcome is the inferior equilibrium (Mahler, Mahler).
⋄Example 16.2 (The Prisoner’s Dilemma) Two suspects in a crime are
put into separate cells. If they both confess, each will be sentenced to
three years in prison. If only one of them confesses, he will be freed
and used as a witness against the other, who will receive a sentence of
four years. If neither confesses, they will both be convicted of a minor
oﬀense and spend one year in prison.
Choosing a convenient payoﬀ
representation for the preferences, we have the game in Figure 17.1.
This is a game in which there are gains from cooperation—the best
outcome for the players is that neither confesses—but each player has
an incentive to be a “free rider”. Whatever one player does, the other
prefers Confess to Don’t Confess, so that the game has a unique Nash
equilibrium (Confess, Confess).
⋄Example 16.3 (Hawk–Dove) Two animals are ﬁghting over some prey.
Each can behave like a dove or like a hawk.
The best outcome for

--- Sayfa 33 ---
2.3 Examples
17
Don’t Confess
Confess
Don’t confess
3, 3
0, 4
Confess
4, 0
1, 1
Figure 17.1 The Prisoner’s Dilemma (Example 16.2).
Dove
Hawk
Dove
3, 3
1, 4
Hawk
4, 1
0, 0
Figure 17.2 Hawk–Dove (Example 16.3).
each animal is that in which it acts like a hawk while the other acts
like a dove; the worst outcome is that in which both animals act like
hawks. Each animal prefers to be hawkish if its opponent is dovish and
dovish if its opponent is hawkish. A game that captures this situation is
shown in Figure 17.2. The game has two Nash equilibria, (Dove, Hawk)
and (Hawk, Dove), corresponding to two diﬀerent conventions about the
player who yields.
⋄Example 17.1 (Matching Pennies) Each of two people chooses either
Head or Tail. If the choices diﬀer, person 1 pays person 2 a dollar; if they
are the same, person 2 pays person 1 a dollar. Each person cares only
about the amount of money that he receives. A game that models this
situation is shown in Figure 17.3. Such a game, in which the interests of
the players are diametrically opposed, is called “strictly competitive”.
The game Matching Pennies has no Nash equilibrium.
Head
Tail
Head
1, −1
−1,
1
Tail
−1,
1
1, −1
Figure 17.3 Matching Pennies (Example 17.1).

--- Sayfa 34 ---
18
Chapter 2.
Nash Equilibrium
The notion of a strategic game encompasses situations much more
complex than those described in the last ﬁve examples. The following
are representatives of three families of games that have been studied
extensively: auctions, games of timing, and location games.
⋄Example 18.1 (An auction) An object is to be assigned to a player in
the set {1, . . . , n} in exchange for a payment. Player i’s valuation of the
object is vi, and v1 > v2 > · · · > vn > 0. The mechanism used to assign
the object is a (sealed-bid) auction: the players simultaneously submit
bids (nonnegative numbers), and the object is given to the player with
the lowest index among those who submit the highest bid, in exchange
for a payment.
In a ﬁrst price auction the payment that the winner makes is the price
that he bids.
? Exercise 18.2
Formulate a ﬁrst price auction as a strategic game and
analyze its Nash equilibria. In particular, show that in all equilibria
player 1 obtains the object.
In a second price auction the payment that the winner makes is the
highest bid among those submitted by the players who do not win (so
that if only one player submits the highest bid then the price paid is the
second highest bid).
? Exercise 18.3
Show that in a second price auction the bid vi of any
player i is a weakly dominant action: player i’s payoﬀwhen he bids vi is
at least as high as his payoﬀwhen he submits any other bid, regardless
of the actions of the other players. Show that nevertheless there are
(“ineﬃcient”) equilibria in which the winner is not player 1.
⋄Example 18.4 (A war of attrition) Two players are involved in a dis-
pute over an object. The value of the object to player i is vi > 0. Time
is modeled as a continuous variable that starts at 0 and runs indeﬁnitely.
Each player chooses when to concede the object to the other player; if
the ﬁrst player to concede does so at time t, the other player obtains the
object at that time. If both players concede simultaneously, the object
is split equally between them, player i receiving a payoﬀof vi/2. Time
is valuable: until the ﬁrst concession each player loses one unit of payoﬀ
per unit of time.
? Exercise 18.5
Formulate this situation as a strategic game and show
that in all Nash equilibria one of the players concedes immediately.
⋄Example 18.6 (A location game) Each of n people chooses whether or
not to become a political candidate, and if so which position to take.

--- Sayfa 35 ---
2.4 Existence of a Nash Equilibrium
19
There is a continuum of citizens, each of whom has a favorite position;
the distribution of favorite positions is given by a density function f on
[0, 1] with f(x) > 0 for all x ∈[0, 1]. A candidate attracts the votes
of those citizens whose favorite positions are closer to his position than
to the position of any other candidate; if k candidates choose the same
position then each receives the fraction 1/k of the votes that the position
attracts. The winner of the competition is the candidate who receives
the most votes. Each person prefers to be the unique winning candidate
than to tie for ﬁrst place, prefers to tie for ﬁrst place than to stay out
of the competition, and prefers to stay out of the competition than to
enter and lose.
? Exercise 19.1
Formulate this situation as a strategic game, ﬁnd the
set of Nash equilibria when n = 2, and show that there is no Nash
equilibrium when n = 3.
2.4
Existence of a Nash Equilibrium
Not every strategic game has a Nash equilibrium, as the game Matching
Pennies (Figure 17.3) shows. The conditions under which the set of Nash
equilibria of a game is nonempty have been investigated extensively. We
now present an existence result that is one of the simplest of the genre.
(Nevertheless its mathematical level is more advanced than most of the
rest of the book, which does not depend on the details.)
An existence result has two purposes. First, if we have a game that
satisﬁes the hypothesis of the result then we know that there is some
hope that our eﬀorts to ﬁnd an equilibrium will meet with success. Sec-
ond, and more important, the existence of an equilibrium shows that
the game is consistent with a steady state solution. Further, the exis-
tence of equilibria for a family of games allows us to study properties of
these equilibria (by using, for example, “comparative static” techniques)
without ﬁnding them explicitly and without taking the risk that we are
studying the empty set.
To show that a game has a Nash equilibrium it suﬃces to show that
there is a proﬁle a∗of actions such that a∗
i ∈Bi(a∗
−i) for all i ∈N
(see (15.2)).
Deﬁne the set-valued function B: A →A by B(a) =
×i∈NBi(a−i).
Then (15.2) can be written in vector form simply as
a∗∈B(a∗). Fixed point theorems give conditions on B under which
there indeed exists a value of a∗for which a∗∈B(a∗). The ﬁxed point
theorem that we use is the following (due to Kakutani (1941)).

--- Sayfa 36 ---
20
Chapter 2.
Nash Equilibrium
Lemma 20.1 (Kakutani’s ﬁxed point theorem) Let X be a compact
convex subset of Rn and let f: X →X be a set-valued function for
which
• for all x ∈X the set f(x) is nonempty and convex
• the graph of f is closed (i.e. for all sequences {xn} and {yn} such
that yn ∈f(xn) for all n, xn →x, and yn →y, we have y ∈f(x)).
Then there exists x∗∈X such that x∗∈f(x∗).
? Exercise 20.2
Show that each of the following four conditions is nec-
essary for Kakutani’s theorem.
(i) X is compact.
(ii) X is convex.
(iii) f(x) is convex for each x ∈X. (iv) f has a closed graph.
Deﬁne a preference relation ≿i over A to be quasi-concave on Ai if
for every a∗∈A the set {ai ∈Ai: (a∗
−i, ai) ≿i a∗} is convex.
Proposition 20.3 The strategic game ⟨N, (Ai), (≿i)⟩has a Nash equi-
librium if for all i ∈N
• the set Ai of actions of player i is a nonempty compact convex subset
of a Euclidian space
and the preference relation ≿i is
• continuous
• quasi-concave on Ai.
Proof. Deﬁne B: A →A by B(a) = ×i∈NBi(a−i) (where Bi is the best-
response function of player i, deﬁned in (15.1)). For every i ∈N the set
Bi(a−i) is nonempty since ≿i is continuous and Ai is compact, and is
convex since ≿i is quasi-concave on Ai; B has a closed graph since each
≿i is continuous. Thus by Kakutani’s theorem B has a ﬁxed point; as
we have noted any ﬁxed point is a Nash equilibrium of the game.
2
Note that this result asserts that a strategic game satisfying certain
conditions has at least one Nash equilibrium; as we have seen, a game
can have more than one equilibrium. (Results that we do not discuss
identify conditions under which a game has a unique Nash equilibrium.)
Note also that Proposition 20.3 does not apply to any game in which
some player has ﬁnitely many actions, since such a game violates the
condition that the set of actions of every player be convex.
? Exercise 20.4 (Symmetric games)
Consider a two-person strategic
game that satisﬁes the conditions of Proposition 20.3. Let N = {1, 2}
and assume that the game is symmetric: A1 = A2 and (a1, a2) ≿1 (b1, b2)
if and only if (a2, a1) ≿2 (b2, b1) for all a ∈A and b ∈A. Use Kakutani’s

--- Sayfa 37 ---
2.5 Strictly Competitive Games
21
theorem to prove that there is an action a∗
1 ∈A1 such that (a∗
1, a∗
1) is a
Nash equilibrium of the game. (Such an equilibrium is called a symmet-
ric equilibrium.) Give an example of a ﬁnite symmetric game that has
only asymmetric equilibria.
2.5
Strictly Competitive Games
We can say little about the set of Nash equilibria of an arbitrary strategic
game; only in limited classes of games can we say something about
the qualitative character of the equilibria. One such class of games is
that in which there are two players, whose preferences are diametrically
opposed. We assume for convenience in this section that the names of
the players are “1” and “2” (i.e. N = {1, 2}).
▶Definition 21.1 A strategic game ⟨{1, 2}, (Ai), (≿i)⟩is strictly com-
petitive if for any a ∈A and b ∈A we have a ≿1 b if and only if
b ≿2 a.
A strictly competitive game is sometimes called zerosum because if
player 1’s preference relation ≿1 is represented by the payoﬀfunction u1
then player 2’s preference relation is represented by u2 with u1 +u2 = 0.
We say that player i maxminimizes if he chooses an action that is
best for him on the assumption that whatever he does, player j will
choose her action to hurt him as much as possible. We now show that
for a strictly competitive game that possesses a Nash equilibrium, a
pair of actions is a Nash equilibrium if and only if the action of each
player is a maxminimizer. This result is striking because it provides a
link between individual decision-making and the reasoning behind the
notion of Nash equilibrium.
In establishing the result we also prove
the strong result that for strictly competitive games that possess Nash
equilibria all equilibria yield the same payoﬀs. This property of Nash
equilibria is rarely satisﬁed in games that are not strictly competitive.
▶Definition 21.2 Let ⟨{1, 2}, (Ai), (ui)⟩be a strictly competitive strate-
gic game.
The action x∗∈A1 is a maxminimizer for player 1
if
min
y∈A2 u1(x∗, y) ≥min
y∈A2 u1(x, y) for all x ∈A1.
Similarly, the action y∗∈A2 is a maxminimizer for player 2 if
min
x∈A1 u2(x, y∗) ≥min
x∈A1 u2(x, y) for all y ∈A2.

--- Sayfa 38 ---
22
Chapter 2.
Nash Equilibrium
In words, a maxminimizer for player i is an action that maximizes the
payoﬀthat player i can guarantee. A maxminimizer for player 1 solves
the problem maxx miny u1(x, y) and a maxminimizer for player 2 solves
the problem maxy minx u2(x, y).
In the sequel we assume for convenience that player 1’s preference rela-
tion is represented by a payoﬀfunction u1 and, without loss of generality,
that u2 = −u1. The following result shows that the maxminimization
of player 2’s payoﬀis equivalent to the minmaximization of player 1’s
payoﬀ.
Lemma 22.1 Let ⟨{1, 2}, (Ai), (ui)⟩be a strictly competitive strategic
game. Then maxy∈A2 minx∈A1 u2(x, y) = −miny∈A2 maxx∈A1 u1(x, y).
Further, y ∈A2 solves the problem maxy∈A2 minx∈A1 u2(x, y) if and
only if it solves the problem miny∈A2 maxx∈A1 u1(x, y).
Proof.
For any function f we have minz(−f(z)) = −maxz f(z) and
arg minz(−f(z)) = arg maxz f(z).
It follows that for every y ∈A2
we have −minx∈A1 u2(x, y) = maxx∈A1(−u2(x, y)) = maxx∈A1 u1(x, y).
Hence maxy∈A2 minx∈A1 u2(x, y) = −miny∈A2[−minx∈A1 u2(x, y)] =
−miny∈A2 maxx∈A1 u1(x, y); in addition y ∈A2 is a solution of the
problem maxy∈A2 minx∈A1 u2(x, y) if and only if it is a solution of the
problem miny∈A2 maxx∈A1 u1(x, y).
2
The following result gives the connection between the Nash equilibria
of a strictly competitive game and the set of pairs of maxminimizers.
Proposition 22.2 Let G = ⟨{1, 2}, (Ai), (ui)⟩be a strictly competitive
strategic game.
a. If (x∗, y∗) is a Nash equilibrium of G then x∗is a maxminimizer
for player 1 and y∗is a maxminimizer for player 2.
b. If (x∗, y∗) is a Nash equilibrium of G then maxx miny u1(x, y) =
miny maxx u1(x, y) = u1(x∗, y∗), and thus all Nash equilibria of G
yield the same payoﬀs.
c. If maxx miny u1(x, y) = miny maxx u1(x, y) (and thus, in particular,
if G has a Nash equilibrium (see part b)), x∗is a maxminimizer for
player 1, and y∗is a maxminimizer for player 2, then (x∗, y∗) is a
Nash equilibrium of G.
Proof. We ﬁrst prove parts (a) and (b). Let (x∗, y∗) be a Nash equi-
librium of G.
Then u2(x∗, y∗) ≥u2(x∗, y) for all y ∈A2 or, since
u2 = −u1, u1(x∗, y∗) ≤u1(x∗, y) for all y ∈A2. Hence u1(x∗, y∗) =
miny u1(x∗, y) ≤maxx miny u1(x, y). Similarly, u1(x∗, y∗) ≥u1(x, y∗)

--- Sayfa 39 ---
2.5 Strictly Competitive Games
23
for all x ∈A1 and hence u1(x∗, y∗) ≥miny u1(x, y) for all x ∈A1, so that
u1(x∗, y∗) ≥maxx miny u1(x, y). Thus u1(x∗, y∗) = maxx miny u1(x, y)
and x∗is a maxminimizer for player 1.
An analogous argument for player 2 establishes that y∗is a max-
minimizer for player 2 and u2(x∗, y∗) = maxy minx u2(x, y), so that
u1(x∗, y∗) = miny maxx u1(x, y).
To prove part (c) let v∗= maxx miny u1(x, y) = miny maxx u1(x, y).
By Lemma 22.1 we have maxy minx u2(x, y) = −v∗.
Since x∗is a
maxminimizer for player 1 we have u1(x∗, y) ≥v∗for all y ∈A2;
since y∗is a maxminimizer for player 2 we have u2(x, y∗) ≥−v∗for
all x ∈A1. Letting y = y∗and x = x∗in these two inequalities we
obtain u1(x∗, y∗) = v∗and, using the fact that u2 = −u1, we conclude
that (x∗, y∗) is a Nash equilibrium of G.
2
Note that by part (c),
we may ﬁnd the players’ Nash equi-
librium strategies by solving the problems maxx miny u1(x, y) and
maxy minx u2(x, y). This fact is sometimes useful, especially when the
players randomize (see for example Exercise 36.1).
Note also that by parts (a) and (c), the Nash equilibria of a strictly
competitive game are interchangeable: if (x, y) and (x′, y′) are equilibria
then so are (x, y′) and (x′, y).
Part (b) shows that maxx miny u1(x, y) = miny maxx u1(x, y) for any
strictly competitive game that has a Nash equilibrium. Note that the
inequality maxx miny u1(x, y) ≤miny maxx u1(x, y) holds more gener-
ally: for any x′ we have u1(x′, y) ≤maxx u1(x, y) for all y, so that
miny u1(x′, y) ≤miny maxx u1(x, y). (If the maxima and minima are
not well-deﬁned then max and min should be replaced by sup and inf
respectively.) Thus in any game (whether or not it is strictly competi-
tive) the payoﬀthat player 1 can guarantee herself is at most the amount
that player 2 can hold her down to. The hypothesis that the game has a
Nash equilibrium is essential in establishing the opposite inequality. To
see this, consider the game Matching Pennies (Figure 17.3), in which
maxx miny u1(x, y) = −1 < miny maxx u1(x, y) = 1.
If maxx miny u1(x, y) = miny maxx u1(x, y) then we say that this pay-
oﬀ, the equilibrium payoﬀof player 1, is the value of the game.
It
follows from Proposition 22.2 that if v∗is the value of a strictly com-
petitive game then any equilibrium strategy of player 1 guarantees that
her payoﬀis at least her equilibrium payoﬀv∗, and any equilibrium
strategy of player 2 guarantees that his payoﬀis at least his equilib-
rium payoﬀ−v∗, so that any such strategy of player 2 guarantees that

--- Sayfa 40 ---
24
Chapter 2.
Nash Equilibrium
player 1’s payoﬀis at most her equilibrium payoﬀ. In a game that is not
strictly competitive a player’s equilibrium strategy does not in general
have these properties (consider, for example, BoS (Figure 16.1)).
? Exercise 24.1
Let G be a strictly competitive game that has a Nash
equilibrium.
a. Show that if some of player 1’s payoﬀs in G are increased in such a
way that the resulting game G′ is strictly competitive then G′ has
no equilibrium in which player 1 is worse oﬀthan she was in an
equilibrium of G. (Note that G′ may have no equilibrium at all.)
b. Show that the game that results if player 1 is prohibited from us-
ing one of her actions in G does not have an equilibrium in which
player 1’s payoﬀis higher than it is in an equilibrium of G.
c. Give examples to show that neither of the above properties necessar-
ily holds for a game that is not strictly competitive.
2.6
Bayesian Games: Strategic Games with Imperfect
Information
2.6.1
Deﬁnitions
We frequently wish to model situations in which some of the parties are
not certain of the characteristics of some of the other parties. The model
of a Bayesian game, which is closely related to that of a strategic game,
is designed for this purpose.
As for a strategic game, two primitives of a Bayesian game are a
set N of players and a proﬁle (Ai) of sets of actions. We model the
players’ uncertainty about each other by introducing a set Ωof possible
“states of nature”, each of which is a description of all the players’
relevant characteristics.
For convenience we assume that Ωis ﬁnite.
Each player i has a prior belief about the state of nature given by a
probability measure pi on Ω. In any given play of the game some state
of nature ω ∈Ωis realized. We model the players’ information about
the state of nature by introducing a proﬁle (τi) of signal functions, τi(ω)
being the signal that player i observes, before choosing his action, when
the state of nature is ω. Let Ti be the set of all possible values of τi; we
refer to Ti as the set of types of player i. We assume that pi(τ −1
i
(ti)) > 0
for all ti ∈Ti (player i assigns positive prior probability to every member
of Ti). If player i receives the signal ti ∈Ti then he deduces that the state
is in the set τ −1
i
(ti); his posterior belief about the state that has been

--- Sayfa 41 ---
2.6 Bayesian Games: Strategic Games with Imperfect Information
25
realized assigns to each state ω ∈Ωthe probability pi(ω)/pi(τ −1
i
(ti)) if
ω ∈τ −1
i
(ti) and the probability zero otherwise (i.e. the probability of ω
conditional on τ −1
i
(ti)). As an example, if τi(ω) = ω for all ω ∈Ωthen
player i has full information about the state of nature. Alternatively, if
Ω= ×i∈NTi and for each player i the probability measure pi is a product
measure on Ωand τi(ω) = ωi then the players’ signals are independent
and player i does not learn from his signal anything about the other
players’ information.
As in a strategic game, each player cares about the action proﬁle; in
addition he may care about the state of nature. Now, even if he knows
the action taken by every other player in every state of nature, a player
may be uncertain about the pair (a, ω) that will be realized given any
action that he takes, since he has imperfect information about the state
of nature. Therefore we include in the model a proﬁle (≿i) of preference
relations over lotteries on A × Ω(where, as before, A = ×j∈NAj). To
summarize, we make the following deﬁnition.
▶Definition 25.1 A Bayesian game consists of
• a ﬁnite set N (the set of players)
• a ﬁnite set Ω(the set of states)
and for each player i ∈N
• a set Ai (the set of actions available to player i)
• a ﬁnite set Ti (the set of signals that may be observed by player i)
and a function τi: Ω→Ti (the signal function of player i)
• a probability measure pi on Ω(the prior belief of player i) for which
pi(τ −1
i
(ti)) > 0 for all ti ∈Ti
• a preference relation ≿i on the set of probability measures over A×Ω
(the preference relation of player i), where A = ×j∈NAj.
Note that this deﬁnition allows the players to have diﬀerent prior
beliefs. These beliefs may be related; commonly they are identical, co-
incident with an “objective” measure. Frequently the model is used in
situations in which a state of nature is a proﬁle of parameters of the
players’ preferences (for example, proﬁles of their valuations of an ob-
ject). However, the model is much more general; in Section 2.6.3 we
consider its use to capture situations in which each player is uncertain
about what the others know.
Note also that sometimes a Bayesian game is described not in terms
of an underlying state space Ω, but as a “reduced form” in which the

--- Sayfa 42 ---
26
Chapter 2.
Nash Equilibrium
basic primitive that relates to the players’ information is the proﬁle of
the sets of possible types.
We now turn to a deﬁnition of equilibrium for a Bayesian game. In
any given play of a game each player knows his type and does not need to
plan what to do in the hypothetical event that he is of some other type.
Consequently, one might think that an equilibrium should be deﬁned
for each state of nature in isolation.
However, in any given state a
player who wishes to determine his best action may need to hold a belief
about what the other players would do in other states, since he may be
imperfectly informed about the state. Further, the formation of such a
belief may depend on the action that the player himself would choose in
other states, since the other players may also be imperfectly informed.
Thus we are led to deﬁne a Nash equilibrium of a Bayesian game ⟨N, Ω,
(Ai), (Ti), (τi), (pi), (≿i)⟩to be a Nash equilibrium of the strategic game
G∗in which for each i ∈N and each possible signal ti ∈Ti there is
a player, whom we refer to as (i, ti) (“type ti of player i”). The set of
actions of each such player (i, ti) is Ai; thus the set of action proﬁles in G∗
is ×j∈N(×tj∈TjAj). The preferences of each player (i, ti) are deﬁned as
follows. The posterior belief of player i, together with an action proﬁle a∗
in G∗, generates a lottery Li(a∗, ti) over A×Ω: the probability assigned
by Li(a∗, ti) to ((a∗(j, τj(ω)))j∈N, ω) is player i’s posterior belief that the
state is ω when he receives the signal ti (a∗(j, τj(ω)) being the action
of player (j, τj(ω)) in the proﬁle a∗).
Player (i, ti) in G∗prefers the
action proﬁle a∗to the action proﬁle b∗if and only if player i in the
Bayesian game prefers the lottery Li(a∗, ti) to the lottery Li(b∗, ti). To
summarize, we have the following.
▶Definition 26.1 A Nash equilibrium of a Bayesian game ⟨N,
Ω, (Ai), (Ti), (τi), (pi), (≿i)⟩is a Nash equilibrium of the strategic game
deﬁned as follows.
• The set of players is the set of all pairs (i, ti) for i ∈N and ti ∈Ti.
• The set of actions of each player (i, ti) is Ai.
• The preference ordering ≿∗
(i,ti) of each player (i, ti) is deﬁned by
a∗≿∗
(i,ti) b∗if and only if Li(a∗, ti) ≿i Li(b∗, ti),
where Li(a∗, ti) is the lottery over A × Ωthat assigns probabil-
ity pi(ω)/pi(τ −1
i
(ti)) to ((a∗(j, τj(ω)))j∈N, ω) if ω ∈τ −1
i
(ti), zero
otherwise.
In brief, in a Nash equilibrium of a Bayesian game each player chooses
the best action available to him given the signal that he receives and his

--- Sayfa 43 ---
2.6 Bayesian Games: Strategic Games with Imperfect Information
27
belief about the state and the other players’ actions that he deduces from
this signal. Note that to determine whether an action proﬁle is a Nash
equilibrium of a Bayesian game we need to know only how each player
in the Bayesian game compares lotteries over A × Ωin which the distri-
bution over Ωis the same: a player never needs to compare lotteries in
which this distribution is diﬀerent. Thus from the point of view of Nash
equilibrium the speciﬁcation of the players’ preferences in a Bayesian
game contains more information than is necessary. (This redundancy
has an analog in a strategic game: to deﬁne a Nash equilibrium of a
strategic game we need to know only how any player i compares any
outcome (a−i, ai) with any other outcome (a−i, bi).)
2.6.2
Examples
⋄Example 27.1 (Second-price auction) Consider a variant of the second-
price sealed-bid auction described in Example 18.1 in which each player i
knows his own valuation vi but is uncertain of the other players’ valu-
ations. Speciﬁcally, suppose that the set of possible valuations is the
ﬁnite set V and each player believes that every other player’s valua-
tion is drawn independently from the same distribution over V . We can
model this situation as the Bayesian game in which
• the set N of players is {1, . . . , n}
• the set Ωof states is V n (the set of proﬁles of valuations)
• the set Ai of actions of each player i is R+
• the set Ti of signals that i can receive is V
• the signal function τi of i is deﬁned by τi(v1, . . . , vn) = vi
• the prior belief pi of i is given by pi(v1, . . . , vn) = Πn
j=1π(vj) for some
probability distribution π over V
• player i’s preference relation is represented by the expectation of the
random variable whose value in state (v1, . . . , vn) is vi−maxj∈N\{i} aj
if i is the player with the lowest index for whom ai ≥aj for all j ∈N,
and 0 otherwise.
This game has a Nash equilibrium a∗in which a∗(i, vi) = vi for all
i ∈N and vi ∈V = Ti (each player bids his valuation). In fact (as
in Exercise 18.3) it is a weakly dominant action for each type of each
player to bid his valuation.
? Exercise 27.2
Two players wish to go out together to a concert of
music by either Bach or Stravinsky. As in BoS their main concern is

--- Sayfa 44 ---
28
Chapter 2.
Nash Equilibrium
to go out together; but neither player knows whether the other prefers
Bach to Stravinsky, or the reverse. Each player’s preferences are rep-
resented by the expectation of his payoﬀ, the payoﬀs to pure outcomes
being analogous to those given in Figure 16.1. Model this situation as
a Bayesian game and ﬁnd the Nash equilibria for all possible beliefs.
Show in particular that there are equilibria in which there is a positive
probability that the players do not go to the same concert.
? Exercise 28.1 (An exchange game) Each of two players receives a ticket
on which there is a number in some ﬁnite subset S of the interval [0, 1].
The number on a player’s ticket is the size of a prize that he may re-
ceive. The two prizes are identically and independently distributed, with
distribution function F. Each player is asked independently and simul-
taneously whether he wants to exchange his prize for the other player’s
prize. If both players agree then the prizes are exchanged; otherwise
each player receives his own prize. Each player’s objective is to maxi-
mize his expected payoﬀ. Model this situation as a Bayesian game and
show that in any Nash equilibrium the highest prize that either player
is willing to exchange is the smallest possible prize.
? Exercise 28.2
Show that more information may hurt a player by
constructing a two-player Bayesian game with the following features.
Player 1 is fully informed while player 2 is not; the game has a unique
Nash equilibrium, in which player 2’s payoﬀis higher than his payoﬀin
the unique equilibrium of any of the related games in which he knows
player 1’s type.
2.6.3
Comments on the Model of a Bayesian Game
The idea that a situation in which the players are unsure about each
other’s characteristics can be modeled as a Bayesian game, in which the
players’ uncertainty is captured by a probability measure over some set
of “states”, is due to Harsanyi (1967/68). Harsanyi assumes that the
prior belief of every player is the same, arguing that all diﬀerences in the
players’ knowledge should be derived from an objective mechanism that
assigns information to each player, not from diﬀerences in the players’
initial beliefs. In Section 5.3 we show that the assumption of a common
prior belief has strong implications for the relationship between the play-
ers’ posterior beliefs. (For example, after a pair of players receive their
signals it cannot be “common knowledge” between them that player 1
believes the probability that the state of nature is in some given set to

--- Sayfa 45 ---
Notes
29
be α and that player 2 believes this probability to be β̸ = α, though it is
possible that player 1 believes the probability to be α, player 2 believes
it to be β, and one of them is unsure about the other’s belief.)
A Bayesian game can be used to model not only situations in which
each player is uncertain about the other players’ payoﬀs, as in Exam-
ple 27.1, but also situations in which each player is uncertain about the
other players’ knowledge.
Consider, for example, a Bayesian game in which the set of players
is N = {1, 2}, the set of states is Ω= {ω1, ω2, ω3}, the prior belief
of each player assigns probability 1
3 to each state, the signal functions
are deﬁned by τ1(ω1) = τ1(ω2) = t′
1, τ1(ω3) = t′′
1, and τ2(ω1) = t′
2,
τ2(ω2) = τ2(ω3) = t′′
2, and player 1’s preferences satisfy (b, ωj) ≻1 (c, ωj)
for j = 1, 2 and (c, ω3) ≻1 (b, ω3) for some action proﬁles b and c, while
player 2 is indiﬀerent between all pairs (a, ω). In state ω1 in such a game
player 2 knows that player 1 prefers b to c, while in state ω2 he does not
know whether player 1 prefers b to c or c to b. Since in state ω1 player 1
does not know whether the state is ω1 or ω2, she does not know in this
case whether (i) player 2 knows that she prefers b to c, or (ii) player 2
is not sure whether she prefers b to c or c to b.
Can every situation in which the players are uncertain about each
other’s knowledge be modeled as a Bayesian game? Assume that the
players’ payoﬀs depend only on a parameter θ ∈Θ. Denote the set of
possible beliefs of each player i by Xi. Then a belief of any player j is a
probability distribution over Θ × X−j. That is, the set of beliefs of any
player has to be deﬁned in terms of the sets of beliefs of all the other
players. Thus the answer to the question we posed is not trivial and is
equivalent to the question of whether we can ﬁnd a collection {Xj}j∈N
of sets with the property that for all i ∈N the set Xi is isomorphic
to the set of probability distributions over Θ × X−i. If so, we can let
Ω= Θ × (×i∈NXi) be the state space and use the model of a Bayesian
game to capture any situation in which players are uncertain not only
about each other’s payoﬀs but also about each other’s beliefs. A positive
answer is given to the question by Mertens and Zamir (1985); we omit
the argument.
Notes
The notion of an abstract strategic game has its origins in the work of
Borel (1921) and von Neumann (1928). The notion of Nash equilibrium
was formalized in the context of such a game by Nash (1950a); the

--- Sayfa 46 ---
30
Chapter 2.
Nash Equilibrium
basic idea behind it goes back at least to Cournot (1838).
The idea
of the proof of Proposition 20.3 originated with Nash (1950a, 1951)
and Glicksberg (1952), though the results they prove are slightly dif-
ferent. As stated the result is similar to Theorem 3.1 of Nikaidˆo and
Isoda (1955). The result in Exercise 20.4 is due to Nash (1951). The
idea of maxminimization dates back at least to the early eighteenth cen-
tury (see Kuhn (1968)). The main ideas of Proposition 22.2 are due
to von Neumann (1928); the theory of strictly competitive games was
developed by von Neumann and Morgenstern (1944). Bayesian games
were deﬁned and studied by Harsanyi (1967/68).
The Prisoner’s Dilemma appears to have ﬁrst entered the literature
in unpublished papers by Raiﬀa (in 1951) and Flood (in 1952, report-
ing joint work with Dresher); the standard interpretation of the game
is due to Tucker (see Raiﬀa (1992, p. 173)). BoS is due to Luce and
Raiﬀa (1957). Hawk–Dove is known also as “Chicken”. Auctions (Ex-
amples 18.1 and 27.1) were ﬁrst studied formally by Vickrey (1961). The
war of attrition in Example 18.4 is due to Maynard Smith (1974), the
location game in Example 18.6 is due to Hotelling (1929), and the game
in Exercise 28.1 is due to Brams, Kilgour, and Davis (1993).

--- Sayfa 47 ---
3
Mixed, Correlated, and Evolutionary
Equilibrium
In this chapter we examine two concepts of equilibrium in which the
players’ actions are not deterministic:
mixed strategy Nash equilib-
rium and correlated equilibrium.
We also brieﬂy study a variant of
Nash equilibrium designed to model the outcome of an evolutionary
process.
3.1
Mixed Strategy Nash Equilibrium
3.1.1
Deﬁnitions
The notion of mixed strategy Nash equilibrium is designed to model a
steady state of a game in which the participants’ choices are not deter-
ministic but are regulated by probabilistic rules. We begin with formal
deﬁnitions, then turn to their interpretation.
In the previous chapter we deﬁne a strategic game to be a triple ⟨N,
(Ai), (≿i)⟩, where the preference relation ≿i of each player i is deﬁned
over the set A = ×i∈NAi of action proﬁles (Deﬁnition 11.1). In this
chapter we allow the players’ choices to be nondeterministic and thus
need to add to the primitives of the model a speciﬁcation of each player’s
preference relation over lotteries on A. Following the current convention
in game theory, we assume that the preference relation of each player i
satisﬁes the assumptions of von Neumann and Morgenstern, so that
it can be represented by the expected value of some function ui: A →
R. Thus our basic model of strategic interaction in this chapter is a
triple ⟨N, (Ai), (ui)⟩that diﬀers from a strategic game as we previously
deﬁned it in that ui: A →R for each i ∈N is a function whose expected
value represents player i’s preferences over the set of lotteries on A.
Nevertheless, we refer to the model simply as a strategic game.

--- Sayfa 48 ---
32
Chapter 3. Mixed, Correlated, and Evolutionary Equilibrium
Let G = ⟨N, (Ai), (ui)⟩be such a strategic game.
We denote by
∆(Ai) the set of probability distributions over Ai and refer to a member
of ∆(Ai) as a mixed strategy of player i; we assume that the players’
mixed strategies are independent randomizations. For clarity, we some-
times refer to a member of Ai as a pure strategy. For any ﬁnite set
X and δ ∈∆(X) we denote by δ(x) the probability that δ assigns to
x ∈X and deﬁne the support of δ to be the set of elements x ∈X for
which δ(x) > 0. A proﬁle (αj)j∈N of mixed strategies induces a proba-
bility distribution over the set A; if, for example, each Aj is ﬁnite then
given the independence of the randomizations the probability of the ac-
tion proﬁle a = (aj)j∈N is Πj∈Nαj(aj), so that player i’s evaluation of
(αj)j∈N is P
a∈A (Πj∈Nαj(aj)) ui(a).
We now derive from G another strategic game, called the “mixed
extension” of G, in which the set of actions of each player i is the set
∆(Ai) of his mixed strategies in G.
▶Definition 32.1 The mixed extension of the strategic game ⟨N, (Ai),
(ui)⟩is the strategic game ⟨N, (∆(Ai)), (Ui)⟩in which ∆(Ai) is the set
of probability distributions over Ai, and Ui: ×j∈N∆(Aj) →R assigns to
each α ∈×j∈N∆(Aj) the expected value under ui of the lottery over A
that is induced by α (so that Ui(α) = P
a∈A (Πj∈Nαj(aj)) ui(a) if A is
ﬁnite).
Note that each function Ui is multilinear.
That is, for any mixed
strategy proﬁle α, any mixed strategies βi and γi of player i, and any
number λ ∈[0, 1], we have Ui(α−i, λβi + (1 −λ)γi) = λUi(α−i, βi) +
(1 −λ)Ui(α−i, γi). Note also that when each Ai is ﬁnite we have
Ui(α) =
X
ai∈Ai
αi(ai)Ui(α−i, e(ai))
(32.2)
for any mixed strategy proﬁle α, where e(ai) is the degenerate mixed
strategy of player i that attaches probability one to ai ∈Ai.
We now deﬁne the main equilibrium notion we study in this chapter.
▶Definition 32.3 A mixed strategy Nash equilibrium of a strate-
gic game is a Nash equilibrium of its mixed extension.
Suppose that α∗∈×j∈N∆(Aj) is a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium
of G = ⟨N, (Ai), (ui)⟩in which each player i’s mixed strategy α∗
i is degen-
erate in the sense that it assigns probability one to a single member—say
a∗
i —of Ai. Then, since Ai can be identiﬁed with a subset of ∆(Ai), the
action proﬁle a∗is a Nash equilibrium of G. Conversely, suppose that
a∗is a Nash equilibrium of G. Then by the linearity of Ui in αi no

--- Sayfa 49 ---
3.1 Mixed Strategy Nash Equilibrium
33
probability distribution over actions in Ai yields player i a payoﬀhigher
than that generated by e(a∗
i ), and thus the proﬁle (e(a∗
i )) is a mixed
strategy Nash equilibrium of G.
We have just argued that the set of Nash equilibria of a strategic game
is a subset of its set of mixed strategy Nash equilibria. In Chapter 2 we
saw that there are games for which the set of Nash equilibria is empty.
There are also games for which the set of mixed strategy Nash equilibria
is empty. However, every game in which each player has ﬁnitely many
actions has at least one mixed strategy Nash equilibrium, as the following
result shows.
Proposition 33.1 Every ﬁnite strategic game has a mixed strategy
Nash equilibrium.
Proof. Let G = ⟨N, (Ai), (ui)⟩be a strategic game, and for each player i
let mi be the number of members of the set Ai. Then we can iden-
tify the set ∆(Ai) of player i’s mixed strategies with the set of vectors
(p1, . . . , pmi) for which pk ≥0 for all k and Pmi
k=1 pk = 1 (pk being the
probability with which player i uses his kth pure strategy). This set is
nonempty, convex, and compact. Since expected payoﬀis linear in the
probabilities, each player’s payoﬀfunction in the mixed extension of G is
both quasi-concave in his own strategy and continuous. Thus the mixed
extension of G satisﬁes all the requirements of Proposition 20.3.
2
Essential to this proof is the assumption that the set of actions of
each player is ﬁnite. Glicksberg (1952) shows that a game in which each
action set is a convex compact subset of a Euclidian space and each
payoﬀfunction is continuous has a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium.
(If each player’s payoﬀfunction is also quasi-concave in his own action
then Proposition 20.3 shows that such a game has a pure strategy Nash
equilibrium.)
The following result gives an important property of mixed strategy
Nash equilibria that is useful when calculating equilibria.
Lemma 33.2 Let G = ⟨N, (Ai), (ui)⟩be a ﬁnite strategic game. Then
α∗∈×i∈N∆(Ai) is a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium of G if and only
if for every player i ∈N every pure strategy in the support of α∗
i is a
best response to α∗
−i.
Proof. First suppose that there is an action ai in the support of α∗
i that
is not a best response to α∗
−i. Then by linearity of Ui in αi (see (32.2))
player i can increase his payoﬀby transferring probability from ai to an
action that is a best response; hence α∗
i is not a best response to α∗
−i.

--- Sayfa 50 ---
34
Chapter 3. Mixed, Correlated, and Evolutionary Equilibrium
Second suppose that there is a mixed strategy α′
i that gives a higher
expected payoﬀthan does α∗
i in response to α∗
−i. Then again by the
linearity of Ui at least one action in the support of α′
i must give a higher
payoﬀthan some action in the support of α∗
i , so that not all actions in
the support of α∗
i are best responses to α∗
−i.
2
It follows that every action in the support of any player’s equilibrium
mixed strategy yields that player the same payoﬀ.
If the set of actions of some player is not ﬁnite the result needs to be
modiﬁed. In this case, α∗is a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium of G
if and only if (i) for every player i no action in Ai yields, given α∗
−i, a
payoﬀto player i that exceeds his equilibrium payoﬀ, and (ii) the set of
actions that yield, given α∗
−i, a payoﬀless than his equilibrium payoﬀ
has α∗
i -measure zero.
Note that the assumption that the players’ preferences can be repre-
sented by expected payoﬀfunctions plays a key role in these character-
izations of mixed strategy equilibrium. The results do not necessarily
hold for other theories of decision-making under uncertainty.
3.1.2
Examples
The following example illustrates how one can ﬁnd mixed strategy Nash
equilibria of ﬁnite games.
⋄Example 34.1 (BoS) Consider the game BoS, reproduced in the top of
Figure 35.1. In Chapter 2 we interpreted the payoﬀs of player i in this ta-
ble as representing player i’s preferences over the set of (pure) outcomes.
Here, given our interest in mixed strategy equilibria, we interpret the
payoﬀs as von Neumann–Morgenstern utilities.
As we noted previously this game has two (pure) Nash equilibria,
(B, B) and (S, S), where B = Bach and S = Stravinsky. Suppose that
(α1, α2) is a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium. If α1(B) is zero or one,
we obtain the two pure Nash equilibria. If 0 < α1(B) < 1 then, given α2,
by Lemma 33.2 player 1’s actions B and S must yield the same payoﬀ,
so that we must have 2α2(B) = α2(S) and thus α2(B) = 1
3. Since 0 <
α2(B) < 1 it follows from the same result that player 2’s actions B and
S must yield the same payoﬀ, so that α1(B) = 2α1(S), or α1(B) = 2
3.
Thus the only nondegenerate mixed strategy Nash equilibrium of the
game is (( 2
3, 1
3), ( 1
3, 2
3)).
It is illuminating to construct the players’ best response functions in
the mixed extension of this game. If 0 ≤α2(B) < 1
3 then player 1’s

--- Sayfa 51 ---
3.1 Mixed Strategy Nash Equilibrium
35
Bach
Stravinsky
Bach
2, 1
0, 0
Stravinsky
0, 0
1, 2
0
2
3
1
α1(B) →
1
3
1
↑
α2(B)
B1
B2
s
s
s
Figure 35.1 The strategic game BoS (top) and the players’ best response functions
in the mixed extension of this game (bottom). The best response function of player 1
is given by the dashed line; that of player 2 is given by the solid line. The small
disks indicate the two pure strategy Nash equilibria and the mixed strategy Nash
equilibrium.
unique best response α1 has α1(B) = 0; if 1
3 < α2(B) ≤1 then her
unique best response has α1(B) = 1; and if α2 = 1
3 then, as we saw
above, all of her mixed strategies are best responses. Making a similar
computation for player 2 we obtain the functions shown at the bottom
of Figure 35.1.
? Exercise 35.1 (Guess the average) Each of n people announces a num-
ber in the set {1, . . . , K}. A prize of $1 is split equally between all the
people whose number is closest to 2
3 of the average number. Show that
the game has a unique mixed strategy Nash equilibrium, in which each
player’s strategy is pure.
? Exercise 35.2 (An investment race) Two investors are involved in a
competition with a prize of $1. Each investor can spend any amount in
the interval [0, 1]. The winner is the investor who spends the most; in
the event of a tie each investor receives $0.50. Formulate this situation
as a strategic game and ﬁnd its mixed strategy Nash equilibria. (Note

--- Sayfa 52 ---
36
Chapter 3. Mixed, Correlated, and Evolutionary Equilibrium
that the players’ payoﬀfunctions are discontinuous, so that Glicksberg’s
result does not apply; nevertheless the game has a mixed strategy Nash
equilibrium.)
In Section 2.5 we deﬁne and study the class of strictly competitive
games.
We show (Proposition 22.2) that in any strictly competitive
strategic game that has a Nash equilibrium the set of equilibria coin-
cides with the set of pairs of maxminimizers. This fact can be used to
ﬁnd the set of mixed strategy Nash equilibria of games whose mixed
extensions are strictly competitive. (Note that the fact that a game is
strictly competitive does not imply that its mixed extension is strictly
competitive. To see this, consider a game in which there are three pos-
sible outcomes a1, a2, and a3. Then we may have a1 ≻1 a2 ≻1 a3 and
a3 ≻2 a2 ≻2 a1, so that the game is strictly competitive, while both
players may prefer a2 to the lottery in which a1 and a3 occur with equal
probabilities, so that its mixed extension is not strictly competitive.)
? Exercise 36.1 (Guessing right) Players 1 and 2 each choose a mem-
ber of the set {1, . . . , K}. If the players choose the same number then
player 2 pays $1 to player 1; otherwise no payment is made. Each player
maximizes his expected monetary payoﬀ. Find the mixed strategy Nash
equilibria of this (strictly competitive) game.
? Exercise 36.2 (Air strike) Army A has a single plane with which it can
strike one of three possible targets. Army B has one anti-aircraft gun
that can be assigned to one of the targets. The value of target k is vk,
with v1 > v2 > v3 > 0. Army A can destroy a target only if the target is
undefended and A attacks it. Army A wishes to maximize the expected
value of the damage and army B wishes to minimize it. Formulate the
situation as a (strictly competitive) strategic game and ﬁnd its mixed
strategy Nash equilibria.
? Exercise 36.3 Show the following mathematical result, which we use in
Exercise 64.2. For any two compact convex subsets X and Y of Rk there
exist x∗∈X and y∗∈Y such that x∗·y ≤x∗·y∗≤x·y∗for all x ∈X and
y ∈Y . (You can prove this result either by appealing to the existence of
a Nash equilibrium in a strategic game (Proposition 20.3), or by the fol-
lowing elementary argument (which avoids the implicit use of Kakutani’s
ﬁxed point theorem). Let (xk) and (yk) be sequences dense in X and
Y respectively, and for each positive integer n consider the strictly com-
petitive game in which each player has n actions and the payoﬀfunction
of player 1 is given by u1(i, j) = xi · yj; use Propositions 33.1 and 22.2.)

--- Sayfa 53 ---
3.2 Interpretations of Mixed Strategy Nash Equilibrium
37
3.2
Interpretations of Mixed Strategy Nash Equilibrium
In this section we discuss a number of interpretations of mixed strategy
equilibrium. We disagree on some points; paragraphs that express the
views of only one of us are preceded by that author’s initials.
3.2.1
Mixed Strategies as Objects of Choice
Viewed na¨ıvely, a mixed strategy entails a deliberate decision by a player
to introduce randomness into his behavior: a player who chooses a mixed
strategy commits himself to a random device that probabilistically se-
lects members of his set of actions. After all the players have so commit-
ted themselves, the devices are operated and an action proﬁle is realized.
Thus each player i chooses a member of ∆(Ai) in the same way that he
chooses a member of Ai in the strategic games discussed in Chapter 2.
There certainly are cases in which players introduce randomness into
their behavior. For example, players randomly “bluﬀ” in poker, gov-
ernments randomly audit taxpayers, and some stores randomly oﬀer
discounts.
ar However, the notion of a mixed strategy equilibrium in a strategic
game does not capture the players’ motivation to introduce randomness
into their behavior. Usually a player deliberately randomizes in order
to inﬂuence the other players’ behavior. Consider, for example, the chil-
dren’s version of Matching Pennies (Example 17.1) in which the players
choose to display an odd or even number of ﬁngers. This game is clas-
sically used to motivate the notion of mixed strategy equilibrium, but
randomization is a bizarre description of a player’s deliberate strategy
in the game. A player’s action is a response to his guess about the other
player’s choice; guessing is a psychological operation that is very much
deliberate and not random. Alternatively, consider another example of-
ten given to motivate mixed strategy equilibrium, namely the relation-
ship between the tax authorities and a taxpayer. The authorities’ aim is
to deter the taxpayer from tax evasion; considerations of cost lead them
to audit only randomly. They would like the taxpayer to know their
strategy and are not indiﬀerent between a strategy in which they audit
the taxpayer and one in which they do not do so, as required in a mixed
strategy equilibrium. The situation should be modeled as a game in
which the authorities ﬁrst choose the probability of auditing, and then,
being informed of this probability, the taxpayer takes an action. In such
a model the set of possible randomizations is the set of pure strategies.

--- Sayfa 54 ---
38
Chapter 3. Mixed, Correlated, and Evolutionary Equilibrium
mjo The main problem with interpreting a player’s equilibrium mixed
strategy as a deliberate choice is the fact that in a mixed strategy equi-
librium each player is indiﬀerent between all mixed strategies whose sup-
ports are subsets of her equilibrium strategy: her equilibrium strategy
is only one of many strategies that yield her the same expected pay-
oﬀ, given the other players’ equilibrium behavior. However, this prob-
lem is not limited to mixed strategy equilibria. For example, it aﬄicts
equilibria in many sequential games (including all repeated games), in
which a player is indiﬀerent between her equilibrium strategy and many
non-equilibrium strategies. Further, in some games there may be other
reasons to choose an equilibrium mixed strategy. In strictly competitive
games, for example, we have seen that an equilibrium mixed strategy
may strictly maximize the payoﬀthat a player can guarantee. (This is
so, for example, in Matching Pennies.) Finally, the ingenious argument
of Harsanyi (1973) (considered below in Section 3.2.4) provides some
relief from this feature of an equilibrium mixed strategy.
mjo It seems likely that the mixed strategy equilibrium of Match-
ing Pennies provides a good description of the steady state behavior of
players who play the game repeatedly against randomly selected oppo-
nents. In such a situation a player has no way of guessing the action of
her opponent in any particular encounter, and it is reasonable for her
to adopt the strategy that maximizes the payoﬀthat she can guaran-
tee. If two players interact repeatedly then the psychology of guessing
may oﬀer insights into their behavior, though even in this case the mixed
strategy equilibrium of the game may provide a good description of their
behavior. The tax auditing situation can equally well be modeled as a
strategic game in which the choices of the players are simultaneous. The
equilibrium audit probability chosen by the authorities is the same in
this game as it is in the game in which the authorities move ﬁrst; given
the behavior of the taxpayer, the authorities are indiﬀerent between
auditing and not.
3.2.2
Mixed Strategy Nash Equilibrium as a Steady State
In Chapter 2 we interpreted a Nash equilibrium as a steady state of an
environment in which players act repeatedly and ignore any strategic
link that may exist between plays. We can interpret a mixed strategy
Nash equilibrium similarly as a stochastic steady state.
The players
have information about the frequencies with which actions were taken
in the past (“80% of the time a player in the role of player 1 in this game

--- Sayfa 55 ---
3.2 Interpretations of Mixed Strategy Nash Equilibrium
39
took the action a1 and 20% of the time such a player took the action
b1”); each player uses these frequencies to form his belief about the
future behavior of the other players, and hence formulate his action. In
equilibrium these frequencies remain constant over time and are stable
in the sense that any action taken with positive probability by a player
is optimal given the steady state beliefs.
A mixed strategy equilibrium predicts that the outcome of a game
is stochastic, so that for a single play of a game its prediction is less
precise than that of a pure strategy equilibrium. But as we argued in
Section 1.5, the role of the theory is to explain regularities; the notion
of mixed strategy equilibrium captures stochastic regularity.
A variant of this interpretation is based on an interpretation of an n-
player game as a model of the interaction of n large populations. Each
occurrence of the game takes place after n players are randomly drawn,
one from each population. The probabilities in player i’s equilibrium
mixed strategy are interpreted as the steady state frequencies with which
the members of Ai are used in the ith population. In this interpretation
the game is a reduced form of a model in which the populations are
described explicitly.
An assumption that underlies the steady state interpretation is that
no player detects any correlation among the other players’ actions or
between the other players’ actions and his own behavior.
Removing
this assumption leads to the notion of correlated equilibrium, which we
discuss in Section 3.3.
3.2.3
Mixed Strategies as Pure Strategies in an Extended Game
Before selecting his action a player may receive random private infor-
mation, inconsequential from the point of view of the other players, on
which his action may depend. The player may not consciously choose
the connection between his action and the realization of his private infor-
mation; it may just happen that there is a correlation between the two
that causes his action to appear to be “random” from the point of view
of another player or outside observer. In modeling a player’s behavior as
random, a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium captures the dependence of
behavior on factors that the players perceive as irrelevant. Alternatively,
a player may be aware that external factors determine his opponents’
behavior, but may ﬁnd it impossible or very costly to determine the
relationship. (For the same reason we model the outcome of a coin toss
as random rather than describe it as the result of the interaction of its

--- Sayfa 56 ---
40
Chapter 3. Mixed, Correlated, and Evolutionary Equilibrium
starting position and velocity, the wind speed, and other factors.) To
summarize, a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium, viewed in this way, is a
description of a steady state of the system that reﬂects elements missing
from the original description of the game.
To be more concrete, consider the game BoS (Example 34.1). As we
saw, this game has a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium (( 2
3, 1
3), ( 1
3, 2
3)).
Now suppose that each player has three possible “moods”, determined
by factors he does not understand.
Each player is in each of these
moods one-third of the time, independently of the other player’s mood;
his mood has no eﬀect on his payoﬀ. Assume that player 1 chooses Bach
whenever she is in moods 1 or 2 and Stravinsky when she is in mood 3,
and player 2 chooses Bach when he is in mood 1 and Stravinsky when he
is in moods 2 or 3. Viewing the situation as a Bayesian game in which the
three types of each player correspond to his possible moods, this behavior
deﬁnes a pure strategy equilibrium corresponding exactly to the mixed
strategy Nash equilibrium of the original game BoS.
Note that this
interpretation of the mixed strategy equilibrium does not depend on each
player’s having three equally likely and independent moods; we need the
players’ private information only to be rich enough that they can create
the appropriate random variables. Nevertheless, the requirement that
such an informational structure exist limits the interpretation.
ar There are three criticisms of this interpretation. First, it is hard
to accept that the deliberate behavior of a player depends on factors
that have no eﬀect on his payoﬀ. People usually give reasons for their
choices; in any particular situation a modeler who wishes to apply the
notion of mixed strategy equilibrium should point out the reasons that
are payoﬀirrelevant and explain the required dependency between the
player’s private information and his choice.
mjo In a mixed strategy equilibrium each player is indiﬀerent between
all the actions in the support of her equilibrium strategy, so that it is
not implausible that the action chosen depends upon factors regarded
by the modeler as “irrelevant”. When asked why they chose a certain
action from a set whose members are equally attractive, people often
give answers like “I don’t know—I just felt like it”.
ar Second, the behavior predicted by an equilibrium under this in-
terpretation is very fragile. If a manager’s behavior is determined by
the type of breakfast he eats, then factors outside the model, such as a
change in his diet or the price of eggs, may change the frequency with
which he chooses his actions, thus inducing changes in the beliefs of the
other players and causing instability.

--- Sayfa 57 ---
3.2 Interpretations of Mixed Strategy Nash Equilibrium
41
mjo For each structure of the random events there is a pattern of
behavior that leads to the same equilibrium. For example, if, before
an increase in the price of eggs, there was an equilibrium in which a
manager oﬀered a discount on days when she ate eggs for breakfast and
got up before 7:30 a.m., then after the price increase there may be an
equilibrium in which she oﬀers the discount when she eats eggs and gets
up before 8 a.m. After the price change her old pattern of behavior is
no longer a best response to the other players’ strategies; whether or not
the system will adjust in a stable way to the new equilibrium depends on
the process of adjustment. A mixed strategy Nash equilibrium is fragile
in the sense that the players have no positive incentive to adhere to their
equilibrium patterns of behavior (since the equilibrium strategies are not
uniquely optimal); beyond this, an equilibrium under this interpretation
is no more fragile than under any other interpretation. (And, once again,
this is a problem that is addressed by Harsanyi’s model, discussed in the
next section.)
ar Third, in order to interpret an equilibrium of a particular problem
in this way one needs to indicate the “real life” exogenous variables on
which the players base their behavior. For example, to interpret a mixed
strategy Nash equilibrium in a model of price competition one should
both specify the unmodeled factors that serve as the basis for the ﬁrms’
pricing policies and show that the information structure is rich enough
to span the set of all mixed strategy Nash equilibria. Those who apply
the notion of mixed strategy equilibrium rarely do so.
mjo A player in the world has access to a multitude of random vari-
ables on which her actions may depend: the time she wakes up in the
morning, the “mood” she is in, the time her newspaper is delivered, . . . .
The structure of these random variables is so rich that it is unnecessary
to spell them out in every application of the theory. To interpret mixed
strategies as pure strategies in a larger game nicely captures the idea
that the action chosen by a player may depend on factors outside the
model.
3.2.4
Mixed Strategies as Pure Strategies in a Perturbed Game
We now present a rationale for mixed strategy equilibrium due to Har-
sanyi (1973). A game is viewed as a frequently occurring situation in
which the players’ preferences are subject to small random variations.
(Thus, as in the argument of the previous section, random factors are
introduced, but here they are payoﬀ-relevant.) In each occurrence of

--- Sayfa 58 ---
42
Chapter 3. Mixed, Correlated, and Evolutionary Equilibrium
the situation each player knows his own preferences but not those of
the other players. A mixed strategy equilibrium is a summary of the
frequencies with which the players choose their actions over time.
Let G = ⟨N, (Ai), (ui)⟩be a ﬁnite strategic game and let ϵ =
(ϵi(a))i∈N,a∈A be a collection of random variables with range [−1, 1],
where ϵi = (ϵi(a))a∈A has a continuously diﬀerentiable density function
and an absolutely continuous distribution function, and the random vec-
tors (ϵi)i∈N are independent. Consider a family of perturbed games in
which each player i’s payoﬀat the outcome a is subject to the small
random variation ϵi(a), each player i knowing the realization (ϵi(a))a∈A
of ϵi but not the realizations of the other players’ random variables.
That is, consider the Bayesian game G(ϵ) in which the set of states of
nature is the set of all possible values of the realizations of ϵ, the (com-
mon) prior belief of each player is the probability distribution speciﬁed
by ϵ, the signal function of player i informs him only of the realizations
(ϵi(a))a∈A, and the payoﬀof player i at the outcome a and state ϵ is
ui(a) + ϵi(a). (Note that each player has inﬁnitely many types.)
Harsanyi’s main result (1973, Theorems 2 and 7) is that for almost
any game G and any collection ϵ∗of random variables satisfying the
conditions above, almost any mixed strategy Nash equilibrium of G is
the mixed strategy proﬁle associated with the limit, as the size γ of the
perturbation vanishes, of a sequence of pure strategy equilibria of the
Bayesian games G(γϵ∗) in each of which the action chosen by each type
is strictly optimal. Further, the limit of any such convergent sequence
is associated with a mixed strategy equilibrium of G (Harsanyi (1973,
Theorem 5)). That is, when the random variations in payoﬀs are small,
almost any mixed equilibrium of the game G is close to a pure equi-
librium of the associated Bayesian game and vice versa. We say that
a mixed strategy equilibrium of G with this property is approachable
under ϵ∗.
(Because of the relative mathematical complexity of these
results we do not include proofs.)
? Exercise 42.1
Consider two-player games in which each player i has
two pure strategies, ai and bi.
Let δi for i = 1, 2 be independent
random variables, each uniformly distributed on [−1, 1], and let the ran-
dom variables ϵi(a) for i = 1, 2 and a ∈A have the property that
ϵ1(a1, x) −ϵ1(b1, x) = δ1 for x = a2, b2 and ϵ2(x, a2) −ϵ2(x, b2) = δ2
for x = a1, b1.
a. Show that all the equilibria of BoS (Example 15.3) are approachable
under ϵ.

--- Sayfa 59 ---
3.2 Interpretations of Mixed Strategy Nash Equilibrium
43
b. For the game in which ui(a1, a2) = 1 for i = 1, 2 and all other payoﬀs
are zero, show that only the pure strategy Nash equilibrium (a1, a2)
is approachable under ϵ.
c. For the game in which ui(a) = 0 for i = 1, 2 and all a ∈A, show
that only the mixed strategy Nash equilibrium α in which αi(ai) =
αi(bi) = 1
2 for i = 1, 2 is approachable under ϵ. (Other equilibria
are approachable under other perturbations.)
Thus Harsanyi’s rationale for a mixed strategy equilibrium is that
even if no player makes any eﬀort to use his pure strategies with the
required probabilities, the random variations in the payoﬀfunctions in-
duce each player to choose his pure strategies with the right frequencies.
The equilibrium behavior of the other players is such that a player who
chooses the uniquely optimal pure strategy for each realization of his
payoﬀfunction chooses his actions with the frequencies required by his
equilibrium mixed strategy.
mjo Harsanyi’s result is an elegant response to the claim that a player
has no reason to choose her equilibrium mixed strategy since she is in-
diﬀerent between all strategies with the same support. I argued above
that for some games, including strictly competitive games, this criticism
is muted, since there are other reasons for players to choose their equi-
librium mixed strategies. Harsanyi’s result shows that in almost any
game the force of the criticism is limited, since almost any mixed strat-
egy Nash equilibrium is close to a strict pure strategy equilibrium of
any perturbation of the game in which the players’ payoﬀs are subject
to small random variations.
3.2.5
Mixed Strategies as Beliefs
Under another interpretation, upon which we elaborate in Section 5.4,
a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium is a proﬁle β of beliefs, in which βi
is the common belief of all the other players about player i’s actions,
with the property that for each player i each action in the support of
βi is optimal given β−i. Under this interpretation each player chooses a
single action rather than a mixed strategy. An equilibrium is a steady
state of the players’ beliefs, not their actions. These beliefs are required
to satisfy two properties: they are common among all players and are
consistent with the assumption that every player is an expected utility
maximizer.
If we were to start from this idea, we would formulate the notion of
equilibrium as follows.

--- Sayfa 60 ---
44
Chapter 3. Mixed, Correlated, and Evolutionary Equilibrium
▶Definition 44.1 A mixed strategy Nash equilibrium of a ﬁnite strategic
game is a mixed strategy proﬁle α∗with the property that for every
player i every action in the support of α∗
i is a best response to α∗
−i.
Lemma 33.2 shows that this deﬁnition is equivalent to our previ-
ous deﬁnition (32.3) and thus guarantees that the idea is indeed an
interpretation of mixed strategy equilibrium.
Note, however, that when we interpret mixed strategy equilibrium in
this way the predictive content of an equilibrium is small: it predicts only
that each player uses an action that is a best response to the equilibrium
beliefs. The set of such best responses includes any action in the support
of a player’s equilibrium mixed strategy and may even include actions
outside the support of this strategy.
3.3
Correlated Equilibrium
In Section 3.2.3 we discuss an interpretation of a mixed strategy Nash
equilibrium as a steady state in which each player’s action depends on a
signal that he receives from “nature”. In this interpretation the signals
are private and independent.
What happens if the signals are not private and independent? Sup-
pose, for example, that in BoS (see Figure 35.1) both players observe a
random variable that takes each of the two values x and y with proba-
bility 1
2. Then there is a new equilibrium, in which both players choose
Bach if the realization is x and Stravinsky if the realization is y. Given
each player’s information, his action is optimal: if the realization is x
then he knows that the other player chooses Bach, so that it is optimal
for him to choose Bach, and symmetrically if the realization is y.
In this example the players observe the same random variable. More
generally, their information may be less than perfectly correlated. Sup-
pose, for example, that there is a random variable that takes the three
values x, y, and z, and player 1 knows only that the realization is either
x or that it is a member of {y, z}, while player 2 knows only that it is
either a member of {x, y} or that it is z. That is, player 1’s information
partition is {{x}, {y, z}} and player 2’s is {{x, y}, {z}}.
Under these
assumptions a strategy of player 1 consists of two actions: one that she
uses when she knows that the realization is x and one that she uses
when she knows that the realization is a member of {y, z}. Similarly, a
strategy of player 2 consists of two actions, one for {x, y} and one for z.
A player’s strategy is optimal if, given the strategy of the other player,

--- Sayfa 61 ---
3.3 Correlated Equilibrium
45
for any realization of his information he can do no better by choosing an
action diﬀerent from that dictated by his strategy. To illustrate how a
player uses his information in choosing an optimal action, suppose that
the probabilities of y and z are η and ζ and player 2’s strategy is to
take the action a2 if he knows that the realization is in {x, y} and b2
if he knows that the realization is z. Then if player 1 is informed that
either y or z has occurred he chooses an action that is optimal given
that player 2 chooses a2 with probability η/(η + ζ) (the probability of y
conditional on {y, z}) and b2 with probability ζ/(η + ζ).
These examples lead us to the following notion of equilibrium.
▶Definition 45.1 A correlated equilibrium of a strategic game
⟨N, (Ai), (ui)⟩consists of
• a ﬁnite probability space (Ω, π) (Ωis a set of states and π is a
probability measure on Ω)
• for each player i ∈N a partition Pi of Ω(player i’s information
partition)
• for each player i ∈N a function σi: Ω→Ai with σi(ω) = σi(ω′)
whenever ω ∈Pi and ω′ ∈Pi for some Pi ∈Pi (σi is player i’s
strategy)
such that for every i ∈N and every function τi: Ω→Ai for which
τi(ω) = τi(ω′) whenever ω ∈Pi and ω′ ∈Pi for some Pi ∈Pi (i.e. for
every strategy of player i) we have
X
ω∈Ω
π(ω)ui(σ−i(ω), σi(ω)) ≥
X
ω∈Ω
π(ω)ui(σ−i(ω), τi(ω)).
(45.2)
Note that the probability space and information partition are not
exogenous but are part of the equilibrium.
Note also that (45.2) is
equivalent to the requirement that for every state ω that occurs with
positive probability the action σi(ω) is optimal given the other players’
strategies and player i’s knowledge about ω. (This equivalence depends
on the assumption that the players’ preferences obey expected utility
theory.)
We begin by showing that the set of correlated equilibria contains the
set of mixed strategy Nash equilibria.
Proposition 45.3 For every mixed strategy Nash equilibrium α of
a ﬁnite strategic game ⟨N, (Ai), (ui)⟩there is a correlated equilibrium
⟨(Ω, π), (Pi), (σi)⟩in which for each player i ∈N the distribution on Ai
induced by σi is αi.

--- Sayfa 62 ---
46
Chapter 3. Mixed, Correlated, and Evolutionary Equilibrium
Proof. Let Ω= A (= ×j∈NAj) and deﬁne π by π(a) = Πj∈Nαj(aj). For
each i ∈N and bi ∈Ai let Pi(bi) = {a ∈A: ai = bi} and let Pi consist
of the |Ai| sets Pi(bi). Deﬁne σi by σi(a) = ai for each a ∈A. Then
⟨(Ω, π), (Pi), (σi)⟩is a correlated equilibrium since (45.2) is satisﬁed for
every strategy τi: the left-hand side is player i’s payoﬀin the mixed
strategy Nash equilibrium α and the right-hand side is his payoﬀwhen
he uses the mixed strategy in which he chooses the action τi(a) with
probability αi(ai) and every other player j uses the mixed strategy αj.
Further, the distribution on Ai induced by σi is αi.
2
The following example is a formal expression of the example with
which we began this section.
⋄Example 46.1
The three mixed strategy Nash equilibrium payoﬀpro-
ﬁles in BoS (see Example 34.1) are (2, 1), (1, 2), and ( 2
3, 2
3). In addi-
tion one of the correlated equilibria yields the payoﬀproﬁle ( 3
2, 3
2): let
Ω= {x, y}, π(x) = π(y) = 1
2, P1 = P2 = {{x}, {y}}, σi(x) = Bach,
and σi(y) = Stravinsky for i = 1, 2. One interpretation of this equilib-
rium is that the players observe the outcome of a public coin toss, which
determines which of the two pure strategy Nash equilibria they play.
This example suggests the following result.
Proposition 46.2 Let G = ⟨N, (Ai), (ui)⟩be a strategic game. Any
convex combination of correlated equilibrium payoﬀproﬁles of G is a
correlated equilibrium payoﬀproﬁle of G.
Proof. Let u1, . . . , uK be correlated equilibrium payoﬀproﬁles and let
(λ1, . . . , λK) ∈RK with λk ≥0 for all k and PK
k=1 λk = 1. For each
value of k let ⟨(Ωk, πk), (Pk
i ), (σk
i )⟩be a correlated equilibrium that gen-
erates the payoﬀproﬁle uk; without loss of generality assume that the
sets Ωk are disjoint. The following deﬁnes a correlated equilibrium for
which the payoﬀproﬁle is PK
k=1 λkuk.
Let Ω= ∪kΩk, and for any
ω ∈Ωdeﬁne π by π(ω) = λkπk(ω) where k is such that ω ∈Ωk. For
each i ∈N let Pi = ∪kPk
i and deﬁne σi by σi(ω) = σk
i (ω) where k is
such that ω ∈Ωk.
2
We can interpret the correlated equilibrium constructed in this proof
as follows: ﬁrst a public random device determines which of the K
correlated equilibria is to be played, and then the random variable
corresponding to the kth correlated equilibrium is realized.
⋄Example 46.3
Consider the game in the left-hand side of Figure 47.1.
The Nash equilibrium payoﬀproﬁles are (2, 7) and (7, 2) (pure) and

--- Sayfa 63 ---
3.3 Correlated Equilibrium
47
L
R
T
6, 6
2, 7
B
7, 2
0, 0
L
R
T
y
z
B
x
–
Figure 47.1 An example of a correlated equilibrium. On the left is a strategic game.
The table on the right gives the choices of the players as a function of the state in a
correlated equilibrium of the game.
(4 2
3, 4 2
3) (mixed).
The following correlated equilibrium yields a pay-
oﬀproﬁle that is outside the convex hull of these three proﬁles. Let
Ω= {x, y, z} and π(x) = π(y) = π(z) = 1
3; let player 1’s partition be
{{x}, {y, z}} and player 2’s be {{x, y}, {z}}. Deﬁne the strategies as
follows: σ1(x) = B and σ1(y) = σ1(z) = T; σ2(x) = σ2(y) = L and
σ2(z) = R. (The relation between the choices and the states is shown in
the right-hand side of Figure 47.1.) Then player 1’s behavior is optimal
given player 2’s: in state x, player 1 knows that player 2 plays L and
thus it is optimal for her to play B; in states y and z she assigns equal
probabilities to player 2 using L and R, so that it is optimal for her to
play T. Symmetrically, player 2’s behavior is optimal given player 1’s,
and hence we have a correlated equilibrium; the payoﬀproﬁle is (5, 5).
This example, in which we can identify the set of states with the set
of outcomes, suggests the following result.
Proposition 47.1 Let G = ⟨N, (Ai), (ui)⟩be a ﬁnite strategic game.
Every probability distribution over outcomes that can be obtained in a
correlated equilibrium of G can be obtained in a correlated equilibrium
in which the set of states is A and for each i ∈N player i’s information
partition consists of all sets of the form {a ∈A: ai = bi} for some action
bi ∈Ai.
Proof. Let ⟨(Ω, π), (Pi), (σi)⟩be a correlated equilibrium of G. Then
⟨(Ω′, π′), (P′
i), (σ′
i)⟩is also a correlated equilibrium, where Ω′ = A,
π′(a) = π({ω ∈Ω: σ(ω) = a}) for each a ∈A, P′
i consists of sets of the
type {a ∈A: ai = bi} for some bi ∈Ai, and σ′
i is deﬁned by σ′
i(a) = ai.2
This result allows us to conﬁne attention, when calculating correlated
equilibrium payoﬀs, to equilibria in which the set of states is the set
of outcomes. Note however that such equilibria may have no natural
interpretation.

--- Sayfa 64 ---
48
Chapter 3. Mixed, Correlated, and Evolutionary Equilibrium
L
R
T
0, 0, 3
0, 0, 0
B
1, 0, 0
0, 0, 0
A
L
R
T
2, 2, 2
0, 0, 0
B
0, 0, 0
2, 2, 2
B
L
R
T
0, 0, 0
0, 0, 0
B
0, 1, 0
0, 0, 3
C
Figure 48.1 A three-player game. Player 1 chooses one of the two rows, player 2
chooses one of the two columns, and player 3 chooses one of the three tables.
In the deﬁnition of a correlated equilibrium we assume that the players
share a common belief about the probabilities with which the states oc-
cur. If there is a random variable about which the players hold diﬀerent
beliefs then additional equilibrium payoﬀproﬁles are possible. Suppose,
for example, that player 1 is sure that team T1 will beat team T2 in some
contest, while player 2 is sure that team T2 will win. Then there is an
equilibrium of BoS (Example 34.1) in which the outcome is (Bach, Bach)
if T1 wins and (Stravinsky, Stravinsky) if team T2 wins, which gives each
player an expected payoﬀof 2! (In Section 5.3 we show that it cannot
be common knowledge between two players that their beliefs diﬀer in
the way we have just assumed if they have the same priors.)
? Exercise 48.1
Consider the three-player game with the payoﬀs given
in Figure 48.1. (Player 1 chooses one of the two rows, player 2 chooses
one of the two columns, and player 3 chooses one of the three tables.)
a. Show that the pure strategy equilibrium payoﬀs are (1, 0, 0), (0, 1, 0),
and (0, 0, 0).
b. Show that there is a correlated equilibrium in which player 3 chooses
B and players 1 and 2 play (T, L) and (B, R) with equal probabilities.
c. Explain the sense in which player 3 prefers not to have the informa-
tion that players 1 and 2 use to coordinate their actions.
3.4
Evolutionary Equilibrium
In this section we describe the basic idea behind a variant of the notion
of Nash equilibrium called evolutionary equilibrium. This notion is de-
signed to model situations in which the players’ actions are determined
by the forces of evolution. We conﬁne the discussion to a simple case in
which the members of a single population of organisms (animals, human

--- Sayfa 65 ---
3.4 Evolutionary Equilibrium
49
beings, plants, . . . ) interact with each other pairwise. In each match
each organism takes an action from a set B.
The organisms do not
consciously choose actions; rather, they either inherit modes of behavior
from their forebears or are assigned them by mutation. We assume that
there is a function u that measures each organism’s ability to survive: if
an organism takes the action a when it faces the distribution β of actions
in the population of its potential opponents, then its ability to survive
is measured by the expectation of u(a, b) under β. This description cor-
responds to a two-player symmetric strategic game ⟨{1, 2}, (B, B), (ui)⟩
where u1(a, b) = u(a, b) and u2(a, b) = u(b, a).
A candidate for an evolutionary equilibrium is an action in B. The
notion of equilibrium is designed to capture a steady state in which all
organisms take this action and no mutant can invade the population.
More precisely, the idea is that for every possible action b ∈B the evo-
lutionary process occasionally transforms a small fraction of the popula-
tion into mutants who follow b. In an equilibrium any such mutant must
obtain an expected payoﬀlower than that of the equilibrium action, so
that it dies out. Now, if the fraction ϵ > 0 of the population consists of
mutants taking the action b while all other organisms take the action b∗,
then the average payoﬀof a mutant is (1−ϵ)u(b, b∗)+ϵu(b, b) (since with
probability 1 −ϵ it encounters a non-mutant and with probability ϵ it
encounters another mutant), while the average payoﬀof a non-mutant
is (1 −ϵ)u(b∗, b∗) + ϵu(b∗, b).
Therefore for b∗to be an evolutionary
equilibrium we require
(1 −ϵ)u(b, b∗) + ϵu(b, b) < (1 −ϵ)u(b∗, b∗) + ϵu(b∗, b)
for all values of ϵ suﬃciently small. This inequality is satisﬁed if and
only if for every b̸ = b∗either u(b, b∗) < u(b∗, b∗), or u(b, b∗) = u(b∗, b∗)
and u(b, b) < u(b∗, b), so that we can deﬁne an evolutionary equilibrium
as follows.
▶Definition 49.1 Let G = ⟨{1, 2}, (B, B), (ui)⟩be a symmetric strate-
gic game, where u1(a, b) = u2(b, a) = u(a, b) for some function u. An
evolutionarily stable strategy (ESS) of G is an action b∗∈B for
which (b∗, b∗) is a Nash equilibrium of G and u(b, b) < u(b∗, b) for every
best response b ∈B to b∗with b̸ = b∗.
In the following example, as in much of the literature, the set B is
taken to be the set of mixed strategies over some ﬁnite set of actions.
⋄Example 49.2 (Hawk–Dove) From time to time pairs of animals in a
population ﬁght over a prey with value 1. Each animal can behave either

--- Sayfa 66 ---
50
Chapter 3. Mixed, Correlated, and Evolutionary Equilibrium
D
H
D
1
2, 1
2
0, 1
H
1, 0
1
2(1 −c), 1
2(1 −c)
Figure 50.1 A Hawk–Dove game.
γ, γ
1, −1
−1, 1
−1, 1
γ, γ
1, −1
1, −1
−1, 1
γ, γ
Figure 50.2 A game without an ESS. Each pure strategy yields a mutant a payoﬀ
higher than the unique symmetric equilibrium mixed strategy.
like a dove (D) or like a hawk (H). If both animals in a match are dovish
then they split the value of the prey; if they are both hawkish then the
value of the prey is reduced by c and is split evenly; if one of them is
hawkish and the other is dovish then the hawk gets 1 and the dove 0.
The game is shown in Figure 50.1. (If c > 1, it has the same structure
as that in Figure 17.2.) Let B be the set of all mixed strategies over
{D, H}. If c > 1, the game has a unique symmetric mixed strategy
Nash equilibrium, in which each player uses the strategy (1 −1/c, 1/c);
this strategy is the only ESS. (In particular, in this case a population
exclusively of hawks is not evolutionarily stable.) If c < 1, the game has
a unique mixed strategy Nash equilibrium in which each player uses the
pure strategy H; this strategy is the only ESS.
It is immediate from Deﬁnition 49.1 that if (b∗, b∗) is a symmetric Nash
equilibrium and no strategy other than b∗is a best response to b∗(i.e.
(b∗, b∗) is a strict equilibrium) then b∗is an ESS. A nonstrict equilibrium
strategy may not be an ESS: consider the two-player symmetric game in
which each player has two actions and u(a, b) = 1 for all (a, b) ∈B × B.
For a more interesting example of a nonstrict equilibrium strategy that
is not an ESS, consider the game in Figure 50.2 in which B consists of
all mixed strategies over a set containing three members and 0 < γ ≤1.
This game has a unique symmetric mixed strategy Nash equilibrium

--- Sayfa 67 ---
Notes
51
in which each player’s mixed strategy is ( 1
3, 1
3, 1
3); in this equilibrium
the expected payoﬀof each player is γ/3.
A mutant who uses any
of the three pure strategies obtains an expected payoﬀof γ/3 when it
encounters a non-mutant, but the higher payoﬀγ when it encounters
another mutant. Hence the equilibrium mixed strategy is not an ESS
(from which it follows that not every game that has a Nash equilibrium
has an ESS).
? Exercise 51.1 Show that in every two-player symmetric strategic game
in which each player has two pure strategies and the payoﬀs to the four
strategy proﬁles are diﬀerent there is a mixed strategy that is an ESS.
Notes
The modern formulation of a mixed strategy is due to Borel (1921; 1924,
pp. 204–221; 1927), although the idea dates back at least to the early
eighteenth century (see Guilbaud (1961) and Kuhn (1968)). Borel es-
tablishes the existence of a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium for some
special strictly competitive games; von Neumann (1928) proves the exis-
tence of an equilibrium for all strictly competitive games. The existence
result (Proposition 33.1) that we prove (which covers all ﬁnite strate-
gic games) is due to Nash (1950a, 1951). The notion of a correlated
equilibrium is due to Aumann (1974), whose paper is also the basis for
the other material in Section 3.3. The idea of an evolutionarily stable
strategy is due to Maynard Smith and Price (see Maynard Smith (1972)
and Maynard Smith and Price (1973); see also Maynard Smith (1974,
1982)).
The large population model mentioned in Section 3.2.2 is due to
Rosenthal (1979).
The idea of interpreting mixed strategies as pure
strategies in an extended game discussed in Section 3.2.3 is due to
Harsanyi (1973), as is the content of Section 3.2.4. The interpretation of
a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium given in Section 3.2.5 is discussed in
Aumann (1987a). Some of the criticism of mixed strategy Nash equilib-
rium given in Section 3.2 is taken from Rubinstein (1991). The examples
in Section 3.3 are due to Aumann (1974).
Our proof of Proposition 33.1, due to Nash (1950a), appeals to Propo-
sition 20.3, the proof of which uses Kakutani’s ﬁxed point theorem.
Nash (1951) presents an alternative proof of Proposition 33.1 that uses
the more basic ﬁxed point theorem of Brouwer, which applies to point-
valued functions.

--- Sayfa 68 ---
52
Chapter 3. Mixed, Correlated, and Evolutionary Equilibrium
The game in Exercise 35.1 is taken from Moulin (1986, p. 72). Exer-
cise 36.3 is taken from Arrow, Barankin, and Blackwell (1953).
For a discussion of mixed strategy Nash equilibrium when the players’
preferences do not satisfy the assumptions necessary to be represented
by expected utility functions see Crawford (1990). The notion of ESS
that we discuss in Section 3.4 has been extended in various directions;
see van Damme (1991, Chapter 9).
We have not addressed the question of whether there is any dynamic
adjustment process that leads to an equilibrium.
One such process,
called ﬁctitious play, is suggested by Brown (1951), and has recently
been reconsidered. In this process each player always chooses a best
response to the statistical frequency of the other players’ past actions.
Robinson (1951) shows that the process converges to a mixed strat-
egy Nash equilibrium in any strictly competitive game; Shapley (1964,
Section 5) shows that this is not necessarily so in games that are not
strictly competitive. Recent research focuses on models that explicitly
capture the forces of evolution and learning; see Battigalli, Gilli, and
Molinari (1992) for an introduction to this work.

--- Sayfa 69 ---
4
Rationalizability and Iterated Elimination of
Dominated Actions
In this chapter we examine the consequences of requiring that a player’s
choice be optimal given a belief consistent with the view that every
player is rational, every player thinks that every player is rational, every
player thinks that every player thinks that every player is rational, and
so on.
4.1
Rationalizability
In Chapters 2 and 3 we discuss solution concepts for strategic games
in which each player’s choice is required to be optimal given his belief
about the other players’ behavior, a belief that is required to be correct.
That is, we assume that each player knows the other players’ equilibrium
behavior. If the players participate repeatedly in the situation that the
game models then they can obtain this knowledge from the steady state
behavior that they observe. However, if the game is a one-shot event
in which all players choose their actions simultaneously then it is not
clear how each player can know the other players’ equilibrium actions;
for this reason game theorists have developed solution concepts that do
not entail this assumption.
In this chapter we study some such solution concepts, in which the
players’ beliefs about each other’s actions are not assumed to be correct,
but are constrained by considerations of rationality: each player believes
that the actions taken by every other player is a best response to some
belief, and, further, each player assumes that every other player reasons
in this way and hence thinks that every other player believes that every
other player’s action is a best response to some belief, and so on.
The solution concepts that we study are weaker than Nash equilib-
rium. In fact, in many games they do not exclude any action from being

--- Sayfa 70 ---
54
Chapter 4. Rationalizability
used. Nevertheless we ﬁnd the approach interesting in that it explores
the logical implications of assumptions about the players’ knowledge
that are weaker than those in the previous chapters.
Fix a strategic game ⟨N, (Ai), (ui)⟩(in which the expectation of ui
represents player i’s preferences over lotteries on A = ×j∈NAj for each
i ∈N). In order to develop the ideas in this chapter it is not necessary
to assume that the action set Ai of each player is ﬁnite, though for
simplicity we adopt this assumption in some of the discussion. A belief of
player i (about the actions of the other players) is a probability measure
on A−i (= ×j∈N\{i}Aj). Note that this deﬁnition allows a player to
believe that the other players’ actions are correlated: a belief is not
necessarily a product of independent probability measures on each of the
action sets Aj for j ∈N \ {i}. As before, an action ai ∈Ai of player i is
a best response to a belief if there is no other action that yields player i
a higher payoﬀgiven the belief. We frequently use the phrase “player i
thinks that some other player j is rational”, which we take to mean that
player i thinks that whatever action player j chooses is a best response
to player j’s belief about the actions of the players other than j.
If player i thinks that every other player j is rational then he must be
able to rationalize his belief µi about the other players’ actions as follows:
every action of any other player j to which the belief µi assigns positive
probability must be a best response to a belief of player j. If player i
further thinks that every other player j thinks that every player h̸ = j
(including player i) is rational then he, player i, must also have a view
about player j’s view about player h’s beliefs. If player i’s reasoning has
unlimited depth, we are led to the following deﬁnition.
▶Definition 54.1 An action ai ∈Ai is rationalizable in the strategic
game ⟨N, (Ai), (ui)⟩if there exists
• a collection ((Xt
j)j∈N)∞
t=1 of sets with Xt
j ⊆Aj for all j and t,
• a belief µ1
i of player i whose support is a subset of X1
−i, and
• for each j ∈N, each t ≥1, and each aj ∈Xt
j, a belief µt+1
j
(aj) of
player j whose support is a subset of Xt+1
−j
such that
• ai is a best response to the belief µ1
i of player i
• X1
i = ∅and for each j ∈N \ {i} the set X1
j is the set of all a′
j ∈Aj
such that there is some a−i in the support of µ1
i for which aj = a′
j
• for every player j ∈N and every t ≥1 every action aj ∈Xt
j is a best
response to the belief µt+1
j
(aj) of player j

--- Sayfa 71 ---
4.1 Rationalizability
55
• for each t ≥2 and each j ∈N the set Xt
j is the set of all a′
j ∈Aj
such that there is some player k ∈N \ {j}, some action ak ∈Xt−1
k
,
and some a−k in the support of µt
k(ak) for which a′
j = aj.
Note that formally the second and fourth conditions in the second part
of this deﬁnition are superﬂuous; we include them so that the deﬁnition
corresponds more closely to the motivation we gave.
Note also that
we include the set X1
i in the collection ((Xt
j)j∈N)∞
t=1, even though it is
required to be empty, merely to simplify the notation. If |N| ≥3 then
X1
i is the only such superﬂuous set, while if |N| = 2 there are many (Xt
i
for any odd t and, for j̸ = i, Xt
j for any even t).
The set X1
j for j ∈N \ {i} is interpreted to be the set of actions of
player j that are assigned positive probability by the belief µ1
i of player i
about the actions of the players other than i that justiﬁes i choosing ai.
For any j ∈N the interpretation of X2
j is that it is the set of all actions
aj of player j such that there exists at least one action ak ∈X1
k of some
player k̸ = j that is justiﬁed by the belief µ2
k(ak) that assigns positive
probability to aj.
To illustrate what the deﬁnition entails, suppose there are three play-
ers, each of whom has two possible actions, A and B. Assume that the
action A of player 1 is rationalizable and that player 1’s belief µ1
1 used in
the rationalization assigns positive probability to the choices of players 2
and 3 being either (A, A) or (B, B). Then X1
2 = X1
3 = {A, B}. The
beliefs µ2
2(A) and µ2
2(B) of player 2 that justify his choices of A and
B concern the actions of players 1 and 3; the beliefs µ2
3(A) and µ2
3(B)
of player 3 concern players 1 and 2. These four beliefs do not have to
induce the same beliefs about player 1 and do not have to assign positive
probability to the action A. The set X2
1 consists of all the actions of
player 1 that are assigned positive probability by µ2
2(A), µ2
3(A), µ2
2(B),
or µ2
3(B).
This deﬁnition of rationalizability is equivalent to the following.
▶Definition 55.1 An action ai ∈Ai is rationalizable in the strategic
game ⟨N, (Ai), (ui)⟩if for each j ∈N there is a set Zj ⊆Aj such that
• ai ∈Zi
• every action aj ∈Zj is a best response to a belief µj(aj) of player j
whose support is a subset of Z−j.
Note that if (Zj)j∈N and (Z′
j)j∈N satisfy this deﬁnition then so does
(Zj ∪Z′
j)j∈N, so that the set of proﬁles of rationalizable actions is the
largest set ×j∈NZj for which (Zj)j∈N satisﬁes the deﬁnition.

--- Sayfa 72 ---
56
Chapter 4. Rationalizability
Lemma 56.1 Deﬁnitions 54.1 and 55.1 are equivalent.
Proof. If ai ∈Ai is rationalizable according to Deﬁnition 54.1 then deﬁne
Zi = {ai} ∪(∪∞
t=1Xt
i) and Zj = (∪∞
t=1Xt
j) for each j ∈N \ {i}. If it is
rationalizable according to Deﬁnition 55.1 then deﬁne µ1
i = µi(ai) and
µt
j(aj) = µj(aj) for each j ∈N and each integer t ≥2. Then the sets
Xt
j deﬁned in the second and fourth parts of Deﬁnition 54.1 are subsets
of Zj and satisfy the conditions in the ﬁrst and third parts.
2
It is clear from Deﬁnition 55.1 that in a ﬁnite game any action that
a player uses with positive probability in some mixed strategy Nash
equilibrium is rationalizable (take Zj to be the support of player j’s
mixed strategy). The following result shows that the same is true for
actions used with positive probability in some correlated equilibrium.
Lemma 56.2 Every action used with positive probability by some player
in a correlated equilibrium of a ﬁnite strategic game is rationalizable.
Proof. Denote the strategic game by ⟨N, (Ai), (ui)⟩; choose a correlated
equilibrium, and for each player i ∈N let Zi be the set of actions that
player i uses with positive probability in the equilibrium.
Then any
ai ∈Zi is a best response to the distribution over A−i generated by the
strategies of the players other than i, conditional on player i choosing
ai. The support of this distribution is a subset of Z−i and hence by
Deﬁnition 55.1 ai is rationalizable.
2
In the Prisoner’s Dilemma (Example 16.2) only the Nash equilibrium
action Confess is rationalizable. In all the other games in Section 2.3
both actions of each player are rationalizable, since in each case both
actions are used with positive probability in some mixed strategy Nash
equilibrium. Thus rationalizability puts no restriction on the outcomes
in these games. For many other games the restrictions that rational-
izability imposes are weak. However, in some games rationalizability
provides a sharp answer, as the following exercises demonstrate.
? Exercise 56.3
Find the set of rationalizable actions of each player in
the two-player game in Figure 57.1.
? Exercise 56.4 (Cournot duopoly) Consider the strategic game ⟨{1, 2},
(Ai), (ui)⟩in which Ai = [0, 1] and ui(a1, a2) = ai(1 −a1 −a2) for i = 1,
2. Show that each player’s only rationalizable action is his unique Nash
equilibrium action.
? Exercise 56.5 (Guess the average) In the game in Exercise 35.1 show
that each player’s equilibrium action is his unique rationalizable action.

--- Sayfa 73 ---
4.1 Rationalizability
57
b1
b2
b3
b4
a1
0, 7
2, 5
7, 0
0, 1
a2
5, 2
3, 3
5, 2
0, 1
a3
7, 0
2, 5
0, 7
0, 1
a4
0, 0
0, −2
0, 0
10, −1
Figure 57.1 The two-player game in Exercise 56.3.
? Exercise 57.1
Suppose that two players choose locations a1 and a2 in
the unit interval; each wishes to be as close as possible to the other, the
payoﬀof each player being −|a1 −a2|. Show that every action of each
player is rationalizable, while the set of Nash equilibria is {(a1, a2): a1 =
a2}. Now assume that each player is informed of the distance to his
opponent. Modify Deﬁnition 55.1 by adding the condition that the sup-
port of a belief that rationalizes a pair (ai, d) consisting of an action ai
and a distance d be a subset of {aj −d, aj + d}. Show that for no d > 0
is there an action ai for which (ai, d) is rationalizable in this new sense,
while (ai, 0) is rationalizable for every ai.
Note that in Deﬁnitions 54.1 and 55.1 we take a belief of player i to
be a probability distribution on A−i, which allows each player to believe
that his opponents’ actions are correlated. In most of the literature,
players are not allowed to entertain such beliefs: it is assumed that each
player’s belief is a product of independent probability distributions, one
for each of the other players. (Such a restriction is obviously inconse-
quential in a two-player game.) This assumption is consistent with the
motivation behind the notion of mixed strategy equilibrium. Our deﬁ-
nition of rationalizability requires that at all levels of rationalization the
players be rational; the alternative deﬁnition of rationalizability requires
in addition that at all levels of rationalization the beliefs preserve the
assumption of independence.
The two deﬁnitions have diﬀerent implications, as the game in Fig-
ure 58.1 shows. In this game there are three players; player 1 chooses one
of the two rows, player 2 chooses one of the two columns, and player 3
chooses one of the four tables. All three players obtain the same pay-
oﬀs, given by the numbers in the boxes. We claim that the action M2

--- Sayfa 74 ---
58
Chapter 4. Rationalizability
L
R
U
8
0
D
0
0
M1
L
R
4
0
0
4
M2
L
R
0
0
0
8
M3
L
R
3
3
3
3
M4
Figure 58.1 A three-player strategic game. Player 1 chooses one of the two rows,
player 2 chooses one of the two columns, and player 3 chooses one of the four tables.
All three players obtain the same payoﬀs, given by the numbers in the boxes.
of player 3 is rationalizable in the sense of Deﬁnitions 54.1 and 55.1,
in which a player may believe that his opponent’s actions are corre-
lated, but is not rationalizable if players are restricted to beliefs that
are products of independent probability distributions. To see this, note
that the action U of player 1 is a best response to a belief that assigns
probability one to (L, M2) and the action D is a best response to the
belief that assigns probability one to (R, M2); similarly, both actions
of player 2 are best responses to beliefs that assign positive probability
only to U, D, and M2. Further, the action M2 of player 3 is a best
response to the belief in which players 1 and 2 play (U, L) and (D, R)
with equal probabilities. Thus M2 is rationalizable in the sense that we
have deﬁned (take Z1 = {U, D}, Z2 = {L, R}, and Z3 = {M2} in Deﬁ-
nition 55.1). However, it is not a best response to any pair of (indepen-
dent) mixed strategies and is thus not rationalizable under the modiﬁed
deﬁnition in which each player’s belief is restricted to be a product of
independent beliefs. (In order for M2 to be a best response we need
4pq + 4(1 −p)(1 −q) ≥max{8pq, 8(1 −p)(1 −q), 3}, where (p, 1 −p)
and (q, 1 −q) are mixed strategies of players 1 and 2 respectively, an
inequality that is not satisﬁed for any values of p and q.)
4.2
Iterated Elimination of Strictly Dominated Actions
Like the notion of rationalizability, the solution concept that we now
study looks at a game from the point of view of a single player. Each
player takes an action based on calculations that do not require knowl-
edge of the actions taken by the other players. To deﬁne the solution we
start by eliminating actions that a player should deﬁnitely not take. In
a complicated game it is particularly attractive to assume that players,

--- Sayfa 75 ---
4.2 Iterated Elimination of Strictly Dominated Actions
59
looking for ways to simplify the situation they confront, will adopt such
a tack. We assume that players exclude from consideration actions that
are not best responses whatever the other players do.
A player who
knows that the other players are rational can assume that they too will
exclude such actions from consideration. Now consider the game G′ ob-
tained from the original game G by eliminating all such actions. Once
again, a player who knows that the other players are rational should not
choose an action that is not a best response whatever the other players
do in G′. Further, a player who knows that the other players know that
he is rational can argue that they too will not choose actions that are
never best responses in G′. Continuing to argue in this way suggests that
the outcome of G must survive an unlimited number of rounds of such
elimination. We now formalize this idea and show that it is equivalent
to the notion of rationalizability.
4.2.1
Never-Best Responses
▶Definition 59.1 An action of player i in a strategic game is a never-
best response if it is not a best response to any belief of player i.
Clearly any action that is a never-best response is not rationalizable.
If an action ai of player i is a never-best response then for every belief
of player i there is some action, which may depend on the belief, that
is better for player i than ai. We now show that if ai is a never-best
response in a ﬁnite game then there is a mixed strategy that, whatever
belief player i holds, is better for player i than ai.
This alternative
property is deﬁned precisely as follows.
▶Definition 59.2 The action ai ∈Ai of player i in the strategic game
⟨N, (Ai), (ui)⟩is strictly dominated if there is a mixed strategy αi
of player i such that Ui(a−i, αi) > ui(a−i, ai) for all a−i ∈A−i, where
Ui(a−i, αi) is the payoﬀof player i if he uses the mixed strategy αi and
the other players’ vector of actions is a−i.
In fact, we show that in a game in which the set of actions of each
player is ﬁnite an action is a never-best response if and only if it is
strictly dominated. Thus in such games the notion of strict domination
has a decision-theoretic basis that does not involve mixed strategies. It
follows that even if one rejects the idea that mixed strategies can be
objects of choice, one can still argue that a player will not use an action
that is strictly dominated.

--- Sayfa 76 ---
60
Chapter 4. Rationalizability
Lemma 60.1 An action of a player in a ﬁnite strategic game is a never-
best response if and only if it is strictly dominated.
Proof. Let the strategic game be G = ⟨N, (Ai), (ui)⟩and let a∗
i ∈Ai.
Consider the auxiliary strictly competitive game G′ (see Deﬁnition 21.1)
in which the set of actions of player 1 is Ai\{a∗
i }, that of player 2 is A−i,
and the preferences of player 1 are represented by the payoﬀfunction v1
given by v1(ai, a−i) = ui(a−i, ai)−ui(a−i, a∗
i ). (Note that the argument
(ai, a−i) of v1 is a pair of actions in G′ while the arguments (a−i, ai) and
(a−i, a∗
i ) are action proﬁles in G.) For any given mixed strategy proﬁle
(m1, m2) in G′ we denote by v1(m1, m2) the expected payoﬀof player 1.
The action a∗
i is a never-best response in G if and only if for any
mixed strategy of player 2 in G′ there is an action of player 1 that yields
a positive payoﬀ; that is, if and only if minm2 maxai v1(ai, m2) > 0. This
is so if and only if minm2 maxm1 v1(m1, m2) > 0 (by the linearity of v1
in m1).
Now, by Proposition 33.1 the game G′ has a mixed strategy Nash
equilibrium, so from part (b) of Proposition 22.2 applied to the mixed
extension of G′ we have minm2 maxm1 v1(m1, m2) > 0 if and only if
maxm1 minm2 v1(m1, m2) > 0; that is, if and only if there exists a mixed
strategy m∗
1 of player i in G′ for which v1(m∗
1, m2) > 0 for all m2 (that
is, for all beliefs on A−i). Since m∗
1 is a probability measure on Ai \{a∗
i }
it is a mixed strategy of player 1 in G; the condition v1(m∗
1, m2) > 0 for
all m2 is equivalent to Ui(a−i, m∗
1) −Ui(a−i, a∗
i ) > 0 for all a−i ∈A−i,
which is equivalent to a∗
i being strictly dominated.
2
Note that the argument in this proof depends upon our assumption
that the players’ preferences over lotteries satisfy the assumptions of
von Neumann and Morgenstern; if the preferences do not satisfy these
assumptions then the properties of being a never-best response and being
strictly dominated are not equivalent in general.
4.2.2
Iterated Elimination of Strictly Dominated Actions
We now deﬁne formally the procedure that we described at the beginning
of the section.
▶Definition 60.2 The set X ⊆A of outcomes of a ﬁnite strategic game
⟨N, (Ai), (ui)⟩survives iterated elimination of strictly dominated
actions if X = ×j∈NXj and there is a collection ((Xt
j)j∈N)T
t=0 of sets
that satisﬁes the following conditions for each j ∈N.
• X0
j = Aj and XT
j = Xj.

--- Sayfa 77 ---
4.2 Iterated Elimination of Strictly Dominated Actions
61
L
R
T
3, 0
0, 1
M
0, 0
3, 1
B
1, 1
1, 0
Figure 61.1 A two-player strategic game. The only rationalizable action of player 1
is M and the only rationalizable action of player 2 is R.
• Xt+1
j
⊆Xt
j for each t = 0, . . . , T −1.
• For each t = 0, . . . , T −1 every action of player j in Xt
j \ Xt+1
j
is
strictly dominated in the game ⟨N, (Xt
i), (ut
i)⟩, where ut
i for each
i ∈N is the function ui restricted to ×j∈NXt
j.
• No action in XT
j is strictly dominated in the game ⟨N, (XT
i ), (uT
i )⟩.
⋄Example 61.1
In the game in Figure 61.1 the action B is dominated
by the mixed strategy in which T and M are each used with probability
1
2. After B is eliminated from the game, L is dominated by R; after L
is eliminated T is dominated by M. Thus (M, R) is the only outcome
that survives iterated elimination of strictly dominated actions.
We now show that in a ﬁnite game a set of outcomes that survives
iterated elimination of dominated actions exists and is the set of proﬁles
of rationalizable actions.
Proposition 61.2 If X = ×j∈NXj survives iterated elimination of
strictly dominated actions in a ﬁnite strategic game ⟨N, (Ai), (ui)⟩then
Xj is the set of player j’s rationalizable actions for each j ∈N.
Proof. Suppose that ai ∈Ai is rationalizable and let (Zj)j∈N be the
proﬁle of sets in Deﬁnition 55.1 that supports ai. For any value of t we
have Zj ⊆Xt
j since each action in Zj is a best response to some belief
over Z−j and hence is not strictly dominated in the game ⟨N, (Xt
i), (ut
i)⟩
(by Lemma 60.1). Hence ai ∈Xi.
We now show that for every j ∈N every member of Xj is rationaliz-
able. By deﬁnition, no action in Xj is strictly dominated in the game in
which the set of actions of each player i is Xi, so by Lemma 60.1 every
action in Xj is a best response among the members of Xj to some belief
on X−j. We need to show that every action in Xj is a best response
among all the members of the set Aj to some belief on X−j. If aj ∈Xj

--- Sayfa 78 ---
62
Chapter 4. Rationalizability
is not a best response among all the members of Aj then there is a value
of t such that aj is a best response among the members of Xt
j to a belief
µj on X−j, but is not a best response among the members of Xt−1
j
.
Then there is an action bj ∈Xt−1
j
\ Xt
j that is a best response among
the members of Xt−1
j
to µj, contradicting the fact that bj is eliminated
at the tth stage of the procedure.
2
Note that the procedure in Deﬁnition 60.2 does not require that all
strictly dominated strategies be eliminated at any stage. Thus the result
shows that the order and speed of elimination have no eﬀect on the set
of outcomes that survive.
Lemma 60.1 and the equivalence of the notions of iterated elimination
of strictly dominated actions and rationalizability fail if we modify the
deﬁnition of rationalizability to require the players to believe that their
opponents’ actions are independent. To see this, consider the game in
Figure 58.1. The action M2 is a best response to the belief of player 3
in which players 1 and 2 play (U, L) and (D, R) with equal probabilities
and is thus not strictly dominated. However, as we saw before, it is not
a best response to any pair of (independent) mixed strategies and is thus
not rationalizable under the modiﬁed deﬁnition in which each player’s
belief is restricted to be a product of independent beliefs.
4.3
Iterated Elimination of Weakly Dominated Actions
We say that a player’s action is weakly dominated if the player has
another action at least as good no matter what the other players do and
better for at least some vector of actions of the other players.
▶Definition 62.1 The action ai ∈Ai of player i in the strategic game
⟨N, (Ai), (ui)⟩is weakly dominated if there is a mixed strategy αi
of player i such that Ui(a−i, αi) ≥ui(a−i, ai) for all a−i ∈A−i and
Ui(a−i, αi) > ui(a−i, ai) for some a−i ∈A−i, where Ui(a−i, αi) is the
payoﬀof player i if he uses the mixed strategy αi and the other players’
vector of actions is a−i.
By Lemma 60.1 an action that is weakly dominated but not strictly
dominated is a best response to some belief. This fact makes the argu-
ment against using a weakly dominated action weaker than that against
using a strictly dominated action. Yet since there is no advantage to us-
ing a weakly dominated action, it seems very natural to eliminate such
actions in the process of simplifying a complicated game.

--- Sayfa 79 ---
4.3 Iterated Elimination of Weakly Dominated Actions
63
L
R
T
1, 1
0, 0
M
1, 1
2, 1
B
0, 0
2, 1
Figure 63.1 A two-player game in which the set of actions that survive iterated
elimination of weakly dominated actions depends on the order in which actions are
eliminated.
The notion of weak domination leads to a procedure analogous to it-
erated elimination of strictly dominated actions (Deﬁnition 60.2). How-
ever, this procedure is less compelling since the set of actions that sur-
vive iterated elimination of weakly dominated actions may depend on
the order in which actions are eliminated, as the two-player game in
Figure 63.1 shows. The sequence in which we ﬁrst eliminate T (weakly
dominated by M) and then L (weakly dominated by R) leads to an out-
come in which player 2 chooses R and the payoﬀproﬁle is (2, 1). On the
other hand, the sequence in which we ﬁrst eliminate B (weakly domi-
nated by M) and then R (weakly dominated by L) leads to an outcome
in which player 2 chooses L and the payoﬀproﬁle is (1, 1).
We dis-
cuss further the procedure of iterated elimination of weakly dominated
actions in Section 6.6.
? Exercise 63.1 Consider a variant of the game in Example 18.6 in which
there are two players, the distribution of the citizens’ favorite positions
is uniform, and each player is restricted to choose a position of the form
ℓ/m for some ℓ∈{0, . . . , m}, where m is even.
Show that the only
outcome that survives iterated elimination of weakly dominated actions
is that in which both players choose the position 1
2.
? Exercise 63.2 (Dominance solvability) A strategic game is dominance
solvable if all players are indiﬀerent between all outcomes that survive
the iterative procedure in which all the weakly dominated actions of
each player are eliminated at each stage. Give an example of a strategic
game that is dominance solvable but for which it is not the case that
all players are indiﬀerent between all outcomes that survive iterated
elimination of weakly dominated actions (a procedure in which not all
weakly dominated actions may be eliminated at each stage).

--- Sayfa 80 ---
64
Chapter 4. Rationalizability
? Exercise 64.1
Each of two players announces a nonnegative integer
equal to at most 100. If a1+a2 ≤100, where ai is the number announced
by player i, then each player i receives payoﬀof ai. If a1 + a2 > 100
and ai < aj then player i receives ai and player j receives 100 −ai; if
a1 + a2 > 100 and ai = aj then each player receives 50. Show that the
game is dominance solvable (see the previous exercise) and ﬁnd the set
of surviving outcomes.
Lemma 60.1 shows that in a ﬁnite game an action that is not strictly
dominated is a best response to some belief.
The following exercise
strengthens this conclusion for an action (or mixed strategy) that is not
weakly dominated.
? Exercise 64.2
Show that in a ﬁnite strategic game any mixed strategy
of a player that is not weakly dominated is a best response to a belief
that assigns positive probability to every vector of actions of the other
players. [Hint: Let ⟨N, (Ai), (ui)⟩be the game and let U be the set of
all vectors of the form (u1(a1
−1, m1), . . . , u1(ak
−1, m1)), where m1 ranges
over the mixed strategies of player 1 and {a1
−1, . . . , ak
−1} is the set of
all vectors of actions for the players other than player 1. Let u∗∈U
correspond to a mixed strategy of player 1 that is not weakly dominated.
You need to show that there exists a positive vector p∗with p∗·u∗≥p∗·u
for all u ∈U. To do so, let u∗= 0 without loss of generality, and for
any ϵ > 0 let P(ϵ) = {p ∈Rk: pi ≥ϵ for all i and Pk
i=1 pi = 1}. Use
the result of Exercise 36.3 for the sets P(ϵ) and U and let ϵ →0; use
also the fact that U is the convex hull of a ﬁnite number of vectors.]
Notes
The notion of rationalizability originated with Bernheim (1984) and
Pearce (1984) (both of whom restrict players to believe that the actions
of their opponents are independent). (Spohn (1982) discusses the idea,
but does not formalize it.) Versions of the procedure of iterated elimina-
tion of dominated strategies were ﬁrst studied in detail by Gale (1953)
and Luce and Raiﬀa (1957, pp. 108–109, 173); the formulation that we
give is due to Moulin (1979). Lemma 60.1 is due to Pearce (1984); it is
closely related to Lemma 3.2.1 of van Damme (1983). Proposition 61.2
is due to Pearce (1984, p. 1035).
The result in Exercise 56.4 is due to Gabay and Moulin (1980),
Bernheim (1984), and Moulin (1984).
Exercise 56.5 is taken from
Moulin (1986, p. 72). Exercise 57.1 is taken from Rubinstein and Wolin-

--- Sayfa 81 ---
Notes
65
sky (1994). The notion of dominance solvability in Exercise 63.2 is due
to Moulin (1979); it is closely related to the notion of “solvability in the
complete weak sense” of Luce and Raiﬀa (1957, p. 109). Exercise 64.1
is due to Brams and Taylor (1994) and Exercise 64.2 is due to Arrow,
Barankin, and Blackwell (1953).
For a family of games in which rationalizability gives a sharp answer
see Vives (1990) and Milgrom and Roberts (1990).

--- Sayfa 83 ---
5
Knowledge and Equilibrium
In this chapter we describe a model of knowledge and use it to formalize
the idea that an event is “common knowledge”, to ask if it is possible for
people to “agree to disagree”, and to express formally the assumptions
on players’ knowledge that lie behind the concepts of Nash equilibrium
and rationalizability.
5.1
A Model of Knowledge
A strategic game models interaction between players. Consequently we
are interested not only in a player’s knowledge of an exogenous param-
eter but also in his knowledge about the knowledge of another player.
We begin by giving a brief introduction to a model of the knowledge of
a single decision-maker.
At the basis of the model is a set Ωof states. The notion of a state
is given two interpretations in the literature. At one extreme, a state
is viewed as a description of the contingencies that the decision-maker
perceives to be relevant in the context of a certain decision problem. This
is the interpretation used in standard economic models of uncertainty.
At the other extreme a state is viewed as a full description of the world,
including not only the decision-maker’s information and beliefs but also
his actions.
5.1.1
The Information Function
One way to deﬁne the extent of a decision-maker’s knowledge of the
state is to specify an information function P that associates with every
state ω ∈Ωa nonempty subset P(ω) of Ω. The interpretation is that
when the state is ω the decision-maker knows only that the state is in

--- Sayfa 84 ---
68
Chapter 5.
Knowledge and Equilibrium
the set P(ω). That is, he considers it possible that the true state could
be any state in P(ω) but not any state outside P(ω).
▶Definition 68.1 An information function for the set Ωof states is
a function P that associates with every state ω ∈Ωa nonempty subset
P(ω) of Ω.
When we use an information function to model a decision-maker’s
knowledge we usually assume that the pair ⟨Ω, P⟩consisting of the set of
states and the information function satisﬁes the following two conditions:
P1
ω ∈P(ω) for every ω ∈Ω.
P2
If ω′ ∈P(ω) then P(ω′) = P(ω).
P1 says that the decision-maker never excludes the true state from the
set of states he regards as feasible: he is never certain that the state
is diﬀerent from the true state. P2 says that the decision-maker uses
the consistency or inconsistency of states with his information to make
inferences about the state. Suppose, contrary to P2, that ω′ ∈P(ω)
and there is a state ω′′ ∈P(ω′) with ω′′ /∈P(ω). Then if the state is
ω the decision-maker can argue that since ω′′ is inconsistent with his
information the true state cannot be ω′. Similarly, if there is a state
ω′′ ∈P(ω) with ω′′ /∈P(ω′) then when the state is ω the decision-maker
can argue that since ω′′ is consistent with his information the true state
cannot be ω′.
The following condition is equivalent to P1 and P2.
▶Definition 68.2 An information function P for the set Ωof states is
partitional if there is a partition of Ωsuch that for any ω ∈Ωthe set
P(ω) is the element of the partition that contains ω.
Lemma 68.3 An information function is partitional if and only if it
satisﬁes P1 and P2.
Proof.
If P is partitional then it clearly satisﬁes P1 and P2.
Now
suppose that P satisﬁes P1 and P2. If P(ω) and P(ω′) intersect and
ω′′ ∈P(ω) ∩P(ω′) then by P2 we have P(ω) = P(ω′) = P(ω′′); by P1
we have ∪ω∈ΩP(ω) = Ω. Thus P is partitional.
2
Given this result, an information function that satisﬁes P1 and P2
may be speciﬁed by the information partition that it induces.
⋄Example 68.4
Let Ω= [0, 1) and assume that the decision-maker
observes only the ﬁrst four digits of the inﬁnite decimal expansion of a
number. Then for each ω ∈Ωthe set P(ω) is the set of all states ω′ ∈Ω

--- Sayfa 85 ---
5.1 A Model of Knowledge
69
such that the ﬁrst four digits of ω′ are the same as those of ω. This
information function is partitional.
? Exercise 69.1
Let Q be a set of questions to which the answer is either
“Yes” or “No”. A state is a list of answers to all the questions in Q.
Suppose that the information function P has the property that for some
state ω1 the set P(ω1) consists of all states in which the answers to the
ﬁrst two questions are the same as in ω1, while for some other state ω2
the set P(ω2) consists of all states in which the answers to the ﬁrst three
questions are the same as in ω2. Is P necessarily partitional?
? Exercise 69.2
A decision-maker is told an integer n but remembers
only that the number is either n −1, n, or n + 1. Model the decision-
maker’s knowledge by an information function and determine if the
function is partitional.
5.1.2
The Knowledge Function
We refer to a set of states (a subset of Ω) as an event.
Given our
interpretation of an information function, a decision-maker for whom
P(ω) ⊆E knows, in the state ω, that some state in the event E has
occurred. In this case we say that in the state ω the decision-maker
knows E.
Given P we now deﬁne the decision maker’s knowledge
function K by
K(E) = {ω ∈Ω: P(ω) ⊆E}.
(69.3)
For any event E the set K(E) is the set of all states in which the decision-
maker knows E. The knowledge function K that is derived from any
information function satisﬁes the following three properties.
K1
K(Ω) = Ω.
This says that in all states the decision-maker knows that some state in
Ωhas occurred.
K2
If E ⊆F then K(E) ⊆K(F).
This says that if F occurs whenever E occurs and the decision-maker
knows E then he knows F: if E implies F then knowledge of E implies
knowledge of F.
K3
K(E) ∩K(F) = K(E ∩F).
The interpretation of this property is that if the decision-maker knows
both E and F then he knows E ∩F.

--- Sayfa 86 ---
70
Chapter 5.
Knowledge and Equilibrium
If P satisﬁes P1 then the associated knowledge function K satisﬁes
the following additional property.
K4 (Axiom of Knowledge)
K(E) ⊆E.
This says that whenever the decision-maker knows E then indeed some
member of E is the true state: the decision-maker does not know any-
thing that is false. The axiom is derived from P1 as follows: if ω ∈K(E)
then P(ω) ⊆E, so that by P1 we have ω ∈E.
If P is partitional (i.e. satisﬁes both P1 and P2) then K(E) is the
union of all the members of the partition that are subsets of E. (If E
does not contain any member of the partition then K(E) is empty.) In
this case the knowledge function K satisﬁes the following two additional
properties.
K5 (Axiom of Transparency)
K(E) ⊆K(K(E)).
Given our interpretation of K(E) as the event in which the decision-
maker knows E, we interpret K(K(E)) to be the event in which the
decision-maker knows that he knows E.
Thus K5 says that if the
decision-maker knows E then he knows that he knows E. As we re-
marked above, if P satisﬁes P1 and P2 then the set K(E) is a union of
members of the partition induced by P; K5 follows from the observation
that if F is a union of members of the partition then K(F) = F.
K6 (Axiom of Wisdom)
Ω\ K(E) ⊆K(Ω\ K(E)).
The interpretation of this axiom is that the decision-maker is aware of
what he does not know: if he does not know E then he knows that he
does not know E. Since P is partitional, K(E) is a union of members
of the partition induced by P; thus Ω\ K(E) also is such a union, and
K6 follows.
Note that given that K satisﬁes K4 the properties in K5 and K6 in
fact hold with equality.
We have taken an information function as the primitive and derived
from it a knowledge function. Alternatively we can start by deﬁning a
knowledge function for the set Ωto be a function K that associates
a subset of Ωwith each event E ⊆Ω. We can then derive from it an
information function P as follows: for each state ω let
P(ω) = ∩{E ⊆Ω: K(E) ∋ω}.
(70.1)
(If there is no event E for which ω ∈K(E) then we take the intersection
to be Ω.)

--- Sayfa 87 ---
5.1 A Model of Knowledge
71
? Exercise 71.1
a. Given an information function P, let K be the knowledge function
deﬁned by (69.3) and let P ′ be the information function derived from
K in (70.1). Show that P ′ = P.
b. Given a knowledge function K that satisﬁes K1, K2, and K3, let
P be the information function deﬁned by (70.1) and let K′ be the
knowledge function derived from P in (69.3). Show that K′ = K.
? Exercise 71.2
Using the framework we have described, we can for-
mulate an individual’s decision problem as follows. Let A be a set of
actions, Ωa set of states, P a partitional information function, π a
probability measure on Ω, and u: A × Ω→R a function whose ex-
pected value represents the individual’s preferences over lotteries on A.
The individual’s problem is to choose a function a: Ω→A (called an
act) for which a(ω) = a(ω′) whenever ω ∈P(ω) and ω′ ∈P(ω) to
solve maxa Eπu(a(ω), ω) (where E is the expectation operator). Deﬁne
the partitional information function P ′ to be coarser than the informa-
tion function P if P(ω) ⊆P ′(ω) for all ω ∈Ω(i.e. if each member
of the partition induced by P ′ is a union of members of the parti-
tion induced by P). Show that if P ′ is coarser than P then the best
act under the information function P ′ is no better than the best act
under the information function P.
Contrast this result with that of
Exercise 28.2.
5.1.3
An Illustrative Example: The Puzzle of the Hats
The following puzzle, which “swept Europe” some time in the ﬁrst half of
the twentieth century (Littlewood (1953, p. 3)), illustrates the concepts
that we have deﬁned. Each of n “perfectly rational” individuals, seated
around a table, is wearing a hat that is either white or black. Each
individual can see the hats of the other n −1 individuals, but not his
own. An observer announces: “Each of you is wearing a hat that is
either white or black; at least one of the hats is white. I will start to
count slowly. After each number you will have the opportunity to raise
a hand. You may do so only when you know the color of your hat.”
When, for the ﬁrst time, will any individual raise his hand?
We can answer this question by using the formal model we have in-
troduced, as follows. Initially, after the observer’s announcement, the
set of states is the set of all conﬁgurations c = (c1, . . . , cn) of colors for

--- Sayfa 88 ---
72
Chapter 5.
Knowledge and Equilibrium
the hats, where each ci is either W or B and at least one ci is W. These
2n −1 states constitute the set
Ω= {c ∈{B, W}n: |{i: ci = W}| ≥1}.
The initial information function P 1
i of any individual i is given as follows:
in any state c the set P 1
i (c) consists of all the states that accord with i’s
observations, and thus contains at most two states, which diﬀer only in
the color of i’s hat. Precisely, if c is a state in which a player diﬀerent
from i has a white hat then P 1
i (c) = {(c−i, W), (c−i, B)}, and if c is the
state in which all the other hats are black then P 1
i (c) = {c} (since not
all the hats are black).
What does it mean for an individual i with information function Pi
to “know the color ci of his hat”? It means either he knows that the
event {c: ci = W} occurs or he knows that the event {c: ci = B} occurs.
Thus the event “i knows the color of his hat” is
Ei = {c: Pi(c) ⊆{c: ci = B} or Pi(c) ⊆{c: ci = W}}.
It is only in a state c in which there is exactly one individual i for whom
ci = W that P 1
j (c) ⊆Ej for some j, and in this case P 1
i (c) ⊆Ei, so that
i raises his hand.
Now let F 1 = {c: |{i: ci = W}| = 1}, the set of states for which
someone raises a hand at the ﬁrst stage. If nobody raises a hand at
the ﬁrst stage then all individuals obtain the additional information
that the state is not in F 1, and thus for all i and for all c /∈F 1 we have
P 2
i (c) = P 1
i (c)\F 1. That is, in any such state every individual concludes
that at least two individuals have white hats. We have P 2
i (c) = P 1
i (c) =
{(c−i, W), (c−i, B)} unless cj = W for exactly one individual j̸ = i, in
which case P 2
i (c−i, W) = {(c−i, W)} (and P 2
j (c−j, W) = {(c−j, W)}).
In other words, in any state c for which cj = W and ch = W for
precisely two individuals j and h we have P 2
j (c) ⊆Ej and P 2
h(c) ⊆Eh,
and hence j and h each raises a hand at the second stage.
Now let
F 2 = {c: |{i: ci = W}| = 2}, the set of states in which the process ends
at the second stage.
In states for which no hand is raised after the
observer counts 2 (c /∈F 1 ∪F 2) all individuals conclude that at least
three hats are white and the process continues with P 3
i (c) = P 2
i (c) \ F 2.
It is easy to see that if k hats are white then no one raises a hand until
the observer counts k, at which point the k individuals with white hats
do so.

--- Sayfa 89 ---
5.2 Common Knowledge
73
5.2
Common Knowledge
We say that an event is “mutual knowledge” in some state if in that
state each individual knows the event. We say that an event is “common
knowledge” if not only is it mutual knowledge but also each individual
knows that all other individuals know it, each individual knows that
all other individuals know that all the individuals know it, and so on.
Restricting for simplicity to the case of two individuals the notion of
common knowledge is formalized in the following deﬁnition.
▶Definition 73.1 Let K1 and K2 be the knowledge functions of indi-
viduals 1 and 2 for the set Ωof states. An event E ⊆Ωis common
knowledge between 1 and 2 in the state ω ∈Ωif ω is a mem-
ber of every set in the inﬁnite sequence K1(E), K2(E), K1(K2(E)),
K2(K1(E)), . . . .
Another deﬁnition of common knowledge (which we show in Proposi-
tion 74.2 is equivalent) is stated in terms of the individuals’ information
functions.
▶Definition 73.2 Let P1 and P2 be the information functions of indi-
viduals 1 and 2 for the set Ωof states. An event F ⊆Ωis self-evident
between 1 and 2 if for all ω ∈F we have Pi(ω) ⊆F for i = 1, 2. An
event E ⊆Ωis common knowledge between 1 and 2 in the state
ω ∈Ωif there is a self-evident event F for which ω ∈F ⊆E.
In words, an event E is self-evident between two individuals if whenever
it occurs both individuals know that it occurs (i.e. whenever it occurs
it is mutual knowledge between the individuals), and is common knowl-
edge in the state ω if there is a self-evident event containing ω whose
occurrence implies E.
⋄Example 73.3
Let Ω= {ω1, ω2, ω3, ω4, ω5, ω6}, let P1 and P2 be the
partitional information functions of individuals 1 and 2, and let K1 and
K2 be the associated knowledge functions. Let the partitions induced
by the information functions be
P1 = {{ω1, ω2}, {ω3, ω4, ω5}, {ω6}}
P2 = {{ω1}, {ω2, ω3, ω4}, {ω5}, {ω6}}.
The event E = {ω1, ω2, ω3, ω4} does not contain any event that is self-
evident between 1 and 2 and hence in no state is E common knowledge
between 1 and 2 in the sense of the second deﬁnition (73.2). The event
E is also not common knowledge in any state in the sense of the ﬁrst

--- Sayfa 90 ---
74
Chapter 5.
Knowledge and Equilibrium
deﬁnition (73.1) since K1(K2(K1(E))) = ∅, as the following calculation
demonstrates:
K1(E) = {ω1, ω2},
K2(E) = E,
K2(K1(E)) = {ω1},
K1(K2(E)) = {ω1, ω2},
K1(K2(K1(E))) = ∅,
K2(K1(K2(E))) = {ω1}.
The event F = {ω1, ω2, ω3, ω4, ω5} is self-evident between 1 and 2 and
hence is common knowledge between 1 and 2 in any state in F in the
sense of the second deﬁnition. Since K1(F) = K2(F) = F the event F is
also common knowledge between 1 and 2 at any state in F in the sense
of the ﬁrst deﬁnition.
Before showing that the two deﬁnitions of common knowledge are
equivalent we establish the following.
Lemma 74.1 Let P1 and P2 be the partitional information functions of
individuals 1 and 2 for the set Ωof states, let K1 and K2 be the asso-
ciated knowledge functions, and let E be an event. Then the following
three conditions are equivalent.
a. Ki(E) = E for i = 1, 2.
b. E is self-evident between 1 and 2.
c. E is a union of members of the partition induced by Pi for i = 1, 2.
Proof. Assume (a). Then for every ω ∈E we have Pi(ω) ⊆E for i = 1,
2, and hence (b) is satisﬁed. Assume (b). Then E = ∪ω∈EPi(ω) for
i = 1, 2, and thus E is a union of members of both partitions, so that
(c) is satisﬁed. Finally (c) immediately implies (a).
2
We now show that Deﬁnitions 73.1 and 73.2 are equivalent.
Proposition 74.2 Let Ωbe a ﬁnite set of states, let P1 and P2 be
the partitional information functions of individuals 1 and 2, and let K1
and K2 be the associated knowledge functions. Then an event E ⊆Ω
is common knowledge between 1 and 2 in the state ω ∈Ωaccording to
Deﬁnition 73.1 if and only if it is common knowledge between 1 and 2
in the state ω according to Deﬁnition 73.2.
Proof. Assume that the event E is common knowledge between 1 and 2
in the state ω according to Deﬁnition 73.1. For each i ∈{1, 2} and j̸ = i
we have E ⊇Ki(E) ⊇Kj(Ki(E)) ⊇Ki(Kj(Ki(E))) ⊇. . . and ω is a
member of all these sets, which are hence nonempty. Thus since Ωis
ﬁnite there is a set Fi = Ki(Kj(Ki · · · Ki(E) · · ·)) for which Kj(Fi) = Fi;
since Pi is partitional, Ki satisﬁes K4 and K5, so that we have also

--- Sayfa 91 ---
5.3 Can People Agree to Disagree?
75
Ki(Fi) = Fi. Thus by Lemma 74.1 the event Fi is self-evident between 1
and 2, so that E is common knowledge in ω according to Deﬁnition 73.2.
Now assume that E ⊆Ωis common knowledge between 1 and 2 in
the state ω according to Deﬁnition 73.2. Then there is a self-evident
event F with ω ∈F ⊆E.
By Lemma 74.1 every set of the type
Ki(Kj(Ki · · · Ki(F) · · ·)) coincides with F. It follows from K2 that ω
is a member of every set of the type Ki(Kj(Ki · · · Ki(E) · · ·)) and thus
E is common knowledge in ω according to Deﬁnition 73.1.
2
5.3
Can People Agree to Disagree?
An interesting question that can be addressed within the framework we
have described is the following. Can it be common knowledge between
two individuals with the same prior belief that individual 1 assigns prob-
ability η1 to some event and individual 2 assigns probability η2̸ = η1 to
the same event? It seems that the answer could be positive: the individ-
uals might “agree to disagree” in this way when they possess diﬀerent
information. However, we now show that if the individuals’ information
functions are partitional then the answer is negative.
One of the contexts in which this result is of interest is that of a
Bayesian game (Section 2.6). An assumption often made in the literature
is that the players in such a game have identical prior beliefs. The result
implies that under this assumption it cannot be common knowledge
between the players that they assign diﬀerent posterior probabilities to
the same event. Thus if we want to model a situation in which such
diﬀerences in beliefs are common knowledge, we must assume that the
players’ prior beliefs are diﬀerent.
Let ρ be a probability measure on the set Ωof states, interpreted as the
individuals’ common prior belief, and let P1 and P2 be the individuals’
information functions.
If E is an event and ρ(E|Pi(ω)) = ηi (where
ρ(E|Pi(ω)) is the probability of E conditional on Pi(ω)) then, given his
information in the state ω, individual i assigns the probability ηi to the
event E. Thus the event “individual i assigns the probability ηi to E”
is {ω ∈Ω: ρ(E|Pi(ω)) = ηi}.
Proposition 75.1 Suppose that the set Ωof states is ﬁnite and individ-
uals 1 and 2 have the same prior belief. If each individual’s information
function is partitional and it is common knowledge between 1 and 2
in some state ω∗∈Ωthat individual 1 assigns probability η1 to some
event E and individual 2 assigns probability η2 to E then η1 = η2.

--- Sayfa 92 ---
76
Chapter 5.
Knowledge and Equilibrium
Proof. If the assumptions are satisﬁed then there is a self-evident event
F ∋ω∗that is a subset of the intersection of {ω ∈Ω: ρ(E|P1(ω)) = η1}
and {ω ∈Ω: ρ(E|P2(ω)) = η2}, and hence a subset of each of these sets,
where ρ is the common prior belief. By Lemma 74.1, for each individual i
the event F is a union of members of i’s information partition. Since Ω
is ﬁnite, so is the number of sets in each union; let F = ∪kAk = ∪kBk.
Now, for any nonempty disjoint sets C and D with ρ(E|C) = ηi and
ρ(E|D) = ηi we have ρ(E|C ∪D) = ηi. Thus, since for each k we have
ρ(E|Ak) = η1, it follows that ρ(E|F) = η1; similarly ρ(E|F) = η2.
Hence η1 = η2.
2
? Exercise 76.1
Show that if two individuals with partitional informa-
tion functions have the same prior then it can be common knowledge be-
tween them that they assign diﬀerent probabilities to some event. Show,
however, that it cannot be common knowledge that the probability
assigned by individual 1 exceeds that assigned by individual 2.
? Exercise 76.2
Show that if two individuals with partitional informa-
tion functions have the same prior then it cannot be common knowledge
between them that individual 1 believes the expectation of some lottery
to exceed some number η while individual 2 believes this expectation
to be less than η. Show by an example that this result depends on the
assumption that the individuals’ information functions are partitional.
5.4
Knowledge and Solution Concepts
In the previous chapters we discussed the concepts of Nash equilibrium
and rationalizability. When motivating these concepts we appealed in-
formally to assumptions about what the players know. In this section we
use the model described above to examine formally assumptions about
the players’ knowledge that lie behind the solution concepts.
Throughout we ﬁx attention on a given strategic game G = ⟨N, (Ai),
(≿i)⟩(see Deﬁnition 11.1).
Let Ωbe a set of states, each of which is a description of the envi-
ronment relevant to the game: that is, a description of each player’s
knowledge, action, and belief. Formally, each state ω ∈Ωconsists of a
speciﬁcation for each player i of
• Pi(ω) ⊆Ω, which describes player i’s knowledge in state ω (where
Pi is a partitional information function)
• ai(ω) ∈Ai, the action chosen by player i in state ω

--- Sayfa 93 ---
5.4 Knowledge and Solution Concepts
77
• µi(ω), a probability measure on A−i = ×j∈N\{i}Aj, the belief of
player i in state ω about the actions of the other players. (Note
that this allows a player to believe that the other players’ actions
are correlated.)
Note that the notion of a state, since it consists of a speciﬁcation of the
knowledge, action, and belief of each player, may be self-referential: if in
state ω1 some player does not know whether the state is ω1 or ω2 then
the description of ω1 refers to itself.
Our implicit assumption in this deﬁnition of the set of states is that it
is common knowledge among the players that the game is G. Thus we
ignore the possibility, for example, that some player does not know his
own action set or the action set of another player, or some player i does
not know whether player j knows player i’s preferences. This assumption
is stronger than we need for some of the results. To formalize weaker
assumptions about the players’ knowledge of the game we would need
to extend the deﬁnition of the set of states, requiring that each state
include a speciﬁcation of the game that is played.
We now isolate properties of a state that imply that the actions in
that state are consistent with various solution concepts. Our ﬁrst result
is that if in some state each player is rational, knows the other players’
actions, and has a belief consistent with his knowledge, then the proﬁle
of actions chosen in that state is a Nash equilibrium of the game.
Proposition 77.1 Suppose that in the state ω ∈Ωeach player i ∈N
a. knows the other players’ actions: Pi(ω) ⊆{ω′ ∈Ω: a−i(ω′) =
a−i(ω)};
b. has a belief that is consistent with his knowledge: the support of µi(ω)
is a subset of {a−i(ω′) ∈A−i: ω′ ∈Pi(ω)};
c. is rational: ai(ω) is a best response of player i to µi(ω).
Then (ai(ω))i∈N is a Nash equilibrium of G.
Proof. By (c) the action ai(ω) is a best response of player i to his belief,
which by (b) assigns probability one to the set {a−i(ω′) ∈A−i: ω′ ∈
Pi(ω)}; by (a) this set is {a−i(ω)}.
2
The assumption that each player knows the actions of all the other
players is very strong. We now show that in a two-player game we can
replace it with the assumption that each player knows the belief of the
other player if we strengthen (c) to require not only that each player be
rational but also that each player know that the other player is rational.
Since the result involves mixed strategies we now let the strategic game

--- Sayfa 94 ---
78
Chapter 5.
Knowledge and Equilibrium
under consideration be G = ⟨N, (Ai), (ui)⟩, where for each i ∈N the
expected value of the function ui represents player i’s preferences over
lotteries on A.
Proposition 78.1 Suppose that |N| = 2 and that in the state ω ∈Ω
each player i ∈N
a. knows the other player’s belief: Pi(ω) ⊆{ω′ ∈Ω: µj(ω′) = µj(ω)}
for j̸ = i;
b. has a belief that is consistent with his knowledge: the support of µi(ω)
is a subset of {aj(ω′) ∈Aj: ω′ ∈Pi(ω)} for j̸ = i;
c. knows that the other is rational: for any ω′ ∈Pi(ω) the action aj(ω′)
is a best response of player j to µj(ω′) for j̸ = i.
Then the mixed strategy proﬁle (α1, α2) = (µ2(ω), µ1(ω)) is a mixed
strategy Nash equilibrium of G.
Proof. Let a∗
i be an action of player i that is in the support of αi = µj(ω).
By (b) there is a state ω′ ∈Pj(ω) such that ai(ω′) = a∗
i . It follows from
(c) that the action a∗
i is a best response of player i to µi(ω′), which by
(a) is equal to µi(ω).
2
Note that neither proposition requires the players to derive their be-
liefs from some common prior on Ω. In particular, note that in (b) we
require only that each player’s belief be consistent with his knowledge.
Note also that the assumption that the game is common knowledge
can be weakened in both results: in Proposition 77.1 it is suﬃcient
to assume each player knows his own action set and preferences, and in
Proposition 78.1 it is suﬃcient to assume the game is mutual knowledge.
The following example demonstrates that Proposition 78.1 does not
have an analog when there are more than two players. Consider the
game at the top of Figure 79.1. (Note that player 3’s payoﬀis always 0.)
Let the set of states be Ω= {α, β, γ, δ, ϵ, ξ} and let the players’ action
functions and information functions be those given in the table at the
bottom of the ﬁgure; assume that the players’ beliefs are derived from
the same prior, which is given in the ﬁrst row of the table.
Consider the state δ. We claim that the three conditions of the propo-
sition are satisﬁed. Condition (b) is satisﬁed since each player’s belief
at δ is deﬁned from the common prior. It remains to verify that in this
state each player knows the beliefs of the other players and knows that
the other players are rational. Consider player 1. She knows that the
state is either δ or ϵ, so that she knows that player 2’s information is
either {γ, δ} or {ϵ, ξ}. In both cases player 2 believes that with prob-

--- Sayfa 95 ---
5.4 Knowledge and Solution Concepts
79
L
R
U
2, 3, 0
2, 0, 0
D
0, 3, 0
0, 0, 0
A
L
R
U
0, 0, 0
0, 2, 0
D
3, 0, 0
3, 2, 0
B
State
α
β
γ
δ
ϵ
ξ
Probability×63
32
16
8
4
2
1
1’s action
U
D
D
D
D
D
2’s action
L
L
L
L
L
L
3’s action
A
B
A
B
A
B
1’s partition
{α}
{β
γ}
{δ
ϵ}
{ξ}
2’s partition
{α
β}
{γ
δ}
{ϵ
ξ}
3’s partition
{α}
{β}
{γ}
{δ}
{ϵ}
{ξ}
Figure 79.1 At the top is a three-player game in which player 1 chooses one of the
two rows, player 2 chooses one of the two columns, and player 3 chooses one of the
two tables. At the bottom are action functions, information functions, and beliefs
for the players in the game.
ability 2
3 the pair of actions chosen by players 1 and 3 is (D, A) and
that with probability 1
3 it is (D, B). Given this belief, the action L that
player 2 takes is optimal. Thus player 1 knows that player 2 is rational.
Similarly player 2 knows that player 1’s information is either {β, γ} or
{δ, ϵ}. In both cases player 1 believes that with probability 2
3 players 2
and 3 will choose (L, B) and that with probability 1
3 they will choose
(L, A). Given this belief, the action D that she takes is optimal, so that
player 2 knows that player 1 is rational.
Player 3 knows that player 1’s information is {δ, ϵ} and that player 2’s
information is {γ, δ}.
Thus, as argued above, player 3 knows that
players 1 and 2 are rational.
In the three states γ, δ, and ϵ, player 3’s belief is that the pair of
actions of players 1 and 2 is (D, L), and thus in the state δ players 1
and 2 know player 3’s belief. They also know she is rational since her
payoﬀs are always zero.
However in the state δ the beliefs do not deﬁne a Nash equilibrium.
In fact, the players’ beliefs about each other’s behavior do not even
coincide: Player 1 believes that player 3 chooses A with probability 1
3

--- Sayfa 96 ---
80
Chapter 5.
Knowledge and Equilibrium
while player 2 believes that she does so with probability 2
3. Neither of
these beliefs together with the actions D and L forms a mixed strategy
Nash equilibrium of the game.
What makes this example work is that in state δ player 1 does not
know that player 2 knows her belief: player 1 thinks that the state
might be ϵ, in which player 2 does not know whether player 1 believes
that player 3 plays B or that player 3 plays B with probability 2
3 and A
with probability 1
3.
Aumann and Brandenburger (1995) show that if all players share a
common prior and in some state rationality is mutual knowledge and
the players’ beliefs are common knowledge then the beliefs at that state
form a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium even if there are more than two
players. The key point is that if the beliefs of players 1 and 2 about
player 3’s action are common knowledge and if all the players share the
same prior, then the beliefs must be the same (by an argument like that
in the proof of Proposition 75.1).
The following result formalizes the arguments in Chapter 4 to the
eﬀect that the notion of rationalizability rests on weaker assumptions
about the players’ knowledge than that of Nash equilibrium, requiring
only that it be common knowledge among the players that all players
are rational. (The result does not depend essentially on the assumption
that there are two players, though the statement is simpler in this case.)
Proposition 80.1 Suppose that |N| = 2 and that in the state ω ∈Ω
it is common knowledge between the players that each player’s belief is
consistent with his knowledge and that each player is rational. That is,
suppose that there is a self-evident event F ∋ω such that for every
ω′ ∈F and each i ∈N
a. the support of µi(ω′) is a subset of {aj(ω′′) ∈Aj: ω′′ ∈Pi(ω′)} for
j̸ = i;
b. the action ai(ω′) is a best response of player i to µi(ω′).
Then for each i ∈N the action ai(ω) is rationalizable in G.
Proof. For each i ∈N let Zi = {ai(ω′) ∈Ai: ω′ ∈F}. By (b) we know
that for any ω′ ∈F the action ai(ω′) is a best response to µi(ω′), whose
support, by (a), is a subset of {aj(ω′′) ∈Aj: ω′′ ∈Pi(ω′)}. Since F is
self-evident we have Pi(ω′) ⊆F, and thus {aj(ω′′) ∈Aj: ω′′ ∈Pi(ω′)} ⊆
Zj. Hence (using Deﬁnition 55.1) ai(ω) is rationalizable.
2
The three results in this section derive implications for the players’
actions or beliefs in a particular state from assumptions about their

--- Sayfa 97 ---
5.5 The Electronic Mail Game
81
A
B
A
M, M
1, −L
B
−L, 1
0, 0
Ga (probability 1 −p)
A
B
A
0, 0
1, −L
B
−L, 1
M, M
Gb (probability p)
Figure 81.1 The component games of the Electronic Mail game. The parameters
satisfy L > M > 1 and p < 1
2 .
knowledge in that state. The result in the following exercise is based
on an assumption of a diﬀerent type—that in every state the players’
rationality is common knowledge. If this assumption is satisﬁed and the
players’ beliefs are derived from a common prior then the distribution
of the players’ actions over Ωis a correlated equilibrium.
? Exercise 81.1
Suppose that for all ω ∈Ωall players are rational (and
hence their rationality is common knowledge in every state, since any
fact that is true in all states is common knowledge in every state). Show
that if each player’s belief in every state is derived from a common prior
ρ on Ωfor which ρ(Pi(ω)) > 0 for all i ∈N and all ω ∈Ω, and ai(ω′) =
ai(ω) for each i ∈N and each ω′ ∈Pi(ω), then ⟨(Ω, ρ), (Pi), (ai)⟩, where
Pi is the partition induced by Pi, is a correlated equilibrium of G. (The
proof is very simple; the main task is to understand the content of the
result.)
5.5
The Electronic Mail Game
In this section we study a game that illustrates the concepts introduced
in this chapter. Each of two players has to choose one of the actions
A or B.
With probability p <
1
2 the game in which the players are
involved is Gb; with probability 1 −p it is Ga. In both Ga and Gb it
is mutually beneﬁcial for the players to choose the same action, but the
action that is best depends on the game: in Ga the outcome (A, A) is
best, while in game Gb the outcome (B, B) is best.
The payoﬀs are
shown in Figure 81.1, where L > M > 1. Note that even if a player is
sure that the game is Gb, it is risky for him to choose B unless he is
suﬃciently conﬁdent that his partner is going to choose B as well.
Which is the true game is known initially only to player 1. Assume
ﬁrst that player 2 cannot obtain this information. Then we can model

--- Sayfa 98 ---
82
Chapter 5.
Knowledge and Equilibrium
the situation as a Bayesian game (Deﬁnition 25.1) in which there are
two states a and b and the information structures induced by the signal
functions are {{a}, {b}} for player 1 and {{a, b}} for player 2. This game
has a unique Nash equilibrium, in which both players always choose A;
the expected payoﬀof each player is (1 −p)M.
Now assume that player 1 can communicate with player 2 in such a
way that the game becomes common knowledge between the two players.
In this case each player’s information structure is {{a}, {b}} and the
(degenerate) Bayesian game has a Nash equilibrium in which each player
chooses A in state a and B in state b; the payoﬀof each player is M.
In the situation we study in this section, the players can communi-
cate, but the means that is open to them does not allow the game to
become common knowledge. Speciﬁcally, the players are restricted to
communicate via computers under the following protocol. If the game is
Gb then player 1’s computer automatically sends a message to player 2’s
computer; if the game is Ga then no message is sent. If a computer
receives a message then it automatically sends a conﬁrmation; this is
so not only for the original message but also for the conﬁrmation, the
conﬁrmation of the conﬁrmation, and so on. The protocol is designed to
send conﬁrmations because the technology has the property that there
is a small probability ϵ > 0 that any given message does not arrive at its
intended destination. If a message does not arrive then the communica-
tion stops. At the end of the communication phase each player’s screen
displays the number of messages that his machine has sent.
To discuss the players’ knowledge in this situation we need to specify
a set of states and the players’ information functions. Deﬁne the set of
states to be Ω= {(Q1, Q2): Q1 = Q2 or Q1 = Q2+1}. In the state (q, q)
player 1’s computer sends q messages, all of which arrive at player 2’s
computer, and the qth message sent by player 2’s computer goes astray.
In the state (q+1, q) player 1’s computer sends q+1 messages, and all but
the last arrive at player 2’s computer. Player 1’s information function is
deﬁned by P1(q, q) = {(q, q), (q, q −1)} if q ≥1 and P1(0, 0) = {(0, 0)};
player 2’s information function is deﬁned by P2(q, q) = {(q, q), (q + 1, q)}
for all q.
Denote by G(Q1, Q2) the game that is played in the state
(Q1, Q2); that is, G(0, 0) = Ga and G(Q1, Q2) = Gb otherwise. Player 1
knows the game in all states. Player 2 knows the game in all states
except (0, 0) and (1, 0). In each of the states (1, 0) and (1, 1) player 1
knows that the game is Gb but does not know that player 2 knows it.
Similarly in each of the states (1, 1) and (2, 1) player 2 knows that the
game is Gb but does not know whether player 1 knows that player 2

--- Sayfa 99 ---
5.5 The Electronic Mail Game
83
knows that the game is Gb. And so on. In any state (q, q) or (q + 1, q)
the larger the value of q the more statements of the type “player i knows
that player j knows that player i knows that . . . the game is Gb” are
correct, but in no state is it common knowledge that the game is Gb.
If ϵ is small then with high probability each player sees a very high
number on his screen. When player 1 sees “1” on her screen, she is not
sure whether player 2 knows that the game is Gb, and consequently may
hesitate to play B. But if the number on her screen is, for example,
17 then it seems to be “almost” common knowledge that the game is
Gb, and thus it may seem that she will adhere to the more desirable
equilibrium (B, B) of the game Gb. Her decision will depend on her
belief about what player 2 will do if the number on his screen is 16 or
17. In turn, player 2’s decision depends on his belief about what player 1
will do if the number on her screen is 16. And so on. To study these
considerations we now deﬁne the following Bayesian game, referred to
as the electronic mail game.
• The set of states is Ω= {(Q1, Q2): Q1 = Q2 or Q1 = Q2 + 1}.
• The signal function τi of each player i is deﬁned by τi(Q1, Q2) = Qi.
• Each player’s belief on Ωis the same, derived from the technology
(characterized by ϵ) and the assumption that the game is Ga with
probability 1 −p: pi(0, 0) = 1 −p, pi(q + 1, q) = pϵ(1 −ϵ)2q, and
pi(q + 1, q + 1) = pϵ(1 −ϵ)2q+1 for any nonnegative integer q.
• In each state (Q1, Q2) the payoﬀs are determined by the game
G(Q1, Q2).
Proposition 83.1 The electronic mail game has a unique Nash equi-
librium, in which both players always choose A.
Proof. In the state (0, 0) the action A is strictly dominant for player 1,
so that in any Nash equilibrium player 1 chooses A when receiving the
signal 0. If player 2 gets no message (i.e. his signal is 0) then he knows
that either player 1 did not send a message (an event with probability
1 −p) or the message that player 1 sent did not arrive (an event with
probability pϵ). If player 2 chooses A then, since player 1 chooses A in the
state (0, 0), player 2’s expected payoﬀis at least (1 −p)M/[(1 −p) + pϵ]
whatever player 1 chooses in the state (1, 0); if player 2 chooses B then
his payoﬀis at most [−L(1 −p) + pϵM]/[(1 −p) + pϵ]. Therefore it is
strictly optimal for player 2 to choose A when his signal is 0.
Assume now that we have shown that for all (Q1, Q2) with Q1 +Q2 <
2q players 1 and 2 both choose A in any equilibrium. Consider player 1’s

--- Sayfa 100 ---
84
Chapter 5.
Knowledge and Equilibrium
decision when she sends q messages. In this case player 1 is uncertain
whether Q2 = q or Q2 = q −1.
Given that she did not receive a
conﬁrmation of her qth message, the probability that she assigns to
Q2 = q −1 is z = ϵ/[ϵ + (1 −ϵ)ϵ] >
1
2. Thus she believes that it is
more likely that her last message did not arrive than that player 2 got
the message. (This is the key point in the argument.) If she chooses
B then her expected payoﬀis at most z(−L) + (1 −z)M (since under
the induction assumption, she knows that if Q2 = q −1 then player 2
chooses A). If she chooses A then her payoﬀis at least 0. Given that
L > M and z > 1
2, her best action is thus A. By a similar argument, if
players 1 and 2 both choose A in any equilibrium for all (Q1, Q2) with
Q1 + Q2 < 2q + 1 then player 2 chooses A when his signal is q. Hence
each player chooses A in response to every possible signal.
2
Thus even if both players know that the game is Gb and even if the
noise in the network (the probability ϵ) is arbitrarily small, the players
act as if they had no information and play A, as they do in the absence
of an electronic mail system!
What would you do if the number on your screen were 17?
It is
hard to imagine that when L slightly exceeds M and ϵ is small a player
who sees the number 17 on his screen will not choose B. The contrast
between our intuition and the game theoretic analysis makes the equilib-
rium paradoxical. In this respect the example joins a long list of games
(like the ﬁnitely repeated Prisoner’s Dilemma (see Proposition 155.1),
the chain-store game (see Section 6.5.1), and the centipede game (see
Section 6.5.2)) in which it seems that the source of the discrepancy be-
tween our intuition and the analysis lies in the fact that mathematical
induction is not part of the reasoning process of human beings.
Notes
The basic model of knowledge described in Section 5.1 was formulated
in the 1950s and 1960s; Hintikka (1962) is seminal.
The concept of
common knowledge is due to Lewis (1969) and Aumann (1976). Lewis
gives an informal deﬁnition (and discusses the philosophical background
for Sections 5.1 and 5.2); Aumann gives a formal deﬁnition and proves
Proposition 75.1.
Section 5.4 is based on Brandenburger (1992) and
Aumann and Brandenburger (1995). (Spohn (1982) contains a result
that is a precursor to Proposition 78.1.) The electronic mail game of
Section 5.5 is studied by Rubinstein (1989); it is close in spirit to the

--- Sayfa 101 ---
Notes
85
“coordinated attack problem” studied by computer scientists (see, for
example, Halpern (1986)).
The origin of the puzzle of the hats in Section 5.1.3 is unclear; see
Littlewood (1953, p. 3). Exercise 76.2 is based on Milgrom and Sto-
key (1982) and Exercise 81.1 is based on Aumann (1987a).
For discussions of models of interactive knowledge in which the play-
ers’ information functions are not partitional see Bacharach (1985) and
Samet (1990). For surveys of the literature see Binmore and Branden-
burger (1990) and Geanakoplos (1992, 1994).

--- Sayfa 103 ---
II
Extensive Games with Perfect Information
An extensive game is an explicit description of the sequential structure of
the decision problems encountered by the players in a strategic situation.
The model allows us to study solutions in which each player can consider
his plan of action not only at the beginning of the game but also at any
point of time at which he has to make a decision.
By contrast, the
model of a strategic game restricts us to solutions in which each player
chooses his plan of action once and for all; this plan can cover unlimited
contingencies, but the model of a strategic game does not allow a player
to reconsider his plan of action after some events in the game have
unfolded.
A general model of an extensive game allows each player, when making
his choices, to be imperfectly informed about what has happened in the
past. We study such a model in Part III. In this part we investigate a
simpler model in which each player is perfectly informed about the play-
ers’ previous actions at each point in the game. In Chapter 6 we describe
the basic model. In the next three chapters we study two interesting
classes of extensive games with perfect information: bargaining games
of alternating oﬀers (Chapter 7) and repeated games (Chapters 8 and
9). In Chapter 10 we present some of the main results of implementation
theory (using the models of both strategic and extensive games).

--- Sayfa 105 ---
6
Extensive Games with Perfect Information
In this chapter we study the model of an extensive game with perfect
information. We argue that the solution concept of Nash equilibrium
is unsatisfactory in this model since it ignores the sequential structure
of the decision problems. We deﬁne the alternative notion of subgame
perfect equilibrium, in which a player is required to reassess his plans
as play proceeds. At the end of the chapter we compare this solution
concept with that of iterated elimination of weakly dominated actions.
6.1
Extensive Games with Perfect Information
6.1.1
Deﬁnition
An extensive game is a detailed description of the sequential structure of
the decision problems encountered by the players in a strategic situation.
There is perfect information in such a game if each player, when making
any decision, is perfectly informed of all the events that have previously
occurred. For simplicity we initially restrict attention to games in which
no two players make decisions at the same time and all relevant moves
are made by the players (no randomness ever intervenes). (We remove
these two restrictions in Section 6.3.)
▶Definition 89.1 An extensive game with perfect information
has the following components.
• A set N (the set of players).
• A set H of sequences (ﬁnite or inﬁnite) that satisﬁes the following
three properties.
◦The empty sequence ∅is a member of H.

--- Sayfa 106 ---
90
Chapter 6.
Extensive Games with Perfect Information
◦If (ak)k=1,...,K ∈H (where K may be inﬁnite) and L < K then
(ak)k=1,...,L ∈H.
◦If an inﬁnite sequence (ak)∞
k=1 satisﬁes (ak)k=1,...,L ∈H for every
positive integer L then (ak)∞
k=1 ∈H.
(Each member of H is a history; each component of a history is an
action taken by a player.) A history (ak)k=1,...,K ∈H is terminal
if it is inﬁnite or if there is no aK+1 such that (ak)k=1,...,K+1 ∈H.
The set of terminal histories is denoted Z.
• A function P that assigns to each nonterminal history (each member
of H \ Z) a member of N. (P is the player function, P(h) being
the player who takes an action after the history h.)
• For each player i ∈N a preference relation ≿i on Z (the preference
relation of player i).
Sometimes it is convenient to specify the structure of an extensive game
without specifying the players’ preferences. We refer to a triple ⟨N, H, P⟩
whose components satisfy the ﬁrst three conditions in the deﬁnition as
an extensive game form with perfect information.
If the set H of possible histories is ﬁnite then the game is ﬁnite. If
the longest history is ﬁnite then the game has a ﬁnite horizon. Let h
be a history of length k; we denote by (h, a) the history of length k + 1
consisting of h followed by a.
Throughout this chapter we refer to an extensive game with perfect
information simply as an “extensive game”. We interpret such a game as
follows. After any nonterminal history h player P(h) chooses an action
from the set
A(h) = {a: (h, a) ∈H}.
The empty history is the starting point of the game; we sometimes
refer to it as the initial history. At this point player P(∅) chooses a
member of A(∅). For each possible choice a0 from this set player P(a0)
subsequently chooses a member of the set A(a0); this choice determines
the next player to move, and so on.
A history after which no more
choices have to be made is terminal. Note that a history may be an
inﬁnite sequence of actions. Implicit in the deﬁnition of a history as a
sequence (rather than as a more complex mathematical object, like a
string of sequences) is the assumption that no action may be taken after
any inﬁnite history, so that each such history is terminal. As in the case
of a strategic game we often specify the players’ preferences over terminal
histories by giving payoﬀfunctions that represent the preferences.

--- Sayfa 107 ---
6.1 Extensive Games with Perfect Information
91
b1
(2, 0)
(0, 2)












XXXXXXXXXXXX
r
(1, 1)
r
   @
@
@
r
2, 0
0, 0
r
2
y
n
r
   @
@
@
r
1, 1
0, 0
r
2
n
y
r
   @
@
@
r
0, 2
0, 0
r
2
n
y
Figure 91.1
An extensive game that models the procedure for allocating two
identical indivisible objects between two people described in Example 91.1.
⋄Example 91.1 Two people use the following procedure to share two de-
sirable identical indivisible objects. One of them proposes an allocation,
which the other then either accepts or rejects. In the event of rejection,
neither person receives either of the objects. Each person cares only
about the number of objects he obtains.
An extensive game that models the individuals’ predicament is ⟨N, H,
P, (≿i)⟩where
• N = {1, 2};
• H consists of the ten histories ∅, (2, 0), (1, 1), (0, 2), ((2, 0), y),
((2, 0), n), ((1, 1), y), ((1, 1), n), ((0, 2), y), ((0, 2), n);
• P(∅) = 1 and P(h) = 2 for every nonterminal history h̸ = ∅.
• ((2, 0), y) ≻1 ((1, 1), y) ≻1 ((0, 2), y) ∼1 ((2, 0), n) ∼1 ((1, 1), n) ∼1
((0, 2), n) and ((0, 2), y) ≻2 ((1, 1), y) ≻2 ((2, 0), y) ∼2 ((0, 2), n) ∼2
((1, 1), n) ∼2 ((2, 0), n).
A convenient representation of this game is shown in Figure 91.1.
The small circle at the top of the diagram represents the initial history
∅(the starting point of the game). The 1 above this circle indicates
that P(∅) = 1 (player 1 makes the ﬁrst move). The three line segments
that emanate from the circle correspond to the three members of A(∅)
(the possible actions of player 1 at the initial history); the labels beside
these line segments are the names of the actions, (k, 2 −k) being the
proposal to give k of the objects to player 1 and the remaining 2 −k
to player 2. Each line segment leads to a small disk beside which is
the label 2, indicating that player 2 takes an action after any history
of length one. The labels beside the line segments that emanate from
these disks are the names of player 2’s actions, y meaning “accept” and n
meaning “reject”. The numbers below the terminal histories are payoﬀs
that represent the players’ preferences. (The ﬁrst number in each pair
is the payoﬀof player 1 and the second is the payoﬀof player 2.)

--- Sayfa 108 ---
92
Chapter 6.
Extensive Games with Perfect Information
Figure 91.1 suggests an alternative deﬁnition of an extensive game
in which the basic component is a tree (a connected graph with no
cycles). In this formulation each node corresponds to a history and any
pair of nodes that are connected corresponds to an action; the names
of the actions are not part of the deﬁnition.
This deﬁnition is more
conventional, but we ﬁnd Deﬁnition 89.1, which takes the players’ actions
as primitives, to be more natural.
6.1.2
Strategies
A strategy of a player in an extensive game is a plan that speciﬁes the
action chosen by the player for every history after which it is his turn
to move.
▶Definition 92.1 A strategy of player i ∈N in an extensive game
with perfect information ⟨N, H, P, (≿i)⟩is a function that assigns an
action in A(h) to each nonterminal history h ∈H \Z for which P(h) = i.
Note that the notion of a strategy of a player in a game ⟨N, H, P, (≿i)⟩
depends only on the game form ⟨N, H, P⟩.
To illustrate the notion of a strategy consider the game in Figure 91.1.
Player 1 takes an action only after the initial history ∅, so that we can
identify each of her strategies with one of the three possible actions that
she can take after this history: (2, 0), (1, 1), and (0, 2). Player 2 takes
an action after each of the three histories (2, 0), (1, 1), and (0, 2), and in
each case he has two possible actions. Thus we can identify each of his
strategies with a triple a2b2c2 where a2, b2, and c2 are the actions that
he chooses after the histories (2, 0), (1, 1), and (0, 2). The interpretation
of player 2’s strategy a2b2c2 is that it is a contingency plan: if player 1
chooses (2, 0) then player 2 will choose a2; if player 1 chooses (1, 1) then
player 2 will choose b2; and if player 1 chooses (0, 2) then player 2 will
choose c2.
The game in Figure 93.1 illustrates an important point: a strategy
speciﬁes the action chosen by a player for every history after which it
is his turn to move, even for histories that, if the strategy is followed,
are never reached. In this game player 1 has four strategies AE, AF,
BE, and BF. That is, her strategy speciﬁes an action after the history
(A, C) even if it speciﬁes that she chooses B at the beginning of the
game. In this sense a strategy diﬀers from what we would naturally
consider to be a plan of action; we return to this point in Section 6.4.
As we shall see in a moment, for some purposes we can regard BE and

--- Sayfa 109 ---
6.1 Extensive Games with Perfect Information
93
b1
r
d
r
A
B
   @
@@
r
   @
@
@
r
c
r
2
C
D
r
   @
@
@
r
a
b
r
1
E
F
Figure 93.1 An extensive game in which player 1 moves both before and after
player 2.
BF as the same strategy; however, in other cases it is important to keep
them distinct.
For each strategy proﬁle s = (si)i∈N in the extensive game ⟨N, H, P,
(≿i)⟩we deﬁne the outcome O(s) of s to be the terminal history that
results when each player i ∈N follows the precepts of si. That is, O(s) is
the (possibly inﬁnite) history (a1, . . . , aK) ∈Z such that for 0 ≤k < K
we have sP (a1,...,ak)(a1, . . . , ak) = ak+1.
As in a strategic game we can deﬁne a mixed strategy to be a probabil-
ity distribution over the set of (pure) strategies. In extensive games with
perfect information little is added by considering such strategies. Thus
we postpone discussing them until Chapter 11, where we study extensive
games in which the players are not perfectly informed when taking ac-
tions; in such games the notion of a mixed strategy has more signiﬁcance.
6.1.3
Nash Equilibrium
The ﬁrst solution concept we deﬁne for an extensive game ignores the
sequential structure of the game; it treats the strategies as choices that
are made once and for all before play begins.
▶Definition 93.1 A Nash equilibrium of an extensive game with
perfect information ⟨N, H, P, (≿i)⟩is a strategy proﬁle s∗such that
for every player i ∈N we have
O(s∗
−i, s∗
i ) ≿i O(s∗
−i, si) for every strategy si of player i.
Alternatively, we can deﬁne a Nash equilibrium of an extensive game
Γ as a Nash equilibrium of the strategic game derived from Γ deﬁned as
follows.

--- Sayfa 110 ---
94
Chapter 6.
Extensive Games with Perfect Information
▶Definition 94.1 The strategic form of the extensive game with
perfect information Γ = ⟨N, H, P, (≿i)⟩is the strategic game ⟨N, (Si),
(≿′
i)⟩in which for each player i ∈N
• Si is the set of strategies of player i in Γ
• ≿′
i is deﬁned by s ≿′
i s′ if and only if O(s) ≿i O(s′) for every s ∈
×i∈NSi and s′ ∈×i∈NSi.
? Exercise 94.2 Let G be a two-player strategic game ⟨{1, 2}, (Ai), (≿i)⟩
in which each player has two actions: Ai = {a′
i, a′′
i } for i = 1, 2. Show
that G is the strategic form of an extensive game with perfect informa-
tion if and only if either for some a1 ∈A1 we have (a1, a′
2) ∼i (a1, a′′
2)
for i = 1, 2 or for some a2 ∈A2 we have (a′
1, a2) ∼i (a′′
1, a2) for i = 1, 2.
If Nash equilibrium were the only solution we deﬁned for extensive
games, we could deﬁne a strategy more restrictively than we have done
so: we could require that a strategy specify a player’s action only after
histories that are not inconsistent with the actions that it speciﬁes at
earlier points in the game. This is so because the outcome O(s) of the
strategy proﬁle s is not aﬀected by the actions that the strategy si of
any player i speciﬁes after contingencies that are inconsistent with si.
Precisely, we can deﬁne a reduced strategy of player i to be a function
fi whose domain is a subset of {h ∈H: P(h) = i} and has the following
properties: (i) it associates with every history h in the domain of fi an
action in A(h) and (ii) a history h with P(h) = i is in the domain of fi
if and only if all the actions of player i in h are those dictated by fi (that
is, if h = (ak) and h′ = (ak)k=1,...,L is a subsequence of h with P(h′) = i
then fi(h′) = aL+1). Each reduced strategy of player i corresponds to
a set of strategies of player i; for each vector of strategies of the other
players each strategy in this set yields the same outcome (that is, the
strategies in the set are outcome-equivalent). The set of Nash equilibria
of an extensive game corresponds to the Nash equilibria of the strategic
game in which the set of actions of each player is the set of his reduced
strategies. (The full deﬁnition of a strategy is needed for the concept of
subgame perfect equilibrium, which we deﬁne in the next section.)
As an example of the set of reduced strategies of a player in an exten-
sive game, consider the game in Figure 93.1. Player 1 has three reduced
strategies: one deﬁned by fi(∅) = B (with domain {∅}), one deﬁned
by fi(∅) = A and fi(A, C) = E (with domain {∅, (A, C)}), and one
deﬁned by fi(∅) = A and fi(A, C) = F (with domain {∅, (A, C)}).
For some games some of a player’s reduced strategies are equivalent
in the sense that, regardless of the strategies of the other players, they

--- Sayfa 111 ---
6.1 Extensive Games with Perfect Information
95
generate the same payoﬀs for all players (though not the same outcome).
That is, for some games there is a redundancy in the deﬁnition of a
strategy, from the point of view of the players’ payoﬀs, beyond that
captured by the notion of a reduced strategy. For example, if a = b in
the game in Figure 93.1 then player 1’s two reduced strategies in which
she chooses A at the start of the game are equivalent from the point of
view of payoﬀs. To capture this further redundancy, together with the
redundancy captured by the notion of a reduced strategy, we can deﬁne
the following variant of the strategic form.
▶Definition 95.1 Let Γ = ⟨N, H, P, (≿i)⟩be an extensive game with
perfect information and let ⟨N, (Si), (≿′
i)⟩be its strategic form. For any
i ∈N deﬁne the strategies si ∈Si and s′
i ∈Si of player i to be equivalent
if for each s−i ∈S−i we have (s−i, si) ∼′
j (s−i, s′
i) for all j ∈N. The
reduced strategic form of Γ is the strategic game ⟨N, (S′
i), (≿′′
i )⟩in
which for each i ∈N each set S′
i contains one member of each set of
equivalent strategies in Si and ≿′′
i is the preference ordering over ×j∈NS′
j
induced by ≿′
i.
(Note that this deﬁnition speciﬁes the names of the actions in the re-
duced strategic form; every choice of such actions deﬁnes a diﬀerent
reduced strategic form. However, the names of the actions do not mat-
ter in any conventional game theoretic analysis, so that we refer to the
reduced strategic form of a game.)
The strategic and reduced strategic forms of the game in Figure 93.1
are shown in Figure 96.1. If a = b then the strategies AE and AF of
player 1 are equivalent, so that player 1 has only two actions in the
reduced strategic form of the game.
The next example illustrates the notion of Nash equilibrium and points
to an undesirable feature that equilibria may possess.
⋄Example 95.2 The game in Figure 96.2 has two Nash equilibria: (A, R)
and (B, L), with payoﬀproﬁles (2, 1) and (1, 2). The strategy proﬁle
(B, L) is a Nash equilibrium because given that player 2 chooses L after
the history A, it is optimal for player 1 to choose B at the start of the
game (if she chooses A instead, then given player 2’s choice she obtains 0
rather than 1), and given player 1’s choice of B it is optimal for player 2
to choose L (since his choice makes no diﬀerence to the outcome).
Our interpretation of a nonterminal history as a point at which a
player may reassess his plan of action leads to an argument that the
Nash equilibrium (B, L) in this game lacks plausibility. If the history A

--- Sayfa 112 ---
96
Chapter 6.
Extensive Games with Perfect Information
C
D
AE
a
c
AF
b
c
BE
d
d
BF
d
d
C
D
AE
a
c
AF
b
c
B
d
d
Figure 96.1 The strategic form (left) and reduced strategic form (right) of the
extensive game in Figure 93.1.
b1
r
1, 2
r
A
B
   @
@@
r
   @
@
@
r
0, 0
2, 1
r
2
L
R
Figure 96.2 An example of a two-player extensive game.
were to occur then player 2 would, it seems, choose R over L, since he
obtains a higher payoﬀby doing so. The equilibrium (B, L) is sustained
by the “threat” of player 2 to choose L if player 1 chooses A.
This
threat is not credible since player 2 has no way of committing himself to
this choice. Thus player 1 can be conﬁdent that if she chooses A then
player 2 will choose R; since she prefers the outcome (A, R) to the Nash
equilibrium outcome (B, L), she thus has an incentive to deviate from
the equilibrium and choose A. In the next section we deﬁne a notion of
equilibrium that captures these considerations.
⋄Example 96.1
The Nash equilibria of the game in Figure 91.1 are
((2, 0), yyy), ((2, 0), yyn), ((2, 0), yny), ((2, 0), ynn), ((1, 1), nyy), ((1, 1),
nyn), ((0, 2), nny), ((2, 0), nny), and ((2, 0), nnn). The ﬁrst four result
in the division (2, 0), the next two result in the division (1, 1), the next
one results in the division (0, 2), and the last two result in the division
(0, 0). All of these equilibria except ((2, 0), yyy) and ((1, 1), nyy) involve
an action of player 2 that is implausible after some history (since he
rejects a proposal that gives him at least one of the objects); like the

--- Sayfa 113 ---
6.2 Subgame Perfect Equilibrium
97
equilibrium (B, L) in Example 95.2, they are ruled out by the notion of
equilibrium we now deﬁne.
6.2
Subgame Perfect Equilibrium
Motivated by the discussion at the end of the previous section we now
deﬁne the notion of subgame perfect equilibrium. We begin by deﬁning
the notion of a subgame.
▶Definition 97.1 The subgame of the extensive game with per-
fect information Γ = ⟨N, H, P, (≿i)⟩that follows the history h
is the extensive game Γ(h) = ⟨N, H|h, P|h, (≿i|h)⟩, where H|h is the
set of sequences h′ of actions for which (h, h′) ∈H, P|h is deﬁned by
P|h(h′) = P(h, h′) for each h′ ∈H|h, and ≿i|h is deﬁned by h′ ≿i|h h′′
if and only if (h, h′) ≿i (h, h′′).
The notion of equilibrium we now deﬁne requires that the action pre-
scribed by each player’s strategy be optimal, given the other players’
strategies, after every history.
Given a strategy si of player i and a
history h in the extensive game Γ, denote by si|h the strategy that si
induces in the subgame Γ(h) (i.e. si|h(h′) = si(h, h′) for each h′ ∈H|h);
denote by Oh the outcome function of Γ(h).
▶Definition 97.2 A subgame perfect equilibrium of an exten-
sive game with perfect information Γ = ⟨N, H, P, (≿i)⟩is a strat-
egy proﬁle s∗such that for every player i ∈N and every nonterminal
history h ∈H \ Z for which P(h) = i we have
Oh(s∗
−i|h, s∗
i |h) ≿i|h Oh(s∗
−i|h, si)
for every strategy si of player i in the subgame Γ(h).
Equivalently, we can deﬁne a subgame perfect equilibrium to be a
strategy proﬁle s∗in Γ for which for any history h the strategy proﬁle
s∗|h is a Nash equilibrium of the subgame Γ(h).
The notion of subgame perfect equilibrium eliminates Nash equilibria
in which the players’ threats are not credible. For example, in the game
in Figure 96.2 the only subgame perfect equilibrium is (A, R) and in the
game in Figure 91.1 the only subgame perfect equilibria are ((2, 0), yyy)
and ((1, 1), nyy).
⋄Example 97.3 (Stackelberg games) A Stackelberg game is a two-player
extensive game with perfect information in which a “leader” chooses an
action from a set A1 and a “follower”, informed of the leader’s choice,

--- Sayfa 114 ---
98
Chapter 6.
Extensive Games with Perfect Information
chooses an action from a set A2. The solution usually applied to such
games in economics is that of subgame perfect equilibrium (though this
terminology is not always used).
Some (but not all) subgame per-
fect equilibria of a Stackelberg game correspond to solutions of the
maximization problem
max
(a1,a2)∈A1×A2 u1(a1, a2)
subject to a2 ∈arg max
a′
2∈A2
u2(a1, a′
2),
where ui is a payoﬀfunction that represents player i’s preferences. If
the set Ai of actions of each player i is compact and the payoﬀfunctions
ui are continuous then this maximization problem has a solution.
? Exercise 98.1
Give an example of a subgame perfect equilibrium
of a Stackelberg game that does not correspond to a solution of the
maximization problem above.
To verify that a strategy proﬁle s∗is a subgame perfect equilibrium,
Deﬁnition 97.2 requires us to check, for every player i and every subgame,
that there is no strategy that leads to an outcome that player i prefers.
The following result shows that in a game with a ﬁnite horizon we can
restrict attention, for each player i and each subgame, to alternative
strategies that diﬀer from s∗
i in the actions they prescribe after just one
history. Speciﬁcally, a strategy proﬁle is a subgame perfect equilibrium
if and only if for each subgame the player who makes the ﬁrst move
cannot obtain a better outcome by changing only his initial action. For
an extensive game Γ denote by ℓ(Γ) the length of the longest history in
Γ; we refer to ℓ(Γ) as the length of Γ.
Lemma 98.2 (The one deviation property) Let Γ = ⟨N, H, P, (≿i)⟩be
a ﬁnite horizon extensive game with perfect information. The strategy
proﬁle s∗is a subgame perfect equilibrium of Γ if and only if for every
player i ∈N and every history h ∈H for which P(h) = i we have
Oh(s∗
−i|h, s∗
i |h) ≿i|h Oh(s∗
−i|h, si)
for every strategy si of player i in the subgame Γ(h) that diﬀers from
s∗
i |h only in the action it prescribes after the initial history of Γ(h).
Proof. If s∗is a subgame perfect equilibrium of Γ then it satisﬁes the
condition. Now suppose that s∗is not a subgame perfect equilibrium;
suppose that player i can deviate proﬁtably in the subgame Γ(h′). Then
there exists a proﬁtable deviant strategy si of player i in Γ(h′) for which
si(h)̸ = (s∗
i |h′)(h) for a number of histories h not larger than the length
of Γ(h′); since Γ has a ﬁnite horizon this number is ﬁnite. From among

--- Sayfa 115 ---
6.2 Subgame Perfect Equilibrium
99
all the proﬁtable deviations of player i in Γ(h′) choose a strategy si for
which the number of histories h such that si(h)̸ = (s∗
i |h′)(h) is minimal.
Let h∗be the longest history h of Γ(h′) for which si(h)̸ = (s∗
i |h′)(h).
Then the initial history of Γ(h∗) is the only history in Γ(h∗) at which
the action prescribed by si diﬀers from that prescribed by s∗
i |h′. Further,
si|h∗is a proﬁtable deviation in Γ(h∗), since otherwise there would be a
proﬁtable deviation in Γ(h′) that diﬀers from s∗
i |h′ after fewer histories
than does si. Thus si|h∗is a proﬁtable deviation in Γ(h∗) that diﬀers
from s∗
i |h∗only in the action that it prescribes after the initial history
of Γ(h∗).
2
? Exercise 99.1
Give an example of an inﬁnite horizon game for which
the one deviation property does not hold.
We now prove that every ﬁnite extensive game with perfect informa-
tion has a subgame perfect equilibrium. Our proof is constructive: for
each of the longest nonterminal histories in the game we choose an op-
timal action for the player whose turn it is to move and replace each
of these histories with a terminal history in which the payoﬀproﬁle is
that which results when the optimal action is chosen; then we repeat
the procedure, working our way back to the start of the game. (The
following result is known as Kuhn’s theorem.)
Proposition 99.2 Every ﬁnite extensive game with perfect information
has a subgame perfect equilibrium.
Proof. Let Γ = ⟨N, H, P, (≿i)⟩be a ﬁnite extensive game with perfect
information. We construct a subgame perfect equilibrium of Γ by induc-
tion on ℓ(Γ(h)); at the same time we deﬁne a function R that associates
a terminal history with every history h ∈H and show that this history
is a subgame perfect equilibrium outcome of the subgame Γ(h).
If ℓ(Γ(h)) = 0 (i.e. h is a terminal history of Γ) deﬁne R(h) = h. Now
suppose that R(h) is deﬁned for all h ∈H with ℓ(Γ(h)) ≤k for some
k ≥0. Let h∗be a history for which ℓ(Γ(h∗)) = k +1 and let P(h∗) = i.
Since ℓ(Γ(h∗)) = k + 1 we have ℓ(Γ(h∗, a)) ≤k for all a ∈A(h∗). Deﬁne
si(h∗) to be a ≿i-maximizer of R(h∗, a) over a ∈A(h∗), and deﬁne
R(h∗) = R(h∗, si(h∗)). By induction we have now deﬁned a strategy
proﬁle s in Γ; by Lemma 98.2 this strategy proﬁle is a subgame perfect
equilibrium of Γ.
2
The procedure used in this proof is often referred to as backwards in-
duction. In addition to being a means by which to prove the proposition,
this procedure is an algorithm for calculating the set of subgame perfect

--- Sayfa 116 ---
100
Chapter 6.
Extensive Games with Perfect Information
equilibria of a ﬁnite game. Part of the appeal of the notion of subgame
perfect equilibrium derives from the fact that the algorithm describes
what appears to be a natural way for players to analyze such a game so
long as the horizon is relatively short.
One conclusion we may draw from the result relates to chess. Under
the rule that a game is a draw once a position is repeated three times,
chess is ﬁnite, so that Proposition 99.2 implies that it has a subgame
perfect equilibrium and hence also a Nash equilibrium. (Under the (of-
ﬁcial) rule that a player has the option of declaring a draw under these
circumstances, chess is not ﬁnite.) Because chess is strictly competitive,
Proposition 22.2 implies that the equilibrium payoﬀis unique and that
any Nash equilibrium strategy of a player guarantees the player his equi-
librium payoﬀ. Thus either White has a strategy that guarantees that
it wins, or Black has a strategy that guarantees that it wins, or each
player has a strategy that guarantees that the outcome of the game is
either a win for it or a draw.
? Exercise 100.1
Show that the requirement in Kuhn’s theorem (Propo-
sition 99.2) that the game be ﬁnite cannot be replaced by the require-
ment that it have a ﬁnite horizon, nor by the requirement that after any
history each player have ﬁnitely many possible actions.
Note that Kuhn’s theorem makes no claim of uniqueness. Indeed, the
game in Figure 91.1 has two subgame perfect equilibria ((2, 0), yyy) and
((1, 1), nyy)) that are not equivalent in terms of either player’s prefer-
ences. However, it is clear that a ﬁnite game in which no player is indif-
ferent between any two outcomes has a unique subgame perfect equilib-
rium. Further, if all players are indiﬀerent between any two outcomes
whenever any one player is indiﬀerent, then even though there may be
more than one subgame perfect equilibrium, all players are indiﬀerent
between all subgame perfect equilibria. This result is demonstrated in
the following exercise.
? Exercise 100.2
Say that a ﬁnite extensive game with perfect informa-
tion satisﬁes the no indiﬀerence condition if
z ∼j z′ for all j ∈N whenever z ∼i z′ for some i ∈N,
where z and z′ are terminal histories.
Show, using induction on the
length of subgames, that every player is indiﬀerent among all subgame
perfect equilibrium outcomes of such a game. Show also that if s and s′
are subgame perfect equilibria then so is s′′, where for each player i the

--- Sayfa 117 ---
6.3 Two Extensions of the Deﬁnition of a Game
101
strategy s′′
i is equal to either si or s′
i (that is, the equilibria of the game
are interchangeable).
? Exercise 101.1
Show that a subgame perfect equilibrium of an exten-
sive game Γ is also a subgame perfect equilibrium of the game obtained
from Γ by deleting a subgame not reached in the equilibrium and assign-
ing to the terminal history thus created the outcome of the equilibrium
in the deleted subgame.
? Exercise 101.2
Let s be a strategy proﬁle in an extensive game with
perfect information Γ; suppose that P(h) = i, si(h) = a, and a′ ∈
A(h) with a′̸ = a. Consider the game Γ′ obtained from Γ by deleting
all histories of the form (h, a′, h′) for some sequence of actions h′ and
let s′ be the strategy proﬁle in Γ′ that is induced by s. Show that if
s is a subgame perfect equilibrium of Γ then s′ is a subgame perfect
equilibrium of Γ′.
? Exercise 101.3
Armies 1 and 2 are ﬁghting over an island initially
held by a battalion of army 2. Army 1 has K battalions and army 2
has L. Whenever the island is occupied by one army the opposing army
can launch an attack. The outcome of the attack is that the occupying
battalion and one of the attacking battalions are destroyed; the attacking
army wins and, so long as it has battalions left, occupies the island with
one battalion. The commander of each army is interested in maximizing
the number of surviving battalions but also regards the occupation of
the island as worth more than one battalion but less than two.
(If,
after an attack, neither army has any battalions left, then the payoﬀof
each commander is 0.) Analyze this situation as an extensive game and,
using the notion of subgame perfect equilibrium, predict the winner as
a function of K and L.
6.3
Two Extensions of the Deﬁnition of a Game
The model of an extensive game with perfect information, as given in
Deﬁnition 89.1, can easily be extended in two directions.
6.3.1
Exogenous Uncertainty
First we extend the model to cover situations in which there is some
exogenous uncertainty. An extensive game with perfect information and
chance moves is a tuple ⟨N, H, P, fc, (≿i)⟩where, as before, N is a ﬁnite
set of players and H is a set of histories, and

--- Sayfa 118 ---
102
Chapter 6.
Extensive Games with Perfect Information
• P is a function from the nonterminal histories in H to N ∪{c}.
(If P(h) = c then chance determines the action taken after the
history h.)
• For each h ∈H with P(h) = c, fc(·|h) is a probability measure on
A(h); each such probability measure is assumed to be independent
of every other such measure.
(fc(a|h) is the probability that a
occurs after the history h.)
• For each player i ∈N, ≿i is a preference relation on lotteries over
the set of terminal histories.
A strategy for each player i ∈N is deﬁned as before. The outcome of a
strategy proﬁle is a probability distribution over terminal histories. The
deﬁnition of a subgame perfect equilibrium is the same as before (see
Deﬁnition 97.2).
? Exercise 102.1
Show that both the one deviation property (Lemma
98.2) and Kuhn’s theorem (Proposition 99.2) hold for an extensive game
with perfect information and chance moves.
6.3.2
Simultaneous Moves
To model situations in which players move simultaneously after certain
histories, each of them being fully informed of all past events when
making his choice, we can modify the deﬁnition of an extensive game
with perfect information (Deﬁnition 89.1) as follows. An extensive game
with perfect information and simultaneous moves is a tuple ⟨N, H, P,
(≿i)⟩where N, H, and ≿i for each i ∈N are the same as in Deﬁni-
tion 89.1, P is a function that assigns to each nonterminal history a set
of players, and H and P jointly satisfy the condition that for every non-
terminal history h there is a collection {Ai(h)}i∈P (h) of sets for which
A(h) = {a: (h, a) ∈H} = ×i∈P (h)Ai(h).
A history in such a game is a sequence of vectors; the components of
each vector ak are the actions taken by the players whose turn it is to
move after the history (aℓ)k−1
ℓ=1 . The set of actions among which each
player i ∈P(h) can choose after the history h is Ai(h); the interpretation
is that the choices of the players in P(h) are made simultaneously.
A strategy of player i ∈N in such a game is a function that assigns
an action in Ai(h) to every nonterminal history h for which i ∈P(h).
The deﬁnition of a subgame perfect equilibrium is the same as that
in Deﬁnition 97.2 with the exception that “P(h) = i” is replaced by
“i ∈P(h)”.

--- Sayfa 119 ---
6.4 The Interpretation of a Strategy
103
? Exercise 103.1
Suppose that three players share a pie by using the
following procedure. First player 1 proposes a division, then players 2
and 3 simultaneously respond either “yes” or “no”.
If players 2 and
3 both say “yes” then the division is implemented; otherwise no player
receives anything. Each player prefers more of the pie to less. Formulate
this situation as an extensive game with simultaneous moves and ﬁnd
its subgame perfect equilibria.
? Exercise 103.2
Consider the following two-player game. First player 1
can choose either Stop or Continue. If she chooses Stop then the game
ends with the pair of payoﬀs (1, 1). If she chooses Continue then the
players simultaneously announce nonnegative integers and each player’s
payoﬀis the product of the numbers. Formulate this situation as an
extensive game with simultaneous moves and ﬁnd its subgame perfect
equilibria.
? Exercise 103.3
Show that the one deviation property (Lemma 98.2)
holds for an extensive game with simultaneous moves but that Kuhn’s
theorem (Proposition 99.2) does not.
6.4
The Interpretation of a Strategy
As we have noted, the deﬁnition of a strategy (92.1) does not correspond
to a plan of action since it requires a player to specify his actions after
histories that are impossible if he carries out his plan. For example, as
we saw before, a strategy of player 1 in the game in Figure 104.1 speciﬁes
both the action she takes at the beginning of the game and the action
she takes after the history (A, C), even if the action she takes at the
beginning of the game is B.
One interpretation for the components of a player’s strategy corre-
sponding to histories that are not possible if the strategy is followed is
that they are the beliefs of the other players about what the player will
do in the event he does not follow his plan. For example, in the game in
Figure 104.1, player 1’s action after the history (A, C) can be thought
of as player 2’s belief about the choice that player 1 will make after
this history, a belief that player 2 needs to hold in order to rationally
choose an action. If player 1 plans to choose A then player 2’s belief co-
incides with player 1’s planned action after the history (A, C). However,
if player 1 plans to choose B then such a belief cannot be derived from
player 1’s plan of action. In this case player 1’s strategy nevertheless
supplies such a belief. Note that the belief of player 2 about player 1 is

--- Sayfa 120 ---
104
Chapter 6.
Extensive Games with Perfect Information
b1
r
2, 1
r
A
B
   @
@@
r
   @
@
@
r
0, 1
r
2
C
D
r
   @
@
@
r
0, 0
1, 2
r
1
E
F
Figure 104.1 An extensive game in which player 1 moves both before and after
player 2.
relevant to the analysis of the game even if player 1 plans to choose B,
since to rationalize the choice of B player 1 needs to form a belief about
player 2’s plan after the history A.
This interpretation has a number of implications. First, it becomes
problematic to speak of the “choice of a strategy”, since a player does
not choose the other players’ beliefs. Second, in any equilibrium of a
game with more than two players there is an implicit assumption that
all the players other than any given player i hold the same beliefs about
player i’s behavior, not only if he follows his plan of action but also if he
deviates from this plan. Third, one has to be careful if one imposes con-
straints on the strategies since one is then making assumptions not only
about the players’ plans of action, but also about their beliefs regarding
each others’ intentions when these plans of action are violated.
This interpretation of a strategy also diminishes the attraction of
the notion of subgame perfect equilibrium. Consider again the game
in Figure 104.1.
There is no way, within the structure of the game,
for player 2 to rationalize a choice of A by player 1 (since player 1
prefers the history B to every history that can result when she chooses
A). Thus if she observes that player 1 chooses A, player 2 must give
up a basic assumption about the game: she must believe either that
player 1 is not rational, that player 1 perceives the game to diﬀer from
that in Figure 104.1, or that player 1 chose A by “mistake” (although
such mistakes are not envisaged in the speciﬁcation of the game). Yet
the notion of subgame perfect equilibrium requires that, whatever his-
tory he observes, player 2 continue to maintain his original assump-
tions that player 1 is rational, knows the game, and does not make
mistakes.

--- Sayfa 121 ---
6.5 Two Notable Finite Horizon Games
105
bk
r
5, 1
r
In
Out
   @
@@
r
   @
@
@
r
0, 0
2, 2
r
CS
F
C
Figure 105.1 The structure of the players’ choices in city k in the chain-store game.
The ﬁrst number in each pair is the chain-store’s payoﬀand the second number is
player k’s payoﬀ.
6.5
Two Notable Finite Horizon Games
In this section we demonstrate some of the strengths and weaknesses
of the concept of subgame perfect equilibrium by examining two well-
known games. It is convenient to describe each of these games by in-
troducing a variable time that is discrete and starts at period 1. This
variable is not an addition to the formal model of an extensive game; it
is merely a device to simplify the description of the games and highlight
their structures.
6.5.1
The Chain-Store Game
A chain-store (player CS) has branches in K cities, numbered 1, . . . , K.
In each city k there is a single potential competitor, player k. In each
period one of the potential competitors decides whether or not to com-
pete with player CS; in period k it is player k’s turn to do so. If player k
decides to compete then the chain-store can either ﬁght (F) or cooperate
(C). The chain-store responds to player k’s decision before player k + 1
makes its decision.
Thus in period k the set of possible outcomes is
Q = {Out, (In, C), (In, F)}. If challenged in any given city the chain-
store prefers to cooperate rather than ﬁght, but obtains the highest pay-
oﬀif there is no entry. Each potential competitor is better oﬀstaying
out than entering and being fought, but obtains the highest payoﬀwhen
it enters and the chain-store is cooperative. The structure of the play-
ers’ choices and their considerations in a single period are summarized
in Figure 105.1.
Two assumptions complete the description of the game. First, at every
point in the game all players know all the actions previously chosen.
This allows us to model the situation as an extensive game with perfect

--- Sayfa 122 ---
106
Chapter 6.
Extensive Games with Perfect Information
information, in which the set of histories is (∪K
k=0Qk) ∪(∪K−1
k=0 (Qk ×
{In})), where Qk is the set of all sequences of k members of Q, and the
player function is given by P(h) = k + 1 if h ∈Qk and P(h) = CS if
h ∈Qk×{In}, for k = 0, . . . , K−1. Second, the payoﬀof the chain-store
in the game is the sum of its payoﬀs in the K cities.
The game has a multitude of Nash equilibria: every terminal history in
which the outcome in any period is either Out or (In, C) is the outcome
of a Nash equilibrium. (In any equilibrium in which player k chooses Out
the chain-store’s strategy speciﬁes that it will ﬁght if player k enters.)
In contrast, the game has a unique subgame perfect equilibrium; in
this equilibrium every challenger chooses In and the chain-store always
chooses C.
(In city K the chain-store must choose C, regardless of
the history, so that in city K −1 it must do the same; continuing the
argument one sees that the chain-store must always choose C.)
For small values of K the Nash equilibria that are not subgame per-
fect are intuitively unappealing while the subgame perfect equilibrium
is appealing. However, when K is large the subgame perfect equilibrium
loses some of its appeal. The strategy of the chain-store in this equi-
librium dictates that it cooperate with every entrant, regardless of its
past behavior. Given our interpretation of a strategy (see the previous
section), this means that even a challenger who has observed the chain-
store ﬁght with many entrants still believes that the chain-store will
cooperate with it. Although the chain-store’s unique subgame perfect
equilibrium strategy does indeed specify that it cooperate with every
entrant, it seems more reasonable for a competitor who has observed
the chain-store ﬁght repeatedly to believe that its entry will be met
with an aggressive response, especially if there are many cities still to
be contested. If a challenger enters then it is in the myopic interest of
the chain-store to be cooperative, but intuition suggests that it may be
in its long-term interest to build a reputation for aggressive behavior, in
order to deter future entry. In Section 12.3.2 we study a perturbation of
the chain-store game, in which the challengers are imperfectly informed
about the motives of the chain-store, that attempts to capture this idea.
6.5.2
The Centipede Game
Two players are involved in a process that they alternately have the
opportunity to stop. Each prefers the outcome when he stops the process
in any period t to that in which the other player does so in period t + 1.
However, better still is any outcome that can result if the process is not

--- Sayfa 123 ---
6.5 Two Notable Finite Horizon Games
107
b
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
1
1
1
2
2
2
S
S
S
S
S
S
C
C
C
C
C
C
1, 0
0, 2
3, 1
2, 4
5, 3
4, 6
6, 5
Figure 107.1 A six-period version of the centipede game.
stopped in either of these periods. After T periods, where T is even, the
process ends. For T = 6 the game is shown in Figure 107.1. (The name
“centipede” comes from the shape of the diagram.)
Formally, the set of histories in the game consists of all sequences
C(t) = (C, . . . , C) of length t, for 0 ≤t ≤T, and all sequences S(t) =
(C, . . . , C, S) consisting of t −1 repetitions of C followed by a single S,
for 1 ≤t ≤T. The player function is deﬁned by P(C(t)) = 1 if t is
even and t ≤T −2 and P(C(t)) = 2 if t is odd. Player P(C(t)) prefers
S(t + 3) to S(t + 1) to S(t + 2) for t ≤T −3, player 1 prefers C(T) to
S(T −1) to S(T), and player 2 prefers S(T) to C(T).
The game has a unique subgame perfect equilibrium; in this equi-
librium each player chooses S in every period.
The outcome of this
equilibrium is the same as the outcome of every Nash equilibrium. To
see this, ﬁrst note that there is no equilibrium in which the outcome
is C(T). Now assume that there is a Nash equilibrium that ends with
player i choosing S in period t (i.e. after the history C(t −1)). If t ≥2
then player j can increase his payoﬀby choosing S in period t−1. Hence
in any equilibrium player 1 chooses S in the ﬁrst period. In order for
this to be optimal for player 1, player 2 must choose S in period 2. The
notion of Nash equilibrium imposes no restriction on the players’ choices
in later periods: any pair of strategies in which player 1 chooses S in
period 1 and player 2 chooses S in period 2 is a Nash equilibrium. (Note
however that the reduced strategic form of the game has a unique Nash
equilibrium.)
In the unique subgame perfect equilibrium of this game each player
believes that the other player will stop the game at the next opportu-
nity, even after a history in which that player has chosen to continue
many times in the past. As in the subgame perfect equilibrium of the
chain-store game such a belief is not intuitively appealing; unless T is
very small it seems unlikely that player 1 would immediately choose S
at the start of the game. The intuition in the centipede game is slightly
diﬀerent from that in the chain-store game in that after any long his-

--- Sayfa 124 ---
108
Chapter 6.
Extensive Games with Perfect Information
tory both players have repeatedly violated the precepts of rationality
enshrined in the notion of subgame perfect equilibrium. After a history
in which both a player and his opponent have chosen to continue many
times in the past, the basis on which the player should form a belief
about his opponent’s action in the next period is far from clear.
? Exercise 108.1
For any ϵ > 0 deﬁne an ϵ-equilibrium of a strategic
game to be a proﬁle of actions with the property that no player has
an alternative action that increases his payoﬀby more than ϵ. Show
that for any positive integer k and any ϵ > 0 there is a horizon T long
enough that the strategic form of the modiﬁcation of the centipede game
in which all payoﬀs are divided by T has an ϵ-equilibrium in which the
ﬁrst player to stop the game does so in period k.
6.6
Iterated Elimination of Weakly Dominated Strategies
6.6.1
Relation with Subgame Perfect Equilibrium
In Section 4.3 we deﬁne the procedure of iterated elimination of weakly
dominated actions for a strategic game and argue that though it is less
appealing than the procedure of iterated elimination of strictly domi-
nated actions (since a weakly dominated action is a best response to
some belief), it is a natural method for a player to use to simplify a
game. In the proof of Kuhn’s theorem (Proposition 99.2) we deﬁne the
procedure of backwards induction for ﬁnite extensive games with perfect
information and show that it yields the set of subgame perfect equilibria
of the game.
The two procedures are related. Let Γ be a ﬁnite extensive game with
perfect information in which no player is indiﬀerent between any two
terminal histories. Then Γ has a unique subgame perfect equilibrium.
We now deﬁne a sequence for eliminating weakly dominated actions in
the strategic form G of Γ (weakly dominated strategies in Γ) with the
property that all the action proﬁles of G that remain at the end of the
procedure generate the unique subgame perfect equilibrium outcome
of Γ.
Let h be a history of Γ with P(h) = i and ℓ(Γ(h)) = 1 and let
a∗
i ∈A(h) be the unique action selected by the procedure of back-
wards induction for the history h. Backwards induction eliminates ev-
ery strategy of player i that chooses an action diﬀerent from a∗
i after
the history h. Among these strategies, those consistent with h (i.e. that
choose the component of h that follows h′ whenever h′ is a subhistory of

--- Sayfa 125 ---
6.6 Iterated Elimination of Weakly Dominated Strategies
109
b1
r
3, 3
r
A
B
   @
@@
r
   @
@
@
r
1, 1
r
2
C
D
r
   @
@
@
r
2, 0
0, 2
r
1
E
F
C
D
AE
2, 0
1, 1
AF
0, 2
1, 1
BE
3, 3
3, 3
BF
3, 3
3, 3
Figure 109.1 An extensive game (left) and its strategic form (right). There is an
order of elimination of weakly dominated actions in the strategic form that eliminates
the unique subgame perfect equilibrium of the extensive game.
h with P(h′) = i) are weakly dominated actions in G. In the sequence
of eliminations that we deﬁne, all of these weakly dominated actions are
eliminated from G at this stage. Having performed this elimination for
each history h with ℓ(Γ(h)) = 1, we turn to histories h with ℓ(Γ(h)) = 2
and perform an analogous elimination; we continue back to the begin-
ning of the game in this way. Every strategy of player i that remains
at the end of this procedure chooses the action selected by backwards
induction after any history that is consistent with player i’s subgame
perfect equilibrium strategy.
Thus in particular the subgame perfect
equilibrium remains and every strategy proﬁle that remains generates
the unique subgame perfect equilibrium outcome.
Note, however, that other orders of elimination may remove all sub-
game perfect equilibria. In the game in Figure 109.1, for example, the
unique subgame perfect equilibrium is (BE, D), while if in the strategic
form the weakly dominated action AE is eliminated then D is weakly
dominated in the remaining game; if AF is eliminated after D then
neither of the two remaining action proﬁles ((BE, C) and (BF, C)) are
subgame perfect equilibria of the extensive game.
Note also that if some player is indiﬀerent between two terminal his-
tories then there may be (i) an order of elimination that eliminates a
subgame perfect equilibrium outcome and (ii) no order of elimination for
which all surviving strategy proﬁles generate subgame perfect equilib-
rium outcomes. The game in Figure 110.1 demonstrates (i): the strate-
gies AC, AD, and BD of player 1 are all weakly dominated by BC; after
they are eliminated no remaining pair of actions yields the subgame per-
fect equilibrium outcome (A, R). If the payoﬀ(1, 2) is replaced by (2, 0)

--- Sayfa 126 ---
110
Chapter 6.
Extensive Games with Perfect Information
b1
A
B





HHHHH
r
   @
@@
r
0, 0
1, 2
r
2
L
R
r
   @
@@
r
1, 1
0, 0
r
1
D
C
L
R
AC
0, 0
1, 2
AD
0, 0
1, 2
BC
1, 1
1, 1
BD
0, 0
0, 0
Figure 110.1 An extensive game (left) and its strategic form (right). There is an
order of elimination of weakly dominated actions in the strategic form that eliminates
a subgame perfect equilibrium outcome of the extensive game.
then the modiﬁed game demonstrates (ii): the outcome (A, L), which is
not even a Nash equilibrium outcome, survives any order of elimination.
6.6.2
Forward Induction
We now present two examples that show that the iterated elimination
of weakly dominated strategies captures some interesting features of
players’ reasoning in extensive games.
⋄Example 110.1 (BoS with an outside option) Consider the extensive
game with perfect information and simultaneous moves shown in Fig-
ure 111.1. In this game player 1 ﬁrst decides whether to stay at home
and read a book or to go to a concert. If she decides to read a book then
the game ends; if she decides to go to a concert then she is engaged in
the game BoS (Example 15.3) with player 2. (After the history Concert
the players choose actions simultaneously.) Each player prefers to hear
the music of his favorite composer in the company of the other player
rather than either go to a concert alone or stay at home, but prefers to
stay at home rather than either go out alone or hear the music of his
less-preferred composer.
In the reduced strategic form of this game S is strictly dominated for
player 1 by Book. If it is eliminated then S is weakly dominated for
player 2 by B. Finally, Book is strictly dominated by B for player 1.
The outcome that remains is (B, B).
This sequence of eliminations corresponds to the following argument
for the extensive game. If player 2 has to make a decision he knows that
player 1 has not chosen Book. Such a choice makes sense for player 1

--- Sayfa 127 ---
6.6 Iterated Elimination of Weakly Dominated Strategies
111
b1
r
2, 2
r
Book
Concert






HHHHHH
B
S
B
3, 1
0, 0
S
0, 0
1, 3
B
S
Book
2, 2
2, 2
B
3, 1
0, 0
S
0, 0
1, 3
Figure 111.1 BoS with an outside option (left; an extensive game with perfect
information and simultaneous moves) and its reduced strategic form (right).
only if she plans to choose B. Thus player 2 should choose B also. The
logic of such an argument is referred to in the literature as “forward
induction”.
In the following example the iterated elimination of weakly dominated
strategies leads to a conclusion that is more striking.
⋄Example 111.1 (Burning money) Consider the game at the top of Fig-
ure 112.1. Two individuals are going to play BoS with monetary payoﬀs
as in the left-hand table in the ﬁgure.
Before doing so player 1 can
discard a dollar (take the action D) or refrain from doing so (take the
action 0); her move is observed by player 2.
Both players are risk-
neutral. (Note that the two subgames that follow player 1’s initial move
are strategically identical.)
The reduced strategic form of the game is shown in the bottom of
Figure 112.1. Weakly dominated actions can be eliminated iteratively
as follows.
1. DS is weakly dominated for player 1 by 0B
2. SS is weakly dominated for player 2 by SB
3. BS is weakly dominated for player 2 by BB
4. 0S is strictly dominated for player 1 by DB
5. SB is weakly dominated for player 2 by BB
6. DB is strictly dominated for player 1 by 0B
The single strategy pair that remains is (0B, BB): the fact that player 1
can throw away a dollar implies, under iterated elimination of weakly
dominated actions, that the outcome is player 1’s favorite.

--- Sayfa 128 ---
112
Chapter 6.
Extensive Games with Perfect Information
b1
r
r
0
D






HHHHHH
B
S
B
3, 1
0, 0
S
0, 0
1, 3
B
S
B
2, 1
−1, 0
S
−1, 0
0, 3
BB
BS
SB
SS
0B
3, 1
3, 1
0, 0
0, 0
0S
0, 0
0, 0
1, 3
1, 3
DB
2, 1
−1, 0
2, 1
−1, 0
DS
−1, 0
0, 3
−1, 0
0, 3
Figure 112.1 An extensive game with perfect information and simultaneous moves
in which player 1 can choose to destroy a dollar before playing the game BoS. The
extensive form is given at the top and the reduced strategic form at the bottom.
An intuitive argument that corresponds to this sequence of elimina-
tions is the following. Player 1 must anticipate that if she chooses 0 then
she will obtain an expected payoﬀof at least 3
4, since for every belief
about the behavior of player 2 she has an action that yields her at least
this expected payoﬀ. Thus if player 2 observes that player 1 chooses D
then he must expect that player 1 will subsequently choose B (since the
choice of S cannot possibly yield player 1 a payoﬀin excess of 3
4). Given
this, player 2 should choose B if player 1 chooses D; player 1 knows this,
so that she can expect to obtain a payoﬀof 2 if she chooses D. But now
player 2 can rationalize the choice 0 by player 1 only by believing that
player 1 will choose B (since S can yield player 1 no more than 1), so
that the best action of player 2 after observing 0 is B. This makes 0 the
best action for player 1.
We now discuss these two examples in light of the distinction we made
in Section 1.5 between the “steady state” and “deductive” approaches to
game theory. From the point of view of the steady state interpretation

--- Sayfa 129 ---
6.6 Iterated Elimination of Weakly Dominated Strategies
113
the two examples share the same argument: the beliefs of player 2 in the
equilibria in which the outcome is Book in the ﬁrst example or (0, (S, S))
in the second example are both unreasonable in the sense that if player 1
deviates (to Concert or D) then the only sensible conclusion for player 2
to reach is that player 1 intends to play B subsequently, which means
that player 2 should play B, making the deviation proﬁtable for player 1.
From the point of view of the deductive interpretation the two games
diﬀer, at least to the extent that the argument in the second example
is more complex. In the ﬁrst example player 1 has to reason about how
player 2 will interpret an action (Concert) that she takes. In the second
example player 1’s reasoning about player 2’s interpretation of her in-
tended action 0 involves her belief about how player 2 would rationalize
an action (D) that she does not take.
The second example raises a question about how to specify a game
that captures a given situation. The arguments we have made are obvi-
ously based on the supposition that the game in Figure 112.1 reﬂects the
situation as perceived by the players. In particular, they presume that
the players perceive the possibility of disposing of a dollar to be relevant
to the play of BoS. We believe this to be an implausible presumption: no
reasonable person would consider the possibility of disposing a dollar to
be relevant to the choice of which concert to attend. Thus we argue that
a game that models the situation should simply exclude the possibility
of disposal. (ar argues this to be so even if the game, including the move
in which player 1 can burn money, is presented explicitly to the players
by a referee, since before a player analyzes a situation strategically he
“edits” the description of the situation, eliminating “irrelevant” factors.)
On what principles do we base the claim that the possibility of disposing
of a dollar is irrelevant? The answer is far from clear; some ideas follow.
(a) The disposal does not aﬀect the players’ payoﬀs in BoS. (b) If the
disposal is informative about the rationality of player 1, a sensible con-
clusion might be that a player who destroys a dollar is simply irrational.
(In contrast, spending money on advertising, for example, may signal
useful information.) (c) The dissimilarity between the two parts of the
game makes it unlikely that player 2 will try to deduce from player 1’s
behavior in the ﬁrst stage how she will behave in the second stage.
One interpretation of the arguments in this section is that each player
accompanies his actions by messages explaining his future intentions.
Thus to investigate the arguments further it may seem natural to aug-
ment the games by adding moves that have such explicit meaning. How-
ever, if we do so then we face diﬃculties, as the following example shows.

--- Sayfa 130 ---
114
Chapter 6.
Extensive Games with Perfect Information
A
B
A
2, 2
0, 0
B
0, 0
1, 1
Figure 114.1 The game relevant to Exercise 114.2.
Suppose that BoS is to be played and that player 1 is able, before BoS
starts, to send a message (any string of symbols) to player 2. Assume
further that each player cares only about the outcome of BoS, not about
the content of any message that is sent or about the relationship between
the action that he takes and the message. This extensive game has sub-
game perfect equilibrium outcomes in which both (B, B) and (S, S) are
played in BoS; in particular, there is an equilibrium in which player 2
completely ignores player 1’s message. This is so because player 2 is not
forced to interpret the message sent by player 1 as meaningful, even if
the message is “I am about to play B”. The fact that a message can be
sent does not aﬀect the outcome because the names of the actions do
not play any role in the concept of Nash equilibrium. A reasonable con-
clusion appears to be that a modiﬁcation of the model of an extensive
game is required if we wish to model communication between players.
? Exercise 114.1
Examine the variant of the game at the top of Fig-
ure 112.1 in which player 1 ﬁrst has the option of burning a dollar, then
player 2, having observed player 1’s action, is also allowed to burn a
dollar, and ﬁnally players 1 and 2 engage in BoS. Find the set of out-
comes that survive iterated elimination of weakly dominated actions and
compare it with the outcome that does so in the game in Figure 112.1.
? Exercise 114.2
Consider the game that diﬀers from that at the top
of Figure 112.1 only in that the game in which the players engage after
player 1 has the option to burn a dollar is that shown in Figure 114.1.
Find the set of outcomes that survives iterated elimination of weakly
dominated actions.
Notes
The notion of an extensive game is due to von Neumann and Morgen-
stern (1944); Kuhn (1950, 1953) suggested the formulation we describe.
The notion of subgame perfect equilibrium is due to Selten (1965).

--- Sayfa 131 ---
Notes
115
The one deviation property (Lemma 98.2) is closely related to a prin-
ciple of dynamic programming. Proposition 99.2 is due to Kuhn (1950,
1953). The idea of regarding games with simultaneous moves as games
with perfect information is due to Dubey and Kaneko (1984). Some of
our discussion of the interpretation of a strategy in Section 6.4 is based
on Rubinstein (1991). The chain-store game studied in Section 6.5.1 is
due to Selten (1978) and the centipede game studied in Section 6.5.2
is due to Rosenthal (1981). Some of the issues that these games raise
are studied by Reny (1993).
(See Section 12.3.2 for a variant of the
chain-store game due to Kreps and Wilson (1982a) and Milgrom and
Roberts (1982).) Moulin (1986) gives results that relate the procedure
of iterated elimination of weakly dominated actions and the solution
of subgame perfect equilibrium.
The game in Figure 109.1 is taken
(with modiﬁcation) from Reny (1992). The idea of forward induction
(together with the game in Example 110.1) is due to Kohlberg; it is
discussed in Kohlberg and Mertens (1986). The game in Example 111.1
is due to van Damme (1989); see also Ben-Porath and Dekel (1992) and
Osborne (1990). (For more discussion of the issues that arise in this
game see Rubinstein (1991).)
Exercise 103.2 is based on an idea of Kreps; Exercise 108.1 is due to
Radner (1980) (see also Radner (1986)).

--- Sayfa 133 ---
7
Bargaining Games
Groups of people often have to choose collectively an outcome in a sit-
uation in which unanimity about the best outcome is lacking. Here we
study a model, based on an extensive game with perfect information,
that captures some of the features of such a situation.
7.1
Bargaining and Game Theory
Game theory deals with situations in which people’s interests conﬂict.
The people involved may try to resolve the conﬂict by committing them-
selves voluntarily to a course of action that is beneﬁcial to all of them.
If there is more than one course of action more desirable than disagree-
ment for all individuals and there is conﬂict over which course of action
to pursue then some form of negotiation over how to resolve the con-
ﬂict is necessary. The negotiation process may be modeled using the
tools of game theory; the model in this chapter is an example of such
an analysis.
Since the presence of a conﬂict of interest is central to game theoretic
situations, the theory of bargaining is more than just an application of
game theory; models of bargaining lie at the heart of the subject and
have attracted a great deal of attention since its inception. Most of the
early work uses the axiomatic approach initiated by John Nash, whose
work we discuss in Chapter 15. In this chapter we use the model of an
extensive game with perfect information to study some features of bar-
gaining, in particular the inﬂuence of the participants’ impatience and
risk aversion on the outcome.

--- Sayfa 134 ---
118
Chapter 7. Bargaining Games
7.2
A Bargaining Game of Alternating Oﬀers
Consider a situation in which two bargainers have the opportunity to
reach agreement on an outcome in some set X and perceive that if they
fail to do so then the outcome will be some ﬁxed event D.
The set
X may, for example, be the set of feasible divisions of a desirable pie
and D may be the event in which neither party receives any of the pie.
To model such a situation as an extensive game we have to specify the
procedure that the parties follow when negotiating.
The procedure we study is one in which the players alternate oﬀers.
It can be described conveniently by introducing the variable “time”, the
values of which are the nonnegative integers. The ﬁrst move of the game
occurs in period 0, when player 1 makes a proposal (a member of X),
which player 2 then either accepts or rejects. Acceptance ends the game
while rejection leads to period 1, in which player 2 makes a proposal,
which player 1 has to accept or reject. Again, acceptance ends the game;
rejection leads to period 2, in which it is once again player 1’s turn to
make a proposal. The game continues in this fashion: so long as no oﬀer
has been accepted, in every even period player 1 makes a proposal that
player 2 must either accept or reject, and in every odd period player 2
makes a proposal that player 1 must either accept or reject. There is no
bound on the number of rounds of negotiation: the game has an inﬁnite
horizon. (See Section 8.2 for a discussion of the choice between a ﬁnite
and inﬁnite horizon when modeling a situation as a game.) The fact
that some oﬀer is rejected places no restrictions on the oﬀers that may
subsequently be made. In particular, a player who rejects a proposal x
may subsequently make a proposal that is worse for him than x. If no
oﬀer is ever accepted then the outcome is the disagreement event D.
We now give a formal description of the situation as an extensive
game with perfect information (see Deﬁnition 89.1). The set of players
is N = {1, 2}.
Let X, the set of possible agreements, be a compact
connected subset of a Euclidian space, and let T be the set of nonnegative
integers. The set of histories H is the set of all sequences of one of the
following types, where t ∈T, xs ∈X for all s, A means “accept”, and
R means “reject”.
I. ∅(the initial history), or (x0, R, x1, R, . . . , xt, R)
II. (x0, R, x1, R, . . . , xt)
III. (x0, R, x1, R, . . . , xt, A)
IV. (x0, R, x1, R, . . .)

--- Sayfa 135 ---
7.2 A Bargaining Game of Alternating Oﬀers
119
It follows from this description of the histories that the player whose
turn it is to move chooses a member of X after a history of type I and
a member of {A, R} after a history of type II. Histories of type III and
IV are terminal; those of type III are ﬁnite, while those of type IV are
inﬁnite. The player function is deﬁned as follows: P(h) = 1 if h is of
type I or type II and t is odd or if h is empty; P(h) = 2 if h is of type I
or type II and t is even.
To complete the description of the game we need to specify the play-
ers’ preferences over terminal histories.
We assume that each player
cares only about whether agreement is reached and the time and con-
tent of the agreement, not about the path of proposals that preceded
the agreement. Precisely, the set of terminal histories is partitioned as
follows: for each x ∈X and t ∈T the set of all histories of type III for
which xt = x is a member of the partition, denoted by (x, t), and the set
of all histories of type IV is a member of the partition, denoted by D.
The preference relation of each player i over histories is induced from a
preference relation ≿i over the set (X × T) ∪{D} of members of this
partition (that is, each player is indiﬀerent between any two histories
that lie in the same member of the partition). We assume that each
player i’s preference relation ≿i satisﬁes the following conditions.
• No agreement is worse than disagreement: (x, t) ≿i D for all (x, t) ∈
X × T.
• Time is valuable: (x, t) ≿i (x, t + 1) for every period t ∈T and
every agreement x ∈X, with strict preference if (x, 0) ≻i D.
• Preferences are stationary: (x, t) ≿i (y, t+1) if and only if (x, 0) ≿i
(y, 1), and (x, t) ≿i (y, t) if and only if (x, 0) ≿i (y, 0).
• Preferences are continuous: if xn ∈X and yn ∈X for all n, {xn}
converges to x ∈X, {yn} converges to y ∈X, and (xn, t) ≿i (yn, s)
for all n, then (x, t) ≿i (y, s).
These assumptions imply that for any δ ∈(0, 1) there is a continuous
function ui: X →R such that the preference relation ≿i is represented on
X ×T by the function δtui(x) in the sense that (x, t) ≿i (y, s) if and only
if δtui(x) ≥δsui(y). (This follows from Fishburn and Rubinstein (1982,
Theorems 1 and 2).) Note that if δtui(x) represents ≿i then for any ϵ ∈
(0, 1) the function ϵtvi(x) where vi is deﬁned by vi(x) = (ui(x))(ln ϵ)/(ln δ)
also represents ≿i. Thus if δtui(x) and ϵtvi(x) are representations of two
preference relations and δ > ϵ then we cannot conclude that the ﬁrst
preference relation is more “patient” than the second unless vi = ui.

--- Sayfa 136 ---
120
Chapter 7. Bargaining Games
b1
     @
@
@
@
@



r
r
r
XXXXXXXXXXXX




r
     @
@
@
@@
2
r





XXXXXXXXXXXX
x0
x1
2
1
R
A
R
A
t = 0
t = 1
(x0, 0)
(x1, 1)
Figure 120.1 A representation of the ﬁrst two periods of a bargaining game of
alternating oﬀers.
We refer to the extensive game with perfect information ⟨N, H, P,
(≿i)⟩thus deﬁned as the bargaining game of alternating oﬀers
⟨X, (≿i)⟩.
The ﬁrst two periods of such a game are illustrated in Figure 120.1.
(Note that x0 is only one of the proposals available to player 1 at the
start of the game, and x1 is only one of the proposals available to player 2
after he rejects x0.)
An important example of a bargaining game of alternating oﬀers is
the following.
⋄Example 120.1 (Split-the-pie) The set of possible agreements X is the
set of all divisions of a desirable pie:
X = {(x1, x2): xi ≥0 for i = 1, 2 and x1 + x2 = 1}.
The preference relation ≿i of each player i over (X × T) ∪{D} has the
properties that (x, t) ≿i (y, t) if and only if xi ≥yi (pie is desirable) and
D ∼1 ((0, 1), 0) and D ∼2 ((1, 0), 0) (in the event of disagreement both
players receive nothing). Thus ≿i can be represented on X × T by a
function of the form δt
iwi(xi) in which 0 < δi < 1 and wi is increasing
and continuous, with wi(0) = 0.

--- Sayfa 137 ---
7.3 Subgame Perfect Equilibrium
121
The set of Nash equilibria of a bargaining game of alternating oﬀers
is very large. In particular, for any x∗∈X there is a Nash equilibrium
in which the players immediately agree on x∗(i.e. player 1’s equilibrium
strategy assigns x∗to the initial history and player 2’s strategy assigns
A to the history x∗). One such equilibrium is that in which both players
always propose x∗and always accept a proposal x if and only if x = x∗.
(Alternatively, each player i could accept a proposal x in period t if
and only if (x, t) ≿i (x∗, t).) In addition, for many speciﬁcations of the
players’ preferences there are Nash equilibria in which an agreement is
not reached immediately. For example, for any agreement x and period t
in a split-the-pie game there is a Nash equilibrium for which the outcome
is the acceptance of x in period t. One such equilibrium is that in which
through period t −1 each player demands the whole pie and rejects all
proposals, and from period t on proposes x and accepts only x.
These Nash equilibria illustrate the point we made at the end of Sec-
tion 6.1.3: the notion of Nash equilibrium does not exclude the use of
“incredible threats”. Consider the Nash equilibrium of a split-the-pie
game in which both players always propose x∗and player i accepts a
proposal x in period t if and only if (x, t) ≿i (x∗, t). If (x∗, 0) ≻2 (x∗, 1)
then by the continuity of the players’ preferences there is an agreement
x in which x2 is slightly less than x∗
2 for which (x, 0) ≻1 (x∗, 0) and
(x, 0) ≻2 (x∗, 1). In the equilibrium player 2’s strategy dictates that in
any period he reject such a proposal x; this “threat” induces player 1 to
propose x∗. Player 2’s threat is incredible, given player 1’s strategy: the
best outcome that can occur if player 2 carries out his threat to reject
x is that there is agreement on x∗in the next period, an outcome that
player 2 likes less than agreement on x in period 0, which he can achieve
by accepting x. As we explained in the previous chapter, the notion of
subgame perfect equilibrium is designed to isolate equilibria in which no
player’s strategy has this unattractive property.
7.3
Subgame Perfect Equilibrium
7.3.1
Characterization
We now show that under some additional assumptions a bargaining game
of alternating oﬀers has an essentially unique subgame perfect equilib-
rium, which we characterize. The ﬁrst assumption is designed to avoid
redundancies.

--- Sayfa 138 ---
122
Chapter 7. Bargaining Games
A1 For no two agreements x and y is it the case that (x, 0) ∼i (y, 0) for
both i = 1 and i = 2.
The next assumption simpliﬁes the analysis.
A2 (bi, 1) ∼j (bi, 0) ∼j D for i = 1, 2, j̸ = i where bi is the best
agreement for player i.
To state the next two assumptions we deﬁne the Pareto frontier of the
set X of agreements to be the set of agreements x for which there is no
agreement y with (y, 0) ≻i (x, 0) for i = 1, 2. We refer to a member of
the Pareto frontier as an eﬃcient agreement.
A3 The Pareto frontier of X is strictly monotone (if an agreement x is
eﬃcient then there is no other agreement y such that (y, 0) ≿i (x, 0)
for both players i) and connected.
A4 There is a unique pair (x∗, y∗) of agreements for which (x∗, 1) ∼1
(y∗, 0), (y∗, 1) ∼2 (x∗, 0), and both x∗and y∗are eﬃcient.
The most important of these assumptions is A4. In a split-the-pie
game a suﬃcient condition for it to be satisﬁed is that each player’s
preference relation exhibit “increasing loss to delay”: xi −fi(x) is an
increasing function of xi for each player i, where f(x) is the agreement
for which (f(x), 0) ∼i (x, 1). Another case in which assumption A4 is
satisﬁed is that in which the Pareto frontier of the set X of agreements
is the set {x ∈R2: x2 = g(x1)} for some decreasing concave function g
and the preference relation of each player i is represented by the function
δt
ixi for some 0 < δi < 1.
Proposition 122.1 A bargaining game of alternating oﬀers ⟨X, (≿i)⟩
that satisﬁes A1 through A4 has a subgame perfect equilibrium.
Let
(x∗, y∗) be the unique pair of eﬃcient agreements for which
(x∗, 1) ∼1 (y∗, 0)
and
(y∗, 1) ∼2 (x∗, 0).
(122.2)
In every subgame perfect equilibrium player 1 always proposes x∗, ac-
cepts y∗and any proposal y for which (y, 0) ≻1 (y∗, 0), and rejects any
proposal y for which (y, 0) ≺1 (y∗, 0); player 2 always proposes y∗, ac-
cepts x∗and any proposal x for which (x, 0) ≻2 (x∗, 0), and rejects any
proposal x for which (x, 0) ≺2 (x∗, 0).
Proof. First we verify that the pair of strategies deﬁned in the proposi-
tion is a subgame perfect equilibrium. To do so we use the fact that the
game has the “one deviation property”: a pair of strategies is a subgame
perfect equilibrium if and only if for every history h the player whose

--- Sayfa 139 ---
7.3 Subgame Perfect Equilibrium
123
turn it is to move cannot deviate proﬁtably by changing his action after
h alone. This property holds for every game with a ﬁnite horizon, as
Lemma 98.2 shows. The proof that it holds also for a bargaining game
of alternating oﬀers is left as an exercise.
? Exercise 123.1
Show that every bargaining game of alternating oﬀers
satisﬁes the one deviation property.
We now need to check the optimality only of the action of each player
after any possible nonterminal history. The most interesting case is a
history of type II. Suppose that it is player 2’s turn to respond to a
proposal xt in period t. If he accepts this proposal then the outcome is
(xt, t) while if he rejects it the outcome is (y∗, t+1). Since his preferences
are stationary it follows from (122.2) that (xt, t) ≿2 (y∗, t + 1) if and
only if (xt, 0) ≿2 (x∗, 0) and thus his acceptance rule is optimal.
We now turn to the more diﬃcult part of the proof: the argument
that the subgame perfect equilibrium is essentially unique. (The only
indeterminacy is in each player’s response to a proposal that he regards
as indiﬀerent to the equilibrium proposal of the other player and the
other player regards as worse; note that no such proposal is eﬃcient.)
Given the stationarity of the players’ preferences, for i = 1, 2 all
subgames that begin with a proposal of player i are identical. Let Gi
be such a subgame (G1 is the game itself). Choose δ ∈(0, 1) and for
i = 1, 2, let ui: X →R be such that δtui(x) represents ≿i on X × T.
Let Mi(Gi) be the supremum of the set of subgame perfect equilibrium
(SPE) payoﬀs of player i in Gi:
Mi(Gi) = sup{δtui(x): there is a SPE of Gi with outcome (x, t)}.
Let mi(Gi) be the corresponding inﬁmum.
Step 1. M1(G1) = m1(G1) = u1(x∗) and M2(G2) = m2(G2) = u2(y∗).
(That is, in every SPE of G1 the payoﬀof player 1 is u1(x∗) and in every
SPE of G2 the payoﬀof player 2 is u2(y∗).)
Proof. Describe the pairs of payoﬀs on the Pareto frontier of X by
the function φ: if x is eﬃcient then u2(x) = φ(u1(x)). By A3 and the
continuity of the preference relations, the domain of φ is an interval and
φ is continuous, one-to-one, and decreasing.
We ﬁrst show that
m2(G2) ≥φ(δM1(G1)).
(123.2)

--- Sayfa 140 ---
124
Chapter 7. Bargaining Games
If player 1 rejects a proposal of player 2 in the ﬁrst period of G2 then
her payoﬀis not more than δM1(G1). Hence in any SPE of G2 she must
accept any proposal that gives her more than δM1(G1). Thus player 2’s
payoﬀis not less than φ(δM1(G1)) in any SPE of G2.
We now show that
M1(G1) ≤φ−1(δm2(G2)).
(124.1)
In any SPE of G1 player 2’s payoﬀis not less than δm2(G2) since player 2
can always reject the opening proposal of player 1. Thus the payoﬀthat
player 1 can obtain in any SPE of G1 does not exceed φ−1(δm2(G2)).
Finally, we argue that M1(G1) = u1(x∗). Since there is an SPE of
G1 in which immediate agreement is reached on x∗we have M1(G1) ≥
u1(x∗). We now show that our assumptions about the set of agreements
and the uniqueness of the solution of (122.2) imply that M1(G1) ≤
u1(x∗).
By A2 we have δu2(b1) = u2(b1), so that u2(b1) = 0; by A3 and the
deﬁnition of φ we have δφ(δu1(b1)) > 0 = u2(b1) = φ(u1(b1)). Since
φ is decreasing we conclude that u1(b1) > φ−1(δφ(δu1(b1))). Now, by
(123.2) and (124.1) we have M1(G1) ≤φ−1(δφ(δM1(G1))). Thus by
the continuity of φ there exists U1 ∈[M1(G1), u1(b1)) satisfying U1 =
φ−1(δφ(δU1)). If M1(G1) > u1(x∗) then U1̸ = u1(x∗), so that taking a∗
and b∗to be eﬃcient agreements for which u1(a∗) = U1 and u1(b∗) =
δu1(a∗) it follows that (a∗, b∗) is a solution to (122.2) that diﬀers from
(x∗, y∗), contradicting A4. Thus M1(G1) ≤u1(x∗).
Similarly we can show that m1(G1) = u1(x∗), M2(G2) = u2(y∗), and
m2(G2) = u2(y∗), completing the proof of this step.
Step 2. In every SPE of G1 player 1’s initial proposal is x∗, which
player 2 immediately accepts.
Proof. In every SPE of G1 player 1’s payoﬀis u1(x∗) (by Step 1)
and player 2’s payoﬀis at least δu2(y∗) = u2(x∗), since the rejection of
player 1’s proposal leads to the subgame G2, in which player 2’s SPE
payoﬀis u2(y∗). Thus by A1 and the fact that x∗is eﬃcient, player 1’s
opening proposal is x∗, which is accepted by player 2.
Step 3. In every SPE of G1 player 2’s strategy accepts any proposal x
for which (x, 0) ≻2 (x∗, 0) and rejects any proposal x for which (x, 0) ≺2
(x∗, 0).
Proof. A rejection by player 2 leads to G2, in which player 2’s payoﬀ
is u2(y∗) (by Step 1). Since u2(x∗) = δu2(y∗), player 2 must accept

--- Sayfa 141 ---
7.3 Subgame Perfect Equilibrium
125
any proposal x for which (x, 0) ≻2 (x∗, 0) and reject any x for which
(x, 0) ≺2 (x∗, 0). (There is no restriction on player 2’s response to a
proposal x̸ = x∗for which (x, 0) ∼2 (x∗, 0).)
Finally, arguments analogous to those in Steps 3 and 4 apply to
player 2’s proposals and player 1’s acceptance rule in every SPE of G2.2
Note that if all the members of the set X of agreements are eﬃcient
(as, for example, in a split-the-pie game) then a bargaining game of alter-
nating oﬀers has a unique (not just essentially unique) subgame perfect
equilibrium. The following example is frequently used in applications.
⋄Example 125.1
Consider a split-the-pie game in which each player i’s
preferences are represented by the function δt
ixi for some δi ∈(0, 1).
Then we have x∗= (a∗, 1 −a∗) and y∗= (1 −b∗, b∗), where a∗and b∗
solve the pair of equations 1 −b∗= δ1a∗and 1 −a∗= δ2b∗, so that
a∗= (1 −δ2)/(1 −δ1δ2) and b∗= (1 −δ1)/(1 −δ1δ2).
An interesting case that is not covered by Proposition 122.1 is a variant
of a split-the-pie game in which each player i incurs the cost ci > 0 for
every period in which agreement is not reached (and there is no upper
bound on the total of these costs that a player can incur).
That is,
player i’s payoﬀif the agreement x is concluded in period t is xi −cit.
This case violates A2, since (x, 0) ≻i (x, 1) for every agreement x. It
also violates A4: if c1̸ = c2 then there is no pair of agreements satisfying
the two conditions while if c1 = c2 then there are many such pairs of
agreements.
? Exercise 125.2
a. Show that if c1 < c2 then the game described in the previous para-
graph has a unique subgame perfect equilibrium, and that this equi-
librium has the same structure as that in Proposition 122.1 with
x∗= (1, 0) and y∗= (1 −c1, c1).
b. Show that if c1 = c2 = c < 1 then the game has many subgame
perfect equilibrium outcomes including, if c < 1
3, equilibria in which
agreement is delayed.
7.3.2
Properties of Equilibrium
Eﬃciency
The structure of a bargaining game of alternating oﬀers al-
lows bargaining to continue for ever, but, under assumptions A1 through
A4, in all subgame perfect equilibria agreement is reached immediately

--- Sayfa 142 ---
126
Chapter 7. Bargaining Games
on an agreement on the Pareto frontier of X (so that the outcome of the
game is eﬃcient).
Stationarity of Strategies
The subgame perfect equilibrium strategies
are stationary: for any history after which it is player i’s turn to propose
an agreement he proposes the same agreement, and for any history after
which it is his turn to respond to a proposal he uses the same criterion
to choose his response. We have not restricted players to use stationary
strategies; rather, such strategies emerge as a conclusion.
First Mover Advantage
Consider again Example 125.1. If δ1 = δ2 = δ
then the amount of the pie that player 1 gets is a∗= 1/(1+δ) > 1
2. The
only asymmetry in the game is that player 1 moves ﬁrst; the fact that
she obtains more than half of the pie indicates that there is an advantage
to being the ﬁrst to make a proposal. This ﬁrst-mover advantage holds
more generally: using A3 and the fact that x∗and y∗are eﬃcient, we
have (x∗, 0) ≻1 (y∗, 0) in any bargaining game of alternating oﬀers that
satisﬁes A1 through A4.
Comparative Statics of Impatience
The key feature of the players’ pref-
erences is that they exhibit impatience. It seems reasonable to expect
that the more impatient a player the worse oﬀhe is in equilibrium. This
is indeed so in the game in Example 125.1, since the values of a∗and b∗
are increasing in δ1 and δ2 respectively. We now generalize this result to
any bargaining game of alternating oﬀers that satisﬁes A1 through A4.
Deﬁne ≿′
i to be at least as impatient as ≿i if both induce the same
ordering on X × {0} and (x, 1) ≾′
i (y, 0) whenever (x, 1) ∼i (y, 0).
Proposition 126.1 Let ⟨X, (≿i)⟩and ⟨X, (≿′
i)⟩be bargaining games
of alternating oﬀers that satisfy A1 through A4 and suppose that ≿′
1 is
at least as impatient as ≿1 and ≿′
2 = ≿2. Let x∗be the agreement
reached in every subgame perfect equilibrium of ⟨X, (≿i)⟩and let x′ be
the agreement reached in every subgame perfect equilibrium of ⟨X, (≿′
i)⟩.
Then (x∗, 0) ≿1 (x′, 0).
Proof. Assume not (so that, in particular, x∗̸ = x′). Consider the subset
S of X × X consisting of all pairs (x, y) such that x and y are eﬃcient
and (y, 1) ∼2 (x, 0). Let y′ be the agreement for which (x′, y′) ∈S.
Since (x′, 1) ∼′
1 (y′, 0) (by (122.2)) it follows that (x′, 1) ≿1 (y′, 0) and
hence (x′, 1) ≻1 (y′, 0) by A4. By A2 we have (b1, b1) ∈S, and by the
assumption that time is valuable and A4 we have (b1, 1) ≺1 (b1, 0). Since
X is compact and connected, the Pareto frontier of X is compact and
connected, so that there is an agreement ˆx on the path on the Pareto

--- Sayfa 143 ---
7.4 Variations and Extensions
127
frontier that connects x′ and b1 such that (ˆx, ˆy) ∈S and (ˆx, 1) ∼1
(ˆy, 0). Since (x′, 0) ≻1 (x∗, 0) and (b1, 0) ≿1 (x′, 0) we have ˆx̸ = x∗,
contradicting A4.
2
7.4
Variations and Extensions
7.4.1
The Importance of the Procedure
To model bargaining as an extensive game we need to give an explicit
description of the sequential structure of the decision problems encoun-
tered by the players: we need to specify a bargaining procedure. The
variant of the model of a bargaining game of alternating oﬀers considered
in the next exercise demonstrates that the structure of the bargaining
procedure plays an important role in determining the outcome.
? Exercise 127.1
Assume that player 1 makes all the oﬀers (rather than
the players alternating oﬀers).
Show that under A1 through A3 the
resulting game has an essentially unique subgame perfect equilibrium,
in which regardless of the players’ preferences the agreement reached is
b1, the best possible agreement for player 1.
In a bargaining game of alternating oﬀers the procedure treats the
players almost symmetrically. The fact that the player to make the ﬁrst
oﬀer is better oﬀthan his opponent in such a game is a vestige of the
extreme advantage that a player enjoys if he is the only one to make
oﬀers.
7.4.2
Variants that Eliminate a Key Feature of the Model
A key feature of the model of a bargaining game of alternating oﬀers is
the ability of one player to force the other to choose between an agree-
ment now and a more desirable agreement later. To illustrate this point,
consider ﬁrst the game in which the players make proposals simultane-
ously in each period, agreement being reached only if the proposals in
any given period are compatible. In this case neither player can force the
other to choose between an agreement now and a better agreement later;
every eﬃcient agreement is a subgame perfect equilibrium outcome.
To illustrate the point further, consider the case in which the set X
of agreements contains ﬁnitely many elements, so that a player’s ability
to oﬀer an agreement today that is slightly better than the agreement
that the responder expects tomorrow is limited. In this case the range

--- Sayfa 144 ---
128
Chapter 7. Bargaining Games
of subgame perfect equilibrium payoﬀs depends on the richness of the
set X. The following exercise demonstrates this point in a speciﬁc case.
? Exercise 128.1
Consider a variant of a split-the-pie game in which
the pie can be divided only into integral multiples of a basic indivisible
unit ϵ > 0 and the preferences of each player i are represented by the
function δtxi. Denote this game by Γ(ϵ) and the game in which the pie
is perfectly divisible by Γ(0).
a. Show that if δ is close enough to 1 then for every agreement x ∈X
there is a subgame perfect equilibrium of Γ(ϵ) for which the outcome
is (x, 0).
b. Show that if δ is close enough to 1 then for every outcome z ∈
(X × T) ∪{D} there is a subgame perfect equilibrium of Γ(ϵ) in
which the outcome is z (use the equilibrium strategies in part a for
x = (1, 0) and x = (0, 1) to deter deviations).
c. Show conversely that for every δ ∈(0, 1) and every η > 0 there
exists ϵ > 0 such that if ϵ < ϵ then for i = 1, 2 the diﬀerence between
player i’s payoﬀin every subgame perfect equilibrium of Γ(ϵ) and his
payoﬀin the unique subgame perfect equilibrium of Γ(0) is less than
η and agreement is reached immediately.
7.4.3
Opting Out
An interesting class of extensions of the model of a bargaining game of
alternating oﬀers is obtained by allowing one or both players, at various
points in the game, to “opt out” (without requiring the approval of the
other player) rather than continue bargaining. A simple case is that in
which only one of the players, say player 2, can opt out, and can do so
only when responding to an oﬀer. Denote the outcome in which he does
so in period t by (Out, t), and assume that (Out, t) ∼1 D for all t ∈T.
Suppose ﬁrst that (Out, 0) ≺2 (y∗, 1), where y∗is the unique subgame
perfect equilibrium proposal of player 2 in the standard bargaining game
of alternating oﬀers.
Then the ability of player 2 to opt out has no
eﬀect on the outcome: although player 2 has an additional “threat”,
it is worthless since he prefers to continue bargaining and obtain the
outcome y∗with one period of delay.
Now suppose that (Out, 0) ≻2 (y∗, 1). Then player 2’s threat is not
worthless. In this case (under A1 through A4), in any subgame perfect
equilibrium player 1 always proposes the eﬃcient agreement ˆx for which
(ˆx, 0) ∼2 (Out, 0), which player 2 accepts, and player 2 always proposes

--- Sayfa 145 ---
7.4 Variations and Extensions
129
the eﬃcient agreement ˆy for which (ˆy, 0) ∼1 (ˆx, 1), which player 1 ac-
cepts. Thus in this case the ability of player 2 to exercise an outside
option causes the outcome of bargaining to be equivalent for him to the
outcome that results if he opts out.
? Exercise 129.1 Prove the result that we have just described for a split-
the-pie game in which each player i’s preference relation over (X × T) ∪
{D}∪({Out}×T) is represented by ui where ui(x, t) = δtxi, ui(D) = 0,
u1(Out, t) = 0 for all t, and u2(Out, t) = δtb for some b < 1 and some
δ ∈(0, 1).
This result is sometimes called the “outside option principle”. It is
not robust to the assumptions about the points at which the players
can exercise their outside options. For example, if one of the players
can opt out at the end of any period, not just after he rejects an oﬀer,
then the game has a great multiplicity of subgame perfect equilibria (see
Shaked (1994) and Osborne and Rubinstein (1990, Section 3.12)).
7.4.4
A Model in Which There Is a Risk of Breakdown
Finally, consider a modiﬁcation of the model of a bargaining game of
alternating oﬀers in which at the end of each period a chance move ends
the game with probability α ∈(0, 1). (We consider this case again in
Section 15.4.) Assume that the players do not care about the time at
which agreement is reached; the pressure on each player to reach agree-
ment is not the player’s impatience but the risk that the negotiations will
break down. In the extensive game (with perfect information and chance
moves) that models this situation there are six types of history. Four of
these types are analogs of types I through IV (see Section 7.2) in which
each occurrence of R is replaced by (R, C), where C is the action of
chance in which bargaining continues (rather than breaks down). A his-
tory of type V takes the form (x0, R, C, x1, R, C, . . . , xt, R), after which
it is the turn of chance to move, and a history of type VI is terminal
and takes the form (x0, R, C, x1, R, C, . . . , xt, R, B), where B stands for
breakdown. We assume that the players are indiﬀerent among all termi-
nal histories in which no agreement is reached (i.e. among all histories of
types IV and VI). Given the presence of chance moves, we need to specify
the players’ preferences over the set of lotteries over terminal histories.
As before, we assume that these preferences depend only on the agree-
ment ﬁnally reached (not on the path of rejected agreements). Further,
we assume that the preference relation of each player i is represented by

--- Sayfa 146 ---
130
Chapter 7. Bargaining Games
a von Neumann–Morgenstern utility function ui: X ∪{B} →R. (Since
histories of type IV do not occur with positive probability, whatever
strategies the players employ, the players’ preference relations do not
have to rank D.) Finally, we assume that ui(B) = 0, ui(x) ≥0 for
all x ∈X, and there is a unique pair (x∗, y∗) of eﬃcient agreements
satisfying
u1(y∗) = (1 −α)u1(x∗)
and
u2(x∗) = (1 −α)u2(y∗).
(130.1)
(This is so, for example, if the players are splitting a pie, ui(x1, x2) =
wi(xi) for some increasing concave function wi, and wi(0) = 0.)
? Exercise 130.2
Prove the analog of Proposition 122.1 for the vari-
ant of a bargaining game of alternating oﬀers described in the previous
paragraph.
7.4.5
More Than Two Players
Proposition 122.1 does not extend to the case in which there are more
than two players, as the following three-player variant of a split-the-pie
game (Example 120.1) demonstrates. The set of possible agreements is
X = {(x1, x2, x3): xi ≥0 for i = 1, 2, 3 and x1 + x2 + x3 = 1}
and each player i’s preferences are represented by ui(x, t) = δtxi for
some 0 < δ < 1. The bargaining procedure is the following. Player 1
initially makes a proposal. A proposal x made by player j in period t
is ﬁrst considered by player j + 1 (mod 3), who may accept or reject it.
If he accepts it, then player j + 2 (mod 3) may accept or reject it. If
both accept it, then the game ends and x is implemented. Otherwise
player j + 1 (mod 3) makes the next proposal, in period t + 1.
Let 1
2 ≤δ < 1. We claim that for every agreement x there is a sub-
game perfect equilibrium in which x is accepted immediately. Such an
equilibrium may be described in terms of four commonly-held “states”
x, e1, e2, and e3, where ei is the ith unit vector. In state y each player i
makes the proposal y and accepts the proposal z if and only if zi ≥δyi.
The initial state is x. Transitions between states occur only after a pro-
posal has been made, before the response. If, in any state y, player i
proposes z with zi > yi then the state becomes ej, where j̸ = i is the
player with the lowest index for whom zj < 1
2. Such a player j exists,
and the requirement that δ ≥1
2 guarantees that it is optimal for him
to reject player i’s proposal. The main force holding this equilibrium

--- Sayfa 147 ---
Notes
131
together is that a player is rewarded for rejecting a deviant oﬀer: after
his rejection, he obtains all of the pie.
? Exercise 131.1
Show that if each player is restricted to use a station-
ary strategy (in which he makes the same proposal whenever he is the
proposer, uses the same rule to accept proposals whenever he is the ﬁrst
responder, and uses the same rule to accept proposals whenever he is
the second responder) then the unique subgame perfect equilibrium of
the game described above assigns the fraction δk−1/(1 + δ + δ2) of the
pie to player k for k = 1, 2, 3.
Notes
The model in this chapter is due to Rubinstein (1982), as is Proposi-
tion 122.1. For an exposition and analysis of the model and its applica-
tions see Osborne and Rubinstein (1990).
Two precursors of the model that eﬀectively restrict attention to ﬁnite-
horizon games are found in St˚ahl (1972) and Krelle (1976, pp. 607–
632).
For a discussion of time preferences see Fishburn and Rubin-
stein (1982). The proof of Proposition 122.1 is a modiﬁcation of the orig-
inal proof of Rubinstein (1982), following the ideas of Shaked and Sut-
ton (1984a). The material in Section 7.4.2 is discussed in Muthoo (1991)
and van Damme, Selten, and Winter (1990). The model in Section 7.4.3,
in which a player can opt out, was suggested by Binmore, Shaked, and
Sutton; see for example Shaked and Sutton (1984b) and Binmore (1985).
The model in Section 7.4.4 is discussed in Binmore, Rubinstein, and
Wolinsky (1986).
The example discussed in Section 7.4.5 is due to
Shaked; see Osborne and Rubinstein (1990, Section 3.13) for more de-
tail. For another interpretation of the model of a bargaining game of
alternating oﬀers see Rubinstein (1995).

--- Sayfa 149 ---
8
Repeated Games
The model of a repeated game is designed to examine the logic of long-
term interaction. It captures the idea that a player will take into account
the eﬀect of his current behavior on the other players’ future behavior,
and aims to explain phenomena like cooperation, revenge, and threats.
8.1
The Basic Idea
The basic idea behind the theory is illustrated by the case in which
two individuals repeatedly play the Prisoner’s Dilemma (reproduced in
Figure 134.1). Recall that this game has a unique Nash equilibrium,
in which each player chooses D; further, for each player the action D
strictly dominates the action C, so that the rationale behind the outcome
(D, D) is very strong. Despite this, both players are better oﬀif they
“cooperate” and choose C. The main idea behind the theory of repeated
games is that if the game is played repeatedly then the mutually desirable
outcome in which (C, C) occurs in every period is stable if each player
believes that a defection will terminate the cooperation, resulting in a
subsequent loss for him that outweighs the short-term gain.
The primary achievement of the theory is to isolate types of strategies
that support mutually desirable outcomes in any game. The theory gives
us insights into the structure of behavior when individuals interact re-
peatedly, structure that may be interpreted in terms of a “social norm”.
The results that we describe show that the social norm needed to sus-
tain mutually desirable outcomes involves each player’s “punishing” any
player whose behavior is undesirable. When we impose the requirement
embedded in the notion of subgame perfect equilibrium that threats
of punishment be credible, the social norm must also ensure that the
punishers have an incentive to carry out the threats in circumstances

--- Sayfa 150 ---
134
Chapter 8. Repeated Games
C
D
C
3, 3
0, 4
D
4, 0
1, 1
Figure 134.1 The Prisoner’s Dilemma.
in which the social norm requires them to do so. In this case the pre-
cise nature of the punishment depends on how the players value future
outcomes. Sometimes it is suﬃcient that a punishment phase last for a
limited amount of time, after which the players return to pursue the mu-
tually desirable outcome; sometimes the social norm must entail future
rewards for players who carry out costly punishments.
Although we regard these results about the structure of the equilib-
rium strategies to be the main achievement of the theory, most of the
results in the literature focus instead on the set of payoﬀs that can
be sustained by equilibria, giving conditions under which this set con-
sists of nearly all reasonable payoﬀproﬁles. These “folk theorems” have
two sides. On the one hand they demonstrate that socially desirable
outcomes that cannot be sustained if players are short-sighted can be
sustained if the players have long-term objectives. On the other hand
they show that the set of equilibrium outcomes of a repeated game is
huge, so that the notion of equilibrium lacks predictive power. “Folk
theorems” are the focus of much of the formal development in this chap-
ter. Nevertheless, we stress that in our opinion the main contribution
of the theory is the discovery of interesting stable social norms (strate-
gies) that support mutually desirable payoﬀproﬁles, and not simply the
demonstration that equilibria exist that generate such proﬁles.
8.2
Inﬁnitely Repeated Games vs. Finitely Repeated Games
The model of a repeated game has two versions: the horizon may be ﬁnite
or inﬁnite. As we shall see, the results in the two cases are diﬀerent. An
extreme (and far from general) case of the diﬀerence is that in which
the constituent game is the Prisoner’s Dilemma. We shall see below
that in any ﬁnite repetition of this game the only Nash equilibrium
outcome is that in which the players choose (D, D) in every period;
on the other hand, in the inﬁnitely repeated game the set of subgame

--- Sayfa 151 ---
8.2 Inﬁnitely Repeated Games vs. Finitely Repeated Games
135
perfect equilibrium payoﬀproﬁles is huge. Thus in applying the model of
a repeated game in speciﬁc situations we may need to determine whether
a ﬁnite or inﬁnite horizon is appropriate.
In our view a model should attempt to capture the features of reality
that the players perceive; it should not necessarily aim to describe the
reality that an outside observer perceives, though obviously there are
links between the two perceptions. Thus the fact that a situation has
a horizon that is in some physical sense ﬁnite (or inﬁnite) does not
necessarily imply that the best model of the situation has a ﬁnite (or
inﬁnite) horizon.
A model with an inﬁnite horizon is appropriate if
after each period the players believe that the game will continue for an
additional period, while a model with a ﬁnite horizon is appropriate if
the players clearly perceive a well-deﬁned ﬁnal period. The fact that
players have ﬁnite lives, for example, does not imply that one should
always model their strategic interaction as a ﬁnitely repeated game. If
they play a game so frequently that the horizon approaches only very
slowly then they may ignore the existence of the horizon entirely until
its arrival is imminent, and until this point their strategic thinking may
be better captured by a game with an inﬁnite horizon.
ar In a situation that is objectively ﬁnite, a key criterion that deter-
mines whether we should use a model with a ﬁnite or an inﬁnite horizon
is whether the last period enters explicitly into the players’ strategic
considerations.
For this reason, even some situations that involve a
small number of repetitions are better analyzed as inﬁnitely repeated
games. For example, when laboratory subjects are instructed to play
the Prisoner’s Dilemma twenty times with payoﬀs as in Figure 134.1
(interpreted as dollars), I believe that their lines of reasoning are better
modeled by an inﬁnitely repeated game than by a 20-period repeated
game, since except very close to the end of the game they are likely to
ignore the existence of the ﬁnal period.
mjo The behavior of experimental subjects who play the Prisoner’s
Dilemma repeatedly a ﬁnite number of times is inconsistent with the
unique subgame perfect equilibrium of the ﬁnitely repeated game. The
fact that it may be consistent with some subgame perfect equilibrium of
the inﬁnitely repeated game is uninteresting since the range of outcomes
that are so-consistent is vast. Certainly the subgame perfect equilibria
of the inﬁnitely repeated game give no insights about the dependence of
the subjects’ behavior on the magnitude of the payoﬀs and the length of
the game. (For a summary of the evidence see Rapoport (1987).) The
experimental results deﬁnitely indicate that the notion of subgame per-

--- Sayfa 152 ---
136
Chapter 8. Repeated Games
fect equilibrium in the ﬁnitely repeated Prisoner’s Dilemma does not
capture human behavior. However, this deﬁciency appears to have more
to do with the backwards induction inherent in the notion of subgame
perfect equilibrium than with the ﬁniteness of the horizon per se. A
model that will give us an understanding of the facts is likely to be a
variant of the ﬁnitely repeated game; some characteristics of the equi-
libria of the inﬁnitely repeated game may be suggestive, but this model
itself appears unpromising as an explanatory tool. Moreover, in con-
texts in which the constituent game has multiple Nash equilibria, the
equilibria of ﬁnitely repeated games correspond well with the casual ob-
servation that people act cooperatively when the horizon is distant and
opportunistically when it is near; the equilibria of inﬁnitely repeated
games can give us no insight into such behavior. Finally, in situations
in which people’s discount factors decline to zero over time, even if they
never become zero (i.e. no ﬁxed ﬁnite horizon is perceived), the equi-
librium outcomes have more in common with those of ﬁnitely repeated
games than with those of inﬁnitely repeated games.
ar In much of the existing literature the fact that the set of equi-
libria in a long ﬁnitely repeated game may be very diﬀerent from the
set of equilibria of an inﬁnite repetition of the same constituent game
is regarded as “disturbing”. In contrast, I ﬁnd it attractive: the two
models capture a very realistic feature of life, namely the fact that the
existence of a prespeciﬁed ﬁnite period may crucially aﬀect people’s be-
havior (consider the last few months of a presidency or the fact that
religions attempt to persuade their believers that there is “life after
death”).
mjo First, for a large set of constituent games there is no discon-
tinuity between the outcomes of the associated ﬁnitely and inﬁnitely
repeated games (see Section 8.10). Second, in some cases in which the
discontinuity does exist it is indeed unappealing. If people who are faced
with a known ﬁxed distant horizon behave as if the horizon is inﬁnite
then this should be the prediction of a model with a ﬁxed ﬁnite horizon;
if it is not then doubts are raised about the plausibility of the notion of
subgame perfect equilibrium in other contexts.
8.3
Inﬁnitely Repeated Games: Deﬁnitions
The model of an inﬁnitely repeated game captures a situation in which
players repeatedly engage in a strategic game G, which we refer to as the
constituent game. Throughout we restrict attention to games in which

--- Sayfa 153 ---
8.3 Inﬁnitely Repeated Games: Deﬁnitions
137
the action set of each player is compact and the preference relation of
each player is continuous. There is no limit on the number of times that
G is played; on each occasion the players choose their actions simulta-
neously. When taking an action, a player knows the actions previously
chosen by all players. We model this situation as an extensive game with
perfect information (and simultaneous moves) as follows.
▶Definition 137.1 Let G = ⟨N, (Ai), (≿i)⟩be a strategic game; let
A = ×i∈NAi.
An inﬁnitely repeated game of G is an extensive
game with perfect information and simultaneous moves ⟨N, H, P, (≿∗
i )⟩
in which
• H = {∅} ∪(∪∞
t=1At) ∪A∞(where ∅is the initial history and A∞is
the set of inﬁnite sequences (at)∞
t=1 of action proﬁles in G)
• P(h) = N for each nonterminal history h ∈H
• ≿∗
i is a preference relation on A∞that extends the preference rela-
tion ≿i in the sense that it satisﬁes the following condition of weak
separability: if (at) ∈A∞, a ∈A, a′ ∈A, and a ≿i a′ then
(a1, . . . , at−1, a, at+1, . . .) ≿∗
i (a1, . . . , at−1, a′, at+1, . . .)
for all values of t.
A history is terminal if and only if it is inﬁnite. After any nonterminal
history every player i ∈N chooses an action in Ai. Thus a strategy of
player i is a function that assigns an action in Ai to every ﬁnite sequence
of outcomes in G.
We now impose restrictions on the players’ preference relations in ad-
dition to weak separability. We assume throughout that player i’s prefer-
ence relation ≿∗
i in the repeated game is based upon a payoﬀfunction ui
that represents his preference relation ≿i in G: we assume that whether
(at) ≿∗
i (bt) depends only on the relation between the corresponding
sequences (ui(at)) and (ui(bt)) of payoﬀs in G.
We consider three forms of the preference relations, the ﬁrst of which
is deﬁned as follows.
• Discounting: There is some number δ ∈(0, 1) (the discount fac-
tor) such that the sequence (vt
i) of real numbers is at least as good
as the sequence (wt
i) if and only if P∞
t=1 δt−1(vt
i −wt
i) ≥0.
According to this criterion a player evaluates a sequence (vt
i) of payoﬀs
by P∞
t=1 δt−1vt
i for some discount factor δ ∈(0, 1).
(Since we have
assumed that the values of the player’s payoﬀs lie in a bounded set, this
sum is well-deﬁned.) When the players’ preferences take this form we

--- Sayfa 154 ---
138
Chapter 8. Repeated Games
refer to the proﬁle ((1−δ) PT
t=1 δt−1vt
i)i∈N as the payoﬀproﬁle in the
repeated game associated with the sequence (vt)∞
t=1 of payoﬀproﬁles in
the constituent game.
Preferences with discounting treat the periods diﬀerently: the value
of a given gain diminishes with time. We now specify two alternative
criteria that treat all periods symmetrically. In one criterion a player
evaluates a sequence (vt
i) of payoﬀs essentially by its limiting average
limT →∞
PT
t=1 vt
i/T. However, this limit does not always exist (the av-
erage payoﬀover t periods may continually oscillate as t increases); the
criterion that we discuss is deﬁned as follows. (It is convenient to deﬁne
this criterion in terms of the strict preference relation.)
• Limit of means: The sequence (vt
i) of real numbers is preferred to
the sequence (wt
i) if and only if lim inf PT
t=1(vt
i −wt
i)/T > 0 (i.e.
if and only if there exists ϵ > 0 such that PT
t=1(vt
i −wt
i)/T > ϵ for
all but a ﬁnite number of periods T).
When the players’ preferences take this form we refer to the proﬁle
limT →∞(PT
t=1 vt
i/T)i∈N, if it exists, as the payoﬀproﬁle in the re-
peated game associated with the sequence (vt)∞
t=1 of payoﬀproﬁles in
the constituent game.
Note that if the sequence (vt
i) is preferred to the sequence (wt
i) accord-
ing to the limit of means then there is a discount factor δ close enough
to 1 such that (vt
i) is preferred to (wt
i) by the discounting criterion.
Under the discounting criterion a change in the payoﬀin a single
period can matter, whereas under the limit of means criterion payoﬀ
diﬀerences in any ﬁnite number of periods do not matter. A player whose
preferences satisfy the limit of means is ready to sacriﬁce any loss in the
ﬁrst ﬁnite number of periods in order to increase the stream of payoﬀs
he eventually obtains.
For example, the stream (0, . . . , 0, 2, 2, . . .) of
payoﬀs is preferred by the limit of means criterion to the constant stream
(1, 1, . . .) independent of the index of the period in which the player ﬁrst
gets 2 in the ﬁrst stream. At ﬁrst sight this property may seem strange.
However, it is not diﬃcult to think of situations in which decision makers
put overwhelming emphasis on the long run at the expense of the short
run (think of nationalist struggles).
We now introduce a criterion that treats all periods symmetrically
and puts emphasis on the long run but at the same time is sensitive to
a change in payoﬀin a single period. (Again we deﬁne the criterion in
terms of the strict preference relation.)

--- Sayfa 155 ---
8.3 Inﬁnitely Repeated Games: Deﬁnitions
139
• Overtaking: The sequence (vt
i) is preferred to the sequence (wt
i)
if and only if lim inf PT
t=1(vt
i −wt
i) > 0.
The following examples illustrate some of the diﬀerences between the
three criteria. The sequence (1, −1, 0, 0, . . .) is preferred for any δ ∈(0, 1)
by the discounting criterion to the sequence (0, 0, . . .), but according
to the other two criteria the two sequences are indiﬀerent.
The se-
quence (−1, 2, 0, 0, . . .) is preferred to the sequence (0, 0, . . .) according
to the overtaking criterion, but the two sequences are indiﬀerent ac-
cording to the limit of means. The sequence (0, . . . , 0, 1, 1, . . .) in which
M zeros are followed by a constant sequence of 1’s is preferred by the
limit of means to (1, 0, 0, . . .) for every value of M, but for every δ
there exists M ∗large enough that for all M > M ∗the latter is pre-
ferred to the former according to the discounting criterion for that value
of δ.
Let G = ⟨N, (Ai), (≿i)⟩be a strategic game and for each i ∈N let ui
be a payoﬀfunction that represents ≿i. We deﬁne the δ-discounted in-
ﬁnitely repeated game of ⟨N, (Ai), (ui)⟩to be the inﬁnitely repeated
game for which the constituent game is G and the preference ordering
≿∗
i of each player i ∈N is derived from the payoﬀfunction ui using
the discounting criterion with a discount factor of δ for each player.
Similarly we deﬁne the limit of means inﬁnitely repeated game
of ⟨N, (Ai), (ui)⟩and the overtaking inﬁnitely repeated game of
⟨N, (Ai), (ui)⟩.
We denote by u(a) the proﬁle (ui(a))i∈N. Deﬁne a vector v ∈RN
to be a payoﬀproﬁle of ⟨N, (Ai), (ui)⟩if there is an outcome a ∈
A for which v = u(a).
We refer to a vector v ∈RN as a feasible
payoﬀproﬁle of ⟨N, (Ai), (ui)⟩if it is a convex combination of payoﬀ
proﬁles of outcomes in A: that is, if v = P
a∈A αau(a) for some collection
(αa)a∈A of nonnegative rational numbers αa with P
a∈A αa = 1. (In
the literature the coeﬃcients αa are allowed to be any real numbers,
not necessarily rational, a generalization that complicates the argument
while adding little substance.)
Note that a feasible payoﬀproﬁle of
⟨N, (Ai), (ui)⟩is not necessarily a payoﬀproﬁle of ⟨N, (Ai), (ui)⟩.
? Exercise 139.1
Consider an inﬁnitely repeated game in which the
players’ preferences are derived from their payoﬀs in the constituent
game using diﬀerent discount factors. Show that a payoﬀproﬁle in such
a repeated game may not be a feasible payoﬀproﬁle of the constituent
game.

--- Sayfa 156 ---
140
Chapter 8. Repeated Games
8.4
Strategies as Machines
As we discussed in the introduction to this chapter, the main achieve-
ment of the theory of repeated games is to give us insights into the
structure of behavior when individuals interact repeatedly. In this sec-
tion we develop a language in which to describe conveniently the struc-
ture of the equilibria that we ﬁnd. We begin by deﬁning a machine,
which is intended as an abstraction of the process by which a player
implements a strategy in a repeated game. A machine (or automa-
ton) for player i in an inﬁnitely repeated game of ⟨N, (Ai), (≿i)⟩has the
following components.
• A set Qi (the set of states).
• An element q0
i ∈Qi (the initial state).
• A function fi: Qi →Ai that assigns an action to every state (the
output function).
• A function τi: Qi × A →Qi that assigns a state to every pair con-
sisting of a state and an action proﬁle (the transition function).
The set Qi is unrestricted. The names of the states do not of course
have any signiﬁcance (the fact that we call a state “cooperative”, for
example, does not mean that the behavior associated with it matches
its name). In the ﬁrst period the state of the machine is q0
i and the
machine chooses the action fi(q0
i ). Whenever the machine is in some
state qi, it chooses the action fi(qi) corresponding to that state. The
transition function τi speciﬁes how the machine moves from one state to
another: if the machine is in state qi and a is the action proﬁle chosen
then its state changes to τi(qi, a).
Note that the input of the transition function consists of the current
state and the proﬁle of all the players’ current actions. It is more natural
to take as the input the current state and the list of actions chosen by the
other players. This ﬁts the natural description of a “rule of behavior” or
“strategy” as a plan of how to behave in all possible circumstances that
are consistent with one’s plans. However, since the game-theoretic deﬁ-
nition requires that a strategy specify an action for all possible histories,
including those that are inconsistent with the player’s own strategy, we
have to include as an input into the transition function the action of the
player himself.
To illustrate the concept of a machine we now give four examples of
machines for a player in the repeated Prisoner’s Dilemma (Figure 134.1).

--- Sayfa 157 ---
8.4 Strategies as Machines
141
C: C
-
all outcomes
except (C, C)
D: D
?
 
{(C, C)}
?
 
all outcomes
Figure 141.1 A machine that corresponds to the grim strategy in the Prisoner’s
Dilemma.
P0: C
6

{(·, C)}
-
{(·, D)}
P1: D
-
all
outcomes
P2: D
-
all
outcomes
P3: D
?


all outcomes
Figure 141.2
The machine M1.
This machine for player 1 in the Prisoner’s
Dilemma plays C as long as player 2 does so and punishes player 2 for choosing D
by choosing D for three periods. (We use {(·, X)} to denote the set of all outcomes
in which player 2’s action is X.)
⋄Example 141.1 (A machine for the “grim” strategy)
The machine
⟨Qi, q0
i , fi, τi⟩deﬁned as follows is the simplest one that carries out the
(“grim”) strategy that chooses C so long as both players have chosen C
in every period in the past, and otherwise chooses D.
• Qi = {C, D}.
• q0
i = C.
• fi(C) = C and fi(D) = D.
• τi(C, (C, C)) = C and τi(X, (Y, Z)) = D if (X, (Y, Z))̸ = (C, (C, C)).
This machine is illustrated in Figure 141.1. Each box corresponds to a
state; inside each box is the name of the state followed (after the colon)
by the action that the machine takes in that state. The box with the
heavy boundary corresponds to the initial state. The arrows correspond
to the transitions; adjacent to each arrow is the set of outcomes that
induces the transition.
⋄Example 141.2
The machine M1 of player 1 shown in Figure 141.2
plays C as long as player 2 plays C; it plays D for three periods, and
then reverts back to C, if player 2 plays D when he should play C.
(We can think of the other player being “punished” for three periods for
playing D, and then “forgiven”.) Notice that a machine must have at
least four states in order to carry out this strategy.
⋄Example 141.3
The machine M2 of player 2 shown in Figure 142.1
starts by playing C and continues to do so if the other player chooses D.

--- Sayfa 158 ---
142
Chapter 8. Repeated Games
R0: C
6

{(D, ·)}
-
{(C, ·)}
R1: D
6

{(C, ·)}
?


{(D, ·)}
Figure 142.1
The machine M2.
This machine for player 2 in the Prisoner’s
Dilemma starts by playing C but switches to D if player 1 chooses C, returning
to C only if player 1 chooses D.
period
state of M1
state of M2
outcome
payoﬀs
1
P0
R0
(C, C)
3, 3
2
P0
R1
(C, D)
0, 4
3
P1
R1
(D, D)
1, 1
4
P2
R0
(D, C)
4, 0
5
P3
R0
(D, C)
4, 0
6
P0
R0
(C, C)
3, 3
Figure 142.2
The outcomes in the ﬁrst six periods of the repeated Prisoner’s
Dilemma when player 1 uses the machine M1 in Figure 141.2 and player 2 uses the
machine M2 in Figure 142.1.
If the other player chooses C then it switches to D, which it continues to
play until the other player again chooses D, when it reverts to playing C.
To illustrate the evolution of play in a repeated game when each
player’s strategy is carried out by a machine, suppose that player 1
uses the machine M1 and player 2 uses the machine M2 in the repeated
Prisoner’s Dilemma.
The machines start in the states P0 and R0 respectively. The outcome
in the ﬁrst period is (C, C) since the output function of M1 assigns the
action C to state P0 and the output function of M2 assigns the action
C to state R0. The states in the following period are determined by the
transition functions. The transition function of M1 leaves the machine
in state P0, since the outcome in the ﬁrst period is (C, C), while the
transition function of M2 moves the machine from R0 to R1 in response
to this input. Thus the pair of states in period 2 is (P0, R1). The output
functions determine the outcome in period 2 to be (C, D), so that M1
now moves from P0 to P1 while M2 stays in R1. Play continues through
period 5 as in the table in Figure 142.2. In period 6 the pair of states
is the same as it is in period 1; subsequently the states and outcomes
cycle, following the pattern in the ﬁrst ﬁve periods. The fact that cycles
are generated is not peculiar to this example: whenever each player

--- Sayfa 159 ---
8.5 Trigger Strategies: Nash Folk Theorems
143
uses a machine with ﬁnitely many states a cycle is eventually reached,
though not necessarily in period 1. (This follows from the fact that each
machine takes as its input only the actions in the previous period (i.e.
it is “Markovian”).)
? Exercise 143.1
Show that not every strategy in an inﬁnitely repeated
game can be executed by a machine with a ﬁnite number of states.
8.5
Trigger Strategies: Nash Folk Theorems
We now study the set of Nash equilibrium outcomes of an inﬁnitely re-
peated game.
We show that this set includes outcomes that are not
repetitions of Nash equilibria of the constituent game. To support such
an outcome, each player must be deterred from deviating by being “pun-
ished”. Such punishment may take many forms. One possibility is that
each player uses a “trigger strategy”: any deviation causes him to carry
out a punitive action that lasts forever. In the equilibria that we study
in this section each player uses such a strategy.
Let ⟨N, (Ai), (≿i)⟩be a strategic game and for each i ∈N let ui be a
payoﬀfunction that represents the preference ordering ≿i. Recall that
we deﬁne a feasible payoﬀproﬁle of G = ⟨N, (Ai), (ui)⟩to be a convex
combination P
a∈A αau(a) for which the coeﬃcients αa are rational. Let
w = P
a∈A αau(a) be such a proﬁle and suppose that αa = βa/γ for
each a ∈A, where every βa is an integer and γ = P
a∈A βa. Then the
sequence of outcomes in the repeated game that consists of an indeﬁnite
repetition of a cycle of length γ in which each a ∈A is played for βa
periods yields an average payoﬀproﬁle over the cycle, and hence in the
entire repeated game, of w.
Deﬁne player i’s minmax payoﬀin G, henceforth denoted vi, to be
the lowest payoﬀthat the other players can force upon player i:
vi =
min
a−i∈A−i max
ai∈Ai ui(a−i, ai).
(143.2)
A payoﬀproﬁle w for which wi ≥vi for all i ∈N is called enforce-
able; if wi > vi for all i ∈N then w is strictly enforceable.1
If
a ∈A is an outcome of G for which u(a) is (strictly) enforceable in G
then we refer to a as a (strictly) enforceable outcome of G. De-
note by p−i ∈A−i one of the solutions of the minimization problem
on the right-hand side of (143.2).
For each action proﬁle a ∈A let
1In much of the literature the term individually rational is used instead of
“enforceable”.

--- Sayfa 160 ---
144
Chapter 8. Repeated Games
bi(a−i) ∈Ai be an action of player i in G that is a best response to a−i
(i.e. bi(a−i) ∈Bi(a−i)). (Notice that p−i and the function bi depend
only on the players’ preferences over A, not on the payoﬀrepresentations
of these preferences.) The collection of actions p−i is the most severe
“punishment” that the other players can inﬂict upon player i in G.
(Note that we restrict punishments to be deterministic. In some of the
literature punishers are allowed to randomize, possibly correlating their
actions over time; this changes the set of feasible payoﬀproﬁles and the
enforceable payoﬀs but not the structure of the set of equilibria of the
repeated game.)
In the next two results we show that the set of Nash equilibrium pay-
oﬀproﬁles of an inﬁnitely repeated game in which the players evaluate
streams of payoﬀs by the limit of means is the set of all feasible enforce-
able payoﬀproﬁles of the constituent game. The third result shows that
the same is approximately true when the players discount future payoﬀs
using a discount factor close to 1.
Proposition 144.1 Every Nash equilibrium payoﬀproﬁle of the limit of
means inﬁnitely repeated game of G = ⟨N, (Ai), (ui)⟩is an enforceable
payoﬀproﬁle of G. The same is true, for any δ ∈(0, 1), of every Nash
equilibrium payoﬀproﬁle of the δ-discounted inﬁnitely repeated game
of G.
Proof. Suppose that w is a payoﬀproﬁle of the limit of means inﬁnitely
repeated game of G that is not enforceable; suppose that wi < vi. Then
w is not a Nash equilibrium payoﬀproﬁle of the repeated game, because
for any strategy proﬁle s the strategy s′
i of player i deﬁned by s′
i(h) =
bi(s−i(h)) for each history h gives player i a payoﬀof at least vi in
each period. The same argument applies to any δ-discounted inﬁnitely
repeated game of G.
2
The following exercise asks you to express the strategy s′
i of player i
in this proof in the language of machines that we developed in Sec-
tion 8.4.
? Exercise 144.2
Consider a two-player inﬁnitely repeated game. For
any given machine for player 2 construct a machine for player 1 that
yields her a payoﬀof at least v1.
Proposition 144.3 (Nash folk theorem for the limit of means criterion)
Every feasible enforceable payoﬀproﬁle of G = ⟨N, (Ai), (ui)⟩is a Nash
equilibrium payoﬀproﬁle of the limit of means inﬁnitely repeated game
of G.

--- Sayfa 161 ---
8.5 Trigger Strategies: Nash Folk Theorems
145
Proof. Let w = P
a∈A(βa/γ)u(a) be a feasible enforceable payoﬀproﬁle,
where βa for each a ∈A is an integer and γ = P
a∈A βa, and let (at) be
the cycling sequence of action proﬁles for which the cycle (of length γ)
contains βa repetitions of a for each a ∈A. Let si be the strategy of
player i in the repeated game that chooses at
i in each period t unless there
was a previous period t′ in which a single player other than i deviated
from at′, in which case it chooses (p−j)i, where j is the deviant in the
ﬁrst such period t′. The strategy proﬁle s is a Nash equilibrium of the
repeated game since a player j who deviates receives at most his minmax
payoﬀvj in every subsequent period; the payoﬀproﬁle generated by s
is w.
2
? Exercise 145.1
Construct a machine that executes the equilibrium
strategy si of player i in this proof.
The strategy si in this proof is a trigger strategy. Many other strategies
can be used to prove the result (for example the strategy used in the
proof of Proposition 146.2).
The following is an analog of Proposition 144.3 for an inﬁnitely re-
peated game with discounting.
The proof is similar to that of the
previous result; we leave it to you.
Proposition 145.2 (Nash folk theorem for the discounting criterion)
Let w be a strictly enforceable feasible payoﬀproﬁle of G = ⟨N, (Ai),
(ui)⟩. For all ϵ > 0 there exists δ < 1 such that if δ > δ then the δ-
discounted inﬁnitely repeated game of G has a Nash equilibrium whose
payoﬀproﬁle w′ satisﬁes |w′ −w| < ϵ.
To illuminate the character of equilibria in which each player uses a
trigger strategy, consider two inﬁnitely repeated games: one in which the
constituent game is the Prisoner’s Dilemma, which we denote G1 (see
Figure 134.1), and the other in which the constituent game is the game
G2 shown in Figure 146.1. In both G1 and G2 each player’s minmax
payoﬀis 1 and by playing D each player holds the other’s payoﬀto this
level (p−1 = p−2 = D).
In both games the trigger strategies used in the proof of Proposi-
tion 144.3 involve each player switching to D for good in response to
any deviation from the equilibrium path. In G1 the action D dominates
the action C, so that it is a stable order for each player to choose D.
Thus there is some rationale for a punisher who believes that a deviation
signals the end of the current stable order to choose the action D in the
future. By contrast, in G2 a constant repetition of (D, D) is not a stable

--- Sayfa 162 ---
146
Chapter 8. Repeated Games
A
D
A
2, 3
1, 5
D
0, 1
0, 1
Figure 146.1 The game G2.
order since A strictly dominates D for player 1. Thus player 1 suﬀers
from the punishment he inﬂicts on his opponent, making incredible his
threat to punish a deviation and casting doubt on the plausibility of
equilibria in which such trigger strategies are employed. We are led to
study the notion of subgame perfect equilibrium, which rules out such
strategies since it requires that each player’s behavior after every history
be optimal.
? Exercise 146.1
Consider the inﬁnitely repeated game in which the
players’ preferences are represented by the discounting criterion, the
common discount factor is 1
2, and the constituent game is the game G2
in Figure 146.1. Show that ((A, A), (A, A), . . .) is not a subgame perfect
equilibrium outcome path.
8.6
Punishing for a Limited Length of Time: A Perfect Folk
Theorem for the Limit of Means Criterion
The strategies used in the proof of Proposition 144.3 to generate an
arbitrary enforceable payoﬀproﬁle punish a deviant indeﬁnitely. Such
punishment is unnecessarily harsh: a deviant’s payoﬀneeds to be held
down to the minmax level only for enough periods to wipe out his (one-
period) gain from the deviation. If the players’ preferences satisfy the
limit of means criterion then a strategy that returns to the equilibrium
path after the punishment has the advantage that it yields the same
payoﬀfor the punishers as does the equilibrium path itself, so that the
players have no reason not to adopt it. Hence under the limit of means
criterion the social norm of punishing for only a ﬁnite number of periods
is a subgame perfect equilibrium of the inﬁnitely repeated game.
Proposition 146.2 (Perfect folk theorem for the limit of means crite-
rion) Every feasible strictly enforceable payoﬀproﬁle of G = ⟨N, (Ai),
(ui)⟩is a subgame perfect equilibrium payoﬀproﬁle of the limit of means
inﬁnitely repeated game of G.

--- Sayfa 163 ---
8.6 A Perfect Folk Theorem for the Limit of Means Criterion
147
Proof. Let w = P
a∈A(βa/γ)u(a) be a feasible strictly enforceable pay-
oﬀproﬁle of G and let (ak)γ
k=1 be the sequence of action proﬁles that
consists of βa repetitions of a for each a ∈A.
We now construct a strategy proﬁle that generates a sequence of action
proﬁles in G consisting of an indeﬁnite repetition of the cycle (ak)γ
k=1.
Each player punishes any deviation for only a limited number of periods.
It is convenient to specify the strategy of each player so that any pun-
ishment begins only in the period that follows the completion of a cycle.
If a single player deviates in some period in which nobody deserves to
be punished then that player, say i, is declared to deserve punishment;
beginning in the ﬁrst period of the next cycle the other players punish
i by choosing p−i for enough periods to cancel out any possible gain for
him. Subsequently the punishers return to the equilibrium, starting at
the beginning of a cycle. (Simultaneous deviations by more than one
player are ignored.) Given that the players’ preferences satisfy the limit
of means criterion, the payoﬀproﬁle is w after every possible history.
To deﬁne the strategies precisely let g∗be the maximal amount that
any player can gain by deviating from any action proﬁle in G. That is,
let g∗be the maximum of ui(a−i, a′
i) −ui(a) over all i ∈N, a′
i ∈Ai and
a ∈A. Since wi > vi there exists an integer m∗≥1 that is an integral
multiple of γ such that γg∗+ m∗vi ≤m∗wi for all i ∈N. The strategy
of each player i punishes any deviant for m∗periods and is given by the
following machine.
• Set of states: {(Normk, d): either k = 1 and d = 0 or 2 ≤k ≤
γ and d ∈{0} ∪N} ∪{P(j, t): j ∈N and 1 ≤t ≤m∗}. (The state
(Normk, 0) means that we are in the kth period of the cycle and no
player deserves punishment. The state (Normk, j) means that we
are in the kth period of the cycle and player j deserves punishment.
The state P(j, t) means that player j is being punished and there
are t periods left in which he has to be punished.)
• Initial state: (Norm1, 0).
• Output function: In (Normk, d) for any d ∈{0} ∪N choose ak
i ; in
P(j, t) choose (p−j)i if i̸ = j and bi(p−i) if i = j.
• Transition function:
◦From (Normk, d) move to2 (Normk+1 (mod γ), d) unless:
2We deﬁne m (mod γ) to be the integer q with 1 ≤q ≤γ satisfying m = ℓγ + q
for some integer ℓ(so that, in particular, γ (mod γ) = γ).

--- Sayfa 164 ---
148
Chapter 8. Repeated Games
· d = 0 and player j alone deviated from ak, in which case
move to (Normk+1, j) if k ≤γ −1 and to P(j, m∗) if k = γ.
· d = j̸ = 0, in which case move to (Normk+1, j) if k ≤γ −1
and to P(j, m∗) if k = γ.
◦From P(j, t) move to P(j, t−1) if 2 ≤t ≤m∗, and to (Norm1, 0)
if t = 1.
We leave it to you to verify that the strategy proﬁle thus deﬁned is a
subgame perfect equilibrium.
2
The strategies that we deﬁne in this proof do not initiate punishment
immediately after a deviation, but wait until the end of a cycle before
doing so. We deﬁne the strategies in this way in order to calculate easily
the length of punishment necessary to deter a deviation: if punishment
were to begin immediately after a deviation then we would have to take
into account, when we calculated the length of the required punishment,
the possibility that a deviant’s payoﬀs in the remainder of the cycle are
low, so that he has an additional gain from terminating the cycle.
? Exercise 148.1 (A game with both long- and short-lived players) Con-
sider an inﬁnite horizon extensive game in which the strategic game G
is played between player 1 and an inﬁnite sequence of players, each of
whom lives for only one period and is informed of the actions taken in
every previous period. Player 1 evaluates sequences of payoﬀs by the
limit of means, and each of the other players is interested only in the
payoﬀthat he gets in the single period in which he lives.
a. Find the set of subgame perfect equilibria of the game when G is the
Prisoner’s Dilemma (see Figure 134.1).
b. Show that when G is the modiﬁcation of the Prisoner’s Dilemma in
which the payoﬀto player 2 of (C, D) is 0 then for every rational
number x ∈[1, 3] there is a subgame perfect equilibrium in which
player 1’s average payoﬀis x.
Consider the inﬁnitely repeated game for which the constituent game
is given in Figure 146.1. In this game v1 = v2 = 1. Consider the strategy
proﬁle deﬁned in the proof of Proposition 146.2 to support the sequence
(at) of outcomes in which at = (A, A) for all t that takes the following
form: each player chooses A in every period (the cycle is of length one)
unless the other player deviated in the previous period, in which case he
chooses D for m∗= 2 periods and then reverts to A.
This strategy proﬁle is not a subgame perfect equilibrium of the in-
ﬁnitely repeated game when the players’ preferences are represented by

--- Sayfa 165 ---
8.7 A Perfect Folk Theorem for the Overtaking Criterion
149
either the overtaking criterion or the discounting criterion. After a de-
viation by player 2, each player is supposed to choose D for two periods
before reverting to A. Player 1 would be better oﬀchoosing A than pun-
ishing player 2, since the sequence of payoﬀs (1, 1, 2, 2, . . .) is preferred
under both criteria to the sequence (0, 0, 2, 2, . . .). (The two sequences
are indiﬀerent under the limit of means criterion.) To support the path
in which the outcome is (A, A) in every period as a subgame perfect
equilibrium, player 2 has to punish player 1 if player 1 does not fulﬁll
her obligations to punish player 2. Further, player 2 has to be punished
if he does not punish player 1 for not punishing player 2, and so on.
In the next two sections we use strategies with these features to prove
perfect folk theorems when the players’ preferences are represented by
the overtaking and discounting criteria.
8.7
Punishing the Punisher: A Perfect Folk Theorem for the
Overtaking Criterion
The next result is an analog of Proposition 146.2 for the overtaking
criterion; it shows how strategies diﬀerent from those used to prove
the perfect folk theorem for the limit of means criterion can support
desirable outcomes when the players’ preferences are represented by the
overtaking criterion. For simplicity we construct a strategy proﬁle only
for the case in which the equilibrium path consists of the repetition of a
single (strictly enforceable) outcome.
Proposition 149.1 (Perfect folk theorem for the overtaking criterion)
For any strictly enforceable outcome a∗of G = ⟨N, (Ai), (ui)⟩there is
a subgame perfect equilibrium of the overtaking inﬁnitely repeated game
of G that generates the path (at) in which at = a∗for all t.
Proof. Let M be the maximum of ui(a) over all i ∈N and a ∈A.
Consider the strategy proﬁle in which each player i uses the following
machine.
• Set of states: {Norm} ∪{P(j, t): j ∈N and t is a positive integer}.
(In the state P(j, t) player j deserves to be punished for t periods
more.)
• Initial state: Norm.
• Output function: In Norm choose a∗
i . In P(j, t) choose (p−j)i if
i̸ = j and bi(p−i) if i = j.
• Transitions in response to an outcome a ∈A:

--- Sayfa 166 ---
150
Chapter 8. Repeated Games
◦From Norm stay in Norm unless for some player j we have
a−j = a∗
−j and aj̸ = a∗
j (i.e. j is the only deviant from a∗), in
which case move to P(j, t), where t is the smallest integer such
that M + tvj < (t + 1)uj(a∗).
◦From P(j, t):
· If a−j = p−j or aℓ̸ = (p−j)ℓfor at least two players ℓ(i.e. all
punishers punish or at least two do not do so) then move to
P(j, t −1) if t ≥2 and to Norm if t = 1.
· If a−j̸ = p−j and aℓ= (p−j)ℓif ℓ̸ = j∗(i.e. j∗is the only
punisher who does not punish) then move to P(j∗, T(j, t)),
where T(j, t) is large enough that the sum of j∗’s payoﬀin
state P(j, t) and his payoﬀin the subsequent T(j, t) periods
if he does not deviate is greater than his payoﬀin the de-
viation plus T(j, t)vj∗. (Such a number T(j, t) exists since
after t periods the players were supposed to go back to the
equilibrium outcome a∗and uj∗(a∗) > vj∗.)
Under this strategy proﬁle any attempt by a player to increase his
payoﬀby a unilateral deviation after any history, including one after
which punishment is supposed to occur, is oﬀset by the other players’
subsequent punishment.
Again we leave it to you to verify that the
strategy proﬁle is a subgame perfect equilibrium.
2
8.8
Rewarding Players Who Punish: A Perfect Folk
Theorem for the Discounting Criterion
The strategy proﬁle deﬁned in the proof of Proposition 149.1, in which
players are punished for failing to mete out the punishment that they
are assigned, may fail to be a subgame perfect equilibrium when the
players’ preferences are represented by the discounting criterion. The
reason is as follows. Under the strategy proﬁle a player who fails to
participate in a punishment that was supposed to last, say, t periods is
himself punished for, say, t∗periods, where t∗may be much larger than
t. Further deviations may require even longer punishments, with the
result that the strategies should be designed to carry out punishments
that are unboundedly long. However slight the discounting, there may
thus be some punishment that results in losses that can never be recov-
ered. Consequently, the strategy proﬁle may not be a subgame perfect
equilibrium if the players’ preferences are represented by the discounting
criterion.

--- Sayfa 167 ---
8.8 A Perfect Folk Theorem for the Discounting Criterion
151
To establish an analog to Proposition 149.1 for the case that the play-
ers’ preferences are represented by the discounting criterion, we con-
struct a new strategy. In this strategy players who punish deviants as
the strategy dictates are subsequently rewarded, making it worthwhile
for them to complete their assignments. As in the previous section we
construct a strategy proﬁle only for the case in which the equilibrium
path consists of the repetition of a single (strictly enforceable) outcome.
The result requires a restriction on the set of games that is usually called
full dimensionality.
Proposition 151.1 (Perfect folk theorem for the discounting criterion)
Let a∗be a strictly enforceable outcome of G = ⟨N, (Ai), (ui)⟩. Assume
that there is a collection (a(i))i∈N of strictly enforceable outcomes of G
such that for every player i ∈N we have a∗≻i a(i) and a(j) ≻i a(i)
for all j ∈N \ {i}.
Then there exists δ < 1 such that for all δ >
δ there is a subgame perfect equilibrium of the δ-discounted inﬁnitely
repeated game of G that generates the path (at) in which at = a∗for
all t.
Proof. The strategy proﬁle in which each player uses the following ma-
chine is a subgame perfect equilibrium that supports the outcome a∗
in every period. The machine has three types of states. In state C(0)
the action proﬁle chosen by the players is a∗.
For each j ∈N the
state C(j) is a state of “reconciliation” that is entered after any pun-
ishment of player j is complete; in this state the action proﬁle that is
chosen is a(j).
For each player j and period t between 1 and some
number L that we specify later, the state P(j, t) is one in which there
remain t periods in which player j is supposed to be punished; in this
state every player i other than j takes the action (p−j)i, which holds
j down to his minmax payoﬀ.
If any player i deviates in any state
there is a transition to the state P(i, L) (that is, the other players plan
to punish player i for L periods). If in none of the L periods of pun-
ishment there is a deviation by a single punisher the state changes to
C(i). The set {C(i)} of states serves as a system that punishes play-
ers who misbehave during a punishment phase: if player i does not
punish player j as he is supposed to, then instead of the state be-
coming C(j), in which the outcome is a(j), player i is punished for
L periods, after which the state becomes C(i), in which the outcome is
a(i) ≺i a(j).
To summarize, the machine of player i is deﬁned as follows, where for
convenience we write a(0) = a∗; we specify L later.

--- Sayfa 168 ---
152
Chapter 8. Repeated Games
• Set of states: {C(j): j ∈{0} ∪N} ∪{P(j, t): j ∈N and 1 ≤t ≤L}.
• Initial state: C(0).
• Output function: In C(j) choose (a(j))i. In P(j, t) choose (p−j)i if
i̸ = j and bi(p−i) if i = j.
• Transitions in response to an outcome a ∈A:
◦From C(j) stay in C(j) unless a single player k deviated from
a(j), in which case move to P(k, L).
◦From P(j, t):
· If a single player k̸ = j deviated from p−j then move to
P(k, L).
· Otherwise move to P(j, t −1) if t ≥2 and to C(j) if t = 1.
We now specify the values of δ and L.
As before, let M be the
maximum of ui(a) over all i ∈N and a ∈A.
We choose L and δ
to be large enough that all possible deviations are deterred. To deter a
deviation of any player in any state C(j) we take L large enough that
M −ui(a(j)) < L(ui(a(j)) −vi) for all i ∈N and all j ∈{0} ∪N and
choose δ > δ∗where δ∗is close enough to 1 that for all δ > δ∗we have
M −ui(a(j)) <
L+1
X
k=2
δk−1(ui(a(j)) −vi).
(This condition is suﬃcient since ui(a(j)) > ui(a(i)) for j̸ = i.) If a
player i deviates from P(j, t) for j̸ = i then he obtains at most M
in the period that he deviates followed by L periods of vi < ui(a(i))
and ui(a(i)) subsequently.
If he does not deviate then he obtains
ui(p−j, bj(p−j)) for between 1 and L periods and ui(a(j)) subsequently.
Thus to deter a deviation it is suﬃcient to choose δ > δ∗close enough
to one that for all δ > δ we have
L
X
k=1
δk−1(M −ui(p−j, bj(p−j))) <
∞
X
k=L+1
δk−1(ui(a(j)) −ui(a(i))).
(Such a value of δ exists because of our assumption that ui(a(j)) >
ui(a(i)) if i̸ = j.)
2
? Exercise 152.1 Consider the three-player symmetric inﬁnitely repeated
game in which each player’s preferences are represented by the discount-
ing criterion and the constituent game is ⟨{1, 2, 3}, (Ai), (ui)⟩where
for i = 1, 2, 3 we have Ai = [0, 1] and ui(a1, a2, a3) = a1a2a3 +
(1 −a1)(1 −a2)(1 −a3) for all (a1, a2, a3) ∈A1 × A2 × A3.

--- Sayfa 169 ---
8.9 Subgame Perfect Equilibria Under the Discounting Criterion
153
a. Find the set of enforceable payoﬀs of the constituent game.
b. Show that for any discount factor δ ∈(0, 1) the payoﬀof any player in
any subgame perfect equilibrium of the repeated game is at least 1
4.
c. Reconcile these results with Proposition 151.1.
8.9
The Structure of Subgame Perfect Equilibria Under the
Discounting Criterion
The strategy of each player in the equilibrium constructed in the proof
of Proposition 151.1, which concerns games in which the discount factor
is close to 1, has the special feature that when any player deviates,
the subsequent sequence of action proﬁles depends only on the identity
of the deviant and not on the history that preceded the deviation. In
this section we show that for any common discount factor a proﬁle of
such strategies can be found to support any subgame perfect equilibrium
outcome.
We begin with two lemmas, the ﬁrst of which extends the one deviation
property proved for ﬁnite extensive games in Lemma 98.2 to inﬁnitely
repeated games with discounting.
Lemma 153.1 A strategy proﬁle is a subgame perfect equilibrium of the
δ-discounted inﬁnitely repeated game of G if and only if no player can
gain by deviating in a single period after any history.
? Exercise 153.2
Prove this result.
The next result shows that under our assumptions the set of subgame
perfect equilibrium payoﬀproﬁles of any δ-discounted inﬁnitely repeated
game is closed.
Lemma 153.3 Let (wk)∞
k=1 be a sequence of subgame perfect equilibrium
payoﬀproﬁles of the δ-discounted inﬁnitely repeated game of G that
converges to w∗. Then w∗is a subgame perfect equilibrium payoﬀproﬁle
of this repeated game.
Proof. For each value of k let sk be a subgame perfect equilibrium of
the repeated game that generates the payoﬀproﬁle wk. We construct
a strategy proﬁle s that we show is a subgame perfect equilibrium and
yields the payoﬀproﬁle w∗. We deﬁne, by induction on the length of
the history h, an action proﬁle s(h) of G and an auxiliary inﬁnite sub-
sequence (rk) of the sequence (sk) that has the property that the payoﬀ
proﬁle generated by the members of the subsequence in the subgame
following the history h has a limit and the action proﬁle rk(h) converges

--- Sayfa 170 ---
154
Chapter 8. Repeated Games
to s(h). Assume we have done so for all histories of length T or less,
and consider a history (h, a) of length T + 1, where h is a history of
length T. Let (rk) be the sequence of strategy proﬁles that we chose for
the history h and let s(h) be the action proﬁle we chose for that his-
tory. For a = s(h) select for (h, a) a subsequence (r′k) of (rk) for which
the sequence (r′k(h, a)) converges, and let the action proﬁle to which
r′k(h, a) converges be s(h, a). Obviously the limiting payoﬀproﬁle of
the subsequence that we have chosen is the same as that of (rk). For
a̸ = s(h) choose for (h, a) a subsequence (r′′k) of (r′k) for which the
sequence of payoﬀproﬁles and the sequence (r′′k(h, a)) both converge,
and let the action proﬁle to which r′′k(h, a) converges be s(h, a).
No player i can gain in deviating from si by changing his action after
the history h and inducing some outcome a instead of s(h) since if this
were so then for large enough k he could proﬁtably deviate from rk
i ,
where (rk) is the sequence that we chose for the history (h, a). Further,
the payoﬀproﬁle of s is w∗.
2
By this result the set of subgame perfect equilibrium payoﬀs of any
player i in the repeated game is closed; since it is bounded it has a min-
imum, which we denote m(i). Let (a(i)t) be the outcome of a subgame
perfect equilibrium in which player i’s payoﬀis m(i).
Proposition 154.1 Let (at) be the outcome of a subgame perfect equi-
librium of the δ-discounted inﬁnitely repeated game of G = ⟨N, (Ai),
(ui)⟩. Then the strategy proﬁle in which each player i uses the following
machine is a subgame perfect equilibrium with the same outcome (at).
• Set of states: {Normt: t is a positive integer} ∪{P(j, t): j ∈N and t
is a positive integer}.
• Initial state: Norm1.
• Output function: In state Normt play at
i. In state P(j, t) play a(j)t
i.
• Transition function:
◦In state Normt move to Normt+1 unless exactly one player, say
j, deviated from at, in which case move to P(j, 1).
◦In state P(j, t): Move to P(j, t+1) unless exactly one player, say
j′, deviated from a(j)t, in which case move to P(j′, 1).
Proof.
It is straightforward to verify, using Lemma 153.1, that this
deﬁnes a subgame perfect equilibrium with the required property.
2

--- Sayfa 171 ---
8.10 Finitely Repeated Games
155
8.10
Finitely Repeated Games
8.10.1
Deﬁnition
We now turn to a study of ﬁnitely repeated games. The formal descrip-
tion of a ﬁnitely repeated game is very similar to that of an inﬁnitely
repeated game: for any positive integer T a T-period ﬁnitely repeated
game of the strategic game ⟨N, (Ai), (≿i)⟩is an extensive game with per-
fect information that satisﬁes the conditions in Deﬁnition 137.1 when the
symbol ∞is replaced by T. We restrict attention to the case in which
the preference relation ≿∗
i of each player i in the ﬁnitely repeated game
is represented by the function ΣT
t=1ui(at)/T, where ui is a payoﬀfunc-
tion that represents i’s preferences in the constituent game. We refer to
this game as the T-period repeated game of ⟨N, (Ai), (ui)⟩.
8.10.2
Nash Equilibrium
The intuitive argument that drives the folk theorems for inﬁnitely re-
peated games is that a mutually desirable outcome can be supported by
a stable social arrangement in which a player is deterred from deviating
by the threat that he will be “punished” if he does so. The same ar-
gument applies, with modiﬁcations, to a large class of ﬁnitely repeated
games. The need for modiﬁcation is rooted in the fact that the out-
come in the last period of any Nash equilibrium of any ﬁnitely repeated
game must be a Nash equilibrium of the constituent game, a fact that
casts a shadow over the rest of the game. This shadow is longest in the
special case in which every player’s payoﬀin every Nash equilibrium of
the constituent game is equal to his minmax payoﬀ(as in the Prisoner’s
Dilemma). In this case the intuitive argument behind the folk theorems
fails: the outcome in every period must be a Nash equilibrium of the
constituent game, since if there were a period in which the outcome were
not such an equilibrium then in the last such period some player could
deviate with impunity. The following result formalizes this argument.
Proposition 155.1 If the payoﬀproﬁle in every Nash equilibrium of
the strategic game G is the proﬁle (vi) of minmax payoﬀs in G then
for any value of T the outcome (a1, . . . , aT ) of every Nash equilibrium
of the T-period repeated game of G has the property that at is a Nash
equilibrium of G for all t = 1, . . . , T.
Proof. Let G = ⟨N, (Ai), (ui)⟩and let a = (a1, . . . , aT ) be the outcome
of a Nash equilibrium s of the T-period repeated game of G. Suppose

--- Sayfa 172 ---
156
Chapter 8. Repeated Games
that at is not a Nash equilibrium of G for some period t. Let t ≥1 be
the last period for which at is not a Nash equilibrium of G; suppose that
ui(at
−i, ai) > ui(at). Consider a strategy ˆsi of player i that diﬀers from
si only in that after the history (a1, . . . , at−1) it chooses ai, and after
any longer history h it chooses an action that, given the proﬁle s−i(h) of
actions planned by the other players after the history h, yields at least
i’s minmax payoﬀ. The outcome of (s−i, ˆsi) is a terminal history ˆa that
is identical to a through period t−1; ui(ˆat) > ui(at) and ui(ˆar) ≥ui(ar)
for r ≥t + 1. Thus player i prefers ˆa to a, contradicting our assumption
that s is a Nash equilibrium of the repeated game.
2
This result applies to a very small set of games. If, contrary to the
assumptions of the result, the constituent game has a Nash equilibrium
a∗in which some player’s payoﬀexceeds his minmax payoﬀthen that
player can be punished for deviating in the penultimate period of the
game whenever the outcome in the ﬁnal period is a∗. This punishment
may not be enough to deter the deviation if the diﬀerence between the
player’s minmax payoﬀand his payoﬀin a∗is small. However, there is
always some integer L such that if the outcome is a∗in the last L peri-
ods then any deviation by the player in any period before this sequence
of L plays begins is deterred by the threat to impose upon the player
his minmax payoﬀin the remaining periods. Further, the value of L is
independent of the length T of the game, so that if for each player the
constituent game has a Nash equilibrium in which that player’s payoﬀ
exceeds his minmax payoﬀthen for T large enough any feasible strictly
enforceable payoﬀproﬁle can be approximately achieved as the average
payoﬀproﬁle in a Nash equilibrium of the T-period repeated game. For
simplicity we state and prove this result only for the case in which the
constituent game has a single Nash equilibrium in which every player’s
payoﬀexceeds his minmax payoﬀ; we also restrict attention to equilib-
rium paths that are repetitions of a single outcome of the constituent
game.
Proposition 156.1 (Nash folk theorem for ﬁnitely repeated games) If
G = ⟨N, (Ai), (ui)⟩has a Nash equilibrium ˆa in which the payoﬀof every
player i exceeds his minmax payoﬀvi then for any strictly enforceable
outcome a∗of G and any ϵ > 0 there exists an integer T ∗such that
if T > T ∗the T-period repeated game of G has a Nash equilibrium in
which the payoﬀof each player i is within ϵ of ui(a∗).
Proof. Consider the strategy of player i that is carried out by the fol-
lowing machine. The set of states consists of Normt for t = 1, . . . , T −L

--- Sayfa 173 ---
8.10 Finitely Repeated Games
157
(L is determined later), Nash, and P(j) for each j ∈N. Each player i
chooses a∗
i in Normt for all values of t, ˆai in Nash, and punishes player j
by choosing (p−j)i in P(j). If a single player j deviates in the state
Normt then there is a transition to P(j); otherwise there is a transition
to Normt+1 if t < T −L and to Nash if t = T −L. Once reached, the
states P(j) and Nash are never left. The outcome is that a∗is chosen
in the ﬁrst T −L periods and ˆa is chosen in the last L periods. To
summarize, player i’s machine is the following.
• Set of states: {Normt: 1 ≤t ≤T −L} ∪{P(j): j ∈N} ∪{Nash}.
• Initial state: Norm1.
• Output function: In Normt choose a∗
i , in P(j) choose (p−j)i, and
in Nash choose ˆai.
• Transition function:
◦From Normt move to Normt+1 unless either t = T −L, in which
case move to Nash, or exactly one player, say j, deviated from
a∗, in which case move to P(j).
◦P(j) for any j ∈N and Nash are absorbing.
It remains to specify L. A proﬁtable deviation is possible only in one
of the states Normt. To deter such a deviation we require L to be large
enough that maxai∈Ai ui(a∗
−i, ai) −ui(a∗) ≤L(ui(ˆa) −vi) for all i ∈N.
Finally, in order to obtain a payoﬀproﬁle within ϵ of u(a∗) we choose
T ∗so that |[(T ∗−L)ui(a∗) + Lui(ˆa)]/T ∗−ui(a∗)| < ϵ for all i ∈N. 2
? Exercise 157.1
Extend this result to the case in which the Nash
equilibrium of G in which player i’s payoﬀexceeds vi may depend on i.
8.10.3
Subgame Perfect Equilibrium
In any subgame perfect equilibrium of a ﬁnitely repeated game the out-
come in the last period after any history (not just after the history that
occurs if every player adheres to his strategy) is a Nash equilibrium of
the constituent game. Thus the punishment embedded in the strategies
used to prove the Nash folk theorem (Proposition 156.1) is not consistent
with a subgame perfect equilibrium; indeed, no punishment is possible
if the constituent game has a unique Nash equilibrium payoﬀproﬁle.
Consequently we have the following result.
Proposition 157.2 If the strategic game G has a unique Nash equilib-
rium payoﬀproﬁle then for any value of T the action proﬁle chosen after

--- Sayfa 174 ---
158
Chapter 8. Repeated Games
C
D
E
C
3, 3
0, 4
0, 0
D
4, 0
1, 1
0, 0
E
0, 0
0, 0
1
2, 1
2
Figure 158.1 A modiﬁed Prisoner’s Dilemma.
any history in any subgame perfect equilibrium of the T-period repeated
game of G is a Nash equilibrium of G.
Proof. The outcome in any subgame that starts in period T of any sub-
game perfect equilibrium of the repeated game is a Nash equilibrium of
G. Thus each player’s payoﬀin the last period of the game is indepen-
dent of history. Consequently in any subgame that starts in period T −1
the action proﬁle is a Nash equilibrium of G. An inductive argument
completes the proof.
2
If the constituent game has more than one Nash equilibrium payoﬀ
proﬁle then punishment can be embedded in a subgame perfect equi-
librium strategy proﬁle: the players’ payoﬀs in the ﬁnal periods of the
game can depend on their behavior in previous periods. The following
example illustrates the equilibria that can arise in this case. We argue
that in the T-period repeated game of the strategic game in Figure 158.1
there is a subgame perfect equilibrium for which the outcome is (C, C)
in every period but the last three, in which it is (D, D), so that if T is
large the average payoﬀproﬁle is close to (3, 3). In the equilibrium each
player uses the following strategy: choose C in every period through
period T −3 unless one of the players chose D in some previous period,
in which case choose E in every subsequent period, regardless of the
subsequent outcomes; if the outcome is (C, C) in every period through
T −3 then choose D in the last three periods. A player who deviates to
D in any period up to T −3 after a history in which the outcome was
(C, C) in every previous period gains one unit of payoﬀin that period,
but then subsequently loses at least 1.5 units, since the other player
chooses E in every subsequent period. That is, the threat to play E
subsequently is enough to deter any deviation; this punishment is cred-
ible since (E, E) is a Nash equilibrium of the constituent game. (Note
that the same strategy proﬁle is a subgame perfect equilibrium also if

--- Sayfa 175 ---
8.10 Finitely Repeated Games
159
in the constituent game the payoﬀproﬁle ( 1
2, 1
2) is replaced by (0, 0), in
which case the constituent game diﬀers from the Prisoner’s Dilemma
only in that each player has an additional weakly dominated action.)
This example makes it clear that if there are two Nash equilibria of the
constituent game G, one of which dominates the other, then any payoﬀ
proﬁle in which every player obtains more than his payoﬀin the inferior
Nash equilibrium of G can be achieved as the average payoﬀproﬁle in a
subgame perfect equilibrium of the T-period repeated game of G for T
large enough. In fact a stronger result can be established: any strictly
enforceable payoﬀproﬁle can be achieved as the average payoﬀproﬁle
in a subgame perfect equilibrium of the repeated game. Such a payoﬀ
proﬁle is supported by a strategy proﬁle that, up until the ﬁnal periods
of the game, is akin to that constructed in the proof of the perfect folk
theorem for the discounting criterion (Proposition 151.1).
In the following statement of the result we restrict attention to equi-
librium paths that consist of the repetition of a single outcome of the
constituent game (as we did in the discussion above).
Proposition 159.1 (Perfect folk theorem for ﬁnitely repeated games)
Let a∗be a strictly enforceable outcome of G = ⟨N, (Ai), (ui)⟩. Assume
that (i) for each i ∈N there are two Nash equilibria of G that diﬀer in
the payoﬀof player i and (ii) there is a collection (a(i))i∈N of strictly
enforceable outcomes of G such that for every player i ∈N we have
a∗≻i a(i) and a(j) ≻i a(i) for all j ∈N \{i}. Then for any ϵ > 0 there
exists an integer T ∗such that if T > T ∗the T-period repeated game of
G has a subgame perfect equilibrium in which the payoﬀof each player i
is within ϵ of ui(a∗).
We omit a proof, which may be found in Krishna (1989), for exam-
ple. The basic argument (which draws upon the ideas in the proofs of
Propositions 151.1 and 156.1) is the following. Time is divided into three
stages. The second and third phases have ﬁxed lengths; as T increases,
the length of the ﬁrst phase increases. In the absence of a deviation,
in the ﬁrst two phases the players adhere to a∗and in the third phase
they play according to a sequence of Nash equilibria of G for which each
player’s average payoﬀexceeds his lowest Nash equilibrium payoﬀin G.
Deviations are punished as follows. A deviation by player i that occurs
during the ﬁrst phase is punished by the other players’ using actions that
hold the deviant to his minmax payoﬀfor long enough to wipe out his
gain.
After this punishment is complete, the players switch to a(i).
If player j deviates during the time he was supposed to participate in

--- Sayfa 176 ---
160
Chapter 8. Repeated Games
the punishment of player i then the players switch to a(j), which is
worse for j than a(i). A deviation that occurs during the second phase,
when there is not enough time left to punish the deviator and deter
the punishers from deviating from the punishment, is deterred by each
player’s choosing his action in the Nash equilibrium of G that is worst
for the deviating player. The lengths of the second and third phases are
chosen to be large enough to deter deviations. The lower bounds on the
lengths of the second and third stages are independent of T, so that for
T large enough the average payoﬀproﬁle induced by the strategy proﬁle
is close to u(a∗).
Notes
Early discussions of the notion of a repeated game and the ideas behind
the Nash folk theorem (Section 8.5) appear in Luce and Raiﬀa (1957,
pp. 97–105 (especially p. 102) and Appendix 8), Shubik (1959b, Ch. 10
(especially p. 226)), and Friedman (1971). Perfect folk theorems for the
limit of means criterion were established by Aumann and Shapley and
by Rubinstein in the mid 1970’s; see Aumann and Shapley (1994) and
Rubinstein (1994). The perfect folk theorem for the overtaking criterion
(Proposition 149.1) is due to Rubinstein (1979). The perfect folk theo-
rem for the discounting criterion (Proposition 151.1) is due to Fudenberg
and Maskin (1986); the proof that we give is based on Abreu, Dutta, and
Smith (1994). Section 8.9 is based on Abreu (1988). Proposition 155.1
and the Nash and perfect folk theorems for ﬁnitely repeated games
(Propositions 156.1 and 159.1) are due to Benoˆıt and Krishna (1985,
1987).
(Luce and Raiﬀa (1957, Section 5.5) earlier argued that the
conclusion of Proposition 155.1 holds for the Prisoner’s Dilemma.)
For an early discussion of the diﬀerence between the models of ﬁnitely
and inﬁnitely repeated games (Section 8.2) see Aumann (1959, Sec-
tion 6). For a detailed discussion of preference relations over streams
of outcomes see, for example, Diamond (1965). For a presentation of
some of the folk theorems in the language of machines see Ben-Porath
and Peleg (1987). The example in Figure 158.1 is taken from Benoˆıt
and Krishna (1985); Friedman (1985) contains a similar example. Ex-
ercise 148.1 is due to Fudenberg and Levine (1989). Exercise 152.1 is
taken from Fudenberg and Maskin (1986).
For a discussion of the issues that arise when the players use mixed
strategies see Fudenberg and Maskin (1991). As we have seen, the equi-
libria of a repeated game are not all eﬃcient; further, the outcome

--- Sayfa 177 ---
Notes
161
generated by an equilibrium after a deviation occurs may not be ef-
ﬁcient even if the outcome in the absence of any deviation is eﬃcient.
Pearce (1992, Section 4) discusses models that examine the consequences
of allowing the set of players, after any history, to switch from their cur-
rent strategy proﬁle to one that is Pareto superior (i.e. to “renegotiate”).
If some or all of the players in a repeated game do not know the form
of the constituent game then many new issues arise. Zamir (1992) and
Forges (1992) are surveys of work in this area.
Krishna (1989), Sorin (1990, 1992), Fudenberg (1992), and Pearce
(1992) are surveys that cover the material in this chapter and extensions
of it.

--- Sayfa 179 ---
9
Complexity Considerations in Repeated
Games
In this chapter we investigate the structure of the equilibrium strategies
in an inﬁnitely repeated game in which each player is concerned about
the complexity of his strategy.
9.1
Introduction
In the previous chapter we described representatives of a family of results
known as “folk theorems”, which establish, under a variety of assump-
tions about the players’ preferences, that a very wide range of payoﬀs is
compatible with Nash equilibrium and even subgame perfect equilibrium
in an inﬁnitely repeated game. A folk theorem entails the construction
of some equilibria that generate the required outcomes. It does not de-
mand that these equilibrium strategies be reasonable in any sense; our
judgments about the nature of the equilibrium strategies used in the
proofs are all informal. In this chapter we focus more closely on the
structure of the equilibrium strategies rather than on the set of equi-
librium payoﬀs, using the tool of a machine described in the previous
chapter.
The basic assumption upon which the analysis is predicated is that
players care about the complexity of their strategies. When choosing
a strategy a player is confronted with a tradeoﬀ: on the one hand he
would like his strategy to serve his goals as well as possible, and on
the other hand he would like it to be as simple as possible. There are
many reasons why a player may value simplicity: a more complex plan
of action is more likely to break down; it is more diﬃcult to learn; it
may require time to implement. We do not study these reasons here,
but simply assume that complexity is costly and is under the control of
the decision-maker.

--- Sayfa 180 ---
164
Chapter 9.
Complexity Considerations in Repeated Games
We explore the eﬀect of this assumption on the equilibrium outcomes
of an inﬁnitely repeated game, asking, in particular, how the introduc-
tion of a cost of complexity aﬀects the predictions of the model. Al-
though we limit attention to repeated games, complexity considerations
may be studied in the context of any model of choice. A model that in-
cludes such “procedural” aspects of decision-making is known as a model
of “bounded rationality”.
9.2
Complexity and the Machine Game
In this chapter we restrict attention, for simplicity, to an inﬁnitely re-
peated game in which the players’ preferences are represented by the
discounting criterion: we study the players’ behavior in the two-player
δ-discounted inﬁnitely repeated game of G = ⟨{1, 2}, (Ai), (ui)⟩(see
Section 8.3).
We study this behavior by analyzing a machine game,
in which each player chooses a machine to play the inﬁnitely repeated
game. In this chapter we deﬁne a machine of player i to be a four-tuple
⟨Qi, q0
i , fi, τi⟩in which
• Qi is a set of states
• q0
i ∈Qi is the initial state
• fi: Qi →Ai is the output function
• τi: Qi × Aj →Qi (where j̸ = i) is the transition function.
This deﬁnition diﬀers from that given in the previous chapter (Sec-
tion 8.4) in that a player’s transition function describes how the state
changes in response to the action of the other player, not in response to
an outcome of the strategic game (i.e. a pair of actions). As deﬁned in
the previous chapter, a machine corresponds to the notion of a strategy
in an extensive game, which requires that a player’s action be speciﬁed
for every history, including those that are precluded by the strategy it-
self (see Section 6.4). Here we want a machine to correspond to a plan
of action as it is usually understood, and thus take as an input to a
player’s transition function only the action of the other player.
Every pair (M1, M2) of machines induces a sequence (at(M1, M2))∞
t=1
of outcomes in G and a sequence (qt(M1, M2))∞
t=1 of pairs of states
deﬁned as follows: for i = 1, 2 and t ≥1 we have
• q1
i (M1, M2) = q0
i
• at
i(M1, M2) = fi(qt
i(M1, M2))
• qt+1
i
(M1, M2) = τi(qt
i(M1, M2), at
j(M1, M2)) (where j̸ = i).

--- Sayfa 181 ---
9.2 Complexity and the Machine Game
165
We restrict each player to choose a machine that has a ﬁnite num-
ber of states, and denote the set of all such machines for player i by
Mi. Thus the machine game is a two-player strategic game in which
the set of actions of each player i is Mi.
To complete the descrip-
tion of this game we need to describe the players’ preferences. If we
assume that each player i cares only about his payoﬀUi(M1, M2) =
(1 −δ) P∞
t=1 δt−1ui(at(M1, M2)) in the repeated game then we obtain
the same conclusion as that of the Nash folk theorem (Proposition 145.2),
since the trigger strategies that are used in the proof of this result can be
implemented by ﬁnite machines. If, on the other hand, each player cares
about both his payoﬀin the repeated game and the complexity of his
strategy then, as we shall see, we obtain results that are very diﬀerent
from the folk theorem.
There are many ways of deﬁning the complexity of a machine. We take
a na¨ıve approach: the complexity c(M) of the machine M = ⟨Q, q0, f, τ⟩
is its number of states (i.e. the cardinality of Q). Our analysis is sensi-
tive to the measure of complexity that we use. We view this measure as
an additional piece of information about the strategic situation, which
should reﬂect the relevant diﬃculties of the player in carrying out a strat-
egy. From this perspective the sensitivity of the model to the complexity
measure is desirable: in diﬀerent circumstances diﬀerent measures may
be appropriate.
In the following deﬁnition we assume that each player’s preferences
in a machine game are positively sensitive to his payoﬀin the repeated
game and negatively sensitive to the complexity of his machine.
▶Definition 165.1 A machine game of the δ-discounted inﬁnitely
repeated game of ⟨{1, 2}, (Ai), (ui)⟩is a strategic game ⟨{1, 2}, (Mi),
(≿i)⟩in which for each player i
• Mi is the set of all ﬁnite machines for player i in the inﬁnitely
repeated game
• ≿i is a preference ordering that is increasing in player i’s payoﬀin
the repeated game and decreasing in the complexity of his machine:
(M1, M2) ≻i (M ′
1, M ′
2) whenever either Ui(M1, M2) > Ui(M ′
1, M ′
2)
and c(Mi) = c(M ′
i), or Ui(M1, M2) = Ui(M ′
1, M ′
2) and c(Mi) <
c(M ′
i).
A special case is that in which each player’s preferences are additive:
≿i is represented by Ui(M1, M2) −γc(Mi) for some γ > 0, in which
case γ can be interpreted as the cost of each state of the machine. An-
other special case is that in which the preferences are lexicographic:

--- Sayfa 182 ---
166
Chapter 9.
Complexity Considerations in Repeated Games
C
D
C
3, 3
0, 5
D
5, 0
1, 1
Figure 166.1 The Prisoner’s Dilemma.
C: C
-
D
D: D
?
 
C
?
 
C or D
Figure 166.2 The machine M in Example 166.1 (a machine that carries out the
grim strategy in the repeated Prisoner’s Dilemma).
each player is concerned ﬁrst with his payoﬀin the repeated game and
second with the complexity of his machine. This case is especially inter-
esting since lexicographic preferences are close to the preferences in the
standard model of a repeated game in which complexity considerations
are absent, a model that is the progenitor of the model of a machine
game.
⋄Example 166.1
Suppose that the game G is the Prisoner’s Dilemma,
with the payoﬀs given in Figure 166.1. Consider the two-state machine
M that implements the grim strategy (see Figure 166.2). If the players’
common discount factor δ is large enough then this machine is a best
response to itself in the δ-discounted repeated game of G. Even by using
a more complex machine, player 1 cannot achieve a higher payoﬀin the
repeated game. However, while there is no machine of player 1 that
achieves a higher payoﬀin the repeated game than M does, given that
player 2 uses M, there is a machine of player 1 that achieves the same
payoﬀand is less complex: that in which there is one state, in which C
is chosen. The state D in the machine M is designed to allow a player to
threaten his opponent, but in equilibrium this threat is redundant since
each player always chooses C. Thus either player can drop the state D
without aﬀecting the outcome; hence (M, M) is not a Nash equilibrium
of the machine game.
⋄Example 166.2
For the Prisoner’s Dilemma (as in the previous ex-
ample) let M be the machine in Figure 167.1. The behavior that this
machine generates can be interpreted as beginning with a display of the

--- Sayfa 183 ---
9.2 Complexity and the Machine Game
167
P1: D
6

C

C

C

D
-
D
P2: D
-
D
P3: D
-
D
R: C
?
 
C
Figure 167.1 The machine M in Example 166.2.
ability to punish.
After this display the player begins a cooperative
phase in which he plays C, threatening to punish a deviant by moving
back to the initial state. If both players use the machine M then the se-
quence of payoﬀs in the repeated game is (1, 1, 1) followed by an inﬁnite
sequence of 3’s.
We claim that if the players’ common discount factor δ is large enough
then (M, M) is a Nash equilibrium of the machine game if the players’
preferences do not give too much weight to complexity (as is the case if
their preferences are either lexicographic or additive with a small cost
of complexity). The argument is as follows. To increase his payoﬀin
the repeated game, a player must choose D at least sometimes when his
opponent’s machine is in state R. Any such choice of D causes the other
machine to choose D for at least three periods, so that when δ is close
enough to 1 a player does not gain by such a maneuver (5+δ +δ2 +δ3 <
3 + 3δ + 3δ2 + 3δ3 for δ close enough to 1). Thus for δ large enough a
player cannot increase his payoﬀin the repeated game by any machine,
however complex.
We now show that a player cannot achieve the same payoﬀin the re-
peated game by using a less complex machine.
To achieve the same
payoﬀhe must choose C at least once when the other player’s ma-
chine is in state R.
To do so his machine must have at least four
states. To see this, consider the ﬁrst period, say t, in which qt
j = R
and fi(qt
i) = C.
We must have fi(qt−3
i
) = fi(qt−2
i
) = fi(qt−1
i
) =
D and hence, in particular, qt
i̸ = qt−1
i
.
Further, qt−2
i̸
= qt−1
i
since
τi(qt−2
i
, D) = qt−1
i
while τi(qt−1
i
, D) = qt
i. Similarly, qt−3
i̸
= qt−2
i
and
qt−3
i̸
= qt−1
i
.
In a machine game a player has to solve a problem in which he balances
his desires to achieve a high payoﬀand to employ a simple machine. In
some sense this problem is more complicated than that of ﬁnding an
optimal strategy in the repeated game, since the player must consider
the complexity of his rule of behavior; we do not impose any constraint
on the player’s ability to solve this problem.

--- Sayfa 184 ---
168
Chapter 9.
Complexity Considerations in Repeated Games
9.3
The Structure of the Equilibria of a Machine Game
We now characterize the structure of the Nash equilibria of a machine
game. We ﬁrst generalize an observation we made about Example 166.1:
if the machine Mi of some player i has a state that is not used when M1
and M2 operate then (M1, M2) is not a Nash equilibrium, since the state
can be eliminated without aﬀecting the outcome, and player i prefers
the machine in which the state is eliminated.
Lemma 168.1 If (M ∗
1 , M ∗
2 ) is a Nash equilibrium of a machine game
then for every state qi of the machine M ∗
i there exists a period t such
that qt
i(M ∗
1 , M ∗
2 ) = qi.
Our next result shows that in a Nash equilibrium each machine has
the same number of states and that any Nash equilibrium of a machine
game corresponds to a Nash equilibrium of the repeated game.
Lemma 168.2 If (M ∗
1 , M ∗
2 ) is a Nash equilibrium of a machine game
then
• c(M ∗
1 ) = c(M ∗
2 )
• the pair of strategies in the repeated game associated with (M ∗
1 , M ∗
2 )
is a Nash equilibrium of the repeated game.
Proof. For any strategy sj of player j in the repeated game and any
machine Mi of player i, denote by Uj(Mi, sj) player j’s payoﬀin the
repeated game when he uses sj and player i uses the strategy that cor-
responds to Mi. Since M ∗
i is ﬁnite, player j’s problem maxsj Uj(M ∗
i , sj)
of ﬁnding a best response (ignoring complexity) to the machine M ∗
i in
the repeated game has a solution (see Derman (1970, Theorem 1 on
p. 23)).
Let M ∗
i
= ⟨Qi, q0
i , fi, τi⟩and for each q ∈Qi let Vj(q) =
maxsj Uj(M ∗
i (q), sj), where M ∗
i (q) is the machine that diﬀers from M ∗
i
only in that the initial state is q. For each q ∈Qi let Aj(q) be the set
of solutions to the problem
max
aj∈Aj{uj(fi(q), aj) + δVj(τi(q, aj))}.
Then in the repeated game a strategy of player j is a best response to
the strategy corresponding to M ∗
i if and only if the action it plays when
player i’s machine is in state q is a member of Aj(q). In particular,
choosing a∗
j(q) ∈Aj(q) for each q ∈Qi, there is a best response that is
implemented by the following machine, which has c(M ∗
i ) states.
• The set of states is Qi.

--- Sayfa 185 ---
9.3 The Structure of the Equilibria of a Machine Game
169
M1:
I1: D
I2: D
Ik: D
Q1: C
Q2: C
Q3: C
Q4: D
-
-
-
-
-
-
p p p
6

C

C

C

D

D

C

D
D
D
D
C
C
D
?


C
M2:
I1: D
I2: D
Ik: D
Q1: C
Q2: C
Q3: D
Q4: C
-
-
-
-
-
-
p p p
6

C

C

C

D

D

D

C
D
D
D
C
C
C
?


D
Figure 169.1
Machines M1 for player 1 and M2 for player 2 for the inﬁnitely
repeated Prisoner’s Dilemma. The pair (M1, M2) generates the path in which (D, D)
occurs for k periods and then the sequence (C, C), (C, C), (C, D), (D, C) is repeated
indeﬁnitely.
• The initial state is q0
i .
• The output function fj is deﬁned by fj(q) = a∗
j(q).
• The transition function τj is deﬁned by τj(q, x) = τi(q, fj(q)) for
any x ∈Ai.
Since (M ∗
1 , M ∗
2 ) is a Nash equilibrium of the machine game it follows
that c(M ∗
j ) ≤c(M ∗
i ) and hence c(M ∗
1 ) = c(M ∗
2 ). Further, since player j
can use a machine with c(M ∗
i ) states to achieve a payoﬀin the repeated
game equal to maxsj Uj(M ∗
i , sj) it follows that the pair of strategies that
is executed by (M ∗
1 , M ∗
2 ) is a Nash equilibrium of the repeated game.2
? Exercise 169.1
Give an example of a three-player game for which the
associated machine game has a Nash equilibrium in which the numbers
of states in the players’ machines are not the same.
We now derive a result that has strong implications for the set of
Nash equilibria of a machine game. To obtain some intuition for the
result, consider the pair of machines for the inﬁnitely repeated Prisoner’s
Dilemma that is shown in Figure 169.1. This pair of machines generates
a path in which there are initially k ≥2 periods in which the outcome is
(D, D) (the players display their threats), after which a cycle of length
four in which the outcomes are (C, C), (C, C), (C, D) and (D, C) is
repeated indeﬁnitely.
Any deviation by a player from the prescribed
behavior in the cycle causes his opponent’s machine to go to its initial
state, punishing the deviant for k periods. As you can check, the pair of
machines is a Nash equilibrium of the repeated game when the discount
factor δ is close enough to 1. However, it is not an equilibrium of the

--- Sayfa 186 ---
170
Chapter 9.
Complexity Considerations in Repeated Games
machine game. To see this, consider M1. In each of the three states Q1,
Q2, and Q3 player 1 takes the same action; she uses the fact that there
are three states only to know when to choose the action D. However, she
could obtain this information by observing player 2’s action, as follows.
Suppose that she adopts the machine M ′
1 in which the three states Q1,
Q2, and Q3 are replaced by a single state Q in which she chooses C,
the state remains Q so long as player 2 chooses C, the state switches
to Q4 if player 2 chooses D, and the transition from the state Ik is to
Q if player 2 chooses D. Then (M ′
1, M2) generates the same sequence
of outcomes of the Prisoner’s Dilemma as does (M1, M2); thus in the
machine game player 1 can proﬁtably deviate to M ′
1 since it has fewer
states than M1.
Note that M ′
1 does not monitor player 2’s behavior when player 2’s
machine is in Q1 or Q2: if player 2 chooses D in either of these states
then M ′
1 does not return to the state I1 but moves to Q4. If player 1
uses the machine M ′
1 then player 2 can exploit this feature by choosing
C in state Q3.
The situation is similar to that in which a paratrooper has to jump af-
ter counting to 100 and another paratrooper has to jump after counting
to 101. If the second paratrooper counts then he can monitor the ﬁrst
paratrooper, who is afraid of jumping. However, counting is costly in the
tense environment of the plane, and the second paratrooper can avoid
the burden of counting by simply watching his friend and jumping im-
mediately after her. However, if the second paratrooper does not count
then the ﬁrst paratrooper can exploit this lack of monitoring and . . . not
jump.
In general we can show that if a Nash equilibrium pair of machines
generates outcomes in which one of the players takes the same action in
two diﬀerent periods then the other player also takes the same action
in these two periods (contrary to the behavior of the players in periods
k + 2 and k + 3 of the example that we just discussed).
Lemma 170.1 If (M ∗
1 , M ∗
2 ) is a Nash equilibrium of a machine game
then there is a one-to-one correspondence between the actions of player 1
and player 2 prescribed by M ∗
1 and M ∗
2 : if at
i(M ∗
1 , M ∗
2 ) = as
i(M ∗
1 , M ∗
2 )
for some t̸ = s then at
j(M ∗
1 , M ∗
2 ) = as
j(M ∗
1 , M ∗
2 ).
Proof.
Let M ∗
i
= ⟨Qi, q0
i , fi, τi⟩and for each qi ∈Qi deﬁne Aj(qi)
as in the proof of Lemma 168.2. By the second part of Lemma 168.2
the machine M ∗
j executes a strategy in the repeated game that is a
solution of the problem maxsj Uj(M ∗
i , sj). Therefore fj(qt
i(M ∗
1 , M ∗
2 )) ∈

--- Sayfa 187 ---
9.3 The Structure of the Equilibria of a Machine Game
171
Aj(qt
i(M ∗
1 , M ∗
2 )) for all t.
Thus if there are two periods t and s in
which at
i(M ∗
1 , M ∗
2 )̸ = as
i(M ∗
1 , M ∗
2 ) and at
j(M ∗
1 , M ∗
2 ) = as
j(M ∗
1 , M ∗
2 ) then
there exists an optimal policy a′
j of player j for which a′
j(qt
i(M ∗
1 , M ∗
2 )) =
a′
j(qs
i (M ∗
1 , M ∗
2 )). That is, player j uses the same action whenever player
i’s state is either qt
i(M ∗
1 , M ∗
2 ) or qs
i (M ∗
1 , M ∗
2 ). The following machine
carries out the policy a′
j and has c(M ∗
i ) −1 states, contradicting the
ﬁrst part of Lemma 168.2.
• The set of states is Qi \ {qs
i }.
• The initial state is q0
i if qs
i̸ = q0
i and is qt
i otherwise.
• The output function is deﬁned by fj(q) = a′
j(q).
• The transition function is deﬁned as follows. If τi(q, fj(q)) = qs
i
then τj(q, x) = qt
i for all x ∈Ai; otherwise τj(q, x) = τi(q, fj(q)) for
all x ∈Ai if q̸ = qt
i and
τj(qt
i, ai) =
 τi(qs
i , fj(qs
i ))
if ai = as
i(M ∗
1 , M ∗
2 )
τi(qt
i, fj(qt
i))
otherwise
This completes the proof.
2
This result has a striking implication for the equilibrium outcome
path in any game in which each player has two actions. For example, if
in the repeated Prisoner’s Dilemma two outcomes appear on the equi-
librium path, then this pair of outcomes is either {(C, C), (D, D)} or
{(C, D), (D, C)}.
We now turn to an exploration of the structure of the equilibrium
machines. Since each player’s machine is ﬁnite there is a minimal number
t′ such that for some t > t′ we have qt
i = qt′
i for both i = 1 and i = 2;
let t∗be the minimal such t. The sequence of pairs of states starting in
period t′ consists of cycles of length t∗−t′. We refer to this stage as the
cycling phase; the stage before period t′ is the introductory phase.
We now show that the sets of states that a player uses in the cycling
and introductory phases are disjoint. Further, in the introductory phase
each state is entered only once and each of a player’s states that is used
in the cycling phase appears only once in each cycle. Thus in equilibrium
there is a one-to-one correspondence between the states in the machines
of players 1 and 2, a fact that may be interpreted to mean that in each
period each machine “knows” the state that the other machine is in.
Proposition 171.1 If (M ∗
1 , M ∗
2 ) is an equilibrium of a machine game
then there exists a period t∗and an integer ℓ< t∗such that for
i = 1, 2, the states in the sequence (qt
i(M ∗
1 , M ∗
2 ))t∗−1
t=1
are distinct and

--- Sayfa 188 ---
172
Chapter 9.
Complexity Considerations in Repeated Games
qt
i(M ∗
1 , M ∗
2 ) = qt−ℓ
i
(M ∗
1 , M ∗
2 ) for t ≥t∗.
Proof. Let t∗be the ﬁrst period in which one of the states of either
of the two machines appears for the second time. That is, let t∗be the
minimal time for which there is a player i and a period ti < t∗such that
qt∗
i
= qti
i . We have at∗
i
= ati
i and hence, by Lemma 170.1, at∗
j
= ati
j .
It follows that for all k ≥0 we have qt∗+k
i
= qti+k
i
, and thus, using
Lemma 168.1, c(M ∗
i ) = t∗−1. By the selection of player i all states of
M ∗
j through time t∗−1 are distinct, so that the ﬁrst part of Lemma 168.2
implies that there exists tj < t∗such that qtj
j = qt∗
j . It remains to show
that tj = ti. Assume to the contrary that, say, tj > ti. Then player j
can obtain the same path of outcomes with a machine in which qti
j is
excluded by making a transition from qti−1
j
to qt∗
j , omitting qti
j . But
this contradicts the optimality of M ∗
j .
2
A machine game is a strategic game, so that no considerations of
the type modeled by the notion of subgame perfect equilibrium enter
the analysis.
To incorporate such considerations, we can modify the
solution concept and require that after every history in the repeated
game the pair of machines be an equilibrium of the machine game. Such
a modiﬁcation implies that the play of the machines does not have any
introductory phase: a player who can change his machine in the course
of play wants to omit any introductory states once the cycling phase is
reached. It follows that the set of equilibrium paths is severely restricted
by this modiﬁcation of the solution, as Exercise 173.2 illustrates.
9.4
The Case of Lexicographic Preferences
The results of the previous section signiﬁcantly limit the set of equilibria
of a machine game. To limit the set of equilibria further we need to
specify the tradeoﬀin each player’s preferences between his payoﬀin
the repeated game and the complexity of his machine. In this section
we assume that the players’ preferences are lexicographic (complexity
being a secondary consideration, after the payoﬀin the repeated game);
we restrict attention to the case in which the component game is the
Prisoner’s Dilemma (with payoﬀs as in Figure 166.1).
As we noted above, Lemma 170.1 implies that the set of outcomes
that occurs on an equilibrium path is either a subset of {(C, C), (D, D)}
or a subset of {(C, D), (D, C)}. First consider equilibria of the former
type. Let nC and nD be two nonnegative integers, at least one of which
is positive. Then for δ close enough to 1 it can be shown that there is

--- Sayfa 189 ---
9.4 The Case of Lexicographic Preferences
173
I1: D
I2: D
I3: D
R1: D
R2: C
-
-
-
-
6

C

C

C

C

D
D
D
D
D
?


C
Figure 173.1 A machine M for either player in the inﬁnitely repeated Prisoner’s
Dilemma.
an equilibrium with a cycle of length nC + nD in which (C, C) appears
nC times and (D, D) appears nD times. For the case nC = nD = 1
there is a symmetric equilibrium in which each player uses the machine
M in Figure 173.1. (For preferences that are not lexicographic the pair
(M, M) is an equilibrium only if the players’s preferences do not put too
much weight on complexity.)
? Exercise 173.1
a. Show that if δ is close enough to 1 then the pair of machines (M, M)
is a Nash equilibrium of the machine game.
b. Show that if the machine M is modiﬁed so that in R1 it plays C, in
R2 it plays D, and the transitions in R1 and R2 are reversed, then
the new pair of machines is not a Nash equilibrium of the machine
game.
In these equilibria the introductory phase is nonempty, and this is so for
any equilibrium that supports a path in which (C, C) is an outcome.
? Exercise 173.2
Show that every equilibrium in which (C, C) is one of
the outcomes has an introductory phase.
Now consider equilibria in which every outcome on the equilibrium
path is either (C, D) or (D, C). Some such equilibria are cyclical, with-
out any introductory phase. Precisely, for all positive integers n1 and
n2 satisfying 5ni/(n1 + n2) > 1 for i = 1 and i = 2 there exists δ large
enough that there is an equilibrium of the machine game in which the
cycle consists of n1 plays of (D, C) followed by n2 plays of (C, D), with-
out any introductory phase. (The condition on n1 and n2 ensures that
each player’s average payoﬀexceeds his minmax payoﬀof 1.)
An equilibrium for the case n1 = n2 = 1 is shown in Figure 174.1.
One interpretation of this equilibrium is that the players alternate being
generous towards each other. One can think of (C, D) as the event in
which player 1 gives a gift to player 2 and (D, C) as the event in which
player 2 gives a gift to player 1. In the equilibrium a player does not care
if his opponent does not accept the gift (i.e. chooses C when he could

--- Sayfa 190 ---
174
Chapter 9.
Complexity Considerations in Repeated Games
M1: D: D
C: C
-
6

D
C
?


C or D
M2:
C: C
D: D
-
6

D
C or D
?


C
Figure 174.1
Machines M1 for player 1 and M2 for player 2 for the inﬁnitely
repeated Prisoner’s Dilemma. For δ large enough the pair (M1, M2) is an equilibrium
of the machine game; it generates the path consisting of repetitions of the cycle
((D, C), (C, D)) .
A
B
A
3, 1
1, 3
B
2, 0
2, 0
Figure 174.2 The constituent game for the repeated game in Exercise 174.1.
have chosen D and received the gift), but he insists that his opponent
give him a gift (play C) in periods in which he expects to get a gift: if
he does not receive a gift then he does not move to the state in which
he is generous.
In our analysis so far the constituent game is a strategic game. One
can think also of the case in which the constituent game is an extensive
game. While the analysis of the Nash equilibria of the repeated game is
unchanged (though the set of subgame perfect equilibria may be some-
what diﬀerent), the analysis of the Nash equilibria of the machine game
is quite diﬀerent in this case, as the following exercise demonstrates.
? Exercise 174.1
Consider the inﬁnitely repeated game for which the
constituent game is given in Figure 174.2.
a. Show that the set of paths associated with the Nash equilibria of the
machine game contains only the outcomes (A, A) and (B, B).
b. Show that if the players’ preferences in the machine game are lexi-
cographic, then every ﬁnite sequence containing only the outcomes
(A, A) and (B, B) is the cycling phase of the path associated with

--- Sayfa 191 ---
Notes
175
some Nash equilibrium of the machine game for δ large enough.
c. Notice that the game is the strategic form of an extensive game with
perfect information. Assume that the players engage in the inﬁnitely
repeated game in which the constituent game is this extensive game,
learning at the end of each round the terminal history that occurs.
Show that the machine game for this repeated game has a unique
Nash equilibrium, in which the payoﬀproﬁle is (2, 0) in every period.
[Hint: When player 1 chooses B she cannot monitor whether player 2
plans to choose A or B if she chooses A.]
Notes
This chapter is based on Rubinstein (1986) and Abreu and Rubin-
stein (1988).
The line of argument, and in particular the proof of
Lemma 170.1, is a modiﬁcation due to Piccione (1992) of the proof of
Abreu and Rubinstein (1988). Exercise 174.1 is based on Piccione and
Rubinstein (1993).
In a related strand of literature the complexity of the machines that
a player can employ is taken to be exogenously bounded.
The main
aim of this line of research is to show that equilibrium outcomes that
diﬀer from repetitions of (D, D) can be supported in the ﬁnitely repeated
Prisoner’s Dilemma; see for example Neyman (1985) and Zemel (1989).

--- Sayfa 193 ---
10
Implementation Theory
In this chapter we study the inverse of the problem considered in the
previous chapters: rather than ﬁx a game and look for the set of out-
comes given by some solution concept, we ﬁx a set of outcomes and look
for a game that yields that set of outcomes as equilibria.
10.1
Introduction
The standard procedure in game theory is to formulate a model that
captures a situation and to investigate the set of outcomes that are
consistent with some solution concept. If we ﬁx the structure of the
game and vary the players’ preferences then a solution concept induces
a correspondence from preference proﬁles to the set of outcomes.
Our general approach in this book is that a game is not necessarily a
description of some physical rules that exist: most strategic situations
lack a clear structure, and even when one exists the players’ perceptions
of the situation do not necessarily coincide with an “objective” descrip-
tion of that situation. By contrast, in this chapter a planner is assumed
to set the rules of the interaction, and the individuals, when confronted
with these rules, are assumed to take them literally. The planner can
design the structure of the game but cannot control the players’ prefer-
ences or actions. She starts with a description of the outcomes she wishes
to associate with each possible preference proﬁle and looks for a game
that “implements” this correspondence. On ﬁnding such a game she can
realize her objective by having the individuals play the game, assuming
of course that their behavior conforms with the solution concept.
An assumption underlying this interpretation of an implementation
problem is that the planner can force the individuals to play the game
but cannot enforce the desirable outcome directly, possibly because she

--- Sayfa 194 ---
178
Chapter 10. Implementation Theory
lacks information about some parameters of the situation, information
that is known to all participants but is either too costly or impossible
for her to obtain.
To illustrate the nature of an implementation problem, consider a
planner who wishes to assign an object to one of two individuals. Sup-
pose that she wants to give it to the individual who values it most, but
does not know who this is. Her problem then is to design a game form
with the property that, for every possible pair of valuations, the out-
come according to some solution concept is that the object is given to
the individual who values it most. Whether this is possible depends on
the outcomes that the planner can impose on the individuals. For exam-
ple, she may be allowed only to transfer money from one individual to
another, or she may be allowed also to impose ﬁnes on the individuals.
As in other chapters, we focus on the conceptual aspects of the theory
and present only a sample of the main ideas. We restrict attention to im-
plementation problems in which the individuals are fully informed about
the parameters of the situation; we do not touch upon the large literature
that considers the case in which there is asymmetric information.
10.2
The Implementation Problem
Let N be a set of individuals, C a set of feasible outcomes, and P a set of
preference proﬁles over C. We denote individual i’s preference relation
by ≿i and sometimes denote a preference proﬁle (≿i)i∈N simply by ≿.
A choice rule is a function that assigns a subset of C to each proﬁle
in P.
We refer to a choice rule that is singleton-valued as a choice
function. The objective of the planner is to design a game form whose
outcomes, for each preference proﬁle ≿in P, coincide with f(≿), where
f is the choice rule or the choice function. If f is not singleton-valued
then the planner is concerned that each of the outcomes in f(≿) be pos-
sible. For instance, in the example discussed in the previous section the
planner may wish to assign the object to the individual whose valuation
is highest, without discriminating between the individuals if their valu-
ations are the same. In a more general problem, the planner may wish
to implement the choice rule that associates with each preference proﬁle
the set of eﬃcient outcomes.
The planner controls the rules of the game, formalized as a game
form. A strategic game form with consequences in C is a triple
⟨N, (Ai), g⟩where Ai, for each i ∈N, is the set of actions available to
player i, and g: A →C (where A = ×i∈NAi) is an outcome function that

--- Sayfa 195 ---
10.2 The Implementation Problem
179
associates an outcome with every action proﬁle. A strategic game form
and a preference proﬁle (≿i) induce a strategic game ⟨N, (Ai), (≿′
i)⟩
where ≿′
i is deﬁned by a ≿′
i b if and only if g(a) ≿i g(b) for each
i ∈N. An extensive game form (with perfect information) with
consequences in C is a tuple ⟨N, H, P, g⟩where H is a set of histories,
P: H \Z →N is a player function, and g: Z →C is an outcome function
(Z ⊆H being the set of terminal histories). (Cf. Deﬁnition 89.1 and
the following deﬁnition of an extensive game form.) An extensive game
form and a preference proﬁle induce an extensive game.
The planner operates in an environment that consists of
• a ﬁnite set N of players, with |N| ≥2
• a set C of outcomes
• a set P of preference proﬁles over C
• a set G of (either strategic or extensive) game forms with conse-
quences in C.
When designing a game form to implement her objectives the planner
must take into account how the individuals will play any possible game.
A solution concept for the environment ⟨N, C, P, G⟩is a set-valued
function S with domain G × P. If the members of G are strategic game
forms then S takes values in the set of action proﬁles, while if the mem-
bers of G are extensive game forms then S takes values in the set of
terminal histories.
The following deﬁnition is one formulation of the planner’s problem.
▶Definition 179.1 Let ⟨N, C, P, G⟩be an environment and let S be a
solution concept. The game form G ∈G with outcome function g is said
to S-implement the choice rule f: P →C if for every preference proﬁle
≿∈P we have g(S(G, ≿)) = f(≿). In this case we say the choice rule
f is S-implementable in ⟨N, C, P, G⟩.
In other notions of implementation via a strategic game form the set
of actions of each player is required to be the set of possible prefer-
ence proﬁles (each player must announce a preference relation for every
player) and announcing the true proﬁle is required to be consistent with
the solution concept. One such notion is the following.
▶Definition 179.2 Let ⟨N, C, P, G⟩be an environment in which G is a
set of strategic game forms for which the set of actions of each player i
is a set P of preference proﬁles, and let S be a solution concept. The
strategic game form G = ⟨N, (Ai), g⟩∈G truthfully S-implements
the choice rule f: P →C if for every preference proﬁle ≿∈P we have

--- Sayfa 196 ---
180
Chapter 10. Implementation Theory
• a∗∈S(G, ≿) where a∗
i = ≿for each i ∈N (every player reporting
the true preference proﬁle is a solution of the game)
• g(a∗) ∈f(≿) (the outcome if every player reports the true preference
proﬁle is a member of f(≿)).
In this case we say the choice rule f is truthfully S-implementable
in ⟨N, C, P, G⟩.
This notion of implementation diﬀers from the previously deﬁned no-
tion in three respects. First, and most important, it requires the set
of actions of each player to be the set of preference proﬁles and “truth
telling” to be a solution to every game that may arise. Second, it al-
lows (non truth-telling) solutions of the game to yield outcomes that are
inconsistent with the choice rule. Third, it allows there to be prefer-
ence proﬁles for which not every outcome prescribed by the choice rule
corresponds to a solution of the game.
Our discussion is organized according to the set of game forms under
consideration and the solution concept used. We begin with strategic
game forms and the solution of dominant strategy equilibrium; we then
consider strategic game forms and the solution of Nash equilibrium;
ﬁnally we consider extensive game forms and the solution of subgame
perfect equilibrium.
We establish two types of results, one negative and one positive. The
negative results give conditions under which only degenerate choice rules
can be implemented. The positive ones give conditions under which ev-
ery rule in a very large set can be (at least approximately) implemented.
Results of the latter type are reminiscent of the “folk theorems” of Chap-
ter 8. Like the folk theorems their main interest is not the fact that
“anything is possible”; rather, the structures of the mechanisms that
we use to prove the results are the most interesting aspects of the in-
vestigation. Some features of these structures sometimes correspond to
mechanisms that we observe, giving us insight into the rationale for these
mechanisms.
10.3
Implementation in Dominant Strategies
In this section we assume that the planner is restricted to use a strategic
game form. We assume also that, desiring to avoid strategic complica-
tions, she aims to achieve her goals by designing the game so that the
outcomes that she wishes to implement are consistent with the solution
concept of dominant strategy equilibrium (DSE), deﬁned as follows.

--- Sayfa 197 ---
10.3 Implementation in Dominant Strategies
181
▶Definition 181.1 A dominant strategy equilibrium of a strategic
game ⟨N, (Ai), (≿i)⟩is a proﬁle a∗∈A of actions with the property that
for every player i ∈N we have (a−i, a∗
i ) ≿i (a−i, ai) for all a ∈A.
Thus the action of every player in a dominant strategy equilibrium is
a best response to every collection of actions for the other players, not
just the equilibrium actions of the other players as in a Nash equilibrium
(Deﬁnition 14.1). (Note that the fact that a∗is a dominant strategy
equilibrium does not imply that for any player i the action a∗
i dominates
(even weakly) all the other actions of player i: it could be that for some
ai̸ = a∗
i we have (a−i, a∗
i ) ∼i (a−i, ai) for all a−i ∈A−i.) The notion
of DSE-implementation is strong, since a dominant strategy is optimal
no matter what the other players do. We now see that it is hard to
DSE-implement a choice rule.
We say that a choice rule f: P →C is dictatorial if there is a
player j ∈N such that for any preference proﬁle ≿∈P and outcome
a ∈f(≿) we have a ≿j b for all b ∈C. The following result, known as
the Gibbard–Satterthwaite theorem, is a milestone in implementation
theory.
Proposition 181.2 Let ⟨N, C, P, G⟩be an environment in which C
contains at least three members, P is the set of all possible preference
proﬁles, and G is the set of strategic game forms. Let f: P →C be a
choice rule that is DSE-implementable and satisﬁes the condition
for every a ∈C there exists ≿∈P such that f(≿) = {a}.
(181.3)
Then f is dictatorial.
A proof of this result uses the following result.
Lemma 181.4 (Revelation principle for DSE-implementation) Let ⟨N,
C, P, G⟩be an environment in which G is the set of strategic game forms.
If a choice rule f: P →C is DSE-implementable then
a. f is truthfully DSE-implementable
b. there is a strategic game form G∗= ⟨N, (Ai), g∗⟩∈G in which Ai is
the set of all preference relations (rather than proﬁles) such that for
all ≿∈P the action proﬁle ≿is a dominant strategy equilibrium of
the strategic game ⟨G∗, ≿⟩and g∗(≿) ∈f(≿).
Proof. Let G = ⟨N, (Ai), g⟩be a game form that DSE-implements f. We
ﬁrst prove (b). The set of dominant actions for any player j depends only
on ≿j, so that we can deﬁne aj(≿j) to be a dominant action for player j
in any game ⟨G, (≿−j, ≿j)⟩. Deﬁne the outcome function g∗of G∗by

--- Sayfa 198 ---
182
Chapter 10. Implementation Theory
g∗(≿) = g((ai(≿i))). Since G DSE-implements f we have g∗(≿) ∈f(≿).
Now suppose that there is a preference proﬁle ≿for which ≿j is not
a dominant strategy for player j in G∗.
Then there is a preference
proﬁle ≿′ such that g∗(≿′
−j, ≿′
j) ≻j g∗(≿′
−j, ≿j), so that aj(≿j) is not
a best response in ⟨G, ≿⟩to the collection of actions (ai(≿′
i))i∈N\{j}, a
contradiction. Thus ≿is a dominant strategy equilibrium of ⟨G∗, ≿⟩.
It is immediate that ≿is a dominant strategy for every player in
the game ⟨G′, ≿⟩in which the set of actions of each player is P and
the outcome function is given by g′((≿(i))) = g∗((≿i(i))) (where ≿(i)
is a preference proﬁle for each i ∈N), so that f is truthfully DSE-
implementable, proving (a).
2
From this lemma it follows that if a choice rule cannot be truthfully
DSE-implemented then it cannot be DSE-implemented. Thus for exam-
ple if P contains only strict preference relations then the choice function
that chooses the second ranked outcome in player 1’s preferences is not
DSE-implementable: if it were, then by the lemma a dominant strategy
in G∗for player 1 would be to announce her true preference relation,
but in fact in G∗it is better for her to announce a preference relation
in which her most preferred action is ranked second.
Notice that the game G∗in the lemma does not necessarily DSE-
implement the choice rule since, as we noted earlier, the notion of truth-
ful DSE-implementation does not exclude the possibility that there are
non-truthful dominant strategy proﬁles for which the outcome is dif-
ferent from any given by the choice rule. In brief, it does not follow
from Lemma 181.4 that DSE-implementation is equivalent to truthful
DSE-implementation.
? Exercise 182.1
Show that if the set P of preference proﬁles con-
tains only strict preferences then a choice function is truthfully DSE-
implementable if and only if it is DSE-implementable.
The main part of the proof of the Gibbard–Satterthwaite theorem
(181.2) is the proof of the following result in social choice theory, which
we omit. (The standard proof of this result relies on Arrow’s impossi-
bility theorem (for a proof of which see, for example, Sen (1986)).)
Lemma 182.2 Let C be a set that contains at least three members and
let P be the set of all possible preference proﬁles. If a choice function
f: P →C satisﬁes (181.3) and for every preference proﬁle ≿∈P we
have f(≿−j, ≿j) ≿j f(≿−j, ≿′
j) for every preference relation ≿′
j then f
is dictatorial.

--- Sayfa 199 ---
10.3 Implementation in Dominant Strategies
183
Proof of Proposition 181.2. It follows from the proof of Lemma 181.4
that if the choice rule f is DSE-implementable, say by the game form
G, then any selection g∗of f (i.e. g∗(≿) ∈f(≿) for all ≿∈P) has
the property that for every preference proﬁle ≿we have g∗(≿−j, ≿j) ≿j
g∗(≿−j, ≿′
j) for every preference relation ≿′
j. Since f satisﬁes (181.3),
g∗does also. Consequently by Lemma 182.2 g∗is dictatorial, so that f
is also.
2
? Exercise 183.1
Explain, without making reference to the Gibbard–
Satterthwaite theorem (181.2), why the following choice function is not
DSE-implementable in an environment ⟨N, C, P, G⟩in which C contains
at least three members, P is the set of all possible preference proﬁles,
and G is the set of strategic game forms:
f(≿) =
 a
if for all i ∈N we have a ≻i b for all b̸ = a
a∗
otherwise,
where a∗is an arbitrary member of C.
The Gibbard–Satterthwaite theorem (181.2) applies to an environ-
ment ⟨N, C, P, G⟩in which P is the set of all possible preference proﬁles.
There are environments in which P does not contain all possible prefer-
ence proﬁles for which we can construct game forms that DSE-implement
nondegenerate choice rules. The most well-known such game forms are
those studied by Clarke (1971) and Groves (1973), which are designed
for a situation in which a set of individuals has to decide whether or not
to pursue some costly joint project and, if they decide to go ahead, how
to assign the expenses. Clarke and Groves take the set C of outcomes
to consist of all pairs (x, (mi)) where x = 1 or 0 according to whether
or not the project is undertaken and mi is a payment by individual i.
They impose the condition that the preference relation over C of each
player i be represented by a utility function of the form θix−mi for some
θi ∈R; under this assumption we can identify the set P of preference
proﬁles with the set RN of proﬁles of real numbers. The aim of the game
forms that Clarke and Groves construct is to implement choice functions
f: RN →C with the property that the project is undertaken if and only
if P
i∈N θi ≥γ, where γ ≥0 is the cost of the project.
Not all such choice functions are DSE-implementable. The next propo-
sition and exercise establish that such a choice function f is truthfully
DSE-implementable if and only if for each j ∈N there is a function hj
such that mj(θ) = x(θ)(γ−P
i∈N\{j} θi)+hj(θ−j) for all θ ∈RN, where
f(θ) = (x(θ), m(θ)). In the strategic game form used to implement f,

--- Sayfa 200 ---
184
Chapter 10. Implementation Theory
each player j announces a number aj, interpreted as a declaration of
his value of the project, and the project is executed if and only if the
sum of these declarations is at least γ; the payment made by player j
is equal to hj(a−j) (which is independent of his announcement), plus,
if the project is carried out, an amount equal to the diﬀerence between
the cost of the project and the sum of the announcements made by the
other players. Formally, in this strategic game form ⟨N, (Ai), g⟩we have
Ai = R and g(a) = (x(a), m(a)) for each a ∈A where
 x(a) = 1 if and only if P
i∈N ai ≥γ
mj(a) = x(a)(γ −P
i∈N\{j} ai) + hj(a−j) for each j ∈N.
(184.1)
Such a game form is called a Groves mechanism.
Proposition 184.2 Let ⟨N, C, P, G⟩be an environment in which C =
{(x, m): x ∈{0, 1} and m ∈RN}, P is the set of proﬁles (≿i) in which
each ≿i is represented by a utility function of the form θix −mi for
some θi ∈R, and G is the set of strategic game forms; identify P with
RN. A choice function f: RN →C with f(θ) = (x(θ), m(θ)) for which
• x(θ) = 1 if and only if P
i∈N θi ≥γ
• for each j ∈N there is a function hj such that mj(θ) = x(θ)(γ −
P
i∈N\{j} θi) + hj(θ−j) for all θ ∈RN
is truthfully DSE-implemented by the Groves mechanism ⟨N, (Ai), g⟩
deﬁned in (184.1).
Proof. Let j ∈N and let a−j be an arbitrary vector of actions of the
players other than j.
We argue that when the players other than j
choose a−j, j’s payoﬀwhen he chooses aj = θj is at least as high as his
payoﬀwhen he chooses any other action in Aj. There are three cases.
• If x(a−j, θj) = x(a−j, a′
j) then mj(a−j, a′
j) = mj(a−j, θj) and hence
g(a−j, a′
j) = g(a−j, θj).
• If x(a−j, θj) = 0 and x(a−j, a′
j) = 1 then j’s payoﬀunder (a−j, θj)
is −mj(a−j, θj) = −hj(a−j), while his payoﬀunder (a−j, a′
j) is
θj −mj(a−j, a′
j) = θj −(γ −P
i∈N\{j} ai) −hj(a−j) < −hj(a−j),
since x(a−j, θj) = 0 implies that P
i∈N\{j} ai + θj < γ.
• If x(a−j, θj) = 1 and x(a−j, a′
j) = 0 then j’s payoﬀunder (a−j, θj)
is θj −mj(a−j, θj) = θj −(γ −P
i∈N\{j} ai) −hj(a−j), while
his payoﬀunder (a−j, a′
j) is −mj(a−j, a′
j) = −hj(a−j) ≤θj −
(γ −P
i∈N\{j} ai) −hj(a−j), since x(a−j, θj) = 1 implies that
P
i∈N\{j} ai + θj ≥γ.

--- Sayfa 201 ---
10.4 Nash Implementation
185
Hence a dominant action for each player j is to choose aj = θj.
The outcome g(θ) is equal to f(θ), so that ⟨N, (Ai), g⟩truthfully DSE-
implements f.
2
Note that the Groves mechanism (184.1) does not Nash-implement a
choice function f satisfying the conditions of the proposition: for exam-
ple, if γ = 2, |N| = 2, and θi = 1 for both players then the associated
game has, in addition to (1, 1), ineﬃcient equilibria (e.g. (0, 0)).
? Exercise 185.1 In an environment like that in the previous proposition,
show that if a choice function f with f(θ) = (x(θ), m(θ)) and x(θ) = 1 if
and only if P
i∈N θi ≥γ is truthfully DSE-implementable then for each
j ∈N there is a function hj such that mj(θ) = x(θ)(γ −P
i∈N\{j} θi) −
hj(θ−j) for all θ ∈RN. [You need to show that whenever x(θ−j, θj) = 1
and x(θ−j, θ′
j) = 0 then mj(θ−j, θj) −mj(θ−j, θ′
j) = γ −P
i∈N\{j} θi.]
10.4
Nash Implementation
We now turn to the case in which the planner, as in the previous section,
uses strategic game forms, but assumes that for any game form she
designs and for any preference proﬁle the outcome of the game may be
any of its Nash equilibria.
The ﬁrst result is a version of the revelation principle (see also Lemma
181.4). It shows that any Nash-implementable choice rule is also truth-
fully Nash-implementable: there is a game form in which (i) each player
has to announce a preference proﬁle and (ii) for any preference pro-
ﬁle truth-telling is a Nash equilibrium.
This result serves two pur-
poses. First, it helps to determine the boundaries of the set of Nash-
implementable choice rules. Second, it shows that a simple game can be
used to achieve the objective of a planner who considers truthful Nash
equilibrium to be natural and is not concerned about the outcome so
long as it is in the set given by the choice rule.
Lemma 185.2 (Revelation principle for Nash implementation) Let ⟨N,
C, P, G⟩be an environment in which G is the set of strategic game
forms. If a choice rule is Nash-implementable then it is truthfully Nash-
implementable.
Proof. Let G = ⟨N, (Ai), g⟩be a game form that Nash-implements the
choice rule f: P →C and for each ≿∈P let (ai(≿)) be a Nash equilib-
rium of the game ⟨G, ≿⟩. Deﬁne a new game form G∗= ⟨N, (A∗
i ), g∗⟩
in which A∗
i = P for each i ∈N and g∗(p) = g((ai(pi))) for each

--- Sayfa 202 ---
186
Chapter 10. Implementation Theory
p ∈×i∈NA∗
i . (Note that each pi is a preference proﬁle and p is a proﬁle
of preference proﬁles.) Clearly the proﬁle p∗in which p∗
i = ≿for each
i ∈N is a Nash equilibrium of ⟨G∗, ≿⟩and g∗(p∗) ∈f(≿).
2
Note that it does not follow from this result that in an analysis of
Nash implementation we can restrict attention to games in which each
player announces a preference proﬁle, since the game that truthfully
Nash-implements the choice rule may have non-truthful Nash equilibria
that generate outcomes diﬀerent from that dictated by the choice rule.
Note also that it is essential that the set of actions of each player be
the set of preference proﬁles, not the (smaller) set of preference rela-
tions, as in part (b) of the revelation principle for DSE-implementation
(Lemma 181.4).
We now deﬁne a key condition in the analysis of Nash implementation.
▶Definition 186.1 A choice rule f: P →C is monotonic if whenever
c ∈f(≿) and c /∈f(≿′) there is some player i ∈N and some outcome
b ∈C such that c ≿i b and b ≻′
i c.
That is, in order for an outcome c to be selected by a monotonic choice
rule when the preference proﬁle is ≿but not when it is ≿′ the ranking of
c relative to some other alternative must be worse under ≿′ than under
≿for at least one individual.
An example of a monotonic choice rule f is that in which f(≿) is the
set of weakly Pareto eﬃcient outcomes: f(≿) = {c ∈C: there is no b ∈
C such that b ≻i c for all i ∈N}. Another example is the rule f in
which f(≿) consists of every outcome that is a favorite of at least one
player: f(≿) = {c ∈C: there exists i ∈N such that c ≿i b for all
b ∈C}.
Proposition 186.2 Let ⟨N, C, P, G⟩be an environment in which G is
the set of strategic game forms. If a choice rule is Nash-implementable
then it is monotonic.
Proof. Suppose that the choice rule f: P →C is Nash-implemented by
a game form G = ⟨N, (Ai), g⟩, c ∈f(≿), and c /∈f(≿′). Then there is
an action proﬁle a for which g(a) = c that is a Nash equilibrium of the
game ⟨G, ≿⟩but not of ⟨G, ≿′⟩. That is, there is a player j and action
a′
j ∈Aj such that g(a−j, a′
j) ≻′
j g(a) and g(a) ≿j g(a−j, a′
j). Hence f is
monotonic.
2
⋄Example 186.3 (Solomon’s predicament) The biblical story of the Judg-
ment of Solomon illustrates some of the main ideas of implementation
theory. Each of two women, 1 and 2, claims a baby; each of them knows

--- Sayfa 203 ---
10.4 Nash Implementation
187
who is the true mother, but neither can prove her motherhood. Solomon
tries to educe the truth by threatening to cut the baby in two, relying
on the fact that the false mother prefers this outcome to that in which
the true mother obtains the baby while the true mother prefers to give
the baby away than to see it cut in two. Solomon can give the baby to
either of the mothers or order its execution.
Formally, let a be the outcome in which the baby is given to mother 1,
b that in which the baby is given to mother 2, and d that in which the
baby is cut in two. Two preference proﬁles are possible:
θ (1 is the real mother): a ≻1 b ≻1 d and b ≻2 d ≻2 a
θ′ (2 is the real mother): a ≻′
1 d ≻′
1 b and b ≻′
2 a ≻′
2 d.
Despite Solomon’s alleged wisdom, the choice rule f deﬁned by f(θ) =
{a} and f(θ′) = {b} is not Nash-implementable, since it is not mono-
tonic: a ∈f(θ) and a /∈f(θ′) but there is no outcome y and player i ∈N
such that a ≿i y and y ≻′
i a. (In the biblical story Solomon succeeds in
assigning the baby to the true mother: he gives it to the only woman to
announce that she prefers that it be given to the other woman than be
cut in two. Probably the women did not perceive Solomon’s instructions
as a strategic game form.)
The next result provides suﬃcient conditions for a choice rule to be
Nash-implementable.
▶Definition 187.1 A choice rule f: P →C has no veto power if
c ∈f(≿) whenever for at least |N| −1 players we have c ≿i y for all
y ∈C.
Proposition 187.2 Let ⟨N, C, P, G⟩be an environment in which G is
the set of strategic game forms. If |N| ≥3 then any choice rule that is
monotonic and has no veto power is Nash-implementable.
Proof. Let f: P →C be a monotonic choice rule that has no veto power.
We construct a game form G = ⟨N, (Ai), g⟩that Nash-implements f as
follows. The set of actions Ai of each player i is the set of all triples
(pi, ci, mi), where pi ∈P, ci ∈C, and mi is a nonnegative integer. The
values g((pi, ci, mi)i∈N) of the outcome function are deﬁned as follows.
• If for some j ∈N and some (≿, c, m) with c ∈f(≿) we have
(pi, ci, mi) = (≿, c, m) for all i ∈N \ {j} then
g((pi, ci, mi)) =
 cj
if c ≿j cj
c
if c ≺j cj.

--- Sayfa 204 ---
188
Chapter 10. Implementation Theory
• Otherwise g((pi, ci, mi)) = ck where k is such that mk ≥mj for all
j ∈N (in the case of a tie the identity of k is immaterial).
This game form has three components. First, if all the players agree
about the preference proﬁle ≿and the outcome c ∈f(≿) to be im-
plemented then the outcome is indeed c.
Second, if there is almost
agreement—all players but one agree—then the majority prevails unless
the exceptional player announces an outcome that, under the preference
relation announced by the majority, is not better for him than the out-
come announced by the majority (which persuades the planner that the
preference relation announced for him by the others is incorrect). Third,
if there is signiﬁcant disagreement then the law of the jungle applies: the
player who “shouts loudest” chooses the outcome.
We now show that this game form Nash-implements f. Let c ∈f(≿)
for some ≿∈P. Let ai = (≿, c, 0) for each i ∈N. Then (ai) is a Nash
equilibrium of the game ⟨G, ≿⟩with the outcome c: any deviation by any
player j, say to (≿′, c′, m′), that aﬀects the outcome has the property
that the outcome is c′ ≺j c.
Now let (a∗
i ) be a Nash equilibrium of the game ⟨G, ≿⟩with the
outcome c∗. We show that c∗∈f(≿).
There are three cases to consider. First suppose that a∗
i = (≿′, c∗, m′)
for all i ∈N and c∗∈f(≿′). If c∗/∈f(≿) then the monotonicity of
f implies that there is a player i ∈N and b ∈C such that c∗≿′
i b
and b ≻i c∗. But then the deviation by player i to the action (≿, b, 0)
changes the action proﬁle to one that yields his preferable outcome b.
Hence c∗∈f(≿).
Second suppose that a∗
i = (≿′, c∗, m′) for all i ∈N and c∗/∈f(≿′). If
there is some i ∈N and outcome b ∈C such that b ≻i c∗then player i
can deviate to (≿′, b, m′′) for some m′′ > m′, yielding the preferred
outcome b. Thus c∗is a favorite outcome of every player; since f has no
veto power we have c∗∈f(≿).
Third suppose that a∗
i̸ = a∗
j for some players i and j. We show that
for at least |N|−1 players c∗is a favorite outcome, so that since f has no
veto power we have c∗∈f(≿). Since |N| ≥3 there exists h ∈N \ {i, j};
a∗
h is diﬀerent from either a∗
i or a∗
j, say a∗
h̸ = a∗
i . If there is an outcome
b such that b ≻k c∗for some k ∈N \ {i} then k can proﬁtably deviate
by choosing (≿′, b, m′′) for some m′′ > mℓfor all ℓ̸ = k. Thus for all
k ∈N \ {i} we have c∗≿k b for all b ∈C. (Note that player i, unlike
the other players, may not be able to achieve his favorite outcome by
deviating since all the other players might be in agreement.)
2

--- Sayfa 205 ---
10.4 Nash Implementation
189
The interest of a result of this type, like that of the folk theorems in
Chapter 8, depends on the reasonableness of the game form constructed
in the proof. A natural component of the game form constructed here
is that a complaint against a consensus is accepted only if the suggested
alternative is worse for the complainant under the preference proﬁle
claimed by the other players. A less natural component is the “shouting”
part of the game form, especially since shouting bears no cost here.
The strength of the result depends on the size of the set of choice rules
that are monotonic and have no veto power. If there are at least three
alternatives and P is the set of all preference proﬁles then no mono-
tonic choice function has no veto power. (This follows from Muller and
Satterthwaite (1977, Corollary on p. 417); note that a monotonic choice
function satisﬁes Muller and Satterthwaite’s condition SPA.) Thus the
proposition is of interest only for either a nondegenerate choice rule or
a choice function with a limited domain.
The game form in the proof of the proposition is designed to cover all
possible choice rules. A speciﬁc choice rule may be implemented by a
game form that is much simpler. Two examples follow.
⋄Example 189.1
Suppose that an object is to be assigned to a player in
the set {1, . . . , n}. Assume ﬁrst that for all possible preference proﬁles
there is a single player who prefers to have the object than not to have
it. The choice function that assigns the object to this player can be
implemented by the game form in which the set of actions of each player
is {Yes, No} and the outcome function assigns the object to the player
with the lowest index who announces Yes if there is such a player, and
to player n otherwise. It is easy to check that if player i is the one who
prefers to have the object than not to have it then the only equilibrium
outcome is that i gets the object.
Now assume that in each preference proﬁle there are two (“privileged”)
players who prefer to have the object than to not have it, and that we
want to implement the choice rule that assigns to each preference proﬁle
the two outcomes in which the object is assigned to one of these players.
The game form just described does not work since, for example, for the
proﬁle in which these players are 1 and 2 there is no equilibrium in which
player 2 gets the object. The following game form does implement the
rule. Each player announces a name of a player and a number. If n −1
players announce the same name, say i, then i obtains the object unless
he names a diﬀerent player, say j, in which case j obtains the object.
In any other case the player who names the largest number gets the

--- Sayfa 206 ---
190
Chapter 10. Implementation Theory
Mine
Hers
Mine+
Mine
(0, ϵ, ϵ)
(1, 0, 0)
(2, ϵ, M)
His
(2, 0, 0)
(0, ϵ, ϵ)
(0, 0, 0)
Mine+
(1, M, ϵ)
(0, 0, 0)
(0, 2ϵ, 2ϵ)
Figure 190.1 A game form that implements the choice function considered in Ex-
ample 190.1 in which the legitimate owner obtains the object. (Note that the entries
in the boxes are outcomes, not payoﬀs.)
object. Any action proﬁle in which all players announce the name of
the same privileged player is an equilibrium. Any other action proﬁle is
not an equilibrium, since if at least n −1 players agree on a player who
is not privileged then that player can deviate proﬁtably by announcing
somebody else; if there is no set of n −1 players who agree then there is
at least one privileged player who can deviate proﬁtably by announcing
a larger number than anyone else.
⋄Example 190.1 (Solomon’s predicament)
Consider again Solomon’s
predicament, described in Example 186.3. Assume that the object of
dispute has monetary value to the two players and that Solomon may
assign the object to one of the players, or to neither of them, and may
also impose ﬁnes on them. The set of outcomes is then the set of triples
(x, m1, m2) where either x = 0 (the object is not given to either player)
or x ∈{1, 2} (the object is given to player x) and mi is a ﬁne imposed
on player i.
Player i’s payoﬀif he gets the object is vH −mi if he
is the legitimate owner of the object and vL −mi if he is not, where
vH > vL > 0; it is −mi if he does not get the object. There are two
possible preference proﬁles, ≿in which player 1 is the legitimate owner
and ≿′ in which player 2 is.
King Solomon wishes to implement the choice function f for which
f(≿) = (1, 0, 0) and f(≿′) = (2, 0, 0). This function is monotonic: for
example (1, 0, 0) ≻2 (2, 0, (vH+vL)/2) and (2, 0, (vH+vL)/2) ≻′
2 (1, 0, 0).
Proposition 187.2 does not apply since there are only two players. How-
ever, the following game form (which is simpler than that in the proof
of the proposition) implements f: each player has three actions, and the
outcome function is that given in Figure 190.1, where M = (vH + vL)/2
and ϵ > 0 is small enough. (The action “Mine+” can be interpreted

--- Sayfa 207 ---
10.5 Subgame Perfect Equilibrium Implementation
191
b
r
r
r
r
mine
mine
his
hers
1
2
(2, 0, 0)
(1, 0, 0)
(2, ϵ, M)
Figure 191.1 An extensive game form that implements the choice function given
in Example 190.1. The vector near each terminal history is the outcome associated
with that history.
as an impudent demand for the object, which is penalized if the other
player does not dispute the ownership.)
Given our interest in the structure of the game forms that we con-
struct, the fact that the game form in this example is simple and lacks a
“shouting” component is attractive.
In the next section (see Exam-
ple 191.2) we show that the choice function in the example can be
implemented by an even simpler scheme.
? Exercise 191.1
Consider the case in which there are two individuals.
Let N = {1, 2} and C = {a, b, c}, and suppose that there are two possible
preference proﬁles, ≿with a ≻1 c ≻1 b and c ≻2 b ≻2 a and ≿′ with
c ≻′
1 a ≻′
1 b and b ≻′
2 c ≻′
2 a. Show that the choice function f deﬁned
by f(≿) = a and f(≿′) = b is monotonic but not Nash-implementable.
10.5
Subgame Perfect Equilibrium Implementation
Finally, we turn to the case in which the planner uses extensive game
forms with perfect information and assumes that for any preference pro-
ﬁle the outcome of the game may be any subgame perfect equilibrium
(SPE). To motivate the possibilities for implementing choice rules in this
case, consider Solomon’s quandary once again.
⋄Example 191.2 (Solomon’s predicament) The choice function f given
in the previous example (190.1) is SPE-implemented by the following
game form. First player 1 is asked whether the object is hers. If she
says “no” then the object is given to player 2. If she says “yes” then
player 2 is asked if he is the owner. If he says “no” then the object is
given to player 1, while if he says “yes” then he obtains the object and
must pay a ﬁne of M satisfying vL < M < vH while player 1 has to
pay a small ﬁne ϵ > 0. This game form is illustrated in Figure 191.1 (in
which outcomes, not payoﬀs, are shown near the terminal histories).

--- Sayfa 208 ---
192
Chapter 10. Implementation Theory
If player 1 is the legitimate owner (i.e. the preference proﬁle is ≿) then
the game has a unique subgame perfect equilibrium, in which player 2
chooses “hers” and player 1 chooses “mine”, achieving the desirable
outcome (1, 0, 0).
If player 2 is the real owner then the game has a
unique subgame perfect equilibrium, in which he chooses “mine” and
player 1 chooses “his”, yielding the outcome (2, 0, 0). Thus the game
SPE-implements the choice function given in Example 190.1.
The key idea in the game form described in this example is that
player 2 is confronted with a choice that leads him to choose truth-
fully. If he does so then player 1 is faced with a choice that leads her
to choose truthfully also. The tricks used in the literature to construct
game forms to SPE-implement choice functions in other contexts are in
the same spirit. In the remainder of the chapter we present a result that
demonstrates the richness of the possibilities for SPE-implementation.
Let C∗be a set of deterministic consequences. We study the case in
which the set C of outcomes has the form
C = {(L, m): L is a lottery over C∗and m ∈RN}.
(192.1)
If (L, m) ∈C then we interpret mi as a ﬁne paid by player i. (Note that
mi is not transferred to another player.)
We assume that for each player i there is a payoﬀfunction ui: C∗→R
such that player i’s preference relation over C is represented by the
function EL(ui(c∗)) −mi; we identify a preference proﬁle with a proﬁle
(ui)i∈N of such payoﬀfunctions and denote ELui(c∗) simply by ui(L).
We assume further that P = U N, where U is a ﬁnite set that excludes
the constant function. The set G of game forms that we consider is the
set of extensive game forms with perfect information with consequences
in C.
The notion of implementation that we explore is weaker than those
studied previously: we construct a game form Γ ∈G with the property
that for any preference proﬁle u ∈P the game ⟨Γ, u⟩has a unique
subgame perfect equilibrium in which the desired alternative is realized
with very high probability, though not necessarily with certainty. More
precisely, we say that a choice function f: P →C∗is virtually SPE-
implementable if for any ϵ > 0 there is an extensive game form Γ ∈G
such that for any preference proﬁle u ∈P the extensive game ⟨Γ, u⟩
has a unique subgame perfect equilibrium, in which the outcome is f(u)
with probability at least 1 −ϵ.

--- Sayfa 209 ---
10.5 Subgame Perfect Equilibrium Implementation
193
Proposition 193.1 Let C∗be a set of deterministic consequences. Let
⟨N, C, P, G⟩be an environment in which |N| ≥3, C is given by (192.1),
P = U N, where U is the (ﬁnite) set of payoﬀfunctions described above,
and G is the set of extensive game forms with perfect information and
consequences in C. Then every choice function f: P →C∗is virtually
SPE-implementable.
Proof.
First note that since for no payoﬀfunction in U are all out-
comes indiﬀerent, for any pair (v, v′) of distinct payoﬀfunctions there
is a pair (L(v, v′), L′(v, v′)) of lotteries over C∗such that v(L(v, v′)) >
v(L′(v, v′)) and v′(L′(v, v′)) > v′(L(v, v′)). (A player’s choice between
the lotteries L(v, v′) and L′(v, v′) thus indicates whether his payoﬀfunc-
tion is v or v′.) For any triple (u, v, v′) of payoﬀfunctions let L∗(u, v, v′)
be the member of the set {L(v, v′), L′(v, v′)} that is preferred by u.
Then for any pair (v, v′) of payoﬀfunctions we have u(L∗(u, v, v′)) =
max{u(L(v, v′)), u(L′(v, v′))}, so that u(L∗(u, v, v′)) ≥u(L∗(u′, v, v′))
for any payoﬀfunction u′. Further, u(L∗(u, u, u′)) > u(L∗(u′, u, u′)).
Now suppose that for some pair (v, v′) a player who announces the
payoﬀfunction u is given the lottery L∗(u, v, v′). Let B be the minimum,
over all pairs (u, u′) of distinct payoﬀfunctions, of the average gain, over
all pairs (v, v′), of any player with payoﬀfunction u from announcing u
rather than u′:
B =
min
(u,u′)∈W

1
M
X
(v,v′)∈W
{u(L∗(u, v, v′)) −u(L∗(u′, v, v′))}

,
where W is the set of all pairs of distinct payoﬀfunctions and M =
|U|(|U| −1) (the number of members of W). By the argument above we
have B > 0.
For every ϵ > 0 we construct a game form that has K + 1 stages
(K being deﬁned below).
Each stage consists of |N| substages.
Let
N = {1, . . . , n}.
In substage i of each of the ﬁrst K stages player i
announces a preference proﬁle (a member of U N); in substage i of stage
K + 1 player i announces a payoﬀfunction (a member of U).
For any terminal history the outcome, which consists of a lottery and
a proﬁle of ﬁnes, is deﬁned as follows. Each stage k for k = 1, . . . , K
contributes to the lottery a consequence with probability (1−ϵ)/K. If in
stage k all the players except possibly one announce the same preference
proﬁle, say (ui), then this consequence is f((ui)); otherwise it is some
ﬁxed consequence c∗∈C∗.

--- Sayfa 210 ---
194
Chapter 10. Implementation Theory
Each substage of the last stage contributes the probability ϵ/|N| to the
lottery. This probability is split into M equal parts, each corresponding
to a pair of payoﬀfunctions. The probability ϵ/|N|M that corresponds
to (i, (v, v′)) ∈N × W is assigned to the lottery L∗(u′
i, v, v′), where u′
i
is the payoﬀfunction that player i announces in stage K + 1.
As for the ﬁnes, a player has to pay δ > 0 if he is the last player in the
ﬁrst K stages to announce a preference proﬁle diﬀerent from the proﬁle
of announcements in stage K + 1. In addition, a player has to pay a
ﬁne of δ/K for each stage in the ﬁrst K in which all the other players
announce the same proﬁle, diﬀerent from the one that he announces.
(In order for the odd player out to be well-deﬁned we need at least three
players.)
Finally, we choose δ so that ϵB/|N| > δ and K so that (1 −ϵ)D/K +
δ/K < δ, where
D = max
v,c,c′{v(c) −v(c′): v ∈U, c ∈C∗, and c′ ∈C∗}.
We now show that for any (ui) ∈U N the game ⟨Γ, (ui)⟩, where Γ is the
game form described above, has a unique subgame perfect equilibrium,
in which the outcome is f((ui)) with probability at least 1 −ϵ.
We
ﬁrst show that after every history in every subgame perfect equilibrium
each player i announces his true payoﬀfunction in stage K + 1.
If
player i announces a false payoﬀfunction at this stage then, relative to
the case in which he announces his true payoﬀfunction, there are two
changes in the outcome. First, the lotteries contributed to the outcome
by substage i of stage K + 1 change, reducing player i’s expected payoﬀ
by at least ϵB/|N|. Second, player i may avoid a ﬁne of δ if by changing
his announcement in the last period he avoids being the last player to
announce a preference proﬁle in one of the ﬁrst K stages that is diﬀerent
from the proﬁle of announcements in the ﬁnal stage. Since ϵB/|N| > δ
the net eﬀect is that the best action for any player is to announce his
true payoﬀfunction in the ﬁnal period, whatever history precedes his
decision.
We now show that in any subgame perfect equilibrium all players
announce the true preference proﬁle (ui) in each of the ﬁrst K stages.
Suppose to the contrary that some player does not do so; let player i
in stage k be the last player not to do so.
We argue that player i
can increase his payoﬀby deviating and announcing the true preference
proﬁle (ui). There are two cases to consider.

--- Sayfa 211 ---
Notes
195
• If no other player announces a proﬁle diﬀerent from (ui) in stage k
then player i’s deviation has no eﬀect on the outcome; it reduces the
ﬁne he has to pay by δ/K, since he no longer announces a proﬁle
diﬀerent from that announced by the other players, and may further
reduce his ﬁne by δ (if he is no longer the last player to announce
a proﬁle diﬀerent from (ui)).
• If some other player announces a proﬁle diﬀerent from (ui) in stage k
then the component of the ﬁnal lottery attributable to stage k may
change, reducing player i’s payoﬀby at most (1 −ϵ)D/K. In ad-
dition he may become the odd player out at stage k and be ﬁned
δ/K. At the same time he avoids the ﬁne δ (since he is deﬁnitely
not the last player to announce a proﬁle diﬀerent from (ui)). Since
(1 −ϵ)D/K + δ/K < δ, the net eﬀect is that the deviation is
proﬁtable.
We conclude that in every subgame perfect equilibrium every player,
after every history at which he has to announce a preference proﬁle,
announces the true preference proﬁle, so that the outcome of the game
assigns probability of at least 1 −ϵ to f((ui)).
2
The game form constructed in this proof is based on two ideas. Stage
K +1 is designed so that it is dominant for every player to announce his
true payoﬀfunction. In the earlier stages a player may wish to announce
a preference proﬁle diﬀerent from the true one, since by doing so he may
aﬀect the ﬁnal outcome to his advantage; but no player wants to be the
last to do so, with the consequence that no player ever does so.
Notes
The Gibbard–Satterthwaite theorem (181.2) appears in Gibbard (1973)
and Satterthwaite (1975). For alternative proofs see Schmeidler and Son-
nenschein (1978) and Barber´a (1983). Proposition 184.2 is due to Groves
and Loeb (1975); the result in Exercise 185.1 is due to Green and Laf-
font (1977). Maskin ﬁrst proved Proposition 187.2 (see Maskin (1985));
the proof that we give is due to Repullo (1987).
The discussion in
Section 10.5 is based on Abreu and Matsushima (1992), who prove a
result equivalent to Proposition 193.1 for implementation via iterated
elimination of strictly dominated strategies in strategic game forms; the
variant that we present is that of Glazer and Perry (1996). The analy-
sis of Solomon’s predicament in Examples 186.3, 190.1, and 191.2 ﬁrst
appeared in Glazer and Ma (1989).

--- Sayfa 212 ---
196
Chapter 10. Implementation Theory
For a characterization of choice functions that are SPE-implementable
see Moore and Repullo (1988).
In writing this chapter we beneﬁted from Moore (1992) (a survey of
the literature) and from unpublished lecture notes by Repullo.

--- Sayfa 213 ---
III
Extensive Games with Imperfect
Information
The model of an extensive game with imperfect information allows a
player, when taking an action, to have only partial information about
the actions taken previously. The model is rich; it encompasses not only
situations in which a player is imperfectly informed about the other
players’ previous actions, but also, for example, situations in which dur-
ing the course of the game a player forgets an action that he previously
took and situations in which a player is uncertain about whether another
player has acted.
We devote Chapter 11 to an exploration of the concept of an extensive
game with imperfect information, leaving until Chapter 12 a study of the
main solution concept for such games, namely the notion of sequential
equilibrium.

--- Sayfa 215 ---
11
Extensive Games with Imperfect
Information
In this chapter we explore the concept of an extensive game with im-
perfect information, in which each player, when taking an action, may
have only partial information about the actions taken previously.
11.1
Extensive Games with Imperfect Information
11.1.1
Introduction
In each of the models we studied previously there is a sense in which
the players are not perfectly informed when making their choices. In
a strategic game a player, when taking an action, does not know the
actions that the other players take. In a Bayesian game a player knows
neither the other players’ private information nor the actions that they
take. In an extensive game with perfect information a player does not
know the future moves planned by the other players.
The model that we study here—an extensive game with imperfect
information—diﬀers in that the players may in addition be imperfectly
informed about some (or all) of the choices that have already been made.
We analyze the model by assuming, as we did previously, that each
player, when choosing an action, forms an expectation about the un-
knowns. However, these expectations diﬀer from those we considered
before. Unlike those in strategic games, they are not derived solely from
the players’ equilibrium behavior, since the players may face situations
inconsistent with that behavior. Unlike those in Bayesian games, they
are not deduced solely from the equilibrium behavior and the exogenous
information about the moves of chance. Finally, unlike those in exten-
sive games with perfect information, they relate not only to the other
players’ future behavior but also to events that happened in the past.

--- Sayfa 216 ---
200
Chapter 11.
Extensive Games with Imperfect Information
11.1.2
Deﬁnitions
The following deﬁnition generalizes that of an extensive game with per-
fect information (89.1) to allow players to be imperfectly informed about
past events when taking actions.
It also allows for exogenous uncer-
tainty: some moves may be made by “chance” (see Section 6.3.1). It
does not incorporate the other generalization of the deﬁnition of an ex-
tensive game with perfect information that we discussed in Section 6.3,
in which more than one player may move after any history (see however
the discussion after Example 202.1).
▶Definition 200.1 An extensive game has the following components.
• A ﬁnite set N (the set of players).
• A set H of sequences (ﬁnite or inﬁnite) that satisﬁes the following
three properties.
◦The empty sequence ∅is a member of H.
◦If (ak)k=1,...,K ∈H (where K may be inﬁnite) and L < K then
(ak)k=1,...,L ∈H.
◦If an inﬁnite sequence (ak)∞
k=1 satisﬁes (ak)k=1,...,L ∈H for every
positive integer L then (ak)∞
k=1 ∈H.
(Each member of H is a history; each component of a history is an
action taken by a player.) A history (ak)k=1,...,K ∈H is terminal
if it is inﬁnite or if there is no aK+1 such that (ak)k=1,...,K+1 ∈H.
The set of actions available after the nonterminal history h is denoted
A(h) = {a: (h, a) ∈H} and the set of terminal histories is denoted Z.
• A function P that assigns to each nonterminal history (each member
of H \ Z) a member of N ∪{c}. (P is the player function, P(h)
being the player who takes an action after the history h. If P(h) = c
then chance determines the action taken after the history h.)
• A function fc that associates with every history h for which P(h) = c
a probability measure fc(·|h) on A(h), where each such probability
measure is independent of every other such measure. (fc(a|h) is the
probability that a occurs after the history h.)
• For each player i ∈N a partition Ii of {h ∈H: P(h) = i} with
the property that A(h) = A(h′) whenever h and h′ are in the same
member of the partition. For Ii ∈Ii we denote by A(Ii) the set A(h)
and by P(Ii) the player P(h) for any h ∈Ii. (Ii is the information
partition of player i; a set Ii ∈Ii is an information set of player i.)

--- Sayfa 217 ---
11.1 Extensive Games with Imperfect Information
201
• For each player i ∈N a preference relation ≿i on lotteries over Z
(the preference relation of player i) that can be represented as the
expected value of a payoﬀfunction deﬁned on Z.
We refer to a tuple ⟨N, H, P, fc, (Ii)i∈N⟩(which excludes the players’
preferences) whose components satisfy the conditions in the deﬁnition
as an extensive game form.
Relative to the deﬁnition of an extensive game with perfect infor-
mation and chance moves (see Section 6.3.1), the new element is the
collection (Ii)i∈N of information partitions. We interpret the histories
in any given member of Ii to be indistinguishable to player i. Thus the
game models a situation in which after any history h ∈Ii ∈Ii player i is
informed that some history in Ii has occurred but is not informed that
the history h has occurred. The condition that A(h) = A(h′) when-
ever h and h′ are in the same member of Ii captures the idea that if
A(h)̸ = A(h′) then player i could deduce, when he faced A(h), that the
history was not h′, contrary to our interpretation of Ii. (Note that Def-
inition 200.1, unlike the standard deﬁnition of an extensive game, does
not rule out the possibility that an information set contains two histo-
ries h and h′ where h′ = (h, a1, . . . , aK) for some sequence of actions
(a1, . . . , aK).)
Each player’s information partition is a primitive of the game; a player
can distinguish between histories in diﬀerent members of his partition
without having to make any inferences from the actions that he observes.
As the game is played, a participant may be able, given his conjectures
about the other players’ behavior, to make inferences that reﬁne this
information.
Suppose, for example, that the ﬁrst move of a game is
made by player 1, who chooses between a and b, and the second move is
made by player 2, one of whose information sets is {a, b}. We interpret
this game to model a situation in which player 2 does not observe the
choice of player 1: when making his move, he is not informed whether
player 1 chose a or b. Nevertheless, when making his move player 2 may
infer (from his knowledge of a steady state or from introspection about
player 1) that the history is a, even though he does not observe the
action chosen by player 1.
Each player’s preference relation is deﬁned over lotteries on the set
of terminal histories, since even if the players’ actions are deterministic
the chance moves that the model allows induce such lotteries.
Note that Deﬁnition 200.1 extends our deﬁnition of an extensive game
with perfect information and chance moves (see Section 6.3.1) in the

--- Sayfa 218 ---
202
Chapter 11.
Extensive Games with Imperfect Information
b1
r
2, 1
r
L
R





HHHHH
r





HHHHH
2
A
B
r
   @
@@
r
0, 0
1, 2
r
ℓ
r
r
   @
@@
r
1, 2
0, 0
r
ℓ
r
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
1
Figure 202.1 An extensive game with imperfect information.
sense that the extensive game with perfect information and chance moves
⟨N, H, P, fc, (≿i)i∈N⟩may naturally be identiﬁed with the extensive
game ⟨N, H, P, fc, (Ii)i∈N, (≿i)i∈N⟩in which every member of the in-
formation partition of every player is a singleton.
⋄Example 202.1
Figure 202.1 shows an example of an extensive game
with imperfect information. In this game player 1 moves ﬁrst, choosing
between L and R. If she chooses R, the game ends. If she chooses L,
player 2 moves; he is informed that player 1 chose L, and chooses A
or B. In either case it is player 1’s turn to move, and when doing so
she is not informed whether player 2 chose A or B, a fact indicated in
the ﬁgure by the dotted line connecting the ends of the histories after
which player 1 has to move for the second time, choosing an action from
the set {ℓ, r}.
Formally, we have P(∅) = P(L, A) = P(L, B) = 1,
P(L) = 2, I1 = {{∅}, {(L, A), (L, B)}}, and I2 = {{L}} (player 1 has
two information sets and player 2 has one). The numbers under the
terminal histories are the players’ payoﬀs. (The ﬁrst number in each
pair is player 1’s payoﬀand the second is player 2’s payoﬀ.)
In Deﬁnition 200.1 we do not allow more than one player to move after
any history. However, there is a sense in which an extensive game as
we have deﬁned it can model such a situation. To see this, consider the
example above. After player 1 chooses L, the situation in which players 1
and 2 are involved is essentially the same as that captured by a game
with perfect information in which they choose actions simultaneously.
(This is the reason that in much of the literature the deﬁnition of an
extensive game with perfect information does not include the possibility
of simultaneous moves.)
A player’s strategy in an extensive game with perfect information
is a function that speciﬁes an action for every history after which the
player chooses an action (Deﬁnition 92.1). The following deﬁnition is

--- Sayfa 219 ---
11.1 Extensive Games with Imperfect Information
203
b
r
r
  @@
r
   @@
r
r
p p p pp
1
bc





PPPP
P
r
   @@
r
r
1
r
   @@
r
r
1
r
   @@
r
r
r
   @@
r
r
p p p p p p p p p
1
b1
   @
@@
r
   @@
r
r
r
   @@
r
r
p p p p p p p p p
1
Figure 203.1 Three one-player extensive games with imperfect recall.
an extension to a general extensive game; since we later consider the
possibility that the players may randomize, we add the qualiﬁer “pure”.
▶Definition 203.1 A pure strategy of player i ∈N in an extensive
game ⟨N, H, P, fc, (Ii), (≿i)⟩is a function that assigns an action in A(Ii)
to each information set Ii ∈Ii .
As for an extensive game with perfect information, we can associate
with any extensive game a strategic game; see the deﬁnitions of the
strategic form (94.1) and reduced strategic form (95.1). (Note that the
outcome of a strategy proﬁle here may be a lottery over the terminal
histories, since we allow moves of chance.)
11.1.3
Perfect and Imperfect Recall
The model of an extensive game is capable of capturing a wide range of
informational environments. In particular, it can capture situations in
which at some points players forget what they knew earlier. We refer
to games in which at every point every player remembers whatever he
knew in the past as games with perfect recall.
To deﬁne such games
formally, let ⟨N, H, P, fc, (Ii)⟩be an extensive game form and let Xi(h)
be the record of player i’s experience along the history h: Xi(h) is the
sequence consisting of the information sets that the player encounters
in the history h and the actions that he takes at them, in the order
that these events occur.
In the game in Figure 202.1, for example,
X1((L, A)) = (∅, L, {(L, A), (L, B)}).
? Exercise 203.2
Give a formal deﬁnition of Xi(h).
▶Definition 203.3 An extensive game form has perfect recall if for
each player i we have Xi(h) = Xi(h′) whenever the histories h and h′
are in the same information set of player i.
The game in Figure 202.1 has perfect recall, while the three (one-
player) game forms in Figure 203.1 do not. In the left-hand game a
player does not know if she has made a choice or not: when choosing an

--- Sayfa 220 ---
204
Chapter 11.
Extensive Games with Imperfect Information
b1
r
o3r
  @@
r
   @@
r
o1
o2r
1
b1
r
o1
o3r




HHHH
r
o2
Figure 204.1 Two distinct one-player extensive games that appear to model the
same situation.
action she does not know whether she is at the beginning of the game or
has already chosen her left-hand action. In the middle game the player
forgets something that she previously knew: when making a choice at
her last information set she is not informed of the action of chance,
though she was so informed when she made her previous choice. In the
right-hand game she does not remember the action she took in the past.
The literature on games with imperfect recall is very small. An ex-
ample of a game theoretic treatment of a situation with imperfect recall
is that of the machine games in Chapter 9. In the underlying repeated
game that a machine game models, each player, when taking an action,
is not informed of past events, including his own previous actions. The
size of his memory depends on the structure of his machine. More mem-
ory requires more states; since states are costly, even in equilibrium a
player still may imperfectly recall his own past actions.
11.2
Principles for the Equivalence of Extensive Games
Some extensive games appear to represent the same strategic situation as
others. Consider, for example, the two one-player games in Figure 204.1.
(In these games, as in the others in this section, we associate letters
with terminal histories. If two terminal histories are assigned the same
letter then the two histories represent the same event; in particular, all
the players are indiﬀerent between them.) Formally, the two games are
diﬀerent: in the left-hand game player 1 makes two decisions, while in the
right-hand game she makes only one. However, principles of rationality
suggest that the two games model the same situation.
We now give further examples of pairs of games that arguably repre-
sent the same situation and discuss some principles that generalize these
examples. We do not argue that these principles should be taken as ax-
ioms; we simply believe that studying them illuminates the meaning of
an extensive game, especially one with imperfect information.

--- Sayfa 221 ---
11.2 Principles for the Equivalence of Extensive Games
205
b1
ℓ







HHHHHHH
b
r




HHHHr




HHHH
2
r
ℓ
r
   @@
r
o1
o2r
1
A
B
r
   @@
r
o3
o4r
ℓ′
r′
r
   @@
r
o5
o6r
r′
ℓ′
p p p p p p p p p p p p
1
Figure 205.1 The game Γ1.
b1
ℓ







HHHHHHH
b
r




HHHHr




HHHH
2
r
ℓ
r
   @@
r
o1
o2r
r
   @@
r
o3
o4r
1
r
   @@
r
o5
o6r
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
Figure 205.2 The game Γ2, equivalent to Γ1 according to the inﬂation–deﬂation
principle.
The four principles that we consider all preserve the reduced strategic
form of the game: if one extensive game is equivalent to another accord-
ing to the principles then the reduced strategic forms of the two games
are the same. Thus a solution concept that does not depend solely on the
reduced strategic form may assign diﬀerent outcomes to games that are
equivalent according to the principles; to justify such a solution concept
one has to argue that at least one of the principles is inappropriate.
Let Γ1 be the game in Figure 205.1. The principles that we discuss
claim that this game is equivalent to four other extensive games, as
follows.
Inﬂation–Deﬂation
According to this principle Γ1 is equivalent to the
game Γ2 in Figure 205.2. In Γ2 player 1 has imperfect recall: at her
second information set she is not informed whether she chose r or ℓat
the start of the game. That is, the three histories ℓ, (r, ℓ), and (r, r)
are all in the same information set in Γ2, while in Γ1 the history ℓlies
in one information set and the histories (r, ℓ) and (r, r) lie in another.
The interpretation that we have given to a game like Γ2 is that player 1,
when acting at the end of the game, has forgotten the action she took
at the beginning of the game. However, another interpretation of an
information set is that it represents the information about history that
is inherent in the structure of the game, information that may be reﬁned

--- Sayfa 222 ---
206
Chapter 11.
Extensive Games with Imperfect Information
b1
ℓ
r







XXXXXXX
r




HHHH
r




HHHH
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
2
r
   @@
r
o1
o2r
r
   @@
r
o1
o2r
r
   @@
r
o3
o4r
r
   @@
r
o5
o6r
p p p p p p p p p p p p
1
p p p p p p p p p p p p
1
Figure 206.1 The game Γ3, equivalent to Γ1 according to the principle of addition
of a superﬂuous move.
by inferences that the players may make. Under this interpretation a
player always remembers what he knew and did in the past and may
obtain information by making inferences from this knowledge. Indeed,
the argument that Γ1 and Γ2 are equivalent relies on the assumption
that player 1 is capable of making such inferences. The fact that she is
informed whether the history was ℓor a member of {(r, ℓ), (r, r)} is irrel-
evant to her strategic calculations, according to the argument, since in
any case she can infer this information from her knowledge of her action
at the start of the game. Under this interpretation it is inappropriate to
refer to a game like that in Figure 205.2 as having “imperfect recall”: the
information sets reﬂect imperfections in the information inherent in the
situation that can be overridden by the players’ abilities to remember
their past experience.
Formally, according to the inﬂation–deﬂation principle the extensive
game Γ is equivalent to the extensive game Γ′ if Γ′ diﬀers from Γ only in
that there is an information set of some player i in Γ that is a union of
information sets of player i in Γ′ with the following property: any two
histories h and h′ in diﬀerent members of the union have subhistories
that are in the same information set of player i and player i’s action
at this information set is diﬀerent in h and h′. (To relate this to the
examples above, let Γ = Γ2, Γ′ = Γ1, and i = 1.)
Addition of a Superﬂuous Move
According to this principle Γ1 is equiv-
alent to the game Γ3 in Figure 206.1. The argument is as follows. If in
the game Γ3 player 1 chooses ℓat the start of the game then the action
of player 2 is irrelevant, since it has no eﬀect on the outcome (note the
outcomes in the bottom left-hand part of the game). Thus in Γ3 whether
player 2 is informed of player 1’s choice at the start of the game should
make no diﬀerence to his choice.
Formally the principle of addition of a superﬂuous move is the follow-
ing. Let Γ be an extensive game, let P(h) = i, and let a ∈A(h). Suppose

--- Sayfa 223 ---
11.2 Principles for the Equivalence of Extensive Games
207
b1
r
o1
r
ℓA
r





PPPPP
ℓB
o2r
r




HHHH
2
r
   @@
r
o3
o4r
r
   @@
r
o5
o6r
p p p p p p p p p p p p
1
Figure 207.1 The game Γ4, equivalent to Γ1 according to the principle of coalescing
of moves.
that for any sequence h′ of actions (including the empty sequence) that
follows the history (h, a) and for any b ∈A(h) we have
• (h, a, h′) ∈H if and only if (h, b, h′) ∈H, and (h, a, h′) is terminal
if and only if (h, b, h′) is terminal
• if both (h, a, h′) and (h, b, h′) are terminal then (h, a, h′) ∼i (h, b, h′)
for all i ∈N
• if both (h, a, h′) and (h, b, h′) are nonterminal then they are in the
same information set.
Then Γ is equivalent to the game Γ′ that diﬀers from Γ only in that (i) all
histories of the form (h, c, h′) for c ∈A(h) are replaced by the single
history (h, h′), (ii) if the information set Ii that contains the history h
in Γ is not a singleton then h is excluded from Ii in Γ′, (iii) the player
who is assigned to the history (h, h′) in Γ′ is the one who is assigned to
(h, a, h′) in Γ, (iv) (h, h′) and (h, h′′) are in the same information set of
Γ′ if and only if (h, a, h′) and (h, a, h′′) are in the same information set
of Γ, and (v) the players’ preferences are modiﬁed accordingly. (Note
that Γ is the game that has the superﬂuous move, which is removed to
create Γ′. To relate the deﬁnition to Γ1 and Γ3, let Γ = Γ3, Γ′ = Γ1,
i = 2, and h = ℓ, and let a be one of the actions of player 2.)
Coalescing of Moves
According to this principle, Γ1 is equivalent to
the game Γ4 in Figure 207.1. In Γ1 player 1 ﬁrst chooses between ℓ
and r, then chooses between A and B in the event that she chooses ℓ.
The idea is that this decision problem is equivalent to that of deciding
between ℓA, ℓB, and r, as in Γ4. The argument is that if player 1 is
rational then her choice at the start of Γ1 requires her to compare the
outcomes of choosing ℓand r; to determine the outcome of choosing ℓ
requires her to plan at the start of the game whether to choose A or B.
Formally the principle of coalescing of moves is the following. Let Γ
be an extensive game and let P(h) = i, with h ∈Ii. Let a ∈A(Ii) and

--- Sayfa 224 ---
208
Chapter 11.
Extensive Games with Imperfect Information
b1
ℓ







HHHHHHH
b
r




HHHHr




HHHH
1
r′
ℓ′
r
   @@
r
o1
o2r
1
A
B
r
   @@
r
o3
o5r
ℓ
r
r
   @@
r
o4
o6r
r
ℓ
p p p p p p p p p p p p
2
Figure 208.1 The game Γ5, equivalent to Γ1 according to the principle of inter-
change of moves.
suppose that {(h′, a): h′ ∈Ii} = I′
i is an information set of player i. Let
Γ′ be the game that diﬀers from Γ only in that the information set I′
i
is deleted, for all h′ ∈Ii the history (h′, a) is deleted and every history
(h′, a, b, h′′) where b ∈A(h′, a) is replaced by the history (h′, ab, h′′)
where ab is a new action (that is not a member of A(h′)), and the
information sets, player function, and players’ preferences are changed
accordingly. Then Γ and Γ′ are equivalent. (In the example let Γ = Γ1,
Γ′ = Γ4, h = ∅, i = 1, and a = ℓ.)
Interchange of Moves
According to this principle Γ1 is equivalent to
the game Γ5 in Figure 208.1.
The idea is that the order of play is
immaterial if one player does not have any information about the other
player’s action when making his choice.
Formally the principle of interchange of moves is the following (which
allows transformations more general than that from Γ1 to Γ5). Let Γ be
an extensive game and let h ∈Ii, an information set of player i. Suppose
that for all histories h′ in some subset H′ of Ii the player who takes an
action after i has done so is j, who is not informed of the action that
i takes at h′. That is, suppose that (h′, a) ∈Ij for all h′ ∈H′ and all
a ∈A(h′), where Ij is an information set of player j. The information
set Ij may contain other histories; let H′′ be the subset of Ij consisting of
histories of the form (h′, a) for some h′ ∈H′. Then Γ is equivalent to the
extensive game in which every history of the type (h′, a, b) for h′ ∈H′
is replaced by (h′, b, a), the information set Ii of player i is replaced
by the union of Ii \ H′ and all histories of the form (h′, b) for h′ ∈H′
and b ∈A(h′, a), and the information set Ij of player j is replaced by
(Ij \ H′′) ∪H′. (In the example we have Γ = Γ1, Γ′ = Γ5, h = r, i = 2,
j = 1, H′ = I2 = {r}, and H′′ = I1 = {(r, ℓ), (r, r)}.)
? Exercise 208.1
Formulate the principles of coalescing of moves and
inﬂation–deﬂation for one-player extensive games and show that every

--- Sayfa 225 ---
11.3 Framing Eﬀects and the Equivalence of Extensive Games
209
one-player extensive game with imperfect information and no chance
moves (but possibly with imperfect recall) in which no information set
contains both a history h and a subhistory of h is equivalent to a decision
problem with a single nonterminal history. (The result holds even for
games with chance moves, which are excluded only for simplicity.)
Thompson (1952) shows that these four transformations preserve the
reduced strategic form. He restricts attention to ﬁnite extensive games
in which no information set contains both a history h and some subhis-
tory of h and shows that if any two such games have the same reduced
strategic form then one can be obtained from the other by a sequence of
the four transformations. We are not aware of any elegant proof of this
result. We simply give an example to illustrate the procedure: starting
with the game at the top of Figure 210.1 the series of transformations
shown in Figures 210.1 and 211.1 leads to the extensive game with per-
fect information and simultaneous moves at the bottom of Figure 211.1.
11.3
Framing Eﬀects and the Equivalence of Extensive
Games
The principles of equivalence between extensive games discussed in the
previous section are based on a conception of rationality that ignores
framing eﬀects.
This conception is inconsistent with the ﬁndings of
psychologists that even minor variations in the framing of a problem may
dramatically aﬀect the participants’ behavior (see for example Tversky
and Kahneman (1986)).
To illustrate that games that are equivalent according to these princi-
ples may diﬀer in their framing and lead to diﬀerent behavior, consider
the strictly competitive games in Figure 212.1. The middle game is ob-
tained from the top one by adding a superﬂuous move; the bottom game
is the strategic form of each extensive game.
A reasonable principle for behavior in these games is that of maxmin-
imizing. However, this principle yields diﬀerent outcomes in the games.
In the bottom game player 1’s maxminimizer is the pure strategy r while
in the top game the logic of maxminimizing directs her towards using the
mixed strategy ( 1
2, 1
2) (since she is informed that chance played right).
This example was originally proposed as a demonstration of the diﬃ-
culties with the principle of maxminimizing, but we view it as a part of
a deeper problem: how to analyze game theoretic situations taking into
account framing eﬀects, an intriguing issue of current research.

--- Sayfa 226 ---
210
Chapter 11.
Extensive Games with Imperfect Information
b1




HHHH
r
   @@
r
o1
o2r
2
r
   @@
r
o3
r
2
r
   @@
r
o4
o5r
1
↓
adding a superﬂuous move
b1







HHHHHHH
r




HHHH
2
r
   @@
r
o1
o2r
2
r
   @@
r
o3
o3r
r
   @@
r
o4
o5r
p p p p p p p p p p p p
1
↓
interchanging moves
b1







HHHHHHH
r




HHHH
1
r
   @@
r
o1
o2r
2
r
   @@
r
o3
o4r
r
   @@
r
o3
o5r
p p p p p p p p p p p p
2
↓
adding a superﬂuous move
bHHHH











1
r







HHHHHHH
1
r




HHHH
r
   @@
r
o1
o2r
r
   @@
r
o3
o4r
r
   @@
r
o3
o4r
2
r
   @@
r
o3
o5r
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
2
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
Figure 210.1
The ﬁrst three transformations in a series that converts the top
game into an extensive game with perfect information and simultaneous moves. The
transformations continue in Figure 211.1.

--- Sayfa 227 ---
11.3 Framing Eﬀects and the Equivalence of Extensive Games
211
↓
adding three superﬂuous moves
b1









HHHHHHHHH
r





HHHHH
1
r
   @
@@
r
   @
@@
2
r
   @
@@
r
  @
@
r
o1
o1r
r
  @
@
r
o2
o2r
r
  @
@
r
o3
o4r
r
  @
@
r
o3
o4r
r
  @
@
r
o3
o5r
r
  @
@
r
o3
o5r
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
2
↓
inﬂation–deﬂation
b1









HHHHHHHHH
r





HHHHH
1
r
   @@
@
@
@
@
@
@
r
   @@
2
@
@
@
@
@
@
r
   @@
@
@
@
@
@
@
r
  @
@
r
o1
o1r
r
  @
@
r
o2
o2r
r
  @
@
r
o3
o4r
2
r
  @
@
r
o3
o4r
2
r
  @
@
r
o3
o5r
r
  @
@
r
o3
o5r
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
↓
coalescing moves (six times)
b1









XXXXXXXXX
r
  @
@
r
o1
o2r
r




PPPP
r
o1
o2r
r
  @
@
r
o4
o3r
r




PPPP
r
o3
o4r
r
  @
@
r
o5
o3r
r




PPPP
r
o3
o5r
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
2
Figure 211.1 The last three transformations in a series that converts the top game
in Figure 210.1 into the extensive game with perfect information and simultaneous
moves in the bottom of this ﬁgure.

--- Sayfa 228 ---
212
Chapter 11.
Extensive Games with Imperfect Information
bc
1
2







HHHHHHH
b
1
2




HHHHr




HHHH
1
r
ℓ
r
   @@
r
6, −6
0, 0
r
ℓ
r
r
   @@
r
2, −2
0, 0
r
2
ℓ
r
r
   @@
r
0, 0
2, −2
r
r
ℓ
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
bc
1
2
1
2







XXXXXXX
r




HHHH
ℓ
r
r




HHHH
r
ℓ
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
1
r
   @@
r
6, −6
0, 0
r
ℓ
r
r
   @@
r
6, −6
0, 0
r
ℓ
r
r
   @@
r
2, −2
0, 0
r
ℓ
r
r
   @@
r
0, 0
2, −2
r
ℓ
r
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
2
ℓ
r
ℓ
4, −4
0, 0
r
3, −3
1, −1
Figure 212.1 Three games. The middle game is obtained from the top game by
adding a superﬂuous move. The bottom game is the strategic form of both the top
and middle games.
11.4
Mixed and Behavioral Strategies
In Deﬁnition 203.1 we deﬁned the notion of a pure strategy in an exten-
sive game. There are two ways to model the possibility that a player’s
actions in such a game depend upon random factors.
▶Definition 212.1 A mixed strategy of player i in an extensive
game ⟨N, H, P, fc, (Ii), (≿i)⟩is a probability measure over the set of
player i’s pure strategies.
A behavioral strategy of player i is a
collection (βi(Ii))Ii∈Ii of independent probability measures, where βi(Ii)
is a probability measure over A(Ii).
For any history h ∈Ii ∈Ii and action a ∈A(h) we denote by βi(h)(a)
the probability βi(Ii)(a) assigned by βi(Ii) to the action a.
Thus, as in a strategic game, a mixed strategy of player i is a probabil-
ity measure over player i’s set of pure strategies. By contrast, a behav-
ioral strategy speciﬁes a probability measure over the actions available
to player i at each of his information sets. The two notions reﬂect two
diﬀerent ways in which a player might randomize: he might randomly

--- Sayfa 229 ---
11.4 Mixed and Behavioral Strategies
213
select a pure strategy, or he might plan a collection of randomizations,
one for each of the points at which he has to take an action. The dif-
ference between the two notions can be appreciated by examining the
game in Figure 202.1. In this game player 1 has two information sets,
at each of which she has two possible actions. Thus she has four pure
strategies, which assign to the information sets {∅} and {(L, A), (L, B)}
respectively the actions L and ℓ, L and r, R and ℓ, and R and r. (If you
are puzzled by the last two strategies, read (or reread) Section 6.1.2.) A
mixed strategy of player 1 is a probability distribution over these four
pure strategies. By contrast, a behavioral strategy of player 1 is a pair
of probability distributions, one for each information set; the ﬁrst is a
distribution over {L, R} and the second is a distribution over {ℓ, r}.
In describing a mixed or behavioral strategy we have used the language
of the na¨ıve interpretation of actions that depend on random factors,
according to which a player consciously chooses a random device (see
Section 3.2). When discussing mixed strategies in Chapter 3, we describe
some other interpretations, which have analogs here. For example, we
may think of the mixed and behavioral strategies of player i as two
ways of describing the other players’ beliefs about player i’s behavior.
The other players can organize their beliefs in two ways: they can form
conjectures about player i’s pure strategy in the entire game (a mixed
strategy), or they can form a collection of independent beliefs about
player i’s actions for each history after which he has to act (a behavioral
strategy).
For any proﬁle σ = (σi)i∈N of either mixed or behavioral strategies in
an extensive game, we deﬁne the outcome O(σ) of σ to be the probabil-
ity distribution over the terminal histories that results when each player i
follows the precepts of σi. For a ﬁnite game this outcome is deﬁned pre-
cisely as follows. For any history h = (a1, . . . , ak) deﬁne a pure strategy
si of player i to be consistent with h if for every subhistory (a1, . . . , aℓ)
of h for which P(a1, . . . , aℓ) = i we have si(a1, . . . , aℓ) = aℓ+1. For any
history h let πi(h) be the sum of the probabilities according to σi of
all the pure strategies of player i that are consistent with h. (Thus for
example if h is a history in which player i never moves then πi(h) = 1.)
Then for any proﬁle σ of mixed strategies the probability that O(σ) as-
signs to any terminal history h is Πi∈N∪{c}πi(h). For any proﬁle β of
behavioral strategies the probability that O(β) assigns to the terminal
history h = (a1, . . . , aK) is ΠK−1
k=0 βP (a1,...,ak)(a1, . . . , ak)(ak+1) (where
for k = 0 the history (a1, . . . , ak) is the initial history).

--- Sayfa 230 ---
214
Chapter 11.
Extensive Games with Imperfect Information
b
r
0
r
a
b
   @
@
@
r
   @
@@
r
0
1
r
a
b
p p p pp
1
Figure 214.1 A one-player extensive game in which there is a behavioral strategy
that is not outcome-equivalent to any mixed strategy.
Two (mixed or behavioral) strategies of any player are outcome-
equivalent if for every collection of pure strategies of the other players
the two strategies induce the same outcome. In the remainder of this
section we examine the conditions under which for any mixed strategy
there is an outcome-equivalent behavioral strategy and vice versa; we
show, in particular, that this is so in any game with perfect recall.
We ﬁrst argue that, in a set of games that includes all those with per-
fect recall, for any behavioral strategy there is an outcome-equivalent
mixed strategy. Consider an extensive game in which no information
set contains both some history h and a history of the form (h, h′) for
some h′̸ = ∅. (Note that this condition is satisﬁed by any game with
perfect recall; it is often included as part of the deﬁnition of an exten-
sive game.) For every behavioral strategy βi of any player i in such a
game, the mixed strategy deﬁned as follows is outcome-equivalent: the
probability assigned to any pure strategy si (which speciﬁes an action
si(Ii) for every information set Ii ∈Ii) is ΠIi∈Iiβi(Ii)(si(Ii)). (Note
that the derivation of this mixed strategy relies on the assumption that
the collection (βi(Ii))Ii∈Ii is independent. Note also that in a game in
which some information set contains histories of the form h and (h, h′)
with h′̸ = ∅there may be a behavioral strategy for which there is no
equivalent mixed strategy: in the game in Figure 214.1, for example,
the behavioral strategy that assigns probability p ∈(0, 1) to a gener-
ates the outcomes (a, a), (a, b), and b with probabilities p2, p(1−p), and
1−p respectively, a distribution that cannot be duplicated by any mixed
strategy.)
We now show that, in a game with perfect recall, for every mixed
strategy there is an outcome-equivalent behavioral strategy.
Proposition 214.1 For any mixed strategy of a player in a ﬁnite ex-
tensive game with perfect recall there is an outcome-equivalent behavioral
strategy.

--- Sayfa 231 ---
11.4 Mixed and Behavioral Strategies
215
b1
L
R





HHHHH
r
   @
@@
r
o1
o2r
L
R
r
   @
@@
r
o3
o4r
R
L
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
1
Figure 215.1 An extensive game in which mixed and behavioral strategies are not
equivalent.
Proof. Let σi be a mixed strategy of player i. As above, for any history h
let πi(h) be the sum of the probabilities according to σi of all the pure
strategies of player i that are consistent with h. Let h and h′ be two
histories in the same information set Ii of player i, and let a ∈A(h).
Since the game has perfect recall, the sets of actions of player i in h
and h′ are the same. Thus πi(h) = πi(h′). Since in any pure strategy
of player i the action a is taken after h if and only if it is taken after
h′, we also have πi(h, a) = πi(h′, a). Thus we can deﬁne a behavioral
strategy βi of player i by βi(Ii)(a) = πi(h, a)/πi(h) for any h ∈Ii for
which πi(h) > 0 (clearly P
a∈A(h) βi(Ii)(a) = 1); how we deﬁne βi(Ii)(a)
if πi(h) = 0 is immaterial.
We claim that βi is outcome-equivalent to σi. Let s−i be a collection
of pure strategies for the players other than i.
Let h be a terminal
history.
If h includes moves that are inconsistent with s−i then the
probability of h is zero under both σi and βi. Now assume that all the
moves of players other than i in h are consistent with s−i. If h includes
a move after a subhistory h′ ∈Ii of h that is inconsistent with σi then
βi(Ii) assigns probability zero to this move, and thus the probability of h
according to βi is zero. Finally, if h is consistent with σi then πi(h′) > 0
for all subhistories h′ of h and the probability of h according to βi is the
product of πi(h′, a)/πi(h′) over all (h′, a) that are subhistories of h; this
product is πi(h), the probability of h according to σi.
2
In a game with imperfect recall there may be a mixed strategy for
which there is no outcome-equivalent behavioral strategy, as the one-
player game with imperfect recall in Figure 215.1 shows. Consider the
mixed strategy in which player 1 chooses LL with probability 1
2 and RR
with probability 1
2. The outcome of this strategy is the probability dis-
tribution ( 1
2, 0, 0, 1
2) over the terminal histories. This outcome cannot be
achieved by any behavioral strategy: the behavioral strategy ((p, 1 −p),
(q, 1 −q)) induces a distribution over the terminal histories in which

--- Sayfa 232 ---
216
Chapter 11.
Extensive Games with Imperfect Information
b1
r
r
A
B









XXXXXXXXX
r










XXXXXXXXX
X
r
r
2
L
R
M r
   @
@@
r
r
ℓ
r
r
   @
@@
r
r
ℓ
r
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
1
Figure 216.1 The extensive game form for Exercise 216.1.
LR has zero probability only if either p = 0 or q = 1, in which case the
probability of either LL or RR is zero.
? Exercise 216.1
Consider the game form in Figure 216.1. Find the
behavioral strategy of player 1 that is equivalent to her mixed strategy
in which she plays (B, r) with probability 0.4, (B, ℓ) with probability
0.1, and (A, ℓ) with probability 0.5.
11.5
Nash Equilibrium
A Nash equilibrium in mixed strategies of an extensive game is (as
before) a proﬁle σ∗of mixed strategies with the property that for every
player i ∈N we have
O(σ∗
−i, σ∗
i ) ≿i O(σ∗
−i, σi) for every mixed strategy σi of player i.
For ﬁnite games an equivalent deﬁnition of a mixed strategy equilib-
rium is that every pure strategy in the support of each player’s mixed
strategy is a best response to the strategies of the other players (cf.
Deﬁnition 44.1). A Nash equilibrium in behavioral strategies is
deﬁned analogously.
Given Proposition 214.1, the two deﬁnitions are equivalent for games
with perfect recall. For games with imperfect recall they are not equiv-
alent, as the game in Figure 214.1 shows. In this game the player is
indiﬀerent among all her mixed strategies, which yield her a payoﬀof 0,
while the behavioral strategy that assigns probability p to a yields her
a payoﬀof p2 · 0 + p · (1 −p) · 1 + (1 −p) · 0 = p(1 −p), so that the best
behavioral strategy has p = 1
2, and yields her a payoﬀof 1
4.
In Chapter 6 we argue that the notion of Nash equilibrium is often
unsatisfactory in extensive games with perfect information and we intro-
duce the notion of subgame perfect equilibrium to deal with the prob-
lems. To extend the ideas behind this notion to general extensive games

--- Sayfa 233 ---
Notes
217
b1
ℓ
r







XXXXXXX
r




HHHH
r




HHHH
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
2
r
   @@
r
1, −1
0, 0
r
ℓ
r
r
   @@
r
0, 0
0, 0
r
ℓ
r
r
   @@
r
0, 0
0, 0
r
ℓ
r
r
   @@
r
0, 0
1, −1
r
ℓ
r
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
1
Figure 217.1 The extensive game with imperfect information in Exercise 217.1.
is challenging, mainly because when making a choice at a non-singleton
information set a player has to form an expectation about the history
that occurred, an expectation that may not be uniquely determined by
the equilibrium strategies. The next chapter is devoted to a discussion
of this issue.
? Exercise 217.1
Consider the strictly competitive extensive game with
imperfect recall in Figure 217.1. Show that player 1’s best behavioral
strategy assures her a payoﬀof 1 with probability 1
4, while there is a
mixed strategy that assures her the payoﬀ1 with probability 1
2.
? Exercise 217.2
Let Γ2 be an extensive game with imperfect informa-
tion in which there are no chance moves, and assume that the game Γ1
diﬀers from Γ2 only in that one of the information sets of player 1 in Γ2
is split into two information sets in Γ1. Show that all Nash equilibria in
pure strategies of Γ2 correspond to Nash equilibria of Γ1. Show that the
requirement that there be no chance moves is essential for this result.
? Exercise 217.3
Formulate the following parlor game as an extensive
game with imperfect information. First player 1 receives a card that is
either H or L with equal probabilities. Player 2 does not see the card.
Player 1 may announce that her card is L, in which case she must pay
$1 to player 2, or may claim that her card is H, in which case player 2
may choose to concede or to insist on seeing player 1’s card. If player 2
concedes then he must pay $1 to player 1. If he insists on seeing player 1’s
card then player 1 must pay him $4 if her card is L and he must pay
her $4 if her card is H. Find the Nash equilibria of this game.
Notes
The model of an extensive game with imperfect information studied in
this chapter is due to Kuhn (1950, 1953), as are the notions of perfect and
imperfect recall. Section 11.2 is based on Thompson (1952); the example

--- Sayfa 234 ---
218
Chapter 11.
Extensive Games with Imperfect Information
at the end of the section is based on one in Elmes and Reny (1994).
The example in Section 11.3 is based on Aumann and Maschler (1972).
Proposition 214.1 is due to Kuhn (1950, 1953). The game in Figure 214.1
is a variant of one due to Isbell (1957, p. 85).

--- Sayfa 235 ---
12
Sequential Equilibrium
In this chapter we extend the notion of subgame perfect equilibrium to
extensive games with imperfect information. We focus on the concept
of sequential equilibrium and brieﬂy discuss some of its reﬁnements.
12.1
Strategies and Beliefs
Recall that a subgame perfect equilibrium of an extensive game with
perfect information is a strategy proﬁle for which every player’s strategy
is optimal (given the other players’ strategies) at any history after which
it is his turn to take an action, whether or not the history occurs if the
players follow their strategies. The natural application of this idea to
extensive games with imperfect information leads to the requirement
that each player’s strategy be optimal at each of his information sets.
For the game in Figure 219.1 this requirement is substantial. The
pair of strategies (L, R) is a Nash equilibrium of this game. If player 1
adheres to this equilibrium then player 2’s information set is not reached.
b1
r
2, 2
r
L
R











PPPPPPPPPP
P
M
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
2
r
   @
@@
r
3, 1
0, 0
r
L
R
r
   @
@@
r
0, 2
1, 1
r
R
L
Figure 219.1 An extensive game with imperfect information in which the require-
ment that each player’s strategy be optimal at every information set eliminates a
Nash equilibrium.

--- Sayfa 236 ---
220
Chapter 12. Sequential Equilibrium
b1
r
2, 2
r
L
R











PPPPPPPPPP
P
M
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
2
r
   @
@@
r
3, 1
0, 2
r
L
R
r
   @
@@
r
0, 2
1, 1
r
R
L
Figure 220.1 An extensive game with imperfect information that has a Nash equi-
librium that is not ruled out by an implementation of the idea behind the notion of
subgame perfect equilibrium.
However, if for some reason player 2’s information set is reached then
his action R is inferior to his action L whatever he thinks caused him to
have to act (i.e. whether player 1, contrary to her plan, chose M or R).
Thus for this game the natural extension of the idea of subgame perfect
equilibrium is unproblematic: the equilibrium (L, R) does not satisfy the
conditions of this extension (while the equilibrium (M, L) does). The
games for which this is so are rare; a more common situation is that
which arises in the game in Figure 220.1. In this game too the strategy
proﬁle (L, R) is a Nash equilibrium in which player 2’s information set is
not reached. But in this case player 2’s optimal action in the event that
his information set is reached depends on his belief about the history
that has occurred. The action R is optimal if he assigns probability of
at least 1
2 to the history M, while L is optimal if he assigns probability
of at most 1
2 to this history. Thus his optimal action depends on his
explanation of the cause of his having to act. His belief cannot be derived
from the equilibrium strategy, since this strategy assigns probability zero
to his information set being reached.
The solutions for extensive games that we have studied so far have
a single component: a strategy proﬁle.
We now study a solution—
sequential equilibrium—that consists of both a strategy proﬁle and a
belief system, where a belief system speciﬁes, for each information set,
the beliefs held by the players who have to move at that information
set about the history that occurred. It is natural to include a belief
system as part of the equilibrium, given our interpretation of the no-
tion of subgame perfect equilibrium (see Section 6.4). When discussing
this notion of equilibrium we argue that to describe fully the players’
reasoning about a game we have to specify their expectations about
the actions that will be taken after histories that will not occur if the

--- Sayfa 237 ---
12.1 Strategies and Beliefs
221
players adhere to their plans, and that these expectations should be
consistent with rationality. In particular, we interpret the components
of a strategy that specify actions after histories that are not consistent
with the strategy as beliefs about what will happen in these unexpected
events. In games with imperfect information, beliefs about unexpected
events must include beliefs not only about the future but also about
the past.
To summarize, the basic idea behind the notion of sequential equilib-
rium is that an equilibrium should specify not only the players’ strategies
but also their beliefs at each information set about the history that oc-
curred. We refer to such a pair as an assessment. That is, an assessment
consists of (i) a proﬁle of behavioral strategies and (ii) a belief system
consisting of a collection of probability measures, one for each informa-
tion set. (Note that the notion of an assessment coincides with that of a
strategy proﬁle for an extensive game with perfect information since in
such a game all information sets are singletons and hence there is only
one possible (degenerate) belief system.)
The extension of the requirement in a subgame perfect equilibrium
that each player’s strategy be optimal after any history is the following,
which we refer to as sequential rationality: for each information set of
each player i the (behavioral) strategy of player i is a best response to
the other players’ strategies, given player i’s beliefs at that information
set.
So far we have imposed no restriction on the players’ beliefs. Several
classes of additional constraints are discussed in the literature, including
the following.
Consistency with Strategies
In the spirit of Nash equilibrium we should
require that the belief system be consistent with the strategy proﬁle, in
the sense that at any information set consistent with the players’ strate-
gies the belief about the history that has occurred should be derived
from the strategies using Bayes’ rule. For example in the game in Fig-
ure 220.1 we do not want (M, L) to be a solution supported by the
belief of player 2 that the history that led to his information set is R. If
player 1’s strategy is consistent with her choosing either M or R (that is,
her strategy assigns positive probability to at least one of these choices),
then we want to require that player 2’s belief that the history M has
occurred be derived from player 1’s strategy using Bayes’ rule. That is,
player 2 should assign probability β1(∅)(M)/(β1(∅)(M) + β1(∅)(R))
(where β1 is player 1’s behavioral strategy) to this event.

--- Sayfa 238 ---
222
Chapter 12. Sequential Equilibrium
Structural Consistency
Even at an information set that is not reached
if all players adhere to their strategies we may wish to require that a
player’s belief be derived from some (alternative) strategy proﬁle using
Bayes’ rule. (This constraint on the beliefs is referred to as “structural”
since it does not depend on the players’ payoﬀs or on the equilibrium
strategy.)
Common Beliefs
Game theoretic solution concepts require that all
asymmetries be included in the description of the game; every player
is assumed to analyze the situation in the same way. In the context
of subgame perfect equilibrium this leads to the (implicit) requirement
that all the players’ beliefs about the plans of some player i in case an
unexpected event occurs are the same. In the current context it leads to
the requirement that all players share the same belief about the cause
of any unexpected event.
For some families of games the formal expression of these three restric-
tions is not problematic, though the reasonableness of the restrictions is
in dispute. One example is the family of games in which the ﬁrst move,
about which the players may be asymmetrically informed, is made by
chance, and subsequently every player is informed of every other player’s
moves. However, for arbitrary games even the formalization of the re-
strictions presents diﬃculties, as we shall see. The most widely-used
formulation is that of sequential equilibrium, which we deﬁne in the
next section. This notion usually leaves many degrees of freedom and
is frequently consistent with a large set of outcomes, a fact that has
motivated game theorists to impose additional restrictions on beliefs. In
later sections we brieﬂy discuss some of these restrictions.
12.2
Sequential Equilibrium
We restrict attention throughout to games with perfect recall (see Deﬁ-
nition 203.3) in which every information set contains a ﬁnite number of
histories. As we discuss above, a candidate for a sequential equilibrium
of such a game is an assessment, deﬁned formally as follows.
▶Definition 222.1 An assessment in an extensive game is a pair (β, µ),
where β is a proﬁle of behavioral strategies and µ is a function that
assigns to every information set a probability measure on the set of
histories in the information set.

--- Sayfa 239 ---
12.2 Sequential Equilibrium
223
Let (β, µ) be an assessment in Γ = ⟨N, H, P, fc, (Ii), (≿i)⟩. The inter-
pretation of µ, which we refer to as a belief system, is that µ(I)(h) is
the probability that player P(I) assigns to the history h ∈I, conditional
on I being reached.
An assessment is sequentially rational if for every player i and every
information set Ii ∈Ii the strategy of player i is a best response to the
other players’ strategies given i’s beliefs at Ii. To state this condition
more formally, deﬁne the outcome O(β, µ|I) of (β, µ) conditional on
I to be the distribution over terminal histories determined by β and µ
conditional on I being reached, as follows. Let h∗= (a1, . . . , aK) be a
terminal history and let h = (a1, . . . , aL) ∈I for some L < K. Then
• O(β, µ|I)(h∗) = 0 if there is no subhistory of h∗in I (i.e. the
information that the game has reached I rules out h∗).
• O(β, µ|I)(h∗) = µ(I)(h) · ΠK−1
k=L βP (a1,...,ak)(a1, . . . , ak)(ak+1).
(If I is the information set consisting of the initial history then O(β, µ|I)
is just the outcome O(β) deﬁned in Section 11.4.) To appreciate the role
of the assumption of perfect recall, note that this assumption implies
that there is at most one subhistory of h∗in I.
Note also that the
rationale for taking the product in the second case is that by perfect
recall the histories (a1, . . . , ak) for k = L, . . . , K −1 lie in diﬀerent
information sets, and thus for k = L, . . . , K −1 the events {ak+1 follows
(a1, . . . , ak) conditional on (a1, . . . , ak) occurring} are independent.
While at ﬁrst sight this deﬁnition of O(β, µ|I) is natural, it has un-
desirable features in a game in which there are two information sets I
and I′ and histories h ∈I and h′ ∈I′ with the property that a subhis-
tory of h is in I′ and a subhistory of h′ is in I. The following example
demonstrates this point.
⋄Example 223.1 Consider the game form shown in Figure 224.1. (Some-
times, as here, we represent the initial history by several small circles
rather than a single circle. In this example the number adjacent to each
such circle is the probability assigned by chance to one of its actions at
the initial history.) In an assessment (β, µ) in which β1 = β3 = Out
player 2’s information set is not reached; if he is called upon to move
then an unexpected event must have occurred. Suppose that his belief
at his information set, I, satisﬁes µ(I)(A, C) > 0 and µ(I)(B, C) > 0.
In deciding the action to take in the event that I is reached, he must cal-
culate O(β, µ|I). The deﬁnition of this distribution given above assumes

--- Sayfa 240 ---
224
Chapter 12. Sequential Equilibrium
1
2 b
1
2
b
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
ppppp
ppppp
ppppp
1
2
3
C
C
C
C
C
C
B
Out
Out
Out
A
Out
Out
Out
Figure 224.1 The game form in Example 223.1. (The game begins with a move of
chance in which A and B are each selected with probability 1
2 .)
that he continues to hold expectations about the moves of players 1 and
3 that are derived from β. However, any strategy proﬁle that generates
the belief µ(I) must diﬀer from β: it must assign positive probability to
both player 1 and player 3 choosing C. That is, if his belief is derived
from an alternative strategy proﬁle, then his explanation of the past is
inconsistent with his expectation of the future.
This example illustrates the complexity of deﬁning a reasonable ex-
tension of the notion of subgame perfect equilibrium for games in which
one information set can occur both before and after another. The deﬁ-
nition of sequential equilibrium that we now present covers such games
but, as the example indicates, can lack appeal in them. We begin with
a formal deﬁnition of sequential rationality.
▶Definition 224.1 Let Γ = ⟨N, H, P, fc, (Ii), (≿i)⟩be an extensive
game with perfect recall. The assessment (β, µ) is sequentially ra-
tional if for every player i ∈N and every information set Ii ∈Ii we
have
O(β, µ|Ii) ≿i O((β−i, β′
i), µ|Ii) for every strategy β′
i of player i.
The following deﬁnition aims to capture some of the restrictions on
beliefs discussed in the previous section. Deﬁne a behavioral strategy
proﬁle to be completely mixed if it assigns positive probability to every
action at every information set.
▶Definition 224.2 Let Γ = ⟨N, H, P, fc, (Ii), (≿i)⟩be a ﬁnite extensive
game with perfect recall. An assessment (β, µ) is consistent if there
is a sequence ((βn, µn))∞
n=1 of assessments that converges to (β, µ) in
Euclidian space and has the properties that each strategy proﬁle βn is
completely mixed and that each belief system µn is derived from βn
using Bayes’ rule.

--- Sayfa 241 ---
12.2 Sequential Equilibrium
225
b
r
r
1
2
C
c
D
d
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
3
r
   @
@@
r
3, 3, 2
0, 0, 0
r
L
R
r
   @
@@
r
4, 4, 0
0, 0, 1
r
L
R
1, 1, 1
Figure 225.1 The game in Example 225.2 (Selten’s horse).
The idea behind this requirement is that the probability of events
conditional on zero-probability events must approximate probabilities
that are derived from strategies that assign positive probability to ev-
ery action. We do not ﬁnd this consistency requirement to be natural,
since it is stated in terms of limits; it appears to be a rather opaque
technical assumption. To quote Kreps (1990a, p. 430), “[r]ather a lot
of bodies are buried in this deﬁnition”. The assumptions embodied in
the deﬁnition are unclear to us, though we shall see that the deﬁnition
does capture some appealing requirements that we may wish to impose
on assessments.
▶Definition 225.1 An assessment is a sequential equilibrium of a
ﬁnite extensive game with perfect recall if it is sequentially rational and
consistent.
We show later (Proposition 249.1) that every ﬁnite extensive game
with perfect recall has a sequential equilibrium. It is clear that if (β, µ) is
a sequential equilibrium then β is a Nash equilibrium. Further, in an ex-
tensive game with perfect information (β, µ) is a sequential equilibrium
if and only if β is a subgame perfect equilibrium.
Consider again the game in Figure 220.1. The assessment (β, µ) in
which β1(L) = 1, β2(R) = 1, and µ({M, R})(M) = α for any α ∈[0, 1]
is consistent since it is the limit as ϵ →0 of assessments (βϵ, µϵ) where
βϵ
1 = (1 −ϵ, αϵ, (1 −α)ϵ), βϵ
2 = (ϵ, 1 −ϵ), and µϵ({M, R})(M) = α for
every ϵ. For α ≥1
2 this assessment is also sequentially rational, so that
it is a sequential equilibrium.
⋄Example 225.2 (Selten’s horse) The game in Figure 225.1 has two types
of Nash equilibria: one in which β1(∅)(D) = 1, 1
3 ≤β2(C)(c) ≤1, and
β3(I)(L) = 1, and one in which β1(∅)(C) = 1, β2(C)(c) = 1, and
3
4 ≤β3(I)(R) ≤1 (where I = {(D), (C, d)}, player 3’s information
set). A Nash equilibrium of the ﬁrst type is not part of any sequential

--- Sayfa 242 ---
226
Chapter 12. Sequential Equilibrium
b1
r
1, 1
r
L
R











PPPPPPPPPP
P
M
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
2
r
   @
@@
r
3, 1
−2, 0
r
L
R
r
   @
@@
r
2, 0
−1, 1
r
R
L
Figure 226.1 The game in Exercise 226.1.
equilibrium since the associated assessment violates sequential rational-
ity at player 2’s (singleton) information set. For every Nash equilibrium
β of the second type there is a sequential equilibrium (β, µ) in which
µ(I)(D) =
1
3.
(To verify consistency, consider the sequence (βϵ) of
strategy proﬁles in which βϵ
1(∅)(C) = 1 −ϵ, βϵ
2(C)(c) = 2ϵ/(1 −ϵ), and
βϵ
3(I)(R) = β3(I)(R) −ϵ.)
? Exercise 226.1
Find the set of sequential equilibria of the game in
Figure 226.1.
The following example shows that the notion of sequential equilibrium
is not invariant to the principle of coalescing of moves considered in
Section 11.2, a principle that seems very reasonable.
⋄Example 226.2
Consider the games in Figure 227.1. The top game
(Γ1) is obtained from the bottom one (Γ2) by coalescing the moves
of player 1.
In Γ1 the assessment (β, µ) in which β1 = L, β2 = L,
and µ({M, R})(R) = 0 is a sequential equilibrium. (To verify consis-
tency, consider the sequence (βϵ) in which βϵ
1(∅) = (1 −ϵ −ϵ2, ϵ, ϵ2)
and βϵ
2({M, R}) = (1 −ϵ, ϵ).) This equilibrium yields the payoﬀproﬁle
(3, 3). On the other hand, in any sequential equilibrium of Γ2 player 1’s
action at her second information set is R, by sequential rationality (since
R dominates L). Thus in any consistent assessment player 2’s belief
µ({(C, L), (C, R)}) assigns probability 1 to (C, R), so that player 2 must
choose R. Hence β1 = (C, R) is the only equilibrium strategy of player 1.
Thus the only sequential equilibrium payoﬀproﬁle in Γ2 is (5, 1).
The signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the two games is that player 2’s
belief in Γ2 is based on the assumption that the relative likelihood of
the actions L and R at player 1’s second information set is the outcome
of a rational choice by player 1, whereas player 2’s belief in Γ1 about
the relative probabilities of M and R is not constrained by any choice
of player 1. We argued in Section 6.4 that in some games a player’s

--- Sayfa 243 ---
12.2 Sequential Equilibrium
227
b1
r
3, 3
r
L
R











PPPPPPPPPP
P
M
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
2
r
   @
@@
r
0, 1
0, 0
r
L
R
r
   @
@@
r
1, 0
5, 1
r
R
L
b1
C





PPPPP
b
r
3, 3
r
S











PPPPPPPPPP
P
r






PPPPP
P
1
R
L
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
2
r
   @
@@
r
0, 1
0, 0
r
L
R
r
   @
@@
r
1, 0
5, 1
r
R
L
Figure 227.1 Two similar games. The top game (Γ1) is obtained from the bottom
game (Γ2) by coalescing the moves of player 1.
strategy is not only a plan of action but also a speciﬁcation of the other
players’ beliefs about his actions in the event that he does not follow
this plan. In Γ2 player 1’s strategy has this role—it speciﬁes player 2’s
belief about the relative probabilities of player 1 choosing L and R when
she begins by choosing C—while in Γ1 player 1’s strategy describes only
her move, without giving any relative probabilities to the other choices.
The following exercise gives an extension of the one deviation prop-
erty for subgame perfect equilibria of extensive games with perfect in-
formation (Lemma 98.2) to sequential equilibria of extensive games with
imperfect information.
? Exercise 227.1 (The one deviation property for sequential equilibrium)
Let (β, µ) be a consistent assessment in a ﬁnite extensive game with per-
fect recall and let β′
i be a strategy of player i; denote β′ = (β−i, β′
i). Show
that if Ii and I′
i are information sets of player i with the property that
I′
i contains histories that have subhistories in Ii then O(β′, µ|Ii)(h) =
O(β′, µ|I′
i)(h) · Pr(β′, µ|Ii)(I′
i) for any terminal history h that has a
subhistory in I′
i, where Pr(β′, µ|Ii)(I′
i) is the probability (according to
(β′, µ)) that I′
i is reached given that Ii is reached. Use this fact to show
that (β, µ) is sequentially rational if and only if no player i has an infor-
mation set Ii at which a change in βi(Ii) (holding the remainder of βi
ﬁxed) increases his expected payoﬀconditional on reaching Ii.

--- Sayfa 244 ---
228
Chapter 12. Sequential Equilibrium
b1
L
R








XXXXXXXX
r




HHHH
L
R
r




HHHH
r
3, 3, 1
r
R
L
r
  @
@
r
0, 0, 0
0, 0, 0
r
L
R
r
  @
@
r
4, 1, 1
1, 1, 2
r
3
R
L
r
  @
@
r
1, 1, 2
1, 4, 1
r
L
R
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
2
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
Figure 228.1 An extensive game in which there is a sequential equilibrium for which
the belief system is not structurally consistent.
In Section 12.1 we discuss three conditions that relate the beliefs and
strategies in an assessment. One of these is structural consistency, which
may be deﬁned formally as follows.
▶Definition 228.1 The belief system µ in an extensive game with per-
fect recall is structurally consistent if for each information set I there
is a strategy proﬁle β with the properties that I is reached with positive
probability under β and µ(I) is derived from β using Bayes’ rule.
(Note that diﬀerent strategy proﬁles may justify the beliefs at diﬀerent
information sets.)
In many games, for any assessment (β, µ) that is consistent (in the
sense of Deﬁnition 224.2) the belief system µ is structurally consistent.
However, the following example shows that in some games there are
consistent assessments (β, µ) (in fact, even sequential equilibria) in which
µ is not structurally consistent: the beliefs cannot be derived from any
alternative strategy proﬁle.
⋄Example 228.2
The game in Figure 228.1 has a unique Nash equilib-
rium outcome, in which players 1 and 2 choose R. To see this, suppose
to the contrary that player 3’s information set is reached with positive
probability. Let the strategy proﬁle used be β and let βi(Ii)(R) = αi for
i = 1, 2, 3, where Ii is the single information set of player i.
a. If α3 ≤1
2 then L yields player 2 a payoﬀof α1(1 + 3α3) ≤5
2α1 <
1 + 2α1, his payoﬀto R.
Thus player 2 chooses R.
But then
µ(I3)((L, R)) = 1 and hence player 3 chooses R with probability
1, contradicting α3 ≤1
2.
b. If α3 ≥1
2 then L yields player 1 a payoﬀof α2(4 −3α3) ≤5
2α2 <
1 + 2α2, her payoﬀto R. Thus player 1 chooses R. Now if player 2
chooses L with positive probability then µ(I3)((R, L)) = 1, and hence
player 3 chooses L with probability 1, contradicting α3 ≥1
2. Thus

--- Sayfa 245 ---
12.2 Sequential Equilibrium
229
b
r
b
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
   @
@
@
@
@
@
   ppppp
ppppp
pppp
1
2
3
2, 0, 0
2, 2, 2
2, 3, 3
2, 1, 3
2, 3, 2
2, 3, 2
3, 1, 2
3, 3, 2
2, 2, 2
0, 0, 2
1
2
1
2
s
s
s
s
c
d
e
b
a
c
d
e
ℓ
r
ℓ
r
Figure 229.1 The game in Exercise 229.1.
player 2 chooses R with probability 1, contradicting our assumption
that player 3’s information set is reached with positive probability.
Thus in any Nash equilibrium α1 = α2 = 1; in addition we need
α3 ∈[ 1
3, 2
3], otherwise either player 1 or player 2 can proﬁtably deviate.
Let β be such an equilibrium. For an assessment (β, µ) to be sequentially
rational, player 3’s belief µ(I3) must assign equal probabilities to the
histories (L, R) and (R, L), and thus must take the form (1−2γ, γ, γ); an
assessment in which µ(I3) takes this form is consistent if and only if γ =
1
2. (A sequence of strategy proﬁles that demonstrates consistency for γ =
1
2 is (βϵ) in which βϵ
1(I1)(R) = βϵ
2(I2)(R) = 1 −ϵ and βϵ
3(I3)(R) = α3.)
However, the belief (0, 1
2, 1
2) of player 3 violates structural consistency
since any strategy proﬁle that yields (L, L) with probability zero also
yields either (L, R) or (R, L) with probability zero.
? Exercise 229.1
Consider the game in Figure 229.1. As in the game in
Figure 224.1 the ﬁrst move is made by chance, and the information sets
are not ordered (player 1’s information set comes either before or after
player 3’s information set, depending on the move of chance).
Show
that the game has three sequential equilibria in pure strategies, in one
of which players 1 and 3 both choose S. Discuss the reasonableness of
these sequential equilibria.
The next example further illustrates the relationship between consis-
tency and structural consistency. It shows that a sequentially rational
assessment (β, µ) in which µ is structurally consistent may not be con-
sistent (and hence may not be a sequential equilibrium).
⋄Example 229.2
In the game in Figure 230.1 the assessment (β, µ) in
which β is the pure strategy proﬁle (R, S, R), player 2’s belief assigns
probability 1 to the history R, and player 3’s belief assigns probability 1

--- Sayfa 246 ---
230
Chapter 12. Sequential Equilibrium
b1
L
R





HHHHH
r
r
S
C
r
r
S
C
0, 0, 0
1, 1, 2
r
   @
@@
r
0, 0, 0
0, 0, 1
r
L
R
r
   @
@@
r
1, 2, 1
1, 0, 0
r
R
L
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
3
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
2
Figure 230.1 An extensive game in which there is a sequentially rational assessment
with structurally consistent beliefs that is not a sequential equilibrium.
to the history (L, C), is sequentially rational. Further, the belief µ is
structurally consistent: in particular, player 3’s belief is supported by
the alternative pure strategy proﬁle in which player 1 chooses L and
player 2 chooses C. That is, if player 3 has to move then she believes
that player 1, as well as player 2, deviated from her equilibrium strategy.
To rationalize her having to move it is suﬃcient for her to believe that
player 2 deviated, and in fact she knows that he did so. Thus structural
consistency allows player 3 to revise her belief about player 1 even though
the only evidence she has is that player 2 deviated, and this is enough
to explain what has happened.
These structurally consistent beliefs are not consistent: every sequence
of assessments that involves strategies that are completely mixed and
converge to β generates beliefs of player 3 that converge to the belief that
assigns probability 1 to the history (R, C) (while µ assigns probability 1
to (L, C)). Thus (β, µ) is not a sequential equilibrium. (In the only
sequential equilibrium of the game the strategy proﬁle is (R, C, L), the
belief of player 2 assigns probability 1 to R, and the belief of player 3
assigns probability 1 to (R, C).)
The next example illustrates how subtle the consistency requirement
can be.
⋄Example 230.1 Consider a two-stage three-player game in which in the
ﬁrst stage players 1 and 2 simultaneously choose from the set {L, M, R},
and in the second stage player 3 ﬁnds out how many players chose R and
how many chose L. In this game player 3 has six information sets (for
example {(M, M)}—the case in which she is informed that two players
chose M—and {(R, L), (L, R)}—the case in which she is informed that
one player chose R and one chose L).

--- Sayfa 247 ---
12.3 Games with Observable Actions: Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium
231
If the strategies of players 1 and 2 call for them to choose the same
action, but if in fact they choose diﬀerent actions, then player 3 has to
form a belief about the action chosen by each of them. At ﬁrst sight it
may seem that the notion of sequential equilibrium does not constrain
these beliefs. Consider for example an assessment (β, µ) in which all
three beliefs µ({(M, L), (L, M)})(M, L), µ({(L, R), (R, L)})(L, R), and
µ({(M, R), (R, M)})(R, M) are equal to
2
3.
These beliefs are clearly
structurally consistent (recall that a diﬀerent strategy proﬁle can sup-
port the belief at each information set). However, the fact that consis-
tency requires the belief at each information set to be justiﬁed by the
same sequence of strategy proﬁles implies that (β, µ) is not consistent,
as the following argument shows.
For (β, µ) to be consistent there must be a sequence (βϵ) for which
the limits of βϵ
1(M)βϵ
2(L)/βϵ
1(L)βϵ
2(M), βϵ
1(L)βϵ
2(R)/βϵ
1(R)βϵ
2(L), and
βϵ
1(R)βϵ
2(M)/βϵ
1(M)βϵ
2(R) as ϵ →0 are all 2 (where βϵ
i (a) is an ab-
breviation for βϵ
i (∅)(a)). But the product of these three ratios is 1, in-
dependent of ϵ, while the product of their limits is 8. Thus consistency
rules out the belief system µ (regardless of β).
12.3
Games with Observable Actions: Perfect Bayesian
Equilibrium
We now examine a family of games in which we can deﬁne a notion
of equilibrium that is closely related to sequential equilibrium but is
simpler.
A Bayesian extensive game with observable actions models
a situation in which every player observes the action of every other
player; the only uncertainty is about an initial move of chance that
distributes payoﬀ-relevant personal information among the players in
such a way that the information received by each player does not reveal
any information about any of the other players. We say that chance
selects types for the players and refer to player i after he receives the
information θi as type θi. The formal deﬁnition follows.
▶Definition 231.1 A Bayesian extensive game with observable
actions is a tuple ⟨Γ, (Θi), (pi), (ui)⟩where
• Γ = ⟨N, H, P⟩is an extensive game form with perfect information
and simultaneous moves
and for each player i ∈N
• Θi is a ﬁnite set (the set of possible types of player i); we write
Θ = ×i∈NΘi

--- Sayfa 248 ---
232
Chapter 12. Sequential Equilibrium
• pi is a probability measure on Θi for which pi(θi) > 0 for all θi ∈Θi,
and the measures pi are stochastically independent (pi(θi) is the
probability that player i is selected to be of type θi)
• ui: Θ × Z →R is a von Neumann–Morgenstern utility function
(ui(θ, h) is player i’s payoﬀwhen the proﬁle of types is θ and the
terminal history of Γ is h).
The situation that such a game models is one in which chance selects
the types of the players, who are subsequently fully cognizant at all
points of all moves taken previously. We can associate with any such
game an extensive game (with imperfect information and simultaneous
moves) in which the set of histories is {∅}∪(Θ×H) and each information
set of each player i takes the form I(θi, h) = {((θi, θ′
−i), h): θ′
−i ∈Θ−i}
for i ∈P(h) and θi ∈Θi (so that the number of histories in I(θi, h) is
the number of members of Θ−i).
A candidate for an equilibrium of such a game is a pair ((σi), (µi)) =
((σi(θi))i∈N,θi∈Θi, (µi(h))i∈N,h∈H\Z), where each σi(θi) is a behavioral
strategy of player i in Γ (the strategy used by type θi of player i) and
each µi(h) is a probability measure on Θi (the common belief, after
the history h, of all players other than i about player i’s type). Such
a pair is closely related to an assessment. The proﬁle (σi) rephrases
the information in a proﬁle of behavioral strategies in the associated
extensive game; the proﬁle (µi) summarizes the players’ beliefs and is
tailored to the assumption that each player is perfectly informed about
the other players’ previous moves and may be uncertain only about the
other players’ types.
Let s be a proﬁle of behavioral strategies in Γ. Deﬁne Oh(s) to be
the probability measure on the set of terminal histories of Γ generated
by s given that the history h has occurred (see Section 6.2).
Deﬁne
O(σ−i, si, µ−i|h) to be the probability measure on the set of terminal
histories of Γ given that player i uses the strategy si in Γ, each type θj
of each player j uses the strategy σj(θj), the game has reached h, and
the probability that i assigns to θ−i is derived from µ−i(h). That is,
O(σ−i, si, µ−i|h) is the compound lottery in which the probability of the
lottery Oh((σj(θj))j∈N\{i}, si) is Πj∈N\{i}µj(h)(θj) for each θ−i ∈Θ−i.
The solution concept that we deﬁne is the following.
▶Definition 232.1 Let ⟨Γ, (Θi), (pi), (ui)⟩be a Bayesian extensive game
with observable actions, where Γ = ⟨N, H, P⟩.
A pair ((σi), (µi)) =
((σi(θi))i∈N,θi∈Θi, (µi(h))i∈N,h∈H\Z), where σi(θi) is a behavioral strat-
egy of player i in Γ and µi(h) is a probability measure on Θi, is a

--- Sayfa 249 ---
12.3 Games with Observable Actions: Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium
233
perfect Bayesian equilibrium of the game if the following conditions
are satisﬁed.
Sequential rationality For every nonterminal history h ∈H \ Z, ev-
ery player i ∈P(h), and every θi ∈Θi the probability measure
O(σ−i, σi(θi), µ−i|h) is at least good for type θi as O(σ−i, si, µ−i|h)
for any strategy si of player i in Γ.
Correct initial beliefs µi(∅) = pi for each i ∈N.
Action-determined beliefs If i /∈P(h) and a ∈A(h) then µi(h, a) =
µi(h); if i ∈P(h), a ∈A(h), a′ ∈A(h), and ai = a′
i then µi(h, a) =
µi(h, a′).
Bayesian updating If i ∈P(h) and ai is in the support of σi(θi)(h) for
some θi in the support of µi(h) then for any θ′
i ∈Θi we have
µi(h, a)(θ′
i) =
σi(θ′
i)(h)(ai) · µi(h)(θ′
i)
P
θi∈Θi σi(θi)(h)(ai) · µi(h)(θi).
The conditions in this deﬁnition are easy to interpret. The ﬁrst re-
quires that the strategy σi(θi) of each type θi of each player i be optimal
for type θi after every sequence of events. The second requires that ini-
tially the other players’ beliefs about the type of each player i be given
by pi.
The condition of action-determined beliefs requires that only a player’s
actions inﬂuence the other players’ beliefs about his type: (i) if player i
does not have to move at the history h then the actions taken at h
do not aﬀect the other players’ beliefs about player i’s type and (ii) if
player i is one of the players who takes an action at h then the other
players’ beliefs about player i’s type depend only on h and the action
taken by player i, not on the other players’ actions.
This condition
excludes the possibility that, for example, player j’s updating of his
belief about player i is aﬀected by a move made by some player k̸ = i.
Thus the condition is consonant with the general approach that assumes
independence between the players’ strategies.
The condition of Bayesian updating relates to a case in which player i’s
action at the history h is consistent with the other players’ beliefs about
player i at h, given σi. In such a case the condition requires not only
that the new belief depend only on player i’s action (as required by the
condition of action-determined beliefs) but also that the players’ beliefs
be derived via Bayes’ rule from their observation of player i’s actions.
Thus the players update their beliefs about player i using Bayes’ rule
until his behavior contradicts his strategy σi, at which point they form a

--- Sayfa 250 ---
234
Chapter 12. Sequential Equilibrium
new conjecture about player i’s type that is the basis for future Bayesian
updating until there is another conﬂict with σ.
We now show that every sequential equilibrium of the extensive game
associated with a ﬁnite Bayesian extensive game with observable actions
is equivalent to a perfect Bayesian equilibrium of the Bayesian extensive
game, in the sense that it induces the same behavior and beliefs.
Proposition 234.1 Let (β, µ) be a sequential equilibrium of the exten-
sive game associated with the ﬁnite Bayesian extensive game with observ-
able actions ⟨⟨N, H, P⟩, (Θi), (pi), (ui)⟩. For every h ∈H, i ∈P(h),
and θi ∈Θi, let σi(θi)(h) = βi(I(θi, h)).
Then there is a collection
(µi(h))i∈N,h∈H, where µi(h) is a probability measure on Θi, such that
µ(I(θi, h))(θ, h) = Πj∈N\{i}µj(h)(θj) for all θ ∈Θ and h ∈H
and ((σi), (µi)) is a perfect Bayesian equilibrium of the Bayesian exten-
sive game.
? Exercise 234.2
Prove the proposition. (The main diﬃculty is to con-
ﬁrm that the beliefs in the sequential equilibrium can be reproduced by
a collection of common independent beliefs about the players’ types.)
The concept of perfect Bayesian equilibrium is easier to work with
than that of sequential equilibrium (since there is no need to mess with
consistency) but applies to a signiﬁcantly smaller set of situations. The
following example shows that even in this restricted domain the two
notions are not equivalent.
⋄Example 234.3
Consider a Bayesian extensive game with observable
actions with the structure given in Figure 235.1.
Player 1 has three
equally likely possible types, x, y, and z, and player 2 has a single
type.
Consider a perfect Bayesian equilibrium ((σi), (µi)) in which
σ1(x) = (Out, L), σ1(y) = (Out, M), σ1(z) = (C, R), µ1(C, L)(y) = 1,
µ1(C, M)(x) = 1, and µ1(C, R)(z) = 1. That is, player 2 believes that
player 1 is certainly of type y if he observes the history (C, L), certainly
of type x if he observes the history (C, M), and certainly of type z if he
observes the history (C, R) (the only history that is consistent with σ1).
We claim that ((σi), (µi)) may (depending on the payoﬀs) be a per-
fect Bayesian equilibrium of such a game, since it satisﬁes the condi-
tions of action-determined beliefs and Bayesian updating. (Note that
µ1(C, L) and µ1(C, M) are not constrained by the condition of Bayesian
updating since the probabilities of the histories (C, L) and (C, M) are
both zero, given σ1.) However, the associated assessment (β, µ) is not

--- Sayfa 251 ---
12.3 Games with Observable Actions: Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium
235
bc
r
r
x
z









PPPPPPPPP
y
r
r
r
r
r
r
r









J
J
J
J
J
J
JJ
J
J
J
J
J
J
JJ
J
J
J
J
J
J
JJ
r
   @@
r
r
[0]
r
   @@
r
r
[1]
r
   @@
r
r
[0]
r
   @@
r
r
[1]
r
   @@
r
r
[0]
r
   @@
r
r
[0]
r
   @@
r
r
[0]
r
   @@
r
r
[0]
r
   @@
r
r
[1]
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
C
C
C
Out
Out
Out
L
L
L
M
M
M
R
R
R
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
-
-
?



?
J
J
JJ^
Figure 235.1 The structure of the Bayesian extensive games with observable actions
in Example 234.3. Such a game may have a perfect Bayesian equilibrium (in which
player 1’s actions are those indicated by the arrows and player 2’s beliefs are indicated
by [1]’s and [0]’s) that is not a sequential equilibrium of the associated extensive game.
consistent, and hence is not a sequential equilibrium of any associated
extensive game, whatever the payoﬀs.
To see this, let (βn, µn) be a
sequence of assessments that converges to (β, µ), with the properties
that each βn assigns positive probability to each choice at every infor-
mation set and each µn is derived from βn using Bayes’ rule. Denote
by cn
θ the probability, according to βn
1 , that player 1 chooses C after
the history θ, and denote by ℓn
θ and mn
θ the probabilities, according to
βn
1 , that she chooses L and M respectively after the history (θ, C). Let
IK
2 = {(x, C, K), (y, C, K), (z, C, K)} for K = L, M, R, be the informa-
tion set of player 2 that is reached if player 1 chooses C and then K.
Then by Bayes’ rule we have µn(IL
2 )(y, C, L) = cn
yℓn
y/(cn
xℓn
x+cn
yℓn
y +cn
z ℓn
z )
(using the fact that the three types of player 1 are equally likely),
which converges (by assumption) to µ(IL
2 )(y, C, L) = 1.
Since ℓn
y →
β1(y, C)(L) = 0 and ℓn
x →β1(x, C)(L) = 1 we conclude, dividing the
numerator and denominator of µn(IL
2 )(y, C, L) by cn
y, that cn
x/cn
y →0.
Performing a similar calculation for the belief at IM
2 , we reach the
contradictory conclusion that cn
y/cn
x →0. Thus (β, µ) is not consistent.
This example reﬂects the fact that the notion of sequential equilibrium
requires that the beliefs of player 2 at two information sets not reached
in the equilibrium not be independent: they must be derived from the
same sequence of perturbed strategies of player 1. The notion of perfect
Bayesian equilibrium imposes no such restriction on beliefs.

--- Sayfa 252 ---
236
Chapter 12. Sequential Equilibrium
bc
ℓ
r
   @
@
@
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
1
1
1
1
p p p p p p p p
2
p p p p p p p p
2
2, 2
0, 0
0, 0
0, 0
0, 0
1, 0
5, 5
1, 1
10, −10
2, 2
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
I1
I2
1
2
1
2
Figure 236.1 The extensive game discussed in Example 236.1. In all sequential
equilibria of this game player 2 believes at his ﬁrst information set that chance chose
r with certainty, but believes at his second information set that there is a positive
probability that chance chose ℓ.
The notion of perfect Bayesian equilibrium may be reﬁned by imposing
additional constraints on players’ beliefs after unexpected events. For
example, one can require that if at some point the players other than i
conclude that i is certainly not of type θi then they never subsequently
reverse this conclusion. This requirement has been used in some of the
literature (see for example Osborne and Rubinstein (1990, pp. 96–97)).
The following example shows, however, that there are games in which no
perfect Bayesian equilibrium satisﬁes it: in all perfect Bayesian equilibria
of the game we describe, a player who at some point assigns probability
zero to some history later assigns positive probability to this history.
⋄Example 236.1
In any sequential equilibrium of the game in Fig-
ure 236.1
• player 1 chooses C after the history r
• player 1 chooses X after the history (r, C, C)
• player 2 chooses C at his information set I1
• player 2 chooses X with probability at least 4
5 at his information set
I2 (otherwise player 1 chooses C after the histories ℓand (ℓ, C, C),
so that player 2 assigns probability 1 to the history (ℓ, C, C, C) at
his information set I2, making C inferior to X)
• player 1 chooses X after the history ℓ.
Thus player 2’s belief at I1 assigns probability 1 to the history r while
his belief at I2 assigns positive probability to chance having chosen ℓ
(otherwise C is better than X).

--- Sayfa 253 ---
12.3 Games with Observable Actions: Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium
237
? Exercise 237.1
Players 1 and 2 bargain over an item whose value for
player 1 is 0 or 3, with equal probabilities. Player 1 knows the value of
the object, while player 2 is informed of this value only after he purchases
it. The value of the object to player 2 is its value to player 1 plus 2. The
bargaining procedure is: player 1 makes an oﬀer, which player 2 either
accepts or rejects; in the event of rejection player 1 makes another oﬀer,
which player 2 either accepts or rejects. If no oﬀer is accepted, player 1
is left with the object and obtains a payoﬀequal to its value; player 2’s
payoﬀis 0. Take the set of possible oﬀers to be ﬁnite, including 2 and 5.
Show that there is a sequential equilibrium in pure strategies in which
there is no deal when player 1’s valuation is 3, while the object is sold
at the price of two in the ﬁrst period when player 1’s valuation is 0.
12.3.1
Signaling Games
A signaling game is a Bayesian extensive game with observable actions
that has the following simple form. There are two players, a “sender”
and a “receiver”. The sender is informed of the value of an uncertain
parameter θ1 and then chooses an action m (referred to as a message,
though it may be payoﬀ-relevant). The receiver observes the message
(but not the value of θ1) and takes an action a. Each player’s payoﬀ
depends upon the value of θ1, the message m sent by the sender, and
the action a taken by the receiver.
Formally, a signaling game is a Bayesian extensive game with ob-
servable actions ⟨Γ, (Θi), (pi), (ui)⟩in which Γ is a two-player game form
in which ﬁrst player 1 takes an action then player 2 takes an action, and
Θ2 is a singleton.
The tension in such a game arises from the fact that the receiver con-
trols the action while the sender controls the information. The receiver
has an incentive to try to deduce the sender’s type from the sender’s
message, and the sender may have an incentive to mislead the receiver.
A well-known simple example of a signaling game is the following,
proposed by Spence (1974).
⋄Example 237.2 (Spence’s model of education) A worker (the sender)
knows her talent θ1 while her employer (the receiver) does not. The
value of the worker to the employer is the expectation of θ1; we assume
that the employer pays the worker a wage w that is equal to this ex-
pectation. (The economic story that underlies this assumption is that
there are many employers who compete for the worker, so that her wage
is driven up to the expectation of θ1.)
To model this behavioral as-

--- Sayfa 254 ---
238
Chapter 12. Sequential Equilibrium
sumption we assume that the payoﬀof the employer is −(w −θ1)2 (the
expectation of which is maximized when w = E(θ1)). The worker’s mes-
sage is the amount e of education that she obtains and her payoﬀis
w −e/θ (reﬂecting the assumption that the larger is θ the easier it is
for a worker to acquire education). Assume that the worker’s talent is
either θL
1 or θH
1 > θL
1 , and denote the probabilities of these values by pL
and pH. Restrict attention to pure strategy equilibria and denote the
choices (messages) of the two types by eL and eH. This game has two
types of perfect Bayesian equilibrium.
Pooling Equilibrium
In one type of equilibrium both types choose
the same level of education (eL = eH = e∗) and the wage is w∗=
pHθH
1 + pLθL
1 . The possible values of e∗are determined as follows. If a
worker chooses a value of e diﬀerent from e∗then in an equilibrium the
employer must pay her a wage w(e) for which w(e)−e/θK
1 ≤w∗−e∗/θK
1
for K = L, H. The easiest way to satisfy this inequality is by making the
employer believe that every deviation originates from a type θL
1 worker,
so that w(e) = θL
1 for e̸ = e∗. The most proﬁtable deviation for the
worker is then to choose eL = 0, so that we need θL
1 ≤w∗−e∗/θL
1 ,
which is equivalent to e∗≤θL
1 pH(θH
1 −θL
1 ).
Separating Equilibrium In another type of equilibrium the two types
of worker choose diﬀerent levels of education. In this case eL = 0 (since
the wage paid to a type θL
1 worker is θL
1 , independent of eL). For it to
be unproﬁtable for either type to mimic the other we need
θL
1 ≥θH
1 −eH/θL
1
and
θH
1 −eH/θH
1 ≥θL
1 ,
which are equivalent to θL
1 (θH
1 −θL
1 ) ≤eH ≤θH
1 (θH
1 −θL
1 ). Since θH
1 >
θL
1 , a separating equilibrium thus always exists; the messages eL = 0
and eH ∈[θL
1 (θH
1 −θL
1 ), θH
1 (θH
1 −θL
1 )] are supported as a part of an
equilibrium in which any action other than eH leads the employer to
conclude that the worker’s type is θL
1 .
? Exercise 238.1
Verify that the perfect Bayesian equilibria that we
have described are also sequential equilibria.
Example 246.1 in the next section shows how a reﬁnement of the
notion of sequential equilibrium excludes most of these equilibria.
12.3.2
Modeling Reputation
In Section 6.5 we study two ﬁnite horizon games that highlight the fact
that in a subgame perfect equilibrium a player maintains the assump-

--- Sayfa 255 ---
12.3 Games with Observable Actions: Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium
239
tion that another player intends to adhere to his equilibrium strategy
even after that player has deviated from this strategy many times. For
example, in the unique subgame perfect equilibrium of the chain-store
game (a ﬁnite horizon extensive game with perfect information) every
challenger believes that the chain-store will acquiesce to its entry even
after a history in which the chain-store has fought every one of a large
number of entrants.
One way to capture the idea that after such a history a player may
begin to entertain doubts about the intentions of his opponents is to
study a model in which at the very beginning of the game there is a
small chance that the opponents have motives diﬀerent from those cap-
tured in the original extensive form. (The aberrant players that are thus
included, with small probability, in the strategic calculations of their op-
ponents are often referred to as “crazy” or “irrational”, although their
payoﬀs, not their strategic reasoning, diverge from the standard.) In
such a “perturbed” game the regular types may ﬁnd it advantageous
to imitate the aberrant types at the beginning of the game: the short-
term loss from doing so may be more than outweighed by the long-term
gain from maintaining their opponents’ doubts about their motivations.
Thus such a game can capture the idea that people may act as if they
are “crazy” because doing so leads their opponents to respond in such
a way that even according to their real, “sane”, preferences they are
better oﬀ. The following example illustrates this approach.
⋄Example 239.1 (A perturbation of the chain-store game) Consider the
variant of the chain-store game in which there is small probability, at
the beginning of the game, that the chain-store prefers to ﬁght than
to accommodate entry. Precisely, consider the Bayesian extensive game
with observable actions ⟨Γ, (Θi), (pi), (ui)⟩in which Γ is the game form of
the chain-store game (Section 6.5.1), ΘCS = {R(egular), T(ough)}, Θk is
a singleton for every potential competitor k = 1, . . . , K, pCS(R) = 1 −ϵ,
pCS(T) = ϵ, and the payoﬀfunctions ui are deﬁned as follows. For any
terminal history h of Γ, let hk be the sequence of actions in period k. The
payoﬀof each challenger k is independent of the type of the chain-store
and is given by
uk(θ, h) =



b
if hk = (In, C)
b −1
if hk = (In, F)
0
if hk = Out,
where 0 < b < 1. The payoﬀuCS(θ, h) of the chain-store is the sum of

--- Sayfa 256 ---
240
Chapter 12. Sequential Equilibrium
its payoﬀs in the K periods, where its payoﬀin period k is given by



0
if hk = (In, C) and θCS = R, or hk = (In, F) and θCS = T
−1
if hk = (In, F) and θCS = R, or hk = (In, C) and θCS = T
a
if hk = Out,
where a > 1. In other words, for both types of chain-store the best
outcome in any period is that the challenger stays out; the regular chain-
store prefers to accommodate an entrant than to ﬁght (ﬁghting is costly),
while the tough chain-store prefers to ﬁght than to accommodate.
We do not characterize all perfect Bayesian equilibria of the game but
merely describe an equilibrium that diﬀers radically from the unique
subgame perfect equilibrium of the perfect information game. This equi-
librium has the following features: so long as no challenger enters the
challengers maintain their original belief that the chain-store is tough
with probability ϵ; entry that is accommodated leads the challengers to
switch to believing that the chain-store is deﬁnitely not tough; entry
that is fought leads the challengers to maintain or increase the proba-
bility that they assign to the chain-store being tough. Consequently it
is optimal for a regular chain-store, as well as a tough one, to threaten
to ﬁght any entry that occurs, at least until the horizon impends. This
threat deters all entry until the horizon gets close, when the regular
chain-store’s threats become less ﬁrm: it cooperates with entrants with
positive probability, behavior that is consistent with the entrants begin-
ning to enter with positive probability. Once a challenger enters and the
chain-store cooperates with it, the challengers switch to believing that
the chain-store is certainly regular and henceforth always enter.
Precisely, the equilibrium is given as follows. The actions prescribed
by the strategy σCS(R) of the regular chain-store and by the strategy
σk of each challenger k after any history depend on µCS(h)(T), the
probability assigned by the challengers after the history h to the chain-
store being tough. The chain-store has to move only after histories that
end with entry by a challenger. For any such history h, denote by t(h) the
number of challengers who have moved, so that σCS(R)(h) prescribes the
response of the chain-store to challenger t(h). The strategy of a regular
chain-store is then given by
σCS(R)(h) =



C
if t(h) = K
F
if t(h) ≤K −1 and µCS(h)(T) ≥bK−t(h)
mh
CS
if t(h) ≤K −1 and µCS(h)(T) < bK−t(h)
if P(h) = CS, where mh
CS is the mixed strategy in which F is used

--- Sayfa 257 ---
12.3 Games with Observable Actions: Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium
241
with probability [(1 −bK−t(h))µCS(h)(T)]/[(1 −µCS(h)(T))bK−t(h)] and
C is used with the complementary probability; the strategy of a tough
chain-store is given by
σCS(T)(h) = F if P(h) = CS.
The strategy of challenger k is given by
σk(h) =



Out
if µCS(h)(T) > bK−k+1
mk
if µCS(h)(T) = bK−k+1
In
if µCS(h)(T) < bK−k+1
if P(h) = k (so that t(h) = k −1), where mk is the mixed strategy in
which Out is used with probability 1/a and In is used with probability
1 −1/a. The challengers’ beliefs are as follows: µCS(∅)(T) = ϵ, and
for any history h with P(h) = k we have µCS(h, In) = µCS(h) and the
probability µCS(h, hk)(T) assigned by challenger k+1 to the chain-store
being tough is



µCS(h)(T)
if hk = Out
max{bK−k, µCS(h)(T)}
if hk = (In, F) and µCS(h)(T) > 0
0
if hk = (In, C) or µCS(h)(T) = 0.
To understand this equilibrium consider Figure 242.1, which shows,
for each value of k, the belief of challenger k at the beginning of pe-
riod k along the equilibrium path that the chain-store is tough. The
number k∗is the smallest value of k for which ϵ < bK−k∗+1. Along
the equilibrium path through period k∗the challengers maintain their
original belief that the chain-store is tough with probability ϵ; all chal-
lengers through k∗−1 stay out. (If, contrary to its strategy, one of
them enters then the regular chain-store, as well as the tough one, re-
sponds by ﬁghting, after which the beliefs of subsequent challengers that
the chain-store is tough are also maintained at ϵ.) Since ϵ < bK−k∗+1,
challenger k∗enters. The regular chain-store responds by randomizing
between ﬁghting and cooperating (since µCS(h)(T) = ϵ < bK−k∗). The
probabilities it uses are such that after it ﬁghts, the probability (cal-
culated using Bayes’ rule) that it is tough is bK−k∗, the point on the
graph of bK−k+1 for period k∗+ 1. (This has the implication that the
closer µCS(h)(T) is to the graph of bK−k+1, the higher is the probability
that the regular chain-store ﬁghts in the event of entry.) If the chain-
store cooperates (as the regular one does with positive probability) the
probability that the challengers assign to the chain-store’s being tough
becomes zero.

--- Sayfa 258 ---
242
Chapter 12. Sequential Equilibrium
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
......................................................................
ϵ
0
k∗
bK−k+1
r
In, C
In, C
In, F
Out
In, F
k →
..............
..................
..........
..............
..........................
..........
Figure 242.1 The belief of the challengers at the beginning of each period that the
chain-store is tough along an equilibrium path of the perfect Bayesian equilibrium
for the perturbation of the chain-store game described in the text. Possible beliefs
along the path are indicated by small disks. Possible transitions are indicated by
dotted lines; the label adjacent to each dotted line indicates the sequence of actions
that induces the transition. (Note that only transitions that can occur with posi-
tive probability along the equilibrium path are indicated; more are possible oﬀthe
equilibrium path.)
If the chain-store ﬁghts the entrant in period k∗then the probability
that challenger k∗+ 1 assigns to the chain-store’s being tough rises to
bK−k∗, so that challenger k∗+ 1 randomizes between entering and not.
If challenger k∗+ 1 does not enter then the belief that the chain-store
is tough remains the same and challenger k∗+ 2 deﬁnitely enters. If
challenger k∗+ 1 enters and the chain-store ﬁghts then the probability
assigned to the chain-store’s being tough again rises to the graph of
bK−k+1. If challenger k∗+ 1 enters and the chain-store cooperates then
the probability assigned to the chain-store’s being tough falls to zero
and challenger k∗+ 2 enters. The same pattern continues until the end
of the game: in any period in which the challenger’s belief lies below
the graph the challenger enters; if the chain-store responds by ﬁghting
then the belief of the subsequent challenger rises to the graph. In any
period in which the challenger’s belief is on the graph the challenger
randomizes; if it does not enter then the belief is unchanged, while if it
enters and is fought then the belief again rises to the graph. In every
case the result of the chain-store’s cooperating is that the probability
that the challengers assign to its being tough falls to zero.
Note that if the belief of any challenger k is given by a point on the
graph then after a history h that ends with the decision by k to enter
the probability that the chain-store ﬁghts is µCS(h)(R)·σCS(R)(h)(F)+
µCS(h)(T) · 1 = (1 −bK−k+1)[(1 −bK−k)bK−k+1]/[(1 −bK−k+1)bK−k] +

--- Sayfa 259 ---
12.4 Reﬁnements of Sequential Equilibrium
243
bK−k+1 = b, making challenger k indiﬀerent between entering and stay-
ing out.
The probability with which the challenger chooses to enter
makes the chain-store’s expected payoﬀ0 regardless of its future ac-
tions.
Similarly, if the belief of any challenger k is given by a point
below (above) the graph then the probability that the chain-store ﬁghts
is less (greater) than b, making it optimal for challenger k to enter (stay
out).
The number of periods remaining after the ﬁrst entry of a challenger
(K −k∗in the case just described) is independent of the length of the
game. Thus the longer the game, the more periods in which no challenger
enters.
? Exercise 243.1
Complete the proof that the pair ((σi), (µi)) described
above is a perfect Bayesian equilibrium of the game.
Sometimes it is said that the regular chain-store “builds reputation”
in this equilibrium.
Note, however, that along the equilibrium path
no reputation is built: no entry takes place until the ﬁnal few periods,
so that even though the regular chain-store would ﬁght entry were it
to occur, it does not get the opportunity to do so. This response of a
regular chain-store to a deviation by a challenger at the beginning of the
game is necessary in order to maintain the doubt that the challengers
hold about the motivation of the chain-store, a doubt required to deter
them from entering. The considerations of the regular chain-store after
such (out-of-equilibrium) entry near the beginning of the game are like
those of a player who wants to build, or at least maintain, a reputation.
12.4
Reﬁnements of Sequential Equilibrium
The concept of sequential equilibrium permits great (though as we have
seen not complete) freedom regarding the beliefs that players hold when
they observe actions that are not consistent with the equilibrium strate-
gies. An advantage of including beliefs as part of the speciﬁcation of an
equilibrium is that it allows us to discuss further restrictions on these
beliefs. Many such restrictions have been proposed; the new solution
concepts that arise are referred to in the literature as reﬁnements of
sequential equilibrium. We give only a very brief introduction to the
subject.
The notion of sequential equilibrium essentially bases beliefs on the
equilibrium strategies and imposes only “structural” restrictions on out-
of-equilibrium beliefs. The reﬁnements of sequential equilibrium intro-

--- Sayfa 260 ---
244
Chapter 12. Sequential Equilibrium
b1
r
2, 2
r
L
R











PPPPPPPPPP
P
M
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
2
r
   @
@@
r
1, 3
0, 0
r
ℓ
r
r
   @
@@
r
0, 0
5, 1
r
r
ℓ
Figure 244.1
This game has a sequential equilibrium with the outcome (L, ℓ),
though player 2’s belief in such an equilibrium has the undesirable feature that it
assigns a positive probability to player 1’s having chosen the action M, which is
strictly dominated by L.
duce new strategic considerations, as demonstrated by the following
example.
⋄Example 244.1
The game in Figure 244.1 has a sequential equilib-
rium with the outcome (R, r). It also has a sequential equilibrium with
the outcome (L, ℓ), in which player 2 believes, in the event that his in-
formation set is reached, that with high probability player 1 chose M.
However, if player 2’s information set is reached then a reasonable ar-
gument for him may be that since the action M for player 1 is strictly
dominated by L it is not rational for player 1 to choose M and hence she
must have chosen R. This argument excludes any belief that supports
(L, ℓ) as a sequential equilibrium outcome.
The next example further illustrates the strategic considerations in-
troduced in the previous example.
⋄Example 244.2 (Beer or Quiche) Consider the game in Figure 245.1,
a signaling game in which there are two types of player 1, strong and
weak, the probabilities of these types are 0.9 and 0.1 respectively, the set
of messages is {B, Q} (the consumption of beer or quiche for breakfast),
and player 2 has two actions, F(ight) or N(ot). Player 1’s payoﬀis the
sum of two elements: she obtains two units if player 2 does not ﬁght and
one unit if she consumes her preferred breakfast (B if she is strong and Q
if she is weak). Player 2’s payoﬀdoes not depend on player 1’s breakfast;
it is 1 if he ﬁghts the weak type or if he does not ﬁght the strong type.
This game has two types of sequential equilibrium, as follows.
• Both types of player 1 choose B, and player 2 ﬁghts if he observes
Q and not if he observes B. If player 2 observes Q then he assigns
probability of at least 0.5 that player 1 is weak.

--- Sayfa 261 ---
12.4 Reﬁnements of Sequential Equilibrium
245
bc
0.9
0.1
strong
weak
r
1
r1
r
   @
@
@
r
3, 1
1, 0
r
N
F
r
   @
@
@
r
2, 0
0, 1
r
N
F
B
Q
B
Q
r
@
@
@
   r
r
2, 1
0, 0
N
F
r
@
@
@
   r
r
3, 0
1, 1
N
F
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
2
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
2
Figure 245.1 The game Beer or Quiche (Example 244.2).
• Both types of player 1 choose Q, and player 2 ﬁghts if he observes
B and not if he observes Q. If player 2 observes B then he assigns
probability of at least 0.5 that player 1 is weak.
The following argument suggests that an equilibrium of the second
type is not reasonable. If player 2 observes that player 1 chose B then
he should conclude that player 1 is strong, as follows.
If player 1 is
weak then she should realize that the choice of B is worse for her than
following the equilibrium (in which she obtains the payoﬀ3), whatever
the response of player 2. Further, if player 1 is strong and if player 2
concludes from player 1 choosing B that she is strong and consequently
chooses N, then player 1 is indeed better oﬀthan she is in the equilibrium
(in which she obtains 2).
Thus it is reasonable for a strong type of
player 1 to deviate from the equilibrium, anticipating that player 2 will
reason that indeed she is strong, so that player 2’s belief that player 1 is
weak with positive probability when she observes B is not reasonable.
The argument in this example is weaker than that in the previous
example. In the previous example the argument uses only the fact that
the action M is dominated and thus is independent of the equilibrium
that is eliminated. By contrast, in the game here the argument is relative
to the equilibrium that is eliminated. Unless the supposition is that the
players behave according to an equilibrium in which both types choose
Q, there is no basis for the argument that the message B must come from
a strong type. This raises a criticism: if the basis of the argument is that
the situation in which both types of player 1 choose Q is an equilibrium
then perhaps player 2 should conclude after observing a deviation simply

--- Sayfa 262 ---
246
Chapter 12. Sequential Equilibrium
that player 1 is not rational or does not understand the structure of the
game, rather than assume that she is rationally trying to send him a
strategic signal.
⋄Example 246.1 (Spence’s model of education) We ﬁrst argue that all
the pooling equilibria of the game in Example 237.2 are eliminated by
arguments like those in the previous example. Let e satisfy w∗−e∗/θL
1 >
θH
1 −e/θL
1 and w∗−e∗/θH
1 < θH
1 −e/θH
1 . (Such a value of e clearly exists.)
If a worker of type θH
1 deviates and chooses e (which exceeds e∗) then
the ﬁrms should conclude that the deviation comes from type θH
1 since
type θL
1 is worse oﬀif she so deviates even if she persuades the ﬁrms that
she is of type θH
1 , while type θH
1 is better oﬀif she so deviates. Thus the
ﬁrms should respond to such a deviation by paying a wage of θH
1 , which
makes the deviation proﬁtable for a worker of type θH
1 .
Now consider separating equilibria. In such an equilibrium eL = 0
and θH
1 −eH/θL
1 ≤θL
1 . If θH
1 −eH/θL
1 < θL
1 then a worker of type θH
1
can deviate by slightly reducing the value of e, arguing that she is not of
type θL
1 , who would lose from such a deviation whatever best response
the ﬁrm used (that is, even if she were paid θH
1 ). Thus in all sequen-
tial equilibria that survive this argument, the level eH of education of
type θH
1 solves the equation θH
1 −eH/θL
1 = θL
1 .
? Exercise 246.2 (Pre-trial negotiation) Player 1 is involved in an acci-
dent with player 2. Player 1 knows whether she is negligent or not, but
player 2 does not know; if the case comes to court the judge learns the
truth. Player 1 sends a “take-it-or-leave-it” pre-trial oﬀer of compensa-
tion that must be either 3 or 5, which player 2 either accepts or rejects.
If he accepts the oﬀer the parties do not go to court. If he rejects it the
parties go to court and player 1 has to pay 5 to player 2 if he is negligent
and 0 otherwise; in either case player 1 has to pay the court expenses
of 6. The payoﬀs are summarized in Figure 247.1. Formulate this sit-
uation as a signaling game and ﬁnd its sequential equilibria. Suggest
a criterion for ruling out unreasonable equilibria. (Consult Banks and
Sobel (1987).)
12.5
Trembling Hand Perfect Equilibrium
The notions of subgame perfect equilibrium and sequential equilibrium
treat the requirement of sequential rationality as part of the players’
strategic reasoning; they invoke the assumption that the players are ra-
tional not only in selecting their actions on the equilibrium path but also

--- Sayfa 263 ---
12.5 Trembling Hand Perfect Equilibrium
247
Y
N
3
−3, 3
−6, 0
5
−5, 5
−6, 0
Player 1 is non-negligent.
Y
N
3
−3, 3
−11, 5
5
−5, 5
−11, 5
Player 1 is negligent.
Figure 247.1 The payoﬀs in Exercise 246.2.
in forming beliefs about the other players’ plans regarding events that
do not occur in equilibrium. The solution concepts that we study in this
section follow a diﬀerent route: they treat the players’ rationality with
respect to out-of-equilibrium events as the result of each player’s taking
into account that the other players could make uncorrelated mistakes
(their hands may tremble) that lead to these unexpected events. The
basic idea is that each player’s actions be optimal not only given his
equilibrium beliefs but also given a perturbed belief that allows for the
possibility of slight mistakes. These mistakes are not modeled as part
of the description of the game. Rather, a strategy proﬁle is deﬁned to
be stable if it satisﬁes sequential rationality given some beliefs that are
generated by a strategy proﬁle that is a perturbation of the equilibrium
strategy proﬁle, embodying “small” mistakes. Note that the perturbed
strategy proﬁle is common to all players and the equilibrium strategy
proﬁle is required to be sequentially rational only with respect to a single
such proﬁle.
The requirement that a player’s strategy be optimal not only against
the other players’ equilibrium strategies but also against a perturba-
tion of these strategies that incorporates the possibility of small mis-
takes is powerful even in strategic games. We begin by studying such
games; subsequently we turn back to extensive games with imperfect
information.
12.5.1
Strategic Games
Recall that we say that a player’s strategy in a strategic game is com-
pletely mixed if it assigns positive probability to each of the player’s
actions.

--- Sayfa 264 ---
248
Chapter 12. Sequential Equilibrium
A
B
C
A
0, 0
0, 0
0, 0
B
0, 0
1, 1
2, 0
C
0, 0
0, 2
2, 2
Figure 248.1
A strategic game in which there are Nash equilibria ((A, A) and
(C, C)) that are not trembling hand perfect.
▶Definition 248.1 A trembling hand perfect equilibrium of a ﬁnite
strategic game is a mixed strategy proﬁle σ with the property that there
exists a sequence (σk)∞
k=0 of completely mixed strategy proﬁles that
converges to σ such that for each player i the strategy σi is a best
response to σk
−i for all values of k.
Let σ be a trembling hand perfect equilibrium. Since each player’s
expected payoﬀis continuous in the vector of the other players’ mixed
strategies it follows that for each player i the strategy σi is a best re-
sponse to σ−i, so that every trembling hand perfect equilibrium is a Nash
equilibrium. Note that the deﬁnition requires only that each player’s
strategy be a best response to some sequence of perturbed strategy
proﬁles in which the probabilities of mistakes converge to zero; all play-
ers’ strategies must be best responses to the same sequence of strategy
proﬁles, but they need not be best responses to all such sequences.
The game in Figure 248.1 shows that not all Nash equilibria are trem-
bling hand perfect: (B, B) is the only trembling hand perfect equilibrium
of the game.
In Section 4.3 we deﬁned the notion of a weakly dominated action in
a strategic game; a player has no reason to use such an action, although,
depending on the other players’ behavior, he may have no reason not to
use such an action either. The notion of Nash equilibrium does not rule
out the use of such actions (see, for example, the actions A and C in the
game in Figure 248.1), but the notion of trembling hand perfect equilib-
rium does, since a weakly dominated strategy is not a best response to
a vector of completely mixed strategies.
In a two-player game we have the following stronger result.
Proposition 248.2 A strategy proﬁle in a ﬁnite two-player strategic
game is a trembling hand perfect equilibrium if and only if it is a mixed

--- Sayfa 265 ---
12.5 Trembling Hand Perfect Equilibrium
249
L
R
T
1, 1, 1
1, 0, 1
B
1, 1, 1
0, 0, 1
ℓ
L
R
T
1, 1, 0
0, 0, 0
B
0, 1, 0
1, 0, 0
r
Figure 249.1 A three-player strategic game in which there is a Nash equilibrium
((B, L, ℓ)) that is not trembling hand perfect but in which every player’s strategy is
undominated.
strategy Nash equilibrium and the strategy of neither player is weakly
dominated.
Proof. It remains to show only that a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium
in which the action of each player is not weakly dominated is trembling
hand perfect. Let σ∗be a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium in which
the strategy σ∗
i of neither player i is weakly dominated. By the result
in Exercise 64.2, the strategy σ∗
i of each player i is a best response to
a completely mixed strategy, say σ′
j of player j̸ = i. For any ϵ > 0 let
σj(ϵ) = (1−ϵ)σ∗
j +ϵσ′
j. This strategy is completely mixed and converges
to σ∗
j ; further, σ∗
i is a best response to it. Thus σ∗is a trembling hand
perfect equilibrium.
2
That the same is not true for a game with more than two players is
demonstrated by the three-player game in Figure 249.1. In this game
the Nash equilibrium (B, L, ℓ) is undominated but is not trembling hand
perfect (player 1’s payoﬀto T exceeds her payoﬀto B whenever players 2
and 3 assign small enough positive probability to R and r respectively).
The following result shows that every strategic game has a trembling
hand perfect equilibrium.
Proposition 249.1 Every ﬁnite strategic game has a trembling hand
perfect equilibrium.
Proof. Deﬁne a perturbation of the game by letting the set of actions
of each player i be the set of mixed strategies of player i that assign
probability of at least ϵj
i to each action j of player i, for some collection
(ϵj
i) with ϵj
i > 0 for each i and j. (That is, constrain each player to use
each action available to him with some minimal probability.) Every such
perturbed game has a Nash equilibrium by Proposition 20.3. Consider a
sequence of such perturbed games in which ϵj
i →0 for all i and j; by the

--- Sayfa 266 ---
250
Chapter 12. Sequential Equilibrium
b1
r
1, 1
r
A
B
   @
@
@r
   @
@@
r
0, 2
r
2
R
L
r
   @
@@
r
2, 0
3, 3
r
1
b
a
L
R
A, a
1, 1
1, 1
A, b
1, 1
1, 1
B, a
0, 2
2, 0
B, b
0, 2
3, 3
Figure 250.1 An extensive game (left) whose strategic form (right) has a trembling
hand perfect equilibrium (((A, a), L)) that is not a subgame perfect equilibrium.
compactness of the set of strategy proﬁles, some sequence of selections
from the sets of Nash equilibria of the games in the sequence converges,
say to σ∗. It may be veriﬁed that σ∗corresponds to a trembling hand
perfect equilibrium of the game.
2
12.5.2
Extensive Games
We now extend the idea of trembling hand perfection to the model of an
extensive game. The game in Figure 250.1 shows that a straightforward
generalization of Deﬁnition 248.1 has an unsatisfactory feature. This
game has a unique subgame perfect equilibrium ((B, b), R). However,
the strategy pair ((A, a), L) is a trembling hand perfect equilibrium of
the strategic form of the game, since the strategy (A, a) of player 1 is a
best response to any strategy of player 2 for which the probability of L is
close enough to 1, and L is a best response to any strategy of player 1 for
which the probability of (A, a) is close enough to 1 and the probability of
(B, a) is suﬃciently high compared with the probability of (B, b). The
point is that when evaluating the optimality of her strategy player 1
does not consider the possibility that she herself will make mistakes
when carrying out this strategy.
If she does allow for mistakes, and
considers that in attempting to carry out her strategy she may choose B
rather than A at the start of the game (in addition to considering that
player 2 may make a mistake and choose R rather than L) then it is no
longer optimal for her to choose a at her second information set.
These considerations lead us to study the trembling hand perfect equi-
libria not of the strategic form but of the agent strategic form of the
game, in which there is one player for each information set in the exten-

--- Sayfa 267 ---
12.5 Trembling Hand Perfect Equilibrium
251
sive game: each player in the extensive game is split into a number of
agents, one for each of his information sets, all agents of a given player
having the same payoﬀs. (Note that any mixed strategy proﬁle σ in the
agent strategic form corresponds to the behavioral strategy proﬁle β in
which βi(Ii) is the mixed strategy of player i’s agent at the information
set Ii.) Thus we make the following deﬁnition.
▶Definition 251.1 A trembling hand perfect equilibrium of a ﬁnite
extensive game is a behavioral strategy proﬁle that corresponds to a
trembling hand perfect equilibrium of the agent strategic form of the
game.
The behavioral strategy proﬁle ((A, a), L) is not a trembling hand per-
fect equilibrium of the extensive game in Figure 250.1 since for any pair
of completely mixed strategies of player 1’s ﬁrst agent and player 2 the
unique best response of player 1’s second agent is the pure strategy b.
More generally, we can show that every trembling hand perfect equilib-
rium of a ﬁnite extensive game with perfect recall corresponds to the
behavioral strategy proﬁle of a sequential equilibrium.
Proposition 251.2 For every trembling hand perfect equilibrium β of
a ﬁnite extensive game with perfect recall there is a belief system µ such
that (β, µ) is a sequential equilibrium of the game.
Proof. Let (βk) be the sequence of completely mixed behavioral strategy
proﬁles that corresponds to the sequence of mixed strategy proﬁles in the
agent strategic form of the game that is associated with the equilibrium
β. At each information set Ii of each player i in the game, deﬁne the
belief µ(Ii) to be the limit of the beliefs deﬁned from βk using Bayes’ rule;
(β, µ) is then a consistent assessment. Since every agent’s information
set is reached with positive probability and every agent’s strategy is a
best response to every βk it follows from the one deviation property for
sequential equilibrium (see Exercise 227.1) that every such strategy is
also a best response to β when the beliefs at each information set are
deﬁned by µ. Thus (β, µ) is a sequential equilibrium.
2
The converse of this result does not hold since in a game with simulta-
neous moves every Nash equilibrium is the strategy proﬁle of a sequen-
tial equilibrium, but only those Nash equilibria in which no player’s
strategy is weakly dominated can be trembling hand perfect. (In the
simultaneous-move extensive game whose strategic form is given in Fig-
ure 248.1, for example, (A, A) and (C, C) are the strategy proﬁles of se-
quential equilibria but are not trembling hand perfect equilibria.) How-

--- Sayfa 268 ---
252
Chapter 12. Sequential Equilibrium
b
r
r
1
2
C
c
D
d
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
3
r
   @
@@
r
3, 3, 2
0, 0, 0
r
L
R
r
   @
@@
r
4, 4, 0
0, 0, 1
r
L
R
1, 1, 1
Figure 252.1 The game Example 252.1 (Selten’s horse).
ever, the converse is “almost” true: for almost every game the strategy
proﬁle of almost every sequential equilibrium is a trembling hand perfect
equilibrium (see Kreps and Wilson (1982b, Theorems 1 and 3)).
The next example illustrates the concept of trembling hand perfect
equilibrium for the game that we studied in Example 225.2.
⋄Example 252.1 (Selten’s horse) As we saw in Example 225.2, the game
in Figure 252.1 (and Figure 225.1) has two types of Nash equilibria.
Equilibria of the ﬁrst type, in which player 1 chooses D, player 2 chooses
c with probability at least 1
3, and player 3 chooses L, do not correspond
to sequential equilibria; they are not trembling hand perfect, since if
player 1 chooses C with positive probability and player 3 chooses L with
probability close to 1 then d is better than c for player 2. Equilibria of the
second type, in which player 1 chooses C, player 2 chooses c, and player 3
chooses R with probability at least 3
4, correspond to sequential equilibria
and are also trembling hand perfect: take σϵ
1(D) = ϵ, σϵ
2(d) = 2ϵ/(1−ϵ),
and σϵ
3(R) = σ3(R) if σ3(R) < 1 and σϵ
3(R) = 1 −ϵ if σ3(R) = 1.
The game in Figure 253.1 shows that the set of trembling hand perfect
equilibria of an extensive game is not a subset of the set of trembling
hand perfect equilibria of its strategic form, and that in a trembling
hand perfect equilibrium of an extensive game a player may use a weakly
dominated strategy. The strategy proﬁle ((L, r), R) is a trembling hand
perfect equilibrium of the game (take a sequence of strategy proﬁles in
which player 1’s second agent trembles more than player 2 does), but it
is not a trembling hand perfect equilibrium of the strategic form of the
game (since player 1’s strategy (L, r) is weakly dominated by (R, r)).
? Exercise 252.2
Show that the notion of trembling hand perfect equi-
librium of an extensive game (like the notion of sequential equilibrium)
is not invariant to the coalescing of moves (one of the principles studied
in Section 11.2). (Use the game in Figure 253.1.)

--- Sayfa 269 ---
12.5 Trembling Hand Perfect Equilibrium
253
b1
L
R





HHHHH
r
   @
@@
r
0, 0
1, 1
r
2
L
R
r
   @
@@
r
0, 0
1, 1
r
1
r
ℓ
L
R
L, ℓ
0, 0
1, 1
L, r
0, 0
1, 1
R, ℓ
0, 0
0, 0
R, r
1, 1
1, 1
Figure 253.1 An extensive game (left) that has a trembling hand perfect equi-
librium that does not correspond to any trembling hand perfect equilibrium of its
strategic form (right).
The next exercise gives an extensive game in all of whose trembling
hand perfect equilibria at least one player uses a weakly dominated strat-
egy (so that no such equilibrium is a trembling hand perfect equilibrium
of the strategic form).
? Exercise 253.1 Two people are engaged in the following game to select
either a good outcome or a bad outcome. First each of them names either
himself or the other person as the one who will make the choice. If they
both name the same person then that person selects the outcome. If
each of them chooses himself then chance selects each of them with equal
probability to make the choice. If each of them chooses the other then
the good outcome is automatically chosen. At no point in the procedure
is either person informed of the person initially selected by the other
person. Each person’s payoﬀfrom the good outcome is 2, regardless of
who chooses it; his payoﬀfrom the bad outcome is 1 if the other person
chooses it and 0 if he himself chooses it. Show that the set of trembling
hand perfect equilibria of this extensive game is disjoint from the set of
behavioral strategy proﬁles associated with the trembling hand perfect
equilibria of its strategic form; interpret the equilibria.
We conclude the chapter by noting that it follows from Proposi-
tion 249.1 that every ﬁnite extensive game with perfect recall has a
trembling hand perfect equilibrium and hence, by Proposition 251.2, a
sequential equilibrium.
Corollary 253.2 Every ﬁnite extensive game with perfect recall has a
trembling hand perfect equilibrium and thus also a sequential equilibrium.

--- Sayfa 270 ---
254
Chapter 12. Sequential Equilibrium
Notes
The main contributors to the extension of the notion of subgame per-
fect equilibrium to games with imperfect information are Kreps, Selten,
and Wilson, who developed the two main solution concepts discussed
in this chapter: trembling hand perfect equilibrium (Selten (1975)) and
sequential equilibrium (Kreps and Wilson (1982b)).
Section 12.2 relies on ideas and examples that appear in Kreps and
Wilson (1982b) and many subsequent papers. For a review of the con-
cept of sequential equilibrium see Kreps (1990b). Example 223.1 and Ex-
ercise 229.1 are due to Kreps and Ramey (1987) and Battigalli (1988).
Example 225.2 is due to Selten (1975), Exercise 226.1 to Kreps and
Wilson (1982b), Example 226.2 to Kohlberg and Mertens (1986), Ex-
ercise 227.1 to Hendon, Jacobsen, and Sloth (1996), Example 228.2
to Kreps and Ramey (1987), Example 229.2 to Battigalli (1996), and
Example 230.1 to Kohlberg and Reny (1997).
The discussion of perfect Bayesian equilibrium in Section 12.3 is based
on Fudenberg and Tirole (1991b), which contains Proposition 234.1 and
Example 234.3. Example 236.1 is based on Madrigal, Tan, and Wer-
lang (1987). Sections 12.3.1 and 12.4 are based on Cho and Kreps (1987).
The model of reputation in Section 12.3.2 is based on Kreps and Wil-
son (1982a) (see also Milgrom and Roberts (1982)); Fudenberg and
Maskin (1986, Section 5) show that the type of irrationality that is
incorporated in the model may dictate the equilibrium outcome. Exer-
cise 246.2 is due to Banks and Sobel (1987).
Most of the material in Section 12.5, which discusses the notion of
trembling hand perfect equilibrium, is taken from Selten (1975). Propo-
sition 248.2 was discovered independently by Cave, Kohlberg, and van
Damme. Proposition 251.2 is due to Kreps and Wilson (1982b). The
game in Exercise 253.1 is taken from Mertens (1995).
Battigalli (1996) studies sequential equilibrium and perfect Bayesian
equilibrium and gives an alternative characterization of consistency for
a class of games. Kohlberg and Reny (1997) formulate an equivalent
deﬁnition of sequential equilibrium using systems of “relative” probabil-
ities. As we have mentioned, there are many reﬁnements of the notion
of sequential equilibrium; especially noteworthy is the work of Kohlberg
and Mertens (1986). Myerson (1978) studies a variant of the notion of
trembling hand perfect equilibrium called “proper equilibrium”.
Kohlberg (1990) and van Damme (1992) are surveys of the literature
on reﬁnements of Nash equilibrium.

--- Sayfa 271 ---
IV
Coalitional Games
The primitives of the models we study in Parts I, II, and III (often
referred to as “noncooperative” games) are the players’ sets of possi-
ble actions and their preferences over the possible outcomes, where an
outcome is a proﬁle of actions; each action is taken by a single player
autonomously. In this part we study the model of a coalitional game.
One primitive of this model is the collection of sets of joint actions that
each group of players (coalition) can take independently of the remain-
ing players. An outcome of a coalitional game is a speciﬁcation of the
coalition that forms and the joint action it takes. (More general mod-
els, in which many coalitions may form simultaneously, are discussed in
the literature.) The other primitive of the model of a coalitional game
is the proﬁle of the players’ preferences over the set of all possible out-
comes. Thus although actions are taken by coalitions, the theory is based
(as are the theories in the other parts of the book) on the individuals’
preferences.
A solution concept for coalitional games assigns to each game a set
of outcomes. As before, each solution concept we study captures the
consequences of a natural line of reasoning for the participants in a game;
it deﬁnes a set of arrangements that are stable in some sense. In general
the stability requirement is that the outcome be immune to deviations
of a certain sort by groups of players; by contrast, most (though not all)
solutions for noncooperative games require immunity to deviations by
individual players. Many variants of the solution concepts we study are
analyzed in the literature; we consider a sample designed to illustrate
the main ideas.
A coalitional model is distinguished from a noncooperative model pri-
marily by its focus on what groups of players can achieve rather than on

--- Sayfa 272 ---
256
what individual players can do and by the fact that it does not consider
the details of how groups of players function internally. If we wish to
model the possibility of coalition formation in a noncooperative game
then we must specify how coalitions form and how their members choose
joint actions. These details are absent from a coalitional game, so that
the outcome of such a game does not depend on them.
To illustrate the diﬀerences between the two modeling approaches,
consider the following situation. Each of a group of individuals owns a
bundle of inputs and has access to a technology for producing a valu-
able single output.
Each individual’s inputs are unproductive in his
own technology but productive in some other individual’s technology.
A noncooperative model of this situation speciﬁes precisely the set of
actions that is available to each individual: perhaps each individual can
announce a price vector at which he is willing to trade inputs, or perhaps
he can propose a distribution of inputs for the whole of the society. A
coalitional model, by contrast, starts from the sets of payoﬀvectors that
each group of individuals can jointly achieve. A coalition may use con-
tracts, threats, or promises to achieve a high level of production; these
institutions are not modeled explicitly in a coalitional game.
We do not view either of the two approaches as superior or more
basic. Each of them reﬂects diﬀerent kinds of strategic considerations
and contributes to our understanding of strategic reasoning. The study
of the interconnections between noncooperative and cooperative models
can also be illuminating.

--- Sayfa 273 ---
13
The Core
The core is a solution concept for coalitional games that requires that no
set of players be able to break away and take a joint action that makes
all of them better oﬀ. After deﬁning the concept and giving conditions
for its nonemptiness, we explore its connection with the concept of a
competitive equilibrium in a model of a market.
13.1
Coalitional Games with Transferable Payoﬀ
We begin with a simple version of a coalitional game in which each group
of players is associated with a single number, interpreted as the payoﬀ
that is available to the group; there are no restrictions on how this payoﬀ
may be divided among the members of the group.
▶Definition 257.1 A coalitional game with transferable payoﬀ
consists of
• a ﬁnite set N (the set of players)
• a function v that associates with every nonempty subset S of N (a
coalition) a real number v(S) (the worth of S).
For each coalition S the number v(S) is the total payoﬀthat is avail-
able for division among the members of S.
That is, the set of joint
actions that the coalition S can take consists of all possible divisions of
v(S) among the members of S. (Later, in Section 13.5, we deﬁne a more
general notion of a coalitional game in which each coalition is associated
with a set of payoﬀvectors that is not necessarily the set of all possible
divisions of some ﬁxed amount.)
In many situations the payoﬀthat a coalition can achieve depends on
the actions taken by the other players. However, the interpretation of a

--- Sayfa 274 ---
258
Chapter 13. The Core
coalitional game that best ﬁts our discussion is that it models a situation
in which the actions of the players who are not part of S do not inﬂuence
v(S). In the literature other interpretations are given to a coalitional
game; for example, v(S) is sometimes interpreted to be the most payoﬀ
that the coalition S can guarantee independently of the behavior of the
coalition N \ S. These other interpretations alter the interpretation of
the solutions concepts deﬁned; we do not discuss them here.
Throughout this chapter and the next we assume that the coalitional
games with transferable payoﬀthat we study have the property that the
worth of the coalition N of all players is at least as large as the sum of the
worths of the members of any partition of N. This assumption ensures
that it is optimal that the coalition N of all players form, as is required
by our interpretations of the solution concepts we study (though the
formal analysis is meaningful without the assumption).
▶Definition 258.1 A coalitional game ⟨N, v⟩with transferable payoﬀis
cohesive if
v(N) ≥
K
X
k=1
v(Sk)
for every partition {S1, . . . , SK} of N.
(This is a special case of the condition of superadditivity, which requires
that v(S ∪T) ≥v(S) + v(T) for all coalitions S and T with S ∩T = ∅.)
13.2
The Core
The idea behind the core is analogous to that behind a Nash equilibrium
of a noncooperative game: an outcome is stable if no deviation is prof-
itable. In the case of the core, an outcome is stable if no coalition can
deviate and obtain an outcome better for all its members. For a coali-
tional game with transferable payoﬀthe stability condition is that no
coalition can obtain a payoﬀthat exceeds the sum of its members’ cur-
rent payoﬀs. Given our assumption that the game is cohesive we conﬁne
ourselves to outcomes in which the coalition N of all players forms.
Let ⟨N, v⟩be a coalitional game with transferable payoﬀ. For any pro-
ﬁle (xi)i∈N of real numbers and any coalition S we let x(S) = P
i∈S xi.
A vector (xi)i∈S of real numbers is an S-feasible payoﬀvector if
x(S) = v(S).
We refer to an N-feasible payoﬀvector as a feasible
payoﬀproﬁle.
▶Definition 258.2 The core of the coalitional game with trans-
ferable payoﬀ⟨N, v⟩is the set of feasible payoﬀproﬁles (xi)i∈N for

--- Sayfa 275 ---
13.2 The Core
259
which there is no coalition S and S-feasible payoﬀvector (yi)i∈S for
which yi > xi for all i ∈S.
A deﬁnition that is obviously equivalent is that the core is the set of
feasible payoﬀproﬁles (xi)i∈N for which v(S) ≤x(S) for every coali-
tion S. Thus the core is the set of payoﬀproﬁles satisfying a system of
weak linear inequalities and hence is closed and convex.
The following examples indicate the wide range of situations that may
be modeled as coalitional games and illustrate the notion of the core.
⋄Example 259.1 (A three-player majority game) Suppose that three
players can obtain one unit of payoﬀ, any two of them can obtain
α ∈[0, 1] independently of the actions of the third, and each player
alone can obtain nothing, independently of the actions of the remaining
two players. We can model this situation as the coalitional game ⟨N, v⟩
in which N = {1, 2, 3}, v(N) = 1, v(S) = α whenever |S| = 2, and
v({i}) = 0 for all i ∈N. The core of this game is the set of all nonneg-
ative payoﬀproﬁles (x1, x2, x3) for which x(N) = 1 and x(S) ≥α for
every two-player coalition S. Hence the core is nonempty if and only if
α ≤2/3.
⋄Example 259.2
An expedition of n people has discovered treasure in
the mountains; each pair of them can carry out one piece. A coalitional
game that models this situation is ⟨N, v⟩, where
v(S) =
 |S|/2
if |S| is even
(|S| −1)/2
if |S| is odd.
If |N| ≥4 is even then the core consists of the single payoﬀproﬁle
( 1
2, . . . , 1
2). If |N| ≥3 is odd then the core is empty.
? Exercise 259.3 (A production economy) A capitalist owns a factory
and each of w workers owns only his own labor power. Workers alone
can produce nothing; together with the capitalist, any group of m work-
ers can produce output worth f(m), where f: R+ →R+ is a concave
nondecreasing function with f(0) = 0. A coalitional game that models
this situation is ⟨N, v⟩where N = {c}∪W (player c being the capitalist
and W the set of workers) and
v(S) =
 0
if c /∈S
f(|S ∩W|)
if c ∈S.
Show that the core of this game is {x ∈RN: 0 ≤xi ≤f(w) −f(w −1)
for i ∈W and P
i∈N xi = f(w)}, where w = |W|, and interpret the
members of this set. (See also Exercises 268.1, 289.1, and 295.2.)

--- Sayfa 276 ---
260
Chapter 13. The Core
⋄Example 260.1 (A market for an indivisible good) In a market for an
indivisible good the set of buyers is B and the set of sellers is L. Each
seller holds one unit of the good and has a reservation price of 0; each
buyer wishes to purchase one unit of the good and has a reservation
price of 1.
We may model this market as a coalitional game with transferable
payoﬀas follows: N = B ∪L and v(S) = min{|S ∩B|, |S ∩L|} for
each coalition S. If |B| > |L| then the core consists of the single payoﬀ
proﬁle in which every seller receives 1 and every buyer receives 0. To
see this, suppose that the payoﬀproﬁle x is in the core. Let b be a
buyer whose payoﬀis minimal among the payoﬀs of all the buyers and
let ℓbe a seller whose payoﬀis minimal among the payoﬀs of all the
sellers.
Since x is in the core we have xb + xℓ≥v({b, ℓ}) = 1 and
|L| = v(N) = x(N) ≥|B|xb + |L|xℓ≥(|B| −|L|)xb + |L|, which implies
that xb = 0 and xℓ≥1 and hence (using v(N) = |L| and the fact that
ℓis the worst-oﬀseller) xi = 1 for every seller i.
? Exercise 260.2
Calculate and interpret the core of this game when
|B| = |L|.
⋄Example 260.3 (A majority game) A group of n players, where n ≥3
is odd, has one unit to divide among its members. A coalition consisting
of a majority of the players can divide the unit among its members as
it wishes. This situation is modeled by the coalitional game ⟨N, v⟩in
which |N| = n and
v(S) =

1
if |S| ≥n/2
0
otherwise.
This game has an empty core by the following argument. Assume that
x is in the core. If |S| = n −1 then v(S) = 1 so that P
i∈S xi ≥1. Since
there are n coalitions of size n−1 we thus have P
{S:|S|=n−1}
P
i∈S xi ≥
n. On the other hand
X
{S:|S|=n−1}
X
i∈S
xi =
X
i∈N
X
{S:|S|=n−1, S∋i}
xi =
X
i∈N
(n −1)xi = n −1,
a contradiction.
? Exercise 260.4 (Convex games) A coalitional game with transferable
payoﬀ⟨N, v⟩is convex if
v(S) + v(T) ≤v(S ∪T) + v(S ∩T)
for all coalitions S and T, where v(∅) = 0. Let ⟨{1, . . . , n}, v⟩be such a

--- Sayfa 277 ---
13.2 The Core
261
game and deﬁne the payoﬀproﬁle x by xi = v(Si ∪{i}) −v(Si) for each
i ∈N, where Si = {1, . . . , i −1} (with S1 = ∅). Show that x is in the
core of ⟨{1, . . . , n}, v⟩.
? Exercise 261.1 (Simple games) A coalitional game with transferable
payoﬀ⟨N, v⟩is simple if v(S) is either 0 or 1 for every coalition S,
and v(N) = 1; a coalition S for which v(S) = 1 is called a winning
coalition.
A player who belongs to all winning coalitions is a veto
player.
a. Show that if there is no veto player then the core is empty.
b. Show that if the set of veto players is nonempty then the core is
the set of all nonnegative feasible payoﬀproﬁles that give zero to all
other players.
? Exercise 261.2 (Zerosum games) A coalitional game with transferable
payoﬀ⟨N, v⟩is zerosum if v(S)+v(N \S) = v(N) for every coalition S;
it is additive if v(S) + v(T) = v(S ∪T) for all disjoint coalitions S and
T. Show that a zerosum game that is not additive has an empty core.
We remarked earlier that when modeling as a coalitional game a sit-
uation in which the actions of any coalition aﬀect its complement there
may be several ways to deﬁne v(S), each entailing a diﬀerent interpreta-
tion. The next exercise asks you to deﬁne v(S) to be the highest payoﬀ
that S can guarantee independently of the behavior of N \ S.
? Exercise 261.3 (Pollute the lake) Each of n factories draws water from
a lake and discharges waste into the same lake. Each factory requires
pure water. It costs any factory kc to purify its water supply, where k is
the number of factories that do not treat their waste before discharging
it into the lake; it costs any factory b to treat its waste. Assume that
c ≤b ≤nc.
a. Model this situation as a coalitional game under the assumption
that the worth v(S) of any coalition S is the highest payoﬀthat
S can guarantee (that is, v(S) is the highest payoﬀof S under the
assumption that none of the other factories treats its waste).
b. Find the conditions under which the game has a nonempty core and
the conditions under which the core is a singleton.
c. Discuss the interpretation of the core of this game, taking into ac-
count that the deﬁnition of v(S) makes assumptions about the be-
havior of the players outside S.

--- Sayfa 278 ---
262
Chapter 13. The Core
13.3
Nonemptiness of the Core
We now derive a condition under which the core of a coalitional game
is nonempty. Since the core is deﬁned by a system of linear inequalities
such a condition could be derived from the conditions for the existence of
a solution to a general system of inequalities. However, since the system
of inequalities that deﬁnes the core has a special structure we are able
to derive a more speciﬁc condition.
Denote by C the set of all coalitions, for any coalition S denote by RS
the |S|-dimensional Euclidian space in which the dimensions are indexed
by the members of S, and denote by 1S ∈RN the characteristic vector
of S given by
(1S)i =
n 1
if i ∈S
0
otherwise.
A collection (λS)S∈C of numbers in [0, 1] is a balanced collection of
weights if for every player i the sum of λS over all the coalitions that
contain i is 1: P
S∈C λS1S = 1N. As an example, let |N| = 3. Then
the collection (λS) in which λS = 1
2 if |S| = 2 and λS = 0 otherwise is
a balanced collection of weights; so too is the collection (λS) in which
λS = 1 if |S| = 1 and λS = 0 otherwise. A game ⟨N, v⟩is balanced if
P
S∈C λSv(S) ≤v(N) for every balanced collection of weights.
One interpretation of the notion of a balanced game is the following.
Each player has one unit of time, which he must distribute among all the
coalitions of which he is a member. In order for a coalition S to be active
for the fraction of time λS, all its members must be active in S for this
fraction of time, in which case the coalition yields the payoﬀλSv(S).
In this interpretation the condition that the collection of weights be
balanced is a feasibility condition on the players’ allocation of time, and
a game is balanced if there is no feasible allocation of time that yields
the players more than v(N).
The following result is referred to as the Bondareva–Shapley theorem.
Proposition 262.1 A coalitional game with transferable payoﬀhas a
nonempty core if and only if it is balanced.
Proof. Let ⟨N, v⟩be a coalitional game with transferable payoﬀ. First let
x be a payoﬀproﬁle in the core of ⟨N, v⟩and let (λS)S∈C be a balanced
collection of weights. Then
X
S∈C
λSv(S) ≤
X
S∈C
λSx(S) =
X
i∈N
xi
X
S∋i
λS =
X
i∈N
xi = v(N),
so that ⟨N, v⟩is balanced.

--- Sayfa 279 ---
13.4 Markets with Transferable Payoﬀ
263
Now assume that ⟨N, v⟩is balanced. Then there is no balanced collec-
tion (λS)S∈C of weights for which P
S∈C λSv(S) > v(N). Therefore the
convex set {(1N, v(N) + ϵ) ∈R|N|+1: ϵ > 0} is disjoint from the convex
cone
{y ∈R|N|+1: y =
X
S∈C
λS(1S, v(S)) where λS ≥0 for all S ∈C},
since if not then 1N = P
S∈C λS1S, so that (λS)S∈C is a balanced col-
lection of weights and P
S∈C λSv(S) > v(N). Thus by the separating
hyperplane theorem (see, for example, Rockafeller (1970, Theorem 11.3))
there is a nonzero vector (αN, α) ∈R|N| × R such that
(αN, α) · y ≥0 > (αN, α) · (1N, v(N) + ϵ)
(263.1)
for all y in the cone and all ϵ > 0. Since (1N, v(N)) is in the cone, we
have α < 0.
Now let x = αN/(−α). Since (1S, v(S)) is in the cone for all S ∈C,
we have x(S) = x·1S ≥v(S) for all S ∈C by the left-hand inequality in
(263.1), and v(N) ≥1Nx = x(N) from the right-hand inequality. Thus
v(N) = x(N), so that the payoﬀproﬁle x is in the core of ⟨N, v⟩.
2
? Exercise 263.2
Let N = {1, 2, 3, 4}. Show that the game ⟨N, v⟩in
which
v(S) =
( 1
if S = N
3
4
if S = {1, 2}, {1, 3}, {1, 4}, or {2, 3, 4}
0
otherwise
has an empty core, by using the fact that there exists a balanced collec-
tion (λS)S∈C of weights in which λS = 0 for all coalitions S that are not
equal to {1, 2}, {1, 3}, {1, 4}, or {2, 3, 4}.
13.4
Markets with Transferable Payoﬀ
13.4.1
Deﬁnition
In this section we apply the concept of the core to a classical model of an
economy. Each of the agents in the economy is endowed with a bundle
of goods that can be used as inputs in a production process that the
agent can operate. All production processes produce the same output,
which can be transferred between the agents. Formally, a market with
transferable payoﬀconsists of
• a ﬁnite set N (the set of agents)

--- Sayfa 280 ---
264
Chapter 13. The Core
• a positive integer ℓ(the number of input goods)
• for each agent i ∈N a vector ωi ∈Rℓ
+ (the endowment of agent i)
• for each agent i ∈N a continuous, nondecreasing, and concave
function fi: Rℓ
+ →R+ (the production function of agent i).
An input vector is a member of Rℓ
+; a proﬁle (zi)i∈N of input vectors
for which P
i∈N zi = P
i∈N ωi is an allocation.
In such a market the agents may gain by cooperating: if their endow-
ments are complementary then in order to maximize total output they
may need to exchange inputs. However, the agents’ interests conﬂict as
far as the distribution of the beneﬁts of cooperation is concerned. Thus
a game-theoretic analysis is called for.
We can model a market with transferable payoﬀ⟨N, ℓ, (ωi), (fi)⟩as a
coalitional game with transferable payoﬀ⟨N, v⟩in which N is the set of
agents and for each coalition S we have
v(S) = max
(zi)i∈S
(X
i∈S
fi(zi): zi ∈Rℓ
+ and
X
i∈S
zi =
X
i∈S
ωi
)
.
(264.1)
That is, v(S) is the maximal total output that the members of S can
produce by themselves. We deﬁne the core of a market to be the core
of the associated coalitional game.
Note that our assumptions that all agents produce the same good and
the production of any coalition S is independent of the behavior of N \S
are essential.
13.4.2
Nonemptiness of the Core
We now use the Bondareva–Shapley theorem (262.1) to show that every
market with transferable payoﬀhas a nonempty core.
Proposition 264.2 Every market with transferable payoﬀhas a non-
empty core.
Proof. Let ⟨N, ℓ, (ωi), (fi)⟩be a market with transferable payoﬀand let
⟨N, v⟩be the coalitional game deﬁned in (264.1). By the Bondareva–
Shapley theorem it suﬃces to show that ⟨N, v⟩is balanced. Let (λS)S∈C
be a balanced collection of weights. We must show that P
S∈C λSv(S) ≤
v(N).
For each coalition S let (zS
i )i∈S be a solution of the problem
(264.1) deﬁning v(S). For each i ∈N let z∗
i = P
S∈C,S∋i λSzS
i . We have
X
i∈N
z∗
i =
X
i∈N
X
S∈C,S∋i
λSzS
i =
X
S∈C
X
i∈S
λSzS
i =
X
S∈C
λS
X
i∈S
zS
i =

--- Sayfa 281 ---
13.4 Markets with Transferable Payoﬀ
265
X
S∈C
λS
X
i∈S
ωi =
X
i∈N
ωi
X
S∈C,S∋i
λS =
X
i∈N
ωi,
where the last equality follows from the fact that (λS)S∈C is a balanced
collection of weights. It follows from the deﬁnition of v(N) that v(N) ≥
P
i∈N fi(z∗
i ); the concavity of each function fi and the fact that the
collection of weights is balanced implies that
X
i∈N
fi(z∗
i ) ≥
X
i∈N
X
S∈C,S∋i
λSfi(zS
i ) =
X
S∈C
λS
X
i∈S
fi(zS
i ) =
X
S∈C
λSv(S),
completing the proof.
2
⋄Example 265.1
Consider the market with transferable payoﬀin which
N = K ∪M, there are two input goods (ℓ= 2), ωi = (1, 0) if i ∈K,
ωi = (0, 1) if i ∈M, and fi(a, b) = min{a, b} for every i ∈N. Then
v(S) = min{|K∩S|, |M∩S|}. By Proposition 264.2 the core is nonempty.
If |K| < |M| then it consists of a single point, in which each agent in
K receives the payoﬀof 1 and each agent in M receive the payoﬀof 0;
the proof is identical to that for the market with an indivisible good in
Example 260.1.
? Exercise 265.2
Consider the market with transferable payoﬀlike that
of the previous example in which there are ﬁve agents, ω1 = ω2 = (2, 0),
and ω3 = ω4 = ω5 = (0, 1).
a. Find the coalitional form of this market and calculate the core.
b. Suppose that agents 3, 4, and 5 form a syndicate: they enter coali-
tions only as a block, so that we have a three-player game. Does the
core predict that the formation of the syndicate beneﬁts its members?
Interpret your answer.
13.4.3
The Core and the Competitive Equilibria
Classical economic theory deﬁnes the solution of “competitive equilib-
rium” for a market. We now show that the core of a market contains its
competitive equilibria.
We begin with the simple case in which all agents have the same pro-
duction function f and there is only one input. Let ω∗= P
i∈N ωi/|N|,
the average endowment.
Given the concavity of f, the allocation in
which each agent receives the amount ω∗of the input maximizes the
total output. Let p∗be the slope of a tangent to the production func-
tion at ω∗and let g be the aﬃne function with slope p∗for which
g(ω∗) = f(ω∗) (see Figure 266.1). Then (g(ωi))i∈N is in the core since

--- Sayfa 282 ---
266
Chapter 13. The Core

f(z)
g(z)
ω∗
0
z →
Figure 266.1 The production function f of each agent and the function g in a
market in which there is a single input.
v(S) = |S|f((P
i∈S ωi)/|S|) ≤|S|g((P
i∈S ωi)/|S|) = P
i∈S g(ωi) and
v(N) = |N|f((P
i∈N ωi)/|N|) = |N|f(ω∗) = |N|g(ω∗) = P
i∈N g(ωi).
The payoﬀproﬁle (g(ωi))i∈N can be achieved by each agent trading
input for output at the price p∗(each unit of input costs p∗units of
output): if trade at this price is possible then agent i maximizes his
payoﬀby choosing the amount z of input to solve maxz(f(z)−p∗(z−ωi)),
the solution of which is ω∗. In terms of the next deﬁnition, the pair
(p∗, (z∗
i )i∈N) where z∗
i = ω∗for all i ∈N is a competitive equilibrium
of the market.
We deﬁne a competitive equilibrium of a market with transferable
payoﬀas a pair (p∗, (z∗
i )i∈N) consisting of a vector p∗∈Rℓ
+ (the vector
of input prices) and an allocation (z∗
i )i∈N such that for each agent i the
vector z∗
i solves the problem
max
zi∈Rℓ
+
(fi(zi) −p∗(zi −ωi)).
(266.1)
If (p∗, (z∗
i )i∈N) is a competitive equilibrium then we refer to fi(z∗
i ) −
p∗(z∗
i −ωi), the value of the maximum in (266.1), as a competitive
payoﬀof agent i. The idea is that the agents can trade inputs at ﬁxed
prices, which are expressed in terms of units of output. If after buying
and selling inputs agent i holds the bundle zi then his net expenditure,
in units of output, is p∗(zi −ωi); he can produce fi(zi) units of output,
so that his net payoﬀis fi(zi) −p∗(zi −ωi). A price vector p∗generates
a competitive equilibrium if, when each agent chooses his trades to max-
imize his payoﬀ, the resulting proﬁle (z∗
i )i∈N of input vectors is feasible
in the sense that it is an allocation.

--- Sayfa 283 ---
13.4 Markets with Transferable Payoﬀ
267
We now show that any proﬁle of competitive payoﬀs in a market with
transferable payoﬀis in the core.
Proposition 267.1 Every proﬁle of competitive payoﬀs in a market
with transferable payoﬀis in the core of the market.
Proof.
Let ⟨N, ℓ, (ωi), (fi)⟩be a market with transferable payoﬀ, let
⟨N, v⟩be the associated coalitional game, let (p∗, (z∗
i )i∈N) be a com-
petitive equilibrium of the market, and assume contrary to the result
that the proﬁle of associated competitive payoﬀs is not in the core.
Then there is a coalition S and a vector (zi)i∈S such that P
i∈S zi =
P
i∈S ωi and P
i∈S fi(zi) > P
i∈S(fi(z∗
i ) −p∗z∗
i + p∗ωi). It follows that
P
i∈S(fi(zi) −p∗zi) > P
i∈S(fi(z∗
i ) −p∗z∗
i ) and hence for at least one
agent i ∈S we have fi(zi) −p∗zi > fi(z∗
i ) −p∗z∗
i , contradicting the
fact that z∗
i is a solution of (266.1). Finally, v(N) = P
i∈N fi(z∗
i ) since
for any (zi)i∈N such that P
i∈N zi = P
i∈N ωi we have P
i∈N fi(zi) ≤
P
i∈N(fi(z∗
i ) −p∗z∗
i + p∗ωi) = P
i∈N fi(z∗
i ).
2
Proposition 267.1 provides an alternative route to show that the core
of a market with transferable payoﬀis nonempty, since every market
with transferable payoﬀhas a competitive equilibrium, as the following
exercise shows.
? Exercise 267.2 Let ⟨N, ℓ, (ωi), (fi)⟩be a market with transferable pay-
oﬀin which every component of P
i∈N ωi is positive, let Xi = {(zi, yi) ∈
Rℓ
+ × R: yi ≤fi(zi)} for each i ∈N, and let {z∗
i }i∈N be a solution of
max
{zi}i∈N
(X
i∈N
fi(zi): subject to
X
i∈N
zi ≤
X
i∈N
ωi
)
.
Show that the coeﬃcients of the hyperplane that separates P
i∈N Xi
from {(z, y) ∈Rℓ× R: z ≤P
i∈N z∗
i and y ≥P
i∈N fi(z∗
i )} deﬁne com-
petitive prices.
The notion of competitive equilibrium is intended to capture a world
in which the bargaining power of each agent is small. In a market that
contains only a few agents some may have strong bargaining positions,
and the core may contain outcomes very diﬀerent from the competitive
equilibrium. However, in a large market, where each agent’s action has
only a small eﬀect on the outcome, we might expect the core to contain
only outcomes that are similar to the competitive equilibrium.
The
following exercise illustrates this idea in a special case; in Section 13.6.2
we study the idea in a more general context.

--- Sayfa 284 ---
268
Chapter 13. The Core
? Exercise 268.1 (A production economy) Let ⟨N, ℓ, (ωi), (fi)⟩be a mar-
ket with transferable payoﬀin which N = {1, . . . , k + 1}, ℓ= 2, ω1 =
(1, 0), ωi = (0, 1) for i̸ = 1, and fi = f for all i ∈N, with f(0, m) = 0 for
all m, f(1, 0) = 0, and limm→∞f(1, m) < ∞. Suppose that the input
goods are indivisible. The associated coalitional game is the same as
that in Exercise 259.3. Show that for all ϵ > 0 there is an integer k∗(ϵ)
such that for all k > k∗(ϵ) no member of the core gives player 1 a payoﬀ
less than f(1, k) −ϵ. Give an economic interpretation of this result.
13.5
Coalitional Games without Transferable Payoﬀ
In a coalitional game with transferable payoﬀeach coalition S is char-
acterized by a single number v(S), with the interpretation that v(S) is
a payoﬀthat may be distributed in any way among the members of S.
We now study a more general concept, in which each coalition cannot
necessarily achieve all distributions of some ﬁxed payoﬀ; rather, each
coalition S is characterized by an arbitrary set V (S) of consequences.
▶Definition 268.2 A coalitional game (without transferable payoﬀ)
consists of
• a ﬁnite set N (the set of players)
• a set X (the set of consequences)
• a function V that assigns to every nonempty subset S of N (a
coalition) a set V (S) ⊆X
• for each player i ∈N a preference relation ≿i on X.
Any coalitional game with transferable payoﬀ⟨N, v⟩(Deﬁnition 257.1)
can be associated with a general coalitional game ⟨N, X, V, (≿i)i∈N⟩as
follows: X = RN, V (S) = {x ∈RN: P
i∈S xi = v(S) and xj = 0 if j ∈
N \ S} for each coalition S, and x ≿i y if and only if xi ≥yi. Under
this association the set of coalitional games with transferable payoﬀis a
subset of the set of all coalitional games.
The deﬁnition of the core of a general coalitional game is a natural
extension of our deﬁnition for the core of a game with transferable payoﬀ
(Deﬁnition 258.2).
▶Definition 268.3
The core of the coalitional game ⟨N, V, X,
(≿i)i∈N⟩is the set of all x ∈V (N) for which there is no coalition S
and y ∈V (S) for which y ≻i x for all i ∈S.
Under conditions like that of balancedness for a coalitional game with
transferable payoﬀ(see Section 13.3) the core of a general coalitional

--- Sayfa 285 ---
13.6 Exchange Economies
269
game is nonempty (see Scarf (1967), Billera (1970), and Shapley (1973)).
We do not discuss these conditions here.
13.6
Exchange Economies
13.6.1
Deﬁnitions
A generalization of the notion of a market with transferable payoﬀis the
following. An exchange economy consists of
• a ﬁnite set N (the set of agents)
• a positive integer ℓ(the number of goods)
• for each agent i ∈N a vector ωi ∈Rℓ
+ (the endowment of agent i)
such that every component of P
i∈N ωi is positive
• for each agent i ∈N a nondecreasing, continuous, and quasi-concave
preference relation ≿i over the set Rℓ
+ of bundles of goods.
The interpretation is that ωi is the bundle of goods that agent i owns
initially. The requirement that every component of P
i∈N ωi be positive
means that there is a positive quantity of every good available in the
economy. Goods may be transferred between the agents, but there is no
payoﬀthat is freely transferable.
An allocation is a distribution of the total endowment in the economy
among the agents: that is, a proﬁle (xi)i∈N with xi ∈Rℓ
+ for all i ∈N
and P
i∈N xi = P
i∈N ωi. A competitive equilibrium of an exchange
economy is a pair (p∗, (x∗
i )i∈N) consisting of a vector p∗∈Rℓ
+ with
p∗̸ = 0 (the price vector) and an allocation (x∗
i )i∈N such that for each
agent i we have p∗x∗
i ≤p∗ωi and
x∗
i ≿i xi for any xi for which p∗xi ≤p∗ωi.
(269.1)
If (p∗, (x∗
i )i∈N) is a competitive equilibrium then (x∗
i )i∈N is a compet-
itive allocation.
As in the case of a competitive equilibrium of a market with transfer-
able payoﬀ, the idea is that the agents can trade goods at ﬁxed prices.
Here there is no homogeneous output in terms of which the prices are
expressed; rather, we can think of p∗
j as the “money” price of good j.
Given any price vector p, each agent i chooses a bundle that is most
desirable (according to his preferences) among all those that are aﬀord-
able (i.e. satisfy pxi ≤pωi). Typically an agent chooses a bundle that
contains more of some goods and less of others than he initially owns: he
“demands” some goods and “supplies” others. The requirement in the

--- Sayfa 286 ---
270
Chapter 13. The Core
O1
O2
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
rω
rx∗
I1
I′
1
I2
I′
2
r
y′
ry′′
Figure 270.1 An Edgeworth box, illustrating an exchange economy in which there
are two agents and two goods.
A competitive equilibrium price ratio is given by
the slope of the line through ω and x∗; x∗corresponds to a competitive allocation.
The core is the set of all allocations that correspond to points on the line joining y′
and y′′.
deﬁnition of competitive equilibrium that the proﬁle of chosen bundles
be an allocation means that for every good the sum of the individuals’
demands is equal to the sum of their supplies.
A standard result in economic theory is that an exchange economy in
which every agent’s preference relation is increasing has a competitive
equilibrium (see, for example, Arrow and Hahn (1971, Theorem 5 on
p. 119)1). Note that an economy may possess many such equilibria.
An exchange economy that contains two agents (|N| = 2) and two
goods (ℓ= 2) can be conveniently represented in a diagram like that in
Figure 270.1, which is known as an Edgeworth box. Bundles of goods
consumed by agent 1 are measured from the origin O1 in the bottom
left, while bundles consumed by agent 2 are measured from the origin
O2 in the top right. The width of the box formed by the two pairs of
axes is the total endowment of good 1 in the economy and the height
1Arrow and Hahn’s result is for the more general notion of an economy with
production. To apply it here, let the production set of each ﬁrm f be Yf = {0}.
Note that if every agent’s preference relation is increasing then every agent is resource
related (in the sense of Arrow and Hahn) to every other agent.

--- Sayfa 287 ---
13.6 Exchange Economies
271
of the box is the total endowment of good 2. Thus each point x in the
box corresponds to an allocation in which agent i receives the bundle
x measured from Oi; the point labeled ω corresponds to the pair of
endowments. The curved lines labeled Ii and I′
i are indiﬀerence curves
of agent i: if x and y are points on one of these curves then x ∼i y.
The straight line passing through ω and x∗is (relative to Oi) the set
of all bundles xi for which pxi = pωi. The point x∗corresponds to a
competitive allocation since the most preferred bundle of agent i in the
set {xi: pxi ≤pωi} is x∗when measured from origin Oi. The ratio of
the competitive prices is the negative of the slope of the straight line
through ω and x∗.
An exchange economy is closely related to a market (as deﬁned in
Section 13.4). In a market, payoﬀcan be directly transferred between
agents, while in an exchange economy only goods can be directly trans-
ferred. Thus we model an exchange economy as a coalitional game with-
out transferable payoﬀ. Precisely, we associate the exchange economy
⟨N, ℓ, (ωi), (≿i)⟩with the coalitional game ⟨N, X, V, (≿i)⟩where
• X = {(xi)i∈N: xi ∈Rℓ
+ for all i ∈N};
• V (S) = {(xi)i∈N ∈X: P
i∈S xi = P
i∈S ωi and xj = ωj for all j ∈
N \ S} for each coalition S;
• each preference relation ≿i is deﬁned by (xj)j∈N ≿i (yj)j∈N if and
only if xi ≿i yi.
The third condition expresses the assumption that each agent cares only
about his own consumption.
We deﬁne the core of an exchange
economy to be the core of the associated coalitional game.
13.6.2
The Core and the Competitive Equilibria
For the coalitional game ⟨N, X, V, (≿i)⟩associated with the exchange
economy ⟨N, ℓ, (ωi), (≿i)⟩the set V (N) is the set of all allocations and
for each j ∈N we have V ({j}) = {(ωi)i∈N}. Thus the core of a two-
agent economy is the set of all allocations (xi)i∈N such that xj ≿j ωj for
each agent j and there is no allocation (x′
i)i∈N such that x′
j ≻j xj for
both agents j. For example, in the Edgeworth box in Figure 270.1 the
core corresponds to the locus of points in the area bounded by I′
1 and
I′
2 for which an indiﬀerence curve of agent 1 and an indiﬀerence curve
of agent 2 share a common tangent (i.e. it is the curved line passing
through y′, x∗, and y′′). In particular, the core contains the competitive
allocation. We now show that this is a general property.

--- Sayfa 288 ---
272
Chapter 13. The Core
Proposition 272.1 Every competitive allocation in an exchange econ-
omy is in the core.
Proof.
Let E = ⟨N, ℓ, (ωi), (≿i)⟩be an exchange economy, let (p∗,
(x∗
i )i∈N) be a competitive equilibrium of E, and assume that (x∗
i )i∈N
is not in the core of E. Then there is a coalition S and (yi)i∈S with
P
i∈S yi = P
i∈S ωi such that yi ≻i x∗
i for all i ∈S; using (269.1)
we have p∗yi > p∗ωi for all i ∈S.
Hence p∗P
i∈S yi > p∗P
i∈S ωi,
contradicting P
i∈S yi = P
i∈S ωi.
2
Note that it follows from this result that an economy that has a
competitive equilibrium has a nonempty core.
By examining an Edgeworth box we can see that in a two-good two-
agent economy the core may be large. However, we now show that as
the number of agents increases, the core shrinks to the set of competitive
allocations. That is, in a large enough economy the predictions of the
competitive equilibrium—a concept that is based on agents who trade at
ﬁxed prices—are very close to those of the core—a concept that is based
on the ability of a group of agents to improve its lot by forming an au-
tonomous subeconomy, without reference to prices. Put diﬀerently, in a
large enough economy the only outcomes that are immune to deviations
by groups of agents are competitive equilibrium allocations.
To state the result precisely, let E be an exchange economy in which
there are n agents. For any positive integer k let kE be the economy
derived from E in which there are kn agents—k copies of each agent in
E. We refer to an agent j in kE who is a copy of agent i in E as being
of type i = ι(j). The comparison between the core of E and that of kE
is facilitated by the following result.
Lemma 272.2 (Equal treatment in the core) Let E be an exchange
economy in which the preference relation of every agent is increasing and
strictly quasi-concave, and let k be a positive integer. In any allocation
in the core of kE all agents of the same type obtain the same bundle.
Proof. Let E = ⟨N, ℓ, (ωi), (≿i)⟩and let x be an allocation in the core
of kE in which there are two agents of type t∗whose bundles are diﬀer-
ent. We now show that there is a distribution of the endowment of the
coalition consisting of the worst-oﬀagent of each type that makes every
member of the coalition better oﬀthan he is in x. Precisely, for each
type t select one agent, it, in kE who is least well oﬀ(according to ≿t)
in x among all agents of type t, and let S be the coalition (of size |N|) of
these agents. For each type t let zt be the average bundle of the agents

--- Sayfa 289 ---
13.6 Exchange Economies
273
of type t in the allocation x: zt = P
{j:ι(j)=t} xj/k. Then we have
• P
t∈N zt = P
t∈N ωt;
• zt ≿t xit (otherwise, zt ≺t xj whenever ι(j) = t, so that by the
quasi-concavity of ≿t we have zt ≺t zt, a contradiction);
• zt∗≻t∗xit∗(by the strict quasi-concavity of the preference rela-
tions).
That is, (i) it is feasible for the coalition S to assign to each agent j ∈S
the bundle zι(j) (since P
j∈S zι(j) = P
t∈N zt = P
j∈S ωj), (ii) for every
agent j ∈S the bundle zι(j) is at least as desirable as xj, and (iii) for
the agent j ∈S of type t∗the bundle zι(j) is preferable to xj.
Since each agent’s preference relation is increasing we can modify the
allocation (zt)t∈N by reducing t∗’s bundle by a small amount and dis-
tributing this amount equally among the other members of S so that we
have a proﬁle (z′
t)t∈N with P
t∈N z′
t = P
t∈N ωt and z′
ι(j) ≻ι(j) xj for all
j ∈S. This contradicts the fact that x is in the core of kE.
2
Given this result, for any positive integer k we can identify the core
of kE with a proﬁle of |N| bundles, one for each type.
Under this
identiﬁcation it is clear that the core of kE is a subset of the core of
E. We now show that the core of kE shrinks to the set of competitive
allocations of E as k increases.
Proposition 273.1 Let E be an exchange economy in which every
agent’s preference relation is increasing and strictly quasi-concave and
every agent’s endowment of every good is positive. Let x be an allocation
in E. If for every positive integer k the allocation in kE in which every
agent of each type t receives the bundle xt is in the core of kE then x
is a competitive allocation of E.
Proof. Let E = ⟨N, ℓ, (ωi), (≿i)⟩. Let
Q =
(X
t∈N
αtzt:
X
t∈N
αt = 1, αt ≥0, and zt + ωt ≻t xt for all t
)
.
Under our assumptions on preferences Q is convex. We claim that 0 /∈Q.
Suppose to the contrary that 0 = P
t∈N αtzt for some (αt) and (zt) with
P
t∈N αt = 1, αt ≥0, and zt + ωt ≻t xt for all t. Suppose that every
αt is a rational number. (If not, we need to do some approximation.)
Choose an integer K large enough that Kαt is an integer for all t, let
S be a coalition in KE that consists of Kαt agents of each type t, and
let x′
i = zι(i) + ωi for each i ∈S. We have P
i∈S x′
i = P
t∈N Kαtzt +

--- Sayfa 290 ---
274
Chapter 13. The Core
P
i∈S ωi = P
i∈S ωi and x′
i ≻i xi for all i ∈S, contradicting the fact
that x is in the core of KE.
Now by the separating hyperplane theorem (see, for example, Rock-
afeller (1970, Theorem 11.3)) there is a nonzero vector p ∈Rℓsuch that
pz ≥0 if z ∈Q. Since all the agents’ preferences are increasing, each
unit vector is in Q (take zt = xt −ωt + 1{m} and αt = 1/|N| for each t,
where 1{m} is the mth unit vector in Rℓ). Thus p ≥0.
Now, for every agent i we have xi −ωi +ϵ ∈Q for every ϵ > 0, so that
p(xi −ωi + ϵ) ≥0. Taking ϵ small, we conclude that pxi ≥pωi for all i.
But x is an allocation, so pxi = pωi for all i.
Finally, we argue that if yi ≻i xi for some i ∈N then pyi > pωi,
so that by (269.1) x is a competitive allocation of E.
Suppose that
yi ≻i xi. Then yi −ωi ∈Q, so that by the choice of p we have pyi ≥pωi.
Furthermore, θyi ≻i xi for some θ < 1, so that θyi −ωi ∈Q and hence
θpyi ≥pωi; also pwi > 0 since every component of ωi is positive. Thus
pyi > pωi.
2
In any competitive equilibrium of kE all agents of the same type
consume the same bundle, so that any such equilibrium is naturally
associated with a competitive equilibrium of E. Thus the result shows
a sense in which the larger k is, the closer are the core and the set of
competitive allocations of kE.
? Exercise 274.1
Consider an exchange economy E in which there are
two goods and two agents; agent 1’s endowment is (1, 0) and her pref-
erences are represented by the utility function x1 + x2, while agent 2’s
endowment is (0, 1) and his preferences are represented by the utility
function min{x1, x2}. For each positive integer k ﬁnd the core and set
of competitive allocations of kE.
Notes
The notion of a coalitional game is due to von Neumann and Morgen-
stern (1944). In the early 1950s Gillies introduced the notion of the core
as a tool to study stable sets (his work is published in Gillies (1959));
Shapley and Shubik developed it as a solution concept. Proposition 262.1
is due to Bondareva (1963) and Shapley (1967).
The idea of model-
ing markets as coalitional games is due to von Neumann and Morgen-
stern (1944, pp. 583–584); it was developed by Shapley and Shubik (see,
for example, Shapley (1959) and Shubik (1959a)). Proposition 264.2 is
due to Shapley and Shubik (1969a). The idea of generalizing a coali-

--- Sayfa 291 ---
Notes
275
tional game to situations in which payoﬀis not transferable is due to
Shapley and Shubik (1953) and Luce and Raiﬀa (1957, pp. 234–235);
the formulation that we describe is due to Aumann and Peleg (1960).
Scarf (1967), Billera (1970), and Shapley (1973) discuss the nonempti-
ness of the core of a coalitional game without transferable payoﬀ. The
relation between the core and the set of competitive equilibria of an
economy was ﬁrst noticed by Edgeworth (1881, pp. 35–39).
The re-
lation between Edgeworth’s work and modern notions in game theory
was recognized by Shubik (1959a). Proposition 273.1 is due to Debreu
and Scarf (1963); for a diagrammatic proof for a two-agent two-good
economy see Varian (1992, pp. 387–392).
Example 259.2 is due to Shapley (inspired by the 1948 movie The
Treasure of the Sierra Madre). The game in Exercise 259.3 is analyzed
by Shapley and Shubik (1967). The market in Example 260.1 is studied
by Shapley (1959).
Exercise 260.4 is taken from Shapley (1971/72),
Exercise 261.3 from Shapley and Shubik (1969b), Exercise 265.2 from
Postlewaite and Rosenthal (1974), and Exercise 268.1 from Owen (1982,
Theorem IX.3.2).
Aumann (1989) contains an introduction to the theory of coalitional
games. Other references include Owen (1982), Shubik (1982), Moulin
(1986, 1988), Friedman (1990), and Myerson (1991).
Aumann (1964) provides an alternative formulation of Edgeworth’s
idea that the core converges to the set of competitive equilibria in a
large economy: he studies a model in which there is a continuum of
agents and shows that the core coincides with the set of competitive
equilibria. Axiomatizations of the core are surveyed by Peleg (1992).

--- Sayfa 293 ---
14
Stable Sets, the Bargaining Set, and the
Shapley Value
In contrast to the core, the solution concepts we study in this chapter
restrict the way that an objecting coalition may deviate, by requiring
that each possible deviation either itself be a stable outcome or be bal-
anced by a counterdeviation. These restrictions yield several solutions:
stable sets, the bargaining set, the kernel, the nucleolus, and the Shapley
value.
14.1
Two Approaches
The deﬁnition of the core does not restrict a coalition’s credible devia-
tions, beyond imposing a feasibility constraint. In particular it assumes
that any deviation is the end of the story and ignores the fact that a devi-
ation may trigger a reaction that leads to a diﬀerent ﬁnal outcome. The
solution concepts we study in this chapter consider various restrictions
on deviations that are motivated by these considerations.
In the ﬁrst approach we study (in Section 14.2), an objection by a
coalition to an outcome consists of an alternative outcome that is itself
constrained to be stable. The idea is that a deviation by a coalition will
lead via some sequence of events to a stable outcome and that a coalition
should choose to deviate on the basis of the ultimate eﬀect of its action,
not the proximate eﬀect. This stability condition is self-referential: a
stable outcome has the property that no coalition can achieve some other
stable outcome that improves the lot of all its members.
In the second approach (studied in Sections 14.3 and 14.4) the chain
of events that a deviation unleashes is cut short after two stages: the
stability condition is that for every objection to an outcome there is a
balancing counterobjection. Diﬀerent notions of objection and counter-
objection give rise to a number of diﬀerent solution concepts.

--- Sayfa 294 ---
278
Chapter 14. Stable Sets, Bargaining Set, and Shapley Value
The arguments captured by the solution concepts in this chapter are
attractive.
Nevertheless, it is our impression that there are few per-
suasive applications of the concepts. Consequently we simply describe
the concepts, discuss their interpretations, and give simple examples.
Throughout we restrict attention to coalitional games with transferable
payoﬀ.
14.2
The Stable Sets of von Neumann and Morgenstern
The idea behind the ﬁrst solution concept we study is that a coalition S
that is unsatisﬁed with the current division of v(N) can credibly ob-
ject by suggesting a stable division x of v(N) that is better for all the
members of S and is backed up by a threat to implement (xi)i∈S on
its own (by dividing the worth v(S) among its members). The logic
behind the requirement that an objection itself be stable is that other-
wise the objection may unleash a process involving further objections by
other coalitions, at the end of which some of members of the deviating
coalition may be worse oﬀ.
This idea leads to a deﬁnition in which a set of stable outcomes satisﬁes
two conditions: (i) for every outcome that is not stable some coalition
has a credible objection and (ii) no coalition has a credible objection
to any stable outcome. Note that this deﬁnition is self-referential and
admits the possibility that there be many stable sets.
We now turn to the formal deﬁnition.
Let ⟨N, v⟩be a coalitional
game with transferable payoﬀ. As in the previous chapter we assume
that ⟨N, v⟩is cohesive (see Deﬁnition 258.1). An imputation of ⟨N, v⟩
is a feasible payoﬀproﬁle x for which xi ≥v({i}) for all i ∈N; let X
be the set of all imputations of ⟨N, v⟩. We ﬁrst deﬁne objections (which
are not necessarily credible).
• An imputation x is an objection of the coalition S to the im-
putation y if xi > yi for all i ∈S and x(S) ≤v(S), in which case
we write x ≻S y.
(In the literature it is sometimes said that “x dominates y via S” if x is
an objection of S to y.) Since ⟨N, v⟩is cohesive we have x ≻S y if and
only if there is an S-feasible payoﬀvector (xi)i∈S for which xi > yi for all
i ∈S. The core of the game ⟨N, v⟩is the set of all imputations to which
there is no objection: {y ∈X: there is no coalition S and imputation
x for which x ≻S y}. The solution concept we now study is deﬁned as
follows.

--- Sayfa 295 ---
14.2 The Stable Sets of von Neumann and Morgenstern
279
▶Definition 279.1 A subset Y of the set X of imputations of a coali-
tional game with transferable payoﬀ⟨N, v⟩is a stable set if it satisﬁes
the following two conditions.
Internal stability If y ∈Y then for no z ∈Y does there exist a coali-
tion S for which z ≻S y.
External stability If z ∈X \Y then there exists y ∈Y such that y ≻S z
for some coalition S.
This deﬁnition can be written alternatively as follows. For any set Y
of imputations let D(Y ) be the set of imputations z for which there is
a coalition S and an imputation y ∈Y such that y ≻S z. Then internal
and external stability are equivalent to the conditions Y ⊆X \ D(Y )
and Y ⊇X \ D(Y ), so that a set Y of imputations is a stable set if and
only if Y = X \ D(Y ).
While the core is a single set of imputations, a game may have more
than one stable set (see the examples below) or none at all (as shown
by the complex example in Lucas (1969)); each such set may contain
many imputations.
Von Neumann and Morgenstern (1944) interpret
each stable set as corresponding to a standard of behavior, the idea
being that all the imputations in any given stable set correspond to some
mode of behavior while imputations in diﬀerent stable sets correspond
to diﬀerent modes of behavior.
Some simple properties of stable sets are given in the following result.
Proposition 279.2 a. The core is a subset of every stable set. b. No
stable set is a proper subset of any other. c. If the core is a stable set
then it is the only stable set.
Proof. a. Every member of the core is an imputation and no member is
dominated by an imputation, so the result follows from external stability.
b. This follows from external stability. c. This follows from (a) and (b).2
⋄Example 279.3 (The three-player majority game) Consider the game
⟨{1, 2, 3}, v⟩in which v(S) = 1 if |S| ≥2 and v(S) = 0 otherwise. One
stable set of this game is
Y = {(1/2, 1/2, 0), (1/2, 0, 1/2), (0, 1/2, 1/2)}.
This corresponds to the “standard of behavior” in which some pair of
players shares equally the single unit of payoﬀthat is available. The
internal stability of Y follows from the fact that for all x and y in Y
only one player prefers x to y. To check external stability, let z be an
imputation outside Y . Then there are two players i and j for whom

--- Sayfa 296 ---
280
Chapter 14. Stable Sets, Bargaining Set, and Shapley Value
zi <
1
2 and zj <
1
2, so that there is an imputation in Y that is an
objection of {i, j} to z.
For any c ∈[0, 1
2) and any i ∈{1, 2, 3} the set
Yi,c = {x ∈X: xi = c}
is also a stable set of the game. This corresponds to a “standard of
behavior” in which one of the players is singled out and given a ﬁxed
payoﬀ. The internal stability of Yi,c follows from the fact that for any
x and y in the set there is only one player who prefers x to y. To show
the external stability of Yi,c let i = 3 and let z be an imputation outside
Y3,c. If z3 > c then z1 + z2 < 1 −c and there exists x ∈Y3,c such that
x1 > z1 and x2 > z2, so that x ≻{1,2} z. If z3 < c and, say, z1 ≤z2 then
(1 −c, 0, c) ≻{1,3} z.
? Exercise 280.1 (Simple games) Let ⟨N, v⟩be a simple game (see Ex-
ercise 261.1). Let T be a minimal winning coalition (a winning coali-
tion that has no strict subset that is winning). Show that the set of
imputations that assign 0 to all players not in T is a stable set.
? Exercise 280.2 (A market for an indivisible good)
For the market
described in Example 260.1 with |B| ≥|L| show that the set
Y = {x ∈X: xi = xj if i, j ∈L or i, j ∈B},
is a stable set; interpret it.
? Exercise 280.3 (Three-player games) For a three-player game the set of
imputations can be represented geometrically as an equilateral triangle
with height v(N) in which each point represents the imputation whose
components are the distances to each edge. (Thus the corners correspond
to the three imputations that assign v(N) to a single player.) Use such a
diagram to ﬁnd the general form of a stable set of the three-player game
in which v({1, 2}) = β < 1, v({1, 3}) = v({1, 2, 3}) = 1, and v(S) = 0
otherwise. We can interpret this game as a market in which player 1 is
a seller and players 2 and 3 are buyers with reservation values β and 1
respectively. Interpret the stable sets of the game in terms of this market.
? Exercise 280.4
Player i is a dummy in ⟨N, v⟩if v(S ∪{i}) −v(S) =
v({i}) for every coalition S of which i is not a member. Show that if
player i is a dummy in ⟨N, v⟩then his payoﬀin any imputation in any
stable set is v({i}).
? Exercise 280.5
Let X be an arbitrary set (of outcomes) and let D
be a binary relation on X, with the interpretation that if x D y then

--- Sayfa 297 ---
14.3 The Bargaining Set, Kernel, and Nucleolus
281
x is an objection of some coalition S to y. Generalize the deﬁnition of
stable sets as follows. The set Y ⊆X of outcomes is stable if it satisﬁes
the following two conditions.
Internal stability If y ∈Y then there exists no z ∈Y such that z D y.
External stability If z ∈X \ Y then there exists y ∈Y such that y D z.
Consider an exchange economy (see Section 13.6) in which there are two
goods and two agents. Let X be the set of all allocations x for which
xi ≿i ωi for each agent i. Deﬁne the relation D by x D y if both agents
prefer x to y. Show that the only (generalized) stable set is the core of
the economy.
14.3
The Bargaining Set, Kernel, and Nucleolus
We now turn to the second approach that we described at the start
of the chapter. That is, we regard an objection by a coalition to be
convincing if no other coalition has a “balancing” counterobjection; we
do not require the objection or counterobjection to be themselves stable
in any sense. We study three solution concepts that diﬀer in the nature
of the objections and counterobjections.
14.3.1
The Bargaining Set
Let x be an imputation in a coalitional game with transferable payoﬀ
⟨N, v⟩. Deﬁne objections and counterobjections as follows.
• A pair (y, S), where S is a coalition and y is an S-feasible payoﬀ
vector, is an objection of i against j to x if S includes i but not
j and yk > xk for all k ∈S.
• A pair (z, T), where T is a coalition and z is a T-feasible payoﬀvec-
tor, is a counterobjection to the objection (y, S) of i against
j if T includes j but not i, zk ≥xk for all k ∈T \ S, and zk ≥yk
for all k ∈T ∩S.
Such an objection is an argument by one player against another. An
objection of i against j to x speciﬁes a coalition S that includes i but
not j and a division y of v(S) that is preferred by all members of S to
x. A counterobjection to (y, S) by j speciﬁes an alternative coalition T
that contains j but not i and a division of v(T) that is at least as good
as y for all the members of T who are also in S and is at least as good
as x for the other members of T. The solution concept that we study is
deﬁned as follows.

--- Sayfa 298 ---
282
Chapter 14. Stable Sets, Bargaining Set, and Shapley Value
▶Definition 282.1 The bargaining set of a coalitional game with
transferable payoﬀis the set of all imputations x with the property
that for every objection (y, S) of any player i against any other player j
to x there is a counterobjection to (y, S) by j.
The bargaining set models the stable arrangements in a society in
which any argument that any player i makes against an imputation x
takes the following form: “I get too little in the imputation x and j gets
too much; I can form a coalition that excludes j in which everybody
is better oﬀthan in x”. Such an argument is ineﬀective as far as the
bargaining set is concerned if player j can respond as follows: “Your
demand is not justiﬁed; I can form a coalition that excludes you in
which everybody is at least as well oﬀas they are in x and the players
who participate in your coalition obtain at least what you oﬀer them.”
The bargaining set, like the other solution concepts in this section,
assumes that the argument underlying an objection for which there is
no counterobjection undermines the stability of an outcome. This fact
is taken as given, and is not derived from more primitive assumptions
about the players’ behavior. The appropriateness of the solution in a
particular situation thus depends on the extent to which the participants
in that situation regard the existence of an objection for which there is
no counterobjection as a reason to change the outcome.
Note that an imputation is in the core if and only if no player has
an objection against any other player; hence the core is a subset of the
bargaining set. We show later (in Corollary 288.3) that the bargaining
set of every game is nonempty.
⋄Example 282.2 (The three-player majority game) Consider the three-
player majority game.
The core of this game is empty (see Exam-
ple 259.1) and the game has many stable sets (see Example 279.3). The
bargaining set of the game is the singleton {( 1
3, 1
3, 1
3)}, by the following
argument. Let x be an imputation and suppose that (y, S) is an objec-
tion of i against j to x. Then we must have S = {i, h}, where h is the
third player and yh < 1 −xi (since yi > xi and y(S) = v(S) = 1). For j
to have a counterobjection to (y, S) we need yh + xj ≤1. Thus for x to
be in the bargaining set we require that for all players i, j, and h we have
yh ≤1 −xj whenever yh < 1 −xi, which implies that 1 −xi ≤1 −xj or
xj ≤xi for all i and j, so that x = ( 1
3, 1
3, 1
3). Obviously this imputation
is in the bargaining set.
⋄Example 282.3 (My aunt and I ) Let ⟨{1, 2, 3, 4}, v⟩be a simple game
(see Exercise 261.1) in which v(S) = 1 if and only if S contains one of

--- Sayfa 299 ---
14.3 The Bargaining Set, Kernel, and Nucleolus
283
the coalitions {2, 3, 4} or {1, i} for i ∈{2, 3, 4}. (Player 2 is “I” and
player 1 is his aunt.) In this game, player 1 appears to be in a stronger
position than the other players since she needs the cooperation of only
one player to form a winning coalition. If x is an imputation for which
x2 < x3 then player 2 has an objection against 3 (via {1, 2}) to x for
which there is no counterobjection. Thus if x is in the bargaining set
then x2 = x3 = x4 = α, say. Any objection of player 1 against player 2
to x takes the form (y, {1, j}) where j = 3 or 4 and yj < 3α; there
is no counterobjection if and only if α + 3α + α > 1, or α > 1
5. An
objection of player 2 against 1 to x must use the coalition {2, 3, 4} and
give one of the players 3 or 4 less than (1 −α)/2; player 1 does not have
a counterobjection if and only if 1 −3α + (1 −α)/2 > 1, or α <
1
7.
Hence the bargaining set is {(1 −3α, α, α, α): 1
7 ≤α ≤1
5}. (Note that
by contrast the core is empty.)
We saw (Example 265.1) that the competition inherent in the core
can drive to zero the payoﬀof players holding goods that are in excess
supply. The following exercise gives an example that shows how this
intense competition is muted in the bargaining set.
? Exercise 283.1 (A market) Consider the coalitional game derived from
the market with transferable payoﬀin Exercise 265.2. Show that the
bargaining set of this game is {(α, α, β, β, β): 0 ≤α ≤3
2 and 2α + 3β =
3}. Contrast this set with the core and give an interpretation.
14.3.2
The Kernel
We now describe another solution that, like the bargaining set, is de-
ﬁned by the condition that to every objection there is a counterobjec-
tion; it diﬀers from the bargaining set in the nature of objections and
counterobjections that are considered eﬀective.
Let x be an imputation in a coalitional game with transferable payoﬀ
⟨N, v⟩; for any coalition S call e(S, x) = v(S) −x(S) the excess of S. If
the excess of the coalition S is positive then it measures the amount that
S has to forgo in order for the imputation x to be implemented; it is the
sacriﬁce that S makes to maintain the social order. If the excess of S
is negative then its absolute value measures the amount over and above
the worth of S that S obtains when the imputation x is implemented;
it is S’s surplus in the social order.
A player i objects to an imputation x by forming a coalition S that
excludes some player j for whom xj > v({j}) and pointing out that

--- Sayfa 300 ---
284
Chapter 14. Stable Sets, Bargaining Set, and Shapley Value
he is dissatisﬁed with the sacriﬁce or gain of this coalition. Player j
counterobjects by pointing to the existence of a coalition that contains j
but not i and sacriﬁces more (if e(S, x) > 0) or gains less (if e(S, x) < 0).
More precisely, deﬁne objections and counterobjections as follows.
• A coalition S is an objection of i against j to x if S includes i
but not j and xj > v({j}).
• A coalition T is counterobjection to the objection S of i against
j if T includes j but not i and e(T, x) ≥e(S, x).
▶Definition 284.1 The kernel of a coalitional game with transferable
payoﬀis the set of all imputations x with the property that for every
objection S of any player i against any other player j to x there is a
counterobjection of j to S.
For any two players i and j and any imputation x deﬁne sij(x) to be
the maximum excess of any coalition that contains i but not j:
sij(x) = max
S∈C {e(S, x): i ∈S and j ∈N \ S}.
Then we can alternatively deﬁne the kernel to be the set of imputations
x ∈X such that for every pair (i, j) of players either sji(x) ≥sij(x) or
xj = v({j}).
The kernel models the stable arrangements in a society in which a
player makes arguments of the following type against an imputation x:
“Here is a coalition to which I belong that excludes player j and sacriﬁces
too much (or gains too little)”. Such an argument is ineﬀective as far as
the kernel is concerned if player j can respond by saying “your demand
is not justiﬁed; I can name a coalition to which I belong that excludes
you and sacriﬁces even more (or gains even less) than the coalition that
you name”.
Note that the deﬁnitions of the core and the bargaining set do not re-
quire us to compare the payoﬀs of diﬀerent players, while that of the
kernel does.
Thus the deﬁnitions of the former concepts can easily
be extended to a general coalitional game ⟨N, X, V, (≿i)⟩(see Deﬁni-
tion 268.2). For example, as we saw in Section 13.5, the core is the set
of all x ∈V (N) for which there is no coalition S and y ∈V (S) for which
y ≻i x for all i ∈S. By contrast, the deﬁnition of the kernel cannot be
so extended; it assumes that there is meaning to the statement that the
excess of one coalition is larger than that of another. Thus the kernel is
an appropriate solution concept only in situations in which the payoﬀs
of diﬀerent players can be meaningfully compared.

--- Sayfa 301 ---
14.3 The Bargaining Set, Kernel, and Nucleolus
285
We show later that the kernel is nonempty (see Corollary 288.3). Its
relation with the bargaining set is as follows.
Lemma 285.1 The kernel of a coalitional game with transferable payoﬀ
is a subset of the bargaining set.
Proof. Let ⟨N, v⟩be a coalitional game with transferable payoﬀ, let x
be an imputation in the kernel, and let (y, S) be an objection in the
sense of the bargaining set of player i against j to x: i ∈S, j ∈N \ S,
y(S) = v(S), and yk > xk for all k ∈S. If xj = v({j}) then (z, {j}) with
zj = v({j}) is a counterobjection to (y, S). If xj > v({j}) then since x is
in the kernel we have sji(x) ≥sij(x) ≥v(S) −x(S) = y(S) −x(S). Let
T be a coalition that contains j but not i for which sji(x) = v(T)−x(T).
Then v(T) −x(T) ≥y(S) −x(S), so that v(T) ≥y(S ∩T) + y(S \ T) +
x(T \S)−x(S \T) > y(S ∩T)+x(T \S), since y(S \T) > x(S \T). Thus
there exists a T-feasible payoﬀvector z with zk ≥xk for all k ∈T \ S
and zk ≥yk for all k ∈T ∩S, so that (z, T) is a counterobjection to
(y, S).
2
⋄Example 285.2 (The three-player majority game) It follows from our
calculation of the bargaining set (Example 282.2), the previous lemma
(285.1), and the nonemptiness of the kernel that the kernel of the three-
player majority game is {( 1
3, 1
3, 1
3)}. To see this directly, assume that
x1 ≥x2 ≥x3, with at least one strict inequality. Then s31(x) = 1 −
x2 −x3 > 1 −x2 −x1 = s13(x) and x1 > 0 = v({1}), so that x is not in
the kernel.
⋄Example 285.3 (My aunt and I ) The kernel of the game in Exam-
ple 282.3 is {( 2
5, 1
5, 1
5, 1
5)}, by the following argument. Let x be in the
kernel. By Lemma 285.1 and the calculation of the bargaining set of
the game we have x = (1 −3α, α, α, α) for some
1
7 ≤α ≤
1
5, so
that s12(x) = 2α and s21(x) = 1 −3α.
Since 1 −3α > 0 we need
s12(x) = 2α ≥s21(x) = 1 −3α, or α ≥1
5; hence α = 1
5.
14.3.3
The Nucleolus
A solution that is closely related to the kernel is the nucleolus. Let x
be an imputation in a coalitional game with transferable payoﬀ. Deﬁne
objections and counterobjections as follows.
• A pair (S, y) consisting of a coalition S and an imputation y is an
objection to x if e(S, x) > e(S, y) (i.e. y(S) > x(S)).

--- Sayfa 302 ---
286
Chapter 14. Stable Sets, Bargaining Set, and Shapley Value
• A coalition T is a counterobjection to the objection (S, y) if
e(T, y) > e(T, x) (i.e. x(T) > y(T)) and e(T, y) ≥e(S, x).
▶Definition 286.1 The nucleolus of a coalitional game with transfer-
able payoﬀis the set of all imputations x with the property that for
every objection (S, y) to x there is a counterobjection to (S, y).
As for the kernel the idea is that the excess of S is a measure of S’s
dissatisfaction with x: it is the price that S pays to tolerate x rather
than secede from N. In the deﬁnition of the kernel an objection is made
by a single player, while here an objection is made by a coalition. An
objection (S, y) may be interpreted as a statement by S of the form “our
excess is too large in x; we suggest the alternative imputation y in which
it is smaller”. The nucleolus models situations in which such objections
cause outcomes to be unstable only if no coalition T can respond by
saying “your demand is not justiﬁed since our excess under y is larger
than it was under x and furthermore exceeds under y what yours was
under x”. Put diﬀerently, an imputation fails to be stable according to
the nucleolus if the excess of some coalition S can be reduced without
increasing the excess of some coalition to a level at least as large as that
of the original excess of S.
This deﬁnition of the nucleolus, which is not standard, facilitates a
comparison with the kernel and the bargaining set and is easier to
interpret than the standard deﬁnition, to which we now show it is
equivalent.
For any imputation x let S1, . . . , S2|N|−1 be an ordering of the coali-
tions for which e(Sℓ, x) ≥e(Sℓ+1, x) for ℓ= 1, . . . , 2|N| −2 and let
E(x) be the vector of excesses deﬁned by Eℓ(x) = e(Sℓ, x) for all ℓ=
1, . . . , 2|N| −1.
Let B1(x), . . . , BK(x) be the partition of the set of
all coalitions in which S and S′ are in the same cell if and only if
e(S, x) = e(S′, x).
For any S ∈Bk(x) let e(S, x) = ek(x), so that
e1(x) > e2(x) > · · · > eK(x).
We say that E(x) is lexicographically less than E(y) if Eℓ(x) < Eℓ(y)
for the smallest ℓfor which Eℓ(x)̸ = Eℓ(y), or equivalently if there exists
k∗such that for all k < k∗we have |Bk(x)| = |Bk(y)| and ek(x) = ek(y),
and either (i) ek∗(x) < ek∗(y) or (ii) ek∗(x) = ek∗(y) and |Bk∗(x)| <
|Bk∗(y)|.
Lemma 286.2 The nucleolus of a coalitional game with transferable pay-
oﬀis the set of imputations x for which the vector E(x) is lexicograph-
ically minimal.

--- Sayfa 303 ---
14.3 The Bargaining Set, Kernel, and Nucleolus
287
Proof.
Let ⟨N, v⟩be a coalitional game with transferable payoﬀand
let x be an imputation for which E(x) is lexicographically minimal. To
show that x is in the nucleolus, suppose that (S, y) is an objection to
x, so that e(S, y) < e(S, x). Let k∗be the maximal value of k such
that ek(x) = ek(y) and Bk(x) = Bk(y) (not just |Bk(x)| = |Bk(y)|)
for all k < k∗. Since E(y) is not lexicographically less than E(x) we
have either (i) ek∗(y) > ek∗(x) or (ii) ek∗(x) = ek∗(y) and |Bk∗(x)| ≤
|Bk∗(y)|. In either case there is a coalition T ∈Bk∗(y) with ek∗(y) =
e(T, y) > e(T, x).
We now argue that e(T, y) ≥e(S, x), so that T
is a counterobjection to (S, y).
Since e(S, y) < e(S, x) we have S /∈
∪k∗−1
k=1 Bk(x) and hence ek∗(x) ≥e(S, x); since ek∗(y) ≥ek∗(x) we have
e(T, y) ≥e(S, x).
Now assume that x is in the nucleolus and that E(y) is lexicographi-
cally less than E(x). Let k∗be the smallest value of k for which Bk(x) =
Bk(y) for all k < k∗and either (i) ek∗(y) < ek∗(x) or (ii) ek∗(y) =
ek∗(x) and Bk∗(y)̸ = Bk∗(x) (and hence |Bk∗(y)|̸ = |Bk∗(x)|). In either
case there exists a coalition S ∈Bk∗(x) for which e(S, y) < e(S, x).
Let λ ∈(0, 1) and let z(λ) = λx + (1 −λ)y; we have e(R, z(λ)) =
λe(R, x) + (1 −λ)e(R, y) for any coalition R. We claim that the pair
(S, z(λ)) is an objection to x for which there is no counterobjection. It
is an objection since e(S, z(λ)) < e(S, x). For T to be a counterobjec-
tion we need both e(T, z(λ)) > e(T, x) and e(T, z(λ)) ≥e(S, x). How-
ever, if e(T, z(λ)) > e(T, x) then e(T, y) > e(T, x), which implies that
T /∈∪k∗
k=1Bk(x) and hence e(S, x) > e(T, x). Also, since T /∈∪k∗−1
k=1 Bk(y)
we have e(S, x) = ek∗(x) ≥ek∗(y) ≥e(T, y). Thus e(S, x) > e(T, z(λ)).
We conclude that there is no counterobjection to (S, z(λ)).
2
The nucleolus is related to the kernel as follows.
Lemma 287.1 The nucleolus of a coalitional game with transferable
payoﬀis a subset of the kernel.
Proof. Let ⟨N, v⟩be a coalitional game with transferable payoﬀand let
x be an imputation that is not in the kernel of ⟨N, v⟩. We show that
x is not in the nucleolus of ⟨N, v⟩. Since x is not in the kernel there
are players i and j for which sij(x) > sji(x) and xj > v({j}). Since
xj > v({j}) there exists ϵ > 0 such that y = x + ϵ1{i} −ϵ1{j} is an
imputation (where 1{k} is the kth unit vector); choose ϵ small enough
that sij(y) > sji(y). Note that e(S, x) < e(S, y) if and only if S contains
i but not j and e(S, x) > e(S, y) if and only if S contains j but not i. Let
k∗be the minimal value of k for which there is a coalition S ∈Bk∗(x)
with e(S, x)̸ = e(S, y). Since sij(x) > sji(x) the set Bk∗(x) contains

--- Sayfa 304 ---
288
Chapter 14. Stable Sets, Bargaining Set, and Shapley Value
at least one coalition that contains i but not j and no coalition that
contains j but not i. Further, for all k < k∗we have Bk(y) = Bk(x) and
ek(y) = ek(x). Now, if Bk∗(x) contains coalitions that contain both i and
j or neither of them then ek∗(y) = ek∗(x) and Bk∗(y) is a strict subset
of Bk∗(x). If not, then since sij(y) > sji(y) we have ek∗(y) < ek∗(x). In
both cases E(y) is lexicographically less than E(x) and hence x is not
in the nucleolus of ⟨N, v⟩.
2
We now show that the nucleolus of any game is nonempty.
Proposition 288.1 The nucleolus of any coalitional game with trans-
ferable payoﬀis nonempty.
Proof.
First we argue that for each value of k the function Ek is
continuous. This follows from the fact that for any k we have
Ek(x) =
min
T ∈Ck−1 max
S∈C\T e(S, x),
(288.2)
where C0 = {∅} and Ck for k ≥1 is the set of all collections of k
coalitions.
Since E1 is continuous the set X1 = arg minx∈X E1(x) is
nonempty and compact. Now, for each integer k ≥1 deﬁne Xk+1 =
arg minx∈Xk Ek+1(x).
By induction every such set is nonempty and
compact; since X2|N|−1 is the nucleolus the proof is complete.
2
This result immediately implies that the bargaining set and kernel of
any game are nonempty.
Corollary 288.3 The bargaining set and kernel of any coalitional
game with transferable payoﬀare nonempty.
Proof.
This follows from the nonemptiness of the nucleolus (Propo-
sition 288.1) and the facts that the nucleolus is a subset of the ker-
nel (Lemma 287.1) and the kernel is a subset of the bargaining set
(Lemma 285.1).
2
As we have seen above the bargaining set of a game may contain many
imputations; the same is true of the kernel. However, the nucleolus is
always a singleton, as the following result shows.
Proposition 288.4 The nucleolus of any coalitional game with trans-
ferable payoﬀis a singleton.
Proof. Let ⟨N, v⟩be a coalitional game with transferable payoﬀ. Suppose
that the imputations x and y are both in the nucleolus, so that E(x) =
E(y). We show that for any coalition S we have e(S, x) = e(S, y) and
hence, in particular, for any player i we have e({i}, x) = e({i}, y), so

--- Sayfa 305 ---
14.4 The Shapley Value
289
that x = y. Assume there is at least one coalition S∗with e(S∗, x)̸ =
e(S∗, y) and consider the imputation z = 1
2(x+y). Since Ek(x) = Ek(y)
for all k we have ek(x) = ek(y) and |Bk(x)| = |Bk(y)| for all k. But
since e(S∗, x)̸ = e(S∗, y) there exists a minimal value k∗of k for which
Bk∗(x)̸ = Bk∗(y). Now, if Bk∗(x) ∩Bk∗(y)̸ = ∅then Bk∗(z) = Bk∗(x) ∩
Bk∗(y) ⊂Bk∗(x); if Bk∗(x)∩Bk∗(y) = ∅then ek∗(z) < ek∗(x) = ek∗(y).
In both cases E(z) is lexicographically less than E(x), contradicting the
fact that x is in the nucleolus.
2
? Exercise 289.1 (A production economy) Show that the single impu-
tation in the nucleolus of the game in Exercise 259.3, which models a
production economy with one capitalist and w workers, gives each worker
1
2[f(w) −f(w −1)]. (Note that since the nucleolus is a singleton you
need only to verify that the imputation is in the nucleolus.)
? Exercise 289.2 (Weighted majority games) A weighted majority
game is a simple game ⟨N, v⟩in which
v(S) =
 1
if w(S) ≥q
0
otherwise,
for some q ∈R and w ∈RN
+, where w(S) = P
i∈S wi for any coalition S.
An interpretation is that wi is the number of votes that player i has and
q is the number of votes needed to win (the quota). A weighted majority
game is homogeneous if w(S) = q for any minimal winning coalition S
and is zerosum if for each coalition S either v(S) = 1 or v(N \ S) = 1,
but not both. Consider a zerosum homogeneous weighted majority game
⟨N, v⟩in which wi = 0 for every player i who does not belong to any
minimal winning coalition. Show that the nucleolus of ⟨N, v⟩consists of
the imputation x deﬁned by xi = wi/w(N) for all i ∈N.
14.4
The Shapley Value
The last solution concept that we study in this chapter is the Shap-
ley value. Following our approach in the previous section we begin by
characterizing this solution in terms of objections and counterobjections.
Then we turn to the standard (axiomatic) characterization.
14.4.1
A Deﬁnition in Terms of Objections and Counterobjections
The solution concepts for coalitional games that we have studied so far
are deﬁned with reference to single games in isolation.
By contrast,
the Shapley value of a given game is deﬁned with reference to other

--- Sayfa 306 ---
290
Chapter 14. Stable Sets, Bargaining Set, and Shapley Value
games. It is an example of a value—a function that assigns a unique
feasible payoﬀproﬁle to every coalitional game with transferable payoﬀ,
a payoﬀproﬁle being feasible if the sum of its components is v(N). (The
requirement that the payoﬀproﬁle assigned by the value be feasible is
sometimes called eﬃciency.)
Our ﬁrst presentation of the Shapley value, like our presentations
of the solutions studied in the previous section, is in terms of certain
types of objections and counterobjections. To deﬁne these objections
and counterobjections, let ⟨N, v⟩be a coalitional game with transferable
payoﬀand for each coalition S deﬁne the subgame ⟨S, vS⟩of ⟨N, v⟩to be
the coalitional game with transferable payoﬀin which vS(T) = v(T) for
any T ⊆S. Let ψ be a value. An objection of player i against player j
to the division x of v(N) may take one of the following two forms.
• “Give me more since otherwise I will leave the game, causing you
to obtain only ψj(N \ {i}, vN\{i}) rather than the larger payoﬀxj,
so that you will lose the positive amount xj −ψj(N \ {i}, vN\{i}).”
• “Give me more since otherwise I will persuade the other players to
exclude you from the game, causing me to obtain ψi(N\{j}, vN\{j})
rather than the smaller payoﬀxi, so that I will gain the positive
amount ψi(N \ {j}, vN\{j}) −xi.”
A counterobjection by player j to an objection of the ﬁrst type is an
assertion
• “It is true that if you leave then I will lose, but if I leave then
you will lose at least as much: xi −ψi(N \ {j}, vN\{j}) ≥xj −
ψj(N \ {i}, vN\{i}).”
A counterobjection by player j to an objection of the second type is an
assertion
• “It is true that if you exclude me then you will gain, but if I exclude
you then I will gain at least as much: ψj(N \ {i}, vN\{i}) −xj ≥
ψi(N \ {j}, vN\{j}) −xi.”
The Shapley value is required to satisfy the property that for every objec-
tion of any player i against any other player j there is a counterobjection
of player j.
These objections and counterobjections diﬀer from those used to de-
ﬁne the bargaining set, kernel, and nucleolus in that they refer to the
outcomes of smaller games. It is assumed that these outcomes are de-
rived from the same logic as the payoﬀof the game itself: that is, the

--- Sayfa 307 ---
14.4 The Shapley Value
291
outcomes of the smaller games, like the outcome of the game itself, are
given by the value. In this respect the deﬁnition of a value shares features
with that of stable sets.
The requirement that a value assign to every game a payoﬀproﬁle with
the property that every objection is balanced by a counterobjection is
equivalent to the following condition.
▶Definition 291.1 A value ψ satisﬁes the balanced contributions
property if for every coalitional game with transferable payoﬀ⟨N, v⟩
we have
ψi(N, v) −ψi(N \ {j}, vN\{j}) = ψj(N, v) −ψj(N \ {i}, vN\{i})
whenever i ∈N and j ∈N.
We now show that the unique value that satisﬁes this property is the
Shapley value, deﬁned as follows. First deﬁne the marginal contribution
of player i to any coalition S with i /∈S in the game ⟨N, v⟩to be
∆i(S) = v(S ∪{i}) −v(S).
▶Definition 291.2 The Shapley value ϕ is deﬁned by the condition
ϕi(N, v) =
1
|N|!
X
R∈R
∆i(Si(R)) for each i ∈N,
where R is the set of all |N|! orderings of N and Si(R) is the set of
players preceding i in the ordering R.
We can interpret the Shapley value as follows. Suppose that all the
players are arranged in some order, all orders being equally likely. Then
ϕi(N, v) is the expected marginal contribution over all orders of player i
to the set of players who precede him. Note that the sum of the marginal
contributions of all players in any ordering is v(N), so that the Shapley
value is indeed a value.
Proposition 291.3 The unique value that satisﬁes the balanced con-
tributions property is the Shapley value.
Proof. First we show that there is at most one value that satisﬁes the
property. Let ψ and ψ′ be any two values that satisfy the condition. We
prove by induction on the number of players that ψ and ψ′ are identical.
Suppose that they are identical for all games with less than n players
and let ⟨N, v⟩be a game with n players. Since ψi(N \ {j}, vN\{j}) =
ψ′
i(N \ {j}, vN\{j}) for any i, j ∈N, we deduce from the balanced
contributions property that ψi(N, v) −ψ′
i(N, v) = ψj(N, v) −ψ′
j(N, v)

--- Sayfa 308 ---
292
Chapter 14. Stable Sets, Bargaining Set, and Shapley Value
for all i, j ∈N.
Now ﬁxing i and summing over j ∈N, using the
fact that P
j∈N ψj(N, v) = P
j∈N ψ′
j(N, v) = v(N), we conclude that
ψi(N, v) = ψ′
i(N, v) for all i ∈N.
We now verify that the Shapley value ϕ satisﬁes the balanced contribu-
tions property. Fix a game ⟨N, v⟩. We show that ϕi(N, v) −ϕj(N, v) =
ϕi(N \ {j}, vN\{j}) −ϕj(N \ {i}, vN\{i}) for all i, j ∈N. The left-hand
side of this equation is
X
S⊆N\{i,j}
αS[∆i(S) −∆j(S)] + βS[∆i(S ∪{j}) −∆j(S ∪{i})],
where αS = |S|!(|N| −|S| −1)!/|N|! and βS = (|S| + 1)!(|N| −|S| −
2)!/|N|!, while the right-hand side is
X
S⊆N\{i,j}
γS[∆i(S) −∆j(S)],
where γS = |S|!(|N| −|S| −2)!/(|N| −1)!. The result follows from the
facts that ∆i(S)−∆j(S) = ∆i(S∪{j})−∆j(S∪{i}) and αS+βS = γS.2
Note that the balanced contributions property links a game only with
its subgames. Thus in the derivation of the Shapley value of a game
⟨N, v⟩we could restrict attention to the subgames of ⟨N, v⟩, rather than
work with the set of all possible games.
14.4.2
An Axiomatic Characterization
We now turn to an axiomatic characterization of the Shapley value. The
derivation, unlike that in the previous section, restricts attention to the
set of games with a given set of players. Throughout we ﬁx this set to
be N and denote a game simply by its worth function v.
To state the axioms we need the following deﬁnitions. Player i is a
dummy in v if ∆i(S) = v({i}) for every coalition S that excludes i.
Players i and j are interchangeable in v if ∆i(S) = ∆j(S) for every
coalition S that contains neither i nor j (or, equivalently, v((S \ {i}) ∪
{j}) = v(S) for every coalition S that includes i but not j). The axioms
are the following.
SYM (Symmetry) If i and j are interchangeable in v then ψi(v) = ψj(v).
DUM (Dummy player) If i is a dummy in v then ψi(v) = v({i}).
ADD (Additivity) For any two games v and w we have ψi(v + w) =
ψi(v) + ψi(w) for all i ∈N, where v + w is the game deﬁned by
(v + w)(S) = v(S) + w(S) for every coalition S.

--- Sayfa 309 ---
14.4 The Shapley Value
293
Note that the ﬁrst two axioms impose conditions on single games,
while the last axiom links the outcomes of diﬀerent games. This last
axiom is mathematically convenient but hard to motivate: the structure
of v + w may induce behavior that is unrelated to that induced by v
or w separately. Luce and Raiﬀa (1957, p. 248) write that the axiom
“strikes us as a ﬂaw in the concept of value”; for a less negative view see
Myerson (1991, p. 437–438).
Proposition 293.1 The Shapley value is the only value that satisﬁes
SYM, DUM, and ADD.
Proof. We ﬁrst verify that the Shapley value satisﬁes the axioms.
SYM: Assume that i and j are interchangeable. For every ordering
R ∈R let R′ ∈R diﬀer from R only in that the positions of i and j are
interchanged. If i precedes j in R then we have ∆i(Si(R)) = ∆j(Sj(R′)).
If j precedes i then ∆i(Si(R)) −∆j(Sj(R′)) = v(S ∪{i}) −v(S ∪{j}),
where S = Si(R) \ {j}.
Since i and j are interchangeable we have
v(S ∪{i}) = v(S ∪{j}), so that ∆i(Si(R)) = ∆j(Sj(R′)) in this case
too. It follows that ϕ satisﬁes SYM.
DUM: It is immediate that ϕ satisﬁes this condition.
ADD: This follows from the fact that if u = v + w then
u(S ∪{i}) −u(S) = v(S ∪{i}) −v(S) + w(S ∪{i}) −w(S).
We now show that the Shapley value is the only value that satisﬁes the
axioms. Let ψ be a value that satisﬁes the axioms. For any coalition S
deﬁne the game vS by
vS(T) =
n 1
if T ⊇S
0
otherwise.
Regard a game v as a collection of 2|N|−1 numbers (v(S))S∈C. We begin
by showing that for any game v there is a unique collection (αT )T ∈C of
real numbers such that v = P
T ∈C αT vT . That is, we show that (vT )T ∈C
is an algebraic basis for the space of games. Since the collection (vT )T ∈C
of games contains 2|N| −1 members it suﬃces to show that these games
are linearly independent.
Suppose that P
S∈C βSvS = 0; we need to
show that βS = 0 for all S. Suppose to the contrary that there exists
some coalition T with βT̸ = 0. Then we can choose such a coalition T
for which βS = 0 for all S ⊂T, in which case P
S∈C βSvS(T) = βT̸ = 0,
a contradiction.
Now, by SYM and DUM the value of any game αvT for α ≥0 is
given uniquely by ψi(αvT ) = α/|T| if i ∈T and ψi(αvT ) = 0 otherwise.
We complete the proof by noting that if v = P
T ∈C αT vT then we have

--- Sayfa 310 ---
294
Chapter 14. Stable Sets, Bargaining Set, and Shapley Value
v = P
{T ∈C:αT >0} αT vT −P
{T ∈C:αT <0}(−αT vT ) so that by ADD the
value of v is determined uniquely.
2
⋄Example 294.1 (Weighted majority games) Consider the weighted ma-
jority game v (see Exercise 289.2) with weights w = (1, 1, 1, 2) and
quota q = 3.
In all orderings in which player 4 is ﬁrst or last his
marginal contribution is 0; in all other orderings his marginal con-
tribution is 1.
Thus ϕ(v) = ( 1
6, 1
6, 1
6, 1
2).
Note that we have v =
v{1,4} + v{2,4} + v{3,4} + v{1,2,3} −v{1,2,4} −v{1,3,4} −v{2,3,4}, from which
we can alternatively deduce ϕ4(v) = 3 · 1
2 + 0 −3 · 1
3 = 1
2.
? Exercise 294.2
Show the following results, which establish that if any
one of the three axioms SYM, DUM, and ADD is dropped then there
is a value diﬀerent from the Shapley value that satisﬁes the remaining
two.
a. For any game v and any i ∈N let ψi(v) be the average marginal
contribution of player i over all the (|N| −1)! orderings of N in
which player 1 is ﬁrst.
Then ψ satisﬁes DUM and ADD but not
SYM.
b. For any game v let ψi(v) = v(N)/|N|. Then ψ satisﬁes SYM and
ADD but not DUM.
c. For any game v let D(v) be the set of dummies in v and let
ψi(v) =
(
1
|N \ D(v)|

v(N) −P
j∈D(v) v({j})

if i ∈N \ D(v)
v({i})
if i ∈D(v).
Then ψ satisﬁes SYM and DUM but not ADD.
⋄Example 294.3
Consider the game ⟨{1, 2, 3}, v⟩in which v(1, 2, 3) =
v(1, 2) = v(1, 3) = 1 and v(S) = 0 otherwise. (This game can be in-
terpreted as a model of a market in which there is a seller (player 1)
who holds one unit of a good that she does not value and two poten-
tial buyers (players 2 and 3) who each value the good as worth one
unit of payoﬀ.) There are six possible orderings of the players. In the
four in which player 1 is second or third her marginal contribution is
1 and the marginal contributions of the other two players are 0; in the
ordering (1, 2, 3) player 2’s marginal contribution is 1, and in (1, 3, 2)
player 3’s marginal contribution is 1. Thus the Shapley value of the
game is ( 2
3, 1
6, 1
6).
By contrast, the core of the game consists of the
single payoﬀproﬁle (1, 0, 0).
⋄Example 294.4 (A market) Consider the market for an indivisible good
in Example 260.1, in which there are b buyers and ℓsellers, with ℓ< b.

--- Sayfa 311 ---
14.4 The Shapley Value
295
Consider replications of the market in which there are kb buyers and kℓ
sellers for some positive integer k. If k is very large then in most random
orderings of the players the fraction of buyers in the set of players who
precede any given player i is close to b/ℓ> 1. In any such ordering the
marginal contribution of player i is 1 if she is a seller, so that the Shapley
value payoﬀof a seller is close to 1 (and that of a buyer is close to 0).
Precisely, it can be shown that the limit as k →∞of the Shapley value
payoﬀof a seller is 1. This is the simplest example of a more general
result due to Aumann (1975) that the Shapley value converges to the
proﬁle of competitive payoﬀs as the size of the market increases.
? Exercise 295.1
Find the core and the Shapley value of the game
⟨{1, 2, 3, 4}, v⟩in which v({1, 2, 3, 4}) = 3, v(S) = 0 if S includes at
most one of the players in {1, 2, 3}, and v(S) = 2 otherwise. Explain the
source of the diﬀerence between the two solutions.
? Exercise 295.2 (A production economy) Find the Shapley value of the
game in Exercise 259.3 and contrast it with the core and the nucleolus
(see Exercise 289.1).
⋄Example 295.3 (A majority game) Consider a parliament in which
there is one party with m−1 seats and m parties each with one seat, and
a majority is decisive (a generalization of My aunt and I ). This situation
can be modeled as a weighted majority game (see Exercise 289.2) in
which N = {1, . . . , m+1}, w1 = m−1, wi = 1 for i̸ = 1, and q = m. The
marginal contribution of the large party is 1 in all but the 2m! orderings
in which it is ﬁrst or last. Hence the Shapley value of the game assigns
to the large party the payoﬀ[(m+1)!−2m!]/(m+1)! = (m−1)/(m+1).
? Exercise 295.4
Consider a parliament in which there are n parties;
two of them have
1
3 of the seats each and the other n −2 share the
remaining seats equally. Model this situation as a weighted majority
game (see Exercise 289.2).
a. Show that the limit as n →∞of the Shapley value payoﬀof each of
the large parties is 1
4.
b. Is it desirable according to the Shapley value for the n −2 small
parties to form a single united party?
? Exercise 295.5
Show that in a convex game (see Exercise 260.4) the
Shapley value is a member of the core.
The result in the following exercise suggests an interpretation of the
Shapley value that complements those discussed above.

--- Sayfa 312 ---
296
Chapter 14. Stable Sets, Bargaining Set, and Shapley Value
? Exercise 296.1
Consider the following variant of the bargaining game
of alternating oﬀers studied in Chapter 7. Let ⟨N, v⟩be a coalitional
game with transferable payoﬀin which v(S) ≥0 and v(S∪{i}) ≥v(S)+
v({i}) for every coalition S and player i ∈N \ S. In each period there
is a set S ⊆N of active players, initially N, one of whom, say player i,
is chosen randomly to propose an S-feasible payoﬀvector xS,i. Then
the remaining active players, in some ﬁxed order, each either accepts or
rejects xS,i. If every active player accepts xS,i then the game ends and
each player j ∈S receives the payoﬀxS,i
j . If at least one active player
rejects xS,i then we move to the next period, in which with probability
ρ ∈(0, 1) the set of active players remains S and with probability 1 −ρ
it becomes S \ {i} (i.e. player i is ejected from the game) and player i
receives the payoﬀv({i}). Players do not discount the future.
Suppose that there is a collection (xS,i)S∈C,i∈S of S-feasible payoﬀ
vectors such that xS,i
j
= ρxS
j + (1 −ρ)xS\{i}
j
for all S, all i ∈S, and all
j ∈S \ {i}, where xS = P
i∈S xS,i/|S| for all S. Show that the game
has a subgame perfect equilibrium in which each player i ∈S proposes
xS,i whenever the set of active players is S. Show further that there is
such a collection for which xS = ϕ(S, v) for each S ∈C, thus showing
that the game has a subgame perfect equilibrium in which the expected
payoﬀof each player i is his Shapley value payoﬀϕi(N, v). Note that
if ρ is close to 1 in this case then every proposal xS,i is close to the
Shapley value of the game ⟨S, v⟩. (Hart and Mas-Colell (1996) show
that every subgame perfect equilibrium in which each player’s strategy
is independent of history has this property; Krishna and Serrano (1995)
study non-stationary equilibria.)
14.4.3
Cost-Sharing
Let N be a set of players and for each coalition S let C(S) be the cost
of providing some service to the members of S. How should C(N) be
shared among the players? One possible answer is given by the Shapley
value ϕ(C) of the game ⟨N, C⟩, where ϕi(C) is the payment requested
from player i. This method of cost-sharing is supported by the axioms
presented above, which in the current context can be given the following
interpretations. The feasibility requirement P
i∈N ϕi(C) = C(N) says
that the total payments requested from the players should equal C(N),
the total cost of providing the service. The axioms DUM and SYM have
interpretations as principles of “fairness” when applied to the game.
DUM says that a player for whom the marginal cost of providing the

--- Sayfa 313 ---
Notes
297
service is the same, no matter which group is currently receiving the
service, should pay that cost. SYM says that two players for whom the
marginal cost is the same, no matter which group is currently receiving
the service, should pay the same. ADD is somewhat more attractive
here than it is in the context of strategic interaction. It says that the
payment of any player for two diﬀerent services should be the sum of
the payments for the two services separately.
Notes
Stable sets were ﬁrst studied by von Neumann and Morgenstern (1944).
The idea of the bargaining set is due to Aumann and Maschler (1964);
the formulation that we give is that of Davis and Maschler (1963). The
kernel and nucleolus are due respectively to Davis and Maschler (1965)
and Schmeidler (1969). Proofs of the nonemptiness of the bargaining
set (using direct arguments) were ﬁrst given by Davis, Maschler, and
Peleg (see Davis and Maschler (1963, 1967) and Peleg (1963b, 1967)).
Our deﬁnition of the nucleolus in terms of objections and counterob-
jections appears to be new. The results in Section 14.3.3 (other than
Lemma 286.2) are due to Schmeidler (1969). The Shapley value is due
to Shapley (1953), who proved Proposition 293.1. The balanced contri-
butions property (Deﬁnition 291.1) is due to Myerson (1977, 1980); see
also Hart and Mas-Colell (1989).
The application of the Shapley value to the problem of cost-sharing
was suggested by Shubik (1962); the theory has been developed by many
authors, including Roth and Verrecchia (1979) and Billera, Heath, and
Raanan (1978).
The game My aunt and I in Examples 282.3 and 285.3 is studied by
Davis and Maschler (1965, Section 6). The result in Exercise 283.1 is due
to Maschler (1976). Exercise 289.1 is taken from Moulin (1988, pp. 126–
127; see also Exercise 5.3). Weighted majority games were ﬁrst studied
by von Neumann and Morgenstern (1944); the result in Exercise 289.2 is
due to Peleg (1968). The game in Exercise 295.1 is due to Zamir, quoted
in Aumann (1986, p. 986). Exercise 295.2 is taken from Moulin (1988,
p. 111). The result in Exercise 295.4 is due to Milnor and Shapley (1978),
that in Exercise 295.5 to Shapley (1971/72), and that in Exercise 296.1
to Hart and Mas-Colell (1996).
Much of the material in this chapter draws on Aumann’s (1989) lecture
notes, though some of our interpretations of the solution concepts are
diﬀerent from his.

--- Sayfa 314 ---
298
Chapter 14. Stable Sets, Bargaining Set, and Shapley Value
The deﬁnitions of stable sets and the bargaining set can be extended
straightforwardly to coalitional games without transferable payoﬀ(see,
for example, Aumann and Peleg (1960) and Peleg (1963a)).
For ex-
tensions of the Shapley value to such games see Harsanyi (1963), Shap-
ley (1969), Aumann (1985a), Hart (1985), and Maschler and Owen (1989,
1992).
Harsanyi (1974) studies an extensive game for which a class of sub-
game perfect equilibria correspond to stable sets.
Harsanyi (1981),
Gul (1989), and Hart and Mas-Colell (1996) study extensive games that
have equilibria corresponding to the Shapley value.
The solution concepts that we study in this chapter can be interpreted
as formalizing notions of “fairness”; for an analysis along these lines see
Moulin (1988).
Lucas (1992) and Maschler (1992) are surveys that cover the models
in Sections 14.2 and 14.3.

--- Sayfa 315 ---
15
The Nash Solution
In this chapter we study two-person bargaining problems from the per-
spective of coalitional game theory. We give a deﬁnition of the Nash
solution1 in terms of objections and counterobjections and characterize
the solution axiomatically. In addition we explore the connection be-
tween the Nash solution and the subgame perfect equilibrium outcome
of a bargaining game of alternating oﬀers.
15.1
Bargaining Problems
In Chapter 7 we discuss two-person bargaining using the tools of the
theory of extensive games. Here we do so using the approach of coali-
tional game theory.
We deﬁne a bargaining problem to be a tuple
⟨X, D, ≿1, ≿2⟩in which X is a set of possible consequences that the
two players can jointly achieve, D ∈X is the event that occurs if the
players fail to agree, and ≿1 and ≿2 are the players’ preference relations
over L(X), the set of lotteries over X. We refer to X as the set of possi-
ble agreements and to D as the disagreement outcome. Note that such
a tuple can be identiﬁed with a coalitional game without transferable
payoﬀ⟨{1, 2}, L(X), V, (≿i)⟩in which V ({1, 2}) = X and V ({i}) = {D}
for i = 1, 2 (see Deﬁnition 268.2).
The members of X should be thought of as deterministic. Note that
we require the players’ preference relations to be deﬁned over the set of
lotteries over X, rather than simply over X itself. That is, each pref-
erence relation includes information not only about the player’s prefer-
ences over the set of possible joint actions but also about his attitude
1The only connection between the Nash solution and the notion of Nash equilib-
rium studied in Parts I, II, and III is John Nash.

--- Sayfa 316 ---
300
Chapter 15.
The Nash Solution
towards risk. We denote by p · x ⊕(1 −p) · y the lottery that gives x
with probability p and y with probability 1 −p and by p · x the lottery
p · x ⊕(1 −p) · D.
Our basic deﬁnition of a bargaining problem contains some restric-
tions, as follows.
▶Definition 300.1 A bargaining problem is a tuple ⟨X, D, ≿1, ≿2⟩
where
• X (the set of agreements) is a compact set (for example, in a
Euclidian space)
• D (the disagreement outcome) is a member of X
• ≿1 and ≿2 are continuous preference relations on the set L(X) of
lotteries over X that satisfy the assumptions of von Neumann and
Morgenstern
• x ≿i D for all x ∈X for i = 1, 2, and there exists x ∈X such that
x ≻1 D and x ≻2 D
• (convexity) for any x ∈X, y ∈X, and p ∈[0, 1] there exists z ∈X
such that z ∼i p · x ⊕(1 −p) · y for i = 1, 2
• (non-redundancy) if x ∈X then there is no x′ ∈X with x′̸ = x such
that x ∼i x′ for i = 1, 2
• (unique best agreements) for each player i there is a unique agree-
ment Bi ∈X with Bi ≿i x for all x ∈X
• for each player i we have Bi ∼j D for j̸ = i.
The ﬁrst three of these assumptions guarantee that each player’s pref-
erence relation over L(X) can be represented by the expectation of some
continuous function over X (the player’s von Neumann–Morgenstern
utility function). The fourth assumption says that disagreement is the
worst possible outcome and that the problem is non-degenerate in the
sense that there exists an agreement that is more attractive to both
players than disagreement. The assumption of convexity requires that
the set of agreements be rich enough that every lottery is equivalent for
both players to some (deterministic) agreement. The last three assump-
tions are made for convenience. The assumption of non-redundancy says
that we identify any two agreements between which both players are in-
diﬀerent. The assumption of unique best agreements implies that the
best agreement for each player is strongly Pareto eﬃcient (i.e. there is
no agreement that is better for one player and at least as good for the
other). The last assumption says that each player is indiﬀerent between

--- Sayfa 317 ---
15.2 The Nash Solution: Deﬁnition and Characterization
301
disagreement and the outcome in which the other player obtains his
favorite agreement.
Given our assumptions on the players’ preferences we can associate
with any bargaining problem ⟨X, D, ≿1, ≿2⟩and any von Neumann–
Morgenstern utility functions u1 and u2 that represent ≿1 and ≿2 a pair
⟨U, d⟩in which U = {(u1(x), u2(x)): x ∈X} and d = (u1(D), u2(D));
we can choose u1 and u2 so that d = (0, 0). Our assumptions imply
that U is compact and convex and contains a point y for which yi > di
for i = 1, 2. In the standard treatment of the Nash solution such a
pair ⟨U, d⟩, rather than a description like ⟨X, D, ≿1, ≿2⟩of the physical
agreements and the players’ preferences, is taken as the primitive; we
ﬁnd the language of agreements and preferences more natural.
Note
that bargaining problems with diﬀerent agreement sets and preference
relations can lead to the same pair ⟨U, d⟩: a bargaining problem contains
more information than such a pair.
Our aim now is to construct reasonable systematic descriptions of the
way that bargaining problems may be resolved. The notion of a bar-
gaining solution is a formal expression of such a systematic description.
▶Definition 301.1 A bargaining solution is a function that assigns
to every bargaining problem ⟨X, D, ≿1, ≿2⟩a unique member of X.
A bargaining solution describes the way in which the agreement (or
disagreement) depends upon the parameters of the bargaining problem.
The bargaining theory that we study focuses on the eﬀect of the players’
risk attitudes on the bargaining outcome.
Alternative theories focus
on other relevant factors (for example the players’ time preferences or
their ability to bargain), but such theories require that we change the
primitives of the model.
15.2
The Nash Solution: Deﬁnition and Characterization
15.2.1
Deﬁnition
We now deﬁne the solution concept that we study in this chapter.
▶Definition 301.2 The Nash solution is a bargaining solution that
assigns to the bargaining problem ⟨X, D, ≿1, ≿2⟩an agreement x∗∈X
for which
if p · x ≻i x∗for some p ∈[0, 1] and x ∈X then p · x∗≿j x for j̸ = i.
(301.3)

--- Sayfa 318 ---
302
Chapter 15.
The Nash Solution
This deﬁnition is equivalent to one whose structure is similar to those
of the bargaining set, kernel, and nucleolus given in the previous chapter.
To see this, deﬁne an objection of player i to the agreement x∗∈X
to be a pair (x, p) with x ∈X and p ∈[0, 1] for which p · x ≻i x∗. The
interpretation is that x is an alternative agreement that player i proposes
and 1 −p is the probability that the negotiations will break down if
player i presses his objection. The agreement x and the probability p
are chosen by player i; the probability p may be determined indirectly
by the actions (like threats and intimidations) that player i takes when
he presses his demand that the agreement be x. Thus player i makes
an argument of the form “I demand the outcome x rather than x∗; I
back up this demand by threatening to take steps that will cause us
to fail to agree with probability 1 −p, a threat that is credible since
if I carry it out and the outcome is x then I will be better oﬀthan I
am now”. Player j can counterobject to (x, p) if p · x∗≿j x. The
interpretation is that under the risky conditions that player i creates by
his objection it is desirable for player j to insist on the original agreement
x∗. Thus player j’s argument is “If you take steps that will cause us to
disagree with probability 1 −p then it is still desirable for me to insist
on x∗rather than agreeing to x”. Given these deﬁnitions of objection
and counterobjection the Nash solution is the set of all agreements x∗
with the property that player j can counterobject to every objection of
player i to x∗.
15.2.2
Characterization
We now show that the Nash solution is well-deﬁned and has a simple
characterization: the Nash solution of the bargaining problem ⟨X, D,
≿1,≿2⟩is the agreement that maximizes the product u1(x)u2(x), where
ui is a von Neumann–Morgenstern utility function that represents ≿i
for i = 1, 2.
Proposition 302.1
a. The agreement x∗∈X is a Nash solution of the bargaining problem
⟨X, D, ≿1, ≿2⟩if and only if
u1(x∗)u2(x∗) ≥u1(x)u2(x) for all x ∈X,
where ui is a von Neumann–Morgenstern utility function that repre-
sents ≿i and satisﬁes ui(D) = 0 for i = 1, 2.
b. The Nash solution is well-deﬁned.

--- Sayfa 319 ---
15.2 The Nash Solution: Deﬁnition and Characterization
303
Proof. We ﬁrst prove (a). Suppose that u1(x∗)u2(x∗) ≥u1(x)u2(x) for
all x ∈X. Then ui(x∗) > 0 for i = 1, 2 (since X contains an agreement
y for which ui(y) > 0 for i = 1, 2). Now, if pui(x) > ui(x∗) for some
p ∈[0, 1] then pui(x)uj(x∗) > ui(x∗)uj(x∗) ≥ui(x)uj(x) and hence
puj(x∗) > uj(x) (since ui(x) > 0), or p · x∗≻j x.
Now suppose that x∗satisﬁes (301.3): if p · x ≻i x∗for some p ∈[0, 1]
and x ∈X then p · x∗≿j x. Let x ∈X be such that ui(x) > 0 for
i = 1, 2 and ui(x) > ui(x∗) for some i. (For any other value of x we
obviously have u1(x∗)u2(x∗) ≥u1(x)u2(x).) Then if p > ui(x∗)/ui(x)
for some p ∈[0, 1] we have puj(x∗) ≥uj(x), so that, since uj(x) > 0, we
have p ≥uj(x)/uj(x∗). Hence ui(x∗)/ui(x) ≥uj(x)/uj(x∗) and thus
u1(x∗)u2(x∗) ≥u1(x)u2(x).
To prove (b), let U = {(u1(x), u2(x)): x ∈X}. By (a), the agree-
ment x∗is a Nash solution of ⟨X, D, ≿1, ≿2⟩if and only if (v1, v2) =
(u1(x∗), u2(x∗)) maximizes v1v2 over U. Since U is compact this prob-
lem has a solution; since the function v1v2 is strictly quasi-concave on
the interior of R2
+ and U is convex the solution is unique. Finally, by
the assumption of non-redundancy there is a unique agreement x∗∈X
that yields the pair of maximizing utilities.
2
The simplicity of this characterization is attractive and accounts for
the widespread application of the Nash solution. The characterization
also allows us to illustrate the Nash solution geometrically, as in Fig-
ure 304.1.
Although the maximization of a product of utilities is a
simple mathematical operation it lacks a straightforward interpretation;
we view it simply as a technical device. Originally Nash deﬁned the solu-
tion in terms of this characterization; we ﬁnd Deﬁnition 301.2 preferable
since it has a natural interpretation.
15.2.3
Comparative Statics of Risk Aversion
A main goal of Nash’s theory is to provide a relationship between the
players’ attitudes towards risk and the outcome of the bargaining. Thus
a ﬁrst test of the plausibility of the theory is whether this relation-
ship accords with our intuition. We compare two bargaining problems
that diﬀer only in that one player’s preference relation in one of the
problems is more risk-averse than it is in the other; we verify that the
outcome of the former problem is worse for the player than that of the
latter.
Deﬁne the preference relation ≿′
1 to be at least as risk-averse as ≿1
if ≿1 and ≿′
1 agree on X and whenever x ∼1 L for some x ∈X and

--- Sayfa 320 ---
304
Chapter 15.
The Nash Solution
0
v1v2 = u1(x∗)u2(x∗)
v1 →
↑
v2
U =
{(u1(x), u2(x)): x ∈X}
(u1(x∗), u2(x∗))
r
Figure 304.1 A geometric characterization of the Nash solution x∗of the bargaining
problem ⟨X, D, ≿1, ≿2⟩. For i = 1, 2 the function ui is a von Neumann–Morgenstern
utility function that represents ≿i and satisﬁes ui(D) = 0.
L ∈L(X) we have x ≿′
1 L. (This deﬁnition is equivalent to the standard
deﬁnition that is given in terms of utility representations.)
Proposition 304.1 Let x and x′ be the Nash solutions of the bargaining
problems ⟨X, D, ≿1, ≿2⟩and ⟨X, D, ≿′
1, ≿2⟩respectively, where ≿′
1 is at
least as risk-averse as ≿1. Then x ≿1 x′.
Proof.
Assume to the contrary that x′ ≻1 x.
By the convexity of
the bargaining problems there exists an agreement z ∈X such that
z ∼i
1
2 · x′ ⊕1
2 · x for i = 1, 2.
Let z∗be a Pareto eﬃcient agree-
ment for which z∗≿i z for i = 1, 2.
By the characterization of
the Nash solution (Proposition 302.1a), the agreements x and x′ are
Pareto eﬃcient, so that x ≺1 z∗≺1 x′ and x′ ≺2 z∗≺2 x.
Now,
since x is the Nash solution of ⟨X, D, ≿1, ≿2⟩we have u1(x)u2(x) >
u1(x′)u2(x′), where ui is a von Neumann–Morgenstern utility function
with ui(D) = 0 that represents ≿i for i = 1, 2. By the quasi-concavity
of the function H(v1, v2) = v1v2 we have u1(z)u2(z) > u1(x′)u2(x′)
and hence u1(z∗)u2(z∗) > u1(x′)u2(x′). Since x′ ≻1 z∗it follows that
1 > u1(z∗)/u1(x′) > u2(x′)/u2(z∗), so that there exists p ∈[0, 1] such
that u1(z∗)/u1(x′) > p > u2(x′)/u2(z∗) and hence p · z∗≻2 x′ and
z∗≻1 p · x′. Since the preference relation ≿′
1 is at least as risk-averse as
≿1 we also have z∗≻′
1 p · x′, so that (z∗, p) is an objection of player 2
to x′ for which there is no counterobjection, contradicting the fact that
x′ is the Nash solution of ⟨X, D, ≿′
1, ≿2⟩.
2

--- Sayfa 321 ---
15.3 An Axiomatic Deﬁnition
305
15.3
An Axiomatic Deﬁnition
15.3.1
Axioms
A beauty of the Nash solution is that it is uniquely characterized by
three simple axioms (properties). In the following statements of these
axioms F denotes an arbitrary bargaining solution.
PAR (Pareto eﬃciency) There is no agreement x ∈X such that x ≿i
F(X, D, ≿1, ≿2) for i = 1, 2 with strict preference for at least one i.
The standard justiﬁcation of PAR is that an ineﬃcient outcome is not
likely since it leaves room for renegotiation that makes both players bet-
ter oﬀ. The fact that the Nash solution satisﬁes PAR follows immediately
from Proposition 302.1a.
To state the next axiom we need ﬁrst to deﬁne a symmetric bargain-
ing problem. Informally, a bargaining problem is symmetric if there is
a relabeling of the set of agreements that interchanges the players’ pref-
erence relations: player 1’s preference relation in the relabeled problem
coincides with player 2’s preference relation in the original problem, and
vice versa. To state this deﬁnition diﬀerently, consider the language that
consists of the names of the preference relations and the name of the dis-
agreement point, but not the names of the agreements. A problem is
symmetric if any deﬁnition of an agreement by means of a formula in
this language deﬁnes the same agreement if we interchange the names
of the players.
▶Definition 305.1 A bargaining problem ⟨X, D, ≿1, ≿2⟩is symmetric
if there is a function φ: X →X with φ(D) = D and φ(x) = y if and
only if φ(y) = x, such that L1 ≿i L2 if and only if φ(L1) ≿j φ(L2) for
i̸ = j and for any lotteries L1 and L2 in L(X), where φ(L) is the lottery
in which each prize x in the support of L is replaced by the prize φ(x).
We refer to the function φ: X →X in this deﬁnition as the symme-
try function. An example of a symmetric bargaining problem is that
in which two risk-neutral players split a pie, obtaining nothing if they
disagree (consider the symmetry function given by φ(x1, x2) = (x2, x1)).
SYM (Symmetry) If ⟨X, D, ≿1, ≿2⟩is symmetric with symmetry func-
tion φ then φ(F(X, D, ≿1, ≿2)) = F(X, D, ≿1, ≿2).
The justiﬁcation of this axiom is that we seek a solution in which all
asymmetries between the players are included in the description of the
bargaining problem. Thus if players 1 and 2 are indistinguishable in a

--- Sayfa 322 ---
306
Chapter 15.
The Nash Solution
certain problem then the agreement assigned to that problem should not
discriminate between them.
Lemma 306.1 The Nash solution satisﬁes SYM.
Proof. Let x∗be the Nash solution of the symmetric bargaining prob-
lem ⟨X, D, ≿1, ≿2⟩with symmetry function φ. Suppose that φ(x∗) is
not the Nash solution of the bargaining problem ⟨X, D, ≿2, ≿1⟩. Then
some player i has an objection (x, p) to φ(x∗) for which there is no coun-
terobjection by player j: p · x ≻i φ(x∗) and p · φ(x∗) ≺j x. But then
φ(p · x) = p · φ(x) ≻j φ(φ(x∗)) = x∗and φ(p · φ(x∗)) = p · x∗≺i φ(x),
so that (φ(x), p) is an objection by player j to x∗for which there is no
counterobjection by player i, contradicting the fact that x∗is the Nash
solution.
2
The ﬁnal axiom is the most problematic.
IIA (Independence of irrelevant alternatives) Let x∗= F(X, D, ≿1, ≿2)
and let ≿′
i be a preference relation that agrees with ≿i on X and
satisﬁes
• if x ≿i x∗and p · x ∼i x∗for some x ∈X and p ∈[0, 1] then
p · x ≾′
i x∗
• if x ≾i x∗and x ∼i p · x∗for some x ∈X and p ∈[0, 1] then
x ∼′
i p · x∗.
Then F(X, D, ≿i, ≿j) = F(X, D, ≿′
i, ≿j).
A player whose preference relation is ≿′
i is more apprehensive than one
whose preference relation is ≿i about the risk of demanding alternatives
that are better than x∗but has the same attitudes to alternatives that
are worse than x∗. The axiom requires that the outcome when player i
has the preference relation ≿′
i is the same as that when player i has
the preference relation ≿i.
The idea is that if x∗survives player i’s
objections originally then it should survive them also in a problem in
which he is less eager to make them (i.e. fewer pairs (x, p) are objections
of player i); it should continue also to survive player j’s objections since
player i’s ability to counterobject has not been changed.
Note that despite its name, the axiom involves a comparison of two
problems in which the sets of alternatives are the same; it is the players’
preferences that are diﬀerent. (The name derives from the fact that the
axiom is analogous to an axiom presented by Nash that does involve
a comparison of two problems with diﬀerent sets of agreements.) Note
also that the axiom diﬀers from PAR and SYM in that it involves a com-

--- Sayfa 323 ---
15.3 An Axiomatic Deﬁnition
307
parison of bargaining problems, while PAR and SYM impose conditions
on the solutions of single bargaining problems.
Lemma 307.1 The Nash solution satisﬁes IIA.
Proof. Let x∗be the Nash solution of the bargaining problem ⟨X, D,
≿i,≿j⟩and let ≿′
i be a preference relation that satisﬁes the hypotheses
of IIA. Consider the bargaining problem ⟨X, D, ≿′
i, ≿j⟩. We show that
for every objection of either i or j to x∗in ⟨X, D, ≿′
1, ≿2⟩there is a
counterobjection, so that x∗is the Nash solution of ⟨X, D, ≿′
1, ≿2⟩.
First suppose that player i has an objection to x∗: p·x ≻′
i x∗for some
x ∈X and p ∈[0, 1]. Then x ≻′
i x∗and hence x ≻i x∗(since ≿i and
≿′
i agree on X). Thus from the ﬁrst part of IIA we have p · x ≻i x∗(if
p·x ≾i x∗then there exists q ≥p such that q·x ∼i x∗and thus q·x ≾′
i x∗,
so that p · x ≾′
i x∗). Since x∗is the Nash solution of ⟨X, D, ≿i, ≿j⟩we
thus have p · x∗≿j x.
Now suppose that player j has an objection to x∗: p·x ≿j x∗for some
x ∈X and p ∈[0, 1]. Since x∗is Pareto eﬃcient we have x∗≿i x and
since x∗is the Nash solution of ⟨X, D, ≿i, ≿j⟩we have p · x∗≿i x. Thus
from the second part of IIA we have p · x∗≿′
i x.
2
15.3.2
Characterization
The following result completes the characterization of the Nash solution
in terms of the axioms PAR, SYM, and IIA discussed above.
Proposition 307.2 The Nash solution is the only bargaining solution
that satisﬁes PAR, SYM, and IIA.
Proof. We have shown that the Nash solution satisﬁes the three axioms;
we now show uniqueness.
Step 1. Let x∗be the Nash solution of the bargaining problem ⟨X, D,
≿1,≿2⟩. If x ∼i p · x∗then [1/(2 −p)] · x ≾j x∗.
Proof. For each player i choose the von Neumann–Morgenstern utility
function ui that represents ≿i and satisﬁes ui(x∗) = 1 and ui(D) =
0.
We ﬁrst argue that for every agreement y ∈X we have u1(y) +
u2(y) ≤2. To see this, suppose to the contrary that for some y ∈X
we have u1(y) + u2(y) = 2 + ϵ with ϵ > 0. By the convexity of the
bargaining problem, for every p ∈[0, 1] there is an agreement z(p) ∈X
with ui(z(p)) = pui(y) + (1 −p)ui(x∗) = pui(y) + 1 −p for i = 1, 2, so
that u1(z(p))u2(z(p)) = 1 + ϵp + p2[u1(y)u2(y) −1 −ϵ]. Thus for p close
enough to 0 we have u1(z(p))u2(z(p)) > 1 = u1(x∗)u2(x∗), contradicting

--- Sayfa 324 ---
308
Chapter 15.
The Nash Solution
the fact that x∗is the Nash solution of the problem. Now, if x ∼i p · x∗
we have ui(x) = p and hence uj(x) ≤2 −p, so that [1/(2 −p)] · x ≾j x∗.
Step 2. Any bargaining solution that satisﬁes PAR, SYM, and IIA is
the Nash solution.
Proof. Let x∗be the Nash solution of the bargaining problem ⟨X, D,
≿1,≿2⟩and let F be a bargaining solution that satisﬁes PAR, SYM, and
IIA. Let ≿′
1 and ≿′
2 be preference relations that coincide with ≿1 and
≿2 on X and satisfy the following conditions. For any Pareto eﬃcient
agreement x ∈X we have
• if x ≻1 x∗and x ∼2 p · x∗for some p ∈[0, 1] then x ∼′
2 p · x∗and
x∗∼′
1 [1/(2 −p)] · x.
• if x ≺1 x∗and x ∼1 p · x∗for some p ∈[0, 1] then x ∼′
1 p · x∗and
x∗∼′
2 [1/(2 −p)] · x
(These conditions completely describe a pair of preference relations sat-
isfying the assumptions of von Neumann and Morgenstern since for every
x ∈X and each player i there is some Pareto eﬃcient agreement x′ for
which x ∼i x′.) Let ui be the von Neumann–Morgenstern utility func-
tion that represents ≿′
i and satisﬁes ui(D) = 0 and ui(x∗) = 1 for i = 1,
2. Then u1(x) + u2(x) = 2 for all Pareto eﬃcient agreements x ∈X.
It is easy to verify that the problem ⟨X, D, ≿′
1, ≿′
2⟩is convex. (One
way to do so is to verify that the set of pairs of utilities is the triangle
{(v1, v2): v1 + v2 ≤2 and vi ≥0 for i = 1, 2}. To show this, use the fact
that since Bi is Pareto eﬃcient and Bi ∼j D we have uj(Bi) = 0 and
ui(Bi) = 2.) To see that the problem is symmetric, deﬁne φ: X →X by
φ(D) = D and [p · B1 ∼′
1 x and q · B2 ∼′
2 x] if and only if [p · B2 ∼′
2 φ(x)
and q · B1 ∼′
1 φ(x)]. This function φ assigns an agreement with the
utilities (v1, v2) to an agreement with utilities (v2, v1). Thus, an eﬃcient
agreement that is a ﬁxed point of φ yields the pair of utilities (1, 1)
and hence by non-redundancy is x∗. Thus by SYM and PAR we have
F(X, D, ≿′
1, ≿′
2) = x∗.
Now, the pair of problems ⟨X, D, ≿′
1, ≿′
2⟩and ⟨X, D, ≿1, ≿′
2⟩and the
pair of problems ⟨X, D, ≿1, ≿2⟩and ⟨X, D, ≿1, ≿′
2⟩satisfy the hypothesis
of IIA since by Step 1 we have [1/(2−p)]·x ≾j x∗if x ∼i p·x∗. Therefore
F(X, D, ≿1, ≿2) = F(X, D, ≿′
1, ≿′
2) = x∗.
2
As noted earlier, Nash deﬁned a bargaining problem to be a pair
⟨U, d⟩, where U ⊆R2 is a compact convex set (the set of pairs of payoﬀs
to agreements) and d ∈U (the pair of payoﬀs in the event of disagree-
ment). A bargaining solution in this context is a function that assigns

--- Sayfa 325 ---
15.3 An Axiomatic Deﬁnition
309
a point in U to every bargaining problem ⟨U, d⟩.
Nash showed that
there is a unique bargaining solution that satisﬁes axioms similar to
those considered above and that this solution assigns to the bargaining
problem ⟨U, d⟩the pair (v1, v2) of payoﬀs in U for which the product
(v1 −d1)(v2 −d2) is highest. The following exercise asks you to prove
this result.
? Exercise 309.1
Show, following the line of the proof of the previous
result, that in the standard Nash bargaining model (as presented in the
previous paragraph) there is a unique bargaining solution that satisﬁes
analogs of PAR and SYM and the following two axioms, in which f
denotes a bargaining solution.
(Covariance with positive aﬃne transformations) Let ⟨U, d⟩be a bar-
gaining problem, let αi > 0 and βi be real numbers, let
U ′ = {(v′
1, v′
2): v′
i = αivi + βi for i = 1, 2 for some (v1, v2) ∈U},
and let d′
i = αidi + βi for i = 1, 2. Then fi(U ′, d′) = αifi(U, d) + βi
for i = 1, 2.
(Independence of irrelevant alternatives) If U ⊆U ′ and f(U ′, d) ∈U
then f(U ′, d) = f(U, d).
15.3.3
Is Any Axiom Superﬂuous?
We have shown that the axioms PAR, SYM, and IIA uniquely deﬁne the
Nash solution; we now show that none of these axioms is superﬂuous.
We do so by exhibiting, for each axiom, a bargaining solution that is
diﬀerent from Nash’s and satisﬁes the remaining two axioms.
PAR: Consider the solution deﬁned by F(X, D, ≿1, ≿2) = D. This
satisﬁes SYM and IIA and diﬀers from the Nash solution.
? Exercise 309.2
Show that there is a solution F diﬀerent from the
Nash solution that satisﬁes SYM, IIA, and F(X, D, ≿1, ≿2) ≻i D for
i = 1, 2 (strict individual rationality). Roth (1977) shows that in the
standard Nash bargaining model (as presented in the previous exercise)
the axioms SYM, IIA, and strict individual rationality are suﬃcient to
characterize the Nash solution. Account for the diﬀerence.
SYM: For each α ∈(0, 1) consider the solution (an asymmetric Nash
solution) that assigns to ⟨X, D, ≿1, ≿2⟩the agreement x∗for which
(u1(x∗))α(u2(x∗))1−α ≥(u1(x))α(u2(x))1−α for all x ∈X, where u1
and u2 represent ≿1 and ≿2 and satisfy ui(D) = 0 for i = 1, 2.

--- Sayfa 326 ---
310
Chapter 15.
The Nash Solution
? Exercise 310.1
Show that any asymmetric Nash solution is well-
deﬁned (the agreement that it selects does not depend on the utility
functions chosen to represent the preferences), satisﬁes PAR and IIA,
and, for α̸ = 1
2, diﬀers from the Nash solution.
IIA: Let ⟨X, D, ≿1, ≿2⟩be a bargaining problem and let ui be a util-
ity function that represents ≿i and satisﬁes ui(D) = 0 for i = 1, 2.
The Kalai–Smorodinsky solution assigns to ⟨X, D, ≿1, ≿2⟩the Pareto
eﬃcient agreement x for which u1(x)/u2(x) = u1(B1)/u2(B2).
? Exercise 310.2
Show that the Kalai–Smorodinsky solution is well-
deﬁned, satisﬁes SYM and PAR, and diﬀers from the Nash solution.
15.4
The Nash Solution and the Bargaining Game of
Alternating Oﬀers
We now show that there is a close relationship between the Nash solution
and the subgame perfect equilibrium outcome of the bargaining game
of alternating oﬀers studied in Chapter 7, despite the diﬀerent methods
that are used to derive them.
Fix a bargaining problem ⟨X, D, ≿1, ≿2⟩and consider the version of
the bargaining game of alternating oﬀers described in Section 7.4.4, in
which the set of agreements is X, the preference relations of the players
are ≿1 and ≿2, and the outcome that results if negotiations break down
at the end of a period, an event with probability α ∈(0, 1), is D. Under
assumptions analogous to A1–A4 (Section 7.3.1) this game has a unique
subgame perfect equilibrium outcome: player 1 proposes x∗(α), which
player 2 accepts, where (x∗(α), y∗(α)) is the pair of Pareto eﬃcient agree-
ments that satisﬁes (1−α)·x∗(α) ∼1 y∗(α) and (1−α)·y∗(α) ∼2 x∗(α)
(see Exercise 130.2).
Proposition 310.3 Let ⟨X, D, ≿1, ≿2⟩be a bargaining problem. The
agreements x∗(α) and y∗(α) proposed by the players in every subgame
perfect equilibrium of the variant of the bargaining game of alternating
oﬀers associated with ⟨X, D, ≿1, ≿2⟩in which there is a probability α
of breakdown after any rejection both converge to the Nash solution of
⟨X, D, ≿1, ≿2⟩as α →0.
Proof. Let ui represent the preference relation ≿i and satisfy ui(D) = 0
for i = 1, 2. From the conditions deﬁning x∗(α) and y∗(α) we have
u1(x∗(α))u2(x∗(α)) = u1(y∗(α))u2(y∗(α)).
Since x∗(α) ≻1 y∗(α) for
all α ∈[0, 1) we have x∗(α) ≿1 z∗≿1 y∗(α), where z∗is the Nash

--- Sayfa 327 ---
15.5 An Exact Implementation of the Nash Solution
311
0
r
r
v1v2 = u1(z∗)u2(z∗)
v1v2 = u1(x∗(α))u2(x∗(α))
(= u1(y∗(α))u2(y∗(α)))
(u1(z∗), u2(z∗))
v1 →
↑
v2
u1(x∗(α))
u1(y∗(α))
u2(x∗(α))
u2(y∗(α))
r
Figure 311.1 An illustration of the proof of Proposition 310.3.
solution of ⟨X, D, ≿1, ≿2⟩(see Figure 311.1). For any sequence (αk)∞
k=1
converging to 0 we have ui(x∗(αk)) −ui(y∗(αk)) →0 for i = 1, 2 by
the deﬁnition of x∗(αk) and y∗(αk), so that ui(x∗(αk)) and ui(y∗(αk))
converge to ui(z∗) for i = 1, 2 and thus x∗(αk) and y∗(αk) converge to
z∗(using non-redundancy).
2
15.5
An Exact Implementation of the Nash Solution
We now return to the implementation approach described in Chapter 10.
A byproduct of the result in the previous section is that the bargaining
game of alternating oﬀers with risk of breakdown approximately SPE-
implements the Nash solution. We now describe an extensive game with
perfect information that exactly implements it. From the point of view of
a planner this game has the advantage that it is simpler, in the sense that
it involves a small number of stages. However, it has the disadvantage
of being more remote from familiar bargaining procedures.
Fix a set X and an event D and assume the planner wants to imple-
ment the Nash solution for all pairs (≿1, ≿2) for which ⟨X, D, ≿1, ≿2⟩is
a bargaining problem. Consider the extensive game form (with perfect
information and chance moves) consisting of the following stages.
• Player 1 chooses y ∈X.
• Player 2 chooses x ∈X and p ∈[0, 1].
• With probability 1 −p the game ends, with the outcome D, and
with probability p it continues.

--- Sayfa 328 ---
312
Chapter 15.
The Nash Solution
• Player 1 chooses either x or the lottery p · y; this choice is the
outcome.
Proposition 312.1 The game form described above SPE-implements
the Nash solution.
? Exercise 312.2
Let x∗be the Nash solution of ⟨X, D, ≿1, ≿2⟩. Show
that x∗is the unique subgame perfect equilibrium outcome of the game
form when the players’ preferences are (≿1, ≿2).
Notes
The seminal paper on the topic of this chapter is Nash (1950b).
Our presentation follows Rubinstein, Safra, and Thomson (1992).
Zeuthen (1930, Ch. IV) contains an early model in which negotiators
bear in mind the risk of a breakdown when making demands. The con-
nection between the Nash solution and the subgame perfect equilibrium
outcome of a bargaining game of alternating oﬀers was ﬁrst pointed out
by Binmore (1987) and was further investigated by Binmore, Rubinstein,
and Wolinsky (1986). The exact implementation of the Nash solution
in Section 15.5 is due to Howard (1992).
The comparative static result of Section 15.2.3 concerning the eﬀect of
the players’ degree of risk aversion on the solution was ﬁrst explored by
Kihlstrom, Roth, and Schmeidler (1981). Harsanyi and Selten (1972)
study the asymmetric Nash solutions described in Section 15.3.3 (ax-
iomatizations appear in Kalai (1977) and Roth (1979, p. 16)) and Kalai
and Smorodinsky (1975) axiomatize the Kalai–Smorodinsky solution.
Exercise 309.2 is based on Roth (1977).
Several other papers (e.g. Roemer (1988)) study models in which the
set of physical agreements, rather than the resulting set of utility pairs
(as in Nash’s model), is a primitive. Roth (1979) and Kalai (1985) are
surveys of the ﬁeld of axiomatic bargaining theory.

--- Sayfa 329 ---
List of Results
This is a list of the main results in the book, stated informally. It is
designed to give an overview of the properties of the solutions that we
study. Not all conditions are included in the statements; refer to the
complete statements in the text for details.
Strategic Games
Nash Equilibrium and Mixed Strategy Equilibrium
(Nash equilibrium existence) Every game in which the action set of each
player is compact and convex and the preference relation of each player
is continuous and quasi-concave has a Nash equilibrium
Proposition 20.3
A symmetric game has a symmetric Nash equilibrium
Exercise 20.4
In a strictly competitive game that has a Nash equilibrium, a pair of
actions is a Nash equilibrium if and only if each action is a maxminimizer
Proposition 22.2
(Mixed strategy equilibrium existence) Every ﬁnite game has a mixed
strategy Nash equilibrium
Proposition 33.1
A mixed strategy proﬁle is a mixed strategy Nash equilibrium of a ﬁnite
game if and only if every player is indiﬀerent between all actions in the
support of his equilibrium strategy
Lemma 33.2
A strategy proﬁle in a ﬁnite two-player strategic game is a trembling
hand perfect equilibrium if and only if it is mixed strategy Nash equi-
librium and the strategy of neither player is weakly dominated
Proposition 248.2

--- Sayfa 330 ---
314
List of Results
(Trembling hand perfect equilibrium existence) Every ﬁnite strategic
game has a trembling hand perfect equilibrium
Proposition 249.1
Correlated Equilibrium
Every mixed strategy Nash equilibrium corresponds to a correlated equi-
librium
Proposition 45.3
Every convex combination of correlated equilibrium payoﬀproﬁles is a
correlated equilibrium payoﬀproﬁle
Proposition 46.2
Every correlated equilibrium outcome is the outcome of a correlated
equilibrium in which the set of states is the set of action proﬁles
Proposition 47.1
Rationalizability
Every action used with positive probability in a correlated equilibrium
is rationalizable
Lemma 56.2
An action is a never-best response if and only if it is strictly dominated
Lemma 60.1
An action that is not weakly dominated is a best response to a completely
mixed belief
Exercise 64.2
Actions that survive iterated elimination of strictly dominated actions
are rationalizable
Proposition 61.2
Knowledge
(Individuals cannot agree to disagree) If two individuals have the same
prior and their posterior beliefs are common knowledge then these beliefs
are the same
Proposition 75.1
If each player is rational, knows the other players’ actions, and has a
belief consistent with his knowledge, then the action proﬁle is a Nash
equilibrium
Proposition 77.1
If there are two players and each player knows that the other player
is rational, knows the other player’s belief, and has a belief consistent
with his knowledge, then the pair of beliefs is a mixed strategy Nash
equilibrium
Proposition 78.1

--- Sayfa 331 ---
List of Results
315
If it is common knowledge that each player is rational and that each
players’ belief is consistent with his knowledge then each player’s action
is rationalizable
Proposition 80.1
If all players are rational in all states, every player’s belief in every
state is derived from a common prior, and each player’s action is the
same in all states in any given member of his information partition,
then the information partitions and actions correspond to a correlated
equilibrium
Exercise 81.1
Extensive Games with Perfect Information
Basic Theory
A strategy proﬁle is a subgame perfect equilibrium of a ﬁnite horizon
game if and only if it has the one deviation property
Lemma 98.2, Exercise 102.1, Exercise 103.3
(Subgame perfect equilibrium existence: Kuhn’s theorem) Every ﬁnite
game has a subgame perfect equilibrium
Proposition 99.2, Exercise 102.1
All players are indiﬀerent among all subgame perfect equilibria of a ﬁnite
game that satisﬁes the no indiﬀerence condition, and all equilibria are
interchangeable
Exercise 100.2
Bargaining Games
A bargaining game of alternating oﬀers that satisﬁes A1–A4 has a unique
subgame perfect equilibrium outcome
Proposition 122.1
In a subgame perfect equilibrium of a bargaining game of alternating
oﬀers, a player is worse oﬀthe more impatient he is
Proposition 126.1
Inﬁnitely Repeated Games
(Nash folk theorem for limit of means) Every feasible enforceable payoﬀ
proﬁle of the constituent game is a Nash equilibrium payoﬀproﬁle of the
limit of means inﬁnitely repeated game
Proposition 144.3
(Nash folk theorem for discounting) Every feasible strictly enforceable
payoﬀproﬁle of the constituent game is close to a Nash equilibrium
payoﬀproﬁle of the discounting inﬁnitely repeated game for a discount
factor close enough to 1
Proposition 145.2

--- Sayfa 332 ---
316
List of Results
(Perfect folk theorem for limit of means) Every feasible strictly enforce-
able payoﬀproﬁle of the constituent game is a subgame perfect equilib-
rium payoﬀproﬁle of the limit of means inﬁnitely repeated game
Proposition 146.2
(Perfect folk theorem for overtaking) For every strictly enforceable out-
come of the constituent game there is a subgame perfect equilibrium of
the overtaking inﬁnitely repeated game consisting of a repetition of the
outcome
Proposition 149.1
(Perfect folk theorem for discounting) For every feasible strictly enforce-
able outcome of a full-dimensional constituent game there is a discount
factor close enough to 1 for which there is a subgame perfect equilibrium
of the discounting inﬁnitely repeated game consisting of a repetition of
the outcome
Proposition 151.1
A strategy proﬁle is a subgame perfect equilibrium of a discounted in-
ﬁnitely repeated game if and only if it has the one deviation property
Lemma 153.1
For any subgame perfect equilibrium outcome of a discounted inﬁnitely
repeated game there is a strategy proﬁle that generates the same out-
come in which the sequence of action proﬁles that follows a deviation
depends only on the identity of the deviant (not on the history or on
the nature of the deviation)
Proposition 154.1
In every equilibrium of a machine game of a discounted inﬁnitely re-
peated game there is a one-to-one correspondence between the actions
chosen by the two machines in the repeated game
Lemma 170.1
Every equilibrium of a machine game of a discounted inﬁnitely repeated
game consists of an introductory phase, in which all the states are dis-
tinct, followed by a cycling phase, in each cycle of which each state
appears at most once
Proposition 171.1
Finitely Repeated Games
If the payoﬀproﬁle in every Nash equilibrium of the constituent game is
the proﬁle of minmax payoﬀs then every Nash equilibrium of the ﬁnitely
repeated game generates a sequence of Nash equilibria of the constituent
game
Proposition 155.1
(Nash folk theorem for ﬁnitely repeated games) If the constituent game
has a Nash equilibrium in which every player’s payoﬀexceeds his min-
max payoﬀthen for any strictly enforceable outcome there is a Nash

--- Sayfa 333 ---
List of Results
317
equilibrium of the ﬁnitely repeated game in which each player’s payoﬀ
is close to his payoﬀfrom the outcome
Proposition 156.1
If the constituent game has a unique Nash equilibrium payoﬀproﬁle
then every subgame perfect equilibrium of the ﬁnitely repeated game
generates a sequence of Nash equilibria of the constituent game
Proposition 157.2
(Perfect folk theorem for ﬁnitely repeated games) If the constituent game
is full dimensional and for every player there are two Nash equilibria that
yield diﬀerent payoﬀs then for any strictly enforceable outcome a suﬃ-
ciently long ﬁnitely repeated game has a subgame perfect equilibrium in
which each player’s payoﬀis close to his payoﬀfrom the outcome
Proposition 159.1
Implementation Theory
(Gibbard–Satterthwaite theorem) In an environment in which there are
at least three consequences and any preference ordering is possible, any
choice rule that is DSE-implementable and satisﬁes the condition that
for any consequence there is a preference proﬁle for which the choice rule
induces that consequence is dictatorial
Proposition 181.2
(Revelation principle for DSE-implementation) If a choice rule is DSE-
implementable then it is truthfully DSE-implementable.
Lemma 181.4
(Revelation principle for Nash-implementation) If a choice rule is Nash-
implementable then it is truthfully Nash-implementable.
Lemma 185.2
If a choice rule is Nash-implementable then it is monotonic
Proposition 186.2
In an environment in which there are at least three players, a choice rule
that is monotonic and has no veto power is Nash-implementable
Proposition 187.2
In an environment in which there are at least three players, who can be
required to pay monetary ﬁnes, every choice function is virtually SPE-
implementable
Proposition 193.1
Extensive Games with Imperfect Information
For any mixed strategy of a player in a ﬁnite extensive game with perfect
recall there is an outcome-equivalent behavioral strategy
Proposition 214.1

--- Sayfa 334 ---
318
List of Results
Every sequential equilibrium of the extensive game associated with a
ﬁnite Bayesian game with observable actions induces a perfect Bayesian
equilibrium of the Bayesian game
Proposition 234.1
Every trembling hand perfect equilibrium of a ﬁnite extensive game with
perfect recall is associated with a sequential equilibrium
Proposition 251.2
(Trembling hand perfect equilibrium and sequential equilibrium existence)
Every ﬁnite extensive game with perfect recall has a trembling hand per-
fect equilibrium and hence a sequential equilibrium
Corollary 253.2
Coalitional Games
Core
A coalitional game with transferable payoﬀhas a nonempty core if and
only if it is balanced
Proposition 262.1
Every market with transferable payoﬀhas a nonempty core
Proposition 264.2
Every proﬁle of competitive payoﬀs in a market with transferable payoﬀ
is in the core of the market
Proposition 267.1
Every competitive allocation in an exchange economy is in the core
Proposition 272.1
If every agent’s preference relation is increasing and strictly quasi-
concave and every agent’s endowment of every good is positive, the core
converges to the set of competitive allocations
Proposition 273.1
Stable Sets
The core is a subset of every stable set; no stable set is a proper subset
of any other; if the core is a stable set then it is the only stable set
Proposition 279.2
Bargaining Set, Kernel, Nucleolus
In a coalitional game with transferable payoﬀthe nucleolus is a member
of the kernel, which is a subset of the bargaining set
Lemmas 285.1 and 287.1
The nucleolus of any coalitional game with transferable payoﬀis a sin-
gleton
Proposition 288.4

--- Sayfa 335 ---
List of Results
319
Shapley Value
The unique value that satisﬁes the balanced contributions property is
the Shapley value
Proposition 291.3
The Shapley value is the only value that satisﬁes axioms of symmetry,
dummy, and additivity
Proposition 293.1
Nash Solution
The deﬁnition of the Nash solution of a bargaining problem in terms of
objections and counterobjections is equivalent to the deﬁnition of it as
the agreement that maximizes the product of the players’ von Neumann–
Morgenstern utilities
Proposition 302.1
In the Nash solution a player is worse oﬀthe more risk-averse he is
Proposition 304.1
The Nash solution is the only bargaining solution that satisﬁes axioms of
Pareto eﬃciency, symmetry, and independence of irrelevant alternatives
Proposition 307.2
The agreements proposed by the players in every subgame perfect equi-
librium outcome of the variant of a bargaining game of alternating oﬀers
in which there is a risk of breakdown converge to the Nash solution
Proposition 310.3

--- Sayfa 337 ---
References
The numbers in brackets after each reference indicate the pages on which the reference
is cited.
Abreu, D. (1988), “On the Theory of Inﬁnitely Repeated Games with
Discounting”, Econometrica 56, 383–396. [160]
Abreu, D., P. K. Dutta, and L. Smith (1994), “The Folk Theorem for
Repeated Games: A NEU Condition”, Econometrica 62, 939–
948. [160]
Abreu, D., and H. Matsushima (1992), “Virtual Implementation in Iter-
atively Undominated Strategies: Complete Information”, Econo-
metrica 60, 993–1008. [195]
Abreu, D., and A. Rubinstein (1988), “The Structure of Nash Equilib-
rium in Repeated Games with Finite Automata”, Econometrica
56, 1259–1281. [175]
Arrow, K. J., E. W. Barankin, and D. Blackwell (1953), “Admissible
Points of Convex Sets”, pp. 87–91 in Contributions to the Theory
of Games, Volume II (Annals of Mathematics Studies, 28) (H. W.
Kuhn and A. W. Tucker, eds.), Princeton: Princeton University
Press. [52, 65]
Arrow, K. J., and F. H. Hahn (1971), General Competitive Analysis.
San Francisco: Holden-Day. [270]
Aumann, R. J. (1959), “Acceptable Points in General Cooperative n-
Person Games”, pp. 287–324 in Contributions to the Theory of
Games, Volume IV (Annals of Mathematics Studies, 40) (A. W.
Tucker and R. D. Luce, eds.), Princeton: Princeton University
Press. [160]
Aumann, R. J. (1964), “Markets with a Continuum of Traders”, Econo-
metrica 32, 39–50. [275]

--- Sayfa 338 ---
322
References
Aumann, R. J. (1974), “Subjectivity and Correlation in Randomized
Strategies”, Journal of Mathematical Economics 1, 67–96. [51]
Aumann, R. J. (1975), “Values of Markets with a Continuum of Tra-
ders”, Econometrica 43, 611–646. [294]
Aumann, R. J. (1976), “Agreeing to Disagree”, Annals of Statistics 4,
1236–1239. [84]
Aumann, R. J. (1985a), “An Axiomatization of the Non-Transferable
Utility Value”, Econometrica 53, 599–612. [298]
Aumann, R. J. (1985b), “What Is Game Theory Trying to Accom-
plish?”, pp. 28–76 in Frontiers of Economics (K. J. Arrow and
S. Honkapohja, eds.), Oxford: Basil Blackwell. [8]
Aumann, R. J. (1986), “Rejoinder”, Econometrica 54, 985–989. [297]
Aumann, R. J. (1987a), “Correlated Equilibrium as an Expression of
Bayesian Rationality”, Econometrica 55, 1–18. [51, 85]
Aumann, R. J. (1987b), “Game Theory”, pp. 460–482 in The New Pal-
grave, Volume 2 (J. Eatwell, M. Milgate, and P. Newman, eds.),
London: Macmillan. [8]
Aumann, R. J. (1989), Lectures on Game Theory. Boulder: Westview
Press. [275, 297]
Aumann, R. J., and A. Brandenburger (1995), “Epistemic Conditions
for Nash Equilibrium”, Econometrica 63, 1161–1180. [80, 84]
Aumann, R. J., and M. Maschler (1964), “The Bargaining Set for Coop-
erative Games”, pp. 443–476 in Advances in Game Theory (An-
nals of Mathematics Studies, 52) (M. Dresher, L. S. Shapley, and
A. W. Tucker, eds.), Princeton: Princeton University Press. [297]
Aumann, R. J., and M. Maschler (1972), “Some Thoughts on the Mini-
max Principle”, Management Science 18, P-54–P-63. [218]
Aumann, R. J., and B. Peleg (1960), “Von Neumann–Morgenstern So-
lutions to Cooperative Games without Side Payments”, Bulletin
of the American Mathematical Society 66, 173–179. [275, 298]
Aumann, R. J., and L. S. Shapley (1994), “Long-Term Competition—A
Game-Theoretic Analysis”, pp. 1–15 in Essays in Game Theory
(N. Megiddo, ed.), New York: Springer-Verlag. [160]
Bacharach, M. (1985), “Some Extensions of a Claim of Aumann in an
Axiomatic Model of Knowledge”, Journal of Economic Theory
37, 167–190. [85]
Banks, J. S., and J. Sobel (1987), “Equilibrium Selection in Signaling
Games”, Econometrica 55, 647–661. [246, 254]

--- Sayfa 339 ---
References
323
Barber´a, S. (1983), “Strategy-Proofness and Pivotal Voters:
A Di-
rect Proof of the Gibbard–Satterthwaite Theorem”, International
Economic Review 24, 413–417. [195]
Battigalli, P. (1988), “Implementable Strategies, Prior Information and
the Problem of Credibility in Extensive Games”, Rivista Inter-
nazionale di Scienze Economiche e Commerciali 35, 705–733.
[254]
Battigalli, P. (1996), “Strategic Independence and Perfect Bayesian
Equilibria”, Journal of Economic Theory, 70, 201–234. [254]
Battigalli, P., M. Gilli, and M. C. Molinari (1992), “Learning and Con-
vergence to Equilibrium in Repeated Strategic Interactions: An
Introductory Survey”, Ricerche Economiche 46, 335–377. [52]
Benoˆıt, J.-P., and V. Krishna (1985), “Finitely Repeated Games”, Econ-
ometrica 53, 905–922. [160]
Benoˆıt, J.-P., and V. Krishna (1987), “Nash Equilibria of Finitely Re-
peated Games”, International Journal of Game Theory 16, 197–
204. [160]
Ben-Porath, E., and E. Dekel (1992), “Signaling Future Actions and the
Potential for Sacriﬁce”, Journal of Economic Theory 57, 36–51.
[115]
Ben-Porath, E., and B. Peleg (1987), “On the Folk Theorem and Finite
Automata”, Research Memorandum 77, Center for Research in
Mathematical Economics and Game Theory, Hebrew University,
Jerusalem. [160]
Bernheim, B. D. (1984), “Rationalizable Strategic Behavior”, Econo-
metrica 52, 1007–1028. [64]
Billera, L. J. (1970), “Some Theorems on the Core of an n-Person Game
without Side-Payments”, SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics
18, 567–579. [269, 275]
Billera, L. J., D. C. Heath, and J. Raanan (1978), “Internal Telephone
Billing Rates—A Novel Application of Non-Atomic Game The-
ory”, Operations Research 26, 956–965. [297]
Binmore, K. G. (1985), “Bargaining and Coalitions”, pp. 269–304 in
Game-Theoretic Models of Bargaining (A. E. Roth, ed.), Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press. [131]
Binmore, K. G. (1987), “Nash Bargaining Theory II”, pp. 61–76 in The
Economics of Bargaining (K. G. Binmore and P. Dasgupta, eds.),
Oxford: Blackwell. [312]
Binmore, K. G. (1987/88), “Modeling Rational Players, Parts I and II”,
Economics and Philosophy 3, 179–214 and 4, 9–55. [5, 8]

--- Sayfa 340 ---
324
References
Binmore, K. G. (1992), Fun and Games.
Lexington, Massachusetts:
D. C. Heath. [8]
Binmore, K. G., and A. Brandenburger (1990), “Common Knowledge
and Game Theory”, pp. 105–150 in Essays on the Foundations of
Game Theory (K. G. Binmore), Oxford: Blackwell. [85]
Binmore, K. G., A. Rubinstein, and A. Wolinsky (1986), “The Nash
Bargaining Solution in Economic Modelling”, Rand Journal of
Economics 17, 176–188. [131, 312]
Bondareva, O. N. (Бондарева, О. Н.) (1963), “Некоторые Применения
Методов Линейного Программирования к Теории Коопера-
тивных Игр”, Проблемы Кибернетики (Problemy Kibernetiki)
10, 119–139. [274]
Borel, E. (1921), “La Th´eorie du Jeu et les Equations Int´egrales `a Noyau
Sym´etrique”, Comptes Rendus Hebdomadaires des S´eances de
l’Acad´emie des Sciences (Paris) 173, 1304–1308.
(Translated
as “The Theory of Play and Integral Equations with Skew Sym-
metric Kernels”, Econometrica 21 (1953), pp. 97–100.) [29, 51]
Borel, E. (1924), El´ements de la Th´eorie des Probabilit´es (Third Edi-
tion). Paris: Librairie Scientiﬁque, J. Hermann. (Pp. 204–221
translated as “On Games That Involve Chance and the Skill of
the Players”, Econometrica 21 (1953), 101–115.) [51]
Borel, E. (1927), “Sur les Syst`emes de Formes Lin´eaires `a D´eterminant
Sym´etrique Gauche et la Th´eorie G´en´erale du Jeu”, Comptes
Rendus Hebdomadaires des S´eances de l’Acad´emie des Sciences
(Paris) 184, 52–54. (Translated as “On Systems of Linear Forms
of Skew Symmetric Determinant and the General Theory of Play”,
Econometrica 21 (1953), 116–117.) [51]
Brams, S. J., D. M. Kilgour, and M. D. Davis (1993), “Unraveling in
Games of Sharing and Exchange”, pp. 195–212 in Frontiers of
Game Theory (K. G. Binmore, A. Kirman, and P. Tani, eds.),
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. [30]
Brams, S. J., and A. D. Taylor (1994), “Divide the Dollar:
Three
Solutions and Extensions”, Theory and Decision 37, 211–231.
[65]
Brandenburger, A. (1992), “Knowledge and Equilibrium in Games”,
Journal of Economic Perspectives 6, 83–101. [84]
Brown, G. W. (1951), “Iterative Solution of Games by Fictitious Play”,
pp. 374–376 in Activity Analysis of Production and Allocation
(T. C. Koopmans, ed.), New York: Wiley. [52]

--- Sayfa 341 ---
References
325
Carnap, R. (1966), Philosophical Foundations of Physics. New York:
Basic Books. [5]
Cho, I.-K., and D. M. Kreps (1987), “Signaling Games and Stable
Equilibria”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 102, 179–221. [254]
Chung, K. L. (1974), A Course in Probability Theory (Second Edition).
New York: Academic Press. [7]
Clarke, E. H. (1971), “Multipart Pricing of Public Goods”, Public Choice
11, 17–33. [183]
Cournot, A. A. (1838), Recherches sur les Principes Math´ematiques de
la Th´eorie des Richesses.
Paris: Hachette.
(English transla-
tion: Researches into the Mathematical Principles of the Theory
of Wealth, New York: Macmillan, 1897.) [30]
Crawford, V. P. (1990), “Equilibrium without Independence”, Journal
of Economic Theory 50, 127–154. [52]
Davis, M., and M. Maschler (1963), “Existence of Stable PayoﬀCon-
ﬁgurations for Cooperative Games”, Bulletin of the American
Mathematical Society 69, 106–108. [297]
Davis, M., and M. Maschler (1965), “The Kernel of a Cooperative
Game”, Naval Research Logistics Quarterly 12, 223–259. [297]
Davis, M., and M. Maschler (1967), “Existence of Stable PayoﬀConﬁg-
urations for Cooperative Games”, pp. 39–52 in Essays in Math-
ematical Economics (M. Shubik, ed.), Princeton: Princeton Uni-
versity Press. [297]
Debreu, G., and H. E. Scarf (1963), “A Limit Theorem on the Core of
an Economy”, International Economic Review 4, 235–246. [275]
Derman, C. (1970), Finite State Markovian Decision Processes. New
York: Academic Press. [168]
Diamond, P. A. (1965), “The Evaluation of Inﬁnite Utility Streams”,
Econometrica 33, 170–177. [160]
Dubey, P., and M. Kaneko (1984), “Information Patterns and Nash
Equilibria in Extensive Games: I”, Mathematical Social Sciences
8, 111–139. [115]
Edgeworth, F. Y. (1881), Mathematical Psychics. London: Kegan Paul.
[275]
Elmes, S., and P. J. Reny (1994), “On the Strategic Equivalence of
Extensive Form Games”, Journal of Economic Theory 62, 1–23.
[218]
Fishburn, P. C., and A. Rubinstein (1982), “Time Preference”, Interna-
tional Economic Review 23, 677–694. [119, 131]

--- Sayfa 342 ---
326
References
Forges, F. (1992), “Repeated Games of Incomplete Information: Non-
Zero-Sum”, pp. 155–177 in Handbook of Game Theory with Eco-
nomic Applications, Volume 1 (R. J. Aumann and S. Hart, eds.),
Amsterdam: North-Holland. [161]
Friedman, J. W. (1971), “A Non-Cooperative Equilibrium for Super-
games”, Review of Economic Studies 38, 1–12. [160]
Friedman, J. W. (1985), “Cooperative Equilibria in Finite Horizon Non-
cooperative Supergames”, Journal of Economic Theory 35, 390–
398. [160]
Friedman, J. W. (1990), Game Theory with Applications to Economics
(Second Edition). New York: Oxford University Press. [8, 275]
Fudenberg, D. (1992), “Explaining Cooperation and Commitment in
Repeated Games”, pp. 89–131 in Advances in Economic Theory,
Volume I (J.-J. Laﬀont, ed.), Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press. [161]
Fudenberg, D., and D. K. Levine (1989), “Reputation and Equilibrium
Selection in Games with a Patient Player”, Econometrica 57,
759–778. [160]
Fudenberg, D., and E. S. Maskin (1986), “The Folk Theorem in Re-
peated Games with Discounting or with Incomplete Information”,
Econometrica 54, 533–554. [160, 254]
Fudenberg, D., and E. S. Maskin (1991), “On the Dispensability of Pub-
lic Randomization in Discounted Repeated Games”, Journal of
Economic Theory 53, 428–438. [160]
Fudenberg, D., and J. Tirole (1991a), Game Theory. Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press. [8]
Fudenberg, D., and J. Tirole (1991b), “Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium
and Sequential Equilibrium”, Journal of Economic Theory 53,
236–260. [254]
Gabay, D., and H. Moulin (1980), “On the Uniqueness and Stability of
Nash-Equilibria in Noncooperative Games”, pp. 271–293 in Ap-
plied Stochastic Control in Econometrics and Management Sci-
ence (A. Bensoussan, P. Kleindorfer, and C. S. Tapiero, eds.),
Amsterdam: North-Holland. [64]
Gale, D. (1953), “A Theory of N-Person Games with Perfect Informa-
tion”, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 39, 496–501. [64]
Geanakoplos, J. (1992), “Common Knowledge”, Journal of Economic
Perspectives 6, 53–82. [85]

--- Sayfa 343 ---
References
327
Geanakoplos, J. (1994), “Common Knowledge”, pp. 1437–1496 in Hand-
book of Game Theory, Volume 2 (R. J. Aumann and S. Hart, eds.),
Amsterdam: North-Holland. [85]
Gibbard, A. (1973), “Manipulation of Voting Schemes: A General Re-
sult”, Econometrica 41, 587–601. [195]
Gibbons, R. (1992), Game Theory for Applied Economists. Princeton:
Princeton University Press. [8]
Gillies, D. B. (1959), “Solutions to General Non-Zero-Sum Games”,
pp. 47–85 in Contributions to the Theory of Games, Volume IV
(Annals of Mathematics Studies, 40) (A. W. Tucker and R. D.
Luce, eds.), Princeton: Princeton University Press. [274]
Glazer, J., and C. A. Ma (1989), “Eﬃcient Allocation of a ‘Prize’—
King Solomon’s Dilemma”, Games and Economic Behavior 1,
222–233. [195]
Glazer, J. and M. Perry (1996), “Virtual Implementation in Backwards
Induction”, Games and Economic Behavior 15, 27–32. [195]
Glicksberg, I. L. (1952), “A Further Generalization of the Kakutani
Fixed Point Theorem, with Application to Nash Equilibrium
Points”, Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society 3,
170–174. [30, 33]
Green, J., and J.-J. Laﬀont (1977), “Characterization of Satisfactory
Mechanisms for the Revelation of Preferences for Public Goods”,
Econometrica 45, 427–438. [195]
Groves, T. (1973), “Incentives in Teams”, Econometrica 41, 617–631.
[183]
Groves, T., and M. Loeb (1975), “Incentives and Public Inputs”, Journal
of Public Economics 4, 211–226. [195]
Guilbaud, G. T. (1961), “Faut-il Jouer au Plus Fin? (Notes sur l’Histoire
de la Th´eorie des Jeux)”, pp. 171–182 in La D´ecision, Paris:
´Editions du Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque. [51]
Gul, F. (1989), “Bargaining Foundations of Shapley Value”, Economet-
rica 57, 81–95. [298]
Halpern, J. Y. (1986), “Reasoning about Knowledge: An Overview”,
pp. 1–17 in Theoretical Aspects of Reasoning about Knowledge
(J. Y. Halpern, ed.), Los Altos, California: Morgan Kaufmann.
[85]
Harsanyi, J. C. (1963), “A Simpliﬁed Bargaining Model for the n-Person
Cooperative Game”, International Economic Review 4, 194–220.
[298]

--- Sayfa 344 ---
328
References
Harsanyi, J. C. (1967/68), “Games with Incomplete Information Played
by ‘Bayesian’ Players, Parts I, II, and III”, Management Science
14, 159–182, 320–334, and 486–502. [28, 30]
Harsanyi, J. C. (1973), “Games with Randomly Disturbed Payoﬀs: A
New Rationale for Mixed-Strategy Equilibrium Points”, Interna-
tional Journal of Game Theory 2, 1–23. [38, 41, 42, 51]
Harsanyi, J. C. (1974), “An Equilibrium-Point Interpretation of Sta-
ble Sets and a Proposed Alternative Deﬁnition”, Management
Science (Theory Series) 20, 1472–1495. [298]
Harsanyi, J. C. (1981), “The Shapley Value and the Risk-Dominance
Solutions of Two Bargaining Models for Characteristic-Function
Games”, pp. 43–68 in Essays in Game Theory and Mathematical
Economics (R. J. Aumann, J. C. Harsanyi, W. Hildenbrand, M.
Maschler, M. A. Perles, J. Rosenm¨uller, R. Selten, M. Shubik,
and G. L. Thompson), Mannheim: Bibliographisches Institut.
[298]
Harsanyi, J. C., and R. Selten (1972), “A Generalized Nash Solution
for Two-Person Bargaining Games with Incomplete Information”,
Management Science 18, P-80–P-106. [312]
Hart, S. (1985), “An Axiomatization of Harsanyi’s Nontransferable Util-
ity Solution”, Econometrica 53, 1295–1313. [298]
Hart, S., and A. Mas-Colell (1989), “Potential, Value, and Consistency”,
Econometrica 57, 589–614. [297]
Hart, S. and A. Mas-Colell (1996), “Bargaining and Value”, Economet-
rica 64, 357–380. [296, 297, 298]
Hendon, E., H. J. Jacobsen, and B. Sloth (1996), “The One-Shot-Devi-
ation Principle for Sequential Rationality” Games and Economic
Behavior 12, 274–282. [254]
Hintikka, J. (1962), Knowledge and Belief. Ithaca: Cornell University
Press. [84]
Hotelling, H. (1929), “Stability in Competition”, Economic Journal 39,
41–57. [30]
Howard, J. V. (1992), “A Social Choice Rule and Its Implementation in
Perfect Equilibrium”, Journal of Economic Theory 56, 142–159.
[312]
Isbell, J. R. (1957), “Finitary Games”, pp. 79–96 in Contributions to the
Theory of Games, Volume III (Annals of Mathematics Studies,
39) (M. Dresher, A. W. Tucker, and P. Wolfe, eds.), Princeton:
Princeton University Press. [218]

--- Sayfa 345 ---
References
329
Kakutani, S. (1941), “A Generalization of Brouwer’s Fixed Point Theo-
rem”, Duke Mathematical Journal 8, 457–459. [19]
Kalai, E. (1977), “Nonsymmetric Nash Solutions and Replications of
2-Person Bargaining”, International Journal of Game Theory 6,
129–133. [312]
Kalai, E. (1985), “Solutions to the Bargaining Problem”, pp. 77–105 in
Social Goals and Social Organization (L. Hurwicz, D. Schmeidler,
and H. Sonnenschein, eds.), Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press. [312]
Kalai, E., and M. Smorodinsky (1975), “Other Solutions to Nash’s
Bargaining Problem”, Econometrica 43, 513–518. [312]
Kihlstrom, R. E., A. E. Roth, and D. Schmeidler (1981), “Risk Aver-
sion and Solutions to Nash’s Bargaining Problem”, pp. 65–71 in
Game Theory and Mathematical Economics (O. Moeschlin and
D. Pallaschke, eds.), Amsterdam: North-Holland. [312]
Kohlberg, E. (1990), “Reﬁnement of Nash Equilibrium:
The Main
Ideas”, pp. 3–45 in Game Theory and Applications (T. Ichiishi,
A. Neyman, and Y. Tauman, eds.), San Diego: Academic Press.
[254]
Kohlberg, E., and J.-F. Mertens (1986), “On the Strategic Stability of
Equilibria”, Econometrica 54, 1003–1037. [115, 254]
Kohlberg, E., and P. J. Reny (1997), “Independence on Relative Proba-
bility Spaces and Consistent Assessments in Game Trees”, Jour-
nal of Economic Theory 75, 280–313. [254]
Krelle, W. (1976), Preistheorie (Part 2). T¨ubingen: J. C. B. Mohr (Paul
Siebeck). [131]
Kreps, D. M. (1988), Notes on the Theory of Choice. Boulder: Westview
Press. [8]
Kreps, D. M. (1990a), A Course in Microeconomic Theory. Princeton:
Princeton University Press. [8, 225]
Kreps, D. M. (1990b), Game Theory and Economic Modelling. Oxford:
Clarendon Press. [8, 254]
Kreps, D. M., and G. Ramey (1987), “Structural Consistency, Consis-
tency, and Sequential Rationality”, Econometrica 55, 1331–1348.
[254]
Kreps, D. M., and R. B. Wilson (1982a), “Reputation and Imperfect
Information”, Journal of Economic Theory 27, 253–279. [115,
254]
Kreps, D. M., and R. B. Wilson (1982b), “Sequential Equilibria”, Econo-
metrica 50, 863–894. [252, 254]

--- Sayfa 346 ---
330
References
Krishna, V. (1989), “The Folk Theorems for Repeated Games”, Working
Paper 89-003, Division of Research, Harvard Business School.
[159, 161]
Krishna, V., and R. Serrano (1995), “Perfect Equilibria of a Model of
N-Person Noncooperative Bargaining”, International Journal of
Game Theory 24, 259–272. [296]
Kuhn, H. W. (1950), “Extensive Games”, Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 36, 570–576.
[114, 115, 217, 218]
Kuhn, H. W. (1953), “Extensive Games and the Problem of Informa-
tion”, pp. 193–216 in Contributions to the Theory of Games, Vol-
ume II (Annals of Mathematics Studies, 28) (H. W. Kuhn and
A. W. Tucker, eds.), Princeton: Princeton University Press. [114,
115, 217, 218]
Kuhn, H. W. (1968), “Preface” to “Waldegrave’s Comments: Excerpt
from Montmort’s Letter to Nicholas Bernoulli”, pp. 3–6 in Pre-
cursors in Mathematical Economics:
An Anthology (Series of
Reprints of Scarce Works on Political Economy, 19) (W. J. Bau-
mol and S. M. Goldfeld, eds.), London: London School of Eco-
nomics and Political Science. [30, 51]
Lewis, D. K. (1969), Convention. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
[84]
Littlewood, J. E. (1953), A Mathematician’s Miscellany.
London:
Methuen. [71, 85]
Lucas, W. F. (1969), “The Proof That a Game May Not Have a Solu-
tion”, Transactions of the American Mathematical Society 137,
219–229. [279]
Lucas, W. F. (1992), “Von Neumann–Morgenstern Stable Sets”, pp. 543–
590 in Handbook of Game Theory with Economic Applications,
Volume 1 (R. J. Aumann and S. Hart, eds.), Amsterdam: North-
Holland. [298]
Luce, R. D., and H. Raiﬀa (1957), Games and Decisions. New York:
John Wiley and Sons. [8, 15, 30, 64, 65, 160, 275, 293]
Madrigal, V., T. C. C. Tan, and S. R. da C. Werlang (1987), “Sup-
port Restrictions and Sequential Equilibria”, Journal of Eco-
nomic Theory 43, 329–334. [254]
Maschler, M. (1976), “An Advantage of the Bargaining Set over the
Core”, Journal of Economic Theory 13, 184–192. [297]

--- Sayfa 347 ---
References
331
Maschler, M. (1992), “The Bargaining Set, Kernel, and Nucleolus”,
pp. 591–667 in Handbook of Game Theory with Economic Appli-
cations, Volume 1 (R. J. Aumann and S. Hart, eds.), Amsterdam:
North-Holland. [298]
Maschler, M., and G. Owen (1989), “The Consistent Shapley Value for
Hyperplane Games”, International Journal of Game Theory 18,
389–407. [298]
Maschler, M., and G. Owen (1992), “The Consistent Shapley Value for
Games without Side Payments”, pp. 5–12 in Rational Interaction
(R. Selten, ed.), Berlin: Springer-Verlag. [298]
Maskin, E. S. (1985), “The Theory of Implementation in Nash Equilib-
rium: A Survey”, pp. 173–204 in Social Goals and Social Organi-
zation (L. Hurwicz, D. Schmeidler, and H. Sonnenschein, eds.),
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. [195]
Maynard Smith, J. (1972), “Game Theory and the Evolution of Fight-
ing”, pp. 8–28 in On Evolution (J. Maynard Smith), Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press. [51]
Maynard Smith, J. (1974), “The Theory of Games and the Evolution of
Animal Conﬂicts”, Journal of Theoretical Biology 47, 209–221.
[30, 51]
Maynard Smith, J. (1982), Evolution and the Theory of Games. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press. [51]
Maynard Smith, J., and G. R. Price (1973), “The Logic of Animal
Conﬂict”, Nature 246, 15–18. [51]
Mertens, J.-F. (1995), “Two Examples of Strategic Equilibrium”, Games
and Economic Behavior 8, 378–388. [254]
Mertens, J.-F., and S. Zamir (1985), “Formulation of Bayesian Analysis
for Games with Incomplete Information”, International Journal
of Game Theory 14, 1–29. [29]
Milgrom, P. R., and D. J. Roberts (1982), “Predation, Reputation, and
Entry Deterrence”, Journal of Economic Theory 27, 280–312.
[115, 254]
Milgrom, P. R., and D. J. Roberts (1990), “Rationalizability, Learning,
and Equilibrium in Games with Strategic Complementarities”,
Econometrica 58, 1255–1277. [65]
Milgrom, P. R., and N. Stokey (1982), “Information, Trade and Common
Knowledge”, Journal of Economic Theory 26, 17–27. [85]
Milnor, J. W., and L. S. Shapley (1978), “Values of Large Games II:
Oceanic Games”, Mathematics of Operations Research 3, 290–
307. [297]

--- Sayfa 348 ---
332
References
Moore, J. (1992), “Implementation, Contracts, and Renegotiation in
Environments with Complete Information”, pp. 182–282 in Ad-
vances in Economic Theory, Volume I (J.-J. Laﬀont, ed.), Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press. [196]
Moore, J., and R. Repullo (1988), “Subgame Perfect Implementation”,
Econometrica 56, 1191–1220. [196]
Moulin, H. (1979), “Dominance Solvable Voting Schemes”, Economet-
rica 47, 1337–1351. [64, 65]
Moulin, H. (1984), “Dominance Solvability and Cournot Stability”,
Mathematical Social Sciences 7, 83–102. [64]
Moulin, H. (1986), Game Theory for the Social Sciences (Second Edi-
tion). New York: New York University Press. [8, 52, 64, 115,
275]
Moulin, H. (1988), Axioms of Cooperative Decision Making. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press. [275, 297, 298]
Muller, E., and M. A. Satterthwaite (1977), “The Equivalence of Strong
Positive Association and Strategy-Proofness”, Journal of Eco-
nomic Theory 14, 412–418. [189]
Muthoo, A. (1991), “A Note on Bargaining over a Finite Number of
Feasible Agreements”, Economic Theory 1, 290–292. [131]
Myerson, R. B. (1977), “Graphs and Cooperation in Games”, Mathe-
matics of Operations Research 2, 225–229. [297]
Myerson, R. B. (1978), “Reﬁnements of the Nash Equilibrium Concept”,
International Journal of Game Theory 7, 73–80. [254]
Myerson, R. B. (1980), “Conference Structures and Fair Allocation
Rules”, International Journal of Game Theory 9, 169–182. [297]
Myerson, R. B. (1991), Game Theory. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Har-
vard University Press. [8, 275, 293]
Nash, J. F. (1950a), “Equilibrium Points in N-Person Games”, Proceed-
ings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 36, 48–49. [29, 30, 51]
Nash, J. F. (1950b), “The Bargaining Problem”, Econometrica 18, 155–
162. [312]
Nash, J. F. (1951), “Non-Cooperative Games”, Annals of Mathematics
54, 286–295. [30, 51]
Neyman, A. (1985), “Bounded Complexity Justiﬁes Cooperation in the
Finitely Repeated Prisoners’ Dilemma”, Economic Letters 19,
227–229. [175]
Nikaidˆo, H., and K. Isoda (1955), “Note on Noncooperative Convex
Games”, Paciﬁc Journal of Mathematics 5, 807–815. [30]

--- Sayfa 349 ---
References
333
Osborne, M. J. (1990), “Signaling, Forward Induction, and Stability
in Finitely Repeated Games”, Journal of Economic Theory 50,
22–36. [115]
Osborne, M. J., and A. Rubinstein (1990), Bargaining and Markets. San
Diego: Academic Press. [129, 131, 236]
Owen, G. (1982), Game Theory (Second Edition). New York: Academic
Press. [275]
Pearce, D. G. (1984), “Rationalizable Strategic Behavior and the Prob-
lem of Perfection”, Econometrica 52, 1029–1050. [64]
Pearce, D. G. (1992), “Repeated Games: Cooperation and Rationality”,
pp. 132–174 in Advances in Economic Theory, Volume I (J.-J.
Laﬀont, ed.), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. [161]
Peleg, B. (1963a), “Bargaining Sets of Cooperative Games without Side
Payments”, Israel Journal of Mathematics 1, 197–200. [298]
Peleg, B. (1963b), “Existence Theorem for the Bargaining Set M (i)
1 ”,
Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 69, 109–110. [297]
Peleg, B. (1967), “Existence Theorem for the Bargaining Set M (i)
1 ”,
pp. 53–56 in Essays in Mathematical Economics (M. Shubik, ed.),
Princeton: Princeton University Press. [297]
Peleg, B. (1968), “On Weights of Constant-Sum Majority Games”, SIAM
Journal on Applied Mathematics 16, 527–532. [297]
Peleg, B. (1992), “Axiomatizations of the Core”, pp. 397–412 in Hand-
book of Game Theory with Economic Applications, Volume 1
(R. J. Aumann and S. Hart, eds.), Amsterdam: North-Holland.
[275]
Piccione, M. (1992), “Finite Automata Equilibria with Discounting”,
Journal of Economic Theory 56, 180–193. [175]
Piccione, M., and A. Rubinstein (1993), “Finite Automata Play a Re-
peated Extensive Game”, Journal of Economic Theory 61, 160–
168. [175]
Postlewaite, A., and R. W. Rosenthal (1974), “Disadvantageous Syndi-
cates”, Journal of Economic Theory 9, 324–326. [275]
Radner, R. (1980), “Collusive Behavior in Noncooperative Epsilon-
Equilibria of Oligopolies with Long but Finite Lives”, Journal
of Economic Theory 22, 136–154. [115]
Radner, R. (1986), “Can Bounded Rationality Resolve the Prisoners’
Dilemma?”, pp. 387–399 in Contributions to Mathematical Eco-
nomics (W. Hildenbrand and A. Mas-Colell, eds.), Amsterdam:
North-Holland. [115]

--- Sayfa 350 ---
334
References
Raiﬀa, H. (1992), “Game Theory at the University of Michigan, 1948–
1952”, pp. 165–175 in Toward a History of Game Theory (E. R.
Weintraub, ed.), Durham: Duke University Press. [30]
Rapoport, A. (1987), “Prisoner’s Dilemma”, pp. 973–976 in The New
Palgrave, Volume 3 (J. Eatwell, M. Milgate, and P. Newman,
eds.), London: Macmillan. [135]
Reny, P. J. (1992), “Backward Induction, Normal Form Perfection and
Explicable Equilibria”, Econometrica 60, 627–649. [115]
Reny, P. J. (1993), “Common Belief and the Theory of Games with
Perfect Information”, Journal of Economic Theory 59, 257–274.
[115]
Repullo, R. (1987), “A Simple Proof of Maskin’s Theorem on Nash
Implementation”, Social Choice and Welfare 4, 39–41. [195]
Robinson, J. (1951), “An Iterative Method of Solving a Game”, Annals
of Mathematics 54, 296–301. [52]
Rockafellar, R. T. (1970), Convex Analysis. Princeton: Princeton Uni-
versity Press. [263, 274]
Roemer, J. E. (1988), “Axiomatic Bargaining Theory on Economic En-
vironments”, Journal of Economic Theory 45, 1–31. [312]
Rosenthal, R. W. (1979), “Sequences of Games with Varying Oppo-
nents”, Econometrica 47, 1353–1366. [51]
Rosenthal, R. W. (1981), “Games of Perfect Information, Predatory
Pricing and the Chain-Store Paradox”, Journal of Economic The-
ory 25, 92–100. [115]
Roth, A. E. (1977), “Individual Rationality and Nash’s Solution to the
Bargaining Problem”, Mathematics of Operations Research 2,
64–65. [309, 312]
Roth, A. E. (1979), Axiomatic Models of Bargaining. Berlin: Springer-
Verlag. [312]
Roth, A. E., and R. E. Verrecchia (1979), “The Shapley Value as Applied
to Cost Allocation: A Reinterpretation”, Journal of Accounting
Research 17, 295–303. [297]
Rubinstein, A. (1979), “Equilibrium in Supergames with the Overtaking
Criterion”, Journal of Economic Theory 21, 1–9. [160]
Rubinstein, A. (1982), “Perfect Equilibrium in a Bargaining Model”,
Econometrica 50, 97–109. [131]
Rubinstein, A. (1986), “Finite Automata Play the Repeated Prisoner’s
Dilemma”, Journal of Economic Theory 39, 83–96. [175]

--- Sayfa 351 ---
References
335
Rubinstein, A. (1989), “The Electronic Mail Game: Strategic Behav-
ior Under ‘Almost Common Knowledge’ ”, American Economic
Review 79, 385–391. [84]
Rubinstein, A. (1991), “Comments on the Interpretation of Game The-
ory”, Econometrica 59, 909–924. [51, 115]
Rubinstein, A. (1994), “Equilibrium in Supergames”, pp. 17–27 in Es-
says in Game Theory (N. Megiddo, ed.), New York: Springer-
Verlag. [160]
Rubinstein, A. (1995), “On the Interpretation of Two Theoretical Mod-
els of Bargaining”, pp. 120–130 in Barriers to Conﬂict Resolu-
tion (K. J. Arrow, R. H. Mnookin, L. Ross, A. Tversky, and
R. B. Wilson, eds.), New York: Norton. [131]
Rubinstein, A., Z. Safra, and W. Thomson (1992), “On the Interpre-
tation of the Nash Bargaining Solution and Its Extension to
Non-Expected Utility Preferences”, Econometrica 60, 1171–1186.
[312]
Rubinstein, A., and A. Wolinsky (1994), “Rationalizable Conjectural
Equilibrium: Between Nash and Rationalizability”, Games and
Economic Behavior 6, 299–311. [64–65]
Samet, D. (1990), “Ignoring Ignorance and Agreeing to Disagree”, Jour-
nal of Economic Theory 52, 190–207. [85]
Satterthwaite, M. A. (1975), “Strategy-Proofness and Arrow’s Condi-
tions: Existence and Correspondence Theorems for Voting Pro-
cedures and Social Welfare Functions”, Journal of Economic The-
ory 10, 187–217. [195]
Savage, L. J. (1972), The Foundations of Statistics (Second Revised
Edition). New York: Dover. [5]
Scarf, H. E. (1967), “The Core of an N Person Game”, Econometrica
35, 50–69. [269, 275]
Schelling, T. C. (1960), The Strategy of Conﬂict. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press. [8]
Schmeidler, D. (1969), “The Nucleolus of a Characteristic Function
Game”, SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics 17, 1163–1170.
[297]
Schmeidler, D., and H. Sonnenschein (1978), “Two Proofs of the
Gibbard–Satterthwaite Theorem on the Possibility of a Strategy-
Proof Social Choice Function”, pp. 227–234 in Decision Theory
and Social Ethics (H. W. Gottinger and W. Leinfellner, eds.),
Dordrecht: D. Reidel. [195]

--- Sayfa 352 ---
336
References
Selten, R. (1965), “Spieltheoretische Behandlung eines Oligopolmod-
ells mit Nachfragetr¨agheit”, Zeitschrift f¨ur die gesamte Staatswis-
senschaft 121, 301–324 and 667–689. [114]
Selten, R. (1975), “Reexamination of the Perfectness Concept for Equi-
librium Points in Extensive Games”, International Journal of
Game Theory 4, 25–55. [254]
Selten, R. (1978), “The Chain Store Paradox”, Theory and Decision 9,
127–159. [115]
Sen, A. (1986), “Social Choice Theory”, pp. 1073–1181 in Handbook
of Mathematical Economics, Volume 3 (K. J. Arrow and M. D.
Intriligator, eds.), Amsterdam: North-Holland. [182]
Shaked, A. (1994), “Opting Out: Bazaars versus ‘Hi Tech’ Markets”,
Investigaciones Econ´omicas 18, 421–432. [129]
Shaked, A., and J. Sutton (1984a), “Involuntary Unemployment as a
Perfect Equilibrium in a Bargaining Model”, Econometrica 52,
1351–1364. [131]
Shaked, A., and J. Sutton (1984b), “The Semi-Walrasian Economy”,
Discussion Paper 84/98 (Theoretical Economics), International
Centre for Economics and Related Disciplines, London School of
Economics. [131]
Shapley, L. S. (1953), “A Value for n-Person Games”, pp. 307–317 in
Contributions to the Theory of Games, Volume II (Annals of
Mathematics Studies, 28) (H. W. Kuhn and A. W. Tucker, eds.),
Princeton: Princeton University Press. [297]
Shapley, L. S. (1959), “The Solutions of a Symmetric Market Game”,
pp. 145–162 in Contributions to the Theory of Games, Volume
IV (Annals of Mathematics Studies, 40) (A. W. Tucker and
R. D. Luce, eds.), Princeton: Princeton University Press. [274,
275]
Shapley, L. S. (1964), “Some Topics in Two-Person Games”, pp. 1–28 in
Advances in Game Theory (Annals of Mathematics Studies, 52)
(M. Dresher, L. S. Shapley, and A. W. Tucker, eds.), Princeton:
Princeton University Press. [52]
Shapley, L. S. (1967), “On Balanced Sets and Cores”, Naval Research
Logistics Quarterly 14, 453–460. [274]
Shapley, L. S. (1969), “Utility Comparison and the Theory of Games”,
pp. 251–263 in La D´ecision, Paris: ´Editions du Centre National
de la Recherche Scientiﬁque. (Reprinted on pp. 307–319 of The
Shapley Value (Alvin E. Roth, ed.), Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1988.) [298]

--- Sayfa 353 ---
References
337
Shapley, L. S. (1971/72), “Cores of Convex Games”, International Jour-
nal of Game Theory 1, 11–26. (See also p. 199.) [275, 297]
Shapley, L. S. (1973), “On Balanced Games without Side Payments”,
pp. 261–290 in Mathematical Programming (T. C. Hu and S. M.
Robinson, eds.), New York: Academic Press. [269, 275]
Shapley, L. S., and M. Shubik (1953), “Solutions of N-Person Games
with Ordinal Utilities”, Econometrica 21, 348–349. (Abstract of
a paper presented at a conference.) [275]
Shapley, L. S., and M. Shubik (1967), “Ownership and the Production
Function”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 81, 88–111. [275]
Shapley, L. S., and M. Shubik (1969a), “On Market Games”, Journal of
Economic Theory 1, 9–25. [274]
Shapley, L. S., and M. Shubik (1969b), “On the Core of an Economic
System with Externalities”, American Economic Review 59, 678–
684. [275]
Shubik, M. (1959a), “Edgeworth Market Games”, pp. 267–278 in Con-
tributions to the Theory of Games, Volume IV (Annals of Mathe-
matics Studies, 40) (A. W. Tucker and R. D. Luce, eds.), Prince-
ton: Princeton University Press. [274, 275]
Shubik, M. (1959b), Strategy and Market Structure. New York: Wiley.
[160]
Shubik, M. (1962), “Incentives, Decentralized Control, the Assignment
of Joint Costs and Internal Pricing”, Management Science 8, 325–
343. [297]
Shubik, M. (1982), Game Theory in the Social Sciences. Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press. [8, 275]
Sorin, S. (1990), “Supergames”, pp. 43–63 in Game Theory and Applica-
tions (T. Ichiishi, A. Neyman, and Y. Tauman, eds.), San Diego:
Academic Press. [161]
Sorin, S. (1992), “Repeated Games with Complete Information”, pp. 71–
107 in Handbook of Game Theory with Economic Applications,
Volume 1 (R. J. Aumann and S. Hart, eds.), Amsterdam: North-
Holland. [161]
Spence, A. M. (1974), Market Signaling. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press. [237]
Spohn, W. (1982), “How to Make Sense of Game Theory”, pp. 239–270
in Philosophy of Economics (W. Stegm¨uller, W. Balzer, and W.
Spohn, eds.), Berlin: Springer-Verlag. [64, 84]
St˚ahl, I. (1972), Bargaining Theory. Stockholm: Economics Research
Institute at the Stockholm School of Economics. [131]

--- Sayfa 354 ---
338
References
Thompson, F. B. (1952), “Equivalence of Games in Extensive Form”,
Research Memorandum RM-759, U.S. Air Force Project Rand,
Rand Corporation, Santa Monica, California.
(Reprinted on
pp. 36–45 of Classics in Game Theory (Harold W. Kuhn, ed.),
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1997.) [209, 217]
Tversky, A., and D. Kahneman (1986), “Rational Choice and the Fram-
ing of Decisions”, Journal of Business 59, S251–S278. [209]
Van Damme, E. (1983), Reﬁnements of the Nash Equilibrium Con-
cept (Lecture Notes in Economics and Mathematical Systems,
Vol. 219). Berlin: Springer-Verlag. [64]
Van Damme, E. (1989), “Stable Equilibria and Forward Induction”,
Journal of Economic Theory 48, 476–496. [115]
Van Damme, E. (1991), Stability and Perfection of Nash Equilibria
(Second Edition). Berlin: Springer-Verlag. [8, 52]
Van Damme, E. (1992), “Reﬁnements of Nash Equilibrium”, pp. 32–75
in Advances in Economic Theory, Volume I (J.-J. Laﬀont, ed.),
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. [254]
Van Damme, E., R. Selten, and E. Winter (1990), “Alternating Bid
Bargaining with a Smallest Money Unit”, Games and Economic
Behavior 2, 188–201. [131]
Varian, H. R. (1992), Microeconomic Analysis (Third Edition). New
York: Norton. [275]
Vickrey, W. (1961), “Counterspeculation, Auctions, and Competitive
Sealed Tenders”, Journal of Finance 16, 8–37. [30]
Vives, X. (1990), “Nash Equilibrium with Strategic Complementarities”,
Journal of Mathematical Economics 19, 305–321. [65]
von Neumann, J. (1928), “Zur Theorie der Gesellschaftsspiele”, Mathe-
matische Annalen 100, 295–320. (Translated as “On the Theory
of Games of Strategy”, pp. 13–42 in Contributions to the The-
ory of Games, Volume IV (Annals of Mathematics Studies, 40)
(A. W. Tucker and R. D. Luce, eds.), Princeton University Press,
Princeton, 1959.) [29, 30, 51]
von Neumann, J., and O. Morgenstern (1944), Theory of Games and
Economic Behavior. New York: John Wiley and Sons. [5, 8, 9,
30, 114, 274, 279, 297]
Zamir, S. (1992), “Repeated Games of Incomplete Information: Zero-
Sum”, pp. 109–154 in Handbook of Game Theory with Economic
Applications, Volume 1 (R. J. Aumann and S. Hart, eds.), Ams-
terdam: North-Holland. [161]

--- Sayfa 355 ---
References
339
Zemel, E. (1989), “Small Talk and Cooperation: A Note on Bounded
Rationality”, Journal of Economic Theory 49, 1–9. [175]
Zeuthen, F. (1930), Problems of Monopoly and Economic Warfare. Lon-
don: George Routledge and Sons. [312]

--- Sayfa 357 ---
Index
Page numbers in boldface indicate pages on which objects are deﬁned; as in the text,
the symbols y,
, ⋄, and
? indicate deﬁnitions, results, examples, and exercises
respectively.
A
Action
extensive game with imperfect
information, y200.1
extensive game with perfect
information, y89.1
strategic game, 11
Action-determined beliefs, y232.1
ADD (Shapley value axiom), 292
Addition of a superﬂuous move
equivalence of extensive games, 206
Additive coalitional game,
? 261.2
Additivity axiom of Shapley value, 292
Agent strategic form, 250
Agree to disagree, 75
Agreements, set of
bargaining game, 118
Nash solution, y300.1
Air strike,
? 36.2
Allocation
competitive, 269
market with transferable payoﬀ, 264
Alternating oﬀers bargaining, see
bargaining game of alternating
oﬀers
Approachable mixed strategy
equilibrium, 42
Armies,
? 101.3
Assessment, 221, y222.1
consistent, y224.2
Asymmetric abilities/perceptions, 6
Asymmetric Nash solution, 309
Auction, ⋄18.1
ﬁrst price,
? 18.2
second price,
? 18.3
imperfect information, ⋄27.1
Automaton, see machine
Axiomatizations of the core, 275
Axioms
for knowledge function, 69–70
for Nash solution, 305–307
for Shapley value, 292
B
Bach or Stravinsky?, ⋄15.3
Bayesian game,
? 27.2
correlated equilibrium, 44, ⋄46.1
interpretation of mixed equilibrium, 40
mixed extension, ⋄34.1
Nash equilibrium, ⋄15.3
with outside option, ⋄110.1
Backwards induction, 99
Balanced contributions property for
coalitional games, y291.1
Balanced game/collection of weights,
262
Balancing counterobjection, see
counterobjection
Bargaining game of alternating oﬀers,
120
constant cost of delay,
? 125.2
equilibria with delay,
? 125.2
importance of procedure, 127
more than two players, 130

--- Sayfa 358 ---
342
Index
Bargaining game of alternating oﬀers
(continued)
multiple equilibrium outcomes,
? 125.2,
? 128.1
Nash equilibria, 121
and Nash solution, 310–311
opting out, 128
pie with discrete elements,
? 128.1
properties of subgame perfect
equilibria, 125
risk of breakdown, 129
relation with Nash solution,
310.3
subgame perfect equilibria, 121–127
characterization,
122.1
variant for coalitional game,
? 296.1
variant with one party proposing,
? 127.1
variant with simultaneous proposals,
127
Bargaining problem (Nash), y300.1
Bargaining set of coalitional game,
y282.1
and kernel,
285.1
Bargaining solution, y301.1, 308
Nash, y301.2
Battle of the sexes, see Bach or
Stravinsky?
Bayesian extensive game, y231.1
perfect Bayesian equilibrium, y232.1
Bayesian game, y25.1
common prior belief, 75
extensive with observable actions,
y231.1
Nash equilibrium, y26.1
signaling game, 237
Beer or Quiche, ⋄244.2
Behavioral strategy, y212.1
completely mixed, 224
Nash equilibrium, 216
outcome-equivalence with mixed
strategy, 214
Belief system, 223
Beliefs
constraints in extensive game
common beliefs, 222
consistency with strategies, 221
structural consistency, 222, y228.1
mixed strategies, 43
rationalizability, 54
Best response function, 15
Best response to belief
action not strictly dominated,
60.1
action not weakly dominated,
? 64.2
Biological example, ⋄49.2, 49
Bondareva–Shapley theorem,
262.1
BoS, see Bach or Stravinsky?
Bounded rationality, 6, 164
Breakdown in bargaining, 129
Burning money game, ⋄111.1
C
Card game,
? 217.3
Centipede game, 106
Chain-store game, 105
perturbation, ⋄239.1
Chance moves in extensive game
imperfect information, 201
perfect information, 101
Chess, 6, 100
Chicken, 30
Choice rule/function, 178
monotonic, y186.1
no veto power, y187.1
Choice theory, 4
Choice under uncertainty, 4,
? 71.2
Clarke–Groves game forms, 183
Coalescing of moves
equivalence of extensive games, 207
sequential equilibrium, ⋄226.2
trembling hand perfect equilibrium,
? 252.2
Coalition, y257.1
Coalitional game
nontransferable payoﬀ, y268.2
bargaining set, kernel, 284, 298
core, y268.3
exchange economy, 269
Shapley value, 298
solutions, see solution
transferable payoﬀ, y257.1
balanced, 262
balanced contributions property,
y291.1
bargaining set, y282.1
cohesive, y258.1
convex,
? 260.4
core, y258.2
cost-sharing, 296
excess of a coalition, 283
feasible payoﬀvector/proﬁle, 258
imputation, 278

--- Sayfa 359 ---
Index
343
Coalitional game
transferable payoﬀ(continued)
kernel, y284.1
nonemptiness of bargaining set and
kernel,
288.3
nonemptiness of nucleolus,
288.1
nonempty core,
262.1
nucleolus, y286.1
objection, see objection,
counterobjection
Shapley value, y291.2
simple,
? 261.1
stable set, y279.1
superadditive, 258
zerosum,
? 261.2
Coalitional vs. noncooperative games, 2,
255
Cohesive coalitional game, y258.1
Common beliefs, 222
Common knowledge, y73.1, y73.2
Communication, 113
Comparative statics of risk aversion in
Nash bargaining,
304.1
Competitive equilibrium
exchange economy, 269
and core, 271–274
existence, 270
and game theory, 3
market with transferable payoﬀ, 266
and core, 265–268
existence,
? 267.2
Competitive payoﬀ, 266
Completely mixed strategy, 224
Complexity of machine, 165
Concave function, 7
Consequences, set of
coalitional game, y268.2
implementation theory, 178
strategic game, 12
Consistency
of beliefs with strategies, 221
of strategy with history, 213
structural, y228.1
Consistent assessment, y224.2
and structural consistency, 228–231
Constituent game of repeated game, 136
Constraints on beliefs, 221–222
Continuous preference relation, 7
Convergence of core and competitive
equilibrium
exchange economy,
273.1
market with transferable payoﬀ, 267
Convex coalitional game,
? 260.4
core and Shapley value,
? 295.5
Convexity of Nash bargaining problem,
y300.1
Cooperative game, see coalitional game
Coordinated attack problem, 85
Coordination game, ⋄16.1
Core
convergence to competitive
equilibrium, 267,
273.1
equal treatment in,
272.2
exchange economy, 271
and competitive equilibrium, 271–274
and generalized stable set,
? 280.5
market with transferable payoﬀ, 264
and competitive equilibrium, 265–268
nontransferable payoﬀgame, y268.3
and stable sets,
279.2
transferable payoﬀgame, y258.2
nonemptiness,
262.1
Correlated equilibrium, y45.1
knowledge,
? 81.1
rationalizability,
56.2
Cost-sharing in coalitional game, 296
Counterobjection in coalitional game
bargaining set, 281
kernel, 284
Nash solution, 302
nucleolus, 286
Shapley value, 290
Cournot duopoly
rationalizability,
? 56.4
Covariance with positive aﬃne
transformations (Nash solution),
? 309.1
Crazy players, 239
Credible objection in coalitional game,
278
Cycling phase of machine game, 171
D
Deductive interpretation, 5
Dictatorial choice rule, 181
Disagreement outcome in Nash solution,
y300.1
Discounting
bargaining game of alternating oﬀers,
119, 122, ⋄125.1
Nash folk theorem,
145.2
perfect folk theorem,
151.1

--- Sayfa 360 ---
344
Index
Discounting (continued)
preferences, 137
repeated game, 139
structure of subgame perfect equilibria
of repeated game, 153–154
Dominance solvable,
? 63.2
Dominant action,
? 18.3
Dominant strategy equilibrium of
strategic game, y181.1
Dominated action, see weakly
dominated action, strictly
dominated action
Dove, see hawk
DSE (dominant strategy equilibrium),
y181.1
DUM (Shapley value), 292
Dummy player in coalitional game,
? 280.4
axiom of Shapley value, 292
Dynamic adjustment process, 52
E
Edgeworth box, 270
Education, Spence’s model, ⋄237.2
reﬁnement of equilibria, ⋄246.1
Eductive interpretation, 5
Eﬃciency in coalitional game, 290
Pareto (Nash solution), 305
Eﬃcient agreement (bargaining), 122,
125
Electronic mail game, 81–84
Elimination of dominated actions, see
iterated elimination
Endowment in market, 264
Enforceable payoﬀproﬁle/outcome, 143
Environment (implementation theory),
179
ϵ-equilibrium,
? 108.1
Equal treatment in core,
272.2
Equilibrium, see solution
Equilibrium, competitive, 266
Equivalence of extensive games
coalescing of moves, 207
framing eﬀects, 209
inﬂation–deﬂation, 205
interchange of moves, 208
one-player games,
? 208.1
superﬂuous moves, 206
Equivalence of mixed and behavioral
strategies, 214
ESS (evolutionarily stable strategy), 50
Event, 69
self-evident, y73.2
Evolutionarily stable strategy, y49.1
existence,
? 51.1
Evolutionary equilibrium, 48
Evolutive interpretation, 5
Excess of a coalition, 283
Exchange economy, 269
core, 271
Exchange game (Bayesian),
? 28.1
Existence
evolutionarily stable strategy,
? 51.1
mixed strategy equilibrium,
33.1, 33
Nash equilibrium,
20.3
sequential equilibrium,
253.2
subgame perfect equilibrium,
99.2
trembling hand perfect equilibrium,
249.1,
253.2
Exogenous uncertainty in extensive
game
imperfect information, 200
perfect information, 101
Extensive game, y200.1
behavioral strategy, y212.1
chance moves, 101, 201
equivalence principles
addition of superﬂuous move, 206
coalescing of moves, 207
inﬂation–deﬂation, 205
interchange of moves, 208
exogenous uncertainty, 101, 200
imperfect information, y200.1
machine game,
? 174.1
mixed strategy, y212.1
outcome, 213, 223
perfect and imperfect recall, y203.3
perfect Bayesian equilibrium, y232.1
perfect information, y89.1
Nash equilibrium, y93.1
no indiﬀerence condition,
? 100.2
outcome, 93
reduced strategic form, y95.1
simultaneous moves, 102
strategic form, y94.1
strategy, y92.1
subgame, y97.1
subgame perfect equilibrium, y97.2
pure strategy, y203.1
sequential equilibrium, see sequential
equilibrium
simultaneous moves, 202

--- Sayfa 361 ---
Index
345
Extensive game (continued)
solutions, see solution
vs. strategic game, 3
trembling hand perfect equilibrium,
y251.1
Extensive game form with perfect
information, 90, 179
External stability in coalitional game,
y279.1
F
Feasible payoﬀproﬁle
coalitional game, 258
strategic game, 139
Fictitious play, 52
Finite extensive game, 90
Finite horizon extensive game, 90
examples, 105
Finite strategic game, 11
Finitely repeated game, 155
Nash equilibrium, 155–157
Nash folk theorem,
156.1
perfect folk theorem,
159.1
subgame perfect equilibrium, 157–160
First mover advantage in bargaining
game, 126
First price auction,
? 18.2
Fixed point theorem,
20.1
Folk theorem, see Nash folk theorem,
perfect folk theorem
Forget, players who do so, 204
Forward induction, 110–114
Framing eﬀects, 209
Full dimensionality in repeated game,
151
G
Game form
extensive, 201
extensive, with perfect information, 90
Game theory and competitive
equilibrium, 3
Gibbard–Satterthwaite theorem,
181.2
Groves mechanism, 184
Guess the average,
? 35.1
rationalizability,
? 56.5
Guessing right,
? 36.1
H
Hats, puzzle of, 71
Hawk–Dove, ⋄16.3, ⋄49.2
History in extensive game
imperfect information, y200.1
perfect information, y89.1
Homogeneous weighted majority game,
? 289.2
I
IIA (Nash solution axiom), 306
Impatience in bargaining game, 126
Imperfect information
extensive game, y200.1
strategic game, 24
Imperfect information in game models,
199
Imperfect recall, 203
Implementable choice rule, y179.1
Implementation theory, 177–196
dominant strategy implementation,
180–185
Nash implementation, 185–191
and Nash solution, 311
subgame perfect equilibrium, 191–195
virtual SPE-implementation, 192
Imputation, 278
Increasing function, 7
Independence of irrelevant alternatives
(Nash solution), 306,
? 309.1
Individually rational
see enforceable, 143
strict (Nash solution),
? 309.2
Indivisible good, market for
core, ⋄260.1
Shapley value, ⋄294.4
stable set,
? 280.2
Inﬁnitely repeated game, y137.1
complexity, 164
Nash equilibrium, 143–146
subgame perfect equilibrium, 146–154
Inﬂation–deﬂation principle, 205
Information
more is better,
? 71.2
more may hurt,
? 28.2,
? 48.1
Information function, y68.1
partitional, y68.2
Information partition
correlated equilibrium, y45.1
extensive game with imperfect
information, y200.1
Information set, y200.1
interpretation, 205

--- Sayfa 362 ---
346
Index
Information set (continued)
nonordered, ⋄223.1,
? 229.1
Initial history, 90
Interchange of moves
equivalence of extensive games, 208
Interchangeable equilibria
extensive game with perfect
information,
? 100.2
strictly competitive game, 23
Interchangeable players in coalitional
game, 292
Internal stability in coalitional game,
y279.1
Interpretation
forward induction, 112
information set, 205
mixed strategy Nash equilibrium,
37–44
solutions, 5
state of the world, 67
strategic game, 13
strategy in extensive game, 103
Introductory phase of machine game,
171
Investment race,
? 35.2
Irrational players, 239
Irrelevant alternatives, independence of,
306
Iterated elimination
forward induction, 110–114
and rationalizable actions,
61.2
strictly dominated actions, y60.2
subgame perfect equilibrium, 108
weakly dominated actions, 62
and subgame perfect equilibrium, 108
J
Judgment of Solomon, see Solomon’s
predicament
K
Kakutani’s ﬁxed point theorem,
20.1
Kalai–Smorodinsky solution, 310
Kernel of coalitional game, y284.1
and bargaining set,
285.1
and nucleolus,
287.1
Knowledge
common, y73.1, y73.2
mutual, 73
Knowledge and solution concepts, 76–81
Knowledge function, 69, 70
Kuhn’s theorem,
99.2
in game with chance moves,
? 102.1
in game with simultaneous moves,
? 103.3
L
Leader–follower game, ⋄97.3
Learning, 52
Lexicographic minimality in nucleolus of
coalitional game,
286.2
Lexicographic preferences in machine
game, 165, 172–174
Limit of means
Nash folk theorem,
144.3
perfect folk theorem,
146.2
preferences, 138
repeated game, 139
Location game, ⋄18.6
iterated elimination of dominated
actions,
? 63.1
rationalizable actions,
? 57.1
Long- and short-lived players in inﬁnite
game,
? 148.1
M
Machine, 140, 164
complexity, 165
Machine game, y165.1
cycling/introductory phases, 171
extensive game and complexity,
? 174.1
lexicographic preferences, 165
structure of equilibria, 168–174
Majority game, ⋄295.3,
? 295.4
bargaining set, ⋄282.2
core, ⋄259.1, ⋄260.3
kernel, ⋄285.2
stable set, ⋄279.3
weighted,
? 289.2
nucleolus,
? 289.2
Shapley value, ⋄294.1
Marginal contribution of player in
coalitional game, 291
Market for indivisible good
core, ⋄260.1
Shapley value, ⋄294.4
stable set,
? 280.2

--- Sayfa 363 ---
Index
347
Market with transferable payoﬀ, 263
bargaining set,
? 283.1
core, 264
nonempty,
264.2
Markovian machine, 143
Matching pennies, ⋄17.1
Maxminimizer, y21.2, 209
Mechanism design, see implementation
theory
Memory, poor (extensive games that
model), 204
Message
in Beer or Quiche game, ⋄244.2
in signaling game, 237
Minmax payoﬀ, 143
Mistakes, 247
Mixed extension
strategic game, y32.1
strictly competitive, 36
Mixed strategy
as belief, 43
extensive game
imperfect information, y212.1
perfect information, 93
na¨ıve interpretation, 37
outcome equivalence with behavioral
strategy, 214
as pure strategy in extended game, 39
strategic game, 32
Mixed strategy equilibrium
approachable, 42
and correlated equilibrium,
45.3
extensive game, 216
Harsanyi’s model, 41–43
interpretation, 37–44
knowledge requirements,
78.1
as steady state, 38
strategic game, y32.3, y44.1
Monotonic choice rule, y186.1
Mutation, 49
Mutual knowledge, 73
My aunt and I (coalitional game)
bargaining set, ⋄282.3
generalization, ⋄295.3
kernel, ⋄285.3
N
Na¨ıve interpretation of mixed strategy,
37
Nash bargaining
and bargaining game of alternating
oﬀers, 310–311
comparative statics of risk aversion,
304.1
independence of irrelevant
alternatives, 306
Pareto eﬃciency, 305
problem, y300.1
symmetry, y305.1
Nash equilibrium
Bayesian game, y26.1
behavioral strategies, 216
and correlated equilibrium,
45.3
existence for strategic game,
20.3
extensive game with perfect
information, y93.1
ﬁnitely repeated game, 155–157
inﬁnitely repeated game, 143–146
interchangeability, 23
knowledge requirements,
77.1
mixed strategy of extensive game, 216
mixed strategy of strategic game,
y32.3, 43
strategic game, y14.1
and maxminimizers,
22.2
and trembling hand perfect
equilibrium, 248
Nash folk theorem
discounting criterion,
145.2
ﬁnitely repeated game,
156.1
limit of means criterion,
144.3
Nash implementation, 185–191
revelation principle,
185.2
Nash solution, y301.2
axiomatic deﬁnition, 305–310
exact implementation, 311
Nature, moves of, see chance moves
Negotiation, see bargaining game of
alternating oﬀers, Nash bargaining
Never-best response, y59.1
No indiﬀerence condition,
? 100.2
No veto power, y187.1
Non-redundancy in Nash bargaining
problem, y300.1
Noncooperative vs. coalitional games, 2,
255
Nondecreasing function, 7
Nonempty core
coalitional game,
262.1
market with transferable payoﬀ,
264.2

--- Sayfa 364 ---
348
Index
Nonordered information sets, ⋄223.1,
? 229.1
Nontransferable payoﬀcoalitional game,
y268.2
Normal form game, see strategic game
Nucleolus of coalitional game, y286.1
and kernel,
287.1
O
Objection in coalitional game
bargaining set, 281
kernel, 284
Nash solution, 302
nucleolus, 285
Shapley value, 290
stable set, 278
One deviation property
sequential equilibrium,
? 227.1
subgame perfect equilibrium,
98.2
bargaining game,
? 123.1
game with chance moves,
? 102.1
game with simultaneous moves,
? 103.3
inﬁnitely repeated game with
discounting,
153.1
Opting out (bargaining), 128
Outcome
extensive game
imperfect information, 213, 223
perfect information, 93
implementation theory, 178
strategic game, 11
Outcome-equivalence of mixed and
behavioral strategies, 214
Outcome-equivalent strategies, 94
Output function of machine, 140, 164
Outside option
in bargaining, 128
in BoS, ⋄110.1
Outside option principle, 129
Overtaking
perfect folk theorem,
149.1
preferences, 139
repeated game, 139
P
PAR (Nash solution axiom), 305
Paradoxes in ﬁnite horizon games, 105
Paratroopers, 170
Pareto eﬃciency, 7
axiom of Nash solution, 305
Pareto frontier of agreement set, 122
Parliament, coalitional game model,
⋄295.3,
? 295.4
Partition of a set, 7
Partitional information function, y68.2
Payoﬀfunction, 13
Payoﬀproﬁle
repeated game
discounting, 138
limit of means, 138
strategic game, 139
Perfect Bayesian equilibrium, y232.1
and sequential equilibrium,
234.1
Perfect folk theorem
discounting criterion,
151.1
ﬁnitely repeated game,
159.1
limit of means criterion,
146.2
overtaking criterion,
149.1
Perfect information extensive game,
y89.1
strategic form, y94.1
Perfect recall, y203.3
Perturbed game
chain-store, ⋄239.1
mixed and pure strategies, 42
trembling hand perfect equilibrium,
247
Phases of equilibrium of machine game,
171
ϕ, see Shapley value
Plan of action vs. strategy, 103
Planner (implementation theory), 177
Player function in extensive game
imperfect information, y200.1
perfect information, y89.1
Pollute the lake,
? 261.3
Pooling equilibrium in Spence’s model,
⋄237.2
eliminated by reﬁnement, ⋄246.1
Pre-trial negotiation,
? 246.2
Preference relation, 7
repeated game, 137
Prior belief
in Bayesian game, y25.1
and posterior belief, 75
Prisoner’s dilemma, ⋄16.2
equilibria of machine game, ⋄166.2,
169, 172

--- Sayfa 365 ---
Index
349
Prisoner’s dilemma (continued)
grim strategy in repeated game, ⋄141.1
complexity, ⋄166.1
inﬁnitely vs. ﬁnitely repeated game,
134
modiﬁed in ﬁnitely repeated game, 159
rationalizability, 56
Probability measure, 7
Production economy
core,
? 259.3
core convergence,
? 268.1
nucleolus,
? 289.1
Shapley value,
? 295.2
Production function, 264
Proﬁle, 7
Proper equilibrium, 254
Punishment
limited length of time,
146.2
punishing the punisher,
149.1
rewarding players who punish, 150, 159
trigger strategies, 143
Pure strategy
extensive game, y203.1
strategic game, 32
Puriﬁcation of mixed strategy
equilibrium, 39
Puzzle of the hats, 71
Q
Quasi-concave preference relation, 7, 20
R
Rational choice, 4
Rational, individually, see enforceable,
143
Rationalizability, 53
independence vs. correlation in beliefs,
57
and iterated elimination of strictly
dominated actions,
61.2
knowledge requirements,
80.1
Rationalizable action, y54.1, y55.1
Recall, 203
Reduced strategic form, y95.1
Reduced strategy, 94
Reﬁnements of sequential equilibrium,
243–246
Relative probabilities, 254
Renegotiation, 161
Repeated game
constituent game, 136
ﬁnite, 155
ﬁnite vs. inﬁnite, 134
forms of preference relation, 137–139
inﬁnite, y137.1
seealso ﬁnitely repeated game,
inﬁnitely repeated game
Reputation, 238–243
Restrictions on beliefs, 243–246
Revelation principle
DSE implementation,
181.4
Nash implementation,
185.2
Reversal of beliefs, ⋄236.1
Risk of breakdown in bargaining, 129
and Nash solution,
310.3
Risk, comparative statics (Nash
bargaining),
304.1
S
S, see coalition
S-feasible payoﬀvector, 258
Second price auction,
? 18.3
imperfect information, ⋄27.1
Self-evident event, y73.2
Selten’s horse
sequential equilibria, ⋄225.2
trembling hand perfect equilibria,
⋄252.1
Separating equilibrium, ⋄237.2, ⋄246.1
Sequential equilibrium, y225.1
assessment, y222.1
belief system, 223
coalescing of moves, ⋄226.2
existence,
253.2
and perfect Bayesian equilibrium,
234.1
reﬁnements, 243–246
restrictions on beliefs, 243–246
reversal of beliefs, ⋄236.1
and structural consistency, 228–231
and trembling hand perfect
equilibrium,
251.2
Sequential rationality, 221, 223, y224.1
Shapley value, y291.2
axiomatic characterization, 292
objections and counterobjections, 289
Short-lived players in inﬁnite game,
? 148.1
Shouting game in implementation, 188,
189

--- Sayfa 366 ---
350
Index
Signal function in Bayesian game, y25.1
Signaling game, 237
pooling equilibrium, ⋄237.2
eliminated by reﬁnement, ⋄246.1
separating equilibrium, ⋄237.2, ⋄246.1
Simple coalitional game,
? 261.1
core,
? 261.1
stable sets,
? 280.1
Simultaneous moves in extensive game
imperfect information, 202
perfect information, 102
Solomon’s predicament, ⋄186.3, ⋄190.1,
⋄191.2
Solution
for coalitional games
bargaining set, y282.1
core (nontransferable payoﬀ), y268.3
core (transferable payoﬀ), y258.2
general idea, 255
kernel, y284.1
Nash solution, y301.2
nucleolus, y286.1
Shapley value, y291.2
stable sets, y279.1
deductive interpretation, 5
for extensive games
perfect Bayesian equilibrium, y232.1
sequential equilibrium, y225.1
subgame perfect equilibrium, y97.2
trembling hand perfect equilibrium,
y251.1
general idea, 2
implementation theory, 179
steady state interpretation, 5
for strategic games
correlated equilibrium, y45.1
dominant strategy equilibrium,
y181.1
evolutionary equilibrium, y49.1
iterated elimination of strictly
dominated actions, y60.2
mixed strategy equilibrium, y32.3
Nash equilibrium, y14.1
rationalizability, y54.1
trembling hand perfect equilibrium,
y248.1
SPE, see subgame perfect equilibrium
Spence’s model of education, ⋄237.2
reﬁnement of equilibria, ⋄246.1
Split-the-pie game, ⋄120.1
subgame perfect equilibrium, ⋄125.1
Stable set of coalitional game, y279.1
and core,
279.2
generalized,
? 280.5
Stackelberg game, ⋄97.3
Standard of behavior in coalitional
game, 279
State of machine, 140, 164
State of the world, 67
Stationarity of strategies in bargaining
game, 126
Steady state interpretation, 5, 14
Strategic form
agent strategic form, 250
extensive game with perfect
information, y94.1
Strategic game, y11.1
Bayesian, y25.1
dominant strategy equilibrium, y181.1
examples, 15–19
existence of Nash equilibrium,
20.3
vs. extensive game, 3
form of extensive game, y94.1
imperfect information, 24
interpretation, 13
mixed extension, y32.1
as reduced strategic form, y95.1
solutions, see solution
strictly competitive, y21.1
symmetric,
? 20.4
tabular representation, 13
trembling hand perfect equilibrium,
y248.1
Strategic game form, 178
Strategy
equilibrium structure in repeated
game, 134, 163
extensive game
imperfect information, y203.1
interpretation, 103
perfect information, y92.1
perfect information and chance
moves, 102
perfect information and simultaneous
moves, 102
vs. plan of action, 103
as machine in repeated game, 140
stationarity in bargaining game, 126
Strict equilibrium, 50
Strict individual rationality
Nash bargaining,
? 309.2

--- Sayfa 367 ---
Index
351
Strict individual rationality (strict
enforceability), 143
Strictly competitive strategic game,
⋄17.1, y21.1
value, 23
Strictly dominated action, y59.2
Strictly enforceable payoﬀ
proﬁle/outcome, 143
Structural consistency, 222, y228.1
and sequential equilibrium, 228–231
Structure of equilibria of repeated
game, 153–154
complexity, 163
cycling/introductory phases, 171
Subgame of extensive game with perfect
information, y97.1
Subgame perfect equilibrium
extensive game with imperfect
information, see sequential
equilibrium
extensive game with perfect
information, y97.2
ﬁnitely repeated game,
157.2,
159.1
implementation, 191
Nash solution, 311
inﬁnitely repeated game, 146–154
discounting,
151.1,
154.1
limit of means,
146.2
overtaking,
149.1
interchangeability,
? 100.2
iterated elimination of weakly
dominated actions, 108
virtual SPE-implementation, 192
Superadditivity of coalitional game, 258
Superﬂuous moves
equivalence of extensive games, 206
Support of probability distribution, 32
SYM (Nash solution axiom), 305
SYM (Shapley value axiom), 292
Symmetric bargaining problem, y305.1
Symmetric game,
? 20.4
evolutionary equilibrium,
? 51.1
Symmetry axiom
Nash solution, 305
Shapley value, 292
Symmetry function, y305.1
T
Terminal history in extensive game
imperfect information, y200.1
perfect information, y89.1
Three-player bargaining, 130
Three-player majority game
bargaining set, ⋄282.2
core, ⋄259.1
kernel, ⋄285.2
stable set, ⋄279.3
Transferable payoﬀ
coalitional game, y257.1
coalitional game without, y268.2
core, y258.2
market, 263
Transition function of machine, 140,
164
Treasure in the mountains, ⋄259.2
Trembling hand perfect equilibrium,
246–253
extensive game, y251.1
existence,
253.2
and sequential equilibrium,
251.2
and weakly dominated strategy, 252
strategic game, y248.1
existence,
249.1
and Nash equilibrium, 248
and weakly dominated strategy,
248.2
Trigger strategy in repeated game, 143
Truthful implementation, y179.2
and DSE-implementation,
181.4
and Nash implementation,
185.2
via Groves mechanism,
184.2
Type of agent in exchange economy, 272
Types of players, 24, y231.1
U
Uncertainty
in extensive game
imperfect information, 200
perfect information, 101
in model of rational choice, 4,
? 71.2
about others’ characteristics, 24
about others’ knowledge, 29
Unique best agreements in Nash
bargaining problem, y300.1
Utility function, 4
see also payoﬀfunction, 13
V
Value
coalitional game, 290
strictly competitive game, 23

--- Sayfa 368 ---
352
Index
Veto player in coalitional game,
? 261.1
Veto power, y187.1
Virtual SPE-implementation, 192
Von Neumann–Morgenstern utility
function, 5
W
War of attrition, ⋄18.4
Weak separability of preferences in
repeated game, y137.1
Weakly dominant action,
? 18.3
Weakly dominated action, y62.1
and trembling hand perfect
equilibrium,
248.2
Weighted majority game,
? 289.2
Shapley value, ⋄294.1
Winning coalition,
? 261.1
Worth of a coalition, y257.1
Z
Zerosum coalitional game,
? 261.2
weighted majority game,
? 289.2
Zerosum strategic game, 21