--- Sayfa 2 ---
Game Theory

--- Sayfa 3 ---
Game Theory
Introduction and Applications
GRAHAM ROMP
OXFORD
UNIVERSITY PRESS

--- Sayfa 4 ---
OXFORD
UNIVERSITY PRESS
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford 0x2 6DP
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
It furthers the University's objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
and education by publishing worldwide in
Oxford New York
Athens Auckland Bangkok Bogota Buenos Aires Calcutta
Cape Town Chennai Dares Salaam Delhi Florence Hong Kong Istanbul
Karachi Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Mumbai
Nairobi Paris Sao Paulo Singapore Taipei Tokyo Toronto Warsaw
with associated companies in Berlin Ibadan
Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University Press
in the UK and in certain other countries
Published in the United States
by Oxford University Press Inc., New York
© Graham Romp 1997
The moral rights of the author have been asserted
Database right Oxford University Press (maker)
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
without the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press,
or as expressly permitted by law, or under terms agreed with the appropriate
reprographics rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction
outside the scope of the above should be sent to the Rights Department,
Oxford University Press, at the address above
You must not circulate this book in any other binding or cover
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Romp, Graham.
Game theory: introduction and applications / Graham Romp.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
1. Game theory. 2. Economics, Mathematical. I. Title.
HB144.R66 1997 330'.01'5193—dc21
97-475
ISBN 0-19-877501-6
ISBN 0-19-877502-4 (Pbk.)
5 7 9 10 8 6 4
Printed in Great Britain
on acid-free paper by
Alden Press, Osney Mead, Oxford

--- Sayfa 5 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Sayfa 6 ---
PREFACE
This textbook is primarily aimed at students undertaking advanced undergraduate
courses or introductory postgraduate courses, which incorporate economic applica-
tions of game theory. Following the widespread use of game theory in economics such
courses are now common in many universities. Although quite a number of textbooks
have recently been published on game theory, few place extensive emphasis on the eco-
nomic applications of this theory. Furthermore these textbooks often present the mate-
rial using high-level mathematics, which many students find over difficult. This text
seeks to remedy these shortcomings. In particular we illustrate how game theory can be
used to help us gain a deeper understanding of many issues economists are interested
in. To do this we analyse a broad range of topics taken from both macroeconomics and
microeconomics. This is done without the use of advanced-level mathematics. Instead,
all that is required is a level of mathematics taught on most introductory undergradu-
ate courses. This is achieved by the extensive use of examples and diagrams to illustrate
arguments presented in the text. The book avoids deriving highly complex proofs used
in game theory. Instead, general results are derived as extensions to more specific prob-
lems.
In order to further aid student learning, each of the main chapters incorporates a
number of exercises. These exercises are an integral part of the text. They seek to
develop previous ideas and often provide the basis for subsequent discussion. Students
are, therefore, strongly recommended to attempt these exercises before continuing with
the text. None the less full solutions to these exercises are provided at the end of each
chapter, which can then be used as worked examples for future reference. Although we
have attempted to maintain a constant level of difficulty with these exercises, some are
necessarily more complex than others. These have been marked with an asterisk (*).
Finally, to guide further reading a selective list of relevant books and articles is provided
at the end of each chapter.
My thanks go to colleagues at UCE for their help and support in writing this book.
Thanks also go to current and past students for undertaking many of the exercises and
offering helpful suggestions. Finally, my thanks go to Jacky for her patience and love.
This book is dedicated to her.
G.R.
University of Central England
Birmingham
V

--- Sayfa 7 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Sayfa 8 ---
CONTENTS
1. What is Game Theory?
1.1. Basic Assumptions of Game Theory
1.1.1. Individualism
1.1.2. Rationality
1.1.3. Mutual interdependence
1.2. Outline of Subsequent Chapters
2. Static Game Theory
2.1. Normal Form and Extensive Form Games
2.1.1. Normal form games
2.1.2. Extensive form games
2.2. Solution Techniques for Solving Static Games
2.2.1. Strict dominance
2.2.2. Weak dominance
2.2.3. Iterated strict dominance
2.2.4. Iterated weak dominance
2.2.5. Nash equilibrium
2.2.6. Mixed strategy Nash equilibrium
2.3. Conclusions
2.4. Solutions to Exercises
3. Dynamic Game Theory
3.1. Dynamic One-Off Games
3.1.1. Subgame perfect Nash equilibrium
3.1.2. Backward induction
3.2. Repeated Games
3.2.1. Infinitely repeated games
3.2.2. Finitely repeated games
3.3. Conclusions
3.4. Solutions to Exercises
Appendix 3.1. Bayes'Theorem
Appendix 3.2. Sequential Equilibrium In a Modified Centipede Game
1
1
2
2
3
4
8
8
8
10
13
14
15
16
17
18
22
24
25
29
29
31
33
34
35
38
48
49
53
54
vii

--- Sayfa 9 ---
Contents
4. Oligopoly
4.1. Three Models of Oligopoly
4.1.1. Cournot competition
4.1.2. Stackelberg competition
4.1.3. Bertrand competition
4.2. Non-Cooperative Collusion
4.2.1. Infinite repetitions
4.2.2. Finite repetitions
4.3. Conclusions
4.4. Solutions to Exercises
5. Entry Deterrence
5.1. Theory of Limit Pricing
5.2. Credible Entry Deterrence
5.2.1. Predatory pricing
5.2.2. Precommitment
5.2.3. Incomplete information
5.3. Conclusions
5.4. Solutions to Exercises
6. New Classical Macroeconomics
6.1. Stabilization Policy
6.2. The Political Business Cycle
6.3. Time-Inconsistency
6.3.1. Precommitment
6.3.2. Supply-side policies
6.3.3. Repeated monetary policy
6.3.4. Incomplete information and reputation
6.4. Conclusions
6.5. Solutions to Exercises
7. New Keynesian Macroeconomics
7.1. Efficiency Wage Models
7.2. Nominal Rigidities and the Business Cycle
7.2.1. Small menu costs
7.2.2. Aggregate demand externality
7.2.3. Combining real and nominal rigidities
VIII
58
58
59
65
68
71
71
76
79
80
86
86
91
91
94
96
101
101
106
107
114
118
122
124
125
128
133
134
140
141
146
148
149
152

--- Sayfa 10 ---
7.3. Co-ordination Failure
7.3.1. Multiple equilibria and strategic complementarity
7.3.2. Possible causes of strategic complementarity
7.4. Conclusions
7.5. Solutions to Exercises
8. International Policy Co-ordination
8.1. Spillover Effects of Monetary Policy
8.1.1. Real income effects
8.1.2. Monetary effects
8.1.3. Relative price effects
8.2. Potential Gains from Policy Co-ordination
8.2.1. Recessionary bias
8.2.2. Expansionary bias
8.3. Problems of International Policy Co-ordination
8.3.1. Sustainability
8.3.2. Inflationary bias
8.3.3. Uncertainty
8.3.4. Reaction of other countries
8.4. Empirical Estimates of the Gains From Co-ordination
8.5. Conclusions
8.6. Solutions to Exercises
9. Strategic Trade Policy
9.1. Perfect Competition
9.1.1. The optimal tariff argument and retaliation
9.1.2. Free trade as a non-cooperative outcome
9.1.3. Conjectural variations
9.2. Imperfect Competition
9.2.1. Strategic trade policy with Cournot duopoly
9.2.2. Extensions to the basic Cournot duopoly model
9.3. Conclusions
9.4. Solutions to Exercises
10. Environmental Economics
10.1. Bilateral Agreements
10.1.1. Unidirectional externalities
10.1.2. Sidepayments
IX
Contents
156
157
158
162
162
168
169
169
170
170
173
174
176
177
177
179
180
181
181
183
183
188
189
189
193
195
196
197
198
205
206
210
212
212
216

--- Sayfa 11 ---
Contents
10.2. Multilateral Agreements
10.2.1. The free-rider problem
10.2.2. Repeated interaction
10.2.3. Stable coalitions
10.3. Conclusions
10.4. Solutions to Exercises
11. Experimental Economics
11.1. Nash Equilibrium
11.1.1. Altruism
11.1.2. Learning
11.1.3. Uncertainty
11.1.4. Reputation
11.1.5. Group reputation
11.2. Sequential Equilibrium
11.3. Multiple Equilibria
11.4. Conclusions
11.5. Solutions to Exercises
12. Criticisms of Game Theory
12.1. Instrumental Rationality can be Self-defeating
12.2. Indeterminacy
12.3. Inconsistency
12.4. Conclusions
Bibliography
Index
219
219
220
221
224
225
229
230
234
234
238
239
240
240
248
255
256
263
264
265
267
268
270
279
x

--- Sayfa 12 ---
1
?
What is Game Theory?
G
AME theory is concerned with how rational individuals make decisions when
they are mutually interdependent. In recent years this theory has been increas-
ingly applied to various branches of economics. Often this synthesis has signif-
icantly improved our understanding of economic issues and led to important new
insights being developed. In many instances the application of game theory has trans-
formed the way economists think about both microeconomic and macroeconomic
problems. This is evidenced by the frequent use of the adjective 'new' when game
theory is applied to different branches of economics. For example, it is now common
for economists to refer to New Industrial and New International Economics. Both of
these areas have developed as game theory has been applied to traditional disciplines
within economics. Also, while not uniquely defined by their use of game theory, much
of New Classical and New Keynesian Macroeconomics has incorporated game theoret-
ical analysis. Indeed, so widespread is the use of game theory in economics that it is dif-
ficult to find an area where such an approach has not yielded new insights and
challenged traditional theory. The aim of this book is to provide an introduction to
basic game theory concepts and to illustrate how these have been applied to a diverse
range of economic issues. In the first section of this chapter we discuss the broad char-
acteristics of game theory. These, in turn, delimit the range of economic issues for
which game theoretical analysis is applicable. In the second section we provide an out-
line of subsequent chapters.
1.1 Basic Assumptions of Game Theory
As stated above game theory is concerned with how rational individuals make decisions
when they are interdependent. To understand this definition more fully we discuss
what is meant by individualism, rationality, and mutual interdependence.
1

--- Sayfa 13 ---
What is Game Theory?
1.1.1 Individualism
It is usual to distinguish two separate branches of game theory. These are co-operative
and non-cooperative game theory. Strictly speaking the previous definition of game
theory only applies to non-cooperative game theory. In non-cooperative game theory
the individuals, or players, in a game are unable to enter into binding and enforceable
agreements with one another. Due to this assumption non-cooperative game theory is
inherently individualistic. In contrast, co-operative game theory analyses situations
where such agreements are possible. The focus of co-operative game theory is therefore
on how groups of individuals committed to each other formulate rational decisions.
This distinction does not mean that non-cooperative game theory precludes individu-
als working together. However, it does state that this will only happen if individuals
perceive such co-operation to be in their own self-interest. From this perspective indi-
viduals work together not because they have to, but because they voluntarily choose to
do so. This individualistic approach is clearly consistent with the dominant emphasis
within neoclassical economics. For this reason it is non-cooperative game theory that
has had the greatest impact within mainstream economics. Given this prominence we
restrict ourselves in this book to economic applications of non-cooperative game
theory. None the less it should be realized that in many cases we consider the co-
operative and non-cooperative approaches are not clearly distinguished. For example,
in many instances complex organizations such as firms, governments, and indeed
countries are considered to act as individual decision-makers. Clearly this is an extreme
simplification and one that ignores how decisions are formulated within these institu-
tions. The value of such a simplification is to make the resulting models more tractable.
As in other areas the skill of the economist is to select the level of aggregation most
appropriate for the problem being analysed.
1.1.2 Rationality
The second characteristic of game theory is that individuals are assumed to be instru-
mentally rational. This means that individuals are assumed to act in their own self-
interest. This presupposes that individuals are able to determine, at least
probabilistically, the outcome of their actions, and have preferences over these out-
comes. As with individualism this characteristic dominates neoclassical economics and
its justification has been attempted in a number of ways.
The first justification is to argue that individuals are indeed rational. However, given
the complexity of many decisions, and the amount of information that often needs to
be analysed, this seems unrealistic. Indeed evidence from many experimental studies
suggests that individuals are not fully rational but instead solve complex decisions by
adopting simplistic rules that are generally suboptimal. A second justification for ratio-
2

--- Sayfa 14 ---
Basic Assumptions of Game Theory
nality is that due to some process of natural selection the economy eventually converges
on the fully rational outcome. From this perspective the assumption of rationality is
consistent with focusing on the long-run equilibrium of the economy. For example, it
is argued that if firms suboptimize then the competitive process will eventually force
them to leave the industry. The result of this is that in long-run equilibrium all remain-
ing firms must be optimizing and fully rational. One problem with this argument, how-
ever, is that although such an evolutionary process may be considered relevant for
competition between firms, it is not always clear how it applies in other contexts. For
example, there seems to be no evolutionary process whereby rational consumers can
eliminate non-rational consumers. Without such a process of selection the economy
will not necessarily converge on the rational outcome. The final justification for ratio-
nality is that it is not intended to describe how individuals actually solve complex deci-
sions, but rather it is only assumed that individuals act as if they were fully rational.
Once again the assumption of rationality is used to make the resulting models more
tractable. As noted by Friedman (1953) all theories must involve some simplification,
as none can include all the possible features of reality. According to this positive
methodology the assumption of rationality should not be dismissed merely because it
is believed to be unrealistic. This is because all simplifying assumptions are necessarily
unrealistic. Instead rationality should only be rejected if the results based on this
assumption are found to be unhelpful. This will be true if the theory either gives rise to
no relevant predictions or these predictions are falsified by empirical evidence. With
this methodology a theory should be judged on its usefulness rather than on the sup-
posed realism of its assumptions. In this book it is argued that game theory based on
rationality can be extremely useful in helping us understand a diverse range of eco-
nomic issues. This, however, does not imply that departures from complete rationality
will not also provide useful insights and predictions. Indeed, a major theme of this book
is that minor departures from full rationality are often required in order to derive
meaningful results from game theory, and that further research incorporating these
modifications is warranted. An alternative justification for analysing models that
incorporate departures from full rationality is that as economists we may not only be
interested in finding useful theories, but also interested in discovering theories that are
true. If this is our aim, then the positivist methodology fails. If a theory's assumptions
are falsified, then these need to be modified so that they conform to reality. As discussed
in this book this is an ongoing process in the development of game theory and its appli-
cation to economics.
1.1.3 Mutual interdependence
The final characteristic of game theory is that it considers situations where individuals
are mutually interdependent. In this situation the welfare of any one individual in a
game is, at least partially, determined by the actions of other players in the game.
3

--- Sayfa 15 ---
What is Game Theory?
Significantly with mutual interdependence individuals may now have the incentive to
act strategically. With strategic decision-making individuals seek to anticipate the effect
their own actions will have on the behaviour of others. Given this expectation each
individual then determines his/her optimal response in order to achieve the most desir-
able outcome. In contrast to individualism and rationality this characteristic of mutual
interdependence is less prominent within neoclassical economics. For example, in
General Equilibrium Theory all agents are assumed to be atomistic. This ensures that
the actions of agents taken in isolation have no effect on market outcomes or the wel-
fare of others. This is assumed true for both firms and consumers. With this, and other
assumptions it can be demonstrated that the competitive equilibrium is Pareto effi-
cient. This means that no one individual can be made better off without making some-
one else worse off. In contrast once interdependence is introduced, so that an
individual's welfare depends on the actions of others, there is the possibility of market
failure and Pareto inefficiency. In this situation at least one individual can be made
better off without any other agent being made worse off. The possibility of such ineffi-
ciency has been confirmed in numerous economic applications of game theory.
Examples of mutual interdependence considered in this book include those between
different firms, between firms and their employees, between the government of a coun-
try and the private sector, and between different governments.
1.2 Outline of Subsequent Chapters
The purpose of this book is to introduce readers to the main concepts of non-
cooperative game theory, and to examine how these concepts have been applied within
economics. These general aims are reflected in the structure of the book. The first two
chapters focus on game theory itself, with little economic analysis except by way of illus-
tration. In contrast Chapters 3 to 11 focus much more on various economic issues that
have been analysed using game theory. In the final chapter we review the current state
of game theory by discussing a number of criticisms levelled against recent models.
From these criticisms we make some recommendations concerning the direction of
future research.
In Chapter 2 we examine static games. These are one-off games where the players are
considered to determine their actions simultaneously. In this context we examine two
alternative ways in which games can be represented. These are the normal form and the
extensive form. We also discuss various techniques commonly used to solve static
games. These solutions correspond to predictions for what each player will do in the
game, and are based on the concepts of dominance or equilibrium. It is here that we
introduce the commonly used solution technique of Nash equilibrium, and discuss
how this may be found for both pure and mixed strategies.
Chapter 3 continues our analysis of game theory by examining dynamic games.
4

--- Sayfa 16 ---
Outline of Subsequent Chapters
These games conform more closely to real world examples where individuals and orga-
nizations repeatedly interact with each other. In these games players are often able to
condition their actions on past events. This greatly enhances the set of strategies avail-
able to players. Once more this chapter discusses how dynamic games can be analysed
and predictions made. In this context the key concept of credibility is introduced, and
various refinements of Nash equilibrium, such as subgame perfection and sequential
equilibrium, are presented.
In Chapters 4 and 5 we begin to focus more exclusively on the economic applications
of game theory by considering two topics taken from industrial economics. The first is
concerned with oligopoly, and examines the consequences of strategic interdepen-
dence between currently competing firms. Initially we consider one-off games between
oligopolies, and discuss the now classic models of Cournot, Stackelberg, and Bertrand
competition. The results from these one-off games are then contrasted with the results
derived when firms are assumed to repeatedly interact. In particular, it is demonstrated
that repeated interaction may enable firms to co-ordinate on the collusive outcome
where joint profits are maximized. The second application taken from industrial eco-
nomics is that of entry deterrence. Here the interdependence is between firms already
in the market and potential entrants. To illustrate this type of strategic interdependence
we examine the situation where a monopolist has the incentive to try and deter other
firms from entering the market and competing against it. Initially this involves a criti-
cal discussion of Bain's (1956) Theory of Limit Pricing. Subsequent to this we present
more recent models of entry deterrence based on non-cooperative game theory. These
models serve to highlight the important roles of predatory pricing, precommitment,
and incomplete information in oligopolistic markets.
Whilst the games considered in Chapters 4 and 5 are primarily microeconomic,
Chapters 6 and 7 focus on macroeconomic games. In Chapter 6 we analyse New
Classical results and give them a game theory interpretation. In the first two sections we
illustrate how New Classical Macroeconomics has challenged earlier results related to
the effectiveness of government policy. This discussion naturally raises the issue of time
inconsistency. This occurs when the government has a short-run incentive to deviate
from its long-run optimal policy. With the private sector perceiving such an incentive
the final equilibrium is Pareto inefficient. In the third section of this chapter we evalu-
ate various suggestions for how governments might avoid the problem of time incon-
sistency.
In Chapter 7 our attention turns to New Keynesian Macroeconomics. Specifically we
examine a number of game theory models that attempt to explain the occurrence of
involuntary unemployment and the effectiveness of government demand policy, whilst
assuming that all agents are rational. Three separate, though related, strands of New
Keynesian Macroeconomics are presented. The first focuses on efficiency wage models,
where unemployment is due to real rigidities. The second examines how unemploy-
ment can result when agents do not fully adjust nominal wages and prices to an adverse
demand shock. Finally, we examine models that exhibit multiple equilibria and
5

--- Sayfa 17 ---
What is Game Theory?
co-ordination failure. This occurs when agents within the economy co-ordinate on a
Pareto-dominated equilibrium. Significantly it is argued that this possibility may arise
even in the absence of real or nominal rigidities.
Chapters 8, 9, and 10 analyse game theory models set in an international context. In
Chapter 8 we examine the role of international policy co-ordination. This chapter
argues that given the presence of spillover effects between countries uncoordinated
policy is likely to lead to an inefficient outcome. This provides the incentive for coun-
tries to try and co-ordinate their domestic policies. Despite potential gains there are a
number of problems associated with policy co-ordination. These are also discussed.
Finally, this chapter seeks to assess the likely magnitude of such gains by reviewing a
number of empirical studies.
Chapter 9 considers the possibility that a government may improve domestic welfare
with the appropriate use of strategic trade policy. This possibility is discussed in two
separate contexts. The first context is where all markets are perfect, but the country
itself has some degree of market power. This occurs when the country in question is
large, and gives rise to the 'optimal tariff argument'. With two or more countries pursu-
ing such a policy, however, all countries can be made worse off. Various mechanisms for
avoiding this outcome are discussed. The second context that provides some justifica-
tion for strategic trade policy is when domestic industries engaged in international
trade have some degree of market power. Faced with oligopolistic competition we
analyse how government trade policy can be welfare enhancing and review some of the
problems associated with such a policy.
The final chapter set in an international context is concerned with environmental
economics. In Chapter 10 we analyse the incentives for countries to enter into interna-
tional environmental agreements (IEAs). Initially we consider bilateral agreements and
then analyse multilateral agreements. In each case we highlight the costs of countries
failing to reach agreement over environmental control, and discuss various ways co-
ordination can be achieved. In particular we examine the use of side payments between
countries, the prospect of punishing countries that break environmental agreements,
and how the number of countries signing IEAs might be expanded.
Chapter 11 is somewhat different from the previous chapters. In this chapter we
focus on a recent branch of economics known as Experimental Economics. Instead of
analysing the theoretical implications of game theory, we discuss a number of experi-
ments that have been designed to test the predictions of this theory. This is done by test-
ing whether they are confirmed by the behaviour of individuals in a controlled
environment. Given how rapidly the literature within experimental economics is
expanding we focus on studies concerned with testing three of the more important
game theory concepts widely used in economics. These are the concepts of Nash equi-
librium, sequential equilibrium, and the possibility of co-ordination failure in games
with Pareto-ranked multiple equilibria. From a review of such experiments we con-
clude that the predictions of game theory often perform remarkably well. None the less
it is clear that not all relevant game theory predictions are confirmed by experimental
6

--- Sayfa 18 ---
Outline of Subsequent Chapters
evidence. Despite the inherent problems with interpreting such results we argue that
greater research is needed on how individuals seek to solve complex decisions under
conditions of uncertainty, and how they seek to learn and co-ordinate appropriate
strategies over time. Similar conclusions are reached in Chapter 12. In this final chapter
we focus on a number of theoretical criticisms levelled at recent game theory models.
These specifically relate to assumptions concerning the rationality of individuals. It is
argued that models based purely on instrumental rationality are either self-defeating,
incomplete, or inconsistent. However, rather than being purely destructive these criti-
cisms can be viewed as a stimulus to further research. We predict that this will involve a
re-evaluation of what is meant by rationality, and a greater emphasis given to factors
such as the role of institutions, culture, and the previous experience of agents. Such
research is an ongoing process, and it is confidently expected that it will lead to further
fruitful applications to economics.
7

--- Sayfa 19 ---
2
Static Game Theory
I
N this chapter we will look at how static games can be represented, and examine
some ways that have been suggested how they might be solved. A solution to a game
is a prediction of what each player in that game will do. In static games the players
make their moves in isolation without knowing what other players have done. This does
not necessarily mean that all decisions are made at the same time, but rather only as if
the decisions were made at the same time. An example of a static game is a one-off
sealed bid auction. In this type of auction each player submits only one bid, without
knowing what any of the other players has bid. The highest bid is then accepted as the
purchase price. In contrast to static games, dynamic games have a sequence to the order
of play and players observe some, if not all, of one another's moves as the game pro-
gresses. An example of a dynamic game is a so-called English auction. Here players
openly bid up the price of an object. The final and highest bid is accepted as the pur-
chase price.
2.1 Normal Form and Extensive Form Games
In non-cooperative game theory there are two ways in which a game can be repre-
sented. The first type is called a normal form game or strategic form game. The second
type is called an extensive form game. Both are widely used in economics and we exam-
ine each in turn.
2.1.1 Normal form games
A normal form game is any game where we can identify the following three things:
(1) The players
The players in a game are the individuals who make the relevant decisions. For there to
be interdependence we need to have at least two players in the game. In most of the
applications we look at there will be only two players. In some games 'Nature' is consid-
8

--- Sayfa 20 ---
Normal Form and Extensive Form Games
ered a further player, whose function is to determine the outcome of certain random
events, such as the weather or the 'type' of players in the game.
(2) The strategies available to each player
A strategy is a complete description of how a player could play a game. This does not
necessarily just list the player's alternative actions. Instead it describes how the player's
actions are dependent on what he or she observes other players in the game to have
done. For example, if I am thinking about selling my car, then my actions are limited to
selling it or keeping it. My chosen strategy, however, tells me how these possible actions
are dependent on what other people do. If someone offers me £5,000 or more for my
car, I will certainly sell it. If they offer me less than £5,0001 will keep the car. In dynamic
games such as this a player's strategy set will be much larger than his or her possible
actions. In static games, however, the two are the same. This is because in static games
decisions are taken in isolation and so players cannot make their actions dependent on
what other players do. In the example where I try to sell my car, this would correspond
to the very strange game where I have to accept or reject someone's offer without know-
ing what it is! In this case my strategies are the same as my actions: to sell or not to sell.
(In this discussion we have ignored the possibility of players adopting mixed strategies.
These are discussed later in this chapter.)
(3) The pay-offs
A pay-off is what a player will receive at the end of the game contingent upon the actions
of all the players in the game. A normal form game shows the pay-offs for every player,
except Nature, for every possible combination of available strategies. These are then
represented in the form of a matrix or matrices. The pay-offs are defined so that the
players in the game always prefer higher to smaller pay-offs. For example, the pay-offs
may correspond to monetary rewards, such as profits, or the utility each player obtains
at the end of the game. Players are said to be rational when they seek to maximize their
pay-off. Players who do not have this objective are said to be irrational, because they are
not acting in their own self-interest.
To make the ideas discussed more specific we will look at one well-known static game
called 'the Prisoners' Dilemma'. In this game the police have arrested two suspects of a
crime. However, they lack sufficient evidence to convict either of them unless at least
one of them confesses. The police hold the two suspects in separate cells and explain the
consequences of their possible actions. If neither confesses, then both will be convicted
of a minor offence and sentenced to one month in prison. If both confess, they will be
sent to prison for six months. Finally, if only one of them confesses, then that prisoner
will be released immediately while the other one will be sentenced to nine months in
prison—six months for the crime and a further three months for obstructing the
course of justice.
The above description of the game satisfies the three requirements of a normal form
game. We have two players, each of whom has two strategies (which in this static game
9

--- Sayfa 21 ---
Static Game Theory
are the same as the prisoners' actions, to confess or not confess), and pay-offs for each
possible combination of strategies. The normal form for this game is shown in Fig. 2.1.
The pay-offs are shown as the negative number of months in prison for each outcome
and for each prisoner. This assumes that each suspect, if rational, seeks to minimize the
amount of time spent in prison. By convention the first pay-off listed in each cell refers
to the row player, prisoner 1, and the second pay-off refers to the column player, pris-
oner 2.
Fig. 2.1 The Prisoners' Dilemma in Normal Form
2.1.2 Extensive form games
In extensive form games greater attention is placed on the timing of the decisions to be
made, as well as on the amount of information available to each player when a decision
has to be made. This type of game is represented not with a matrix but with a decision,
or game, tree. The extensive form for the prisoners' dilemma is shown in Fig. 2.2.
Starting at the left of the diagram the open circle represents the first decision to be
made in the game. It is labelled 1 to show that it is prisoner 1 that makes this decision.
The branches coming out of this initial node represent the actions available to the
player at that point in the game. Prisoner 1 can either confess to the crime or not con-
fess. At the end of these branches there is a node representing prisoner 2's decision.
Again this prisoner can either confess to the crime or not confess, as given by the
branches coming from his decision nodes. However, prisoner 2 makes this decision
without knowing what prisoner 1 has done. This is shown by joining prisoner 2's deci-
sion nodes with a dotted line. This dotted line shows that the connected nodes are in the
same information set. This means that prisoner 2 is unable to distinguish which of the
two nodes he is at, at the time this decision is made. This is because he does not know if
prisoner 1 has confessed or not confessed to the crime. Finally, at the end of the game
we have the pay-offs for each player. These are again dependent on what each pris-
10

--- Sayfa 22 ---
oner has done in the game, and they are listed in the order of the players in the game, i.e.
prisoner 1's pay-off is first, and prisoner 2's pay-off is second.
Generalizing from Fig. 2.2 we can state that extensive form games have the following
four elements in common:
Nodes
This is a position in the game where one of the players must make a deci-
sion. The first position, called the initial node, is an open dot, all the rest are
filled in. Each node is labelled so as to identify who is making the decision.
Branches
These represent the alternative choices that the person faces, and so corre-
spond to available actions.
Vectors
These represent the pay-offs for each player, with the pay-offs listed in the
order of players. When we reach a pay-off vector the game ends. When
these pay-off vectors are common knowledge the game is said to be one of
complete information. (Information is common knowledge if it is known by
all players, and each player knows it is known by all players, and each player
knows that it is known that all players know it, and so on ad infmitum.) If,
however, players are unsure of the pay-offs other players can receive, then it
is an incomplete information game.
Information Sets When two or more nodes are joined together by a dashed line this
means that the player whose decision it is does not know which node he or
she is at. When this occurs the game is characterized as one of imperfect
information. When each decision node is its own information set the game
is said to be one of perfect information, as all players know the outcome of
previous decisions.
A fundamental assumption of game theory is that the structure of the game is com-
mon knowledge. This places three specific requirements on information sets. The first
is that players always remember whether they have moved previously in the game. This
does not, however, mean that they always remember what decision they previously
11
Normal Form and Extensive Form Games
Fig. 2.2 The Prisoners' Dilemma Game in Extensive Form

--- Sayfa 23 ---
Static Game Theory
made, only that a decision was made. The second requirement is that nodes in the same
information set have the same player moving. The final condition is that nodes in the
same information set have the same possible actions coming from them. If this were not
true, players could differentiate between the nodes by examining the available actions.
Again generalizing from Fig. 2.2 we can state one further requirement that is always sat-
isfied for extensive form games:
Each node has at least one branch pointing out of it (some action is available to
the player) and at most one branch pointing into it. (The initial node has no
branch pointing to it.)
This means that at whatever node we begin at there is only one possible path back to the
initial node and we never cycle back to the node we started from. For this reason exten-
sive form games always look like trees. From the initial node we always branch out and
a branch never grows back into itself.
We have now seen that there are two different ways of representing the same game,
either as a normal form game or as an extensive form game. The normal form gives the
minimum amount of information necessary to describe a game. It lists the players, the
strategies available to each player, and the resulting pay-offs to each player. The exten-
sive form gives additional details about the game concerning the timing of the decisions
to be made and the amount of information available to each player when each decision
has to be made. Clearly the two forms are closely related and we can state the following
two results:
For every extensive form game there is one and only one corresponding nor-
mal form game.
For every normal form game there are, in general, several corresponding
extensive form games.
The reason for this lack of one-to-one correspondence between a normal form game
and an extensive form game is that, as described above, the extensive form game
EXERCISE 2.1
Depict the following situation as both a normal form game and an extensive form game:
Two rival firms are thinking of launching a similar product at the same time. If both firms
launch the product, then they will each make a profit of £40,000. If only one firm launches
its product, then it can act as a monopolist and will make a profit of £100,000. If either firm
decides not to launch the product that firm makes a loss of £50,000, due to costs already
incurred in developing the product.
12

--- Sayfa 24 ---
Solution Techniques for Solving Static Games
includes additional information. This implies that different extensive forms can be
drawn from the same normal form game, depending on what is assumed about these
additional details of the game.
2.2 Solution Techniques for Solving Static Games
As stated at the beginning of this chapter a solution to a game is a prediction of what
each player in that game will do. This may be a very precise prediction, where the solu-
tion gives one optimal strategy for each player. When this occurs the solution is said to
be unique. However, it is often the case that the solution to a particular game is less
13
EXERCISE 2.2.
Interpret the following diagrams and discuss whether they represent valid extensive form games.

--- Sayfa 25 ---
Static Game Theory
precise, even to the extent that none of the available strategies are ruled out. As may be
expected many different solution techniques have been proposed for different types of
games. For static games two broad solution techniques have been applied. The first set
of solution techniques rely on the concept of dominance. Here the solution to a game is
determined by attempting to rule out strategies that a rational person would never play.
Arguments based on dominance seek to answer the question 'What strategies would a
rational player never play?' The second set of solution techniques is based on the con-
cept of equilibrium. In non-cooperative games an equilibrium occurs when none of the
players, acting individually, has an incentive to deviate from the predicted solution.
With these solution techniques a game is solved by answering the question 'What prop-
erties does a solution need to have for it to be an equilibrium?'
In the following section we examine various dominance techniques that can be
applied to static games, and two equilibrium concepts. In subsequent chapters further
equilibrium concepts that are commonly used in game theory will be presented and
discussed.
2.2.1 Strict dominance
A strategy is said to be strictly dominated if another strategy always gives improved pay-
offs whatever the other players in the game do. This solution technique makes the seem-
ingly reasonable assumption that a rational player will never play a strictly dominated
strategy. If players knowingly play a strictly dominated strategy, they cannot be maxi-
mizing their expected pay-off, given their beliefs about what other players will do. In
this sense a player who plays a strictly dominated strategy is said to be irrational.
Applying the principle of strict dominance rules out this type of irrational behaviour.
To illustrate this technique we use it to solve the prisoners' dilemma game. In applying
the principle of strict dominance we examine each player in turn and exclude all those
strategies that are strictly dominated. This process may rule out all but one strategy for
each player. This is true for the prisoners' dilemma game, and so this technique pro-
duces a unique solution for this game.
Consider first the dilemma facing prisoner 1. Should she confess or should she
remain quiet hoping the other prisoner does the same. The principle of strict domi-
nance argues that prisoner 1 should confess. The reason for this is that whatever pris-
oner 2 decides to do prisoner 1 is always better off confessing. This means not
confessing is strictly dominated and so it seems reasonable to suppose it will not be
played. The same logic applies equally to prisoner 2 and so strict dominance predicts
that he will also confess. The solution to this game based on strict dominance is that
both prisoners confess even though both would be better off if neither confessed. As at
least one of the players in this game can, with a different outcome, be made better off
without the other player being made worse off this solution is said to be Pareto ineffi-
cient. (In fact if neither player confesses, both would be better off.) This is a very com-
14

--- Sayfa 26 ---
Solution Techniques for Solving Static Games
mon feature of many games used in economics, and it will be illustrated in many con-
texts throughout this book.
It should be noted here that the cause of Pareto inefficiency is not that the players
cannot communicate, but rather that they cannot commit themselves to the Pareto-
efficient outcome. Even if both prisoners agreed before being arrested that neither of
them will confess, once in custody it is in their individual self-interest to do the oppo-
site. This illustrates the difference between non-cooperative and co-operative game
theory. In co-operative game theory the two prisoners could enter into a binding and
enforceable agreement not to confess and so be made better off. This is not possible in
non-cooperative game theory.
EXERCISE 2.3
Solve the previous product launch game described in Exercise 2.1 using the principle of
strict dominance.
2.2.2 Weak dominance
A strategy is said to be weakly dominated if another strategy makes the person better off
in some situations and leaves them indifferent in all others. Again it seems reasonable to
assume that a rational player will not play a weakly dominated strategy, as he or she
could do at least as well, and possibly even better, by playing the dominant strategy.
Consider the normal form game shown in Fig. 2.3. In this game there are two players
each with two possible strategies. Player 1 can move either 'up' or 'down', and player 2
can move either 'left' or 'right'. The pay-offs are given in the matrix, where the first fig-
ure is the pay-off for player 1 and the second figure is the pay-off for player 2. For this
game none of the available strategies is ruled out using the principle of strict domi-
nance. This is because no strategy makes that player worse off in all circumstances. For
example, if player 1 plays 'up', then player 2 is indifferent between 'left' and 'right'.
Similarly if player 2 plays 'left', player 1 is indifferent between 'up' and 'down'. Although
we cannot appeal to the principle of strict dominance to rule out any of the available
strategies, we can apply the principle of weak dominance.
According to the principle of weak dominance player 1 will never play'down' and so
this can be ruled out. Similarly player 2 will never play 'right', and so this can also be
ruled out. This leaves only one remaining strategy for each player. The predicted out-
come is that player 1 will move 'up' and player 2 will move 'left'. Again this is a Pareto-
inefficient solution. This is because the outcome 'down/left' makes player 2 better off
15

--- Sayfa 27 ---
Static Game Theory
and player 1 no worse off. The reason player 1 does not switch to playing 'down', even
though this leads to a Pareto improvement, is that it entails greater risk for this player. If
player 2 were to play 'right', then player 1 is definitely worse off moving 'down' instead
of 'up'. This element of avoiding unnecessary risk is reflected in the principle of weak
dominance.
2.2.3 Iterated strict dominance
Iterated strict dominance assumes that strict dominance can be applied successively to
different players in a game. For example, if one player rules out a particular strategy,
because it is strictly dominated by another, then it is assumed other players recognize
this and that they also believe the other player will not play this dominated strategy. This
in turn may lead them to exclude dominated strategies, and so on. In this way it may be
possible to exclude all but one strategy for each player, and so make a unique prediction
for the game being analysed. Consider the game shown in Fig. 2.4.
In this game player 1 has two possible strategies, 'up' and 'down', and player 2 has
three possible strategies, 'left', 'middle', and 'right'. Initially neither 'up' nor 'down' is
strictly dominated by the other for player 1. However, for player 2 'right' is strictly dom-
Fig. 2.4 An Application of Iterated Strict Dominance
16
Fig. 2.3 An Application of Weak Dominance

--- Sayfa 28 ---
Solution Techniques for Solving Static Games
inated by'middle'. Appealing to strict dominance we can reason that player 2 will never
play'right'. If player 1 also knows that player 2 is rational and will not play'right', then
'up' now strictly dominates 'down' for player 1. Iterated strict dominance now predicts
that 'down' will not be played. Finally, if player 2 knows that player 1 will never move
'down', then iterated strict dominance predicts that player 2 will play 'middle'. The
unique solution to this game based on successive or iterated strict dominance is there-
fore'up/middle'.
2.2.4 Iterated weak dominance
The final dominance technique is iterated weak dominance. This is the same as iterated
strict dominance except here it is weak dominance that is applied successively to differ-
ent players in the game. Again it is possible that this technique can produce a unique
solution to a particular game.
One problem with iterated weak dominance, which is not shared by iterated strict
dominance, is that the predicted solution can depend on the order in which players'
strategies are eliminated. This is true for the game shown in Fig. 2.5. If we start by apply-
ing weak dominance to player 1, then we predict that the players will choose the unique
solution 'up/middle'. If we first apply weak dominance to player 2, then all we can con-
clude is that player 2 will not play 'right'. Clearly the order in which we apply weak dom-
inance significantly affects the predicted outcome of the game. Unfortunately for most
games this choice is totally arbitrary.
It should be noted that in applying iterated-dominance arguments we are assuming
a stronger version of rationality than we did with mere dominance. With dominance we
assumed that rational players will not play dominated strategies. With iterated domi-
nance we assume that rational players will not play dominated strategies, and also that
players assume that other players are rational and will not do this. For iterated domi-
nance to predict accurately people must not only be rational but assume that others are
17
Fig. 2.5 An Application of Iterated Weak Dominance

--- Sayfa 29 ---
Static Game Theory
rational as well, and this requirement needs to be strengthened with each iteration. (For
example, I need to assume that you believe that I believe that you believe that I am ratio-
nal, and so on. When this sequence of reasoning continues ad infinitum we have the fre-
quently used assumption of common knowledge of rationality.) As the number of
iterations becomes large these additional assumptions become increasingly more dubi-
ous. An example of a game where the principle of iterated strict dominance is taken to
extreme lengths is Rosenthal's (1981) centipede game. This dynamic game is discussed
at the end of Chapter 3.
If a game yields a unique solution by applying either strict, weak, or iterated domi-
nance, then that game is said to be dominance solvable. The main problem with all
these solution techniques is that often they give very imprecise predictions about a
game. Consider the game shown in Fig. 2.6. In this game arguments based on domi-
nance lead to the very imprecise prediction that anything can happen! If a more specific
solution to this type of game is needed, then a stronger solution technique must be
applied. This leads us on to solution techniques based not on dominance but on the
concept of equilibrium.
Fig. 2.6 An Illustration of the Problem with Dominance Techniques
2.2.5 Nash equilibrium
As stated in the introduction to this section arguments based on dominance ask the
question 'What strategies would a rational player never play?' In contrast the concept of
Nash equilibrium is motivated by the question 'What properties must an equilibrium
have?' The answer to this question from John Nash (1951), based on much earlier work
by Cournot (1838), was that in equilibrium each player's chosen strategy is optimal
given that every other player chooses the equilibrium strategy. If this were not the case,
then at least one player would wish to choose a different strategy and so we could not be
18

--- Sayfa 30 ---
Solution Techniques for Solving Static Games
in an equilibrium. Again this concept seeks to apply the economist's assumption that
individuals are rational in the sense that they seek to maximize their own self-interest.
Finding the Nash equilibrium for any game involves two stages. First, we identify
each player's optimal strategy in response to what the other players might do. This
involves working through each player in turn and determining their optimal strategies.
This is done for every combination of strategies by the other players. Second, a Nash
equilibrium is identified when all players are playing their optimal strategies simulta-
neously.
Strictly speaking, the above methodology only identifies pure-strategy Nash equilib-
ria. It does not identify mixed-strategy Nash equilibria. A pure-strategy equilibrium is
where each player plays one specific strategy. A mixed-strategy equilibrium is where at
least one player in the game randomizes over some or all of their pure strategies. This
means that players place a probability distribution over alternative strategies. For
example, players might decide to play each of two available pure strategies with a prob-
ability of 0.5, and never play any other strategy. A pure strategy is therefore a restricted
mixed strategy with a probability of one given to the chosen strategy, and zero to all the
others. The concept of mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium is discussed later in this sec-
tion.
To illustrate the two-stage methodology for finding a (pure-strategy) Nash equilib-
rium we apply it to the prisoners' dilemma game. This is shown in Fig. 2.7.
Stage One.
We first need to identify the optimal strategies for each prisoner, dependent upon what
the other prisoner might do. If prisoner 1 expects prisoner 2 to confess, then prisoner
1's best strategy is also to confess (-6 is better than -9). This is shown in Fig. 2.7 by
underlining this pay-off element for prisoner 1 in the cell corresponding to both pris-
oners confessing. If prisoner 1 expects prisoner 2 not to confess, then prisoner 1's
best strategy is still to confess (this time 0 is better than -1). Again we show this by
19
Fig. 2.7 The Nash Equilibrium of the Prisoners' Dilemma Game

--- Sayfa 31 ---
Static Game Theory
underlining this pay-off element for prisoner 1. The same analysis is undertaken for
prisoner 2 and his best strategy pay-offs are underlined.
Stage Two.
Next we determine whether a Nash equilibrium exists by examining the occurrence of
the previously identified optimal strategies. If all the pay-offs in a cell are underlined,
then that cell corresponds to a Nash equilibrium. This is true by definition, since in a
Nash equilibrium all players are playing their optimal strategy given that other players
also play their optimal strategies. In the prisoners' dilemma game only one cell has all
its elements underlined. This corresponds to both prisoners confessing, and so this is
the unique Nash equilibrium for this game.
This prediction for the prisoners' dilemma game is the same as that derived using
strict dominance. In fact it is always true that a unique strict dominance solution is the
unique Nash equilibrium. The reverse of this statement is, however, not always true. A
unique Nash equilibrium is not always a unique strict dominant solution. In this sense
the Nash equilibrium is a stronger solution concept than strict dominance. For this rea-
son the Nash equilibrium concept may predict a unique solution to a game where strict
dominance does not. This is illustrated in the game used previously to demonstrate that
a game may not be dominance solvable. This game shown in Fig. 2.6 is reproduced in
Fig. 2.8. As stated before, arguments based on dominance applied to this game predict
that anything can happen. Using the two-stage methodology of finding a (pure-strat-
egy) Nash equilibrium, however, yields the unique prediction that player 1 will choose
'down' and player 2 will choose 'right'. The concept of Nash equilibrium may therefore
be particularly useful when dominance arguments do not provide a unique solution.
One important result from game theory is that for any finite game (i.e. games with a
finite number of players and strategies) there always exists at least one Nash equilib-
rium. Before thinking that this result means that we can always make a definite predic-
Fig. 2.8 A Further Application of Nash Equilibrium
20

--- Sayfa 32 ---
Solution Techniques for Solving Static Games
tion about what people will do in any game the following two qualifications need to be
stated.
First, the above result is only true if we include mixed strategies, as well as pure strate-
gies. This means that we cannot always state for certain what all players in a game will
do, but instead we may only be able to give the probabilities for various outcomes
occurring. This possibility is discussed below.
Second, the above result does not rule out the possibility of multiple Nash equilibria.
Indeed, many games do exhibit multiple Nash equilibria. With multiple equilibria
the problem is how to select one equilibrium from many. In answer to this question
21
EXERCISE 2.4.
State whether the following games have unique pure strategy solutions, and if so what they
are and how they can be found.

--- Sayfa 33 ---
Static Game Theory
numerous refinements of Nash equilibrium have been proposed to try and restrict the
set of possible equilibria. Some of these refinements are discussed in later chapters.
2.2.6 Mixed strategy Nash equilibrium
To illustrate that there may be multiple Nash equilibria to a particular game, and also
the idea of mixed strategies, we look at another classic game called the 'Battle of the
Sexes'. In this game a husband and wife are trying to decide where to go for an evening
out, Whilst apart they must choose either to go to a boxing match, or to the ballet. Both
players would rather go anywhere together, but given this the man prefers the boxing
and the woman the ballet. (This game was proposed in the 1950s, which partly explains
its stereotypical views.) These preferences are represented in the normal form game
shown in Fig. 2.9.
Applying the two-stage method of identifying a pure-strategy Nash equilibrium we
can see that the above game has two such equilibria. These are that either both will go to
the boxing or both will go to the ballet. This means that each person will go wherever
they think the other person will go. This is not very helpful, as it tells neither player what
the other person is likely to do. As there is no unique pure-strategy Nash equilibrium
neither player can confidently predict what the other person will do. Playing a mixed
strategy is a response to this uncertainty. A mixed strategy is when a player randomizes
over some or all of his or her available pure strategies. This means that the player places
a probability distribution over their alternative strategies. A mixed-strategy equilib-
rium is where at least one player plays a mixed strategy and no one has the incentive to
deviate unilaterally from that position.
The key feature of a mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium is that every pure strategy played
as part of the mixed strategy has the same expected value. If this were not true, a player
22
Fig. 2.9 The Battle of the Sexes Games in Normal Form

--- Sayfa 34 ---
Solution Techniques for Solving Static Games
would play the strategy that yields the highest expected value to the exclusion of all others.
This means the initial situation could not have been an equilibrium. Here we show how to
identify the mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium for the battle of the sexes game.
Let Profr(boxing)H be the probability that the husband goes to the boxing match, and
Prob(boxing)w the probability that the wife goes to the boxing match. Similarly let
Profe(ballet)Hbe the probability that the man goes to the ballet, and Prob(ballet)w the
probability that the woman goes to the ballet. As these are the only two alternatives it
must be true that Prob(boxing) + Prob(ballet) = 1 for both the husband and wife. Given
these probabilities we can calculate the expected value of each person's possible action.
From the normal form game the expected pay-off value for the wife if she chooses to
go to the boxing match is given as
jt(boxing)w = Prob(boxing)H(l) + Prob(ballet)H(0)
= Prob(boxing)H.
Similarly the expected pay-off value if she goes to the ballet is
jt(ballet)w = Prob(boxing)H(0) + Prob(ballet)H(2)
= 2Pr0b(ballet)H.
In equilibrium the expected value of these two strategies must be the same and so we
get
Jt(boxing)w = Ji(ballet)w
... Prob(boxing)H = 2 Prob(ballet)H
... 1 - Prob(ballet)H = 2 Prob(ballet)H
...1 = 3 Prob(ballet)H
.
.
 .Prob(ballet)H = 1/3 and Prob(boxing)H = 2/3.
This means that in the mixed-strategy equilibrium the husband will go to the ballet
with a 1/3 probability and the boxing with a 2/3 probability. We can perform the same
calculations for the husband's expected pay-off and derive the similar result that in
equilibrium his wife will go to the ballet with a probability of 2/3 and the boxing with a
probability of 1/3. With these individual probabilities we can calculate that they will
both go to the boxing with a probability of 2/9, both go to the ballet with a probability
of 2/9, and go to separate events with a probability of 5/9.
This combination of mixed strategies constitutes a third Nash equilibrium for this
game. Intuitively this seems the most reasonable Nash equilibrium of the three, as it
explicitly takes into account the inherent uncertainty in the game. It should be noted
that playing a mixed strategy does not mean that players flip a coin or roll a dice to make
their decisions. Rather playing a mixed strategy is a rational response to uncertainty
about what other players will do.
23

--- Sayfa 35 ---
Static Game Theory
One curious aspect of a mixed-strategy equilibrium is that because each of the cho-
sen pure strategies in the mixed strategy has the same expected pay-off value, each
player is indifferent as to which strategy he or she actually plays. A mixed-strategy equi-
librium is, therefore, said to be a weak equilibrium because none of the players is made
worse off if they abandon their mixed strategy, and play any one of the pure strategy
components of their mixed strategy. This feature of a mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium
has caused its application within economics to be controversial. In particular this solu-
tion technique has been criticized as imposing unacceptable constraints on players'
beliefs. Some of these criticisms are discussed in Chapter 12.
EXERCISE 2.5.
Draw the normal form game for the following game and identify both the pure- and mixed-
strategy equilibria. In the mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium determine each firm's expected
profit level if it enters the market.
There are two firms that are considering entering a new market, and must make their deci-
sion without knowing what the other firm has done. Unfortunately the market is only big
enough to support one of the two firms. If both firms enter the market, then they will each
make a loss of £10m. If only one firm enters the market, that firm will earn a profit of £50m.,
and the other firm will just break even.
2.3 Conclusions
Static games are where players make decisions in isolation. Each decision is made with-
out knowing what the other players have done. These games can be represented as
either normal or extensive form games. Normal form games give the minimum
amount of information necessary to describe a game. They list the players in the game,
the strategies available to each player, and the pay-offs dependent on the outcome of the
game. Extensive form games give additional details on the timing of decisions and the
amount of information players have when making these decisions. Static games are
predominantly represented as normal form games. This is because in such games the
amount of information available to players does not vary within the game, and the tim-
ing of decisions has no effect on players' choices. In the next chapter we examine
dynamic games where the timing of decisions and information constraints critically
determine the outcome of the game.
In attempting to predict the outcome of static games various solution techniques
have been suggested. These are either based on the concept of dominance or equilib-
rium. These solution techniques try and predict what rational players will do in speci-
24

--- Sayfa 36 ---
Conclusions
fied games. Sometimes they yield a definite prediction of what each player will do.
Often, however, the solution is less precise. These solution techniques can also be
applied to dynamic games, but as we will see in the next chapter additional assumptions
are typically needed so that reasonable predications are generated.
2.4 Solutions to Exercises
Exercise 2.2.
(1) This is a one-player static game against nature with imperfect information. Nature deter-
mines the outcome of the toss of an unbiased coin. Without knowing whether the outcome
is heads or tails, player A calls either heads or tails. If the call is correct, the player wins a pay-
off of 1. If the call is wrong, the player receives nothing. This diagram is a valid extensive
form game. In such games we assume that players simply maximize their expected pay-off.
In particular there are no strategic considerations in one-player games. For this reason this
book only analyses games with two or more (rational) players.
(2) This is a dynamic game with imperfect recall. Player A initially decides between A1 and A2.
This is observed by player B who then decides between B1 and B2. If B1 is chosen, the game
ends. If B2 is chosen, player A moves again, playing either A1 or A2. Significantly these two
final decision nodes are in the same information set, which means that player A does know
which one she is at. However, the only difference in the paths to these nodes is player A's ini-
tial move. This means that player A must have forgotten what her first move was! This is a
25
Fig. 2.11
Fig. 2.10
Exercise 2.1
The normal and extensive forms for this static game are shown in Figs. 2.10 and 2.11 respec-
tively:

--- Sayfa 37 ---
Static Game Theory
valid extensive form game, and indeed some economic models have assumed that agents
have imperfect recall. In this book, however, we limit ourselves to games where all players
have perfect recall. This means that players do not forget any information that has been pre-
viously revealed to them.
(3) This is not a valid extensive form game as it entails a logical contradiction. In the diagram
player B's decision nodes are in the same information set, which means that they cannot be
distinguished. However, at the decision node following Al there are three possible actions,
while at the node following A2 there are only two options. Player B must know the actions
available to him and so based on this information he will be able to distinguish between his
decision nodes. This contradicts the fact they are shown as being in the same information
set. To avoid such logical contradictions it is required that the set of possible actions from
nodes in the same information set must be identical.
(4) This is not a valid extensive form game, as it violates one of the previous assumptions. This
is the requirement that each node has at most one branch pointing to it. This is not true for
player C's decision node. The reason this assumption is made is to guarantee a unique path
from any decision node back to the initial node. (This is important for the application of
backward induction discussed in the next chapter.) This diagram does not satisfy this fea-
ture, as there are two possible paths back to the initial node from player C's decision node.
Exercise 2.3
Strict dominance predicts that both firms will launch their respective products because this
gives each firm a higher pay-off whatever the other firm does.
Exercise 2.4
(1) The unique pure-strategy equilibrium is 'down/left'. This is both a Nash equilibrium and an
iterated strict dominant solution. The process of elimination for the dominant solution is
'right','up','middle'.
(2) The unique pure-strategy Nash equilibrium this time is 'up/left', and is both a Nash equilib-
rium and an iterated weak dominant solution. The process of elimination in the latter case
is 'down', 'middle', 'right'.
(3) This game is not dominance solvable, but 'up/left' is a Nash equilibrium.
Exercise 2.5
The normal form for this static entry game is given in Fig. 2.12. Using the two-stage method for
finding a pure-strategy Nash equilibrium we can see that there are two such equilibria. Both
involve one firm entering the market, and the other firm staying out.
We can determine the mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium in the following way. Let
ProB(enter)1 and Prob(enter)2 be the probabilities of firm 1 and firm 2 entering the market
respectively. And let Prob(stay out)1 and Prob(stay out)2 be the probabilities of the two firms
staying out of the market.
Expected profits for firm 1 if it enters the market are therefore
ji(enter)1 = -10 .Prob(enter)2 + 50 .Prob(stay out)2
26

--- Sayfa 38 ---
Further Reading
and its expected profit if it stays out of the market is 0. In equilibrium these expected values must
equal each other and so we get
-10 .Prob(enter)2 + 50 .Prob(stay out)2 = 0
... 50 .Prob(stay out)2 = 10 .Prob(enter)2
... 5 .Prob(stay out)2 = Prob(enter)2
... 5 .Prob(stay out)2 = 1 - Prob(stayout)2
... 6.Prob(stayout)2 = 1
... Profo(stay out)2 = % and Profr(enter)2 = %.
We could do the same calculations to find the same probabilities of firm 1 entering and stay-
ing out of the market.
Substituting these probabilities back into the equation for Jt(enter) 1 we can find the expected
value for firm 1 of entering the market.
n(enter)1 = -10 .Prob(enter)2 + 50 .Prob(stay out)2
.'. n(enter)1 = -10.% + 50.%
:. Jt(enter)1 = 0.
The same result holds for firm 2. In the mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium the expected value
for both firms if they enter the market is zero. This could have been found by noting that this
equals the expected value of not entering which equals zero.
Further Reading
Aumann, R., and S. Hart (1992), Handbook of Game Theory with Economic Applications, New
York North-Holland.
Bierman, H. S., and L. Fernandez (1993), Game Theory with Economic Applications, Reading,
Mass.: Addison-Wesley.
27
Fig. 2.12

--- Sayfa 39 ---
Static Game Theory
Dixit, A., and B. J. Nalebuff (1991), Thinking Strategically: The Competitive Edge in Business,
Politics, and Everyday Life, New York: Norton.
Eatwell, J.,M.Milgate, and P. Newman (1989), TheNewPalgrave: Game Theory, New York: W.W.
Norton.
Gibbons, R. (1992), Game Theory for Applied Economists, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Kreps, D. (1990), A Course in Microeconomic Theory, New York: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Kreps, D. (1990), Game Theory and Economic Modelling, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Rasmusen, E. (1993), Games and Information, Oxford: Blackwell.
Varian, H. (1992), Microeconomic Analysis, New York: Norton.
28

--- Sayfa 40 ---
3
Dynamic Game Theory
I
N the previous chapter we focused on static games. However, for many important
economic applications we need to think of the game as being played over a number
of time-periods, making it dynamic. A game can be dynamic for two reasons. First,
the interaction between players may itself be inherently dynamic. In this situation play-
ers are able to observe the actions of other players before deciding upon their optimal
response. In contrast, static games are ones where we can think of players making their
moves simultaneously. Second, a game is dynamic if a one-off game is repeated a num-
ber of times, and players observe the outcome of previous games before playing later
games. In section 3.1 we consider one-off dynamic games, and in section 3.2 we analyse
repeated games.
3.1 Dynamic One-Off Games
An essential feature of all dynamic games is that some of the players can condition their
optimal actions on what other players have done in the past. This greatly enhances the
strategies available to such players in that these are no longer equivalent to their possi-
ble actions. To illustrate this we examine the following two-period dynamic entry
game, which is a modified version of the static game used in Exercise 2.4.
There are two firms (A and B) that are considering whether or not to enter a new
market. Unfortunately the market is only big enough to support one of the two firms. If
both firms enter the market, then they will both make a loss of £ 10m. If only one firm
enters the market, that firm will earn a profit of £50m., and the other firm will just break
even. To make this game dynamic we assume that firm B observes whether firm A has
entered the market before it decides what to do. This game can be represented by the
extensive form diagram shown in Fig. 3.1.
In time-period 1 firm A makes its decision. This is observed by firm B which decides
to enter or stay out of the market in period 2. In this extensive form game firm B's deci-
sion nodes are separate information sets. (If they were in the same information set, they
would be connected by a dashed line.) This means that firm B observes firm
As action before making its own decision. If the two firms were to make their moves
29

--- Sayfa 41 ---
30
Dynamic Game Theory
Fig. 3.1 The Dynamic Entry Game in Extensive Form
simultaneously, then firm B would have only two strategies. These would be either to
enter or stay out of the market. However, because firm B initially observes firm A's deci-
sion it can make its decision conditional upon what firm A does. As firm A has two pos-
sible actions, and so does firm B, this means that firm B has four (2 x 2) strategies. We
can list these as
Always enter the market whatever firm A does.
Always stay out of the market whatever firm A does.
Do the same as firm A.
Do the opposite of firm A.
Recognizing that firm B now has these four strategies we can represent the above
game in normal form. This is shown in Fig. 3.2. Having converted the extensive form
game into a normal form game we can apply the two-stage method for finding pure-
strategy Nash equilibria, as explained in the previous chapter. First, we identify what
each player's optimal strategy is in response to what the other players might do. This
involves working through each player in turn and determining their optimal strategies.
This is illustrated in the normal form game by underlining the relevant pay-off. Second,
a Nash equilibrium is identified when all players are playing their optimal strategies
simultaneously.
As shown in Fig. 3.2 this dynamic entry game has three pure-strategy Nash equilib-
ria. In these three situations each firm is acting rationally given its belief about what the
other firm might do. Both firms are maximizing their profits dependent upon what
they believe the other firm's strategy is. One way to understand these possible outcomes
is to think of firm B making various threats or promises, and firm A acting accordingly.
We can therefore interpret the three Nash equilibria as follows:
1. Firm B threatens always to enter the market irrespective of what firm A does. If firm
A believes this threat, it will stay out of the market.
2. Firm B promises always to stay out of the market irrespective of what firm A does. If
firm A believes this promise, it will certainly enter the market.

--- Sayfa 42 ---
Fig. 3.2 The Dynamic Entry Game in Normal Form
3. Firm B promises always to do the opposite of what firm A does. If firm A believes this
promise, it will again enter the market.
In the first two Nash equilibria firm B's actions are not conditional on what the other
firm does. In the third Nash equilibrium firm B does adopt a conditional strategy. A
conditional strategy is where one player conditions his or her actions upon the actions
of at least one other player in the game. This concept is particularly important in
repeated games, and is considered in more detail in the next section.
In each of the equilibria firm A is acting rationally in accordance with its beliefs.
However, this analysis does not consider which of its beliefs are themselves rational.
This raises the interesting question 'Could firm A not dismiss some of firm B's threats
or promises as mere bluff?' This raises the important issue of credibility. The concept of
credibility comes down to the question 'Is a threat or promise believable?' In game the-
ory a threat or promise is only credible if it is in that player's interest to carry it out at the
appropriate time. In this sense some of firm B's statements are not credible. For exam-
ple, firm B may threaten always to enter the market irrespective of what firm A does, but
this is not credible. It is not credible because if firm A enters the market, then it is in firm
B's interest to stay out. Similarly the promise always to stay out of the market is not cred-
ible because if firm A does not enter, then it is in firm B's interest to do so. Assuming that
players are rational, and that this is common knowledge, it seems reasonable to suppose
that players only believe credible statements. This implies that incredible statements
will have no effect on other players' behaviour. These ideas are incorporated into an
alternative equilibrium concept to Nash equilibrium (or a refinement of it) called sub-
game perfect Nash equilibrium.
3.1.1 Subgame perfect Nash equilibrium
In many dynamic games there are multiple Nash equilibria. Often, however, these equi-
libria involve incredible threats or promises that are not in the interests of the players
31
Dynamic One-Off Games

--- Sayfa 43 ---
Dynamic Game Theory
making them to carry out. The concept of subgame perfect Nash equilibrium rules out
these situations by saying that a reasonable solution to a game cannot involve players
believing and acting upon incredible threats or promises. More formally a subgame
perfect Nash equilibrium requires that the predicted solution to a game be a Nash equi-
librium in every subgame. A subgame, in turn, is defined as a smaller part of the whole
game starting from any one node and continuing to the end of the entire game, with the
qualification that no information set is subdivided. A subgame is therefore a game in its
own right that may be played in the future, and is a relevant part of the overall game. By
requiring that a solution to a dynamic game must be a Nash equilibrium in every sub-
game amounts to saying that each player must act in his or her own self-interest in every
period of the game. This means that incredible threats or promises will not be believed
or acted upon.
To see how this equilibrium concept is applied, we continue to examine the dynamic
entry game discussed above. From the extensive form of this game, given in Fig. 3.1, we
can observe that there are two subgames, one starting from each of firm B's decision
nodes. For the predicted solution to be a subgame perfect Nash equilibrium it must
comprise a Nash equilibrium in each of these subgames. We now consider each of the
Nash equilibria identified for the entire game to see which, if any, is also a subgame per-
fect Nash equilibrium.
1. In the first Nash equilibrium firm B threatens always to enter the market irrespective
of what firm A does. This strategy is, however, only a Nash equilibrium for one of the
two subgames. It is optimal in the subgame beginning after firm A has stayed out but
not in the one where firm A has entered. If firm A enters the market, it is not in firm
B's interest to carry out the threat and so it will not enter. This threat is not credible
and so should not be believed by firm A. This Nash equilibrium is not subgame per-
fect.
2. In the second Nash equilibrium firm B promises always to stay out of the market
irrespective of what firm A does. Again this is only a Nash equilibrium for one of the
two subgames. It is optimal in the subgame beginning after firm A has entered but
not in the one when firm A has stayed out. If firm A stays out of the market, it is not
in the interest of firm B to keep its promise, and so it will enter. This promise is not
credible, and so should not be believed by firm A. Once more this Nash equilibrium
is not subgame perfect.
3. The third Nash equilibrium is characterized by firm B promising to do the opposite
of whatever firm A does. This is a Nash equilibrium for both subgames. If firm A
enters, it is optimal for firm B to stay out, and if firm A stays out, it is optimal for firm
B to enter. This is a credible promise because it is always in firm B's interest to carry
it out at the appropriate time in the future. This promise is therefore believable, and
with this belief it is rational for firm A to enter the market.
The only subgame perfect Nash equilibrium for this game is that firm A will enter
and firm B will stay out. This seems entirely reasonable given that firm A has the ability
32

--- Sayfa 44 ---
Dynamic One-Off Games
to enter the market first. Once firm B observes this decision it will not want to enter the
market, and so firm A maintains its monopoly position. The way we solved this
dynamic game has been rather time-consuming. This was done so that the concept of
subgame perfection may be better understood. Fortunately, there is often a quicker way
of finding the subgame perfect Nash equilibrium of a dynamic game. This is by using
the principle of backward induction.
3.1.2 Backward induction
Backward induction is the principle of iterated strict dominance applied to dynamic
games in extensive form. However, this principle involves ruling out the actions, rather
than strategies, that players would not play because other actions give higher pay-offs.
In applying this principle to dynamic games we start with the last period first and work
backwards through successive nodes until we reach the beginning of the game.
Assuming perfect and complete information, and that no player is indifferent between
two possible actions at any point in the game, then this method will give a unique pre-
diction which is the subgame perfect Nash equilibrium. Once more this principle is
illustrated using the dynamic entry game examined above. The extensive form for this
game is reproduced in Fig. 3.3.
Fig. 3.3 The Dyanmic Entry Game and Backward Induction
Starting with the last period of the game first, we have two nodes. At each of these
nodes firm B decides whether or not to enter the market based on what firm A has
already done. At the first node firm A has already entered and so firm B will either make
a loss of £10m. if it enters, or break even if it stays out. In this situation firm B will stay
out, and so we can rule out the possibility of both firms entering. This is shown by
crossing out the corresponding pay-off vector (-£10m., -£10m.). At the second node
firm A has not entered the market, and so firm B will earn either £50m. if it enters or
nothing if it stays out. In this situation firm B will enter the market, and we can rule out
the possibility of both firms staying out. Once more we cross out the corresponding
33

--- Sayfa 45 ---
Dynamic Game Theory
pay-off vector (0,0). We can now move back to the preceding nodes, which in this game
is the initial node. Here firm A decides whether or not to enter. However, if firm A
assumes that firm B is rational, then it knows the game will never reach the previously
excluded strategies and pay-offs. Firm A can reason therefore that it will either receive
£50m. if it enters or nothing if it stays out. Given this reasoning we can rule out the
possibility that firm A will stay out of the market, and so cross out the corresponding
pay-off vector (0, £50m.). This leaves only one pay-off vector remaining, correspond-
ing to firm A entering the market and firm B staying out. This, as shown before, is the
subgame perfect Nash equilibrium.
3.2 Repeated Games
The previous section considered one-off dynamic games. However, many games that
economists are interested in involve repeated interaction between agents. Intuitively it
would seem that repeated interaction between agents should have an effect on the pre-
dicted outcome of the game. For example, it would seem reasonable to assume that in
repeated games players have more opportunity to learn to co-ordinate their actions so
as to avoid the prisoners' dilemma discussed in the previous chapter. This section
focuses on this issue and examines how repetition affects the predicted outcome of a
game, and examines the conditions under which non-cooperative collusion is possible.
This is undertaken in a number of contexts. First, we examine games where the one-off
34
EXERCISE 3.1
Using the principle of backward induction find the subgame perfect Nash equilibrium for
the following three-player extensive form game. State all the assumptions you make.

--- Sayfa 46 ---
Repeated Games
game (called the stage game) is repeated an infinite number of times. Second, we look at
games where the stage game is repeated only a finite number of times and where the
one-off game has a unique Nash equilibrium. In this context we discuss the so called
'paradox of backward induction'. This paradox is that while co-ordination may be pos-
sible in infinitely repeated games it is not possible in certain situations with finitely
repeated games. This is true no matter how large the number of repetitions. Finally, we
examine ways in which this paradox of backward induction may be avoided.
3.2.1 Infinitely repeated games
To illustrate some of the issues involved with repeated games we will consider the fol-
lowing situation between two competing firms. Assume that two firms, A and B, domi-
nate a specific market. The marketing departments of both companies have discovered
that increased advertising expenditure, all other things remaining the same, has a posi-
tive effect on that firm's sales. However, total sales also depends negatively on how much
the other company spends on advertising. This is because it adversely affects the market
share of the first company. If we assume there are only two levels of advertising (high or
low expenditure) which each firm can carry out, then the pay-off matrix in terms of
profits (£m. per year) for the two companies is given in Fig. 3.4.
From this normal form game both firms are better off if they each maintain low
advertising expenditure compared to both incurring high advertising costs. This is
35
EXERCISE 3.2
Convert the following extensive form game into a normal form game, and identify the Nash
equilibria and subgame perfect Nash equilibrium. Finally, what is the Nash equilibrium if
both players make their moves simultaneously?

--- Sayfa 47 ---
Dynamic Game Theory
Fig. 3.4 The Advertising Game in Normal Form
because if both firms increase their advertising expenditure simultaneously, then mar-
ket shares are unaffected, but due to increased advertising costs profits fall. However,
each firm has an incentive to try and increase its level of advertising above its competi-
tor's level as this increases market share and overall profits.
If this game were played only once, then there is a unique Nash equilibrium with both
firms incurring high advertising costs. This is a prisoners'-dilemma-type game as both
firms would be made better off if they both had low-cost advertising campaigns. The
problem for the firms is how they can co-ordinate their actions on this Pareto-domi-
nant outcome without the use of legally enforceable contracts. In the one-off game this
would not seem to be possible as there is a clear incentive to increase advertising expen-
diture. However, if the interaction between the firms is infinitely repeated, then it is pos-
sible for the two firms to co-ordinate their actions on the Pareto-optimal outcome. This
will occur if both firms adopt an appropriate conditional strategy and do not discount
the future too much.
As stated previously a conditional strategy is where a player conditions what he or she
does on the actions of at least one other player in the game. This allows the possibility
for one or more players, in effect, to punish other players if they deviate from the
Pareto-efficient outcome. This is known as a punishment strategy. If the prospect of
punishment is sufficiently severe, players will be deterred from deviation. In this way
the Pareto-efficient outcome can be maintained indefinitely. Once more the issue of
credibility is important. For example, threatened punishment of deviant behaviour will
only maintain the co-operative outcome if the threat is credible. This will only happen
if it is in the interests of the person threatening punishment to exact it when deviation
is observed. This implies that a punishment strategy will only be effective in maintain-
ing the co-operative solution if it is part of a subgame perfect Nash equilibrium for the
entire game. To illustrate how these ideas can work in practice consider the following
specific punishment strategy for the previous advertising game.
Each firm starts off with low-cost advertising, and this is maintained provided
the other firm has always done the same in previous periods. If, however, the
other firm has undertaken a high-cost advertising campaign in the past, then
the firm undertakes a high-cost advertising campaign thereafter.
36

--- Sayfa 48 ---
Repeated Games
This particular type of punishment strategy is frequently used in infinitely repeated
games and is known as a trigger strategy.
A trigger strategy is where the actions of one player in a game causes other players
permanently to switch to another course of action. The above trigger strategy implies
an infinite punishment period if either of the firms incurs high-cost advertising. Once
one firm increases its level of advertising, the other firm does the same ever after. This
rules out the possibility of ever returning to the Pareto-efficient outcome. A firm that
undertakes a high-cost advertising campaign will see profits rise from £5m. to £6m. in
the first year of deviation, but then fall to at most only £4m. per year thereafter. For this
trigger strategy to maintain the Pareto-efficient outcome two conditions must be satis-
fied. First, the punishment itself must be credible. Second, the promise to maintain low-
cost advertising, given the prospect of future punishment, must also be credible. We
consider each of these issues in turn.
With the above trigger strategy the threat of punishment is credible because if one
firm switches to high-cost advertising, then it is rational for the other firm to also
switch to high-cost advertising. This punishment strategy is credible because it corre-
sponds to the Nash equilibrium of the stage game. Playing the Nash equilibrium is
always a credible strategy because, by definition, it is the optimal response to the other
players' expected strategies. The remaining issue is whether the promise to continue
with low-cost advertising is also credible. Assuming that firms attempt to maximize
total discounted profits then the co-operative outcome, where both firms have low-
cost advertising campaigns, will be maintained indefinitely if the present value of co-
operation is greater than the present value of deviating. This will be the case if firms
do not discount the future too much. This is demonstrated as follows.
As this is an infinitely repeated game we will have to assume that future pay-offs are
discounted, so as to obtain a present value of future profits. Let 6 = 1/(1 + r) equal
each firm's rate of discount, where r is the rate of interest or the firm's rate of time
preference. This represents the fact that a pound received today is worth more than a
pound received in the future, because it can be invested at the rate of interest r. The
further in the future a pound is received the less is its present value. With this rate of
discount the present value of maintaining a low-cost advertising campaign, PV(low),
is equal to
Alternatively the present value of deviating from this co-operative outcome and
engaging in a high-cost advertising campaign, PV(high), is equal to
37

--- Sayfa 49 ---
This tells us that with infinite interaction, and the given trigger strategy, both firms
will maintain low-cost advertising if their rate of discount is greater than one-half.
Given that this condition is satisfied, this means that the promise to continue with low-
cost advertising is credible. With both the threat of punishment and the promise to
maintain low advertising being credible this corresponds to a subgame perfect Nash
equilibrium for this game. (This outcome, however, is now only one of many subgame
perfect equilibria. For example, another subgame perfect equilibrium is where both
firms have high-cost advertising every period. The problem now becomes how firms
co-ordinate upon one of the many equilibria. This problem is discussed in later chap-
ters.) If the firms' rate of discount is less than one-half, then each firm will immediately
deviate to high-cost advertising. The co-operative outcome cannot be maintained with
the assumed trigger strategy because the future threat of punishment is not sufficient to
deter deviation. This is because the firms place too great a weight on current prcr "s, and
not enough on future profits. The promise to maintain low-cost advertising is noc cred-
ible, and so both firms will undertake high-cost advertising campaigns.
3.2.2 Finitely repeated games
In the previous section on infinitely repeated games it was shown that players may be
able to maintain a non-cooperative collusive outcome, (co-operative outcome for
short), which is different from the Nash equilibrium of the stage game. This was shown
to be the case if the players adopt an appropriate punishment strategy and do not dis-
count the future too much. Here we examine under what conditions this result contin-
ues to hold in the context of finitely repeated games.
38
Dynamic Game Theory
Therefore the co-operative outcome will be maintained indefinitely if

--- Sayfa 50 ---
Repeated Games
(2) Demonstrate that the Pareto-efficient solution of 'down/right' in the previous game
can be a subgame perfect Nash equilibrium if the game is infinitely repeated and both
players adopt the following trigger strategy:
Play 'right/down' initially or if this has always been played in the past. Otherwise
play 'up/left'.
(3) How does the necessary condition on the value of the discount factor change from (2),
if the players now adopt the following alternative punishment strategy for the previ-
ously infinitely repeated game?
Play 'right/down' initially or if the outcomes 'right/down' or 'up/left' occurred in
the previous period. Otherwise play 'up/left' for one period.
Explain this result.
The paradox of backward induction
One result obtained from applying the logic of backward induction to finitely repeated
games is that if the one-off stage game has a unique Nash equilibrium, then the sub-
game perfect Nash equilibrium for the entire game is this Nash equilibrium played in
every time-period. This is true however large the number of repetitions.
To understand this result consider the following argument. Suppose that a game hav-
ing a unique Nash equilibrium is played a prespecified finite number of times. To find
the subgame perfect Nash equilibrium for this game we start with the last period first.
As the last period is just the one-off stage game itself, the predicted outcome in this
period is the unique Nash equilibrium of the stage game. Now consider the penultimate
period. Players using the principle of backward induction know that in the last period
the Nash equilibrium will be played irrespective of what happens this period. This
implies there is no credible threat of future punishment that could induce a player to
play other than the unique Nash equilibrium in this penultimate period. All players
39
EXERCISE 3.3
(1) Identify the Nash equilibrium of the following normal form game if it is played only
once.

--- Sayfa 51 ---
Dynamic Game Theory
know this and so again the Nash equilibrium is played. This argument can be applied to
all preceding periods until we reach the first period, where again the unique Nash equi-
librium is played. The subgame perfect Nash equilibrium for the entire game is simply
the Nash equilibrium of the stage game played in every period. This argument implies
that a non-cooperative collusive outcome is not possible.
This result can be illustrated using the advertising game described above, by assum-
ing that it is only played for two years. In the second year we just have the stage game
itself and so the predicted solution is that both firms will incur high advertising costs,
and receive an annual profit of £4m. With the outcome in the second period fully deter-
mined the Nash equilibrium for the first period is again that both firms will have high-
cost advertising campaigns. Similar analysis could have been undertaken for any
number of finite repetitions giving the same result that the unique stage game Nash
equilibrium will be played in every time-period. The subgame perfect solution, there-
fore, is that both firms will have high-cost advertising in both periods.
This general result is known as the paradox of backward induction. It is a paradox
because of its stark contrast with infinitely repeated games. No matter how many finite
number of times we repeat the stage game we never get the same result as if it were infi-
nitely repeated. There is a discontinuity between infinitely repeated games and finitely
repeated games, even if the number of repetitions is very large. This is counter-intuitive.
It is also considered paradoxical because with many repetitions it seems reasonable to
assume that players will find some way of co-ordinating on the Pareto-efficient out-
come, at least in early periods of the game.
The reason for this paradox is that a finite game is qualitatively different from an infi-
nite game. In a finite game the structure of the remaining game changes over time, as we
approach the final period. In an infinite game this is not the case. Instead its structure
always remains the same wherever we are in the game. In such a game there is no end-
point from which to begin the logic of backward induction. A number of ways have
been suggested in which the paradox of backward induction maybe overcome. These
include the introduction of bounded rationality, multiple Nash equilibria in the stage
game, uncertainty about the future, and uncertainty about other players in the game.
These are each examined below.
Bounded rationality
One suggested way of avoiding the paradox of backward induction is to allow people to
be rational but only within certain limits. This is called bounded, or near, rationality.
One specific suggestion as to how this possibility might be introduced into games is by
Radner (1980). Radner allows players to play suboptimal strategies as long as the pay-
off per period is within epsilon, e > 0, of their optimal strategy. This is called an e-best
reply. An e-equilibrium is correspondingly when all players play e-best replies. If the
number of repetitions is large enough, then playing the co-operative outcome, even if it
is not a subgame perfect Nash equilibrium, can still be an E-equilibrium given appro-
priate trigger strategies. This is demonstrated for the repeated advertising game
40

--- Sayfa 52 ---
Repeated Games
described above. Assume that both firms adopt the punishment strategy given when
considering infinite repetitions, but now the game is only played a finite number of
times. If we assume that there is no discounting, then the pay-off for continuing to play
according to this strategy, if the other firm undertakes high-cost advertising, is
3 + 4(t-l), where t is the remaining number of periods the firms interact. The pay-off
for initiating a high-cost advertising campaign is at most 6 + 4( t-1). Deviating from the
punishment strategy therefore yields a net benefit of 3. This is equal to 3/t per period. If
players are boundedly rational as defined by Radner, then the co-operative outcome is
an e -equilibrium if e > 3/t. This will be satisfied for any value of e, provided the remain-
ing number of periods is great enough. Given a large number of repetitions co-
operation, which in this example means low-cost advertising, will be observed in the
initial periods of the game.
Although interesting to analyse the effects of bounded rationality in repeated games,
it is not clear that Radner's suggestion is the best way of doing this. For example,
Friedman (1986) argues that bounded rationality might imply that people only calcu-
late optimal strategies for a limited number of periods. If this is true, then the game
becomes shorter, and the result of backward induction more likely. Furthermore if peo-
ple do not fully rationalize we should consider why. If it is due to calculation costs, then
these costs should be added to the structure of the game itself. This is an area of ongo-
ing research.
Multiple Nash equilibria
The paradox of backward induction can be avoided if there are multiple Nash equilib-
rium in the stage game. With multiple Nash equilibria there is no unique prediction
concerning the last period of play. This may give the players in the game a credible
threat concerning future play which induces other players to play the co-operative solu-
tion. This is illustrated for the hypothetical game shown in Fig. 3.5 which we assume is
played twice.
Fig. 3.5 A Normal Form Stage Game with Multiple Nash Equilibria
41

--- Sayfa 53 ---
Dynamic Game Theory
This one-off stage game has two Nash equilibria 'up/left' and 'right/down'. These are
both Pareto inefficient. If the players could co-ordinate on 'middle/centre', then both
players would be better off. In the repeated game suppose that both players adopt the
following punishment strategy:
In the first period play 'middle/centre'. In the second period play 'right/down'
if 'middle/centre' was the outcome in the first round, otherwise play 'up/left'.
Assuming the two periods are sufficiently close to each other we can ignore any dis-
counting of pay-offs and so the matrix for the entire game is now that shown in Fig. 3.6.
Fig. 3.6 The Pay-off Matrix with No Discounting and Appropriate Punishment Strategy
The choices shown in this matrix correspond to each player's first-period move,
dependent on them adopting the previous punishment strategy. The pay-offs in this
matrix were obtained by adding 3 to the player's second-round pay-off, when 'mid-
dle/centre' is the first-round outcome, but only 1 to all other first-round outcomes. This
game now has three Nash equilibria, the previous two and now 'middle/centre'. Playing
'middle/centre' in the first round and 'right/down' in the second is a subgame perfect
Nash equilibrium. Players thus avoid the paradox of backward induction, and achieve
Pareto efficiency in the first period.
Uncertainty about the future
Another way of avoiding the paradox of backward induction is to introduce uncertainty
about when the game might end. One way of doing this is to suppose there is a constant
probability that the game will end after any one period. In this situation, although the
game is finite, the exact timing of when the game will end is unknown. The implication
of this is that, as with an infinitely repeated game, the structure of the remaining game
does not change the more periods are played. As no one period can be classified as the
last period of the game, we have no certain point from which to begin the process of
backward induction and so the paradox is avoided. Backward induction is, therefore,
42

--- Sayfa 54 ---
Repeated Games
only applicable to games which have a definite known end. If the final period is indefi-
nite, credible threats and promises can be made that result in non-cooperative collusion
in every time-period. This analysis is the same as with the infinite game except that the
rate of discount, 6, has to be redefined. Instead of this depending only on the rate of
interest, r, it will also depend on the probability that the game will end after any time-
period. In effect players discount the future more heavily, as now there is a positive
probability that future returns will not be received as the game will have ended by then.
The rate of discount is now equal to
where Prob is the probability that the game ends at the end of any one period.
Uncertainty about other players
So far we have only considered games of complete information. A game is said to have
complete information if all players' pay-off functions are common knowledge. This
means that everyone knows everyones' pay-off function, and everyone knows everyone
knows this, and so on ad infinitum. In contrast incomplete information means that play-
ers are not sure what the other players in the game are like, as defined by their pay-off
functions, or what they know about other players. (Incomplete information should not
be confused with imperfect information. Imperfect information is where at least one
player does not know all the moves other players have made in either past or current
periods. We have already examined games of imperfect information, indeed static
games with more than one player are always, by definition, imperfect information
games.) Clearly in many real-world situations people do not have complete informa-
tion about everyone they interact with. For example, I may know that you are rational,
but I may not know that you know that I am rational. This lack of common knowledge
can greatly add to the complexity of a game, and the possible strategies that players
might adopt. This is particularly true in repeated games.
To introduce some of these issues we examine an amended version of the advertising
game previously analysed. Suppose that the game is played only once, but now Firm 1
can be one of two types (type A or type B) represented by different pay-offs. Firm 1
knows which type it is but Firm 2 does not. This is therefore a game of incomplete infor-
mation as Firm 2 does not know the type of firm it is competing against. This situation
can be illustrated by two separate extensive form games, one for each type of Firm 1. We
assume that the pay-offs are as shown in Fig. 3.7 where L represents low-cost advertis-
ing and H high-cost advertising.
There are two changes to the firms' pay offs as compared to the previous advertising
game represented in Fig. 3.4.
1. Firm 1 has the same pay-offs as before if it is type A, but type B receives £4m. less
per year if it undertakes a high-cost advertising campaign. This can reflect either a
43

--- Sayfa 55 ---
Dynamic Game Theory
genuine cost differential between the two types of firm, or a difference in prefer-
ences, i.e. type B might have moral objections against high-powered advertising.
2. Firm 2 now receives £2m. per year less than before if it undertakes a high-cost adver-
tising campaign, and firm 1 has a low-cost campaign. This might, for example, be
due to a production constraint that precludes the firm benefiting from higher
demand for its goods. Its other pay-offs remain the same. The effect of this change,
and the reason it was made, is that Firm 2 no longer has the strictly dominant strat-
egy of high-cost advertising. This implies that its behaviour can depend on which
type of competitor it thinks it is playing against. This is the result we wish to show.
Fig. 3.7 The Modified Advertising Game with Incomplete Information
One immediate problem of solving games with incomplete information is that the
techniques so far discussed cannot be directly applied to these situations. This is
because they all make the fundamental assumption that players know which game they
are playing. This is not the case if players are unsure what their opponents are like. As
Fig. 3.7 illustrates Firm 2 does not know which of the two extensive form games it is
playing. Fortunately Harsanyi (1967,1968) showed that games with incomplete infor-
mation, can be transformed into games of complete but imperfect information. As we
have already examined such games the previous solution techniques can be applied to
these transformed games. The transformation is done by assuming that Nature deter-
mines each player's type, and hence pay-off function, according to a probability distri-
bution. This probability distribution is assumed to be common knowledge. Each player
is assumed to know his or her own type but not always the type of other players in the
game. This is now a game of complete but imperfect information as not all players
observe Nature's initial moves. If we assume that Nature assigns Type A to Firm 1 with
probability Prob and Type B with probability 1 - Prob, then this situation can now be
represented by just the one extensive form game. This is shown in Fig. 3.8.
As this is a game of complete information we can use the solution techniques used for
solving static games. This specific game can be solved using the principle of iterated
strict dominance which gives us a unique Nash equilibrium. If Firm 1 is of Type A, then
44

--- Sayfa 56 ---
Fig. 3.8 The Modified Advertising Game with Imperfect Information
having a high-cost advertising campaign strictly dominates a low-cost campaign. If,
however, it is of Type B, then low-cost advertising dominates. If Firm B assumes Firm 1
is rational, whatever its type, then it knows that it will see Firm 1 incurring a high-cost
campaign with probability Prob, and a low-cost campaign with probability 1 - Prob.
With these probabilities it can calculate its own expected profit conditional on its level
of advertising. If Firm 2 decides on high-cost advertising then its expected profit level is
If it decides on low-cost advertising then its expected profit level is
Assuming Firm 2 wishes to maximize expected profit it will undertake a high-cost
advertising campaign if (HB IH) > (ITs IL). This gives us the following condition:
Firm 2 will play H if Prob > 1/2 and will play L if Prob < 1/2. If Prob = 1/2, then it is
indifferent between these two options. The optimal strategy for Firm 2, therefore,
depends on the probability that its competitor is a particular type. In this game the
firms will achieve a Pareto-efficient solution, with both firms playing L and receiving
£5m., if Firm 1 is of Type B and Prob < 1/2.
The above illustration has shown that incomplete information can lead to player's
achieving a Pareto-efficient outcome. However, in this one-off game, this only hap-
pened if Firm 1 was of a type that always undertakes a low-cost advertising campaign.
If the game is repeated a finite number of times, this restriction need not always apply
for the outcome to be Pareto efficient. Unfortunately, solving such repeated games is far
from straightforward. This is because of two added complications.
45

--- Sayfa 57 ---
Dynamic Game Theory
The first complication is that in dynamic games of incomplete information, players
may be able to learn what other players are like by observing their past actions. This
gives players the opportunity to try and influence other players' expectations of their
type by modifying their actions. For example, consider what might happen if the above
incomplete information advertising game is repeated a finite number of times. If Firm
1 can convince Firm 2 that it is Type B, then Firm 2 will incur low advertising costs and
so increase Firm 1 's profits. The only way that Firm 1 can convince the other firm that it
is Type B is to play as a Type B firm would play. This is true even if firm 1 is actually Type
A. Thus it is possible that players might seek to conceal their true identity, so as to gain
a reputation for being something they are not. Gaining such a reputation can be
thought of as an investment. Although obtaining a reputation for something you are
not will be costly in the short-run, it brings with it the expectation of higher future
returns.
The second complication is that players know that other players might have this
incentive to conceal their true identity. This will influence how they update their prob-
ability assessment of the other player's type conditional on observing his or her actions.
The other player will in turn take this into account when determining their behaviour,
and so on.
Only recently have such games been explicitly solved by game theorists and applied
to economic situations. The equilibrium concept often used in such games is Bayesian
Subgame Perfect Nash Equilibrium, or Bayesian Perfect for short. This type of equilib-
rium satisfies two conditions:
(1) It is subgame perfect in that no incredible threats or promises are made or believed.
(2) The players update their beliefs rationally in accordance with Bayes' Theorem.
(An alternative equilibrium concept used is sequential equilibrium. This was developed
by Kreps and Wilson (1982 b) and is a slightly stronger condition than Bayesian perfect
equilibrium with regard to the consistency of the solution. In many cases, however, the
two concepts yield the same solution.)
Bayes'Theorem is explained in Appendix 3.1. The relevance of Bayesian perfect equi-
librium is that even very small amounts of uncertainty concerning the type of player
you are playing against can be greatly magnified in repeated games. This alters the
incentives faced by players in the game, and often leads to the prediction that the
Pareto-optimal solution is played in early stages of the game. In this way the paradox of
backward induction is overcome. To illustrate this possibility we discuss the centipede
game developed by Rosenthal (1981). Consider the extensive form game shown in Fig.
3.9.
In this game there are two players each with two possible moves. They can either
move across (A) or down (D). The resulting pay-offs are as shown in the diagram.
Solving this game by backwards induction gives the result that person 1 will immedi-
ately play down and so both players receive the same pay-off of 1. This is clearly a
Pareto-inefficient outcome because if both players play across they both receive poten-
46

--- Sayfa 58 ---
Fig. 3.9 Rosenthal's Centipede Game
tially much greater pay-offs. In this sense the game is very much like a repeated pris-
oner's dilemma game, where initial co-operation can make everyone better off. There
are two specific points to notice about this subgame perfect prediction.
First, the prediction that the first player will immediately play down is based on 200
rounds of iterated strict dominance. In reality it is often hard to believe that players are
so sure of their opponents' rationality, and that their opponents are sure of their oppo-
nents' rationality etc.
Second, what effect will player 1 have on player 2 if instead of playing downs he plays
along? Player 2 now has direct evidence that player 1 is not rational. Based on this evi-
dence, player 2 may decide that it is best to also play along, and take player 1 for a ride.
In this situation we move out along the tree and both players are made better off. This
reasoning suggests that it may be rational to initially pretend to be irrational! (We
return to some of these issues in Chapter 12.)
Each of these points suggests that for this game the assumption of common knowl-
edge of rationality may be inappropriate. An alternative assumption is to introduce
incomplete information. With this assumption players are unsure if their opponent is
rational. This has a dramatic effect on the equilibrium behaviour of a rational player.
Even if there is only a very small probability that your opponent is co-operative, in that
he or she always plays across, then it is rational for players to play across in the initial
periods of the game. In this way each player builds up a reputation for being co-
operative. It can be shown that the sequential equilibrium of this incomplete informa-
tion game involves both players initially playing across, and then to randomize over
their actions as they approach the end of the game. In fact the number of periods for
which the players will adopt mixed strategies does not depend on the number of peri-
ods the game is played. In consequence as the number of periods increases the propor-
tion of the game characterized as co-operative also increases. This equilibrium strategy
is depicted in Fig. 3.10.
47
Repeated Games
Fig. 3.10 Bayesian Subgame Perfect Nash Equilibrium for Rosenthal's Centipede Game with
Incomplete Information

--- Sayfa 59 ---
Dynamic Game Theory
As players initially co-operate and play across the paradox of backward induction is
partially overcome. In Appendix 3.2 we derive the sequential equilibrium for a simpli-
fied version of the centipede game. This modified version of Rosenthal's game was
developed by McKelvey and Palfrey (1992), who used their simplified game to test
whether experimental subjects actually played according to the sequential equilibrium
hypothesis. This experiment, among others, is reviewed in Chapter 11.
EXERCISE 3.4
Assume that two players are faced with Rosenthal's centipede game. Use Bayes'theorem to
calculate the players' reputation for being co-operative in the following situations if they
play across.
(1) At the beginning of the game each player believes that there is a 50/50 chance that the
other player is rational or co-operative. It is assumed that a co-operative player always
plays across. Furthermore suppose that a rational player will play across with a proba-
bility of 0.2
(2) At their second move the players again move across. (Continue to assume that the
probability that a rational player plays across remains equal to 0.2).
(3) How would the players' reputation have changed after the first move had the other
player believed that rational players always play across. (Assume all other probabilities
remain the same.)
(4) Finally, how would the players' reputation have changed after the first move had the
other player believed that rational players never play across. (Again assume all other
probabilities remain the same.)
3.3 Conclusions
Most interaction between people and organizations are not one-off events, but rather
take place within the context of an ongoing relationship. This makes them dynamic. In
dynamic games players observe the moves of other players before making their own
optimal responses. This possibility greatly enriches the strategies that players might
adopt. This chapter has examined how dynamic games can be analysed and predictions
made. A key concept in all dynamic games is credibility. For a threat or promise to be
credible it must be in that players interest to carry it out at the appropriate time. If a
threat or promise is not credible, then it would seem reasonable to suppose that it will
48

--- Sayfa 60 ---
Solutions to Exercises
not be believed. Subgame perfection applies this insight to dynamic games. In games of
perfect and complete information, where players are not indifferent between various
actions, backward induction generates a unique prediction. This prediction is the sub-
game perfect Nash equilibrium.
When a game is repeated it might be supposed that the players will learn over time to
co-ordinate their actions so as to avoid Pareto-inefficient outcomes. This possibility
was examined in section 3.2. Initially we examined infinitely repeated games where the
stage game had a unique Nash equilibrium. It was demonstrated that, provided players
do not discount future returns too much, a non-cooperative collusive outcome can
indeed be maintained. This result breaks down, however, if the game is only finitely
repeated. This is the paradox of backward induction. As this paradox is counter-
intuitive many explanations have been proposed as to how it might be avoided. This
chapter examined four ways in which the paradox of backward induction is overcome.
These were the introduction of bounded rationality, multiple Nash equilibria, uncer-
tainty about the future, and incomplete information. These concepts have become cen-
tral to many recent developments in game theory.
This and the previous chapter have presented many of the basic concepts needed to
understand non-cooperative game theory models. All of these basic ideas are employed
in subsequent chapters where we analyse, in greater depth, recent economic applica-
tions of game theory.
3.4 Solutions to Exercises
Exercise 3.1
Using the principle of backward induction we start at the end of the game and work backwards
ruling out strategies that rational players would not play. If the game reaches player 3's decision
node, then she receives with certainty a pay-off of 7 if she plays 'up' or 9 if she plays 'down'.
Assuming this player is rational she will play'down', and so we can exclude her strategy of'up'.
Moving back along this branch we reach player 2's node after player 1 has moved 'down'. If we
assume player 2 believes player 3 is rational then he anticipates receiving a pay-off of 8 if he
moves 'up', and 1 if he moves 'down'. If player 2 is also assumed to be rational, then at this deci-
sion node he will play 'up' and we can exclude 'down' from this node.
Player 2 also has a decision node following player 1 moving 'up'. By considering player 2's cer-
tain pay-off's following this decision we can exclude 'up' and 'down' as we have already assumed
this player is rational.
We now only have to solve player 1's move at the start of the game. There are now only two
remaining pay-offs for the game as a whole. If we assume player 1 believes player 2 is rational
then she will anticipate a pay-off of 3 if she moves 'up'. Further, if we assume that player 1 believes
that player 2 believes that player 3 is rational then she will anticipate a pay-off of 6 if she moves
'down'. With these assumptions we can exclude pliyer 1 moving 'up'.
With the above assumptions we are left with one remaining pay-off vector corresponding to
49

--- Sayfa 61 ---
Dynamic Game Theory
the subgame perfect Nash equilibrium. This equilibrium is that player 1 moves 'down' followed
by player 2 moving 'up', and finally player 3 choosing to play'down'. We derive the same solution
if we assume all players in the game are rational and that this is common knowledge. This
assumption is stronger than absolutely necessary, but for convenience it is typically made when
applying the principle of backward induction.
Exercise 3.2
For the extensive form game given in this exercise there are two Nash equilibria, but only one is
perfect. To identify these Nash equilibria we first convert the game into a normal form game.
Player Ahas only two strategies, Al or A2. However, player 2 has four available strategies because
he can condition his actions on what he observes player A does. Player 2's strategies are, there-
fore, to always play B1, to always play B2, do the same as player A, or do the opposite. This gives
us the normal form game shown in Fig. 3.11.
Fig. 3.11
Using the two-stage procedure for finding pure-strategy Nash equilibria we can identify that
'Al/Always Bl' and 'A2/Same as A' are both Nash equilibria. The concept of subgame perfect
Nash equilibrium, however, rules out 'Al /Always B1' because it is not a Nash equilibrium for the
subgame beginning at B's choice node following 'A2'. This is because player B threatening to
always play 'Bl', irrespective of what player A does, is not credible. If player A plays 'A2', then
player B has the incentive to play 'B2'. The only subgame perfect equilibrium for this game is
'A2/Same as A'. This subgame perfect equilibrium could also have been found by using backward
induction.
If the players take their actions simultaneously rather than sequentially, then we get the nor-
mal form game illustrated in Fig. 3.12.
In this new game we have a unique Nash equilibrium of 'A1/B1'. All that we have changed
between the two games is the amount of information that player B has available to him when he
makes his decision. None the less the predicted outcome and corresponding pay-offs are very
different. Indeed, in this game giving player B less information, now he cannot observe player A's
move, actually makes him better off!
50

--- Sayfa 62 ---
Solutions to Exercises
Fig. 3.12
Exercise 3.3
(1) Applying the two-stage methodology for finding pure-strategy Nash equilibria it can be
shown that this game has the unique Nash equilibrium of'up/left'. It should be confirmed
by the reader that there is no mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium for this prisoners' dilemma
game.
(2) With infinite repetitions the co-operative outcome can result in 'right/down' being played
indefinitely if the players adopt the suggested trigger strategy and players do not discount
the future too much. This is demonstrated as follows.
Let the player's rate of discount be 5. The present value of always playing 'right/down' to
each player is therefore
The present value of deviating to each player is
Thus we can predict that the two players will continue to collude as long as
51
The threat of punishment is credible since having observed the other player's defection
from the co-operative solution it is rational to play the static Nash equilibrium.
Furthermore, if the above condition holds, then the promise to play 'right/down' is also
credible, because the loss incurred as a result of deviating outweighs the possible gains.
(3) With the players adopting this alternative one-period punishment strategy, each player has
the option of deviating from the Pareto-efficient outcome every other period. Indeed, if it is
rational to deviate initially this is what they will do. The present value of deviating this
period is therefore equal to

--- Sayfa 63 ---
As future punishment is less severe, lasting for only one period following each deviation,
players are less likely to be deterred from deviating from the Pareto-optimal outcome. This
is shown by the smaller subset of discount values which maintain Pareto efficiency.
where A corresponds to the statement that 'the other player is co-operative', and B to the obser-
vation that 'the other player has just played across'. The probabilities in the equation, therefore
have the following interpretation.
Prob(A IB)
= the probability that the other player is co-operative, given that he or she
has just played across. This corresponds to that player's reputation for
being co-operative.
Prob(A)
= the prior probability that the other player is co-operative.
Prob(not A)
= the prior probability that the other player is rational
= 1 - Prob(A)
Prob(B I A)
= the probability that the other player will play across if he or she is co-
operative. In our example this equals 1 by definition
Prob(B I not A) = the probability that the other player will play across if he or she is ratio-
nal.
(1) From the above equation we can calculate the probability that players are co-operative if
they initially play across. This equals Prob(AI B) = (1 x 0.5)/( (1 x 0.5) + (0.2 x 0.5)) = 0.833.
From this we can see that the player's reputation for being co-operative has increased as a
result of playing across.
(2) If the players play across with their second move, then the other player assigns an even
greater probability to the belief that the player is co-operative. Using the result derived in (1)
as the new prior probability that the player is co-operative we get: Prob(A I B) =
(1 x 0.833)/( (1 x 0.833) + (0.2 x 0.167) ) = 0.961.
(3) If rational players always play across then we have Prob(B I not A) = 1. Substituting this into
Bayes' Theorem we get Prob(A I B) = (1 x 0.5)/( (1 x 0.5) + (1 x 0.5)) = 0.5. In this situation
there is no useful information learnt from observing a player's move across. This is because
52
Dynamic Game Theory
Comparing this with the present value pay-off of not deviating we get the result that both
players will continually play the Pareto-efficient outcome if
Exercise 3.4
From Bayes' Theorem we can write

--- Sayfa 64 ---
Bayes
1 Theorem
both rational and co-operative players are predicted to act alike. With no new information
available the players' reputations remain unchanged.
(4) In this final example we have Prob(B I not A) = 0, and so Prob(A IB) = (1 x 0.5)/(( 1 x 0.5) +
(0 x 0.5)) = 1. In this example the players learn for certain that both are co-operative. This
occurs because the prior belief was that a rational player would always play down. The only
consistent explanation of observing the other player move across, therefore, is that they are
co-operative.
From the results derived in (3) and (4) we can note that players' reputations can only be
improved if they adopt a mixed strategy. Otherwise their reputation remains unchanged, or
their identity is fully revealed.
Appendix 3.1 Bayes
1 Theorem
Bayes' Theorem, named after the Reverend Thomas Bayes (1702-61), shows how probabilities
can be updated as additional information is received. It answers the question 'Given that event B
has occurred what is the probability that event A has or will occur?' This revised probability is
written as Prob(A I B). It is the conditional probability of event A given the occurrence of event
B. For example in games of incomplete information a player can use Bayes' Theorem to update
their probability assessment that another player is of a certain type, by observing what he or she
does. The Theorem can be written as follows:
Suppose that event B has a non-zero probability of occurring, then for each event Ais of which
there are N possibilities,
For example, if there are only two possible types of a certain player, A1 and A2, the updated prob-
ability for each type, given that this player has undertaken an action B is:
The probabilities used on the right-hand side of these expressions are called 'prior probabili-
ties', and are determined before event B occurs. The updated probabilities Prob(Ai I B) are called
'posterior probabilities'. In repeated games these posterior probabilities would then be used as
the prior probabilities of Prob(Ai) in subsequent periods.
53
and

--- Sayfa 65 ---
Dynamic Game Theory
Proof of Bayes' Theorem
From the nature of conditional probabilities it is true that
and
From (2) we get
Substituting in for Prob(Ai and B) from equation (1) gives
Multiplying through by Prob(B) yields
Summing both sides over the index i gives
Since the events {Ai,..., A^} are mutually exclusive and exhaustive we know that
Substituting (7) into (6) we have
Substituting (8) into (4) gives us Bayes' Theorem. This completes the proof.
Appendix 3.2 Sequential Equilibrium In A Modified
Centipede Game
In this appendix we demonstrate how a sequential equilibrium may be identified for a modified
version of Rosenthal's centipede game. This version of the game is due to McKelvey and Palfrey
(1992). The extensive form of this game, assuming complete information, is shown in Fig. 3.13.
54

--- Sayfa 66 ---
Sequential Equilibrium In A Modified Centipede Game
Fig. 3.13
With complete information the unique subgame perfect Nash equilibrium for this game is for
player 1 to play down (D) at the first decision node. This solution can be confirmed using the
principle of backward induction. With this outcome the pay-offs are 0.4 and 0.1 for players 1 and
2 respectively. Clearly this is a Pareto-inefficient outcome as both players can be made better off
if they initially co-operate and play across (A). With incomplete information, however, sequen-
tial equilibrium will generally involve some degree of co-operation by both players. To illustrate
this we will assume there is a small probability of either player in the game being co-operative in
the sense that they always play across. This may be because they are either altruistic, and care
about their opponent's final pay-off, or because they are irrational. Each player is assumed to
know he or she is rational or co-operative, but not the type of the opponent. It is assumed that
the prior probability that a player is co-operative is 0.05. As a 'co-operative' player always plays
across we need only derive the equilibrium predictions for a 'rational' player. With this degree of
uncertainty it is rational for player 1 to always play across at the first decision node, thus partially
offsetting the paradox of backward induction. At the next two nodes the players will adopt a
mixed strategy. If the game reaches the final node player 2 will always play down.
To derive this equilibrium we start from the last period first and work back to the beginning
of the game. We will use the following notation. Let fl* be the expected final pay-off for player
k= 1,2, if the game is at decision node; = 1,...,4.(; = 1 is the first node,;'=2 the second etc.).
This will be conditional on whether player fcplays down (D) or across (A) at that node. Similarly
Prob^(A) and Prob^(D) are the probabilities of player k, if he or she is rational, playing A or D at
decision node _;'. Finally, r* is the probability assessment by the other player that player k is 'co-
operative' if the game has reached decision node j. This corresponds to player fc"s reputation for
being 'co-operative'. Initially, by assumption, r\ - if = r% = 0.05. This final probability is based
on the fact that player 2 can do nothing to affect his reputation prior to node 2, as this is player
2's first decision node.
4th node (j = 4) If the game reaches player 2's final decision node, then the expected pay-offs for
that player are Hi (D) = 3.2 and HI (A) = 1.6. As down strictly dominates across it is clear that if
player 2 is rational he will always play down. This pure-strategy prediction implies that ProV^ (A)
= 0 and Probi (D) = 1 for a rational player.
3rd node (j = 3)Based on the results derived for node 4 the expected pay-offs for player 1 if the
game reaches node 3 are Hs (D) = 1.6 and fls (A) = 0.8 (1 - ?f) + 6.4?f. If one of these expected
pay-offs is greater than the other, then player 1 will play a pure strategy at this node. If, however,
these expected values are equal, then player 1 (if rational) is indifferent between playing across or
55

--- Sayfa 67 ---
Player 1 will, therefore, adopt a mixed strategy at node 3 if player 2 plays this mixed strategy at
node 2.
2nd node (j = 2) At node 2 we can derive the following expected pay-offs for player 2.
II^(D) = 0.8and
Again if either of these expected pay-offs is greater than the other, then player 2 will adopt a pure
strategy. If these expected pay-offs are equal, then player 2 (if rational) can adopt a mixed strat-
egy at this node. This will occur when Prob\ (D) = 617(l — rty. Given that r\ is sufficiently small,
player 2 will use a mixed strategy at node 2 if player 1 is anticipated to play the appropriate mixed
strategy at node 3. This is similar to the prediction derived for node 3. The mixed strategies at
nodes 2 and 3 are self-supporting in equilibrium.
If we assume that player 1 always plays across at node 1 (this assumption is validated below),
then from Bayes' Theorem r\ = 0.05. From the previous equation, therefore, player 2 will play a
mixed strategy at node 2 if Prob\ (D) = 0.902 and Probl
3 (A) = 0.098.
1 st node (j = 1) In order to justify the use of mixed strategies derived above for nodes 2 and 3 all
that is needed now is to demonstrate that, given these predictions, player 1 will play across at this
first decision node. Again the expected pay-offs for player 1 at this node are given astr^ (D) = 0.4
and
56
Dynamic Game Theory
down. In this situation player 1 can play a mixed strategy at this node. This will occur when
r§ = 1/7. Player 1 will only play a mixed strategy at this node if player 2 has previously enhanced
his reputation for being 'co-operative'. This, in turn, can only happen if player 2 has played a
mixed strategy at decision node 2. Specifically using Bayes' Theorem we can calculate the
implied probability of player 2 playing down at node 2 in order to induce player 1 to play a mixed
strategy at node 3. Thus

--- Sayfa 68 ---
Further Reading
Given the previous mixed-strategy predictions we can calculate that H \ (A) = 1.036. For player
1 playing across dominates playing down at this node, and so player 1 will always play across
irrespective of their type. This pure-strategy prediction implies that Prob\ (A) = 1 and Prob\ (D)
= 0 for a rational player.
This demonstrates that the use of mixed strategies at nodes 2 and 3 can form part of a sequen-
tial equilibrium. In fact it can be shown that this is the only sequential equilibrium for this game.
This unique equilibrium is illustrated in Fig. 3.14.
These predictions conform to the typical pattern observed with sequential equilibrium.
Initially there is a pure-strategy phase, where players co-operate. Players then adopt mixed
strategies, where a player's reputation for being co-operative may be enhanced. Finally players
adopt the pure strategy associated with non-cooperation.
Further Reading
Aumann, R., and S. Hart (1992), Handbook of Game Theory with Economic Applications, New
York North-Holland.
Bierman, H. S., and L. Fernandez (1993), Game Theory with Economic Applications, Reading,
Mass.: Addison Wesley.
Dixit, A., and B. J. Nalebuff (1991), Thinking Strategically: The Competitive Edge in Business,
Politics, and Everyday Life, New York: Norton.
Eatwell, J., M. Milgate, and P. Newman (1989), The New Palgrave: Game Theory, New York: W. W.
Norton.
Gibbons, R. (1992 ),Game Theory for Applied Economists, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Kreps, D. (1990), A Course in Microeconomic Theory, New York: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Kreps, D. (1990), Game Theory and Economic Modelling, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Rasmusen, E. (1993), Games and Information, Oxford: Blackwell.
Varian, H. (1992), Microeconomic Analysis, New York: Norton.
57
Fig. 3.14

--- Sayfa 69 ---
4
Oligopoly
O
LIG O P O LY is the term typically used to describe the situation where a few
firms dominate a particular market. The defining characteristic of this type of
market structure is that the competing firms are interdependent. This occurs
when the behaviour of one firm affects the profits earned by other firms in the industry.
It is this characteristic of interdependence that makes oligopoly suitable for game
theory analysis. Oligopoly can be contrasted with the two extremes of market structure.
Under perfect competition all firms are price-takers, and so they are assumed to be
independent of each other. In the case of monopoly, as there is only one firm in the mar-
ket, there is again no interdependence.
Initially, in examining the behaviour of oligopolistic firms we consider one-off
games where firms are assumed to interact with each other only once. In this context we
present the now classic models of Cournot, Stackelberg, and Bertrand competition.
Having discussed the outcome of these models, we then analyse how repeated interac-
tion between firms can change their predicted behaviour. In particular we discuss the
extent to which oligopolies can maintain a non-cooperative collusive outcome that
maximizes joint profits. In discussing these issues many of the ideas presented in the
previous two chapters are directly applied. One important contrast between the games
previously discussed and those presented in this chapter is that now we represent the
players making choices over a continuous, rather than a discrete, strategic variable. For
example, we examine how ideas presented in the previous two chapters can be applied
when firms must choose one particular output-price combination from a continuum
of such choices as represented by the demand curve.
4.1 Three Models of Oligopoly
A number of different models have been developed that try to explain and predict the
behaviour of oligopolistic firms. In this section we will examine three such models, each
named after their originator. The distinguishing feature of these models of oligopoly is
their underlying market structure. In Cournot competition firms simultaneously com-
pete in terms of quantity supplied to the market. In Stackelberg competition one or more
58

--- Sayfa 70 ---
Three Models of Ogliopoly
firms are able initially to precommit themselves to a particular output level. The
remaining firms observe this level of output and then simultaneously determine their
own optimal output levels. Finally, in Bertrand competition firms simultaneously com-
pete in terms of the price they charge consumers. These differences fundamentally alter
the underlying structure of the game between firms, and dramatically change the pre-
dicted behaviour of the firms involved. To illustrate these differences we initially focus
our attention on the case of one-off competition between just two firms. More general
models of oligopoly, where there are more than two interdependent firms, are exam-
ined in various exercises, while repeated interaction between firms is analysed in the
next section.
4.1.1 Cournot competition
As stated above in Cournot competition firms simultaneously decide how much of the
good they will supply to the market. Once aggregate supply is determined the price is set
so that the market clears. To examine this type of competition we initially assume that
two firms produce an identical product. As the output decisions are taken simultane-
ously each firm supplies the market without observing the other firm's level of supply.
The market price, P, is determined so that aggregate supply, Q, is just demanded. We
assume that total demand for the product is determined according to the inverse
demand curve P = a - Q, where a is a positive constant. There are assumed to be con-
stant marginal costs equal to c and no fixed costs. Each firm is assumed to maximize
profits.
From this informal description we can identify the three basic requirements for a
normal form game.
(1) The players
These are the two firms. We will call them firm A and firm B.
(2) The strategies available to each player
As this is a static game the available strategies are the same as the possible actions of the
two players. The available strategies are therefore the possible quantities of the good
each firm can supply to the market. We will assume that firms A and B can supply any
positive level of output, and denote these as qA and qB respectively.
(3) The pay-offs
These are the profits each firm receives. These are denoted as HA and HB for firms A and
B respectively.
Furthermore we also know how much information each player has when deciding
upon their optimal strategy, and the timing of these events. We can therefore represent
this competitive structure as an extensive form game. This is shown in Fig. 4.1.
59

--- Sayfa 71 ---
Ogliopoly
Fig. 4.1 Cournot Duopoly: Extensive Form Game
This extensive form game illustrates the essential elements of Cournot competition.
In particular it shows that both firms make their supply decisions before knowing how
much the other firm has supplied to the market. This is represented by having all of firm
B's decision nodes in the same information set. This is also true for firm A as it is
depicted as only having one decision node, the initial node. It should be noted, how-
ever, that Fig. 4.1 does simplify the game described above by assuming that each firm
has only three possible levels of output. In contrast, we assumed above that the firms
can supply any positive level of output. This means there are an infinite number of
actions available to each firm. It is clearly impossible fully to represent all these possi-
bilities diagrammatically, and so the extensive form game depicts only a representative
sample of the available strategies. Once each firm has chosen its optimal level of supply,
the market price is determined, and the firms receive the corresponding level of profit.
As we are restricting ourselves to one-off competition between firms in this section, the
game is assumed to end when firms have received these profit levels.
Having depicted Cournot competition as a game between interdependent firms, we
can now apply the solution techniques discussed in Chapter 2 to predict the outcome of
this market structure. An obvious solution technique to use in this static game is the
concept of Nash equilibrium. This involves determining each firm's optimal strategy
dependent on what it expects the other firm to do. Diagrammatically this involves
drawing each firm's so-called reaction function. This shows a firm's optimal supply of
output for every possible quantity chosen by the other firm. (The term 'reaction func-
tion' is a misnomer because strictly it is not possible for either firm to react to each
other's output decision in this static game.)
To find each firm's reaction function we differentiate the firm's profit function with
respect to its own output level and set this equal to zero. Rearranging this yields the
first-order condition for finding a maximum. The second-order condition, that the
60

--- Sayfa 72 ---
Three Models of Ogliopoly
second derivative is negative, is then checked to ensure that a maximum has indeed
been found. These calculations are performed below for firm A and firm B, under the
assumptions of the model being used.
The penultimate line of these calculations is the reaction function for each firm. These
functions show that the optimal level of supply for each firm is negatively related to the
expected level of supply of the other firm. As an expected increase in one firm's supply
causes the other firm to cut back on its supply the output of the two firms are said to be
strategic substitutes for each other. (Conversely if strategic variables are positively
related there are said to be strategic complements.} Diagrammatically strategic substi-
tutes are illustrated by downward-sloping reaction curves. The reaction functions for
firm A and firm B are plotted in Fig. 4.2.
61
Fig.4.2 Cournot-Na sh E qu ilib rium

--- Sayfa 73 ---
Ogliopoly
This diagram also shows the relationship between each firm's reaction curve and its
isoprofit curves. In this diagram the isoprofit curve plots the different combinations of
the two firms' output that yield the same level of profit for one of the firms. Profits are
greatest when each firm is the sole supplier to the market. If one of the firms acts as a
monopolist, it will supply (a-c)!2 units of the product to the market. This is equal to
the intercept value of the reaction functions. The further away the firm is from this
monopoly outcome the smaller its level of profit. This is indicated by moving on to iso-
profit curves further away from the relevant intercept. As firm A is assumed to maxim-
ize profit given the expected level of supply by firm B, so its reaction function intersects
its isoprofit curves where they are horizontal. Similarly, firm B's reaction function
intersects its isoprofit curves where they are vertical. This represents maximum profit
for firm B for each anticipated level of supply by firm A. In Nash equilibrium both firms
must be maximizing profits simultaneously, given their beliefs about the other firm's
level of supply. This means that both firms must be on their reaction curves simultane-
ously. In Fig.4.2 the reaction curves intersect only once, and so this corresponds to the
unique Nash equilibrium for this model. From the diagram we can see that the Nash
equilibrium is where each firm supplies an output equal to (a - c)/3. This can be con-
firmed algebraically by setting the two equations for the reaction functions equal to
each other.
Although we have identified the output levels of (a - c)/3 as the unique solution to
this model using the concept of Nash equilibrium, it should be noted that Cournot
(1838) also claimed this output combination to be the equilibrium. Cournot, however,
identified this as the equilibrium to the model by analysing how the firms would react
when they were out of equilibrium. Cournot assumed that each firm believes that if it
changed its own output level the other firm would not react by changing its output
level. To show this yields the same equilibrium as before consider Fig. 4.3.
Fig. 4.3 Cournot Disequilibrium Dynamics
62

--- Sayfa 74 ---
Three Models of Ogliopoly
This diagram again plots the two firms' reaction functions. Assume initially that only
firm A is producing in this market. As firm A is initially a monopoly it will produce the
amount (a - c)/2 and be at point A. If now firm B enters the market, and assumes that
firm A will maintain its initial level of supply, then it will produce at point B, which is on
firm B's reaction curve vertically above point A. However, at point B firm A is off its
reaction curve and so, if it assumes firm B will not change its level of supply, it will
change its output to point C. It can be seen that this process will continue until we reach
the Nash equilibrium. A similar argument could be advanced starting from any point
in Fig. 4.3, with the two firms converging on the Nash equilibrium. As both methods
yield the same equilibrium it is often called the Cournot-Nash equilibrium.
Although both the Cournot solution and the Nash equilibrium predict the same final
output levels the concept of Nash equilibrium is theoretically much the stronger.
Specifically, Cournot's methodology has two main weaknesses. First, it postulates that
each firm is able to react to the other firm's output level. This is inconsistent with the
initial structure of the game where it was assumed both firms set their output levels
simultaneously. Second, although each firm assumes the other will not respond to out-
put changes, this would in fact be falsified by actual behaviour if the firms did repeat-
edly interact, and were initially away from Nash equilibrium. This means that each
firm's assumption about the behaviour of the other firm is not consistent with the
model itself, and so is not a rational conjecture. Although Cournot's equilibrium is rea-
sonable his analysis of what happens out of equilibrium must be regarded as unsatis-
factory.
In contrast, the concept of Nash equilibrium does not introduce a dynamic process
into an otherwise static model, nor does it introduce arbitrary behavioural assump-
tions. Instead each firm sets the equilibrium quantity based on rational beliefs about
the behaviour of the other firm. It is via this rational decision-making process, where
each firm explicitly takes into account its interdependence with other firms, that equi-
librium is attained.
Before going on to discuss other models of oligopoly it is worth noting that the
Cournot-Nash equilibrium is Pareto inefficient. If the two firms could co-ordinate
their supply decisions, then they can potentially both earn greater profits. From Fig. 4.2
the Nash equilibrium is seen to be inefficient because at this point the two firm's iso-
profit curves are not tangential. This implies there are other supply combinations
where at least one firm is better off and the other firm no worse off. These combinations
are shown as the shaded lens-shaped region in Fig. 4.2. The boundary of this shaded
area is formed by the two isoprofit curves passing through the Nash equilibrium.
Within this shaded area, therefore, both firms move on to isoprofit curves closer to their
respective monopoly outcomes, and so both firms are better off. On the boundary
itself, apart from where the isoprofit lines intersect, one firm is strictly better off while
the other firm receives the same level of profit as in Nash equilibrium.
In order for an outcome to be Pareto efficient the isoprofit curves must be tangential.
If this is the case, then one firm can only be made better off at the expense of the other
63

--- Sayfa 75 ---
Ogliopoly
firm's profit level. Also drawn in Fig. 4.2 is the contract curve. The contract curve shows
the set of Pareto-efficient outcomes, where the firms' isoprofit lines are tangential.
Exercise 4.2 demonstrates that along the contract curve joint supply is equal to (a - c)/2,
which is the quantity a monopolist would supply to the market. Aggregate profits along
the contract curve are therefore, in this model, equal to the monopoly profit level.
Distribution of profits along this curve is, therefore, called a constant-sum game. If the
two firms could fully co-ordinate their supply decisions, they would maximize joint
profit by being on the contract curve. From this contract curve it can be seen, however,
there are an infinite number of Pareto-efficient outcomes. This raises the question of
which of these many output combinations firms might attempt to co-ordinate upon. In
answer to this question, it seems reasonable to exclude points on the contract curve
which are outside the shaded area. These outcomes can be rejected because one of the
two firms strictly prefers the Nash equilibrium, and so will not maintain the collusive
outcome. This leaves all the points on the contract curve within the shaded area. If the
two firms are identical, one focal point for collusion is where both firms produce half
the monopoly level of supply, and so each receives half the monopoly profit level. This
focal point is labelled as point C in Fig. 4.2. Although this outcome might seem entirely
reasonable, there is good reason to believe that in the game we are considering it is
unsustainable. This is because point C is not a Nash equilibrium, and hence firms have
the incentive unilaterally to deviate from it by changing their level of supply. The reason
for this is that the cartel maximizes joint profits by acting like a monopolist, i.e. it
restricts output and increases price. At this output level both firms, in general, will want
to increase their own production, thereby increasing their own profits. Diagramatically
at point C both firms are off their reaction curves. In Cournot equilibrium the total out-
put is higher and the price is lower but at this point neither firm has an incentive to
change its level of output. This is an example of a prisoners' dilemma game considered
in Chapter 2. Each player has an incentive to deviate from the collusive outcome, with
the result that the final equilibrium is Pareto inefficient.
This is the classic argument for why we might expect a cartel to be unstable. Each firm
has a unilateral incentive to deviate from the collusive arrangement. We return to this
issue of collusion, and specifically how a non-cooperative collusive outcome might be
sustained, in section 4.2.
EXERCISE 4.1
Assume that there are ;'=1,..., n identical firms in an industry, each with constant mar-
ginal costs of cand no fixed costs. If the market price, P, is determined by the equation P=
a- Q, where Q is total industry output and o is a constant, determine the Cournot-Nash
equilibrium output level for each firm. What happens as n —> °°?
64

--- Sayfa 76 ---
Three Models of Ogliopoly
EXERCISE 4.2.
Find an equation for the contract curve for the model presented in Exercise 4.1 when n = 2.
Show that along this contract curve aggregate supply of the good is equal to the quantity
that a profit-maximizing monopolist would supply.
4.1.2 Stackelberg competition
With Cournot competition each firm chooses its desired level of supply simultaneously.
In Stackelberg competition it is assumed that at least one of the firms in the market is
able to precommit itself to a particular level of supply before other firms have fixed their
level of supply. These other firms observe the leader's supply and then respond with
their output decision. The firms able to initially precommit their level of output are
called the market leaders and the other firms are the followers. Again to aid under-
standing, we examine the case of duopoly, where there is one leader and one follower.
The extensive form game for this type of competition is shown in Fig. 4.4.
In Fig. 4.4 firm A is the leader and firm B the follower. The only difference between
this diagram and the extensive form game drawn for Cournot duopoly, is that firm B's
decision nodes are now in separate information sets rather than being in the same
information set. This corresponds to the assumption that the follower now observes
Fig. 4.4 Stackelberg Duopoly: Extensive Form Game
65

--- Sayfa 77 ---
Ogliopoly
the leader's supply decision before choosing its own optimal response. This change in
market structure significantly alters the predicted behaviour of the two firms.
In predicting the outcome of this extensive form game we need to realize that the
game is no longer static but inherently dynamic. This raises the possibility of threats
and promises being made and possibly acted upon. For example, firm B may threaten
to produce such a large amount of the good that if believed the leader would set output
equal to zero, thus leaving firm B the sole supplier. This represents one possible Nash
equilibrium. There will, with a continuum of such threats and promises, be an infinite
number of such Nash equilibria. The problem with this reasoning is that most of these
equilibria involve the leader believing incredible threats or promises. They are incredi-
ble because they are not in the interest of the follower actually to carry them out if
required to do so. In order to rule out such incredible threats and promises we require
that the predicted outcome of the game be subgame perfect. To find the subgame per-
fect Nash equilibrium for this game we apply the principle of backward induction.
To see how the principle of backward induction may be applied in this situation we
make the same assumptions previously used to analyse Cournot competition, except
now we let firm A be the leader and firm B the follower. Using backward induction we
start with the last period first, and initially determine the follower's output decision.
Given that the follower is rational it will attempt to maximize its pay-off, here given in
terms of its profit level, subject to the leader's known level of supply. The follower's
profit function is given as
Differentiating this with respect to qB and setting this equal to zero gives us the first-
order condition for a maximum.
This equation is the follower's reaction function. (Note that the term 'reaction func-
tion' is no longer a misnomer in this dynamic game.) This function shows the follower's
optimal response for any level of supply chosen by the leader. Therefore the only credi-
ble threat/promise that the follower can make is that it will be on its own reaction func-
tion.
Having made the prediction that the follower will locate on its reaction function in
the last period of the game, we can now consider what the leader will do in the first
period. From the arguments above the leader knows that the eventual outcome of the
game must be on the follower's reaction function. The leader will therefore maximize
its own profits subject to this constraint. The first-order condition for a maximum is
66

--- Sayfa 78 ---
Three Models of Ogliopoly
derived as follows, where we substitute firm B's reaction function in for its level of out-
put.
This is the subgame perfect Nash equilibrium level of supply for the leader. Substituting
this in to the follower's reaction function gives us that firm B's optimal response is to
produce qB = (a- c)/4. With one leader and one follower, the follower produces half the
amount of the leader, and Q = 3(a - c)/4. These results are illustrated in Fig. 4.5.
The leader knows that if the follower is rational it will produce on its reaction func-
tion. Given this constraint the leader will maximize profits where its isoprofit curve is
tangential to the follower's reaction curve. Firm A would ideally like to be the sole sup-
plier in this market so that it could earn monopoly profits. This corresponds to point A
in Fig. 4.5. However, the lowest isoprofit curve that it can reach, subject to the final out-
put combination being on the follower's reaction function, is the one through point S.
This is the Stackelberg-(subgame perfect) Nash equilibrium. Interestingly, with only
Fig. 4.5 Stackelberg-Subgame Perfect Nash Equilibrium
67

--- Sayfa 79 ---
Ogliopoly
one leader and one follower, the leader produces the monopoly output level. (This
result does not generalize to the case of more than one follower, as Exercise 4.3 demon-
strates.) The leader, however, does not earn monopoly profits. This is because the fol-
lower's positive level of output drives down the market price that the leader receives. In
the Stackelberg-Nash equilibrium the firms' isoprofit curves continue to intersect and
so, as with the Cournot-Nash equilibrium, there are still potential gains to be had from
collusion.
Fig. 4.5 also illustrates the Cournot-Nash equilibrium. Compared to this equilib-
rium the Stackelberg equilibrium entails higher profits for the leader and smaller prof-
its for the follower. More information has actually made the follower worse off! In
contrast, the ability of the leader to precommit itself to a particular level of supply has
made that firm better off. In this model there is said to be a first-move advantage.
EXERCISE 4.3
Assume there are m identical Stackelberg leaders in an industry, indexed j= 1,..., m, and
n identical Stackelberg followers, indexed k= 1
n. All firms have a constant marginal
cost of c and no fixed costs. The market price, Q, is determined according to the equation
P= a- Q, where Q is total industry output, and a is a constant. Find the subgame perfect
Nash equilibrium supply for the leaders and the followers. Confirm the duopoly results for
both Cournot competition and Stackelberg competition, and the generalized Cournot
result for n firms derived in Exercise 4.1.
4.1.3 Bertrand competition
In Cournot and Stackelberg competition the firms' strategic variable is the quantity of
the good they supply to the market. In Bertrand competition the strategic variable is the
price firms charge their customers. In this model firms simultaneously announce the
price at which they are prepared to sell their product, and then consumers determine
the amount they will buy. The extensive form for this type of competition with just two
firms is the same as for Cournot duopoly, except now firms decide on the price to sell
their product. This is shown in Fig. 4.6.
The nature of the equilibrium that results from Bertrand competition depends crit-
ically upon whether the firms sell identical or differentiated products. We will initially
assume that the firms' products are identical and then consider the case of product dif-
ferentiation.
68

--- Sayfa 80 ---
Fig. 4.6 Bertrand Duopoly: Extensive Form Game
Undifferentiated products
With undifferentiated products there is a unique Nash equilibrium, where the firms
charge the same price, and just earn normal profits. To see that this is the case consider
the following two-stage argument.
If the firms sell identical goods, then consumers will only buy from the firm offering
the product at the lowest price. Therefore, if firms were to sell the product at different
prices the firm with the lower price would capture the whole market. If in this situation
this firm is making supernormal profits, then the other firm has an incentive to slightly
undercut its competitor's price. Doing this it will capture the whole market and begin
earning positive profits. If, on the other hand, the initial firm is earning less than nor-
mal profits, then that firm has an incentive to raise its price. This will be to where it
either earns at least normal profits, or has zero sales and leaves the industry. From these
scenarios it is clear that firms charging different prices cannot be a Nash equilibrium.
A similar argument can be made concerning firms charging the same price but earn-
ing more or less than normal profits. In this situation both firms will have an incentive
either to slightly increase or decrease the price they charge. The unique Nash equilib-
rium is, therefore, all firms charging the same price and earning normal profits. This is
identical to the perfectly competitive outcome. This result, that as few as two firms will
yield the competitive outcome, is referred to as the Bertrand paradox. It is a paradox
because it seems implausible to believe that so few firms would not find some way of
colluding so as to move away from the competitive outcome in order to earn supernor-
mal profits. One way of avoiding the Bertrand paradox is to allow firms to repeatedly
interact. As argued in section 4.2, this allows the possibility of non-cooperative collu-
sion, where firms can earn greater profits than those suggested by this one-off game. An
alternative way of avoiding the paradox is to allow the firms to sell differentiated prod-
ucts. This situation is analysed below.
69

--- Sayfa 81 ---
Ogliopoly
Product differentiation
With product differentiation the firms will no longer face all-or-nothing demand as
experienced when they produce a homogeneous good. Instead, firms will now face a
downward-sloping demand curve. The firms remain interdependent but this is not as
extreme as when they produce identical products. Here we examine the case of
Bertrand duopoly with differentiated products. Let two firms, A and B, set the prices PA
and pB respectively. We assume that the quantity each firm sells is determined by the fol-
lowing equations
where b > 0 reflects that the two goods are substitutes for each other. As with previous
models we assume that the firms have constant marginal costs equal to cand no fixed
costs. Assuming firms attempt to maximize profits, we can derive the Nash equilibrium
as follows. First, we derive each firm's reaction function, which gives us their optimal
price given the price the other firm sets.
These two reaction functions are plotted in Fig. 4.7.
The reaction curves for Bertrand competition are seen to be upward-sloping, and so
the prices of the two firms are strategic complements. To find a Bertrand-Nash equilib-
rium both firms must be maximizing their profits simultaneously given the expected
behaviour of the other firm. Again this means that both firms must be on their reaction
curves. Setting the two reaction functions equal to each other we obtain the unique
Nash equilibrium that each firm will set its price equal to (a + c)/(2 - b). As with the
Nash equilibrium associated with Cournot and Stackelberg competition, this outcome
is Pareto inefficient. Both firms can be made better off if they set higher prices. These
Pareto-dominant outcomes are shown as the lens-shaped area in Fig. 4.7. The problem
with achieving one of these Pareto-dominant outcomes is that, again, at least one firm
has an incentive to deviate from it. This justifies the Nash equilibrium as being the
expected outcome for this particular model.
70

--- Sayfa 82 ---
Fig. 4.7 Bertrand-Nash Equilibrium
4.2 Non-Cooperative Collusion
In the previous section we illustrated the three classic models of oligopoly as one-off
games. The predicted outcome of each model was either a Nash equilibrium or a sub-
game perfect Nash equilibrium. In all three models the equilibrium was shown to be
Pareto inefficient. With effective collusion all firms could receive higher profits. The
problem, however, is that without the use of legally enforceable contracts such collu-
sion is not credible in these one-off games. This is because at least a subset of the firms
involved in the collusion has an incentive to unilaterally deviate from it. This section
extends our analysis of oligopoly by discussing the possibility of non-cooperative col-
lusion when firms repeatedly interact. This is closer to reality for many oligopolies, and
provides us with the opportunity to see how the issues of repeated games, as presented
in Chapter 3, can be applied to oligopolistic competition. First, we examine the situ-
ation where firms experience infinite interaction with each other. We will then consider
what happens when there are only a finite number of repetitions of the one-off game. In
this latter context we discuss the role of multiple equilibria, uncertainty about the
future, and uncertainty about one's competitors.
4.2.1 Infinite repetitions
With infinite interaction firms have the possibility of adopting punishment strategies
that induce other firms to maintain the non-cooperative collusive outcome. This is
because with repeated interaction there is the possibility of firms being punished if they
break an explicit or tacit collusive agreement. For example, if one firm increases its out-
71

--- Sayfa 83 ---
Ogliopoly
put other firms may retaliate by increasing their output causing all firms to be worse off.
If this effective punishment is sufficiently severe, firms will voluntarily maintain the
collusive outcome. This involves firms forgoing an increase in short-run profits in order
to avoid the costs associated with future punishment.
One particular form of punishment that firms might adopt is a trigger strategy. As
discussed in Chapter 3 a trigger strategy is where a certain action by one player induces
other players in the game to permanently change the way they act. With a trigger strat-
egy, therefore, a firm faces the prospect of an infinite punishment period if it deviates
from the collusive outcome. It was J. Friedman (1971) who first showed that non-
cooperative collusion could be maintained if oligopolies continually interact and adopt
an appropriate trigger strategy.
To see how adoption of a trigger strategy can lead to non-cooperative collusion we
apply a specific trigger strategy to our model of Cournot duopoly. In section 4.1 it was
shown that any point within the shaded region of Fig. 4.2 makes both firms better off
compared to the Nash equilibrium. However, it was previously argued that given the
symmetry of our model, and the assumption that firms will aim for a Pareto-efficient
outcome, a focal point for attempted collusion is where each firm produces half the
monopoly output level. This corresponds to point C in Fig. 4.2. If firms do seek to co-
ordinate upon this output combination, then they may adopt the following trigger
strategy
Produce half the monopoly output level in the first period, and continue to do
so if the other firm has always done so in the past. Otherwise produce the
Cournot-Nash output level.
With this trigger strategy firms, in effect, promise to collude as long as they perceive that
the other firm has always done so. The threat, however, is that if a firm deviates from the
collusive outcome it will be punished by the other firm producing the Cournot-Nash
equilibrium output level forever. For the collusive outcome to be a subgame perfect
Nash equilibrium both the promise and the threat implied by this strategy must be
credible.
The threatened punishment is clearly credible because if one firm is seen to have
deviated from the collusive outcome, then it is always rational for the other firm to pro-
duce the output level associated with the Nash equilibrium. For the promise to be cred-
ible the present value of maintaining collusion must exceed the present value of
deviating from it. This will be true provided that firms do not discount the future 'too
much'. This is shown as follows. If both firms continue to collude, then they each earn
half the monopoly level of profit, FlM/2, in every time-period. Discounting this by the
relevant discount factor 5=l/(l + r);0<8<l, we obtain the present value of always
continuing to collude:
72

--- Sayfa 84 ---
Non-Cooperative Collusion
If, alternatively, one firm deviates from the collusive outcome, then let the profit it
earns in the first time-period be equal to lip (where the subscript D refers to deviation).
In subsequent periods the most it can earn is equal to the Cournot-Nash equilibrium
profit level HO The present value of deviating is therefore:
As HD > IlM/2 >IIc, the right-hand side of the inequality will be between zero and
one. This condition is therefore satisfied provided 8 is sufficiently close to one. This
confirms that non-cooperative collusion will be maintained provided that the rate of
discount is not too small. When this condition is satisfied the resulting non-cooperative
collusion is self-enforcing. Each firm, given the other firm has adopted the above trig-
ger strategy, willingly maintains the collusive outcome.
One natural question that arises from the above analysis is what happens if the rate
of discount is smaller than that necessary to maintain the collusive outcome? Here we
discuss two possibilities.
One possibility is that the firms continue to adopt the previous trigger strategy where
punishment is equivalent to the Cournot-Nash equilibrium being played forever.
Although this punishment strategy cannot sustain joint output equal to the monopoly
outcome, because firms are assumed to discount future profits too much, other less
profitable collusive outcomes may be supported. As long as the rate of discount is not
zero there always exist other sustainable collusive outcomes that yield greater present-
value profits compared to the Cournot-Nash equilibrium. From these possible out-
comes it seems reasonable to assume that firms will co-ordinate on the symmetric
outcome which yields highest present-value profits given the firm's actual rate of time-
preference. If the rate of discount is zero, i.e. firms are only interested in present profits,
then we return, in effect, to the one-off game, and the only subgame perfect equilibrium
is that the Cournot-Nash solution is played every period.
An alternative possibility in trying to maintain an otherwise unsustainable collusive
outcome, is to make the threat of punishment more severe. Instead of seeking to collude
on an alternative outcome that is sustainable with the proposed trigger strategy, the
firms might try to adopt an alternative trigger strategy. In order for this alternative trig-
ger strategy to sustain the desired collusive outcome it must credibly threaten a more
severe punishment for deviation. The problem with this proposal is that in this model
73
Non-cooperative collusion will be maintained if

--- Sayfa 85 ---
Ogliopoly
any permanentpunishment which is more severe, implies that the adopted trigger strat-
egy is not credible. This can be illustrated by the following argument.
The most severe trigger strategy possible is to punish a deviant with its so called min-
imax punishment forever. The minimax punishment is the worst outcome players can
inflict upon another, given that the other player will be seeking to maximize his or her
pay-off. In our Cournot duopoly model this corresponds to one firm seeking to mini-
mize the other firm's profits given that that firm will always seek to be on its reaction
function. This occurs when the punishing firm produces the perfectly competitive out-
put a- c. If the other firm expects to observe this level of output, then from its reaction
function it will voluntarily cease production and earn zero profit. This confirms that
this is the minimax punishment. (Note that a firm cannot be forced to earn negative
profits because it always has the option of leaving the market and just breaking even.) If
a firm believes it will face this extreme punishment if it deviates, it clearly has a stronger
incentive to maintain the collusive outcome. In this way the desired collusive outcome
can be part of a Nash equilibrium. The problem with this punishment strategy, how-
ever, is that it is not credible, and so the collusive outcome supported by it cannot be
subgame perfect. The reason the minimax threat in this model is not credible is because
it is off the punishing firm's reaction function. If it believed the other firm were going to
produce zero output, then its optimal output is the monopoly output level (a - c)/2,
and not the competitive output level. For a trigger strategy to be credible the punish-
ment to be inflicted must be on the punishing firm's reaction function. However, as the
other firm will always seek to maximize its own profit level, it must also be on that firm's
reaction function as well. The only credible punishment, given that the firms adopt a
trigger strategy, must be a Nash equilibrium in the stage game. The only credible trig-
ger strategy, within our duopoly model, is the one considered previously where pun-
ishment corresponds to the Cournot-Nash equilibrium.
The above argument seems to imply that a more severe punishment strategy will not
be credible. This, however, is not the case. The above argument rules out more-severe
trigger strategies, but not more severe punishment strategies in general. Indeed, Abreu
(1986) has proposed a way in which firms can threaten more severe punishment for
observed deviation, and yet for it to still remain credible. The way to make punishment
more severe and remain credible is to move away from a trigger strategy and adopt a
carrot-and-stick approach. Abreu's suggestion is that firms need not threaten an infinite
punishment period, as suggested by the use of trigger strategies, but instead threaten
only a temporary period of punishment. The reason a more severe punishment
can now be credible is that firms are punished themselves if they do not punish other
firms.
The strategy suggested by Abreu is as follows. If all firms adopt the punishment strat-
egy within the punishment period, firms revert back to the collusive outcome. This is
the carrot. If, however, firms deviate from the prescribed punishment, then punish-
ment is continued. This is the stick. In this way firms are punished if they do not pun-
ish other deviant firms. This strategy, therefore, gives firms a greater incentive to punish
74

--- Sayfa 86 ---
Non-Cooperative Collusion
other firms. As a result the punishment itself need no longer be the Cournot-Nash out-
come. More severe punishment can become credible because all firms have an incentive
to carry it out so as to avoid being punished themselves. With more severe punishment
being credible the desired collusive outcome can be sustained for even smaller values of
the discount factor. This possibility is demonstrated for our Cournot duopoly model in
Exercise 4.4.
The above result is an application of the Folk Theorem as presented by Fudenberg and
Maskin (1986). In this context the theorem states that all possible output combinations
that Pareto-dominate the minimax outcome can form part of a subgame perfect Nash
EXERCISE 4.4*
In the text we derived that 8 > (rip - (riM/2))/(nD - Oc) is a necessary and sufficient con-
dition for each firm in a Cournot competing duopoly to produce half the monopoly output
level if it faces continual interaction and adopt the following trigger strategy: Produce half
the monopoly output level in the first period, and continue to do so if the other firm has
always done so in the past Otherwise produce the Cournot-Nash output level.
(1) Determine the necessary and sufficient conditions for this collusive outcome to be
maintained if the firms adopt the following alternative punishment strategies.
(a) Instead of a permanent switch to the Cournot-Nash equilibrium, deviation from the
collusive outcome causes the other firm to produce the Cournot-Nash output level for
only one period, and then reverts back to producing the collusive output level.
(b) Each firm produces the collusive output level initially, and if this outcome was main-
tained in the previous period. If, however, one firm deviates from the collusive output
level, then it will be punished for one period by the other firm producing the amount gp.
If the non-deviant firm does indeed produce qp in response to deviation by the other
firm then both firms return to the collusive outcome in the following period. If, how-
ever, the punishing firm deviates from the punishment output level qp, then it is, in
turn, punished by the other firm producing gp. This process continues indefinitely.
(2) Using the necessary and sufficient conditions just derived to maintain the collusive
outcome for each of the above three punishment strategies, calculate the specific con-
ditions for 8 in the following model. Price is determined by the equation P(£) = 65-0,
where Q is the joint output of the two firms. Each firm has constant marginal costs
equal to £5, and no fixed costs. For the carrot-and-stick punishment strategy given in
(1)b calculate the necessary conditions when qp is 25, 30, and 35. Identify which of
these punishment strategies supports the collusive outcome with the lowest value of
8.
75

--- Sayfa 87 ---
Ogliopoly
equilibrium provided firms do not discount the future 'too much', and that they adopt
appropriate punishment strategies. The minimax outcome is where each player is try-
ing to minimize other player's pay-offs. In Cournot duopoly this is when both firms
receive zero profits. This theorem states, therefore, that all feasible profit allocations can
be subgame perfect equilibria provided both firms earn at least zero profits and do not
overly discount future profits. This is a strong result. Due to the resulting multiple equi-
libria implied by this theorem firms must somehow co-ordinate their output on one
particular equilibrium. The selection process often used in the literature, and which has
been applied above, is to suppose that the equilibrium will be symmetric and on the
contract curve provided the discount factor is not too small.
To conclude our discussion on infinite competition between firms it should be noted
that the above results strongly contrast with those derived when examining one-off
competition between firms. There it was argued that non-cooperative collusion is not
possible. By modelling infinite repetitions of these one-off games we have derived the
opposite result. Provided firms are sufficiently interested in future profits non-
cooperative collusion is now possible. In these infinitely repeated games collusion is
sustained by the credible threat of future punishment. Given the stark contrast of these
results it is important that we go on to explore the predicted outcome of competition
between firms when the one-off game is only finitely repeated.
4.2.2 Finite repetitions
In Chapter 3 it was argued that there is a fundamental difference between infinitely
repeated and finitely repeated games. This is demonstrated by the paradox of backward
induction. The relevance of this paradox to finite interaction between oligopolies is that
with a unique Nash equilibrium in the one-off game non-cooperative collusive out-
comes are unsustainable. This can be applied to all three models analysed in section 4.1.
Here we consider its application to Cournot competition.
Assume that a finite number of oligopolies Cournot compete with each other over a
known finite number of time-periods. In applying the paradox of backward induction
we consider the last period first. In this last period there can be no subsequent punish-
ment for deviation from a collusive outcome. The only credible outcome in this period,
therefore, is the Cournot-Nash equilibrium. We now consider the period before last. As
both firms know that the Cournot-Nash solution will be played in the next time-period,
there is again no effective punishment for deviation in this penultimate period. The
Cournot-Nash equilibrium will, therefore, be played in this last but one period. This
argument can be repeated for all successive time-periods until we reach the beginning of
the game. The only subgame perfect Nash equilibrium for this finitely repeated game is
that the Cournot-Nash equilibrium is played in every time-period. The paradox of
backward induction rules out the possibility of non-cooperative collusion between oli-
gopolies in finitely repeated games of complete information, where there is a unique
76

--- Sayfa 88 ---
Non-Cooperative Collusion
Nash equilibrium in the stage game. As many economists believe that oligopolies do col-
lude so as to increase profit, a number of ways of avoiding the paradox have been applied
to oligopolistic competition. Here we discuss three suggested ways oligopolies might
succeed in colluding without assuming infinite interaction between firms.
Multiple Nash equilibria
In the one-off models we examined in section 4.1 there was shown to be a unique Nash
equilibrium. This, however, need not always be the case. For example, with more com-
plex demand and/or cost functions it is quite possible for there to be multiple Nash
equilibria in these one-off games. Fig. 4.8 illustrates how non-linear reaction functions
can generate multiple Nash equilibria when two firms Cournot compete. In this dia-
gram there are three Nash equilibria at points A, B, and C. The existence of multiple
Nash equilibria means that the outcome in the final period of play is no longer uniquely
determined. This in turn means there is no unique subgame perfect equilibrium for the
whole game. In particular, if the multiple Nash equilibria in the one-off game are asso-
ciated with different levels of profit for the competing firms, a collusive outcome can be
self-supporting in the early periods of the game.
Fig. 4.8 Multiple Cournot Equilibria
Non-cooperative collusion is now possible because multiple Nash equilibria allow
firms to be effectively punished if they deviate from the collusive outcome. If the pun-
ishment is sufficiently severe, then it will be in firms self-interest to maintain the collu-
sive outcome. As the final period is approached the non-cooperative cartel will break
down. This is demonstrated by the fact that the outcome in the final period must be a
Nash equilibrium. Benoit and Krishna (1987) demonstrate that by combining multiple
Nash equilibria in the stage game with a suitable carrot-and-stick punishment strategy
the set of possible non-cooperative collusive outcomes is almost identical to that
derived under infinite repetition, provided the game is repeated a sufficiently large
number of times.
77

--- Sayfa 89 ---
Ogliopoly
Uncertainty about the future
As discussed in Chapter 3 an alternative way of avoiding the paradox of backward
induction is to introduce uncertainty about when the game might end. Without a
known last period of interaction between competing firms the process of backward
induction cannot be initiated. In this situation firms can credibly threaten future pun-
ishment if other firms deviate from the collusive outcome. Given that this future pun-
ishment may not be forthcoming, as interaction may have ceased before this is possible,
this threat is not as severe as when made in an infinitely repeated game. However, sim-
ilar results derived under infinite repetition can be reproduced when there is uncer-
tainty about when finite interaction will end. Once again the non-cooperative collusive
outcome can be sustained given that the firms do not overly discount future returns.
Uncertainty about competitors
A final way of avoiding the paradox of backward induction is by introducing incom-
plete information. In the context of oligopoly this involves competition between firms
who are unsure about some aspect of their rivals' pay-off function. This may either be
because firms are unsure about the parameters of their competitors' profit function, or
the objectives of other firms. For example, firms maybe uncertain about the demand or
costs facing their competitors, which determine their rivals' profit function.
Alternatively, it may not be clear whether other firms are interested in maximizing pro-
fits or have some other objective such as maximizing total revenue. Due to mutual
interdependence firms will try and estimate the pay-off function of their competitors.
This is necessary so that firms can attempt to predict the behaviour of other firms.
Firms will then attempt to maximize their pay-offs based on these estimates. One
important way firms seek to learn what their competitors are like, or the constraints
they face, is by observing their current and past behaviour. Other firms realizing this
may then seek to manipulate their own behaviour in order to influence the expectations
of other firms. This, in turn, will be taken into account when firms interpret the actions
of their rivals. Clearly solving such models can be quite complicated. As discussed in
Chapter 3, a relevant equilibrium concept to use in models of incomplete information
is that of Bayesian subgame perfect Nash equilibrium. With this type of equilibrium no
incredible threats or promises are made or believed, and firms update their expecta-
tions rationally according to Bayes' Theorem. Typically the equilibrium need not
involve firms playing the Nash equilibrium for the stage game in each and every period
of the game. To illustrate the intuition behind this result consider a number of
Bertrand-competing firms with incomplete information about each other's marginal
costs of production.
As shown in section 4.1 Bertrand-competing firms can be made better off if they all
set higher prices. Furthermore, as prices in the one-off game are strategic compliments,
if a firm believes other firms are going to raise their price, it will also increase its price.
Prices are, in turn, positively related to marginal costs of production. With uncertainty
78

--- Sayfa 90 ---
Conclusions
about other firms' marginal costs of production, each firm has an incentive to persuade
its competitors that its marginal costs are high. In this way firms have an incentive to
increase the price they set now so as to try and develop a reputation for having high
marginal costs, and for setting high prices. In equilibrium it is possible for all firms to
set high prices and a non-cooperative collusive outcome to be maintained in the initial
periods of the repeated game.
The above argument illustrates how uncertainty can enhance the probability of non-
cooperative collusion being sustained. This, however, need not always be the case. For
example, most of the proposed ways in which collusion outcomes have been demon-
strated to be self-supporting have relied upon firms being punished if and when they
deviate from the collusive outcome. This mechanism presupposes that such deviation
can be detected. If deviation from the collusive outcome can go undetected, then a firm
may be able to cheat on a tacit agreement without fear of being punished. In this situ-
ation firms will have to find other ways in which to support the collusive outcome. This
may involve the sharing of information on prices charged and quantities produced, or
the development of punishment strategies conditional upon the observed market vari-
ables. Green and Porter (1984) and Porter (1983), for example, develop models where
Cournot-competing oligopolies do not observe each other's output levels but only the
derived market price. In these models the firms adopt a trigger price strategy, where each
firm produces the collusive output level as long as the market price remains above the
trigger price. If the market price falls below the trigger price, then a period of punish-
ment where the Cournot-Nash equilibrium quantities are produced ensues. In this way
collusion can be maintained as long as demand shocks do not cause the market price to
fall below the trigger price. The typical equilibrium in models such as these involves
alternating periods of collusive behaviour followed by price wars when demand for the
good is sufficiently low.
4.3 Conclusions
This chapter has illustrated how game theory can be used to model the strategic inter-
action faced by oligopolistic firms. Initially one-off games were used to present the
three classic models of Cournot, Bertrand, and Stackelberg competition. Each was
shown to have a different underlying structure that greatly influences the way firms are
predicted to behave. None the less each of the Nash equilibria associated with these
models are Pareto inefficient. With different output combinations all firms could be
made better off. This raises the question of whether firms are able to co-ordinate upon
a more profitable outcome. If firms face a period of one-off competition, this seems
unlikely. If, however, firms face continual interaction, non-cooperative collusion
would seem possible. This derives from the possibility of firms being credibly threat-
ened with future punishment if they deviate from the collusive outcome. In this way
79

--- Sayfa 91 ---
Ogliopoly
tacit collusion can be self-enforcing. The only exception to this is when the paradox of
backward induction is applicable. However, as demonstrated in the text, this result
depends on the extreme assumptions of a known end to competition, and common
knowledge about all competing firms. In reality neither of these assumptions is likely to
be satisfied.
Demonstrating the possibility of non-cooperative collusion is undoubtedly a major
achievement of game-theoretical analysis. In one sense, however, such analysis is too
successful, in that often there are a large number of feasible outcomes upon which firms
may co-ordinate. In the text we argued that with such multiple equilibria it seems
reasonable to assume that firms will co-ordinate on a focal point. This raises the ques-
tion of what features of the underlying competition make one equilibrium more salient
than another. Without greater attention being given to these factors we will be unable
to confidently predict the outcome of oligopolistic competition in any specific
market. These considerations are the subject of ongoing research, and some of the gen-
eral issues involved are discussed in Chapter 12.
80
4.4 Solutions to Exercises
Exercise 4.1
The profit function for the fth firm is equal to:
where the variable Q_; refers to aggregate output of all firms excluding the f th.
Differentiating with respect to <j, and setting this equal to zero gives us the first order condi-
tion for a maximum.
As all firms are identical, in Nash equilibrium they will all produce the same level of output, and
so Q-i = (n — 1) <jj. Substituting this into the above equation gives us:
This corresponds to the Nash equilibrium output level of each firm in the industry. With n = 2
we obtain the previous result that qi= (a - c)/3. As n —> °° so industry output approaches the per-
fectly competitive outcome with price equal to marginal cost, and Q = a - c.

--- Sayfa 92 ---
Solutions to Exercises
Exercise 4.2
There are two possible ways in which the equation for the contract curve can be found. The first
method is to select a fixed level of profit for one of the firms and then maximize profit for the
other firm. The second method is to maximize the weighted sum of profits of the two firms. Here
we demonstrate the second method.
Define the weighted sum of the two firms profits as W so that
The first-order condition for a maximum is that the two partial derivatives 3 W/dq\ and 3 W/d(fe
equal zero. From these two requirements the following quadratic equation can be obtained
This equation has two solutions where joint supply, Q = q1 + q2, equals (a-c) or (a-c)|2. The
second solution corresponds to the output a monopolist would supply to the market, and so this
is the solution that maximizes the sum of weighted profits. The equation for the contract curve
is therefore written as
As stated in the text a Pareto-efficient outcome results when the two firms agree to divide the
monopoly output level between them.
Exercise 4.3
To find the subgame perfect Nash equilibrium of this inherently dynamic game we use the prin-
ciple of backward induction. We first find the reaction function of a typical follower.
Throughout the following derivation we make use of the fact that in Nash equilibrium all lead-
ers will have the same level of supply, as they are assumed to be identical. Similarly all followers
will supply the same quantity. The profit function for any one follower is given as:
where the variable Q_t refers to the aggregate output of all followers excluding the fc'th firm.
Differentiating this with respect to qk and setting this equal to zero, gives us the first order con-
dition for maximizing profits.
As in Nash equilibrium all followers will have the same supply, we can rewrite this as:
81

--- Sayfa 93 ---
Ogliopoly
This is the Nash equilibrium supply for any leader. Substituting this into the follower's reaction
function gives us their equilibrium level of supply.
In Cournot duopoly we have either two 'leaders' and no 'followers', or no 'leaders' and two 'fol-
lowers'. In each case we get the result that both firms supply (a- c)/3. For Stackelberg duopoly
we get that the leader supplies (a-c)/2 and the follower supplies (a—c)/4. With n Cournot com-
petitors, either all 'leaders' or all 'followers', each firm supplies (a - c)l(n +1). These findings
confirm previous results.
Exercise 4.4
(la) Given the proposed punishment strategy, if a firm continually produces the collusive out-
put level then its present value profits is:
In determining the optimal strategy for the leaders, we need to substitute this reaction func-
tion into their profit function. Again taking a representative leader; and letting the variable Q_;
represent the aggregate output of all leaders excluding this firm we have:
Differentiating with respect to this firm's output, and setting this equal to zero yields the first-
order condition for a maximum
Once more in Nash equilibrium all leaders' supply will be equal to each other, and so:
Alternatively if the firm deviates from the collusive outcome in the first period then it will
rationally deviate in every alternate period, and so its present-value profit is, at most:
82

--- Sayfa 94 ---
Solutions to Exercises
Comparing this condition with that derived in the text when the punishment period is infi-
nite, we can note that the set of discount values for which collusion on the monopoly out-
come is possible is smaller. This is because the threatened punishment is less severe, and so
firms are less likely to be deterred from deviating from the cartel.
(Ib) In order for the collusive outcome to be maintained with this punishment strategy two
conditions will need to be simultaneously satisfied. The first condition is that neither firm
has an incentive to deviate from the collusive output level, given that the proposed future
punishment is credible. The second condition is that neither firm has the incentive to devi-
ate from producing the punishment level of output qp, when required, given that the first
condition is satisfied.
The first necessary condition is derived as follows. If a firm maintains the collusive out-
come then present-value profits are:
If a firm deviates from the collusive output, then present value profits are at most:
where IlDev.collusion and Hpunjshed are the period profits associated with deviating from the
collusive outcome and being punished for so deviating respectively.
The firms will continue to produce the collusive outcome if the proposed punishment is
credible and
83
The firms will maintain the collusive outcome if
Similarly the second necessary condition is derived as follows. If a firm produces qp fol-
lowing deviation by the other firm then, if the first condition is satisfied, its present-value
profits equal:

--- Sayfa 95 ---
Ogliopoly
where Ilpunishing is the expected level of profit when punishing the other firm. Alternatively,
if it deviates from the proposed punishment level of output then present-value profits will
be at most:
where IlDev.punishing is the expected profit level associated with deviating from the pro-
posed level of punishment output. A firm will therefore maintain the proposed punish-
ment strategy if the first condition is satisfied and
(2) Under the trigger strategy where deviation from the collusive outcome causes firms per-
manently to switch to the Cournot-Nash equilibrium the collusive outcome is self-sup-
porting if
With the punishment strategy given in (1 a) the condition becomes
Finally, the results derived assuming the carrot-and-stick punishment strategy are shown
in Table 4.1, where the binding constraint is underlined.
The results in the Table 4.1 indicate that as the punishment level of output qp increases
the minimum rate of discount needed to maintain the collusive outcome initially falls and
then rises. This is confirmed in Fig. 4.9 where the two conditions over 6 are plotted for
values of qp between 20 (the Cournot-Nash equilibrium output level) and 60 (the mini-
max output level). From these results the most effective punishment strategy in maintain-
Table 4.1
84
qP = 25
qp = 30
qP = 35
5S 0.391
SS 0.250
5 > 0.191
8 > 0.098
8 > 0.250
82:0.431

--- Sayfa 96 ---
Further Reading
Further Reading
Friedman, J. (1977), Oligopoly and the Theory of Games, Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Gravelle, H., and R. Rees (1992), Microeconomics, London: Longman.
Jacquemin, A., and M. E. Slade (1989), 'Cartels, Collusion, and Horizontal Merger', in R.
Schmalensee and R. D. Willig (eds.), Handbook of Industrial Organization, i, Elsevier Science
Publishers.
Kreps,D. (1990), A Course in Microeconomic Theory, New York: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Lyons, B., and Y. Varoufakis (1989), 'Game Theory, Oligopoly and Bargaining', in J. D. Hey (ed.)>
Current Issues in Microeconomics, London: Macmillan.
Martin, S. (1992), Advanced Industrial Economics, Oxford: Blackwell.
Phlips, L. (1995), Competition Policy: A Game Theoretic Perspective, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Rees, R. (1993), 'Tacit Collusion,' Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 9: 27-40; repr. in T.
Jenkinson (1996), Readings in Microeconomics, New York: Oxford University Press.
Shapiro, C. (1989), 'Theories of Oligopoly Behavior', in R. Schmalensee and R. D. Willig (eds.),
Handbook of Industrial Organization, i, Elsevier Science Publishers.
Tirole, J.(1988), The Theory of Industrial Organisation, Cambridge Mass.: MIT Press.
Vickers, J. (1985), 'Strategic Competition among the Few—Some Recent Developments in the
Economics of Industry", Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 1: 39-62, repr. in T. Jenkinson
(1996), Readings in Microeconomics, New York: Oxford University Press.
85
Fig. 4.9
ing collusion in this model is the carrot-and-stick punishment strategy when qp is set equal
to 30. With this punishment strategy collusion on the monopoly outcome can be sustained
provided 8^ 0.25.

--- Sayfa 97 ---
5
Entry Deterrence
I
N this chapter we continue to examine how game theory can be used to analyse the
strategic interaction between firms. In the previous chapter this interaction
occurred between firms currently competing against each other. In this chapter the
interaction is between a firm already active in a specific market and a potential entrant
or entrants into that market. In particular, we examine situations where a monopolist
has the incentive to try and prevent other firms from entering its market and compet-
ing against it. If successful, the firm maintains its monopoly position. This issue is
known as entry deterrence. Following standard practice the initial monopolist is called
the incurhbent and the potential competitor is called the entrant (even though it may
subsequently decide not to enter the market). It is not necessary that the entrant pro-
duce an identical product as the incumbent, only that they are regarded as close substi-
tutes. As a result of this assumption entry will have an adverse affect on the monopolist's
profits.
In section 5.1 we critically analyse an early attempt to explain how a monopolist
might attempt to deter future entry by increasing its current output. In doing this the
monopolist hopes to convince the potential entrant that its level of sales will not be
large enough to earn a positive rate of return. If the entrant believes this to be the case,
it will stay out of the market. This argument is known as the Limit Price Theory. It is
argued in this chapter, however, that this theory implies irrational behaviour by both
the incumbent monopolist and the entrant. In section 5.2 we consider more recent
game theory explanations of how an incumbent firm may credibly deter entry. Here
we examine the role of predatory pricing, precommitment, and incomplete informa-
tion.
5.1 Theory of Limit Pricing
In the basic textbook analysis of monopoly the possibility of future competition is
ignored and the focus is on how a monopoly maximizes current profits. This is the
static theory of monopoly. It shows that the monopoly, in order to maximize current
profits, produces where the marginal cost curve cuts the marginal revenue curve from
86

--- Sayfa 98 ---
Theory of Limit Pricing
below. The firm then sets the highest price possible so as to just sell this level of output.
This standard analysis is shown in Fig, 5.1.
In this diagram monopoly profits are maximized when marginal cost (MQ equals
marginal revenue (MR). The firm produces Qo of the output per period of time with
price set equal to PQ- Here the firm earns a return greater than is necessary to maintain
it in this market, and so earns supernormal profits. This level of supernormal profit is
equal to the shaded area in Fig. 5.1.
Fig. 5.1 The Static Theory of Monopoly
This analysis implicitly assumes that there are significant barriers to entry which pre-
vent other firms from entering the market. These barriers, for example, might be due to
government legislation, in which case we have a legal monopoly, or due to large
economies of scale, where we then have a natural monopoly. With these barriers to
entry the monopolist's position is assured and in this situation it can maximize current
profits in every time-period. As other firms are unable to enter the industry the incum-
bent need not concern itself with the possibility of future competition. Bain (1956)
noted that in the absence of these barriers to entry the presence of supernormal profits
will attract other firms into the industry. This increased level of competition is likely to
have an adverse effect on the incumbent firm's profits. If the monopoly is concerned
with both current and future levels of profits, there is an incentive for it to try and deter
entry provided such action Is not too costly. Bain suggested that a monopoly could
achieve this objective by increasing its output to an appropriate level and charging a
correspondingly lower price. The appropriate level of output and price is determined so
that the entrant believes its sales will be just insufficient to earn a normal rate of profit.
Given this belief a rational entrant will not enter the market, and hence the monopo-
list's entry deterrence strategy is successful.
Bain's theory, which was later developed by Modigtiani (1958) and Sylos-Labini
(1962), starts with the critical assumption that potential entrants into a market believe
that the incumbent firm will continue to produce the same level of output in the future.
87

--- Sayfa 99 ---
Entry Deterrence
This is believed true irrespective of whether entry takes place or not. (This is similar to
the behavioural assumption made by Cournot in his model of duopoly. There each firm
believes the other firm will maintain its current level of output.) This assumption is also
assumed to be common knowledge, i.e. the incumbent knows the entrant believes this,
and the entrant knows that the incumbent knows this, and so on. This assumption gives
rise to the concept of the residual demand curve. The residual demand curve shows how
much demand is 'left-over' for the entrant once the incumbent has sold its level of out-
put. This is illustrated in Fig. 5.2.
Fig. 5.2 Residual Demand Curves and Limit Pricing
In this diagram, if the monopoly is concerned with maximizing current profits, then,
as we have seen, it produces output Qo. With the incumbent producing this level of out-
put the residual demand curve faced by the entrant is given by the curve Po-Ro- This is
derived by shifting what remains of the incumbent's demand curve (all points to the
right of Qo) back to the vertical axis. If the entrant has the same cost curves as the
incumbent, then the entrant can earn positive profits. This is because part of its resid-
ual demand curve lies above the average cost curve. With the prospect of earning super-
normal profits the entrant will enter the market, and adversely affect the incumbent's
future level of profits.
In order to avoid this prospect of reduced future profits the incumbent firm may set
a different initial price and output combination that attempts to deter entry. Entry will
be deterred if the entrant believes it will be unable to earn at least normal profits. This
will arise when the residual demand curve is below the average cost curve at all levels of
output. When the residual demand curve is tangent to the average cost curve the
entrant is indifferent between entering and staying out of the market. We may assume
that in this situation entry is just deterred. In Fig. 5.2 the residual demand curve tangent
to the average cost curve is shown as PIR\. In order for the entrant to perceive this as its
88

--- Sayfa 100 ---
Theory of Limit Pricing
EXERCISE 5.1
Find the output and price combination for the following incumbent monopolist that just
deters entry, assuming the entrant believes that the monopolist will maintain its level of
output in subsequent periods. The market demand curve is given by the equation:
where P is the market price and Q is total market output. Both the incumbent and the
entrant are assumed to have the following identical total cost function
where i= I, E corresponds to the incumbent and the entrant respectively. TCiare total costs
for firm /and q, is the level of output produced by firm i. Contrast this limit price strategy
with the output and price combination when the incumbent firm maximizes current-period
profits.
residual demand curve, and hence is just persuaded to stay out of the market, the
incumbent needs to set a price of P1 and sell the amount Q1. This is the highest price at
which entry is deterred and is called the limit price. The strategy of charging the limit
price is called the limit price strategy. Under this strategy the monopolist sacrifices some
of its current profits in an attempt to ensure higher profits in the future. It is argued that
a rational monopolist will pursue this limit price strategy if the present value of profits
in doing so exceeds the present value of maximizing current profits.
Bain's theory of limit pricing highlights that a monopoly facing the prospect of
future competition, which adversely affect its future profits, may pursue strategic
behaviour which is at variance with the aim of maximizing current profits. This model
suggests that the traditional textbook analysis of monopoly is likely to give misleading
predictions about monopoly behaviour, and the welfare implications of monopoly. For
example, if we ignore the possibility of limit pricing, we are likely to overestimate the
static, or dead-weight, welfare loss associated with monopoly. Clearly the Limit Price
Theory has important policy implications concerning the regulation of monopolies.
However, from a game theory point of view the theory of limit pricing seems far from
satisfactory. This is because it seems to rely on both the incumbent firm and the poten-
tial entrant acting irrationally. The main criticism of Bain's theory relates to the
entrant's belief that the incumbent will continue to produce the same level of output.
This belief is maintained irrespective of whether the entrant intends to enter the mar-
ket or not. There are situations where this assumption might be valid. For example, if
the monopoly must publicly commit itself to a certain level of output, then the entrant's
belief may be justified. None the less this assumption does not seem very realistic in
many real-world situations. The normal expectation is that if the entrant enters the
89

--- Sayfa 101 ---
Entry Deterrence
market it will force the monopolist to change its output-price combination. This is
because the incumbent will realize it is now competing as a duopolist.
The incumbent may initially threaten to produce the same level of output, hoping to
deter entry, but from the perspective of game theory this threat is not credible. Given
that entry occurs, it is not in the incumbent's best interest to carry out this threat. From
this perspective the limit price strategy, derived in Bain's model, is not a subgame per-
fect Nash equilibrium. For these reasons it seems necessary to reject Bain's theory of
limit pricing as it is based on unreasonable behaviour by firms. It is irrational for the
incumbent to issue such an incredible threat, and even more irrational for the entrant
to believe it and act upon it.
One way of further understanding this criticism of Bain's model is to draw the exten-
sive form for this model. It is assumed there are only two periods, and that the incum-
bent firm is free to change its level of output between them. This is done in Exercise 5.2.
EXERCISE 5.2
Draw the two-period extensive form game of entry deterrence under the following
assumptions:
(1) At the beginning of the first period the incumbent chooses its output level which the
(potential) entrant observes.
(2) At the end of the first period the entrant decides whether or not to enter the market,
which is observed by the incumbent.
(3) In the second period we have the following situation: If the entrant has not entered the
market, then the incumbent sets its output level so as to maximize monopoly profits. If
the entrant has entered the market, we have the Cournot model of duopoly, i.e. both
the incumbent and entrant choose their output levels simultaneously.
From the extensive form game drawn in answer to Exercise 5.2, it can be observed
that beginning from the second period of play to the end of the game we have a series of
separate subgames. To avoid the proposed equilibrium to the whole game involving
incredible threats, we require that the solution must be a Nash equilibrium in all of
these subgames. This is consistent with the equilibrium being subgame perfect. Bain's
theory of limit pricing violates this requirement and so is not a subgame perfect Nash
equilibrium.
To find the subgame perfect Nash equilibrium for the game given in Exercise 5.2 we
use the principle of backward induction. This states that we must predict the outcome
of the second period before we solve for the first period. If the entrant enters the market
90

--- Sayfa 102 ---
Credible Entry Deterrence
at the end of the first period, then the second period involves both firms Cournot com-
peting. In this situation each firm sets the Nash equilibrium output associated with this
type of competition, as explained in Chapter 4. If the entrant has not entered the mar-
ket, then the incumbent is free to maximize current profits as predicted by the tradi-
tional theory of monopoly. Based on these predictions for the second period, firms will
derive their optimal first-period actions. For the entrant it will only enter the market if
it can make positive profits under Cournot competition. If not, it will stay out of the
market. Significantly this entry decision is made irrespective of what the incumbent
does in the first period of the game. In particular, the entrant ignores any limit price
strategy pursued by the incumbent firm. The incumbent in turn realizes that nothing it
does in the first period affects the entrant's entry decision. It is rational, therefore, for
the incumbent to maximize current period profits in the first period.
In conclusion, there are only two subgame perfect equilibria for this game. The first
equilibrium is where the incumbent firm remains a monopolist in both periods and
maximizes current profits in each period. In this case the incumbent firm enjoys a nat-
ural monopoly. The second equilibrium is where the incumbent monopolist maxi-
mizes current profits in the first period, but faces duopolistic competition in the second
period. Which of these equlibria occurs depends on the underlying parameters of the
game. In neither equilibrium is there a role for entry deterrence or limit pricing.
The above argument has demonstrated that for the game described in Exercise 5.2,
entry deterrence based on limit pricing implies irrational behaviour by both the
incumbent and the entrant. It should be realized, however, that this model makes a
number of simplifying assumptions. In particular, it assumes that there is limited inter-
action between the incumbent and the entrant, that there is no possibility of precom-
mitment by the incumbent, and finally there is complete information. Recent game
theory models have relaxed each of these assumptions to see if entry deterrence can be
made credible. These extensions to the basic model are discussed in the next section.
5.2 Credible Entry Deterrence
5.2.1 Predatory pricing
The previous section analysed the situation where an incumbent firm modifies its
current behaviour so as to deter future entry into its market. An alternative argument
that has been put forward is that an incumbent can deter entry by engaging in a price
war if and when any firm actually enters the market. Here the incumbent does not set
a limit price but instead engages in predatory pricing when entry occurs. Limit pric-
ing is where an incumbent sets a low price before entry occurs. Predatory pricing, in
contrast, is where the incumbent sets a low price after entry has occurred. Typically,
predatory pricing makes both the entrant and the incumbent worse off compared to
91

--- Sayfa 103 ---
Entry Deterrence
accommodating entry. If this is true, the incumbent would always accommodate entry
in a one-off game, and so the entrant is sure to enter if it can make positive profits. In
this context, predatory pricing is irrational and entry is not deterred. However,
Milgrom and Roberts (1982b) have shown that if the incumbent faces an infinite num-
ber of possible entrants, in different markets, then predatory pricing can be rational
behaviour, and in equilibrium it deters entry. Consider the following so-called chain-
store game.
A monopoly incumbent operates in an infinite number of separate but identical
markets, and faces a potential entrant in each one. The entrants make their decision to
enter each market sequentially. If entry occurs on any one market, then the incumbent
has two options. It can either engage in predatory pricing and both firms make a loss, or
it can accommodate entry and both firms earn positive profits, though this is less than
the incumbent would have earned if it had remained the sole supplier. If an entrant does
not enter, it is assumed to make zero profits, and the incumbent earns monopoly prof-
its. These pay-offs are shown in Fig. 5.3 where the first pay-off refers to the incumbent
(I) and the second pay-off to the entrant (E).
It is assumed that M> A\ > 0 > F\ and AE > 0 > FE. With these assumptions the incum-
bent prefers its monopoly position to accommodating entry, which it prefers to fight-
ing entry. An entrant will only enter a market if it expects to be accommodated. All
previous outcomes are assumed to be observed by all players in the game.
Consider the first market and the first entrant. If the incumbent accommodates
entry here, the other potential entrants will observe this and so rationally anticipate
accommodation if they enter their respective markets. This is because in infinite
supergames the nature of the game does not change between periods. This implies that
if a decision is optimal in one period it must be optimal in all periods. With the expec-
tation of accommodation, entry will occur in every market. If it was rational for the
incumbent to accommodate the first entrant, it will accommodate all others. The
incumbent's expected present value of profits from accommodating the first entrant is
therefore
92
Fig. 5.3 Pay-offs for the Chain-Store Game

--- Sayfa 104 ---
Credible Entry Deterrence
where 5 is the appropriate discount factor.
On the other hand if the incumbent fights the first entrant, then successive entrants
will expect the same behaviour, and so they will stay out of their respective markets. In
this way the incumbent maintains its monopoly position in all succeeding markets. The
expected present value of profits from fighting the first entrant is therefore
From these pay-offs the incumbent will fight the first entrant if
Rearranging this condition the incumbent will fight entry if 8 > (Ai - Fi)/(M- F\). As
M> AI this condition is satisfied provided 8 is sufficiently close to one, i.e. the incum-
bent does not discount the future too much. When this condition is met, entrants know
that the incumbent firm will fight the first entrant, and so entry into every market is
deterred. This result illustrates that, with the prospect of repeated entry, it maybe cred-
ible for an incumbent to threaten predatory pricing, and in this way successfully deter
entry. It should be noted that in this model the incumbent is free to maximize its cur-
rent profits in every period. This is because entry is deterred not by what the incumbent
does in pre-entry periods, but instead, because entrants know that the incumbent
always has the incentive to fight such entry. This entry-deterrent result only holds true,
however, if the number of markets where entry is possible is infinite. If the number of
such markets is finite, then fighting entry is not credible and entry occurs in every mar-
ket. This result is known as the chain-store paradox, and is an application of the para-
dox of backward induction. To understand this result consider the following argument.
Given the pay-offs in Fig. 5.3, the incumbent will definitely accommodate entry in
the last market. This is because there are no future gains from doing otherwise, and so
the firm maximizes current profits. The entrant into this market predicts this outcome,
and so entry is followed by accommodation. In the penultimate market we get the same
result. As the outcome of the final period has already been determined, there are again
no future benefits of fighting entry, and so the incumbent will again accommodate.
Once more the entrant knows this and so enters this market. This argument can be
applied to all preceding markets until we reach the beginning of the game. The only
subgame perfect equilibrium for this finite game is that entry occurs in every market
and the incumbent always accommodates. Once more there is no possibility of entry
deterrence.
93

--- Sayfa 105 ---
Entry Deterrence
5.2.2 Precommitment
The failure of the Limit Price Theory to explain entry deterrence, and the chain-store
paradox, occur because the incumbent firm is unable to credibly precommit its future
behaviour. Without such precommitment entry deterrence is not possible in these
finite and complete-information models. For entry to be deterred the incumbent needs
to find some way of credibly committing itself to a strategy which induces the entrant
to perceive that if it enters the market, it will make a loss. The only way the incumbent
can do this is by undertaking some action in the current period that affects the nature
of competition in subsequent periods. In order for the current action to have the
desired entry-deterrent effect it must, to some extent, be irreversible. If the incumbent's
strategic action is easily reversible, then it will have no credible effect on the perceived
nature of future competition, and so will not influence the entrant's decision of
whether or not to enter the market. This highlights the importance of sunk costs, i.e.
costs that cannot be recovered once they have been incurred. The role of sunk costs in
determining the nature of competition within markets has been emphasized in the lit-
erature on contestable markets, as developed by Baumol, Panzar, and Willig (1982).
Initially we examine a model developed by Dixit (1981). In this model, investment in
capital in the current period affects that firm's future marginal costs. Due to this
intertemporal link an incumbent can credibly deter entry into its market. We then dis-
cuss other ways in which an incumbent may successfully deter entry via precommit-
ment.
Investment in capital
Dixit (1981) makes use of a two-period model. In the first period the incumbent is the
sole supplier, whilst in the second period an entrant enters the market if it thinks it will
earn positive profits by doing so. If entry does occur, then the two firms are assumed to
Cournot compete. The possibility of precommitment by the incumbent is introduced
by allowing it to invest in capital in the first period, which lowers its marginal costs in
the second period. This investment can be in either physical or human capital, but it is
assumed to be irreversible, and so in the second period such expenditure is regarded as
a sunk cost. This investment is observed by the potential entrant. Via this intertempo-
ral link the incumbent is able to affect the nature of competition in the second period,
and so influence the entrant's entry decision. This can be shown using the reaction
functions of the two firms as shown in Fig. 5.4.
In Fig. 5.4 the Nash equilibrium in the second period, if the entrant enters the mar-
ket and the incumbent undertakes no strategic investment in the first period, is at point
A. This is where the two initial reaction functions cross. As indicated by the isoprofit
line through point A the entrant will earn a positive rate of return with this outcome,
and so enters the market. However, the incumbent firm can alter this decision through
strategic investment in capital in the first period. As increased investment reduces the
94

--- Sayfa 106 ---
Credible Entry Deterrence
Fig. 5.4 Entry Deterrence under Cournot Competition
incumbent's future marginal costs, this investment in capital shifts the incumbent's
reaction function to the right. With lower marginal costs the incumbent optimally pro-
duces more of its own product for each level of production by the entrant. This changes
the nature of competition in the second period, and adversely affects the entrant's per-
ceived rate of profit. With the appropriate level of investment the incumbent can reduce
the entrant's expected rate of profit on entry to zero. This is achieved when the incum-
bent's reaction function cuts the entrant's reaction function at point B, which lies on the
isoprofit line indicating zero profits for the entrant. The entrant's reaction function
does not continue beyond point B as this would imply negative profits, which are
avoided by staying out of the market. By optimally shifting its own reaction function to
the right through increased investment in capital the incumbent credibly deters entry.
Entry is deterred in this model because the entrant now perceives that if it enters the
market the incumbent, based on its new reaction function, will act more aggressively
and produce a higher level of output. With this expectation, the entrant perceives that
it will make a loss on entry and so stays out of the market.
EXERCISE 5.3
Draw a diagram illustrating an incumbent's and an entrant's reaction functions when, if
entry occurs, the two firms produce differentiated products and compete over price accord-
ing to Bertrand competition. Explain and illustrate how, with this type of competition,
strategic investment in capital by the incumbent can credibly deter entry.
95

--- Sayfa 107 ---
Entry Deterrence
Other forms of precommitment
So far we have examined how strategic investment in capital may commit an incumbent
firm to future behaviour that deters entry. Here we list some other ways that have been
suggested for how an incumbent might achieve the same result.
Research and development. As with investment in capital, increased expenditure on
research and development can reduce a firm's future marginal costs. This can, if per-
ceived to be successful, credibly alter the competitive outcome in subsequent periods.
Again this intertemporal link may commit an incumbent firm to future action that
deters entry into its market.
Advertising. Advertising can be a form of precommitment if its effects are durable. If
its effects are durable, then current advertising expenditure will affect future competi-
tion between firms. For example, entrants may have to match increased advertising by
the incumbent in order to compete effectively. This raises the entrants' costs and so may
deter entry.
Switching costs. Switching costs are costs consumers incur when switching between
different firms' products. This may, for example, be due to retraining costs or simply a
dislike of change itself. In this case customers are likely to remain loyal to existing sup-
pliers. Increasing current sales increases a firm's customer base and may put a future
entrant at a competitive disadvantage, thus deterring entry. Long-term contracts with
customers and network economies have a similar effect. Network economies arise
when consumers derive greater benefits from a product, the greater the number of
other people consuming the product. An obvious example is a telephone or computer
network.
Learning by doing. This occurs when a firm's costs fall as the firm gains greater experi-
ence in producing its product. This cost benefit will accrue more quickly the greater the
current rate of production. Once more an incumbent has the incentive to increase cur-
rent production, so that future costs are lower. In this way the incumbent can ensure a
competitive advantage in the future, which may once more deter entry.
5.2.3 Incomplete Information
A final way in which entry deterrence might be credible, even if the game is only finitely
repeated, is if there is incomplete information about the type of incumbent the entrant
is facing. For example, the entrant might not know the marginal costs of the incum-
bent, or whether the incumbent's managers obtain positive satisfaction from aggres-
sively fighting entrants. In both these examples the entrant does not know for certain,
at the beginning of the game, what pay-offs the incumbent will receive at the end of the
game. To illustrate how incomplete information can lead to credible entry deterrence,
we discuss two specific models. The first model was developed by Milgrom and Roberts
(1982 a), and shows how limit pricing can be seen as rational behaviour if there is uncer-
96

--- Sayfa 108 ---
Credible Entry Deterrence
tainty about an incumbent's costs. The second model developed by Kreps and Wilson
(1982a), examines how the threat of predatory pricing can deter entry when there is
uncertainty about the incumbent's incentives to engage in such aggressive behaviour.
Limit pricing
The model analysed here is based on a simplified version of the Milgrom and Roberts
model, and is similar to the one presented by Fudenberg and Tirole (1986). Assume that
there is only one incumbent and one potential entrant in an industry. The entrant
observes the pricing policy of the incumbent in the first period, and then decides
whether or not to enter the industry and compete against it in the second and final
period of the game. The incumbent has one of two types of cost functions determined
by nature. It has either low marginal costs equal to CL with probability Probi, or high
marginal costs equal to CH with probability Prob^. It is assumed that the entrant will
only enter the market if it believes that the incumbent has high costs, or that the proba-
bility that it has high costs is sufficiently large. In this situation the incumbent has the
incentive to signal that it is a low-cost firm and try to deter entry. However, the entrant
will only believe that the incumbent has low costs if the signal is credible. For example,
the entrant will not believe the incumbent if it merely announces that it has low costs.
In order for the signal to be credible it must be costly. Milgrom and Roberts show that
the limit price strategy can be rational, as it acts as a credible signal that a firm does
indeed have low costs. It is credible because it is not in the interests of a high-cost firm
to imitate it. To analyse this possibility in more detail, we will examine the equilibrium
to this game, first under the assumption of complete information, and then introduce
uncertainty about the incumbent's costs.
With complete information it is common knowledge what type of cost the incum-
bent has. If the incumbent has low marginal costs, then the entrant will definitely stay
out of the market in the second period, and so the incumbent can set the monopoly
price in both periods. This is equal to (PL
MI CL) and the present value of profits for the
incumbent is equal to H(P^\ CL) + 5 n(PL
Ml CL), where 5 is the discount factor. If the
incumbent has high marginal costs the entrant will definitely enter the market in the
second period. Here the incumbent sets the monopoly price in the first period, because
with complete information it cannot hope to deter entry via limit pricing, and the Nash
equilibrium duopoly price in the second period. These price levels are (P™\ CH) and
(Pif I CH) respectively, and give the incumbent present-value profits equal to
nCPn1! CH) + 6 U(PH\ CH). With complete information the equilibrium to this entry
game is very simple. By assumption the entrant enters when the incumbent has high
marginal costs, with a probability of Probn, and stays out if the incumbent has low mar-
ginal costs, with a probability of Probi.
We now consider the effect of incomplete information on the equilibrium of this
game. Assume now that only the incumbent knows for certain what type of cost func-
tion it has. In this situation the entrant will try and learn what type of costs the incum-
bent has from its behaviour in the first period. In signalling games such as this the
97

--- Sayfa 109 ---
Entry Deterrence
Bayesian equilibrium can be one of two general types. It can either be a pooling equilib-
rium or a separating equilibrium. In a pooling equilibrium the players' types are not
revealed by their actions because they do the same thing. In a separating equilibrium
their type is revealed because their behaviour is different. Here we initially focus on the
separating equilibrium and rule out the possibility of a pooling equilibrium. This is
done by assuming that, based on its initial prior probabilities Probi and Probn, the
entrant expects to make a positive profit in the second period. This assumption implies
that in a pooling equilibrium the entrant will definitely enter the market. With this pre-
diction, however, the incumbent will have the incentive to set its monopoly price. As
this price level differs between a high-cost and a low-cost incumbent there can be no
pooling equilibrium. In the subsequent analysis we, therefore, assume that the prior
probability that the incumbent has low costs is sufficiently large so that any equilibrium
must be a separating equilibrium.
In a separating equilibrium the nature of the incumbent's costs are fully revealed. For
this to be an equilibrium a high-cost firm must not imitate a low-cost firm, and a low-
cost firm must not imitate a high-cost firm. These conditions require the equilibrium
be incentive compatible. This requirement constrains the set of feasible actions available
to each type of incumbent. We consider each of these types in turn.
The first condition, that a high-cost firm must not imitate a low-cost firm in the first
period, will be satisfied if the following inequality holds:
The left-hand side of this inequality is the present value of profits for a high-cost firm
given its cost function is revealed by its actions in the first period. If this is the case, it will
charge its monopoly price in the first period and the Nash equilibrium duopoly price in
the second. Total discounted profits will be the same as that derived under complete
information. The right-hand side gives the present value of profits if the high-cost
incumbent imitates a low-cost firm in the first period. PL is the price charged by the
low-cost firm in the first period, which in a separating equilibrium deters entry. As
entry is deterred, the high-cost firm will set the monopoly price in the second period.
Similarly a low-cost firm will not imitate a high-cost firm in the first period if the fol-
lowing inequality holds:
The left-hand side is the present-value profits for the low-cost incumbent if it acts
according to its type in both periods. As entry does not occur, the incumbent maxi-
mizes profits by setting its monopoly price in the second period. The right-hand side is
the present value of profits if the low-cost incumbent initially imitates a high-cost firm.
Here it sets the monopoly price associated with a high-cost firm in the first period.
Entry is not deterred, but in the second period the entrant wrongly thinks it is compet-
ing against a high-cost incumbent. The incumbent will maximize its profits taking this
false belief on the part of the entrant into account.
98

--- Sayfa 110 ---
Credible Entry Deterrence
The above inequalities define the domain within which PL must be set by the low-
cost incumbent to guarantee a separating equilibrium. This will typically be less than
the monopoly price a low-cost incumbent would set under conditions of complete
information. (This is illustrated in Exercise 5.4.) In this situation the low-cost incum-
bent pursues a limit price strategy. As this is a separating equilibrium the entrant cor-
rectly perceives the cost function of the incumbent based on its pricing policy. This
means that the entrant makes the same entry decisions as under certainty. It enters the
market with a probability of Probn and stays out of the market with a probability of
Probi. If the limit price strategy does not affect the probability of entry it might be asked
why the low-cost incumbent does not set its monopoly price in the first period. The
answer is that if it did, the high-cost incumbent would have the incentive to imitate it.
If this occurred, then the entrant perceiving the possibility of deception might enter the
market, and so the low-cost incumbent would make smaller expected profits in the
future. The limit pricing strategy, in this case, involves the low-cost incumbent reduc-
ing first-period profits so as to guarantee monopoly profits in the second period. The
limit price strategy therefore deters entry from occurring when the entrant might
otherwise have mistakenly perceived the incumbent to be a high-cost firm.
The above results are modified if the final equilibrium is a pooling equilibrium. As
argued before if both types of incumbent set the same price in the first period, then the
entrant learns nothing about its potential competitor. This means that in a pooling
equilibrium the incumbent must perceive that it will make negative profits if it enters
the market. Contrary to the separating equilibrium in a pooling equilibrium entry is
always deterred. Again the first-period equilibrium price may be determined from the
use of two necessary conditions. These relate to the fact that each type must prefer to
charge the equilibrium price rather than set its monopoly price in the first period. In
such an equilibrium it is typically the high-cost monopolist that now reduces its first-
period price level and engages in limit pricing. By setting its price equal to what the low-
cost monopolist would charge entry is effectively deterred and the incumbent is free to
set the monopolist price in the second period.
EXERCISE 5.4*
Find the separating equilibrium behaviour of the low-cost incumbent in the following two-
period model. The incumbent has marginal costs equal to either £4 or £2. Only the incum-
bent initially knows its exact costs. The entrant observes the incumbent's output decision
in the first period and only enters the market in the second period if it believes that the
incumbent has low marginal costs. If entry does occur, the two firms Cournot compete, and
we assume that at this stage in the game the incumbent's true costs are revealed. Price, P,
is determined by the following equation P= 10- Q, where Q is the combined output of the
two firms. Finally, it is assumed that the firms' discount factor is equal to 0.3.
99

--- Sayfa 111 ---
Entry Deterrence
Predatory pricing
In this second model of incomplete information it is assumed that potential entrants do
not initially know for certain whether the incumbent has a preference for fighting entry,
even if this involves reduced profits for that firm. Apart from this uncertainty the game
is the same as the chain-store game with a finite number of markets. Clearly, if the prob-
ability that the incumbent is of this 'irrational' type is large, then entry is likely to be
deterred. Kreps and Wilson (1982a) show, however, that entry can be deterred in the
early stages of a repeated game even if this probability is very small. This involves a
rational incumbent prepared to fight entry in early periods of the game. This is contrary
to the chain-store paradox.
The reason entry is deterred is that now the rational incumbent has an incentive to
act as if it were irrational in the early periods of the game. In this way the incumbent
develops a reputation of being irrational, which deters future entry, and so raises the
present value of expected future profits. The entrants know that the incumbent has this
incentive to fight irrespective of its type in early periods, and so are deterred from enter-
ing. As we reach the end of the game the benefits of defending such a reputation dimin-
ish, as there is less time to reap future rewards. Towards the end of the game a rational
incumbent will certainly accommodate entry. Before this stage in the game it is rational
for the incumbent to play a mixed strategy. An entrant on the other hand will initially
enter a market sometime during this mixed-strategy stage. If entry is accommodated,
then it is known for sure that the incumbent is rational, and so entry occurs in all suc-
ceeding markets. If entry precipitates a price war, then the entrants will revise their
probability that the incumbent is irrational, according to Bayes' Theorem. This
increase in the entrants' perceived probability that the incumbent is irrational means
that the incumbent now has a more valuable reputation to protect, and so it increases
the probability that it will fight future entry. This in turn delays further entry. During
the mixed-strategy stage the probability of fighting by the incumbent falls assuming
there is no entry. Part of this Bayesian perfect equilibrium is illustrated in Fig. 5.5.
As in the infinite chain-store game entry is initially deterred, not from what the
incumbent does pre-entry, but instead because potential entrants realize that the
incumbent has the incentive to fight such entry. As a result the monopolist is free to
maximize current profits in periods where entry does not occur. However, this is not
Fig. 5.5 Equilibrium for the Kreps-Wilson Model
100

--- Sayfa 112 ---
Conclusions
the case when the incumbent engages in predatory pricing. In these situations the firm
invests in a reputation for being irrational which deters future entry. This involves a
reduction in current-period profits but has the benefit of increased future profits.
5.3 Conclusions
Static analysis predicts that a monopoly will attempt to maximize current profits by set-
ting output where marginal cost equals marginal revenue. This implicitly assumes that
there are significant barriers to entry that prevent other firms entering the market and
competing away the monopolist's profits. If this assumption is relaxed, then the
monopoly may have the incentive to strategically alter its behaviour in the current
period, with the aim of deterring entry. One early attempt to model how a monopoly
might accomplish this was provided by the Limit Price Theory. Here the monopoly
increases its current output hoping that potential entrants believe that the remaining
market is not large enough to support any more firms. A critical assumption in this
theory is that the entrant believes the monopolist will continue to produce the same
level of output even if entry occurs. This chapter has argued that this theory implies
irrational behaviour by both the incumbent and potential entrants, and as a result
should be rejected. Game theory has helped clarify the ways in which this theory is
unsatisfactory. However, recent game theory models have suggested alternative ways in
which an incumbent monopoly can strategically deter future entry. These models have
been derived by relaxing certain assumptions made by the Limit Price Theory. In this
way models incorporating the possibility of entry in an infinite number of separate
markets, precommitment, and uncertainty have demonstrated that otherwise prof-
itable entry may be deterred. These models represent significant advances in our
understanding of how firms may strategically interact over time.
5.4 Solutions to Exercises
Exercise 5.1
From the market demand curve we can write the entrant's residual demand curve as
The entrant's profit function is therefore given as
101

--- Sayfa 113 ---
Entry Deterrence
Differentiating this equation and setting it equal to zero gives us the entrant's first-order condi-
tion for maximizing its profits.
As expected the entrant's optimal level of output depends on the incumbent's level of output.
Substituting this optimal level of output, <JE*, back into the entrant's profit function we observe
that its profit also depends on the incumbent's output level.
According to the Limit Price Theory the incumbent, in order to deter entry, will set its output
level so that HE equals zero. Setting the previous equation equal to zero gives us
With the incumbent producing either of these outputs the entrant will make zero profits and
so will not enter the market. Comparing these two output levels the incumbent makes a greater
profit when qi — 2, and sets p = 6. This is the limit price strategy.
If the incumbent firm were to maximize current-period profits, then it performs the follow-
ing calculation.
As described in the text the limit price strategy involves the incumbent increasing its output
and so reducing price.
Exercise 5.2
In the extensive form game drawn in Fig. 5.61 refers to the incumbent firm and E to the entrant.
The pay-offs are not shown but these are the present value of current and future profits for each
firm. In order for the diagram to be manageable we have assumed that each firm has only three
output levels that it can produce.
102

--- Sayfa 114 ---
Solutions to Exercises
Fig. 5.6
Exercise 5.3
Fig. 5.7 illustrates the reaction functions for an incumbent and an entrant when they have dif-
ferentiated products and price compete, according to Bertrand competition. As shown in
Chapter 4 the reaction functions slope upwards. If one firm expects the other firm to raise its
price, it will also raise its price. Profits for both firms are greater the farther out along their reac-
tion curves they are. The initial equilibrium without strategic investment in capital is at point A.
Here the entrant perceives it will make positive profits upon entry, and so enters the market. If,
however, the incumbent invests in strategic capital, reducing its future marginal costs, its reac-
tion function shifts to the left. With lower marginal costs the incumbent will optimally sell its
product at a lower price for any given price set by the entrant. This reduces the profits of the
entrant. With the appropriate level of strategic investment by the incumbent, the entrant will
perceive that it will make a zero profit upon entry, and so it stays out of the market. This is shown
in the above diagram by the new equilibrium at point B. The entrant's reaction function discon-
tinues at point B, as at lower prices it perceives it will make a loss, and so does not enter the
market.
Exercise 5.4
To find the separating equilibrium we adapt and apply the inequalities of (5.1) and (5.2) to this
model. The equivalent inequalities for this model in terms of the firms setting output are:
103

--- Sayfa 115 ---
Entry Deterrence
Fig. 5.7
where qM and qD are the incumbent's output levels when it acts as a monopolist and when it is in
a duopoly respectively, each being conditional upon its costs. qL is the equilibrium quantity that
the low-cost incumbent sets in the first period. Given the details of the model we can find values
for each of the above terms, except for the incumbent's profit level when setting qi. Using the
solution techniques discussed in Chapter 4, we obtain the following results.
Substituting these values into the above inequalities we get:
In order that the proposed solution be incentive-compatible for both the high- and low-cost
incumbent firms, both these conditions must be satisfied simultaneously, and so we obtain the
result that 4.225 <qL < 5.76. In contrast the monopoly output level for the low-cost firm is equal
to 4. Therefore a low-cost incumbent needs to increase its output from the optimum quantity
under complete certainty so as to clearly distinguish itself from a high-cost firm. This guarantees
that entry does not occur, and the firm is assured of monopoly profits in the second period. The
corresponding price in the first period for a low-cost firm is lower than it would have been with
complete certainty, and so this strategy is equivalent to the limit price strategy.
104

--- Sayfa 116 ---
Further Reading
Further Reading
Gilbert, R. J. (1989), 'Mobility Barriers and the Value of Incumbency', in R. Schmalensee and
R. D. Willig (eds.)> Handbook of Industrial Organization, i, Elsevier Science Publishers.
Gravelle, H., and R. Rees (1992), Microeconomics, London: Longman.
Martin, S. (1992), Advanced Industrial Economics, Oxford: Blackwell.
Ordover, J. A., and G. Saloner (1989), 'Predation, Monopolization, and Antitrust', in R.
Schmalensee and R. D. Willig (eds.), Handbook of Industrial Organization, i, Elsevier Science
Publishers.
Tirole, J.( 1988), The Theory of Industrial Organisation, Cambridge Mass.: MIT Press.
Wilson, R. (1992), 'Strategic Models of Entry deterrence', in R. J. Aumann and S. Hart (eds.),
Handbook of Game Theory with Economic Applications, New York: North-Holland.
105

--- Sayfa 117 ---
6
New Classical
Macroeconomics
I
N the previous two chapters we have examined how game theory can be used to
model the behaviour of individual firms. These were essentially microeconomic
games. In this and the next chapter we present a number of macroeconomic games.
In this chapter we analyse New Classical models based on the key assumptions of per-
fect competition and rational expectations. We give these models a game theory inter-
pretation, and demonstrate how they modify the results of earlier models. It is argued
that macroeconomic models concerned with optimal policy-making can be thought of
as a game between the government and the private sector. From this perspective it is
natural to expect each side to try and anticipate the actions of the other, and respond in
an optimal way. Both New Classical and New Keynesian macroeconomics attempt to
incorporate this insight by excluding irrational behaviour by both the government and
the private sector. Relating this to the way agents formulate their expectations both
these schools of thought have adopted the Rational Expectations Hypothesis.
The Rational Expectations Hypothesis, as originally defined by Muth (1961), states
that 'expectations, since they are informed predictions of future events, are essentially
the same as the predictions of the relevant economic theory.' In this strong version of
the Rational Expectations Hypothesis agents' expectations of economic variables are
the same as those derived from the relevant economic theory, conditional upon the
information currently available to them. This version of the Rational Expectations
Hypothesis assumes not only that individuals make the best use of all available infor-
mation, but significantly, that the correct model of the economy is common knowl-
edge. Agents then use this correct model of the economy to update their expectations.
This does not necessarily mean that individuals' expectations are always proved correct.
If there are random shocks hitting the economy, agents will inevitably make forecasting
errors. Rather it implies that expectations must be correct on average. The Rational
Expectations Hypothesis assumes that these errors will not be systematic. If agents do
make systematic forecasting errors, then clearly they have an incentive to change the
way they formulate their expectations. This process will continue until agents' expecta-
tions converge on the rational expectation. In effect the strong version of the Rational
106

--- Sayfa 118 ---
Stabilization Policy
Expectations Hypothesis assumes that this learning process has already been com-
pleted. A weaker version of the Rational Expectations Hypothesis assumes instead that
agents only use currently available information in an optimal way. In this version agents
may still need to learn the correct model of the economy. This may involve identifying
either its structure or some particular parameter value. Despite the extreme nature of
the strong version of the Rational Expectations Hypothesis it is this assumption that
has typically been used in both New Classical and New Keynesian macroeconomics.
In adopting the Rational Expectations Hypothesis New Classical macroeconomics
has highlighted the fact that results derived in earlier models were dependent upon
agents having arbitrary expectations. In particular New Classical macroeconomics has
significantly modified the predictions of earlier models related to government eco-
nomic policy. To illustrate these advances we initially examine two specific examples.
The first is the role of demand policy in stabilizing the economy. This is considered in
section 6.1. Here we present the New Classical policy neutrality result, which states that
a systematic demand management policy has no effect on real variables, such as output
or employment. The second example is the nature of the political business cycle. This is
considered in section 6.2. In this section we present the New Classical result that a gov-
ernment's long-run optimal monetary policy may be time-inconsistent, resulting in the
economy suffering from inflationary bias. In section 6.3 we consider ways that time
inconsistency may be avoided. This includes a discussion of the New Classical political
business cycle, where, contrary to the policy neutrality result, systematic demand man-
agement can have short-run effects on real variables due to incomplete information.
6.1 Stabilization Policy
New Classical macroeconomics is characterized by two key assumptions. The first is
that there is perfect competition in all markets. In particular all private sector agents are
price-takers and markets clear instantaneously. As a result of this assumption private-
sector agents are independent of each other. There is assumed to be interdependence,
however, between the government and the private sector as a whole. The second key
assumption is that agents formulate their expectations rationally. In early New Classical
models, as developed by Lucas (1972), Sargent (1973),and Sargent and Wallace (1975),
the main result derived was that a nominal demand shock will only effect real variables
if it is unanticipated. If a demand shock is anticipated, than agents will instantaneously
adjust wages and prices so that real variables remain unchanged. This result is illus-
trated in Fig. 6.1.
In Fig. 6.1 the aggregate price level (P) and real national income (Y) are determined
where aggregate demand equals aggregate supply. The aggregate demand curve (AD) is
assumed to be downward-sloping. This is due to the real balance effect. As the price
level falls so the real money supply expands, and this increases aggregate demand for
107

--- Sayfa 119 ---
Fig. 6.1 Demand Shocks in a New Classical Model
goods and services. On the supply side the diagram distinguishes between the long-run
and short-run aggregate supply curves. The economy is assumed to be in long-run
equilibrium when agents' price expectations (Pe) are correct, and so Pe = P. In this situ-
ation all real variables are assumed to be at their natural rates. This implies that the
long-run aggregate supply curve (LRAS) is vertical through the natural rate of output
(YN). Real variables will only deviate from their natural values if price expectations are
incorrect. This gives us the short-run aggregate supply curve (SRAS), which is assumed
to be upward-sloping. If the price level is higher than expected firms increase their out-
put, and real national income rises. This type of supply curve is known as a Lucas sup-
ply curve. Finally it is assumed that agents formulate their expectations according to the
Rational Expectations Hypothesis. Fig. 6.1 illustrates the effects of a positive demand
shock.
The economy is initially assumed to be in long-run equilibrium at point A, with the
price level equal to PQ. Suppose now that aggregate demand increases, as shown by the
upward shift in the aggregate demand curve from ADo to ADi. This may be due, for
example, to the government expanding fiscal or monetary policy, or some other exoge-
nous shock. The effects on the economy depend on whether this shock is anticipated or
unanticipated. If the shock is anticipated, then agents will adjust their expectations at
the same time as aggregate demand increases. In this situation the new rational expec-
tation for the price level is PI , as this is the only price level consistent with long-run
equilibrium. As the aggregate demand curve shifts up so the short-run aggregate sup-
ply curve shifts up by the same amount. The price level rises to PZ and all real variables
remain at their natural rates. The economy jumps from point A to point C. Anticipated
demand shocks have no effects on real variables in either the short or the long run. If, on
the other hand, the demand shock is unanticipated, then agents' expectations will not
immediately adjust. With price-level expectations remaining equal to P0, the economy
will move up the original short-run supply curve to point B and output expands to YI.
Only as agents discover that aggregate demand has increased will they adjust their
expectations, and real variables return to their natural rates. In the absence of persis-
108

--- Sayfa 120 ---
Stabilization Policy
tence effects which hinder the adjustment of real variables, the economy will jump to
point C when agents learn that aggregate demand has increased to AD\. In contrast to
anticipated shocks, unanticipated demand shocks cause real variables to be temporar-
ily away from their natural rates.
This key New Classical result that only unanticipated demand shocks can influence
real variables has been used to challenge the Keynesian proposition that the govern-
ment can use systematic demand policy to stabilize the economy. The reason such a pol-
icy must be ineffective in these New Classical models is that if such a policy where
adopted, agents would anticipate policy-induced changes in demand, and so incorpo-
rate them into their expectations of the price level. With rational expectations any sys-
tematic demand policy will be fully anticipated and so have no affect on real variables.
This is known as the policy neutrality result. Government stabilization policy will only
be effective, in these models, if agents make systematic forecasting errors. This result
can be illustrated using the following infinitely repeated policy game between the gov-
ernment and the private sector.
Assume that national income at time-period t (Yt) is determined by the following
Lucas supply curve
where Y* is the natural rate of output, Mt the money supply at time period t, M* is the
expected level of the money supply at time period t, and ef is a random demand shock
to output. The random demand shocks are assumed to be serially uncorrelated with
mean zero. The expected value of these shocks in any one period is therefore assumed
to be zero. (6.1) is consistent with the New Classical proposition that only unanticipated
demand shocks will influence real variables. In particular this equation states that if the
money supply is greater than expected there will be a positive effect on output. It is fur-
ther assumed that due to persistence effects output only gradually adjusts back towards
its natural rate. The speed of adjustment is determined by the size of A.. If X = 0, there are
no persistence effects and output returns immediately to its natural rate when expecta-
tions are correct. If X = 1, there is no such adjustment, and so output equals its previous-
period level when expectations are proved correct.
The strategic variables for the government and the private sector are the money sup-
ply and its expected value respectively. Specifically, at the beginning of each period,
before et is observed, the government sets the value of the money supply, over which it
has complete control. At the same time the private sector formulates its expectation of
the money supply, which determines the level of wages and prices within the economy
for that period. All variables determined in previous periods are assumed to be
observed by the government and private sector.
Concerning each player's pay-offs, they are assumed to have the following
utility functions The government's utility is given by the equation VtG= — (YN- Yt)2.
With this utility function the government seeks to minimize output's deviation from
the natural rate. The private-sector's utility function, on the other hand, is equal to
109

--- Sayfa 121 ---
New Classical Macroeconomics
VP = - (Me - Mt)2. The private sector, therefore, seeks to minimize its forecast error
concerning the level of the money supply.
Although the government has the incentive to try and stabilize output around its nat-
ural rate, this is only possible, in this game, if agents act irrationally and make system-
atic forecasting errors. To see why this is true we initially assume that agents adopt
non-rational expectations. Suppose, for example, that agents adopt naive expectations,
whereby the money supply expected this period is assumed to equal the previous
period's value, i.e. Me = Mt-1. With these naive expectations (6.1) can be rewritten as
In order to maximize its utility the government will set the value of the money sup-
ply so that the expected value of output is equal to its natural rate. From (6.2) the
expected value of output is equal to
Setting this equal to YN, and rearranging gives us the following optimal money supply
rule
Provided X is greater than zero, the government will increase the money supply when
output is below its natural rate, and reduce the money supply when it is above this rate.
This equation corresponds to a policy of active demand management, where the money
supply is determined by an optimal feedback rule dependent on last period's level of
output. Substituting this equation back into (6.1) gives us the path output follows when
the government pursues this optimal monetary policy. With these assumptions output
is equal to
Equation (6.5) demonstrates that with naive expectations the government is able to
fully stabilize output around its natural rate, except for the occurrence of within-period
shocks to the economy. This equation justifies the Keynesian claim that the government
can use active demand management to fine-tune the economy. The New Classical
insight, however, is that this result depends on agents making systematic, and hence
predictable, forecasting errors. If, for example, the government, following Keynesian
policy advice, set its monetary policy according to (6.4), then the private sector's fore-
casting error will be equal to
As agents are assumed to be able to observe last period's random demand shock, ef_i,
the expected value of this forecast error is, in general, not equal to zero. The private
110

--- Sayfa 122 ---
Stabilization Policy
sector knowingly makes systematic forecasting errors. Adopting naive expectations
implies that the private sector is acting irrationally, in that it does not maximize its util-
ity. Rationality dictates that agents recognize that the government will seek to manipu-
late the money supply in order to stabilize output, and this will influence their
expectations accordingly. The only way the private sector can avoid making systematic
forecasting errors is if they adopt rational expectations. As the name suggests this is the
only mechanism for formulating expectations that is consistent with rationality in this
game. Although the adoption of rational expectations is the optimal strategy for the
private sector, the implication is that systematic monetary policy can no longer effect
real variables. This is the New Classical policy ineffectiveness result. If there were an
optimal policy rule, then the private sector would base their expectations upon it and so
expectations would be proved correct. In this situation the path of output would be
given by the equation
Comparing (6.7) with (6.1) it is clear that monetary policy now has no effect on output,
and so stabilization policy is ineffective. Based on this policy neutrality result New
Classical economists have proposed that the government's monetary policy should not
target real economic variables, such as output or unemployment, but rather nominal
variables, such as the rate of inflation. Furthermore, in order for the money supply to be
as predictable as possible they argue that the government should follow a simple fixed
policy rule. These arguments can, therefore, be used to justify Milton Friedman's (1968)
proposal that the money supply should be allowed to grow at a constant rate of growth,
and that the government should forgo attempts to stabilize the economy. This policy
conclusion is further analysed in Exercise 6.1.
EXERCISE 6.1
(1) Draw a one-period extensive form game for the stabilization policy game described in
the text.
(2) New Classical economists have argued that this model supports the view that the gov-
ernment should abandon stabilization policy and maintain a constant growth rate for
the money supply. Explain why this policy conclusion is not, in general, a Nash equilib-
rium for this game.
(3) Explain how the policy recommendation in (2) of this exercise can be a Nash equilib-
rium if the government is able to precommit its monetary policy before agents deter-
mine their expectation of the money supply. How does this possibility alter the
extensive form game drawn in answer to (1)?
111

--- Sayfa 123 ---
New Classical Macroeconomics
As discussed above the New Classical policy neutrality result is contrary to Keynesian
predictions about the effects of aggregate demand policy. In Keynesian models system-
atic demand policy is able to influence real variables. Based on this effectiveness, it is
often proposed that the government use demand policy to stabilize the economy
around full employment. Early Keynesian models justified these claims by assuming
that agents had non-rational expectations. It should be noted, however, that assuming
that agents respond optimally to the government's demand policy does not on its own
guarantee that such a policy has no effect on real variables. Here we discuss a number of
ways in which demand policy can be effective, whilst still assuming that all agents act
rationally.
Information advantage
One way for systematic demand policy to influence real variables is to allow the gov-
ernment to have an information advantage. One example of an information advantage
is where the government is able to observe events within the economy more quickly
than the private sector. In this situation, without government intervention, the econ-
omy will remain away from its long-run equilibrium until agents correctly discern the
shock and adjust wages and prices accordingly. With such an information advantage
the government may be able to offset these exogenous shocks more quickly than the
private sector. This will hasten the economy's return to long run-equilibrium, and sta-
bilization policy is once more effective. A typical New Classical response to this obser-
vation is to ask why the government does not simply make known its information
advantage to the private sector. In this way the government avoids having to implement
a counter-cyclical demand policy, and adjustment back to long-run equilibrium is left
to market forces. Howitt (1981), however, argues that it may be too costly for the private
sector to be given all the relevant information. In this situation it maybe more efficient
for the government to collect the relevant economic data and respond by implement-
ing the appropriate demand policy to stabilize the economy. This will only be true, how-
ever, if the government is able to respond quickly and accurately to any new
information. If there is uncertainty about events within the economy, and lags associ-
ated with implementing policy, it is possible that the government's demand policy may
be destabilizing.
Imperfect wage and price adjustment
The policy neutrality result obtained in the stabilization game was demonstrated by
assuming a Lucas supply curve. With this type of supply curve only unanticipated
changes in aggregate demand can effect real variables. This type of supply curve will be
valid, however, only if there is perfect wage and price adjustment, with continuous mar-
ket clearing. With imperfect wage and price adjustment nominal demand shocks can
once again have real effects, even if expectations are formed rationally. This possibility
has been denominated by Gray (1976), Fischer (1977), and Phelps and Taylor (1977). In
these models either wages or prices are set one period in advance of when they will
112

--- Sayfa 124 ---
Stabilization Policy
apply. Once wages and prices have been fixed aggregate demand policy can again have
temporary effects on real variables, and may be used to offset demand shocks hitting the
economy. The New Classical response to these models has been to question why there is
imperfect wage and price adjustment. In Classical models such imperfections imply
that agents are not fully optimizing, and so they are viewed as being inconsistent with
the assumption of rationality. New Keynesian macroeconomics has attempted to meet
this criticism by developing models where imperfect wage and price adjustment is con-
sistent with rationality. Some of these models are examined in the next chapter.
Learning
The game used to illustrate the policy neutrality result also made use of the so-called
strong version of the Rational Expectations Hypothesis. This assumes that agents know
and use the correct model of the economy when formulating their expectations. This,
however, ignores the question of how agents acquire this knowledge. The weak version
of the Rational Expectations Hypothesis states that agents need only optimally use all
the information currently available to them in formulating their expectations. This
weak version does not assume that the correct model of the economy is common
knowledge. If individuals have imperfect information about either the structure of the
economy, or some particular parameter value, then a learning process is required.
Given the endogeneity of agents' expectations this learning process need not always
converge upon the true model of the economy. Even if convergence is guaranteed, prior
to agents identifying the true nature of the economy, systematic demand policy can be
effective in influencing real variables. Once again the policy neutrality result ceases to
be valid, even though all agents are acting rationally.
One particular type of uncertainty that has been incorporated into macroeconomic
policy games is incomplete information about the government's pay-off function. In
these models the private sector is not certain about which type of government is in
power. Once again such uncertainty may result in anticipated demand policy influenc-
ing real variables. This insight forms the basis of the New Classical business cycle, and is
examined in section 6.3.
Multiple Equilibria
A final possible reason why the policy neutrality result may cease to be valid, even if
agents are acting rationally, is if there are multiple rational expectations equilibria.
With multiple equilibria a variety of expectations can be self-fulfilling and so fully
rational. It maybe the case that for some of these equilibria systematic demand policy
can affect real variables. This possibility has been developed by a number of New
Keynesian economists, and is examined in the next chapter.
113

--- Sayfa 125 ---
New Classical Macroeconomics
6.2 The Political Business Cycle
In the stabilization policy game presented in the previous section the government's
objective was to stabilize the economy around its long-run equilibrium. It has long
been recognized, however, that governments may primarily be interested in political,
rather than economic, objectives. From this perspective policy-makers will use eco-
nomic instruments to try and secure political objectives. One approach which consid-
ers the government's strategic use of economic policy in achieving political objectives
was developed by Nordhaus (1975). In this model the government uses monetary pol-
icy to influence the state of the economy. This in turn determines the popularity of the
government. The prediction of Nordhaus's model is that the government will stimulate
the economy just prior to a general election. By doing so the government hopes it will
grow in popularity and obtain a majority of the votes at the forthcoming election.
Subsequent to the election, the government will reverse this policy, and contract aggre-
gate demand. It is this sequence of expansionary and contractionary demand policy
over the life-time of a government that generates a political business cycle. Here we crit-
ically examine this model from a game theory perspective. The fundamental criticism
is that the model's predictions are once more dependent on voters having non-rational
expectations. If voters seek to avoid making systematic forecasting errors and adopt
rational expectations, the model no longer generates a political business cycle. In sec-
tion 6.3 an adapted version of this model shows that by introducing rational expecta-
tions the model now generates New Classical policy conclusions. Specifically, if the
government has discretion over its monetary policy its optimal long-run monetary
policy is time-inconsistent, and the economy experiences inflationary bias.
Nordhaus's model can be represented by the following infinitely repeated game
between the government and voters. The government's objective is simply to stay in
power by winning a majority of the votes at the next election. The proportion of votes
it obtains is, in turn, determined by the state of the economy, as given by the current rate
of inflation, ph and current rate of unemployment, Ut. We will assume that the propor-
tion of votes cast for the present government is determined by the following equation
This equation is depicted in Fig. 6.2 as a series of indifference curves.
Along each indifference curve the proportion of votes cast for the government is con-
stant. In the diagram each indifference curve is indexed by the percentage of total votes
the government would receive if a general election were held in the current period. The
government's popularity is maximized when inflation is zero and unemployment is at
its optimal level, 17*. This is called the bliss point and is labelled point BP in Fig. 6.2. The
further away the economy is from this bliss point the less popular the government, and
the fewer votes it would receive in an election. These indifference curves represent the
government's preferences.
114

--- Sayfa 126 ---
The Political Business Cycle
Fig. 6.2 The Government's Indifference Curves
Due to its control over money supply the government is assumed to be able to deter-
mine both the rate of inflation and the rate of unemployment, subject to the constraints
imposed upon it. These constraints are given by the expectations-augmented Phillips
curve and voters' current expectation of the inflation rate, pe
t. The expectations-
augmented Phillips curve is associated with Milton Friedman (1968) and is given by the
following equation
This equation is consistent with the New Classical result that only unanticipated mon-
etary policy will effect real variables. When expectations are correct the economy is in
long-run equilibrium and unemployment is at its natural rate. Setting pt=j>t in equa-
tion (6.9) and rearranging we derive that the natural rate of unemployment, UN, is
equal to a/b > 0. Due to market imperfections it is assumed that this natural rate of
unemployment is greater than the optimal rate of unemployment, i.e. IP* > U*. If the
government increases the money supply unexpectedly, inflation rises and unemploy-
ment falls. From (6.9) when inflation is greater than expected, unemployment is below
the natural rate. Conversely, if the government unexpectedly reduces the money supply
inflation falls and unemployment rises. Again from (6.9) when inflation is less than
expected unemployment is above the natural rate. The expectations-augmented
Phillips curve is depicted in Fig. 6.3.
The economy will be on the long-run Phillips curve (LRPC) when expectations are
correct. When this occurs unemployment will be at its natural rate. The long-run
Phillips curve is therefore vertical through this value. The short-run Phillips curves
(SRPQ correspond to different values of inflationary expectations, and are downward-
sloping for reasons explained above. The short-run curves cut the long-run curve when
the expected rate of inflation equals the actual rate of inflation.
The second constraint upon the government is that of the voters' inflationary expec-
tations. Nordhaus made the simplifying assumption that voters have naive expecta-
tions so that the rate of inflation expected to prevail in the current period is equal to the
rate of inflation in the previous period, i.e. pe
t = pt-\. Combining Figs. 6.2 and 6.3
115

--- Sayfa 127 ---
New Classical Macroeconomics
Fig. 6.3 The Expectations-Augmented Phillips Curve
together with this assumption of how voters formulate their expectations we are able to
derive Nordhaus's political business cycle. This is shown in Fig. 6.4.
Assume that the economy is initially at point A and that the government is facing the
run up to a general election. At point A the economy is in long-run equilibrium with
zero inflation. From the indifference curve passing through this point we can see that
currently 40 per cent of voters intend to vote for the government at the next election. If
the government unexpectedly increases the money supply, however, it can increase its
share of the vote. With expectations unchanged an increase in the money supply will
cause the economy to move up the short-run Phillips curve passing through point A.
The maximum share of votes the government can obtain given this short-run Phillips
curve is 50 per cent. This occurs where the short-run Phillips curve is tangent to an
Fig. 6.4 The Political Business Cycle
116

--- Sayfa 128 ---
The Political Business Cycle
indifference curve. The government, in order to increase its own popularity, will inflate
the economy just prior to the election. The economy moves to point B with unemploy-
ment falling to U\ and inflation rising to p\. Point B, however, does not represent a long-
run equilibrium as inflation is greater than expected. Subsequent to the election voters
will observe the increase in inflation and so update their inflationary expectations. This
adjustment causes the short-run Phillips curve to shift to the right. Inflation rises fur-
ther and unemployment rises back towards its natural rate. This continues until the
economy has returned to long-run equilibrium at point C. Unemployment is again
equal to its natural rate and inflation equals p2- With unemployment and inflation both
higher the government is now less popular. At point C only 30 per cent of the electorate
would vote for the present government. In order to increase its popularity, and secure
victory at the next election, the government must reduce the rate of inflation. The gov-
ernment, therefore, reverses its previously expansionary monetary policy and reduces
the money supply. Inflation falls and unemployment rises above the natural rate. The
economy moves down the short-run Phillips curve to point D. Again this does not rep-
resent a long-run equilibrium, as inflation is now less than expected. As expectations
are revised downwards so the short-run Phillips curve shifts to the left. Inflation falls
further and unemployment returns to its natural rate. The economy returns to point A.
The above process will be initiated once more as the next election approaches.
Over the lifetime of a single parliament we will observe the following sequence of
events. The government initially pursues a contractionary monetary policy, which
reduces inflation and causes unemployment to rise. The government then reverses this
policy as a general election approaches, causing inflation to rise and unemployment to
fall. These successive contractions and expansions of aggregate demand are the cause of
the economy fluctuating around the natural rate. According to this model, therefore, it
is the government manipulating economic policy for political objectives which causes
the business cycle.
Although this model gives an interesting interpretation of the business cycle, and one
that has a certain degree of intuitive appeal, from a game theory perspective it is criti-
cally flawed. The reason for this assessment is that it assumes that voters are far from
rational. Prior to each election they are continually surprised that the government
increases the money supply, even though the model predicts this outcome. Similarly,
within the lifetime of each parliament the voters are continually surprised by the reduc-
tion in the money supply, even though, once more, the model predicts the government
doing this. Voters' expectations are inconsistent with the predictions of the model itself.
Furthermore, it is as if voters never learn from their previous experience. Instead of
deriving voters' expectations from explicit maximization of their utility, which is con-
sistent with rationality, this model merely assumes they have naive expectations. As in
the stabilization policy game this means that agents make systematic, and hence pre-
dictable, forecasting errors. If agents have an incentive to correctly forecast inflation,
the assumption of naive expectations implies irrational behaviour.
From a game theory perspective the assumption of naive expectations cannot be part
117

--- Sayfa 129 ---
New Classical Macroeconomics
of a subgame perfect Nash equilibrium. In effect, Nordhaus assumes that voters accept
the government's promise to maintain inflation at its current rate. This promise, how-
ever, is incredible. It is incredible because, if believed by the private sector, the govern-
ment has an incentive to deviate from it. In order for the solution of the model to be
subgame perfect voters must formulate their expectations in a way that predictable
forecasting errors are avoided. This will occur if agents adopt rational expectations.
This implies that with common knowledge of the correct model of the economy there
is no political business cycle. This is demonstrated by the following argument. In equi-
librium the government must have no incentive to change its monetary policy from the
one expected by voters. If it had such an incentive, voters would perceive this and so
modify their current inflationary expectations. This means the initial situation could
not have been an equilibrium. In equilibrium, therefore, the government's monetary
policy is completely anticipated and all real variables remain at their natural rates.
Monetary policy now has no systematic effects on real variables, and there is no politi-
cal business cycle. Nordhaus's model is unacceptable because it assumes voters do not
act rationally, and the predictions of the model are not subgame perfect.
One way to reintroduce the possibility of a political business cycle is to assume agents
have incomplete information. Economist's have recently developed this approach to
generate New Classical political business cycle models. These models are discussed
towards the end of the next section. Before that we discuss the important concept of
time-inconsistency.
6.3 Time-Inconsistency
In New Classical macroeconomics the economy is defined as being in long-run equilib-
rium when expectations are correct. Only hi the short run will agents' expectations
remain incorrect. This distinction raises the possibility that a government's optimal
long-run policy may differ from its optimal short-run policy. A government's optimal
long-run policy is formulated under the constraint that agents' expectations are cor-
rect. In the short run, however, the government may have the incentive to produce an
unanticipated policy shock. This will cause agents' expectations to be temporarily
wrong. When the government has this incentive the optimal long run policy is said to
be time-inconsistent. An optimal long-run policy is, therefore, time-inconsistent when
the government has an incentive to deviate from it in the short run. If the private sector
has complete information they will foresee this policy conflict. As a result they will
rationally anticipate the government deviating from its optimal long-run policy. Only
with a time-consistent policy does the government not have an incentive to deviate
from it, and so expectations are justified. In an economy where agents' expectations are
rational the equilibrium must involve the government pursuing a time-consistent
policy. If the government's long-run optimal policy is time-inconsistent, this cannot be
118

--- Sayfa 130 ---
Time-Inconsistency
an equilibrium. This implies that in equilibrium the government is necessarily worse
off. The government would receive a higher pay-off if it could persuade the private sec-
tor that it will maintain its optimal long-run policy. However, given the incentive to
deviate, and with discretion over its own policy, this is not possible. The private sector
would always anticipate deviation, and so the optimal long-run policy is no longer fea-
sible. Once more we have an example of the prisoners' dilemma. Here the government
is made worse off because it is unable to commit itself to its optimal long-run policy.
An alternative way of viewing time-inconsistency is to see it as a dynamic game
played between the government and the private sector. Here the government tries to
influence private-sector expectations. From this perspective Mankiw (1992) defines
time-inconsistency as 'The tendency of policy-makers to announce policies in advance
in order to influence the expectations of private decision-makers, and then to follow
different policies after those expectations have been formed and acted on.' Using this
definition we can illustrate the concept of time-inconsistency using the extensive form
game shown in Fig. 6.5.
Fig. 6.5 Time-Inconsistency
In this game the government initially announces its optimal long-run policy in order
to influence private-sector expectations. This optimal policy is formulated under the
assumption that the private sector anticipates this policy and acts upon it. Having
announced its policy intentions the private sector formulates its expectations. Clearly it
has the choice of either believing the government's policy announcement, or not.
Finally, having observed the private sectors' expectations, and consequent actions, the
government enacts its optimal short-run policy to maximize its pay-off. This policy is
119

--- Sayfa 131 ---
New Classical Macroeconomics
determined on the basis of actual expectations held by the private sector. The long-run
optimal policy is time-inconsistent if, were it to be believed, the government has an
incentive to deviate from it. The long-run optimal policy is only time-consistent if it is
the same as the short run optimal policy. If the private sector acts rationally, it will solve
this dynamic game using the principle of backward induction. Using this principle it
will anticipate the government's short-run optimal policy, and so recognize the gov-
ernment's incentive to renege on any preannounced policy that is time-inconsistent.
With this reasoning the government has no influence over private-sector expectations,
and so it may as well announce a policy that is time-consistent. The government no
longer announces a policy it has an incentive to renege upon if believed. The time-
consistent policy is, therefore, the policy associated with the subgame perfect Nash
equilibrium for this dynamic game. Only credible threats and promises are made and
believed. The promise to pursue a time-inconsistent policy is not credible and so not
believed.
This concept of time-inconsistency has been used by New Classical economists to
argue that discretionary monetary policy leads to a Pareto-inefficient outcome where
the economy exhibits an inflationary bias. This result can be illustrated using a modified
version of Nordhaus's political business-cycle model. This model is the same as the
model presented in section 6.2 except for the following three changes. First, the govern-
ment itself is assumed to be interested in economic, rather than political, outcomes.
Specifically, equation (6.8) now represents the government's utility function. From this
equation deviations of inflation and unemployment from their optimal rates reduce
the government's level of utility. Second, the private sector are assumed to formulate
their expectations according to the strong version of the Rational Expectations
Hypothesis. Agents are, therefore, assumed to know the correct model of the economy
and to rationally use all currently available information to formulate their expecta-
tions. Third, the policy game is assumed to be played only once rather than infinitely
repeated. This assumption is later relaxed so that the effects of repeated monetary pol-
icy can be analysed. This one-off policy game is depicted in Fig. 6.6.
Fig. 6.6 illustrates the government's preferences indifference curves and the short-
and long-run Phillips curves. In the long run private-sector expectations will be cor-
rect, and so unemployment must be at its natural rate. In this situation the long-run
Phillips curve is the relevant constraint on government monetary policy. Facing this
constraint the government maximizes its utility by setting the money supply consistent
with zero inflation. The government's optimal long-run policy is, therefore, given by
point A. In the short run, however, the private sector's expectation need not be correct.
If the private sector believes that the government will pursue its long-run optimal mon-
etary policy, it will anticipate zero inflation. The relevant constraint is now the short-
run Phillips curve passing through point A. Given this constraint the government can
increase its utility by unexpectedly inflating the economy. The government's utility is
maximized when its indifference curve is tangent to this short-run Phillips curve. The
government's optimal short-run monetary policy is to increase inflation to p\ causing
120

--- Sayfa 132 ---
Time-Inconsistency
Fig. 6.6 Inflationary Bias of Discretionary Monetary Policy
unemployment to fall to U\. This is given as point B in Fig. 6.6. Given this incentive to
produce an inflationary surprise, it is clear that its optimal long-run monetary policy is
time-inconsistent. As a result any statement that the government will pursue its long-
run optimal monetary policy will not be believed by the private sector. Anticipating
zero inflation cannot be a rational expectation. Instead the rational expectation for the
private sector is to anticipate a policy that is consistent with the government maximiz-
ing its own pay-off function. In equilibrium the government will have no incentive to
change its monetary policy, and expectations must be proved correct. This will occur
when the government's indifference curve is tangent to the relevant short-run Phillips
curve and on the long-run Phillips curve. This only occurs at point C. At this point the
government has no incentive to change its monetary policy, and private-sector expec-
tations are correct. This point corresponds to the Nash equilibrium of this one-off pol-
icy game. In equilibrium unemployment is at its natural rate and inflation is equal to p2-
Compared to the optimal long-run monetary policy at point A inflation is higher and
there is no consequent reduction in unemployment. The economy is, therefore, said to
experience an inflationary bias equal to p2- This level of inflationary bias reduces the
government's level of utility with no gain to the private sector. The final outcome is
therefore Pareto inefficient.
From the previous analysis discretionary monetary policy is seen to lead to a Pareto-
inefficient outcome and inflationary bias. A common New Classical policy conclusion
from this result is that the government should renounce discretionary policy and pur-
sue fixed policy rules instead. In this way it is hoped the government can commit itself
to its optimal long-run policy and avoid the adverse consequences of time-inconsis-
tency. This, however, is not the only way the government might seek to avoid the prob-
lems associated with time-inconsistency. This and other ways that have been proposed
to avoid the problems associated with time-inconsistency are discussed below.
121

--- Sayfa 133 ---
New Classical Macroeconomics
EXERCISE 6.2
In Fig. 6.5 it is assumed that the government formulates its monetary policy subsequent to
the private sector formulating their expectations, and that this policy need not be the same
as that previously announced. This exercise modifies these assumptions and examines the
implications for government monetary policy.
How is the extensive form game depicted in Fig. 6.5 changed in the following situations?
(1) The government for some reason is unable to renege on its initial policy announce-
ment.
(2) The private sector forms its expectations at the same time as the government enacts
its policy.
Using Fig. 6.6 what will be the equilibrium level of inflation and unemployment in each of
these alternative games?
EXERCISE 6.3
Using short-run and long-run Phillips curves identify the time-consistent monetary policy
under each of the following assumptions:
(1) The government delegates its monetary policy to an independent central bank, which
is required solely to target price stability.
(2) The natural rate of unemployment is the optimal rate of unemployment.
6.3.1 Precommitment
The first scenario in Exercise 6.2 corresponds to the situation where the government is
able to effectively precommit itself to a particular monetary policy prior to the private
sector formulating its expectations. If the government is able credibly to precommit
itself to maintaining the economy at point A in Fig. 6.6, then agents will expect zero
inflation and this would be the new long-run equilibrium. From this perspective the
lack of precommitment is a basic cause of time-inconsistency. Various suggestions have
been made as to how a government can precommit itself to an otherwise time-
inconsistent optimal monetary policy.
122

--- Sayfa 134 ---
Time-Inconsistency
Legislation
One extreme way for the government to precommit itself to a particular monetary pol-
icy is via legislation. Such legislation may be viewed as working in one of two ways.
Either the government is explicitly prohibited from varying its monetary policy from
previously published targets, or the process of such deviation is so time-consuming and
expensive that it is not in the government's interest to pursue it. As a result of such leg-
islation the government is no longer able to operate a discretionary monetary policy,
and the problem of time-inconsistency is avoided.
One example of such legislation is for the government to delegate monetary policy to
an independent central bank, which is instructed to maintain price stability. This pos-
sibility was considered in question (1) of Exercise 6.3. If the monetary authority is only
concerned with achieving an inflation target, then it has no incentive to deviate from its
optimal long-run policy of price stability. In this situation the optimal long-run mon-
etary policy is time-consistent, and there is no inflationary bias.
Apart from the practical difficulties of implementing such legislation, and obtaining
politicians consent to restrict their own powers, it is questionable whether such a severe
restriction of the government's power is desirable. For example, if the monetary
authority is constrained to follow a specific monetary policy rule, this will restrict its
ability to enact desirable policy initiatives related to stabilization policy. Although the
problem of inflationary bias may be overcome, this may be offset by other problems
such as welfare-reducing fluctuations in unemployment.
Monetary targets
A second suggestion for how a government might be able to precommit itself to an oth-
erwise time-inconsistent monetary policy is to announce monetary targets that the
government intends to meet. Clearly, the announcement on its own does not make the
targets credible. The idea instead is that having published the monetary targets it will be
too embarrassing for the government to renege on them subsequently. From a game
theory perspective the government receives a lower pay-off when it is observed to devi-
ate from previously published monetary targets. In this way such announcements
might become credible and so believed, and acted upon, by the private sector.
An example of the UK government using monetary targets in this way was in the
early 1980s, when Mrs Thatcher's government published its Medium-Term Financial
Strategy (MTFS). The MTFS set forth the government's targets for public spending and
the growth rate of the money supply. It was hoped that these targets would be believed
by the public, and hence the government's anti-inflation policy would not cause exces-
sive unemployment. Unfortunately the economy entered a particularly severe recession
with unemployment going above 3 million. From such evidence it would appear that
politicians merely saying that they are going to undertake a particular policy does not
make it more credible. One reason for this is that the government inevitably seeks to
123

--- Sayfa 135 ---
New Classical Macroeconomics
blame factors outside of its control as the cause of policy targets not being achieved. The
government does this to try and reduce its own political embarrassment, but if agents
perceive the government will do this then the initial credibility of policy targets is
undermined.
Exchange rate targets
An extension to the idea of the government announcing monetary targets is that it
announces an exchange rate target instead. Under a fixed exchange rate regime the gov-
ernment is unable to pursue an independent monetary policy. Instead interest rates are
subordinated to the role of maintaining the target exchange rate. With no discretion
over monetary policy it is argued that maintaining a fixed exchange rate policy over-
comes the problems of time-inconsistency. However, the problem of credibility is
merely switched from monetary targets to the exchange rate target. If the government
had an incentive to deviate from monetary targets, it seems reasonable to suppose that
it now has an incentive to allow the exchange rate to deviate from its preannounced tar-
get. If, however, reneging on an exchange rate target entails greater political embarrass-
ment for the government, then such a policy may be more credible than the
government announcing monetary targets.
This analysis can be related to the UK's recent experience within the European
Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM) in the early 1990s. Here the government attempted
to maintain its exchange rate within a prespecified band with respect to other European
currencies. It was hoped that maintaining a high exchange rate would again enhance
the credibility of the government's anti-inflationary policy, and so reduce the costs
associated with reducing inflation. Once more, however, the economy entered a severe
recession. Despite successive government announcements that it was committed to
maintaining the current exchange rate, and although the government spent billions of
pounds trying to support sterling, it became increasingly less credible that the govern-
ment could maintain such a high exchange rate. Eventually currency speculators, bet-
ting against the government maintaining its exchange rate target, forced the
government to leave the ERM and allow sterling to depreciate. Again the government's
policy was revealed to be time-inconsistent and so lacked credibility. It appears reason-
able to conclude that precommitment, short of legislative changes, are unable to over-
come the problems of time-inconsistency associated with monetary policy.
6.3.2 Supply-side policies
Part (2) of Exercise 6.3 illustrates that a government's optimal long-run monetary pol-
icy is only time-inconsistent if the optimal rate of unemployment differs from the nat-
ural rate of unemployment. If there is a divergence between these two rates, then there
is an incentive for the government to renege on its commitment to price stability. The
124

--- Sayfa 136 ---
Time-Inconsistency
reason the natural rate is likely to be above the optimal rate of unemployment is due to
labour market imperfections. These include the presence of proportional income tax
and unemployment benefits that reduce the incentive to work.
One possible way of avoiding the problem of time-inconsistency in monetary policy
is, therefore, to deal directly with these labour market imperfections. The benefit of
doing so is not only reduced equilibrium unemployment, but also reduced inflationary
bias. Even if such labour market imperfections cannot be totally eradicated, any reduc-
tion in the divergence between the optimal and natural rate of unemployment will
reduce the extent of inflationary bias. Set against these benefits, however, are the possi-
ble costs associated with implementing these supply-side policies. The nature of these
costs will typically be both economic and political.
6.3.3 Repeated monetary policy
So far we have only examined how the problems of time-inconsistency may be avoided
in the context of a one-off game. In reality, of course, the government is involved in
repeated interaction with the private sector. This changes the basic structure of the
game being played. In particular, repeated interaction between the government and the
private sector introduces the possibility that the private sector can credibly punish the
government if it deviates from its optimal long-run policy of price stability. Given that
this punishment is sufficiently severe the government is effectively deterred from tem-
porarily inflating the economy. The government no longer has an incentive to produce
unanticipated policy shocks, and so the problem of time-inconsistency is avoided.
When this occurs the government's optimal long-run policy will be subgame perfect.
One model that demonstrates this result was developed by Barro and Gordon
(1983). In this model the previous game is infinitely repeated, and the private sector is
assumed to adopt a one-period punishment strategy. If the government maintains
price stability, then the private sector continues to expect zero inflation. If, however, the
government is observed to deviate from this policy, then, in the next period, the private
sector will expect the rate of inflation associated with the time-consistent Nash equilib-
rium of the one-off game. If this expectation is fulfilled, then zero inflation is expected
in the subsequent period, otherwise private sector expectations are unchanged. After
the punishment period, therefore, bygones are bygones, and the government has the
possibility of returning the economy to zero inflation at the natural rate of unemploy-
ment. Faced with the prospect of future punishment, it is not always in the govern-
ment's interest to deviate from its long-run optimal policy. If this is true, then the
problem of time-inconsistency is overcome. To demonstrate this result we need to
compare the benefits of deviating with costs of future punishment.
If the government does not inflate the economy then it will receive utility equal to the
social welfare function associated with point A in Fig. 6.6. Let this be equal to V°(A).
The government will receive this in each and every time-period. Given that 5 represents
125

--- Sayfa 137 ---
New Classical Macroeconomics
the appropriate rate of discount, then the present value for the government of not devi-
ating (PVND) is equal to
In contrast if the government deviates from its long-run optimal policy it will receive,
at most, V^B) in the first period, followed by VG(C) in the second period. These are the
levels of utility the government receives associated with points B and C respectively. If
it was optimal for the government to deviate initially, then it will deviate at each subse-
quent opportunity. The present value of discounting is therefore equal to
The problem of time-inconsistency will only be overcome if the government has no
incentive to deviate from its long-run optimal policy. This will only occur if
PVND > PVD. This implies that
With the private sector adopting its one-period punishment strategy the government
will maintain its optimal long-run policy provided that the discounted value of the next
period's punishment, 8 [ VG(A) - V^CC) ], is greater or equal to the current value of devi-
ating, VGB) - VG(A). Whether this condition is satisfied can be related to three aspects
of the government's preferences. First, this condition depends on the value of the gov-
ernment's discount factor, 6. The less the government discounts future utility the more
likely its optimal long-run monetary policy will be time-consistent. With the govern-
ment totally discounting future utility, i.e. 5 = 0, its current policy is unaffected by the
threat of future punishment and so always deviates. This corresponds to the one-off
policy game discussed previously. Second, the condition depends on the degree to
which the government is concerned about inflation. Again this determines effectiveness
of the punishment period. This is because the threatened punishment strategy is that
inflation will be higher next period than it otherwise would have been. How effective
this punishment is depends on how serious the government views higher inflation. This
determines the value of VGA) - VGC). If the government is relatively unconcerned
with inflation, this threatened future punishment will not be effective in deterring devi-
ation, and so the problem of time-inconsistency remains. If, for example, VGA) -
VG(C) = 0, then this means that the government is totally unconcerned about inflation
and so, if it values higher employment at all, it will surely inflate the economy. Third, as
just indicated, how highly the government values reductions in unemployment also
determines whether the above condition is satisfied. This, together with the costs of
126

--- Sayfa 138 ---
Time-Inconsistency
increased inflation, determines the value of VG(B) - VG(A). As discussed previously if
the government is unconcerned with the level of unemployment then there is no time-
inconsistency problem.
This result shows that provided the above condition is satisfied the problem of time-
inconsistency is avoided. There are, however, two particular problems associated with
this model, The first is the problem of multiple equilibria. This corresponds to the Folk
Theorem of infinitely repeated games. The previous analysis has demonstrated that if
the private sector adopts the assumed one-period punishment strategy, then the prob-
lem of time-inconsistency may be avoided. Given a positive discount factor, however,
this is not the only credible punishment strategy that generates this result. For example,
the private sector may either credibly threaten a longer period of punishment, or one
where the punishment itself is more severe, or some combination of these. This aspect
of multiple Nash equilibrium was discussed more fully in Chapter 4 in the context of
oligopolies maintaining tacit collusion. In this context, however, indeterminacy due to
multiple equilibria can be seen as greater criticism of the model. This is partly due to the
increased difficulty of potentially millions of individuals co-ordinating their actions on
one particular punishment strategy. There is also the problem of applying punishment
strategies to the private sector which is that it is made up of numerous atomistic indi-
viduals. In this situation no one individual can influence the outcome of the game, and
so there is little sense in talking about individual's choosing their optimal punishment
strategy.
The second problem associated with the Barro and Gordon model is the assumption
that the game is infinitely repeated. This seems to be especially unrealistic as the life of
any one parliament is necessarily finite. If the policy game is not infinitely repeated,
then the solution to the problem of time-inconsistency breaks down due to the paradox
of backward induction. To see this suppose the game is played only a finite number of
times. Using backward induction we start with the last period first. In this period there
can be no future punishment, and so the government will certainly deviate from its
optimal long-run policy by inflating the economy. The private sector will anticipate this
and so the only possible solution in the last period is the Nash equilibrium of the stage
game. Now consider the period before last. As the government knows that in the last
period the Nash equilibrium will be played, there is again no effective punishment
against deviation. The Nash equilibrium will be played in the last period whatever the
government does in this penultimate period and so it might as well deviate now. Again,
the private sector anticipates this and so the only outcome possible in this period is the
Nash equilibrium. This logic can be applied to all succeeding periods until we reach the
beginning of the game. The conclusion of backward induction is that the government
will deviate in the first period, the private sector will anticipate this, and the economy
will experience inflationary bias in every time-period.
As with previous applications this problem of backward induction can be avoided if
we introduce uncertainty about when the game will actually end. This involves reinter-
preting the rate of discount as follows
127

--- Sayfa 139 ---
New Classical Macroeconomics
where Prob is the probability that the game ends in any one period, and r is the rate of
time preference. With this type of uncertainty introduced into the model there is no
definite last period from which to begin the logic of backward induction, and so once
more Barro and Gordon's punishment strategy may be sufficient to avoid the time-
inconsistency problem.
6.3.4 Incomplete information and reputation
As discussed in Chapter 3 one way in which the paradox of backward induction may be
overcome is by allowing players in the game to have incomplete information. New
Classical economists have used this assumption to show how the problem of time-
inconsistency can, at least partially, be avoided. These models also provided a New
Classical explanation of the political business cycle. A common method of incorporat-
ing incomplete information into a repeated policy game between the government and
the private sector is to assume that the private sector does not know for certain which
type of government is in power. Specifically, the private sector is unsure of the govern-
ment's preferences as given by its utility function. This assumption has been adopted by
Backus and Driffel (1985), and Barro (1986). Here we will examine one relatively sim-
ple example to illustrate the type of results that have been derived.
Suppose there are only two possible types of government. A''strong government' is
only concerned with inflation, and so its indifference curves are horizontal straight
lines. A 'weak government is concerned with both inflation and unemployment, and
has indifference curves as shown in Fig. 6.2. Each type of government is assumed to
maximize its own utility, while the private sector seeks to correctly anticipate future
monetary policy, and hence the rate of inflation. This policy game is assumed to be
played a finite number of periods. If there was complete information then from the prin-
ciple of backward induction we would observe one of two possible outcomes in every
period. These outcomes are illustrated in Fig. 6.7.
If a strong government is in power, then it never has an incentive to deviate from its
optimal long-run monetary policy. In this situation we would always observe zero infla-
tion and unemployment at its natural rate. This is shown as point S in Fig. 6.7. If, how-
ever, the government is weak, then it does have an incentive to deviate from its optimal
long-run monetary policy. With complete information the private sector will anticipate
this and the only possible equilibrium is the time-consistent monetary policy associ-
ated with inflationary bias. This is shown as point W in Fig. 6.7. This outcome will again
be observed in every time-period.
With these two types of government only the weak government faces the problem of
time-inconsistency. This implies that a weak government has the incentive to appear
strong, and avoid inflationary bias. This type of deception will be possible, however,
128

--- Sayfa 140 ---
Time-Inconsistency
Fig. 6.7 Weak and Strong Government with Complete Information
only if there is incomplete information. With incomplete information the weak govern-
ment may be able to develop a reputation for being strong by acting as if it were strong.
This corresponds to a weak government renouncing the opportunity of inflating the
economy and maintaining zero inflation. It forgoes the opportunity of increasing its
utility in the short run so as to foster a reputation for being strong. In this context the
term 'reputation' has the specific definition of the probability assessment of the private
sector that the government is strong. In order to try and make accurate predictions of
future monetary policy the private sector will try and discern which type of govern-
ment is in power. It will do this by observing the government's policy actions. The equi-
librium concept often used to solve dynamic games with incomplete information is
that of sequential equilibrium associated with Kreps and Wilson (1982b). As discussed
in Chapter 3 this equilibrium concept has two characteristics. First, the government's
strategy is subgame perfect, i.e. no incredible threats or promises are made or believed.
Second, the private sector update their beliefs in accordance with Bayes' Theorem.
Specifically, adapting the equation derived in Appendix 3.1 the government's reputa-
tion for being strong is determined by the following equation,
where S corresponds to the government being strong, and W to it being weak. The prob-
abilities in the equation, therefore, have the following interpretation:
Prob (S I pt-1=0) = the probability that the government is strong, given that there
has been no inflationary shock in the past.
Prob(S) = the prior probability that the government is strong.
Prob( W) = the prior probability that the government is weak.
Prob (pt _ 1= OS) = the probability that a strong government would have set zero
129

--- Sayfa 141 ---
New Classical Macroeconomics
inflation. In our example this equals 1 because a strong government never inflates the
economy.
Prob (pt-1= 01 W) = the probability that a weak government would have set zero
inflation.
One extreme example of this type of learning is when a weak government inflates the
economy. As there are only two types of government, then the private sector will imme-
diately infer that the government is weak. In this situation the government literally loses
all credibility that it is strong. If on the other hand inflation is not observed, the private
sector may well increase its probability assessment that the government is strong. In this
case the government improves its reputation.
Typical results for a model such as this are as follows. A strong government will con-
tinue to pursue its optimal long-run policy of not inflating the economy; A weak gov-
ernment on the other hand will condition its action on which period of the game it is
currently in. In early periods it never inflates, hoping to build a reputation for itself later
in the game. In subsequent periods it will inflate with a positive probability, though less
than one. In the final stages of the game it will definitely inflate so as to reduce unem-
ployment below the natural rate. This description of a weak government's optimal
strategy is illustrated in Fig. 6.8.
Fig. 6.8 Equilibrium Strategy for a Weak Government
During the first phase of this game neither a strong nor weak government inflates the
economy, and so the government's reputation remains unchanged. This phase of the
game is characterized as a pooling equilibrium. Here each type of government pursues
the same optimal policy. In this situation the private sector receives no useful informa-
tion to help it discern which type of government is in power. In the mixed-strategy
phase the government's reputation for being strong will increase provided there is no
inflationary demand shock. As the end of the game is approached the incentive for a
weak government to inflate increases. At the end of this phase a weak government will
certainly inflate the economy in order to reduce unemployment. If such a shock is
observed, then the private sector knows for certain that the government is weak.
Alternatively, if by the time the final phase is reached no inflationary shock has been
observed, the private sector knows the government is strong. This final phase of the
game is characterized as a separating equilibrium. Here the different types of govern-
ment reveal their identity by pursuing diverse optimal strategies.
130

--- Sayfa 142 ---
Time-Inconsistency
To complete the description of this game we can illustrate the effects of these equi-
librium strategies for inflation and unemployment. This is shown in Fig. 6.9 using the
expectation-augmented Phillips curve. Initially the private sector correctly forecasts
that neither a weak nor a strong government will inflate the economy. Actual and
expected inflation are, therefore, both equal to zero and unemployment is at its natural
rate. In the pooling equilibrium phase of this game the economy remains at point S and
the problem of time-inconsistency is avoided. In the mixed-strategy phase of the game
there is a positive probability that the government will inflate the economy. The private
sector's expected level of inflation will therefore be positive and the short-run Phillips
curve shifts up. If there is no inflation, this causes unemployment to rise. In Fig. 6.9 we
move to a position such as point A. With no inflationary shock the government's repu-
tation for being strong increases. What happens next depends on which type of gov-
ernment is in power. If the government is weak, it will eventually inflate the economy.
This is represented by the economy jumping from point A to point B where the govern-
ment maximizes its utility subject to the appropriate short-run Phillips curve. Once the
private sector discerns this demand shock they will know that the government is weak.
The private sector now has complete information and the economy jumps to, and
remains at, the time-consistent outcome for a weak government. This is point W. If the
government is strong it will not induce a positive demand shock. When the separating
equilibrium phase is reached the private sector will know that the government is strong.
Once more the private sector has complete information and the economy returns to
point S.
From this illustration it can be seen that the problem of time-inconsistency is ini-
tially avoided. Eventually, however, the economy experiences a temporary rise in unem-
ployment above the natural rate. The path of inflation depends on which type of
government is in power. For a weak government this predicted sequence of events is
Fig. 6.9 New Classical Political Business Cycle
131

--- Sayfa 143 ---
New Classical Macroeconomics
EXERCISE 6.4*
In the text we argued that a weak government can exploit the private sector's uncertainty
about the government's preferences to partially avoid the inflationary bias associated with
time-inconsistent monetary policy. In this exercise we provided a simple model that illus-
trates this result.
Assume that the government, via its monetary policy, can perfectly control inflation.
Furthermore the government can be one of two types. Either it is strong or it is weak. A
strong government is only concerned about the rate of inflation, and so never inflates the
economy. A weak government, however, is concerned about both inflation and unemploy-
ment. Specifically, its welfare in time-period t is given by the following equation:
where ptand Utarethe rates of inflation and unemployment in time-period t respectively,
and c, d, and e are all positive parameters. It is assumed the government does not discount
future welfare, and so a weak government attempts to maximize the sum of its per-period
welfare over all current and future periods. The constraint facing the government is given
by the expectations-augmented Phillips curve. This is written as
where pf is the expected rate of inflation in period t determined at the beginning of that
period, and again o and b are positive parameters. The private sector formulates its expec-
tations rationally in accordance with Bayes' Theorem. Finally, it is assumed that this policy
game lasts for only two periods.
(1) Determine the subgame perfect path of inflation if it is common knowledge the gov-
ernment is weak.
(2) Determine the sequential equilibrium path of inflation if there is incomplete informa-
tion and the private sector's prior probability that the government is strong is 0.2.
(Hint: initially determine the necessary condition for the weak government to be indif-
ferent between inflating and not inflating the economy.)
strictly preferred to the government initially revealing itself through stimulating
demand. A weak government is consequently made better off by the presence of incom-
plete information. In contrast a strong government is likely to be made worse off by
incomplete information. This is because it now experiences a rise in unemployment
above the natural rate. This type of model has been used to explain the sharp rise in
unemployment in the early 1980s. Under this interpretation the newly elected
Conservative government was committed to reducing inflation, even though it had yet
132

--- Sayfa 144 ---
Conclusions
to gain this anti-inflationary reputation. As a consequence expected inflation was
higher than actual inflation, and unemployment rose above its natural rate. Only over
time did the government's reputation improve, causing the private sectors' inflationary
expectations and unemployment to fall. Even though agents formulate their expecta-
tions rationally, and wages and price are market-clearing we are still able to observe a
political business cycle as the government attempts to develop a reputation for being
anti-inflationary.
6.4 Conclusions
New Classical macroeconomics make two fundamental assumptions. These are that all
agents formulate their expectations rationally, and that all markets are perfectly com-
petitive. In early New Classical models it was assumed that the correct model of the
economy is common knowledge. This is the strong version of the Rational Expectations
Hypothesis. These models were used to challenge previous Keynesian results on the
effectiveness of government demand policy. Two examples have been analysed in this
chapter. The first refuted the effectiveness of government stabilization policy. The sec-
ond denied the possibility of a political business cycle. In both instances Keynesian
results were shown to depend on agents making systematic forecasting errors. This was
argued to be inconsistent with full rationality, and that such results were not subgame
perfect. As such they depended on the private sector believing and acting upon incred-
ible policy statements by the government. To say the least, such an assumption is not a
good foundation on which to base policy recommendations.
In the third section of this chapter we introduced the important concept of time-
consistency. Using a one-off policy game it was demonstrated that if the government's
optimal long-run monetary policy is time-inconsistent the economy will suffer from
inflationary bias. In this situation the subgame perfect equilibrium will be Pareto inef-
ficient. Various ways have been suggested how this inefficient outcome might be
avoided. Here we discussed the role of precommitment, supply-side policies, and
repeated monetary policy. In this final context we also considered recent New Classical
models based on incomplete information. In these models it is no longer assumed that
the correct model of the economy is common knowledge. Instead agents try to discern
the correct model over time. This is the weak version of the Rational Expectations
Hypothesis. These models tend to contradict earlier New Classical results. In particular
with incomplete information systematic demand policy may well be able to influence
real variables, and once more there may be the possibility of a political business cycle.
Having initially refuted many Keynesian beliefs, recent New Classical models can be
viewed as qualifying such results and rigorously identifying the underlying assumption
upon which they depend. These advances have been made possible due to the incorpo-
ration of game-theoretic concepts in to mainstream macroeconomics. This process
continues and it is hoped it will provided further insights in the future.
133

--- Sayfa 145 ---
New Classical Macroeconomics
6.5 Solutions to Exercises
Exercise 6.1
(1) One possible extensive form representation for the one-period policy game between the
government (G) and the private sector (PS) is shown in Fig. 6.10. Critically the government
and private sector set their strategic variables simultaneously. This means that each of these
two players' decision nodes are in the same information set. In order to incorporate random
demand shocks to the economy, we introduce a third player called Nature (N). In this exten-
sive form game each player is restricted to three possible actions. The pay-offs are given by
the utility functions for the government and private sector, Vf
G and Vf respectively.
Fig. 6.10
134

--- Sayfa 146 ---
Solutions to Exercises
(2) The policy of maintaining a constant growth rate of the money supply by the government is
only a Nash equilibrium within this game if there are no random demand shocks to output.
With no such shocks, and a fully anticipated monetary policy, output will remain at its nat-
ural rate. In this situation any systematic monetary policy will be a Nash equilibrium. If,
however, demand shocks cause output to deviate from natural rate, then the government
has an incentive to try and set the money supply above or below what is expected by the pri-
vate sector. In this situation the government has an incentive to depart from any systematic
monetary policy in order to try and stabilize the economy and increase its own utility. If
there are no limits placed upon the value of the money supply, there is no systematic mon-
etary policy that corresponds to a Nash equilibrium.
(3) One way of overcoming this unsatisfactory result that there is no Nash equilibrium for this
infinite game with demand shocks is to allow the government to precommit its monetary
policy. Now the private sector is able to observe the government's monetary policy before it
formulates its expectations. In terms of the extensive form game depicted in Fig. 6.10, the
private sector's decision nodes are no longer in the same information set, and so the dashed
line disappears. As expectations are now always correct, the government is unable to effect
the path of output. The government no longer has any influence over its own level of utility,
and so any level of the money supply will be a Nash equilibrium. To justify the specific New
Classical policy recommendation other considerations, such as the welfare costs of higher
inflation, must be taken in to account.
Exercise 6.2
(1) With the government unable to renege upon its initial policy announcement, it acts as a
Stackelberg leader. In this situation the policy announcement is identical to actual policy.
The government no longer has two separate decisions to make concerning its policy
announcement and actual policy. These two decisions reduce to the same thing. With the
government moving first it only faces one decision node. The extensive form for this game
is shown in Fig. 6.11. With the government committed to carrying out its preannounced
policy, it will pursue its optimal long-run monetary policy. This is given as point A in Fig.
6.6. Inflation will be zero and unemployment at its natural rate. Once expectations are fixed
the government would like to inflate the economy to increase its own utility, but is unable to
do so.
(2) Given that the private sector formulates its expectation of monetary policy at the same time
as the government enacts its policy, means that the government sets its monetary policy
before observing expectations. The government, therefore, does not know for certain which
decision node it is at following the private sectors' decision about expected inflation. The
resulting extensive form game is shown in Fig. 6.12. Although the government is unable to
observe the private sector's expectation, it can calculate what the rational expectation is.
Assuming common knowledge of rationality implies that the solution must be a Nash equi-
librium. As discussed in the text the only Nash equilibrium in this game is at point C in Fig.
6.6. Only at this point does neither player have an incentive to deviate. This equilibrium
entails inflationary bias equal to p2, and unemployment at its natural rate.
135

--- Sayfa 147 ---
New Classical Macroeconomics
Fig. 6.11
Fig. 6.12
136

--- Sayfa 148 ---
Solutions to Exercises
Exercise 6.3
(1) With the central bank only concerned with the rate of inflation, its indifference curves are
represented as horizontal straight lines. This is illustrated in Fig. 6.13. In this situation the
optimal long-run policy of maintaining price stability is time-consistent, and there is no
inflationary bias. The monetary authority now has no incentive to induce the economy
away from point A as this would reduce its welfare.
Fig. 6.13
(2) If the natural rate of unemployment is equal to the optimal rate of unemployment then the
bliss point is on the long-run Phillips curve with zero inflation. This is given as point A in
Fig. 6.14. The further away the economy is from this point the lower is the government's wel-
Fig.6.14
fare. With the economy initially at point A, there is no incentive for the government to alter
its monetary policy. If it were to do so, both inflation and unemployment would deviate
from their optimal rates and the government's utility would be reduced. Once more the gov-
ernment's long-run optimal monetary policy is time-consistent and there is no inflationary
bias.
137

--- Sayfa 149 ---
New Classical Macroeconomics
Exercise 6.4
(1) To determine the subgame perfect path of inflation we start in the final period first and work
backwards. In the second period a weak government sets monetary policy to maximize wel-
fare in that period. From the model this equals
i.
Rearranging the expectations-augmented Phillips curve and substituting for U2, this can be
rewritten as
The government maximizes this function for a given value of j$$. Setting the differential of
this equation with respect to §2 to zero and rearranging gives us the optimal inflation rate
for period 2. This is equal to e/2bd. This corresponds to the unique Nash equilibrium in this
period, and represents the level of inflationary bias due to time-inconsistency. Let this equi-
librium value equal p*. From the principle of backward induction we know that this unique
Nash equilibrium must also be the outcome in the first period. In equilibrium, therefore,
inflation is equal to p* in both periods.
(2) To determine the sequential equilibrium of this incomplete information game we again ini-
tially solve for the final period first and work backwards. In the final period the weak gov-
ernment will maximize welfare in that period by taking the private sector's inflationary
expectations as given. This is identical to the problem solved in (1), and so in this period the
government sets inflation equal to p* = e/2bd. Solving for the first period is more complex.
Now the government may have the incentive to try and deceive the private sector into think-
ing it is strong. The only way to do this is by playing a mixed strategy, with positive proba-
bilities over zero and positive inflation. If, in this mixed strategy phase, the government
adopts zero inflation, then its reputation for being strong increases. If, however, it induces
positive inflation, the private sector will know it is weak. In this situation welfare in the sec-
ond period is fully determined and so the government will seek to maximize welfare in the
first period, again taking inflationary expectations as given. Therefore, if the government
inflates the economy in the first period it will set it equal to p*. The only possible equilib-
rium outcomes are either inflation equal to zero or p* in the first period, followed by p* in
the second period. A necessary condition for this to be a sequential equilibrium is that the
government is indifferent between the alternative pure strategies adopted in the mixed-
strategy phase. To determine this condition we set the welfare levels associated with each
pure strategy equal to each other.
If the government sets inflation to zero in the first period then its aggregate level of wel-
fare is equal to
Alternatively, if the government sets inflation in both periods equal to p* then aggregate
welfare equals
138

--- Sayfa 150 ---
Further Reading
It can be confirmed that these two expressions are only equal to each other if p2 — p/2.
Finally, using this result we can solve for the probability distribution over pure strategies in
the first period. This is done in the following way. We know that the expected rate of infla-
tion in the second period equals the probability that the government is weak multiplied by
p*, i.e. p2 = Prob (W \ p\ = 0). p*. In equilibrium this must equal j$*/2. Using Bayes'
Theorem this condition can be written as
From this condition we derive that in equilibrium Prob (pi = 0 \ W) = 0.25. The unique
sequential equilibrium is that the weak government plays a mixed strategy in the first
period, with the probability of zero inflation equal to 0.25, and the probability of inflation
set at p* equal to 0.75. In the second period it adopts the pure strategy of setting inflation
equal to S*.
Further Reading
Blackburn, K. (1992), 'Credibility and Time Consistency in Monetary Policy", in K. Dowd and
M. K. Lewis (eds.), Current Issues in Financial and Monetary Economics, London: Macmillan.
Hargreaves Heap, S. P. (1992), The New Keynesian Macroeconomics: Time, Belief and Social
Interdependence, Aldershot: Edward Elgar.
Hoover, K. D. (1988), The New Classical Macroeconomics, Oxford: Blackwell.
Leslie, D. (1993), Advanced Macroeconomics, London: McGraw-Hill.
Levine. P. (1990), 'Monetary Policy and Credibility', in T. Bandyopadhyay and S. Clutah (eds.),
Current Issues in Monetary Economics, London: Macmillan.
Peel, D. (1989), 'New Classical Macroeconomics', in D. Greenaway (ed.) Current Issues in
Macroeconomics, London: Macmillan.
Phelps, E. S. (1992),'Expectations in Macroeconomics and the Rational Expectations Debate', in
A. Vercelli and N. Dimitri (eds.), Macroeconomics: A Survey of Research Strategies, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Romer.D. (1996), Advanced Macroeconomics, New York: McGraw-Hill.
Schaling,E. (1995), Institutions and Monetary Policy, Aldershot: Edward Elgar.
Snowdon, B., H. Vane, and P. Wynarczyk (1994), A Modern Guide to Macroeconomics: An
Introduction to Competing Schools of Thought, Aldershot: Edward Elgar.
139

--- Sayfa 151 ---
7
New Keynesian
Macroeconomics
I
N his General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money (1936) Keynes set out to
show that an economy could become stuck in an unemployment equilibrium due
to insufficient aggregate demand. In such an equilibrium market forces on their
own will not return the economy to full employment, and so government intervention,
in the form of active demand management, is advocated. Following Hicks's (1937)
interpretation of the General Theory, Keynesian results were initially derived under the
assumption that wages and prices adjust slowly to clear markets. This allowed demand
shocks to an economy to have real effects, and supports the need for government stabi-
lization policy. In the 1970s this fundamental assumption of imperfect wage and price
adjustment became increasingly criticized as being essentially ad hoc, and inconsistent
with the rational maximizing behaviour of individuals. Furthermore, as discussed in
the previous chapter, the way agents were assumed to formulate their expectations was
also considered to be inconsistent with full rationality. So effective were these criticisms
that New Classical economists, such as Lucas (1980), could even write about the death
of Keynesian economics. Recently, however, Keynesian economics has experienced a
significant revival, primarily due to the work of New Keynesian economists. The aim of
New Keynesian Macroeconomics is to derive Keynesian results within models where
agents fully optimize. Often New Keynesian models have sought to explain why agents
might rationally avoid changing wages or prices, even though markets do not clear. In
other New Keynesian models involuntary unemployment is possible even if wages and
prices are completely flexible. A common feature on these New Keynesian models is
that private-sector agents are interdependent of each other. This contrasts with New
Classical models, where due to perfect competition, private-sector agents are assumed
to be independent of one another. In this chapter we examine a number of New
Keynesian models and give them a game theory interpretation.
In section 7.1 we examine efficiency wage models. In these models workers are more
productive the higher the real wage rate. This provides firms with the incentive to
increase the wage they pay their employees. With all firms seeking to pay a higher real
wage there can be persistent involuntary unemployment. Efficiency wage models are
140

--- Sayfa 152 ---
Efficency Wage Models
therefore one reason why real wages may not fully adjust to their market-clearing level.
These models support the Keynesian result that due to real wage rigidity an economy
can experience an unemployment equilibrium. Section 7.2 goes on to critically discuss
New Keynesian models where agents fail to adjust nominal wages and prices in
response to demand shocks. Due to these nominal rigidities, demand shocks will cause
real variables to deviate from their natural rates. These fluctuations can be used to jus-
tify the Keynesian proposition that government demand management is needed to sta-
bilize the economy, and promote social welfare. In section 7.3 we analyse New
Keynesian models which exhibit multiple equilibria, and specifically examine the issue
of co-ordination failure. This occurs when agents within an economy co-ordinate upon
a Pareto-dominated equilibrium. Once again the selected equilibrium may be charac-
terized by involuntary unemployment, providing further justification for stabilization
policy. We argue that co-ordination failure can occur even when wages and prices are
completely flexible and agents have rational expectations.
7.1 Efficiency Wage Models
Involuntary unemployment occurs when there are workers prepared to work at the
going wage rate but firms are unwilling to employ them. This situation is illustrated in
Fig. 7.1.
Fig. 7.1 Involuntary Unemployment
In this diagram the market-clearing real wage rate is (W/P) *. With this real wage rate
the demand for labour, Ld, equals the supply of labour, Ls, and the level of employment
is L*. Everyone who wants to work at the market-clearing real wage rate is able to find a
firm willing to employ them. Anyone unemployed at this real wage rate must be volun-
tarily unemployed. If, however, the real wage rate is set above the market-clearing level,
141

--- Sayfa 153 ---
New Keynesian Macroeconomics
say at (W/P)o, then there is excess supply of labour. With this real wage rate workers are
willing to supply L0s amount of labour, but firms are only willing to employ L0. Jobs will
be rationed and involuntary unemployment is equal to the amount Ls - L0. Involuntary
unemployment will persist if real wage rigidity prevents the wage rate falling to its mar-
ket-clearing level.
Two reasons often suggested why the real wage rate may fail to clear the labour mar-
ket are the actions of unions, seeking to maintain their members' standard of living, and
the government, via minimum wage legislation. Efficiency wage models identify
another possible reason for why real wages may fail to fall in response to excess supply.
In these models it is firms themselves who resist cuts in real wages. The reason for this
is that a cut in the real wage rate reduces the efficiency of the workforce, leading to a
reduction in profits. In these circumstances it can be rational for firms to pay an effi-
ciency wage rate above the market-clearing real wage in order to maximize profits. The
critical assumption behind all efficiency wage models is that worker productivity is
positively related to the real wage rate. A number of reasons have been suggested for
why this might be true.
Shirking
Many workers have some discretion over the level of effort they put into their job.
Furthermore, their performance cannot always be directly observed by their employer.
This might be because constant monitoring is too expensive or because productivity
depends on the contribution of all the members in a team. In such circumstances it is
not possible for employers to relate the wage paid to each worker to their individual
productivity. If, however, increased effort reduces workers' utility, firms will need to
find some way of motivating their workforce to work hard rather than shirk. Shapiro
and Stiglitz (1984) show that firms paying an efficiency wage above the market-clearing
wage rate can induce workers not to shirk, and this can increase firms' profits. A sim-
plified version of this model is examined later in this section.
Labour turnover
Workers move between jobs for a variety of reasons. The resulting labour turnover is
often costly for firms. These costs include expenses associated with hiring and training
new workers. Firms will seek to economize on such costs by reducing the rate of
turnover. One way to do this is to make the present job more attractive by paying a
higher wage. Salop (1979) develops an efficiency wage model where firms increase their
wage rate with the aim of economizing on labour turnover costs.
Adverse selection
Another reason why firms might have an incentive to pay an efficiency wage is to attract
and maintain a high-quality workforce. Weiss (1980) presents a model where firms
paying a high wage attract both more and a better quality of job applicants. Firms pay-
ing a low wage will experience adverse selection, where only poor-quality workers apply
142

--- Sayfa 154 ---
Efficency Wage Models
for vacancies. To economize on the costs associated with employing poor-quality work-
ers, such as increased training costs or costs associated with firing unsuitable workers, a
firm can increase its profits by paying a wage above the market-clearing level.
Sociological factors
A final reason why worker productivity might be positively related to real wages is due
to sociological factors. A common theme in such explanations is that workers' morale
is affected by, among other things, their rate of pay. With a higher rate of pay workers
feel more valued by the firm and morale is boosted. Productivity is, in turn, assumed to
be positively related to worker morale. This may be because teamwork is improved or
because workers experience less stress-related illness and so take less sick leave.
For these various reasons increased wages are able to improve worker productivity,
and so may actually increase firms' profits. To see the implications of this relationship
we examine a simplified game theory version of the model developed by Shapiro and
Stiglitz (1984). In this model it is assumed that there are a large number of identical
firms and workers. These are the strategic players in the game. As all firms are assumed
identical their equilibrium strategies must be the same. This is also true for all workers.
Firms initially decide how many workers to employ and the real wage rate they are will-
ing to pay. Having observed the firms' wage offer, workers then decide whether or not
to accept it, and if so, how much effort to supply in return. These are the players' strate-
gic variables. Firms and workers are mutually interdependent because both firms' prof-
its, II, and workers' utility, V, depend on the real wage rate, w, and the amount of effort
supplied by workers, e. For simplicity we assume that workers have a discrete choice
over the amount of effort to supply. Specifically they can either work hard all the time
or none of the time. This is represented by setting e equal to either 1 or 0 respectively. If
a worker shirks, then we assume there is a fixed probability, Prob, of being caught and
fired. If a worker rejects a firm's wage offer, or is caught shirking and fired, then he
expects to earn the outside or reservation wage, WT. This is the income a worker expects
to receive if he looks for work elsewhere.
Firms are assumed to maximize expected profits and workers' expected utility. We
will assume the following specific pay-off functions for a representative firm and
worker. The firm's profits are equal to:
where TR is the total revenue for the firm, and N is the number of workers employed by
the firm. Total revenue is assumed to be positively related to both employment and
effort over the relevant range of production. With either N= 0 or e = 0 for all workers
we assume that total revenue is zero. Utility for a worker who works hard is equal to:
Utility for a worker who shirks depends on whether or not they are caught and fired. If
they are not caught, then their utility equals:
143

--- Sayfa 155 ---
New Keynesian Macroeconomics
If they are caught shirking and fired, their utility equals the reservation wage and:
Having defined the players, the strategic variables, the pay-off functions, as well as
the timing of the decisions to be made and amount of information available to each
player we can formulate this model as an extensive form game between a representative
firm and worker. This is shown in Fig. 7.2.
Fig. 7.2 Extensive Form Game for the Shirking Model
This extensive form game shows the representative firm first deciding upon its opti-
mal wage offer. In Fig. 7.2 three possible wage offers are depicted, w1, W2, and w3.
Having observed the firm's wage offer the worker then decides whether or not to accept
the job, and how much effort to supply. Finally, nature determines whether a worker
who shirks is caught and fired, according to a given probability distribution. To find the
subgame perfect Nash equilibrium for this game we apply the principle of backward
induction. Working backwards the first strategic decision to be determined is the
144

--- Sayfa 156 ---
Efficency Wage Models
optimal level of effort workers will supply given that the real wage rate offered by the
firm is acceptable. If the worker works hard, then utility is given by (7.2). Conversely
from (7.3) and (7.4) the expected utility of shirking is given as
The worker will therefore work hard if
Rearranging this inequality we get that the worker will work hard if
In order for the employer to induce workers to work hard they must pay more than the
reservation wage, wr. The reservation wage, however, is determined in part by the wages
set by other firms. We define the reservation wage as follows:
where U is the unemployment rate and b the level of unemployment benefits. The
reservation wage is equal to the probability of finding an alternative job offer multiplied
by the real wage rate plus the probability of remaining unemployed multiplied by the
level of unemployment benefit. This is equal to the expected level of alternative income.
Substituting (7.8) into (7.7) and rearranging yields the condition that workers will only
work hard if
If ProbU= 1, then the minimum wage the firms need pay to induce effort is equal to the
level of unemployment benefit plus full compensation for the effort involved in work-
ing hard. However, ProbUwill only equal 1 if shirking is always detected, and as a result
that individual remains unemployed. With Prob < 1 (i.e. there is imperfect monitoring)
or U< 1 (i.e. there is some positive probability of finding alternative employment), then
the real wage rate must be set above this minimum level in order to induce positive
effort. In this case firms will have to pay workers a wage premium to induce them to
work hard. If ProbU= 0, then the wage premium becomes infinite, and no finite wage
induces workers to work hard. This is because there is either no chance of being caught
shirking (Prob = 0), or because an alternative job, paying the same real wage rate, can
always be found (U=0). In order for equation (7.9) to be satisfied there must be some
positive level of unemployment. This demonstrates that firms must pay an efficiency
wage above the market-clearing wage rate if they are to induce effort from their work-
ers. The reason for this is as follows.
If all firms pay the market-clearing wage rate, there is no incentive for workers to
work hard. If workers are caught shirking and fired, then they can find another job pay-
ing the same real wage rate. With no effective punishment workers will definitely shirk.
145

--- Sayfa 157 ---
New Keynesian Macroeconomics
Firms realizing this are willing to pay an efficiency wage above the market-clearing
wage rate. This results in a positive level of involuntary unemployment. The effective
punishment if a worker shirks and is caught, is that he faces a positive probability of
being unemployed for a certain period of time. With all firms acting identically it is not
wage differentials that induce workers to work hard, but rather the prospect that if
caught shirking and fired workers could remain unemployed and only receive unem-
ployment benefit. In this way unemployment acts as a worker discipline device.
So far we have only solved the worker's decision whether to work hard or not. To fully
solve the model we must work back towards the firm's initial decision about its optimal
wage offer. Before that we determine what characterizes an acceptable wage offer for the
worker. It can first be noted that the worker will always accept a wage offer which satis-
fies (7.9). This is because any such wage rate, net of the disutility of work, must be
greater than the reservation wage a worker earns if he rejects the job offer. Similarly, if
the real wage rate does not satisfy (7.9), but is greater than the reservation wage, then
the worker will again accept the job offer, but supply no effort. This implies that the
worker will accept the job offer if the real wage rate is greater than b. If the wage offer is
less than b, then the offer is rejected. This completes the description for the equilibrium
strategies for the worker.
Given that the firm can also determine these optimal strategies for the worker its
decision is straightforward. If it sets a wage below b + 1/PrU, then profits will always be
less than or equal to zero. (Either its wage offer is rejected, in which case it earns zero
profit, or accepted but the workers make no effort in which case the firm makes a loss.)
The firm's optimal policy is to offer a real wage equal to b + 1/ProbU if this generates
positive profits, or zero otherwise. With a positive real wage rate the firm will hire work-
ers until their marginal productivity equals the real wage rate. With a zero wage offer
the firm sets employment equal to zero, and produces nothing. This completes the
solution for this efficiency wage game.
7.2 Nominal Rigidities and the Business Cycle
As discussed in the previous section efficiency wage models provide one possible expla-
nation for involuntary unemployment. However, such models are unable, on their
own, to explain a further important Keynesian result. This is that nominal demand
shocks can have real effects on the economy. In order for nominal demand shocks to
influence real variables there needs to be some kind of nominal imperfection. New
Classical macroeconomics attempts to explain fluctuations caused by nominal demand
shocks by incorporating imperfect information about the aggregate price level into
models of perfect competition. In contrast, one strand of New Keynesian macroeco-
nomics analyses the effects of nominal wage and price rigidity in the presence of
imperfect competition. With nominal rigidities wages and prices do not adjust instanta-
146

--- Sayfa 158 ---
Nominal Rigidities and the Business Cycle
EXERCISE 7.1
The efficiency wage model presented in the text made two simplifying assumptions. First,
workers only had a discrete choice over their level of effort, setting it equal to 0 or 1.
Second, there was a fixed probability that a worker shirking would be caught and fired,
equal to Prob. This Exercise relaxes both of these assumptions. Consider the model pre-
sented in the text when it is modified by the following alternative assumptions: (1) work-
ers have a continuous choice over the level of effort supplied, provided e is between 0 and
1 inclusive and (2) the probability that a worker is caught shirking depends on the level of
effort supplied according to the equation Prob- 1- e.
These modified assumptions also change the relevant definition of the utility associated
with the reservation wage. In this current model a worker can be caught shirking and fired
even if he is supplying a positive level of effort. The utility associated with alternative
income must reflect this possible disutility of work. The reservation utility is therefore equal
to
wr = (1-U)(w-e) + Ub.
Using this adapted model answer the following questions:
(1) What real wage rate will just induce the worker to accept the job?
(2) Determine an equation showing how a worker's optimal level of effort varies with the
real wage rate. Plot this function.
(Hint: Find an equation for e that maximizes a worker's utility if he accepts a job offer.)
(3) What is the firm's optimal efficiency wage rate?
(Hint: To maximize profits firms will seek to minimize the wage rate per unit of effort,
w/e.)
neously to offset shocks hitting the economy. These shocks therefore cause fluctuations
in real variables. The main finding of this research has been that small nominal rigidi-
ties can, under imperfect competition, lead to large fluctuations in real variables. This
in turn implies that there will be large changes in aggregate welfare. This result was
developed independently by Akerlof and Yellen (1985), Mankiw (1985), and Parkin
(1986), and has become known as the 'PAYM insight'.
Nominal rigidities are introduced into these New Keynesian models in one of two
ways. Parkin and Mankiw assume there are small costs associated with changing nom-
inal wages and prices. These so called 'menu costs' include the physical costs of adjust-
ing prices, such as printing new catalogues and price lists. They also cover the costs of
having to calculate and renegotiate new prices. Alternatively Akerlof and Yellen intro-
duce the concept of 'near rationality. This involves individuals suboptimizing, and so
147

--- Sayfa 159 ---
New Keynesian Macroeconomics
not behaving completely rationally, but only when the costs of doing so are small. The
PAYM result is important because it is generally agreed that the costs of adjusting nom-
inal wages and prices, and the costs associated with 'near rationality', cannot be very
large. To illustrate this result we discuss the arguments presented in Mankiw (1985) and
give them a game theory interpretation.
7.2.1 Small menu costs
In the argument that follows we assume that all firms are identical so that results
derived for a representative firm apply to all firms in the economy. With imperfect com-
petition firms face downward-sloping demand and marginal revenue curves. This is
illustrated in Fig. 7.3.
Fig. 7.3 Imperfect Competition and Small Menu Costs
The initial demand and marginal revenue curves for the representative firm are DO
and MRo respectively. We assume that marginal cost, MC, is constant. The firm will
maximize profits by setting output where marginal revenue is equal to marginal cost,
and then setting the price just compatible with selling this level of output. Firms will
initially set output equal to Q*o and price equal to P*O. This gives them a level of super-
normal profit equal to area P*o ABC.
Consider what happens if there is now a fall in nominal aggregate demand. This may,
for example, be due to a contraction in the money supply. With prices unchanged this
causes a fall in the real demand for goods and services. The demand and marginal rev-
enue curves will shift to the left. The new demand and marginal revenue curves are
shown as D1 and MR1 respectively. Price rigidity will be Nash equilibrium if the gain to
a single firm from changing its price, given that all other firms maintain their current
148

--- Sayfa 160 ---
Nominal Rigidities and the Business Cycle
price, is less than the cost of changing the price. In such an equilibrium no one firm, act-
ing in isolation, has the incentive to change its price. In this situation the general price
level will remain unchanged. Price rigidity is therefore a Nash equilibrium if the costs to
a firm of unilaterally changing its price outweigh the benefits. This will involve firms
comparing their expected level of profit under the alternative strategies of changing or
maintaining their current price.
If a firm maintains the price of P*o, then it will maximise its profit by producing the
level of output Q1. With this fixed price strategy the firm earns supernormal profits
equal to the area P*oFGC. At this level of output, however, marginal revenue is greater
than marginal cost, and so profits (excluding adjustment costs) will rise if the firm
increases its level of output and reduces price. Profits are maximized if the firm pro-
duces Q*1, and cuts its price to P*1. The benefit of cutting its price is that the firm now
earns a higher level of profit equal to the area P*1DEC. The cost of this strategy is the
small menu cost of adjusting price. The firm will maintain its current price if this menu
cost outweighs the increase in profit. Price rigidity will therefore be a Nash equilibrium
if the menu cost is greater than P*1DEC - P*oFGC. When this necessary condition is
satisfied the full effect of a nominal demand shock will fall on quantity adjustment. In
this equilibrium all firms experience a fall in profit and consumer surplus is reduced.
Social welfare is therefore significantly reduced following the fall in nominal aggregate
demand. These are traditional Keynesian results.
It is important to realize that the above condition for price rigidity to be a Nash equi-
librium will only be satisfied if there is imperfect competition. With imperfect compe-
tition the increase in profit from a firm reducing its price will only be of second-order
magnitude (i.e. small). The increase in sales leads to greater profit, but this is partly off-
set by the fall in price. This is not true with perfect competition. This can be demon-
strated by the following argument. Assume again that there is a fall in nominal
aggregate demand. With perfect competition, and given the expectation that all other
firms will maintain their initial prices, each firm believes it could capture the entire
market with a slight price reduction. This would greatly increase the firm's profits, and
certainly outweigh any possible menu costs. Each firm would therefore like unilaterally
to reduce its price. This contradicts the assumption that other firms will maintain cur-
rent prices. Under perfect competition complete price rigidity cannot be a Nash equi-
librium. Instead the Nash equilibrium for perfect competition is immediate and
complete price adjustment by all firms. For this reason small menu costs can only
explain how nominal demand shocks have real effects on the economy if there is imper-
fect competition.
7.2.2 Aggregate demand externality
One interpretation of the PAYM result that allows us to see it more clearly as an appli-
cation of game theory has been given by Blanchard and Kiyotaki (1987). They argue
149

--- Sayfa 161 ---
New Keynesian Macroeconomics
EXERCISE 7.2
Determine the necessary condition, regarding the cost of adjusting prices, for complete
price rigidity to be a Nash equilibrium in response to the following adverse demand shock.
Assume there are n identical firms, indexed i = 1, . . . . , n, and that all firms are initially max-
imizing profits. The initial demand curve is given as pi(£) = 250 - qi, where pi-and qiare the
price charged and quantity produced by firm i. After the demand shock this becomes
pi (£) = 230 - qi. Total costs for firm i, TCi, are given by the equation TCi, (£) = 50.qi-. Draw a
diagram illustrating your results.
that the reason there can be large social costs associated with nominal price rigidity,
even though it is not in any individual firm's interest to change its own price, is because
there is a basic aggregate demand externality. This externality arises when there is
imperfect competition.
The type of imperfect competition typically modelled in New Keynesian economics
is monopolistic competition, which is associated with Chamberlain (1933). With this
type of competition there are a large number of firms selling differentiated products.
Product differentiation causes firms' products to be imperfect substitutes for each
other, and so each firm has some degree of market power. The aggregate demand exter-
nality with this type of competition can be explained as follows. If only one firm adjusts
its price in response to a fall in nominal demand, there is a small yet negligible effect on
the aggregate price level. This implies that the fall in nominal aggregate demand trans-
lates into a fall in real aggregate demand. This will cause the economy to enter a reces-
sion. If, however, a significant number of firms reduce their prices, this will significantly
reduce the aggregate price level, and so partially offset the fall in aggregate demand. In
this situation the resulting recession is not so severe, and firms are less worse off. It is
this interdependence under imperfect competition, via the level of aggregate demand,
which constitutes the externality. Each firm in calculating its own optimal price strat-
egy will ignore the effect it has on other firms, and so the resulting equilibrium will
be Pareto inefficient. This result is illustrated in Fig. 7.4 for a reduction in the money
supply.
In this diagram we assume there are a large number of identical firms engaged in
imperfect competition. On the horizontal axis is the weighted price index for the econ-
omy as a whole, P, divided by the total amount of (nominal) money in the economy, M.
This axis gives the inverse of the real money supply. On the vertical axis is the price of a
representative firm, Pi, again relative to the nominal money supply. The diagram illus-
trates a number of firm i's isoprofit curves, indexed by the level of profit earned by that
firm, II. Moving farther to the right implies reduced demand for each firm's product,
and correspondingly reduced profit. Each firm is assumed to be only interested in
150

--- Sayfa 162 ---
Nominal Rigidities and the Business Cycle
Fig. 7.4 Imperfect Competition and the Aggregate Demand Externality
maximizing its own level of profit, and ignores any effect its price has on real aggregate
demand. This means that firms take the value of the real money supply as given and
determine their own optimal price accordingly. To maximize profit firms set their price
where the isoprofit line is vertical for each level of the real money supply. Joining these
profit-maximizing positions together gives us firm i's reaction function, Ri. This curve
shows how the firm's optimal price responds to changes in the inverse of the real money
supply. In Fig. 7.4 it is assumed that this reaction function is upward-sloping. (It is pos-
sible for the reaction function to be downward-sloping, but this does not significantly
alter the results of this section. As all firms are identical, the equilibrium involves firms
setting the same price level. The resulting equilibrium is called a symmetric Nash equi-
librium. This implies that the final equilibrium will be on the 45° line. With all firms ini-
tially setting their profit-maximizing price, the equilibrium will be at point A, where
the reaction curve cuts the 45° line. In this Nash equilibrium all firms set a price of Pi0
corresponding to the nominal money supply of MO, and earn a level of profit equal
to HO.
We now consider what happens if there is a contraction in the nominal money sup-
ply. If the amount of money in the economy contracts, to M1, then with fixed prices the
real money supply also falls. With fixed prices the economy moves to point B, and firms
earn a smaller level of profits equal to H1. This point, however, is off each firm's reaction
function, and so, ignoring menu costs, firms are suboptimizing. With each firm having
a negligible impact on the aggregate price level, firms will maximize profit by cutting
their price to Pil, and moving vertically down to point C. This reduction in price
increases profits to E2. Firms acting individually, however, will only reduce price if this
increase in profit is greater than the menu cost of changing price. If the menu cost
exceeds this second-order gain in profit, firms will maintain their initial price of Pi0 and
point B will be the new Nash equilibrium. In the absence of effective co-ordination no
one firm has the incentive to change its price and the economy will enter a recession due
151

--- Sayfa 163 ---
New Keynesian Macroeconomics
to the fall in aggregate demand. This supports Keynes's view that the government
should aim to target aggregate demand so as to stabilize the economy and avoid fluctu-
ations in real variables. If there were no costs of adjustment, each firm would reduce its
price immediately anticipating all other firms to do likewise. In this situation the econ-
omy would move instantaneously back to point A following the nominal demand
shock. Imperfect competition, on its own, is insufficient to justify a Keynesian business
cycle. Instead a further market imperfection must be introduced so that nominal
demand shocks can have real effects.
It can finally be noted that if all firms are able to co-ordinate their prices, they can
reduce prices to such an extent that the economy moves to point D. At this point firms
have internalized the aggregate demand externality, and maximize joint profit. Here
each firm's isoprofit curve is tangent to the 45° line, with all firms earning a profit equal
to 113. This is the symmetric Pareto-efficient outcome. If all firms reduce their prices to
the level associated with point D, real aggregate demand for goods is higher and all
firms are made better off. However, as point D lies off each firm's reaction function, it
does not correspond to a sustainable Nash equilibrium. Point D is not a Nash equilib-
rium because if firms believe other firms will set their prices consistent with this point,
they have the incentive to set a higher price. Point A is the unique Nash equilibrium for
the model depicted, and corresponds to an economy-wide prisoners' dilemma.
Imperfect competition leads to prices being set too high and output too low, resulting
in Pareto inefficiency. With sufficient nominal price rigidity expansionary monetary
may be able to alleviate this problem and enhance social welfare. In this situation an
increase in the money supply becomes equivalent to a co-ordinated reduction in prices
by all firms. Real aggregate demand increases and all firms are made better off.
7.2.3 Combining real and nominal rigidities
The above analysis has illustrated that, given the presence of imperfect competition,
small degrees of nominal rigidity can cause fluctuations in demand to have significant
effects on real variables and welfare. One criticism made of these models, however, is
that price rigidity will only be a Nash equilibrium under implausible parameter values.
Most importantly, the supply of labour needs to be highly elastic. As most empirical evi-
dence indicates that the supply of labour is highly inelastic this is a serious criticism.
This criticism derives from incorporating the above partial equilibrium analysis, where
we looked at the goods market in isolation, into a general equilibrium framework. The
advantage of using a general equilibrium framework is that interactions between mar-
kets can be explicitly modelled. Consider, for example, the incorporation of the labour
market into the above model. Given an adverse demand shock, and nominal price
rigidity, firms will reduce their level of output. This in turn reduces their demand for
labour. With inelastic labour supply this will cause the real wage rate to fall. This feeds
back to affect the goods market by driving down marginal costs. With marginal costs
152

--- Sayfa 164 ---
Nominal Rigidities and the Business Cycle
falling firms have a greater incentive to cut prices. With plausible parameter values this
increased incentive to reduce prices will dominate any small menu cost. With inelastic
labour supply small menu costs, on their own, cease to be a plausible explanation of
business cycle fluctuations.
To counter this criticism Ball and Romer (1990) have demonstrated that by combin-
mgboth real and nominal rigidities Keynesian results can once more be re-established,
without the need to assume unrealistic parameter values. Real rigidities are important
because nominal price rigidity is only a Nash equilibrium if individual firms do not
change prices in the belief that all other firms will maintain their prices. With this belief
a firm perceives that changing its price represents a change in its real price in response
to a real demand shock. If there is real price rigidity, this will reinforce the costs associ-
ated with nominal price adjustment. To illustrate this argument we will examine a
number of real rigidities and indicate how they reduce the incentive of firms to cut
prices following an adverse demand shock.
Efficiency wages
In the criticism outlined above the enhanced incentive for firms to reduce their prices
resulted from declining real wages in the labour market. However, as we have seen in
section 7.1, if firms pay efficiency wages above the market-clearing level, then labour is
off its supply curve. In this situation a fall in demand for labour can reduce employment
with little effect on the real wage rate. If this occurs, marginal costs will not fall greatly,
and small menu costs may be sufficient to deter firms cutting prices. With efficiency
wages price rigidity can be a Nash equilibrium for plausible parameter values.
This explanation suggests that interaction between the goods market and labour
market strengthens the case for both wage and price rigidity. For example, firms might
be prepared to reduce their prices following an adverse demand shock if they expect
wages to fall. If, however, they anticipate wages to remain fixed, then given small menu
costs they may decide to maintain current prices. Similarly, in the labour market, firms
might be prepared to reduce wages if they expect prices to fall. If, however, if they expect
prices to remain constant, then for efficiency wage considerations they will resist cuts to
the nominal wage rate. In this way it is possible for the resulting Nash equilibrium to
consist of complete wage and price rigidity, and for demand shocks to cause large fluc-
tuations in output, employment, and welfare.
Thick market externality
Given the presence of trade frictions there are costs associated with undertaking mutu-
ally beneficial trade. This means buyers and sellers will only be brought together if they
incur various search costs. For example, consumers will need to spend time searching
the market for the best product to buy, while firms may need to incur advertising and
promotional costs to attract new customers. Diamond (1982) has argued that these
costs will be negatively related to the level of activity in the economy. When there are
many potential trading partners, as in a boom, then search costs are likely to be lower
153

--- Sayfa 165 ---
New Keynesian Macroeconomics
than when there are few potential trading partners, as in a recession. As more people
engage in economic activity, so search costs are reduced for other agents. This interde-
pendence is called the 'thick market externality'. With search costs moving counter-
cyclically due to this externality, firms are more likely to maintain prices following a
nominal demand shock.
Customer markets
Closely related to the thick market externality, is the idea that customers will economize
on search costs. Consumers can do this by having a low frequency of search relative to
how often they buy a product. Following Okun (1975, 1981) markets with this charac-
teristic are called customer markets. With this behaviour customers will only continue
to buy a firm's product if they believe they are being charged an acceptable price. If cus-
tomer's believe that a firm is charging a price significantly above what other firms are
likely to be charging, they will stop buying from that firm and search elsewhere. This
implies that the elasticity of demand is greater for a price rise than it is for a price fall.
The demand curve is therefore kinked at the current price. If a firm raises its price, then
its sales will fall due to some customers switching their demand to other firms, and the
remaining customers buying less. If the firm reduces its price, it will sell more to current
customers, but it will not immediately attract new customers from other firms, as they
will not initially observe the price change. It is no longer sufficient that firms know that
nominal demand has changed in order for it to change its price; consumers must also
acquire the same information. This will tend to delay the change in price, and introduce
a further degree of price rigidity into the economy.
Judging quality by price
Another possible outcome in markets where consumers have imperfect information is
that they will judge a product's quality by its price. With this behaviour customers (or
potential customers) infer that if a price increases this is due to an improvement in
quality, while if the price falls this signals a deterioration in quality. Stiglitz (1987) has
argued that in this situation firms will be reluctant to reduce prices following a negative
demand shock for fear that consumers wrongly infer that quality has deteriorated.
Collusive oligopoly
Stiglitz (1984) has further argued that the gains derived from collusive oligopoly under
imperfect information may prevent firms within a cartel from cutting their prices fol-
lowing a negative demand shock. This may happen if firms have imperfect information
concerning the demand faced by other members of the cartel. In this situation one pos-
sible Nash equilibrium for maintaining a collusive outcome beneficial to all firms is to
use price change as a trigger strategy. Each firm maintains the collusive price as long as
other firms do so, otherwise each firm sets the Pareto-inefficient Nash equilibrium
price. With this strategy firms may not reduce their prices following a fall in demand,
due to the fear that this will be misinterpreted and cause other members of the cartel to
154

--- Sayfa 166 ---
Nominal Rigidities and the Business Cycle
revert to the non-collusive outcome. This would result in all firms being made worse
off. Real price rigidity will be an equilibrium if the expected gains from maintaining
prices outweigh the costs of not optimally adjusting to the demand shock.
Rotemberg and Woodford (1991) also appeal to collusive oligopoly to justify real
price rigidity. They argue that the desired mark up of prices over costs falls in booms
and increases in recessions. They suggest that this is because collusion is harder to
maintain in booms due to increased competition. If this is true, then firms have less
incentive to cut prices in a recession and so this again acts as a real price rigidity.
Staggered wage and price adjustment
A final argument for why prices might be sticky is that price adjustment across firms is
not synchronized but staggered. With staggered price adjustment the length of time it
takes for an economy to adjust to a nominal demand shock can be much greater than
the length of time individual firms hold prices fixed. This is because with staggered
price adjustment a change in price will correspond to a change in that firm's real price.
If firms seek to avoid changes in relative price, they will wish to avoid large one-off price
changes. For each successive price adjustment following a demand shock firms will only
partially adjust towards the new long-run equilibrium. As all firms in the economy only
partially adjust, the whole adjustment process is slowed down. The resulting price-level
inertia implies that nominal demand shocks can have large and long-lasting real effects
on the economy. This can be true even if individual firms change their prices frequently.
Blanchard (1983) has further argued that if staggering occurs over firms at different
stages in the chain of production, complete adjustment is further delayed.
Similar arguments can be made for wage adjustment. For example, workers might be
prepared to take a cut in wages, following an adverse demand shock if all other workers
accept a proportionate pay cut at the same time. However, with staggered wage con-
tracts, adjustment will imply changes in relative wages. If workers are concerned about
their wages relative to other workers, the adjustment process will be gradual, even if
wages are changed frequently.
Each of the above real rigidities can reinforce the costs associated with nominal price
adjustment. This increases the probability that firms will maintain prices and adjust
quantities in response to demand fluctuations. It seems likely that the combination of
empirically plausible menu costs, other real rigidities, and imperfect competition can
cause nominal demand shocks to have real effects. This supports a basic Keynesian con-
tention that the business cycle is demand driven and that there is a potential welfare-
enhancing role for government stabilization policy via active demand management.
155

--- Sayfa 167 ---
New Keynesian Macroeconomics
7.3 Co-ordination Failure
The previous section has argued that wage and price rigidity may form part of a Nash
equilibrium in macroeconomic games characterized by imperfect competition. In this
section we illustrate how interdependence can lead to the existence of multiple equilib-
ria. Furthermore, we argue that these equilibria can be Pareto ranked. This means that
from the perspective of social welfare some equilibria are better than others. This leads
to the possibility of co-ordination failure. Co-ordination failure occurs when an econ-
omy co-ordinates on an equilibrium which is Pareto inferior compared to alternative
equilibria.
The possibility of multiple equilibria and co-ordination failure has a number of sig-
nificant implications. For example, it opens up a potentially important role for govern-
ment policy. This involves the government attempting to induce the economy to
co-ordinate upon a Pareto-dominant equilibrium. This may involve the government
using active demand policy to prevent the economy becoming stuck in an unemploy-
ment equilibrium. Similarly, models with multiple equilibria can exhibit hysteresis
effects, where shocks to the economy can have permanent effects. For example, Howitt
and McAfee (1988) and Durlauf (1989) show that which of the many equilibria an
economy co-ordinates upon depends on initial conditions.
An alternative implication is that the economy may switch between different equi-
libria due to changing expectations. This result would seem to support Keynes's pro-
position that 'animal spirits' can be an important influence on the level of economic
activity and welfare. From this perspective these models are similar to 'sunspot equilib-
ria' developed in overlapping-generation models. The idea here is that, because the
economy does not process a unique equilibrium, agents will use a variable of no intrin-
sic importance, such as sunspots, to co-ordinate their beliefs upon one particular equi-
librium. In this way an extraneous event can have real effects on the economy via its
influence on agents' expectations. Given this possibility, the performance of different
economies may be largely unrelated to underlying fundamentals. One method individ-
uals might use to co-ordinate upon one particular equilibrium is to adopt common
conventions. These conventions might in turn be related to certain institutions, such as
the degree of centralization over wage-bargaining. Interestingly, the co-ordinating
convention could also be the acceptance of a particular economic theory. Hargreaves
Heap (1992) presents an overlapping-generation model where if agents formulate
expectations according to Classical economic theory, an equilibrium consistent with
these beliefs is selected. Alternatively, if agents formulate expectations according to
Keynesian theory, the resulting equilibrium exhibits Keynesian features. Both methods
of formulating expectations are self-fulfilling and so are rational. (A model with similar
properties, based on monopolistic competition, is presented in Exercise 7.3.)
To examine some of these issues we initially state a general requirement for multiple
equilibria to exist in macroeconomic games. This is based on the work of Cooper and
156

--- Sayfa 168 ---
Co-ordination Failure
John (1988). We then discuss how this condition can be met in various economic con-
texts.
7.3.1 Multiple equilibria and strategic complementarity
Cooper and John (1988) demonstrate that a necessary condition for there to be multi-
ple symmetric Nash equilibria is that the economy exhibits strategic complementarity.
As discussed in Chapter 4, strategic complementarity refers to the situation where an
increase in one player's strategic variable induces others to increase their strategic vari-
able. Diagramatically this is represented by upward-sloping reaction curves.
Conversely, strategic substitutability corresponds to downward-sloping reaction
curves. To see that strategic complementarity is necessary for multiple symmetric Nash
equilibria consider Fig. 7.5.
Fig. 7.5 Strategic Complementarity and Multiple Nash Equilibria
On the vertical axis is the value of a representative individual's strategic variable, ei.
The nature of this variable will depend on the economic model under consideration.
On the horizontal axis is the aggregate value of this strategic variable, e. This is the
weighted average of e{ over all individuals in the economy. It is assumed that due to the
large number of individuals within the economy, each individual has a negligible effect
on the value of e. A symmetric Nash equilibrium must lie on the 45° line. Fig. 7.5 illus-
trates individual i's reaction function, Ri. This reaction function shows how individual
i optimally adjusts his or her strategic variable as e changes. (A specific application of
this type of interdependence has been used in Fig. 7.4.) In Fig. 7.5 there are three sym-
metric Nash equilibria, at points A, B, and C. Given that the reaction function is con-
tinuous it should be clear that multiple intersections with the 45° line are only possible
if the reaction curve is, at least in part, upward-sloping. Thus Cooper and John empha-
size that a necessary condition for multiple equilibria is strategic complementarity. It
157

--- Sayfa 169 ---
New Keynesian Macroeconomics
should also be noted that strategic complementarity also provides a natural explana-
tion of the Keynesian multiplier process. For example, if the strategic variable corre-
sponds to firm's chosen level of output, then strategic complementarity implies that as
some firms expand output this induces other firms to do likewise. In this way strategic
complementarity is able to explain multiple expansions or contractions in national
output. We now discuss how this general condition might be met, and how New
Keynesian models can generate multiple Nash equilibria and co-ordination failure.
7.3.2 Possible causes of strategic complementarity
Aggregate demand externality
One way in which an economy can exhibit strategic complementarity is for there to be
an aggregate demand externality. This has been demonstrated by Rotemberg and
Saloner (1986, 1987), Blanchard and Kiyotaki (1987), Ball and Romer (1991), and Alvi
(1993). In these models strategic complementarity arises because an increase in the
general price level causes an individual firm, in the absence of menu costs, to increase
its own optimal price. This can be explained as follows. The increase in the general price
level has two effects on the individual firm's optimal price. First, for a given level of real
aggregate demand the firm will want to maintain its price relative to other firms. This
will induce the firm to increase its price level. Second, the increase in the general price
level reduces the real money supply and real aggregate demand, and as a consequence
of this, the firm will want to reduce its price. The net effect on the firm's optimal price is
ambiguous. If the relative price effect outweighs the aggregate demand effect, there is
strategic complementarity. If, however, the elasticity of aggregate demand to the real
price level is greater than one, then the aggregate demand effect might outweigh the rel-
ative price effect. In this situation there is strategic substitutability. As discussed above,
strategic complementarity is necessary for there to be multiple equilibria and co-
ordination failure. The following argument illustrates how this can occur with an
aggregate demand externality and small menu costs. In particular we argue that price
rigidity itself is an example of co-ordination failure.
Suppose that the government reduces the nominal money supply. If other firms are
expected to cut their prices, then with strategic complementarity, each firm will desire
to cut its price. If, however, as a result of menu costs, other firms are expected not to cut
their prices, then there is no relative price effect, and each firm has a smaller incentive
to reduce its own price level. The implication is that the cost to an individual firm, in
terms of reduced profit, of not adjusting its price, increases the greater the proportion
of other firms changing their price. For certain values of menu costs there will be mul-
tiple equilibria. One possible equilibrium is where all firms expect other firms to adjust.
With this expectation the cost of not adjusting is perceived to be large, and so each firm
will adjust its price. Another equilibrium is where all firms expect others to maintain
their current price. Here the perceived cost of non-adjustment is small, and can be
158

--- Sayfa 170 ---
Co-ordination Failure
smaller than the menu cost. If this condition is satisfied, none of the firms will adjust its
price. In both equilibria, expectations are self-fulfilling and rational. In the second,
equilibrium firms maintain their initial price and adjust quantities. Following a fall in
the money supply this equilibrium will cause the economy to enter a recession and eco-
nomic welfare is reduced. This argument illustrates that the combination of strategic
complementarity, due to the aggregate demand externality, and small menu costs can
lead to Pareto-ranked multiple Nash equilibria.
Before discussing alternative ways in which an economy might exhibit multiple equi-
libria it is useful to see that the above argument goes some way to meeting two related
criticisms levelled against small menu costs being a justification of nominal price rigid-
ity. The first criticism is that the small menu cost literature focuses on costs of price
adjustment but ignores the costs of quantity adjustment. The argument here is that a
firm will, contrary to the small menu cost literature, compare the cost of each type of
adjustment following a nominal demand shock. If there are costs associated with quan-
tity adjustment, it is no longer clear that firms prefer to maintain prices and allow quan-
tities to adjust. The second criticism is that the standard presentation of how menu costs
can lead to nominal price rigidity ignores dynamic considerations. The argument here
is that the costs associated with a firm not adjusting its price will accumulate over time.
Given that firms are concerned about future discounted profits this will increase their
incentive to change price immediately following a nominal demand shock.
The reason the previous argument relating small menu costs to multiple Nash equi-
libria addresses these criticisms is that the type of shock a firm perceives it is facing
depends on which equilibrium the economy co-ordinates upon. If firms expect other
firms to adjust their prices, then they will perceive the shock as nominal. In this situ-
ation firms are indeed likely to adjust their prices. If, however, firms expect other firms
to maintain their prices, then they perceive the shock to be real. In this situation firms
are more likely to infer that quantity adjustments are necessary to re-establish long-run
equilibrium. With this belief firms will resist price changes, and prefer quantities to
adjust. This explanation of nominal price rigidity is no longer dependent on firms
ignoring either quantity adjustment costs, nor the cumulative long-run effects of non-
price adjustment.
Thick market externality
As discussed in section 7.2 thick market externalities occur when the cost of contacting
potential trading partners is negatively related to the level of general economic activity.
In a boom search costs are likely to be smaller than in a recession, and this provides a
further inducement for firms to expand output. Once more we have strategic comple-
mentarity. As some firms expand their level of activity, this reduces the search costs of
other firms. This provides the incentive for these other firms to increase their level of
activity. This introduces the possibility of multiple Nash equilibria. If firms expect there
to be a high level of economic activity, and consequently low search costs, then each
firm will optimally produce a high level of output. If, however, firms expect a low level
159

--- Sayfa 171 ---
New Keynesian Macroeconomics
of economic activity, and consequently high search costs, they will produce a low level
of output. Both of these scenarios generate self-fulfilling expectations and so represent
possible Nash equilibria. As with the aggregate demand externality these equilibria are
characterized by different levels of economic activity, and so will be Pareto ranked.
Once more there is the potential for co-ordination failure.
Increasing returns
A final source of co-ordination failure is when production is characterised by increas-
ing returns. With increasing returns production costs fall as output is expanded. In this
situation production is more attractive when demand for the good is high. Again, if all
firms expect a high level of aggregate demand, then they will expand their level of pro-
duction. Alternatively, if they expect a low level of aggregate demand then they will cut
back on production. Once more there is the possibility of Pareto-ranked multiple equi-
libria each characterized by self-fulfilling expectations. The implications of increasing
returns have been developed by Kiyotaki (1988), Shleifer (1986), Shleifer and Vishny
(1988), and Murphy, Shleifer, and Vishny (1989a, 1989b).
It should be noted that these final two mechanisms used to generate multiple equi-
libria in Keynesian models do not rely on imperfect wage and/or price adjustment.
These models therefore demonstrate that co-ordination failure can result even if wage
and prices are fully flexible. Indeed, models based on co-ordination failure and nomi-
nal rigidity are sometimes presented as alternative paradigms. However, models based
on the aggregate demand externality show that these two approaches are closely related.
As argued above, in certain models nominal price rigidity can itself represent a co-ordi-
nation failure.
EXERCISE 7.3.*
In the text we argued that price rigidity can itself be a co-ordination failure following a
nominal demand shock. In this exercise we present a model where the resulting equilibrium
depends on how agents expect others to react to a reduction in the nominal money supply.
If agents have 'Classical' expectations, then the demand shock has no real effects.
Conversely, if agents have 'Keynesian' expectations then there is co-ordination failure and
the economy enters a recession. Consider the following economy of n firms, indexed i =1,
. . . . , n, that compete against each other according to monopolistic competition. Each firmm
faces the same demand function, given by the equation
160

--- Sayfa 172 ---
Co-ordination Failure
where di and pi are respectively the demand and price of firm i's product, M is the nominal
money supply, and P is the weighted average price level over all firms, defined as
Each firm's total cost (TCi) is given by the equation
TCi = cPd2
Firms attempt to maximize profits and ignore any effect their own price/output decisions
have on the aggregate price level, P. Initially we assume that there are no menu costs asso-
ciated with changing prices.
(1) Derive expressions for each firm's optimal output and price.
(2) Derive expressions for the Nash equilibrium of output and price for each firm.
(3) Derive expressions for each firm's price and output if firms maximize joint real profits
and divide the optimal output level equally between themselves. Explain why the
expressions derived here differ from those found in (2).
For all subsequent questions assume the following parameter values: n = 20, c = 0.5.
(4) If M= 100, what are the Nash equilibrium values for each firm's output and price?
(5) Assume now that the government reduces the money supply by 10 per cent. Calculate
each firm's optimal price and output, and their resulting expected real profit level,
under the following assumptions:
(a) Each firm expects all other firms to reduce their prices by 10 per cent.
(b) Each firm expects all other firms to maintain their initial prices.
(6) Calculate each firm's output and expected real profit level if instead of optimizing in
(5), they maintain their initial price level. Again do this for each of the two assumptions
about what other firms will do.
(7) From your results to (5) and (6), derive the range of values associated with the costs of
changing prices for which both of the following situations are equilibria, dependent on
expectations and a 10 percent reduction in the money supply.
(a) All firms reduce prices by 10 per cent
(b) All firms maintain their initial prices.
161

--- Sayfa 173 ---
New Keynesian Macroeconomics
7.4 Conclusions
New Keynesian Macroeconomics attempts to derive traditional Keynesian results
within models where all agents are assumed to act rationally. In part, this is a response
to New Classical criticisms that earlier Keynesian results were dependent upon essen-
tially ad hoc assumptions. In particular, as discussed in the previous chapter, many
Keynesian results were initially derived in models where agents formulated their expec-
tations in ways inconsistent with complete rationality. To meet this criticism New
Keynesian economists have developed game theory models where agents determine
their expectations according to the Rational Expectations Hypothesis. In this chapter
we have analysed three separate, though related, strands of New Keynesian
Macroeconomics. These were efficiency wage models, models based on nominal rigidi-
ties, and models where due to multiple equilibria there is the potential for co-ordina-
tion failure. In each case there is the possibility of sustained involuntary
unemployment, and often a clear role for government stabilization policy. These results
are no longer dependent on agents acting irrationally. Instead, the key assumption in all
the models analysed is that private sector agents are interdependent. This contrasts with
New Classical models where, due to the assumption of perfect competition, private-
sector agents are independent. (In New Classical Macroeconomics there is none the less
interdependence between the government and the private sector.) From this perspec-
tive which school of thought is viewed as offering the most relevant policy advice
depends not so much on whether individuals act rationally or otherwise, but on the
underlying structure of the economy being considered. In some economies New
Classical models can be viewed as being the most relevant. In other economies New
Keynesian prescriptions will be valid. With the widespread use of game theory models
in both New Keynesian and New Classical macroeconomics there appears less reason to
reject either school of thought on the grounds that they employ ad hoc assumptions
concerning either the rationality of agents or wage and price adjustment. Instead we
must now appraise the two schools of thought according to different criteria. In partic-
ular the empirical relevance of competing models is once more seen to be of paramount
concern.
7.5 Solutions to Exercises
Exercise 7.1
(1) The expected utility for a worker accepting a job offer equals
Conversely the expected utility of rejecting a job offer is
162

--- Sayfa 174 ---
Conclusions
A worker will accept a job offer if
An offer will therefore be accepted if
Substituting in the equation for wr yields the following condition for an acceptable wage
offer
A worker will accept any job offer where the wage minus the disutility of work is greater than
the level of unemployment benefit. As the worker can always set e = 0 the minimum accept-
able real wage is b.
(2) Given that the wage offer is accepted a worker will determine his optimal level of effort by
maximizing his utility, VA.. Substituting the equation Prob =\-e into the expression for VA
gives
Differentiating, setting this equal to zero and rearranging gives us the following equation for
how workers determine their optimal level of effort:
This function is plotted in Fig. 7.6.
(3) Provided profits are positive firms will seek to minimize the wage rate per unit of worker
effort, w/e. This corresponds to the maximum value of elw. This value is represented by the
slope of a line taken from the origin to the function e(w). From the above diagram w/e is
minimized when e = 1, and so firms set the real wage rate equal to 1/U+b+1. If U=0, then
firms always have an incentive to increase the wage rate. This cannot, therefore, represent an
Fig. 7.6
163

--- Sayfa 175 ---
New Keynesian Macroeconomics
equilibrium. As with the model in the text, the equilibrium must exhibit a positive rate of
involuntary unemployment to induce workers optimally to supply effort.
Exercise 7.2
Multiplying the initial demand curve for firm i by that firm's level of output and differentiating
gives us firm i's marginal revenue curve:
Setting this equal to marginal cost of £50 we can derive that the firm's initial profit-maximizing
level of output is 100. The firm will just sell this amount when it sets its price equal to £150. Initial
profits for each firm are therefore £10,000.
After the adverse demand shock the marginal revenue curve becomes
Setting this equal to marginal cost gives us the new profit-maximizing level of output of 90, and
price equal to £140. With price adjustment each firm will earn profits equal to £8,100. From this
level of profit, however, must be subtracted the cost of adjusting the price level, i.e. the small
menu cost. Alternatively, if the firm maintains its initial price of £150, then the most it will be
able to sell will be 80 units of the good. This yields a profit of £8,000.
The necessary condition for price rigidity to be a Nash equilibrium is therefore that the cost
of adjusting prices for all firms is greater than £100. If this condition is satisfied, no firm has the
incentive to change its price. Instead firms will reduce their supply of output by 20 per cent in
response to the demand shock. These results are illustrated in Fig. 7.7.
Fig. 7.7
164

--- Sayfa 176 ---
Solutions to Exercises
Exercise 7.3
(1) Rearranging the demand function we can derive the inverse demand function for firm i
From this expression we can formulate firm i's profit function
By setting the differential of this equation, with respect to di, equal to zero, and rearranging,
we can derive expressions for the firm's optimal output and price level.
(2) The Nash equilibrium for this model will exhibit two features:
(a) All firms will be on their reaction functions, and so will set output and price according
to the equations derived in (1).
(b) All firms will set the same level of output and price, and so pi = P, for all i. (As all firms
face the same constraints, the equilibrium will be a symmetric Nash equilibrium.)
From these two observations we can derive equations for pi and di consistent with Nash
equilibrium.
(3) In this problem firms attempt to maximize joint profits, II, given that all firm set the same
price and produce the same output. We can therefore state that P= pi and D = ndi = M/P.
With these constraints joint nominal profit is equal to
and joint real profit is equal to
165

--- Sayfa 177 ---
New Keynesian Macroeconomics
Setting the differential with respect to D equal to zero and rearranging gives us the follow-
ing expressions
and
Compared to the Nash equilibrium this joint profit-maximizing outcome involves firms
doubling their output and halving their price. The reason for this is that by co-ordinating
their price and output decisions they can internalize the aggregate demand externality. This
involves firms recognizing that by reducing prices simultaneously their relative prices
remain unchanged, but the real money supply expands. This increases the demand for all
firms and makes them all better off.
(4) From the equations derived in (2) each firm's output is equal to 0.5, and prices are set equal
to 10 in Nash equilibrium.
(5) and (6) The answers to these questions are given in Table 7.1, where Pe corresponds to the
firm's expectation of the average price level, and IIi/Pe is its expected real profit level.
(7) From examining the results derived in parts (5) and (6) we can state the following two
results:
(a) If firm's expect all other firms to reduce prices by 10 per cent, then it is optimal for all
firms to do so, provided the cost of changing prices (menu costs) are less than
0.375-0.368 = 0.007.
(b) If firm's expect all other firms to maintain their initial prices, then it is optimal for all
firms to do so, provided menu costs are larger than 0.350 - 0.349 = 0.001.
Both of these scenarios will be Nash equilibria given that the following condition is satisfied:
0.001 < menu costs < 0.007.
Provided that this condition is satisfied, which equilibrium prevails depends upon firms'
expectations. For example, if firms expect other firms to react according to Classical eco-
nomic theory, and reduce prices in proportion to the fall in the nominal money supply, then
the economy will co-ordinate on the first equilibrium. Alternatively, if firms expect other
firms to react according to Keynesian economic theory, and keep prices constant, then the
economy will co-ordinate upon the second equilibrium. In this sense economic theory itself
can be a way for individuals to co-ordinate their expectations. Both types of expectation are
Table 7.1
Question (5a)
Question (5b)
Question (6a)
Question (6b)
Pe
9.0
10.0
9.0
10.0
di
0.50
0.48
0.41
0.45
Pi
9.0
9.7
10.0
10.0
ni/Pe
0.375
0.350
0.368
0.349
166

--- Sayfa 178 ---
Further Reading
rational as they are self-fulfilling, and generate either a 10 per cent reduction in price, or a 10
per cent reduction in the output.
Further Reading
Akerlof, G., and J. Yellen (1986), Efficiency
Wage Models of the Labour Market, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Hargreaves Heap, S. P. (1992), The New Keynesian Macroeconomics: Time, Belief and Social
Interdependence, Aldershot: Edward Elgar.
Leslie, D. (1993), Advanced Macroeconomics, London: McGraw-Hill.
Mankiw, N. G., and D. Romer (1991), New Keynesian Economics: i and ii, Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press.
Romer, D. (1996), Advanced Macroeconomics, New York: McGraw-Hill.
Snowdon, B., H. Vane, and P. Wynarczyk (1994), A Modern Guide to Macroeconomics: An
Introduction to Competing Schools of Thought, Aldershot: Edward Elgar.
Weiss, A. (1991), Efficiency
Wages: Models of Unemployment, Layoffs and Wage Dispersion,
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
167

--- Sayfa 179 ---
8
International Policy
Co-ordination
I
N the previous two chapters we have discussed the role of macroeconomic policy
from a purely domestic perspective. In particular we ignored the effects a country's
economic policy might have on other countries. This is justified if the country
under consideration is small. With this assumption it is legitimate to ignore any
spillover effects that a country's macroeconomic policy might have on other countries
because they are likely to be negligible. However, if we are interested in analysing large
economies such effects may be significant, and need to be explicitly modelled. With
spillover effects different countries are interdependent. This chapter illustrates that in
the presence of spillover effects countries can benefit by co-ordinating their economic
policies rather than setting them unilaterally. For this reason the prospect of policy co-
ordination has especially appealed to the large G7 nations (USA, Germany, Japan, UK,
France, Italy, and Canada), and in particular the G3 nations (USA, Germany, and
Japan).
Policy co-ordination occurs when countries agree to pursue economic policies
intended to promote the welfare of all nations involved in the agreement. This will
involve countries explicitly taking into consideration the spillover effects their policies
have on other countries. Spillover effects occur when one country's economic policy
affects the economic performance of at least one other country. In the absence of policy
co-ordination each country ignores these externalities and seeks to maximize its own
individual welfare. With all countries acting independently the outcome will be a Nash
equilibrium. With spillover effects this equilibrium is likely to be Pareto inefficient. This
provides the incentive for countries to co-ordinate their policies. Policy co-
ordination is, therefore, designed to avoid Pareto-inefncient outcomes.
Given that there is no supranational authority that can enforce agreements made
between sovereign nations the appropriate tool for analysing economic policy co-
ordination is non-cooperative game theory. From this perspective each country
will only agree to policy co-ordination if it perceives this is in its own self-interest. As a
result all agreements must be self-enforcing. To illustrate some of the issues involved in
policy co-ordination we will focus on monetary policy. Specifically each section of this
168

--- Sayfa 180 ---
Spillover Effects of Monetary Policy
chapter addresses a separate question. In section 8.1 we ask the question: What are the
main spillover effects of monetary policy? Here we discuss three ways in which aggre-
gate demand policy in one country can spillover to effect the welfare of another coun-
try. These spillover effects are then illustrated using a modified version of the
Mundell-Fleming model under the extreme assumptions of perfectly fixed and per-
fectly flexible exchange rates. In section 8.2 we ask the question: What are the conse-
quences of these spillover effects? This section illustrates the potential gains from
countries co-ordinating their monetary policies. This is done by using a two-country
model and contrasting the possible outcomes under the alternative assumptions of no
co-ordination and complete co-ordination. Although there are often potential gains
from co-ordination, there are also problems for countries in realizing these gains. Some
of these problems and how they might be overcome are discussed in section 8.3. This
section therefore answers the question: What are the problems associated with mone-
tary policy co-ordination? The final question we address in section 8.4 is: How large are
the potential gains from policy co-ordination? To answer this question we review vari-
ous studies that have attempted to estimate the possible gains from co-ordination.
8.1 Spillover Effects of Monetary Policy
As discussed in the introduction spillover effects occur when one country's economic
policy affects the economic welfare of at least one other country. Here we discuss how
such spillover effects can be associated with monetary policy. There are three broad
ways in which any aggregate demand policy in one country can spillover to effect
another country. These are the real income effect, the monetary effect, and the relative
price effect. We discuss each of these effects in turn.
8.1.1 Real income effects
This linkage between countries takes place through the current account of the balance
of payments. It occurs when a change in one country's national income increases its
demand for imports from another country. This will stimulate aggregate demand in the
overseas country, and alter its level of economic welfare. For example, if the UK
increases the growth rate of its money supply this will stimulate domestic aggregate
demand. This will cause aggregate demand in other countries also to expand as UK res-
idents increase their demand for imports. Clearly the size of this spillover effect will
depend crucially on the marginal propensity to import.
169

--- Sayfa 181 ---
International Policy Co-ordination
8.1.2 Monetary effects
In addition to real income effects there will also be monetary effects if nations seek to
intervene in foreign exchange markets. The rationale for government's doing this is to
influence the value of their exchange rate. This is done by either buying or selling
foreign exchange. However, as foreign exchange constitutes part of a country's high-
powered money supply this affects the quantity of money in the economy. With less
than fully flexible exchange rates this provides another linkage between countries.
Consider again the example of the UK expanding its domestic money supply which
results in an increase in UK imports. This will improve the balance of payments of the
UK's overseas trading partners. In the absence of exchange rate intervention the value
of the foreign currency will appreciate against sterling. If this is viewed as undesirable
the overseas government will sell its own currency and buy sterling on foreign exchange
markets. The effect is that the foreign country accumulates sterling which leads to an
expansion in its level of high-powered money. This in turn will lead to a multiple
expansion in that country's own money supply. Once more domestic monetary policy
affects aggregate demand and economic welfare in other countries. Only if exchange
rates are completely flexible will there be no monetary effects.
8.1.3 Relative price effects
This final linkage occurs when the exchange rate between countries is allowed to appre-
ciate or depreciate. This will cause a change in the relative price of goods and services
between countries. This in turn affects the demand for imports and exports. With this
linkage an expansion in the UK money supply will cause its trading partners to experi-
ence an exchange rate appreciation. This will make foreign goods and services less com-
petitive, tending to reduce their exports and increase imports. This effect only works
when there is less than completely fixed exchange rates.
As has been explained above, which of these effects operate, and which are dominant,
depends on whether countries have fixed or flexible exchange rates. To see this we illus-
trate these spillover effects specifically for monetary policy in a modified version of the
Mundell-Fleming model. This will be done under the alternative assumptions of fixed
and flexible exchange rates. To illustrate the various spillover effects associated with
monetary policy we make use of the so called IS/LM model. (This model is presented in
most intermediate macroeconomic textbooks. If, however, the reader is unfamiliar
with this model the rest of this section may be omitted.)
The basic two-country Mundell-Fleming model makes a number of simplifying
assumptions. Significantly it assumes that both countries are small. It is this assump-
tion that we modify and assume instead that both countries are large. Only with this
modification can spillover effects be modelled, and the issue of policy co-ordination
170

--- Sayfa 182 ---
Spillover Effects of Monetary Policy
discussed. All other assumptions of the Mundell-Fleming model, however, are main-
tained. In particular, we assume that there is perfect capital mobility, and that increases
in aggregate demand lead to an expansion in national income rather than wage and
price inflation.
Figs. 8.1 and 8.2 illustrate the spillover effects following an expansionary monetary
policy by one of two large countries. The first diagram corresponds to when both coun-
tries maintain a fixed exchange rate, and the second is when they allow the exchange
rate to be completely flexible. Initially the effects of the monetary expansion are the
same under each of these policy regimes. Prior to the change in monetary policy both
countries are assumed to be in equilibrium at point A in both diagrams. Only at this
point are the goods market and money market simultaneously in equilibrium. In coun-
try A the rate of interest (r) and national income (Y) are initially r0 and Y"o respectively.
Similarly in country B they initially equal 1*0 and Y*0. We now suppose that country A
expands its domestic money supply. This is represented by the LM curve for that econ-
omy shifting to the right from LMo to LM1. The increase in the money supply will cause
the domestic rate of interest to fall, and this stimulates investment and aggregate
demand. This leads to an increase in national income in country A, as shown by the
economy moving to point B, where the new LM curve cuts ISo. Output expands to Y1
and the domestic rate of interest falls to r\. As this economy is large the expansion in
country A's domestic money supply will also lead to a significant increase in the world
money supply. This will cause a fall in the world rate of interest. This reduction, how-
ever, will be less than the fall in the domestic rate of interest. We assume that the world
rate of interest only falls to r2. At point B, therefore, the domestic rate of interest is below
the world rate of interest and so country A experiences an incipient balance-of-
payments deficit. As national income in country A has increased, we assume that it also
increases its demand for imports. In this two-country model this is equivalent to an
increase in the demand for goods from country B. This real income effect is depicted by
country B's 7S curve shifting from IS0* to IS*1. This causes country B to adjust to point
B with both a higher national income and interest rate. At this point the foreign rate of
interest is above the world rate of interest. Country B will, therefore, experience an
incipient balance-of-payments surplus. At point B neither country has balance-of-
payments equilibrium. This disequilibrium will induce further adjustment and
spillover effects, the nature of which depends on the exchange rate regime between the
two countries.
Fixed exchange rates
With a fixed exchange rate, adjustment towards long-run equilibrium occurs via mon-
etary effects. This effect is shown in Fig. 8.1. At point B country A is running a balance-
of-payments deficit. In order to stop its exchange rate from depreciating the monetary
authorities in that country must buy its domestic currency and sell foreign exchange.
This will reduce the amount of high-power money in that economy and cause a multi-
ple contraction in the domestic money supply. This is shown by a leftward shift of the
171

--- Sayfa 183 ---
International Policy Co-ordination
LM curve. In country B this process is reversed causing its domestic money supply to
increase and its LM curve to shift to the right. These adjustments continue until both
economies return to long-run equilibrium at point C. At this point both countries
experience balance-of-payments equilibrium, and their domestic rates of interest equal
the world rate of interest. With balance-of-payments equilibrium neither country need
intervene any further in foreign exchange markets and so each country's domestic
money supply remains unchanged.
Fig. 8.1 Expansionary Monetary Policy with Fixed Exchange Rates
Flexible exchange rates
With a fully flexible exchange rate, adjustment towards the long-run equilibrium
occurs via a change in relative prices. This effect is shown in Fig. 8.2. At point B country
A is running an incipient balance-of-payments deficit. With flexible exchange rates
country As currency will depreciate. Similarly, country B's currency will appreciate.
This change in the terms of trade makes country As goods more competitive and coun-
try B's goods less competitive. With no adjustment lags this will cause the demand for
country As goods to increase, and its IS curve to shift to the right. In country B aggre-
gate demand falls and its IS curve shifts to the left. These adjustments continue until
both economies are in long-run equilibrium at point C.
The previous examples have illustrated the possible spillover effects associated with
expansionary monetary policy. In particular, with fixed exchange rates expansionary
monetary policy in country A leads to increased national income in both countries.
Assuming this increases welfare in country B we can state there is a positive Spillover
effect from, country A to country B. This contrasts with the result derived under flexible
exchange rates where an expansionary monetary policy in country A, reduces national
income in country B. This is a typical example of a beggar-my-neighbour policy. With
welfare being reduced in country B, we have a negative spillover effect from country A.
Although these example are useful in highlighting various possibilities it is important
172

--- Sayfa 184 ---
Potential Gains from Policy Co-ordination
Fig. 8.2 Expansionary Monetary Policy with Flexible Exchange Rates
to realize that these results are model-specific. With a different set of assumptions these
spillover effects may be negated or reversed.
8.2 Potential Gains from Policy Co-ordination
The previous section has illustrated how large countries typically face positive or nega-
tive spillover effects associated with aggregate demand policy. This causes economies to
be mutually interdependent. In this context if each country sets its own monetary
policy unilaterally, then there is the possibility that the final outcome will be Pareto
inefficient. This will occur when government's have more policy objectives than policy
instruments. If government's have at least as many independent instruments as
EXERCISE 8.1
In the text we illustrated the possible spillover effects associated with an expansionary
monetary policy. This exercise shows how these spillover effects apply when a government
adopts an expansionary fiscal policy.
(1) Using the modified Mundell-Fleming model presented in the text, illustrate the
spillover effects when one country pursues an expansionary fiscal policy under fixed
exchange rates.
(2) Repeat (1) under the assumption of flexible exchange rates.
173

--- Sayfa 185 ---
International Policy Co-ordination
objectives, then they can, if certain conditions are met, achieve all their objectives
simultaneously. This is an application of Tinbergen's Theorem (1952) which states that
for a government to achieve all of its independent policy objectives it must have at least
as many independent policy instruments. In an international context government's
can, in theory, offset adverse spillover effects originating from other nations. With
fewer instruments than objectives this is not possible and the resulting inefficiency may
be characterized by either expansionary or contractionary bias. Which of these occurs
depends on whether the spillover effects are positive or negative, and the objectives of
the government's involved. International policy co-ordination offers the prospect of
increasing the welfare of all countries involved by taking the spillover effects explicitly
into consideration when determining each country's optimal monetary policy. To dis-
cuss these possibilities we focus on a static two-country model and make use of the so
called Hamada (1974, 1976, 1979) diagrams. Initially we examine an example where the
final competitive outcome exhibits recessionary bias. We then consider an example of
expansionary bias. Both examples assume that the exchange rate between the two coun-
tries is fixed.
8.2.1 Recessionary bias
To illustrate the possibility of recessionary bias we assume that both countries have two
policy objectives but only one policy instrument. The policy objectives are assumed to
relate to an optimal level of national income, and an optimal balance-of-payments sur-
plus. This second objective assumes that for some reason both countries seek to accu-
mulate foreign currency reserves, at least in the short run. The policy instrument is
again assumed to be monetary policy, specifically related to the growth rate of the
domestic money supply. Fig. 8.3 shows the Hamada diagram derived under these
assumptions.
On the horizontal axis is the growth rate of the money supply in the domestic econ-
omy, Ms. On the vertical axis is the growth rate of the money supply in the foreign
country, Ms*. With spillover effects a country's welfare will be determined by the policy
stance within both countries. In particular the only way that either country can achieve
a balance-of-payments surplus is for its money supply to expand slower than the other
country's. Clearly, in this two-country model both countries cannot simultaneously
run a balance-of-payments surplus. This represents a serious conflict of interest. This is
illustrated by having separate bliss points for each country. A country's bliss point is the
outcome of monetary growth rates that gives that country its highest possible level of
welfare. The bliss point for the domestic country is at point B. This is above the 45° line,
implying that ideally it desires the other country to have the faster rate of monetary
expansion. This will secure the desired balance-of-payments surplus for the home
nation. Similarly the bliss point for the foreign nation is at point B*. This is below the
45° line, again because it desires that the other country have the faster rate of monetary
174

--- Sayfa 186 ---
Potential Gains from Policy Co-ordination
Fig. 8.3 Recessionary Bias
expansion. The further away each country is from its own bliss point the lower its eco-
nomic welfare. Each country's set of indifference curves are therefore concentric
around its bliss point. A number of these are shown in Fig, 8.3, With each nation ignor-
ing the spillover effects associated with its own monetary policy we would expect this
situation to lead to Pareto inefficiency. This can be confirmed from Fig. 8.3.
With no policy co-ordination each country will attempt to maximize its own welfare,
taking the other country's monetary policy as given. This implies that each country
seeks to be on its own reaction function. These are shown for the domestic and foreign
countries as R and R* respectively. For the domestic country its reaction function cuts
its indifference curves where they are horizontal. This curve, therefore, shows where
domestic welfare is maximized for variations in foreign monetary policy. For the for-
eign country its reaction function cuts its indifference curves where they are vertical.
Both these reaction functions are upward-sloping. For a Nash equilibrium both coun-
tries must be simultaneously maximizing their own welfare, given the expected behav-
iour of the other nation. This only occurs at point N where the two reaction functions
intersect. Here both countries set an identical growth rate for their money supply, and
their balance of payments are in equilibrium.
Although neither country can improve on this Nash equilibrium acting indepen-
dently, if they co-ordinate their monetary policies, both can be made better off. This is
because the Nash equilibrium is Pareto inefficient. Diagramatically this is demon-
strated by noting that at this equilibrium the two countries, indifference curves are not
tangential. At any point within the shaded area of Fig. 8.3 both countries are better off
compared to point N. For an outcome to be Pareto efficient the two countries1 indiffer-
ence curves must be tangential. The set of these outcomes is represented by the contract
curve which joins the two bliss points. It may be supposed that policy co-ordination
would seek to avoid Pareto inefficiency and so produce an outcome on this curve. With
175

--- Sayfa 187 ---
International Policy Co-ordination
identical countries an obvious focal point for co-ordination is point C, At this point the
two countries have identical monetary policies, and neither country has a balance-of -
payments deficit or surplus. Compared to the Nash equilibrium this co-operative out-
come involves the two countries increasing the growth rate of their money supply.
From this perspective it can be seen that the Nash equilibrium exhibits a recessionary
bias. This outcome is due to the competitive attempt by each country to run a balance-
of-payments surplus. From point C each country has the incentive to reduce the growth
rate of its money supply so as to try to improve its balance-of-payments position.
However, with both countries ignoring the adverse effects its policy has on the other
nation the resulting Nash equilibrium makes both countries worse off. Co-ordination
is beneficial because it is able to avoid the adverse effects associated with such beggar-
niy-neighbour policies.
8.2.2 Expansionary bias
In order to illustrate the alternative possibility of expansionary bias we need only make
a minor modification to the previous model. This is done by now assuming that both
countries desire a balance-of-payments deficit rather than a surplus. All other assump-
tions remain unchanged. The Hamada diagram for this model is shown in Fig. 8.4.
With each country now desiring a balance-of-payments deficit, they will seek to have
a greater monetary growth rate than the other country. The domestic country's bliss
point (B) is now below the 45° line, and the foreign country's bliss point (B*) above the
45° line. With separate bliss points we again have a conflict of interest. The domestic
country's reaction curve is shown as R, and the foreign country's reaction curve is R*.
Fig. 8.4 Expansionary Bias
176

--- Sayfa 188 ---
Problems of International Policy Co-ordination
The Nash equilibrium is where these two curves intersect at point N. Once more this
can be seen to be Pareto inefficient, with any point within the shaded region making
both countries better off. Again the focal point for co-ordination is point C, which is the
unique symmetrical Pareto-efncient outcome. Compared to this outcome the Nash
equilibrium now involves both countries setting too fast a growth rate for their domes-
tic money supply. This occurs as each country seeks to bid up the growth rate of its
money supply, whilst again ignoring the adverse effects this has on the other country. In
this situation such beggar-my-neighbour policy leads to an expansionary bias.
EXERCISE 8.2
Using the two-country Hamada diagrams presented in the text illustrate the following two
scenarios. In each case state whether the Nash equilibrium is Pareto inefficient.
(1) There are no spillover effects between the two countries.
(2) There are spillover effects but the bliss points of the two countries coincide.
(3) There are spillover effects but each country has only one policy objective.
8.3 Problems of International Policy Co-ordination
The previous section presented examples where countries are motivated to overcome
Pareto inefficiency by co-ordinating their economic policies rather than acting unilat-
erally. Despite the potential welfare gains of such co-ordination there are a number of
problems that need to be overcome before these gains are realized. In this section we
look at why these problems arise and how they might be overcome.
8.3.1 Sustainability
One of the major problems identified for international policy co-ordination is whether
the agreed outcome is sustainable. As can be seen from the previous Hamada diagrams,
all points on the contract curve, except at the bliss points, lie off both countries' reaction
curves. Indeed, any agreement that co-ordinates monetary policy on a point other than
the Nash equilibrium necessarily implies that at least one country has an incentive to
renege upon the agreement. Once it is realized that countries have an incentive to
renege upon the agreement no country will enter into policy co-ordination. In the sta-
177

--- Sayfa 189 ---
International Policy Co-ordination
tic games considered in section 8.2 it appears that the only outcome can be the Nash
equilibrium. This problem of sustainability is also relevant to dynamic games. In this
context the problem is that of time-inconsistency. This issue was previously discussed in
section 6.3 and arises when a government has the short-run incentive to deviate from
its long-run optimal policy. In Figs. 8.3 and 8.4. the government's optimal long-run
policy is associated with policy co-ordination at point C. However, as in the static
model, government's may have a short-run incentive to deviate from this outcome.
This problem is particularly severe when the game is known to be played only a finite
number of times. In this situation backward induction predicts that all countries will
pursue the Nash equilibrium every time-period, as this is the only subgame perfect
Nash equilibrium for this game. This prediction appears to rule out the possibility of
effective policy co-ordination. Fortunately a number of ways have been suggested for
how government might overcome this problem of sustainability. Most of these propos-
als are closely related to those discussed when considering the time-inconsistency of
domestic monetary policy. These include the importance of precommitment, an effec-
tive punishment strategy against countries that break international agreements (imple-
mented either by other governments or the private sector), and countries being
concerned with maintaining a favourable reputation for co-operation. In the context of
international monetary policy one type of precommitment has received considerable
attention. This is the situation where one country acts as the leader and then other
countries follow its lead. This proposal is qualitatively the same as the Stackelberg
model of duopoly presented in Chapter 4. Fig. 8.5 illustrates the outcome of this model
for the example of recessionary bias discussed in the previous section. In this example
both countries maintain a fixed exchange rate and desire a balance-of-payments sur-
plus.
Fig. 8.5 Stackelberg Equilibrium
178

--- Sayfa 190 ---
Problems of International Policy Co-ordination
In this diagram the domestic country acts as the leader and the foreign country is the
follower. As in the Stackelberg model of duopoly the leader sets its monetary policy at
the point where its indifference curve is tangential to the other country's reaction curve.
It, therefore, sets its monetary growth rate equal to MS. The follower then set its mone-
tary policy consistent with this point. Its growth rate is therefore equal to MS*. As illus-
trated in Fig. 8.5 the leader will be made better off compared to the Nash equilibrium.
The follower, however, may be made better or worse off depending on the structure of
the model. Even if the follower is made better off the gains from such an arrangement
are unlikely to be equally divided. As a result there will, in general, be some conflict over
who should be the leader, which may cause this equilibrium to be unsustainable. Even
if this equilibrium is maintained it is only a partial solution to the problem of time-
inconsistency as it still yields a Pareto-inefficient outcome.
8.3.2 Inflationary bias
Another potential problem with the co-ordination of monetary policy is that it can
worsen the inflationary bias within each country. If the costs associated with this
increased domestic inflation outweigh the gains due to policy co-ordination, countries
will prefer to act unilaterally. As discussed in Chapter 6 a country can experience infla-
tionary bias if its optimal long-run monetary policy is time-inconsistent. Rogoff (1985)
showed that policy co-ordination may increase the government's incentive to deviate
from its optimal monetary policy. If this is perceived by the private sector, it will
increase its inflationary expectations resulting in an increased level of equilibrium
inflation. The reason the government has a greater incentive to deviate from its long-
run optimal policy is because co-ordination can improve the trade-off facing the gov-
ernment over inflation and unemployment. Diagramatically the short-run Phillips
curve becomes flatter under co-ordination as opposed to non-coordination. This can
be explained as follows.
If one country expands its money supply in isolation, then its exchange rate will
depreciate causing the cost of imports to rise, and this stimulates inflation. If, however,
monetary policy is co-ordinated, and all countries expand their money supplies simul-
taneously, then the exchange rate effects are less severe and so inflation is tempered. The
costs of expansionary monetary policy caused by higher inflation are less for a co-
ordinated expansion of monetary policy than for an isolated expansion of monetary
policy by one country. As the costs are lower, there is a greater incentive for the govern-
ment to expand the money supply. Agents perceive this and so anticipate a faster growth
rate of the money supply, and hence expect higher inflation. The optimal response for
the government is then to produce this higher level of inflation. In equilibrium there
is now a greater level of inflationary bias in the economy. This outcome is illustrated
in Fig. 8.6. With no policy co-ordination the Nash equilibrium is at point A with
179

--- Sayfa 191 ---
International Policy Co-ordination
Fig. 8.6 Inflationary Bias under Policy Co-ordination
inflation equal topA- Under policy co-ordination the short-run Phillips curve is less
steep and so the new Nash equilibrium is at point B with inflation equal to pB.
8.3.3 Uncertainty
In our analysis so far we have assumed that all governments know the correct model of
the economy. However, as governments typically base their forecasts on different mod-
els this assumption cannot be true. Furthermore, it is almost certainly true that no one
knows the 'true' model of the economy. This basic uncertainty will clearly cause prob-
lems when governments attempt to co-ordinate their economic policies. With govern-
ment's using different models they may be unable to agree on the most appropriate
agreement, and negotiations may break down.
This issue of model uncertainty has been emphasized by Frenkel and Rockett (1988)
who considered co-operation between the USA and other OECD countries. To repre-
sent model uncertainty they allowed each hypothetical policy-maker to choose one
model from ten. Based on its chosen model the government then determines its opti-
mal monetary policy. This gives a total combination of 100 policy formulations. Nature
then chooses which of the ten models is actually true, giving a total of 1,000 possible
combinations. Frenkel and Rockett then estimate whether there are potential gains
from co-ordination in each of these possible scenarios. Their findings were that co-
operation increased USA welfare in only 546 cases and improved welfare in the other
industrialized countries in only 539 cases. In more than a third of the cases co-
operation actually makes the countries worse off. These results, however, have been
challenged by a number of authors. For example, Ghosh and Masson (1988) argue that
these results depend on policy-makers acting irrationally. Instead of merely selecting
one of the available models as true Ghosh and Masson argue that policy-makers will
take uncertainty explicitly into account when formulating policies. This will involve
two separate aspects. First, governments may view all the available models as being
180

--- Sayfa 192 ---
Empirical Estimates of the Gains from Co-ordination
essentially plausible, and so base their policy proposals on some weighted average of
their forecasts. Second, they may actively seek to learn which model, if any, is true. This
will involve governments updating their beliefs about the true economic model using
their observations of macroeconomic variables. Given these responses to model uncer-
tainty the performance of economies with co-ordinated, rather than uncoordinated,
policies improves substantially. Indeed, such arguments may actually reverse Frenkel
and Rockett conclusions and suggest that the case of co-operation is strengthened given
the presence of model uncertainty.
8.3.4 Reaction of other countries
A final problem associated with the policy co-ordination is that countries not involved
in the policy agreement may react in such a way as to offset the gains from such an ini-
tiative. For example, if Europe and the USA jointly deflate their economies this will have
an adverse effect on Japan's exports. As a consequence Japan may retaliate by using
trade restrictions, with makes Europe and the USA worse off than if they had not agreed
to deflate. The implication is that a set of countries cannot determine their optimal
policies without determining how other countries will react. This complicates the
process of deciding on which optimal policy combination to pursue, and may cause
countries to act unilaterally.
8.4 Empirical Estimates of the Gains from Co-ordination
From the arguments outlined above it is clear that international policy co-ordination
may enhance or reduce the economic welfare of the countries involved, and that ulti-
mately this must be an empirical issue. The problem in this area is that direct compari-
son of the benefits of co-ordination against non-coordination is not possible. This is for
the simple reason that a country cannot follow both policies simultaneously. In
response to this problem empirical evidence of the gains from co-ordination have been
estimated in one of two ways. The first approach uses simulation techniques based on
large-scale macroeconomic models. These models are based on the econometric esti-
mates of the main international spillover effects. In contrast the second method uses
small theoretical models comprising only a few equations. In this approach parameter
values are typically imposed on the model rather than econometrically estimated. With
both approaches the economic welfare derived under the assumption of independent
policy actions is contrasted with the co-operative outcome. Here we review a number
of studies from each of these methodologies.
An early study that attempted to estimate the potential gains from policy co-
ordination using an empirical macroeconomic model was undertaken by Oudiz and
181

--- Sayfa 193 ---
International Policy Co-ordination
Sachs (1984). In this study Oudiz and Sachs estimate the potential welfare gains for the
G3 nations (USA, Germany, and Japan) if they had co-ordinated their macroeconomic
policies in the mid 1970s. This was done by initially computing each countries optimal
policy consistent with the static Nash equilibrium and comparing this with the co-
operative solution. In general the welfare gains were found to be small, with the esti-
mated benefits for each country being approximately 0.5 per cent of gross national
product (GNP) per year. Subsequent studies have tended to support these findings. For
example, Hughes Hallet (1987) allowed for dynamic decision-making and estimated
potential gains for USA, EEC, and Japanese co-ordination of between 0.5 and 1.5 of
GNP. Other studies based on empirical models that report small gains from co-
ordination include Canzoneri and Minford (1986), Currie, Levine and Vidalis (1987)
and Minford and Canzoneri (1987).
Although employing a different methodology this result—that the gains from co-
operation are generally small—has typically been confirmed by studies based on small
theoretical models. One such study was undertaken by Currie and Levine (1985). Here
the authors used a two-country model comprising eighteen equations. It was assumed
that the spillover effects were constant and symmetric between the two countries. Once
again the gains from co-operation are found to be small. Miller and Salmon (1985) use
an even smaller theoretical model comprising only three equations per country.
Interestingly in this model there is no long-run policy conflict between countries. This
is because it was assumed that in the long run output returns to its natural rate and
exchange rates are flexible. None the less policy co-ordination may result in net welfare
gains by altering the adjustment path towards long-run equilibrium. Miller and
Salmon report, however, that such gains are again only small. Other theoretical studies
yielding similar results include Oudiz and Sachs (1985), Taylor (1985) and Levine and
Currie (1987).
From these various studies it is reasonable to conclude that co-ordination can pro-
duce welfare gains, but that these gains are likely to be small. It needs to be stressed,
however, that such results can only be indicative of the potential gains from co-
ordination. In particular, these results should be viewed as tentative for two reasons.
First, they are only as good as the models upon which they are based. This is particularly
relevant here because one of the main international linkages is via the exchange rate,
but this mechanism is generally poorly understood by economists. Second, these esti-
mates typically assume that governments know the correct structure of the economy.
As discussed previously, depending on how governments respond to model uncer-
tainty, this may either enhance or detract from the gains from co-ordination.
182

--- Sayfa 194 ---
Conclusions
8.5 Conclusions
The use of game theory to analyse policy co-ordination was initially undertaken in a
series of seminal articles by Hamada (1974, 1976, 1979). Using simple symmetrical
two-country models Hamada demonstrated that, given the presence of international
spillover effects, the final outcome could be Pareto inefficient. This result implies that
policy co-ordination may be used to overcome these inefficiencies. In recent years more
complex models have been developed to test the robustness of this conclusion. In gen-
eral these models have tended to qualify earlier results. For example, extending the
model so that the policy game is not just between governments, but also against the
respective private sectors, yields the result that policy co-ordination without govern-
ment's having a strong reputation for being anti-inflationary, can worsen economic
welfare. Similar results can be derived in models which incorporate model uncertainty,
and the reaction of non-cooperating countries.
In addition to this theoretical research empirical estimates have been made to try and
assess the importance of policy co-ordination. The finding of the majority of these
models is that while gains from policy co-ordination do exist they are likely to be small.
These estimates, however, are generally dependent on governments knowing the cor-
rect model of the global economy. Given the presence of model uncertainty, it is possi-
ble that the gains from policy co-ordination could be significantly enhanced. This is an
important area of future research, which includes attempts to model how governments
respond to model uncertainty, and seek to update their beliefs over time.
8.6 Solutions to Exercises
Exercise 8.1
(1) Fig. 8.7 depicts the situation when country A expands fiscal policy and maintains a fixed
exchange rate with country B. Initially both countries are in long-run equilibrium at point
A. When country A expands its fiscal policy its IS curve shifts from ISo to IS1. This increases
aggregate demand and both national income and the domestic rate of interest rise. With
national income increasing the demand for imports from country B also rises. This stimu-
lates aggregate demand in that country, and so its IS curve shifts from ISo* to IS*1. National
income and interest rates correspondingly rise in country B. With national income rising in
both countries world interest rates rise. This will be a weighted average of the two countries
domestic interest rates, and we assume it is equal to r2. From the diagram country A's inter-
est rate is above the world rate of interest, and so that economy initially experiences a bal-
ance-of-payments surplus. The converse is true for country B, which experiences a
balance-of-payments deficit at point B. Given this balance-of-payments disequilibrium the
monetary authorities will need to intervene in the foreign exchange market in order to
maintain the desired exchange rate. This will cause country A's money supply to expand and
183

--- Sayfa 195 ---
International Policy Co-ordination
country B's money supply to contract. Eventually, long-run equilibrium will be established
at point C. In the diagram both countries' national income have risen following the expan-
sionary fiscal policy in country A.
Fig. 8.7
(2) With flexible exchange rates the short-run analysis is identical to that discussed in (1).
Initially both economies jump from point A to point B. This is replicated in Fig. 8.8. As with
monetary policy the subsequent dynamics contrast with those experienced under fixed
exchange rates. Now country A's currency appreciates, and country B's depreciates. This
change in the terms of trade makes country A's goods less competitive and country B's more
competitive. This causes country A's IS curve to shift to the left, and country B's IS curve to
shift to the right. This continues until long-run equilibrium is established at point C. The
diagram again depicts the situation where national income rises in both countries.
Fig. 8.8
184

--- Sayfa 196 ---
Solutions to Exercises
Fig. 8.9
Exercise 8.2
(1) With no spillover effects between countries each country's welfare is uniquely determined
by its own monetary policy. In particular, changes in the other countries' money supply have
no effect on domestic welfare. There is no longer a unique bliss point, but instead a bliss line.
This is equivalent to that country's reaction function, and corresponds to that country's
optimal monetary policy. In Fig. 8.9 the home country's optimal growth rate for its money
supply is equal to Ms, and its reaction function is R. Similarly the foreign country's optimal
growth rate is Ms*, and its reaction function is R*. With no spillover effects the indifference
curves are either horizontal or vertical. The Nash equilibrium (N) is where the two reaction
functions intersect. At this equilibrium both countries obtain their greatest level of welfare
by setting their optimal monetary policy. With no spillover effects there is no Pareto ineffi-
ciency and no need for policy co-ordination.
(2) With spillover effects the indifference curves are no longer horizontal or vertical. However,
with the countries' bliss points coinciding there is no inherent policy conflict. This is
depicted in Fig. 8.10 as the point where the two countries' reaction functions intersect. (This
diagram illustrates the special case where these curves are horizontal and vertical.) The
indifference curves are concentric around this point. Again the Nash equilibrium is where
the reaction functions intersect. As these must pass through the bliss points this is the Nash
equilibrium. Once again the Nash equilibrium is Pareto efficient, and there is no need for
policy co-ordination.
(3) With each country having the same number of independent policy instruments as targets
they can, in these static models with complete information, achieve all their targets simul-
taneously. Fig. 8.11 illustrates the case where each country has one target and one instru-
ment. Even in the presence of spillover effects each country can achieve its policy objective
by adjusting its own policy instrument. Thus the reaction curves depicted in Fig. 8.11 rep-
resent the highest possible levels of welfare for each country. Where these two lines intersect
185

--- Sayfa 197 ---
International Policy Co-ordination
Fig. 8.10
Fig. 8.11
is the Nash equilibrium. With no policy conflict in equilibrium this equilibrium is again
Pareto efficient.
Further Reading
Bladen-Hovell, R. C. (1992),'International Monetary Policy', in K. Dowd and M. K. Lewis (eds.)
Current Issues in Financial and Monetary Economics, London: Macmillan.
Buiter, W. H., and R. C. Marston (1985), International Economic Policy Coordination,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Currie, D. A. (1990), 'International Policy Coordination', in D. T. Llewellyn and C. Milner (eds.),
Current Issues in International Monetary Economics, London: Macmillan.
186

--- Sayfa 198 ---
Further Reading
Currie, D. A., and P. Levine (1991), 'International Policy Coordination—A Survey', in
C. J. Green and D. T. Llewellyn (eds.), Surveys in Monetary Economics, i, Oxford: Basil
Blackwell; repr. in D. Currie and P. Levine (1993), Rules, Reputation and Macroeconomic
Policy, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hallwood, C. P., and R. MacDonald (1994), International Money and Finance, Oxford: Blackwell.
Hughes Hallet, A. J. (1989), 'Macroeconomic Interdependence and the Coordination of
Economic Policy', in D. Greenaway (ed.), Current Issues in Macroeconomics, London:
Macmillan.
187

--- Sayfa 199 ---
9
Strategic Trade Policy
T
RADE policy is where the government of a country deliberately sets out to alter
the pattern of international trade, so as to increase total domestic welfare, or the
welfare of one particular sector in the economy. Strategic trade policy is when a
government does this and explicitly takes into account the possible reactions of other
agents that jointly determine the final outcome. This chapter analyses two broad ways
in which governments can use strategic trade policy to enhance domestic welfare. The
first is when international markets are perfectly competitive, and the second is when
they are imperfect. As there are, as yet, no international organizations that can enforce
agreements between nations, the analysis of strategic trade policy is best conducted
using the tools of non-cooperative, rather than co-operative, game theory.
With perfect competition the case for government intervention in international
trade is the well-known 'optimal tariff argument'. This argument is considered in sec-
tion 9.1. Even if individual agents within an economy are all price-takers, the country
itself, if large, can have significant market power. In this situation governments may
exploit the country's market power via trade restrictions. This can improve the coun-
try's terms of trade and ultimately its economic welfare at the expense of other coun-
tries. When two or more countries engage in such beggar-my-neighbour policies, we
have strategic interaction in the game theory sense. The first formal model of strategic
tariff-setting was by Johnson (1954). He considered the situation of two countries
simultaneously setting a one-off tariff, and showed the prisoners' dilemma result may
apply with both countries being made worse off in the absence of co-operation. This
analysis has been extended in a number of directions in recent years and presented
using game theory analysis.
In section 9.2 we focus on more recent arguments for why governments might seek
to influence international trade. These agruments derive from the observation that
many international markets are imperfect and oligopolistic. In this context govern-
ments may be able to improve the competitive position of domestic firms by commit-
ting itself to a particular trade policy. For such trade policy to be strategic the
government must consider the actions of either foreign firms, foreign governments, or
both. This theory of strategic trade policy in the presence of oligopolistic competition
was initially developed by Brander and Spencer (1983, 1984, 1985), and again has been
extended in a number of directions.
188

--- Sayfa 200 ---
Perfect Competition
9.1 Perfect Competition
9.1.1 The optimal tariff argument and retaliation
The optimal tariff argument is that a government a of large economy can improve
domestic welfare by exploiting the country's market power in international trade. This
is accomplished by imposing import tariffs which improve the country's terms of trade.
This can be illustrated using the partial equilibrium diagram in Fig, 9.1.
Fig.9.1 The Optima1 Tariff Argument
In this diagram the demand and supply curves for an imported good, before the
imposition of a tariff, are Da and So respectively. The supply curve is upward-sloping
denoting that the country in question is large, and so collectively has a degree of market
power. Under perfect competition, individuals acting in isolation ignore their influence
on price and so continue to import the good until demand equals supply at point A. The
government, however, by setting the optimal tariff can induce individuals to act as if
they were a monopsonist and so raise total welfare. From the supply curve a monop-
sonist realizes that as it increases its purchase of imports, the price charged on all
imports of that good rises. This means that the marginal cost curve, MC, lies above the
supply curve, So, In this situation a monopsonist buys imports only up to the point
where demand equals marginal cost at point B. The government can induce identical
behaviour by imposing an ad valorem import tariff on the good. With an ad valorem
tariff a proportion of the import price is now paid to the government. To offset this
additional cost the exporter of the good will demand a higher proportionate price for
each quantity it sells, and so the supply curve pivots upwards. With the optimal tariff
being set the new supply curve S1 will be identical to the monopsonist's marginal cost
curve, MC.
189

--- Sayfa 201 ---
Strategic Trade Policy
To measure the welfare implications for the domestic country we look at changes in
consumer surplus and government revenue before and after the imposition of the tar-
iff. For the domestic economy consumer surplus has been reduced from p3Ap0 to p3Bp1,
but this is compensated by the increase in government revenue equal to p1BCp2.
Domestic welfare increases as (po - p2) • q1 is greater than 112(p1 - po) (qo - q1) • These are
shown as the two shaded regions in Fig. 9.1. This increase in domestic welfare is at the
expense of a fall in producer surplus accruing to foreign exporters. This is reduced from
OpoA to Op2C, and so foreign producer surplus falls by the amount poACp2. Global wel-
fare is also reduced as measured by the dead-weight loss given by area ABC. Finally, as
the price paid to oversea producers has fallen from po to p1 this represents an improve-
ment in the terms of trade for the domestic economy.
Fig. 9.1 illustrates the case for a large country imposing a tariff upon its imports. The
problem is that when more than one country does this all countries can be made worse
off and the final equilibrium is Pareto inefficient. This outcome is commonly associated
with other countries retaliating to the imposition of tariffs on their exports. We exam-
ine this issue by analysing a two-good, two-country model where each government sets
its tariff rate simultaneously. The results derived can be readily extended to include
many goods and countries as shown by Kuga (1973).
Assume there are only two goods, x and y, which are imported by the domestic and
foreign country respectively. The domestic country sets an ad valorem tariff rate equal
to t and the foreign country an ad valorem tariff rate equal to t*. (A negative tariff rate
corresponds to an import subsidy, and the lower limit is equal to -1.) The national
prices of the two goods are related by the following equations

where px and py are the domestic prices of goods x and y respectively, and p*x and py are
their prices in the foreign country. The relative price of the two goods on world markets
is p = px/py- An increase in p means that domestic imports are more expensive, and so
the terms of trade have deteriorated. Each country's level of imports is determined by
the terms of trade and its own tariff rate. Let M(p, t) and M*(p, t*) represent the domes-
tic and foreign import functions. The balance of trade condition is

which determines p as a function of the two tariff rates. We assume that this function is
continuous and differentiable. We also assume that an increase in either countries' tariff
rate improves the terms of trade for that country, i.e. dp/dt < 0 and dp/dt* > 0. This
assumption is satisfied if the Marshall-Lerner condition is fulfilled, and all tariff revenue
is redistributed to consumers. (The Marshall-Lerner condition is that the sum of import
and export elasticities is greater than one.) The pay-offs to each country are given by the
domestic and foreign social welfare functions W- W(t, t*) and W* = W*(t, t*). With
190

--- Sayfa 202 ---
Perfect Competition
these assumptions each country's welfare is reduced by an increase in the other country's
tariff rate. We further assume that each country's welfare function has a unique max-
imum as its own tariff rate increases from zero, given the other country's tariff rate. The
indifference curves corresponding to these social welfare functions are drawn in Fig. 9.2.
Fig. 9.2 Optimal Tariffs and Nash Equilibria
In this diagram the domestic country's welfare increases as we move downwards, and
the foreign country's welfare increases as we move to the left. The diagram also shows
each country's reaction curve, which gives us the country's optimal tariff correspond -
ing to any tariff set in the other country. R is the domestic country's reaction curve, and
R* is the foreign country's reaction curve. We finally assume that these reaction curves
are downward-sloping and cross only once.
As discussed above, the traditional optimal tariff argument assumes that only one
country imposes an import tariff, so as to exploit its market power and maximize social
welfare. If the foreign country abstains from setting a tariff, the optimal tariff for the
domestic country is given at point A. In contrast, if the domestic country abstains from
setting a tariff, the optimal tariff for the foreign country is given at point A*. In the sim-
ultaneous game being played, neither of these outcomes is a Nash equilibrium, as the
country setting zero tariffs is off its reaction curve. One Nash equilibrium is where the
two reaction curves cross. Here both countries set positive tariff rates on imports. This
equilibria is, however, Pareto inefficient, as at this point the two country's indifference
curves cut each other rather than being tangential. Pareto efficiency requires that all
mutually advantageous trade is undertaken, which implies that, through the process of
arbitrage, relative prices in the two countries must be the same. That is
Using equations (9.1), and the definition of the terms of trade, this can be rewritten as
191

--- Sayfa 203 ---
Strategic Trade Policy
This Pareto-efficient loci is shown by the contract curve EE. Along this contract
curve the two countries indifference curves are tangential, which means that along this
curve one country cannot be made better off without making the other country worse
off. The shaded area in Fig. 9.2 corresponds to Pareto-superior outcomes as compared
with point N. Co-operation, if it leads to tariffs being set within this shaded region, or
on the contact curve itself between Cand C*, will make at least one country better off
and the other country no worse off. One problem, however, is that there are an infinite
number of Pareto-efficient outcomes, that make both countries at least as well off as at
point N. This raises the problem of which of these many points countries should
attempt to co-ordinate upon.
One suggestion is that the final outcome is derived from the process of countries sys-
tematically reducing tariff rates over a number of periods. Mayer (1981) considers for-
mulae for reducing tariffs similar to those that have been used in previous GATT
negotiations, such as the Kennedy and Tokyo Rounds. For example, one suggested for-
mula is that starting from point N each country reduces its tariff rate by some equal pro-
portion. This proportional cut is the largest possible, whilst leaving both countries
better off. These new tariff rates then become the subject for the next round of negotia-
tion. This process continues until no more Pareto improvements are possible. The
appeal of this suggestion is that it is simplistic, and does seem to have been used in prac-
tice. One problem is that different proposed formulae have different effects on coun-
tries' welfare, and so bargaining is shifted from choosing a point in Fig. 9.2 to choosing
an appropriate formula for reducing tariffs. A more fundamental problem is that, in
general, all formulae are time-inconsistent. Once agreed upon at least one country will
have an incentive to deviate from it. This is relevant here because as yet GATT does not
have the authority to enforce such agreements.
An alternative method of predicting the outcome of co-operation is to note that an
obvious focal point for co-ordination is that of free trade at point F. (Free trade need not
always be Pareto superior to point N. This will only occur if the two countries are sim-
ilar. Johnson (1954) shows that the country with the greatest import elasticity is more
likely to prefer the Nash equilibrium at point N to free trade. Kennan and Riezman
(1988) show that larger countries may also prefer this Nash equilibrium.) However,
even if countries agree upon free trade as being the focal point for co-operation the
problem still remains of how countries can be induced to observe it. Subsection 9.1.2
examines this issue, and in particular discusses how countries might pursue free trade,
even though in the above static game both countries have an incentive to set positive
tariffs.
192

--- Sayfa 204 ---
Perfect Competition
EXERCISE 9.1
Redraw Fig. 9.2 assuming that only one of the two countries has any market power. What
is the Nash equilibrium involving international trade for this static two-country/two-good
model? Is this outcome Pareto efficient?
9.1.2 Free trade as a non-cooperative outcome
In the static tariff game analysed above free trade is not an equilibrium. However, as
seen in previous chapters repeated interaction between players opens up the possibility
of non-cooperative collusion, which in this context may result in countries pursuing
free trade policies. We first consider the situation when such repetition is infinite or
indefinite, and countries discount future returns by the factor 5. This discount factor
either reflects countries' pure rate of time-preference, or includes the probability that
interaction will cease at the end of the current period. From the Folk Theorem, as dis-
cussed in Chapter 4, we know that all rational and feasible outcomes can be sustained as
a subgame perfect Nash equilibrium if the discount factor is not too small, and players
adopt appropriate punishment strategies. If the discount factor is equal to one, i.e.
countries do not discount future returns at all, then all the points in the shaded region
of Fig. 9.2 can be sustained as a subgame perfect Nash equilibrium. Although there is
clearly the problem of multiple equilibria this will not be too serious in this context if,
as argued before, the free trade equilibrium acts as a focal point for all countries.
If the discount factor is not sufficiently large to maintain free trade as a subgame per-
fect Nash equilibrium, then an alternative punishment strategy must be sought that
increases the costs of deviating from free trade. This will involve either increasing the
length of the punishment period, or increasing the severity of the punishment within
each period. The limit to the first option is to impose an infinite punishment period if
deviation from free trade is observed. This is where the countries adopt a trigger strat-
egy. This will reduce the required size of the countries' discount factor, and so increase
the likelihood that free trade can be supported as an equilibrium. The problem with the
second alternative is that the punishment itself must be credible. One such credible
threat is to play the Nash equilibrium associated with point N. There is, though, an
alternative punishment strategy that countries can credibly commit themselves to. This
can be seen by noting that autarky is another Nash equilibrium to the static game
analysed above. This was first noted by Dixit (1987). If one country sets its tariff so high
that its imports are reduced to zero, then the outcome must be autarky, irrespective of
the other country's tariff rate. Compared to the Nash equilibrium at point N autarky
makes both countries worse off. As this is a Nash equilibrium it can form part of a
193

--- Sayfa 205 ---
Strategic Trade Policy
credible punishment strategy. Using this as the punishment threat, a larger set of out-
comes can be sustained as the equilibrium to the supergame compared with the alter-
native of using the Nash equilibrium at point N.
Although free trade might be sustainable if interaction between governments is infi-
nite or indefinite, the paradox of backward induction again applies if the interaction is
of definite finite length. In this situation an alternative mechanism must be found to
support free trade. As in other applications of game theory, the main suggestions have
been concerned with multiple equilibria, incomplete information, and bounded ratio-
nality.
As noted above the static tariff game has multiple equilibria, one associated with
point N in Fig. 9.2 and another associated with autarky. Benoit and Krishna (1985)
show that this general property of multiple equilibria in the stage game gives rise to the
possibility of non-cooperative collusion. We know that in the last period of interaction
the outcome must be a Nash equilibrium. However, with multiple equilibria this is
indeterminant. Countries can use this indeterminacy to credibly induce other coun-
tries to pursue free trade in previous periods. For example, consider the static tariff
game being played twice, and countries adopting the following punishment strategy:
Set a zero tariff initially. If free trade was observed in the first period then set
tariffs associated with the Nash equilibrium at point N in Fig. 9.2 in the second
period. Otherwise set the tariff rate so that imports are reduced to zero.
The present value of national welfare of pursuing free trade in the first period with
the expectation that other countries will follow the above punishment strategy is
where W(F) is the value of the social welfare under free trade, and W(N) its value when
the Nash equilibrium at point N occurs. In contrast the present value of welfare of not
pursuing free trade in the first period is
where V(D) and V(A.) equal the value of the social welfare when that country deviates
from free trade and autarky respectively. Countries will set zero tariffs in the first period
if
As V(D) >  V(F > V(N) > V(A))this condition is satisfied provided countries do not
discount the future too much. Extending the number of periods that countries interact,
and assuming countries adopt appropriate punishment strategies, free trade can be
sustained for a greater number of periods with a smaller discount factor.
An alternative approach in which free trade might be sustained in early periods of
194

--- Sayfa 206 ---
Perfect Competition
repeated interaction is by introducing incomplete information as shown by Kreps and
Wilson (1982a). Suppose it is common knowledge there is a small probability that
countries will always pursue free trade, perhaps due to ideological reasons. It is then
rational for each country to encourage other countries initially to believe this about
itself by setting zero tariffs in early periods of interaction. In this way free trade is sus-
tained as part of a sequential equilibrium in all but the last few periods of interaction.
Finally, free trade might be sustained if countries are rational but only in a limited
way, i.e. we introduce bounded rationality. As discussed in Chapter 3, Radner (1980)
allows players to play suboptimal strategies as long as the pay-off per period is within e
of the optimal strategy. If the number of repetitions is large enough, then pursuing free
trade can be an e-equilibrium given that countries adopt appropriate punishment
strategies.
9.1.3 Conjectural variations
Before leaving this topic of optimal tariff-setting, the conjectural variation approach
taken by Thursby and Jensen (1983) deserves some discussion as it purports to show
that tariffs will not be set at so high a rate as suggested by the previous static game ana-
lysis. This approach attempts to model the dynamics associated with tariff wars, where
countries might reasonably expect other countries to react if they change their own tar-
iff rates. For example, countries might expect retaliation if they increase their own tar-
iffs. Conversely, they might expect other countries to follow them if they reduce their
tariff rates. Thursby and Jensen model these beliefs by linking t* with t and vice versa,
via the conjectural variations dt*/dt> 0 and dt/dt* > 0. This implies that the reaction
functions in Fig. 9.2 shift downwards as shown in Fig. 9.3.
The reason the reaction functions are downward-sloping is that they now cut the
country's indifferent curves where they have the same slope as the value of the conjec-
tural variation. (Figure 9.2 is the special case where the conjectural variations are set
Fig. 9.3 A Conjectural Variation Equilibrium
195

--- Sayfa 207 ---
Strategic Trade Policy
equal to zero.) The equilibrium given these positive conjectural variations is where the
new reaction curves intersect. This is at point E in Fig. 9.3. As drawn, tariffs are set lower
than the Nash equilibrium at point N.
There are two serious problems that cause us to reject this approach in favour of the
previous analysis. First, it is ad hoc to impose a positive value for the conjectural varia-
tions into the model. Instead, conjectures should be determined in a way that is consis-
tent with the underlying structure of the model so that a rational conjectural variations
equilibrium is determined. Bresnahan (1981) has shown, in the context of duopoly,
that such rational conjectures will normally be negative, and so the resulting equilib-
rium for this model will involve higher, not lower, tariffs compared with point N. A
second and more fundamental problem with this approach is that conjectural varia-
tions are inconsistent with the underlying nature of the static game. The reason for this
is that it is impossible for any country to react in static games. This criticism is the same
as that made against Cournot's disequilibrium analysis of oligopoly discussed in
Chapter 4. In order to analyse countries' reactions in a consistent way the underlying
game itself must be dynamic. This has already been examined in the above analysis of
repeated interaction between countries.
9.2 Imperfect Competition
The previous section analysed the role of strategic trade policy when there is perfect
competition in all markets in the sense that consumers and producers are all price-
takers. In this situation firms earn normal profits and the only market power that exists
is between countries. The optimal tariff argument is that governments can exploit this
market power so as to increase national welfare. In this section we examine the possi-
bility of welfare-enhancing trade policy when individual producers have market power,
and industries are oligopolistic.
If an industry is characterized as oligopolistic, firms in that industry will typically be
earning economic rent. This does not necessarily mean that firms are earning super-
normal profits. Economic rent may be captured by the employees in the form of wages
being above the minimum amount necessary to keep the workers in that firm, or by the
government via increased taxation. As long as it is not distributed overseas increased
economic rent earned by domestic firms increases domestic welfare. The insight of
Brander and Spencer (1983,1984,1985), in a series of influential papers, was that the
government, via strategic trade policy, might be able to improve the competitive posi-
tion of domestic firms against foreign rivals. This raises the possibility of increasing the
amount of economic rent domestic firms secure and, hence, national welfare. In effect
economic rent is being transferred from other countries to the domestic economy and
are therefore called rent-shifting policies. To analyse these policies we initially examine a
simple model of Cournot duopoly, and then discuss various extensions.
196

--- Sayfa 208 ---
Imperfect Competition
9.2.1 Strategic trade policy with Cournot duopoly
The simplest example of a rent-shifting trade policy is in a two-period model. In the
first period the government commits itself to a particular trade policy, such as an export
subsidy or tax. In the second period domestic and foreign firms compete against each
other. Let us assume that there is only one domestic and one foreign firm in a particu-
lar industry, and that they Cournot compete. In order to facilitate comparison with
results derived in Chapter 4 we use the same specific demand and supply assumptions
made in section 4.1. The two firms produce an identical product, and each firm pro-
duces its desired level of output without knowing the level of output the other firm has
produced. The market price is determined so that the total quantity of the good pro-
duced, Q, is just demanded, according to the equation P( Q) = a - Q. There are assumed
to be constant marginal production costs equal to c and no fixed costs. Each firm is
assumed to maximize profits. We also assume that they sell all their output in a third
country. This final assumption is made so that the effects on consumer surplus can be
ignored.
From section 4.1 we know that in the absence of strategic trade policy each firm will
produce an output equal to (a - c)/3 where the two firm's reaction functions intersect.
This is illustrated in Fig. 9.4 where q and q* represent the domestic and foreign firms'
output, and R0 and R0* their reaction curves in the absence of government trade policy.
The equations for these reaction curve are: q = (a - q* - c)/2 and q* = (a-q- c)/2.
Fig. 9.4 Trade Policy with Cournot Competition
As shown by the isoprofit lines, if the domestic firm could commit itself to produc-
ig a higher level of output, then it could increase its level of economic rent by moving
own the foreign firm's reaction function R*. If such commitment were possible, prof-
is would be maximized at point S, the Stackelberg equilibrium. The problem is that
icre is no credible way the domestic firm can commit itself to an output level off its
197

--- Sayfa 209 ---
Strategic Trade Policy
own reaction curve. However, the government setting an appropriate trade policy in
the first period can provide the needed precommitment. This can be seen by noting that
the domestic firm's reaction function depends on its level of marginal costs. The gov-
ernment can in effect reduce these marginal costs by paying the firm an export subsidy
for each unit of the good sold. This induces the domestic firm to increase production
for each level of output produced by the foreign competitor. This is represented by the
domestic firm's reaction function shifting to the right. With the optimal export subsidy
the domestic firm's reaction function can be shifted so that it intersects the foreign
firm's reaction function at point S. This then becomes the equilibrium for the second
period, and domestic rent is maximized, at the expense of foreign rent.
This and similar models have been used to explain and justify governments targeting
specific industries for export promotion via the use of trade policies. For example, it has
often been argued that French and Japanese governments have targeted certain sectors
of their economies with the aim of giving them a competitive advantage over foreign
competitors. However, both the theoretical results and the issues involved in practical
implementation have been subject to a number of criticisms. These criticisms are now
discussed as we look at various extensions to the basic Cournot duopoly model, pre-
sented above.
EXERCISE 9.2
For the two-period model analysed in the text above, derive the optimal levels of output
each firm will produce and the unit export subsidy the government pays the domestic firm.
By how much will domestic welfare increase in monetary terms as a result of the govern-
ment paying this subsidy?
9.2.2 Extensions to the basic Cournot duopoly model
Domestic consumption
In the basic duopoly model analysed above it was assumed that there was no domestic
consumption of the good in question. This simplified the analysis as it meant there were
no changes in consumer surplus as a result of introducing export subsidies. This is no
longer the case if there is domestic consumption of the subsidized good. With an export
subsidy the domestic firm will switch sales from the domestic to the overseas market.
This will raise the price of the good in the domestic economy, and so there will be a cor-
responding fall in consumer surplus. This exacerbates the already inherent market fail-
ure due to imperfect competition. This loss needs to be set against any gains from the
198

--- Sayfa 210 ---
Imperfect Competition
trade policy, but it is now possible for there to be a net welfare loss for the economy as a
whole.
An alternative policy in this situation would be for the country to pay a production
subsidy rather than an export subsidy. With a production subsidy the effects on inter-
national markets are the same as before, but now the domestic consumers will also
benefit as the firm will increase sales to the domestic market thus lowering the price
domestic consumers have to pay. Domestic welfare increases by more than previously
indicated in the basic model with an export subsidy.
Nature of competition between firms
The Cournot model of duopoly assumes that the two firms compete in terms of quan-
tity produced. However, as discussed in Chapter 4, this is not the only way in which
firms might compete. One alternative is the Bertrand assumption that firms compete in
terms of price. Unfortunately the implications for trade policy are highly sensitive to
the nature of competition between firms. The reason for this is that in the Cournot
duopoly model an export subsidy is only welfare-enhancing because it causes the for-
eign firm to cut back on its production. Without this reduction in foreign sales,
increased domestic sales would reduce the price of the good to such an extent that
domestic profits would fall. The welfare effects, therefore, depend crucially upon the
reaction of the foreign firm to the imposition of a domestic subsidy. This, in turn,
depends on the nature of competition between the two firms. This issue has been
analysed by Eaton and Grossman (1986). For example, they showed that when the two
firms produce differentiated products and compete in prices the optimal trade policy is
not an export subsidy but an export tax. This is illustrated in Fig. 9.5.
In this diagram the domestic firm charges price p and the foreign firm charges p*.
The reaction curves are upward-sloping. If a firm expects its competitor to set a higher
price, then it is optimal for that firm to also set a higher price. The domestic and foreign
reaction curves without government intervention are R0 and R* respectively. The
Fig. 9.5 Trade Policy with Bertrand Competition
199

--- Sayfa 211 ---
Strategic Trade Policy
isoprofit curves for the domestic firm are also shown. The higher the isoprofit line the
greater the level of domestic profit. The Nash equilibrium in the absence of any trade
policy is at point N. If the domestic firm could precommit itself to a higher price level,
then its profits would be maximized at point S, the Stackelberg equilibrium. If, how-
ever, firms set prices simultaneously, then this optimal price level for the domestic firm
is not credible, as it is' off its own reaction function. Once again point S can only be
achieved if the government commits itself to a trade policy that shifts the domestic
firm's reaction function from RQ to R\. The appropriate policy here is an export tax as
this will credibly commit the domestic firm to raise its price to cover this increased cost.
The foreign firm perceives this commitment and so raises its price also. As the prices set
by both firms have increased, the domestic firm does not suffer too large a fall in mar-
ket share. The domestic firm's net profit falls but this is more than compensated by
increased tax revenue the government now receives. This can be seen from Fig. 9.5 by
noting that the firm has moved on to a higher isoprofit curve representing increased
gross profits to the firm. Once more national welfare has increased as a result of strate-
gic trade policy. If the government mistakenly paid an export subsidy, in the belief that
the two firms competed in terms of quantity, then the domestic firm's reaction curve
would shift to the left. The resulting Nash equilibrium would involve lower national
welfare. Clearly, the government needs to be sure about the nature of competition
between domestic and foreign firms in order to enact the appropriate optimal policy.
This is not always an easy thing to discover.
Number of firms
One obvious way in which the Cournot duopoly model can be extended is to change the
number of firms competing against each other. One trivial example is the possibility
that there is only one firm in the industry. In this situation there is no case in favour of
strategic trade policy. A monopolist, as it faces no strategic interdependence with other
firms, is able to maximize its economic rent without the need for government interven-
tion. Of more interest is when there are more than two competing firms. This can be
due to either more domestic firms or more foreign firms.
An increase in the number of domestic firms tends to weaken the case for export sub-
sidies. The greater the number of domestic firms the greater will be total domestic out-
put, as individual firms compete for market share. With a sufficient number of
domestic firms, an export subsidy can be detrimental to national welfare. In this situ-
ation an export tax is again welfare-enhancing as it makes the domestic firms behave
more like a monopolist. This is identical to the optimal tariff argument, where individ-
ual firms are too small to exploit their collective market power themselves, but the gov-
ernment can do so on their behalf.
An increase in the number of foreign competitors, on the other hand, tends to
increase the case for an export subsidy. The greater the number of foreign firms, the
greater the fall in foreign production given an increase in domestic production. In
200

--- Sayfa 212 ---
Imperfect Competition
response to a domestic subsidy each foreign firm may reduce its output by a smaller
amount, but in aggregate foreign output falls further. This means that increased
domestic production as a result of the export subsidy does not depress prices by so
much. As a result the gain in domestic rent is greater the more foreign firms there are.
Retaliation
So far we have only examined strategic trade policy under imperfect competition on the
assumption that only one government enacts such a policy. As with the optimal tariff
argument, the desirability of such policies can be greatly altered when this assumption
is relaxed. For example, with many countries paying export subsidies, the intended
competitive advantage conferred on firms cancels out, and as a result all countries can
be made worse off. Once more this is the familiar prisoners' dilemma argument.
Individually it maybe in the interests of countries to impose such policies, but collec-
tively they are all made worse off. Whether free trade can be sustained as an equilibrium
when governments repeatedly interact parallels many of the arguments presented
above in connection with avoiding tariff wars.
EXERCISE 9.3
Find the subgame perfect Nash equilibrium output and subsidy levels for the Cournot duop-
oly model analysed previously under the assumption that both governments now pay the
optimal export subsidy. Show that both countries are worse off compared to when neither
government pays a subsidy.
Freedom of entry
Another assumption upon which the desirability or otherwise of strategic trade policy
depends is the degree to which firms can enter the industry. The basic strategic argu-
ment for export subsidies is that it can shift economic rent from foreign to domestic
firms. Economic rent will only persist, however, if there are significant barriers to entry.
For example, firms will only continue to earn supernormal profits if other firms are pre-
vented from entering the market. This will happen if there are significant barriers to
entry such as high capital requirements, R&D requirements, or legal barriers. In the
absence of such barriers other firms will enter the market and supernormal profits will
disappear. With freedom of entry the benefits of export subsidies will typically be only
short-lived. Indeed, once we introduce the possibility of entry, export subsidies can
reduce national welfare. This may occur for a number of reasons. For example, entry
into the industry is likely to be greater in countries paying an export subsidy. If this is
201

--- Sayfa 213 ---
Strategic Trade Policy
true, the number of firms in such countries will expand. As the number of domestic
firms increases, competition amongst domestic firms becomes excessive from the point
of maximizing national welfare. (We are here assuming all output is exported, and so
there is no beneficial increase in consumer surplus.) As argued above, with a greater
number of domestic firms in the industry, the optimal policy is more likely to be an
export tax, with an export subsidy reducing national welfare. Furthermore, the subsidy
may induce excessive entry from the point of view of achieving optimal economies of
scale. In this situation costs of production will rise more than would have been the case
without the subsidy, and again national economic welfare is reduced.
These types of argument support the view that export subsidies, when there is free-
dom of entry, will at best only confer temporarily welfare gains to the country using
them, and at worst may actually reduce national welfare. Venables (1985) has presented
an alternative model where even with freedom of entry an export subsidy can have
long-lasting benefits. Venables makes the important assumptions that domestic con-
sumption occurs and the domestic and foreign markets are segmented in the sense that
prices need not be equated between them. He also assumes that due to high fixed costs
marginal costs are always falling. Suppose now that the domestic government intro-
duces an export subsidy. Domestic firms will increase production and so their marginal
costs will fall. Conversely, foreign firms will cut back on production and their marginal
costs will rise. If domestic consumers buy proportionately more of the good from
domestic firms rather than foreign firms, their welfare will increase as the price they pay
for the good falls. Total domestic welfare increases because consumer surplus and gov-
ernment revenue increases and producers continue to earn normal profits due to entry
and exit considerations. A variation on this model is where there are significant 'learn-
ing by doing' economies of scale. This is where production costs fall as firms gain
greater experience. These economies can be obtained more quickly if the firm increases
its rate of production. In this way, trade policy may enhance learning by doing
economies, by stimulating domestic firms to increase their rate of production. This
results in domestic production costs falling more quickly than production costs of for-
eign firms, and so may allow domestic firms to become dominant in the industry. This
process can result in increased long-term profits for domestic firms and improved
national welfare.
Related to the issue of freedom of entry is the idea that strategic trade policies can also
be used to deter foreign firms entering an industry, and in this way improve the com-
petitive position of domestic firms. If this policy is successful, it can limit the extent of
foreign competition and so maintain supernormal profits of domestic firms. One
simple model that illustrates this possibility is given by Laussel and Montet (1994). It is
assumed there are two potential entrants into an industry, one domestic and one for-
eign. The following three-stage game is considered. In the first period the domestic gov-
ernment decides on the appropriate level of its trade policy. Here we only consider a
subsidy paid to the domestic firm. In the second period the two firms decide whether or
not to enter the market. If a firm does enter, it incurs a sunk cost equal to F. In the third
202

--- Sayfa 214 ---
Imperfect Competition
period those firms that have entered compete against each other. The exact nature of the
competition is not specified but profits are assumed to be negatively related to the num-
ber of firms in the industry. The pay-offs in terms of profits earned for the two firms are
given in the normal form game shown in Fig. 9.6.
Fig. 9.6 Trade Policy and entry deterrence
Assuming that II( 1) - Pis non-negative, so that the industry can support at least one
firm, Laussel and Montet consider the following two cases. The first is when
11(2) - F < 0. In this situation if both firms enter the industry, they each make a loss.
With this condition there are two pure-strategy Nash equilibria for the final period of
the game. These correspond to one firm entering and earning a positive profit, and the
other firm staying out and breaking even. If the domestic firm could commit itself to
entering the industry, it would do so, thus deterring the foreign firm from doing so.
However, the mere threat of always entering the market is not credible, and so is not part
of a subgame perfect Nash equilibrium for the entire game. Once more the government
can ensure that the domestic firm always enters the industry by paying an appropriate
subsidy. In this case the optimal lump-sum subsidy paid conditional on entry is equal to
F-II(2). With this subsidy the domestic firm now has the (weakly) dominant strategy
of always entering the industry. The foreign firm perceives this to be the case and so is
deterred from entering. The domestic firm will earn profits equal to n(2) - II( 1) > 0.
The second case considered is when 11(2) - F > 0. With this condition, entry domi-
nates staying out of the industry for both firms, and so the Nash equilibrium is that both
firms enter and make non-negative profits. Even so it may still be optimal for the
domestic government to try and attempt to deter the foreign firm from entering indus-
try thus securing monopoly power for the domestic firm. This will involve setting the
domestic subsidy so that the foreign firm expects to make a loss if it enters the market.
If this is possible, then the foreign firm will indeed stay out of the market, and the
domestic firm will have a monopoly position.
203

--- Sayfa 215 ---
Strategic Trade Policy
From these two examples we see that strategic trade policy may be welfare-
enhancing if it can effectively deter entry by foreign firms. This can be achieved by
affecting either domestic firms' or foreign firms' entry conditions.
Factor prices
It has already been noted that increased economic rent earned by domestic firms as a
result of strategic trade policy need not necessarily result in higher profits. For example,
if the industry is dominated by strong unions, increased economic rent might be appro-
priated by workers in the form of higher wages. If this were merely a straight transfer
from owners to employees, then it would leave net national welfare unchanged.
However, if unions, or other institutions, do succeed in capturing some of the increased
economic rent by forcing up costs, this will affect the competitive position of the firm.
This will affect the equilibrium outcome of the underlying game. To the extent that
costs are forced up, so the less effective is the export subsidy in improving the competi-
tiveness of domestic firms, and so the smaller is the resulting welfare gain.
From a general equilibrium perspective, the consideration of factor prices can cause
export subsidies, paid to certain targeted industries, to be detrimental to domestic wel-
fare. Dixit and Grossman (1986), for example, consider the case where the subsidized
industry uses a resource that is in fixed supply. They suggest that this might be either
scientists or engineers. In this case, output can only expand in this industry if it con-
tracts in another. For such a trade policy to be optimal the subsidy must be targeted on
the industry capable of generating the greatest returns. If all industries have equal abil-
ity to capture foreign rents, then the optimal policy is one of non-intervention. If the
government does not process sufficient information to compare relative returns, then
there is the possibility that export subsidies will reduce national welfare.
Identifying industries to target
One final criticism that has been levied against the promotion of targeted industries via
trade policies is the difficulty of identifying which industries to support. One aspect of
this is the difficulty of measuring the economic rent earned by an industry. For exam-
ple, in the entry deterrent arguments developed above, what is needed are reliable esti-
mates of future industry returns. These are by their nature very difficult to obtain.
Furthermore, the correct measure of economic rent earned in an industry needs to
reflect the risk involved. Returns to R&D, for example, can be very large, but this often
reflects the high degree of risk attached to such activities. For every successful R&D pro-
ject there are many that fail to earn adequate returns. Just looking at the profits earned
by the successful ventures overstates the amount of economic rent being earned
because it ignores the returns to unsuccessful ventures. Such issues complicate the
implementation of strategic trade issues when there is imperfect competition, and can
be used to support the argument that such policies should be avoided as being too risky.
204

--- Sayfa 216 ---
Conclusions
9.3 Conclusions
This chapter has analysed two ways that have been suggested for how a government
might be able to increase national welfare, via international trade policy. The first was
the optimal tariff argument. This suggests that a government can increase national wel-
fare by exploiting the country's monopoly power in international markets. From a
game theory perspective, this argument assumes that other countries do not impose
import tariffs, which presupposes that they do not have any market power. In reality
this assumption is unlikely to be met. With more than one country having some degree
of market power in international trade, each of these countries will have an incentive to
impose import tariffs. This raises the possibility that the final equilibrium will be Pareto
inefficient, with all countries made worse off. In this situation countries will increase
national welfare if they can co-ordinate on free trade, and set zero tariffs. This is clearly
contrary to the optimal tariff argument. The problem with such co-ordination is how
to prevent individual countries reneging on this commitment. Various ways suggested
how this might be achieved include the possibility of punishing such behaviour, and the
role of incomplete information. If these mechanisms are successful, individual coun-
tries will no longer have the incentive to set unilateral tariffs.
The second argument in favour of international trade policy is that such policies can,
in the context of imperfect competition, be rent-shifting. This involves shifting eco-
nomic rent from foreign to domestic firms, and hence increasing national welfare.
These arguments have been developed using game theory models. As with the optimal
tariff argument, however, any gains in national welfare are highly sensitive to the under-
lying assumptions of the model used. Issues such as retaliation by other governments,
freedom of entry into international markets, the nature of competition between firms,
and the role of incomplete information, can make otherwise beneficial trade policy
detrimental to national welfare. The difficulty of identifying the nature and role of these
factors in reality tends to undermine the usefulness of strategic trade policy in oligopo-
listic markets.
For both the optimal tariff argument, and the more recent policy prescriptions based
on imperfect competition, game theory has greatly enhanced our understanding of
when such trade policy will be effective in increasing national welfare. In general, game
theory has highlighted the major difficulties that governments face when trying to
implement optimal trade policy. These difficulties are largely due to interdependence
between governments and competing firms. With such interdependence, and the
adoption of'beggar-rny-neighbour' trade policies, the final equilibrium is likely to be
Pareto inefficient. Based on these arguments many economists have recommended that
governments forgo the use of strategic trade policies, and instead pursue free trade.
This may involve countries giving up temporary benefits, but it is argued that in the
long run all countries will be better off. The analysis of recent game theory models, as
discussed in this chapter, has tended to support this view.
205

--- Sayfa 217 ---
Strategic Trade Policy
9.4 Solutions to Exercises
Exercise 9.1
In Fig. 9.7 only the domestic country has market power in international trade and so it has the
same indifference and reaction curves as in Fig. 9.2. The foreign country has no market power
which means if it sets any non-zero tariff its welfare will be reduced. Its indifference curves are
therefore downward-sloping and its reaction function is along the horizontal axis. The Nash
equilibrium involving international trade is at point N, which is the same as point A in Fig. 9.2.
The traditional optimal tariff argument is therefore only justified as a Nash equilibrium when
only one country enjoys market power. This is a Pareto-efficient outcome, as any other combi-
nation of tariffs must reduce the welfare of at least one country.
Exercise 9.2
This two-period model can be solved using the principle of backward induction. In the second
period, each firm simultaneously sets its output in order to maximize profits taking the subsidy
paid to the domestic firm (s) and the output of its competitor as given, i.e.
Differentiating these functions and setting them equal to zero gives us the first-order condi-
tions for a maximum, and each firm's reaction functions.
206

--- Sayfa 218 ---
Solutions to Exercises
A Nash equilibrium in the second period requires that each firm maximize its profits given the
other firm's output. Setting the two reaction functions equal to each other yields
These correspond to the Nash equilibrium output quantities, and significantly both firm's
output decisions are conditional upon the level of the subsidy paid to the domestic firm. If s = 0,
then each firm produces (a - c)/3 as shown by point N in Fig. 9.4. In the first period the domes-
tic government sets the level of the subsidy so as to maximize domestic welfare, based upon its
expectations of how firms will behave in the second period. It does this by maximizing the
domestic firm's net of subsidy profit level, IIN. (The government is concerned with net profits as
the subsidy in itself is merely a transfer from the government to the firm, and so, assuming it
yields the same value to both, it leaves domestic welfare unchanged.) The government sets the
value of s so as to
Substituting in for q and q* derived in solving for the second period gives us
This simplifies to
The first-order condition for a maximum is therefore
This is the optimal level for the subsidy. Substituting this back into the previous equations for
the two firms' conditional output levels gives us
This confirms the values shown in Fig. 9.4 for point E, and corresponds to the Stackelberg equi-
librium derived in Chapter 4. Finally, the monetary value of the increase in domestic welfare can
be derived by calculating the difference in the domestic firm's net profits with and without the
subsidy, AIIN.
207

--- Sayfa 219 ---
Strategic Trade Policy
This result shows that paying the subsidy does indeed increase national welfare, and so the
domestic firm's profits rise by a greater amount than the subsidy it receives from the govern-
ment.
Exercise 9.3
As with Exercise 9.2 this model is solved using the principle of backward induction. In the
second period both firms determine their optimal output level given the subsidies paid by the
domestic and foreign governments, s and 5* receptively, i.e.
From the first-order conditions we derive the following reaction functions
Setting these two reaction functions equal to each other we obtain the Nash equilibrium for the
second period
We can now solve the governments' optimization problem for determining the level of subsidy
that maximizes each country's national welfare. As the two countries are symmetrical we need
only derive s and then set this equal to s*.
Substituting in each firm's optimal output level conditional on the subsidies and rearranging
gives
Differentiating this and setting it equal to zero yields
208

--- Sayfa 220 ---
These are the governments' reaction functions for the optimal subsidies. Setting these equal to
each other gives the Nash equilibrium for the first period.
Further Reading
Substituting these optimal subsidies into the conditional output levels gives us
To show that both countries are made worse off with both governments paying an optimal
export subsidy we again calculate the difference in monetary value of each firm's net profits with
and without subsidies. This is done explicitly for the domestic country.
Further Reading
Bierman, H. S., and L. Fernandez (1993), Game Theory with Economic Applications, Reading,
Mass.: Addison Wesley.
Dixit, A. (1987), 'Strategic Aspects of Trade Policy', in T. Bewley (ed.), Advances in Economic
Theory: Fifth World Congress, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Krugman, P. R. (1989), 'Industrial Organization and International Trade', in R. Schmalensee
and R. Willig (eds.), Handbook of Industrial Organization, ii, Elsevier Science Publishers.
Krugman, P. R. (1987), 'Is Free Trade PasseT Economic Perspectives, 1:131-44.
Krugman, P. R. (1986), Strategic Trade Policy and the New International Economics, Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press.
Laussel, D., and C. Montet. (1994), 'Strategic Trade Policies', in D. Greenaway and L. A. Winters
(eds.), Surveys in International Trade, Oxford: Blackwell.
209

--- Sayfa 221 ---
10
Environmental Economics
I
N recent decades there has been greater concern about environmental issues. This
has primarily developed as we have become more aware of the detrimental effects
of human activity on the environment. These range from local instances of envi-
ronmental degradation to global issues such as climate change and ozone depletion.
The predominant response of economists has been to highlight the underlying
instances of market failure that often give rise to these problems. Three widely dis-
cussed types of market failure associated with man's interaction with his environment
are externalities, common property resources, and public goods. Externalities occur
when an individual's welfare is directly influenced by the actions of others. Pollution,
for example, is a detrimental externality when a polluter's actions directly reduce the
welfare of other individuals. Such interdependence is external to the market mecha-
nism, and is a specific problem associated with incomplete markets. A common prop-
erty resource is one where individuals have free access to a valuable asset. Examples
include the atmosphere used for waste disposal, and ocean fishing. With individuals
acting in their own self-interest such resources are likely to be overexploited. Finally, an
environmental asset is a public good if one person's consumption does not reduce what
is available for others to consume. An example of this is the value of biodiversity and
carbon sequestration associated with the tropical rain forests. Such goods may repre-
sent instances of market failure due to the free-rider problem. Individuals have an
incentive to avoid paying for such goods in the hope that others will do so. In equilib-
rium, therefore, public goods are likely to be undersupplied. Each of these instances of
market failure implies that individuals are interdependent. These can also be used to
justify and inform policy-makers on the need for remedial measures.
Much has been written on how authorities ought to respond to these instances of
market failure when they occur within one country's borders. Here the government
should intervene either to induce or force producers and/or consumers to act in a way
that brings about the socially beneficial outcome. This, however, is not possible when
market failure occurs in an international context. With international environmental
problems there is, as yet, no supranational authority that can enforce the socially desir-
able outcome. Although there are organizations that seek to co-ordinate environmen-
tal policy between countries, such as the United Nations Environmental Programme,
these do not have the authority to compel countries to forgo policies seen to be in their
210

--- Sayfa 222 ---
Environmental Economics
own self-interest. It is in this context that non-cooperative game theory makes a signif-
icant contribution to environmental economics. This chapter, therefore, focuses upon
international and global environmental problems. The following topics are some of the
international environmental problems for which non-cooperative game theory has
proved particularly useful.
Transnational physical externalities
An obvious example of a physical externality between countries is pollution. It is often
the case that pollution is not confined within national borders, but instead pollution
generated in one country can adversely affect the welfare of individuals in other coun-
tries. Here we may distinguish the following three cases. First, there is unidirectional
pollution. This is where pollution from one country adversely affects welfare in one or
more other countries but this interdependence is not reversed. An example of unidi-
rectional pollution is river pollution. Here upstream countries that pollute a river
adversely affects the welfare of citizens in downstream countries. In Europe the river
Rhine is such an example where German pollution adversely affects welfare in the
Netherlands. On its own, unidirectional pollution does not give rise to mutual interde-
pendence, and so there seems little scope for non-cooperative game theory. However,
mutual interdependence can be introduced if downstream countries offer side pay-
ments to the upstream country. These are offered with the aim of inducing the
upstream country to reduce its pollution levels. If there are several victims of such pol-
lution, then we can observe once more the free-rider problem. Second, there can be
regional reciprocal pollution. This is where a group of countries are both the source and
victims of environmental pollution. An example of this is acid rain in European coun-
tries. Finally, there is global pollution. Here all countries in the world are affected.
Examples of this type of pollution include global warming and ozone depletion. This
type of pollution is very similar to regional reciprocal pollution, except now the region
encompasses the whole world.
Non-physical externalities
With non-physical externalities interdependence is psychological rather than physical.
This occurs, for example, if people are concerned about biodiversity and conservation
of rare species. In this situation the destruction of tropical rain forests entails a negative
externality. By its very nature such externalities are likely to have an international
dimension, and affect many individuals in various countries.
International trade effects
Even if an environmental problem is limited to within individual countries, the
response of government's to these problems can have effects on other countries via
international trade. If, for example, government's require domestic industries to reduce
their levels of pollution, this will, other things remaining equal, adversely affect the
competitiveness of these industries in international trade. This additional economic
211

--- Sayfa 223 ---
Environmental Economics
cost of pollution abatement may provide national authorities with an incentive to relax
their environmental standards. If all countries act on this incentive, environmental
standards will be competitively bid down, and all countries will be made worse off.
International agreements
Due to the international dimension of environmental problems, it can often be in the
interests of different countries to co-operate with each other to produce a Pareto-
efficient outcome. As there is no supranational authority able to override national sov-
ereignty international agreements must be self-enforcing. From the perspective of non-
cooperative game theory a country will only be signatory to an international treaty or
convention if it perceives it is acting in its own self-interest. Issues explored using non-
cooperative game theory include analysing under what conditions countries will want
to co-operate, and how countries can be induced to sign treaties not initially seen to be
in their own self-interest.
To analyse some of these issues we will initially examine unidirectional and recip-
rocal environmental externalities in a two-country model. This is undertaken in sec-
tion 10.1. With the aid of this model we examine the economic issues related to
bilateral agreements, and specifically the role of side payments in overcoming inter-
national environmental problems. However, this two-country model is unable to
capture certain important aspects of regional and global environmental problems.
In section 6.2, therefore, we go on to examine a model with many countries. Using
this multi-country model it is argued that groups of countries may have the incen-
tive to form voluntary coalitions to overcome environmental problems. This possi-
bility provides one explanation why countries voluntarily commit themselves to
multilateral agreements. Finally, in this section we examine under what conditions
such coalitions are likely to develop, and suggest ways they might be beneficially
expanded.
10.1 Bilateral Agreements
In this section we will discuss how bilateral agreement between two countries can
develop in order to overcome environmental problems associated with externalities. In
the text we assume that the externality is unidirectional, whilst Exercise 10.1 assumes
that it is reciprocal.
10.1.1 Unidirectional externalities
Consider the following two-country model, where each country is indexed by i = 1,2. It
is assumed that each country initially emits levels of a pollutant equal to Ei. Each coun-
212

--- Sayfa 224 ---
Bilateral Agreements
try, however, is able to invest in a costly abatement technology which reduces its emis-
sions of the pollutant. Levels of abatement are equal to AD, and net emissions are equal
to Ej - Aj. An externality is introduced by assuming that country 1 's pollution is trans-
ported to country 2 via the environment. For example, the pollution may be either
water- or air-borne, with country 1 being upstream or upwind, and country 2 being
downstream or downwind. Country 1 is assumed to be adversely affected by its own
emissions of the pollutant, while country 2 is adversely affected by both its own emis-
sions and pollution transported to it from country 1. We make the simplifying assump-
tion that all of country 1's pollution is transported to country 2.
With countries acting non-cooperatively the optimization problem for each country
is to determine its level of emissions abatement that maximizes its own social welfare,
Vj. Abatement has two effects on social welfare. First, increased abatement reduces net
pollution and so raises welfare. Second, as abatement is assumed to be costly, increased
abatement reduces the amount of resources available for other uses and so reduces wel-
fare. If we let Fj (.) be the social welfare function dependant upon levels of net pollution
in country i, and Cj-(.) be the welfare function associated with the cost of emissions
reduction, then total welfare for country 1 is given as
with dFi/dA1 and dC1/dA1 > 0.
Similarly total welfare for country 2 is equal to
with again dF2/dA2 and dC2/dA2 > 0.
Setting the differential of these total welfare functions with respect to each country's
level of abatement equal to zero and rearranging gives us the following first-order con-
ditions for the non-cooperative Nash equilibrium:
In a non-cooperative Nash equilibrium each country sets its own marginal benefit of
abatement, dF1/dA1, equal to its marginal cost, dC1/dA1. In particular it disregards any
beneficial effect its own action might have for the other country. The Nash equilibrium
for this simple game is illustrated in Fig. 10.1.
In the bottom half of the diagram we have drawn each country's marginal benefit,
(MBi), and marginal cost, (MCi), curves of increased abatement. It is assumed that the
marginal benefit of abatement rises, and marginal cost of abatement falls, the greater
the level of pollution in each country. As pollution is negatively related to the level of
abatement, the marginal benefit curve is downward-sloping, and the marginal cost
curve upward-sloping. In the top left-hand quadrant of the diagram are drawn each
213

--- Sayfa 225 ---
country's reaction function. These show how each country's optimal level of abatement
varies with respect to the other country's level of abatement.
Consider first the problem confronting country 1. As the externality is unidirectional
country 1's marginal benefit and marginal cost curves are independent of pollution in
country 2. These are shown as MB1 and MC1 respectively. Setting marginal benefit
equal to marginal cost it is clear that country 1's optimal abatement level is also inde-
pendent of country 2's actions. Its optimal level of abatement in this situation is equal
to A1*. As its optimal level of abatement is independent of country 2's actions country 1 's
reaction function, R1, is horizontal. This reaction curve corresponds to an indifference
curve where social welfare for country 1 is maximized. Other indifference curves asso-
ciated with lower welfare (not illustrated) are parallel to the reaction function. Any
deviation away from the optimal level of abatement reduces social welfare in this coun-
try.
Now consider country 2's optimization problem. Due to the pollution externality
country 2's marginal benefit and marginal cost curves are dependent on emissions in
country 1. If country 1 reduces its emissions, then other things being equal there is less
pollution in country 2. This will increase country 2's marginal costs of abatement, and
reduce its marginal benefits. Taken together, this will induce country 2 to reduce its own
level of abatement. Country 2's reaction function is therefore downward-sloping.
Moving up this reaction function corresponds to higher levels of social welfare for
214

--- Sayfa 226 ---
Bilateral Agreements
country 2. This is shown in Fig. 10.1 by country 2 moving on to higher indifference
curves associated with enhanced social welfare. Given that the optimal level of abate-
ment in country 1 is A1*, the marginal benefit and marginal cost curves faced by coun-
try 2 are MB2(A*) and MC2(A\) respectively. Setting these equal to each other gives us
country 2's optimal level of abatement as A|. This corresponds to where the two coun-
tries' reaction functions intersect. The levels of abatement A*1 and A*2, therefore, repre-
sent the non-cooperative Nash equilibrium. With these abatement levels, both
countries are maximizing their individual social welfare dependent on their expecta-
tions of what the other country will do.
Despite the presence of a negative pollution externality it should be noted that the
Nash equilibrium is Pareto efficient. This is illustrated by the fact that at the Nash equi-
librium each country's indifference curves are tangent to each other. Any deviation
away from this equilibrium will mean that at least one of the countries must be worse
off. Any change in country 1's level of abatement from A1* will necessarily reduce its
social welfare, while with this level of abatement, country 2 maximizes its social welfare
by setting its abatement level equal to A*2. Country 2 would like country 1 to reduce its
level of pollution even further, but it is not in the interests of country 1 to do this. Within
the current game there is no incentive for country 1 to consider the detrimental effects
it is having on country 2's welfare, and so there is no incentive for it to deviate from A*.
Although the above Nash equilibrium is Pareto efficient it does not correspond to the
co-operative solution to the game. In the co-operative solution each country sets its level
of abatement so as to maximize joint social welfare, V. Aggregating over (10.1) and
(10.2) we get that joint social welfare is equal to
With countries seeking to maximize this function the first-order conditions are:
We can compare these optimality conditions with those derived when countries act
non-cooperatively, as given in (10.3). The condition of optimality for country 2
remains unchanged. It is still required to set its own marginal benefit of abatement
equal to marginal cost. This is because there is no externality associated with country 2's
level of abatement. This, however, is not the case for country 1. Country 1's condition
of optimality has now changed. To maximise joint welfare it needs to set the sum of the
marginal benefits, (dF1/dA1) + (dF2/dA1), equal to its marginal cost of abatement. To
maximize joint welfare country 1 has to take into account the effect of its abatement
policy on country 2. As the joint marginal benefits are greater than country 1's indi-
vidual marginal benefit of abatement, the co-operative solution involves country
1 increasing its own level of abatement compared to the non-cooperative Nash
215

--- Sayfa 227 ---
Environmental Economics
equilibrium. This co-operative outcome is illustrated in Fig. 10.1 as point C. The opti-
mal abatement levels are now Af and A£ This co-operative outcome is still on country
2's reaction curve, as its condition of optimality has not changed. However, it is off
country 1 's reaction function. Country 1 now abates more than when it acted in its own
self-interest. In response to this change country 2 will decrease its level of abatement.
This is because as pollution levels in that country fall its marginal costs of abatement
will rise, and marginal benefits will fall. Its marginal benefit and marginal costs curves
are now given by MB(Af) and MC( Aj) respectively. Compared to the Nash equilibrium
this co-operative outcome has made country 2 better off and country 1 worse off.
However, as joint welfare is only now being maximized it must be the case that the gain
to country 2 outweighs the loss incurred by country 1. This net gain in social welfare
gives both countries the incentive to attempt to co-ordinate upon the co-operative
solution, provided country 1 is compensated for its loss of welfare.
10.1.2 Side payments
One way of achieving the co-operative outcome, whilst maintaining the assumption
that countries act in their own self-interest, is to introduce the possibility of side pay-
ments supported by binding contracts. By changing the nature of the game both coun-
tries can make themselves better off. Here we consider the effects of country 2 paying
country 1 to reduce its level of pollution. With this financial inducement country 1 now
has an incentive to increase its level of abatement. With appropriate inducement the co-
operative outcome can be reproduced. With side payments allowed the social welfare
functions for the two countries become
where T(A1) is the side payment transferred from country 2 to country 1. The amount
of side payment depends on the level of pollution abatement undertaken by country 1.
The first-order conditions under non-cooperation are given by the following two equa-
tions
We can compare these conditions with those derived assuming co-operative behav-
iour, as given in (10.5). Clearly the conditions will be equivalent if dT/dA1 = dF2/dA1.
As dF2/dA1 > 0, so this condition implies that the side payment transferred from coun-
try 2 to country 1 must be positively related to the level of pollution abatement in coun-
216

--- Sayfa 228 ---
Bilateral Agreements
try 1. In this way country 1 can be induced to reduce its level of pollution to the co-
operative level and social welfare is maximized.
Using a two-country model we have shown that if there is either a unidirectional or
reciprocal externality, then side payments can make both countries better off. Despite
this result such transfers are rarely observed in practice. Here we discuss some criti-
cisms levelled against the use of side payments, which may partially explain why they
are rarely adopted.
EXERCISE 10.1
In the two-country model presented in the text it was assumed there was a unidirectional
externality. The use of the environment by one country adversely affected the welfare of the
other country. In this exercise we extend this model to analyse the effects of a reciprocal
externality.
Assume there are two countries, indexed i = 1, 2. Both countries have free access to a
shared common resource. This may, for example, be the atmosphere or shared open water.
Each country uses the resource as a means of waste disposal. Social welfare in each coun-
try is dependent on the aggregate level of pollution of the shared environment. As in the
text each country can invest in a costly abatement technology. Specifically, we assume that
social welfare in each country is equal to Vi= F(A1 + A2- E)- Ci (Ai), where E is the initial
aggregate rate of pollution, and other notation is as in the text. It is initially assumed that
marginal benefit of abatement is positively related to aggregate pollution, whilst marginal
cost is positively related to the level of abatement in each country.
(1) Find the first-order optimality conditions for each country given that they act non-
cooperatively. Illustrate the reaction curves for these two countries and show the Nash
equilibrium. Is this equilibrium Pareto efficient?
(2) Derive the optimality conditions if the countries work together co-operatively and seek
to maximize joint social welfare. Compared to the results derived in (1) what does this
co-operative solution imply about levels of abatement?
(3) Demonstrate that the two countries can be induced to replicate the co-operative out-
come when the possibility of side payments is introduced into the model.
(4) What is the specific outcome for (3) when both countries are identical?
(5) What is the specific outcome for (3) when marginal costs of abatement are constant,
but not necessarily the same in each country?
217

--- Sayfa 229 ---
Environmental Economics
Polluter pays principle
In the previous models countries achieved the co-operative solution if the victim of
pollution induces the polluter, via side payments, to reduce its emissions. A guiding
principle, however, that is often adopted by countries when negotiating solutions to
environmental problems is that it is the polluter, and not the victim, who should bear
the costs of its actions. This is known as the polluter pays principle (PPP), and contrasts
with the victim pays principle (VPP). For example, at the Stockholm Conference in
1972 the OECD countries declared that 'States have . . . responsibility to ensure that
activities within their jurisdiction or control do not cause damage to the environment
of other States or areas beyond the limits of national jurisdiction.' A strong argument in
favour of this principle is that it accords with the notion of natural justice. This is based
on the belief that individuals have the right to an unpolluted environment. One reason
countries might be reluctant to use side payments in order to induce polluters to reduce
their emissions is that it violates the polluter pays principle.
Indeterminacy
In order to induce the polluter country to reduce emissions to the co-operative level the
rate of side payment must equal the marginal benefit of abatement for the other coun-
try. This maximizes the level of joint social welfare which can then be divided between
the two countries. The exact distribution of social welfare, however, is not uniquely
determined. There is in fact a range of varying levels of side payments that produce the
co-operative outcome and make both countries better off. Because of this multiple
equilibria the final outcome is indeterminant, and depends on bargaining between the
two countries. This raises the possibility that the countries may not be able to reach a
satisfactory agreement or that the costs of doing so outweigh the potential benefits. In
either situation the two countries may again avoid using side payments.
Uncertainty
In the two-country model discussed above it was implicitly assumed that there was no
uncertainty. If, however, there is incomplete or imperfect information, then countries
may be unwilling to use side payments to offset environmental problems. Uncertainty
may arise because countries marginal cost and marginal benefit functions of abatement
are not common knowledge. In this situation countries have an incentive to lie about
their cost or benefit functions in order to increase their share of the net gain in welfare.
This may involve polluter countries overstating the true cost of abatement hoping to
receive a greater level of side payment. Similarly victims of pollution may overstate the
extent of environmental damage hoping to reduce the agreed level of side payment.
Another instance of uncertainty is when the final level of abatement by the polluter
country cannot be accurately measured and agreed upon by both countries. Again
there is the incentive for countries to give false information. In situations such as these
mechanisms will need to be instituted so as to induce countries to truthfully reveal their
218

--- Sayfa 230 ---
Multilateral Agreements
information. Such mechanisms, if they exist, may greatly increase the complexity of
negotiations, and may cause countries to abandon the use of side payments.
More than two countries
The above result on the optimality of side payments was derived in only a two-country
model. In reality environmental problems typically involve more than just two coun-
tries. Even in the case of a unidirectional externality there may be many countries pol-
luting the environment and/or there may be many countries who are victims. These
possibilities can change a country's incentive to make or receive side payments. For
example, if there are many victims of one or more countries' pollution, then each vic-
tim has an incentive not to offer side payments in the hope that the other victims will do
so. This free-rider problem, and how it may be avoided, is discussed more fully in the
next section. Furthermore, even if one particular environmental problem is confined
just to two countries, these countries may be involved in negotiations with other coun-
tries concerning separate though related issues. Here a country may be unwilling to
adopt the victim pays principle associated with side payments so as not to appear a
weak negotiator. In this way it hopes to develop a reputation for being a strong negotia-
tor, and so improve its pay-off in the long run.
10.2 Multilateral Agreements
10.2.1 The free-rider problem
In the previous section we analysed the effects of an environmental externality in a two-
country model. This model, however, can only be considered relevant to a small num-
ber of real world examples. Instances of bilateral environmental agreements include
those made between the USA and Canada over acid rain, fishing rights, and manage-
ment of the Great Lakes. Most environmental problems that confront the world today
involve many countries. This is obviously true for global environmental problems such
as ozone depletion and global warming. In order for there to be effective environmen-
tal control in these instances multilateral, rather than bilateral, agreements are needed.
As in the two-country model the presence of environmental externalities and free
access to common resources provides an incentive for all countries to co-ordinate their
actions. When there are many countries, however, the free-rider problem becomes par-
ticularly severe. Here individual countries have the incentive not to co-ordinate their
environmental policies with other countries. This is in the hope that other countries
will address the environmental problem without them. In this way the free-rider coun-
try enjoys the benefits of the other countries environmental control, but incurs none of
the associated costs. With all countries faced with this same incentive full co-operation
219

--- Sayfa 231 ---
Environmental Economics
between countries is not possible. Taking this game theory result on face value gives
the pessimistic prediction that we should not expect to observe environmental co-
operation between countries. Fortunately this prediction is not confirmed by reality. In
practice we do observe countries co-ordinating their environmental policies for the
common good. Examples of so-called international environmental agreements (lEAs)
include the Helsinki Protocol (1985) on sulphur dioxide reduction and the Montreal
Protocol (1987) on ozone depletion. This section explicitly considers how such lEAs
can be sustained, and hence the free-rider problem overcome. This involves examining
environmental policy when countries repeatedly interact and the possibility of groups
of countries forming stable coalitions.
10.2.2 Repeated interaction
As considered in previous chapters allowing players repeatedly to interact can greatly
alter the predicted outcome of a game. With continual interaction players can adopt
punishment strategies in an attempt to induce other players to act in a certain way. This
is most clearly illustrated in games where players are assumed to interact an infinite
number of times. The most commonly quoted version of the Folk Theorem states that
with infinite repetitions any feasible individually rational pay-off can be supported as a
subgame perfect Nash equilibrium provided the players are sufficiently concerned with
future pay-offs. By individually rational it is meant that each player gains at least its
maximin level of welfare. This is the minimum pay-off a player can guarantee for itself
provided they act rationally. A feasible outcome is merely one that can be obtained by
some combination of players' strategies, not necessarily equilibrium ones. This result
vastly increases the set of strategy combinations that can be supported as a credible
equilibrium. In particular, given that countries adopt appropriate punishment strate-
gies environmental co-operation can be sustained provided countries do not overly
discount the future. In this way an IEA can be self-enforcing. A similar result can be
obtained if interaction between countries is finite but indeterminant. Even if interac-
tion ends after a finite period of time, an IEA may still be self-enforcing if there is
incomplete information. In this situation there is uncertainty about another country's
social welfare function. For example, it may not be completely known how strongly a
country views a particular environmental problem. Here a country might on moral
grounds credibly threaten severe retaliation against any country breaking an IEA. With
this threat other countries may be deterred from deviating. Again all countries will be
made better off, and the free-rider problem avoided.
As just discussed an IEA may be subgame perfect if countries adopt appropriate pun-
ishment strategies. One criticism often made of this approach is that it ignores the pos-
sibility of renegotiation. Specifically, the above mechanisms rely on countries adopting
punishment strategies and pursuing them until the end of the game. However, with no
international authority able to compel countries to act in this way, there is always the
220

--- Sayfa 232 ---
Multilateral Agreements
possibility that countries will seek to renegotiate an agreement. This can undermine the
credibility of future punishment, and the basis of environmental co-operation. If, for
example, one country breaks an environmental agreement, then according to the pro-
posed punishment strategy it should be punished by the other countries. This may,
however, involve the punishing countries themselves being made worse off compared
to the co-operative solution. If this is the case, then they clearly have an incentive to
let bygones be bygones and renegotiate the agreement. In this way it is hoped that co-
operation can be restored, so that all countries can again be made better off. The prob-
lem with this reasoning is that if renegotiation is anticipated countries will not expect
to be punished for breaking an agreement, and so countries are not deterred from doing
so. Once again countries will be unable to co-ordinate on the co-operative outcome.
One way to incorporate the possibility of renegotiation is to require the initial equi-
librium strategies to be renegotiation proof. With this refinement of Nash equilibrium
the predicted outcome must be subgame perfect, and there must also be no incentive
for players to renegotiate the agreement once deviation is observed. Conditions under
which strategies are renegotiation proof have been given by Farrell and Maskin (1989).
For a punishment strategy to be weakly renegotiation proof it must be the case that the
punishing players are better off punishing the offender rather than letting bygones be
bygones and returning to the co-operative outcome. A further requirement for a strat-
egy to be strongly renegotiation proof is that the pay-offs during punishment must not
be Pareto-dominated. As each of these refinements place further restrictions over the
set of possible equilibrium strategies, it is no longer the case that the co-operative solu-
tion can be self-supporting. Barrett (1994) applies the strong renegotiation proof crite-
ria to a multi-country model with a reciprocal environmental externality. In this model
whether environmental co-operation is self-enforcing depends on specific parameter
values. In particular, co-operation is only possible if the number of countries involved
is below a critical number. This critical number of countries depends, in turn, on the
marginal costs and benefits of environmental control. Barrett's conclusion is that when
there are a large number of countries, lEAs are only self-supporting if the net benefits
of co-operation are small. Significantly, if either the benefits or costs of co-operation
are large, then the free-rider problem prevails, and full co-operation cannot be
achieved. This yields the rather pessimistic conclusion that when co-operation is most
needed it is least likely to be observed.
10.2.3 Stable coalitions
The free-rider problem discussed previously states that when all players in a game pro-
duce the fully co-operative outcome, some, if not all, players will seek to deviate from it.
This implies that the fully co-operative solution is unstable. It can be noted, however,
that the free-rider problem does not necessarily imply that all coalitions are unstable. It
may well be the case that smaller coalitions, consisting of only a subset of players in the
221

--- Sayfa 233 ---
Environmental Economics
game, are stable. In this situation the players within the coalition seek to maximize their
joint welfare, while other players maximize their individual welfare. The final outcome
will be one of partial co-operation. Donsimoni et at. (1986) show that the existence of
stable coalitions exists under fairly general conditions. This seems a potentially helpful
insight in explaining the existence of lEAs, as indeed it is often only a subset of all
nations who sign any agreement. In this context a coalition will be stable when two con-
ditions are satisfied. (These conditions were initially developed by D'Aspremont and
Gabszewicz (1986) in the context of oligopoly.) First, none of the signatories must have
an incentive to leave the coalition unilaterally. This means that none of the signatories
has an incentive to free-ride on the agreement. Second, none of the non-signatories, act-
ing in self-interest, wants to join the coalition. When both of these conditions are satis-
fied, the number of signatories to an environmental agreement remains constant, and
so the coalition is stable. The final outcome will lie somewhere between the fully co-
operative outcome and the non-cooperative solution. The larger the number of coun-
tries forming the co-operative coalition the closer the final outcome will be to the fully
EXERCISE 10.2.*
In this exercise we determine the equilibrium number of countries that will sign an IEA
which maximizes the joint welfare of signatories, for a specific multi-country model.
Assume there are n identical countries indexed j=1,. . . , n. Each country seeks to choose
its optimal level of pollution abatement, A, .Social welfare for country i (Vj) is given by
where A is the total level of pollution abatement across all countries, and band care posi-
tive constants. Assume that n* countries sign an IEA to act co-operatively and maximize the
joint welfare of the signatories nations. Non-signatories are assumed to act non-coopera-
tively, and maximize their individual welfare.
(1) Find expressions for the optimal levels of abatement for individual signatory and non-
signatory countries.
(2) Determine the levels of welfare for individual signatory and non-signatory countries.
(3) Using your results from (2) specify the two conditions necessary for a coalition to be
stable.
(4) Show that if there are five total countries, then a stable coalition comprising of three
countries exists.
222

--- Sayfa 234 ---
Multilateral Agreements
co-operative solution. In general the equilibrium number of countries wishing to sign
an IEA will depend on the functional specification and parameters of the model being
used.
One criticism of this approach is that the number of countries forming a stable coali-
tion is often found to be small. This has led economists to seek ways that other countries
can be induced to sign an IEA, and so enlarge the number of signatories. Here we con-
sider three ways that have been suggested for how this might be achieved. These are the
use of side payments when some countries are committed to environmental control,
linking lEAs to other issues that countries are concerned about, and matching.
Side payments and commitment
One approach that has often been suggested how stable coalitions might be expanded
is by again introducing the possibility of side payments. It is argued that because co-
operating countries are made better off when the number of countries within the coali-
tion increases there is an incentive for them to offer side payments to non-cooperating
countries to induce them to become signatories. Carraro and Siniscalco (1995), how-
ever, have demonstrated that the resulting coalition is unstable. The reason for this is
that with side payments on offer the incentive to be an original non-signatory is now
greater. This induces some of the original signatories to leave the coalition. In equilib-
rium the number of countries joining the coalition is unchanged. One way to overcome
this problem is to introduce some form of commitment by countries to remain part of
the coalition. If this commitment exists, all countries can be made better off by induc-
ing non-signatories to join the coalition via the use of side payments. Clearly the prob-
lem with this approach is that a country merely saying it is committed to an IEA is not
credible. This is because the committed country could do better for itself if it free-rides
on the agreement when other countries become signatories. In order for the coalition
to be expanded current signatories need credibly to commit themselves to the
agreement. One way to do this might be through overinvestment in abatement tech-
nology. This reduces the cost of future abatement, and makes it less likely that that
country will leave the coalition. Alternatively, a country may try and develop a reputa-
tion for being co-operative, or morally committed to environmental control. This will
only be possible if there is incomplete information about the true nature of signatories.
To develop such a reputation it will need to undertake some action that is costly to itself.
This might involve not breaking the conditions of an IEA even though this would
increase its short-term welfare. Alternatively, it might increase its own pollution abate-
ment above that required to maximize its own social welfare. In this way the country
acts as a leader in overcoming international problems, and may lead to all countries
being made eventually better off.
Linking IBAs to other issues
Another possible way of encouraging non-signatories to sign a multilateral environ-
mental agreement is to link the agreement to other issues countries are concerned
223

--- Sayfa 235 ---
Environmental Economics
about. For example, continued free trade, financial aid, or co-operation on research and
development might be made conditional on countries signing the environmental
agreement. This carrot-and/or-stick approach will change the pay-offs faced by coun-
tries and may cause the stable coalition to be expanded. Carraro and Siniscalco (1995)
demonstrate that this is indeed possible in a model where technological co-operation
between countries is dependant on countries signing an IEA. In their model, enlarging
environmental co-operation is desirable but on its own unstable. Technological co-
operation, however, is both desirable and stable. By linking these issues all countries can
be made better off. In effect the gains of free-riding on the IEA are now offset by the cost
of reduced technological co-operation.
Related to this issue of linked agreements is the role of trade provisions within lEAs.
The Montreal Protocol (1987), for example, bans the import and export of products
containing chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) from or to non-signatory nations. Although
primarily designed to prevent non-signatories offsetting the pollution abatement of
signatories, it also enhances the incentive for countries to sign the agreement. In this
way the self-enforcing coalition is again expanded, and all countries are made better off.
Matching
As discussed above the equilibrium number of countries signing a self-enforcing IEA
depends on the structure and parameter of the model. In particular it is dependent on
the slope of the reaction functions of individual countries. If the reaction curves relat-
ing different countries abatement levels are negatively sloped, this means that if one
country increases its level of abatement other countries will abate less. The more steeply
sloped the reaction curves, the smaller the benefits of any one country reducing its
emissions. This reduces the incentive to sign an IEA, and so other things being equal the
smaller the resulting coalition. Conversely, the flatter the reaction curves, the larger
the resulting coalition. One way in which reaction curves can be made flatter is for
countries to adopt a matching rate of abatement. Here countries agree to match, at least
to some extent, the abatement levels of other countries. This increases the benefits of
any one country joining the coalition as now other signatories will match the increased
abatement. This will increase the equilibrium number of countries within the coali-
tion, and move the final outcome closer to the fully co-operative solution. Guttman
(1978) has indeed shown, within a different context, that matching can under certain
conditions, support the fully co-operative outcome.
10.3 Conclusions
This chapter has focused on international environmental problems. Specifically, we
have analysed the incentives for countries to enter into international environmental
agreements (lEAs). This was undertaken in the context of both bilateral and multilat-
224

--- Sayfa 236 ---
Solutions to Exercises
eral agreements. Of particular interest was the possible use of side payments between
countries. It has been suggested that in bilateral agreements these can be used to inter-
nalize environmental externalities, and in multilateral agreements they can be used to
expand the number of signatories. This chapter has, however, highlighted a number of
theoretical and practical problems associated with side payments. These considera-
tions reduce the likelihood that countries will use side payments to alleviate environ-
mental problems. Instead, other mechanisms will have to be found for inducing
countries to work co-operatively. These may include the use of punishment strategies
directed against countries that break international agreements, the linking of lEAs to
other issues, and the possibility of matching. By employing these and other strategies it
is hoped countries will have the incentive to work together to improve our environment
for the benefit of all.
10.4 Solutions to Exercises
Exercise 10.1
(1) Acting non-cooperatively each country maximizes its welfare taking the other country's
level of abatement as given. Differentiating each country's welfare function with respect to
its own level of abatement and setting this equal to zero yields the following first-order con-
ditions.
As each country's marginal benefit depends only on the aggregate level of pollution, and
hence on the aggregate level of abatement, A, these conditions can be rewritten as
In equilibrium each country determines its optimal level of abatement by setting its own
marginal benefit equal to its own marginal cost. Assuming the equilibrium is not a corner
solution marginal costs of abatement will be equal in both countries. This Nash equilibrium
is illustrated as point NE in Fig. 10.2. At this point the indifference curves intersect and so
this equilibrium is not Pareto efficient. Any point within the shaded lens shaped area will
improve the welfare of both countries.
(2) Joint welfare of the two countries is given by
Differentiating this function with respect to each country's level of abatement, we obtain the
following optimality conditions.
225

--- Sayfa 237 ---
Environmental Economics
The first half of this expression states that countries will increase abatement until joint mar-
ginal benefit equals the marginal cost of doing so. Compared to the non-cooperative out-
come this will entail a greater level of aggregate abatement as now each country considers
the beneficial effects its environmental policy has on the other. Compared to the co-
operative solution the Nash equilibrium entails excessive use of the common resource. This
is an important game theory result that can be generalized. If individuals or countries have
free access to a common resource and act no n-cooper a lively, then we can expect that
resource to be overused, and the outcome to be Pareto inefficient. The second half of this
condition again states that the marginal cost of abatement in equilibrium must be the same
in each country. This guarantees that the aggregate level of abatement is produced at mini-
mum cost. For efficiency to be achieved, not only must the socially desirable level of abate-
ment be achieved, but also the costs of doing so must be optimally shared between
countries. These conditions can be replicated if the two countries adopt appropriate side
payments dependent on the other country's level of abatement. This is demonstrated in (3).
(3) With the possibility of side payments between countries dependent upon levels of abate-
ment each country's welfare function is given as
and
where T, (A-i) is the amount country i transfers to the other country (-«'), dependent upon
the other country's level of abatement. Differentiating each function with respect to that
country's level of abatement and setting these equal to zero yields the following first-order
conditions.
226

--- Sayfa 238 ---
Solutions to Exercises
With the marginal rates of transfer payments set equal to the marginal benefit of abatement
we obtain the co-operative solution. Here each country is induced to increase its own opti-
mal level of abatement due to the financial incentive provided by the other country.
(4) If both countries are identical, then each country will abate pollution by the same amount.
In the diagram given in answer to (1) this is given as point C. This point is Pareto efficient as
the two countries' indifference curves are tangential, and on the 45° line. It seems reasonable
to assume that with identical countries the gains of co-ordinating upon this outcome will be
divided evenly. If this is true, each country will receive the same level of transfer payment
from the other. If only net side payments are actually transferred, then there will be no pay-
ments made. The co-operative solution is derived from instrumentally rational behaviour
supported by side payments even though in equilibrium no side payments are ever made!
The reason for this paradoxical result is that there is now an effective punishment if either
country deviates from the 'co-operative' outcome. Without the possibility of side payments
each country will reduce its level of abatement. However, with side payments this means
that any deviating country will pay a net side payment to the other country. It is this extra
cost of deviating from the co-operative solution that induces countries to maintain the
optimal abatement levels.
(5) If marginal costs are constant, either we obtain the result explained in (4), or only one coun-
try abates its pollution. This first result occurs when the countries have the same constant
marginal cost of abatement, and so the two countries are identical. The second result occurs
when the countries have different constant marginal costs. In this situation the requirement
that in equilibrium marginal costs are equal cannot be satisfied, and so we have a corner
solution. In order for aggregate abatement to be produced at least cost the more efficient
country will undertake all the required abatement. In this situation only the abating coun-
try receives any side payment, and pays nothing to the other country.
Exercise 10.2
(1) Non-signatories to the IEA seek to maximize V;NS= bA - (c!2)Af. By differentiating with
respect to A; we can derive that non-signatories will set their level of abatement equal to
Afs = blc. Signatories to the IEA, however, seek to maximize their joint welfare
From the first-order condition for a maximum we obtain that signatories set their abate-
ment levels equal to Af = n*blc.
(2) From(l) total abatement, A, is equal to (n* - ri)(blc) + n*((n*b)lc). Substituting this into
each country's welfare function and simplifying gives us the following levels of welfare for
signatories and non-signatories:
227

--- Sayfa 239 ---
Environmental Economics
(3) The first condition for an equilibrium is that signatories must have no incentive to leave the
coalition unilaterally. This implies that Vf (n*) * Vfs (n*-l). From the answer to (2) this
means that in equilibrium
The second equilibrium condition is that non-signatories have no incentive to become sig-
natories. This implies that Vfs («*) a Vf (n* + I). This can be written as
(4) When « = 5 and n* = 3 it can be confirmed that the first of the above equilibrium conditions
is just satisfied, while the second condition is met by an inequality. This means that the sig-
natories are indifferent to becoming non-signatories, but non-signatories strictly prefer not
joining the coalition. With both conditions being jointly satisfied the coalition of three
countries is confirmed to be a stable equilibrium.
Further Reading
Barrett, S. (1990), 'The Problem of Global Environmental Protection', Oxford Review of
Economic Policy, 6:68-79; repr. in D. Helm (1991), Economic Policy Towards the Environment,
Oxford: Blackwell; also in T. Jenkinson (1996), Readings in Microeconomics, New York:
Oxford University Press.
Field, B. (1994), Environmental Economics: An Introduction, New York: McGraw-Hill.
Hanley, N., J. F. Shogren, and B. White (1997), Environmental Economics: In Theory and Practice,
London: Macmillan.
Maler, G-M. (1991), 'International Environmental Problems', in D. Helm (ed.), Economic Policy
Towards the Environment, Oxford: Blackwell.
Pearce, D. W., and R. K. Turner (1990), Economics of Natural Resources and the Environment,
Hemel Hempstead: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Perman, R., Y. Ma, and J. McGilvray (1996), Natural Resources and Environmental Economics,
London: Longman.
228

--- Sayfa 240 ---
11
Experimental Economics
P
REVIOUS chapters have largely focused on the theoretical implications of
applying game theory concepts to various areas of economics. Part of econom-
ics, however, has been concerned with testing whether the predictions of game
theory are confirmed by individuals' making interdependent decisions in a controlled
environment. This is part of the rapidly expanding area of experimental economics. In
this chapter we review a number of experiments that have directly sought to test some
of the more important game theory concepts used in previous chapters.
In section 11.1 the fundamental concept of Nash equilibrium is examined. Here we
present experiments where individuals played both one-off and repeated prisoners'
dilemma games. Observations from such experiments can then be used to test the pre-
dictions of Nash equilibrium and subgame perfect Nash equilibrium. A typical finding
in these experiments is that the cooperative outcome is observed much more frequently
than is suggested by these equilibrium concepts. This section also outlines possible
explanations for why this might be so. One common interpretation of why individuals
are observed to be more co-operative than predicted is that, in the games being played,
there is incomplete information. With this type of uncertainty one relevant refinement
of Nash equilibrium is that of sequential equilibrium. Given the widespread use of
sequential equilibrium, section 11.2 reviews a number of experiments that set out to
test its predictions against observed behaviour.
In many games the predictions of game theory are highly specific and can be directly
tested against experimental evidence. This is true for the decision-making problems
used in experiments reviewed in the first two sections of this chapter. In other games,
however, the predictions of game theory are less precise. This occurs, for example, when
there are multiple equilibria. In such games there is the possibility of co-ordination fail-
ure. This occurs when players fail to co-ordinate on a Pareto-dominant equilibrium.
Section 11.3 reviews experiments that examine how individuals make decisions when
there is this possibility of co-ordination failure.
229

--- Sayfa 241 ---
Experimental Economics
11.1 Nash Equilibrium
A number of experiments have sought to test the predictions of game theory about how
rational individuals will play certain games. For example, there have been an enormous
number of experiments concerned with how people play prisoners' dilemma games. If
players view each game as a one-off event, then observed behaviour can be used to test
the prediction that individuals determine their optimal strategy based on Nash equi-
librium reasoning or strict-dominance arguments. Alternatively, if individuals perceive
they are playing a finite number of repetitions of the prisoners' dilemma game, then
observed behaviour can be used to test the prediction that individuals determine their
chosen strategy based on the principle of backward induction, which yields the sub-
game perfect Nash equilibrium. Before examining some of the experimental evidence
conducted on prisoners' dilemma games it should be remembered that the concepts of
Nash equilibrium and subgame perfection are based on the combination of two funda-
mental assumptions, "[he first is that individuals are instrumentally rational, whilst the
second is that this is common knowledge. At best, experimental evidence can only test
the joint hypothesis formed by these two assumptions. If the experimental evidence
contradicts the predictions of either Nash equilibrium or subgame perfection, it will
not, in general, be clear which of these two underlying assumptions has been violated.
Rather than attempt to review the now hundreds of experiments undertaken to
examine how individuals play one-off and repeated prisoners' dilemma games, we
restrict ourselves to reporting two recent and fairly typical experiments. The first is by
Cooper et al. (1991) and is concerned with how individuals play a series of one-off pris-
oners' dilemma games. The second by Selten and Stoecker (1986) examines the effects
when such games are finitely repeated.
In the Cooper etal. (1991) experiment individuals played a prisoners' dilemma game
twenty times against different players. The reason why players were not paired together
more than once was to encourage subjects to view each game as a one-off rather than as
a single round of a repeated game. Players made their moves simultaneously without
communicating with their opponent. The actual game played is shown in Fig. 11.1.
The pay-offs shown, however, do not correspond to monetary payments but rather
to points a player could earn. The greater the number of points a player obtains, the
greater the probability that he or she will win a monetary prize in a subsequent lottery.
The incentive behind this mechanism is to offset differences in risk preference. In con-
trast, if the pay-offs in Fig. 11.1 corresponded directly to monetary payments, and play-
ers perceived their opponent was playing a mixed strategy, then their optimal strategy
would depend on risk preference. The lottery mechanism, therefore, seeks to induce
individuals to maximize the number of points earned irrespective of their risk prefer-
ence.
With individuals seeking to maximize the number of points earned the unique Nash
equilibrium for this game is that both players should play non-cooperatively and adopt
230

--- Sayfa 242 ---
Fig. 11.1 The Prisoners' Dilemma Game used by Cooper et al. (1991)
the pure strategy, E. As this is a prisoners' dilemma game this is also the solution based
on strict dominance. If, however, both players play co-operatively, that is N, then both
are made better off. Finally, the preferred outcome for a player is for that player to devi-
ate from co-operation, E, whilst the other player co-operates, N. The results of how sub-
jects played this game are shown in Table 11.1.
As can be seen from Table 11.1 subjects played the co-operative solution a significant
proportion of the time even though this is strictly dominated by the strategy of always
playing non-cooperatively. However, as the subjects gain greater experience of the game
the rate of co-operation falls. For the first five matchings co-operation was observed 43
per cent of the time. For the last five matchings this fell to only 20 per cent. From these
observations it seems that individuals need some experience of the game before they
tend towards the Nash equilibrium. However, even after many repetitions of the game
some individuals continued to play the dominated strategy at least some of the time.
These results are fairly typical of other experiments conducted on one-off prisoners'
dilemma games. In conclusion, the prediction that the outcome of the game played
between rational individuals will be the Nash equilibrium receives only limited sup-
port. Similar conclusions are derived by Selten and Stoecker (1986).
In Selten and Stoecker's experiment individuals played a 10-period repeated prison-
ers' dilemma 'supergame' game, which was itself repeated twenty-five times. Within
231
Table 11.1 Results from Cooper et al. ( 1 99 1 )
Matchings
1-5
6-10
11-15
16-20
Percentage of co-operative choices (N)
43%
33%
25%
20%
Nash Equilibrium

--- Sayfa 243 ---
Experimental Economics
each 'supergame' subjects played against the same opponent, but they played different
opponents in different 'supergames'. Subjects did not know whom they were playing
against. The outcome of each individual prisoners' dilemma game was announced to
the players at the end of each period. Apart from this there was no communication
between players. The actual stage game played by subjects in this experiment is shown
in Fig. 11.2.
Fig. 11.2 The Prisoners' Dilemma Game used by Selten and Stoecker (1986)
In this experiment the pay-offs were monetary payments denominated in German
Marks. Although subjects played the same prisoners' dilemma game repeatedly against
the same opponent the subgame perfect equilibrium is that the Nash equilibrium for
this stage game (NP/NP) will be played in every period. This can be confirmed by
applying the principle of backward induction to each 'supergame'.
The main finding of this experiment was that subjects again co-operated much more
than predicted on the basis of (subgame perfect) Nash equilibrium. Once subjects had
gained sufficient experience of the game the following pattern of behaviour typically
emerged. At the start of each 'supergame'both players would initially co-operate, (HP),
until one of them defected, (NP). Once defection was observed both players would then
play non-cooperatively until the end of that 'supergame'. Based on observed behaviour
and written statements by the players Selten and Stoecker estimated the intended
period of deviation for each player within each 'supergame'. The mean and standard
deviation of these estimates over all subjects are plotted in Fig. 11.3 for the final twelve
'supergames'. In calculating these statistics Selten and Stoecker only included
'supergames' which were classified as an 'end-effect play'. This was defined as a game
where at least four periods of co-operation were observed followed firstly by defection
by one player and then the Nash equilibrium thereafter. If a player intended to co-
operate for the entire 'supergame', their intended period of deviation was set equal to
11.
232

--- Sayfa 244 ---
Nash Equilibrium
Fig. 11.3 Mean and Standard Deviation of the Intended Period of Deviation in 'End-Effect
Plays' for Final 12 'Supergames' (Selten and Stoecker 1986)
As can be seen from Fig. 11.3 players experienced with this 'supergame' intended to
co-operate, on average, for at least the first seven periods. It is also clear that on average
players intended to deviate earlier in later 'supergames'. It appears that having initially
learnt to co-operate, players then learnt to deviate earlier in the hope of being the first
player to do so and so earn a higher pay-off. It is not clear, however, if this subsequent
unravelling process would have continued with extended repetitions until subjects
ceased to co-operate in any period. Despite this possibility the subgame perfect Nash
equilibrium is not a good predictor of how subjects actually played this finitely
repeated prisoners' dilemma game. This finding has again been confirmed by many
other experiments analysing how individuals play repeated prisoners' dilemma games.
From the experiments reported by Cooper et al. (1991), Selten and Stoecker (1986),
and others, the predictions of game theory based on the dual assumptions that individ-
uals are instrumentally rational and common knowledge of rationality can only be said
to have received limited support. In general individuals are more likely to act co-
operatively than is predicted on the basis of these assumptions. This evidence indicates
that the predictions of game theory based on these assumptions do not give us the com-
plete picture, and that important aspects of how individuals make decisions have
been ignored. Partly as a result of these experimental findings economists and non-
economists have attempted to identify what some of these missing aspects might be.
Here we review five suggested explanations for why individuals are observed to be more
co-operative than the predictions of Nash equilibrium and subgame perfect Nash equi-
librium when confronted with prisoners' dilemma games.
233

--- Sayfa 245 ---
Experimental Economics
11.1.1 Altruism
One common interpretation of the above experimental evidence is that not all individ-
uals are solely motivated by monetary rewards. Instead it is often argued that some indi-
viduals receive additional utility when they act altruistically. Andreoni and Miller
(1993) present three different ways in which altruism might affect an individual's util-
ity within a prisoners' dilemma game. The first is called pure altruism. In this situation
a player is not only concerned with his or her own pay-off but also with the utility of the
other player. Here an individual receives additional utility the greater the pay-off gained
by the other player. The second model of altruism they call duty. Here the individual
feels a certain moral obligation to act co-operatively rather than competitively. In this
case an individual receives additional utility when he or she acts co-operatively. Finally,
an individual's utility may be affected by reciprocal altruism. In this case an individual
receives extra utility if both players act co-operatively. This model has also been called
the 'warm glow' effect as it is supposes that players receive particular pleasure when
there is mutual co-operation.
The significant effect of each of these types of altruism is that individuals' pay-offs
from playing a game such as the prisoners' dilemma need no longer be the same as those
explicitly set by the experimenter. With a different pay-off function it may cease to be
true that competition dominates co-operation. With this interpretation individuals
observed to co-operate may still be maximizing their pay-off functions, but that these
can no longer be directly observed. Furthermore as the pay-off functions are no longer
directly observed this means that the game actually being played is one of incomplete
information. Each player can be assumed to know their own pay-off function but is
unsure of the pay-off function of the opponent. This clearly increases the uncertainty
each player experiences when playing the game. This uncertainty raises the possibility
that in repeated prisoners' dilemma games players may seek to develop a reputation for
being altruistic by playing co-operatively. As discussed below each of these considera-
tions of uncertainty and reputation have been further used to explain experimental
results observed with prisoners' dilemma games.
11.1.2 Learning
Another interpretation of the experimental results obtained from prisoners' dilemma
games concerns the role of learning when individuals are boundedly rational. One sug-
gestion is that individuals do not determine which strategy to play on the basis of explicit
maximization, but rather on the basis of trial and error. This approach has replicated
work undertaken by biologists seeking to explain the evolution of animal behaviour. In
consequence games incorporating these learning dynamics are known as evolutionary
games. In these games individuals initially choose an arbitrary strategy, and then adjust
their strategy in the light of experience. If a strategy is seen to be successful, it is more
234

--- Sayfa 246 ---
Nash Equilibrium
EXERCISE 11.1
In the text it was argued that individuals may choose to play co-operatively within a pris-
oners' dilemma game if they are sufficiently altruistic. This exercise demonstrates this
proposition using each of the three models of altruism discussed previously. Assume that in
a hypothetical experiment subjects are asked to play the following one-off prisoners'
dilemma game against a randomly assigned anonymous opponent.
Assume there are a large number of individuals, indexed j= 1
n, all of whom seek to
maximize expected utility. Predict the proportion of subjects that will play co-operatively
under the following scenarios.
(1) Duty
Individual j's utility (Vj) is given by the equation Vj, <= II; + a;, where II; is the pay-off as
given by the game itself, while a; is the extra utility the person obtains if he or she plays co-
operatively, (C). Individuals only know their own value of a and that within the subject pop-
ulation this variable is uniformly distributed over the range of 0 to 8 inclusive.
(2) Reciprocal altruism
Again an individual's utility is given by V; = n, + a,-, but this time a,- refers to the extra util-
ity gained if both players co-operate (C). Other assumptions are the same as those given in
(1).
(3) Pure altruism
This time an individual fs utility isgiven as V-, = II;+a;II_;, where n_;is the pay-off gained
by the other person, and a/ the weight an individual attaches to other people's welfare.
Individuals only know their own value of a and that within the subject population this vari-
able is uniformly distributed over the range 0 to 1 inclusive.
Hint: For each model let Prob equal the probability that an individual's opponent will
play co-operatively, and then calculate the expected levels of utility associated with play-
ing either C or D. From these equations calculate the critical value of a,-, a*, so that indi-
vidual's with a/ > a* will play co-operatively. Finally Prob can be determined from the
equation Prob(a,-> a*) = {amax - a*)/amax, where amax is the maximum possible value
of a.
235

--- Sayfa 247 ---
Experimental Economics
likely to be adopted in the future rounds. If seen to be unsuccessful, then it is less likely
to be adopted in the future. This adjustment process may be viewed in one of two ways.
The first is to imagine that a number of individuals change their adopted pure strategy
to more successful strategies. The second justification is that individuals initially play a
mixed strategy and subsequently adjust the probability mix over their pure strategies.
Here the probability of an individual playing a successful strategy increases. In either
situation the result is the same. Successful strategies are played more frequently in the
future. With either process an equilibrium occurs when the economy reaches a steady
state, and by definition the probability distribution over alternative strategies remains
unchanged. Such an equilibrium may be either stable or unstable. An equilibrium is
stable if, when disturbed by small changes in players' strategies, possibly due to players
making mistakes, players eventually return to their original strategies . In this case the
equilibrium is known as an evolutionarily stable strategy. If the dynamics of the system
lead away from the original equilibrium, it is said to be unstable. Significantly an evolu-
tionarily stable strategy must be a Nash equilibrium. However, not all Nash equilibria
are evolutionarily stable. Furthermore whilst learning is still taking place out-of-quilib-
rium strategies will be played. To illustrate some of these ideas we apply a particular
learning process to the prisoners' dilemma game used in the experiment by Cooper et
a/.(1991).
We assume that a large number of individuals play this one-off game a number of
times against different randomly selected opponents. It is assumed that the learning
process adopted by individuals can be represented by the following dynamic equation
where Prob is the probability that a player will play strategy E, I1(E) is the expected pay-
off from playing this strategy, and n is the average pay-off over all individuals. This
equation states that the change in the probability of players playing strategy E is pro-
portional to its current probability multiplied by the difference between its expected
pay-off and the average pay-off. If the strategy's expected pay-off is greater than the
average pay-off received by players, then the probability of this strategy being played
increases over time.
Using the game represented in Fig. 11.1 we can calculate the expected pay-off for an
individual playing either N or E. The expected pay-off of playing N is
and the expected pay-off of playing E is
From these equations we can calculate the average pay-off over all individuals.
236

--- Sayfa 248 ---
237
where Prob is the probability that anjndividual will play strategy A, n(A) is the expected
pay-off from playing strategy A, and n is the average pay-off over all individuals.
EXERCISE 11.2
In a hypothetical experiment assume that subjects are asked to play one of the two follow-
ing symmetric games a number of times against different anonymous opponents. For suc-
cessive repetitions of the game individuals are randomly paired together from a large
subject pool. For each of the one-off games identify the pure and mixed-strategy Nash
equilibria. Finally, assuming that individuals are boundedly rational, determine the evolu-
tionary stable strategy when subjects adopt the following learning process
Fig. 11.4 plots this equation over the permitted range of Prob between 0 and 1 inclusive.
From this so-called phase diagram two steady-state equilibria can be identified.
Substituting (11.3) and (11.4) into (11.1) and rearranging gives us the following
dynamic equation
Nash Equilibrium

--- Sayfa 249 ---
Experimental Economics
These occur when dProb/dt= 0 and so the probabilities Prob = 0 and Prob = 1 both cor-
respond to steady-state equilibria. With any other initial probability distribution it
must be true that dProb/dt> 0. This implies that out of equilibrium the probability of
individuals playing strategy E will increase over time. (This is illustrated by the direc-
tional arrows in the phase diagram.) This result generally conforms to the observations
made by Cooper etal. (1991) that the percentage of subjects playing the co-operative
strategy (N) declined over the course of the experiment. This learning approach pre-
dicts, however, that this process should eventually converge upon the equilibrium
where all players play the non-cooperative strategy all the time. This equilibrium is the
unique evolutionarily stable strategy, and corresponds to the Nash equilibrium of this
prisoners' dilemma game.
The above analysis has demonstrated how a dynamic learning process can be used to
analyse a series of symmetrical one-off games. Exercise 11.2 provides two further exam-
ples of this type of game. This approach can also be extended to analyse more complex
repeated games. Indeed Selten and Stoecker (1986) develop a learning model to inter-
pret the results observed from their repeated prisoners' dilemma experiment.
Specifically, the period in which individuals intend to deviate to the non-cooperative
strategy is related to the outcome in the previous 'supergame'. They demonstrate that
based on parameter estimates derived from the first twenty'supergames' they can suc-
cessfully predict individual's strategies in the last five 'supergames'.
11.1.3 Uncertainty
The prisoners' dilemma game has not only been of interest to economists but also to
many psychologists. Shafir and Tversky (1992), for example, use experiments on a pris-
oners' dilemma game to examine how subjects make decisions in the presence of uncer-
tainty. In their experiment they compare the rates of co-operation in the normal
one-off prisoners' dilemma game with co-operation rates when one of the players is
informed of the other player's initial move. In the sequential move game 16 per cent of
238

--- Sayfa 250 ---
Nash Equilibrium
subjects played co-operatively when they knew their opponent had initially played co-
operatively. In contrast only 3 per cent of subjects played co-operatively when they
knew their opponent had played non-cooperatively. On its own this evidence tends to
support the model of reciprocal altruism discussed above. However, the most signifi-
cant result of this paper is that in the simultaneous game 37 per cent of subjects were
observed to play co-operatively. Shafir and Tversky argue that this result cannot be
solely attributed to players being altruistic, as this would imply subjects being most co-
operative when they knew their opponent had played co-operatively. Instead they
attribute some of the high rates of co-operation in the normal prisoners' dilemma game
to the inherent uncertainty of the game. Thus they write 'uncertainty promotes a ten-
dency to co-operate, which disappears once the other player's decision has been deter-
mined. It appears that many subjects did not appropriately evaluate each possible
outcome and its implications.' With this interpretation individuals attempt to maxi-
mize their utility but are unable fully to evaluate outcomes when their consequences are
unclear. It is again this limited rationality that causes individuals to act co-operatively.
11.1.4 Reputation
The above explanations of why individuals co-operate in prisoners' dilemma games
have essentially focused on the psychological factors of altruism, learning, and
bounded rationality. Interestingly Kreps etal. (1982) have demonstrated that if, due to
these reasons, players perceive there is a small probability that their opponent will play
co-operatively, then within a finitely repeated prisoners' dilemma game it can be ratio-
nal for players to co-operate in early periods of the game. In this way player's develop a
reputation for being co-operative, and this maximizes their pay-off over the entire
game. This explanation states that due to incomplete information a relevant equilib-
rium concept used to predict the behaviour of individuals playing such a game is that of
sequential equilibrium. Typically the profile of an individual's play in such an equilib-
rium involves three stages. Initially rational players play co-operatively. In the second
phase players adopt a mixed strategy where they assign positive probabilities over co-
operation and deviation. In this stage non-deviation will enhance the individual's rep-
utation for being co-operative. Eventually, in the third stage a rational player, if he or she
has not already done so, will certainly deviate from co-operation. It maybe noted that
such an equilibrium fits well with the observed behaviour of experienced players in
Selten and Stoecker's (1986) repeated game experiment. Indeed, even the unravelling
process, whereby individuals having learnt to co-operate then learnt to deviate earlier
in the game, can be explained as part of a sequential equilibrium. This is done by assum-
ing that, as the players gain more experience of the game, they revise downwards the
probability that other players are 'irrational'. If there were no 'irrational' players in the
subject population, this process would continue until the sequential equilibrium con-
verged on the subgame perfect equilibrium.
239

--- Sayfa 251 ---
Experimental Economics
11.1.5 Group reputation
In the sequential equilibrium described above individuals may seek to establish a repu-
tation of being co-operative. This can only occur in the context of a repeated game with
incomplete information. In a series of one-off prisoners' dilemma games against dif-
ferent anonymous opponents there is no possibility of an individual developing such a
reputation. Kandori (1992), however, demonstrates that if the number of subjects is not
too large, then players may adopt strategies whereby the group as a whole builds and
maintains a reputation for being co-operative.
In Kandori's example a number of individuals play a series of one-off prisoners'
dilemma games. It is supposed that the players are randomly and anonymously
matched from the group population. It is further assumed that there is no communica-
tion between players, and that they can only observe the outcome of the games in which
they are directly involved. In this context Kandori demonstrates that co-operation can
be maintained if players adopt 'contagious punishments'. With players adopting this
strategy reputation is related to the group as a whole and not individuals. If a player has
never observed any of their opponents playing non-cooperatively, then he will perceive
that the group as a whole is co-operative. If, however, a player observes one of his oppo-
nents deviating, then he ceases to view the group as co-operative. In a contagious equi-
librium an individual will play co-operatively in early repetitions of the game if he
perceives the group is co-operative. If he views the group as being non-cooperative, he
will also play non-cooperatively. With all players adopting this strategy once any player
defects from co-operation deviation spreads like an epidemic throughout the entire
population. This continues until co-operation within the whole group breaks down. It
is this collapse of co-operation that effectively deters individuals from initially deviat-
ing in early repetitions of the game. Once more co-operation can be part of rational
equilibrium behaviour, and so may partly explain the observed experimental evidence
of individuals playing a series of one-off prisoners' dilemma games.
11.2 Sequential Equilibrium
As discussed in the previous section one possible way of explaining experimental
results on how individuals play repeated prisoners' dilemma games has been to assume
there is incomplete information. With this assumption it can be rational for individu-
als to co-operate so as to develop a reputation for such behaviour. Given the promi-
nence of sequential equilibrium in explaining experimental evidence, and also its use in
many economic models, it is not surprising that experimental economists have explic-
itly sought to test this hypothesis. In this section we review four recently conducted
experiments.
240

--- Sayfa 252 ---
Sequential Equlibrium
Andreoni and Miller (1993)
In an extension to previous experiments Andreoni and Miller (1993) contrast the
behaviour of individuals playing a series of one-off prisoners' dilemma games against
those playing the game repeatedly. The intention here is to test whether observed
behaviour is consistent with the sequential equilibrium hypothesis that rational indi-
viduals will seek to build a reputation for being co-operative. This constitutes a direct
test of the model proposed by Kreps etal. (1982). Specifically Andreoni and Miller con-
trast the rates of co-operation between players who play a one-off prisoners' dilemma
game 200 times against 'strangers', with those who play a ten-period repeated version of
the stage game twenty times against 'partners'. In the repeated game subjects are paired
with the same individual for each ten-period game but with different individuals for
different 'supergames'. Clearly only players involved in the repeated version of the game
can develop individual reputations for being co-operative. This means that according
to the sequential equilibrium hypothesis individuals playing against 'partners' should
be observed to be more co-operative in early rounds than those playing against
'strangers.' The results of this experiment are shown in Fig. 11.5.
Fig. 11.5 Andreoni and Miller (1993): Percentage of Subjects Playing Co-operatively by
Period
This diagram shows the percentage of subjects playing co-operatively over the ten
periods. As indicated the results are generally consistent with the sequential equilib-
rium hypothesis. In particular, the 'partners' are observed to be significantly more co-
operative than strangers (at the 0.1 per cent level). Furthermore, 'partners' are found to
be significantly more co-operative in the first five rounds compared to the final five
rounds. This was not found to be true for the 'strangers'. Andreoni and Miller also note
that the rates of co-operation in the final period are virtually identical for the two
groups. All these feature of the data are consistent with the sequential equilibrium
hypothesis. Regarding the behaviour of those playing the one-off game in isolation
241

--- Sayfa 253 ---
Experimental Economics
Andreoni and Miller argue that persistent co-operation observed by some of their sub-
jects indicates that a significant number of individuals are altruistic. Based on their
observations they estimate that the prior probability that an opponent will play co-
operatively in these one-off games was approximately 20 per cent. This interpretation
that some players are indeed altruistic further justifies the assumption of incomplete
information. As Andreoni and Miller point out in a strict interpretation of the sequen-
tial equilibrium hypothesis no altruistic or irrational players need exist. Instead, it need
only be assumed that players believe such players exist. With this assumption all players
may be viewed as actmgrationally. This, however, implies that players' beliefs are wrong.
A more reasonable assumption would seem to be that rational players believe other
players are altruistic or irrational, because some of them actually are. Andreoni and
Miller's observations indicate that such beliefs are justified.
Camerer and Weigelt (1988)
In each of the experiments previously discussed incomplete information may be
inferred from the behaviour of individuals playing the game. In contrast the experi-
ment undertaken by Camerer and Weigelt explicitly introduces such uncertainty.
Observations from this experiment are again used to test the predictions of sequential
equilibrium. The basic nature of the game resembles the decisions faced by a lender and
a borrower. The inherent uncertainty within the game is that the lender does not know
for certain whether the borrower will repay a loan or default. If the perceived probabil-
ity that the borrower will renege on the loan is high, the loan will be withheld. One styl-
ized version of the stage game that subjects were asked to play in this experiment is
shown in Fig. 11.6.
In this game there are two possible types of borrower. Which type actually plays the
game is represented as being determined by 'Nature'. Type Y, according to the pay-offs
of the game, never has the incentive to default. (This is because they receive a pay-off of
Fig. 11.6 One Version of the Extensive Form Game used by Camerer and Weigelt (1988)
242

--- Sayfa 254 ---
Sequential Equlibrium
60 if they repay the loan, but nothing if they default.) Type X, however, does have such
an incentive. (Here they receive a pay-off of 150 if they default.) The probability that a
borrower is type X, Profcx, is 0.67, while the probability they are type Y, 1 - Probx, is 0.33.
All subjects were informed of these probabilities but the lender is initially unclear what
type of borrower she faces. In order for there to be a sequential equilibrium this one-off
game was repeated eight times between the same players. Each subject then repeated
this game a number of times against different opponents. Alternative versions of the
game were derived by changing two parameters, the proportion of X- and Y-type bor-
rowers, and the pay-offs to the lender.
Camerer and Weigelt demonstrate that for each version of their repeated games there
is a unique sequential equilibrium. This equilibrium is characterized by three succes-
sive phases. In the first phase a type-X borrower will not wish to reveal his true identity,
and so he always repay the loan. The lender anticipates this behaviour and is therefore
prepared to offer the loan. In this phase loans are always made and repaid irrespective
of the type of borrower. In the second phase, an X-type borrower will play a mixed strat-
egy, with the probability of repayment decreasing over successive periods of the game.
If repayment was observed in the previous period, then the loan is made in the current
period. If the loan was not repaid in the previous period, then the lender knows the
borrower is type-X, and so no further loans are made. In the final phase of the game a
type-X borrower will definitely default on the loan. For the parameter values used by
Camerer and Weigelt this corresponds to the final period of the game. The predicted
probabilities of defaulting on the loan for different periods of the game are shown in
Fig. 11.7.
These probabilities are calculated for X-type borrowers, assuming they have not pre-
viously defaulted, and the parameters are as shown in Fig. 11.6. Fig. 11.7 also depicts the
actual proportions of experienced type-X borrowers initially defaulting in each period.
Fig. 11.7 Results from Camerer and Weigelt (1988)
243

--- Sayfa 255 ---
Experimental Economics
(In early plays of the game subjects' behaviour was highly erratic, with individuals pre-
sumably still learning the nature of the game.)
As can be seen from Fig. 11.7 there is strong evidence of reputation-building, with
the majority of type-X borrowers repaying the loan in early periods. However, as can be
seen from the diagram the actual proportion of subjects defaulting in each period of the
game was generally lower than those predicted by the sequential equilibrium hypothe-
sis. As the 90 per cent confidence intervals indicate, such discrepancies, except for
period 7, cannot be merely dismissed as chance. Camerer and Weigelt attribute these
high levels of repayment to the presence of'homemade priors' which increase individ-
ual's subjective probability that borrowers are of type Y. This is based on the belief that
other players will seek to play co-operatively for altruistic reasons. In this game playing
co-operatively corresponds to offering the loan and not defaulting. From their empiri-
cal evidence Camerer and Weigelt estimate that the home-made prior probability that
potential X-type player will play as a Y-type player is approximately 0.17. This estimate
was derived under the twin assumptions that the home-made prior is common knowl-
edge, and that individuals adopt strategies in accordance with the sequential equilib-
rium hypothesis. To test these assumptions Camerer and Weigelt compare the
estimated home-made prior across different experiments of this and alternative ver-
sions of the game. They report that the resulting estimates are generally consistent. This
can be interpreted as providing further support for sequential equilibrium hypothesis.
Camerer and Weigelt (1988) conclude that once subjects were familiar with the game
they were playing, and after home-made priors had been introduced, the predictions of
sequential equilibrium fitted the data reasonably well. This positive conclusion has,
however, been challenged by further experimental evidence provided by Neral and
Ochs(1992).
Neral and Ochs( 1992)
In this experiment Neral and Ochs initially asked subjects to play the game presented in
Fig. 11.6. Despite slight modifications, such as in this experiment in which the repeated
game consisted of six, rather than eight, periods, their results are not substantially dif-
ferent from those obtained by Camerer and Weigelt (1988). In fact less out-of-equilib-
rium behaviour was observed this time compared to the initial experiment. Having
replicated Camerer and Weigelt's results Neral and Ochs asked a different set of subjects
to play a slightly modified version of the previous game. The only difference between
the two games was that now the pay-off to a type-X borrower if he defaulted was
reduced from 150 to 100. All other parameters of the game remained unchanged. This
parameter change was selected because the predictions based on sequential equilib-
rium are extremely counter-intuitive. The sequential equilibrium hypothesis predicts
that when the pay-off for defaulting is reduced, then the borrower's behaviour will
remain unchanged, but the lender will reduce her probability of offering the loan dur-
ing the mixed strategy phase of the sequential equilibrium. (This result is illustrated in
Exercise 11.3.) In contrast, the intuitive prediction is that reneging on the loan will be
244

--- Sayfa 256 ---
Sequential Equlibrium
less likely, because the pay-off from doing so is smaller, and as a result the lender will be
more likely to offer the loan. If subjects are observed to play counter-intuitively in line
with the game theory prediction, this would be strong evidence in favour of the sequen-
tial equilibrium hypothesis. Subjects, however, were not observed to play according to
the predictions of sequential equilibrium. The relevant results from Neral and Ochs are
presented in Table 11.2.
In this table the observed probabilities of a loan being made and a type-X borrower
initially defaulting over different periods are reported for both sets of experiments. To
test whether the change in pay-offs has had any significant effect on subjects' behaviour
the chi-square statistic is calculated. Finally, the exact probability of observing the
reported differences is presented for each of the two hypotheses. If this figure is less than
0.01 then we can state that the reported difference is significant at the 1 per cent level.
We first consider the behaviour of the lenders. From the table it can be seen that for
three out of five periods for which a mixed strategy is predicated (periods 2-6) the
lenders increase the probability of offering a loan. This is contrary to the sequential
equilibrium hypothesis. Furthermore, this increase in the propensity to lend is signifi-
cant for periods 3 and 4. Neral and Ochs therefore reject the null hypothesis that the
parameter change will reduce the probability of loans being offered. We now consider
the behaviour of type-X borrowers. Again it can be seen that the observed probability
of initial default has risen in all periods except period 5. This increase is significant for
period 3. Once more Neral and Ochs reject the null hypothesis that the parameter
change will have no effect on borrower behaviour.
The results from Neral and Ochs experiment are therefore mixed. As with Camerer
and Weigelt (1988) there is strong evidence that subjects seek to develop favourable
reputations. This is consistent with the sequential equilibrium hypothesis. However,
subjects' behaviour is inconsistent with the predictions of sequential equilibrium fol-
lowing a specific parameter change. Neral and Ochs do not offer an explanation why
subjects responded to the parameter change in the way they did. However, they do
note that such finding cannot be explained merely by introducing home-made priors
245
Table 1 1.2 Results from Neral and Ochs (1992)
Probability of loan being made
Probability of initial default by type-X borrower
Period
1
2
3
4
5
6
Original
experiment
1.000
0.989
0.878
0.600
0.698
0.875
Modified
experiment
0.979
0.996
1.000
0.873
0.667
0.192
Chi-square
statistic
2.231
0.059
27.571
31.722
0.065
40.471
Significance/
exact probability
0.135
0.809
0.000
0.000
0.800
0.000
Original
experiment
0.983
0.966
0.636
0.515
0.546
0.000
Modified
experiment
1.000
0.994
0.968
0.690
0.468
0.375
Chi-square
statistic
0.832
1.577
46.924
2.818
0.022
Significance/
exact probability
0.362
0.209
0.000
0.093
0.882
0.209

--- Sayfa 257 ---
Experimental Economics
similar to those used by Camerer and Weigelt. As with previous experimental results the
predictions of game theory do not tell us the whole story. What some of the missing fac-
tors might be is suggested by an experiment by McKelvey and Palfrey (1992).
McKelvey and Palfrey (1992)
In this test of sequential equilibrium subjects played a modified version of Rosenthal's
(1981) centipede game. The extensive form of this modified game was initially pre-
sented in Appendix 3.2. This game is reproduced in Fig. 11.8. (McKelvey and Palfrey
also asked subjects to play a six-period version of this game. We do not report the results
from this experiment as they were similar to those derived from this four-period game.)
EXERCISE 11.3.*
Both Camerer and Weigelt (1988) and Neral and Ochs (1992) use a repeated version of the
game depicted in Fig. 11.6. Experimental observations were then used to test the predic-
tions of the sequential equilibrium hypothesis. In particular Neral and Ochs examine
whether subjects playing this game follow the counter-intuitive sequential equilibrium
prediction that if the pay-off fora type-X borrower reneging on a loan falls, then the prob-
ability of default remains unchanged but the probability of the lender offering a loan
decreases. In this exercise we illustrate these predictions for a two-period version of this
game. Initially we examine the subgame perfect Nash equilibrium if the game is played only
once.
(1) Using the principle of backward induction derive the subgame perfect Nash equilib-
rium if the game illustrated in Fig. 11.6 is played only once, with the modification that
Proox = 0.25. Explain why this predicted outcome is Pareto inefficient.
(2) Derive the characteristics of the sequential equilibrium if the game in Fig. 11.6 is played
twice and Probx = 0.25. Based on these equilibrium predictions calculate each player's
expected pay-off at the beginning of the game.
(3) Derive the sequential equilibrium comparative static predictions if the pay-off for a
type-X borrower defaulting falls from 150 to 100. Assume all other aspects of the game
remain the same as for (2). Based on these equilibrium predictions calculate each
player's expected pay-off at the beginning of this modified game.
In Appendix 3.2 we derived the predictions for a rational player based on the com-
mon knowledge assumption that 5 per cent of players are altruistic in that they always
play across. From these predictions we are able to calculate the implied probabilities of
the game reaching each of the five possible outcomes. These predictions are shown in
the second column of Table 11.3. For example, the final outcome corresponding to both
players twice playing across (AAAA) will only be achieved, according to the sequential
246

--- Sayfa 258 ---
Fig. 11.8 McKelvey and Palfrey's (1992) Centipede Game
equilibrium hypothesis, if each player is altruistic. The probability of this occurring is
0.05 x 0.05 = 0.0025
In McKelvey and Palfrey's experiment subjects were asked to play this game up to ten
times against different opponents. Each subject remained either player 1 or player 2 in
successive repetitions of the game. In total this game was played 281 times between dif-
ferent pairings of twenty-nine subjects. The proportion of these games reaching each of
the possible final outcomes is shown in the third column of Table 11.3. Clearly there is
again strong evidence of reputation-building, with only 7 per cent of games played end-
ing with player 1 initially moving down. However, as can be seen from comparing
columns 2 and 3 of this table the sequential equilibrium hypothesis is unable to explain
all the features of the observed results. For example, the outcome AD is observed sig-
nificantly less frequently than that predicted by the sequential equilibrium hypothesis.
Table 11.3 Results from McKelvey and Palfrey (1992)
Outcome
Sequential equilibrium
Actual
Learning/Errors
D
AD
AAD
AMD
AAAA
0.0000
0.6498
0.3001
0.0476
0.0025
0.071
0.356
0.370
0.153
0.049
0.097
0.333
0.324
0.218
0.028
McKelvey and Palfrey argue that what is missing from the sequential equilibrium
hypothesis is the possibility that individuals make errors in their intended actions, and
have errors in their beliefs about their opponents. To test these possible explanations
they estimate an econometric model based on sequential equilibrium hypothesis using
maximum-likelihood methods. This model incorporates the possibility of both errors
in action and errors in belief. The predictions using this econometric model are shown
in column 4 of Table 3.2. Clearly these predictions are much closer to those actually
observed than produced by sequential equilibrium alone. Based on this econometric
model they estimate that approximately 5 per cent of the population maybe considered
altruistic. (This justifies the sequential equilibrium predictions given in column 2.)
Furthermore they conclude that there is significant evidence of subjects making errors
in action and having errors in beliefs. Concerning errors in action they conclude that
247
Sequential Equlibrium

--- Sayfa 259 ---
Experimental Economics
their model is consistent with learning, and that subjects learn to make fewer errors the
greater their experience of the game. For their four-period game the error rate falls from
a high of 18 per cent in early games to a low of 12 per cent in latter games. (Much smaller
error rates, however, were observed for their six-period game. As a result the econo-
metric model for this game performed less well in explaining observed behaviour.)
Regarding errors in belief, McKelvey and Palfrey reject the hypothesis that subjects have
common beliefs regarding the proportion of altruists in the population. They cannot,
however, reject the rational expectations hypothesis which states that beliefs are correct
on average. McKelvey and Palfrey conclude that the sequential equilibrium hypothesis,
after allowing for the presence of altruists, errors in actions, and errors in beliefs is able
to account for the main features of their data.
Reviewing the studies reported in this and the previous section we may conclude that
game theory predictions derived on the assumptions that individuals always act ratio-
nally, and that this is common knowledge, are not confirmed by experimental evidence.
This inconsistency can be interpreted in one of two ways. Either the theory is wrong or
the experimental evidence is unreliable. Indeed, various reasons can be suggested why
evidence derived from controlled experiments must be interpreted with care. Some of
these reasons are discussed in the conclusion to this chapter. Despite these provisos it
would seem reasonable to conclude, given the extent of the experimental evidence, that
game theory models based on common knowledge of rationality need to be modified,
and alternative assumptions employed. This could include allowing a proportion of
individuals to be altruistic so that they are not solely motivated by monetary payments.
Rather than undermining recent game theory models this supports the emphasis given
to studying games based on incomplete information. However, as experiments dis-
cussed in this section suggest, even this departure from complete rationality may be
insufficient to fully explain individuals' behaviour. Other factors suggested by the
experimental evidence include the necessity of modelling how individuals learn over
time and respond when confronted with genuine uncertainty. Each of these factors
would seem to provide promising areas for future research. (These issues are discussed
more fully in Chapter 12, where theoretical criticisms of recent game theory models are
evaluated.)
11.3 Multiple Equilibria
All the games so far considered in this chapter have the property that there is a unique
equilibrium strategy. In games with multiple equilibria this is no longer true. In such
games players have the increased difficulty of trying to predict how other rational play-
ers will play the game. Without such co-ordination the final outcome will not be a Nash
equilibrium. Even if the final outcome is an equilibrium this need not be the Pareto-
dominant equilibrium. In either case we can say there has been co-ordination failure.
248

--- Sayfa 260 ---
Multiple Equilibrium
Given the prominence of multiple equilibria, especially in recent macroeconomics
games, it is clearly of interest to examine how individuals respond to this situation. A
number of questions readily come to mind. Are individuals able to co-ordinate upon
one of the many equilibria? Will this be the Pareto-efficient equilibrium? What factors
influence how individuals select one equilibrium from many? Does the possibility of
pre-play communication between players help them to avoid co-ordination failure? In
this section we review a number of experiments that have attempted to provide answers
to these and other questions.
Van Huyck, Battalio, and BeU (1990)
In a series of experiments Van Huyck, Battalio, and Beil (1990) asked subjects to play a
game that exhibited Pareto-ranked Nash equilibria. The intention of these experiments
was to determine whether individuals playing such a game could co-ordinate upon an
equilibrium, and if so whether this would be the Pareto-dominant equilibrium. In one
of the experiments individuals were placed in groups of between fourteen and sixteen
people. Each player in the group was then asked to select an integer between 1 and 7
inclusive, in the knowledge that their pay-off would be determined by his or her own
choice, and the minimum value chosen by the group. The exact pay-offs are shown in
Table 11.4.
Table 11.4 Pay-off Matrix for Van Huyck ef al. (1990)
Smallest integer chosen
Individual
i's
choice
of
integer
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
1.30
1.10
0.90
1.20
1.00
1.10
_
_
_
_
_
_
—
—
—
0.70
0.80
0.90
1.00
-
-
—
0.50
0.60
0.70
0.80
0.90
-
—
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60
0.70
0.80
•—
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60
0.70
From these pay-offs each player has an incentive to try and ensure a high minimum
value. However, each player is penalized for choosing a number greater than the mini-
mum. There are seven Pareto-ranked Nash equilibria for this game, one corresponding
to each symmetrical outcome. The Pareto-dominant equilibrium is where all players
select the number 7. Players played this game ten times within the same group, with no
possibility of communication between members. The minimum value of each round
was reported to the members of that group before the next round was played. In total
107 subjects played this game divided into seven groups. Results for the first group,
made up of sixteen individuals, are shown in Fig. 11.9.
249
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

--- Sayfa 261 ---
Experimental Economics
The vertical axis of Fig. 11.9 gives the frequency a particular integer was chosen. The
horizontal axis shows how these frequencies vary over the ten successive rounds of the
game. For example, in the first round eight out of sixteen subjects chose the value 7,
three chose 6, two chose 5, and the values 4,3 and 2 were chosen by only one subject. A
typical result observed across all groups was that subjects quickly learnt to select smaller
numbers. In Fig. 11.9 this is clearly indicated by the dramatic rise in the number of indi-
viduals choosing the minimum value of 1. Significantly, the vast majority of subjects
(72 per cent) chose the value 1 in the final round of the game. Indeed, this was the min-
imum value chosen over all groups from the fourth round onwards. This maybe inter-
preted as evidence that the groups were converging on the Nash equilibrium where all
individuals simultaneously choose the value 1. Indeed, with extended play of this and a
modified game some groups were indeed observed to converge on this Nash equilib-
rium. The results from this experiment illustrate the possibility of co-ordination
failure. This contradicts the view sometimes made by theorists that if there are Pareto-
ranked Nash equilibria, players will co-ordinate upon the Pareto-efficient equilibrium
as this acts as a focal point.
One factor that might be supposed to influence whether co-ordination failure occurs
is the number of players in the game. Van Huyck, Battalio, and Bell test this supposition
by asking a proportion of subjects to play the previous game against only one other
opponent. The pairs were formed in one of two ways. In the first version players were
permanently paired together and asked to play a series of games against each other. In
the alternative version subjects played a series of one-off games against randomly
matched opponents.
With fixed pairings the results were quite different from those derived from the large
groups. In particular, most pairs were able to quickly converge on the Pareto-dominant
250
Fig. 11.9 Results from Van Huyck et al. (1990)

--- Sayfa 262 ---
Multiple Equilibrium
equilibrium. For example ten out of the fourteen fixed pairings co-ordinated on this
equilibrium after only four rounds of this game. This was despite the fact that only one
of these pairs initially played this equilibrium. Once a pair had co-ordinated upon the
Pareto-dominant equilibrium they remained there for all subsequent repetitions of the
game. With random pairings, however, there was no convergence upon any of the equi-
libria. These results illustrate the importance of both repeated play and the number of
players in the game. Repeated interaction between a small number of players seems able
to reduce the occurrence of co-ordination failure.
Cooper, Dejong, Forsythe, and Ross. (1990)
In another series of experiments Cooper et al. (1990) seek to test three separate
hypotheses in games with multiple Nash equilibria. The first two hypotheses are the
same as for Van Huyck, Battalio, and Bell (1990). These are firstly that subjects will co-
ordinate upon a Nash equilibrium, and secondly that a Pareto-dominant equilibrium
will be selected. The third hypothesis is that equilibrium selection should not be influ-
enced by other dominated strategies. This final hypothesis conforms with the common
assumption in game theory that dominated strategies are ignored when players choose
their optimal strategies. To test these hypotheses Cooper et al. asked subjects to play a
series of one-off co-ordination games against different anonymous opponents. Two
such games are shown in Fig. 11.10. Again, so as to avoid the effects of differences in risk
preferences, these pay-offs are not monetary payments but rather points. These points
then determine the probability of winning a subsequent lottery. Both games shown in
Fig. 11.10 have two pure-strategy Nash equilibria. One corresponds to both players
adopting strategy 1. The other is when both play strategy 2. These equilibria are Pareto
ranked, with the outcome corresponding to both players choosing strategy 2 Pareto
dominant.
Fig. 11.10 Co-ordination Games from Cooper etal. (1990)
251

--- Sayfa 263 ---
Experimental Economics
The only difference between the two games is the pay-off for each player choosing
strategy 2 while their opponent chooses strategy 3. In Game 1 this pay-off isO, in Game
2 it is 1,000. However, it should be noticed that strategy 3 is strictly dominated by strat-
egy 1. This means that strategy 1 always gives a higher pay-off compared to strategy 3
irrespective of what the other player does. The implication of this is that the changed
pay-off between the two games should be irrelevant if the other player is assumed never
to play a dominated strategy. This hypothesis, however, is not confirmed by observa-
tion. The results given by Cooper et al. of subjects playing these two games are shown in
Fig. 11.11.
Fig. 11.11 Results from Cooper et al. (1990)
These results have been derived by aggregating over 110 repetitions of the two games
played between experienced subjects. As can be seen, players overwhelmingly selected a
single strategy in each of these games. For Game 1 this was strategy 1, and for Game 2 it
was strategy 2. These findings are consistent with the prediction that players will select
a strategy consistent with a Nash equilibrium. However, as subjects tended to co-ordi-
nate on strategy 1 in the first game, the prediction that the Pareto-dominant equilib-
rium will act as a focal point must be rejected. In Game 1 subjects co-ordinated on a
Pareto-inefficient outcome and experienced co-ordination failure. Furthermore, as the
changed behaviour must be attributed to the parameter change, the final hypothesis
must also be rejected. Although players do not, in general, select a dominated strategy,
it seems that such a strategy can influence which Nash equilibrium players co-ordinate
upon. Contrary to the practice adopted in many game theory models it seems that
dominated strategies can have an effect on players' behaviour. In the above experiment
the change in pay-offs alter which of the possible equilibria is focal. This is despite the
fact that the changed pay-off can only be considered relevant if there is some possibil-
ity that the other player will act irrationally and play strategy 3. Given this possibility,
252

--- Sayfa 264 ---
Multiple Equilibrium
however, it is easy to see why a rational player may switch strategies as a result of the
parameter change. Once again the assumption of common knowledge of rationality
appears to be violated.
Cooper, Dejong, Forsythe, and Ross (1989)
The above experiments involving games with multiple equilibria have demonstrated
that co-ordination failure is a distinct possibility. Factors determining whether co-ordi-
nation failure occurs have included the number of players in the game, the nature of
repeated play, and the pay-offs associated with out-of-equilibrium play. To conclude
this section we discuss an experiment undertaken by Cooper et al. (1991). The purpose
of this experiment was to investigate the role of pre-play communication in avoiding
the possibility of co-ordination failure. In particular it seeks to determine whether cost-
less, non-binding, and pay-off-irrelevant communication can help players co-ordinate
their actions on a Pareto-efficient outcome. This type of communication is often
referred to as 'cheap-talk'. Subjects were asked to play a version of the battle of the sexes
game shown in Fig. 11.12.
Fig. 11.12 The Battle of the Sexes Game used by Cooper etal. (1989)
Again the pay-offs represent points which then determine the probability of players
winning a lottery. Individuals played this one-off game a number of times against dif-
ferent, anonymous opponents. This game has three Nash equilibria. The first two cor-
respond to the two pure-strategy equilibria (Rl, C2) and (R2, Cl). The third
equilibrium is where the players adopt mixed strategies. In this equilibrium player 1
plays strategy Rl with probability 0.25 and strategy R2 with probability 0.75. Similarly
player 2 plays Cl with probability 0.75 and C2 with probability 0.25. Given players
adopt these mixed strategies the probability that the final outcome will be one of the
pure-strategy Nash equilibrium is 0.375. With these strategies the probability of ex post
co-ordination failure is, therefore, 0.625.
In order to investigate the effects of pre-play co-ordination Cooper et al divided the
subject population into various groups and allocated to each group an alternative com-
munication structure. In the experiment four different communication structures
253

--- Sayfa 265 ---
Experimental Economics
were allowed. In the first group no pre-play communication was allowed. In the second
group one round of one-way communication was allowed. In this group player 1 was
initially allowed to state her intended strategy before both players simultaneously chose
their actions. Alternatively player 1 could, if she so desired, choose not to send any mes-
sage, or even lie about her intentions. In the third group one round of two-way com-
munication was allowed. Here both players were allowed to state their intended strategy
before play began. In the final group players were allowed three rounds of two-way
communication. This involves players sending and receiving up to three messages
about their possible intentions. The results from these different communication struc-
tures are shown in Table 11.5.
Table 11.5 Results from Cooper et al. (1989)
In this table we report the proportion of games played under each communication
structure where the final outcome corresponds to a pure-strategy Nash equilibrium.
These are referred to as 'hits' and correspond to instances where communication failure
has been avoided. As can be seen 48 per cent of games played with no communication
resulted in expos? equilibrium. This is significantly higher than the prediction based on
players adopting the Nash equilibrium with mixed strategies. None the less ex post co-
ordination failure is still the most likely outcome, with ex post disequilibrium occurring
52 per cent of the time. This rate of disequilibrium is greatly reduced when one-way
communication is allowed. With this type of communication the proportion of hits
was observed to be 95 per cent. In the vast majority of these games player 1 sent the mes-
sage that she intended to play R2. This was typically believed by player 2 who then
responded with Cl. Clearly this type of communication has a major impact on reduc-
ing the occurrence of co-ordination failure. In contrast, two-way communication was
less effective in reducing the incidence of such failure. With one round of two-way com-
munication the proportion of hits only increased to 55 per cent, while with three
rounds it increased to 63 per cent. Whilst two-way communication does help players
co-ordinate their actions, there is a greater likelihood of conflict compared to one-way
communication. Cooper et al. conclude that the type of communication structure
faced by players can greatly influence the outcome of co-ordination games. This is true
even when communication is restricted to non-binding announcements.
254
Type of pre-play communication
Proportion of hits
No communication
One-way communication
(One round)
Two-way communication
(One round)
Two-way communication
(Three rounds)
0.48
0.95
0.55
0.63

--- Sayfa 266 ---
Conclusions
11.4 Conclusions
This chapter has reviewed a number of experiments undertaken to examine how indi-
viduals play various games when their decisions are interdependent. These observa-
tions have been compared with the predictions of game theory. From these studies it is
clear that game theory predictions are not always confirmed by experimental evidence.
However, before we can confidently reject certain elements of game theory as being
unrealistic great care needs to be taken in interpreting the experimental evidence. In
some of the experiments undertaken to test the full rationality of individuals the
experimenters may be viewed as agent provocateurs. Subjects are often placed in situa-
tions where intuitive reasoning alone will cause them to commit the crime of not act-
ing in accordance with the principles of complete rationality. The experimenters then
declare that such evidence proves beyond reasonable doubt that individuals are irra-
tional. In assessing such evidence, however, the context from which it is amassed must
be taken into consideration. Subjects are, in effect, asked to play contrived games, in
artificial settings, where the predictions of the relevant hypothesis are often counter-
intuitive. In these circumstances it does not seem entirely surprising that individuals
are observed to act in ways not entirely consistent with full rationality. This is true even
when individuals have had prolonged experience of the game they are asked to play.
There are indeed several problems in attempting to generalize experimental results
to the choices individuals make when confronted with everyday decisions. For exam-
ple, individuals typically have a much greater familiarity with the decisions they are
required to make in everyday life compared to the problems devised by experimental
economists. This is especially true when it is realized that most experiments are pre-
sented in purely abstract terms with little or no perceived relevance to real-life deci-
sions. This enhanced familiarity with real-life problems is due to repeated experience of
the same problem, as well as the ability of individuals to make links with other related
problems of which they have experience. Furthermore, such learning will typically take
place over a much longer time-period. This will enable individuals to more fully evalu-
ate their decisions and revise future strategies. With little time to reflect upon decisions
it may be necessary for individuals to rely on their intuition. This may be the case even
though such intuition was developed in contexts where it was more appropriate.
Another problem in generalizing some of the findings discussed above is that, con-
trary to the nature of many experiments, individuals are rarely required to solve com-
plex decision problems in isolation. Instead, real world decisions are often encountered
within a social context. Again, such social interaction is likely to enhance the learning
process, and cause individuals to modify their intended strategies. Allowing individu-
als more time and social interaction also introduces the possibility that they will seek
further information before deciding on a particular course of action. This may involve
seeking the advice of so-called experts, with the explicit intention of helping individu-
als to reach a more rational decision. Each of these considerations raises questions
255

--- Sayfa 267 ---
Experimental Economics
about the relevance of experimental evidence. Indeed, given the diverse nature of
experimental and real-world decisions, it is perhaps surprising how often observed
behaviour fits with the predictions derived from full rationality.
The above arguments have stressed the difficulty of generalizing experimental evi-
dence to real-life decision-making. None the less two broad conclusions would appear
warranted by such evidence. First, it seems reasonable to conclude that not all individ-
uals act according to instrumental rationality all of the time. This may be due to
bounded rationality, altruism, or how individuals respond when faced with genuine
uncertainty. In part this conclusion would seem to validate the importance of model-
ling incomplete information, and the use of sequential equilibrium in economics.
However, it seems undoubtedly true that greater insight is needed into how individuals
make complex decisions. These insights can then inform economists on how to
improve the predictions of game theory. Second, when individuals are confronted with
unfamiliar decision problems considerable learning is often required. From this per-
spective the predictions of game theory may only be considered relevant once such
learning has taken place. This conclusion would seem to validate the use of evolution-
arily stable strategies, especially when there are multiple equilibria. Again it seems that
in the areas of learning and avoiding co-ordination failure further experimental evi-
dence is required. Only then will economists be able to devise and test theories about
how individuals learn to be rational and co-ordinate their optimal strategies.
11.5 Solutions to Exercises
Exercise 11.1
(1) Duty
With Prob equal to the probability that an opponent will play co-operatively the expected
level of utility for subject i playing C is
Similarly the expected level of utility of playing D is
Individual i will therefore maximize expected utility by playing co-operatively if
The critical value of a; is therefore 2. From the assumed distribution of a over the popula-
tion we can predict that 75 per cent of subjects will play co-operatively.
256

--- Sayfa 268 ---
Solutions to Exercises
(2) Reciprocal altruism
Following the same methodology as in (1) we can obtain the following expressions for
expected utility from playing C or D.
and
This time individual i will play co-operatively if
From the equation Prob (a,- > a*) = (amax - ct*)/amax, where a* = 2/Prob, we can derive the
result that Prob = 0.5. In this example it is predicted that 50 per cent of subjects will play co-
operatively.
(3) Pure altruism
With individual i's utility function as given we can derive the following expressions
and
With these expected levels of utility subject i will play co-operatively if
Once more it is predicted that 50 per cent of subjects will play co-operatively.
Exercise 11.2
(1) Co-ordination game
Using the two-stage procedure for identifying pure-strategy Nash equilibria developed in
Chapter 2 it can be confirmed that there are two such equilibria for this game. One is where
both players play strategy A, and the other is where they both play strategy B. In the mixed
strategy equilibrium the expected return from each of these two strategies must be equal to
each other. Letting Prob equal to the probability that players adopt strategy A the expected
pay-off of strategy A is
257

--- Sayfa 269 ---
Experimental Economics
Similarly the expected pay-off of strategy B is
Setting these expected pay-offs equal to each other and solving for Prob gives us the mixed-
strategy Nash equilibrium where each player sets Prob = 0.5. In this equilibrium players set
the probability of playing each strategy equal to 0.5, and their expected pay-off is 15. These
equilibria are Pareto ranked. The game is called co-ordination, as players would ideally like
to co-ordinate on the Pareto-efficient equilibrium. Any other outcome represents a co-ordi-
nation failure.
The average pay-off, given the value of Prob, over all individuals is
Substituting the values for I1(A) and II into the dynamic-learning equation gives us the fol-
lowing expression
This equation is plotted in the phase drawn in Fig. 11.13. As can be seen from this diagram
there is a steady-state equilibrium corresponding to each of the three previously identified
Nash equilibria. However, as indicated by the directional arrows, the mixed-strategy equi-
librium is unstable, while the other two equilibrium are stable. These two pure-strategy
Nash equilibria are the evolutionarily stable strategies. In this evolutionary game players
either converge upon always playing strategy A or always playing strategy B. Which equilib-
rium players co-ordinate upon depends on the initial probability distribution over the two
strategies. If initially Prob > 0.5, then they converge on strategy A. If Prob < 0.5, then they
converge on strategy B. If any point on this unit interval is equally likely, then the players will
converge on the Pareto-dominated equilibrium with probability 0.5.
(2) Chicken
This game is traditionally called chicken for the following reason. The two players represent
motorists speeding towards each other. Each has the choice of either swerving to avoid a col-
258
Fig. 11.13

--- Sayfa 270 ---
Solutions to Exercises
lision, or driving straight on. If both drivers swerve then a crash is avoided and both players
receive a pay-off of 30. If neither swerve there is a head-on collision and players receive the
smaller pay-off of 10. Finally, if one player swerves but the other drives straight on, the crash
is again avoided. This time, however, the driver who was 'chicken' receives only 20 due to loss
efface, while the other receives 40 on account of his or her bravery.
Using the same methodology used in the previous co-ordination game we can identify
three Nash equilibria. Two of these are pure-strategy Nash equilibria where players adopt
the same strategy. The third is where players adopt a mixed strategy of playing strategy A
with a probability 0.25, and strategy B with probability 0.75. Deriving the relevant equations
for I1(A) and II and substituting these into the dynamic learning equation yields the fol-
lowing expression
Again this equation is plotted in Fig. 11.14. Once more there is a steady-state equilibrium
corresponding to each of the three Nash equilibria. This time, however, only the mixed-
strategy Nash equilibrium is stable and so this corresponds to the evolutionarily stable strat-
egy-
Exercise 11.3
(1) Using the principle of backward induction we can state that if a loan has been made then
this will only be repaid if the borrower is of type Y (60 > 0). If the borrower is type X, the loan
will not be repaid (60 < 150). Moving back to the lender's decision, a loan will only be
offered if the expected net pay-off from doing so is greater than or equal to zero. With com-
mon knowledge of the proportion of X- and Y-type borrowers this expected net gain is
equal to
With the expected net pay-off of making a loan negative no loan will be offered. The sub-
game perfect Nash equilibrium is, therefore, no loan will be made by the lender and each
player will receive a pay-off of 10.
This solution is clearly Pareto inefficient. If the borrower could precommit himself to
repaying the loan, then both players would be better off. In this situation the lender would
259
Fig. 11.14

--- Sayfa 271 ---
Experimental Economics
receive a pay-off of 40, and the borrower a pay-off of 60. This corresponds to the co-
operative solution. Without precommitment, however, this outcome is not credible. If the
borrower is type X, there is a clear incentive to default on the loan. This is demonstrated by
noting that the co-operative solution does not comprise a Nash equilibrium for the sub-
game beginning at the borrower's decision node if he is type X. For this reason the co-
operative solution is not subgame perfect.
(2) To solve for the sequential equilibrium we again use the principle of backward induction.
This involves solving for the second and last period first, conditional on what has occurred
in the first period of the game.
In the final period we know that if a loan has been made a type-Y borrower will certainly
repay it and a type-X borrower will certainly default. Let Profeya be the probability assess-
ment by the lender that the borrower is type Y at the beginning of the second period. This
corresponds to the borrower's reputation for being type Y. With this reputation the lender
will only offer a loan if the net expected pay-off of doing so is greater or equal to zero. A loan
will therefore only be made in period 2 if
This implies that a loan will only be made if the borrower's reputation, Profey2> is greater
than or equal to 0.785. As this is greater than the initial prior probability that a borrower is
of type Y, this implies that, if a loan is offered in period 2, then an X-type player must have
invested in a favourable reputation in the first period. This can only occur, however, if a
type-X borrower plays a mixed strategy and subsequently repays the loan in period 1.
Specifically, with a mixed strategy a type-X borrower will set the probability of repaying the
loan in the first period, Profe(Rxi). so that the lender is indifferent about offering a loan in
period 2. This means that the above condition must hold as an equality and Probf2 = 0.785.
Using Bayes' rule we can determine the value of Profr(Rx1) so that this requirement is satis-
fied. Thus we can write
From this equation we derive the prediction that if a loan is made to an X-type borrower in
the first period, it will be repaid with probability 0.821, and reneged upon with probability
0.179. With these probabilities the expected net pay-off for the lender making a loan in the
first period equals
As this is positive the lender will certainly make the loan in the first period. If this is repaid,
then the lender will also play a mixed strategy in the second period so as to cause the bor-
rower to be indifferent between repaying and defaulting in the first period. (If the borrower
were not indifferent between repaying and defaulting in the first period, then he would cease
to play a mixed strategy.) This will happen when the borrower's total expected pay-off from
both periods is independent of Profr(Rxi). Letting Prob(L2) be the probability that a loan is
made in the second period, a type-X borrower's total expected pay-off equals
From this equation it can be calculated that the lender must set Probfa) - 0.643.
260

--- Sayfa 272 ---
Solutions to Exercises
We can now summarize the predictions made by the sequential equilibrium hypothesis.
In the first period the loan is made with certainty. If the borrower is type Y, this is repaid. If
the borrower is type X, it will be repaid with probability 0.821. If the borrower defaults in
this period, then no loan will be made in the next period, as the lender will know the bor-
rower is type X. If, however, the first period loan is repaid, then the lender will offer the loan
with probability 0.643. If made, this will be repaid if the borrower is type Y, but will not be
repaid if the borrower is type X.
The expected pay-offs at the beginning of the game can be calculated as follows
X-type borrower:
Y-type borrower:
Lender:
(3) The only effects of a reduction in the pay-off for a type-X borrower defaulting are to reduce
the probability of the lender offering a loan in the final period, and to change the expected
pay-offs for players. In particular, the equilibrium strategies of the borrowers remain
unchanged. This can be confirmed by noting that the modified pay-off did not enter any of
the calculations determining the borrower's equilibrium strategies in (2). The first occur-
rence of this pay-off was when determining the probability that the lender will offer a loan
in the second period. This was calculated so that an X-type borrower would be indifferent
between repaying or defaulting on his first period loan. The modified equation now
becomes
From this equation it can be predicted that the lender will now set Prob(Li) = 0.444.
Substituting this revised probability into the expected pay-offs for the players at the
beginning of the game gives us the following values.
X-type borrower:
Y-type borrower:
Lender:
Comparing these pay-offs with those derived in (2), the lender is now expected to be better
off, while the borrower is worse off, irrespective of his type.
261

--- Sayfa 273 ---
Experimental Economics
Further Reading
Davis, D. D., and C. A. Holt (1993), Experimental Economics, Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Coleman, A. M. (1983), Game Theory and Experimental Games, Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Hey, J. (1991), Experiments In Economics, Oxford: Blackwell.
Kagel, J. H., and A. E. Roth (1995), The Handbook of Experimental Economics, Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Poundstone, W. (1992), Prisoner's Dilemma, New York: Doubleday.
262

--- Sayfa 274 ---
12
Criticisms of Game Theory
I
N Chapter 1 we defined game theory as being concerned with how rational indi-
viduals make decisions when they are mutually interdependent. In subsequent
chapters we have presented various game theory concepts and examined how these
have been applied to a diverse range of economic issues. Each of these chapters has illus-
trated how the use of game theory has helped economists to developed important
insights and challenged previous theories. None the less a number of criticisms have
been levelled against recent game theory models and their application to economics. In
particular, the use of instrumental rationality has been severely challenged on both
empirical and theoretical grounds. Some of these empirical inconsistencies were dis-
cussed in Chapter 11 on Experimental Economics. There we concluded that although
the predictions of game theory often perform remarkably well, they are not all con-
firmed by the experimental evidence. As a consequence it was argued that greater
research is needed on how individuals solve complex decisions under uncertainty, and
how they seek to learn and co-ordinate their actions over time. In this chapter we will
argue that similar conclusions are justified on the basis of theoretical criticisms of
recent game theory models. In particular we illustrate with reference to games analysed
in previous chapters, three broad reasons why the widely used assumptions of instru-
mental rationality, and common knowledge of such rationality, have been viewed as
unsatisfactory. The first argument is that the use of instrumental rationality by individ-
uals can be self-defeating. This means that individuals may actually serve their own self-
interest better if they act in ways not considered instrumentally rational. The second
criticism is that often the solution to a game based on instrumental rationality is inde-
terminant. When this occurs non-rational considerations must be introduced to pro-
vide a unique prediction. Finally, it is argued that these assumptions yield logical
contradictions when the predicted outcome is based on arguments about what happens
out of equilibrium. In response to each of these criticisms we suggest alternative
assumptions that might be adopted. These form the basis of ongoing research within
game theory.
263

--- Sayfa 275 ---
Criticisms of Game Theory
12.1 Instrumental Rationality can be Self-defeating
Instrumental rationality states that individuals are solely interested in satisfying their
own preferences or desires. That is, individuals are assumed to act in their own self-
interest. If an agent is observed to act in a way not consistent with satisfying his desires
he is considered irrational. Such irrationality presupposes that the individual holds
some false belief. At its simplest level this false belief is that the observed action was the
best way of satisfying the individual's desires. It is this false belief, rather than the act
itself, that is considered irrational. One problem with such a means-end view of ratio-
nality is that it can be self-defeating. This means that in certain circumstances a person
might be able to best satisfy his desires if he rejects the prescriptions of instrumental
rationality. An obvious example of such an occurrence is when two players are con-
fronted with a prisoners' dilemma game. According to instrumental rationality each
player should play non-cooperatively. If, however, both players co-operate, then they
are each made better off. Given that co-operation leads to a Pareto improvement some
economists have argued that such behaviour should not be classified as irrational.
Instead it is often proposed that an alternative definition of rationality needs to be
adopted.
One alternative definition of rationality that is often discussed is based on the work
of Kant (1788). According to Kant individuals behave rationally if they act according to
categorical imperatives. These are laws that prescribe a certain type of behaviour derived
from reason alone. Furthermore, as all individuals can use their reasoning to formulate
the same imperatives, rationality will only dictate behaviour all individuals can under-
take. If it is not possible for all individuals to undertake an action, then that action is
said to be irrational. For example, consider an employee considering the choice
between working hard or shirking. According to instrumental rationality such a
decision depends purely on which course of action best satisfies that individual's self-
interest. In Chapter 7 such factors as the probability and costs of being caught shirking
were used to develop an efficiency wage model. In this model involuntary unemploy-
ment was caused by firms setting the wage rate above the market-clearing level in order
to induce employees to work hard. According to Kantian rationality, however, the cate-
gorical imperative is for employees to work hard. The reason for this is that not all
employees would choose to shirk as this would cause the firm to go bankrupt. Given
this moral imperative a worker observed to be shirking is considered irrational. With
decisions now being based on moral reasoning rather than self-interest the final out-
come can be very different. In this example there is no efficiency wage, and in equilib-
rium there is no unemployment. This is because firms no longer have to induce their
employees to work hard. Similar arguments have been used to argue how it can be
rational for individuals to co-operate in a prisoners' dilemma game.
Although Kantian rationality may be considered an extreme alternative to instru-
mental rationality other, less radical, definitions may generate similar results. One less
264

--- Sayfa 276 ---
Indeterminacy
extreme conception of rationality is bounded rationality. This is primarily associated
with Simon (1982). According to this concept of rationality individuals have limited
computational ability. As a result of these limitations individuals may well adopt pro-
cedures, or rules of behaviour, that help them to achieve satisfactory outcomes. Again
this view of rationality may be used to avoid the self-defeating nature of instrumental
rationality in certain situations. An interesting illustration of how simple rules of
thumb can out perform more complex decision rules has been provided by an experi-
ment undertaken by Axelrod (1980).
In this experiment Axelrod invited game theorists to submit computer programs on
how best to play a repeated prisoners' dilemma game. The programs were then ran-
domly paired in a round-robin tournament against one another. Within each pairing a
prisoners' dilemma game was repeated 200 times. This process itself was repeated five
times and average pay-offs calculated. Initially there were fourteen entrants. The most
successful strategy was tit-for-tat submitted by Anatol Rapoport. Under this strategy
the program starts with co-operation, and then does whatever its opponent did in the
previous period. Not only was this the most successful strategy but it was also the sim-
plest. Commenting on this result Rapoport (1987) notes that 'Tit-for-tat did not "beat"
a single strategy against which it was pitted.' However, this strategy was most successful
because other programs 'designed to beat their opponents, reduced each other's scores
when pitted against each other, including themselves.' In this way the simpliest strategy
outperformed more complex strategies explicitly designed to win the tournament. On
the basis of such evidence we may conclude that it is sometimes rational to act irra-
tionally. Alternatively, so as to avoid this contradictory statement, we may wish to alter
our definition of what it means to be rational.
12.2 Indeterminacy
A second criticism often made against game theory models is that instrumental ratio-
nality often fails to prescribe a unique course of action. This occurs when there are mul-
tiple equilibria. The prime example of this occurs in co-ordination games. An example
of such a game is illustrated in Fig. 12.1.
In this game there are three Nash equilibria. Two of these equilibria are with pure
strategies. These correspond to both players adopting the same strategy. The other
equilibrium involves mixed strategies. Here both players adopt each strategy with a
probability of 0.5. On the basis of instrumental rationality there is no unique prescrip-
tion of how either player should play the game. Even with the strong assumption of
common knowledge of rationality the optimal strategy remains indeterminant. What a
player should do depends on his or her expectations of what the other player will do. In
such a situation the choice of which equilibrium strategy to play must be dependent on
non-rational considerations. For example, following the work of Schelling (1960), it is
265

--- Sayfa 277 ---
Criticisms of Game Theory
Fig. 12.1 A Co-ordination Game
often argued that agents will co-ordinate upon the focal point. The argument here is
that agents use some salient feature of the game they are playing to co-ordinate their
actions so that the final outcome is an equilibrium. Significantly these salient features
cannot be determined by rationality alone, for otherwise there would be no problem of
indeterminacy. Instead it will often be the case that what individuals consider salient is
conditioned by their culture, previous experience, and the way the game has been pre-
sented to them. The implication of this is that when game theorists appeal to the con-
cept of salience they are using something other than instrumental rationality. In order
for economists to fully understand why agents co-ordinate upon one particular out-
come rather than another it would seem that greater emphasis needs to be given to such
factors as the institutional, cultural, and historical context within which decisions are
made. In doing this economists will increasingly move away from models based solely
on instrumental rationality and introduce additional considerations specific to the
problem under consideration.
Another criticism of recent game theory models is directed against the use of a
mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium. As discussed in Chapter 2 this is a weak equilibrium
concept. This is because if a player expects others to play according to the mixed-
strategy Nash equilibrium, then he or she is indifferent over the pure strategy compo-
nents of their mixed-strategy equilibrium. This feature has led economists to question
why individual players should persist with the mixed strategy. Even if the mixed-
strategy equilibrium is unique, it is consistent with instrumental rationality for players
to play any probabilistic combination of their pure-strategy components. Once more
there is a basic indeterminacy. One interpretation of mixed strategies that tries to over-
come this problem is associated with Aumann (1987). In this interpretation the proba-
bility distribution over pure strategies does not correspond to what players will do, but
rather to their subjective beliefs about what other players will do. Equilibrium requires,
therefore, that these beliefs are consistent. Aumann then appeals to the Harsanyi doc-
trine that states that if rational players have the same information, then they must nec-
essarily hold the same beliefs. If this is true, then the problem of indeterminacy
disappears, as beliefs will only be consistently aligned at the mixed-strategy Nash equi-
librium. The problem with this argument is that it is not clear that rational individuals
266

--- Sayfa 278 ---
Inconsistency
with the same information always reach identical conclusions. For example, if such
beliefs are under-determined then it seems likely that different individuals will inter-
pret available information in different ways. In this situation the problem of indetermi-
nacy remains. To resolve such issues greater attention needs to be given to how
individuals determine their initial beliefs.
12.3 Inconsistency
A third broad criticism of game theory has been directed at the concept of subgame per-
fection. This criticism was first presented by Binmore (1987,1988) and illustrated with
reference to Rosenthal's centipede game. This game was initially discussed in Chapter
3, and its extensive form is reproduced in Fig. 12.2.
Fig. 12.2 Rosenthal's Centipede Game
Using the principle of backward induction it can be confirmed that the subgame per-
fect Nash equilibrium for this game is for player 1 to play down at the initial node.
Binmore argues, however, that such reasoning is based on the use of counterfactuals
that are inconsistent with the assumption of common knowledge of rationality. To
understand this criticism consider the final decision node. Here we consider what
player 2 will do if the game has continued this far. From the pay-offs it seems reasonable
to suppose that player 2 will play down. With common knowledge of rationality back-
ward induction applies similar logic to all preceding decision nodes, and at each one the
same prediction is generated. The problem with such reasoning is that common know-
ledge of rationality predicts that the game will end at the first node. It is therefore incon-
sistent with this assumption to ask what a player will do if a subsequent node is reached.
According to instrumental rationality these nodes will never be reached and so any
argument based on this reasoning is spurious. An alternative way of appreciating this
argument is to consider what player 2 should believe about player 1 if she has not ini-
tially played down. Player 2 now has clear evidence that player 1 is 'irrational' but this
contradicts his certain knowledge, by assumption, that player 1 is rational. No possible
belief is able to reconcile these two facts. Once more there is a logical contradiction.
Seen from this perspective the problem with assuming common knowledge of ratio-
nality is that it imposes a false certainty into a game where there is inherent uncertainty.
267

--- Sayfa 279 ---
Criticisms of Game Theory
It rules out the possibility of any player ever playing across even though this is a legit-
imate choice. A number of ways have been suggested for how the resulting inconsisten-
cies might be avoided. The first, as proposed by Selten (1975), involves assuming that
players may make random mistakes when carrying out their intentions. With this so-
called trembling-hand assumption a player may play across without violating the
assumption of rationality. The resulting equilibrium is then known as trembling-hand
perfection. Although errors of this kind might be considered justified in certain con-
texts, it does not seem appropriate for all games.
A more radical departure from subgame perfection is to allow agents to believe that
other players might be irrational. It was this assumption, often referred to as common
belief of rationality, that Kreps and Wilson (1982b) used in their development of
sequential equilibrium. In their model this belief was held even though all agents were
assumed rational. As argued in Chapter 11, a more reasonable assumption seems to be
that some agents are in fact 'irrational'. Whichever approach is adopted players are now
justified in considering the possibility of out-of-equilibrium behaviour.
Despite these proposals Binmore argues that to resolve the problem an alternative
definition of rationality is needed. In particular Binmore agues for a type of procedural
rationality. This is introduced so as to avoid the infinite regress arguments needed to
determine a player's optimal strategy. These arguments are of the type 'I believe, that
you believe, that I believe...' and so on. To avoid such continual reflection players must
adopt an arbitrary stopping rule. With different agents adopting different stopping
rules deviations from subgame perfection need not be inconsistent with procedural
rationality. The conclusion of this argument is that perfect rationality is an impossibil-
ity. This is because it implies a never-ending reasoning process. Instead there are differ-
ent types of procedural rationality, each differentiated by an alternative stopping rule.
12.4 Conclusions
This chapter has presented three broad criticisms directed against recent game theory
models. In particular we argued that in certain situations the assumptions that all indi-
viduals are instrumentally rational, and that this is common knowledge, are unsatis-
factory. This is because they are either self-defeating, incomplete, or involve
inconsistencies. These theoretical criticisms reinforce those made in Chapter 11 where
we observed that not all game theory predictions are supported by empirical evidence.
However, rather than viewing these criticisms as being purely destructive, they can be
seen as providing a stimulus for further research. Indeed, this is an ongoing process. In
recent years game theorists have developed many alternative conceptions of rationality
and equilibrium, some of which have been discussed in this book. Areas which offer the
greatest potential for yielding further insights and results are expected to derive from
models based on modifications to instrumental rationality and common knowledge.
268

--- Sayfa 280 ---
Further Reading
This will involve a re-evaluation of what is meant by rationality, so as to incorporate fac-
tors such as learning, uncertainty, morality as well as computational limitations.
Furthermore, it would appear that greater emphasis will need to be given to considera-
tions such as the role of institutions, culture, and history. It is predicted that game
theory and its application to economics will be at the forefront of these advances.
Further Reading
Bianchi, M., and H. Moulin (1991), 'Strategic Interactions in Economics: The Game Theory
Alternative', in N. De Marchi and M. Blaug (eds.), Appraising Economic Theories, Aldershot:
Edward Elgar.
Binmore, K. (1992), Fun and Games: A Text on Game Theory, Lexington, Mass.: Heath.
Binmore, K. (1987), 'Modeling Rational Players: Parti', Economics and Philosophy, 3:179-214;
repr. in K. Binmore (1990), Essays on the Foundations of Game Theory, Oxford: Blackwell.
Binmore, K. (1988), 'Modeling Rational Players: Part II', Economics and Philosophy, 4: 9-55;
repr. in K. Binmore (1990), Essays on the Foundations of Game Theory, Oxford: Blackwell.
Gerrard, B. (1993), The Economics of Rationality, London: Routledge.
Hargreaves Heap, S. (1989), Rationality in Economics, Oxford: Blackwell.
Hargreaves Heap, S., and Y. Varoufakis (1995), Game Theory: A Critical Introduction, London:
Routledge.
Sugden, R. (1991), 'Rational Choice: A Survey of Contributions from Economics and
Philosophy', Economic Journal, 101:751-85.
269

--- Sayfa 281 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Abreu, D. (1986), 'Extremal Equilibria of Oligopolistic Supergames', Journal of Economic
Theory 39:191-235.
Akerlof, G. A,, and J. L. Yellen (1985), 'A Near-Rational Model of the Business Cycle, with Wage
and Price Inertia', Quarterly Journal of Economics, 100: 823-38; repr. in N. G. Mankiw and
D, Romer (1991), NewKeynesian Economics, i, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
(1986), Efficiency Wage Models of the Labour Market, Cambridge, Mass.: Cambridge
University Press.
Alvi, E. (1993), 'Near Rationality/Menu Costs, Strategic Complementarity and Real Rigidity',
Journal of Macroeconomics, 15:619-25.
Andreoni, J., and J. H. Miller (1993), 'Rational Cooperation in the Finitely Repeated Prisoner's
Dilemma: Experimental Evidence', Economic Journal, 103:570-85.
Aumann, R. J. (1987), 'Correlated Equilibrium as an Expression of Bayesian Ignorance",
Econometrica, 55:1-18.
Aumann, R., and S. Hart (1992), Handbook of Game Theory with Economic Applications, New
York: North-Holland.
Axelrod, R. (1980), "The Emergence of Cooperation Among Egoists', American Political Science
Review, 75:306-18.
Backus, D., and J. Driffel (1985), 'Inflation and Reputation', American Economic Review, 75:530-8.
Bain, J. (1956), Barriers To New Competition, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Ball, L, N. K. Mankiw, and D. Romer (1988), 'The New Keynesian Economic and the Output-
Inflation Trade-off', Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1:1-65; repr. in N. G. Mankiw and
D. Romer (1991), New Keynesian Economics, i, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
and P. Romer (1990), 'Real Rigidities and the Non-Neutrality of Money', Review of
Economic Studies, 57:183-203; repr. in N. G. Mankiw and D. Romer (1991), New Keynesian
Economics, i, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
(1991), 'Sticky Prices as Coordination Failure', American Economic Review, 81:
939-52.
Barrett, S. (1990), 'The Problem of Global Environmental Protection', Oxford Review of
Economic Policy, 6:68-79; repr. in D. Helm (1991), Economic Policy Towards the Environment,
Oxford: Blackwell. Also in T. Jenkinson (1996), Readings in Microeconomics, New York:
Oxford University Press.
(1994), 'Self-Enforcing International Environmental Agreements', Oxford Economic
Papers, 46:878-94.
Barro, R. J. (1986), 'Reputation in a Model of Monetary Policy', Journal of Monetary Economics,
17: 3-20.
and D. A. Gordon (1983), 'Rules, Discretion and Reputation in a Model of Monetary
Policy', Journal of Political Economy, 17:101-22.
Baumol, W., J. Panzer, and R. Willig (1982), Contestable Markets and the Theory of Industry
Structure, New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
270

--- Sayfa 282 ---
Bibliography
Benoit, J. P., and V. Krishna (1985), 'Finitely Repeated Games', Econometrica, 53:890-904.
(1987), 'Dynamic Duopoly: Prices and Quantities', Review of Economic Studies, 54:
23-36.
Bianchi, M., and H. Moulin (1991), 'Strategic Interactions in Economics: The Game Theory
Alternative, in N. De Marchi and M Blaug (eds.), Appraising Economic Theories, Aldershot:
Edward Elgar.
Bierman, H. S., and L. Fernandez (1993), Game Theory with Economic Applications, Reading,
Mass.: Addison Wesley.
Binmore, K. (1987), 'Modeling Rational Players: Part I', Economics and Philosophy, 3:179-214;
repr. in K. Binmore (1990), Essays on the Foundations of Game Theory, Oxford: Blackwell.
(1988), 'Modeling Rational Players: Part II', Economics and Philosophy, 4: 9-55; repr. in
K. Binmore (1990), Essays on the Foundations of Game Theory, Oxford: Blackwell.
(1992), Fun and Games: A Text on Game Theory, Lexington, Mass.: Heath.
Blackburn, K. (1992), 'Credibility and Time Consistency in Monetary Policy', in K. Dowd
and M. K. Lewis (eds.), Current Issues in Financial and Monetary Economics, London:
Macmillan.
Bladen-Hovell, R. C. (1992), 'International Monetary Policy', in K. Dowd and M. K. Lewis
(eds.), Current Issues in Financial and Monetary Economics, London: Macmillan.
Blanchard, O. J. (1983), 'Price Asychronization and Price Level Inertia', in R. Dornbusch and
M. Simonsen (eds.), Inflation, Debt, and Indexation, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press; repr. in
N. G. Mankiw and D. Romer (1991), New Keynesian Economics, i, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press.
and N. Kiyotaki (1987), 'Monopolistic Competition and the Effects of Aggregate
Demand', American Economic Review, 77: 647-66; repr. in N. G. Mankiw and D. Romer
(1991), New Keynesian Economics, i, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Brander, J. A., and B. J. Spencer (1983), 'International R&D Rivalry and Industrial Strategy',
Review of Economic Studies, 50:707-22.
(1984), 'Tariff Protection and Imperfect Competition', in H. Kierzkowski (ed.),
Monopolistic Competition and International Trade, New York: Oxford University Press.
(1985), 'Export Subsidies and International Market Share Rivalry', Journal of
International Economics, 18:83-100.
Bresnahan, T. F. (1981), 'Duopoly Models with Consistent Conjectures', American Economic
Review, 71:934-45.
Buiter, W. H., and R. C. Marston (1985), International Economic Policy Coordination,
Cambridge, Mass.: Cambridge University Press.
Camerer, C., and K. Weigelt (1988), 'Experimental Tests of the Sequential Equilibrium
Reputation Model', Econometrica, 56:1-36.
Canzoneri, M. B., and P. Minford (1986), 'When Policy Coordination Matters: An Empirical
Analysis', CEPR Discussion Paper No. 119.
Carraro, C., and D. Siniscalco (1995), 'Policy Coordination for Sustainability: Commitments,
Transfers, and Linked Negotiations', in I. Goldin and L. A. Winters (eds.), The Economics of
Sustainable Development, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Chamberlain, E. H. (1933), The Theory of Monopolistic Competition, Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press.
Coleman, A. M. (1983), Game Theory and Experimental Games, Oxford: Pergamon Press.
271

--- Sayfa 283 ---
Bibliography
Cooper, R. W., D. V. Dejong, R. Forsythe, and T. W. Ross. (1989), 'Communication in the Battle
of the Sexes Game: Some Experimental Results', Rand Journal of Economics, 20:568-87.
and T. W. Ross (1990), 'Selection Criteria in Coordination Games: Some
Experimental Results', American Economic Review, 80:218-33.
(1991), 'Cooperation without Reputation', Working Paper, University of
Iowa.
and A. John (1988), 'Coordinating Coordination Failures in Keynesian Models', Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 103: 441-63; repr. in N. G. Mankiw and D. Romer (1991), New
Keynesian Economics Vol. 2, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Cournot, A. (1838), Recherches sur les Principes Mathematiques de la Theorie des Richesses,
English edn.: N. Bacon (ed.), Researches into the Mathematical Principles of the Theory of
Wealth, New York: Macmillan 1897.
Currie, D. A. (1990), 'International Policy Coordination', in D. T. Llewellyn and C. Milner (eds.),
Current Issues in International Monetary Economics, London: Macmillan.
Currie, D. A., and P. Levine (1985), 'Macroeconomic Policy Design in an Interdependent World',
in W. H. Buiter and R. C. Marston (eds.), International Economic Policy Coordination,
Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press.
(1991), 'International Policy Coordination—A Survey', in C. J. Green and D. T.
Llewellyn (eds.), Surveys in Monetary Economics, i, Oxford: Basil Blackwell; repr. in D. Currie
and P. Levine (1993), Rules, Reputation and Macroeconomic Policy, Cambridge and New York:
Cambridge University Press.
- and N. Vidalis (1987), 'International Cooperation and Reputation in an Empirical
Two-Bloc Model', in R. Bryant and R. Portes (eds.), Global Macroeconomic Policy Conflict and
Cooperation, London: Macmillan.
D'Aspremont, C. A., and J. J. Gabszewicz (1986), 'On the Stability of Collusion', in G. E
Matthewson and J. E. Stiglitz, New Developments in the Analysis of Market Structure, New
York: Macmillan.
Davis, D. D., and C. A. Holt (1993), Experimental Economics, Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Diamond, P. A. (1982), 'Aggregate Demand Management in Search Equilibrium', Journal of
Political Economy, 90: 881-94; repr. in N. G. Mankiw and D. Romer (1991), New Keynesian
Economics, ii, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Dixit, A. (1981), 'The Role of Investment in Entry Deterrence', Economic Journal, 90:95-106.
(1987), 'Strategic Aspects of Trade Policy', in T. Bewley (ed.), Advances in Economic Theory:
Fifth World Congress, New York: Cambridge University Press.
and G. M. Grossman (1986), 'Targeted Export Promotion with Several Oligopolistic
Industries', Journal of International Economics, 21:233-49.
and B. J. Nalebuff (1991), Thinking Strategically: The Competitive Edge in Business, Politics,
and Everyday Life, New York: Norton.
Donsimoni, M. P., N. S. Economides, and H. M. Polemarchakis (1986), 'Stable Cartels',
International Economic Review, 27:317-27.
Durlauf, S. N. (1989), 'Locally Interacting Systems, Coordination Failure, and the Behavior of
Aggregate Activity', Stanford University, mimeo.
Eaton, J., and G. Grossman (1986), 'Optimal Trade and Industrial Policy under Oligopoly',
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 101:383-406.
272

--- Sayfa 284 ---
Bibliography
Eatwell, J., M. Milgate, and P. Newman (1989), The New Palgrave: Game Theory, New York:
W. W. Norton.
Farrell, J., and E. Maskin (1989), 'Renegotiation in Repeated Games', Games and Economic
Behaviour, 1:327-60.
Field, B. (1994), Environmental Economics: An Introduction, New York: McGraw-Hill.
Fischer, S. (1977), 'Long Term Contracts, Rational Expectations and the Optimal Money Supply
Rule', Journal of Political Economy, 85:191-205; repr. in N. G. Mankiw and D. Romer (1991),
New Keynesian Economics, i, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Frenkel J. A., and K. R. Rockett (1988), 'International Macroeconomic Policy Coordination
When Policymakers Do Not Agree on the True Model', American Economic Review, 78:
318-40.
Friedman, J. (1971), 'A Non-cooperative Equilibrium for Supergames', Review of Economic
Studies, 38:1-12.
(1977), Oligopoly and the Theory ofGames, Amsterdam: North-Holland.
(1986), Game Theory with Applications to Economics, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Friedman, M. (1953), 'The Methodology of Positive Economies', in M. Friedman, Essays in
Positive Economics, Chicago: University of Chicago Press; repr. in B. Caldwell (1984),
Appraisal and Criticism in Economics: A Book of Readings, Boston: Allen & Unwin.
(1968), "The Role of Monetary Policy', American Economic Review, 58:1-17.
Fudenberg, D., and E. Maskin (1986), 'The Folk Theorem in Repeated Games with Discounting
or with Incomplete Information', Econometrica, 54:533-56.
and Tirole, J. (1986), Dynamic Models of Oligopoly, New York: Harwood.
Gerrard, B. (1993), The Economics of Rationality, London: Routledge.
Ghosh, A. R., and P. Masson (1988), 'International Policy Coordination in a World with Model
Uncertainty', International Monetary Fund Staff Papers, 35:230-58.
Gibbons, R. (1992), Game Theory for Applied Economists, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Gilbert, R. J. (1989), 'Mobility Barriers and the Value of Incumbency', in R. Schmalensee and
R. D. Willig (eds.), Handbook of Industrial Organization, i, Elsevier Science Publishers.
Gordon, R. J. (1981) 'Output Fluctuations and Gradual Price Adjustment', Journal of Economic
Literature, 19:493-530.
(1990), 'What is New-Keynesian Economics?' Journal of Economic Literature, 28:1115-71.
Gravelle, H., and R. Rees (1992), Microeconomics, London: Longman.
Gray, J. (1976), 'Wage Indexation: A Macroeconomic Approach', Journal of Monetary Economics,
2:221-35.
Green, E., and R. Porter (1984), 'Noncooperative Collusion under Imperfect Price Information',
Econometrica, 52:87-100.
Guttman, J. M. (1978), 'Understanding Collective Action: Matching Behaviour', American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 68:251-5.
Hallwood, C. P., and R. MacDonald (1994), International Money and Finance, Oxford:
Blackwell.
Hamada, K. (1974), 'Alternative Exchange Rate Systems and the Interdependence of Monetary
Policies', in R. Z. Aliber (ed.), National Monetary Policies and the International Financial
System, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
(1976), 'A Strategic Analysis of Monetary Interdependence', Journal of Political Economy,
86:677-700.
273

--- Sayfa 285 ---
Bibliography
Hamada, K. (1979), 'Macroeconomic Strategy and Coordination under Alternative Exchange
Rates', in R. Dornbusch and J. A. Frenkel (eds.), International Economic Policy: Theory and
Evidence, Baltimore: John Hopkins University Press.
Hanley, N., J. F. Shogren, and B. White (1997), Environmental Economics: In Theory and Practice,
London: Macmillan.
Hargreaves Heap, S. (1989), Rationality in Economics, Oxford: Blackwell.
(1992), The New Keynesian Macroeconomics: Time, Belief and Social Interdependence,
Aldershot: Edward Elgar.
and Y. Varoufakis (1995), Game Theory. A Critical Introduction, London: Routledge.
Harsanyi, J. (1967,1968), 'Games with Incomplete Information Played by Bayesian Players I, II
and III', Management Science, 14:159-82,302-34, and 486-503.
Hey, J. (1991), Experiments In Economics, Oxford: Blackwell.
Hicks, J. R. (1937), 'Mr. Keynes and the 'Classics': A Suggested Interpretation', Econometrica, 5:
147-59.
Hoover, K. D. (1988), TheNew Classical Macroeconomics, Oxford: Blackwell.
Howitt, P. (1981), 'Activist Monetary Policy under Rational Expectations', Journal of Political
Economy, 89:249-69.
and R. P. McAfee (1988), 'Stability of Equilibria with Externalities', Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 103:261-78.
Hughes Hallet, A. J. (1987), 'The Impact of Interdependence on Economic Policy Design: The
Case of the US, EEC, and Japan', Economic Modelling, 10:377-96.
(1989), 'Macroeconomic Interdependence and the Coordination of Economic Policy', in
D. Greenaway (ed.), Current Issues in Macroeconomics, London: Macmillan.
Jacquemin, A., and M. E. Slade (1989), 'Cartels, Collusion, and Horizontal Merger', in
R. Schmalensee and R. D. Willig (eds.), Handbook of Industrial Organization, i, Elsevier
Science Publishers.
Johnson, H. G. (1954), 'Optimum Tariffs and Retaliation', Review of Economic Studies, 21:142-53.
Kagel, J. H., and A. E. Roth (1995), The Handbook of Experimental Economics, Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Kandori, M. (1992), 'Social Norms and Community Enforcement', Review of Economic Studies,
59:63-80.
Kant, I. (1788), Critique of Practical Reason,tr&ns.anded.L. W.Beck, Critique of Practical Reason
and Other Writings in Moral Philosophy, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kennan, J., and R. Riezman (1988), 'Do Big Countries Win Tariff Wars?' International Economic
Review, 29:81-5.
Keynes, J. M. (1936), General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, London: Macmillan.
Kiyotaki, N. (1988), 'Multiple Expectational Equilibria under Monopolistic Competition",
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 102:695-714.
Kreps, D. (1990a), A Course in Microeconomic Theory, New York: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
(1990£>), Game Theory and Economic Modelling, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
P. Milgrom, J. Roberts, and R. Wilson (1982), 'Rational Cooperation in the Finitely
Repeated Prisoners' Dilemma Game', Journal of Economic Theory, 27:245-52.
and R. Wilson (1982a), 'Reputation and Imperfect Information', Journal of Economic
Theory, 27:253-79.
(1982&), 'Sequential Equilibria', Econometrica, 50:863-94.
274

--- Sayfa 286 ---
Bibliography
Krugman, P. R. (1986), Strategic Trade Policy and the New International Economics, Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press.
(1987), 'Is Free Trade Passe?' Economic Perspectives, 1:131-44.
(1989), 'Industrial Organization and International Trade', in R. Schmalensee and R. Willig
(eds.), Handbook of Industrial Organization, ii, Elsevier Science Publishers.
Kuga, K. (1973), 'Tariff Retaliation and Policy Equilibrium', Journal of International Economics,
3:351-66.
Laussel, D., and C. Montet (1994), 'Strategic Trade Policies', in D. Greenaway and L. A. Winters
(eds.), Surveys in International Trade, Oxford: Blackwell.
Leslie, D. (1993), Advanced Macroeconomics, London: McGraw-Hill.
Levine. P. (1990), 'Monetary Policy and Credibility', in T. Bandyopadhyay and S. Clutah (eds.),
Current Issues in Monetary Economics, London: Macmillan.
and D. Currie (1987), 'Does International Macroeconomic Policy Coordination Pay and
is it Sustainable? A Two Country Analysis', Oxford Economic Papers, 39:38-74.
Lucas, R. E. (1972), 'Expectations and the Neutrality of Money', Journal of Economic Theory, 4:
103-24.
(1980), The Death of Keynesian Economics: Issues and Ideas, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Lyons, B., and Y. Varoufakis (1989), 'Game Theory, Oligopoly and Bargaining', in J. D. Hey (ed.),
Current Issues in Microeconomics, London: Macmillan.
McKelvey, R. D., and T. R. Palfrey (1992), 'An Experimental Study of the Centipede Game',
Econometrica, 60:802-36.
Maler, G-M. (1991), 'International Environmental Problems', in D. Helm (ed.), Economic Policy
Towards the Environment, Oxford: Blackwell.
Mankiw, N. G. (1985), 'Small Menu Costs and Large Business Cycles: A Macroeconomic Model
of Monopoly', Quarterly Journal of Economics, 100: 529-37; repr. in N. G. Mankiw and
D. Romer (1991), New Keynesian Economics, i, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
(1992), Macroeconomics, New York: Worth Publishers.
Martin, S. (1992), Advanced Industrial Economics, Oxford: Blackwell.
Mayer, W. (1981), 'Theoretical Considerations on Negotiated Tariff Adjustments', Oxford
Economic Papers, 33:135-53.
Milgrom, P., and J. Roberts. (1982a), 'Limit Pricing and Entry Under Incomplete Information:
An Equilibrium Analysis', Econometrica, 50:443-59.
(1982fe), 'Predation, Reputation and Entry Deterrence', Journal of Economic Theory,
27:280-312.
Miller, M., and M. Salmon (1985), Policy Coordination and the Time Inconsistency of Optimal
Policy in Open Economies', Economic Journal, Supplement: 124-35.
Minford, P., and M. B. Canzoneri (1987), 'Policy Interdependence: Does Strategic Behaviour
Pay?' CEPR Discussion Paper, No. 201.
Modigliani, R (1958), 'New Developments on the Oligopoly Front', Journal of Political Economy,
66:215-32.
Murphy K. J., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (1989a), 'Income Distribution, Market Size, and
Industrialization", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 104:537-64.
(1989&), 'Industrialization and the Big Push', Journal of Political Economy, 96:
1221-31.
275

--- Sayfa 287 ---
Bibliography
Muth,J. F. (1961), 'Rational Expectations and the Theory of Price Movements', Econometrica,
29:315-35.
Nash, J. (1951), 'Non-Cooperative Games', Annals of Mathematics, 54:286-95.
Neral, J., and J. Ochs (1992), 'The Sequential Equilibrium Theory of Reputation Building: A
Further Test', Econometrica, 60:1151-69.
Nordhaus, W. (1975), 'The Political Business Cycle', Review of Economic Studies, 42:169-90.
Okun, A. M. (1975), 'Inflation: Its Mechanics and Welfare Costs', Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, 2:351-401; repr. in N. G. Mankiwand D. Romer (1991), NewKeynesian Economics,
ii, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
(1981), Prices and Quantities: A Macroeconomic Analysis, Oxford: Blackwell.
Ordover, J. A., and G. Saloner (1989), 'Predation, Monopolization, and Antitrust', in
R. Schmalensee and R. D. Willig (eds.), Handbook of Industrial Organization, i, Elsevier
Science Publishers.
Oudiz, G., and J. Sachs (1984), 'Macroeconomic Policy Coordination Among the Industrial
Economies', Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1:1-64.
(1985), 'International Policy Coordination in Dynamic Macroeconomic Models', in
W. H. Buiter and R. C. Marston (eds.), International Economic Policy Coordination,
Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press.
Parkin, M. (1986), 'The Output-Inflation Trade-off when Prices are Costly to Change', Journal
of Political Economy, 94:200-24.
Peel, D. (1989), 'New Classical Macroeconomics', in D. Greenaway (ed.), Current Issues in
Macroeconomics, London: Macmillan.
Perman, R., Y. Ma, and J. McGilvray (1996), Natural Resources and Environmental Economics,
London: Longman.
Phelps, E. S. (1992), 'Expectations in Macroeconomics and the Rational Expectations Debate',
in A. Vercelli and N. Dimitri (eds.), Macroeconomics: A Survey of Research Strategies, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
and J. Taylor (1977), 'Stabilizing Powers of Monetary Policy with Rational Expectations',
Journal of Political Economy, 85:163-90.
Phlips, L. (1995), Competition Policy: A Game Theoretic Perspective, Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press.
Porter, R. (1983), 'Optimal Cartel Trigger-Price Strategies', Journal of Economic Theory, 29:313-38.
Poundstone, W. (1992), Prisoner's Dilemma, New York: Doubleday.
Radner, R. (1980), 'Collusive Behavior in Oligopolies with Long but Finite Lives', Journal of
Economic Theory, 22:136-56.
Rasmusen, E. (1993), Games and Information, Oxford: Blackwell.
Rapoport, A. (1987), 'Prisoner's Dilemma', in J. Eatwell, M. Milgate and P. Newman (eds.), The
New Palgrave Game Theory, New York: W. W. Norton & Co.
Rees, R. (1993), 'Tacit Collusion', Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 9: 27-40; repr. in T.
Jenkinson (1996), Readings in Microeconomics, New York: Oxford University Press.
Rogoff, K. (1985), 'Can International Monetary Policy Coordination be Counter-Productive?'
Journal of International Economics, 18:199—217.
Romer, D. (1996), Advanced Macroeconomics, New York: McGraw-Hill.
Rosenthal, R. (1981), 'Games of Perfect Information, Predatory Pricing, and the Chain-store
Paradox', Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 25:92-100.
276

--- Sayfa 288 ---
Bibliography
Rotemberg, J., and G. Saloner (1986), 'A Supergame-Theoretic Model of Price Wars during
Booms', American Economic Review, 76: 390-407; repr. in N. G. Mankiw and D. Romer
(1991), New Keynesian Economics, ii, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
(1987), 'The Relative Rigidity of Monopoly Pricing', American Economic Review, 77:
917-26.
and M. Woodford (1991), 'Markups and the Business Cycle', NBER Macroeconomics
Annual.
Salop, S. C. (1979), 'A Model of the Natural Rate of Unemployment', American Economic Review,
69:117-25.
Sargent, T. J. (1973), 'Rational Expectations, the Real Rate of Interest, and the Natural Rate of
Unemployment', Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2:429-72.
and N. Wallace (1975), 'Rational Expectations, the Optimal Monetary Instrument and the
Optimal Money Supply Rule', Journal of Political Economy, 83:241-54.
Schaling, E. (1995), Institutions and Monetary Policy, Aldershot: Edward Elgar.
Schelling, T. (1960), The Strategy of Conflict, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Selten, R. (1975), 'Re-examination of the Perfectless Concept for Equilibrium Points in
Extensive Games', International Journal of Game Theory, 4:22-55.
and R. Stoecker (1986), 'End Behavior in Sequences of Finite Prisoner's Dilemma
Supergames', Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 7:47-70.
Shafir, E., and A. Tversky (1992), 'Thinking Through Uncertainty: Nonconsequential
Reasoning and Choice', Cognitive Psychology, 24:449-74.
Shapiro, C. (1989), 'Theories of Oligopoly Behavior', in R. Schmalensee and R. D. Willig (eds.),
Handbook of Industrial Organization, i, Elsevier Science Publishers.
Shapiro, N., and J. Stiglitz (1984), 'Equilibrium Unemployment as a Discipline Device",
American Economic Review, 74: 433-44; repr. in N. G. Mankiw and D. Romer (1991), New
Keynesian Economics, ii, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Shleifer, A. (1986), 'Implementation Cycles', Journal of Political Economy, 94:1163-90; repr. in
N. G. Mankiw and D. Romer (1991), New Keynesian Economics, ii, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press.
and R. W. Vishny (1988), 'The Efficiency of Investment in the Presence of Aggregate
Demand Spillovers', Journal of Political Economy, 96:1221-31.
Simon H. A. (1982), Models of Bounded Rationality, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Snowdon, B., H. Vane, and P. Wynarczyk (1994), A Modern Guide to Macroeconomics: An
Introduction to Competing Schools of Thought, Aldershot: Edward Elgar.
Stiglitz, J. E. (1984), 'Price Rigidities and Market Structure', American Economic Review, 74:
350-55; repr. in N. G. Mankiw and D. Romer (1991), New Keynesian Economics, ii,
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
(1987), 'The Causes and Consequences of the Dependency of Quality on Price", Journal of
Economic Literature, 25:1—48.
Sugden, R. (1991), 'Rational Choice: A Survey of Contributions from Economics and
Philosophy', Economic Journal, 101:751-85.
Sylos-Labini, P. (1962), Oligopoly and Technical Progress, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press.
Taylor, J. B. (1985), 'International Coordination in the Design of Macroeconomic Policy Rules',
European Economic Review, 28: 53-82.
277

--- Sayfa 289 ---
Bibliography
Tinbergen, J. (1952), On The Theory of Economic Policy, Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Tirole, J.(1988), The Theory of Industrial Organisation, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Thursby, M., and R. Jensen (1983), 'A Conjectural Variations Approach to Strategic Tariff
Equilibria', Journal of International Economics, 14:145-61.
Van Huyck, J. B., R. C. Battalio, and R. O. Beil (1990), 'Tacit Coordination Games, Strategic
Uncertainty, and Coordination Failure', American Economic Review, 80:234-48.
Varian, H. (1992), Microeconomic Analysis, New York: Norton.
Venables, A. (1985), 'Trade and Trade Policy with Imperfect Competition: The Case of Identical
Products and Free Entry', Journal of International Economics, 19:1-19.
Vickers, J. (1985), 'Strategic Competition among the Few—Some Recent Developments in the
Economics of Industry', Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 1: 39-62; repr. in T. Jenkinson
(1996), Readings in Microeconomics, New York: Oxford University Press.
Weiss, A. (1980), 'Job Queues and Layoffs in Labour Markets with Flexible Wages', Journal of
Political Economy, 88:526-38.
(1991), Efficiency Wages: Models of Unemployment, Layoffs and Wage Dispersion, Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Wilson, R. (1992), 'Strategic Models of Entry Deterrence', in R. J. Aumann and S. Hart (eds.),
Handbook of Game Theory with Economic Applications, New York: North-Holland.
278

--- Sayfa 290 ---
INDEX
Abreu,D. 74
acid rain 211,219
actions 9,11,33
adverse selection 142
advertising:
and entry deterrence 96
and incomplete information 43-5
as a Prisoners'Dilemma game 35-6
as a repeated game 36—8,40
aggregate demand externality 149-52,158-9
Akerlof.G.A. 147
altruism 55,234,235,239,242,244,247-8,256-7
Alvi.E. 158
AndreoniJ. 234,241-2
auctions 8
Aumann.R. 266
autarky 193,194
Axelrod,R. 265
Backus, D. 128
backward induction 26,33-4,49-50,267-8; see also
paradox of backward induction
Bain,J. 5,87
Ball,L. 153,158
bargaining:
and side payments 218
Barrett, S. 221
barriers to entry 87,210-2
Battalio,R.C. 249-51
Battle of the Sexes game:
experimental evidence 253-4
normal form 22,253
Nash equilibria 22—4
Barro,R. 125-8
Baumol.W. 94
Bayes,T. 53
Bayesian subgame perfect Nash equilibrium 46
borrower/lender game 246,259-61
centipede games 47-8,54-7
limit pricing 97-9,103-4
monetary policy 128-33,137-9
New Classical political business cycle 128-33,138-9
oligopoly 78-9
predatory pricing 100-1
repeated Prisoners' Dilemma game 239
Bayes Theorem 46,52-4,100,129-30,260
beggar-my-neighbour policies 176-7,188,205
Beil,R.O. 249-51
beliefs:
and Bayesian updating 46,52-4; centipede games
54-7,246-8; borrower/lender game 242-6,
259-61; experimental evidence 240-8; mone-
tarypolicy 128-33,137-9; New Classical
political business cycle 128-33,138-9; oligop-
oly 78-9; predatory pricing 100-1; repeated
Prisoners'Dilemma game 239
consistently aligned beliefs 266-7
mistaken beliefs 247-8
and model uncertainty 183
out-of-equilibrium beliefs 267-8
and sequential equilibrium 242
BenoitJ.P. 77,194
Bertrand competition 5,59,68-71,95,103
and strategic trade policy 199-200
Bertrand paradox 69
Binmore.K. 267-8
biodiversity 210,211
Blanchard,O.J. 149,155,158
borrower/lender game 242-6,259-61
bounded rationality 40-1,147-8,195,234,256,265,
269
branches 11
BranderJ.A. 188,196
Bresnahan, T. E 196
Camerer.C. 242-6
Canzoneri.M.B. 182
Carraro,C. 223,224
centipede games:
Bayesian subgame perfect Nash equilibrium 54-7
experimental evidence 246-8
extensive form 46-7,267-8
incomplete information 47—8,52-3,54—7
iterated dominance 18,47
sequential equilibrium 54—7
subgame perfect Nash equilibrium 46-7,267—8
central bank independence 123
chain store game 92-3,100-1
chain store paradox 93
Chamberlain, E. H. 150
chicken game 237,258-9
climate change see global warming
coalitions 212,221-4,227-8
common knowledge 11,43,88,106; see also rationality
common property resources 210,219,226
communication:
and co-ordination failure 253—4
conjectural variations:
and strategic trade policy 195-6
conservation 211
contagious punishment strategy 240
contestable markets 94
contract curve:
Cournot competition 63-4,65,81
policy co-ordination 175-7,185-6
tariff wars 191-2
279

--- Sayfa 291 ---
Index
conventions 156
Cooper, R. W. 156-7,230-1,233,236,238,251-4
co-operation:
environmental policy 215-6,219-24,225-8
co-ordination failure:
experimental evidence 248-54
in New Keynesian models 141,156-61,165-7
and price rigidity 158-9,160-1,165-7
co-ordination games 205-6,237
and experimental evidence 248-54
and learning 257-8
Cournot, A. 18, 62
Cournot competition 5, 58-64,80-1,88,90-1,94
and strategic trade policy 197-204
Cournot solution 63
credibility:
threats and promises 31—3
punishment strategy 36-8, 221
Currie,D.A. 182
customer markets 154
D'Aspremont.C.A. 222
decisions:
nodes 11,12
timing of decisions 10
Dejong, D. V. 230-1,233,236,238,251-4
Diamond, P. A. 153
discounting 36
rate of discount 37,43,193
Dixit,A. 94,193,204
dominance:
iterated 16-18,26
strict 14-15,26
weak 15-16,26
Donsimoni, M. P. 222
DriffelJ. 128
Durlauf.S.N. 156
dynamic game theory see game theory
E-equilibrium 40-1,195
EatonJ. 199
economic rent 196,204
economies to scale 160,202
effkiencywages 140-7,153,162-4,264
entry deterrence 5,86-105
limit pricing: Bain's theory 86-91,101—3; incomplete
information 97-9,103-4
precommitment 94-6,103
predatory pricing: complete information 91-3;
incomplete information 100-1
and strategic trade policy 202—4
environmental economics 6,210-28
bilateral agreements: reciprocal externalities 217,
225-7; unidirectional externalities 212-19
multilateral agreements 219-24,227-8
use of game theory 210—12
environmental policy:
international policy 210-11; see also international
environmental agreements
national policy 210
and trade effects 211-12
errors:
in beliefs and action 247-8
evolution 3
evolutionary games 234-8,256,257-9
evolutionary stable strategy 236-8,257-9
exchange rates:
ana1 spillover-effects 170
targets 124
expansionary bias 176-7
expectations:
'animal spirits' 156
augmented Phillips curve 115—16
andmultiple equilibria 156,160-1,164-7
naive expectations 110-11,115-16
rational expectations 106-7,162,248
experimental economics 6-7,229-62
multiple equilibria 248—56
Nash equilibrium 230-40,256-9
sequential equilibrium 240-8,259-61
export subsidies 197-204,206-9
extensive form games 8,10-13
advertising game with incomplete information
43-5
Bertrand duopoly 68-9
borrower/lender game 242
centipede games 46-7,247,267
Cournot duopoly 59-60
dynamic entry game 29-30,32—4
efficiency wage model 144
entry deterrence 90,102-3
and normal form games 12-13
stabilization policy 134-5
Stackelberg duopoly 65-6
time-inconsistency 119,122,135-6
Prisoners' Dilemma game 10-11
externalities 210-11
unidirectional 212-16
reciprocal 217,219,225-7
factor prices:
and strategic trade policy 204
FarrellJ. 221
fiscal policy:
spillover effects 173, 183-4
Fischer, S. 112
focal points 64, 72, 80, 192, 250, 252, 265-6
Folk Theorem 75, 127, 193, 220
Forsythe.R. 230-1, 233, 236, 238, 251-4
free-rider problem:
environmental policy 210,211,219
free trade 192, 193-5, 205
Frenkel,J.A. 180
Friedman,J. 41,72
Friedman, M. 3, 115
Fudenberg,D. 75,97
Gabszewicz, J.J. 222
game theory:
basic assumptions 1—4,11-12
cooperative game theory 2
critique of game theory 263-9
280

--- Sayfa 292 ---
Index
dynamic game theory 4-5; one-off games 29-34,
49-51; repeated games 34-48,51-3
experimental evidence 229-62,265
non-cooperative game theory 2
solution concepts 8,13—14; dominance based 13-18;
equilibrium based 13-14, 18-24
static game theory 4, 8-27
GATT negotiations 192
General Equilibrium Theory 4
Ghosh, A. R. 180
global warming 211,219
Gordon, D. A. 125-8
Gray,J. 112
Green, E. 79
Grossman, G.M. 199,204
group reputation 240
Guttman.J.M. 224
Hamada,K. 174, 183
Hargreaves Heap, S. 156
HarsanyiJ. 44
Harsanyi doctrine 266-7
Helsinki Protocol 220
Hicks, J. R. 140
Howitt,P. 112, 156
Hughes Hallet, A. J. 182
hysteresis 156
imperfect recall 25—6
incomplete information see information
incomplete markets 210
increasing returns to scale 160, 202
indeterminacy see multiple equilibria
individualism 2
inflationary bias 120-2, 135-7
and policy co-ordination 179—80
and precommitment 122-4
and repeated monetary policy 125-33, 137-9
and supply side policies 124-5
information 10
advantage 112
complete information 11, 33, 43
imperfect information 11, 25, 43; see also uncertainty
incomplete information 11, 43-8, 52-7, 220, 248; and
advertising 43-5; and centipede games 47—8,
52-3,54-7; and entry deterrence 96-101,103-4;
experimental evidence 240-8,259-61; and mon-
etary policy 128-33,136-9; and oligopoly 78-9;
andtariffwars 195
perfect information 11,33
sets 11-12,26,29
see also uncertainty
interdependence 3-4,210-11
international environmental agreements 212
bilateral agreements 212-16
multilateral agreements 219-24
international policy co-ordination 6,168-87
empirical evidence 181-2
potential gains 173-7,185-6
potential problems 177-81
spillover effects 169-73,183-4
investment 94-5,103
irrationality 55,239,264-5,268
iterated strict dominance 16-17
iterated weak dominance 17—18
Jensen, R. 195
John, A. 157
Johnson, H.G. 188,192
Kandori.M. 240
Kant, I. 264
Kennan.J. 192
Keynes,J.M. 140
Kiyotaki,N. 149,158,160
Kreps,D. 46,97,100,129,195,239,241,268
Krishna, V. 77,194
Kuga,K. 190
labour supply 152-3
labour turnover 142
Laussel,D. 202
learning 46,52-3,234-7,248-56,269
by-doing 96,202
and the chicken game 258-9
end co-ordination games 257-8
and model uncertainty 181
and rational expectations 106-7
and stabilization policy 113
see also beliefs
Levine,P. 182
limit pricing 5
Bain's theory 86-91,101-3
and incomplete information 97-9,103-4
Lucas, R.E. 107,140
Lucas supply curve 108,112-13
McAfee, R. P. 156
McKelvey,R.D. 48,54,246-8
Mankiw.N.G. 119,147,148
market failure 210
Marshall-Lerner condition 190
Maskin.E. 75,221
Masson.P. 180
matching 224
Mayer, W. 197
Medium Term Financial Strategy 123
menu costs 147,148-52,159,164
Milgrom,P. 92,96-7,239,241
Miller, J.H. 234,241-2
Miller, M. 182
Minford,P. 182
minimum wage legislation 142
mixed strategy 19; see also strategy; Nash equilibrium
Modigliani, F. 87
monetary policy:
and international co-ordination 169—82,185-6
and monetary targets 111,121,123-4
and the political business cycle 114—17
and stabilization policy 107-14,134-5
and strategic trade policy 200
and time-inconsistency 118—33,135—9
281

--- Sayfa 293 ---
Index
monopolistic competition 150, 160-1, 165-7
monopoly 58
and limit pricing 87-91,96-9
and precommitment 93-6,100-1
and predatory pricing 91-3
static theory 86-7
welfare loss 89
Montet,C. 202
Montreal Protocol 220,224
morale 143
morality 264,269
multiple equilibria:
and Cournot competition 77
experimental evidence 248—54
and indeterminacy 265-7
and monetary policy 127
multiple Nash equilibria 21-2,26-7,31-2,41-2,50,
156-61,248-54
in New Keynesian models 156-61
and side payments 218
and stabilization policy 113
andtariffwars 190-1,193,206
see also subgame perfect Nash equilibrium; Bayesian
subgame perfect Nash equilibrium
multiplier 158
Mundell-Fleming model 170-3
Murphy, K.J. 160
MuthJ.E. 106
Nash, J. 18
Nash equilibrium:
definition 18-19
existence theorem 20-1
experimental evidence 230-40
mixed strategy Nash equilibrium 19,21,22-4,253-4,
266-7
multiple Nash equilibria 21-2,26-7,31-2,41-2,50,
156-61,248-54
pure strategy Nash equilibrium 19-20,26,30-1
renegotiation proof 221
and strict dominance 20
see also Bayesian subgame perfect Nash equilibrium;
subgame perfect Nash equilibrium
nature 8-9,25,44
near rationality see bounded rationality
NeralJ. 244-6
New Classical Macroeconomics 5,106-39
basic assumptions 107
political business cycle 114-18,128-33
stabilization policy 107-13,134-5
time inconsistency 118-22; and incomplete informa-
tion 128-33,137-9; andprecommitment
122-4,135-6; and repeated monetary policy
125-8; and supply side policies 124-5,137
New Keynesian Macroeconomics 5-6,140-67
co-ordination failure 156-61,165-7
efficiency wage models 141-6,162—4
nominal rigidities and the business cycle 146-56,164
nodes see decision nodes
Nordhaus,W. 114
normal form games 8-10
advertising game 35-6
Battle of the Sexes game 22,253
chain store game 92
chicken game 237
co-ordination games 237,251,256-6
dynamic entry game 30
and extensive form games 12—13
Prisoners'Dilemma game 9-10,19
static entry game 26-7
trade policy and entry deterrence 203
OchsJ. 244-6
Okun 154
oligopoly 5,58-85
Bertrand competition 68-71
and collusion 71-9,154-5
Cournot competition 59-65
and price rigidity 154-5
Stackelberg competition 65-8
and strategic trade policy 188,196-204
optimal tariff argument 188,189-92,206
Oudiz,G. 181-2
overinvestment:
in abatement technology 223
m capital 94-5,103
in research and development 96
ozone depletion 210,211,219,220
Palfrey, T.R. 48,54,246-8
Panzer.J. 94
paradox of backward induction 35,39-40
and advertising 40
and the centipede game 46-7,267-8
and the chain-store game 93
and Cournot competition 76-7
and free trade 194
and monetary policy 127
and policy co-ordination 178
ways of avoiding the paradox; bounded rationality
40-1; incomplete information 43-8; multiple
equilibria 41-2; uncertainty about the future
42-3
Pareto optimality 4,36
Parkin, M. 147
PAYM result 147-52
pay-offs 9
vectors 11
Phelps,E.S. 112
Phillips curve 115-6
and policy co-ordination 179—80
players 8
policy co-ordination see international policy
co-ordination
political business cycle:
New Classical theory 128-33
Nordhaus model 114-18
polluter pays principle 218
pollution 210-11; see also externalities
pooling equilibrium 98
entry deterrence 99
monetary policy 130-1
282

--- Sayfa 294 ---
Index
Porter, R. 79
positivism 3
precommitment:
and the borrower/lender game 259-60
and entry deterrence 94-6,103
and monetary policy 122-4,135
and strategic trade policy 197-8,203-4
predatory pricing:
complete information 91-3
incomplete information
100-1
price adjustment:
and co-ordination failure 158-9,160-1,165-7
nominal rigidity 146-52,164
real rigidity 152-5
and stabilization policy 112-3
Prisoners'Dilemma game 9
basic game: and altruism 235,256-7; description 9;
and evolutionary stable strategies 236-8; experi-
mental evidence 230-40,241; in extensive form
10-11; and group reputation 240; ami instru-
mental rationality 264; Nash equilibrium 19-20;
in normal form 10 ;Pareto inefficiency 14-15;
and the problem of co-ordination 34—48; and
strict dominance 14; ami uncertainty 238-9
other Prisoners' Dilemma type games; advertising 36;
and the aggregate demand externality 152; envi-
ronmental policy 217,225-6; export subsidies
201; oligopoly 64; international policy
co-ordination 173-7; tariff wars 188,190-2,
208-9
product differentiation:
and Bertrand competition 70-1
public goods 210
pure strategy 19; see also strategy; Nash equilibrium
Radner,R. 40-1,195
Rapoport.A. 265
rational expectations 106-7,162,248
rationality 2-3,9,34,263-9
bounded 40-1,147-8,195,234,256,265,269
common belief of 268
common knowledge of 18,31,47,50,230,233,248,
267-8
and expectations 106-7,162,248
and experimental evidence 248,253,255-6
instrumental 263-6
and iterated dominance 17-18,47
Kantian 264
near see bounded rationality
procedural 268
reaction functions:
aggregate demand externality 150-2
Bertrand competition 70-1,95,103
and conjectural variations 195-6
Cournot duopoly 61-4,94-5
export subsidies/taxes 197-8,199-200
international policy co-ordination 173-7,185-6
over-investment 94—5,103
pollution abatement 213-14,224,225
Stackelberg competition 66—7
and strategic complementarity 61,70,157
and strategic substitutability 61,157
tariff wars 190-1,206
recessionary bias 174-6
renegotiation 220-1
research and development 96
reservation wage 143-5,147
returns to scale 160,202
repeated games 34-48,51-3
experimental evidence 231-3,239,240-8
general theory: infinitely repeated games 34-8,51-2;
finitely repeated games 35,38-48,52-3
specific applications: advertising 34—40,43-5; inter-
national environmental agreements 220-1; limit
pricing 97-9,103-4; monetary policy 125-33,
137-9; oligopoly 71-9; policy co-ordination
178; predatory pricing 91-3,100-1; tariff wars
193-5
reputation 46-7
and the borrower/lender game 260-1
and centipede games 52-3
and entry deterrence 100-1
and environmental policy 219,223
and experimental evidence 240-8
of a group 240
and monetary policy 128-33,137-9
and policy co-ordination 179-80,183
and the Prisoners' Dilemma game 239,240
and rent shifting policies 196
residual demand curve 88-9,101-2
Riezman.R. 192
Roberts,]. 92,96-7,239,241
Rockett,K.R. 180
Rogoff.K. 179
Romer.D. 153,158
Rosenthal,R. 18,46,54,246,267
Ross,T.W. 230-1,233,236,238,251-4
RotembergJ. 155,158
Sachs, J. 182
Salmon, M. 182
Saloner.G. 158
Salop, S.C. 142,143
Sargent, T.J. 107
ScheUing,T. 265
search costs 153-4,159-60
Selten,R. 230,231-3,238,239,268
separating equilibrium 98
entry deterrence 98-9,103-4
monetary policy 130-1
sequential equilibrium 46,239,286
centipede games 54-7
experimental evidence 240-8,259-61
monetary policy 128-33,137-9
see also Bayesian subgame perfect Nash equilibrium
Shafir.E. 238
Shapiro, N. 142,143
shirking 142
Shleifer.A. 160
side payments 211,212,216-9,223,226-7
Simon, H. A. 265
Siniscalco,D. 223,224
283

--- Sayfa 295 ---
Index
solution techniques:
dominance based 14-18
equilibrium based 18—24
Spencer, B.J. 188,196
spillover effects
168-9
0/fiscal policy 173,183^1
of monetary policy 169-73,185-6
stabilization policy 107-13,123,134-5,140,155
Stackelberg competition 5,58-9,65-8,81-2
Stackelberg leadership:
and oligopoly 65-8,81-2
and policy co-ordination
178-9
and strategic trade policy 197-8,200,206-8
see also precommitment
static game theory see game theory
StiglitzJ.E. 142,154
Stoecker.R. 230,231-3,238,239
strategic complementarity 61,70,157-60
strategic form games see normal form games
strategic substitutability 61
strategic trade policy 6,188-209
with imperfect competition 196-204,206-9
with perfect competition 189-96,206
strategy 4,9
conditional strategy 29-31,36
mixed strategy 19
punishment strategy 36,51,71-6,82-5,220; carrot
and stick 74—5,77,82—5; contagious strategy
240;minimax 74-6; tit-for-tat strategy 265;
trigger strategy 36-7,51,72,84-5,193
pure strategy 19
strict dominance 14-15
subgame 32
subgame perfect Nash equilibrium 31-4,49-50,267-8
borrower/lender game 246,259-60
centipede games 47,55,267-8
dynamic entry game 29—34
entry deterrence 90-1,93
and experimental evidence 230—40
export subsidies 206-9
and inconsistency 267-8
policy co-ordination 178
political business cycle 118
tariffwars 193-4
time-inconsistency 120,125-8,137-8
trade policy and entry deterrence 203
sunk costs 94
sunspot equilibria 156
supply side policies 124—5
sustainability:
policy co-ordination
177-9
switching costs 96
Sylos-Labini, P. 87
tariffwars 190-2
Taylor, J.B. 112,182
thick market externality 153^,159-60
Thursby.M. 195
time inconsistency 118—22
and monetary policy 118-33,135-9
and policy co-ordination 178
and tariff reductions 192
Tinbergen.J. 174
Tinbergen's Theorem 174
TiroleJ. 97
tit-for-tat see strategy
trade policy 188; see also strategic trade policy
trembling-hand perfection 268
trigger price strategy 79
trigger strategy see strategy
tropical rain forests 210,211
Tversky.A. 238
uncertainty 238-9,248,256,267-9
about competitors 78-9
and environmental policy 218—19
about the future 42-3,78,127-8
about the government 128-33
about other players 43-8,220,234,239
and policy co-ordination 180-1
and stabilization policy 112
unemployment:
and efficiency wages 141-6,162-4,264
involuntary unemployment 140-2
natural rate of unemployment 115,124—5
optimal rate of unemployment 115,124—5
unions 141
United Nations Environmental Programme 210-11
VanHuyck,J.B. 249-51
Venables,A. 202
victim pays principle 218,219
Vidalis,N. 182
Vishny.R. 160
wage adjustment:
and stabilization policy 112-13
and wage contracts 155
Wallace, N. 107
weak dominance 15-16
Weigelt,K. 242-6
Weiss,A. 142
Willig,R. 94
Wilson, R. 46,97,100,129,195,239,241,268
Woodford.M. 155
YellenJ.L. 147
284