--- Sayfa 1 ---
Global Trends 2030:
Alternative
Worlds
a publication of the National Intelligence Council

--- Sayfa 2 ---
O
F
F
I
C
E

O
F

T
H
E

D
I
R
E
C
T
O
R

O
F

N
A
T
I
O
N
A
L

I
N
T
E
L
L
I
G
E
N
C
E
Global Trends 2030:
Alternative
Worlds
a publication of the National Intelligence Council
december 2012
NIC 2012-001
ISBN 978-1-929667-21-5
To view electronic version:
www.dni.gov/nic/globaltrends
Facebook.com/odni.nic
Twitter: @odni_nic

--- Sayfa 3 ---
Dear Reader:
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds is the fifth installment in the National Intelligence
Council’s series aimed at providing a framework for thinking about the future. As with previous
editions, we hope that this report will stimulate strategic thinking by identifying critical trends and
potential discontinuities. We distinguish between megatrends, those factors that will likely occur
under any scenario, and game-changers, critical variables whose trajectories are far less certain.
Finally, as our appreciation of the diversity and complexity of various factors has grown, we have
increased our attention to scenarios or alternative worlds we might face.
We are at a critical juncture in human history, which could lead to widely contrasting futures.
It is our contention that the future is not set in stone, but is malleable, the result of an interplay
among megatrends, game-changers and, above all, human agency. Our effort is to encourage
decisionmakers—whether in government or outside—to think and plan for the long term so that
negative futures do not occur and positive ones have a better chance of unfolding.
I would like to point out several innovations in Global Trends 2030. This volume starts with a look
back at the four previous Global Trends reports. We were buoyed by the overall positive review in the
study we commissioned, but cognizant too of the scope for needed changes, which we have tried to
incorporate in this volume.
Our aim has been to make this effort as collaborative as possible, believing that a diversity of
perspectives enriches the work. We have reached out to experts far beyond Washington, D.C. We
have held numerous meetings, many in universities, in Indiana, Texas, California, New Mexico,
Pennsylvania, Massachusetts, Colorado, Tennessee, New York, and New Jersey.
We also sponsored a public blog which featured blog posts and comments by experts on key themes
discussed in Global Trends 2030. The blog had over 140 posts and over 200 comments. As of
mid-October, it had 71,000 hits and had been viewed by readers in 167 different countries. To ensure
that the blog posts can continue to be consulted, we are linking them to the web and e-book versions
of the final published report.
We expanded our engagement overseas by holding meetings on the initial draft in close to 20
countries. Many times this was at the invitation of governments, businesses, universities, or think
tanks. One beneficial outcome of the NIC’s quadrennial efforts has been the growing interest
elsewhere in global trends, including elaboration by others on their own works, which we
encourage. Because of the widespread interest in how Global Trends 2030 is seen elsewhere, we
have detailed the reactions of our international experts to the initial draft in a special box following
the introduction.
O
F
F
I
C
E

O
F

T
H
E

D
I
R
E
C
T
O
R

O
F

N
A
T
I
O
N
A
L
I
N
T
E
L
L
I
G
E
N
C
E

--- Sayfa 4 ---
In this volume, we expanded our coverage of disruptive technologies, devoting a separate section
to it in the work. To accomplish that, we engaged with research scientists at DoE laboratories at
Sandia, Oak Ridge, and NASA in addition to entrepreneurs and consultants in Silicon Valley and Santa
Fe. We have also devoted strong attention to economic factors and the nexus of technology and
economic growth.
Finally, this volume contains a chapter on the potential trajectories for the US role in the international
system. Previous editions were criticized—particularly by overseas readers—for not discussing at
greater length the US impact on future international relations. We believe that the United States also
stands at a critical juncture; we have devoted a chapter to delineating possible future directions and
their impact on the broader evolution of the international system.
Scores of people contributed to the preparation of Global Trends 2030, and we have sought to
acknowledge the key contributors from outside the NIC in a separate entry. Within the NIC, Counselor
Mathew Burrows was our principal author in addition to orchestrating the entire process from
beginning to end. He was assisted by Elizabeth Arens as senior editor; Luke Baldwin, who established
the first-ever NIC blog; Erin Cromer, who oversaw logistical support; and Jacob Eastham and Anne
Carlyle Lindsay, who created the design. Dr. Burrows worked closely with regional and functional
National Intelligence Officers, who reviewed and contributed to the draft. Among NIC offices, the
NIC’s Strategic Futures Group under Director Cas Yost rates special mention for its participation across
the board in Global Trends-related work. I would especially like to acknowledge the work of the late
senior analyst Christopher Decker who provided critical help with the forecasts on global health and
pandemics before his untimely death.
I encourage readers to review the complete set of Global Trends 2030 documents, which can be
found on the National Intelligence Council’s website, www.dni.gov/nic/globaltrends, and to explore
possible scenario simulations using the interactive material. We also have published the work in an
e-book format so readers can download it for their use on a tablet. These formats are available for
downloading from our website.
As with our previous Global Trends studies, we hope this report stimulates dialogue on the challenges
that will confront the global community during the next 15-20 years—and positive and peaceful ways
to meet them.
Sincerely,
Christopher Kojm,
Chairman, National Intelligence Council

--- Sayfa 5 ---
Track Record of Global Trends Works
Before launching work on the current volume, the NIC commissioned an academic
study of the four previous Global Trends studies, beginning with the first edition
in 1996-97. The reviewers examined the Global Trends papers to highlight any
persistent blind spots and biases as well as distinctive strengths. A subsequent
conference focused on addressing shortcomings and building on the studies’ strong
points for the forthcoming work. We sought to address the reviewers’ concerns in
designing the present project.
The key “looming” challenges that our reviewers cited for GT 2030 were to develop:
• A greater focus on the role of US in the international system. Past works assumed US
centrality, leaving readers “vulnerable” to wonder about “critical dynamics” around the US role.
One of the key looming issues for GT 2030 was “how other powers would respond to a decline or
a decisive re-assertion of US power.” The authors of the study thought that both outcomes were
possible and needed to be addressed.
• A clearer understanding of the central units in the international system. Previous works
detailed the gradual ascendance of nonstate actors, but we did not clarify how we saw the role of
states versus nonstate actors. The reviewers suggested that we delve more into the dynamics of
governance and explore the complicated relationships among a diverse set of actors.
• A better grasp of time and speed. Past Global Trends works “correctly foresaw the direction
of the vectors: China up, Russia down. But China’s power has consistently increased faster than
expected . . . A comprehensive reading of the four reports leaves a strong impression that [we] tend
toward underestimation of the rates of change . . . ”
• Greater discussion of crises and discontinuities. The reviewers felt that the use of the word
“trends” in the titles suggests more continuity than change. GT 2025, however, “with its strongly
worded attention to the likelihood of significant shocks and discontinuities, flirts with a radical
revision of this viewpoint.” The authors recommended developing a framework for understanding
the relationships among trends, discontinuities, and crises.
• Greater attention to ideology. The authors of the study admitted that “ideology is a frustratingly
fuzzy concept . . . difficult to define . . . and equally difficult to measure.” They agreed that grand
“isms” like fascism and communism might not be on the horizon. However, “smaller politico-pycho-
social shifts that often don’t go under the umbrella of ideology but drive behavior” should be a focus.
• More understanding of second- and third-order consequences. Trying to identify looming
disequilibria may be one approach. More wargaming or simulation exercises to understand possible
dynamics among international actors at crucial tipping points was another suggestion.
We will let our readers judge how well we met the above challenges in this volume.
O
F
F
I
C
E

O
F

T
H
E

D
I
R
E
C
T
O
R

O
F

N
A
T
I
O
N
A
L
I
N
T
E
L
L
I
G
E
N
C
E

--- Sayfa 6 ---
i
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds
E x e c u t i v e S u m m a r y
This report is intended to stimulate thinking about the rapid and
vast geopolitical changes characterizing the world today and
possible global trajectories during the next 15-20 years. As with the
NIC’s previous Global Trends reports, we do not seek to predict the
future—which would be an impossible feat—but instead provide a
framework for thinking about possible futures and their implications.
“ . . . the idea of the future being different from the present
is so repugnant to our conventional modes of thought and
behavior that we, most of us, offer a great resistance to acting
on it in practice.”
John Maynard Keynes, 1937

--- Sayfa 7 ---
ii
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds
Global trends 2030: an overview
Megatrends
Individual
Empowerment
Individual empowerment will accelerate owing to poverty reduction, growth of the global
middle class, greater educational attainment, widespread use of new communications and
manufacturing technologies, and health-care advances.
Diffusion of Power
There will not be any hegemonic power. Power will shift to networks and coalitions in a
multipolar world.
Demographic
Patterns
The demographic arc of instability will narrow. Economic growth might decline in “aging”
countries. Sixty percent of the world’s population will live in urbanized areas; migration
will increase.
Food, Water,
Energy Nexus
Demand for these resources will grow substantially owing to an increase in the global
population. Tackling problems pertaining to one commodity will be linked to supply and
demand for the others.
Game-changers
Crisis-Prone Global
Economy
Will global volatility and imbalances among players with different economic interests
result in collapse? Or will greater multipolarity lead to increased resiliency in the global
economic order?
Governance Gap
Will governments and institutions be able to adapt fast enough to harness change instead of
being overwhelmed by it?
Potential for
Increased Conflict
Will rapid changes and shifts in power lead to more intrastate and interstate conflicts?
Wider Scope of
Regional Instability
Will regional instability, especially in the Middle East and South Asia, spill over and create
global insecurity?
Impact of New
Technologies
Will technological breakthroughs be developed in time to boost economic productivity
and solve the problems caused by a growing world population, rapid urbanization, and
climate change?
Role of the
United States
Will the US be able to work with new partners to reinvent the international system?
Potential worlds
Stalled Engines
In the most plausible worst-case scenario, the risks of interstate conflict increase. The US draws
inward and globalization stalls.
Fusion
In the most plausible best-case outcome, China and the US collaborate on a range of issues,
leading to broader global cooperation.
Gini-Out-of-the-
Bottle
Inequalities explode as some countries become big winners and others fail. Inequalities within
countries increase social tensions. Without completely disengaging, the US is no longer the
“global policeman.”
Nonstate World
Driven by new technologies, nonstate actors take the lead in confronting global challenges.

--- Sayfa 8 ---
iii
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds
T
he world of 2030 will be radically
transformed from our world today.
By 2030, no country—whether the
US, China, or any other large country—will
be a hegemonic power. The empowerment
of individuals and diffusion of power among
states and from states to informal networks will
have a dramatic impact, largely reversing the
historic rise of the West since 1750, restoring
Asia’s weight in the global economy, and
ushering in a new era of “democratization”
at the international and domestic level. In
addition to individual empowerment and the
diffusion of state power, we believe that two
other megatrends will shape our world out to
2030: demographic patterns, especially rapid
aging; and growing resource demands which,
in the cases of food and water, might lead to
scarcities. These trends, which are virtually
certain, exist today, but during the next 15-20
years they will gain much greater momentum.
Underpinning the megatrends are tectonic
shifts—critical changes to key features of our
global environment that will affect how the
world “works” (see table on page v).
Extrapolations of the megatrends would alone point
to a changed world by 2030—but the world could
be transformed in radically different ways. We
believe that six key game-changers—questions
regarding the global economy, governance, conflict,
regional instability, technology, and the role of the
United States—will largely determine what kind of
transformed world we will inhabit in 2030. Several
potential Black Swans—discrete events—would
cause large-scale disruption (see page xi). All but two
of these—the possibility of a democratic China or a
reformed Iran—would have negative repercussions.
Based upon what we know about the megatrends and
the possible interactions between the megatrends and
the game-changers, we have delineated four archetypal
futures that represent distinct pathways for the world
out to 2030. None of these alternative worlds is
inevitable. In reality, the future probably will consist of
elements from all the scenarios.
Megatrends and Related
Tectonic Shifts
Megatrend 1: Individual Empowerment
Individual empowerment will accelerate substantially
during the next 15-20 years owing to poverty reduction
and a huge growth of the global middle class, greater
educational attainment, and better health care. The
growth of the global middle class constitutes a tectonic
shift: for the first time, a majority of the world’s
population will not be impoverished, and the middle
classes will be the most important social and economic
sector in the vast majority of countries around the
world. Individual empowerment is the most important
megatrend because it is both a cause and effect of
most other trends—including the expanding global
economy, rapid growth of the developing countries,
and widespread exploitation of new communications
and manufacturing technologies. On the one hand,
we see the potential for greater individual initiative as
key to solving the mounting global challenges over the
next 15-20 years. On the other hand, in a tectonic shift,
individuals and small groups will have greater access
to lethal and disruptive technologies (particularly
precision-strike capabilities, cyber instruments, and
bioterror weaponry), enabling them to perpetrate
large-scale violence—a capability formerly the
monopoly of states.

--- Sayfa 9 ---
iv
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds
resources. Aging countries will face an uphill battle in
maintaining their living standards. Demand for both
skilled and unskilled labor will spur global migration.
Owing to rapid urbanization in the developing
world, the volume of urban construction for housing,
office space, and transport services over the next 40
years could roughly equal the entire volume of such
construction to date in world history.
Megatrend 4: Growing Food, Water, and
Energy Nexus
Demand for food, water, and energy will grow by
approximately 35, 40, and 50 percent respectively
owing to an increase in the global population and
the consumption patterns of an expanding middle
class. Climate change will worsen the outlook for the
availability of these critical resources. Climate change
analysis suggests that the severity of existing weather
patterns will intensify, with wet areas getting wetter
and dry and arid areas becoming more so. Much of
the decline in precipitation will occur in the Middle
East and northern Africa as well as western Central
Asia, southern Europe, southern Africa, and the
US Southwest.
We are not necessarily headed into a world of
scarcities, but policymakers and their private sector
partners will need to be proactive to avoid such
a future. Many countries probably won’t have the
wherewithal to avoid food and water shortages
without massive help from outside. Tackling problems
pertaining to one commodity won’t be possible
without affecting supply and demand for the others.
Agriculture is highly dependent on accessibility to
adequate sources of water as well as on energy-rich
fertilizers. Hydropower is a significant source of energy
for some regions while new sources of energy—such
as biofuels—threaten to exacerbate the potential for
food shortages. There is as much scope for negative
tradeoffs as there is the potential for positive synergies.
Agricultural productivity in Africa, particularly, will
require a sea change to avoid shortages. Unlike Asia
and South America, which have achieved significant
improvements in agricultural production per capita,
Africa has only recently returned to 1970s’ levels.
Megatrend 2: Diffusion of Power
The diffusion of power among countries will have a
dramatic impact by 2030. Asia will have surpassed
North America and Europe combined in terms of
global power, based upon GDP, population size,
military spending, and technological investment.
China alone will probably have the largest economy,
surpassing that of the United States a few years before
2030. In a tectonic shift, the health of the global
economy increasingly will be linked to how well the
developing world does—more so than the traditional
West. In addition to China, India, and Brazil, regional
players such as Colombia, Indonesia, Nigeria, South
Africa, and Turkey will become especially important
to the global economy. Meanwhile, the economies of
Europe, Japan, and Russia are likely to continue their
slow relative declines.
The shift in national power may be overshadowed
by an even more fundamental shift in the nature of
power. Enabled by communications technologies,
power will shift toward multifaceted and amorphous
networks that will form to influence state and global
actions. Those countries with some of the strongest
fundamentals—GDP, population size, etc.—will
not be able to punch their weight unless they also
learn to operate in networks and coalitions in a
multipolar world.
Megatrend 3: Demographic Patterns
We believe that in the world of 2030—a world
in which a growing global population will have
reached somewhere close to 8.3 billion people (up
from 7.1 billion in 2012)—four demographic trends
will fundamentally shape, although not necessarily
determine, most countries’ economic and political
conditions and relations among countries. These
trends are: aging—a tectonic shift for both for the
West and increasingly most developing countries;
a still-significant but shrinking number of youthful
societies and states; migration, which will increasingly
be a cross-border issue; and growing urbanization—
another tectonic shift, which will spur economic
growth but could put new strains on food and water

--- Sayfa 10 ---
v
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds
In a likely tectonic shift, the United States could
become energy-independent. The US has regained its
position as the world’s largest natural gas producer
and expanded the life of its reserves from 30 to
100 years due to hydraulic fracturing technology.
Additional crude oil production through the use of
“fracking” drilling technologies on difficult-to-reach
oil deposits could result in a big reduction in the US
net trade balance and improved overall economic
growth. Debates over environmental concerns about
fracturing, notably pollution of water sources, could
derail such developments, however.
Tectonic Shifts between now and 2030
Growth of the
Global Middle
Class
Middle classes most everywhere in the developing world are poised to expand substantially in
terms of both absolute numbers and the percentage of the population that can claim middle-
class status during the next 15-20 years.
Wider Access
to Lethal and
Disruptive
Technologies
A wider spectrum of instruments of war—especially precision-strike capabilities, cyber
instruments, and bioterror weapony—will become accessible. Individuals and small groups will
have the capability to perpetrate large-scale violence and disruption—a capability formerly the
monopoly of states.
Definitive Shift
of Economic
Power to the
East and South
The US, European, and Japanese share of global income is projected to fall from 56 percent
today to well under half by 2030. In 2008, China overtook the US as the world’s largest saver; by
2020, emerging markets’ share of financial assets is projected to almost double.
Unprecedented
and Widespread
Aging
Whereas in 2012 only Japan and Germany have matured beyond a median age of 45 years, most
European countries, South Korea, and Taiwan will have entered the post-mature age category by
2030. Migration will become more globalized as both rich and developing countries suffer from
workforce shortages.
Urbanization
Today’s roughly 50-percent urban population will climb to nearly 60 percent, or 4.9 billion people,
in 2030. Africa will gradually replace Asia as the region with the highest urbanization growth rate.
Urban centers are estimated to generate 80 percent of economic growth; the potential exists to
apply modern technologies and infrastructure, promoting better use of scarce resources.
Food and Water
Pressures
Demand for food is expected to rise at least 35 percent by 2030 while demand for water
is expected to rise by 40 percent. Nearly half of the world’s population will live in areas
experiencing severe water stress. Fragile states in Africa and the Middle East are most at risk of
experiencing food and water shortages, but China and India are also vulnerable.
US Energy
Independence
With shale gas, the US will have sufficient natural gas to meet domestic needs and generate
potential global exports for decades to come. Increased oil production from difficult-to-access
oil deposits would result in a substantial reduction in the US net trade balance and faster
economic expansion. Global spare capacity may exceed over 8 million barrels, at which point
OPEC would lose price control and crude oil prices would collapse, causing a major negative
impact on oil-export economies.

--- Sayfa 11 ---
vi
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds
Earlier economic crises, such as the 1930s’ Great
Depression, also hit when the age structures of
many Western populations were relatively youthful,
providing a demographic bonus during the postwar
economic boom. However, such a bonus will not exist
in any prospective recovery for Western countries. To
compensate for drops in labor-force growth, hoped-for
economic gains will have to come from growth in
productivity. The United States is in a better position
because its workforce is projected to increase during
the next decade, but the US will still need to increase
labor productivity to offset its slowly aging workforce.
A critical question is whether technology can
sufficiently boost economic productivity to prevent a
long-term slowdown.
As we have noted, the world’s economic prospects will
increasingly depend on the fortunes of the East and
South. The developing world already provides more
than 50 percent of global economic growth and 40
percent of global investment. Its contribution to global
investment growth is more than 70 percent. China’s
contribution is now one and a half times the size of the
US contribution. In the World Bank’s baseline modeling
of future economic multipolarity, China—despite a
likely slowing of its economic growth—will contribute
about one-third of global growth by 2025, far more
than any other economy. Emerging market demand
for infrastructure, housing, consumer goods, and new
plants and equipment will raise global investment to
levels not seen in four decades. Global savings may
not match this rise, resulting in upward pressure on
long-term interest rates.
Despite their growing economic clout, developing
countries will face their own challenges, especially in
their efforts to continue the momentum behind their
rapid economic growth. China has averaged 10-percent
real growth during the past three decades; by 2020
its economy will probably be expanding by only 5
percent, according to several private-sector forecasts.
The slower growth will mean downward pressure on
per capita income growth. China faces the prospect
of being trapped in middle-income status, with its
per capita income not continuing to increase to the
level of the world’s advanced economies. India faces
Game-Changers
Game-Changer 1: The Crisis-Prone
Global Economy
The international economy almost certainly will
continue to be characterized by various regional and
national economies moving at significantly different
speeds—a pattern reinforced by the 2008 global
financial crisis. The contrasting speeds across different
regional economies are exacerbating global imbalances
and straining governments and the international
system. The key question is whether the divergences
and increased volatility will result in a global
breakdown and collapse or whether the development
of multiple growth centers will lead to resiliency. The
absence of a clear hegemonic economic power could
add to the volatility. Some experts have compared the
relative decline in the economic weight of the US to
the late 19th century when economic dominance by
one player—Britain—receded into multipolarity.
A return to pre-2008 growth rates and previous
patterns of rapid globalization looks increasingly
unlikely, at least for the next decade. Across G-7
countries, total nonfinancial debt has doubled since
1980 to 300 percent of GDP, accumulating over a
generation. Historical studies indicate that recessions
involving financial crises tend to be deeper and require
recoveries that take twice as long. Major Western
economies—with some exceptions such as the US,
Australia, and South Korea—have only just begun
deleveraging (reducing their debts); previous episodes
have taken close to a decade.
Another major global economic crisis cannot be ruled
out. The McKinsey Global Institute estimates that the
potential impact of an unruly Greek exit from the euro
zone could cause eight times the collateral damage
as the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy. Regardless of
which solution is eventually chosen, progress will be
needed on several fronts to restore euro zone stability.
Doing so will take several years at a minimum, with
many experts talking about a whole decade before
stability returns.

--- Sayfa 12 ---
vii
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds
during the next 15-20 years. Countries moving from
autocracy to democracy have a proven track record
of instability.
Other countries will continue to suffer from a
democratic deficit: in these cases a country’s
developmental level is more advanced than its level
of governance. Gulf countries and China account for
a large number in this category. China, for example,
is slated to pass the threshold of US $15,000 per
capita purchasing power parity (PPP) in the next five
years, which is often a trigger for democratization.
Chinese democratization could constitute an immense
“wave,” increasing pressure for change on other
authoritarian states.
The widespread use of new communications
technologies will become a double-edged sword for
governance. On the one hand, social networking will
enable citizens to coalesce and challenge governments,
as we have already seen in Middle East. On the other
hand, such technologies will provide governments—
both authoritarian and democratic—an unprecedented
ability to monitor their citizens. It is unclear how the
balance will be struck between greater IT-enabled
individuals and networks and traditional political
structures. In our interactions, technologists and
political scientists have offered divergent views.
Both sides agree, however, that the characteristics
of IT use—multiple and simultaneous action,
near instantaneous responses, mass organization
across geographic boundaries, and technological
dependence—increase the potential for more frequent
discontinuous change in the international system.
The current, largely Western dominance of global
structures such as the UN Security Council, World
Bank, and IMF probably will have been transformed by
2030 to be more in line with the changing hierarchy
of new economic players. Many second-tier emerging
powers will be making their mark—at least as
emerging regional leaders. Just as the larger G-20—
rather than G-7/8—was energized to deal with the
2008 financial crisis, we expect that other institutions
will be updated—probably also in response to crises.
many of the same problems and traps accompanying
rapid growth as China: large inequities between rural
and urban sectors and within society; increasing
constraints on resources such as water; and a need
for greater investment in science and technology to
continue to move its economy up the value chain.
Game-Changer 2: The Governance Gap
During the next 15-20 years, as power becomes even
more diffuse than today, a growing number of diverse
state and nonstate actors, as well as subnational actors,
such as cities, will play important governance roles.
The increasing number of players needed to solve
major transnational challenges—and their discordant
values—will complicate decisionmaking. The lack
of consensus between and among established and
emerging powers suggests that multilateral governance
to 2030 will be limited at best. The chronic
deficit probably will reinforce the trend toward
fragmentation. However, various developments—
positive or negative—could push the world in different
directions. Advances cannot be ruled out despite
growing multipolarity, increased regionalism, and
possible economic slowdowns. Prospects for achieving
progress on global issues will vary across issues.
The governance gap will continue to be most
pronounced at the domestic level and driven by
rapid political and social changes. The advances
during the past couple decades in health, education,
and income—which we expect to continue, if not
accelerate in some cases—will drive new governance
structures. Transitions to democracy are much more
stable and long-lasting when youth bulges begin to
decline and incomes are higher. Currently about 50
countries are in the awkward stage between autocracy
and democracy, with the greatest number concentrated
in Sub-Saharan Africa, Southeast and Central Asia, and
the Middle East and North Africa. Both social science
theory and recent history—the Color Revolutions
and the Arab Spring—support the idea that with
maturing age structures and rising incomes, political
liberalization and democracy will advance. However,
many countries will still be zig-zagging their way
through the complicated democratization process

--- Sayfa 13 ---
viii
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds
in Asia and the Middle East. A more fragmented
international system in which existing forms of
cooperation are no longer seen as advantageous to
many of the key global players would also increase
the potential for competition and even great power
conflict. However, if such a conflict occurs, it almost
certainly will not be on the level of a world war with
all major powers engaged.
Three different baskets of risks could conspire to
increase the chances of an outbreak of interstate
conflict: changing calculations of key players—
particularly China, India, and Russia; increasing
contention over resource issues; and a wider spectrum
of more accessible instruments of war. With the
potential for increased proliferation and growing
concerns about nuclear security, risks are growing that
future wars in South Asia and the Middle East would
risk inclusion of a nuclear deterrent.
The current Islamist phase of terrorism might end
by 2030, but terrorism is unlikely to die completely.
Many states might continue to use terrorist group out
of a strong sense of insecurity, although the costs to
a regime of directly supporting terrorists looks set
to become even greater as international cooperation
increases. With more widespread access to lethal and
disruptive technologies, individuals who are experts
in such niche areas as cyber systems might sell their
services to the highest bidder, including terrorists
who would focus less on causing mass casualties
and more on creating widespread economic and
financial disruptions.
Game-Changer 4: Wider Scope of
Regional Instability
Regional dynamics in several different theaters during
the next couple decades will have the potential to
spill over and create global insecurity. The Middle
East and South Asia are the two regions most likely
to trigger broader instability. In the Middle East,
the youth bulge—a driving force of the recent Arab
Spring—will give way to a gradually aging population.
With new technologies beginning to provide the world
with other sources of oil and gas, the region’s economy
Game-Changer 3: Potential for
Increased Conflict
Historical trends during the past two decades show
fewer major armed conflicts and, where conflicts
remain, fewer civilian and military casualties than in
previous decades. Maturing age structures in many
developing countries point to continuing declines
in intrastate conflict. We believe the disincentives
will remain strong against great power conflict: too
much would be at stake. Nevertheless, we need to be
cautious about the prospects for further declines in
the number and intensity of intrastate conflicts, and
interstate conflict remains a possibility.
Intrastate conflicts have gradually increased in
countries with a mature overall population that contain
a politically dissonant, youthful ethnic minority. Strife
involving ethnic Kurds in Turkey, Shia in Lebanon, and
Pattani Muslims in southern Thailand are examples
of such situations. Looking forward, the potential for
conflict to occur in Sub-Saharan Africa is likely to
remain high even after some of the region’s countries
graduate into a more intermediate age structure
because of the probable large number of ethnic and
tribal minorities that will remain more youthful than
the overall population. Insufficient natural resources—
such as water and arable land—in many of the same
countries that will have disproportionate levels of
young men increase the risks of intrastate conflict
breaking out, particularly in Sub-Saharan African and
South and East Asian countries, including China and
India. A number of these countries—Afghanistan,
Bangladesh, Pakistan, and Somalia—also have faltering
governance institutions.
Though by no means inevitable, the risks of interstate
conflict are increasing owing to changes in the
international system. The underpinnings of the
post-Cold War equilibrium are beginning to shift.
During the next 15-20 years, the US will be grappling
with the degree to which it can continue to play the
role of systemic guardian and guarantor of the global
order. A declining US unwillingness and/or slipping
capacity to serve as a global security provider would
be a key factor contributing to instability, particularly

--- Sayfa 14 ---
ix
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds
will need to become increasingly diversified. But the
Middle East’s trajectory will depend on its political
landscape. On the one hand, if the Islamic Republic
maintains power in Iran and is able to develop nuclear
weapons, the Middle East will face a highly unstable
future. On the other hand, the emergence of moderate,
democratic governments or a breakthrough agreement
to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict could have
enormously positive consequences.
South Asia faces a series of internal and external
shocks during the next 15-20 years. Low growth,
rising food prices, and energy shortages will pose stiff
challenges to governance in Pakistan and Afghanistan.
Afghanistan’s and Pakistan’s youth bulges are
large—similar in size to those found in many African
countries. When these youth bulges are combined
with a slow-growing economy, they portend increased
instability. India is in a better position, benefiting from
higher growth, but it will still be challenged to find
jobs for its large youth population. Inequality, lack
of infrastructure, and education deficiencies are key
weaknesses in India. The neighborhood has always
had a profound influence on internal developments,
increasing the sense of insecurity and bolstering
military outlays. Conflict could erupt and spread
under numerous scenarios. Conflicting strategic goals,
widespread distrust, and the hedging strategies by all
the parties will make it difficult for them to develop a
strong regional security framework.
An increasingly multipolar Asia lacking a
well-anchored regional security framework able to
arbitrate and mitigate rising tensions would constitute
one of the largest global threats. Fear of Chinese
power, the likelihood of growing Chinese nationalism,
and possible questions about the US remaining
involved in the region will increase insecurities. An
unstable Asia would cause large-scale damage to the
global economy.
Changing dynamics in other regions would also
jeopardize global security. Europe has been a critical
security provider, ensuring, for example, Central
Europe’s integration into the “West” after the end of
the Cold War. A more inward-focused and less capable
Europe would provide a smaller stabilizing force for
crises in neighboring regions. On the other hand,
a Europe which overcomes its current intertwined
political and economic crises could see its global
role enhanced. Such a Europe could help to integrate
its rapidly developing neighbors in the Middle
East, Sub-Saharan Africa, and Central Asia into the
global economy and broader international system. A
modernizing Russia could integrate itself into a wider
international community; at the same time, a Russia
which fails to build a more diversified economy and
more liberal domestic order could increasingly pose a
regional and global threat.
Progress toward greater regional cohesion and
integration in Latin America and Sub-Saharan
Africa would promise increased stability in those
regions and a reduced threat to global security.
Countries in Sub-Saharan Africa, Central America, and
the Caribbean will remain vulnerable, nevertheless,
to state failure through 2030, providing safe havens
for both global criminal and terrorist networks and
local insurgents.
Game-Changer 5: The Impact of
New Technologies
Four technology arenas will shape global economic,
social, and military developments as well as the world
community’s actions pertaining to the environment by
2030. Information technology is entering the big
data era. Process power and data storage are becoming
almost free; networks and the cloud will provide
global access and pervasive services; social media and
cybersecurity will be large new markets. This growth
and diffusion will present significant challenges for
governments and societies, which must find ways to
capture the benefits of new IT technologies while
dealing with the new threats that those technologies
present. Fear of the growth of an Orwellian
surveillance state may lead citizens particularly in the
developed world to pressure their governments to
restrict or dismantle big data systems.
Information technology-based solutions to maximize
citizens’ economic productivity and quality of

--- Sayfa 15 ---
x
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds
life while minimizing resource consumption and
environmental degradation will be critical to ensuring
the viability of megacities. Some of the world’s future
megacities will essentially be built from scratch,
enabling a blank-slate approach to infrastructure
design and implementation that could allow for the
most effective possible deployment of new urban
technologies—or create urban nightmares, if such new
technologies are not deployed effectively.
New manufacturing and automation technologies
such as additive manufacturing (3D printing) and
robotics have the potential to change work patterns
in both the developing and developed worlds. In
developed countries these technologies will improve
productivity, address labor constraints, and diminish
the need for outsourcing, especially if reducing
the length of supply chains brings clear benefits.
Nevertheless, such technologies could still have
a similar effect as outsourcing: they could make
more low- and semi-skilled manufacturing workers
in developed economies redundant, exacerbating
domestic inequalities. For developing economies,
particularly Asian ones, the new technologies will
stimulate new manufacturing capabilities and further
increase the competitiveness of Asian manufacturers
and suppliers.
Breakthroughs, especially for technologies pertaining
to the security of vital resources—will be
neccessary to meet the food, water, and energy needs
of the world’s population. Key technologies likely
to be at the forefront of maintaining such resources
in the next 15-20 years will include genetically
modified crops, precision agriculture, water irrigation
techniques, solar energy, advanced bio-based fuels, and
enhanced oil and natural gas extraction via fracturing.
Given the vulnerabilities of developing economies
to key resource supplies and prices and the early
impacts of climate change, key developing countries
may realize substantial rewards in commercializing
many next-generation resource technologies first.
Aside from being cost competitive, any expansion or
adoption of both existing and next-generation resource
technologies over the next 20 years will largely depend
on social acceptance and the direction and resolution
of any ensuing political issues.
Last but not least, new health technologies will
continue to extend the average age of populations
around the world, by ameliorating debilitating
physical and mental conditions and improving overall
well-being. The greatest gains in healthy longevity
are likely to occur in those countries with developing
economies as the size of their middle class populations
swells. The health-care systems in these countries may
be poor today, but by 2030 they will make substantial
progress in the longevity potential of their populations;
by 2030 many leading centers of innovation in disease
management will be in the developing world.
Game-Changer 6: The Role of the
United States
How the United States’ international role evolves
during the next 15-20 years—a big uncertainty—and
whether the US will be able to work with new partners
to reinvent the international system will be among
the most important variables in the future shape of
the global order. Although the United States’ (and the
West’s) relative decline vis-a-vis the rising states is
inevitable, its future role in the international system
is much harder to project: the degree to which the US
continues to dominate the international system could
vary widely.
The US most likely will remain “first among equals”
among the other great powers in 2030 because of
its preeminence across a range of power dimensions
and legacies of its leadership role. More important
than just its economic weight, the United States’
dominant role in international politics has derived
from its preponderance across the board in both hard
and soft power. Nevertheless, with the rapid rise of
other countries, the “unipolar moment” is over and
Pax Americana—the era of American ascendancy
in international politics that began in 1945—is fast
winding down.
The context in which the US global power will operate
will change dramatically. Most of Washington’s historic

--- Sayfa 16 ---
xi
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds
Potential Black Swans That Would Cause the Greatest Disruptive Impact
Severe
Pandemic
No one can predict which pathogen will be the next to start spreading to humans, or when or
where such a development will occur. An easily transmissible novel respiratory pathogen that
kills or incapacitates more than one percent of its victims is among the most disruptive events
possible. Such an outbreak could result in millions of people suffering and dying in every corner
of the world in less than six months.
Much More
Rapid Climate
Change
Dramatic and unforeseen changes already are occurring at a faster rate than expected. Most
scientists are not confident of being able to predict such events. Rapid changes in precipitation
patterns—such as monsoons in India and the rest of Asia—could sharply disrupt that region’s
ability to feed its population.
Euro/EU
Collapse
An unruly Greek exit from the euro zone could cause eight times the collateral damage as the
Lehman Brothers bankruptcy, provoking a broader crisis regarding the EU’s future.
A Democratic or
Collapsed China
China is slated to pass the threshold of US$15,000 per capita purchasing power parity (PPP) in
the next five years or so—a level that is often a trigger for democratization. Chinese “soft” power
could be dramatically boosted, setting off a wave of democratic movements. Alternatively, many
experts believe a democratic China could also become more nationalistic. An economically
collapsed China would trigger political unrest and shock the global economy.
A Reformed Iran
A more liberal regime could come under growing public pressure to end the international
sanctions and negotiate an end to Iran’s isolation. An Iran that dropped its nuclear weapons
aspirations and became focused on economic modernization would bolster the chances for a
more stable Middle East.
Nuclear War or
WMD/Cyber
Attack
Nuclear powers such as Russia and Pakistan and potential aspirants such as Iran and North Korea
see nuclear weapons as compensation for other political and security weaknesses, heightening
the risk of their use. The chance of nonstate actors conducting a cyber attack—or using WMD—
also is increasing.
Solar
Geomagnetic
Storms
Solar geomagnetic storms could knock out satellites, the electric grid, and many sensitive
electronic devices. The recurrence intervals of crippling solar geomagnetic storms, which are less
than a century, now pose a substantial threat because of the world’s dependence on electricity.
US
Disengagement
A collapse or sudden retreat of US power probably would result in an extended period of global
anarchy; no leading power would be likely to replace the United States as guarantor of the
international order.

--- Sayfa 17 ---
xii
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds
Western partners have also suffered relative economic
declines. The post-World-War-II-era was characterized
by the G-7 countries leading both economically and
politically. US projection of power was dependent on
and amplified by its strong alliances. During the next
15-20 years, power will become more multifaceted—
reflecting the diversity of issues—and more
contextual—certain actors and power instruments will
be germane to particular issues.
The United States’ technological assets—including
its leadership in piloting social networking and
rapid communications—give it an advantage, but
the Internet also will continue to boost the power
of nonstate actors. In most cases, US power will
need to be enhanced through relevant outside
networks, friends, and affiliates that can coalesce on
any particular issue. Leadership will be a function
of position, enmeshment, diplomatic skill, and
constructive demeanor.
The US position in the world also will be determined
by how successful it is in helping to manage
international crises—typically the role of great powers
and, since 1945, the international community’s
expectation of the United States. Should Asia replicate
Europe’s 19th- and early 20th-century past, the United
States will be called upon to be a balancer, ensuring
regional stability. In contrast, the fall of the dollar
as the global reserve currency and substitution by
another or a basket of currencies would be one of the
sharpest indications of a loss of US global economic
position, strongly undermining Washington’s political
influence too.
The replacement of the United States by another global
power and erection of a new international order seems
the least likely outcome in this time period. No other
power would be likely to achieve the same panoply
of power in this time frame under any plausible
scenario. The emerging powers are eager to take their
place at the top table of key multilateral institutions
such as UN, IMF, and World Bank, but they do not
espouse any competing vision. Although ambivalent
and even resentful of the US-led international order,
they have benefited from it and are more interested
in continuing their economic development and
political consolidation than contesting US leadership.
In addition, the emerging powers are not a bloc;
thus they do not have any unitary alternative vision.
Their perspectives—even China’s—are more keyed
to shaping regional structures. A collapse or sudden
retreat of US power would most likely result in an
extended period of global anarchy.
ALTERNATIVE WORLDS
The present recalls past transition points—such as
1815, 1919, 1945, and 1989—when the path forward
was not clear-cut and the world faced the possibility
of different global futures. We have more than enough
information to suggest that however rapid change
has been over the past couple decades, the rate of
change will accelerate in the future. Accordingly, we
have created four scenarios that represent distinct
pathways for the world out to 2030: Stalled Engines,
Fusion, Gini Out-of-the-Bottle, and Nonstate World.
As in previous volumes, we have fictionalized the
scenario narratives to encourage all of us to think
more creatively about the future. We have intentionally
built in discontinuities, which will have a huge impact
in inflecting otherwise straight linear projections of
known trends. We hope that a better understanding of
the dynamics, potential inflection points, and possible
surprises will better equip decisionmakers to avoid
the traps and enhance possible opportunities for
positive developments.
Stalled Engines
Stalled Engines—a scenario in which the risk of
interstate conflict rise owing to a new “great game” in
Asia—was chosen as one of the book-ends, illustrating
the most plausible “worst case.” Arguably, darker
scenarios are imaginable, including a complete
breakdown and reversal of globalization due
potentially to a large scale conflict on the order of a
World War I or World War II, but such outcomes do
not seem probable. Major powers might be drawn
into conflict, but we do not see any such tensions or
bilateral conflict igniting a full-scale conflagration.
More likely, peripheral powers would step in to try

--- Sayfa 18 ---
xiii
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds
to stop a conflict. Indeed, as we have stressed, major
powers are conscious of the likely economic and
political damage to engaging in any major conflict.
Moreover, unlike in the interwar period, completely
undoing economic interdependence or globalization
would seem to be harder in this more advanced
technological age with ubiquitous connections.
Stalled Engines is nevertheless a bleak future. Drivers
behind such an outcome would be a US and Europe
that turn inward, no longer interested in sustaining
their global leadership. Under this scenario, the
euro zone unravels quickly, causing Europe to be
mired in recession. The US energy revolution fails
to materialize, dimming prospects for an economic
recovery. In the modeling which McKinsey Company
did for us for this scenario, global economic growth
falters and all players do relatively poorly.
Fusion
Fusion is the other book end, describing what we
see as the most plausible “best case.” This is a world
in which the specter of a spreading conflict in South
Asia triggers efforts by the US, Europe, and China to
intervene and impose a ceasefire. China, the US, and
Europe find other issues to collaborate on, leading
to a major positive change in their bilateral relations,
and more broadly leading to worldwide cooperation
to deal with global challenges. This scenario relies
on political leadership, with each side overruling
its more cautious domestic constituencies to forge a
partnership. Over time, trust is also built up as China
begins a process of political reform, bolstered by the
increasing role it is playing in the international system.
With the growing collaboration among the major
powers, global multilateral institutions are reformed
and made more inclusive.
In this scenario, all boats rise substantially. Emerging
economies continue to grow faster, but GDP growth
in advanced economies also picks up. The global
economy nearly doubles in real terms by 2030 to
$132 trillion in today’s dollars. The American Dream
returns with per capita incomes rising $10,000 in
ten years. Chinese per capita income also expands
rapidly, ensuring that China avoids the middle-income
trap. Technological innovation—rooted in expanded
exchanges and joint international efforts—is critical
to the world staying ahead of the rising financial and
resource constraints that would accompany a rapid
boost in prosperity.
Gini Out-of-the-Bottlea
This is a world of extremes. Within many countries,
inequalities dominate—leading to increasing political
and social tensions. Between countries, there are
clear-cut winners and losers. For example, countries in
the euro zone core which are globally competitive do
well, while others on the periphery are forced to leave
the EU. The EU single market barely functions. The
US remains the preeminent power as it gains energy
independence. Without completely disengaging, the
US no longer tries to play “global policeman” on every
security threat. Many of the energy producers suffer
from declining energy prices, failing to diversify their
economies in time, and are threatened by internal
conflicts. Cities in China’s coastal zone continue to
thrive, but inequalities increase and split the Party.
Social discontent spikes as middle-class expectations
are not met except for the very “well-connected.”
The central government in Beijing, which has
a difficult time governing, falls back on stirring
nationalistic fervor.
In this scenario, economic performance in emerging
and advanced economies leads to non-stellar global
growth, far below that in our Fusion scenario, but
not as bad as in Stalled Engines. The lack of societal
cohesion domestically is mirrored at the international
level. Major powers are at odds; the potential for
conflicts rises. More countries fail, fueled in part by the
dearth of international cooperation on assistance and
development. In sum, the world is reasonably wealthy,
but it is less secure as the dark side of globalization
poses an increasing challenge in domestic and
international politics.
a  The “Gini” in this scenario title refers to the Gini Coefficient, which is a
recognized statistical measurement of inequality of income.

--- Sayfa 19 ---
xiv
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds
Nonstate World
In this world, nonstate actors—nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs), multinational businesses,
academic institutions, and wealthy individuals—as well
as subnational units (megacities, for example), flourish
and take the lead in confronting global challenges. An
increasing global public opinion consensus among
elites and many of the growing middle classes on
major global challenges—poverty, the environment,
anti-corruption, rule-of-law, and peace—form the base
of their support. The nation-state does not disappear,
but countries increasingly organize and orchestrate
“hybrid” coalitions of state and nonstate actors which
shift depending on the issue.
Authoritarian regimes find it hardest to operate in
this world, preoccupied with asserting political
primacy at home and respect in an increasingly “fully
democratized” world. Even democratic countries,
which are wedded to the notion of sovereignty and
independence, find it difficult to operate successfully
in this complex and diverse world. Smaller, more agile
countries in which elites are also more integrated
are apt to do better than larger countries that lack
social or political cohesion. Formal governance
institutions that do not adapt to the more diverse
and widespread distribution of power are also less
likely to be successful. Multinational businesses, IT
communications firms, international scientists, NGOs,
and others that are used to cooperating across borders
and as part of networks thrive in this hyper-globalized
world where expertise, influence, and agility count for
more than “weight” or “position.”
This is nevertheless a “patchwork” and very uneven
world. Some global problems get solved because
networks manage to coalesce, and some cooperation
occurs across state and nonstate divides. In other
cases, nonstate actors might try to deal with a
challenge, but they are stymied because of opposition
from major powers. Security threats pose an increasing
challenge: access to lethal and disruptive technologies
expands, enabling individuals and small groups to
perpetuate violence and disruption on a large scale.
Economically, global growth does slightly better
than in the Gini Out-of-the-Bottle scenario because
more cooperation occurs on major global challenges
in this world. The world is also more stable and
socially cohesive.

--- Sayfa 20 ---
xv
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds
Table of Contents
Introduction
1
Megatrends
6
individual empowerment
8
poverty reduction
8
an expanding global middle class
8
Education and the gender gap
10
role of communications technologies
11
improving health
11
A MORE CONFLICTED IDEOLOGICAL
LANDSCAPE
12
Diffusion of Power
15
THE RISE AND FALL OF COUNTRIES:
NOT THE SAME OLD STORY
17
THE LIMITS OF HARD POWER IN THE
WORLD OF 2030
18
demographic patterns
20
widespread aging
20
shrinking number of youthful
countries
22
a new age of migration
23
the world as urban
26
Growing Food, water,
and Energy Nexus
30
food, water, and climate
30
a brighter energy outlook
34
game-changers
38
The Crisis-Prone
Global Economy
40
The Plight of the West
40
Crunch Time Too for
the Emerging Powers
43
A Multipolar Global Economy:
Inherently More Fragile?
46
The Governance Gap
48
Governance Starts at Home:
risks and opportunities
48
INCREASED FOCUS ON EQUALITY
AND OPENNESS
53
NEW GOVERNMENTAL FORMS
54
A New Regional Order?
55
Global Multilateral Cooperation
55
The Potential for
Increased Conflict
59
INTRASTATE CONFLICT: CONTINUED
DECLINE
59
Interstate Conflict: chances rising
61
Wider scope of
regional instability
70
The Middle East: At a Tipping Point
70
south asia: shocks on the horizon
75
east asia: multiple strategic futures
76
europe: transforming itself
78
sub-saharan africa: turning
a corner by 2030?
79

--- Sayfa 21 ---
xvi
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds
Latin America: More Prosperous but
Inherently Fragile
81
The impact of
new Technologies
83
information technologies
83
AUTOMATION AND MANUFACTURING
TECHNOLOGIES
87
Resource Technologies
90
health technologies
95
The role of the
United States
98
Steady US Role
98
Multiple Potential Scenarios for
the United States’ Global Role
101
alternative worlds
107
stalled Engines
110
FUSION
116
gini-out-of-the-bottle
122
Nonstate world
128
acknowledgements
134
GT2030 blog references
137

--- Sayfa 22 ---
1
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds
“It was the best of times, it was the worst of times . . . it
was the spring of hope, it was the winter of despair . . . we
were all going direct to Heaven, we were all going direct
the other way . . . ”
Charles Dickens, A Tale of Two Cities
i n t r o d u c t i o n
The backdrop for A Tale of Two Cities was the French Revolution and
dawn of the Industrial Age. We are living through a similar transformative
period in which the breadth and scope of possible developments—both
good and bad—are equal to if not greater than the aftermath of the
political and economic revolutions of the late 18th century.

--- Sayfa 23 ---
2
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds
 . . . but it is not totally back to the future.
The world has been transformed in other ways. By
2030, majorities in most countries will be middle-class,
not poor, which has been the condition of most people
throughout human history.
 . . . and the pace of technological change will
accelerate.
Absorption of new technologies by Americans has
become much more rapid. The absorption rate in
developing states is also quickening, allowing these
states to leapfrog stages of development that advanced
economies had to pass through.
Global population in urban areas is expanding
quickly . . .
Every year, 65 million people are added to the world’s
urban population, equivalent to adding seven cities the
size of Chicago or five the size of London annually.
The world is transforming at an unprecedented rate . . .
As the graph below shows, it took Britain 155 years
to double GDP per capita, with about 9 million people
in 1870 . . . The US and Germany took between 30
and 60 years with a few tens of million people . . . but
India and China are doing this at a scale and pace
not seen before: 100 times the people than Britain and
in one tenth the time. By 2030 Asia will be well on its
way to returning to being the world’s powerhouse, just
as it was before 1500.
Average increase in percentage point share of global GDP, per decade
Share of global middle-class consumption, 2000-2050 (percent)
Percent urban population
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
India,
2010-30
China,
2000-20
Japan,
1950-80
US,
1900-50
UK,
1820-70
0
20
40
60
80
2030
2010
1950
100
2000
2010
2020
2030
2040
2050
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Others
EU
US
Japan
Other Asia
India
China
1870
2000
Electricity 1873
46
TElephone 1876
35
radio 1897
31
Color
TeleVison 1951
18
mobile phone
1983
13
world wide
web 1991
7
years necessary for an
invention to be used by
25 percent of the US
population

--- Sayfa 24 ---
3
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds
Introduction
This report is intended to stimulate thinking about
this rapid, vast array of geopolitical, economic,
and technological changes transforming our world
today and their potential trajectories over the next
15-20 years.
We begin by identifying what we see as the most
important megatrends of our transforming world—
individual empowerment, the diffusion of power to
multifaceted networks and from West to East and
South, demographic patterns highlighted by aging
populations and exploding middle classes, and natural
resource challenges. These megatrends are knowable.
By themselves they point to a transformed world, but
the world could transform itself in radically different
ways. We are heading into uncharted waters.
We contend that the megatrends are interacting
with six variables or game-changers that will
determine what kind of transformed world we will
inhabit in 2030. These game-changers—questions
about the global economy, national and global
governance, the nature of conflict, regional spillover,
advancing technologies, and the United States’ role
in the international arena—are the raw elements
that could sow the seeds of global disruption or
incredible advances.
Based on what we know about the megatrends, and
by positing the possible interactions between the
megatrends and the game-changers, we envision four
potential worlds. At one end of the spectrum is a
Stalled Engines world in which the risks of interstate
conflict increase and the US retrenches. At the other
extreme is a newly rebalanced and Fused world in
which social, economic, technological, and political
progress is widespread. In the middle are two other
possibilities: a Gini-Out-of-the-Bottle world in which
inequalities dominate or a Nonstate World in which
nonstate actors flourish both for good and ill.
None of these outcomes is inevitable. The future
world order will be shaped by human agency as
much as unfolding trends and unanticipated events.
In describing potential futures, we identify inflection
points as well as opportunities and risks to help
readers think about strategies for influencing the
world’s trajectory.
“These game-changers . . . are the raw
elements that could sow the seeds of
global disruption or incredible advances.”
In looking out 15-20 years, we have sought not to
be overly influenced by what has been in the West,
at least, a gloomy outlook resulting from the 2008
financial crisis. Rather, we have taken a broad view
of global developments at this historical juncture and
of the forces that are working to sway them in one
direction or another.
As with the NIC’s previous Global Trends reports,
we do not seek to predict the future—an impossible
feat—but instead provide a framework for thinking
about potential outcomes, their implications, and
opportunities to influence the course of events.

--- Sayfa 25 ---
4
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds
International Reactions to
Global Trends 2030
We met with experts in nearly 20 countries on
five continents to solicit reactions to the initial
draft of Global Trends 2030. Governmental and
nongovernmental institutions in several of the
countries we visited also have undertaken similar
studies. Thus we took the opportunity to gain
a better understanding of how others view the
future. Obviously, it would be impossible to capture
all the reactions to our very wide-ranging draft
covering a large number of topics. However, a
number of common themes surfaced from the
numerous discussions:
Too Much Optimism? To many, the draft appeared
too optimistic about likely progress from trends
like individual empowerment and technological
advances. One critic stated, “I am puzzled about
your optimistic view on the Internet because on
one side the Internet could carry irrational things,
not only ideology but crazy cults.” One participant
said that, “we tend to think that when people have
access to more goods and services, they will calm
down, but when they have more they have rising
expectations. New generations do not have the
patience to work for 20-30 years to get rich so they
will be destructive.”
“The World Looks More Like Hobbes than Kant:”
Many felt that the initial draft did not adequately
address identity politics. One reviewer opined,
“individual power could be balanced by collective
empowerment.” Another said, “The growing rise
of the politics of identity . . . leads to fragmentation
including within states. This does not lead to
convergence of values because the politics of
identity is to differ with others rather than find
common ground.” Another thought that, “religious
obscurantism, sectarianism and strife (could) throw
entire regions to the past.” Commenting on the
section in the work about social media expanding
the roles of Muslim women, one participant stated,
“Muslim women who learn to read will read the
Koran, not the Bill of Rights.”
Arab Spring. Some Chinese analysts saw the
Arab Spring “as the beginning of a very chaotic
period and disorder, including unintended
consequences.” For Russian analysts, the emerging
strategic environment was not just multipolar but
also “multi-civilization.” Our Russian interlocutors
expressed concern about the potential for
increased global instability created by extremists
in the “Muslim civilization.” Our UAE interlocutors
thought there was no such thing as a “moderate
jihadist,” and some doubted whether the Arab
uprisings would lead to democracy—even over the
longer term.
Consumerism Run Amok? Most everyone agreed
that the rising middle classes were a key megatrend
with momentous implications. However, some
participants, such as those from Brazil, cited the
likely environmental stresses from growing resource
consumption by the middle classes. One saw an
“ecological disaster” happening simultaneously with
the rise of the middle classes.
China. China was a key theme in all the discussions,
as much outside China as inside. Some thought the
initial text emphasized the country too much, but
others wanted an even more fulsome treatment,
seeing China as it own game-changer. For some
Chinese analysts, “it is the best of times and the
worst of times in China. Corruption is at its worst. In
2030, the situation will be better including in political
reform.” African analysts said that “as Africans, we
need to decide what we want from China and be
strategic, not leave it to them to set the rules of
engagement.” Indian analysts worried about their
own position as the economic and technological gap
with China widens. Most agreed with the point made
in the text that the US-China relationship is perhaps
the most important bilateral tie shaping the future.

--- Sayfa 26 ---
5
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds
Future of Europe. More than in reviews of previous
Global Trends works, Europe was a lively topic for
discussion. The Russians saw an even greater need
for partnership with Europe and stronger US-Russian
ties to ward off growing instability. Many European
interlocutors saw “fragmentation” as summing up
Europe’s future, while some European businessmen
stressed the likelihood of fiscal integration and the
continued importance of transatlantic economic
ties to the global economy. Outside of Europe,
participants raised the possibility of decline with
many in Africa worrying that Europe’s decline would
lead to too much dependence on China and other
emerging powers.
Ambivalence Toward the US. Many saw the
need for a strong power like US to uphold the
international system: according to some of our
Russian interlocutors, “the US never will stop being
a world superpower guaranteeing the world order—
there will not be isolationism . . . “Nevertheless,
some disputed whether the US had been a good
security provider.“ The US has been the instigator of
conflicts like Iraq, and the US has been involved in
more wars since World War II than anyone else.”
The Governance Gap. The need for better
leadership and governance was a universal theme,
with most analysts bemoaning the lack of it in their
regions. “The state is becoming bigger everywhere
but less capable and powerful . . . “ Some Chinese
saw major disruptions: “if there is no global
governance in 2030, we will still need to satisfy
our economy with resources. As there is no global
governance mechanism, it could be a crisis.”
Increasing Risk of Conflicts. Participants worried
that the number of conflicts could increase in the
future. Some Russian analysts noted that future
conflict will be characterized by new areas of
military potential, including cyberweapons, the
militarization of space, a precision global strike
capability, and non-nuclear anti-ballistic missile
defenses. Many anticipated further nuclear
proliferation and questioned whether stable
multipolar nuclear deterrence would be achieved.
Indian analysts talked about the need to think about
a “new extended commons” which would include
cyberspace, outer space, and maritime space. Our
African interlocutors particularly worried about
climate change creating new social and economic
tensions that could flare into civil conflict.
Continuity as well as Change in the International
System. Most saw momentous, historic changes
underway, sharing our view that the rapid change
makes it difficult to forecast the future of the
international system in 2030. One expert succinctly
commented, “old is gone, new is not here yet.”
Many worried about a “chaotic situation in the future
for the international system which would no longer
be rules-based but interests-based. However, a
number saw some continuity. As one said, “We
think the system of international relations will be
more polycentric, although with the same hierarchy
of powers.” Our Chinese interlocutors stressed
that it would take decades for China to catch up to
the US: China will not be the United States’ “peer
competitor” in 2030. Most agreed that nonstate
actors were gaining power, but some disputed
whether they will ever come close to wielding as
much power as governments.

--- Sayfa 27 ---
CHAPTER 1
Megatrends

--- Sayfa 28 ---
Four overarching megatrends will shape the world in 2030:
• Individual Empowerment.
• The Diffusion of Power.
• Demographic Patterns.
• The Growing Nexus among Food, Water, and Energy in
combination with climate change.
These trends exist today, but during the next 15-20 years they will
deepen and become more intertwined, producing a qualitatively
different world. For example, the hundreds of millions of entrants
into the middle classes throughout all regions of the world create the
possibility of a global “citizenry” with a positive effect on the global
economy and world politics. Equally, absent better management
and technologies, growing resource constraints could limit further
development, causing the world to stall its engines.
Underpinning the megatrends are tectonic shifts—critical changes to
key features of our global environment that will affect how the world
“works.” (See table on page v.)

--- Sayfa 29 ---
8
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | MEGATRENDS
for a long time, but the rate has been declining with
population growth. Significant numbers of people have
been moving from well below the poverty threshold
to relatively closer to it due to widespread economic
development. Absent a global recession, the number
of those living in extreme poverty is poised to decline
as incomes continue to rise in most parts of the world.
The number could drop by about 50 percent between
2010 and 2030, according to some models.
Numerical declines of those living in extreme
poverty in East Asia, notably China, have already
been substantial, and the number is expected to drop
further owing to rapid economic growth. The numbers
are also expected to drop rapidly in South Asia and
the Middle East as well as North Africa. In Sub-Saharan
Africa, however, the average person living in extreme
poverty will remain about 10 percent below the
extreme poverty threshold during the next 15-20 years.
“ . . . we see the potential for greater
individual initiative as key to solving the
mounting global challenges during the
next 15-20 years.”
Under most scenarios—except the most dire—
significant strides in reducing extreme poverty will be
achieved by 2030. However, if a long global recession
occurred, the 50 percent reduction of those living
in extreme poverty would be more than halved: as
many as 300 million more people would remain in
extreme poverty and experience malnutrition. Under
low-growth scenarios, smaller reductions in the
extreme poverty rate would occur and fewer new
entrants would join the global middle class.
AN EXPANDING GLOBAL MIDDLE CLASS
Middle classes most everywhere in the developing
world are poised to expand substantially in terms
of both absolute numbers and the percentage of the
population that can claim middle-class status during
the next 15-20 years. Even the more conservative
models see a rise in the global total of those living
in the middle class from the current 1 billion or
MEGATREND 1
individual
empowerment
Individual empowerment is perhaps the most
important megatrend because it is both a cause and
effect of most other trends including the expanding
global economy, rapid growth of the developing
countries, and widespread exploitation of new
communications and manufacturing technologies.
On the one hand, we see the potential for greater
individual initiative as key to solving the mounting
global challenges during the next 15-20 years. On the
other hand, in a tectonic shift, individuals and small
groups will have greater access to lethal and disruptive
technologies (particularly precision-strike capabilities,
cyber instruments, and bioterror weaponry), enabling
them to perpetrate large-scale violence—a capability
formerly the monopoly of states. (See pages 67-70 for
further discussion.)
Individual empowerment will accelerate substantially
owing to poverty reduction and a huge growth of the
global middle class, greater educational attainment,
and better health care. The growth of the middle class
constitutes a tectonic shift: for the first time, a majority
of the world’s population will not be impoverished,
and the middle classes will be the most important
social and economic sector in the vast majority of
countries around the world. The ability of individuals
to affect governance will be enabled by many existing
and yet-to-be-developed communications technologies.
Despite the greater empowerment of individuals, many
will not feel secure owing to intensified competition
for jobs.
POVERTY REDUCTION
Today about 1 billion people globally are living in
extreme poverty, earning less than $1.25 a day,a and 1
billion are undernourished. The number of those living
in extreme poverty globally has been relatively stable
a  “Extreme poverty” is defined as earning less than $1 per day at
purchasing power parity (PPP); most recently rebased to $1.25 per day.

--- Sayfa 30 ---
9
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | MEGATRENDS
middle class will be faster than elsewhere in the
rapidly developing world, but the base is now very low.
Establishing the threshold for determining when
someone is middle class versus climbing out of poverty
is difficult, particularly because the calculations rely
on the use of purchasing power parity. Most new
members of the middle class in 2030 will be at the
lower end of the spectrum. Their per capita incomes
will be still rated as “poor” by Western standards even
though they will have begun to acquire the trappings
of middle-class status. Growth in the number of those
living in the top half of the range of this new middle
class—which is likely to be more in line with Western
middle-class standards—will be substantial, rising
from 330 million in 2010 to 679 million in 2030. Much
of the future global leadership is likely to come from
this segment.
The rapid growth of the middle class has important
implications. Demand for consumer goods, including
cars, rises sharply with the growth of the middle class.
The Goldman Sachs study indicated that resource
constraints are going to be “arguably tighter than they
so to over 2 billion people.a Others see even more
substantial rises with, for example, the global middle
class reaching 3 billion people by 2030.b All the
analyses we reviewed suggest that the most rapid
growth of the middle class will occur in Asia, with
India somewhat ahead of China over the long term.
According to the Asian Development Bank, if China
“achieves the new plan target of increasing household
expenditures at least as rapidly as GDP, the size of
its middle class will explode” with “75 percent of
China’s population enjoying middle-class standards
and $2/day poverty will be substantially wiped out.”
Goldman Sachs in its study of the global middle class
underlined that even not counting China and India,
“new [middle class] entrants would still be larger than
the world has seen for many decades.” Multiple studies
project that the rate of growth in the size of Africa’s
a  There are multiple applicable definitions of what constitutes
membership in the middle class. The International Futures model that we
use in this report focuses on per capita consumption expenditures rather
than GDP per capita. In that model, middle-class membership is defined
as per capita household expenditures of $10-50 per day at PPP. Goldman
Sachs used a comparable GDP per capita of $6,000-30,000 per year, which
yields a similar estimate of 1.2 billion middle-class people in the world in
2010. Kharas (OECD study) calculated the number of those in the middle
class at 1.85 billion in 2009; Ravallion (World Bank) calculated that 2.64
billion people were in the middle class in 2005.
b  The source for this estimate is a 2008 Goldman Sachs study.
Shares of Global middle-class consumption, 2000-2050
Source: OECD.
Others
European Union
United States
Japan
Other Asia
India
China
100
2000
2010
2020
2030
2040
2050
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Percent

--- Sayfa 31 ---
10
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | MEGATRENDS
and be dwarfed by the wave of new middle-class
consumers (see graphic on page 10) in the developing
world. Slower economic growth among many OECD
countries will further ingrain the perception of a
struggling Western middle class that also faces greater
competition from an increasingly global employment
market, including competition for jobs requiring higher
skills. Some estimates, for example, see middle-class
consumption in North America and Europe only rising
by 0.6 percent a year over the next couple of decades.
In contrast, spending by middle-class Asian consumers
could rise 9 percent a year through 2030, according to
Asian Development Bank estimates.
Education and the gender gap
The educational sector is likely to be both the motor
and beneficiary of expanding middle classes. The
economic status of individuals and countries will
greatly depend on their levels of education. The
average years of completed formal education in
the Middle East and North Africa are likely to rise
from about 7.1 to more than 8.7 years. Moreover,
the level for women in that region could rise from
5.0 to 7.0 years. Women throughout much of the
world are steadily narrowing the gap with men in
years of formal education and have moved ahead in
enrollment and completion rates in upper-middle and
higher-income countries.
The closing of the gender gap on educational
attainment (and health outcomes as well) during the
past couple decades has had limited effect, however,
on narrowing differences on economic participation
and political empowerment. Increased entry and
retention of women in the workplace will be a
key driver of success for many countries, boosting
economic productivity and mitigating the impacts
of aging. Better governance could also be a spinoff
of greater political involvement of women, as some
studies suggest participation of women in parliament
or senior government positions correlates stronger
with lower corruption.a
a   For more on the role of women as agents of change in the economic
and political spheres, see previous Global Trends works—Global Trends
2020: Mapping the Global Future, pp 38-39 and Global Trends 2025: A
Transformed World, pp 16-17.
were in late 19th-century Europe and the US” when
the middle classes also made enormous gains.
More generally, values shift and demand for
sociopolitical change rises as more individuals move
up into the middle class. Historically, the rise of middle
classes has led to populism and dictatorships as well as
pressures for greater democracy. The value of $12,000
GDP per capita income is sometimes considered to be
the level above which democracies do not revert to
authoritarian systems.
With the expansion of the middle class, income
inequalities—which have been a striking characteristic
of the rising developing states—may begin to lessen
in the developing world. Even if the Gini coefficients,
which are used to measure inequalities, decline in
many developing countries, they are still unlikely
to approach the level of many current European
countries like Germany and Finland where inequality
is relatively low.
“All the analyses we reviewed suggest that
the most rapid growth of the middle class
will occur in Asia, with India somewhat
ahead of China.”
That said, a perception of great inequality will remain,
particularly between urban- and rural-dwellers,
motivating a growing number of rural-dwellers to
migrate to the cities to seek economic opportunities.
Their chances of becoming richer will be substantially
greater in cities, but the increasing migration to urban
areas will mean at least an initial expansion in the
slums and the specter of poverty. If new middle-class
entrants find it difficult to cling to their new status
and are pulled back toward impoverishment, they will
pressure governments for change. Rising expectations
that are frustrated have historically been a powerful
driver of political turmoil.
The increase in the overall numbers of the middle
class worldwide disguises growing pressures on the
middle class in Western economies. The share of global
middle-class consumers from the US will decline

--- Sayfa 32 ---
11
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | MEGATRENDS
of the impact of such technologies on governance.)
The spread of smartphones in Africa during the past
few years—65 percent of the continent’s population
now has access to them—has been particularly
impressive. Now millions of Africans are connected to
the Internet and the outside world, and they are using
such technologies to mitigate deep-seated problems
such as waterborne illness, which have slowed
development. For example, an innovative program in
western Kenya to distribute water filters and stop the
use of contaminated water involved using smartphones
to monitor changes in behavior.
IMPROVING HEALTH
By 2030 we expect to see continued progress on
health—including extending the quality of life for
those aging (see discussion on pages 98-102). Even
in the face of the HIV/AIDS epidemic, the global
disease burden has been shifting rapidly for several
According to the World Economic Forum’s Global
Gender Gap Index,a only 60 percent of the economic
gap and only 20 percent of the political one have been
closed globally in 2012. No country has completely
closed the economic participation or the political
empowerment gap, but the Nordic countries have
come closest to gender equality. Their cases are
instructive of the time and effort involved in achieving
parity. Most Nordic countries enfranchised women
relatively “early” (in the early 20th century), and many
political parties introduced voluntary gender quotas
in the 1970s. The quotas have led to a high number of
women parliamentarians and political leaders in those
societies. The Nordic countries also have promoted
high female employment participation rates through
generous childcare and maternity policies, which has
contributed to higher birth rates.
Looking ahead to 2030 using the International Futures
model suggests that pace of change will continue to
be slow in all regions. The Middle East, South Asia,
and Sub-Saharan, which start from a relatively low
base of economic and political gender parity, will
continue to lag other regions. The fastest pace in
closing the gender gap is likely to be in East Asia and
Latin America. The gap almost certainly will remain
significantly narrower in high-income countries in
North America and Europe in 2030, where the gap is
already smaller than elsewhere.
ROLE OF COMMUNICATIONS
TECHNOLOGIES
Emerging technologies such as second-generation
wireless communications (smartphones) are also
likely to accelerate the empowerment of individuals,
introducing new capabilities to the developing
world in particular. The second wave of wireless
communications engenders a reduced need for
developing countries to invest in and build expansive,
costly communications infrastructures. Such
technologies will reduce the urban-rural split that
characterized first-wave technologies, especially in
developing countries. (See pages 55-56 for discussion
a  World Economic Forum Gender Gap Report 2012 is available at
http://ww3.weforum.org/docs/WEF GenderGAP Report 2012.pdf.
How Social Media Are Accelerating the
Process of Individual Empowerment
Muslim women have historically lagged in
educational skills and integration into the
market economy. More recently, they have
become prolific users and consumers of
social media. Although some data points to a
connection between online participation and
radicalization of Muslim women, indications
of female empowerment and solidarity are
far more plentiful. Muslim women are using
online communities to reach beyond their
everyday social networks into “safe spaces”
to discuss such issues as women’s rights,
gender equity, and the role of women within
Islamic law. Participation in online and social
media platforms hinges on income, literacy,
and access. As these expand by 2030, a
growing number of Muslim women are likely to
participate in online forums, potentially affecting
their societies and governance.

--- Sayfa 33 ---
12
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | MEGATRENDS
decades from communicablea to noncommunicable
diseases. Absent a virulent pandemic (see box on page
14), global deaths from all communicable diseases—
including AIDS, diarrhea, malaria, and respiratory
infections—are projected to decline by nearly 30
percent by 2030, according to our modeling and other
studies. AIDS appears to have hit its global peak—
around 2 million deaths per year—in 2004. Great
strides are being made toward wiping out malaria,
but past periods of progress have sometimes given
way in the face of donor fatigue and growing disease
resistance to treatment. Nevertheless, in Sub-Saharan
Africa, where the provision of health-care services has
traditionally been weak, we believe the declining total
deaths from communicable diseases and the increasing
number from noncommunicable causes (such as from
heart disease) will cross over in about 2030.
“By 2030 we expect to see continued
progress on health—including extending
the quality of life for those aging.”
Elsewhere—even in other parts of the developing
world—deaths from “chronic” maladies such as
cardiovascular disease, cancer, and diabetes have been
preponderant for some time, and the ongoing progress
globally against noncommunicable or chronic diseases
has resulted in longer life expectancy. With the
dramatic reduction of infant and child mortality, due to
the continued success against communicable diseases
and maternal and perinatal diseases, life expectancy
in the developing world almost certainly will improve.
However, a significant gap in life expectancy will most
likely remain between rich and poor countries.
A MORE CONFLICTED IDEOLOGICAL
LANDSCAPE
A world of surging middle classes, varying economic
potentials, and more diffuse power will also exhibit
an increasingly diverse ideological landscape. The
economics of globalization have spread the West’s
a  Communicable diseases include maternal and perinatal conditions in
addition to major communicable diseases such as AIDS, diarrhea, malaria,
and respiratory diseases.
ideas of scientific reason, individualism, secular
government, and primacy of law to societies seeking
the West’s material progress but reluctant to sacrifice
their cultural identites and political traditions.
Managing the intensifying interaction of traditional
political, religious, and cultural norms with the
ideologies of the globalizing West will be a core
challenge for many rapidly developing societies,
affecting prospects for global and domestic governance
and economic performance through 2030.
Amid this fluid ideological landscape, the West’s
conception of secular modernity will not necessarily
provide the dominant underlying values of the
international system. The persistence, if not growth
and deepening, of religious identity, growing
environmental concerns, and resource constraints,
and the empowerment of individuals through
new communications technologies are already
providing alternative narratives for global politics.
As non-Western societies continue their economic
transformation, the prospect of a retrenchment along
religious, ethnic, cultural, and nationalistic lines could
fuel dysfunction and fragmentation within societies.
Alternatively, the intersection of Western ideas
with emerging states could generate—particularly
over time—new hybrid ideologies that facilitate
collaboration in an expanding number of areas, leading
to increased economic output and greater consensus
on global governance issues. The recent EU global
trends studyb using global survey data saw more
“convergence” than “divergence” in norms and values
as diverse peoples confront similar economic and
political challenges.
The role assigned to religion by the state and society
probably will be at the center of these ideological
debates within and across societies. Religion—
especially Islam—has strengthened as a key force
in global politics owing to global increases in
democratization and political freedoms that have
allowed religious voices to be heard as well as
advanced communications technologies and the
b  European Strategy and Policy Analysis System (ESPAS) Report on Global
Trends 2030, Institute for Security Studies, European Union, October,
2011.

--- Sayfa 34 ---
13
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | MEGATRENDS
Pandemics:
Unanswered Questions
Scientists are just beginning to recognize the
amount of “viral chatter” that is occurring
worldwide, discovering previously unknown
pathogens in humans that sporadically make the
jump from animals to humans. Examples include a
prion disease in cattle that jumped in the 1980s to
cause variant Creutzeldt-Jacob disease in humans,
a bat henipavirus that in 1999 became known as
Nipah Virus in humans, and a bat corona virus that
jumped to humans in 2002 to cause SARS. Human
and livestock population growth and encroachment
into jungles increases human exposure to these
previously rare crossovers. No one can predict
which pathogen will be the next to start spreading
to humans, or when or where such a development
will occur, but humans will continue to be vulnerable
to pandemics, most of which will probably originate
in animals.
An easily transmissible novel respiratory pathogen
that kills or incapacitates more than one percent
of its victims is among the most disruptive events
possible. Unlike other disruptive global events, such
an outbreak would result in a global pandemic that
directly causes suffering and death in every corner
of the world, probably in less than six months.
Unfortunately, this is not a hypothetical threat.
History is replete with examples of pathogens
sweeping through populations that lack preexisting
immunity, causing political and economic upheaval,
and determining the outcomes of wars and
civilizations. Examples include the Black Death
that killed a third of Europeans; measles and
smallpox in the Americas that may have killed
90 percent of the native population; and the
1918 influenza pandemic that decimated certain
populations, including sickening more than 15
percent of German forces in June 1918. The WHO
has described one such pandemic, an influenza
pandemic, as “the epidemiological equivalent of a
flash flood.” The WHO states, “[pandemics] have
started abruptly without warning, swept through
populations globally with ferocious velocity, and left
considerable damage in their wake.”
Novel pandemic pathogens that spread more
slowly but are just as deadly, if not more so,
such as HIV/AIDS, are just as likely to emerge by
2030. In fact, such a slow-moving pathogen with
pandemic potential may have already jumped into
humans somewhere, but the pathogen and disease
manifestations may not be recognized yet. This was
the case for HIV/AIDS, which entered the human
population more than a half century before it was
recognized and the pathogen identified.
New discoveries in the biological sciences hold
promise for more rapidly identifying pathogens and
developing targeted therapeutics and vaccines;
however, such advances may be inadequate to
keep up with the threat. Drug-resistant forms of
diseases previously considered conquered, such as
tuberculosis, gonorrhea, and Staphylococcus aureus
could become widespread, markedly increasing
health-care costs and returning large segments of
populations to the equivalent of the pre-antibiotic
era. Advances in genetic engineering by 2030 may
enable tens of thousands of individuals to synthesize
and release novel pathogens, compounding the
already formidable naturally occurring threat.

--- Sayfa 35 ---
14
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | MEGATRENDS
failure of governments to deliver services that
religious groups can provide. The ability of religious
organizations to define norms for governance in
religious terms and to mobilize followers on economic
and social justice issues during a period of global
economic upheaval is likely to raise the prominence
of religious ideas and beliefs in global politics. In this
new era, religious ideas, actors, and institutions are
likely to be increasingly influential among elites and
publics globally.
Nationalism is another force that is likely to intensify,
particularly in regions—such as East Asia—where
there are unresolved territorial disputes and countries’
fortunes may be rapidly changing. Moreover, many
developing and fragile states—such as in Sub-Saharan
Africa—face increasing strains from resource
constraints and climate change, pitting different
tribal and ethnic groups against one another and
accentuating the separation of various identities.
Ideology is likely to be particularly powerful and
socially destructive when the need for basic resources
exacerbates already existing tensions between tribal,
ethnic, religious, and national groups. Urbanization—
once expected to encourage secularization—is
contributing instead, in some settings, to increased
expressions of religious identity. Immigrants to cities—
mostly Muslims in Europe and Russia, for example—
are coalescing along religious lines. Urbanization
is driving demands for social services provided by
religious organizations—an opening that Islamic and
Christian activists have been effective in using to
bolster religious cohesion and leverage.

--- Sayfa 36 ---
15
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | MEGATRENDS
China’s GDP,c for example, is likely to be about 140
percent larger than Japan’s.
As the world’s largest economic power, China is
expected to remain ahead of India, but the gap could
begin to close by 2030. India’s rate of economic
growth is likely to rise while China’s slows. In 2030
India could be the rising economic powerhouse that
China is seen to be today. China’s current economic
growth rate—8 to 10 percent—will probably be a
distant memory by 2030.
The total size of the Chinese working-age population
will peak in 2016 and decline from 994 million
to about 961 million in 2030. In contrast, India’s
working-age population is unlikely to peak until
about 2050. Also of significance, India will most likely
continue to consolidate its power advantage relative to
Pakistan. India’s economy is already nearly eight times
as large as Pakistan’s; by 2030 that ratio could easily be
more than 16-to-1.
In Africa, Egypt, Ethiopia, and Nigeria have the
potential to approach or surpass South Africa in
overall national power, but the key will be better
governance to further economic growth and social
and human development. In Southeast Asia, Vietnam’s
regional power will grow, approaching by 2030,
Thailand. Vietnam benefits from a steady growth
in GDP per capita while Thailand has been subject
to erratic, drop-and-surge GDP per-capita-growth
patterns. In Latin America, the next 15 years probably
will confirm Brazil’s position as the “colossus of the
South,” increasing its position relative to Mexico and
Colombia—despite these countries’ overall good
growth prospects. In Europe, Germany is likely
to remain the leader of the other 26 EU countries
because of its economic growth prospects, but will
be challenged by an aging population. By 2030 Russia
faces a steep population drop—about 10 million
people—a greater decline than any other country
during that time frame. However, depending on its
economic growth rates and immigration, Russia could
retain its current global power share.
c  This estimate is based on the Market Exchange Rate.
Megatrend 2
Diffusion of power
The diffusion of power among countries and from
countries to informal networks will have a dramatic
impact by 2030, largely reversing the historic rise of
the West since 1750 and restoring Asia’s weight in the
global economy and world politics. In a tectonic shift,
by 2030, Asia will have surpassed North America and
Europe combined in terms of global power, based
upon GDP, population size, military spending, and
technological investment. China alone will probably
have the largest economy, surpassing that of the
United States a few years before 2030.a Meanwhile, the
economies of Europe, Japan, and Russia are likely to
continue their slow relative declines.
Just as important, the economies of other non-Western
states such as Colombia, Egypt, Indonesia, Iran, South
Africa, Mexico, Turkey, and others that are middle
tier today could rise by 2030. Individually most of
these countries will remain second-order players
because China and India are so large. However, as a
collective group, they will begin to surpass Europe,
Japan, and Russia in terms of global power by 2030.
Our modeling shows, for example, that this group of
rapidly developing middle-tier countries—the Goldman
Sachs “Next Eleven”b—will collectively overtake the
EU-27 in global power by 2030. When this second
tier is combined with the non-Western giants of
China and India, the shift of power from the West
to the emerging or non-Western world is even more
pronounced. The enormity of this shift in national
power is reflected in the number of regional power
transitions that will be ongoing by 2030—some of the
more dynamic will occur outside of Asia, where China
and India are already consolidating their regional
positions. In 2030
a  Modeling suggests that China will surpass the US in 2022 if GDP is
measured at purchasing power parity (PPP) and sometime near 2030
if GDP is measured at market exchange rates (MERs). Although MER-
based measures are important for trade and financial analysis, PPP-based
measures probably provide better insight into fundamental economic
strength.
b  Goldman Sachs’ Next Eleven consists of Bangladesh, Egypt, Indonesia,
Iran, Mexico, Nigeria, Pakistan, The Philippines, South Korea, Turkey, and
Vietnam.

--- Sayfa 37 ---
16
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | MEGATRENDS
The main discussion refers to a global power index, based upon GDP, population size, military spending,
and technology, which we have used in previous Global Trends works. Recently, we have contributed to
the development of a new global power index, which incorporates a broader array of elements relevant
to 21st-century power, including health, education, and governance. Using the new index, China’s and
India’s shares of global power increase, but at a slower pace than projected by the other index. Using
the earlier, four-pronged power index, China’s share of national power equals the US share in 2030; using
the new index, China’s share is 4-5 percentage points below the US share. Using the new, broader power
index, Europe (EU-27) ranks much closer to the US than in the previous index. Using either index, the
aggregate power of developing states overtakes that of all developed states, including the US, by 2030.
The share of global power held by the EU, Japan, and less so Russia decreases under both indices.
Aggregate Power of Developing States Set to Surpass US Power by 2030
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
2050
2045
2040
2035
2030
2025
2020
2015
2010
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
2050
2045
2040
2035
2030
2025
2020
2015
2010
0
5
10
15
20
25
2050
2045
2040
2035
2030
2025
2020
2015
2010
0
5
10
15
20
25
2050
2045
2040
2035
2030
2025
2020
2015
2010
Traditional, Four-Component Power Forecast
New Multi-Component Global Power Index Forecast
Traditional, Four-Component Power Forecast
Non-OECD
US
EU
EU
Japan
Japan
Russia
Russia
US
China
China
India
India
Non-OECD
OECD
OECD
New Multi-Component Global Power Index Forecast
Index
Index
Index
Index
By 2030, no matter the power index, developing states (OECD) overtake developed states (non-OECD).

--- Sayfa 38 ---
17
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | MEGATRENDS
Our modeling also indicates that many of the currently
vulnerable or fragile states—such as Afghanistan,
Democratic Republic of Congo, and Somalia—
are likely to remain highly vulnerable during the
next 15-20 years. These countries will most likely
continue to have weak governance, security, and
economic performance while facing demographic and
environmental challenges. (See chart on page 19.)
THE RISE AND FALL OF COUNTRIES: NOT
THE SAME OLD STORY
The rapid change of various countries’ fortunes—as
much as the changes themselves—will put stresses
both on countries’ conduct with one another and
internally as expectations about the position of one’s
country in the overall international setup are realized
or dashed. A number of countries will pass through
inflection points in the period out to 2030: their global
power will either level off or the rate of increase of
their global power will slow. Not only China and
the United States, but also Europe, Japan, and Russia
may be passing through inflection points, which will
translate into added stress on the international system.
Selected countries punching above their weight in 2010
a Relative diplomatic power is the percentage of global diplomatic power
held by each country. It is calculated by weighted country memberships
in inter-governmental organization, the number of embassies that a
country has in other countries and the number of treaties held by the UN
seecretariat that a country has signed and ratified.
b Relative material power relates to the percentage of total global material
held by each country. It is calculated from GDP, population size, military
spending and technology.
Source: International Futures Model, University of Denver.
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
RELATIVE MATERIAL POWERb
RELATIVE DIPLOMATIC POWERa
United States
France
India
China
Denmark
Canada
Chile
Japan
South Korea
Spain
Italy
Belgium
Netherlands
Germany
United Kingdom
Percent

--- Sayfa 39 ---
18
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | MEGATRENDS
“Not only China and the United States, but
also Europe, Japan, and Russia may be
passing through major inflection points,
which will translate into added stress on
the international system.”
For example, although China’s global power will
continue increasing, the rate of increase will slow.
In the power cycle model developed by academics,a
when the rate of a country’s increasing power starts
to slow or level off, countries are likely to become
fearful and more assertive. Historically, the rate of
change has been far slower for transitions in the power
structure. China’s and India’s current economic rises,
for example, dwarf all the previous ones of Britain
(19th century) and the US and Japan (20th century).b
Previously, only one or two countries have been rising
at a time, shaking the international system rather than
reordering it wholesale in a compressed time frame.
THE LIMITS OF HARD POWERc IN THE
WORLD OF 2030
The shift in national power is only half the story
and may be overshadowed by an even more
fundamental shift in the nature of power. By 2030,
no country—whether the US, China, or any other
large country—will be a hegemonic power. Enabled
by communications technologies, power almost
certainly will shift more toward multifaceted and
amorphous networks composed of state and nonstate
actors that will form to influence global policies on
various issues. Leadership of such networks will be
a function of position, enmeshment, diplomatic skill,
and constructive demeanor. Networks will constrain
policymakers because multiple players will be able to
block policymakers’ actions at numerous points.
a  For further detail regarding the theory and tests of its explanatory
power using the historical record, see Charles F. Doran, Systems in
Crisis, Cambridge University Press, 1991 and Jacob L. Heim, “Tapping the
Power of Structural Change: Power Cycle Theory an Instrument in the
Toolbox of National Security Decision-Making,” SAIS Review, Vol 24, No 2,
113-27. RAND sponsored a workshop for the NIC on power cycle theory.
b  See graphic opposite the Introduction on page 2.
c  Hard power generally relates to military, economic, and technological
prowess. Soft power relates to political, diplomatic, social, and cultural
attainments and values that also garner influence and the capability to
persuade.
Researchers at Sandia National Laboratories are
developing a Human Resilience Index (HRI) to
provide tools that help explore the links among
human ecological conditions, human resilience, and
conflict. Seven indicators are used to calculate the
HRI: population growth rate, population density,
caloric intake per capita, renewable fresh water
per capita, arable land per capita, median age,
and population health (including infant and child
mortality and life expectancy). The table above
lists countries that are projected to have a high risk
of instability, conflict, or some other type of state
failure in 2030 because of their poor human ecology
and resilience.
countries at high risk of state failure
Rank
2008
2030
1
Burundi
Somalia
2
Yemen
Burundi
3
Somalia
Yemen
4
Afghanistan
Uganda
5
Uganda
Afghanistan
6
Malawi
Malawi
7
Dem. Rep. of
Congo
Dem. Rep. of
Congo
8
Kenya
Kenya
9
Haiti
Nigeria
10
Ethiopia
Niger
11
Bangladesh
Pakistan
12
Pakistan
Chad
13
Nigeria
Haiti
14
Niger
Ethiopia
15
Chad
Bangladesh
Source: Sandia National Laboratories.

--- Sayfa 40 ---
19
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | MEGATRENDS
to positive outcomes resulting from the use of their
power. Good intentions will not be enough. One could
anticipate a dual-pronged movement of more state
regulation on bad actors—such as hackers—while
more political space opens up for individuals with
positive motives.
Although we believe that worldwide norms may
converge toward greater democratic governance,
tackling global challenges might become more
vexing because of the multiplicity of actors, including
nonstate ones, and their dissimilar views.
Those countries to the northwest of the line (see
graphic on page 18) are punching above their
weight in hard power. In the next 20 years, we
expect many of the middle powers to rise above the
line as both their hard and soft powers increase.
Factors used to determine diplomatic weight include
intergovernmental and UN treaties to which the
country is a party, and diplomatic connections and
alliances. Considerable weight accrues to countries
with both material and diplomatic power, such as the
US and China, but such countries will be unlikely to
get their way without state and nonstate partners.
Technology will continue to be the great leveler. The
future Internet “moguls”—as with today’s Google or
Facebook—sit on mountains of data and have more
real-time information at their fingertips than most
governments. As these mountains of data are used
to improve knowledge of human motivations, non
state actors such as private companies will be able to
influence behavior on as large a scale as state actors.
“The shift in national power is only half the
story and may be overshadowed by an
even more fundamental shift in the nature
of power . . . Enabled by communications
technologies, power almost certainly
will shift more toward multifaceted and
amorphous networks composed of state
and nonstate actors . . . “
As the power of nonstate actors increases, achieving
legitimacy will become a more important and crucial
test for them—especially those seen to wield enormous
power. Just as governments are likely to come under
growing pressure to become more accountable from a
more highly connected citizenry, nonstate actors will
have to prove their worth to the public by pointing

--- Sayfa 41 ---
20
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | MEGATRENDS
Megatrend 3
DEMOGRAPHIC PATTERNs
We believe that in the world of 2030—a world in
which the growing global population will have
reached somewhere close to 8.3 billion people (up
from 7.1 billion in 2012)—four demographic trends
will fundamentally shape, although not necessarily
determine, most countries’ economic and political
conditions and relations among states. These trends
are: aging both for the West and increasingly most
developing states; a still significant but shrinking
number of youthful societies and countries;
migration, which will increasingly be a cross-border
issue; and growing urbanization, which will spur
economic growth but place new strains on food and
water resources.
WIDESPREAD AGING
In 2030, age structures will range from extraordinarily
youthful populations (median age 25 or younger)
to populations that are longer lived than previously
thought possible. The median age of almost all
societies around the world is rising rapidly, except
in Sub-Saharan Africa. Aging countries face an uphill
battle in maintaining their living standards while
more youthful ones have the potential, owing to the
“demographic dividend,” to gain an economic boost if
they can put the extra numbers of youth to work.
OECD high-income countries will reach as a group
a median age of 42.8 years by 2030, rising from an
average of 37.9 years in 2010. Whereas in 2012 only
the populations of Japan and Germany have matured
beyond the median age of 45 years, by 2030, in a
tectonic shift, a much larger group of countries is
projected to have entered this post-mature category
in Europe and East Asia (see map on page 22). The
populations of these countries will feature a large
proportion of people over 65 years of age—an
unprecedented “pensioner bulge.” At the same time,
absent a large influx of youthful immigrants or an
unlikely significant upturn in fertility, the working-age
populations of these countries will decline in
size and contain a relatively large proportion of
middle-aged workers.
Countries that are amassing a large proportion of
seniors face the possibility of slower aggregate GDP
growth or stagnation. These post-mature states will
be challenged to undertake cost-effective reforms
of their retirement and health-care programs—
and muster funding to adequately support needy
retirees—while maintaining the living standards of
those families and taxpayers who support them. The
retreat from pay-as-you-go pension and health-care
systems to more securely funded systems probably
will create a political backlash as governments seek to
reduce beneficiaries and benefits, increase workers’
contributions, and extend the required number of
working years. Governments of post-mature countries
could be pressured to vastly restrain discretionary
state spending and impose a higher tax burden.
“Countries that are amassing a large
proportion of seniors face the possibility
of a decline in economic productivity
and slower aggregate GDP growth
or stagnation.”
Some analysts expect aging societies to be risk-averse
and fiscally limited; these analysts contend that some
European and rapidly aging East Asian states might
conclude that they cannot afford to maintain a sizeable
military or extend their power overseas. For some
low-fertility Western European countries that have
poorly integrated Asian and African immigrants, the
rapid growth of these minorities could erode social
cohesion and promote reactionary politics.
Most of these impacts are speculative, however.
The magnitude of aging’s effects and the ability of
countries with well-developed institutions to minimize
the negative impacts of aging are unknown. Advances
in health care—which we examine on pages 98-102—
are likely to improve the quality of life for some
seniors, enabling them to work longer.

--- Sayfa 42 ---
21
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | MEGATRENDS
The Median Age of Country-level Populations, 2010-2030
Source: US Census Bureau’s International Database, June 2011. The median ages of Arab Gulf states (Bahrain, Kuwait,
Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and UAE) reflect the age structure of resident citizens, omitting temporary labor migrants.
Youthful (25 or younger)
Intermediate (over 25 to 35)
Mature (over 35 to 45)
Post-mature (over 45)

--- Sayfa 43 ---
22
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | MEGATRENDS
The group of countries with mature age structures
(median age over 35 and less than or equal to 45 years)
will also grow larger by 2030, gaining East Asian states
and losing some European ones to the post-mature
category. For countries in the mature category,
such as China, the advantages and opportunities
of the demographic bonus will have largely faded,
though those that invested heavily in human capital
may prolong that bonus. Despite the fading of their
demographic advantages, these countries will not yet
have large proportions of seniors. They will, however,
need to pay closer attention to creating sustainable
pension and health-care programs in order to avoid
long-term risks to their development.
In the United States and Russia, the advance of
the median age and an increase in the proportion
of seniors will proceed slowly. In the US, a high
rate of immigration and a fertility level that is near
replacement are slowing aging. In Russia, the high
rate of deaths among young men—because of tobacco
use, alcohol abuse, and related accidents—means
that instead of aging, males especially are dying at a
relatively young age—in their 50s instead of living into
their 60s and 70s as in other countries.
SHRINKING NUMBER OF YOUTHFUL
COUNTRIES
Today more than 80 countries have populations with
a median age of 25 years or less. As a group, these
countries have an over-sized impact on world affairs—
since the 1970s, roughly 80 percent of all armed civil
and ethnic conflicts (with 25 or more battle-related
deaths per year) have originated in countries with
youthful populations. The “demographic arc of
instability” outlined by these youthful populations
ranges from clusters in the mid-section of Central
America and the Central Andes, covers all of
Sub-Saharan Africa, and stretches across the Middle
East into South and Central Asia.
By 2030, this arc will have contracted (see map
on page 22). Due to fertility declines that are well
under way today, the tally of countries with youthful
populations is projected to fall to about 50 by 2030.
The largest persistent cluster of youthful states is
projected to be located along the equatorial belt of
Sub-Saharan Africa. A second, more diffuse group of
youthful countries is projected to persist in the Middle
East—including the Palestinian Territories (West Bank
and Gaza), and Jordan and Yemen in the region’s south.
In the Americas, only Bolivia, Guatemala, and Haiti
are likely to retain their youthful populations. Along
the Pacific Rim, this challenging condition is expected
to persist in East Timor, Papua New Guinea, and the
Solomon Islands.
Among the US Census Bureau’s current projections for
South Asia, only Afghanistan is projected to remain
youthful by 2030. However, the aging that will occur
among the large and growing populations in nearby
Pakistan and India probably will mask youthful
ethnic and regional populations that could remain a
security concern. Youthful age structures are likely
to persist for most of the next two decades among
tribal populations in Pakistan’s western provinces and
territories. In Pakistan and Afghanistan, the rates of
childbearing are probably greater than five children
per woman among the Pushtun. In India, where the
southern states and large cities have attained low
fertility, youthfulness—which can contribute to
instability in the absence of employment outlets—is
likely to erode more slowly in the central northern
states of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar.
Kurdish fertility in southeastern Turkey appears
to be stalled at about four children per woman. In
Israel, the fertility of the diverse Ultra-Orthodox
Jewish minority remains above six children per
woman. The persistence of high rates of fertility and
population growth among dissonant minorities is
bound to perturb the political order, particularly as
these populations become much larger—although
demography alone gives no clues as to how countries
will adjust to these population shifts.

--- Sayfa 44 ---
23
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | MEGATRENDS
A NEW AGE OF MIGRATION?a
The first globalization of the late 19th and early 20th
centuries saw a massive movement of people within
the European continent and from Europe to the New
World. We will not see the same high proportion
of migrants as in the first industrial revolution, but
international migration is set to grow even faster
than it did in the past quarter-century. The factors
promoting cross-border migration are likely to remain
strong or intensify. These factors are globalization,
disparate age structures across richer and poorer
countries, income inequalities across regions and
countries, and the presence of migrant networks
linking sending and receiving countries.
Internal migration—which will be at even higher
levels than international migration—will be driven
by rapid urbanization in the developing world and,
in some countries toward the end of our time frame,
by environmental factors and the impact of climate
change. Climate-change-driven migration is likely to
affect Africa and Asia far more than other continents
because of dependence on agriculture in Africa and
parts of Asia and because of greater susceptibility
in Asia to extreme weather events. Drought-driven
migration will be a gradual phenomenon. Our
interlocutors in Africa pointed to the growing
numbers of migrants already spilling over from the
Sahel region as it experiences increasingly drier
conditions. Flood-driven migration will wipe out
homes and infrastructures and significantly increase
the perception of the risk of staying.
As with international migration, the specter of greater
economic opportunities outside of local communities
will be the biggest driver of internal migration. In
China alone, nearly 250 million people are estimated to
be internal migrants today; that number will continue
to rise as more rural residents seek to raise their
standard of living by moving to cities.
a  See the joint NIC-EUISS work, Global Governance 2025: At A Critical
Juncture, NIC 2010-08, September 2010, for further insights on migration and
the lack of global governance oversight. We also benefited from an Atlantic
Council-hosted workshop on migration in 2011. Data and insights from
workshop papers were extensively used in the formulation of this section.
four Population age structures
Age profiles of Japan illustrating the four
categories of population age structures:
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Youthful, 1935
Percentage of total population
male
female
male
female
male
female
male
female
Percentage of total population
Percentage of total population
Percentage of total population
Intermediate, 1970
Mature, 1990
Post-mature, 2025 (projected)
5-yr groups
100+
0-4
5-yr groups
100+
0-4
5-yr groups
100+
0-4
5-yr groups
100+
0-4

--- Sayfa 45 ---
24
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | MEGATRENDS
advantage of migration opportunities, and those young
people can earn higher incomes abroad than at home,
many will choose to migrate to richer countries.
The recently developed countries will offer numerous
opportunities. Owing to rapid urbanization in the
developing world, the volume of urban construction
for housing, office space, and transport services
over the next 40 years—concentrated in Asia and
Africa—could roughly equal the entire volume of
such construction to date in world history, creating
enormous opportunities for both skilled and unskilled
workers. Many emerging countries, such as Brazil,
China, and Turkey—whose youthful populations are
declining—will attract migrants from low-income
countries with youthful populations, for example,
countries in Sub-Saharan Africa and Southeast Asia.
Brazil, China, and Turkey have already seen sharp
drops in fertility: Brazil’s youthful population is
projected to decline by 5 million by 2030; China’s will
drop by 75 million; Turkey’s is expected to decline
slightly by 2030.
GLOBALIZED FLOWS OF WORKERS
Migration is likely to become more globalized as
demand for both skilled and unskilled labor soars
in traditional and new destination countries for
migrants. Currently, the top ten countries hosting
over half of the world’s migrants are dominated by
the G-8. Opportunities for migrants to fill gaps in rich
countries’ labor forces will continue to exist, even as
these countries’ economic growth slows. In Germany,
the number of young people age 15-24 will fall by 25
percent, or about 2.5 million people by 2035; Japan’s
proportion of young people will decline by 25 percent
or 3 million. Even in the US, although the number
of young people will grow slightly, their percentage
of the total population will decline from 14 to 12.8
percent in the next quarter century.
Age and income disparities create a paradox. One
would normally expect fast-growing economies
to attract migrant labor, not to send it. However,
where economic growth enables more young people
to acquire the knowledge and resources to take
The Demographic window of opportunity
Country
Median Age,
2010
Median Age,
2030
Demographic Window
of Opportunity
Brazil
29
35
2000 to 2030
India
26
32
2015 to 2050
China
35
43
1990 to 2025
Russia
39
44
1950 to 2015
Iran
26
37
2005 to 2040
Japan
45
52
1965 to 1995
Germany
44
49
before 1950 to 1990
United Kingdom
40
42
before 1950 to 1980
United States
37
39
1970 to 2015
According to UN
demographers, a
country’s demographic
window of opportunity
can be estimated by
identifying those years
in which the proportion
of children (0 to 14
years of age) in the
total population is
less than 30 percent,
and the proportion
of seniors (65 years
and older) is less than
15 percent.

--- Sayfa 46 ---
25
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | MEGATRENDS
which is unattainable for many—could begin to
blur. Countries may try to attract more highly skilled
workers by offering permanent residents privileges,
such as voting in local elections, formerly reserved for
full citizens.
Technology—including widespread use of biometrics—
will increase the capacity of countries to control
entry, but greater information flows will enable more
people to become aware of opportunities for work
both nearby and in distant places. The Internet and
social media can also provide increased information
on conditions in receiving countries and ways to
better integrate migrants. Migrants are likely to remain
attracted to immigrant communities with similar
ethnic, religious, or national backgrounds, but the IT
revolution ensures greater and more real-time linkages
to friends and family members in migrants’ countries
of origin.
The attractiveness of a broader number of both
developed and rapidly emerging countries could
become a serious blow to poor countries if it leads
to an increased and one-way flow of highly skilled
individuals. Migration generates a considerable flow of
remittances, but a flood of skilled worker emigration
has shown to harm development at home. Many
countries in Sub-Saharan Africa, Central America, and
the Caribbean show worrying levels of brain drain
now, with some of these exceeding 30 percent of
skilled workers. With the current exception of the
Philippines, few “sending countries” are creating plans
to protect migrants and enhance their abilities to
succeed in recipient countries.
Nigeria is a good example of potential upside and
downside risks from migration for many aspiring states.
Nigeria’s increasingly favorable demographic conditions
offer it the opportunity to escape from the economic
stagnation it has seen in the post-Independence period.
If it collects its demographic dividend in full, it could
see per capita incomes treble by 2030, lifting 80
million people out of poverty. Part of that economic
success would involve experiencing continued high
levels of migration as young Nigerians immigrate to
acquire or hone their skills abroad before returning
In theory, higher rates of migration would yield
higher returns for global development. The World
Bank estimates that a 3-percentage-point increase
in the stock of migrants by 2025 would lead to a
0.6-percent increase in global income, a gain of $368
billion, with developing countries and migrants from
those countries benefiting more than the natives of
high-income countries. This is more than the gains
from removing all remaining barriers to free trade.
Increasingly, elites in developed countries are likely
to consider migration policy as part of an economic
growth strategy, particularly as competition grows for
highly skilled employees. China may see some increase
in outmigration, as skilled workers seek opportunities
in faster-growing countries while China’s growth slows
as its population ages. China could, however, see a
much larger flow of in-migration as it seeks workers to
care for and support its aging society.
“The World Bank estimates that a
3-percentage-point increase in the stock
of migrants by 2025 would lead to a
0.6-percent increase in global income,
a gain of $368 billion . . . more than the
gains from removing all remaining barriers
to free trade.”
Over time, governments may need to increasingly
manage mobility rather than simply immigration as
more short-term movement occurs in addition to
permanent migration. More people—particularly
the highly skilled—will have their feet in more than
one country’s labor market. The rise of more global
labor markets will create the need for international
institutions to set new standards. For example, what
happens to pensions and social and health benefits
when people move: will they keep their entitlements
in a country they formerly worked in? The growing
number of even medium-sized companies with
far-flung international interests and networks will be
a pressure group for changing national policies. The
dividing line between permanent residency, which
most migrants can qualify for, and citizenship—

--- Sayfa 47 ---
26
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | MEGATRENDS
countries. The extent of the flows—potentially of tens
of millions of people from the poorest developing
countries to middle-income countries as well as to
rich developed countries—creates the potential for
huge human rights abuses and exploitation. Immigrant
communities open up avenues for increased criminal
activity such as drug smuggling. The rapidly growing
age and gender imbalances across developed and
developing countries also increase the potential for
greater human trafficking.
Migration—unlike trade and other central features of
increased globalization—is relatively unregulated by
international agreements or cooperation. Immigration
and border security is still largely—with the exception
of the Schengen area in continental Europe—seen as
coming under the purview of the country and not a
subject for more international cooperation by most
states in both the developing and developed worlds.
THE WORLD AS URBAN
In a tectonic shift, today’s roughly 50-percent urban
population (3.5 billion urban of the world’s 7.1 billion
people) will almost certainly climb to near 60 percent
(4.9 billion of the world’s projected 8.3 billion), a
sharp contrast to the largely rural world of 1950,
when roughly 30 percent (750 million) of the world’s
2.5 billion were estimated to be urban residents.
Between now and 2030, demographers expect urban
population to grow most rapidly where rates of
population growth are highest and where the urban
proportion of the population remains relatively low, in
Sub-Saharan Africa (now 37-percent urban) and Asia
(near 50 percent)—two regions currently on disparate
economic paths. According to the UN, between 2011
and 2030, there will be an additional urban population
of 276 million in China and 218 million in India,
which will together account for 37 percent of the total
increase for urban population in 2030. Nine additional
countries are projected to contribute 26 percent of
the urban growth, with increases ranging from 22
million to 76 million. The countries are: Bangladesh,
Brazil, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Indonesia,
Mexico, Nigeria, Pakistan, the Philippines, and the US.
In Africa, we expect urban formation and expansion
to join the growing middle class and contribute to the
economic miracle at home. Policy failure, in contrast,
could lead to a demographic disaster, with economic
underperformance and enhanced risks of strife and
conflict, creating substantially increased incentives
to migrate.
“Owing to rapid urbanization in the
developing world, the volume of urban
construction for housing, office space, and
transport services over the next 40 years
could roughly equal the entire volume of
such construction to date in world history,
creating enormous opportunities for both
skilled and unskilled workers.”
In the developed world, migration has the potential
to increase fertility and reshape the population’s age
structure. If current levels of migration continue,
for example, most OECD countries can expect to
see modest increases in their workforces. In only
six OECD countries (the Czech Republic, Finland,
Hungary, Japan, Poland, and the Slovak Republic)
is the current level of immigration insufficient to
compensate for a decline in the workforce. At the
same time, the likely migration from Muslim countries
with traditionally higher birth rates could create new
political and social frictions. The Pew Foundation
forecasts that Europe’s Muslim population will double
from 4.1 percent of Europe’s total population today
to 8 percent by 2030. France, Sweden, Austria, and
Belgium, which already have the world’s largest
Muslim minorities, will have Muslim communities with
9-10 percent of their total populations.
History has repeatedly demonstrated the power of
migration. At best, migration could help harmonize
the very different economic and demographic
conditions that will be experienced by countries
as the world moves toward its peak population.
At worst, migration could be driven primarily by
economic failure, not success—reemerging as both
a cause and result of conflict within and between

--- Sayfa 48 ---
27
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | MEGATRENDS
The urban proportion of the population, 2010-2030
Rural
Mostly rural
Mixed
Mostly urban
Urban
The proportion of the population living in urban areas, 2010
estimates and 2030 projections. Data are drawn from the United
Nations Population Division (2010). The criteria that define an
urban area were selected by individual states.

--- Sayfa 49 ---
28
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | MEGATRENDS
and animals (including local extinctions), and changes
in the availability and quality of fresh water. In some
studies these impacts have been detectable at distances
sometimes exceeding 100 kilometers from the nearest
urban center. Many urban centers are also vulnerable
to potential shocks from flooding, particularly given
inadequate drainage systems.
By 2030, few forested reserves, wetlands, and
freshwater sources will be located on the perimeter of
the impact zone of this fine-meshed urban network.
Rapidly growing cities are likely to compete to
secure freshwater catchment and land for housing
growth, bringing greater prosperity to some nearby
agriculturists, but setting up further tensions over
freshwater rights, water quality, and urban expansion.
These tensions will lead to legal battles, pressure for
policy reforms, and public calls for state intervention
(a situation already evident in China).
According to the McKinsey Global Institute (MGI),
demand for power in China’s cities will more than
double from today’s level, accounting for roughly 20
percent of global energy consumption. India’s power
targets are also ambitious—if present trends continue,
India’s carbon dioxide emissions will grow, and carbon
emissions of South Asia as a whole will double by 2030.
China’s will also nearly double. Water is likely to be as
much of a challenge as energy for both giants. India’s
cities will need 94 billion liters of potable water that
MGI and others estimate will not be easily available.
Sanitation also will need to be upgraded. In many poor
mid-size cities, sewage collection coverage can be as
low as 10-20 percent. Many transport infrastructures
also are inadequate to absorb growth in mid-sized
cities. Roads are neither wide enough nor sufficiently
maintained to absorb expanding traffic.
Urban centers are engines of productivity, generating
roughly 80 percent of economic growth. In much
of Asia, Latin America, and Africa, large segments
of the urban economy remain “informal”—outside
the reach of business and labor laws, environmental
regulation, and taxation. Similarly, only a fraction of
utility consumption in these regions is metered and
paid for directly. We expect the next two decades to
to help drive several constructive developmental
trends, including urban-centered economic growth,
smaller family sizes, and higher average educational
attainment. Rapid urbanization could therefore give a
boost to Asia’s and Africa’s long-term competitiveness
and social and political stability, or, if not mastered,
could become their Achilles’ heels.
“The extent of the flows—potentially of
tens of millions of people from the poorest
developing countries to middle-income
countries as well as to rich developed
countries—creates the potential for huge
human rights abuses and exploitation.”
The next two decades’ pattern of urban growth will
look strikingly different from urban growth patterns
of the late 20th century, dynamics that gave rise to
most of today’s 27 megacities (cities with a population
greater than 10 million). Although UN demographers
expect this count to continue to rise, these giants will,
we believe, become further limited by physical land
constraints and burdened by vehicular congestion and
costly infrastructural legacies, entrenched criminal
networks and political gridlock, and deteriorating
sanitation and health conditions. The peri-urban or
“rurban” areas will grow faster than city centers,
as such areas provide cheaper land for housing and
manufacturing. Metropolitan regions will spill over
multiple jurisdictions creating mega-regions. By
2030, there will be at least 40 large bi-national and
tri-national metro regions.
Cities have the potential to apply modern technologies
and infrastructure: some of the world’s largest cities
are taking measures to reduce their carbon footprint
and be more conservative consumers of energy. Still
their growth will, we believe, promote substantial
environmental and resource pressures. The growth
of urban concentrations have, historically, led to
dramatic reductions in forest cover, adverse shifts in
the nutrient content and microbial composition of
soils, alterations in the composition of higher plants

--- Sayfa 50 ---
29
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | MEGATRENDS
witness unparalleled action by city governments in
these regions to augment their power by taxing urban
income flows and pricing utility use, an effort that will
require the formalization of now-informal industries
and service providers as well as the registration and
taxation of consumers and land users.
“Rapid urbanization could therefore give
a boost to Asia’s and Africa’s long-term
competitiveness and social and political
stability, or, if not mastered, could become
their Achilles’ heels.”
In 2030 urban politics might feature confrontations
between government authorities on the one hand
and tax-evading entrepreneurs and informal markets
on the other hand, as well as with squatters who
maintain permanent residences. Local police are likely
to escalate their efforts to extend their powers into
established squatter settlements in some countries—
particularly in Latin America and Sub-Saharan Africa.
However, for formalization and policing to succeed,
city governments in these regions will need to provide
more services, hold police accountable for their
actions, and extend representation to low-income
residents. The confrontations of the coming decades
will test the capacity of some urban governments.
The Asian Development Bank, in fact, warned in
its study of Asia in 2050 that, “better financing and
management of cities will require long-term planning
and visionary leadership, further decentralization
of responsibility to local governments, more local
accountability and greater market financing of urban
capital investments.”

--- Sayfa 51 ---
30
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | MEGATRENDS
Tackling problems pertaining to one commodity won’t
be possible without affecting supply and demand
for the others. Agriculture is highly dependent on
accessibility of adequate sources of water as well as
on energy-rich fertilizers. Hydropower is a significant
source of energy for some regions while new sources
of energy—such as biofuels—threaten to exacerbate
the potential for food shortages. There is as much
scope for negative trade-offs as there is the potential
for positive synergies.
The marketplace is also changing. State-backed Asian
resource investment strategies are changing the
business environment for competitors in extractive
industries and other infrastructure investments in
developing countries. Foreign direct investments by
state-owned enterprises—largely based in emerging
markets—have focused increasingly on mining,
quarrying, and petroleum. Overall, commodities are
now responsible for about two-thirds of foreign direct
investment by state-owned enterprises. Asian countries
already prioritize long-term bilateral resource supply
deals for oil, gas, and coal, sealed with political and
economic assistance packages.a
FOOD, WATER, AND CLIMATE
An extrapolation of current trends in per capita
consumption patterns of food and water shows the
projected extent of the problem during the next
couple decades. Demand for food is set to rise by more
than 35 percent by 2030, but global productivity gains
have fallen from 2.0 percent between 1970 and 2000 to
1.1 percent today and are still declining. The world has
consumed more food than it has produced in seven of
the last eight years.b A major international study finds
that annual global water requirements will reach 6,900
billion cubic meters (BCM) in 2030, 40 percent above
current sustainable water supplies. Agriculture, which
accounts for approximately 3,100 bcm, or just under
70 percent of global water withdrawals today, will
a  This analysis is from a Chatham House study produced for the NIC in
October, 2012, National Security Impacts of Natural Resources by
2020, 2030, and 2040. This study is forthcoming and will be available,
when published, on the NIC’s website, www.dni.gov/nic/globaltrends.
b  This material is quoted from British researcher Alex Evans’ unpublished
paper on 2020 development futures.
Megatrend 4
Growing food, water,
and Energy Nexus
The increasing nexus among food, water, and energy—
in combination with climate change—will have
far-reaching effects on global development over the
next 15-20 years. In a tectonic shift, demand for these
resources will grow substantially owing to an increase
in the global population from 7.1 billion today to 8.3
billion by 2030. As we have discussed, an expanding
middle class and swelling urban populations will
increase pressures on critical resources—particularly
food and water—but new technologies—such as
“vertical” farming in high-rise structures which also
reduce transportation costs —could help expand
needed resources. Food and water security is being
aggravated by changing weather conditions outside of
expected norms.
“ . . . expanding middle class and swelling
urban populations will increase pressures
on critical resources—particularly food and
water—but shortages are not inevitable.”
We are not necessarily headed into a world of
scarcities, but policymakers and their private sector
partners will need to be proactive to avoid scarcities
in the future. Many countries probably won’t have
the wherewithal to avoid food and water shortages
without massive help from the outside. The questions
will be whether management of critical resources
becomes more effective, the extent to which
technologies mitigate resource challenges, and
whether better governance mechanisms are employed
to avoid the worst possible outcomes. Currently, no
effective international frameworks exist for dealing
with export controls, which often exacerbate food
shortages. Increased promotion of food imports can
help water-scarce countries to reduce pressure on
their water sources. These “uncertainties” of largely
human agency will be explored in the next chapters
discussing game-changers and alternative worlds. This
chapter focuses on the pressures on these resources.

--- Sayfa 52 ---
31
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | MEGATRENDS
Climate Change 2030:
More Extreme Weather
Empirical evidence alone—without reference to
climate models—indicates that a general warming
trend is affecting weather and ecosystems, causing
increasing impacts on humans. Recent weather has
been characterized by an increase in the frequency
of extreme weather events—floods, droughts,
tornadoes, glacial lake outbreaks, extreme coastal
high-water levels, heat waves, etc.—and this pattern
almost certainly will continue during the next
20 years.
According to the March 2012 Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Special Report
on Managing the Risks of Extreme Eventsa,
climate change is reinforcing extreme weather,
making it more intense. Although the number of
cyclones probably will not increase by 2030, the
destructive power of tropical storms will intensify.
Meanwhile, owing to population growth and the
expansion of urban centers and rural agriculture,
more people and infrastructures will be vulnerable
to such extreme weather events. The key unknown
is whether improved disaster risk-management
measures will be adopted to effectively cope with
these changing conditions by 2030.
Food security has been aggravated partly
because during the past two decades the world’s
land masses have been experiencing weather
conditions outside of expected norms. Observed
temperature increases (though enhanced
in the Arctic) are not solely a high-latitude
phenomenon. Recent scientific work shows that
temperature anomalies during growing seasons
and persistent droughts have lessened agricultural
productivity. Degraded agricultural productivity,
when coupled with more protectionist national
policies tightening global supply, undercuts
a  The complete title of the report is, Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC) Special Report on Managing the Risks
of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate Change
Adaptation, IPCC, March 2012.
food security, especially in impoverished regions.
Flows in the Nile, Tigris-Euphrates, Niger, Amazon,
and Mekong river basins have been diminished
by droughts that have persisted during the past
decade. Although weather patterns in these regions
are dominated by natural variability, these persistent
droughts are consistent with the expected effects
of warming from increased greenhouse gas
concentrations in the atmosphere.
Dramatic and unforeseen changes are occurring
at a faster rate than expected in regions with snow
and ice. Observations show that Arctic summer sea
ice is diminishing in area and volume faster than
any models predicted and could vanish earlier than
the original predictions of 2030-2050. Changes are
also occurring in the major ice shelves (Greenland
and Antarctica) that were unforeseen even five
years ago. Future rates of change are currently
unpredictable without better observations to
improve the development of ice-prediction models.
Sea-level rise could increase with the rapid melt
of either the Greenland Ice Sheet or the West
Antarctica Ice Shelf. With this melting, scientists
now estimate that sea-level rise will be 1 meter or
more by the end of the century and the rate will
increase, making effective adaptation more difficult
to achieve. Even modest sea-level rises, when
coupled with potential storm surges from more
intense storms and subsidence of delta lands, will
have a significant adverse impact on coastal regions
and Pacific small-island states.
The present emissions pathway is leading to a
doubling of greenhouse gases by mid-century.
Based on a better understanding of climate
sensitivity and emissions, this concentration will
lead to approximately 2°C warming by mid-century.
Under the present emissions pathway, 6°C is more
likely than 3°C by the end of the century, and will
lead to even more significant impacts. By 2030 the
emissions trajectory will be cast, determining this
century’s climate outcome.

--- Sayfa 53 ---
32
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | MEGATRENDS
as well as western Central Asia, southern Europe,
southern Africa and the US Southwest. In places such
as Algeria and Saudi Arabia, precipitation by 2050 is
forecast to decline by 4.9 percent and 10.5 percent,
respectively, while in Iran and Iraq, precipitation is
forecast to decline by 15.6 percent and 13.3 percent,
respectively. Average temperature change will be
significant in many regions.
In the Andes, glacial meltwater supports river flow and
water supply for tens of millions of people during the
long dry season. Many small glaciers, e.g., in Bolivia,
Ecuador, and Peru, will disappear within the next few
decades, adversely affecting people and ecosystems.
Hundreds of millions of people in China, India, and
Pakistan depend upon glacier meltwater from the
Hindu Kush and Himalaya Mountain regions.
Food supply will be strongly influenced by the
availability of land and water as well as the use of
emerging technologies. Given that agriculture uses 70
percent of global freshwater resources and livestock
farming uses a disproportionate share of this, water
management will become critical to long-term food
security. However, water management practices—
including regulating the price of water, which could
incentivize investment and better management—would
come with high political costs.
The world is already farming its most productive land.
Given the limited availability of new agricultural land,
improving crop efficiency will become especially
important to meeting global food needs. High-growth
economies in South and East Asia are expected to
account for two-thirds of the increase in fertilizer
use during the next five years. In poorer countries,
underutilization of fertilizer due to low crop prices has
eroded soil quality and imperiled the sustainability of
crop production.
Our modeling suggests that the long-term trend of
decreasing world food prices, which has already
reversed itself, may have come to an end, with
repercussions for consumers, especially poor ones.
As long as the global economy continues to grow—
which is also suggested by the modeling—increasing
require 4,500 bcm without efficiency gains. About 40
percent of humanity lives in or near an international
river basin; over 200 of these basins are shared by
more than two countries, increasing the dependencies
and vulnerabilities from changes in demand and
availability of water. Based on current trajectories, the
OECD estimates that by 2030 nearly half the world’s
population will live in areas with severe water stress.
Economic growth in developing countries has led to
greater demands for a meat-based diet. The demand
for meat places extra pressures on the grain market—
because livestock feed on grain—and on water
resources. The amount of water required to produce
meat is far more than that required to produce an
equivalent amount of grain or vegetables. In addition to
population increases, rapid urbanization will increase
pressure on land and water resources that are essential
for food production. Biofuels also drive demand for
agricultural commodities; 30-40 percent of the US corn
crop is diverted to fuels in a given year.a
The most important short-term driver of crop supplies
is weather. Of course, favorable weather can boost
harvest outputs, but poor weather or large-scale
weather-related disruptions can deal a serious setback.
Poor harvests caused by bad weather, droughts, or
crop infestations in major producing regions have
already contributed to high food prices.
Climate change impacts on food and water availability
will vary widely by region and probably will be more
limited in the period out to 2030 than in the decades
after that. In the medium-term, atmospheric carbon
rise is expected to boost carbon fertilization and
thereby crop yields; however, the impact of climate
change on extreme weather events (see box on page
32) probably will offset the positive effect on farming.
Moreover, climate change analysis suggests that
average precipitation patterns will change such that
wet areas will become wetter while dry, arid areas will
become more so. Much of the decline in precipitation
will occur in the Middle East and northern Africa,
a  This was drawn from a NIC conference report, Global Food Security
to 2040, NICR 2012-05, February, 2012.  The report is available on the
NIC’s website.

--- Sayfa 54 ---
33
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | MEGATRENDS
food costs will not necessarily lead to greater child
malnutrition. Tighter markets will result in higher
prices and increased price volatility but not necessarily
in a fundamental shortage of food. Continued reliance
on maize as a biofuel feedstock will also increase the
potential for volatility.
A stable supply of agricultural commodities to meet
global food security needs and ensure trade flows
can be achieved through supply-side management
practices to boost crop production—including new
technologies—to mitigate the potentially negative
impacts of climate change.
However, a number of supply-and-demand factors
could derail that outcome. These include extreme
weather-related disruptions from unmitigated climate
change, prolonged periods of poor management
of water and soil, and inadequate use of modern
agricultural technologies and fertilizer. If one or more
of these factors came into play, a second, higher-risk
outcome would emerge in which food production
failed to keep pace with demand growth. Such a
development would create shortages that could have
dire geopolitical, social, and economic repercussions.
Increasing agricultural productivity in Africa would
present a significant opportunity to boost and diversify
global production and address regional poverty and
food security. However, agricultural productivity
in Africa will require major changes even to avoid
shortages. Unlike Asia and South America, which have
achieved significant improvements in production per
capita, Africa only recently returned to 1970s’ levels.
Many African states have poor enabling environments
for agricultural development, including lack of
sufficient rural infrastructure and transportation to get
seeds and fertilizer from the ports inland, and weak
governance. Even a fairly marginal improvement in
food supply chain management could translate into a
significant reduction in waste, negating a significant
amount of the pressures from growing populations and
increased wealth.
Without rapid investment in adaptation, climate
change is also expected to result in sharp declines in
yields.a Increasing crop productivity on irrigated land
could decrease the need to irrigate other land. This
takes a disproportionately high amount of pressure
off of water resources. The risk of failing to achieve
increased crop productivity therefore could have a
negative impact not only on food security but also on
water security.
Cereal production in China and India faces significant
challenges from environmental stresses relating to
water scarcity, soil depletion, climate change, and
pressures on land availability from urbanization. Both
countries are major producers of wheat, and China
is the second-largest producer and consumer of corn
after the US. China, particularly, is investing heavily in
agricultural technology and productivity. China and
India are unlikely to abandon their efforts to achieve
grain self-sufficiency through 2020. However, by 2030,
demographic pressures and increasing environmental
constraints may force both countries to increase
imports, potentially triggering a significant price runup
on international markets.b
The primary consequence of rising prices for
agricultural commodities is the commensurate hike
in staple food prices for average households. Although
rich countries will also feel the pinch, the share of
food spending in low-income households in poorer
countries is far greater, and these families will be
affected to a greater extent. As a result, food-price
inflation probably will fuel social discontent over
other economic issues such as low wages and
poor governance.
Wheat is likely to exhibit particularly high
price volatility. Significant production occurs in
water-stressed and climate-vulnerable regions in
China, India, Pakistan, and Australia, suggesting
markets will remain tight and vulnerable to harvest
shocks, including disease.
In general, the groups most vulnerable to the impacts
of food-price inflation will be import-dependent
a  The source for this information is a NIC-commissioned report from
Chatham House, US National Security Impacts of Natural Resources by
2020, 2030, and 2040.
b  Ibid.

--- Sayfa 55 ---
34
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | MEGATRENDS
poor countries, such as Bangladesh, Egypt, Djibouti,
and Sudan. For this set of countries, the primary
line of defense to stem food-price inflation will be to
maintain, or, if necessary, expand existing subsidies
on basic foodstuffs. This strategy will have its limits,
however, as governments face budgetary constraints
or cut funding for other programs in order to keep
food prices down. Moreover, poor import-dependent
countries are not in a position to undertake overseas
investments to secure greater crop outputs elsewhere.
Large emerging markets such as China, India, and
Russia—all of which are likely to see continuing
spikes in food-price inflation—are less likely to see
serious disruptive upticks in social unrest. Large
grain-producing countries such as Russia and China
will be better able to shield themselves domestically
from rising food prices by imposing restrictions on the
export of crops, although such policies will exacerbate
food-price inflation and food scarcity globally. In
addition to export curbs, these countries have
more robust balance sheets to provide and maintain
subsidies and domestic price controls and to use
monetary policy tools to control inflation with more
efficacy than smaller, less developed states. China,
Saudi Arabia, the UAE, and others have been buying
up overseas farming land. This trend will probably
continue as food prices rise and the potential for
scarcities increases.
A BRIGHTER ENERGY OUTLOOK
Experts are virtually certain that demand for energy
will rise dramatically—about 50 percent—over
the next 15-20 years largely in response to rapid
economic growth in the developing world. The US
Energy Information Agency anticipates steadily rising
global production through 2035, driven primarily
by a combination of OPEC production increases and
larger unconventional sources. The main or reference
scenario of the International Energy Agency also posits
growing global production of key fossil fuels through
2030 (about 1 percent annually for oil).
Much of this increased production—and recent
optimism—derives from unconventional oil and gas
being developed in North America. The scale-up of
two technologies, horizontal drilling and hydraulic
fracturing, (see box on page 37) is driving this new
energy boom. Producers have long known shale
as “source rock”—rock from which oil and natural
gas slowly migrated into traditional reservoirs over
millions of years. Lacking the means economically to
unlock the massive amounts of hydrocarbon in the
source rock, producers devoted their attention to the
conventional reservoirs. Once the industry discovered
how to combine hydraulic fracturing and horizontal
drilling, the vast gas resources trapped in shale
deposits became accessible.
The economic and even political implications of this
technological revolution, which won’t be completely
understood for some time, are already significant. In a
“Good” and “Bad” Wild Cards
Technology is perhaps the most important wild
card to ensuring global food security. Crop
yield improvements due to better agricultural
practices and technological improvements have
accounted for nearly 78 percent of the increase
in crop production between 1961 and 1999.
(For more on possible future technological
advances, see pages 91-93).
A nasty wild card, however, such as the spread
of wheat rust could also have a long-lasting
effect on food supplies. Wheat rust was largely
eliminated by the genetic stock of the Green
Revolution, but it reappeared in Uganda in 1998,
spread to Kenya and Ethiopia, jumped to Iran
in 2007, was confirmed in South Africa in 2010,
and is likely to appear soon in Pakistan and the
Punjab. In Kenya, it destroyed one fourth of the
crop. The lesser biological diversity of wheat
now than before the Green Revolution could
make wheat rust a greater threat now than then.
Efforts to combat it, even if they are successful,
are likely to involve increasing genetic diversity
again, with at least yield reductions.

--- Sayfa 56 ---
35
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | MEGATRENDS
reserves both in North America and elsewhere is
their environmental impact. Poor well construction
and cementing, wastewater management and other
above-ground risks will continue to cause accidents.
Greater seismic activity around shale-producing areas
has turned the public’s attention in the US to possible
seismic risks. Seismic activity can affect well integrity
and construction, increasing the chances of methane
entering drinking water supplies. Many environmental
concerns could be mitigated by existing wastewater
management techniques and technologies. A tighter
regulatory environment—which is beginning to
happen in some US states—could also close loopholes
and reassure public safety. Nevertheless a major
drilling-related accident could cause a public backlash,
halting the fracking activity in key production areas.
The prospect of significantly lower energy prices
will have significant positive ripple effect for the US
economy, encouraging companies to taking advantage
of lower energy prices to locate or relocate to the
US. Preliminary analysis of the impact on the US
economy suggests that these developments could
tectonic shift, energy independence is not unrealistic
for the US in as short a period as 10-20 years. Increased
oil production and the shale gas revolution could yield
such independence. US production of shale gas has
exploded with a nearly 50 percent annual increase
between 2007 and 2011, and natural gas prices in the
US have collapsed. US has sufficient natural gas to meet
domestic needs for decades to come, and potentially
substantial global exports. Service companies are
developing new “super fracking” technologies that
could dramatically increase recovery rates still further.
Shale oil production in the US is still in its early
stages, and its full potential remains uncertain, but
development is happening at a faster pace than shale
gas. Preliminary estimates for 2020 range from 5-15
million barrels per day with a production breakeven
price as low as $44-68 per barrel depending upon the
fields. By the 2020, the US could emerge as a major
energy exporter.
The greatest obstacle to the proliferation of new
techniques to tap unconventional oil and gas
SHale oil (light tight oil) us production estimates, 2005-2020
Source: HPDI; EIA; team analysis for NIC.
Million barrels per day
0
5
10
15
20
2020
2015
2010
2005
Alaska
Gulf of Mexico
Other lower 48 states
LTO
High scenario
Middle
scenario
Low scenario
4
3
2
1

--- Sayfa 57 ---
36
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | MEGATRENDS
to provide a relatively small increase in the share
of overall energy requirements. The IEA’s baseline
scenario shows the share of renewables rising just 4
percent during the 2007-2050 period. Hydropower
accounts for the overwhelming majority of renewables
in this scenario, with wind and solar energy providing
5 and 2 percent contributions in 2050 respectively.
Their contributions in 2030 would be even less. IEA
“blue” scenarios (built around ambitious goals for
carbon emission reductions) show possible paths to
solar power and wind power becoming much more
appreciable shares by 2050—anywhere from 12 to 25
percent in the case of solar and 12 to 22 percent for
wind, depending on the desired drop in CO2 emissions
under the various “blue” scenarios. Numbers for 2030
would be a lot smaller. Achieving 12-to-25 percent
shares under the blue scenarios would also require,
according to IEA calculations, substantial investment in
alternatives compared to the baseline scenario.
deliver a 1.7-2.2 percent increase in GDP and 2.4-3.0
million additional jobs by 2030. Additional crude oil
production would result in a significant reduction in
US net trade balance. The US would import less or no
crude oil from its current suppliers—Canada, Mexico,
Saudi Arabia, Latin America and West Africa, forcing
them to find alternative markets. A dramatic expansion
of US production could also push global spare capacity
to exceed 8 million barrels per day, at which point
OPEC could lose price control and crude oil prices
would drop, possibly sharply. Such a drop would
take a heavy toll on many energy producers who are
increasingly dependent on relatively high energy
prices to balance their budgets.
Other regions and countries have significant shale
reserves. According to its Ministry of Land and
Resources’ preliminary study, China has the world’s
largest reserves of nonconventional gas—double
the estimated US reserves. China’s relative lack of
equipment, experience and potentially the necessary
extraction resources—mainly water—may inhibit or
slow down development there.
European leaders are uncertain about the geology,
political and public acceptability, environmental
impact, and financial viability of shale gas in Europe.
For example, national authorization processes
vary considerably by EU member-state and are
generally stricter than for North America. The Polish
Government sees shale gas as an important resource
for diversification away from dependence on Russian
gas and has been granting exploration licenses, while
the French Government has banned hydraulic fracking.
ALTERNATIVES—THE WEAK PLAYER IN THE NATURAL
GAS EXPLOSION
The potential for more abundant and cheaper supplies
of natural gas to replace coal by 2030 would have
undeniable benefits for curbing carbon emissions.
Nevertheless, another consequence of an increased
reliance on relatively cleaner natural gas as a source of
energy could be the lack of a major push on alternative
fuels such as hydropower, wind, and solar energy.
Under most scenarios, alternative fuels continue

--- Sayfa 58 ---
37
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | MEGATRENDS
HYDRAULIC FRACTURING
Hydraulic fracturing, or fracking—a new technology
to extract gas and oil from rock formations—is
already making sizable differences in the ability
of oil and gas companies to extract natural gas
and oil from resources previously thought to be
inaccessible. The technology will enable the release
of natural gas and oil in sufficient quantities to
drive down the cost of those energy resources and
make substantial differences to the oil and gas
import requirements of countries using fracking,
as well as their dependence on coal. During the
last five years the combined technologies of
fracking and horizontal drilling have been an energy
game-changer in the United States and other
countries with large reserves of shale gas and oil.
Fracking technology was first developed and
commercialized in the late 1940s. Since then
over 2 million fracking stimulations of gas and oil
have been completed. In fracking well operators
pump a fluid (usually water) mixed with propping
agent (usually sand) and a dozen or so chemical
additives to control physical characteristics, such as
viscosity, pH, surface tension, and scale prevention,
at high pressure into a well bore. The pressure
creates fractures that propagate through the rock
formation; the propping holds the fractures open
to allow the gas to flow through the opened porous
formation once the well has been completed.
The technology has evolved from its early days of
using 750 gallons of fluid and 400 pounds of sand
in a well to today’s levels: fracking now uses over
a million gallons of fluid and 5 million pounds of
sand. The latest fracturing operations use computer
simulations, modeling, and microseismic fracture
mapping as well as tilt sensors, which monitor rock
deformations. For fracking to be most efficient,
the technology is coupled with horizontal drilling,
a technique that became standard practice in the
1980s in oil and gas wells.
The coupling of fracking and horizontal drilling
has provided oil and gas companies with access to
numerous resources that were previously considered
to be unusable. As a result, unconventional natural
gas and oil have steadily become a larger portion
of the gas and oil production in the United States.
In the last five years, the increased supply and lower
prices for natural gas have reduced the use of coal
in the United States for power generation, thereby
reducing carbon dioxide emissions.
The major hurdle that fracking faces in reaching
its full potential to develop nonconventional gas
and oil resources is the public concern that it will
negatively impact the environment through water
contamination, seismic inducement, and methane
emissions. The fear of contamination of surface
water and groundwater during site preparation,
drilling, well completion, and operation and the
risk to water resources for all users in the watershed
are the primary environmental concerns of
regulatory agencies.
Current research is focused on finding better ways
to handle and treat the large quantities of water
required and reducing significantly the amount of
water used in fracking by using wastewater or mine
water, liquids other than water, or compressed
gases, including potentially carbon dioxide. Existing
wastewater management techniques can mitigate
water contamination by recycling the produced
water or disposing it into deep wells. Deep-well
disposal of produced water is the most common
disposal technique, but at times it has been linked
to seismic events in the area of a well site.
Fugitive emissions of methane, a potent greenhouse
gas, are another environmental concern. Although
the combustion of natural gas produces less carbon
dioxide than that of coal or fuel oil, that advantage
could be obviated by fugitive emissions of methane
during drilling, completion, and operation of an
unconventional gas well. If these emissions are kept
small (~1 percent of production), a net advantage of
natural gas remains, but if they are large (7-8 percent
of production), natural gas loses its greenhouse gas
advantage over coal.

--- Sayfa 59 ---
CHAPTER 2
game-changers

--- Sayfa 60 ---
The vast changes resulting from the megatrends alone ensure a transformed
world by 2030. How the game-changers sketched below evolve and interact
with each other and with the megatrends will determine what kind of
transformed world we will inhabit in 2030. In this chapter, we drill down on
six key game-changers and their potential impacts:
•• The Crisis-Prone Global Economy. Will divergences among
players with different economic interests and global volatility result
in a worldwide economic breakdown and collapse? Or will the
development of multiple growth centers lead to increased resiliency
in the global economic order?
•• The Governance Gap. Will current governments and international
institutions be able to adapt fast enough to harness change instead
of being overwhelmed by it?
•• The Potential for Increased Conflict. Will rapid changes and shifts
in power lead to more intrastate and interstate conflicts?
•• Wider Scope of Regional Instability. Will regional spillover,
especially in the Middle East and South Asia, cause global instability?
•• The Impact of New Technologies. Will technological breakthroughs
be developed in time to boost economic productivity and solve
the problems caused by the strain on natural resources and
climate change as well as chronic disease, aging populations, and
rapid urbanization?
•• The Role of the United States. Will the US be able to work with new
partners to reinvent the international system, carving out new roles in
an expanded world order?

--- Sayfa 61 ---
40
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
Game-CHANGER 1
The Crisis-Prone
Global Economy
The international economy will most likely continue
to be characterized by various regional and national
economies moving at significantly different speeds—a
pattern reinforced by the 2008 financial crisis.
Although growth rates may converge as China’s
economy, in particular, begins to slow, the contrast
between the current higher growth of the emerging
economies and the slow or stagnating recoveries in the
major developed economies exemplifies this trend—
at least for the next decade or so. The contrasting
speeds across different regional economies are
exacerbating global imbalances—which were one
of the contributing causes of the 2008 crisis—and
straining governments and the international system.
The key question is whether the divergences and
increased volatility will result in a global breakdown
and collapse or whether the development of multiple
growth centers will lead to increased resiliency. Future
political and economic crises are a real possibility in
the absence of concerted policy adjustments in the
major developed and developing economies.
“The 2008 crisis and its long ‘tail’ raise the
prospect of an extended crisis that would
undermine the social and political fabric in
many Western countries and create long-
term destabilizing effects.”
Both developed and developing countries face stiff
challenges to achieve a new “normalcy” or stability in
the global economy. For the West, the challenge will
be to ensure that the recent slow or stagnating growth
since the 2008 financial crisis, driven by de-leveraging
(paying down debt), does not lead to a prolonged
slump or worse—more financial crises. In the case of
many European countries and Japan, the challenge
also will involve finding ways to sustain growth in
the face of rapidly aging populations. For rising states
such as China and India, the main challenge involves
sustaining economic development and not falling
into the “middle- income trap” (a situation in which
per capita income does not increase to the level of
the world’s advanced economies). To avoid such an
outcome, the rising powers will need to consider
implementing wide-ranging changes to political and
social institutions. Finally, the transition to a more
multipolar global economy brings its own risks,
which are likely to be particularly pronounced as the
West’s grip is loosening and the emerging powers
are primarily focused on domestic development. In
the interim, international management of the system
could falter as players with diverging interests fail to
cooperate with one another.
THE PLIGHT OF THE WEST
The 2008 crisis and its long “tail” raise the prospect
of an extended crisis that would undermine the social
and political fabric in many Western countries and
create long-term destabilizing effects. Historical studies
indicate that recessions involving financial crises tend
to be deeper and require recoveries that take twice as
long.a
McKinsey Global Institute’s (MGI’s) recent study of
debt and deleveraging indicates that in the years since
the onset of the financial crisis, “major [Western]
economies have only just begun deleveraging.” Total
debt has actually grown for most major Western
economies with the exception of the US, Australia,
and South Korea, where the ratio of total debt to GDP
has declined. Previous episodes of deleveraging have
taken close to a decade. The report concludes that this
pattern is likely to continue. “No single country has
all the conditions in place to revive growth.”b Most of
the leading Western countries could therefore suffer
the consequences of low economic growth that lasts
longer than a decade.
A future rise in interest rates—highly likely under
a  Mark Carney, “Growth in the Age of Deleveraging” speech to the
Empire Club of Canada/Canadian Club of Toronto, 12 December 2011,
available on Bank for International Settlements (BIS) website (www.bis.
org); C.M. Reinhart and V.R.Reinhart, “After the Fall”, Macroeconomic
Challenges: The Decade Ahead, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City
2010, Economic Policy Symposium.
b  See “Debt and Deleveraging: Uneven Progress on the Path to Growth,”
McKinsey Quarterly, January 2012.

--- Sayfa 62 ---
41
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
A Crisis-Prone Global Economy
Type
Present Status
Trendline
Impacts on
Global Economy
Advanced
Economies
The 2008 crisis and its
long “tail” raise the
prospect of an extended
crisis undermining the
social and political
fabric in many Western
countries, leading to
potentially destabilizing
effects.
To compensate for slowing labor
force growth, Western countries
will need to rely on growth in
productivity. Even the slowly
growing labor force may not
be fully employed because of
external competition, particularly
among low-skill workers. One
billion workers from developing
countries are likely to be added
to the global labor pool.
In Europe, economic and
fiscal issues are entwined with
decisions on the EU’s future,
making potential solutions
more complex because of
the multiplicity of actors and
political concerns.
The declining weight of US
and other Western countries
and growing multipolarity
enhances fragility of the
global economy. Absent
a hegemonic power or
strong global governance
mechanisms, risks
increase in this multipolar
environment for major
economic powers to focus
on domestic imperatives
without regarding the
impact on others.
Emerging
Powers
In the coming decades,
not only will the big
emerging powers like
China, India, and Brazil
make relative economic
gains, but Colombia,
Mexico, Indonesia,
South Korea, Turkey, and
potentially Nigeria also
will make their marks.
To avoid the middle-income trap,
China will need to transition to
a more consumer-driven and
knowledge-intensive economy,
involving difficult political and
social reforms. India faces
similar problems and traps
accompanying rapid growth, but
New Delhi benefits from having
democracy as a safety valve and
a more youthful demographic
profile. China and India are
vulnerable to the volatility of
key resources.
The health of the global
economy will increasingly
be linked to how well the
developing world does—
more so than the traditional
West. The assumption of
more global responsibilities
in both political and
economic spheres by
emerging powers will be
critical to ensure a stable
global economic outlook.

--- Sayfa 63 ---
42
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
globalization and technology lead to a two-tiered labor
market of low- and high-skilled labor with a particular
squeeze on workers at the low-to-middle end. If past
experience, and economic theory holds, the increase
in global labor supply will put additional downward
pressure on low-skilled labor incomes, forcing
low-skilled workers to accept lower wages or become
redundant. The development of robotics and other
emerging advanced manufacturing technologies is also
likely to eliminate many jobs in the short-to-medium
term (see pages 90-92 in technology section).
More advanced emerging market countries, such as
China, with rising wages, also will face competition
from other countries for low- and middle-skilled jobs
unless they too move up the value chain to develop
higher skilled workers. If they do, these countries
will compete with more expensive skilled labor in
advanced countries, increasing pressure on once-safe
high-end employment. To level the playing field,
developing countries will have to dramatically improve
labor productivity, which in many cases means
shedding low-skilled workers, increasing skills, and
boosting automation.b
“A recent Oxford Economics study
estimates that another one billion workers
from developing countries are likely to be
added to the global labor pool in the next
several decades.”
A relatively generous welfare system has cushioned
the blow to the unemployed, particularly in Europe,
for now. However, low economic growth rates,
rising pension liabilities, and debt crises in European
countries and the US place increased pressure on
already strained budgets. With borrowing constrained
because of high debts, these countries probably will
not be able to afford to finance generous welfare
systems unless they can significantly increase
economic growth rates and labor productivity.
Reducing borrowing risks political blowback,
complicating and lengthening efforts to undertake
b  Drawn from Bruce Jones’ paper. “Labor and the Third Industrial
Revolution: The Employment Challenge,” 30 August 2011.
some scenarios—would see ballooning interest
payments at a time when social entitlement payments
are set to grow, making it more difficult to pay down
the accumulated debt.a Many experts believe that,
“drastic measures” will be necessary to check the rapid
growth of current and future liability of governments
and reduce their adverse consequences for long-term
growth and monetary stability.
“Most of the leading Western countries
could therefore suffer the consequences of
low economic growth that lasts longer than
a decade.”
The key structural challenge—aging—underlying this
negative economic outlook will impact Europe and
Japan more but will have significant effects on the
United States as well.
Previous financial and economic crises, such as the
1930s’ Great Depression, hit when populations were
youthful, providing a demographic bonus during the
postwar economic boom. However, such a bonus will
not exist in any prospective recovery. To compensate
for significant drops in labor-force size, the hoped-for
economic growth in countries such as Germany and
Japan will have to come from growth in productivity.
In spite of “baby boomer” retirements, the US is in
a better position, with its working-age population
projected to rise by 8 percent through 2030.
Ironically, even declining or slowly growing labor
forces—which will dampen growth in richer, aging
countries—may not be fully employed because of
external competition, particularly at the low-skilled
end. Western countries are likely to continue suffering
from increasing global labor competition—a trend
that began in the 1980s. A recent Oxford Economics
study estimates that another one billion workers
from developing countries are likely to be added to
the global labor pool in the next several decades.
Labor force studies show that the twin impacts of
a  The source of this information is the Bank for International Settlements,
BIS Working Papers No 300, Stephen G. Cecchetti, M.S. Mohanty
and Fabrizio Zampolli, “The Future of Public Debt: Prospects and
Implications,” March 2010.

--- Sayfa 64 ---
43
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
Demographically, the United States is in the best
position of all the major developed powers (and some
developing ones like China) with a birth rate close
to replacement level. However, the burden on the
US to fund entitlement programs (Social Security
and Medicare) will increase markedly, particularly
without a slowdown in the rate of the United States’
rising health-care costs. Economists also worry that
the approaching transition of the “baby boomer”
generation from workers to retirees will remove from
the US labor force the cadre of its most educated,
skilled, and experienced workers. The United States’
declining educational base is not seen as adequately
preparing younger workers for the more globally
competitive environment. Moreover, most economists
believe that, “a fundamental rebalancing of the
composition of the US economy will be required”
for the US to recover its former path of “buoyant and
job-creating growth.”c
CRUNCH TIME TOO FOR THE
EMERGING POWERS
Most of the emerging economies weathered the 2008
financial crisis well. In the coming decade, we will
probably witness not only relative economic gains
by China, India, and Brazil, but also the increasing
importance of emerging regional players such as
Colombia, Indonesia, Nigeria, South Africa, South
Korea, Mexico, and Turkey. However, developing
countries will face their own challenges, especially in
continuing the momentum behind their rapid growth.
The health of the global economy will be increasingly
linked to how well the developing world does—more
so than the traditional West. The developing world
already provides more than 50 percent of global
growth and 40 percent of global investment. Its
contribution to global investment growth is more
than 70 percent. China’s contribution is now one
and a half times the size of the US contribution. In the
World Bank’s baseline modeling of future economic
multipolarity, China—despite a slowing of its economic
c  This analysis is from NIC-commissioned workshops and a report from
McKinsey & Co, Global Economic Scenarios (December, 2010); C. Fred
Bergsten, The United States in the World Economy, Peterson Institute for
International Economics, August 12, 2011.
structural economic reform. On the other hand, failure
to take budgetary action risks the likelihood of more
abrupt rises in government bond yields at medium and
long maturities.
Europe is a special case: economic and fiscal issues
are entwined with political decisions on the future
of the EU, including more centralized powers for
EU financial management. EU leaders want to avoid
a breakup of the euro zone even though current
efforts to avoid such an outcome have resulted in a
crisis atmosphere, sowing uncertainty about Europe’s
future global markets. The current mode of crisis
management is unsustainable over the long term.
Possible solutions such as a multispeed Europe will
spawn questions about Europe’s capacity for unitary
political action. Economic divergence and market
volatility are likely to continue to characterize the
EU throughout much of this period even if—as some
expect—“Europe is well on its way to completing the
original concept of a comprehensive economic and
monetary union [and] . . . will emerge much stronger
as a result.”a
More than most Western countries, Japan’s rapidly
aging and dwindling population is putting the
society in a bind, severely undercutting its long-term
growth potential. The combination of a long-term
deteriorating fiscal situation with a dramatically aging
and declining population—roughly one elderly person
per two working-age people by 2025—will limit the
government’s maneuvering room to consolidate its
fiscal situation. (In Germany the population ages 15-65
will decline from 54 to 47 million between 2010 and
2030 and, in Japan, from 81.5 to 68.7 million.) The
IMF has suggested that “strong policy adjustments”
with adverse political repercussions will be required
to put “public finances back on sustainable footing.”
Ambitious debt stabilization cannot be put in place
without the risk of “substantial short-term output
costs,” posing a risk to economic recovery.b
a  For more discussion, see “The Coming Resolution of the European
Crisis,” C. Fred Bergsten and Jacob Funk Kirkegaard, Policy Brief PB12-1,
Peterson Institution for International Economics.
b  See Japan: Population Again and the Fiscal Challenge, IMF,
(co-authored by Martin Muhleisen and Hamid Faruqee) Finance and
Development, Volume 38, Number 1, March 2001.

--- Sayfa 65 ---
44
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
In addition to the decline of its working-age
population, a pending youth dearth is on the horizon
for China.b The share of the population aged 15-29—
now just over 30 percent—will fall to about 21 percent
by 2030. University applications have declined for the
past two years.c Presumably the early manifestation of
a tightening labor market also is contributing to the
rising labor unrest of the country.
China has averaged 10-percent real growth during
the past three decades; by 2020 the economy will
probably be expanding by only 5 percent, according to
several private-sector forecasts. The slower growth—
which will probably be twice the US average—will
still ensure that China surpasses the US in overall
economic size sometime during the next decade
b  The Chinese youth dearth will not be the worst in the world in 2030;
in fact, it will place the country 40th globally. Hong Kong and Japan will
lead at just 15 percent of the population between ages 15 and 29, followed
closely by Qatar, South Korea, Malta, Germany, Bosnia, and Austria (all
under 17 percent).
c  The Next China,” The Economist, July 31, 2010; pgs. 48-50.
By 2020, emerging markets’ share of financial assets is projected to almost double.a
a  Assumes consensus GDP forecasts for individual countries and that emerging markets’ currencies appreciate vis-à-vis the US dollar.
growth—will contribute about one-third of global
growth by 2025, far more than any other economy. The
world economy no longer depends on US consumers
but on investment growth in emerging countries.
“The health of the global economy will
be increasingly linked to how well the
developing world does—more so than the
traditional West.”
Despite its bright prospects to become the world’s
economic growth engine, China probably faces
some of the biggest hurdles to achieving that goal.
The country’s population will begin to age rapidly.
Whereas 8 percent of the Chinese population is
now 65 and older, that figure will exceed 16 percent
in 2030. Meanwhile, the proportion of China’s
population in the normal working years (15-65), which
recently peaked at 72 percent, will decline to about
68 percent by 2030.
Emerging Markets’ share of financial assets, 2000-2020
Percent
0
20
40
60
80
100
2020
2010
2000
35
34
19
11
10
9
14
27
29
24
22
9
9
17
19
3
5
3
US
Western Europe
Japan
Other developed
China
Other emerging
Source: McKinsey Global Institute, The Emerging Equity Gap: Growth And Stability In The New Investor Landscape (2011).

--- Sayfa 66 ---
45
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
An economically difficult transition could mean an
equally difficult political one in the case of China.
Slower per capita growth will increase the difficulty
of meeting rising expectations, potentially sparking
discontent. A political crisis would make it harder for
China to meet its economic goals. A prolonged political
and economic crisis could cause China to turn inward,
blaming external forces for its problems at home.
Although the leadership and much of the middle class
are now wedded to globalization because of China’s
success during the past 30 years, suspicion of the
outside world lingers and, similar to historical cases
elsewhere, could reemerge as a powerful political
force if Chinese economic development stalls.
The World Bank assesses that India will join China as
an “emerging economy growth pole” by 2025, which
could help to strengthen the global economy. India’s
expected robust growth in the next 15-20 years means
that its contribution to global growth will surpass that
of any individual advanced economy except the United
States. World Bank modeling suggests that together
China and India will serve as nearly twice the engine
for growth as of the United States and the euro zone
combined by 2025.a
India, however, faces many of the same problems
and traps accompanying rapid growth as China: large
inequities between rural and urban sectors and within
society, increasing constraints on resources such as
food and water, and a need for greater investment in
science and technology in order to continue to move
its economy up a notch. India’s democracy provides it
with a safety valve for discontent in a way that China’s
one-party rule does not. At the same time, regional
tensions between India and many of its neighbors
could threaten India’s rise should such tensions
explode in conflict and confrontation. As with China,
a sharp economic downturn—particularly propelled
by a political or military crisis—could quickly have
broader regional and global effects.
India—in contrast to China—will remain a relatively
youthful country, continuing to benefit from a
a  See Global Development Horizons 2011: Multipolarity: The New
Global Economy, The World Bank 2011.
or two. However, the slower growth will mean
downward pressure on per capita income growth.
China’s per capita income in 2020 will have reached
$17,000 in nominal terms, whereas Brazil’s and Russia’s
will be more than $23,000 and $27,000 respectively.
The G-7 economies are set to reach $64,000 per capita
income (PPP) in 2020, more than three times China’s.
China faces the prospect of being trapped in
middle-income status. Many Latin American countries
faced a similar situation in the 1980s and were
unable to avoid the trap because of income inequality
and their inability to restructure their economies.
Understanding that the Chinese economy is likely
to slow, China’s leaders want to transition to a more
consumer-driven economy and move China up
the value-added industrial production chain. They
are promoting S&T as the new economic growth
driver, and China is already achieving progress in
sectors such as nanotechnology, stem-cell research,
materials research, and new applications of
existing technologies.
“India—by contrast—will remain a relatively
youthful country, continuing to benefit from
a demographic dividend.”
To achieve its goals, however, China will also need to
develop its agricultural sector through establishment
of fair and equitable land rights and build a banking
sector that is more market-based and not geared
to favor state-owned enterprises. There is also the
question of whether a country can move to greater
consumption if it does not have a social safety net.
In the last 20 years, opening up brought capital and
technology to China, enabling domestic industries
to catch up with Western companies. In the next 20
years, Chinese firms will probably need to go outside
China to obtain the next level of technological and
managerial innovation and sophistication. To do so,
China will have to engage in foreign direct investment
in other countries— a logical step at this stage of
development and possibly the only way for China to
move up the value chain.

--- Sayfa 67 ---
46
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
infrastructure, housing, property, and manufacturing
plants and equipment will raise global investment
to levels not seen in four decades. Emerging market
countries, with their faster growth rates and higher
saving rates, will become the most important source
of global finance, nearly doubling their share of the
world’s financial assets during the next decade or so.
(See graphic on page 47.) However, the savings of
emerging market countries may not be able to meet
the increasing investment demands. McKinsey &
Company estimates that the gap between potential
capital supply and demand will reach between $0.8
and 2.4 trillion by 2030. This gap will result in upward
pressure on long-term interest rates, particularly in
regions without adequate savings. Such a secular trend
would have negative implications for investments
around the world.
A MULTIPOLAR GLOBAL ECONOMY:
INHERENTLY MORE FRAGILE?
Some experts have compared the upcoming decline
of US economic weight to the late 19th century when
economic dominance by one player—Britain—receded
into multipolarity. Other resemblances include
an accelerating globalization, rapid technological
development, and growing geopolitical competition
among the great powers. The late 19th century was
a time of relatively high real economic volatility with
wide fluctuations in growth rates. The average growth
rate of the leading country, the United Kingdom, in
the 19th century was not high, while the growth rate
of the rival—the US—was higher but variable. Just as
now, intellectual property rights were in dispute with
no government in a position to enforce them abroad.
An added current complication are the differences
over market liberalization and role of the state in the
economy, which are likely to continue.
Other experts emphasize that the global economic
system will become increasingly stressed. Up to
now less than one billion people have accounted for
three-quarters of global consumption; during the
next two decades, new and expanded middle classes
in the developing world could create as many as two
billion additional consumers. Such an explosion will
demographic dividend. The share of its population ages
15-65 will continue to rise from about 65 percent now
to perhaps 69 percent by 2030. India’s declining birth
rate combined with a greater proportion of dependent
seniors will not begin to create an economic burden
before 2050. Consequently, long-term forecasts show
Indian economic power growing steadily throughout
the 21st century and overtaking China at the end
of the century because of China’s maturing age
structure. To maximize its advantage from the greater
proportion of youths, however, India will need to
boost its educational system, both attainment and
quality at lower levels; make substantial governance
improvements, particularly in countering corruption;
and undertake large-scale infrastructure program to
keep pace with rapid urbanization and the needs of a
more advanced economy.
Both China and India are also vulnerable to the
volatility in prices of key resources and to the
potential early impacts of climate change. The Asian
Development Bank indicated in a 2011 reporta that
based on current trends Asia could become 90
percent dependent on imported oil by 2050. Rapid
urbanization also enhances the vulnerabilities of Asian
countries. Approximately 44 million people are being
added to Asia’s urban population every year; by 2025,
the majority of Asia’s population will be urban.
Currently many of China’s and India’s urban densities
(unlike Tokyo, Seoul, and Singapore) are decreasing,
creating urban sprawl, which is spurring growth in
car ownership, higher energy use, and higher costs
to provide utilities and transportation networks.
Food and water demands also rise exponentially
with urbanization. Asian cities are vulnerable to the
severe weather connected to climate change, which
amplifies storm surges and flooding of low-lying areas.
This is particularly the case for many of these coastal
cities: Kolkata (Calcutta), Mumbai (Bombay), Dhaka,
Guangzhou, Ho Chi Minh City, Shanghai, Manila,
Bangkok, Yangon and Hai Phong.
In light of these trends, emerging market demand for
a  See Asia 2050: Realizing the Asian Century, Asian Development Bank,
2011.

--- Sayfa 68 ---
47
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
late 19th century, a leading—though not dominant—
global currency (the dollar) may remain, but alongside
others. The absence of a clear hegemonic economic
power—as represented by an unrivalled global
currency—could in turn add to volatility as in the late
19th century. The various players pursued their special
interests with little risk of any enforcement of common
rules by an overwhelming power.
Of course, the future will not exactly repeat the
past: there are both reasons to believe that the global
economy will be stronger than in the late 19th century
and also situations in which it could become more
crisis-prone. We have a stronger global financial system
for dealing with stresses than we did in earlier eras.
The gold standard did not allow for a stabilization
policy by central banks, accentuating the volatility.
Bretton Woods institutions (the IMF and World
Bank)—which reduce the risk of spillover from fiscal
and other crises—did not exist. However, the degree
to which the emerging powers would view these
originally Western-established bodies with legitimacy
and deference in a full- scale economic crisis is unclear.
The current institutional framework is not likely to
withstand the unleashing of a major conflict between
the big economic players. Despite all the economic
integration during the late 19th century Belle Epoque,
the first globalization spurt was undone by the First
World War and 1930s’ Great Depression. As we’ll
explore in a later section, in the next couple decades
conflict involving great powers is not inconceivable,
but if such a conflict does occur, it almost certainly
will not be on the level of a world war with all major
powers engaged.
Finally, we are assuming that the new normal—albeit
more fragile and volatile than the Great Moderation
of the pre-2008 period—would be based on active
support of the emerging powers. As described above,
one could envisage mercantilist and protectionist
pressures growing to break down globalization,
particularly if coupled with rising political tensions
with neighbors and rivals.
mean a scramble for raw materials and manufactured
goods. With greater demand for products, economists
worry that the number of bottlenecks will increase
markedly and that supply of resources and goods will
face at least temporary constraints. This could mean
that the durations of business cycles will become
significantly shorter and that they will be less smooth.
Competition over resources might lead governments
to become increasingly involved in managing them,
ramping up tensions with other countries vying for the
same resources.
“Up to now less than one billion people
have accounted for three-quarters of
global consumption; during the next two
decades, new and expanded middle
classes in the developing world could
create as many as two billion additional
consumers. Such an explosion will
mean a scramble for raw materials and
manufactured goods.”
Effective global governance would be necessary to
avoid such tensions escalating and to ensure against
risks of mercantilism and protectionism infecting the
global economy. Such risks are greater in a multipolar
world marked by wide divergences in domestic forms
of capitalism and differences regarding how to manage
the international system. Any economic breakdowns
in key countries such as China would be likely to spur
political disruption, which would complicate recovery
and potentially limit the ability of others to help.
Interest rates may increase with imbalances between
easily available supplies and growing demand of raw
materials. Upward movement in interest rates may also
be pushed by a decline in global savings capacities as
rising middle classes in the developing world consume
more and aging populations in the developed world
begin to draw down their savings. Some economists
also expect growing incentives for investors to
diversify. With long-run growth trends diverging, the
relative attractiveness of Western bonds as opposed
to emerging markets will begin to decline. As in the

--- Sayfa 69 ---
48
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
Game-CHANGER 2
The Governance Gap
Whether governments and international institutions
will be able to adapt fast enough to harness change
instead of being overwhelmed by it is a key question
for future developments. The rapid advances in
information, communications, and other technologies
argue for publics and institutions that will be better
able to tackle global and regional challenges. If the
global middle class expands as many experts project,
demand for rule of law and government accountability
is likely to increase. Challenges associated with
managing increasing urban conglomerations will tax
governing structures, but such challenges also will
prompt development of more effective governing
structures and smarter technologies. However,
the increasing number of players needed to solve
major transnational challenges will complicate
decisionmaking. A growing number of diverse and
dissimilar state, subnational, and nonstate actors will
play important governance roles in an increasingly
multipolar world. Finally, the lack of consensus
between and among established and emerging
powers suggests that the baseline case for multilateral
governance out to 2030 will be at best limited.
“The rapid advances in information,
communications, and other technologies
argue for publics and institutions that
will be better able to tackle global and
regional challenges . . . However, the
increasing number of powers needed to
solve a major transnational challenge will
complicate decisionmaking.”
GOVERNANCE STARTS AT HOME: RISKS
AND OPPORTUNITIES
The governance gap will be most pronounced at the
domestic level and driven by the rapid political and
social changes. The advances over the past couple
decades in health, educational levels, and income—
which we expect to continue, if not accelerate in
some cases—are both affected by and drivers of new
governance structures. Both social science theory
and recent history—the Color Revolutions and the
Arab Spring—support the idea that with maturing
age structures, greater educational levels, and rising
incomes, political liberalization and democracy
are nurtured and advance. However, the extended
transition to full democracy is much more stable and
long-lasting when youth bulges begin to decline and
incomes are higher.
Two conditions can increase the prospects for
instability: First, studies have shown that countries
moving through the mid-range between autocracy and
democracy have a proven record of high instability.
Second, countries that have a government system that
is highly inconsistent with their level of development
in other spheres, particularly their economic levels,
tend to be less stable. These same two risk factors
apply to a large number of the countries in the world.
Countries in the Awkward Mid-Range
If we use Polity’s 20-point scalea and define the
awkward mid-range between autocracy and democracy
as scores between five and 15 (with autocracy below
five and democracy above 15), currently about 50
countries qualify as falling into this major risk group.
Most countries remain below a more consolidated
democratic level of 18 or above, suggesting that even
in 2030, many countries will still be zig-zagging their
way through the complicated democratization process.
The greatest number of countries in the mid-range
in 2030 is likely to be in Sub-Saharan Africa (23 of 45
countries), followed by Asia (17 of 59 total, including
five of the 11 Southeast Asian countries and four of
the nine Central Asian ones), then the Middle East
a  The Polity data series is a widely used data series in political
science research. It measures along a 20-point scale regime authority
characteristics and transitions for all independent states with greater
than 500,000 total population and covers the years 1800–2006. Polity’s
conclusions about a state’s level of democracy are based on an evaluation
of that state’s competitiveness of political participation, openness and
competitiveness of executive recruitment, and constraints on the chief
executive.

--- Sayfa 70 ---
49
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
Natural Disasters That
Might Cause Governments
to Collapse
In October 2011, the National Intelligence Council
(NIC) partnered with Oak Ridge National Laboratory
(ORNL) to identify and investigate natural disaster
scenarios that would pose a severe threat to the
US and other major nations.a Participants—which
included subject-matter experts from universities
in the US, Canada, and Europe in addition to NIC
and ORNL officials—were asked to distinguish
among various categories of natural disasters:
extinction-level events; potentially fatal scenarios
with medium recurrence intervals; and “ordinary”
disasters with short recurrence intervals.
Scenarios in the extinction-level category are so
rare that they were discounted. The impacts from
these events—such as large volcanic eruptions or
impacts of large asteroids or comets—are likely to
be minimal because something else—such as major
military defeat or economic collapse— is far more
likely to bring down any great nation or civilization.
At the other end, “ordinary” disasters—which
typically cause high mortality and substantial human
misery and therefore warrant major prevention and
recovery efforts—do not present a major threat to
the foundations of nations or human society.
Far more serious threats are those natural disasters
that are both sufficiently severe to bring down
nations and also sufficiently likely to occur. A short
list of candidates fitting these criteria includes:
Staple-crop catastrophes, especially extreme
and prolonged drought, crop plagues, and highly
sulfurous long-duration but low-level volcanic
eruptions. Although severe outbreaks of generalist
pests (locusts and grasshoppers) are possible,
many of the worst epidemics can be traced to the
development of monocultures, which is increasingly
the case in modern agriculture. (See page 35
a  The full report will be available from the NIC.
where we talk about the potential for the spread
of wheat rust to have a devastating effect because
of the lesser biological diversity of wheat.) The
“Laki” eruption in Iceland in 1783-84 only lasted
eight months, but the “dry fog” that was produced
by its sulfurous plumes resulted in a hemispheric
temperature drop of 1.0-1.5 degree Centigrade and
widespread crop failures.
Tsunamis in selected locations, especially Tokyo
and the Atlantic Coast of the US. Tokyo—which
is at a low elevation—is the largest global city at
greatest risk. The largest tsunami that could hit
the US East would be due to an earthquake in the
Puerto Rico area. The travel time for the tsunami
to the East Coast is only 1.5 hours. The probability
of another massive earthquake occurring in Puerto
Rico within this century is over 10 percent.
Erosion and depletion of soils. Modern agriculture
is eroding soil at rates at least 10-to-20 times faster
than soil forms. Worldwide soil erosion has caused
farmers to abandon 430 million hectares of arable
land since the Second World War, an area the size
of India. Increases in oil prices and thus end of
cheap fertilizers means that maintaining agricultural
productivity without healthy soil will become
increasingly expensive and difficult.
Solar geomagnetic storms that could knock out
satellites, the electric grid, and many sensitive
electronic devices. The recurrence intervals of
crippling solar geomagnetic storms are less than
a century and now pose a threat because of the
world’s dependence on electricity. Until “cures”
are implemented, solar super-storms will pose
a large-scale threat to the world’s social and
economic fabric.

--- Sayfa 71 ---
50
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
or institutional incongruity, which almost certainly is
a weakness.
Those countries with high levels of a democratic
deficit—such as China and Gulf countries—present
great risks because of their systemic importance
to the international system. Under most scenarios,
China is slated to pass the threshold of US$15,000
per capita (PPP) in the next five years or so. This
level is often a trigger for democratization, especially
when coupled with high levels of education and
a mature age structure. Democratization is often
accompanied by political and social disruptions.
Many experts believe a more democratic China
would unleash growing nationalistic sentiment, at
least in the short-to-medium term, increasing already
existing tensions with China’s neighbors. Over the
longer term, as rule-of-law institutions become more
rooted and the political system stabilizes and and is
perceived as non-threatening, Chinese “soft power”
could be boosted. China’s successful transition to
democratization could increase pressure on other
authoritarian states as well as further burnish
China’s economic development model as long as
democratization did not permanently stem China’s
economic growth.
“The exponential increase in data,
combined with emerging capabilities
to analyze and correlate it, will give
unprecedented capabilities to individuals
and connected networks in nearly every
part of the world well before 2030.”
Several Gulf and Middle Eastern countries might be
able to provide the economic well-being and lack of
overt, violent repression that can hold back pressures
for political change, as does Singapore today. It is very
unlikely that many or all will. Although most risk
analysis is heavily focused on Africa, the prominence
of Middle Eastern countries, especially given the
substantial dependence of the world on energy from
the region, points to the need for continued attention
on these Middle Eastern countries during the next
15-20 years.
and North Africa (11 out of 16).a Recent events in the
Middle East/Levant confirm the region’s vulnerability
to the governance transition risk, which is likely to be
playing out to 2030.
“ . . . even in 2030, many countries will
still be zig-zagging their way through the
complicated democratization process.”
Countries with A Democratic Deficit
A “democratic surplus” is said to exist when a
country’s level of democratization is more advanced
than its level of development. When democracy is
present in the very poorest countries (India seems
to be an exception) and autocracy exists in the most
developed countries (those with not just high income,
but high educational attainment), those countries are
unstable. Regions that have somewhat higher levels of
democracy than we might expect and therefore may
be at some risk of reversal include Sub-Saharan Africa,
Latin America, and the Caribbean and South Asia.
A “democratic deficit” is said to exist when a country’s
developmental level is more advanced than its level of
governance. Democratic deficits are tinder that might
be ignited by various sparks.
Our modeling—based on the International Futures
model — highlights many of the Gulf, Middle East and
Central Asia countries—Qatar, the UAE, Bahrain, Saudi
Arabia, Oman, Kuwait, Iran, Kazakhstan, Azerbaijan—
and Asian countries such as China and Vietnam.
This set of countries is very different from the “usual
suspects” lists provided by indices of state fragility or
failure. These are not countries in which instability
has manifested itself in violence or a breakdown
of public services. Most of the standard indices of
vulnerability do not include any measure of repression
a  The full list of mid-range, vulnerable countries is Algeria, Angola,
Azerbaijan, Belarus, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Central African
Republic, Chad, China, Cote d’Ivoire, Cuba, Djibouti, Egypt, Equatorial
Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Laos,
Madagascar, Mauritania, Micronesia, Morocco, Myanmar, Niger, Nigeria,
Palestine, Papua New Guinea, Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Samoa, Sao
Tome, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syria, Tajikistan, Tanzania, Togo, Tonga,
Tunisia, Uganda, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Vietnam, Yemen, and Zimbabwe.

--- Sayfa 72 ---
51
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
Closing the Governance Gap
Governance
Level
Present Status
Trendline
Drivers
Subnational
Spread of new
communications technologies
has broadened individual’s
sense of community, bridging
national, regional, ethnic, and
gender divides. More networks
of cities are shaping policy
debates and leading national
and even global responses to
governance challenges.
Cities will tap into
growing public calls for
more local control and
decentralized government.
Some “global cities” will
overshadow their central
governments. Well-run
cities will manage resources
effectively; less efficient
ones could fuel instability.
National
The governance gap is most
pronounced at the domestic
level. Currently 50 countries
are in the “awkward” range
between autocracy and
democracy. Highly developed
East Asian and Middle
Eastern/Gulf countries have a
“democratic deficit”: a style
of governance that does not
match their economic levels.
Many countries are primed
to move toward greater
democracy by 2030,
but the process is often
destabilizing. China’s
democratization would have
immense repercussions.
Rapid economic
development—inasmuch
as it leads to greater
per capita income and
higher educational
levels—often accelerates
democratization. A high
correlation also exists
between more mature
age structures and a
country’s ability to achieve
full democracy.
Regional
All regions have made
great strides in regional
institution- building, but
integration has progressed
at varying speeds and levels
of comprehensiveness.
The likely growth of
intraregional trade points to
greater regional integration.
Whether a regional
collective security order can
be established, particularly
in Asia, is less clear.
Continuing distrust and
economic competition
and jockeying is likely
to limit the extent
of sovereignty-sharing.
Multilateral
Institutions
Many are questioning their
legitimacy because they
do not reflect the changing
economic hierarchy.
Even if global institutions
better mirror the changing
power setup, whether they
can tackle growing global
challenges is unclear.
A new concert among
newer and established
powers would enhance the
workings of institutions
and their effectiveness in
tackling global challenges.

--- Sayfa 73 ---
52
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
• The shift to cloud architecture will improve
utilization rates of computing infrastructure and
optimize network use. The cloud also will put
increased computing capability and meaningful
analysis in the hands of 80 percent of the
world’s population.
• Mobile devices are becoming increasingly
rich sensor platforms, enabling nearly all
communication mediated by technology to be
tracked and analyzed at a fine level of detail. More
than 70 percent of the world’s population already
has at least one mobile device; global mobile
data traffic in 2010 was three times the size of
the entire Internet in 2000. By 2015—only three
years away—in Sub-Saharan Africa, Southeast Asia,
South Asia, and the Middle East more people will
have mobile network access than with electricity
at home.
• Cheap digital storage means nearly all data
will be archived indefinitely. Information will be
“smart” about itself—indexed, categorized, and
richly tagged upon collection so that it can be
easily analyzed later.
• Bots—programs that run automated tasks in
the Internet-connected world—could become
as prevalent as robotics in the industrial world.
Although bots are best known for their use in
hacking and disruptive activities, they can be
used for any purpose. When combined with
massive data, bots could manage complex and
persistent tasks on behalf of individuals and
networked groups.
This new environment of widespread and enabled IT
use also will benefit illicit networks involved in crime,
terrorism, human and drug trafficking, and the theft of
intellectual property. IT devices will play an increasing
role in the fight against corruption and government
malfeasance and incompetence. However, at least for
the moment, such illicit activities are outstripping
the capacities of most countries and multilateral
institutions to contain them.
A number of Central Asian countries are on the
democratic deficit list or close below the top 20.
More generally, the region is another area beyond
sub-Saharan Africa where countries (other than
Afghanistan and Pakistan in South Central Asia or
South Asia) seldom make the highest positions on risk
lists when perhaps they should.
NEW TECHNOLOGIES SHIFTING ROLES OF CITIZEN
AND STATE
The spread of IT use will give individuals and groups
unprecedented capabilities to organize and collaborate
in new ways. Networked movements enabled by IT
already have demonstrated the capacity for disruption
and the ability to quickly draw global attention to the
need for political and social change. IT use enables
individuals to organize around shared ideas in the
virtual world and carry out sustained action. (See
pages 86-90 for more on the future of IT technologies.)
Sub-Saharan Africa, rural India, and other traditionally
isolated regions are being globally connected with
positive economic impacts. Social networking will
continue to be a potentially potent political weapon.
The pressure of social networks, particularly on
governmental power, almost certainly will grow
even stronger. The fact that the immense choices on
the Internet have not always led to a broadening of
perspectives, but rather to a narrowing points to a
potentially negative impact of social networking, such
as increasing partisanship and nationalism.
The exponential increase in data, combined with
emerging capabilities to analyze and correlate it, will
give unprecedented capabilities to individuals and
connected networks in nearly every part of the world
well before 2030. The use of IT will accelerate due to
three projected trends: a 95 percent drop in computer
memory costs, a reduction in raw data storage costs
to one hundredth of the current price, and a network
efficiency increase by more than a factor of 200. In
addition, four technological developments will provide
individuals and groups with new capabilities as the use
of IT proliferates:

--- Sayfa 74 ---
53
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
boundaries, and technological dependence—increase
the potential for more frequent discontinuous change
in the international system.
INCREASED FOCUS ON EQUALITY AND
OPENNESS
Newly empowered citizens will demand equality,
open access, transparency, and fairness. Authoritarian
regimes, particularly, will face increasing pressures
for greater accountability, openness, and citizen
participation. Despite having some more powerful
tools of their own, governments that fail to liberalize
and open up are likely to face a losing battle.
Growing gaps in income and wealth within countries
and between countries and regions has been a side
effect of the rapid economic transformation for some
time. During the next 15-20 years, some of this gap
will be reduced with the rise of a growing middle
class, although income inequalities in many societies
both in the emerging and developed world will
remain large. Other forms of inequality will become
increasingly important.
First, owing to the likely growth of revenues
dedicated to funding pensions, health-care, and other
entitlements in the West to care for aging populations,
younger generations will feel a growing sense of
inter-generational inequality.
Second, the urban/rural divide, particularly in the
rapidly developing world, will increase as the rising
megacities become more important engines of regional
and global growth. This may have an impact beyond
the country in which the city is located. These new
international cities will draw talent not only from
the rest of the country, but also from less developed
neighboring regions, complicating those regions’
efforts to develop.
Third, awareness of inequalites between different
actors of society, in particular between average
citizens and international private economic actors,
will grow. The focus on inequality will be due to
individuals’ sense of the impacts of globalization
AN EMPOWERED STATECRAFT?
The new expanding IT architectures and their use—
whether by individuals and networks or states—are
not deterministic. Governments and other traditional
political institutions have the capacity to adapt and
gain influence and clout.
Connective technologies will give governments—both
authoritarian and democratic—an unprecedented
ability to monitor their citizens. If threats and
challenges to state control escalate, IT use in
statecraft presents opportunities for middle and
emerging powers to project soft power and increase
their influence through new IT-enabled strategic
communications relative to bigger countries. Over
time, many experts we consulted believe that by 2020
or so, governments could begin to constrain the most
threatening illicit activities by adapting their use of
IT and partnering with nonstate actors and networks.
Countries could root out the most threatening actors
by going after places and organizations that support
illicit activities. The 30 corporations that control
around 90 percent of Internet traffic represent
chokepoints that could be used to enforce bans on
illicit activity.
“Both sides agreed . . . that the
characteristics of IT use . . . increase the
potential for more frequent discontinuous
change in the international system.”
Experts do not know how the balance will be
struck between greater IT-enabled individuals and
networks and traditional political structures. In our
interactions, technologists and political scientists
offered widely divergent views. Political scientists
remained skeptical of IT-enabled alternatives to state
power, while technologists viewed the IT as a global
revolution that will make states and legacy institutions
less influential in the next couple decades. Both sides
agreed, however, that the characteristics of IT use—
multiple and simultaneous action, near instantaneous
responses, mass organization across geographic

--- Sayfa 75 ---
54
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
governance challenges. The role of cities will be an
even more important feature of the future as urban
areas grow in wealth and economic power. In fact,
McKinsey Global Institute calculates that, by 2025,
emerging market cities will have more higher-end
middle-income households than developed ones.
Increasingly, cities are likely to take the initiative
on resource management, environmental standards,
migration, and even security because of their critical
importance to the welfare of urban dwellers. Already
many examples exist of grassroots innovation and
creativity; in fact, within the territories of failed
states, city and local governance structures are
often the only ones that work. The growing calls for
distributed governance networks and for legitimacy
around different geographic and social contexts
reinforce the importance of cities as actors within
governance networks.
Localism is unlikely to be an unqualified positive
trend. Historically, large-scale corruption has been a
feature of rapid urbanization. Badly managed urban
settings have also been a cauldron for political and civil
strife, including revolution. Too narrow a community
or local focus will prevent coordination or investment
around high-level and strategic responses. Two critical
issues for the future of the urban role in helping to
tackle global challenges will be whether coherence
can be built into local approaches to global issues
and whether cities will coordinate their efforts with
broader country and regional mechanisms. Within
a more decentralized system, sharing mechanisms,
joint framing, and more integration in planning
processes will be critical. A key uncertainty is the
extent to which effective approaches will be built for
sharing innovative approaches across different cities
and localities (especially from emerging economies
and slums where pressures create extraordinary
environments for innovation). The extent to which
learning and linking up can take place to create global
movements of local groups and communities will be
important in addressing global challenges.
in consolidating wealth at the top of the global
distribution of wealth (whether individuals, families, or
corporations). Many are likely to fear that this highly
mobile layer will be exempt from the same economic,
political, and social constraints that affect other
citizens, who are geographically constrained. Citizens
will focus on misconduct and corruption of some of
these actors, as well as governance gaps that arise from
off-shore accounts, secrecy jurisdictions, and other
aspects of the global taxation system.
The themes of equality and fairness are likely to have
an impact in the international arena as well. For some
time, the emerging powers have called for a more
democratic process for international relations whereby
the established powers are seen as setting the rules.
Elites and publics in the emerging power countries
believe the Post-World War II international system has
been skewed to favor the West, disputing Western
perceptions of an open, liberal order which has
allowed emerging powers to prosper and rise. On the
contrary, the impression of many of our interlocutors
was that, “America’s liberalism is selective and often in
short supply.” Examples cited include Western support
for authoritarian regimes, a double standard toward
states that acquire nuclear weapons, or actions that
are perceived to undermine international law and
human rights, particularly in the Middle East. Equality,
openness, and fairness are not just values to be applied
to domestic setups, but also pertain to the broader
international order.
NEW GOVERNMENTAL FORMS
The political landscape will be much more
complicated in 2030: megacities and regional
groupings are likely to assume increasing powers
whereas countries and global multilateral institutions
will struggle to keep up with the rapid diffusion
of power.
Cities’ growing political role and clout already exists
as witnessed by the growing number of networks
of cities, increasing bilateral relationships between
regions, and the role of cities in shaping policy debates
and leading national and even global responses to

--- Sayfa 76 ---
55
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
GLOBAL MULTILATERAL COOPERATION
The current, largely Western dominance of global
structures such as the UN Security Council, World
Bank, and IMF probably will have been transformed by
2030 to be more in line with the changing hierarchy
of new economic players. Besides the large emerging
powers like Brazil, India (who are not permanent
UNSC members), and China (has a veto in UNSC, but
not IMF voting rights commensurate with its economic
power), many second-tier emerging powers will be
making their mark—at least as emerging regional
leaders. Just as the larger G-20—rather than G-7/8—
was energized to deal with the 2008 financial crisis,
we expect that other institutions will be updated—
most probably also in response to crises.
Even if global institutions by 2030 better mirror the
changing power setup, however, the degree to which
they will have tackled growing global challenges is
unclear. A difficult tradeoff exists between legitimacy
and efficiency: trying to ensure all the right countries
are represented when a decision is taken—at the
A NEW REGIONAL ORDER?
Economic trends, especially the likely growth
of intraregional trade, point to greater regional
integration, suggesting the possibility of a world
order built more around regional structures. Asia has
made great strides in starting a process of regional
institution-building with a more diverse array of
regional groups than anywhere else in the world. The
scope will increase, especially for more functional
groupings aimed at dealing with particular problems,
such as environmental hazards—e.g., rising sea
levels—and trade and financial regulations as regional
integration advances.
It is less clear whether a regional collective security
order can be established in Asia. Geopolitically, some
Asian countries are drawn toward a Sino-centric
system whereas many others strongly oppose the
expansion of Chinese influence. This diversity means
that it is difficult for Asian countries to agree on an
answer to the most basic of questions: what is Asia?
The United States is a key factor in whether Asia
will move toward greater integration: the US has
been influential elsewhere in encouraging regional
multilateral institutions. China could be more
reassuring and, in the event that it starts down the
road of democracy, could be much more persuasive,
particularly if Asians develop doubts about the
credibility of the United States’ staying power.
Regional integration elsewhere will progress, but
at varying speeds and more for specific functional
purposes, which over time could further increase
demand for more integration. Regions such as South
Asia and the Middle East are unlikely to build regional
cooperation to the point of dealing with difficult
regional peace and security issues in the period out
to 2030. Scenarios we asked experts to construct for
both regions point to continuing geopolitical rivalry
and distrust even in the better cases. European
integration—in the sense that Europe has succeeded in
pooling sovereignty—is likely to remain the exception.
Europe is increasingly not seen by other regions as a
model for development.
GLobal population in urban areas
Source: McKinsey Company.
Percent urban
0
20
40
60
80
100
2030
2010
1950

--- Sayfa 77 ---
56
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
Challenge
Present Status
Worst-Case Outcome
Best-Case Outcome
Liberal Trade/
Economic
Coordination
Between 1980 and 2005,
world GDP growth
increased 32 percent
and world merchandise
imports/exports increased
more than sevenfold, but
the Doha trade round
has stalled.
Prospects for current and future
international trade rounds dim. Selective
multilateralism or regional arrangements
are more likely than open trading.
Destabilizing trade imbalances make
multilateral coordination difficult, but
1930s’-style protectionism is unlikely absent
a system breakdown from other causes.
Concessions by both
developed and emerging
powers lead to agreement
in the Doha round. The G-20
role is solidified as the global
forum for coordinated macro-
economic coordination.
Climate
Change
Annual meetings have
failed to yield any new
post-Kyoto comprehensive
agreement.
Global economic slowdown makes it
impossible for the US, China, and other
major emitters to reach meaningful
agreement. The result leaves UN-
sponsored climate negotiations in a
state of collapse, with greenhouse gas
emissions unchecked.
Cheaper and more plentiful
natural gas make emissions
target easier to achieve, but
so-called “two-degree” target
would be unlikely to be met. As
disparities between rich and
poor countries decrease, rising
powers may be more prepared
to make economic sacrifices.
Nuclear
Proliferation
Establishment and near-
universal adoption of the
Nuclear Non-Proliferation
Treaty (NPT) has facilitated
the emergence of a
powerful international
norm against nuclear
proliferation. Unilateral
action and military force
has been employed to
address non-compliance in
some cases.
Iran and North Korea trigger others’ active
interest in acquiring or developing nuclear
weapons. Terrorists or extremist elements
also acquire WMD material. The erosion in
NPT spills over, potentially triggering a total
breakdown in the international system.
Iran and North Korea are
dissuaded from further WMD
development. Terrorist groups
do not acquire WMD. The
West may need to extend
the nuclear umbrella to those
countries feeling threatened
by proliferation.
Responsibility
to Protect
(R2P)
Multilateral efforts to
prevent violent political
repression have been
sporadic and partially
successful, especially since
the end of the Cold War.
Western countries become increasingly
isolated. The lack of international consensus
prevents UNSC from acting to impose
sanctions, authorize military force, or make
referrals to the International Criminal Court.
Facing political and economic constraints,
the US and Europe would only be capable of
taking ad hoc actions to prevent atrocities.
Western engagement with
India, Brazil, and other rising
democracies would lead to
greater consensus on R2P,
particularly the basis for
military intervention.
Failing
States/
Ungoverned
Spaces
Multilateral efforts
to date have been
sporadic, spotty, and
under- resourced. Most
have focused on acute
security threats.
As a result of shrinking international
commitments, criminal and terrorist networks
flourish. UN and regional organizations
find themselves further under-resourced
to combat growing challenges. Resources
in fragile states are squandered, adding
to corruption and governance problems.
Increase in number of failed states.
Emerging powers see their
interests threatened by
failing states. With a growing
consensus, the G-20 facilitates
burdensharing among major
powers, the UN, and regional
groups. Regional organizations
assume greater responsibilities
for fragile states in their
neighborhoods.
Best- and Worst-Case Outcomes for Global Challenges 2030

--- Sayfa 78 ---
57
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
change by making mitigation efforts less burdensome
on productivity. Such advances would also make a
meaningful agreement to reduce carbon emissions
more acceptable to both developing countries and the
US, which worry that a carbon ceiling would impact
economic growth prospects.
“Future governance will not be either
black or white: advances cannot be
ruled out despite growing multipolarity,
increased regionalism, and possible
economic slowdowns.”
The future of nuclear proliferation hinges
on the outcome of North Korean and Iranian
efforts to develop nuclear weapons. Iran’s success,
especially, could trigger an arms race in the Middle
East, undermining the nonproliferation regime.
On the other hand, if the international community
prevails in its efforts to stop both of them,
multilateral cooperation would be bolstered and the
Non-Proliferation Treaty strengthened. Similarly,
use of nuclear weapons by state or nonstate actors
could either encourage or discourage proliferation
depending on how events unfolded.
Increased great power convergence in combating
the challenges of weak and failing states is conceivable,
particularly when the interests of all the powers is at
stake. For example, the G-20 could be used to facilitate
greater burdensharing among the major powers. With
their large military manpower, emerging powers,
including Brazil, India, and South Africa, have already
played increasingly significant roles in supporting
peacekeeping operations. Even China, a country
that once criticized UN peacekeeping operations as
interference with national sovereignty, now has more
than 2,000 forces deployed.
Coalitions of the willing with the tacit acceptance
or resignation of the other powers may still be able to
get the job done in some cases. Although there is broad
international support for “protecting populations from
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing, and crimes
against humanity,” the emerging powers may not want
same time trying to keep the numbers down to
facilitate decisionmaking. The growing multipolarity
and diffusion of power will make the process of
updating global institutions difficult. However, no
reform would mean the increasing loss of legitimacy in
the eyes of many publics in the emerging world.
Governance will still be complicated by diversity
and disparities between emerging and established
powers, the growing clout of nonstate actors, and
increasing capacities of subnational actors such as
megacities. Moreover, discordant values among many
of the key players and lingering suspicions are likely
to be the norm throughout this transitional period.
Longstanding worries by emerging powers about
incursions on sovereignty by more powerful Western
actors are deeply imbedded in popular as well as elite
opinion and will only ease gradually as the emerging
powers have to tackle growing transnational problems.
China’s recent movement away, for example, from
strict noninterference toward greater involvement in
peacekeeping and international military anti-piracy
operations has surprised many observers. At the
same time, China and many other emerging powers
are likely to remain leery, if not hostile to direct
interference, including sanctions aiming at forcing
changes in other regimes’ behavior. A democratic
China that might be more nationalistic would be
equally concerned about ceding sovereignty to others.
Future governance will not be either black or white:
advances cannot be ruled out despite growing
multipolarity, increased regionalism, and possible
economic slowdowns. Prospects for achieving progress
on global challenges will also vary across issues.
Technology and markets are likely to have a more
important impact in reducing carbon emissions than
efforts to negotiate any comprehensive or updated
Kyoto-style agreement—the success of which looks
questionable for the next decade or so. The expanded
exploitation and use of cheaper and cleaner natural
gas could overtake coal, resulting in significant
emissions cuts for the US and other big emitters such
as China. Other technological advances in renewable
technologies would also shift the debate on climate

--- Sayfa 79 ---
58
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
to take the initiative in order to avoid the appearance
of interference. Of course, this would allow others
to take action, including the use of force. With
increased communications and more active global
public opinion, the great powers will have increasing
difficulty avoiding action for humanitarian relief or
suppression of genocide.
The shared interests among the diverse collection
of major countries mean that even if the best case is
not achievable, multilateral and regional cooperation
will not unravel completely. The recent example of
the states avoiding 1930s’-style protectionism despite
the large- scale financial crisis in 2008 and prolonged
recession for most Western economies is a case in
point. On the other hand, the fact that no single nation
or bloc of countries will have the political or economic
leverage to drive the international community toward
collective action means that continued multilateral
advances will be difficult to forge. Given this paradox,
the table on page 59 provides clues as to how
governance outcomes for key global challenges would
fare under either the best or worst case.

--- Sayfa 80 ---
59
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
INTRASTATE CONFLICT: CONTINUED
DECLINE
As we have noted, since the 1970s, roughly 80 percent
of all armed civil and ethnic conflicts (with 25 or
more battle-related deaths per year) have originated in
countries with youthful age structures—a population
with a median age of 25 years or less. Wherever civil
and ethnic wars have emerged, they have tended to
persist. The average intrastate conflict that began
between 1970 and 1999 continued without a one-year
break in battle-associated fatalities for about six years.
Some—including the Angolan civil war, Northern
Ireland Troubles, Peru’s war against the Shining Path,
and the Afghan civil war—endured for decades. In
contrast, interstate conflicts that began between 1970
and 1999 lasted, on average, less than two years.
Beginning in the early 1990s, there was a marked
expansion in size and number of peace support
operations (PSOs) deployed in the aftermath of
intrastate conflicts. The PSOs, appear to have
dampened the persistence of some conflicts and
prevented the reemergence of others. The proportion
of youthful countries experiencing one or more
violent intrastate conflicts declined from 25 percent
in 1995 to 15 percent in 2005. Peacemaking and
nation-building—despite public ambivalence about
such efforts—has also helped to keep down casualties.
Looking forward, the risk of intrastate conflict almost
certainly will continue to decline in countries and
regions with maturing age structures (median age
above 25 years). Latin American countries and the
Caribbean—with the exception of Bolivia, Guatemala,
Haiti, and Paraguay—will be getting older and
therefore lowering their risks. Similarly, the risk of
intrastate conflicts will probably decline in continental
East Asia—where many countries are aging quickly.
However, the risk will remain high during the next
two decades in western, central, and eastern portions
of Sub-Saharan Africa; in parts of the Middle East and
South Asia; and in several Asian-Pacific island hotspots:
Timor Leste, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, and
Solomon Islands. (See map on page 22.)
Game-CHANGER 3
The Potential for
Increased Conflict
Historical trends over the past two decades show
fewer major armed conflicts and, where conflicts
remain, fewer civilian and military casualties. Maturing
age structures in many developing states point to the
likelihood of continuing declines in the number of
intrastate conflicts. In contrast, the chance of interstate
conflict, including one that could draw in the great
powers, although historically low, is rising. The
great powers would not want to engage in interstate
conflict because too much would be at stake. Their
main objective is economic development, and they
know that conflict could easily derail that. The nuclear
context also makes the cost of war prohibitively high.
Nevertheless, miscalculation by any one player remains
a possibility.
The globalizing environment over the past several
decades characterized by growing interdependence
could change, particularly as economic growth slows
in many countries and the global economy becomes
more volatile and potentially crisis-prone. In a more
competitive atmosphere, great power conflict may
not be inconceivable. Several regions—the Middle
East and South Asia—appear particularly susceptible
to outbreaks of large-scale violence despite the costs
to themselves and others. Many experts also have
hypothesized that growing resource constraints
combined with the possibility of increasing
environmental degradation may be a tipping point
for societies already struggling and lead to greater
intra- or interstate conflict. Finally, unlike during
previous periods, large-scale violence is increasingly
no longer the monopoly of the state. Individuals and
small groups will have access to WMD and cyber
instruments capable of causing massive harm and
widespread disruption.

--- Sayfa 81 ---
60
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
potential for increased conflict
Type
Present Status
Trendline
Factors
Changes in Character
Intrastate
The proportion of
youthful countries
experiencing
one or more
violent intrastate
conflicts declined
from 25 percent in
1995 to 15 percent
in 2005.
The risk of intrastate
conflict will continue to
decline in countries and
regions—such as Latin
America and Asia—with
maturing age structures
(median age above
25 years). The risk will
remain high over the
next two decades in
western, central, and
eastern portions of
Sub-Saharan Africa; in
parts of the Middle East
and South Asia; and in
several Asian-Pacific
island hotspots.
Constrained natural
resources—such as
water and arable
land—in many of
the same countries
that will have
disproportionate
levels of young
men—particularly
Sub-Saharan Africa,
South Asia, and parts
of the Middle East—
increase the risks of
intrastate conflict.
Most intrastate conflict
will be characterized
by irregular warfare—
terrorism, subversion,
sabotage, insurgency,
and criminal activities.
However, the spread of
precision weaponry—
such as standoff
missiles—may make
some conflicts more
like traditional forms
of warfare.
Interstate
Several interstate
conflicts have
occurred in the
past decade, but
the number is at a
historical low.
New powers are rising,
but they stand to
benefit from the existing
international order and
are therefore status quo
oriented. An increasing
number of states has
consciously or implicitly
chosen to maintain
military capabilities
far below their
inherent capabilities.
A more fragmented
international system
increases the
risks. Additionally,
increased resource
competition, spread
of lethal technologies,
and spillover from
regional conflicts
increase the potential
for interstate conflicts.
Future wars in Asia
and the Middle East
could include nuclear
element. Information
superiority will be
increasingly vital.
Proliferation of standoff
missiles will increase
the capacity of nonstate
actors. Distinction
between regular and
irregular forms of
warfare may fade as
some state-based
militaries adopt
irregular tactics.

--- Sayfa 82 ---
61
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
peace during the past five centuries.a Scholars account
for this in several ways. There have been few if any
periods in the past when global power has been
distributed as incongruously as it is today. US military
capabilities are unmatched by any other plausible
combination of powers and are likely to remain so
for decades to come. New powers are rising, but they
stand to benefit from the existing international order
and are therefore status quo-oriented. An increasing
number of countries has consciously or implicitly
chosen to maintain military capabilities far below their
inherent capabilities. This reflects their assessment of
the modern utility of using force to achieve political
objectives and perhaps their belief that they have
little to fear regarding the threat of major war in the
near future.
Nevertheless, we and other experts believe that
the risks of interstate conflict are increasing
owing to changes in the international system.
The underpinnings of the current post-Cold War
equilibrium are beginning to shift. If the United States
is unwilling or less able to serve as a global security
provider by 2030, the world will be less stable. If
the international system becomes more fragmented
and existing forms of cooperation are no longer
as seen as advantageous to many of the key global
players, the potential for competition and conflict also
will increase.
Three different baskets of risks could conspire
to increase the chances of an outbreak: changing
calculations of key players, contention over resource
issues, and a wider spectrum of more accessible
instruments of war.
In addition, the chances are growing that regional
conflicts—particularly in the Middle East and South
Asia—will spill over and ignite a wider conflagration.
The Middle East most likely will remain the most
volatile region, even as it moves toward greater
a  This information is from the Stockholm International Peace Research
Institute (SIPRI) Yearbook 2011. The SIPRI classifies a conflict that has a
core intrastate dynamic and attracts outside actors as an intrastate conflict
rather than an interstate one. Also see Bruno Tertrais’ article, The Demise
of Ares: The End of War as We Know It?, The Washington Quarterly,
Summer 2012, 35:3 pp 7-22.
We need to be cautious about the prospects for
a marked decline in the number and intensity of
intrastate conflicts, however. First, such an outcome is
probably dependent on continued global support for
costly PSOs. Second, a gradual increase in intrastate
conflict is occurring in countries with more mature
country-level populations that contain a politically
dissonant, youthful ethnic minority. Strife involving
ethnic Kurds in Turkey, Shia in Lebanon, and Pattani
Muslims in southern Thailand are examples of
intrastate conflicts persisting in states that display an
intermediate age structure (median age from about 25
to 35 years). A few of these conflicts have persisted
after the country-level age structure turned mature
(median age from 35 to 45 years). Examples include the
Chechen conflict in southern Russia and the Northern
Ireland Troubles. Looking forward, the potential in
Sub-Saharan Africa for intrastate conflict is likely to
remain high even after some of the region’s countries
graduate into a more intermediate age structure
because of the probable large number of ethnic and
tribal minorities who will remain much more youthful
than various countries’ overall populations.
Moreover, constrained natural resources—such
as water and arable land—in many of the same
countries that will have disproportionate levels of
young men increase the risks of intrastate conflict
breaking out. An index of countries facing growing
resource scarcities and environmental risks highlights
many Sub-Saharan African and South and East Asian
countries, including India and China. Many of the
wealthier countries are already dealing with the
growing threats; however, a number of countries in
these regions—Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Pakistan, and
Somalia—also have faltering governance institutions
and may not be able to cope with increasing
environmental challenges and population pressures.
INTERSTATE CONFLICT: CHANCES RISING
Few interstate conflicts have occurred for almost a
decade, and no major power war has erupted since
1939, constituting the longest era of major power

--- Sayfa 83 ---
62
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
mistrust. This situation probably won’t change as both
powers grow simultaneously—a first for Asia, where
one power has usually dominated. India’s concern
is fueled by what it perceives as a Chinese policy
of containment that threatens India’s rise. China’s
continuing cooperation with Pakistan on nuclear and
missile developments, its growing assertiveness in
its territorial claims, and opposition to New Delhi’s
participation in regional and global forums are likely to
remain irritants and shape India’s strategic outlook.
Russia’s strategic calculations will depend to a great
extent on whether Russian leaders decide to increase
Russia’s integration into the international system and
mitigate the threat of future armed conflict or whether
they choose to continue Russia’s relative isolation and
mistrust of others, exacerbating interstate tensions.
Russia has serious concerns regarding the threat posed
by a rapidly expanding China, particularly Beijing’s
growing appetite for natural resources which could
eventually encroach upon the Russian Far East and
Siberia. Russian leaders believe that they need to be
wary of the potential for the US and NATO to intervene
democratization. Fledgling democracies have a higher
risk of backsliding and instability. Endemic rivalries—
such as between Iran and its neighbors—would be
inflamed if Iran decided to develop nuclear weapons.
Many of these conflicts, once begun, would not be
easily containable and would have global impacts. The
increasing empowerment of nonstate actors, such as
Hizballah, in the region has the potential to further
escalate any conflicts. Instability in South Asia would
also have strong global repercussions as the region
increasingly becomes the driver for global economic
growth. Indo-Pak tensions remain at the forefront: we
are concerned, for example, about an escalation in
tensions should another major terrorist attack occur on
Indian soil emanating from territory under Pakistan’s
control. A conflict-ridden East Asia would constitute a
key global threat and cause large-scale damage to the
global economy. We address the possibility of regional
conflicts with global consequences in Game-Changer
Four, which begins on page 73.
CHANGING CALCULATIONS OF KEY PLAYERS
The strategic calculations of the emerging powers—
whose regional and global interests are in flux—are
likely to change dramatically over the next 15-20 years.
Heated debates are occurring among China’s elites,
for example, regarding whether China should move
away from its traditional policies —not having overseas
bases or major military alliances and not interfering in
the internal affairs of other countries—as its overseas
interests expand. The outcome of these debates will be
critical indicators of whether China intends to become
a global superpower, which in turn will have major
implications for the prospect of future great power
competition. Historical parallels with other great
power rises suggest that Chinese assertiveness might
increase as its economic growth slows and there is
political need at home to demonstrate China’s standing
in the world.
With growing economic ties and dependencies in both
the Persian Gulf region and Asia, India’s worldview
is expanding rapidly. Despite booming bilateral trade
and economic relations between Beijing and New
Delhi, the India-China relationship is clouded by
Global trends in Violent conflict, 1946-2009
Source: Center for International Development and
Conflict Management.
Interstate conflict
Internal conflict
Total Conflict
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
2005
2000
1995
1990
1985
1980
1975
1970
1965
1960
1955
1950
Number of active conflicts

--- Sayfa 84 ---
63
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
disasters to grow in scope, US military assets—such as
lift and intelligence information—will be key for the
success of broad-based global efforts.
NEW SOURCES OF FRICTION IN A RESOURCE-
CONSTRAINED WORLD
Allied with the changing security outlooks are
increasing tensions over resources. Access to key
resources—minerals in addition to energy—will
be vital to many developing states’ continued rapid
economic growth, and these states will be increasingly
dependent on outside sources. The potential for
disputes to grow over seabed rights is particularly
striking in several regions—the South China Sea and
the Indian, Arctic, and South Atlantic Oceans (see
textbox on page 68). Not only are the territorial claims
unsettled, but new technologies are increasingly
able to tap deep seabed resources. Nevertheless, the
relevant countries know that engaging in conflict over
these resources would jeopardize their exploitation.
This might prove to be a deterrent.
“Water may become a more significant
source of contention than energy or
minerals out to 2030 at both the intrastate
and interstate levels.”
Water may become a more significant source of
contention than energy or minerals out to 2030 at
both the intrastate and interstate levels. Although
water stressa exists in the United States and Mexico
and along the western coast of South America, the
world’s major belt of water stress lies across northern
Africa, the Middle East, central and southern Asia, and
northern China. These stresses are increasing because
this is also the zone of the largest projected population
growth during the next 15-20 years. Across this central
belt, there are numerous well-known watersheds
of significance, including the Nile, the Tigris and
Euphrates, the Indus, the Ganges, the Mekong, the
Yellow, and the Yangtze Rivers. Except for the Yangtze
and Mekong, all of these are under moderate (the Nile
a  Water stress is present when a country’s or region’s annual water supply
is less than 1,700 cubic meters per person per year.
in a conflict involving Russia and one of the former
Soviet republics.
Europe almost certainly will remain very cautious
about the use of force and military intervention.
The Europeans probably will continue to perceive
that their primary security challenges result from
globalization. These include threats that stem from
WMD proliferation; cyber threats directed at critical
infrastructures, including space assets; and threats
resulting from the competition for resources or the
influx of refugees from potential zones of instability.
Severe budget constraints for the foreseeable
future are likely to force European countries to
integrate European defense resources, causing the
military gap between Europe and the new global
powers to be reduced over time. With more defense
cooperation, the Europeans could play a greater
role in future multilateral operations, particularly in
humanitarian interventions.
The United States also is likely to face budgetary
constraints at the same time that—like Europe—its
global security challenges are multiplying. As such,
the US overall will be grappling with how much it
can continue to play the role of systemic guardian and
guarantor of the international system. (For a fuller
discussion of the US role see page 101) This may play
out in several different arenas. The United States’
historic role as security guarantor in Asia, including
its substantial on-the-ground military presence, puts
it in a competitive position with rising Asian states—
particularly China—who desire greater regional roles
for themselves. Continued US protection of the sea
lanes—particularly in the Persian Gulf and extending
both to Europe and through the Indian Ocean to East
Asia—are likely to be welcomed by most countries in
those regions. However, tensions—particularly with
China—probably will grow over the US role. Chinese
strategists worry that China’s dependence on the US
for sea lane security will be a strategic vulnerability for
China in a future conflict, such as over Taiwan, where
the US might impose an oil embargo. In response,
China is building up its naval power and developing
land-bound energy transportation routes to diversify its
access to energy. With the potential for humanitarian

--- Sayfa 85 ---
64
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
The proliferation of precision-guided weapons would
allow critical infrastructures to be put at risk by
many more potential adversaries. This could create
a fundamentally new security dynamic in regions
like the Middle East with multiple contending forces.
The proliferation of long-range precision weapons
and antiship missile systems would pose significant
challenges to US or NATO to forward deploy forces,
limiting in-theater options for military action. It could
discourage third parties from cooperating because of
fears of becoming a victim of more precision targets
with greater lethal consequences. More accurate
weapons could lead attackers to become overconfident
in their military capabilities and therefore more apt to
employ such systems. Precision also may give attackers
a false sense of their abilities to tailor attacks to create
specific, narrow effects.
Cyberweapons can take various forms including
viruses (self-replicating programs that require human
action to spread), worms (a sub-class of viruses that
can spread without human action), Trojan horses
(malicious software hidden within a legitimate
program), denial-of- service attacks (bombarding
servers with messages to make them crash), and
phishing (rogue emails and websites that trick people
into revealing password information).
Potential cyberwarfare scenarios include coordinated
cyberweapon attacks that sabotage multiple
infrastructure assets simultaneously. One scenario
involves a case where power, the Internet, cash
machines, broadcast media, traffic lights, financial
systems, and air traffic software simultaneously failed
for a period of weeks. The trends in cyberattacks so far
suggest that although some computer systems are more
secure than others; few, if any, systems can claim to
be completely secure against a determined attack. For
some attackers, cyberwarfare offers other advantages
that have seldom been the case for most warfare:
anonymity and low buy-in costs. These attributes favor
the employment by disaffected groups and individuals
who want to sow mayhem.
Growing interconnectivity of devices and software,
including greater use of the cloud and integration
and Ganges) to high stress and the Mekong is at least
temporarily under high stress as a result of drought
and Chinese reservoir filling.
The lesser (and in many cases) less well-known
watersheds across this belt—including the Jordan in
Israel/Palestine, the Kura-Ural and Kizilimak (adjacent
to the Tigris & Euphrates and largely in Turkey), Syr
Darya and Amu Darya (at one time more substantial
rivers feeding the Aral Sea), and Lake Balkhash and
Tarim in Central Asia—are mostly under high stress.
Across northern Africa, the Arabian Peninsula, and
Iran, considerable territory has no notable watersheds
and is therefore heavily dependent on fossil and
imported water, including “virtual water” imports—
such as agricultural goods like meat, fruit, and
vegetables using high levels of water to produce.
Historically, water tensions have led to more
water-sharing agreements than violent conflicts, but
a number of risks could change this past pattern,
including high levels of population growth in affected
areas and rapid changes in the availability of water,
such as, for example, from severe droughts. Intrastate
disruptions and conflicts probably are more likely
to be the immediate result as pressures build within
countries for relief and migration from impacted
areas puts added strains on other areas. However,
the fact that many of the river basins in the most
affected water-stressed areas are shared means that
interstate conflict cannot be ruled out—especially in
light of the other tensions ongoing between many of
these countries.
SPREADING LETHAL TECHNOLOGIES
The next 15-20 years will see a wider spectrum
of more accessible instruments of war, especially
precision-strike capabilities, cyber instruments,
and bioterror weaponry.
The commercial availability of key components, such
as imagery, and almost universal access to precision
navigation GPS data is accelerating the diffusion of
precision-strike capabilities to state and nonstate
actors, which we expect will be widespread by 2030.

--- Sayfa 86 ---
65
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
A Redefined OCEAN
Geography by 2030
With the shift in economic power from West to
East and South and changing climatic conditions,
the world’s geographic focus will also change.
The Pacific and Indian Ocean basins are already
the fastest-growing commercial hubs for the
exchange of goods, services, and people—a trend
that will intensify. With the growing competition
for resources, the regions below, which are rich in
natural resources, will also be of prime importance.
Indian Ocean. Although the Indian Ocean maritime
region currently ranks fifth out of nine regions for
global security (as classified by Lloyd’s Maritime
Intelligence Unit) behind northern Europe, the
Pacific, the Far East, and the Mediterranean/
Black Sea, the region is becoming an important
avenue for global trade and arena for geopolitical
competition. It has significant deposits of primary
raw materials that are vital to the world’s economy—
such as bauxite, chromite, coal, copper, gold,
iron ore, natural gas, nickel, oil, phosphates,
titanium, tungsten, uranium, and zinc. The region’s
fisheries also are a key part of food security and
regional livelihoods.
South China Sea. The difficulty of determining
national jurisdiction has been exacerbated by
coastal states’ interest in the exploitation of
fisheries and control of potential energy resources.
Overlapping claims by China and several ASEAN
states could lead to more confrontation, if not
conflict. Coastal states’ efforts to increase their
maritime jurisdiction pose a cumulative threat
to the military and commercial interests of all
maritime states.
Arctic. By 2030 it will be possible to transit both
the Northern and Northwest Passage for about 110
days per year, with about 45 days easily navigable.
However, use of the Arctic for commercial purposes
will depend on Arctic coastal infrastructure
development, agreed safety standards for
commercial vessels, and the availability of adequate
search-and-rescue capabilities. The use by Arctic
states of the Arctic Council to develop common
policies reduces the potential for disagreements
to lead to conflict. At the same time, climate
change and related events, such as the melting of
Arctic ice, will continue to propel a globalization of
interest in the Arctic. The US Energy Information
Administration estimates that the Arctic could
hold about 22 percent of the world’s undiscovered
conventional oil and natural gas resources, but
exploiting such resources involves greater expense,
risk, and a longer timeline than elsewhere in the
world. An array of interested parties plan to expand
scientific research and invest in assets such as
icebreakers that give themselves legitimacy as
Arctic actors.

--- Sayfa 87 ---
66
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
“Terrorists for the moment appear focused
on causing mass casualties, but this could
change as they understand the scope of
the disruptions that can be caused by
cyber warfare.”
There are few alternatives to the Internet. One
response would be to create disconnected networks,
which would be less efficient but safer from cyber
attacks. Authoritarian regimes are already taking such
steps; for example, Iran has created a national Internet.
Over the long term, however, organizations and
individuals will likely have to work hard to get offline
or carry out actions without leaving a digital trace.
between systems, will increase the vulnerabilities
of technology leaders, including the US, to attack.
Current trends suggest that deep interconnectivity
between different software systems and devices is
likely to become the norm, enabling remote access to
all kinds of systems that are offline today. More and
more everyday actions will have a digital component—
boarding a bus, buying groceries, entering a meeting
room. As societies become more dependent on
software and systems become more interconnected,
the potential levels of damage that cyberweapons will
be able to inflict will increase.
Environmental Water Scarcity Index by Basin: High-Stress Belt by 2030
Extremely more stressed
Exceptionally more stressed
Uncertainty in magnitude
Uncertainty in direction
No data or out of area
Significantly less stressed
Moderately less stressed
Near-normal conditions
Drier but still low stress
Moderately more stressed
Severely more stressed

--- Sayfa 88 ---
67
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
employ information technologies which communicate
and collaborate with like-minded individuals.
Advances in synthetic biology also have the potential
to be a double-edged sword and become a source of
lethal weaponry accessible to do-it-yourself biologists
or biohackers. As costs decline and DNA sequencing
and synthesis improve, researchers are capitalizing
on such advances in ways that are laying important
foundations for the field’s development. Because early
commercialization efforts have capitalized on the
supply of tools and low-cost materials to academic
and commercial researchers, the bio community has
established an open-access repository of standardized
and interchangeable building block or “biobrick”
biological parts that researches can use. Such advances
not only contribute to opportunities for exploring
increasingly novel and valuable applications, they also
raise the risk for unintended and intentional dual-use
developments to occur. This will be particularly true
as technology becomes more accessible on a global
basis and, as a result, makes it harder to track, regulate,
or mitigate bioterror if not “bioerror.”
To date, policy initiatives have focused on introducing
reporting requirements on suppliers of goods, but
such efforts could become futile as research becomes
more diffuse. Recent trends suggest applications
of the technology will continue to advance ahead
of understanding all the risks. Absent efforts to
strengthen regulatory frameworks to proactively
manage risks, the greater access to synthetic biology
increases chances of the development and use of
bioweaponry by individuals or terrorist groups
or release unintentionally of dangerous material
through “bioerror.”
POTENTIAL NEW SHAPE OF WAR
If future state-on-state conflicts occur, they will most
likely involve multiple forms of warfare. Future wars
in Asia involving Russia, China, or India and Pakistan
would risk use of a nuclear weapon in addition to
conventional military capabilities. Future conflicts in
the Middle East might also include nuclear aspects
if the proliferation of nuclear weapons continues.
As with the broad array of potential targets—
everything from military systems to electricity grids,
communications networks, and financial systems—so
too are potential cyber saboteurs widely varied. So far
the cyberweapons wielded by criminals and malicious
individuals are unsophisticated in comparison to
state actors, but this is likely to improve as criminal
organizations become more adept and potentially sell
their services to those state and nonstate actors with
even more dangerous intentions. Terrorists for the
moment appear focused on causing mass casualties,
but this could change as they understand the scope of
the disruptions that can be caused by cyber warfare.
Countries with nuclear weapons could be tempted to
explode a nuclear device to wipe out their opponent’s
ability to maintain connectivity. Many current systems
cannot operate in a hostile electromagnetic or radiated
environment. In this instance, nuclear first use would
not be used to harm humans as much as to deny
opponents use of electronic systems. Space, ocean, and
near coastal bottlenecks could be areas of nuclear use
with little human collateral damage.
A cyber arms race is likely to occur as states seek to
defend both public and private infrastructures against
state and nonstate actors as well as to incorporate
cyber and other debilitating physical attacks into
their arsenals of strategy and weaponry. The degree
to which cyber instruments will shape the future of
warfare is unclear, however. Historians of war believe
cyberpower may end up somewhat akin to early
20th century projections of the decisiveness of air
power. Although air power played a significant role in
20th-century conflicts, it never achieved what its most
ardent enthusiasts claimed it would: an independent,
war-winning capability.
Cyber power may be as important off the battlefield in
terms of the ability of information technology enabling
the emergence of networked social movements that
can create large economic, political, and security
effects. The potential opened up by information
technology is for future “do-it-yourself” revolutions
conducted by networked social movements that

--- Sayfa 89 ---
68
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
The Future of Terrorism
Several circumstances are ending the current
Islamist phase of terrorism, which suggest that as
with other terrorist waves—the Anarchists in the
1880s and 90s , the postwar anti-colonial terrorist
movements, the New Left in 1970s—the recent
religious wave is receding and could end by 2030.
Terrorism is unlikely to die completely, however,
because it has no single cause. The traditional use
of the term “root cause” for understanding what
drives terrorism is misleading. Rather, some experts
point to the analogy of a forest fire: a mixture of
conditions—such as dry heat, a spark, and wind—
that lead to terrorism.
• A Receding Enemy. Although al-Qa‘ida and
others have focused on the United States a
clear enemy, the appeal of the United States as
the “great enemy” is declining. The impending
withdrawal of US forces from Iraq and decreases
in US forces in Afghanistan help to reduce
the extent to which terrorists can draw on
the United States as a lightning rod for anger.
Soon, US support for Israel could be the last
remaining major focus of Muslim anger.
• Moral Resurgence of Secular Democracy. The
Arab uprisings have demonstrated the moral
and strategic legitimacy of nonviolent struggle.
Protestors acted in the name of democratic
values, not in the name of religion.
• Evaporation of Imagined War. Although
warfare is very real, it is also an imagined
state, based on a narrative of an enemy
and conflict between fundamental values.
These perceptions can change—sometimes
quickly. A new generation may simply view
things differently and be less interested in an
old narrative.
Al-Qa‘ida core has been in decline for several
years, as the kings of Muslims diminished the
organization’s broad appeal, the war in Afghanistan
cost al-Qa‘ida its initial base and forced it to move
into the more difficult environment in the trial areas
of Pakistan, and US attacks killed many senior
leaders and key operatives. In the short term, the
al-Qa‘ida core might still be able to launch attacks;
experts noted that organizations such as the
Baader-Meinhof group in the 1970s still did damage
even when facing similar problems as al-Qa‘ida is
today. Some al-Qa‘ida affiliates and other types
of Islamist terrorist organizations are likely to pose
more serious threats, however. Shia groups such
as Hizballah will continue to see terrorism as a
means to achieve their objectives. Taking a global
perspective, future terrorists could come from
many different religions, including Christianity and
Hinduism. Right-wing and left-wing ideological
groups—some of the oldest users of terrorist
tactics— also will pose threats.
STATES MANAGING TERRORISM
Many states might continue to use terrorist groups:
states choose to exploit terrorist movements out
of a strong sense of insecurity. States such as
Pakistan and Iran feel threatened by what they
perceive as stronger, threatening powers in their
regions or globally. Therefore, they seek asymmetric
options to assert power and deter attack; using
terrorist groups as proxies and pursuing nuclear
weapons are two such asymmetric tools. However,
international disapproval of state support for
terrorist movements has increased significantly,
and the costs to a regime of directly supporting
terrorists looks set to become even greater as
international cooperation increases.
MORE WEAPONS AND TARGETS IN THE FUTURE
To date, most terrorists have focused on causing
mass casualties, but this could change. The future
will include very large vulnerabilities: only a small
number of people might understand critical cyber
systems, for example, creating a risk that they
could sell their services to the highest bidder,
including terrorists who would focus less on mass
casualties and more on widespread economic and
financial disruptions.

--- Sayfa 90 ---
69
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
increasing numbers of ballistic and cruise missiles that
can employed against them.
Information Superiority vs. Information Denial.
The traditional way of war for the the US and NATO
allies depends on achieving information superiority
to identify targets, employ precision-guided weapons,
and maintain effective command and control. The
ability of a future adversary to deny or mitigate
that information advantage—including through
widening the combat to outer space—would have a
dramatic impact on the future conduct of war. China’s
development of capabilities to counter US information
superiority in a future conflict is an example of this
type of competition.
Regular vs. Irregular Forms of Combat. The
competition between regular, organized state-based
military operations and decentralized, irregular
warfighting exhibited recently in Afghanistan and
Iraq almost certainly will continue. This competition
is not new, but the evolution of “hybrid adversaries,“
who combine irregular tactics with advanced standoff
weaponry, add new dimensions to it.
Conflicts with state-sponsored organizations, such as
Hizballah and HAMAS, represent the middle ground
in the spectrum of future warfare because such
adversaries would probably combine irregular warfare
tactics and organizational concepts with advanced
standoff weaponry and air defenses.
The character of future wars will most likely be shaped
ultimately by a number of ongoing and emerging
military competitions. The dynamic created by these
competitions, as well as the prospect of a clear winner
eventually emerging, will help to define the character
of the future security environment and any wars that
take place within it.
Access vs. Anti-Access. The US ability to project air
and maritime forces is in competition with China’s
burgeoning capabilities to deter and deny such force
projection. The outcome of this competition will
impact the ability of either side to control the maritime
and air approaches to East Asia and the US ability to
assure allies in the region.
Nuclear Disfavor vs. Nuclear Renaissance. Nuclear
ambitions in the US and Russia over the last 20 years
have evolved in opposite directions. Reducing the
role of nuclear weapons in US security strategy is a US
objective, while Russia is pursuing new concepts and
capabilities for expanding the role of nuclear weapons
in its security strategy. Other nuclear powers, such as
Pakistan and potential aspirants Iran and North Korea,
desire nuclear weapons as compensation for other
security weaknesses.
Missile Defense vs. Missile Offense. The
proliferation of standoff missilies to both state and
nonstate actors has become a feature of modern
warfare. The threat these missiles pose to critical
infrastructures (economic, energy, political, etc) as
well as to military forces will increase as their ability
to be precisely targeted or carry weapons of mass
destruction increases. In response, some countries
are making significant efforts to counter the threat
through multi-layed missile defenses. It remains to be
seen whether technologically advanced and expensive
missile defense systems can keep pace with the

--- Sayfa 91 ---
70
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
Republic maintains power in Iran and is able to
acquire nuclear weapons, the Middle East will face
a highly unstable future. The collapse of the House
of Saud could wreak havoc on the region’s economy,
and the emergence of a radical Islamist government in
Egypt could exacerbate regional tensions on a variety
of fronts. Fragmentation along ethnic and religious
lines in Iraq and Syria could lead to an unraveling of
current borders. On the other hand, the emergence
of moderate, democratic governments in these
countries, or a breakthrough agreement to resolve
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, could have enormously
positive consequences.
Our discussions with experts led us to identify six
key determinants of the region’s future, which we
discuss below.
1. Will political Islam moderate as it assumes
power? Political Islam, after the false start of the
Islamic Salvation Front (FIS) election in Algeria over
20 years ago, is becoming empowered in the Sunni
world. From the Justice and Development Party (AKP)
in Turkey, to the Freedom and Justice Party (FJP) in
Egypt, Ennahda in Tunisia, and Hamas in Gaza, and
potential Islamic victories in Libya and Syria, the
Middle East landscape is changing in profound ways.
Islamic parties such as those in Egypt have responded
with calls for expanding the safety net for the lower
middle class; adding thousands of jobs to the public
sector; and retaining subsidies on food and energy.
These policies are not sustainable. Future ruling
Islamic parties will become more market-oriented,
empowering the more entrepreneurial younger Muslim
Brotherhood “new guard” and others who can grow
the economy.
Over time political pragmatism could trump ideology
helped by a growing civil society that will begin to
produce a new cadre of pragmatic, entrepreneurial and
social leaders—something that authoritarian regimes
consistently stifled.
Islamic democracy almost certainly will mutate into
a variety of political hues. Tunisian Islamic parties
will be different from one another, but all of them
Game-CHANGER 4
Wider scope of
regional instability
Regional dynamics in several different theaters during
the next couple decades will have the potential to
spill over and create global insecurity. The Middle
East and South Asia are the two regions most likely
to trigger broader instability. The number of potential
conflicts in these two regions is rising. Many of these,
once begun, would not be easily containable and
would have global impacts. Changing dynamics in
other regions would prove equally important for global
security. An increasingly multipolar Asia lacking
a well-anchored regional security framework able
to arbitrate and mitigate rising tensions constitutes
a significant global threat; an unstable Asia would
cause large-scale damage to the global economy. A
more inward-focused and less capable Europe would
provide a less stabilizing force for crises in neighboring
regions. Countries in Sub-Saharan Africa and
Central America and the Caribbean will remain
vulnerable, nevertheless, to state failure through 2030,
providing safe haven to both global criminal and
terrorist networks and local insurgents.
The Middle East: At a Tipping Point
By 2030, the Middle East will be a very different place,
but the possibilities run a wide gamut from fragile
growth and development to chronic instability and
potential regional conflicts. Demographically, the
youth bulge–a driving force for the recent Arab Spring–
will give way to a gradually aging population, as the
social and economic impacts of declining fertility rates
begin to manifest. With new technologies beginning
to provide the world with other sources of oil and gas,
the region’s economy will need to become increasingly
diversified in order to continue to grow. Like other
emerging powers around the globe, highly-populous
Middle East countries could see their regional and
potential global influence enhanced.
The future of the Middle East hinges primarily on
political developments in the region. If the Islamic

--- Sayfa 92 ---
71
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
weak governments mired in domestic violence and
civil strife are unlikely to play a strong role, leaving
non-Arab powers, especially Turkey, Iran, and Israel, as
the major players.
3. Can Middle Eastern countries fix their
economies and ride the globalization wave?
The fertility rate is coming down, but the youth
bulge will last until 2030. At the same time, an aging
population by 2030 may face a health-care crisis
absent a better-provisioned welfare system. Only 2
percent of global foreign direct investment (FDI) is
currently going to the Middle East, and there is little
to attract FDI apart from energy, tourism, and real
estate. Many Middle Eastern countries are also far
behind on technology, and the region is one of the
least integrated in trade and finance. The Middle East’s
traditional trade partner—Europe—is facing slower
growth, although Sub-Saharan Africa, whose economy
is expanding could present increased opportunities.
“If the Islamic Republic maintains power
in Iran and is able to acquire nuclear
weapons, the Middle East will face a highly
unstable future.”
The richer Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries
are in a good position to help: GCC sovereign wealth
funds have built up sizable assets in recent years and
a growing share of petrodollar wealth is likely to
be invested in local and regional markets, including
Egypt, Libya, and Tunisia. In addition, GCC states
are turning more of their oil into refined products or
petrochemicals to create value-added commodities.
The Gulf is a magnet for investments from Asia,
Europe, and elsewhere.
Still, Gulf countries could face stiff challenges if oil
supplies increase substantially from the exploitation
of shale gas and oil deposits, which will undercut high
energy prices. The fiscal breakeven price of oil for
Saudi Arabia keeps rising from $67 a barrel to more
recent government figure of $100, suggesting spiraling
budget expenditures that could outpace oil price rises.
Without hikes in the internal oil price, which would
will be intent on establishing their legitimacy in
this new post-authoritarian era. In post-Assad Syria,
it is likely that an urban Sunni would take power
in a coalition comprising the Muslim Brotherhood,
religious minorities, Druze, Kurds, and others. Before
Hafez Assad took power over 40 years ago, urban
Sunni parties ruled Damascus in frequent and unstable
governments. It may be back to the 1960s in Syria.
In Iraq, the government is already showing signs of
reverting to factionalism, in this case the Shia are
willing to share power with the Sunni Arabs or Kurds.
If corruption and chronic unemployment persists, or
if large segments of the working poor feel their lives
have failed to improve with the election of democratic
governments, they may choose to turn to political
leaders who offer a more radical approach. Hardline
Islamists may have greater popular appeal given their
commitment to conservative religious principles,
providing a clearly identified alternative to Western
capitalism and democracy.
2. Will governments in transition prevent civil
strife? Chronic instability will be a feature of the
region because of the growing weakness of the state
and the rise of sectarianism, Islam, and tribalism. The
challenge will be particularly acute in states such as
Iraq, Libya, Yemen, and Syria where sectarian tensions
were often simmering below the surface as autocratic
regimes co-opted minority groups and imposed
harsh measures to keep ethnic rivalries in check. In
event of a more fragmented Iraq or Syria, a Kurdistan
would not be inconceivable. Having split up before,
Yemen—with a weak central government—may do
so again. Under any scenario, Yemen is likely to be
a security concern with weak central government,
poverty, unemployment with a young population that
will go from 28 million today to 50 million in 2025.
Bahrain could also become a cockpit for growing
Sunni-Shia rivalry, which could be destabilizing for the
Gulf region.
Over time, ongoing violence could undermine
support for democratic governance and lead to the
emergence of strongman dictators—propelling these
countries away from liberal democracy. Regionally,

--- Sayfa 93 ---
72
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
Israeli room for maneuver, however, if it wants to avoid
an escalating conflict with Arab opponents.
Resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict would
have dramatic consequences for the region over the
next two decades. For Israel, a permanent resolution
to the conflict could open the door to regional
relationships unthinkable today. The end of Palestinian
conflict would provide a strategic setback to Iran
and its resistance camp and over time undermine
public support for militant groups such as Hizballah
and Hamas. Without some sort of resolution, Israel
would be increasingly absorbed with trying to control
a burgeoning Palestinian population with limited
political rights and a restive Gaza next door.
Many of our interlocutors saw a Palestine emerging
from Arab-Israeli exhaustion and an unwillingness of
Israelis and Palestinians to engage in endless conflict.
Issues like ‘right of return’, demilitarization and
Jerusalem will not be fully resolved by 2030, and there
will be no complete end of conflict. The way forward
toward a Palestinian state will be through a series of
unofficial independent actions known as ‘coordinated
unilateralism,’ incrementally leading to statehood. As
Hamas moves away from Syria and Iran to the Sunni
Arab fold, the potential for reconciliation between
the Palestinian Authority in Ramallah and Hamas
in Gaza would increase. Palestine’s borders will be
roughly along the 1967 borders with adjustments or
land swaps along the Green Line, but other issues will
remain unresolved.
6. Will Saudi Arabia and other Sunni Gulf
monarchies—beyond Bahrain—remain immune
from regime-threatening protest movements that
have transformed the Arab world? Whether or not
oil spare capacity develops elsewhere, political turmoil
in Saudi Arabia could trigger widespread economic and
political uncertainty. Within the country, competing
groups probably would vie for power, including
Muslim-Brotherhood-affiliated groups, radical Islamic
extremists, secularists, and Shiite actors. As in Egypt,
a future political transition could be messy and
complicated. Other Sunni monarchies may soon find
themselves under pressure to embrace far-reaching
reduce rising domestic consumption, Saudi Arabia is
on course to become a net oil importer by 2037.
4. How will Iran project regional power? Iran’s
influence is linked to its nuclear aspirations. A number
of our interlocutors believe that Iran will stop short
of developing a nuclear weapon— but will retain the
ability to develop such a weapon. In this scenario,
a breakdown of the nonproliferation system would
be inevitable, with Saudi Arabia obtaining nuclear
weapons or capabilities from Pakistan. Turkey might
react to a nuclear Iran by seeking its own nuclear
capability or relying instead on the NATO defensive
shield. The UAE, Egypt, and possibly Jordan almost
certainly would begin nuclear programs in the energy
field as hedges that enabled them to go forward if Iran,
Saudi Arabia, or others in the region became overt
nuclear powers. If this occurred, the region would
be in constant crisis. Sunni-Shia and Arab-Persian
antagonisms would increase, spilling over to create
far-reaching instability outside the region.
A second scenario would involve the Iranian regime
coming under growing pressure from its public,
which could desire economic gains rather than
nuclear weapons, and might not want to pay the price
in terms of international isolation. Eventually, the
regime could be toppled by elite infighting and mass
demonstrations. Under this scenario in which Tehran
focused more on economic modernization, a more
pro-Western, democratic Iran—and a more stable
region—would emerge.
5. Can an Israeli-Palestinian settlement be
reached, enhancing the region’s prospects for
stability? At home, Israel faces increasing political
and social divisions between those who still cherish
a vision harking back to its 1948 founding of a
sectarian, liberal republic or an Israel characterized
by the growing demographic weight of the religiously
conservative Haredim and settler movement. Some of
our interlocutors thought the divisions would come
to a head before 2030. Israel will remain the strongest
military power, but face continuing threats from low
intensity warfare in addition to any nuclear one from
Iran. Growing Arab public opinion could constrain

--- Sayfa 94 ---
73
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
wider scope of regional instability
Type
Present Status
Trendline
Drivers
Middle
East
At a tipping point, the Middle
East faces a wide gamut
of possibilities from fragile
growth to chronic instability
and regional conflicts.
The youth bulge—a driving
force for the recent Arab
Spring—almost certainly will
give way to a gradually aging
population. New energy
technologies and production
elsewhere will mean Middle
East economies will need
to diversify.
If Iran develops nuclear
weapons, the Middle East
faces a highly unstable future.
Other critical variables include
the stability of the House of
Saud; the emergence of a
radical Islamist government
in Egypt; and fragmentation
in Iraq and Syria, which could
lead to the unraveling of
current borders.
South Asia
Low economic growth,
large youth bulges, rising
food prices, and energy
shortages pose stiff
challenges in Pakistan and
Afghanistan. Inequality,
lack of infrastructure, and
educational deficiencies are
key weaknesses in India.
Three possible scenarios
include a Turn-the-Corner
scenario, which many experts
believe is unlikely. In an
Islamistan scenario, the
influence of radical Islamists
grows. In an Unraveling
scenario, destructive forces
would come to the fore,
resulting in a social and
political fracturing of Pakistan
and Afghanistan.
Intra-regional trade would be
important in building trust
between India and Pakistan. A
Mumbai-style terrorist attack
perpetrated by militants
backed by Pakistan could spark
an open conflict with India.
Conflicting strategic goals and
widespread distrust will make
it difficult to develop a strong
regional security framework
for Afghanistan.
East Asia
Surging economic growth,
dramatic power shifts,
nationalism, and aggressive
military modernization—not
just in China but India and
elsewhere—have amplified
rather than diminished
regional competition.
Regional trends will pull
countries in two directions:
toward China economically but
toward the US and each other
for security.
Rule of law and more
transparency on its military
modernization would assuage
security concerns about
China. China’s weaknesses,
however, could make Beijing
more unpredictable or even
highly aggressive.
Europe
By any measure—GDP,
trade volume, number of
transnational companies, or
technological capabilities—
Europe will remain a
great power.
Economic logic—which
argues for more integration—
conflicts with the desire of
publics to hold onto separate
national affiliations, limiting
greater integration.
Massive transfers of
sovereignty may be a bridge
too far. On the other hand, EU
members may stick together
to avoid major political and
economic disruptions.

--- Sayfa 95 ---
74
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
wider scope of regional instability continued
Type
Present Status
Trendline
Drivers
Sub-
Saharan
Africa
The megatrends of population
growth without aging, rapid
urbanization, and middle
class expansion will shape
the trajectories of most
African countries. At least
a few—particularly in the
Sahel and the Horn—will
be sharply challenged by
resource scarcities.
Most African states already
face moderate-to-high threats
of instability, but improved
governance, resource
management, and economic
diversification offer the chance
to move to more stable
ground. The Sahel region,
Congo/DROC, and Somalia will
be the most vulnerable.
Africans will be able to choose
from best-proven approaches
and technologies in the
developed world without
needing to adapt and reform
legacy systems, but rent-
seeking, patronage, populism,
and corruption may tempt
many and challenge long-
term planning.
Latin
America
Latin America and the
Caribbean have undergone
far-reaching change during
the past decade, including
sustained economic growth,
but the distribution of the
benefits still remains uneven.
With annual real GDP growth
averaging 4 percent, the
middle class ranks have
swelled. The region has also
seen greater economic and
political participation by
women, indigenous peoples,
and minority groups, many of
whom have benefited from
greater access to education
and health-care services.
The pace of world economic
growth will be a key factor
affecting the demand for
Latin American commodities,
labor, and other services. The
second key factor is the extent
to which Latin Americans
position themselves to capture
economic gains through
investments in education,
market-opening reforms, and
enhanced rule of law and
governing capacity.
Russia
Russia’s economy is its
Achilles’ heel. Its budget is
heavily dependent on energy
revenue; efforts to modernize
the economy have made
little progress; and its aging
workforce will be a drag on
economic growth.
Russia will need to
improve the environment
for foreign investment
and create opportunities
for Russian exports of
manufactured goods.
Russia’s posture towards the
West and China will help
determine whether it moves
to becoming a more stable,
constructive global player. A
negative role is more likely
with sagging living standards
which would spur more
nationalist sentiments.

--- Sayfa 96 ---
75
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
and bolstering military outlays. Pakistan’s large and
fast-growing nuclear arsenal in addition to its doctrine
of “first use” is intended to deter and balance against
India’s conventional military advantages. India worries
about a second Mumbai-style terrorist attack from
militants backed by Pakistan. A major incident with
many casualties and Pakistani fingerprints would put
a weakened Indian Government under tremendous
pressure to respond with force, with the attendant risk
of nuclear miscalculation. Afghanistan could become
the focus of future Indian-Pakistani competition,
particularly after the drawdown in US and NATO
forces post-2014. Both countries want to deny giving
the other a strategy advantage, making regional
cooperation difficult. More broadly, conflicting
strategic goals, widespread distrust, and hedging
strategies of all Afghanistan’s neighbors—not just India
and Pakistan—will make it difficult to develop a strong
regional security framework.
Increasingly China is also driving India threat
perceptions, partly because of China’s role in
supporting Pakistan, but mostly because of China’s
increasing global and regional profile. Indian elites
worry about the potential for a widening economic
gap between China and India if Indian growth does
not rebound from its recent slowdown and India
does not put more emphasis on rapid economic and
technological development. Intensifying competition
between India and China could lead to great-power
conflict that would not be limited to the South Asian
theatre, drawing in the US and others.
Three possible scenarios include:
In a Turn-the-Corner scenario, sustained economic
growth in Pakistan based on the gradual normalization
of trade with a rising India would be a critical
factor. An improved economic environment would
produce more opportunities for youth entering the
workforce, lessening the attractiveness of militancy
and containing the spread of Islamic violence.
Intra-regional trade would also be important in
building trust between India and Pakistan, slowly
changing threat perceptions and anchoring sectors
with vested interests in continuing economic
political reforms or face a similar uprising in their own
countries. In Lebanon, the Palestinian Territories, Iraq,
and other places where the Saudis have used their
influence to support Sunni allies, groups that have long
relied on such support may be considerably weakened,
perhaps to the benefit of Shiite and pro-Iranian rivals.
If the GCC monarchies are able to successfully ride out
the Arab Spring, the greatest beneficiaries regionally
might be Jordan and Morocco—the most vulnerable
Sunni monarchies. Such a result would also ensure
GCC regional influence, providing Gulf countries
with continued economic leverage in Arab countries
in transition, including Egypt and potentially Syria.
Finally, the status quo scenario would preserve and
perhaps deepen the cold war dynamic between the
Gulf states and Iran, especially as Iran nears the
nuclear threshold.
South Asia: Shocks on the Horizon
Like the Middle East, South Asia will face a series of
internal and external shocks during the next 15-20
years. Impacts from climate change, including water
stress, in addition to low economic growth, rising
food prices, and energy shortages will pose stiff
challenges to governance in Pakistan and Afghanistan.
Afghanistan’s and Pakistan’s youth bulges are
large—similar in size to those found in many African
countries—and when combined with slow-growing
economies portend increased social instability. India
is in a better position, benefiting from higher growth,
but New Delhi will still be challenged to find jobs
for its large youthful population. Inequality, lack of
infrastructure, and educational deficiencies are key
weaknesses in India. India also faces an intransigent
rural insurgency—the Naxalites—which constitutes
an internal security challenge. Rapid urbanization in
India and Pakistan almost certainly will transform their
political landscapes from more traditional control by
rural elites to one shaped by a growing pool of urban
poor and middle class.
The neighborhood has always had a profound
influence on internal developments in all the countries
in the region, increasing the sense of insecurity

--- Sayfa 97 ---
76
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
to Islamist insurgents and would be more willing to
engage in negotiations with these Islamists.
In an Unraveling scenario, all the destructive forces
lurking in the region—such as weak government, large
numbers of unemployed youths, and food and water
crises—would come to the fore and result in the social
and political fracturing of Pakistan and Afghanistan.
India would be left trying to defend against the
spillover of militancy, increased tensions in Kashmir,
and potential radicalization of its Muslim populations.
Rather than uplifting its neighbors as in the Turn-the-
Corner scenario, India would be dragged down by
them, challenging its ability to play a more global role.
East Asia: Multiple Strategic Futures
Surging economic growth, dramatic power shifts,
nationalism, and aggressive military modernization—
not just in China but India and elsewhere—have
amplified rather than diminished tensions and
competition among the rising powers and with
Japan. Owing to the unusual nature of the post-World
War II settlement in Asia—and the persistence of
conflicts on the Korean Peninsula and Taiwan Strait
as a result of that settlement—historical grievances
have festered and intensified in Asia. Fear of Chinese
power, growing nationalism across the region, and
possible questions about US staying power will fuel
these tensions over the coming decades. Economic
growth and interdependence have not diminished
Asians’ grievances, as seen in the difficult relations
today between Japan-China, Japan-Korea, China-Korea,
India-China and Vietnam-China.
Regional trends probably will continue to pull
countries in two directions: toward China
economically but toward the United States and each
other for security. Since 1995, Asian powers —
including Japan, Korea, Australia, and India—have
gradually swapped the United States for China as
their top trading partner but have coupled growing
economic interdependence with the continued
“insurance” of close US security ties. This pattern is
likely to continue through 2030, although political
liberalization in China—such as rule of law and more
cooperation. Just as China’s economic engine
transformed its relations with neighbors from the early
1990s, so a strong economic engine in India could lay
down new foundations for prosperity and regional
cooperation in South Asia. Over several decades,
Pakistan would grow into a relatively stable economy,
no longer requiring foreign assistance and IMF
tutelage. Suspicions of India would persist in military
circles; even so, both nuclear-armed countries could
find means to coexist in order to avoid threatening the
growing economic ties.
“Just as China’s economic engine
transformed its relations with neighbors
from the early 1990s, so a strong economic
engine in India could lay down new
foundations for prosperity and regional
cooperation in South Asia.”
Many of our interlocutors saw this scenario as unlikely.
Critical to the scenario would be the establishment
of a more capable civilian government in Pakistan
and improved governance, such as better tax and
investment policies that spurred new industries, jobs
and more resources for modern education. A collapse
in neighboring Afghanistan would probably set back
any such civilian-led agenda, reinforcing security fears
and retrenchment. On the other hand, Indian policies
to open up trade and visa access with its neighbor
could serve as a countervailing fore, building up new
Pakistani constituencies for reform.
In an Islamistan scenario, the influence of radical
Islamists in Pakistan and Talibans in Afghanistan would
grow. In Pakistan, a weak government would continue
to lose ground to Islamists over the next decade. Signs
of growing influence of radical Islamists would include
more broadly held extreme interpretations of sharia
law, proliferation of jihad-oriented militant bases in
settled areas, and greater control of local government
by Islamists. A symbiotic relationship would deepen
between the military and the Islamists. As Pakistan
became more Islamicized, the army would become
more sympathetic to the Islamic cause. Consequently,
the military would likely cede control of territory

--- Sayfa 98 ---
77
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
by the preponderance of power enjoyed by the United
States and its allies, thereby deterring aggressive action
by Beijing or Pyongyang. Asian institutions continue to
develop roots and economic integration continues to
be oriented around a Pacific rather than an exclusively
Asian axis.
2. A balance-of-power order of unconstrained
great power competition fueled by dynamic shifts
in relative power and a reduced US role. A US retreat
into isolationism or economic decline would lead to
the weakening of Washington’s alliance commitments
in East Asia and its willingness to remain the region’s
security guarantor. Such a regional order would be
“ripe for rivalry.” Some Asian powers might develop
and seek to acquire nuclear weapons as the only means
of compensating for less US security.
3. A consolidated regional order in which an East
Asian community develops along the lines of Europe’s
democratic peace, with China’s political liberalization
a precondition for such a regional evolution. Such
a pathway for regional order presumes that Asian
regionalism will develop in a pluralistic way that
preserves the autonomy of smaller Asian states. A
pluralistic and peace-loving East Asian community
might require the continued role of the United States
as the region’s security guarantor.
4. A Sinocentric order centered on Beijing that
sustains a different kind of East Asian community on
the basis of China’s extension of a sphere of influence
across the region. An Asian system in which China
sat at the summit of a hierarchical regional order
presumes that Asian institution-building develops along
closed lines of Asian exclusivity, rather than through
the open transpacific regionalism that has been the
dominant impulse behind Asian community-building
since the early 1990s.
Numerous Wild Cards
Should India fail to rise or Japan temper its relative
decline, the Sinocentric order become more likely.
Should the United States’ core Asian partners possess
less capability or willingness to balance Chinese power
transparency on its military modernization program—
would likely assuage security concerns in ways that
would make the regional “hedge” less necessary.
Better-than-expected Chinese economic growth and
Beijing’s ability to manage the challenging transition
to an innovation-and-consumer-based economy could
increase Beijing’s magnetic pull on regional trade and
investment, increasing China’s status as the leading
provider of Asian foreign direct investment.
Alternatively, a serious or prolonged Chinese economic
slump could take the steam out of China’s regional
clout and reinforce latent fears about the potential
regional implications of internal unrest there. Other
important variables include the potential for a unified
Korea and a subsequent strategic alignment away from
the US.
“Regional trends probably will continue to
pull countries in two directions: toward
China economically but toward the United
States and each other for security.”
As global economic power has shifted to Asia, the
Indo-Pacific is emerging as the dominant international
waterway of the 21st century, as the Mediterranean
was in the ancient world and the Atlantic in the
20th century. US naval hegemony over the world’s
key sea lanes, in this and other oceans, will fade as
China’s blue-water navy strengthens. This could beg
the question of which power is best-positioned to
construct maritime coalitions to police the commons
and secure universal freedom of passage.
At the macro level, four broad pathways for Asian order
are possible during the coming decades:
1. A continuation of the present order that mixes
rules-based cooperation and quiet competition within
a regional framework structured around existing
alignments sustained by US leadership. Continued
US maritime preeminence and the US alliance
system sustain a security order in which China’s
“militarization,” North Korea’s nuclear mischief, and
other potential security dilemmas in Asia are mitigated

--- Sayfa 99 ---
78
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
European governments have grown very large relative
to their economies, and demographic trends point
to a shrinking labor force as well as increased age
imbalance between active and non-active citizens.
Because the euro zone lacks many of the features
economists deem necessary to a well-functioning
optimal currency area (including labor mobility, fiscal
transfers, similar economic culture, and solidarity),
the first decade of the euro has seen considerable
divergence in the economies of the core euro zone
and its periphery. The former generally thrived while
the latter experienced massive capital influx leading
to market bubbles while losing competitiveness,
which led to sovereign debt crises. Beginning in 2010,
euro zone leaders have been introducing reforms
and new instruments to address the crisis, but more
integration probably will be required to overcome
the crisis and address structural problems. A genuine
“leap forward” in integration would imply massive
transfers of sovereignty to central authorities, with the
accompanying loss of autonomy which is increasingly
unpopular with European publics. Popular feelings
against the EU have gained traction with populist
anti-EU parties gaining strength even in traditionally
pro-EU member states. Economic logic—which argues
for more integration—conflicts with the logic of those
publics who want to hold onto separate national
affiliations and limit greater integration.
Below we outline three scenarios for Europe and its
international role in 2030:
A Collapse scenario has a low probability of occuring
but would entail very high international risks. In this
scenario, domestic firms and households respond to
indications of an imminent currency regime change by
rapidly accelerating withdrawal of euro deposits from
domestic financial institutions. Following contagion
to other member states and economic damage to the
core countries, the euro would be the first casualty.
The EU as an institution would be a likely collateral
victim because the single market and freedom of
movement across Europe would be jeopardized by the
reinstatement of capital and border controls. Under
such a scenario, severe economic dislocation and
themselves, the US may need to step up involvement as
a counterbalance, risking a direct contest with China.
Chinese weakness is perhaps the biggest uncertainty.
If Beijing fails to transition to a more sustainable,
innovation-based economic model, it will remain a
top-tier player in Asia, but the influence surrounding
what has been a remarkable ascendance will dissipate.
In an extreme case, China would collapse with deep
divisions opening up between rich coastal area and
the impoverished interior and also growing separatism
in China’s far-flung areas of Tibet and Xinjiang. Under
these circumstances, China may become a more
unpredictable or even highly aggressive power with
the leadership trying to divert attention away from
its domestic problems. A conflict with one of its
neighbors and/or the US that China lost could also
puncture its standing. On the other hand, a victory
would increase the chances of a Sinocentric order.
Europe: Transforming Itself
By most any measure—GDP, trade volume, number
of transnational companies, or technological
capabilities—Europe will remain, in the aggregate,
a great power in 2030. The key question is whether
it will punch its collective weight in the future. The
stakes are high both politically and economically—and
Europe’s future is very uncertain.
Even before the recent unprecedented sovereign debt
crisis, the conflicting forces of fragmentation and
integration made Europe an inherently unpredictable
actor. Constructed as a union of “peoples,” the EU has
not aimed at merging European peoples into a single
identity. The euro zone crisis has laid bare the tensions
and divisions between member states and, for the first
time in decades, raised fundamental questions about
Europe’s future. Although there is no consensus on the
region’s future shape or role, our experts agree that it
will not resemble today’s Europe.
On top of the current crisis, the European economy is
suffering from enormous structural woes. Productivity
has been declining vis-à-vis other developed economies
in the last 15 years, spending on R&D remains low,

--- Sayfa 100 ---
79
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
approaches and technologies in the developed world
without needing to adapt and reform legacy systems,
but rent-seeking, patronage, populism, and corruption
may tempt many and challenge long-term planning.
Elections are now frequent in Africa, but the quality
and rooting of democracy is often shallow and subject
to regression.
The megatrends of population growth without aging,
rapid urbanization, and, to some extent, middle class
expansion will significantly shape the trajectories
of most African countries and at least a few—
particularly in the climate change-threatened Sahel
and Sahara regions—will be sharply challenged by
resource scarcities. With other regions rapidly aging,
increasingly a disproportionate number of Africans
will make up the global working age population.
However, the trend of individual empowerment will
only slowly be evidenced in the most impoverished
regions, and Africa will be catching up to the world in
introduction of existing and new technologies.
Countries that improve governance and management
of their economies will harness higher productivity
from relatively youthful and urban populations,
spurring economic growth. New technologies, legal
frameworks, and trade and investment incentives can
lead to more efficient food and energy production
and water and resource management. Governments
that do not respond to demographic change and meet
popular expectations face increased destabilization,
criminality, and emigration—particularly by the
most skilled. Education will be a game-changer for
those African countries that not only offer nominally
widespread schooling but ensure that qualified
teachers are in classrooms—currently lacking across
the continent. Providing electricy and building
infrastructures, creating better and more stable policy
regimes, raising the skill levels of workers, maintaining
security, opening space for private sector development
and entrepreneurship, and closing opportunities for
corruption will also be critical.
Commodity-exporting countries need to be wary that
increased volatility in global markets is probably ahead
and will challenge their fiscal viability and stability
political fracture would lead to a breakdown in civil
society. If the collapse were sudden and unexpected, it
would very likely trigger a global recession or another
Great Depression.
“Even before the recent unprecedented
sovereign debt crisis, the conflicting forces
of fragmentation and integration made
Europe an inherently unpredictable actor.”
In a Slow Decline scenario, Europe manages to escape
from the worst aspects of the current crisis, but
fails to undertake the necessary structural reforms.
As member states endure years of low economic
growth, they stick together in order to avoid major
political and economic disruptions. EU institutions
hang on, but public discontent remains high. The
euro survives, but it does not become a rival to the
dollar or the renminbi. Given years of low economic
growth, Europe’s international presence is diminished;
countries re-nationalize their foreign policies.
Our third scenario, Renaissance, is based on the
familiar pattern of crisis and renewal, which Europe
has experienced many times in the past. After staring
at the abyss, most European leaders agree on a
“federalist leap.” Publics support such a step, given
the imminent risks involved maintaining the status
quo. A more federal Europe might begin with only a
core group of euro zone countries with some choosing
to opt out or adopt a wait-and-see policy. Over time,
despite the existence of a multispeed Europe, the
single market would still be completed and a more
united foreign and security policy agreed upon with
enhanced elements of European democracy. European
influence would increase, strengthening Europe’s role
and that of multilateral institutions on the world stage.
Sub-Saharan Africa: Turning a
Corner by 2030?
Many African countries have the opportunity to
greatly advance while others are likely to be left
behind, creating a more diverse Africa in 2030. African
countries will be able to choose from the best-proven

--- Sayfa 101 ---
80
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
Russia: Potential
Global Futures
Russia’s role in the world during the next two
decades will be shaped by the rising challenges it
faces at home as well as in the global environment.
Russia’s economy is its Achilles’ heel. Its budget is
heavily dependent on energy revenue; efforts to
modernize the economy have made little progress;
and its aging of the workforce will be a drag on
economic growth.
Russia’s population is projected to decline from
almost 143 million in 2010 to about 130 million in
2030. Although Russia’s fertility rate is similar to that
of many European countries and aging populations
are also a drag of European economies, life
expectancy is about 15 years lower for Russians than
for Europeans: since 2007 the size of the Russian
workforce has been declining and it will continue to
do so for the next two decades.
However, Russia’s greatest demographic challenge
could well be integrating its rapidly growing ethnic
Muslim population in the face of a shrinking ethnic
Russian population. There are now about 20 million
Muslims in Russia, comprising about 14 percent of
the population. By 2030, that share is projected to
grow to about 19 percent. Russia’s changing ethnic
mix already appears to be a source of growing
social tensions.
To enhance its economic outlook, Russia will need
to improve the environment for foreign investment
and create opportunities for Russian exports of
manufactured goods. Russia’s entry into World
Trade Organization (WTO) should provide a boost
to these efforts and help Moscow to diversify the
economy: by one estimate Russia’s membership in
the WTO could provide a substantial boost to the
economy, adding 3 percent to GDP in the short
term and 11 percent over the longer term.
Russia’s relations with the West and China are also
likely to be a critical factor in determining whether
Russia moves toward becoming a more stable,
constructive global player during the next two
decades. We see three possibilities:
1. Russia could become more of a partner
with others, most probably, in a marriage of
convenience, not of values. Russia’s centuries-long
ambivalence about its relationship with the West
and outside is still at the heart of the struggle over
Russia’s strategic direction.
2. Russia might continue in a more or less
ambivalent relationship with the other powers,
but over the next 20 years this path would likely be a
more troublesome one for international cooperation
if Russia rebuilds its military strength and must
contend with an increasingly powerful China.
3. Russia could become a very troublesome
country, trying to use its military advantage over
its neighbors to intimidate and dominate. This
outcome would be most likely if a Russian leader
were facing rising public discontent over sagging
living standards and darkening economic prospects
and is looking to rally nationalist sentiments by
becoming much more assertive in the Near Abroad.

--- Sayfa 102 ---
81
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
Latin America: More Prosperous but
Inherently Fragile
Latin America and the Caribbean have undergone
far-reaching change during the past decade, including
sustained economic growth and a reduction in poverty.
The greater integration of the Americas through free
trade agreements (FTAs) with the North American
Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) has expanded to
multiple regional and extra-regional FTAs, especially
by Canada, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and Peru. With
annual real GDP growth averaging 4 percent, the ranks
of the middle classes have swelled, along with greater
economic and political participation by women,
indigenous peoples, and minority groups, many of
whom have benefited from greater access to education
and health services. However, the distribution of these
political and economic benefits remains uneven across
Latin America and the Caribbean, even though income
inequality has been reduced in recent years.
Other trends, such as the spread of criminal violence
associated with drug trafficking and criminal
gangs have hurt the region. Two primary factors,
one external and the other internal, will drive the
economic growth rate and quality of life in Latin
America over the next 18 years. The first factor is
the pace of world economic growth, which affects
the demand for Latin American commodities, goods,
labor and other services. China has led in ramping
up demand for Latin American commodities to the
point that many experts in Brazil and elsewhere
worry about an overdependence on commodity
exports. Cheap Chinese imports have also undercut
the competitiveness of industrial goods, and some
of our interlocutors worry about the future of the
manufacturing sector.
The second key factor is the extent to which Latin
American countries position themselves to capture
potential economic gains through investments in
education, market-opening reforms, and enhanced
rule of law and governing capacity. Assuming that
average GDP growth in the region declines to 3.5 with
the lower global growth projections, aggregate Latin
American GDP will total $9 trillion by 2030, possibly
if they do not work to diversify their economies.
Technological advances in the developed world
might reduce demand for African hydrocarbons and
other minerals. The high petroleum prices of recent
years enjoyed by oil-dependent economies such as
Angola and Nigeria might not continue. On the other
hand, Africa was largely insulated from the shock of
recent international financial crises because African
borrowing from private lenders is limited.
The diffusion of power in the international system
toward multipolarity is unlikely to give Africa a much
stronger voice in global forums by 2030, given its
weaker economic weight in the international system.
Global powers will most likely be less able to forge
consensus to address African crises if the United
States and Europe are less able to assert leadership and
provide assistance. Consequently, Africa will need to
become more independently able to address regional
threats. Opportunities exist to strengthen the African
Union and subregional organizations to this end.
Africa will be at risk of conflict and increased violence
as development proceeds unevenly among and within
African countries. Most African states already face
moderate-to-high threats of instability but improved
governance, resource management, and economic
diversification offer the chance to move to more
stable ground. The Sahel region, Congo/DROC, and
Somalia will be the most vulnerable and challenged
to improve governance and resource management.
In some instances, individual empowerment and
disillusionment with the unmet promises of modern
democracy, education, and medicine will highlight
ethnic and religious divisions at the expense of
national unity. Beyond traditional conflict, criminal
networks and extremist groups will be able to expand
their reach within countries and across borders if the
capabilities of national governments do not keep pace.
Despite the strides toward greater stability in
Sub-Saharan Africa, substantial outside humanitarian
and economic assistance will be needed to ensure
these continuing conflicts do not spill over into
broader regional and global conflagrations.

--- Sayfa 103 ---
82
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
overwhelmed by crime and infrastructure strain,
and there is no greater investment in education.
The environment could play a critical role in Brazil’s
fortunes during the next 15-20 years—the Amazon
Basin produces about 20 percent of the Earth’s fresh
water flows into the oceans and has a major impact on
global weather. An Amazon die-back or deforestation
could alter the region’s water cycle in a way that
would devastate Brazilian and much of Argentinian
agriculture. Recent models suggest a die-back tipping
point could be when deforestation reaches 20 percent;
it presently stands at 18 percent.
approaching half the size of the US economy. Given
reduced population growth rates, Latin America’s
per capital income could reach $14,000—almost 50
per cent more than current levels. At the same time,
the emergence of an even larger middle class in Latin
America will fuel additional political and economic
expectations with which governments must be
prepared to cope.
Under more adverse global circumstances,
vulnerabilities in some Latin American countries could
generate strategically significant crisis if stability is
jeopardized amid spiking insecurity and transnational
criminal activity; institutions are undermined by
populist politics; and integration, trade, and growth
drop precipitously with the contagion spreading more
broadly throughout the region. In such a scenario,
outside actors such as the US may be confronted with a
range of politically and economically costly dilemmas
that impose substantial trade-offs for the United States’
and others’ abilities to cope with emergencies in Latin
America and elsewhere. Natural disasters—frequent
already in Central America and the Caribbean—could
have fundamental stability implications in a weaker
global economic environment.
Even in the case of a relatively robust global economy,
subregions such as Central America and Caribbean will
find it harder to cope with security and governance
challenges. Rising food and fuel costs are likely to
add further strain on the more fragile governance
structures in Central America and the Caribbean. In
recent years, Mexican drug cartels have increasingly
used Central America for transshipment, which
also undermines governance and rule of law. Unlike
elsewhere in the region, Central America’s lack of
competitiveness and continuing sole reliance on US
markets means that its economy has not grown at the
rate it needs to to attract investment and generate jobs
for its large youth population.
Brazil will play an outsized role on the region’s
future. Its resources and scale could offer benefits and
insulation others lack. However, the country could
be challenged if global trade and growth declines,
instability grows on its periphery, megacities are

--- Sayfa 104 ---
83
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
many emerging markets, like China has recently done
in photovoltaic panels.
Technological breakthroughs pertaining to
the security of vital resources will be necessary
to meet the food, water, and energy needs of the
world’s population. Key technologies likely to be at
the forefront in this arena will include genetically
modified crops, precision agriculture, water-irrigation
techniques, solar energy, advanced bio-based fuels, and
enhanced oil and natural gas extraction via fracturing
(see box on page 35).
“ . . . a shift in the technology center of
gravity from West to East and South . . .
almost certainly will continue . . . ”
Last but not least, new health technologies will
continue to extend the average age of populations
around the world, ameliorate debilitating physical and
mental conditions, and improve overall well-being.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES
During the next 15-20 years, the hardware, software,
and connectivity aspects of IT will experience massive
growth in capability and complexity as well as more
widespread diffusion. This growth and diffusion will
present significant challenges for governments and
societies, which must find ways to capture the benefits
of new IT technologies while dealing with the new
threats that those technologies present.
Three technology developments with an IT focus
have the power to change the way we will live, do
business, and protect ourselves before 2030: solutions
for storage and processing large quantities of data,
social networking technologies, and “smart cities”
encompassing a host of urban technologies enabled
by enhanced and secure IT systems. Advances in
data storage and analysis herald a coming economic
boom in North America; advances in a host of urban
technologies will be shaped by the giant investments
in smart-cities infrastructures in the developing world.
Game-CHANGER 5
THE IMPACT OF NEW
TECHNOLOGIES
Economic growth in emerging market countries will
stimulate increased technological innovation around
the world during the next 15-20 years.
A shift in the technological center of gravity from West
to East and South, which has already begun, almost
certainly will continue as the flows of companies,
ideas, entrepreneurs, and capital from the developed
to the developing markets increase. During the next
15-20 years, more technological activity is likely to
move to developing world as multinationals focus on
the fastest-growing emerging markets and as Chinese,
Indian, Brazilian, and other emerging-economy
corporations rapidly become internationally
competitive. The speed of this movement will depend
on the availability of risk capital in the developing
countries, rules of law to protect intellectual property
rights, and the desire of developing-economy
companies to grow and be globally competitive.
Four technology arenas will shape global
economic, social, and military developments by
2030: information technologies, automation and
manufacturing technologies, resource technologies,
and health technologies.
Information technology is entering the big data era.
Process power and data storage are becoming almost
free; networks and the cloud will provide global access
and pervasive services; social media and cybersecurity
will be large new markets.
Automation and advanced manufacturing
technologies are changing the business model of
mass production and how future products and services
will be delivered to the increasingly important middle
classes in both developed and developing countries.
Asian manufacturing enterprises have already built
the competencies to develop novel automation and
advanced manufacturing applications from their
current capabilities, and they are poised to dominate

--- Sayfa 105 ---
84
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
improve the accuracy of predictive models. On the
other hand, advanced data solutions could become a
channel for information overload, a tool of oppressive
governments, a high-maintenance burden that is
nevertheless necessary for ubiquitous infrastructures,
and a battleground for multipolar information warfare.
Current applications of data solutions are already
important to commerce, large-scale scientific efforts,
and government services, including intelligence and
law enforcement. For example, large retailers use data
Data Solutions
Data solutions comprise a range of emerging
technologies that help organizations accumulate,
store, manage, and extract value from “big data”—
extremely large data sets that are difficult to manage
using conventional tools. On the one hand, new
solutions for data storage and processing could
help policymakers address difficult economic and
governance problems, enable more intuitive and
humanlike interaction with computers, enhance the
accessibility and usability of knowledge, and greatly
information Technologies
Technology Focus
Current Status
Potential for 2030
Issues
Impact
Data Solutions
Large data sorting
and analysis is
applied in various
large industries,
but the quantity of
data accumulating
is outstripping the
ability of systems
to leverage it
efficiently.
As software
and hardware
developments
continue, new
solutions will
emerge to allow
considerably
more data to be
collected, analyzed
and acted on.
The greatest areas
of uncertainty are
the speed with
which big data can
be usefully and
securely utilized by
organizations.
Opportunities
for commercial
organizations
and governments
to “know” their
customers better
will increase.
These customers
may object to the
collection of so
much data.
Social Networking
Large numbers
of people have
embraced social
networking and
found innovative
uses of the
networks.
Social networks will
evolve as new uses
are found.
Service providers
must find successful
business models
to support their
growth. Network
users have to make
tradeoffs between
privacy and utility.
Social networks
enable both useful
and dangerous
communications
across diverse
user groups and
geopolitical
boundaries.
Smart City
Technologies
The IT components
of a smart city
are today poorly
integrated and not
very efficient.
New and
developing cities
will have installed
semi-integrated IT
infrastructures to
sustain the myriad
of services they
provide.
Only an integrated
system can
maximize the full
value of smart
city visions. The
scale, complexity
and high costs of
implementing such
a system may be
too expensive for
most cities.
Gains are huge
in terms of
improved quality
of life, increased
commercial activity,
and lower resource
consumption.

--- Sayfa 106 ---
85
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
ensure that people who need the information get
access to the right information at the right time—and
don’t become overloaded with confusing or irrelevant
information. How rapidly—or even whether—such an
evolution occurs is highly uncertain.
“Fear of the growth of an Orwellian
surveillance state may lead citizens . . . to
pressure their governments to restrict or
dismantle big data systems.”
Equally uncertain is the way in which governments
or individuals will shape the future growth of
data solutions. Fear of the growth of an Orwellian
surveillance state may lead citizens, particularly in
the developed world, to pressure their governments
to restrict or dismantle big data systems. Similarly,
individuals’ distaste for overly intrusive advertising that
exploits personal details may lead to a backlash against
many kinds of commercial uses of data solutions
technologies. On the other hand, the governments of
many authoritarian countries probably will try to use
big data systems to further control opposition forces.
Social Networking Technologies
Today’s social networking technologies help individual
users form online social networks with other users,
based on factors that can include shared interests,
common backgrounds, relationships, geographic
locations, and so on. In many respects, social networks
are becoming part of the fabric of online existence,
as leading services integrate social functions into
everything else an individual might do online.
The kinds of networks and interactions that social
network services foster varies greatly. In many cases,
members have developed uses for their social network
services that go far beyond what the service providers
themselves may have intended. Innovative uses for
such services range from controlling home appliances
remotely to managing restaurant reservations in
real time, and analysts widely cite Twitter (along
with other social network services) as having been
a significant contributor to the Arab Spring protests.
Protestors used social network services to organize
solutions to fuse information about their customers’
in-store spending habits, credit histories, web-surfing
histories, social network postings, demographic
information, and so on. From such fusion, data
solutions allow retailers to extract valuable insights
about their customers’ preferences, allowing for very
precisely targeted advertising, among other things.
Retailers and other businesses also commonly
use data solutions technologies for supply-chain
management and logistics. Internet companies are
also heavy users of data solutions technologies,
which are essential to enabling web search, targeted
advertising, image recognition, language translation,
natural language processing, and similar features and
functions. Scientific applications of data solutions
include weather prediction, physics research, and
space exploration, with the potential for new domains
including computational ecology.
Government services rely on very large databases and
information-delivery systems and are beginning to use
data solutions to fuse those databases and systems.
Government collectors, who are major customers and
users of advanced large-scale IT systems, currently
handle some of the largest, most unstructured, and
most heterogeneous data sets. Current data solutions
rely on conventional computation, but quantum
computing is a technology wild card that could begin
to have an impact by 2030, with implications for
basic scientific discovery, search, and cryptography.
Formidable technical challenges remain, but progress
by several different routes has occurred.
Since modern data solutions have emerged, big data
sets have grown exponentially in size. At the same
time, the various building blocks of knowledge
discovery, as well as the software tools and best
practices available to organizations that handle big data
sets, have not kept pace with such growth. As a result,
a large—and very rapidly growing—gap exists between
the amount of data that organizations can accumulate
and organizations’ abilities to leverage those data in a
way that is useful. Ideally, artificial intelligence, data
visualization technologies, and organizational best
practices will evolve to the point where data solutions

--- Sayfa 107 ---
86
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
social networks of the future may not even be formal
organizations, but rather anarchic collectives built
on sophisticated variants of peer-to-peer file-sharing
technologies, against which developed- and many
developing-world governments might have no
meaningful negotiating leverage. However, the
Chinese Government and several others will likely
severely restrict any services that threaten their control
over information flow.
Smart Cities
Smart cities are urban environments that leverage
information technology-based solutions to maximize
citizens’ economic productivity and quality of
life while minimizing resource consumption and
environmental degradation. In smart cities, advanced
IT capabilities are the foundation of urban planning,
governance, resource-management, physical
infrastructure, communications infrastructure,
building design, transportation systems, security
services, emergency services, and disaster response
systems. Many of those capabilities deliver maximum
value only in the context of an integrated system.
For example, emerging “city dashboard” solutions
provide city managers with real-time comprehensive
situational awareness of the state of their cities. City
dashboards integrate data from a wide range of sources
distributed throughout the city, potentially including
cameras and distributed sensor arrays that monitor the
health of critical infrastructures such as transportation
and power and water supplies. Dashboards will also
provide valuable insights and input for modeling
and simulation activities that can help cities grow
more smoothly. Smart city technologies also support
and are connected to private infrastructures. For
example, citizens will increasingly interact with smart
city infrastructure via their smartphones, which are
already beginning to see use as sensor platforms to
feed data back into smart city systems.
themselves, disseminate information, and bypass
government censorship efforts. Some governments
are already deploying aggressive countermeasures,
while simultaneously using social networks as a
means of gathering information on dissidents. Social
networking technologies could allow groups of people
to easily communicate outside traditional media and
government channels in order to pursue progressive,
disruptive, and criminal agendas that can have impact
across geopolitical boundaries.
Because social networking technologies are becoming
the fabric of online existence, they could become
an important tool for providing corporations and
governments with valuable information about
individuals and groups, facilitating development of
robust human social predictive models that can have
applications ranging from targeted advertising to
counterterrorism. Social networks could also displace
services that existing corporations and government
agencies now provide, substituting instead new classes
of services that are inherently resistant to centralized
oversight and control. For example, social networks
could help drive the use of alternative and virtual
monetary currencies.
A significant uncertainty regarding the future
development of social networking technologies
involves the complex tradeoffs that users must make
between privacy and utility. In general, the more
open one is on a social network service, the more
utility the service can provide. Thus far, users seem
to have voted overwhelmingly in favor of utility over
privacy, but future events might make large numbers
of users change their preferences, thereby depriving
social network services of the information they
need to stay relevant to users. Another significant
uncertainty involves the business of social networking
itself. Historically, social network services have
been relatively short lived, as users have tired of one
service and flocked to another or as service providers
have failed to develop ways to make money and
grow. Facebook has emerged as the dominant social
network worldwide, with nearly a billion users, but its
continued dominance during the next 15-20 years (or
even the next five) is not guaranteed. The dominant

--- Sayfa 108 ---
87
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
manufacturing and automation technologies such as
additive manufacturing (3D printing) and robotics
have the potential to change work patterns in both the
developing and developed worlds. However, relative
to existing trends, any transition may be relatively
slow. In developed countries these technologies have
the potential to improve productivity, address labor
constraints, and diminish the need for outsourcing,
especially if reducing the length of supply chains
brings clear benefits. Nevertheless, such technologies
could still have a similar effect to outsourcing in
making more low- and semi-skilled manufacturing
workers in developed economies redundant,
which would exacerbate domestic inequalities. For
developing economies, particularly Asian ones, the
new technologies will stimulate new manufacturing
capabilities and further increase the competitiveness
of manufacturers and suppliers.
Robotics
Robotics is in use in a range of civil and military
applications today. Robotic systems perform physical
manipulations similar to humans; such manipulations
are programmable and can be carried out
autonomously or by teleoperation. Robots have better
sensory and mechanical capabilities than humans do,
making them ideal for routine tasks. Industrial robots
have transformed many manufacturing environments;
over 1.2 million industrial robots are already in daily
operation around the world. Home robots vacuum
homes and cut lawns; hospital robots patrol corridors
and distribute supplies; the US military has thousands
of robots operating on battlefields; and a new
generation of robots is emerging for service-sector
applications, including cleaning, public relations,
and maintenance.
Developers are extending the capabilities of robots,
crossing the boundary between industrial robots and
nonindustrial robots. Although much development is
still required to improve robots’ cognitive abilities,
many of the building blocks for futuristic and highly
disruptive systems could be in place by 2030. Such
robotics could eliminate the need for human labor
entirely in some manufacturing environments, with
“Such an approach could allow for the
most effective possible deployment of
new urban technologies—or create urban
nightmares, if new technologies are not
deployed effectively.”
Governments around the world, especially in
developing countries, could spend as much as $35
trillion in public-works projects in the next two
decades. To do so in a manner that maximizes
sustainability, quality of life, and economic
competitiveness they will need a mix of novel
approaches to security, energy and water conservation,
resource distribution, waste management, disaster
management, construction, and transportation. These
areas represent massive market opportunities for
information technology, systems-integration, and
sustainable-technology providers and integrators—to
ensure that the megacities develop. Some of the world’s
future megacities will essentially be built from scratch,
enabling a blank-slate approach to infrastructure
design and implementation. Such an approach could
allow for the most effective possible deployment of
new urban technologies—or create urban nightmares,
if new technologies are not deployed effectively. Most
megacities will need to integrate new technologies
and approaches into existing physical, social, and
government infrastructures, a process that may not
always yield good results—or may not happen at
all. In any event, for both cities built from scratch
and cities needing to integrate new technologies
into existing infrastructures, the major challenges
will be the enormous scale, complexity, and costs
of new technologies. With this heavy investment in
smart-city infrastructure in African, Latin American,
and especially Asian urban centers, the epicenter of
smart-city innovation will begin by 2030 to move away
from Europe and North America.
AUTOMATION AND MANUFACTURING
TECHNOLOGIES
As manufacturing has gone global in the last two
decades, a global ecosystem of manufacturers,
suppliers, and logistics companies has formed. New

--- Sayfa 109 ---
88
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
assist with daily living. Robotics addresses some of the
impacts of an aging society, but in the next 20 years
the effect is likely to be most pronounced in specific
countries like Japan and South Korea.
Cost is both a driver and barrier to the implementation
of robotics technologies. Robots are often expensive
to buy, but their ability to repeat tasks efficiently and
quickly, reduce waste, or minimize labor costs can
save companies money. Manufacturers could lease
expensive robots to users, but the cost per unit must
decrease significantly before widespread applications
emerge. Technology development is the biggest
single constraint for nonindustrial robotics, because
researchers must overcome major barriers in the
development of robots’ intelligence, including their
understanding of the world around them, coping with
total automation becoming more cost effective than
outsourcing manufacturing to developing economies.
Even in developing countries, robots might supplant
some local manual labor in sectors such as electronics,
potentially holding down local wages.
The military is expected to increase its use of robots
to reduce human exposure in high-risk situations
and environments as well as the number of troops
necessary for certain operations. The ability to deploy
such robots rapidly, for particular tasks, could help
military planners address the wider resource demands
present in a more fragmented, multipolar world.
Health-care and elder-care robots will become more
autonomous and be able to interact with humans.
However, they will be able to perform only specialized
functions such as surgical support or certain tasks to
Automation and Manufacturing Technologies
Technology Focus
Current Status
Potential for 2030
Issues
Impact
Robotics
Robotics is already
in wide use in
defense and
manufacturing.
Robotics will
eliminate human
labor in some
applications.
Blurring between
industrial and
service robots will
occur.
Researchers must
reduce the cost of
robots and improve
their intelligence.
As robots spread
they will face much
greater public
scrutiny.
Total automation
may become more
cost effective
than using large
levels of labor
or outsourcing
to developing
countries.
Remote and
Autonomous
Vehicles
Remote and
autonomous
vehicles are in
use in defense
and mining and
exploration.
UAVs will routinely
monitor intrastate
and interstate
conflicts, enforce
no-fly zones and
survey national
borders.
Ensuring
autonomous
vehicles operate
safely and reliably in
populated areas will
be crucial.
Increased
disruption is
possible from
terrorists’ use of
UAVs.
Additive
Manufacturing/3D
Printing
Additive
manufacturing is
in use for creating
models and for
rapid prototyping
in the automotive
and aerospace
industries.
Additive
manufacturing
begins to replace
some conventional
mass-produced
products, especially
high value
products.
Material quality
and cost are the
limiting factors for
the acceptance
of additive
manufacturing by
industry.
Both advanced
and developing
economies will
benefit from the
flexibility, speed,
and customization
of additive
manufacturing.

--- Sayfa 110 ---
89
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
novel security risks that could be difficult to address.
Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) are already being
used to spy or launch missiles. By 2030, UAVs could
be in common use to monitor intrastate and interstate
conflicts, enforce no-fly zones, or survey national
borders. Low-cost UAVs with cameras and other types
of sensors could support wide-area geo-prospecting,
support precision farming, or inspect remote power
lines. Autonomous vehicles could spawn a new era of
industrialization in mining and agriculture, addressing
heightened demand from developing economies.
Self-driving cars could begin to address the worsening
congestion in urban areas, reduce roadway accidents
and improve individuals’ productivity (by allowing
drivers the freedom to work through their commutes).
Mass-transit innovations will likely emerge from the
fastest-growing urban areas of Asia. Nevertheless,
more disruption could result from terrorists’ use of
civilian UAVs as platforms to deliver explosives or
unconventional weapons.
The key problem for autonomous vehicles—and,
to some extent, remote vehicles—is the concern
regarding whether such vehicles can operate safely
and reliably, especially when operating in—or over—
populated areas. For this reason, most regulatory
agencies worldwide greatly restrict operation of
UAVs in civilian airspace. Self-driving cars currently
being tested on public roads still rely on an attentive
human driver who can take the wheel at a moment’s
notice. An additional barrier for UAVs is the question
of acceptance: Users appears to have had little trouble
adapting to office-workplace telepresence robots, but
facilitating a transition between human-piloted and
autonomous vehicles may be more difficult.
“Autonomous vehicles could transform
military operations, conflict resolution,
transportation, and geo-prospecting, while
simultaneously presenting novel security
risks that could be difficult to address.”
unanticipated events, and interacting with humans.
Nevertheless, with many enabling technologies now
available off the shelf, a new generation of developers
and enthusiasts may be able to construct new
robotic products, some with potentially dangerous
capabilities. Many of these non-industrial applications
will be conceived and commercialized initially in
today’s developed countries, but such applications
will face unprecedented scrutiny by the media. The
public’s reaction also could affect the development of
nonindustrial robotics.
“Health-care and elder-care robots will
become more autonomous and be
able to interact with humans. However,
they will be able to perform only
specialized functions . . . ”
Autonomous Vehicles
Today, remote and autonomous vehicles are mostly
in use in the military and for specific industrial tasks
in remote locations. Mining companies are using
remote and/or autonomous vehicles to improve
safety, reduce cost, increase efficiency, and address
skilled labor shortages. A remote vehicle refers either
to remote-operated versions of traditional land, sea,
and air vehicles, or to specialized mobile telerobotic
platforms such as bomb-disposal robots and tethered
submersibles. Remote vehicles are controlled
using radiofrequency transmission or via a tether
and incorporate electric or hydraulic actuators for
manipulation, as well as cameras and other sensors for
surveillance. Autonomous vehicles, which are mobile
platforms that can operate without any direct human
control, incorporate sensors and control software to
orient the vehicle and avoid obstacles. Autonomous
vehicles may also use radar or laser-based rangefinders
to detect objects and data from global navigation
satellite systems and geographic information systems
to facilitate navigation and maneuvering.
Autonomous vehicles could transform military
operations, conflict resolution, transportation, and
geo-prospecting, while simultaneously presenting

--- Sayfa 111 ---
90
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
manufacturing could also level the playing field for
those countries or organizations that missed out in
earlier periods—because additive manufacturing
requires less industrial infrastructure than
conventional manufacturing. At the same time, additive
manufacturing could reduce the need for some
conventional manufacturing jobs in many regions of
the world.
The relatively less sophisticated quality of the materials
produced by additive manufacturing limits the
acceptance of additive manufacturing by industry. The
ability of developers to produce parts with sufficient
strength in high volume and at low cost is still highly
uncertain. Inexpensive 3D printing machines are
now available for $500, but they produce relatively
low-quality objects, suitable as novelties, but not yet
viable for many applications. Industrial machines cost
upwards of $30,000, and laser-based machines that
make high-quality metal products can cost as much as
$1 million. Some machines improve the performance
of metal or ceramic objects, but greater knowledge
and skill is required than for the objects that come
out of cheaper 3D printing machines. Additive
manufacturing is currently limited to structural
components that have no electronic, optical, or other
functional capabilities. By 2030, manufacturers may
be able to combine some electrical components
(such as electrical circuits, antennae, batteries, and
memory) with structural components in one build, but
integration with printed electronics manufacturing
equipment will be necessary. Though printing of
arteries or simple organs may be possible by 2030,
bioprinting of complex organs will require significant
technological breakthroughs.
RESOURCE TECHNOLOGIES
Technology advances will be required to accommodate
increasing demand for resources owing to global
population growth and economic advances in today’s
underdeveloped countries. Such advances can affect
the food, water, and energy nexus by improving
agricultural productivity through a broad range of
technologies encompassing precision farming and
genetically modified (GM) crops for food and fuel.
Additive Manufacturing
Additive manufacturing is a group of technologies that
allows a machine to build an object by adding one
layer of material at a time. Additive manufacturing,
or 3D printing, is already in use to make models
from plastics in sectors such as consumer products
and the automotive and aerospace industries, but by
2030, additive manufacturing could replace some
conventional mass-production, particularly for short
production runs or where mass customization has high
value. Additive machines use computer-aided design
(CAD) and a computer-guided laser, extruder, or
printer head to construct an object one layer at a time.
They can generate geometrically complex objects,
with internal cavities or moving parts inside an object,
which traditional machines cannot manufacture. With
additive manufacturing, manufacturers can avoid the
high initial setup costs for specialty tooling and molds
and can also build geometrically complex objects
that cannot easily be fabricated by other means. The
CAD file can be a laser scan of the surface of another
object or a person or can even be medical data, such
as computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) scans, which makes it possible to build
objects in the shape and with the functionality of
bones or internal organs.
A combination of low-cost machines and online stores
of 3D object files could democratize manufacturing
and empower individuals, resembling the early
days of personal computers and the Internet, when
small companies were able to make a large impact.
Additive manufacturing could lead to large numbers of
micro-factories akin to preindustrial revolution craft
guilds, but with modern manufacturing capabilities.
Such local micro-factories could manufacture
significant amounts of products, especially those for
which transportation costs are traditionally high or
delivery times are long, and in the process shorten and
simplify supply chains.
The developing world could be a major beneficiary
because additive manufacturing allows products
to be designed and printed for local consumption,
reducing the reliance on expensive imports. Additive

--- Sayfa 112 ---
91
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
resource and health Technologies
Technology Focus
Current Status
Potential for 2030
Issues
Impact
Food and Water
GM Crops
Successful but
limited applications
are economically
successful.
GM crop
technology will
expand the types
of crops able to be
modified and the
traits able to be
transferred to these
crops.
Time to market for
each transferred
trait into each crop
is the major hurdle.
Many governments
have reservations
about the safety of
GM crops.
GM crop
deployments will
enable higher
yields and address
climate-change
driven food
scarcities.
Precision
Agriculture
Automation of
equipment is
suitable only for
large-scale farming.
Feasible reductions
in scale and price
will enable greater
application of
automated systems
and higher yields
per hectare.
The cost of
equipment and the
scalability to small
farms is the major
barrier.
Major impact will
be continued
yield and quality
improvements
for large-scale
agricultural
operations in
developed
countries.
Water
Management
Microirrigation
techniques deliver
water to roots with
90 efficiency.
Water demand will
be high. Cheaper
subsurface drip-
irrigation together
with precision
agriculture is
likely. Commercial
drought-tolerant
crops are a
possibility.
Microirrigation will
be too expensive
for widespread
use in developing
countries.
Insufficient
water supplies
for residential,
industrial and
agricultural use
will affect a large
proportion of the
world’s population
living in water-
stressed areas.
Energy
Bio-Based Energy
Technology of
delivering energy
from non-food
biomass is
proven but non-
competitive.
Non-food biomass
will be a growing
alternative
source for energy
and chemical
feedstocks.
Widespread
deployment
depends on
government
policies.
If cost-competitive,
the technology
would provide a
useful alternative to
fossil fuels.
Solar Energy
Photovoltaics has
substantial growth
potential, but has its
limitations.
Advances in
photovoltaics,
storage
technologies, and
smart grid solutions
needed for solar to
be competitive with
carbon-sourced
energy production.
Research focuses
on dealing
with negative
environmental
consequences of
the technology.
Successful
extension of
accessible natural
gas and oil
reserves will stymie
arguments for
aggressive climate-
change mitigation
strategies.

--- Sayfa 113 ---
92
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
Genetically Modified Crops
Genetically modified crops are key to meeting the
challenge of providing sufficient and affordable
food and fuel from plant crops for a world with an
expanding population and a changing climate. The
rapidly evolving genetic knowledge of plant cells,
enabled by the tools of molecular biology, is likely to
accelerate during the next 15-20 years, providing the
means to increase the yield of major food crops. The
promising results of ongoing research to relate key
plant traits to a plant’s genetic structure indicate that
the application of modern molecular plant breeding
and transgenic technologies have the potential to
significantly enhance global food security in the next
15-20 years. However, this group of plant technologies
faces some of the most intense regulatory and
public pressures of any new technologies, which
makes widespread adoption of any of these potential
advances uncertain.
Advances in molecular biology applied to crop
development have enabled scientists to identify genes
that express important agronomic traits in crop
plants. Transgenic technologies—which enable the
transfer of genes from one plant species to another to
New resource technologies can also enhance water
management through desalination and irrigation
efficiencies. In addition, they can increase the
availability of energy, not only through highly
successful enhanced oil and natural gas extractions
resulting from use of hydraulic fracturing (see box
on page 37), but also through alternative energy
sources such as solar and wind power and biofuels.
Widespread communication technologies will make
the potential effects of these technologies on the
environment, climate, and health well known to
increasingly educated populations.
China, India, and Russia—countries that have critical
needs for key resources—are expected to realize
substantial rewards in being the first countries to
commercialize next-generation resource technologies.
Being first may allow private and state-owned Chinese,
Indian, and Russian resource companies to establish
strong global competitive positions. Aside from being
cost competitive, any expansion or adoption of both
existing and next-generation resource technologies
during the next 15-20 years will largely depend on
social acceptance and the direction and resolution of
any ensuing political issues.
resource and health Technologies continued
Technology Focus
Current Status
Potential for 2030
Issues
Impact
Disease
Management
Molecular
diagnostics
technologies
identify
some disease
predispositions or
presence.
Genetic sequencing
enables more
personalized
healthcare.
Costs per individual
diagnostic tests
must be reduced to
enable widespread
adoption.
Will lead to
increased life
quality, life
expectancy, and
aging societies.
Human
Augmentation
Contemporary
prosthetic limbs
and exoskeletons
provide limited
functionality to
users.
Fully functional
limb replacements,
enhanced eyesight,
and hearing
augmentations will
be widely available.
Improved
understanding
of human, brain
function, and
enhanced portable
power sources are
necessary.
Very high
technology
costs could
limit availability
to the well off,
professional
athletes, and
military.

--- Sayfa 114 ---
93
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
Precision Agriculture
Precision agriculture holds promise for increasing
crop yields by reducing the use of inputs such as
seed, fertilizer, and water; minimizing the negative
environmental impacts of farming, and improving the
quality of crops. The development of cost-effective,
versatile, and highly automated forms of precision
agriculture suitable for a wide range of farm types
and sizes could help provide worldwide food
security even in the face of resource scarcities and
environmental restrictions. Trends in precision
agriculture point to increasing automation of farm
vehicles and implements. Within the next five to 10
years, autonomous tractors probably will begin to take
on a full range of roles in large-scale farming, which
will begin to resemble automated manufacturing
facilities. In 10-to-15 years, technological developments
and the scale of manufacturing could drive down
the size of today’s autonomous farming vehicles and
implements. The development of smaller farm vehicles
would enable farmers to use them on small sections of
a field and small land holdings, leading to higher-yield,
higher-intensity cultivation. The key question is
whether such systems will ever be affordable for use
on small plots in developing countries where the
greatest productivity gains are called for.
Water Management
Water management will be critical to achieving
global food security because agriculture today
requires irrigation for 40 percent of its production
and consumes approximately 70 percent of global
freshwater supplies. Currently, agricultural irrigation
wastes about 60 percent of the water withdrawn from
freshwater sources.
Efficient water management will be required to sustain
a necessary increase in agricultural productivity.
Even though desalination technologies might be
economically feasible for household and industrial
water, such technologies are unlikely to produce
irrigation water from saline waters at a low enough
cost to be feasible for agricultural use. As water
scarcity increases, adopting technologies that increase
produce a plant with new or improved traits—hold the
most promise for achieving food security in the next
15-20 years.
Through transgenic technologies, researchers have
identified hundreds of genes with corresponding
useful traits in crop plants that could eventually
be commercialized. However, in spite of the rapid
growth of transgenic technology, only a few traits
in three plant species exist on a commercial scale:
herbicide- and insect-resistant soybeans, cotton, and
maize. Modified potato crops are new additions to
this list; in the next five years commercial plantings
of genetically modified canola and rice are also likely.
The development of nitrogen fixation by non-legume
plants and drought-tolerant maize are examples of
the goals and advances of scientists using today’s GM
crop technology know-how. Drought-tolerant maize
received regulatory approval in 2012 and is in the
beginning stages of commercialization.
“Transgenic technologies—which enable the
transfer of genes from one plant species
to another to produce a plant with new or
improved traits—hold the most promise
for achieving food security in the next
15-20 years.”
Having the information about specific genes that
combine to express desirable traits in crop plants is an
essential starting point, but such knowledge does not
necessarily lead to a modified plant that will express
these genes. The R&D necessary to achieve such
goals requires significant time and money. Similarly,
meeting all the necessary regulatory requirements can
result in many years of effort before a new GM crop
reaches the market. Despite the regulatory approvals
and safeguards achieved to date, many consumers
and political representatives across the world are
not persuaded that the dangers are minimal and that
adequate safeguards are in place. Hence, GM crops
face significant hurdles in the years ahead.

--- Sayfa 115 ---
94
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
encourage water efficiency: Farmers typically pay up
to a tenth the price that industry and households pay
for water; thus farmers have little incentive to save
water. In spite of the high costs, increasing use of
precision farming in irrigated land and, in time, higher
yields from GM drought-tolerant crops in rain-fed land
may contribute to increasing the overall efficiency of
water use in agriculture.
Bio-Based Energy
If bio-based energy becomes cost competitive, it
could enable advanced biofuels and other products
that derive from nonfood sources to at least partially
replace current food-crop-derived biofuels and
petroleum feedstocks in the next 15-20 years.
A transition to bio-based energy produced from
nonfood biomass would radically alter world energy
markets and be essential to improving food security.
The nearest-term advanced biofuel is cellulosic
ethanol derived from various types of biomass from
agricultural and forest residues, dedicated energy
crops such as perennial grasses and trees, and
municipal solid waste. Other biofuels that could
enter the market include drop-in biofuels, which are
easily integrated with existing transportation-fuel
infrastructures. Biobutanol produced by fermentation
and renewable hydrocarbons produced by algae and
genetically engineered organisms are examples of such
drop-in biofuels.
“A transition to bio-based energy produced
from nonfood biomass would radically alter
world energy markets and be essential to
improving food security.”
To avoid conflicting with food crop production,
researchers are developing technologies that use
nonfood biomass feedstocks. Although production
costs are higher than ethanol production from corn,
some large-scale cellulosic ethanol plants are on track
to begin operations in the next few years. Biodiesel,
which is currently derived from food plant oils,
used cooking oils, and animal fats, has seen a rapid
growth worldwide, especially in Europe. Research
water-use efficiency will be the only option farmers
will have for confronting global water scarcity.
The array of such technologies includes precision
agriculture and GM drought-tolerant and salt-tolerant
crops as well as micro-irrigation systems and
hydroponic greenhouse technologies.
“Micro-irrigation technology . . . is likely
to be the key technology for improving
agricultural water management because it
delivers a highly water-efficient solution.”
Micro-irrigation technology, which has advanced
considerably over the last three decades, is likely to
be the key technology for improving agricultural
water management because it delivers a highly
water-efficient solution. Although currently applied
mainly to high-value vegetable crops, micro-irrigation
is suitable for all types of crops. Using today’s leading
micro-irrigation technologies, the percentage of water
delivered to a field is some 90 percent to 95 percent
compared to 35-60 percent for furrow irrigation or
60-80 precent for sprinkler systems. Such efficiency
comes at a cost, however (some $2,500-$5,000 per
hectare over a 10-to-15-year lifetime).
Although rain-fed agriculture is responsible for 58
precent of global cereal grain production, relatively
little effort has focused on applying technology to
enhance its productivity. Rain-fed areas of the world
are largely regions with poverty, malnutrition, water
scarcity, severe land degradation, and poor physical
and financial infrastructures. Well-established
inexpensive practices—such as zero-till and mulching,
which transfer more water to plants rather than
losing it to evaporation—are not in widespread use.
New technologies that contribute to improving
the yield of rain-fed agriculture while reducing the
need for withdrawal from surface water sources will
become increasingly important. Agricultural leaders
are considering harvesting water through managed
underground storage.
An increased demand for water is likely to stimulate
governments to adjust their water-pricing policies to

--- Sayfa 116 ---
95
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
with other electricity-generating fuel sources—coal,
natural gas, nuclear, or wind—is unclear. Some
forecasts indicate that the projected costs of electricity
production from natural gas and coal will remain
lower than electricity production from solar power
in the next 15-20 years. Other forecasts indicate that
photovoltaic electricity production will be competitive
with conventional electricity production without
subsidization in the next five to 10 years. Meanwhile,
during the next several decades, new, highly efficient
natural gas electricity-generating plants are expected
to come on line and increased natural gas supplies as a
result of fracking technology will maintain low natural
gas prices.
Despite its position as the most abundant renewable
energy resource and its theoretical potential in many
regions to exceed current total energy supply as well
as its benign environmental consequences, solar
energy faces some formidable hurdles to reach its full
potential. If government policies to provide financial
and regulatory incentives for solar energy disappeared
as a result of strained government budgets, solar
energy might not reach a cost-competitive position
in the next two decades to be a serious competitor
to electricity produced from coal and natural gas.
Another hurdle facing solar energy is that it is an
intermittent source, generating power only when the
sun is shining. Without some efficient energy storage,
such as large batteries or molten salt, solar energy will
not be able to fully replace other energy-generating
systems. Rather, it could only operate as a hybrid
system relying on other energy sources, such as
natural gas, to generate electricity when the sun is
not shining. Additionally, widespread use of solar
energy for distributed generation of electricity will
require large grid-infrastructure investments to
handle the multi-directional flow of electricity in the
distribution network.
HEALTH TECHNOLOGIES
Disease management technologies in development
promise significant healthy longevity gains throughout
the world while human augmentation technologies
into algae-based technologies suggests that such
technologies offer attractive benefits including high
productivity; the productive use of nonarable land;
the use of diverse water sources (fresh, saline, and
wastewater); and the recycling of carbon dioxide and
other wastes.
Achieving cost competitiveness for bio-based energy
technologies is the primary hurdle for commercial
success. Linked to that hurdle is the highly uncertain
future pricing of fossil fuel sources of energy and
wider use of battery transportation technology. In
addition, consistent government financial support
will be necessary for the development of bio-based
energy technologies, which introduces another
uncertainty for the long-term viability of the
technologies. For example, the United States and the
European Union have aggressive biofuel mandates
that include sustainability mandates for reducing
greenhouse gas emissions. Although some advanced
biofuel technologies could meet these standards, costs
are high and the technologies are not proven on a
commercial scale.
Solar Energy
Solar energy, which has substantial growth potential,
could disrupt the global energy environment if it
achieves a competitive cost with electricity produced
from other sources of energy. Because of government
subsidies and rapidly declining costs, photovoltaic
technology is now widely used for electrical power
generation. China is already the leading manufacturer
of photovoltaic panels.
Solar thermal technology can also generate electrical
power by using mirrors to concentrate sunlight,
which is converted to heat in a solar collector. The
heat is transferred to a heat storage medium such as
molten salt, which can be used for steam generation
to produce electricity. Because heat can be stored less
expensively than electricity, solar thermal technology
can generate electricity when the sun is not shining.
However, whether solar-photovoltaic or solar-thermal
electricity-generating plants will be cost competitive

--- Sayfa 117 ---
96
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
approach in one treatment, may become an important
discipline for disease management, reducing hospital
costs by accelerating patients’ recovery times and
complications caused by invasive surgery. Advances
in synthetic biology will likely result in production
facilities making novel treatments and diagnostics
agents. Advances in regenerative medicine almost
certainly will parallel these developments in diagnostic
and treatment protocols. For example, replacement
organs, such as kidneys and livers, could be developed
by 2030.
The new disease management technologies will
increase the longevity and quality of life for the world’s
aging population, tipping the demographic profile
of many countries toward an older (but healthy)
population. However, improvements in disease
management technologies could be out of reach of
poor people in countries that do not have health
coverage for all.
Cost is the major barrier preventing molecular
diagnostic technologies from becoming routinely
available in physician’s surgeries, although costs
for genetic sequencing are rapidly decreasing. The
cost per individual diagnostic test is more important
than the cost of the diagnostic equipment itself. A
move away from expensive biological reagents to
silicon-based molecular diagnostics procedures should
reduce the costs of genetic tests further. The drawback
of today’s genetic profiling is that the number of
known disease-related genes is insufficient to provide
mass screening. Synergistic technologies such as
computer processing power and big data storage and
analysis will be important for managing the huge
amounts of data gathered by genome sequencing.
However, with computing technology still advancing
at a high rate computer power should not be a
rate-limiting factor. Acquiring governments’ approval
for diagnostic tests will delay their implementation.
Human Augmentation
Spanning a wide gamut of technologies, ranging from
implants and prosthetics to powered exoskeletons,
human augmentation enhances innate human abilities,
will likely transform everyday life, particularly for the
elderly and mobility-impaired populations.
The greatest gains in healthy longevity are likely
to occur in those developing countries that will
experience a huge growth in the size of their middle
class populations. Although the current health-care
systems of such countries may be poor, developing
countries are expected to make substantial progress in
the longevity potential of their populations by 2030.
Indeed, many leading centers of innovation in disease
management are likely to be in the East.
Disease Management
Disease management is the effective control and
treatment of communicable and noncommunicable
illnesses. Today, physicians struggle to differentiate
between many illnesses with similar symptoms.
Obtaining results from detection tests can take
several days, leading to delays in diagnosis, which
can be life threatening. Consequently, diagnostic
and pathogen-detection devices will be key enabling
technologies for disease management; the future
accuracy of molecular diagnostics has the power
to transform medicine. The targets of molecular
diagnostics include genetic information on disease
presence or predisposition, and the ability to monitor
the physical manifestation of a disease. One enabling
technology, DNA sequencing, is advancing rapidly with
some techniques currently capable of reading a human
genome for about $1,000.
Molecular diagnostic devices will revolutionize
medicine by providing a rapid means of testing for
both genetic and pathogenic diseases during surgeries.
Readily available genetic testing will hasten disease
diagnosis and help physicians decide on the optimal
treatment for each patient. Such personalized medicine
will reduce the health-care costs associated with
physicians’ prescribing ineffective drugs. In addition,
the declining cost of such testing will facilitate
the cataloguing of many more individuals’ genetic
profiles, which will lead to a greater understanding
of the genetic basis of many diseases. Theranostics,
the combination of a diagnostic and a therapeutic

--- Sayfa 118 ---
97
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
Owing to the high cost of human augmentation,
it probably will be available in 15-20 years only to
those who are able to pay for it. Such a situation
may lead to a two-tiered society of an enhanced and
non-enhanced persons and may require regulation.
In addition, the technology must be sufficiently
robust to prevent hacking and interference of human
augmentation. Advances in synergistic and enabling
technologies are necessary for improved practicality
of human augmentation technologies. For example,
improvements in battery life will dramatically improve
the practicality of exoskeleton use. Progress in
understanding human memory and brain functions
will be critical to future brain-machine interfaces,
while advances in flexible biocompatible electronics
will enable better integration with the recipient
of augmentations and recreate or enhance sensory
experiences. Moral and ethical challenges to human
augmentation are inevitable.
or replaces missing or defective functions such as
damaged limbs. Prosthetic limbs have now reached the
stage where they offer equivalent or slightly improved
functionality to human limbs. Brain-machine interfaces
in the form of brain-implants are demonstrating that
directly bridging the gap between brain and machine
is possible. Military organizations are experimenting
with a wide range of augmentation technologies,
including exoskeletons that allow personnel to carry
increased loads and psychostimulants that allow
personnel to operate for longer periods.
Human augmentation could allow civilian and military
people to work more effectively, and in environments
that were previously inaccessible. Elderly people
may benefit from powered exoskeletons that assist
wearers with simple walking and lifting activities,
improving the health and quality of life for aging
populations. Successful prosthetics probably will be
directly integrated with the user’s body. Brain-machine
interfaces could provide “superhuman” abilities,
enhancing strength and speed, as well as providing
functions not previously available.
“The high cost of human augmentation
means that it probably will be available in
15-20 years only to those who are able to
pay. Such a situation may lead to a two-
tiered society . . . ”
As replacement limb technology advances, people may
choose to enhance their physical selves as they do with
cosmetic surgery today. Future retinal eye implants
could enable night vision, and neuro-enhancements
could provide superior memory recall or speed of
thought. Neuro-pharmaceuticals will allow people
to maintain concentration for longer periods of
time or enhance their learning abilities. Augmented
reality systems can provide enhanced experiences
of real-world situations. Combined with advances in
robotics, avatars could provide feedback in the form of
sensors providing touch and smell as well as aural and
visual information to the operator.

--- Sayfa 119 ---
98
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
demographic trends are favorable compared to other
advanced and some developing countries. US strength
also derives from high immigrant inflows and the
United States’ unusual ability to integrate migrants.
US industry will also benefit from increased domestic
natural gas production, which will lower energy
costs for many manufacturing industries. Over time,
the increased domestic energy production could
reduce the US trade deficit because the US would be
able to reduce energy imports and may be able to
export natural gas and oil. Increased domestic energy
production could boost employment at home.
“The multifaceted nature of US power
suggests that even as its economic weight
is overtaken by China—perhaps as early as
the 2020s based on several forecasts—the
US most likely will remain “first among
equals” alongside the other great powers
in 2030 . . . ”
The multifaceted nature of US power suggests
that even as its economic weight is overtaken by
China—perhaps as early as the 2020s based on
several forecasts—the US most likely will remain
the “first among equals” alongside the other great
powers in 2030 because of its preeminence across
a range of power dimensions and legacies of its
leadership. Nevertheless, with the rapid rise of
multiple other powers, the “unipolar moment” is over
and Pax Americana—the era of unrivalled American
ascendancy in international politics that began in
1945—is fast winding down. The graphic on page 103
shows a snapshot of the relative power and factors
underlying leading countries in 2030.
A DIFFERENT SETUP GOING FORWARD
The US faces stiff economic challenges—not as clearly
foreseen before the 2008 financial crisis—which
will require broad-based structural reform if it is to
avoid a rapid decline in its economic position. Health
care is expensive and inefficient: public and private
Game-CHANGER 6
The role of the
United States
How the US evolves over the next 15-20 years—a
big uncertainty—will be among the most important
variables in the future shape of the international order.
The United States’ relative economic decline vis-a-vis
the rising states is inevitable and already occurring,
but its future role in the international system is much
harder to assess. The extent of US power in the system
is important—in the short run because of the need
for systemic public goods, especially security,, and
in the longer run out to 2030 because of the growing
uncertainties associated with rapid geopolitical
change. Even in 2030, the transition to a multipolar
world will not be complete; the world’s ultimate shape
is far from being predetermined.
An economically restored US would be a “plus” in
terms of the capability of the international system to
deal with major global challenges during this long
transitional period. However, a strong US would
not be able by itself to guarantee that the growing
global challenges—particularly in this world of rapid
power diffusion—were met. A weak and defensive
US, on the other hand, would make it much harder
for the international system to grapple with major
global challenges.
STEADY US ROLE
The United States’ dominant role in international
politics has derived from its preponderance across
the board in most dimensions of power, both “hard”
and “soft.” The United States’ weight in the global
economy has steadily lessened since the 1960s, but
it has been dropping more rapidly since the early
2000s with the rise of China’s place in the world
economy. Nevertheless, the US remains among the
world’s most open, innovative, and flexible countries.
Despite being home to less than five percent of the
world’s population, the US accounted for 28 percent
of global patent applications in 2008 and is home to
nearly 40 percent of the world’s best universities. US

--- Sayfa 120 ---
99
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
struggle with fascism and then communism. For
example, Europe, through NATO, has historically
provided Washington with many of its key coalition
partners. Even before 2008, the pressures on European
security capabilities were apparent and Europe had
begun a substantial defense retrenchment.
Looking ahead, regardless of the various realistic
economic growth scenarios one can construct,
although strong transatlantic ties will remain an
important US asset, the G-7 overall will account for
a decreasing share of total global military spending.
In a multispeed economic world in which the West
continues to experience severe fiscal constraints—
which is the most likely development for the
foreseeable future—the trend toward an increasingly
disproportionate share of military spending by the
non-G-7 will grow. Although the US will remain the
leading military power in 2030, the gap with others
will diminish and its ability to depend on its historic
alliance partnerships will diminish even further.
The US ability to maintain near-current levels of
defense spending is open to serious question. The
trend for national defense spending as a share of the
US economy has been downward for several decades.
The US devoted on average 7 percent share of GDP to
national defense during the Cold War, which dropped
to below 5 percent over the past decade, including
expenditures on the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.
However, spending for major entitlement programs—
particularly Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid—
has grown rapidly over the past several decades. As
a result, it is difficult to reverse the historic trend or
increase the share in the future in the absence of a
major emergency. With an aging population and the
prospect of higher interest rates in the future, the
rising entitlement costs will consume an increasing
proportion of the Federal budget without major
reform of the programs or substantially increased tax
revenues.a
a  See Cindy Williams, “The Future Affordability of US National Security,”
unpublished paper, 28 October 2011. According to this study, putting
federal budgets on a sustainable path will require shifting about 6 percent
of GDP into revenues or out of spending relative to their likely current
course, according to the Congressional Budget Office. One study believes
that an affordable long-term level for national defense would be between
1.6 and 2.6 percent of GDP, well below current levels.
health spending is 50 percent higher per capita
than that of the next highest OECD country. As the
population ages, these costs are expected to rise
rapidly. Secondary education is weak, with 15 year-old
American students ranking only 31st of 65 countries
in mathematics and 22nd in science in a survey
that includes many developing countries. The US
educational advantage relative to the rest of the world
has been cut in half in the past 30 years. Without
large-scale improvements in primary and secondary
education, future US workers—which have benefited
from the world’s highest wages—will increasingly
bring only mediocre skills to the workplace.
“Without large-scale improvements in
primary and secondary education, future
US workers—which have benefited
from the world’s highest wages—will
increasingly bring only mediocre skills to
the workplace.”
Income distribution in the US is considerably more
unequal than in other advanced countries and is
becoming more so. Although incomes of the top 1
percent of Americans have soared, median household
incomes have declined since 1999. Social mobility is
lower and relative poverty rates are higher in the US
than in most other advanced countries. Despite its high
productivity and competitiveness, the US cumulative
current account deficit during the last 30 years was
$8.5 trillion, a reflection of extremely low household
savings rates and government deficits.
The context in which US global power has operated
has changed dramatically: it is just not a matter of the
United States’ relative economic decline, but also of
the West— Washington’s historic partners. Most other
Western states have also suffered a stiff downturn,
while developing states are accounting for a larger
share of the global economy. The post-World War II
era was characterized by the G-7 countries—which
were allies and partners—leading both economically
and politically. US projection of power was dependent
on and amplified by its strong alliances with Western
partners, which were forged during an extensive

--- Sayfa 121 ---
100
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
US POWER: Linchpin of the International System
Element of Power
Present Status
Trendline
Factors
Economic
The US share of world GDP
was largely steady until
2005. It is currently around
24 percent (market rate) of
world GDP, which makes the
US still the single country
with the largest share.
But the US share of world
GDP will continue to drop,
and the US will be the
world’s second-largest
economic power in
PPP terms.
China and India are
gaining ground at an
unprecedented rate (the
US rise in the 19th century
was slower as measured by
gains in world GDP).
Military
The US ability to maintain
near-current levels of
defense spending is
open to serious question.
The trend for national
defense spending as a
share of the US economy
has been downward for
several decades.
Spending for major
entitlement programs
makes it difficult to reverse
the trend of decreasing
military spending.
The G-7 overall will account
for a decreasing share
of total global military
spending. Although the
US will remain the leading
military power in 2030, the
gap with others will diminish
and Washington’s ability
to depend on its historic
alliance partnerships will
diminish even further.
Political
The US remains preeminent,
though the unipolar moment
has passed.
There is no competing
alternative to the Western
liberal order, though many
rising states want less US
“hegemonic” behavior.
The potential for an
overstretched US facing
increased demands is
greater than the risk of
the US being replaced as
the world’s preeminent
political leader.
S & T
The US remains the world’s
leader, but Washington
has growing worries about
declining educational and
skill levels.
China’s large, sustained
investments could make it
close to a peer competitor
by 2030.
Technology is increasingly
a networked and
international enterprise.
Leadership in key fields will
increasingly entail working
with international partners.
Soft Powers
US preponderance across
hard and soft powers
makes it unique among
great powers.
The gap with others almost
certainly will narrow, but
China is unlikely to rival the
US in soft power in 2030.
US ability to integrate
outsiders will remain a
key strength for attracting
the world’s best talent
and ensuring S&T and
economic leadership.

--- Sayfa 122 ---
101
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
Internet has boosted even more the power of nonstate
actors and been a key factor in the diffusion of power.
In most cases, US power will need to be enhanced
through relevant outside networks, friends, and
affiliates that can be gathered on any particular issue.
As mentioned earlier, leadership will increasingly be
a function of position, enmeshment, diplomatic skill,
and constructive demeanor.
MULTIPLE POTENTIAL SCENARIOS FOR THE
UNITED STATES’ GLOBAL ROLE
The degree to which the United States continues to
dominate the international system could vary widely.
Historically many such powers have played a dominant
role long after their economic or even military weight
has lessened in relation to others. The American
economy surpassed Britain’s in the late 19th century,
but the US only assumed its global role during World
War II. The legacy of US power—as chief architect of
the post-WWII order—has a potentially long tail.
In other key domains, a similar pattern exists of a
narrowing gap between the US and its competitors
and between the West and the “rest.” This pattern
has implications for the United States’ role and power
in the world of 2030. The US will still be the world’s
S&T leader in 2030, but the gap with China, India
and others will have shrunk. The US continues to
have the biggest contingent of top-ranked universities
while the number in Asia grows and Europe’s share
has diminished.
Under any scenario, the US will also have to contend
with the growing diffusion of power, which would
make it virtually impossible—as we stated in chapter
one on the relative certainties—for any power
to act hegemonically. Power has become more
multifaceted—reflecting the diversity of issues—
and more contextual— certain actors and power
instruments are germane to particular issues. The
United States’ technological assets—including its
leadership in piloting social networking and rapid
communications—give it an advantage, but the
Elements of Power of Leading Countries in 2030
Source: International Futures Model.
Percent share of global power
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
Russia
Germany
France
United
Kingdom
Japan
India
China
United
States
Internet/Communication Technologies
Research & Development
Government Revenue
Human Capital
International Assistance
Foreign Direct Investments
Trade
Nuclear Weapons
GDP (purchasing power parity)
Military Spending
Energy

--- Sayfa 123 ---
102
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
newly empowered consumers will demand education,
entertainment, and products and services driven by
information technology—all goods the US excels at
producing. Moreover, as a global technological leader,
the US could be motored by innovations in medicine,
biotechnology, communications, transportation, or
energy. For example, developments that improve the
efficiency or extraction of shale natural gas and oil—of
which the US possesses large reserves—will provide
disproportionate benefits to the United States.
In an optimistic scenario, the US would address its
structural weaknesses, including falling educational
standards, skyrocketing health-care costs, and
widening fiscal deficits. At the same time, outside the
US, the euro zone would remain intact, eliminating
one of the major threats to US recovery in the short-to-
medium term. Continued prosperity in emerging
market countries, where approximately one billion
people will be added to the world middle class by
2030, could play to US economic strengths. These
Is There An Alternative Order
on the Horizon?
The NIC sponsored several seminars with
international relations experts to examine the world
view of emerging powers and whether they were
or would be seeking a fundamental transformation
of the international order over the next couple
decades. Many participants believe that today’s
emerging powers do not have a revisionist view
of the world order along the lines offered by the
Soviet Union, Imperial Japan, or Nazi Germany even
though their relations with the US are ambiguous.
Many emerging countries seek to use their ties with
the US to advance their national interests, creating
freedom for maneuver. India sees the US as a hedge
against the rise of China, and Brazil recognizes
Washington as a backer of its rise and guarantor of
regional economic stability.
Emerging powers are likely to be particularly
sensitive to future perceived slights by the US.
Words like “humiliation” and “respect” cropped up
repeatedly in the presentations and conversations,
especially with experts from those regions. As
emerging powers seek greater influence and
recognition in the international order they are likely
to clash diplomatically with the US. Elite and publics
in emerging countries have increasingly objected to
“hegemonic” behavior or extensive interventions
abroad by the US. One of the attractions of a
multipolar world for many of them is a lessened
US dominance. Maintaining and protecting one’s
sovereignty would continue to be a preoccupation,
particularly so long as they feel their position in the
international order is not secured.
For most emerging powers, it was clear from the
discussions that participants saw significant barriers
to emerging powers building the political, military,
and diplomatic capacity necessary to project
power and influence internationally. In many ways,
the intellectual capacity is even more difficult to
acquire than military assets. As countries enjoy
a rapid increase in their power they will need to
think about the world in new ways and overcome
severe domestic constraints that can impede
this transition.
Participants saw China in a separate category:
the US and China will be in competition with one
another but they will also be required to cooperate
to solve common threats and challenges and to
protect mutual interests. This contrasts sharply with
the Cold War which was characterized by mutual
independence and ideological rivalry. For China,
the principal question is whether it can continue to
operate within the existing international order or if
it will eventually pursue a revisionist course. There
was disagreement about which was the most likely
outcome. However, our interlocutors agreed that
if China does seek to overturn the international
order it is likely to be the result of events inside and
outside China rather than the consequence of a
grand design.

--- Sayfa 124 ---
103
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
global and regional challenges would be addressed. A
stronger US economy dependent on trade in services
and cutting-edge technologies would be a boost for
the world economy, laying the basis for stronger
multilateral cooperation. Washington would have a
stronger interest in world trade, potentially leading
a process of World Trade Organization reform that
streamlines new negotiations and strengthens the
rules governing the international trading system. The
US would be in a better position to boost support for
a more democratic Middle East and prevent the slide
of failing states. The US could act as balancer ensuring
regional stability, for example, in Asia where the rise of
multiple powers—particularly India and China—could
spark increased rivalries. However, a reinvigorated
US would not necessarily be a panacea. Terrorism,
proliferation, regional conflicts, and other ongoing
threats to the international order will be affected by
the presence or absence of strong US leadership but
are also driven by their own dynamics.
The US impact is much more clear-cut in the negative
case in which the US fails to rebound and is in sharp
economic decline. In that scenario, a large and
dangerous global power vacuum would be created and
in a relatively short space of time. With a weak US, the
potential would increase for the European economy to
unravel. The European Union might remain, but as an
empty shell around a fragmented continent. Progress
on trade reform as well as financial and monetary
system reform would probably suffer. A weaker and
less secure international community would reduce
its aid efforts, leaving impoverished or crisis-stricken
countries to fend for themselves, multiplying the
chances of grievance and peripheral conflicts. In
this scenario, the US would be more likely to lose
influence to regional hegemons—China and India in
Asia and Russia in Eurasia. The Middle East would be
riven by numerous rivalries which could erupt into
open conflict, potentially sparking oil-price shocks.
This would be a world reminiscent of the 1930s when
Britain was losing its grip on its global leadership role.
Under this optimistic scenario, we would expect the
US economy to grow steadily at about 2.7 percent a
year, up from 2.5 percent during the last 20 years.
US growth reflects both solid labor force growth and
technological advance. Average living standards would
rise—almost 40 percent in this scenario—potentially
engendering greater social mobility. Although the
relative size of the US economy would still decline—
from about a third of G20 GDP in 2010 to about a
quarter in 2030 in real US dollars—the US economy
would remain the world’s largest at market exchange
rates. In PPP terms, however, the US economy would
still be surpassed by China before 2030. Trade would
also still shift to the East: the US share of world trade
would dip from around 12 to 10 percent, while East
Asia’s share would probably double from 10 to 20
percent. Though its growth would slow sharply by
2030, China would still become the central player
in world trade and the largest trading partner of
most countries.
“ . . . a reinvigorated US would not
necessarily be a panacea. Terrorism,
proliferation, regional conflicts, and other
ongoing threats to the international order
will be affected by the presence or absence
of strong US leadership but are also driven
by their own dynamics.”
A starkly different picture would emerge—both for
the US and the international system—should the US
economy not rebound and growth in the US slow to
an average of 1.5 percent a year through 2030. Weaker
international trade and financial arrangements, as well
as spillovers from US domestic crises, would slow
growth in other countries by about 0.5 percent a year.
Slower growth would hold down US living standards.
If seen as a country in absolute decline, the perception
itself would make it harder for the US to lead.
BIG STAKES FOR THE INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM
The optimistic scenario of a reinvigorated US economy
would increase the prospects that the growing

--- Sayfa 125 ---
104
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
dueling claims are likely to escalate with growing
interest in exploitation of valuable seabed resources.
Other regions may require stepped up US leadership:
in the Middle East and South Asia increased rivalries
and the potential for both interstate and intrastate
conflict are rising (see the conflict section). One
can easily imagine widespread calls for strong US
leadership to stave off an open Indian-Pakistani
conflict or defuse a nuclear arms race in the Middle
East. Humanitarian crises—particularly those involving
the need for US lift and intelligence capabilities—will
also help ensure continued US leadership. As we
described earlier, environmental disasters are likely
to be more frequent and more severe; as a result, the
United States’ military assets are likely to be in greater
demand. Providing technological solutions for growing
resource scarcities and in some cases spearheading
diplomatic arrangements for better sharing of
existing resources such as water are also likely to
be tests of US leadership. US success or failure in
EVENTS WILL ALSO DRIVE OUTCOMES FOR THE
US ROLE
The US position in the world will be determined
also by how successful it is in helping to manage
international crises—typically the role of great powers
and, since 1945, the international community’s
expectation of Washington.
Should Asia replicate Europe’s 19th- and early
20th-century past and become a region divided by
power struggles and rivalries, the US would be called
by many—including potentially even a rising China—to
be a balancer, ensuring regional stability. All countries
would want and need stability to ensure their
continued internal development. Potential crises that
could ocur in the 2030 time frame—such as Korean
unification or a tense standoff between the US and
China over Taiwan—probably would lead to demands
for sustained US engagement at a high level. Asia is a
region with a large number of unresolved territorial
disputes, including in the South China Sea where
Military spending, 2010-2030
Source: International Futures Model.
Billion US $
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2030
2025
2020
2015
2010
World
G-20
(except EU)
G-7

--- Sayfa 126 ---
105
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
quickly or slowly that happens will have a major
impact on the US global role.
“A collapse or sudden retreat of US power
would most likely result in an extended
period of global anarchy where there
would be no stable international system
and no leading power to replace the US.”
FEW COMPETING VISIONS OF A NEW
INTERNATIONAL ORDER—FOR THE MOMENT
The replacement of the United States by another global
power and erection of a new international order seems
the least likely outcome in this time period. No other
power would be likely to achieve the same panoply
of power in this time frame under any plausible
scenario. The emerging powers are eager to take their
places at the top table of key multilateral institutions
such as UN, IMF, and World Bank, but they do not
espouse any competing vision. Although ambivalent
and even resentful of the US-led international order,
they have benefited from it and are more interested
in continuing their economic development and
political consolidation than contesting US leadership.
In addition, the emerging powers are not a bloc:
they don’t have any unitary alternative vision. Their
perspectives—even China’s—are more keyed to
shaping regional structures. A collapse or sudden
retreat of US power would most likely result in an
extended period of global anarchy where there would
be no stable international system and no leading power
to replace the US. When we have discussed decreasing
US power abroad, many scholars and analysts have
tended to assume even greater levels of chaos and
disorder would ensue than many US experts.
THE FOG OF TRANSITION
The present recalls past transition points—such as
1815, 1919, or 1945—when the path forward was
not clear-cut and the world faced the possibility
of different global futures. In all those cases, the
transition was extended and re-balancing was partly
a matter of trial and error. Domestic politics was an
managing these crises probably will directly affect the
world community’s perception of US power.
Historically, US dominance has been buttressed by
the dollar’s role as the global reserve currency. The
fall of the dollar as the global reserve currency and
substitution by another or a basket of currencies would
be one of the sharpest indications of a loss of US global
economic position, equivalent to the sterling’s demise
as the world’s currency, contributing to the end of the
British Empire in the post-World War II period. Most
experts see the usurpation of the dollar as unlikely
in the next 15-20 years. However, the growing global
and regional use of other major currencies such as the
renminbi (RMB) and euro—sharing a global status
with the dollar—is probably more likely out to 2030.
As Asia becomes the world’s economic powerhouse
and creditor, it is only a matter of time before its
currencies also take on a greater global status. How
China and India’s Dramatic Rise
Note: UK, US, and Japan data from Angus Maddison historical
database, measured in 1990 International Geary-Khamis dollars.
China and India data from Brookings projections, measured in 2055
PPP dollars.
Source: Brookings Institution.
Average increase in percentage point
share of global GDP per decade
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
India,
2010-30
China,
2000-20
Japan,
1950-80
US,
1900-50
UK,
1820-70

--- Sayfa 127 ---
106
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | GAME-CHANGERS
a new role. The transition away from unipolarity
toward new global leadership will be a multifaceted
and multilayered process, played on a number of
different levels and driven too by the unfolding of
events, both domestically and more broadly in the rest
of the world.
important factor shaping international outcomes.
Going forward, US domestic politics will be critical to
how the US conceives and prosecutes its international
role. Many of our interlocutors stressed the need
for developing a strong political consensus as a key
condition for greater US economic competitiveness. A
divided US would have a more difficult time of shaping
World Rebalanced—Parallels
with the Past?
Some of our interlocutors drew parallels between
the current period and the European “long
peace” after 1815 set in motion by the Congress
of Vienna. Similarities include a period of rapid
social, economic, technological and political
change and an international system which was
largely multipolar. The Europe of 1815 consisted
of a diverse set of autocracies like Russia, Prussia
and Austro-Hungarian Empire and liberal states
such as Britain and France. In such a world, Britain
occupied a special role: it managed to play an
outsized role despite its lack of overwhelming
power capabilities—in 1830, Russia and France
were roughly the same size as Britain in terms of
GNP and by 1913 the US, Russia and Germany
all had larger economies. Its global financial and
economic position and empire, role as offshore
balancer in Europe and protector of commercial sea
lanes linking its overseas dominions gave Britain
the preeminent global role in the international
system during the nineteenth and into the
twentieth centuries.
The current multipolar system is also very diverse
with an even larger number of players (think G20),
and international economics and politics is much
more globalized. In 1815, coming out of over 25
years of conflict, the great powers had conflicting
views which they did not disguise, particularly
at home. The Holy Alliance of Russia, Prussia
and Austria sought to fight against democracy,
revolution and secularism but ended up finding
it hard to coordinate collective efforts and, in any
event, their efforts proved only effective temporarily
as revolutions and separatist movements continued
across Europe throughout the length of the
nineteenth century. A long, general peace among
the great powers prevailed, mostly because no
one wanted to risk imposing its will on the others
for fear of the larger consequences. Equilibrium
was achieved in part because of the differences.
Britain’s role also outlasted its demise as a first
rate economic power and despite the rise of
several competing states stayed preeminent in
part because the others were reluctant to wrest
leadership away from it until the First World War.

--- Sayfa 128 ---
CHAPTER 3
alternative worlds

--- Sayfa 129 ---
The substantial number of game-changers and complex interactions among
them suggest an endless variety of scenarios. We have sought here to
delineate four archetypal futures that represent distinct pathways for
future developments out to 2030. In reality, the future probably will
consist of elements from all the alternative worlds.
The graphic on the top of that page shows US share of real global GDP under
the four scenarios. The graphic on the bottom of the page at left illustrates
patterns in the shift in global economic clout across regions (measured in terms
of regions’/countries’ share of global GDP) in 2010 and in our four scenarios for
2030. The four scenarios are:
Stalled Engines–a scenario in which the US and Europe turn inward and
globalization stalls.
Fusion–a world in which the US and China cooperate, leading to worldwide
cooperation on global challenges.
Gini-Out-of-the-Bottle–a world in which economic inequalities dominate.
Nonstate World–a scenario in which nonstate actors take the lead in solving
global challenges.

--- Sayfa 130 ---
109
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | alternative worldS
The graphic below illustrates patterns in the shift in global economic clout across regions
(measured in terms of their share of real global GDP) in 2010 and in our four scenarios for 2030.
The graphic below compares the US share of real GDP in our four scenarios for 2030.
Comparison of global gdp composition in our 2030 scenarios
us share of real global gdp, 1950-2030
a Other includes Eastern Europe and Central Asia, Turkey, Canada, South Asia (except India), and MENA.
Source: McKinsey Global Growth Model.
Trillion US $
Fusion
Nonstate World
Gini-Out-of-
the-Bottle
Stalled Engines
2010
Othera
Sub-Saharan Africa
Latin America
Other Asia
India
China
Russia
Japan
Europe
US
14.9
18.3
21.0
19.4
7.7
17.0
6.8
11.3
12.8
12.7
15.4
12.8
11.6
7.3
19.9
7.5
21.6
22.0
22.4
23.9
8.0
23.4
7.9
12.6
13.4
15.5
19.5
7.1
17.8
6.5
10.2
11.0
11.3
17.5
5.9
1.8
1.8
1.0
6.4
5.5
5.3
7.1
1.8
2.2
2.2
1.7
2.4
2.8
133.1
123.0
112.2
105.7
67.3
3.3
2.4
Source: McKinsey Global Growth Model; Angus Maddison; team analysis.
Percent of global GDP
15
0
20
25
30
2030
2020
2010
2000
1990
1980
1970
1960
1950
Fusion
Stalled Engines
Gini-Out-of-the-Bottle
Nonstate World

--- Sayfa 131 ---
110
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | alternative worldS
fails to address its fiscal challenges and consequently
economic policy and performance drift. The European
project unravels. Greece’s exit from the euro zone
triggers the rapid, unmanaged exit of the rest of the
periphery. More nationalist, even nativist, parties
rise to claim positions of influence in coalition
governments. By the 2020s, it looks like only a limited
free trade zone will remain.
Economic growth continues in major emerging
markets and accounts for approximately three quarters
of global growth. Nonetheless, fundamental economic
and political reforms remain elusive in China and
India. Corruption, social unrest, weak financial
systems, and chronically poor infrastructures slow
their growth rates. China’s growth falls, for example,
from 8 percent at the start of the period to around
3 percent by 2030.
As pressures grow everywhere for disengagement and
protectionism, the global governance system is unable
to cope with a widespread pandemic that triggers
panic. Rich countries wall themselves off from many
developing and poor countries in Asia, Africa, and
the Middle East. By disrupting international travel and
trade, the severe pandemic helps to stall out, but does
not kill globalization.
alternative world 1
stalled engines
We chose Stalled Engines—a scenario in which the
US and Europe turn inward and globalization stalls—as
one of the bookends, illustrating the most plausible
worst case. Arguably, darker scenarios are imaginable,
including a complete breakdown and reversal of
globalization due to a potential large-scale conflict on
the order of World War I or World War II, but such an
outcome does not seem probable. We believe the risks
of interstate conflict will rise, but we do not expect
bilateral conflict to ignite a full-scale conflagration.
Moreover, unlike in the interwar period, the
complete unraveling of economic interdependence or
globalization would be more difficult—and therefore
less likely—in this more advanced technological age
with ubiquitous connections.
Stalled Engines is nevertheless a bleak future. Our
modeling suggests that under this scenario total
global income would be $27 trillion less than under
Fusion, our most optimistic scenario. This amount
is more than the combined economies of the US and
euro zone today. In a Stalled Engines world, the US
and Europe are no longer capable nor interested in
sustaining global leadership. The US political system
1
On the sidelines of the annual Davos meeting, a number of multinational CEOs gather to discuss
what they see as globalization stalling out. One of their members has asked the director of her
“Strategic Vision” office to write a short paper describing the downward spiral, which is used as the
basis for the discussion. The following is an extract from that paper:

--- Sayfa 132 ---
111
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | alternative worldS
I have to confess I did not see it coming, but we have to face up to the fact that we are in
a new world—one in which globalization is no longer a given. You may ask how this came
about. The key was the inward turn of the United States. I think all of us thought that the
discovery of shale gas meant that the US was “back” despite all the domestic squabbling.
Clearly, we did not take into consideration the US legal system. Not only did our earlier
inflated estimates fall victim to slower-than-anticipated technological improvements in
extraction efficiency and deposits that proved to be at the lower end of initial forecasts, but
we failed to factor in the costly series of lawsuits against the energy producers.
Then we were hit with a double whammy. Just when we thought Europe was digging
itself out from Greece’s unruly exit from the euro zone and negotiating a new political and
economic pact, the French people have revolted in the latest referendum on a new EU treaty.
It was a devastating defeat for the French Government and now a huge problem for everyone
else. It is not clear that a new deal can be devised given the wide margin of defeat for the
former treaty proposal. Increasingly, German elites are saying that Germany doesn’t need the
EU anymore: they want to get out now.
I’m not sure the developing world understands the seriousness of these changes. I think there
was, on their part, a certain schadenfreude—rejoicing—about the West’s problems. China
welcomed the US decision to draw down its overseas forces, seeing it as a guarantee of US
non-interference, though Chinese “liberals” are chagrined because they saw a strong US as
keeping the pressure on Beijing for reforms. Beijing expects Vietnam and The Philippines to
gradually back down in the South China Sea without strong US support.
China has its own share of problems. Fundamental economic and political reforms have
stalled; corruption and social unrest is slowing growth rates, which perhaps explains why
the government is fomenting nationalism and becoming more adventurist overseas.
Many Indian strategists have been leery of putting too much trust in the US; the recent US
drawdown confirms they were right. New Delhi has few other natural partners. India worries
a lot about its influence in Central Asia. A Taliban coup recently occurred in which all the
other factions—which had formed the government—were brutally suppressed. India, which
blames Pakistan, sought Western help but was largely rebuffed.
WORLDCORP Strategic Vision Group
1800 Ladbroke Lane, Suite 615
London, England
W10 5NE
1

--- Sayfa 133 ---
112
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | alternative worldS
Indian distrust of China has also grown to the extent that no more BRIC summits are being
held. Chinese and Indian diplomats won’t sit together even in a multilateralist setting. China
recently completed a 38,000-megawatt dam on the Brahmaputra close to the disputed border
with India and has begun building another. China’s decision to test Vietnam’s determination
to stand up to Beijing in the South China Sea has Indian officials on edge. In Delhi’s view,
China’s aggression appears to be unstoppable without a greater US willingness to intervene.
It appears to be only a matter of time before China’s blue water navy extends its sway farther
west into the Indian Ocean.
The global economy has suffered the consequences of the escalating tensions among
the emerging powers. Global growth is now trending downward. Poorer countries,
particularly, are suffering: during bad harvest years, more countries are creating export bans,
exacerbating food shortages and price spikes.
Another turning point was when the Middle East boiled over. Sunni-Shia violence exploded in
the Gulf. Iran intervened to protect Shia in Bahrain, prompting Saudi military retaliation. Iran
then announced that it would start testing a nuclear device. The US debated whether to send
the Sixth Fleet to the Gulf to ensure the free flow of oil, but Washington decided to take a
“wait-and-see” approach. If I have to choose a moment when it was clear that the US role had
changed, this was it. Even the Chinese got worried about a diminishing US role and sent their
fleet to the Gulf of Oman.
There appears to be no end in sight to the Sunni-Shia tensions. Saudi Arabia and Iran—both
hit by lower energy prices because of the global growth slowdown—have nevertheless
increased tensions by launching a proxy war in Syria and Lebanon. Hizballah has also
launched its first large-scale cyber attack against Israel and the United States.
With large amounts of arable land, unconventional energy reserves (if the lawyers ever allow
them to be tapped), and adequate water resources, the US can be more self-sufficient than
most other countries. The growing disorder outside the US has strengthened those in favor
of disengagement. In China, however, the party is increasingly under fire for what many
Chinese people view as gross mismanagement of the economy. A coordinated general strike
has been ongoing in several of the major cities. India’s development has also substantially
slowed. No government stays in power long and there is a constant reshuffling of government
posts among coalition partners.
As with most ill fortune, troubles tend to come in waves: a deadly virus—which scientists
had warned about repeatedly—has erupted in Southeast Asia. Ironically, with the increased
security and border controls, the US, some Europeans, and even China are better able to
weather the pandemic, which is spreading quickly. Flights have been cancelled and ship
transports have been stopped. There are reports of tens of millions of deaths. Twitter tried
2

--- Sayfa 134 ---
113
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | alternative worldS
to operate even at the height of the pandemic, but a number of governments pulled the plug,
saying that the use of social media was responsible for the increasing panic. The virulent
strain spread quickly outside Southeast Asia to South Asia and along the trade and travel
routes to the Middle East and Africa.
As a result of the pandemic, there is now a new map of the world in everybody’s mind. I
can remember when the world map was the British Empire with a quarter of the Earth’s
surface colored in pink. Then we had the map of the Free World with Washington as its
capital. Now the new mental map shows a devastated Southeast Asia and portions of India,
the Horn of Africa, and parts of the Gulf. Many of these areas are still not getting any
international assistance.
This new mental map, created by what happened to the poor and destitute and their being
shunned by the rich countries, including China, is widening the gulf between North and
South and East and West. The new map will be what survivors in the developing world carry
around in their minds and, consciously or not, will inform thinking for a generation on
world affairs.
Even in the rich, developed countries, which were spared the worst impact from the
pandemic, the death toll reached several million—the youth were particularly susceptible. I
can’t tell you the psychological impact on the rich survivors. The worldwide pandemic has
put globalization even more in disfavor. It was the coup de grace for many, sealing the case
against what was seen as the rampant globalization earlier in the 21st century.
Western multinationals have seen forced nationalization in Southeast Asia, India, and Africa.
Governments there say that those businesses which ceased their operations during the
pandemic lost their rights to resume their businesses afterward.
Still, I noticed that Facebook is becoming more popular and that young people are also
beginning to travel and study abroad. Maybe this augurs a rebound in globalization’s
fortune . . .
In 2030, the East-West Center—founded in 1960 by the US Congress to promote
better relations and understanding among the people and nations of the United
States, Asia, and the Pacific through cooperative study, research, and dialogue—
has decided to change its name to the Center for Global Integration. The inaugural
3

--- Sayfa 135 ---
114
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | alternative worldS
How game-changers shape scenario:
Global
Economy
All boats sink in this scenario. Slower global growth is
accompanied by higher food prices.
Conflict
A new “great game” ramps up in Asia. Sunni-Shia violence erupts
in the Middle East, pitting Iran against Saudi Arabia. Outside
powers such as the US and Europe decline to intervene.
Regional
Stability
Southeast Asia and portions of India, the Horn of Africa, and parts
of the Gulf are hit hard by the pandemic, undermining stability.
Even before the pandemic, the breakdown in global governance
has meant an increasingly unstable Central Asia and Middle East.
Governance
Multilateralism comes to a halt following a worldwide pandemic.
Rich countries panic and try to isolate poorer countries where the
outbreak started and is more severe. Resentments build between
East and West and North and South.
Technology
Lack of technological improvements means the shale gas
revolution is delayed. By end of scenario, however, IT connections
are source of renewal, preserving globalization.
US Role
in the World
The US turns inward. The US public is no longer as interested in
sustaining the burdens of global leadership and, following the
pandemic, is more interested in building a Fortress America.
stalled engines

--- Sayfa 136 ---
115
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | alternative worldS
How major powers/regions fare in scenario:
Europe
Preoccupied by domestic turmoil, Europe sits with the US on the
sidelines.
Russia
Russian power in the Near Abroad has grown with the US pullback
from Afghanistan and Central Asia.
China
Fundamental economic and political reforms have stalled;
corruption and social unrest is slowing growth rates, which
perhaps explains why the government is fomenting nationalism
and becoming more adventurist overseas.
India
A US withdrawal from Asia leaves India having to fend on its own
against what it sees as an increasingly aggressive China.
Brazil/Middle
Tier Powers
Brazil and the rest of South America are less affected by growing
geopolitical tensions and the worldwide pandemic. As a major
food exporter, Brazil has benefited from rising prices. It seeks to
fill the vacuum created by a withdrawn US and Europe.
Poor
Developing
States in
Africa,
Asia and
Latin America
Poorer states suffer enormously in this scenario from rising
geopolitical tensions and food inflation. Pandemic deaths are
greatest in poorer countries, and recovery will be difficult with the
breakdown in global economic and technological cooperation.
stalled engines

--- Sayfa 137 ---
116
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | alternative worldS
address for the rechristened institution will be given by a noted archaeologist whose works
underlining the similarities among civilizations are being rediscovered, winning public acclaim
for his foresight. In recent years, he was beginning to doubt whether he was right, as he
recounts here.
The growing tensions between the great powers had him on the brink of recanting what seemed
like an overly optimistic view of global trends. In his address (excerpted right), he explains why
those doubts have now dissipated and he is returning to his earlier rosy outlook.
To: Center for Global Integration
From: Dr. Arthur E. Kent
growing collaboration among major powers, global
multilateral institutions are reformed and made more
inclusive. In other words, political and economic
reforms move forward hand-in-hand.
In this scenario, all boats substantially rise. Emerging
economies continue to grow faster than advanced
economies, but GDP growth in advanced economies
also accelerates. The global economy nearly doubles
by 2030 to $132 trillion that year. The American
Dream returns, with per capita incomes rising
$10,000 in ten years. Chinese per capita incomes
also rapidly increase, ensuring that China avoids
the middle-income trap. In Europe, the euro zone
crisis proves to be the catalyst for deep political and
economic restructuring.
In addition to political leadership in states, the role of
nonstate actors is also key. Technological innovation—
rooted in expanded exchanges and joint efforts at the
university- and research-lab level—is critical to the
world staying ahead of the rising resource constraints
that would result from the rapid boost in prosperity.
Alternative world 2
Fusion
Fusion is the other bookend, portraying what we
see as the most plausible best case. This is a world in
which the specter of a spreading conflict in South Asia
triggers efforts by the US and China to intervene and
impose a cease-fire. China and the US find other issues
to collaborate on, leading to a sea change in their
bilateral relations, as well as to broader worldwide
cooperation on global challenges. This scenario would
only be possible through strong political leadership
that overrules cautious domestic constituencies
and forges stronger international partnerships. As
a result, trust between societies and civilizations
would increase.
In a Fusion world, economic growth resumes as the
initial collaboration on security is widened to include
intellectual property and innovation to deal with
resource issues and climate change. China, bolstered
by the increasing role it is playing in the international
system, begins a process of political reform. With the
2

--- Sayfa 138 ---
117
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | alternative worldS
Subject: Inaugural Address Transcript
If you had asked me anytime during the second decade of the 21st century, I would
have told you that we were headed into a world catastrophe. It felt like what we read
about the runup to the First World War when there were mounting frictions between
the great powers. In this case there was sparring between China and India, China and
the US, and the US and Europe over Middle East policy and among the US, India, and
Pakistan over Afghanistan.
Talk about the Great Game—everybody seemed to be playing it despite knowing
the harm it was doing to the global economy. The West was having a bad economic
decade. The needed political and structural reforms in both the US and Europe
were taking time to produce a payoff. Much of Europe was dealing with the dramatic
aging of its population. The United States was bogged down in long-running
partisan debates.
The surprise was China. Everyone assumed that it would continue to advance. No one
anticipated the leadership’s decisionmaking paralysis and how the internal wrangling
was taking a toll on China’s economic growth. As Metternich was wont to say about
France at the Congress of Vienna, if China sneezes everyone else catches a cold.
China did more than make everyone get an economic cold. China’s leaders—despite
or maybe because of the downturn—ramped up military spending, causing everyone’s
nerves to get on edge.
In this environment of slowing global growth and increasing distrust, Indo-Pakistani
tensions also flared: in a year of drought, Pakistan accused India of holding back
much-needed relief with its refusal to open its dams along the Indus. Delhi viewed the
increased militant infiltration in Kashmir as a Pakistani provocation. It also detected
Islamabad’s hand in a plot by extremists to blow up the Mumbai stock exchange. India
mobilized its army.
The major powers were scrambling. Beijing sent a secret envoy to Washington with
a cease-fire plan. Together the US and China brought the plan to the UN Security
Council. China promised to inject massive amounts of humanitarian and development
aid if Pakistan ceased further retaliation. The US and Europe threatened massive
Center for Global Integration
1

--- Sayfa 139 ---
118
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | alternative worldS
sanctions if India did not withdraw. The US and China are cosponsoring peace talks in
Geneva to settle issues such as Kashmir and Pakistani support for militant groups.
No one would have predicted such a positive outcome. A lot depended on the
personal ties between US and Chinese leaders. Both leaderships disregarded the
objections raised by mid-level bureaucrats to cooperating with the other and have
been awarded Nobel Peace Prizes for their joint initiative. The leaders saw the danger
of a major war for everyone’s future and acted. They also wanted to do more: hence
their decision to ignite a global technological revolution.
Developing technological solutions to major challenges had an electrifying effect,
particularly for younger generations. Whereas the 2010s were all “doom and
gloom,” the 2020s turned suddenly into a golden age for technology. Mechanisms
for global sharing of innovation were established by China and the United States.
Global education exchanges flourished like never before. Turkey, Russia, and Israel,
for example, became creative hotbeds for cross-cultural fertilization. Knowledge
industries spread into Africa and Latin America.
In this collaborative environment, a global consensus for action on clean energy
and food security emerged. US labs led in producing new materials to support
improved energy storage. Scientists based in India worked on more decentralized
energy systems serving rural areas. Brazil became the center for work on a new
green revolution.
The Gulf states have seen the writing on the wall and are rapidly diversifying their
economies. Their efforts to develop strong universities—which began with US and
Western help—have paid off for the region. The Gulf states now have a highly trained
and entrepreneurial elite. A sort of contagion took hold—somewhat along the lines of
what happened in Asia in the 1970s and 1980s—and the Middle East is experiencing
rapid economic development.
Years from now I think that historians will see changing immigration and mobility as
the foundation for the growing political and technological cooperation. For good or
for ill, a cosmopolitan elite with ties to multiple countries has formed: these elites
are comfortable working and living in multiple places. Even the less skilled are more
mobile, filling in gaps in many aging societies. The increasing spread of biometrics has
meant that government authorities can now easily track flows of people. The number
of “illegals” in America or Europe has dropped. As a result, governments are more
confident about allowing expanded flows of workers.
There is less talk of declinism—the United States’ or Europe’s. World attention is now
2

--- Sayfa 140 ---
119
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | alternative worldS
more focused on how to protect the biosphere given the rampant growth unleashed
by greater international cooperation. Plant and insect species are dying off at an
alarming rate due to the rampant urbanization and agricultural revolutions. The size
of the middle class has exploded across the globe. Even Western middle classes are
getting richer. It is a never-ending cycle. New technologies are replacing or making
available resources go farther, but the growing number of nouveau riche are causing
cities to swell and rural areas to depopulate. Other environmental concerns have also
become troubling. Several recent typhoons have been unusually powerful, causing an
unprecedented number of deaths and greater physical destruction than ever before.
Arctic ice melted at a far more rapid rate than anticipated, and rampant exploitation of
resources in the Arctic has begun. Methane gas levels are rising rapidly, exacerbating
climate change scientists’ fears.
South Asia is still a concern. Cooperation elsewhere and pressure from other powers
such as China and the US have persuaded the Indians and Pakistanis to increase
their strategic dialogue and to begin to open trade flows. India’s rapid economic
expansion fuels distrust, suspicion, and envy among Pakistanis. Pakistan has not
ceased its nuclear modernization program, and Afghanistan is a still a battleground
for competing interests.
A page has been turned in human history—no more competition over resources . . .
In 2028, the Editor of the New Marxist Review launched a competition for the best short
essay on the meaning of Marx and Communism 210 years after Marx’s birth in 1818. To
her surprise, the journal was flooded with thousands of submissions. She was having a
hard time sifting through the piles and selecting a winner, but she found one that pulled
together many of the recurring themes. The essay made the case that Marx isn’t dead but
3

--- Sayfa 141 ---
120
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | alternative worldS
How game-changers shape scenario:
Global
Economy
All boats substantially rise. Emerging economies continue to
grow faster than advanced ones, but GDP growth in advanced
economies also accelerates. The global economy nearly doubles
by 2030 to $132 trillion that year. Chinese per capita incomes
rapidly increase, ensuring that China avoids the middle-income
trap.
Conflict
The specter of a spreading conflict in South Asia triggers
intervention by the US and China, leading to a cease-fire and
settlement. Such success breeds broader cooperation on global
and regional challenges, lowering risks of conflict.
Regional
Stability
Tensions remain in South Asia, the Middle East, and elsewhere,
but increased multilateral cooperation on poverty and climate
change lessens the risks of instability. Europe rebounds. A liberal
China increases possibilities for regional security in Asia.
Governance
Cooperation, initially based on the US and China coming
together, quickly spreads. Greater democratization takes hold
first with a more liberal regime in China. Reform of the multilateral
institutions is a final stage, following deepening cooperation
among powers.
Technology
The rapid expansion of scientific knowledge is a key factor in
sustaining a more cooperative world. Technological innovation
is also critical to the world staying ahead of the rising resource
constraints that would result from the rapid boost in prosperity
posited under this scenario.
US Role
in the World
The American Dream returns, with per capita incomes rising
$10,000 in ten years. The United States’ technological surge and
efforts to end conflicts are the basis of US leadership. Talk of US
declinism has abated in this new environment where cooperation
has replaced competition among the great powers.
FUSION

--- Sayfa 142 ---
121
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | alternative worldS
How major powers/regions fare in scenario:
Europe
In Europe, the euro zone crisis proves to be the catalyst for deep
political and economic restructuring.
Russia
As technology becomes the source of international legitimacy and
status, Russia starts rebuilding its S&T sector. Russia becomes a
creative hotbed for cross-cultural fertilization.
China
China emerges stronger with its soft power enhanced and begins
to move toward democracy. It assumes increased global and
regional roles.
India
India’s high-tech industries benefit greatly from the new
cooperative environment. While Sino-Indian ties improve, India
still struggles to overcome historic tensions with Pakistan. The
advances in energy and water help to ensure continued economic
development.
Brazil/Middle-
Tier Powers
Brazilian scientists are on the forefront of the new green revolution
for Africa. With more cooperation among the great powers,
middle-tier powers find that they play less of a global role than
when US and China competed for their support.
Poor
Developing
States
Poor states benefit greatly from the technological advances in
food and energy. Some states continue to teeter on the edge
of failure, but many more are doing better in the cooperative
atmosphere.
FUSION

--- Sayfa 143 ---
122
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | alternative worldS
is instead thriving and doing better in the 21st century than anybody could have imagined just 15 or 20
years ago. The following are excerpts from that essay.
Marx Updated for the 21st Century
The breakup of the EU a couple years ago was a classic case of Marxist inevitability. In a sense, what we
saw was a transposition of the class struggle onto a larger regional landscape with northern Europeans
in the role of exploitative bourgeoisie and the Mediterranean South the defenseless proletariat. These
alternative world 3
Gini Out-of-the-Bottle
In Gini Out-of-the-Bottle,a inequalities within countries
and between rich and poor countries dominate. The
world becomes wealthier—as global GDP grows—but
less happy as the differences between the haves and
have-nots become starker and increasingly immutable.
The world is increasingly defined by two self-reinforcing
cycles—one virtuous leading to greater prosperity, the
other vicious, leading to poverty and instability. Political
and social tensions increase. Among countries, there
are clear-cut winners and losers. Countries in the euro
zone core that are globally competitive do well, while
others on the periphery are forced out. The EU splinters
and eventually falters. The US remains the preeminent
power, achieving an economic turnaround fueled by
its new energy revolution, technological innovation,
prudent fiscal policies, and the relative weakness
of many potential competitors. Without completely
disengaging, however, the United States no longer tries
to play “global policeman” on every security threat.
Parts of Africa suffer the most. The secessions of
Eritrea from Ethiopia and South Sudan from Sudan are
seen in retrospect as precursors of this era in which
the boundaries across the Sahel are redrawn. States
fragment along sectarian, tribal, and ethnic lines. The
shale oil and gas revolution that benefits the US proves
disastrous for those African countries dependent upon
oil exports. The failed states in Africa and elsewhere
serve as safehavens for political and religious extremists,
a The “Gini” in this scenario title refers to the Gini Coefficient, which is a
recognized statistical measurement of inequality of income.
3
insurgents, and terrorists.
The transformed global energy market and Saudi
Arabia’s failure to diversify its economy hit Riyadh
particularly hard. Saudi Arabia’s economy barely grows
during this period while its population continues to
increase. Saudi per capita income declines from almost
$20,000 today to just over $16,000 by 2030. In the face
of this economic challenge, the Kingdom no longer
possesses the resources to play a major regional role.
Elsewhere, cities in China’s coastal zone continue to
thrive, but inequalities increase. Social discontent spikes
as middle-class expectations are not met except for the
very “well-connected.” Fissures appear within China’s
leadership as members struggle for wealth, which in
turn breeds self-doubt, undermining the legitimacy
of the ruling institutions. Having an increasingly
difficult time governing, the party reverts to stirring
nationalistic fervor.
In this world, the lack of societal cohesion domestically
is mirrored at the international level. With Europe
weakened and the US more restrained, international
assistance to the most vulnerable populations declines.
Major powers remain at odds; the potential for conflict
rises. An increasing number of states fail, fueled in
part by the lack of much international cooperation
on assistance and development. Economic growth
continues at a moderate pace, but the world is less
secure owing to political and social fissures at all levels.

--- Sayfa 144 ---
123
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | alternative worldS
tensions—as Marx (and Lenin, by the way) tell us—cannot be resolved except through
conflict and breakup. At first it looked like the process of reorganizing the EU into tiers could
be orderly with the less well-off taking a backseat without much fuss.
Unfortunately, Brussels did not address growing resentments among the have-nots. Practically
overnight, we saw this process turn into chaos. EU Commission offices were attacked and
burned down, not just by rioters in many southern European cities, but also in major cities
in the richer north. For a while it looked like we would see a reenactment of the 1848
revolutions: unemployed youth in even the better off northern European countries taking to
the streets in sympathy.
The EU’s websites were hacked into; its internal system was inoperable for months due to
sabotage. The class struggle is widening into a new dimension that did not occur to Marx. A
generational war appears to be afoot. The recently organized youth parties in England and
France are calling for cutbacks in social entitlements for the elderly. They also want higher
education fees to be drastically cut.
We’ve seen growing class divisions elsewhere, pointing to a potential global revolution.
Beijing’s power over the provinces has been declining. China’s coastal cities continue to
do relatively well because of their overseas commercial links and richer domestic markets.
Government efforts to build up the new interior cities have floundered. Little investment
money is flowing in. A Maoist revival is under way there and a party split seems inevitable.
The Chinese should have known better. They inducted too much of the rising bourgeoisie
into the party. This was bound to create conflict with the real workers. I don’t see any
resolution except through more class warfare and conflict.
The Marxist- and Maoist-inspired insurgencies are increasingly spreading in rural areas all
over the world. India has a long history of Naxalist insurgencies, which continue to grow
stronger. Interestingly, counterparts are rising up in urban areas. There you see a lot more
crime; much of it is sophisticated, making it impossible for the bourgeoisie to wall themselves
off into gated communities. I know of some bourgeois families that have reverted back to
paying for everything with cash. Every time they have banked online or used a credit card,
cybercriminals—who appear to have composed a list of targets—siphon off funds from their
accounts and charge enormous sums to their credit cards. Banks are finding maintaining
security to be increasingly costly.
1

--- Sayfa 145 ---
124
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | alternative worldS
In the Middle East and parts of Africa, unfortunately from a Marxist point of view, the
terrorists and insurgents are still falling back on religion or ethnicity. The Saudi authorities
are reeling from increased homegrown terrorists attacking the wealthy, citing their irreligious
behavior. Every day in Saudi Arabia or one of the Gulf countries another luxury mall is
bombed by self-styled jihadists.
Nigeria is virtually split with the Christian communities under siege in the North. The
transposition of the class conflict along sectarian, tribal, and ethnic lines in Africa means the
old “colonialist” map has been virtually torn up. By my count, there are ten new countries on
the African continent alone. In the Middle East, we now have a Kurdistan, carved out from
several countries. Winston Churchill and Gertrude Bell—architects of a united Iraq after
World War I—would be spinning in their graves. Of course, the West and China have yet
to recognize many of these partitions. They are like ostriches with their heads in the sand.
There’s too much veneration for those so-called “venerable statesmen” who drew up the old
imperialist maps in the 19th and 20th centuries.
I’m not sure that the US is yet ripe for revolution. It’s done too well from shale gas. The
working class there got lulled by the increased manufacturing possibilities as businesses
moved back from Asia when US domestic energy prices dropped. But it could be just a
matter of time. Entitlement reform in the 2010s didn’t happen because US growth picked up.
US debt has continued to climb: it is only a matter of time before entitlements will be back
on the political agenda. The onset of a global downturn with all the turmoil in Europe and
elsewhere is beginning to stir up class tensions. The US thinks it is immune, but we’ll see.
Unfortunately, opposition activists in America no longer read Marx.
One thing Marx would have reveled in is the power that the proletariat now has. These
revolutionary groups have many more destructive means at their disposal, from drones
and cyberweapons to bioweapons. I worry that the tensions could get out of hand and the
counterrevolutionaries will strike before the downtrodden have built up their strength and
perfected tactics. In a sense, with the wider access to lethal weapons, there is less inequality
than Marx imagined.
However, the bourgeoisie are beginning to understand. The wealthy cities and towns will no
doubt build up their security forces to deal with the constant disruptions and riots. The US,
some Europeans, Chinese Communist Party leaders, Russian oligarchs, and others are talking
about a global initiative against cybercrime. It’s paradoxical. Years ago, the US and Europeans
were glib about the need to keep the Internet uncensored and available to all. The Chinese
and Russians were concerned about such freedoms getting out of hand and tilting the balance
too much in favor of empowered individuals. Suddenly, the scales have dropped from the
Americans’ eyes and class interest is back in vogue.
2

--- Sayfa 146 ---
125
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | alternative worldS
Oh—that Marx could see that the class struggle never did die. Globalization has just spawned
more of it . . .
3

--- Sayfa 147 ---
126
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | alternative worldS
How game-changers shape scenario:
Global
Economy
The global economy grows at rate of 2.7%, much better than in
Stalled Engines but less well than in Fusion or Nonstate World.
The US achieves an economic turnaround fueled by its new
energy revolution and the relative weakness of many potential
competitors. By contrast, growth slows in China with fears
rising that the country will not escape the middle-income trap.
Countries in the euro zone core that are globally competitive do
well, some on the periphery are forced out. The EU splinters and
eventually falters.
Conflict
Rural-urban and class tensions erupt, particularly in Africa and
parts of the Middle East and Asia. The scope of conflicts grows
as insurgents and terrorists employ drones, cyber attacks and
bioweapons
Regional
Stability
Parts of Africa fare the worst with increasing fragmentation along
sectarian, tribal, and ethnic lines. Middle East borders are redrawn
with an emerging Kurdistan. Political, social, and generational
conflict is rampant in Europe, China, and India.
Governance
The lack of societal cohesion domestically is mirrored at the
international level. With Europe weakened and the US more
restrained, international assistance to the most vulnerable
populations declines. More states fail and more are partitioned.
Technology
The fracking technology behind the US energy revolution hits
energy producers like Saudi Arabia very hard. States increasingly
worry that technology has given individuals too much power.
By the end of scenario, Western powers are joining with China,
Russia, and others to restrict Internet freedoms.
US Role
in the World
The US becomes more restrained in fighting global fires: the few
that threaten clear national interests are extinguished, but many
are allowed to burn. By the end of the scenario, however, the US
is beginning to ally with authoritarian states to try to restore some
order because of growing nonstate threats.
gini out-of-the-bottle

--- Sayfa 148 ---
127
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | alternative worldS
How major powers/regions fare in scenario:
Europe
Collective Europe is a shell; there is more diversity than uniformity
across countries. The euro crisis turned out to be a devastating
blow to aspirations for a Europe as a whole playing a dynamic role
in the international arena.
Russia
Inequalities at home become a bigger issue with Russian elites
allying with counterparts in US, Europe, and China to stem the rise
of cybercriminals.
China
China struggles to maintain its previous high economic growth
rate as divisions between urban and rural populations grow.
Owing to increasing discontent at home, the regime is losing
legitimacy. A Maoist revival is under way with growing divisions in
the party.
India
India struggles to keep up its growth rate as the rural Naxalite
insurgency spreads.
Brazil/Middle-
Tier Powers
Brazil’s efforts to fight inequality pay off with less domestic
instability than in most other states. The rise of Kurdistan is a blow
to Turkish integrity, increasing the risks of major conflict in its
surrounding neighborhood.
Poor
Developing
States in
Africa, Asia,
and Latin
America
Poor states suffer from the overall slower economic growth rates.
Domestic conflicts worsen the outlook for food production.
Humanitarian crises overwhelm the international system’s ability
to provide assistance.
gini out-of-the-bottle

--- Sayfa 149 ---
128
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | alternative worldS
international scientists, NGOs, and groups that are
used to cooperating across borders thrive in this
hyper-globalized world where expertise, influence,
and agility count for more than “weight” or “position.”
Private capital and philanthropy matter more, for
example, than official development assistance. Social
media, mobile communications, and big data are key
components, underlying and facilitating cooperation
among nonstate actors and with governments.
In this world, the scale, scope, and speed of
urbanization—and which actors can succeed in
managing these challenges—are critical, particularly in
the developing world. National governments that stand
in the way of these clusters will fall behind.
This is a “patchwork” and uneven world. Some global
problems get solved because networks manage to
coalesce, and cooperation exists across state and
nonstate divides. In other cases, nonstate actors may try
to deal with a challenge, but they are stymied because
of opposition from major powers. Security threats pose
an increasing challenge: access to lethal and disruptive
technologies expands, enabling individuals and small
groups to perpetrate violence and disruption on a large
scale. Terrorists and criminal networks take advantage
of the confusion over shifting authorities among a
multiplicity of governance actors to acquire and use
lethal technologies. Economically, global growth does
slightly better than in the Gini Out-of-the-Bottle scenario
because there is greater cooperation among nonstate
actors and between them and national governments on
big global challenges in this world. This world is also
more stable and socially cohesive than Nonstate World
and Stalled Engines.
alternative world 4
nonstate world
In a Nonstate World, nongovernmetal organizations
(NGOs), multinational businesses, academic institutions,
and wealthy individuals, as well as subnational units,
such as megacities, flourish and take the lead in
confronting global challenges. New and emerging
technologies that favor greater empowerment of
individuals, small groups, and ad hoc coalitions spur
the increased power of nonstate actors. A transnational
elite—educated at the same global academic
institutions—emerges that leads key nonstate actors
(major multinational corporations, universities, and
NGOs). A global public opinion consensus among
many elites and middle-class citizens on the major
challenges—poverty, the environment, anti-corruption,
rule-of-law, and peace—form the base of their
support and power. Countries do not disappear, but
governments increasingly see their role as organizing
and orchestrating “hybrid” coalitions of state and
nonstate actors which shift depending on the challenge.
Authoritarian regimes—preoccupied with asserting the
primacy and control of the central government—find
it hardest to operate in this world. Smaller, more agile
states where the elites are also more integrated are apt
to be key players—punching way above their weight—
more so than large countries, which lack social or
political cohesion.
Global governance institutions that do not adapt
to the more diverse and widespread distribution
of power are also less likely to be successful.
Multinational businesses, IT communications firms,
4
In 2030 an historian is writing a history of globalization and its impact on the state during the past
30 years. He had done a doctoral thesis on the 17th century Westphalian state system but hadn’t
managed to land an academic job. He was hoping that a study of a more recent period would give
him a chance at a big-time management consultancy job. Following is a synopsis of his book, The
Expansion of Subnational Power.

--- Sayfa 150 ---
129
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | alternative worldS
Globalization has ushered in a new phase in the history of the state. Without question,
the state still exists. The continuing economic volatility in the global economy and
need for government intervention shows that the state is not going away. However, it
would also be wrong to say that the powers of the state have remained the same. During
the past 30 years, subnational government authorities and the roles of nonstate bodies
have greatly expanded. This has been especially the case in Western democracies, but
the increase in subnational power has spread far and wide; the West no longer has
a monopoly.
The expansion has been fueled by the formation of a transnational elite who have been
educated at the same universities, work in many of the same multinational corporations or
NGOs, and vacation at the same resorts. They believe in globalization, but one that relies on
and benefits from personal initiative and empowerment. They don’t want to rely on “big”
government, which they see as oftentimes behind the curve and unable to react quickly in a
fast-moving crisis.
This “can-do” and “everyone-can-make-a-difference” spirit has caught on with the rising
middle classes around the world, which are increasingly self-reliant. It’s fair to say that in a
number of cases, the rising middle classes distrust the long-time elites who have controlled
national governments in their countries. Hence, for the rising middle classes, working
outside and around government has been the way to be upwardly mobile. Denied entry at
the national level, many—when they seek elected office—see cities as steppingstones to
political power.
This new global elite and middle class also increasingly agree on which issues are the major
global challenges. For example, they want to stamp out cronyism and corruption because
these factors have been at the root of what has sustained the old system or what they term
the ancien regime. The corruption of the old elites has impeded upward mobility in many
countries. The new elites believe strongly in rule-of-law as a way of enforcing fairness and
opportunity for all. A safe and healthy environment is also important to ensuring quality of
life. Many are crusaders for human justice and the rights of women.
Technology has been the biggest driver behind the scenes. With the IT revolution, all the
nonstate bodies, from businesses to charities to universities and think tanks, have gone
global. Many are no longer recognizable as American, South African, or Chinese. This has
been disconcerting to central governments—particularly the remaining authoritarian ones—
which do not know whether to treat them as friend or foe.
1

--- Sayfa 151 ---
130
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | alternative worldS
The technological revolution has, in fact, gone way beyond just connecting people in far-flung
parts of the world. Owing to the wider access to more sophisticated technologies, the state
does not have much of an edge these days. Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD) are within
the reach of individuals. Small militias and terrorist groups have precision weaponry that can
hit targets a couple hundred miles away. This has proven deadly and highly disruptive in a
couple of instances. Terrorists hacked into the electric grid and have brought several Middle
Eastern cities to a standstill while authorities had to barter and finally release some political
prisoners before the terror-hackers agreed to stop.
Many people fear that others will imitate such actions and that more attacks by ad hoc
groups will occur. We have seen in the past decade what many experts feared for some time:
the increasing overlap between criminal networks and terrorists. Terrorists are buying the
services of expert hackers. In many cases, hackers don’t know for whom they are working.
A near-miss bioterrorist attack occurred recently in which an amateur’s experiments almost
led to the release of a deadly virus. Fortunately, the outcry and panic led to stronger domestic
regulations in many countries and enormous public pressure for greater international
regulation. As an example of the enhanced public-private partnership, law enforcement
agencies are asking the bio community to point out potential problems. In light of what
could happen, the vast majority of those in the bio community are more than eager to help.
However, most everyone has recognized that action at the country level is needed too. Thus,
the original intent of the Westphalian system—to ensure security for all—is still relevant;
since the near-miss bioterror attack, no one is talking about dispensing with the nation-state.
On the other hand, in so many other areas, the role of the central government is weakening.
Consider food and water issues. Many NGOs sought central government help to institute
country-wide plans, including pricing of water and reduced subsidies for subsistence farmers.
There was even that huge G-20 emergency summit—after the wheat harvests failed in both
the US and Russia and food riots broke out in Africa and the Middle East—which called for
a new WTO round to boost production and ensure against growing export restrictions. Of
course, all the G-20 leaders agreed, but when they got back home, the momentum fell apart.
The momentum took a dive not just in the US and the EU, where the lobbyists sought to
ensure continued subsidies, but also in places like India where subsistence farmers constitute
important political constituencies for the various parties.
Five years later no progress has been made in restarting a World Trade Organization round.
On the other hand, megacities have sought their own solutions. On the frontlines in dealing
with food riots when they happen, many far-sighted mayors decided to start working with
farmers in the countryside to improve production. They’ve dealt with Western agribusiness
to buy or lease land to increase production capacities in surrounding rural areas. They
are increasingly looking outside the countries where the urban centers are located to
2

--- Sayfa 152 ---
131
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | alternative worldS
negotiate land deals. At the same time, “vertical farming” in skyscrapers within the cities
is being adopted.
This effort of each megacity looking after itself probably is not the most efficient. Many
people not living in well-governed areas remain vulnerable to shortages when harvests fail;
those living in the better-governed areas can fall back on local agricultural production to ride
out the crisis.
In general, expanded urbanization may have been the worst—and best—thing that has
happened to civilization. On the one hand, people have become more dependent on
commodities like electricity and therefore more vulnerable when such commodities have
been cut off; urbanization also facilitates the spread of disease. On the other hand, it has also
boosted economic growth and meant that many resources—such as water and energy—are
used more efficiently. This is especially true for many of the up-and-coming megacities—the
ones nobody knew about 10 or 15 years ago. In China, the megacities are in the interior. Some
of them are well planned, providing a lot of public transportation. In contrast, Shanghai and
Beijing are losing businesses because they have become so congested. Overall, new or old,
governance at the city level is increasingly where the action is.
We’ve also seen a new phenomenon: increasing designation of special economic and political
zones within countries. It is as if the central government acknowledges its own inability to
forge reforms and then subcontracts out responsibility to a second party. In these enclaves,
the very laws, including taxation, are set by somebody from the outside. Many believe that
outside parties have a better chance of getting the economies in these designated areas
up and going, eventually setting an example for the rest of the country. Governments in
countries in the Horn of Africa, Central America, and other places are seeing the advantages,
openly admitting their limitations.
3

--- Sayfa 153 ---
132
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | alternative worldS
How game-changers shape scenario:
Global
Economy
Global growth does slightly better than in the Gini Out-of-the-
Bottle scenario because there is greater cooperation among
nonstate actors and between them and national governments
on major global challenges. This world is also more stable and
socially cohesive.
Conflict
Security threats pose an increasing challenge as access to lethal
and disruptive technologies expands. Terrorists and criminal
networks take advantage of the confusion over shifting authorities
and responsibilities and the multiplicity of governance actors to
establish physical and virtual safe havens.
Regional
Stability
Regional institutions become more hybrid as non governmental
bodies become members and sit side-by-side with states. Mayors
of mega-cities take a lead in ramping up regional and global
cooperation. There is increasing designation of special economic
and political zones within regions to spur economic development.
Governance
Countries do not disappear, but governments increasingly see
their role as organizing and orchestrating “hybrid” coalitions of
state and nonstate actors that shift depending on the challenge.
Multinational businesses, IT communications firms, international
scientists, NGOs and groups that are used to cooperating across
borders thrive in this hyper-globalized world where expertise,
influence, and agility count for more than “weight” or “position.”
Technology
Social media, mobile communications, and big data are key
components, underlying and facilitating cooperation among
nonstate actors and governments.
US Role
in the World
The US has an advantage because many nonstate actors—
multinationals, NGOs, think tanks, and universities—originated
there, but they increasingly see themselves as having a global
identity. The US Government maximizes its influence when it
organizes a hybrid coalition of state and nonstate actors to deal
with global challenges.
nonstate world

--- Sayfa 154 ---
133
Global Trends 2030: Alternative Worlds | alternative worldS
How major powers/regions fare in scenario:
Europe
Europe thrives as it uses its soft powers—NGOs, universities, and
global finance and business—to boost its standing. The emphasis
on coalition and inclusivity in this world plays to the Europeans’
strength of coalition-building to solve challenges.
Russia
Moscow is increasingly concerned about security threats posed
by the growth of terrorist and criminal organizations. Russia finds
it difficult to work with the proliferation of global nonstate actors
in the international arena.
China
China as an authoritarian regime is preoccupied with asserting the
primacy and control of the central government and finds it difficult
to operate in this world.
India
India has the potential to flourish with its elites imbedded in
global business and academic networks. If it manages its urban
challenges, it also can serve as a trailblazer to others in the
developing world, grappling with rapid urbanization.
Brazil/Middle-
Tier Powers
Middle-tier powers play an outsized role where size and weight
are less important than engagement in networks. The degree to
which they have a highly developed nonstate sector will be an
important determinant of success in this world.
Poor
Developing
States in
Africa, Asia,
and Latin
America
The degree to which developing states manage urbanization
will determine whether they thrive or fail in this world. National
governments that stand in the way of emerging urban clusters
are likely to fall behind those who use urbanization to bolster
economic and political prospects.
nonstate world

--- Sayfa 155 ---
134
Global Trends 2030: Acknowledgements
The list of those who helped us to compile Global Trends
2030 is long and extensive. With each new edition,
we have benefited from a broader and more diverse
array of contributors from around the world, including
individual scholars and experts, universities, think tanks,
science labs, businesses, and government institutions.
Given the impossibility of mentioning everyone who has
participated in the multitude of conferences, workshops,
individual meetings, and other activities associated with
producing this report, we would like to mention a number
of organizations and individuals whose contributions were
particularly notable:
The Atlantic Council of the United States (ACUS) was
foremost in organizing a set of workshops on key themes
and also conferences in Silicon Valley and multiple
countries overseas. Mr. Fred Kempe, ACUS President and
CEO; Mr. Barry Pavel, Director of ACUS’ Brent Scrowcroft
Center for International Security; Dr. Banning Garrett; and
Mr. Carles Castello-Catchot opened doors to a diverse set
of expert groups we would not have had the opportunity
to engage with otherwise. Ms. Ellen Laipson, President
of the Stimson Center, hosted the initial workshop on
the track record of previous Global Trends works, which
helped us to avoid some past pitfalls. Mr. David Michel’s
work at Stimson on maritime and environmental trends
also was of critical value.
The International Futures model of the Frederick S. Pardee
Center at the University of Denver, with support from
Professor Barry Hughes and Dr. Jonathan Moyer, provided
an overall framework that enabled us to explore possible
futures across a wide range of domains, from geopolitics
to health and education. McKinsey & Company was
instrumental in helping us think through the scenarios
and model the possible economic trajectories of our
alternative futures with the help of its proprietary Global
Growth Model.
Princeton Professor John Ikenberry has led quarterly
meetings of international relations scholars with the NIC
for the past decade, providing numerous opportunities
to explore many of the ideas about the changing
international system featured in Global Trends 2030
and its predecessor volumes. Dr. Gregory Treverton,
RAND Corporation, organized a pivotal workshop on
the changing nature of power for this study. Drs. William
Ralston and Nick Evans of Strategic Business Insights,
Inc. provided critical thinking and expertise on disruptive
technologies. Dr. Bernice Lee and her team at the
Royal Institute of International Affairs (Chatham House)
provided extensive research on resource scarcities. Dr.
Steve Szabo hosted several meetings on resource issues
at German Marshall Fund’s Transatlantic Academy. Dr.
Xenia Dormandy of Chatham House shared with us her
research on nonstate actors. Mr. David Low and his team
at Oxford Analytica organized a workshop on the future
of terrorism, which provided the basis for the treatment of
terrorism in the text. Mr. Jonathan Paris, a London-based
analyst, member of Chatham House, and Nonresident
Senior Fellow with the Atlantic Council, provided help
with Middle East futures and organized several overseas
meetings for us.
The Department of Energy laboratories were very
generous with their help: Drs. Alvin Sanders and
Richard Snead at Oak Ridge organized a workshop on
natural disasters and, at Sandia, Drs. Howard Passell,
Russ Skocypec, Tommy Woodall and others undertook
extensive work on resource sustainability and its impact
on state fragility. A number of experts and scholars
provided critical inputs and reviews of the draft: Dr.
Daniel Twining, German Marshall Fund; Professors William
Inboden and Jeremi Suri, University of Texas; Mr. Philip
Stephens, Financial Times; Professor Christopher Layne,
Texas A & M; Dr. Richard Cincotta, Stimson Center;
Professors Tom Fingar, Paul Saffo and Ian Morris, Stanford
University; Professors John Kelmelis and Darryl Farber,
Acknowledgements

--- Sayfa 156 ---
135
Global Trends 2030: Acknowledgements
Penn State University; Drs. David Gordon and Ash Jain,
Eurasia Group; Dr. Giovanni Grevi, FRIDE (Fundacion par
alas Relaciones Internacionale); Ms. Rosemarie Forsythe,
Exxon Mobil Corporation; Professor Jack Goldstone,
George Mason University; Dr. Dan Steinbock, Research
Director of International Business, India, China & America
Institute; Deputy Director Olivier Erschens, Centre
d’Etudes Strategiques Aerospatiales; Professor Sumit
Ganguly, Indiana University; Professor Emile Nakhleh,
University of New Mexico; Dr. James Shinn, Princeton
University; Ms. Catarina Tully, Director, FromOverHere,
Ltd; Drs. Fiona Hill and Justin Vaisse, Brookings Institution;
Dr. David Shorr; The Stanley Foundation; Mr. Kari Mottola;
Special Adviser at the Finnish Ministry of Foreign Affairs;
Mr. Arturo Lopez-Levy, University of Denver; Dr. Mark
Fitzpatrick, International Institute for Strategic Studies;
Dr. Malcolm Cook, Flinders University; Dr. Patrick Cronin,
Center for New American Security (CNAS); Dr. Cho Khong,
Shell Corporation; Dr. Alexander Van de Putte; Mr. Herve
de Carmoy; and Mr. Alexandre Adler, Le Figaro.
A number of academic institutions hosted events at which
we received input and reactions which proved critical to
the final draft. These institutions include the LBJ School of
Public Affairs at the University of Texas; the International
Security Program at the University of Notre Dame;
Stanford University; University of New Mexico; Indiana
University School of Public and Environmental Affairs and
Center for the Study of the Middle East; the Frank Batten
School of Leadership and Public Policy at the University
of Virginia; Princeton University; the Naval Postgraduate
School; and Penn State University.
The Bush School at Texas A & M hosted a two-day gaming
exercise to test theories of future US power and impact
on the international system. The Inter-American Dialogue
hosted a meeting at Georgetown University to discuss the
impact of global trends on Latin America. Mr. Sergio Bitar
has been especially active in thinking about those impacts.
The Tobin Project in Cambridge, Massachusetts—which
seeks to close the gap between scholars and government
practitioners—brought together academics from around
the country to critique the draft. Other US institutions
and organizations which hosted us for a review of the
draft include the Santa Fe Institute, NASA; the Brookings
Institution, CNAS, the RAND Corporation, the Eurasia
Group, CENTRA Technologies, Facebook, Twitter, Google,
CISCO, Bloom, Numenta, and the Aspen Security Forum.
Our overseas interlocutors were immensely helpful. Our
effort and the EU’s recent global trends publication
under the direction of Dr. Alvaro de Vasconcelos, former
Director of the EU’s Institute for Security Studies, have
been conducted almost in tandem. We have held several
joint meetings on the same topics and have learned
from one another. The inter-institutional group behind
the EU global trends effort includes Mr. James Elles,
Member of the European Parliament; Mr. Jean-Claude
Thebault, Director-General, Bureau of European Policy
(BEPA), EU Commission; Dr. Joao Marques de Almeida,
BEPA; Messrs. Leo Schulte Nordholt and Matthew Reece,
both with the General Secretariat of the EU Council—all
of whom provided key insights on the future of Europe
and the world. Swedish Foreign Minister Carl Bildt
hosted a dynamic lunchtime discussion at the outset of
our effort; other Swedish practitioners and thinkers—
Dr. Lars Hedstrom, Director of the National Defence
College; Professor Bengt Sundelius, Civil Contingencies
Agency; Dr. Anna Jardfelt, Director of Swedish Institute
of International Affairs; and Dr. Bates Gill, former Director
of the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute—
have stimulated our thinking and hosted meetings.
In the UK, Wilton Park hosted a joint Foreign and
Commonwealth Office-NIC conference on Middle East
futures; Dr. Robin Niblett, Director of Chatham House,
who holds regular exchanges with the NIC, also organized
several workshops for us. In France, Dr. Bruno Tertrais,
Research Director at the Fondation pour la Recherche
Strategique in Paris, hosted a roundtable discussion
that was instrumental in shaping our thinking on Europe.
We also benefited from an exchange with Drs. Nicolas
Regaud and Guillaume de Rouge in the MoD’s Directorate
for Strategic Affairs on their publication, Horizons
Strategiques. In the Netherlands, Dr. Jair van der Lijn at
the Clingendael think tank arranged a lively discussion on
the draft. In Canada, Dr. Peter Padbury of the Horizons
office, along with experts at other government agencies,
shared their work and hosted a meeting on the draft and
futures methodology. In the United Arab Emirates (UAE),
Dr. Anwar Gargash, Foreign Affairs Minister of State,
hosted a discussion for us on the UAE's perspectives on
global trends.
In China, we were hosted by China Institutes of
Contemporary International Relations, the China
Institute of International Studies, the China Center for
Contemporary World Studies, the Shanghai Institute
of International Studies, and the China Foundation
for International Strategic Studies; several of these
organizations are far advanced on their own studies of
global trends. In Singapore, Dr. Ping Soon Kok, Senior
Director of the National Security Coordination Centre in
the Prime Minister’s Office, arranged a week-long series of
exchanges, reflecting the depth of experts' thinking on the
future. In India, the Observer Research Foundation Centre
for Policy Research, Gateway House, Center for Peace and
Conflict Studies, and Institute for Defence Studies hosted
us for meetings. In Russia, Dr. Alexander Dynkin, Director
of the Institute of World Economy and International
Relations (IMEMO), hosted a meeting in which we

--- Sayfa 157 ---
136
Global Trends 2030: Acknowledgements
compared results of IMEMO’s own published study,
Global Outlook 2030, with our Global Trends 2030 draft.
We visited several African countries to gain reactions to
the draft. In South Africa, in addition to meetings with
government officials, we held meetings with the South
Africa Institute of International Affairs and Institute of
Security Studies. In Nigeria, we met with government
officials and were hosted by the Ken Nnamani Centre,
the Centre for Democracy and Development, the
Institute for Peace and Conflict Resolution, and the
Centre for the Study of Economies of African (CSEA).
In Kenya, we briefed the President’s National Security
Advisory Committee and met with the Kenya Institute
for Public Policy Research and Analysis and UN Habitat
offices. In Ethiopia, Dr. Martin Kimai, Director of Conflict
Early Warning and Response Mechanism, organized
a discussion on the draft. The Global Futures Forum
hosted a meeting in Botswana, which we attended,
that gathered together technology practitioners from
around the continent. In Brazil, we met with the Institute
Fernando Cardoso, Instituto de Pesquisa de Relacoes
Internacionaios, IBM Research Brazil, and Fapsep
Foundation.
The GT 2030 blog, an innovation for this edition,
generated wide-ranging discussions on key themes. We
relied on the help of many of our Intelligence Community
Associates and other experts for the management of the
weekly themed discussions, including Drs. Daniel Twining,
Ash Jain, William Burke-White, Thomas Mahnken, Peter
Feaver, Jackie Newmyer Deal, Steve Weber, Andrew
Erdmann, William Inboden, Richard Cincotta, Ralph
Espach, Allan Dafoe, Howard Passell, and Cung Vu.
Within the US Government, special thanks goes to Dr.
Susan Nelson, Ms. Christina Condrey, Ms. Rachel Warner,
Ms. Judith Van Zalen, and Mr. Nate Price in the State
Department’s Bureau of Intelligence and Research. They
spent countless hours making the arrangements for many
of the meetings with outside organizations and experts.

--- Sayfa 158 ---
137
Global Trends 2030: Blog references
Dan Twining and Ash Jain Moderated – What is the impact of the rise of the rest on the liberal
international order: End of the Western world?
Bill Burke-White Moderated – What Will be the Shape of the United Nations Security Council
(UNSC) in 2030?
Thomas Mahnken Moderated – Will China’s economic growth stall out? What will be the impact
on the global economy?
NIC Analyst – Can China Avoid the “Middle Income Trap” without Political Reform?
Peter Feaver Moderated with Ionut Popescu & Seth Cantey – What Will be the US Role in a
Multipolar International System?
Jackie Newmyer Deal Moderated – How will the security environment of 2030 be affected by
the proliferation of advanced technologies to a variety of smaller regional actors and even
non‑state actors?
Steve Weber Moderated – How Will Employment Change with the Expansion of New
Technologies—like Robotics—in Manufacturing? Will We See a New Unemployable Underclass?
NIC Analyst Moderated – Future trajectories of migration and issues policy makers will face.
Drew Erdmann Moderated – Urbanization Dynamics and Challenges
William Inboden Moderated – American Decline
Richard Cincotta Moderated – Will Aging Cripple the West? Will It Cripple China’s Development?
Ralph Espach Moderated – Brazil’s Future Role in the International System
Allan Dafoe Moderated – Will the Long Peace Persist?
NIC Analyst Posted – Climate Change 2030: More Extreme Weather
Howard Passell Moderated – Will Mega-Cities be a Cauldron for Revolution or Be an Engine for
Technological Revolutions?
Cung Vu Moderated – Will Shale Gas Give a Second Burst to US Manufacturing?
GT2030 Blog references

--- Sayfa 159 ---
This assessment was prepared under the auspices of the
Counselor, National Intelligence Council.
Questions about this paper or requests for copies can be directed
to the Counselor, Dr. Mathew Burrows on 703-482-0741.
This publication can be found on www.dni.gov/nic/globaltrends

--- Sayfa 160 ---
NIC 2012-001