--- Sayfa 1 ---
Rutgers Business Review   Vol. 2, No. 2
163

Global Leadership in an Era of Growing
Nationalism, Protectionism, and Anti-
Globalization

Farok J. Contractor
Rutgers University

Abstract

The rise of nationalistic political leaders has spanned the globe—from Donald
Trump and Marine Le Pen in the West, to Recep Tayyip Erdoğan in the Middle
East, to Narendra Modi and Rodrigo Duterte in the East. To varying degrees,
each of these leaders espouse an “our country first” mentality, skepticism or
outright hostility toward multilateral institutions and global trade, and
leadership styles that emphasize ethnic or group identification, distrust of
immigrants, and increased assertiveness sometimes bordering on bluster and
aggression.
How do we measure this phenomenon called globalization? What are some
underlying causes of the backlash against globalization? Is national progress
incompatible with global progress? Has globalization stopped or slowed in
recent years? Is nationalism—or a “my country first” approach—compatible
with economic growth? What leadership qualities are needed for a 21st-century
civilization? Are leadership styles that emphasize strength of personality,
ethnic or group identification, and increased assertiveness compatible with
human progress and civilization? In the most general sense, does human
evolution suggest a dominant role for competition—or cooperation?

Globalization and How to Measure It
To trace the progress or slowdown of globalization, we first need to
measure it. Various criteria of globalization have been used by the OECD,1
consultants such as McKinsey & Co., and academics. They generally include
 Trade flows (products and services)
 Investment flows (portfolio and direct investment capital)

--- Sayfa 2 ---
Global Leadership in an Era of Anti-Globalization

164
Rutgers Business Review
Summer 2017

 Information flows (cross-border information and data flows on

internet networks)
 People flows (persons crossing borders temporarily or permanently)
One of the most comprehensive is an index developed by Pankaj
Ghemawat at New York University and sponsored by DHL (a global courier
and delivery service), whose categories are shown in Table 1. The weightings
of the sub-indexes roughly correspond to their relative importance in the
world economy. The DHL “Depth” measure is a ratio of a country’s
international flows compared with its domestic economy (GDP), whereas the
“Breadth” index in Table 1 compares a country’s distribution, or spread, of
international flows with the rest of the world’s distribution of the same index.

Table 1. DHL Global Connectedness Index 20162
Pillar
(weight % of total)
Depth Component
(weight % of pillar)
Breadth Component
(weight % of pillar)
1. Trade (35%)
1.1. Merchandise Trade (75%)
1.1. Merchandise Trade (100%)
1.2. Services Trade (25%)
-
2. Capital (35%)
2.1. FDI Stocks (25%)
2.1. FDI Stocks (25%)
2.2. FDI Flows (25%)
2.2. FDI Flows (25%)
2.3. Portfolio Equity Stocks (25%) 2.3. Portfolio Equity Stocks (50%)
2.4. Portfolio Equity Flows (25%)
-
3. Information (15%)
3.1. International Internet
Bandwidth (40%)
-
3.2. Telephone Call Minutes
(40%)
3.2. Telephone Call Minutes
(67%)
3.3. Trade in Printed Publications
(20%)
3.3. Trade in Printed Publications
(33%)
4. People (15%)
4.1. Migrants (33%)
4.1. Migrants (33%)
4.2. Tourists (33%)
4.2. Tourists (33%)
4.3. Students (33%)
4.3. Students (33%)
Source: Ghemawat, P., & Altman, S.A. (2016). DHL Global Connectedness Index 2016: The
State of Globalization in an Age of Ambiguity.2

How has globalization progressed (or some say shrunk) in the past
decade? Figure 1 shows the movement of the Depth, Overall or Average, and
Breadth indexes over the period 2005–2015. For a half century after the end
of World War II, globalization by most measures had shown an unremitting
upward increase. But some things began to go wrong around the year 2005.
The great recession of 2008 is reflected in the dip in the graphs in Figure 1.
And indeed, on the Breadth measure, globalization has been flat, or has even
shrunk slightly, since 2005. The Breadth measure tracks the geographical
spread of multinational activity. The Depth measure, by contrast, tracks the
penetration of international trade, investment, data flows, and people in each

--- Sayfa 3 ---
Global Leadership in an Era of Anti-Globalization

Rutgers Business Review   Vol. 2, No. 2
165

country—i.e., how deep a role globalization is playing in each nation’s Gross
Domestic Product (GDP).

Figure 1. How Globalization Has Progressed or Shrunk Recently:
Global Connectedness, Depth and Breadth (2005–2015)

Source: Ghemawat, P., & Altman, S.A. (2016). DHL Global Connectedness Index 2016: The
State of Globalization in an Age of Ambiguity.2

By the Breadth measure (coverage of number of countries), globalization
may indeed have plateaued temporarily.3 But by Prof. Ghemawat’s Depth and
Overall indexes, after the dip in 2008, globalization kept increasing at a
healthy rate, as seen in Figure 1.
Taking a longer sweep of history over the last two centuries gives us an
even more dramatic perspective on how world civilization has integrated
across borders. See Figure 2. While international trade over distances of
thousands of kilometers has been occurring since the Babylonian and Persian
empires 2,600 years ago, a big acceleration in globalization occurred  from
the year 1800 onward. The overall trend, covering two centuries, is decidedly
upward, although we see in Figure 2 that exports and Foreign Direct
Investment (FDI)4 as a percentage of GDP declined temporarily after the
Great Depression, with exports recovering and growing exponentially after
1950. FDI took off sharply after the 1980s, following the collapse of socialist
ideologies, and a liberalizing sea-change in government attitudes that began
to welcome multinational companies into local markets.5 Today, for the most
part, governments appear to be falling over each other to welcome FDI.

--- Sayfa 4 ---
Global Leadership in an Era of Anti-Globalization

166
Rutgers Business Review
Summer 2017

Figure 2. Globalization Over the Last 215 Years: World Urbanization
and Selected Indicators, 1800-2015

Sources: Ghemawat, P., & Altman, S.A. (2016). DHL Global Connectedness Index 2016: The
State of Globalization in an Age of Ambiguity,2 who in turn drew from UNCTAD, World
Bank, and IMF data.

Agglomerations and Networks: Their Impact on Civilization and
Global Business
An even more significant change affecting world civilization generally is
the acceleration in the exchange of ideas and innovation through physical
proximity. Historically, humans had been isolated into small groups of
hunter-gatherers. Even after the agricultural revolution around 10,000 BCE,
relatively little interaction occurred between isolated farming villages and
communities. Urban centers such as Babylon, Rome, ChangAn (Xian today),
or Pataliputra (Patna today) were the exception, never containing even at
their peak more than a few hundred thousand inhabitants each, so that 95
percent of humanity lived lives within a 10 kilometer radius. See the
Urbanization graph in Figure 2.
Innovation, science, and progress require a cross-fertilization of ideas, to
say nothing about mass production needing a market of sufficient national

--- Sayfa 5 ---
Global Leadership in an Era of Anti-Globalization

Rutgers Business Review   Vol. 2, No. 2
167

or international scale that can sustain the development and sale of new
products and ideas. By the year 1800, barely 5 percent of humanity lived in
urban centers. Today, 55 percent of us do so, as seen in Figure 2. Urban
clusters such as Silicon Valley or Bangalore, where like-minded firms and
individuals congregate, confirm the need for physical proximity of
technicians to spark the interchange of knowledge and ideas.6 But it is not
just high-technology sectors such as Information & Communication
Technology (ICT) or Bio-Pharmaceuticals that form clusters. Mundane
production does the same: 70 percent of bags and suitcases sold in the US
and Europe are produced in Shiling, China (population 350,000); 90 percent
of global-brand eyewear comes from Ouhai, China (population 900,000); and
85 percent of polished diamonds destined for the global market are produced
by over half a million workers in Surat, India.7, 8
And this is not just about cheap labor. An agglomeration of local suppliers
of, say, only zippers, or diamond-polishing compounds, or plastic injection-
molding machinery, provide accumulated expertise, and rapid delivery
because of proximity to the assemblers of the final product. Buyers from
abroad communicate quality and design standards that spread throughout
firms in the cluster. Physical proximity rapidly disseminates ideas, designs,
labor, standards, and materials for rapid response to changes in global
market demand.
But why do we need physical proximity in an internet-connected world?
Virtual networks do substitute for physical proximity9—partially. In the new
millennium, Information & Communication Technology ICT networks are as
critical a measure of globalization as are shipping lanes for the export of
goods. The DHL Global Connectedness Index (Figure 3) shows this as the
fastest growing component of its index. Whereas International Trade, Cross-
Border Capital, and Migration of People increased by barely 10 percent in the
20052015 decade, Information Flows zoomed by more than 60 percent.

The Viral Spread of Thoughts, Sentiments, and Phobias Worldwide
If we define globalization not merely in commercial terms (exports,
capital, etc.) but also in terms of the transmission and blending of ideas,
concepts, lifestyles, cultures—and also phobias—then the introduction of
the internet must surely be reckoned as a major inflection point in human
history.
The term “virus” is not inappropriate. In my opinion humankind is
developing an emerging “global consciousness”—a global simultaneity and
collective sensitivity to noble thoughts, as well as to phobias and ignoble
protectionism. The same channels that transmit the latest décolleté fashion
styles from Milan or Gangnam music style from Seoul to a farm family outside

--- Sayfa 6 ---
Global Leadership in an Era of Anti-Globalization

168
Rutgers Business Review
Summer 2017

Bombay or Basra also then engender in those viewers  a feeling of cultural
unease or ambiguity, raising questions about identity that are often
expressed in a backlash against globalization.

Figure 3. Trade, Capital, Information, and People Pillars of the DHL
Index of Globalization, 2005–2015

Source: Ghemawat, P., & Altman, S.A. (2016). DHL Global Connectedness Index 2016: The
State of Globalization in an Age of Ambiguity.2

The Backlash against Globalization
Anti-globalization sentiment springs from very different sources in the
developed and the developing worlds. In richer nations, globalization has
been (for the most part falsely) accused of causing job losses and economic
stagnation. In developing nations, the reaction stems from the threats to
identity because of the influx of foreign products and ideas.

Cultural Angst
Among the more than 10,000 Catholic Christian saints, St. Valentine
(226–278 CE) of Terni, Italy remained a relatively obscure figure until the
1850s, when American entrepreneurs began marketing greeting cards. Even
past the middle of the 20th century, Valentine’s Day was unknown outside
the US and UK. Today we have the astonishing spectacle every February 14 of
malls in Asian cities from Beijing to Singapore thronged with extra shoppers

--- Sayfa 7 ---
Global Leadership in an Era of Anti-Globalization

Rutgers Business Review   Vol. 2, No. 2
169

and restaurants and shows being heavily booked, with streets suffering
additional traffic, because of this almost mythical figure that lived 1,700 years
ago and 8,000 kilometers away.
The transmission of ideas, fashions, and “cultural” practices began, even
before 1998, via print media. But the internet has radically speeded up the
interchange. One may ask, “What’s wrong if flower and chocolate shops in
Asia and Latin America do additional business on February 14?” After all, if
consumers and merchants are happier, that may appear to be a good thing.
But not everybody agrees. Demonstrations against Valentine’s Day occur
almost annually in India, some involving vandalism of shops, and also
resulting, albeit rarely, in the lynching or suicide of harassed couples.10 Hindu
fundamentalist groups protest the incursion of foreign cultural practices as
eroding traditional culture.
The incursion of foreign styles and culture is threatening to all ancient
societies. Only one or two generations ago, the markers of identity in India
or Korea or Bolivia or the Middle East were based on local religion, traditions,
and small-distance familial relationships.11 Today, to their children squinting
at a small screen, all the world’s a stage.

Job losses
The laid-off workers in the rust belts of Ohio, USA or Northeast France
bear a different grudge. Whipped up by politicians such as Don Trump or
Marine Le Pen, they blame globalization for their misfortunes. The job losses
and angst are real. The diagnoses of politicians (blaming trade and
immigration) are grossly overstated or false. Figure 4 shows the results of an
analysis done by the McKinsey Global Institute, which concludes that in six
industrialized nations (with the exception of Sweden) the majority of
households saw a flattening or drop in their wages and investment income.12
Even after accounting for taxes and transfer payments, households in Italy,
the Netherlands, and the UK were affected. Undoubtedly, a major reason was
that the year 2014 was compared with the year 2005, a period during which
the effects of the Great Recession were still present in most nations.
The reader should note that it is easy to misread the survey results in
Figure 4. The survey covers both “falling (as well as) flat incomes.”  But for
many respondents, even if their income remained “flat” for a decade, that is
certainly cause for dismay—a legitimate concern that politicians such as Le
Pen and Trump latched onto and magnified.
In 2017, jobs have rebounded since 2014. However, a sense of malaise
lingers. Employees in the US and Europe (and perhaps worldwide) are
working harder, running faster, and more apprehensive because of greater
competition in the labor market, aided by the relentless drive for productivity

--- Sayfa 8 ---
Global Leadership in an Era of Anti-Globalization

170
Rutgers Business Review
Summer 2017

gains through automation and ICT. Most depressingly, the McKinsey report
suggests that a great psychological letdown is felt in western nations where
two centuries of economic progress led every generation to believe they
would be better off than their parents. No longer.

Figure 4. Flat or Falling Incomes: Percent of Households in Segments
with Flat or Falling Income, 2005–2014

Source: McKinsey Global Institute, 2016

Politicians demagogically put the blame on international trade, the
offshoring of production, and immigrants allegedly robbing native-born
citizens of their jobs. This assertion is true only in small part. For every one
US job lost through international trade (1980–2016), informed analysts, such
as the Wharton School, conclude that three or four jobs have been lost
because of automation, robotics, information technology, and other
productivity boosters.13
The simplest example of a “productivity” measure is “output-per-worker.”
When workers are laid off and replaced with machines, computers, or robots,
the same output comes out of a factory, but with fewer workers, thus raising
the output-per-worker ratio, or productivity measure. Automation, much
more than international trade, has made the US the world’s most productive
nation, by far.14 International business has certainly produced cheaper prices
for industrial and retail consumers. But productivity increases and
automation have delivered far greater benefits.

--- Sayfa 9 ---
Global Leadership in an Era of Anti-Globalization

Rutgers Business Review   Vol. 2, No. 2
171

Which groups have benefited most from the productivity gains in the US
and Europe over the last 30 years? There are three principal beneficiaries (and
they do not include labor):
1) Consumers of the finished products and services, who benefit from
cheaper prices when productivity savings are passed on to buyers.15
2) Top managers of companies that award themselves bonuses and
higher salaries in cases where the incremental profits from
productivity gains need not be passed on to consumers in the shape
of lower prices, but can be otherwise allocated. (It is worth noting here
that the power of unions in Europe, and particularly in the US, has
greatly diminished so that they cannot demand a significant share of
the incremental benefits for workers, as in the past. Union
membership in the US, for example, has fallen to a low of less than 10
percent of the workforce.)
3) Shareholders of the firms who expect, and get, fatter dividend
distributions and equity growth.
What about labor sharing in the benefits? Gains from automation,
robotics, ICT, and artificial intelligence have not gone to labor, as many
studies show.16, 17 Over the past 15 years, the best an American or Western
European worker could hope for, on average, is to keep his/her job and earn
the same pay as before. The ones laid off because of automation are degraded
to lower-paying jobs and/or receive government assistance, which partially
ameliorates their pain (this is why the right-hand side of Figure 4 shows lower
percentages compared with the left-hand side).

International trade (on the import side only) and globalization have
undoubtedly resulted in job losses. But automation has caused far more. The
benefits of cheaper imports are widely dispersed over all the consumers in an
importing nation. (In a hypothetical scenario, assuming all Chinese
manufactured imports were replaced by US manufacturing, I calculated an
additional cost of $295 billion to American consumers.18 That is to say the
average US household benefits to the tune of $2,380 each year because of
Chinese imports compared with the make-it-in-America alternative.) On the
export side, international trade creates millions of new jobs. But the pain of
import-induced job losses tend to be geographically concentrated in certain
regions of France and the US.19 Depending on the voting system, these
(dis)affected regions can sometimes have a disproportionate impact in
elections in some countries.20

Immigration
Most studies (even those by authors with a conservative bent)21 concur
that immigrants, on the whole, produce a net benefit for a country in the

--- Sayfa 10 ---
Global Leadership in an Era of Anti-Globalization

172
Rutgers Business Review
Summer 2017

medium and long run. That is to say, on average, and over time, immigration
produces a net benefit for the nation. Alas, the economist’s and sociologist’s
favorite expressions, “on average” and “over time,” are small comfort to those
affected in labor markets by competition from immigrants—generally at the
unskilled or low-income end of the spectrum. As in the case of import
competition, the pain of job competition is concentrated on a small
proportion of the population, while the benefits of immigration are widely
spread over the entire population. (For example, while all Americans benefit,
few think about how much more their lettuce, or meat, or lawn-cutting
service would cost were it not for Latin American and Mexican immigrants
who toil in difficult conditions for a pittance.)
Figure 5 lists the 10 countries with the largest immigrant populations.22
With the exception of Russia, the number of immigrants has increased
slightly since 2005. Nevertheless, for most on the top-10 list, immigrants
constitute only around 11–14 percent of the population. (Exceptions are small-
population nations with a large land surface—Canada, Australia, and Saudi
Arabia—which have quietly been welcoming selected immigrants to boost
their GDP and expand and spread their populace over their large empty
spaces.)
Despite as many as 43 million US residents born elsewhere, immigrants
(both legal and undocumented) constitute only around 13 percent of the
overall US population of 326 million in 2017. Germany, France, and the UK
have comparable or lower percentages.
Besides competition for jobs, mostly at the lower-income end of the labor
market,23 immigrants bring foreign ideas, religions, and ethnicity that
threatens the self-perception and identity of sensitive native-born segments
of the population.
Again, as in many aspects of globalization, the impact is concentrated in
certain parts of each nation. Immigrants tend to congregate in certain cities
and areas. The irony in the US and French presidential elections, as well as
in the Brexit vote, was that in areas with the largest immigrant
concentrations (such as New York, San Francisco, London, and Paris), the
native-born votes went to the liberal and globalist candidates. But in areas
where immigrants are scarce or unseen (such as in Wyoming and West
Virginia in the US, or in Lincolnshire in the UK), the votes went to the nativist
scaremonger.24, 25
How to explain this seemingly paradoxical result? In part, the answer lies
in the fact that major metropolitan areas tend to be more prosperous and
contain more educated and higher-income residents than outlying areas.
Immigrants also cluster in major metropolises. Eventually, the proximity of
multicultural ideas and ethnicities renders immigrants unthreatening to the

--- Sayfa 11 ---
Global Leadership in an Era of Anti-Globalization

Rutgers Business Review   Vol. 2, No. 2
173

native-born urbanites. By contrast, in Lincolnshire or Wyoming, where
few foreigners are seen, residents, who may not be as well-educated as their
urban counterparts, tend to be more fearful watching images of terrorism on
their televisions, making them easier targets for scaremonger politicians.

Figure 5. Countries with Largest Immigrant Populations

Source: Kirk, A. (2017). Which Country Has the Most Immigrants? The Telegraph.22

In cold-blooded insurance or actuarial terms, the likelihood of an
American being killed by a foreign-born terrorist is vanishingly small.26 Even
including the 3,000 deaths on 9/11/2001, the lifetime odds are roughly
comparable to tornado deaths, at one in 60,000.27 Since 9/11, which is unlikely
to occur again on that scale, fewer than five Americans have died annually at
the hand of terrorists, domestic or foreign. By contrast, around 350
Americans die annually by falling out of beds, chairs, or other furniture.
Traffic fatalities in 2016 killed 40,000 people, and injured 4.6 million more,
on U.S. roads.28

Fragmentation of the New Media Landscape and Erosion of Trust in
Institutions
Fear sells products as well as political platforms. Advertisers, mass-
market television news stations seeking higher ratings, and campaign

--- Sayfa 12 ---
Global Leadership in an Era of Anti-Globalization

174
Rutgers Business Review
Summer 2017

managers all know that what hooks viewers and votes are the two bookends
of mortality: sex leading to conception and death. Male candidates can be
more appealing when gossip links them with multiple women.29 A strong
personality that frequently threatens or scares is similarly attractive to many.
The internet has fragmented and multiplied media sources. A the turn of
the millennium, Americans got their information from what were then
considered reliable and venerable sources such as CBS, NBC, and the New
York Times, just as the British public trusted its institutions such as the BBC
and the Times of London. Today, that trust in institutions has eroded to the
point where Don Trump and Nigel Farage (the UK Independence Party
[UKIP] leader principally responsible for Brexit) can openly mock the
traditional news outlets—and get thunderous applause at rallies. Readers
and viewers do not know whom to trust anymore.
Hence, many turn to Facebook as their principal source of “information.”
Especially pernicious and troubling has been the role of algorithms in the
new media companies. Half of 18–49-year-old Americans get their “news”
online in a biased fashion.30 According to a Pew Research study, “About two-
thirds (63%) of Americans say family and friends are an important way they
get news.”31 What nobody realizes is that algorithms at Google and Facebook
deduce what users prefer and then steer them toward “like”-minded
customized news sources that their family, friends, and social network also
read.
Why do Google, Facebook, and others do this? The answer is that a user
is more likely to purchase from an advertiser when the content viewed is
congruent with his/her preconceptions and predilections. Similarly, Fox
News, MSNBC, and Breitbart endeavor to lure and retain “like-minded”
viewers whose biases are confirmed and reinforced every time they visit the
site. No organization wishes to drive viewers away by presenting them with
dissonant or uncomfortable facts—hence, the selective algorithm-driven
filter.
Such viewer screening and algorithms create and perpetuate inbred,
selective, and self-reinforcing “filters” that segregate the public into
“alternative realities”—separate camps and “silos” from which the world
looks very different, depending on which silo one occupies. Is it any wonder
that politics in the US, Europe, and even Turkey and India are becoming
polarized into camps with markedly different views on the same
phenomenon?
This institutional failure away from objective journalism that presents a
wide range of facts—however uncomfortable—should not be blamed on the
internet, which is merely a dumb medium. Rather, it is a manifestation of a
phenomenon that has been gaining momentum over the past three

--- Sayfa 13 ---
Global Leadership in an Era of Anti-Globalization

Rutgers Business Review   Vol. 2, No. 2
175

decades—the drive for profits superseding the duty of a journalistic
institution or company to serve the largest interest of the public. (Mind you,
I am a professor at a business school who very much believes in the social
value of fair competition. But I also recognize that sometimes corporate
interests diverge from the “greater good.”)

Is Globalization in Retreat?
No. Some aspects of globalization, such as trade, saw their growth slowed
in the 2005–2014 period. And increasing nationalism in some nations such as
the US, UK, and Turkey may result in greater protectionism against the
import of several categories of products. Immigration may level off or decline
in certain countries. But the welcome mat continues to be laid out for
incoming FDI. Cross-border data and communication flows continue to grow
rapidly. Moreover, the giant domestic markets of China and India are far from
a saturation point for foreign products and ideas. Indians and Chinese (who
total 2.6 billion persons and constitute 37 percent of humanity) are not
xenophobic. They are more ready to adopt foreign ideas and modern 21st-
century lifestyles32 compared with sections of US and European societies
currently undergoing self-examination and angst. The “middle class” citizens
who buy processed or manufactured goods and services in China and India
have been variously estimated to total between 800 million and 1,400 million.
They joyfully buy mobile phones from Korea or the US, watch action-
oriented American movies with subtitles, and clothe themselves in jeans and
tailored western-cut garments.33
Is globalization in retreat? The answer is a reasonably strong “no,”
especially if the view is from an emerging-nation context rather than the
West. While America and parts of Europe are in a temporary bout of
introspection, developing nations are optimistically forging ahead. While
aging infrastructure (roads and bridges) in the US need attention, Don
Trump calls for billions to be spent on a border wall. Meanwhile, thousands
of kilometers of China’s “One Belt, One Road” construction project, designed
to connect China with Europe and SE Asia by road and train, have already
been completed, as well as a string of ports built on the Pacific and Indian
Oceans.34 The Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB), with 70
emerging countries as members (from Azerbaijan to Vietnam), has an already
subscribed capital of $100 billion and is sponsoring projects in Asia and
Africa.35
The second broad conclusion is that globalization has been falsely
accused. It is not globalization, per se, that causes job losses, culture shocks,
and xenophobia among sections of the public in the US and Europe. Rather,
it is modernization of lifestyles and industries that more fundamentally alters

--- Sayfa 14 ---
Global Leadership in an Era of Anti-Globalization

176
Rutgers Business Review
Summer 2017

the patterns of work and life. Much more than imports or offshoring, it is
automation that eliminates jobs in advanced nations. Increased domestic
competition (more than import competition) drives companies to try to cut
costs and the labor content of production.
In part, Marine Le Pen is correct. In the US, Western Europe, and indeed
worldwide, the last 25 years have proclaimed the gospel of hyper-competition
and an intense focus on company stock values and profits. The power of
unions has shrunk. This has tilted the social balance in favor of capital
investors, top management, and all consumers (who benefit from better and
cheaper products) and against labor. “Nothing wrong with that,” many would
say. Indeed, before the 1980s, unions in several manufacturing sectors were
perhaps overly strong, resulting in inefficiencies, low productivity, and
meager profits. For each society it is a matter of finding the right balance—
how to manage the allocation of benefits accruing to (1) labor, to (2)
consumers, to (3) top management, or to (4) shareholders.
Do not blame globalization. It is a symptom, and not the cause, of the
introspection convulsing some western societies groping for the right
balance in lifestyles between work and leisure, as well as between
consumerism, corporate interests, and social justice.

A Globalizing World: Benefits and Backlash
We still live in a world of distinct nation-states and cultures, although the
various aspects of globalization such as trade, FDI, the internet, travel, and
migration are stitching us together. Today, nations and societies are grossly
unequal in income and knowledge. But this inequality is not based on
malevolent forces trying to keep the poor down. On the contrary,
globalization has lifted around two billion people out of poverty since 1980
through FDI and trade. Table 2, derived from World Bank data (using $1.90
per person per day as their cutoff), shows dramatic decreases in poverty rates
after 1980. In 1981, 44 percent of humankind lived in absolute poverty. With
the big increase in global trade and investment since then, even though the
world population almost doubled, by 2015 only 9.6 percent of us were in
grinding poverty.
Take Bangladesh as an example. Although it is one of the poorer nations
on the planet, today it is the second biggest exporter of garments to retailers
around the world (e.g., H&M, Zara, Marks & Spencer, Walmart). Its 2.4
million garment workers, supporting households totaling 8.5 million, enjoy
a minimal lower-middle-class life. True, their hourly wage, hovering at 45–85
US cents per hour, appears shockingly low to westerners. But a $5 daily wage
times two income earners, or $10 per day, is enough in a low-cost nation to
allow a family to live an adequate or tolerable life. (The alternative, in the

--- Sayfa 15 ---
Global Leadership in an Era of Anti-Globalization

Rutgers Business Review   Vol. 2, No. 2
177

farm villages from where many came to work in the urban factories, would
likely be below the World Bank’s criterion of $1.90 per person per day.)

Table 2. Reduction in Poverty
Year
World
Population
% Living in Extreme
Poverty (at $1.90 per
person per day)
Absolute Numbers of
Humankind Living in
Extreme Poverty
1981
4.5 billion
44%
1.98 billion persons
2015
7.4 billion
9.6%
.71 billion persons
Source: World Bank. http://iresearch.worldbank.org/PovcalNet/index.htm?1

Citizens of Europe, the US, and Japan also benefit. As consumers, they
enjoy low prices compared with a world where international trade and FDI
did not exist and garments would cost thrice as much, for example. They can
spend the savings on a wider range of items. As producers, many have jobs
intended for foreign markets—i.e. export. In the US alone, 12 million jobs are
directly related to exports, with up to 35 million jobs if ancillary suppliers of
components and services are included.36 (Contrary to the statements of
scaremonger politicians, the US remains by far the most productive nation
on earth and is also highly competitive in world markets—a very close second
to China in total exports, as seen in Table 3, where the EU is grouped into a
total of 28 countries).37, 38 Worldwide, I conservatively estimate at least 200
million jobs directly dedicated to exports and around 600 million total jobs,
including ancillary suppliers.
FDI is an alternative channel to exports in reaching a foreign buyer. An
American purchasing a Honda CR-V may not know whether his or her
particular car was assembled in Honda’s US subsidiary, exported to the US
from Honda’s Mexico subsidiary, or shipped to the US out of Japanese
production. (All three sources are used.) Honda’s USA subsidiary employs
30,000 Americans directly39 (and an estimated 60,000 more indirectly). The
worldwide total stock of FDI in 2015 was $24,983 billion, and the total jobs (at
multinational headquarters and subsidiaries globally) are likely to approach
the hundreds of millions, the numbers attributable to exports.
Some economists estimate that the world GDP is at least 10 percent
higher—or an additional $8.5 trillion—because of globalization.40
Globalization has produced enormous net benefits for the world:  gains for
consumers, hundreds of millions of additional jobs, and alleviation of mass
poverty in developing nations.

--- Sayfa 16 ---
Global Leadership in an Era of Anti-Globalization

178
Rutgers Business Review
Summer 2017

Table 3. The US and EU (28 Nations) Together Are Far Bigger Exporters
than China and Japan
Country/Region
Services
Exports
$ Billions
Merchandise
Exports
$ Billions
Total
Exports
$ Billions
EU (28 nations)
2,064
5,374
7,438
USA
752
1,455
2,207
Japan
174
645
819
China
208
2,098
2,306
WORLD
4,879
16,002
20,881
Source: UNCTADStat. http://unctadstat.unctad.org/wds/ReportFolders/ reportFolders.aspx

What Leadership Qualities Are Needed in an Interdependent
Globalizing World?
All of the above suggest we are in a far more complex, interdependent
world where negotiated cooperation, based on common rules, is the only way
to make our planetary civilization function. My exports are your country’s
imports. My new drug discovery needs patent protection in your nation.
International banking and finance cannot function without common norms
and protocols for transactions. African dust pollution wafts over to the
eastern US. Air travel is impossible without close coordination among
controllers in many nations. Millions outside the US use GPS devices
receiving signals from American satellites. Passengers and cargo require
assurances of safe passage through waters claimed by individual countries.
The internet must operate on commonly accepted technical standards.
Mutually negotiated technical standards apply to almost all industries.
Since we live in a world of nation-states (as opposed to a world
government), negotiations on a multitude of issues must take place. A “my
country first” approach may be desirable, but only as an early starting point.
Great mutual gains are to be had in every nation by participating in planetary
standards, common rules, technical and economic cooperation, and policies
that promote trade and FDI—while tackling at home the inevitable
adjustments and pain suffered by segments of each country’s workers who
are laid off. Globalization is not pain-free. But the overall gains vastly
outweigh the pain felt by affected segments of each nation’s population.
For politics, if global cooperation inevitably means a minor loss of
economic sovereignty, what are desirable leadership qualities in an
interdependent world? Our recent tribal past still powerfully influences
human behavior and politics. From a leadership qualities point of view, the
opposite of globalization is not nationalism, it is tribalism. Tribes were, and
are, led by “big chiefs,” “strong men,” potentates, and kings—in short,
autocrats.

--- Sayfa 17 ---
Global Leadership in an Era of Anti-Globalization

Rutgers Business Review   Vol. 2, No. 2
179

Table 4. Leadership Qualities for a Global Civilization
The “Big Chief” or Autocrat
The Globalist Leader
Personality expansion
Process facilitation
Central decision-making
Collaboration across organization levels
and borders
Egotism / Impulse
Humility / Deliberation
Family / Nepotism / Patronage
Merit
Demands for personal loyalty
Loyalty to principles / Democracy
Mano a mano (Win / Lose)
Consensus (Win / Win)
No obligation beyond immediate circle
Noblesse oblige
Secrecy
Openness / Disclosure / Communication
Language:

Short

Succinct

Repeated

Powerful
Language:

Nuanced

Contingent

Complex

Persuasive

Tribal leadership is characterized by centralization of power,
concentrated in an individual (the chief) and his immediate circle. See Table
4. Ego, impulse, and passion are frequently displayed. Outward impressions
are emphasized, and flaunting of wealth, power, hangers-on, and retinue are
the result. Value is placed on fast decision-making and the appearance, or
image, of decisiveness and machismo.
The globalist leader, on the other hand, recognizes her apex role
differently, knowing that a global economy and civilization require
cooperation and assent from other countries, as well as from her own
organization and citizens. S/he sees her/himself as a facilitator of interactive
and interdependent processes, a catalyzer of cooperation across organization
levels in her own government, as well as inter-organizational cooperation at
the international level. Passion (strong likes and dislikes) and rapid decision-
making are recognized as impulses to be suppressed in favor of deliberation,
consultation, and advice from a wider circle of opinion.
The tribal leader, or autocrat, typically draws from a smaller circle of
advice—from family, sycophants who have pledged personal loyalty, and
external patrons who stand to be politically rewarded. Sharing information
and disclosure are seen as forms of weakness, giving needless advantage to
others. Secrecy is a desirable norm. His language is characterized by short
phrases, often repeated, and his speech projects an impression of “great”
power. Life and work to him are an endless series of “mano a mano”
negotiations in which one party wins and the opponent loses. Maneuver,
covertness, and psychological tactics are seen as important ways to get ahead
in this world view that emphasizes a “me first” or “my country first and the
rest be damned” mentality.

--- Sayfa 18 ---
Global Leadership in an Era of Anti-Globalization

180
Rutgers Business Review
Summer 2017

The globalist leader has a more realistic and humble perception of her
own capabilities. Her instincts are democratic. She knows, in today’s
complex, interdependent, and multicultural world, that no single person is
knowledgeable or wise enough to make highly centralized decisions.
Advisors are chosen based on merit, rather than nepotism. Her language style
is moderate, nuanced, contingent, complex, and persuasive. Openness and
disclosure make for better collective decisions. Openness, communication,
and cooperation also enable reciprocity and consensus to be reached with
other countries on common rules, standards, protocols, and norms without
which something as simple as the internet or cross-border phone calls and
air travel would not be possible—let alone the “architecture” of thousands of
worldwide technical standards or the political dialogue needed to build and
sustain a global civilization.
The tribal leader’s world view is a planet populated by distinct and often
conflicting tribes, with each tribe looking after its own. If not racist, tribalists
look upon other tribes as inferior in capability and skills. The globalist’s
weltanschauung41 is a planet populated by a uniform and undifferentiated
humanity with a collective global consciousness. If in the 21st century some
of humanity remains inferior in wealth or education, that is not an
indictment or judgment against them. Rather it represents an opportunity,
nay an obligation, to raise their education and living standards higher. As
Table 2 shows, this happy transformation of billions being lifted out of abject
poverty is something that globalization is already accomplishing.

Conclusions
It took humankind 100,000 years to reverse their scattering into tiny
isolated tribes occupying remote corners of the planet and begin having
contact with one another, and another 12,000 years to move from being
hunter-gatherers to launching the industrial revolution in the 18th century.
Another 250 years later, we are today in a globalizing economy that has
benefited most of humanity, especially in the developing world, although it
may have adversely affected jobs, expectations, and self-worth in some
segments of society in Europe and the US. The gains of globalization, as seen
in Table 2, vastly exceed the pain felt by some in advanced nations—
although it is no consolation to the laid-off worker in Lille, Detroit, or
Birmingham42 to be told that millions in Buenos Aires, Bombay, and Beijing
enjoy an elevated existence. It is small comfort to the television viewer in
Kent, traumatized by images of terrorism (however minuscule the
probability of being personally affected may be) to be told that millions in
Kinshasha, Kolkata, and Kunming don western dress, speak English, listen to

--- Sayfa 19 ---
Global Leadership in an Era of Anti-Globalization

Rutgers Business Review   Vol. 2, No. 2
181

Beyoncé, and follow Facebook, so that their culture and life, superficially at
least, approximates that of the person in Kent.
Darwin may not be all wrong. But today we know that he was less than
half-right. Cooperation, even more than competition (or “survival of the
fittest”), forms the basis, or architecture, of biological life at the cellular level,
as well as behavior within and between species.43
The same applies to the mind. In the 21st century, when we speak of
“institutions” (be they national or international) we are speaking of mental
architecture. Treaties, technical standards, air traffic control, shipping lanes,
GPS, international postage, the internet, and all such commonly accepted
standards may have a paper or softcopy repository. But once negotiated and
implemented, they really are collective pathways of the mind that most of
humanity follows to its advantage.
The coming-together of humankind in a global, integrated economy will
likely continue—although history is replete with scenarios of human
progress followed by retreat or even “dark ages.” To build a global civilization,
we need leaders who espouse democracy, openness, morality, benevolence,
meritocracy, egalitarianism, and a recognition that our edifice is built on
international cooperation, mutually negotiated rules, and commonly
accepted procedures.

Author
Farok Contractor is Distinguished Professor of Management and Global Business
at Rutgers Business School, a Fellow of the Academy of International Business
(AIB), and author of nine books and over 100 scholarly articles. He holds a Ph.D.
(Managerial Science and Applied Economics) and an M.B.A. from the Wharton
School, as well as two engineering degrees (M.S. in Industrial Engineering,
University of Michigan, and B.S. in Mechanical Engineering, University of Bombay).
He has chaired or been on the supervisory committees of 17 doctoral dissertations
on International Business topics. He has taught at the Wharton School,
Copenhagen Business School, Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy, Tufts
University, Nanyang Technological University, Indian Institute of Foreign Trade,
XLRI (India), Rutgers business programs in Beijing and Shanghai, Lubin School of
Business, and Theseus and EDHEC in France. He has also conducted executive
seminars in the US, Europe, Latin America, and Asia. Farok Contractor’s research
focuses on key issues in International Business, such as corporate alliances,
outsourcing and offshoring, valuation of intangible assets, the technology transfer
process, licensing, and foreign direct investment. His papers and books have been
cited approximately 9,000 times, and he is among the top-ranked contributors of
scholarly papers in the field. He has served Rutgers as Department Chair, CIBER
(Center for International Business Education and Research) Research Director,
Ph.D. program coordinator, and other key school and university initiatives. He

--- Sayfa 20 ---
Global Leadership in an Era of Anti-Globalization

182
Rutgers Business Review
Summer 2017

writes a blog for managers, students, policy makers, and educated laypeople
covering International Business issues from economic and cultural perspectives at
https://globalbusiness.blog.
 email: farok@business.rutgers.edu

Acknowledgment
Small portions of this article were derived from Contractor, F. (2017). Why Do
People Oppose Globalization?. YaleGlobal (June 15). http://yaleglobal.yale.edu/
content/why-do-people-oppose-globalization

Endnotes
1.
The Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) is a research and
policy think tank organized and funded by 35 of the richest nations. See
http://www.oecd.org/about/membersandpartners/list-oecd-member-countries.htm
2.
Ghemawat, P., & Altman, S.A. (2016). DHL Global Connectedness Index 2016: The State
of
Globalization
in
an
Age
of
Ambiguity.
Deutsche
Post
DHL
Group.
http://www.dhl.com/content/dam/downloads/g0/about_us/logistics_insights/gci_2016
/DHL_GCI_2016_full_study.pdf
3.
Ibid. Multinational companies grow out of their home markets to serve neighboring
nations. But most multinationals—even the giant ones—have controlled subsidiaries
typically in no more than 40-odd nations. There are natural limits to a firm’s
geographical spread. In a ranking of countries, below rank 40 the remaining 153 nations
are not considered attractive enough markets for most multinationals based in rich
nations to bother with directly, or invest in substantially. See Contractor, F. (2007). The
Evolutionary or Multi-Stage Theory of Internationalization and its Relationship to the
Regionalization of Firms. In Regional Aspects of Multinationality and Performance:
Research in Global Strategic Management (pp. 11–30), Rugman, R. (Ed.), Oxford: Elsevier.
Hence, the geographical breadth of coverage for most multinational firms is decidedly
limited—even if the penetration, or depth of investment, in the favored 40-odd markets
keeps increasing over time.
4.
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) is the globalization category describing a multinational
parent firm’s ownership of affiliates and subsidiaries in foreign nations. A “foreign
affiliate” of a multinational company is a case where the foreign firm owns at least 10
percent of the shares in the local company: 10–49 percent is a minority share, and 50–
100 percent foreign ownership is considered to be majority control. In fact, most foreign
affiliates of multinational companies are fully owned subsidiaries, with 100 percent of
the shares controlled by the foreign firm. In the 18th century, the Dutch and English East
India Companies had full control of their overseas operations—not by legally formed
subsidiaries, but by royal charter.
5.
The UN has been tracking government policy changes since the 1980s; data shows an
almost worldwide dismantling of barriers and restrictions on incoming FDI. Despite
opinions voiced against multinational companies, most governments today have a
welcome mat put out for them. See UN Conference on Trade and Development’s
Investment Policy Monitor database at: http://investmentpolicyhub.unctad.org/IPM.

--- Sayfa 21 ---
Global Leadership in an Era of Anti-Globalization

Rutgers Business Review   Vol. 2, No. 2
183

6.
McCann, B.T., & Folta, T.B. (2008). Location Matters: Where We Have Been and Where
We Might Go in Agglomeration Research. Journal of Management, 34(3), 532–565.
7.
Industrial clusters: Bleak times in bra town. (2016). The Economist (April 16). Retrieved
from
http://www.economist.com/news/china/21697004-one-product-towns-fuelled-
chinas-export-boom-many-are-now-trouble-bleak-times-bra-town
8.
Lee, Y.M., Pinto, S., Simons, R., Stochniol, N., & Zverina, C. (2008). The Gujarat Diamond
Cluster: Is It Forever? Harvard Business School Research Paper for Microeconomics of
Competitiveness, Spring (May 2). Retrieved from http://www.isc.hbs.edu/resources/
courses/moc-course-at-harvard/Documents/pdf/studentprojects/
India_(Gujarat)_Diamonds_2008.pdf
9.
Huang, Y., Shen, C., & Contractor, N.S. (2013). Distance Matters: Exploring Proximity
and Homophily in Virtual World Networks. Decision Support Systems, 55(4), 969–977.
10. Kerala: Victim of moral policing on Valentine’s Day kills himself. (2017). The Indian
Express (February 24). Retrieved from http://indianexpress.com/article/india/kerala-
moral-policing-victim-kills-himself/
11. Henry, C.  (2005). The Clash of Globalisations in the Middle East. In International
Relations of the Middle East (pp. 104–128), Fawcett, L. (Ed.), Oxford: The University
Press.
12. Dobbs, R., Madgavkar, A., Manyika, J., Woetzal, J., Bughin, J., Labaye, E., & Kashyap, P.
(2016). Poorer Than Their Parents? A New Perspective on Income Inequality. McKinsey
Global
Institute
(July).
Retrieved
from
http://www.mckinsey.com/global-
themes/employment-and-growth/poorer-than-their-parents-a-new-perspective-on-
income-inequality
13. Can Trump—or Anyone—Bring Back American Manufacturing? (2016). Knowledge at
Wharton (November 30). Retrieved from http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article/
can-trump-anyone-bring-back-american-manufacturing/
14. Contractor, F.J. (2012). Seven Reasons to Expect US Manufacturing Resurgence.
YaleGlobal Online (August 7). Retrieved from http://yaleglobal.yale.edu/content/7-reasons-
expect-us-manufacturing-resurgence
15. Hundreds of travel agencies in China and other emerging countries specialize in travel
to the US for the express purpose of shopping. Because of intense competition and one
of the world’s most open markets, prices in the USA (on a wide range of items from
iPhones to jeans to food) are among the lowest in the world. For the US consumer, this
is an unmitigated boon. Of course, for the foreign visitor, the attractiveness of US prices
depends on the strength or weakness of the US dollar. In 2017, the dollar is strong
compared with the currencies of visitors from Latin America, and so shopping tourism
has diminished somewhat from that region of the world. But the Chinese RMB (yuan),
which has been appreciating against the dollar, continues to lure Chinese tourists to
American shopping malls.
16. For example, see Mishel, L., & Gee, K-F. (2012). Why Aren't Workers Benefiting from
Labour Productivity Growth in the United States?. International Productivity Monitor,
23, 31–43.
17. Cooper, D., & Mishel, L. (2015). The Erosion of Collective Bargaining Has Widened the
Gap between Productivity and Pay. Economic Policy Institute (January 6). Retrieved from
http://www.epi.org/publication/collective-bargainings-erosion-expanded-the-
productivity-pay-gap/

--- Sayfa 22 ---
Global Leadership in an Era of Anti-Globalization

184
Rutgers Business Review
Summer 2017

18. Contractor, F. (2017). What Is at Stake in China-US Relations? An Estimate of Jobs and
Money Involved in the Bilateral Economic Tie. Rutgers Business Review, 2(1), 2–22.
19. David, H., Dorn, D., & Hanson, G.H. (2013). The Geography of Trade and Technology
Shocks in the United States. American Economic Review, 103(3), 220–225.
20. Hillary Clinton won the 2016 US Presidential Election, receiving 3 million more votes
than Don Trump. However, Trump won more congressional districts (many in
depressed areas, or “rust belts” in Ohio, Pennsylvania, West Virginia, etc.). Under the
American electoral college system, where the number of electors only roughly
corresponds with the numbers of votes cast, Trump captured the presidency.
21. See Orrenius, P. (2016). Benefits of Immigration Outweigh the Costs. George W. Bush
Institute (2; Spring). Retrieved from http://www.bushcenter.org/catalyst/north-
american-century/benefits-of-immigration-outweigh-costs.html.
The
author,
Pia
Orrenius, is Vice President and Senior Economist at the Dallas Federal Reserve Bank.
22. Kirk, A. (2017). Which Country Has the Most Immigrants? The Telegraph (21 January).
Retrieved from http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/middleeast/12111108/
Mapped-Which-country-has-the-most-immigrants.html
23. Much has been made by Don Trump about how the H-1B visa program illustrates the
displacement of qualified Americans at the middle or upper end of the salary spectrum,
$60–100,000 per year. The 2017 quota fixed by the US Congress was a maximum of 85,000
temporary three-year H-1B visas; 85,000 temporary workers are a tiny fraction of the 123
million US full-time work force. True, many of these temporary workers then apply to
stay on in the US under permanent visas, and their applications are sponsored by their
companies because of their talents. There are no reliable data on how many H-1B visas
were converted to permanent visas. Even if we use the upper-end guesstimates that, over
the years, cumulatively 600,000 US permanent residents immigrated originally via the
H-1B program, this number is still less than one half of one percent of the US workforce.
Moreover, H-1B visa holders are some of the planet’s most talented and skilled computer,
bio-tech, and science-technology-engineering-math (STEM) specialists.
24. Trump Country: Where the Immigrants Aren’t. (2017). Populyst (February 27). Retrieved
from https://populyst.net/2017/02/17/trump-country-where-the-immigrants-arent/
25. Wike, R. (2017). Five Charts Showing Where France’s National Front Draws Its Support.
Pew Research Center (April 21). Retrieved from http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-
tank/2017/04/21/5-charts-showing-where-frances-national-front-draws-its-support/
26. In actuarial terms, the numbers speak for themselves. Yet I hesitate to use these numbers
as an analogy because whereas accidents are not premeditated, terrorism involves
premeditated, vicious, and politically symbolic acts that deserve vigilance and
countermeasures, however small the numbers of fatalities may be.
27. Mosher, D., & Gould, S. (2017). How Likely Are Foreign Terrorists to Kill Americans? The
Odds
May
Surprise
You.
Business
Insider
(January
31).
Retrieved
from
http://www.businessinsider.com/death-risk-statistics-terrorism-disease-accidents-
2017-1
28. Motor Vehicle Deaths in 2016 Estimated to Be Highest in Nine Years (2017). National
Safety Council (February 15). Retrieved from http://www.nsc.org/Connect/
NSCNewsReleases/Lists/Posts/Post.aspx?ID=180
29. After Silvio Berlusconi’s sex scandals, including with underage girls, were revealed, his
ratings went up. See more here.

--- Sayfa 23 ---
Global Leadership in an Era of Anti-Globalization

Rutgers Business Review   Vol. 2, No. 2
185

30. Mitchell, A., Gottifried, J., Barthel, M., & Shearer, E. (2016). The Modern News
Consumer--New Attitudes and Practices in the Digital Era. Pew Research Center (July 7).
Retrieved from http://www.journalism.org/2016/07/07/the-modern-news-consumer
31. Ibid.
32. Undercurrents of nationalism in China and Hindu fundamentalism have manifested in
protests against Valentine’s Day; but they are not the dominant or driving factors
affecting the attitudes of the rising consumer classes in China and India.
33. Over the last decade, there has been considerable cross-investment by Chinese
companies in Hollywood and in movie chains in the US, as well as US investment in
Chinese studios. For example, see Toonkel, J. (2017). China Extends Hollywood Push
with $1 Billion Paramount Investment. Reuters Business News (January 19). Retrieved
from http://www.reuters.com/article/us-viacom-paramount-china-idUSKBN153335
34. Ngai, J., Sneader, K., & Zecha, C.M. (2016). China’s One Belt, One Road: Will it reshape
global trade? McKinsey & Co. Podcast (July). Retrieved from ttp://www.mckinsey.com/
global-themes/china/chinas-one-belt-one-road-will-it-reshape-global-trade. Joe Ngai
and Kevin Sneader are senior partners in McKinsey’s Hong Kong office. Cecilia Ma Zecha
is the head of digital communications for Asia and is based in the Singapore office.
35. See Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank at https://www.aiib.org/en/index.html
36. Johnson, S. (2016). Trump’s Tariff Proposal Would Gut US Export Jobs. The Boston Globe
(June 27). Retrieved from https://www.bostonglobe.com/opinion/2016/06/26/johnson/
ZE8JJbSqqJb4pP2hE6rohM/story.html
37. See figures in Contractor, F.J. (2012). Seven Reasons to Expect US Manufacturing
Resurgence. YaleGlobal Online (August 7). Retrieved from http://yaleglobal.yale.edu/
content/7-reasons-expect-us-manufacturing-resurgence
38. The 28 EU nations combined appear to be highly export-oriented because they export
to one another, compared with giant unified economies such as China and the US. This
is to say that if, in 1787, the constitutional convention in Philadelphia had failed, and we
had a DSA (Disunited States of America) as opposed to the USA (United States of
America), each individual state in the “DSA,” like today’s EU, would be very export-
oriented, with New Jersey selling to Pennsylvania and so on.
39. See Honda in America Employment: Honda Employs More Than 30,000 Associates in
the U.S. at https://hondainamerica.com/employment/
40. Tyson, L., & Lund, S. (2017). Adapting to the New Globalization. Project Syndicate
(February 8). Retrieved from https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/digital-
globalization-policy-response-by-laura-tyson-and-susan-lund-2017-02
41. The German word weltanschauung literally means “world perspective” and is
denotatively the same as the English word “worldview.” But to a German,
weltanschauung has a larger and broader connotation as “philosophy of life.”
42. In January 2017, the city of Birmingham in the UK had the worst unemployment in that
country. See Walker, J. (2017). Birmingham Has the Worst Unemployment in the
Country. Birmingham Mail (18 January; updated 30 January). Retrieved from
http://www.birminghammail.co.uk/news/midlands-news/birmingham-worst-
unemployment-country-12471928
43. For example, see Rand, D.G., & Nowak, M.A. (2013). Human Cooperation. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 17(8), 413–425.