--- Sayfa 1 ---
Introduction
W
hat is happening to Britain in the world? Since 2016, when Brexit
began with the United Kingdom’s shock “leave” vote to quit the
European Union, the conversation has become almost impossi-
ble to have without entering into a fierce and polemical debate surrounding
the country’s departure. Britain’s foreign policy debate, once a calm corner
of Westminster for researchers, former senior officials, and engaged politi-
cians, turned as bitterly divided as the rest of the country between so-called
Remainers and Leavers. Emotional, vituperative, and campaigning rhetoric
established itself as the norm amid Britain’s struggle to negotiate its exit.
Brexit and the tempestuous debate that followed did not only divide London:
it was apparent, from a vantage point at the Atlantic Council, that it divided
Washington too. After Trump’s 2016 presidential victory on the heels of the
UK’s June vote, it became commonplace inside the Beltway for Democrats
to see themselves as Remainers and for Republicans to see themselves as
Leavers—especially as Trump frequently announced himself a Brexit sup-
porter. Eclipsed in all this has been cool-headed, nonpartisan, strategic anal-
ysis about Britain’s position in the world or how it is remaking its foreign policy
after cutting itself loose from the bloc. Events, especially the new AUKUS de-
fense agreement between Australia, the United States, and the UK, are now
outpacing the conversation.
This is the debate that the Europe Center at the Atlantic Council is engag-
ing in with this project, “Global Britain: An American Review.” The project
began as a series of expert roundtables and think tank briefings from senior
UK officials seeking to explain Britain’s new agenda as outlined in Global
Britain in a Competitive Age, the country’s March 2021 integrated review of
security, defense, development, and foreign policy. Following these briefings,
Global Britain:
An American Review
ISSUE BRIEF
The Europe Center conducts
research and uses real-time
commentary and analysis to
guide the actions and strategy of
key transatlantic decisionmakers
on the issues that will shape
the future of the transatlantic
relationship and convenes US
and European leaders through
public events and workshops to
promote dialogue and to bolster
the transatlantic partnership.
OCTOBER 2021
BEN JUDAH & LIVIA GODAERT, Editors
Atlantic Council
EUROPE CENTER

--- Sayfa 2 ---
2
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF
Global Britain: An American Review
invited participants and colleagues engaged in a review of
post-Brexit British foreign policy. This brief brings together
the voices of fifteen experts from five US institutions, each
offering a review, a grade, and a policy suggestion for Her
Majesty’s government (HMG).
This project represents one of the first scholarly efforts
to assess what Washington thinks of the Global Britain
agenda: from its broadest strokes to the nuts and bolts of
its various components, from climate and trade to cyber-
security and ties with China. It seeks to advance the con-
versation in London and Washington about Britain in the
world after the divisions of the referendum and exit, with
clear-eyed and frank analysis concerning China, COVID-19,
AUKUS, Afghanistan, trade deals, and grand strategy, not
only for Britain but also the United States. We hope this
brief, “Global Britain: An American Review,” can play a part
in a new transatlantic debate: where next?
Ben Judah
Nonresident Senior Fellow, Europe Center, Atlantic Council
September 27, 2021
B
Average Grade of the Integrated Review:

--- Sayfa 3 ---
3
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Global Britain: An American Review
ISSUE BRIEF
A-
Topic: The Indo-Paciﬁc Tilt
Grade: A-
“The UK should harmonize
transatlantic engagement in
the Indo-Paciﬁc.”
James Batchik
Program Assistant,
Europe Center
Atlantic Council
C+
Topic: International Trade Policy
Grade: A (eﬀort) +
D (strategic perspective) = C+
“Focus on implementing
the TCA.”
Fran Burwell
Distinguished Fellow,
Europe Center
Atlantic Council
B
Topic: International Trade Policy
Grade: B
“The UK is well-positioned to
shape how Western powers
navigate the often fragile line
between national security and
national economic interest.”
Julia Friedlander
C. Boyden Gray Senior
Fellow and Deputy Director,
GeoEconomics Center
Atlantic Council
C
Topic: Anti-Kleptocracy Initiatives
Grade: A (innovation) +
E (enforcement) = C
“Britain must summon the
political will and resources
needed to massively strengthen
enforcement of its own existing laws.”
Nate Sibley
Research Fellow,
Kleptocracy Initiative
Hudson Institute
+
B
Jörn Fleck
Deputy Director,
Europe Center
Atlantic Council
Topic: US-UK Relations
Grade: B+
“Keep Brexit debates with the EU
as constructive as possible.”
Topic: UK-EU Relations
Grade: B+
“Some high-level
summitry is in order.”
Damir Marusic
Senior Fellow,
Europe Center
Atlantic Council
+
B
B-
B
Topic:
Climate Change and Biodiversity
Grade: B
“The government should
increase ﬁnancing to help
vulnerable populations.”
Margaret Jackson
Former Deputy Director for
Climate and Advanced Energy,
Global Energy Center
Atlantic Council
+
B
Topic: Cyber Capacity Building
Grade: B+
“To build resilience domestically
and abroad, the UK must build
on existing alliances and
partnerships.”
Safa Shahwan Edwards
Deputy Director, Cyber
Statecraft Initiative, Scowcroft
Center for Strategy and Security
Atlantic Council
A
Topic: NATO
Grade: A
Highlight “investments in cyber,
missile, and nuclear capabilities”
and “commit to increased
presence on the ground in Europe.”
Leah Scheunemann
Deputy Director, Transatlantic
Security Initiative, Scowcroft
Center for Strategy and Security
Atlantic Council
A-
Topic: The Integrated Approach
Grade: A-
“Keep the IR at the forefront of
public consciousness."
Livia Godaert
Nonresident Fellow,
Europe Center
Atlantic Council
B
Rachel Ellehuus
Deputy Director and Senior
Fellow, Europe, Russia, and
Eurasia Program
Center for Strategic and
International Studies
Grade: B
UK must “set priorities from
the IR and defense command
paper.”
REPORT CARD AVERAGE GRADE: B
Topic:
Rollout of the Integrated Review
Grade: B
“The fundamental priority
should be getting the UK-EU
relationship right.”
Max Bergmann
Senior Fellow
Center for American Progress
B
Grade: B+
“The policy focus should now
be on implementation.”
Peter Rough
Senior Fellow
Hudson Institute
+
B
Topic:
UK-EU Defense Cooperation
Grade: B-
“Insulate the foreign policy
and defense relationship from
frictions arising in other domains.”
Olivier-Rémy Bel
Nonresident Senior Fellow,
Europe Center
Atlantic Council
B
Topic: Global Finance
Grade: B
“Focus on being an
intermediator of capital,
not money.”
Yakov Feygin
Associate Director,
Future of Capitalism
Berggruen Institute
Topic:
Rollout of the Integrated Review
Topic:
Rollout of the Integrated Review

--- Sayfa 4 ---
4
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF
Global Britain: An American Review
T
he integrated review lays out a promising vision for
how the UK can continue to play a critical role in
global affairs. The review is clear-eyed about the
challenges, outlining a competition between democracy
and authoritarian systems, the need to reverse austerity
when it comes to defense, and the importance of the Indo-
Pacific region, climate, and new technology. In fact, what is
striking is not just the alignment with the strategic outlook
of the United States but with the European Union’s as well.
The key question is whether Washington, London, and, crit-
ically, Brussels can address the threats and challenges out-
lined in the strategic review in a unified way.
The review gets a B (and not an A) because it is disappointing
when it comes to UK-EU relations. Ultimately, there will be
no so-called Global Britain if it is consumed with seemingly
petty fights with the EU. As much as London will enjoy nee-
dling Paris over the AUKUS submarine affair, a further rup-
ture in UK-EU relations will only distract Britain from its global
role. This was evident at the Group of Seven (G7) meeting.
Despite the UK being front and center on the world stage, a
dispute over sausages and Northern Ireland distracted from
an otherwise productive summit. Thus the fundamental pri-
ority should be getting the UK-EU relationship right and re-
building trust. Doing so would position the UK to be both a
global leader and a leader in Europe. The UK can be nimble
and push the often slow and plodding EU to act—whether in
responding to Russian abuses, China’s crackdown on Hong
Kong, or climate change. Thus for Global Britain to work, the
UK will need to stop pretending the EU is irrelevant and treat
it as the critical global actor and partner that it is.
Recommendation: The fundamental priority should be getting the UK-EU relationship right and rebuilding trust.
Doing so would position the UK to be both a global leader and a leader in Europe.
Prime Minister Boris Johnson with President of the European Commission Ursula von der
Leyen at the G7 Summit in Cornwall. June 11, 2021. Leon Neal/Pool via REUTERS
Topic:
Rollout of the Integrated Review
Grade: B
“The fundamental priority
should be getting the UK-EU
relationship right.”
Max Bergmann
Senior Fellow
Center for American Progress
B

--- Sayfa 5 ---
5
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Global Britain: An American Review
ISSUE BRIEF
T
he UK’s integrated review reads like the natural out-
growth of Brexit. It seizes on qualities like nimbleness
and flexibility: “to move swiftly and with greater agil-
ity [as] the determining characteristics of the UK’s foreign
policy following our departure from the EU.” Self-assured
and confident, the integrated review marries Britain’s exist-
ing strengths to global ambitions.
It also covers new terrain that captures the spirit of the
times. There are dozens of references to biodiversity and
long discussions of climate policy. Most of all, the inte-
grated review focuses on the UK as a technology super-
power. Already “a world leader in applied innovation and
transformative tech,” it identifies advanced technologies as
“the foundation of our approach.” As in the United States,
this has tempted traditionally free-market Britain to con-
sider industrial policy and “accept more risk in our public in-
vestments [to] back breakthrough technologies.” Relatedly,
London also is betting its growing defense budget on a
high-tech fighting force of tomorrow (while shrinking the
size of the British Army).
Herein lies a seeming incongruity. The command paper
complementing the integrated review calls for cuts to
the army while the review identifies Russia as “the most
acute direct threat to the UK.” In this field, like in all others,
London hopes to fill the gap through increased agility (and
lethality).
Finally, in what has captured headlines, the integrated review
calls for a tilt toward Asia, where the UK holds high hopes
for the relationship with India and other members of the
Commonwealth, and recognizes the conundrum of Beijing.
“China and the UK both benefit from bilateral trade and in-
vestment,” the review argues, “but China also presents the
biggest state-based threat to the UK’s economic security.”
All in all, the integrated review is forward-looking and fu-
turistic, and deserves good marks. The policy focus should
now be on implementation: to ensure government is fit for
purpose. It is one thing to call for agility, but another to
demonstrate it. As Sino-American competition unfolds, the
UK will need cross-Whitehall mechanisms, overseen by the
National Security Council (NSC), to execute the integrated
review, but also make adjustments when necessary.
Prime Minister Boris Johnson delivers a speech at the Vauxhall
car factory. July 6, 2021. REUTERS/Phil Noble
Recommendation: The policy focus should now be
on implementation: to ensure government is fit for
purpose. It is one thing to call for agility, but another
to demonstrate it. As Sino-American competition un-
folds, the UK will need cross-Whitehall mechanisms,
overseen by the NSC, to execute the integrated re-
view, but also make adjustments when necessary.
Grade: B+
“The policy focus should now
be on implementation.”
Peter Rough
Senior Fellow
Hudson Institute
+
B
Topic:
Rollout of the Integrated Review

--- Sayfa 6 ---
6
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF
Global Britain: An American Review
H
MG deserves credit for a smooth rollout of the inte-
grated review and defense command paper, Defence
in a Competitive Age. The review is comprehensive
and contains a good analysis of the security environment.
Prime Minister Boris Johnson also succeeded in weaving
a persistent (if not entirely credible) Global Britain narra-
tive throughout his meeting with President Joe Biden, the
G7, and the NATO Summit. There was significant engage-
ment with the US government throughout the integrated
review process, such that Washington was onboard with
the public messaging upon its release. The United States
craves and needs a globally minded ally that is willing to
be active in the world, so is willing to embrace and tempo-
rarily support the UK’s ambition. Examples of this include
the recent AUKUS security agreement between the United
States, UK, and Australia to provide subs for Canberra, and
the January 2021 US-UK agreement to form a joint carrier
strike group around US Marine Corps F-35s and the UK’s
Queen Elizabeth 2. Nevertheless, doubts remain as to how
realistic the Global Britain vision is over the long term given
the decreasing size of the UK armed forces, anticipated
gaps in key enabling capabilities (e.g., strategic lift), and the
impact of COVID-19 on UK finances. The UK’s diminished
influence in EU economic, trade, and technology policies
post-Brexit also is a concern as these, combined, will be a
major tool in meeting the China challenge. The rollout gets
an overall grade of B. Regarding policy actions the UK can
take, it should set priorities from the integrated review and
defense command paper; clarify roles and responsibilities
within HMG; and address concerns about resourcing. For
example, there is concern that, because much of the bud-
get is needed to fill existing holes in UK defense, few new
capabilities will be fielded before the second half of the
decade. Finally, there is more work to be done in rational-
izing how a force posture that is persistently deployed and
distributed around the globe still allows the UK to lead in
NATO on the Russia fight.
F-35s sitting on the deck of the HMS Queen Elizabeth, a sign of US-UK defense cooperation. May 27, 2021.
REUTERS/Bart Biesemans
Recommendation: Regarding policy actions the UK can take, it should set priorities from the integrated review and
defense command paper; clarify roles and responsibilities within HMG; and address concerns about resourcing.
B
Rachel Ellehuus
Deputy Director and Senior
Fellow, Europe, Russia, and
Eurasia Program
Center for Strategic and
International Studies
Grade: B
UK must “set priorities from
the IR and defense command
paper.”
Topic:
Rollout of the Integrated Review

--- Sayfa 7 ---
7
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Global Britain: An American Review
ISSUE BRIEF
T
he integrated review outlines an ambitious agenda
for post-Brexit Britain. The new strategic framework
sets out four objectives for Global Britain: establish-
ing science and technology prowess, shaping open inter-
national systems, ensuring security and defense both in the
UK and overseas, and ensuring resilience against risk in a
changing world.
Many of the priorities in the review will not come as a sur-
prise—climate change, international trade, NATO, science
and tech investment, critical infrastructure—but the ap-
proach is unique among strategic reviews. The priority is
on integration and collective approaches: among allies and
partners, across the government, and throughout sectors
and policy areas. We are now in an era of blurred lines,
where concerns like climate change or COVID-19 transcend
borders, national infrastructure and economic security are
national security issues, domestic and foreign policy are
intertwined, and urgent crises require faster, more nimble
decision-making. An integrated approach is the right one—
and if implemented correctly, it can be a model for other
democracies wrestling with these problems.
The integrated review rollout merits an A-. It’s a bold, am-
bitious undertaking that—while not comprehensive—pro-
vides a vision for a post-Brexit Britain that remains active
and engaged with allies and partners in solving global cri-
ses. There is still much to be done, as the UK implements
this strategic framework, and much of it will require the
buy-in of British citizens. The government should keep the
integrated review at the forefront of public consciousness
in the UK, articulating the progress of the review and its
impact through traditional and social media, with a focus
on telling success stories and providing action items to cit-
izens to engage with their own national security (see the
Swedish Civil Contingencies Agency’s 2018 brochure titled
“If Crisis or War Comes” as one possible model for giving
citizens a stake in their own security as part of an integrated
approach).
Recommendation: The government should keep
the integrated review at the forefront of public
consciousness in the UK, articulating the progress
of the review and its impact through traditional and
social media, with a focus on telling success stories
and providing action items to citizens to engage
with their own national security.
A woman takes a picture of giant QR promoting the NHS
COVID-19 app in Milton Keynes, Britain. September 25, 2020.
REUTERS/Andrew Boyers
A-
Topic: The Integrated Approach
Grade: A-
“Keep the IR at the forefront of
public consciousness."
Livia Godaert
Nonresident Fellow,
Europe Center
Atlantic Council

--- Sayfa 8 ---
8
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF
Global Britain: An American Review
T
he UK’s commitment to NATO remains at the top
level: A. Though the Indo-Pacific tilt will necessitate
defense-posture adjustments, the UK reaffirmed its
commitment in the integrated review to critical efforts like
the NATO Readiness Initiative and the Enhanced Forward
Presence mission. NATO also benefits from the UK’s con-
tinued focus on freedom of navigation in the critical Black
Sea as well as the UK’s ongoing support for Ukraine. As
the United States strategically prioritizes the Indo-Pacific
region and countering the threat of China, the demands
could grow for Britain to increase its focus on deterring
Russia in Europe. Even though the integrated review has
reaffirmed, on paper, the UK’s focus on Russia as its pri-
mary strategic threat, London will cut certain conventional
capabilities seen as integral to a land-based conflict in-
cluding tanks, infantry fighting vehicles, and overall army
end strength (i.e., personnel count). These cuts will lead
to a smaller UK fighting force and could also lead to a less
credible or capable force in the face of Russian aggres-
sion in Europe. The UK should articulate how its neces-
sary cuts will enhance deterrence of Russia, including
highlighting its investments in cyber, missile, and nuclear
capabilities, and additionally should commit to increased
presence on the ground in Europe to enhance conven-
tional deterrence.
Recommendation: The UK should articulate how its
necessary cuts will enhance deterrence of Russia,
including highlighting its investments in cyber, mis-
sile, and nuclear capabilities, and additionally should
commit to increased presence on the ground in
Europe to enhance conventional deterrence.
British troops stationed in Estonia during a tactical exercise with
the NATO enhanced Forward Presence battle group. June 18,
2020. REUTERS/Ints Kalnins
A
Topic: NATO
Grade: A
Highlight “investments in cyber,
missile, and nuclear capabilities”
and “commit to increased pres-
ence on the ground in Europe.”
Leah Scheunemann
Deputy Director, Transatlantic
Security Initiative, Scowcroft
Center for Strategy and Security
Atlantic Council

--- Sayfa 9 ---
9
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Global Britain: An American Review
ISSUE BRIEF
T
he recent integrated review of the UK, which has a
positive track record with cyber capacity building,
highlights the importance of capacity building and
its links to cyber diplomacy. While workforce development
remains a government priority, it must be reciprocated by
industry. The UK’s ability to achieve its objectives will ulti-
mately be determined by its ability to build a robust cyber
workforce, and it will take more than just government to
make this a reality.
The UK has devoted resources to capacity building, with
a special focus on Africa and the Indo-Pacific region, tying
these to broader diplomatic efforts. While this is a positive
development, the UK will have to balance this with capac-
ity-building efforts within existing frameworks, such as the
Five Eyes intelligence-sharing network, NATO, and the
European Union. The cyber workforce of tomorrow will be
international: to build resilience domestically and abroad,
the UK must build on existing alliances and partnerships.
Recommendation: The cyber workforce of tomorrow
will be international: to build resilience domestically
and abroad, the UK must build on existing alliances
and partnerships.
Recommendation: The government should increase
financing to help vulnerable populations that already
bear the highest human and economic costs of global
warming.
T
ackling the dual challenges of climate change and bio-
diversity loss is the UK’s leading international priority,
as stated in the integrated review. Though it lacks
specific economic and diplomatic policy actions, the strate-
gic document gives a broad overview of how these two sig-
nificant problem sets will shape the UK’s engagement with
global partners across the spectrum of finance, emissions
reductions, resilience, and science and technology, as they
work together to solve more complex transnational security
threats induced by a changing natural environment.
The UK has emerged as a global climate leader through
an ambitious suite of domestic policies, notably included in
the Ten Point Plan for a Green Industrial Revolution and in
the targets outlined in its nationally determined contribu-
tion, its pledge as a Paris Agreement signatory. In addition
to being a leader in the shift away from coal-fired power to
clean energy sources like offshore wind and nuclear power,
the UK also is foremost in the deployment and adoption of
advanced technologies, such as carbon capture and hydro-
gen production, and setting bold objectives for the electri-
fication of the transportation sector. However, in a global
context, the recent dramatic cuts in international aid are at
odds with the UK’s ambition to fight climate change and ex-
treme poverty. The government should increase financing
to help vulnerable populations that already bear the high-
est human and economic costs of global warming.
+
B
Topic: Cyber Capacity Building
Grade: B+
“To build resilience domestically
and abroad, the UK must build
on existing alliances and
partnerships.”
Safa Shahwan Edwards
Deputy Director, Cyber State-
craft Initiative, Scowcroft Center
for Strategy and Security
Atlantic Council
B
Topic:
Climate Change and Biodiversity
Grade: B
“The government should
increase ﬁnancing to help
vulnerable populations.”
Margaret Jackson
Former Deputy Director for
Climate and Advanced Energy,
Global Energy Center
Atlantic Council

--- Sayfa 10 ---
10
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF
Global Britain: An American Review
T
he integrated review was a good sign: Global Britain
means London is not turning its back on Europe. The
absence of a foreign policy and defense framework
in the December 2020 EU-UK agreements was certainly
a missed opportunity for close collaboration. However,
the review provides an optimistic vision of Britain’s rela-
tionship with Europe and opens the door somewhat for
renewed cooperation. The language, notably on pages 21
and 72, is careful yet provides a hook to expand on: “co-
operate with the EU on matters of security and defense
as independent partners, where this is in our interest.”
Key bilateral European relationships, notably with France
(see pages 60 and 77) and Germany (page 61), also are
emphasized.
As argued in Toward a Future EU-UK Relationship in Foreign
Policy and Defense, an Atlantic Council report, the EU and
the UK have much to gain in working together on foreign
policy and defense. They still share the same strategic
environment and face the same challenges, which might
require deploying together. Cooperation on capability de-
velopment also entails a deep network between British and
European industry.
While a comprehensive agreement is probably still fur-
ther down the road, the relationship can be sustained and
even built up through a network of bilateral cooperation
and ad hoc formats, from the European intervention ini-
tiative to the Joint Expeditionary Force and the E3 group
(France, Germany, and the UK). Operations alongside
European partners including the British deployment to Mali
(as part of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, known as MINUSMA), are a
good way of working together and maintaining those ties.
In future it would be wise for the UK and the EU to try to
insulate the foreign policy and defense relationship from
frictions arising in other domains. The AUKUS deal has
strained the relationship with France and raised further
questions about the UK’s European positioning. Building
on linguistic hooks for European cooperation in the inte-
grated review is therefore more necessary than ever. In
particular, maintaining familiarity between officials and en-
suring strategic understanding, for instance through track
1.5 (i.e., back channel) discussions, will be essential to lay
the groundwork for a close-knit relationship.
Recommendation: In future it would be wise for the
UK and the EU to try to insulate the foreign policy and
defense relationship from frictions arising in other
domains. Maintaining familiarity between officials
and ensuring strategic understanding, for instance
through track 1.5 discussions, will be essential to lay
the groundwork for a close-knit relationship.
German Defence Minister Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer with
British Secretary of State for Defence Ben Wallace and French
Defense Minister Florence Parly, in Germany. August 21, 2020.
REUTERS/Kai Pfaffenbach
B-
Topic:
UK-EU Defense Cooperation
Grade: B-
“Insulate the foreign policy
and defense relationship from
frictions arising in other domains.”
Olivier-Rémy Bel
Nonresident Senior Fellow,
Europe Center
Atlantic Council

--- Sayfa 11 ---
11
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Global Britain: An American Review
ISSUE BRIEF
T
he release of Britain’s integrated review, aptly ti-
tled Global Britain in a Competitive Age, marked a
post-Brexit milestone. It set a necessarily ambitious
agenda for charting a new course outside the limiting stric-
tures of the European Union.
Still, glaringly absent from the review is any mention of how to
approach rebuilding bridges with Brussels. While it is under-
standable that the initial focus would be to find alternatives
to previous arrangements, Britain must remember that above
all, it remains a European power. Washington will continue to
be obsessed with crafting a durable approach to China, and
while Britain can and will play an important role in the Pacific
theater, it should not lose sight of where both its immediate
interests lie, and where it can exert greatest impact.
As emotions subside in the wake of the contentious AUKUS
announcement, an opportunity exists for Britain to rein-
vent its relationship with the EU. Indeed, policy makers in
Washington are likely to welcome efforts from London to
rebuild a new and lasting security arrangement with the
Continent as its own focus inexorably drifts east.
Recommendation: To reboot the relationship, some
high-level summitry is in order. UK-France and UK-
Germany meetings should happen first, leading up
to a broader UK-EU meeting.
Prime Minister Boris Johnson and President Joe Biden at the G7 Summit in Cornwall. June 12, 2021. Leon Neal/Pool via REUTERS
Topic: UK-EU Relations
Grade: B+
“Some high-level
summitry is in order.”
Damir Marusic
Senior Fellow,
Europe Center
Atlantic Council
+
B

--- Sayfa 12 ---
12
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF
Global Britain: An American Review
T
he US-UK relationship is on a decent footing, and US
officials should be pleased with the UK’s alignment
on the Biden administration’s priorities.
The G7 summit and Johnson’s recent White House visit both
provided an opportunity for Biden and Johnson to show-
case their ability to lead on global challenges. The UK will
host climate change talks in Glasgow, known as COP26, and
the integrated review featured combatting climate change
prominently in line with the Biden team’s increased focus on
the green transition. Britain’s support for protesters in Hong
Kong and a joint US-UK charter against authoritarian influ-
ence also reveals an increasingly firm posture against China
from the strategic ambivalence of previous UK govern-
ments. Finally, the surprise AUKUS deal fully aligns Britain
with the United States in the Indo-Pacific region.
On the other hand, the consequences of Brexit will be one
of the biggest uncertainties for US-UK relations. AUKUS
aside, the United States is unlikely to step in the middle
of UK-EU rows over trade. The Johnson government also
should be concerned about the politics surrounding the
Northern Ireland Protocol, given the UK’s departure agree-
ment with Brussels, and US concerns in particular. The is-
sue is carefully watched in the halls of Congress, the State
Department, and the Oval Office, and Biden himself directly
warned Johnson against upsetting the balance in Northern
Ireland. Meanwhile, given the way Biden played down pros-
pects for a free trade agreement—a UK priority for its US
engagement, as identified in the integrated review—British
policy makers should be realistic about what to expect from
the United States on areas of free trade.
To make a Global Britain’s US relationship a success, it
should keep Brexit debates with the EU as constructive as
possible and carefully manage the situation in Northern
Ireland to protect the Good Friday Agreement of 1998.
Demonstrators wave the Union Jack at an anti-government
protest in Hong Kong. October 23, 2019. REUTERS/Umit Bektas
Recommendation: Keep Brexit debates with the EU
as constructive as possible and carefully manage
the situation in Northern Ireland to protect the Good
Friday Agreement.
+
B
Jörn Fleck
Deputy Director,
Europe Center
Atlantic Council
Topic: US-UK Relations
Grade: B+
“Keep Brexit debates with the EU
as constructive as possible.”

--- Sayfa 13 ---
13
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Global Britain: An American Review
ISSUE BRIEF
An investment manager in the UK. The UK’s role in the capital
market is still uncertain. November 15, 2018. REUTERS/Simon
Dawson
I
n the post-Brexit environment, the UK is attempting to be
a responsible stakeholder in the global financial system—
while not only maintaining the City of London’s centrality
as a money market but expanding its importance as an in-
termediator of global capital. Can these goals be met at the
same time? The division of labor between London and New
York has traditionally been a money market versus a cap-
ital market. In other words, New York’s market is focused
on the funding of real assets such as corporate bonds and
stocks, whereas London is the market for money itself. It is
that money that funds the New York market. London had
two advantages in this division of labor. First, it sat between
the United States and the European Union (and still does),
and was able to work in both markets. Second, the common
law courts were particularly well suited to conducting inter-
national legal arbitrage. This latter capability also is tied to
offshore, low-tax jurisdictions in overseas territories. Brexit
removes the first of these advantages, which requires the
UK to lean on the second of these advantages to sustain
London’s competitiveness. In other words, regulate even
less. There are two problems: it is inimical to responsible
stewardship of the international financial system, and will
put the UK at odds with both the United States and the
European Union.
Moreover, the European markets are themselves becoming
more sophisticated. This is particularly true of the vaunted
“green bonds” that UK bankers claim to have pioneered,
but are now more often issued in Amsterdam or Frankfurt.
Afterall, these are actually capital-market instruments. This
means the UK’s long-term advantage will be network ef-
fects and human capital in the money markets. However, if
one were to venture into futurology, governments will likely
have to tamp down on international flows a bit, making
such a role more difficult. The UK should focus on switch-
ing its role from being an intermediator of money to be-
ing one of capital—to stimulate internal production rather
than global flows. That would require a large state-led in-
vestment regime that may well disquiet the Johnson gov-
ernment. It also means reorienting the US-UK relationship
from one that sees security as an exercise in hard power to
a joint process of economic world building. Creating that
world means signing up for a global development regime
and accepting the Biden administration’s push for a global
minimum tax.
To date, there are no signs of radical thinking about the UK
as a steward of the global financial system. Given the chal-
lenges, though, the posture rates a B.
Recommendation: The UK should focus on switch-
ing its role from being an intermediator of money to
being one of capital—to stimulate internal produc-
tion rather than global flows.
B
Topic: Global Finance
Grade: B
“Focus on being an
intermediator of capital,
not money.”
Yakov Feygin
Associate Director,
Future of Capitalism
Berggruen Institute

--- Sayfa 14 ---
14
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF
Global Britain: An American Review
T
he UK undoubtedly has one of the strongest an-
ti-money laundering and anti-corruption regimes
in the world, on paper at least. It also has generally
done a good job of keeping anti-corruption efforts on the
international agenda, engaging partners to promote vital
reforms such as corporate transparency.
Boris Johnson’s apparent lack of interest relative to his pre-
decessors, however, has delayed implementation of sev-
eral key measures. Above all, repeated failure to enforce
existing laws—not only effectively, but often at all—has
been deeply harmful to the UK’s credibility. In particular, the
City of London and several overseas territories can still be
counted among the most prominent and dangerous global
money-laundering hubs.
As President Biden and the 117th Congress launch a rare bi-
partisan push to target foreign kleptocracy, the UK, despite its
achievements, is in severe danger of being shown as a paper
tiger by its closest ally. To retain global anti-corruption leader-
ship and remain a trusted partner for the United States in its
war against corruption, Britain must summon the political will
and resources needed to massively strengthen enforcement
of its own existing laws—or anticipate increasingly awkward
conversations with US counterparts in the months to come.
Recommendation: To retain global anti-corruption
leadership and remain a trusted partner for the
United States in its war against corruption, Britain
must summon the political will and resources needed
to massively strengthen enforcement of its own ex-
isting laws—or anticipate increasingly awkward con-
versations with US counterparts in the months to
come.
I
nvestors, regulators, and governments are waiting to see
how the UK will ultimately define post-Brexit trade, partic-
ularly when it comes to financial services. The role of the
City of London is in question, with many firms organizing
a move to the Continent or at least hedging their bets. By
not answering key questions regarding EU regulation and
standards, the UK risks bifurcating global markets further
as tensions with China rise, depressing domestic growth,
and reaping fewer benefits from any potential flexibility that
Brexit provides.
In line with the integrated review and expanding legislative
remit in the area, the UK is well-positioned to shape how
Western powers navigate the often fragile line between na-
tional security and national economic interest. That means
helping to define how to use defensive instruments such as
investment security, export controls, and other market re-
strictions while not erecting trade barriers or impeding on
fair global competition. Defending free markets and core
national security equities (i.e., interests) do not have to be
conflicting priorities.
Recommendation: The UK is well-positioned to
shape how Western powers navigate the often frag-
ile line between national security and national eco-
nomic interest. That means helping to define how
to use defensive instruments such as investment
security, export controls, and other market restric-
tions while not erecting trade barriers or impeding
on fair global competition. Defending free markets
and core national security equities do not have to be
conflicting priorities.
C
Topic: Anti-Kleptocracy Initiatives
Grade: A (innovation) +
E (enforcement) = C
“Britain must summon the
political will and resources
needed to massively strengthen
enforcement of its own existing laws.”
Nate Sibley
Research Fellow,
Kleptocracy Initiative
Hudson Institute
B
Topic: International Trade Policy
Grade: B
“The UK is well-positioned to
shape how Western powers
navigate the often fragile line
between national security and
national economic interest.”
Julia Friedlander
C. Boyden Gray Senior
Fellow and Deputy Director,
GeoEconomics Center
Atlantic Council

--- Sayfa 15 ---
15
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Global Britain: An American Review
ISSUE BRIEF
T
he UK integrated review sets out an ambitious inter-
national trade agenda for the new, post-Brexit Britain:
negotiate trade agreements; reinvigorate the World
Trade Organization; influence global rules and standards;
promote exports; and create jobs across the UK. This
agenda was reinforced by Britain’s leadership of the G7
this year, which also saw a critical agreement on global tax
emerge. The UK renegotiated many trade agreements in-
herited from its time in the EU, as well as gaining a new one
with Australia. This is a remarkable achievement, especially
given that four years ago the UK had no capability in trade
negotiations at all.
This record cannot, however, be evaluated in a vacuum.
The irony is that Britain’s most important decision in trade
policy—to leave the EU—has resulted in the creation of
many new trade barriers between the UK and its biggest
trading partner. Is that a recipe for leadership in creating
an open global economy? The challenges facing British
fishing, the cumbersome creation of a UK equivalent of
the CE trademark (signaling conformity with regulations),
and the perils of paperwork faced by small British export-
ers, all demonstrate the British government’s willingness
to sacrifice free trade on the altar of party politics. Britain’s
new trading partners must be watching the constant re-
interpretations of the EU-UK Trade and Cooperation
Agreement (TCA) with trepidation. In part because of
uncertainties over the TCA, the UK has failed so far to
achieve a US-UK free trade agreement and is unlikely to
see one anytime soon. Perhaps most importantly, as a
leading member of the largest trading bloc in the world,
the UK would have had much more heft and influence on
this critical agenda.
A Unionist sign condemning border checks in Northern Ireland. February 12, 2021. REUTERS/Clodagh Kilcoyne
Recommendation: London must focus on implementing the TCA, including the Northern Ireland protocol.
C+
Topic: International Trade Policy
Grade: A (eﬀort) +
D (strategic perspective) = C+
“Focus on implementing
the TCA.”
Fran Burwell
Distinguished Fellow,
Europe Center
Atlantic Council

--- Sayfa 16 ---
16
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF
Global Britain: An American Review
T
he integrated review’s Indo-Pacific tilt is worthy of
praise. It brings a clear-eyed vision of both the Indo-
Pacific’s strategic importance and the UK’s role to
play in the region. The biggest feat of Britain’s Indo-Pacific
tilt is of course the AUKUS deal. The deal deepens Britain’s
alignment with a US focus on China, brings likely lucrative
contracts to build Australia’s nuclear submarines, and even
potentially allows British subs to base in Australia for ex-
tended deployments. Cooperation with other regional al-
lies is also crucial to the success of Britain’s Indo-Pacific
tilt, and the HMS Queen Elizabeth 2 participating in joint
exercises and stopping in Japan, for example, are welcome
signs of intensified military engagement.
On trade, Britain has made some progress on the inte-
grated review’s objectives. It became an ASEAN Dialogue
Partner and concluded a trade deal with Japan and one
in principle with Australia. Talks on Britain’s accession to
the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-
Pacific Partnership are also set to begin in the fall. Britain,
however, will still need trade agreements with New Zealand
and India, in particular, to be successful.
The Indo-Pacific tilt deserves an A- and not an A for its fram-
ing of Europe’s role. While identifying France and Germany
as partners, the integrated review defines its ambitions
relative to Europe’s, declaring Britain’s goal to be “the
European partner with the broadest and most integrated
presence.” Treating its European neighbors as competitors
instead of natural partners who share similar interests will
only diminish Britain’s effectiveness. Instead, the UK should
harmonize transatlantic engagement in the Indo-Pacific. It
should propose engaging Indo-Pacific partners in a Quad
+2 format with France as a sign that Britain is global, inde-
pendent, but cooperative with its neighbors.
Prime Minister Boris Johnson and Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison in London. Australia was
the first free trade agreement for the UK after Brexit. June 15, 2021. Dominic Lipinski/Pool via REUTERS
Recommendation: The UK should harmonize transatlantic engagement in the Indo-Pacific and propose
engaging Indo-Pacific partners in a Quad +2 format with France.
A-
Topic: The Indo-Paciﬁc Tilt
Grade: A-
“The UK should harmonize
transatlantic engagement in
the Indo-Paciﬁc.”
James Batchik
Program Assistant,
Europe Center
Atlantic Council

--- Sayfa 17 ---
17
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
Global Britain: An American Review
ISSUE BRIEF
Conclusion: Two Difficult Questions
T
he expert reactions in this piece show a higher con-
fidence in Global Britain from the United States than
might be expected at this juncture. Across defense,
diplomacy, global finance, and international cooperation,
Global Britain receives passing—if not excelling—marks.
It’s time to put away the wounds of Brexit: an ambitious,
confident, and outward-looking Britain is in the interest of
the European Union and the United States. Yet at the same
time, as shown by the fallout with France over the AUKUS
deal and the crisis in Afghanistan, it is important not to cre-
ate new ones. As the United States turns to engage Global
Britain, two questions about priorities and trust remain: one
for Washington and another, more difficult one for London.
While the decision of the United States to double down
on cooperation in the Indo-Pacific region with the UK and
Australia through the AUKUS deal has significant strategic
value, the fact that it damaged relations with France is a
grave misstep. Washington must ask itself this question: is
there value in elevating one European relationship at the
expense of another in the Indo-Pacific region? The correct
answer is no—rather, the United States should find ways to
promote both Britain and France in the region, maximizing
their unique advantages while prioritizing improvements
in the relationship between the two. As a first step, the
United States should quickly move to promote Britain and
France as observers to the emerging Quad grouping in the
region.
The Western alliance can hardly afford internal divisions.
Both a Global Britain and a Global Europe are necessary to
make it strong.
A more difficult question now remains for London: what of
Britain’s confidence in the United States? The uncertainty
of this was revealed in rather brutal fashion by the with-
drawal crisis in Afghanistan.
In the House of Commons on August 18, former Prime
Minister Theresa May, a member of Parliament (MP), called
the Taliban takeover a “major setback,” saying: “We boast
about Global Britain, but where is Global Britain in the streets
of Kabul?” Tom Tugendhat, MP and chair of the Foreign
Affairs Committee in the Commons, said in his own address
that the UK can set out a vision with European partners
“to make sure that we are not dependent on a single ally.”
Though this review shows confidence in Britain’s ability to be
global, it did not address Britain’s ability to define and pursue
its international objectives independent of the United States.
In the case of Afghanistan, the UK tried to influence the sit-
uation without success: along with Italy and Turkey, the UK
advocated that a NATO coalition remain in place, but was
unable to sway Washington from the withdrawal.
Both AUKUS and Afghanistan demonstrate that Global
Britain is an incomplete project— there is still work to be
done as it transforms from rhetoric to reality.
As London considers a future in which there will be more
crises beyond direct competition with China, a future in
which Washington may be disengaged from London’s own
priorities, HMG needs to ask itself how to engage Europe—
and in particular France—to secure its interests without
Washington. The path to a truly successful Global Britain,
in an uncertain security environment across Eurasia, North
Africa, and the Indo-Pacific, must inevitably run through
Paris, Brussels, and Berlin and will require reconciliation.
In practical terms, how can the UK and the United States
move forward from here together? London should take
President Macron’s call for proposals to reboot the relation-
ship seriously, and Washington should firmly encourage it
to do so. Bolstering more autonomous allies should be a
key objective for US policy makers.
Livia Godaert
Nonresident Fellow, Europe Center, Atlantic Council
September 27, 2021

--- Sayfa 18 ---
18
ATLANTIC COUNCIL
ISSUE BRIEF
Global Britain: An American Review
Ben Judah is a nonresident senior fellow with the Atlantic
Council's Europe Center. He is a foreign policy writer based
in New York, with his current research focus on the foreign
policy of the Biden-Harris Administration, transnational
kleptocracy, and Britain’s attempts to reset its diplomatic
posture after Brexit.
In Washington DC, he has worked closely with the offices
of Democratic senators, including Senator Sanders and
Senator Whitehouse, seeking to develop a global anti-
money laundering agenda as a central plank of American
foreign policy.
He has been a fellow at the Hudson Institute in Washington
DC, leading research on the institute’s groundbreaking
Kleptocracy Initiative, the European Council on Foreign
Relations in London, and the European Stability Initiative,
in Istanbul.
He has interviewed and profiled global figures includ-
ing French President Emmanuel Macron, Pakistani Prime
Minister Imran Khan, UK Chancellor Rishi Sunak, and most
recently First Lady Melania Trump. As a journalist, he has
reported on the Russo-Georgia War, unrest in Central Asia,
the Arab Spring and British, French and American elections.
He is the author of two acclaimed books, Fragile Empire, a
study of Vladimir Putin’s Russia, and This Is London, on the
British capital. In 2021, he will release his third book with
Picador Macmillan.
He has been Highly Commended for British Feature Writer
of the Year at the british press awards, been selected as a
Forbes European 30-Under-30, and most recently was a
finalist for the 2019 Ryszard Kapuściński Award for Literary
Reportage.
Livia Godaert is a nonresident fellow and former assistant
director with the Atlantic Council’s Europe Center, where
she managed portfolios on the European Union, the United
Kingdom, Southern Europe, and the Western Balkans. She
was also responsible for the Europe Center’s communi-
cations strategy and digital content, and she edited the
weekly EuropeWatch newsletter. She joined the Europe
Center team as a Program Assistant in February 2019.
Previously, she worked as an intern at the Center for a
New American Security within their Transatlantic Security
Program, and she interned with the Atlantic Council’s
Millennium Leadership Program. Livia has a BA in Political
Science from Pacific Lutheran University in Tacoma, WA.
This publication was produced with the financial support of the British Embassy Washington. Its contents are the
sole responsibility of the Atlantic Council and do not necessarily reflect the views of Her Majesty’s Government. All
views expressed are the authors’ own.

--- Sayfa 19 ---
Board of Directors
CHAIRMAN
*John F.W. Rogers
EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN
EMERITUS
*James L. Jones
PRESIDENT AND CEO
*Frederick Kempe
EXECUTIVE VICE CHAIRS
*Adrienne Arsht
*Stephen J. Hadley
VICE CHAIRS
*Robert J. Abernethy
*Richard W. Edelman
*C. Boyden Gray
*Alexander V. Mirtchev
*John J. Studzinski
TREASURER
*George Lund
DIRECTORS
Stéphane Abrial
Todd Achilles
*Peter Ackerman
Timothy D. Adams
*Michael Andersson
David D. Aufhauser
Barbara Barrett
Colleen Bell
Stephen Biegun
*Rafic A. Bizri
*Linden P. Blue
Adam Boehler
Philip M. Breedlove
Myron Brilliant
*Esther Brimmer
R. Nicholas Burns
*Richard R. Burt
Teresa Carlson
James E. Cartwright
John E. Chapoton
Ahmed Charai
Melanie Chen
Michael Chertoff
*George Chopivsky
Wesley K. Clark
Beth Connaughty
*Helima Croft
Ralph D. Crosby, Jr.
*Ankit N. Desai
Dario Deste
*Paula J. Dobriansky
Joseph F. Dunford, Jr.
Thomas J. Egan, Jr.
Stuart E. Eizenstat
Thomas R. Eldridge
Mark T. Esper
*Alan H. Fleischmann
Jendayi E. Frazer
Courtney Geduldig
Meg Gentle
Thomas H. Glocer
John B. Goodman
*Sherri W. Goodman
Murathan Günal
Amir A. Handjani
Frank Haun
Michael V. Hayden
Amos Hochstein
Tim Holt
*Karl V. Hopkins
Andrew Hove
Mary L. Howell
Ian Ihnatowycz
Mark Isakowitz
Wolfgang F. Ischinger
Deborah Lee James
Joia M. Johnson
*Maria Pica Karp
Andre Kelleners
Henry A. Kissinger
*C. Jeffrey Knittel
Franklin D. Kramer
Laura Lane
Jan M. Lodal
Douglas Lute
Jane Holl Lute
William J. Lynn
Mark Machin
Mian M. Mansha
Marco Margheri
Michael Margolis
Chris Marlin
William Marron
Gerardo Mato
Timothy McBride
Erin McGrain
John M. McHugh
Eric D.K. Melby
*Judith A. Miller
Dariusz Mioduski
*Michael J. Morell
*Richard Morningstar
Georgette Mosbacher
Dambisa F. Moyo
Virginia A. Mulberger
Mary Claire Murphy
Edward J. Newberry
Thomas R. Nides
Franco Nuschese
Joseph S. Nye
Ahmet M. Ören
Sally A. Painter
Ana I. Palacio
*Kostas Pantazopoulos
Alan Pellegrini
David H. Petraeus
W. DeVier Pierson
Lisa Pollina
Daniel B. Poneman
*Dina H. Powell McCormick
Ashraf Qazi
Robert Rangel
Thomas J. Ridge
Gary Rieschel
Lawrence Di Rita
Michael J. Rogers
Charles O. Rossotti
Harry Sachinis
C. Michael Scaparrotti
Ivan A. Schlager
Rajiv Shah
Gregg Sherrill
Ali Jehangir Siddiqui
Kris Singh
Walter Slocombe
Christopher Smith
Clifford M. Sobel
James G. Stavridis
Michael S. Steele
Richard J.A. Steele
Mary Streett
*Frances M. Townsend
Clyde C. Tuggle
Melanne Verveer
Charles F. Wald
Michael F. Walsh
Ronald Weiser
Olin Wethington
Maciej Witucki
Neal S. Wolin
*Jenny Wood
Guang Yang
Mary C. Yates
Dov S. Zakheim
HONORARY DIRECTORS
James A. Baker, III
Ashton B. Carter
Robert M. Gates
James N. Mattis
Michael G. Mullen
Leon E. Panetta
William J. Perry
Colin L. Powell
Condoleezza Rice
Horst Teltschik
William H. Webster
*Executive Committee
Members
List as of July 30, 2021

--- Sayfa 20 ---
The Atlantic Council is a nonpartisan organization that
­promotes constructive US leadership and engagement in
­international ­affairs based on the central role of the Atlantic
community in ­meeting today’s global ­challenges.
© 2021 The Atlantic Council of the United States. All rights
reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or
transmitted in any form or by any means without permission
in writing from the Atlantic Council, except in the case of
brief quotations in news articles, critical articles, or reviews.
Please direct inquiries to:
Atlantic Council
1030 15th Street, NW, 12th Floor,
Washington, DC 20005
(202) 463-7226, www.AtlanticCouncil.org