--- Sayfa 2 ---
1
The Wife, the Companion, the Scholar
Reşit Haylamaz
Downloaded via Sunniconnect.com

--- Sayfa 3 ---
240
Table of Contents
PREFACE
3
Chapter 1
5
Meccan Years and the Migration
5
BETROTHAL
6
MECCAN MEMOIRS
6
The Marriage OϦer
7
First Stop
8
Second Address
8
The Advice Given to Umm Ruman
9
The Holy Migration
10
Hijra
13
The Medina Pestilence
14
Chapter 2
18
A Home Full of Peace and Virtue
18
The Marriage
19
Her Father’s Attitude after the Wedding
21
The Physical Conditions of Aisha’s house
22
Enduring Austerity
28
Women’s Representative
30
Her Love for the Messenger of God
41
The Prophet’s Love
47
The Real Reason for this Love
52
Aisha inside the Home
54
Entertainment
62

--- Sayfa 4 ---
241
Competition
63
Request for a New Name
64
Sensitivity
65
Her Worship
67
Her asceticism and humility
71
Her Generosity
77
Her Attention to Hijab
80
Guiding Others and Conveying the Message
83
Aisha’s Attendance to Military Campaigns
84
Performing ablution with sand or earth
85
Chapter 3
93
Aisha the Immaculate
93
The Slander
94
The Sickness of Aisha
98
The Companions’ Reaction and Belief
101
The Good News
104
The wives of God’s Messenger and Aisha
109
Khadija
110
Other wives of God’s Messenger
112
Aisha’s Status
113
The Prohibition (tahrim)
123
Aisha and Fatima
125
The Last Days with the Messenger of God
128
Chapter 4
138
After the Prophet
138
THE ERA OF THE FOUR RIGHTLY GUIDED CALIPHS
AND MUAWIYA
139

--- Sayfa 5 ---
242
The Caliphate of Abu Bakr
141
The Caliphate of Umar
144
The Caliphate of Uthman
149
The Caliphate of Ali
155
Muslims’ Test with Their Brothers: The Battle of the
Camel
157
The Caliphate of Muawiya
166
Chapter 5
173
Aisha and Knowledge
173
Aisha was the Source of Knowledge for Everyone
174
Aisha and Transmission of Knowledge
177
Interpretation (Tafsir)
180
Hadith
183
Fiqh: Muslim Canonical Jurisprudence
188
Islamic Theology (Kalam)
191
Aisha’s literary skills
192
Poetry and Oratory
195
Medicine
199
Her Students
201
Urwa ibn Zubayr
203
Qasim ibn Muhammad
206
Amra bint Abdurrahman
207
Muaza al-Adawiyah
209
At What Age Did Aisha Marry the Prophet?
215
ALI AND AISHA
225
BIBLIOGRAPHY
233
COMPUTER PROGRAMS AND WEB SITES
239

--- Sayfa 6 ---
3
K
PREFACE
hadija and Aisha, may God be pleased with them, had a
special position among the wives of God’s Messenger, peace
and blessings be upon him; while the former was like the royal
vizier in Mecca for fifteen years before the revelation, the latter
fulfilled the same duty during the Medina years and after. When
they are considered in terms of their mission, each of them had the
proper qualifications. God Almighty provided the Messenger of
God with a strong character: in Mecca, where belief, self-sacrifice,
and bravery were so necessary, He gave him Khadija; in Medina,
where the requirements of knowledge, intelligence and reasoning
were needed, He bestowed him Aisha.
Khadija was the sturdiest woman of Mecca. She provided
unyielding support to God’s Messenger during the hardest days
when troubles were at their peak, during his days of suffering when
there were consecutive problems and disasters. When he began to
call people to Islam, she was his greatest supporter, both materially
and spiritually. Khadija was the first Muslim; believing in God’s
Messenger at a vital moment when he needed her most meant a
special place at the side of God and His Messenger.
Aisha’s place was different. She was a special vizier to the
Messenger of God after the Hijra to Medina, when it was necessary
to render service to religion. Aisha, with a bright, inquisitive mind
and a quick wit, distinguished herself in the Prophet’s house. God
Almighty bestowed her with extraordinary brilliance. She had a
questioning nature, and did not blindly accept what she heard. She
was critical of everything she heard, according to the criteria of the
Qur’an and the Sunnah (the Prophetic Tradition). Her eyes and ears
were constantly on the alert for revelation. Aisha was like a bridge

--- Sayfa 7 ---
4
between the time of the Prophet and the future of Islam.
Aisha represented the vitality of revelation during the half-century
after the death of God’s Messenger, and did not deprive her students
of the light of Prophethood. Like a meeting point for travelers from
different directions, her place was by the Four Rightful Caliphs.
When possible controversies arose, Aisha was a kind arbitrator. For
mistakes on religious issues, she was a dignified corrector, and a
decisive and patient example of the straight path of Islam.
Wherever she went, that place would come to life. People who
entered into her ambience felt that they became colored with the
light of revelation and returned in excitement, almost as if they had
visited the Messenger of God. There was no one who came to her
with a question who was unable to get an answer. She concluded
nearly every matter with revelation, and found solutions to others’
problems directly from the Qur’an and the Sunnah. In other matters,
she evaluated, compared, and interpreted based on her own vast
knowledge of the religion.
Aisha was the mother of all believers. Among the things that
passed to us from her, there was certain information that would
normally remain private between spouses. Out of necessity, she
appeared to convey details of the religion. Many matters would have
remained unknown to us if she had not existed. Behind closed
doors, she asked the most intimate questions to God’s Messenger, as
if she was throwing a life ring to us. Aisha invites people of
conscience to the Straight Path of Islam. We hope that this book in
your hands, like an invitation, will be the means for good deeds.

--- Sayfa 8 ---
5
CčĆĕęĊė 1
MECCAN YEARS AND THE MIGRATION

--- Sayfa 9 ---
6
O
BETROTHAL
ne day, there was a knock on Abu Bakr’s door and Mut’im ibn
‘Adiy1 came in to ask the family if they would give their
daughter, Aisha, as a bride to Jubayr, his son. Mut’im ibn ‘Adiy was
a rare person who, like Abu Bakr, was knowledgeable in the field of
genealogy; as such, it was natural that he wanted to join families
with a person like Abu Bakr. Mecca in those days was so small that
people knew each other intimately, and hence Mut’im ibn ‘Adiy
could foresee the future of Aisha—her nature, attitude and behavior.
He dreamed of having a daughter-in-law like Aisha who was
intelligent, respectful, polite and pure. That day, Abu Bakr did not
decline the request. In those days, to some, not declining a request
was equivalent to a betrothal. But Abu Bakr, who considered his
statement as a contract, had decided to give special attention to the
request. However, as the days passed, suspicions arose. Since no
answer was given, the ibn ‘Adiy family began to have grave doubts
about marrying their son with the daughter of Abu Bakr. Their visits
to Abu Bakr’s household became less frequent.
The problem was understood later. Assessing the changed
conditions, Ibn ‘Adiy’s family were defeated by their doubts. When
Prophet Muhammad’s revelation began in the cave of mount Hira,
Abu Bakr’s family accepted Islam. It was a time when believers
started to convey the message from Ibn Arqam’s house, when
calling people to Islam became public and worship was not hidden
in Mecca as it had been before. As the beloved Companion of the
Prophet, Abu Bakr and his family were at the front lines. The visits
from ibn ‘Adiy’s family to Abu Bakr’s family ceased as the ibn
‘Adiy family watched from afar the trials of Abu Bakr, whose
daughter they had insistently requested for their son.
MECCAN MEMOIRS
But life went on. Every morning, Mecca became luminous with the
news of new believers entering the faith. Every night, Mecca
became dark with the hardships forced on believers.

--- Sayfa 10 ---
7
Experiencing joy and difficulty together, Aisha watched
everything, and would describe these precisely to future
generations. Her natural sense of curiosity led her to record every
development she experienced, almost like a photographic record of
her life. She knew where verses were revealed, who became Muslim
and when. One day, many years later, a man from Iraq came to
Medina and asked questions about the Meccan period. In her reply,
Aisha related an insightful analysis of the time.
The Meccan period was full of unforgettable and sad memories
for Aisha. The only brightness in their lives was the Messenger of
God. He visited the house of Abu Bakr frequently and comforted
them. Aisha expressed her pleasure at this and said:
“Ever since I can remember, I saw my parents as practicing
believers. The Messenger of God used to visit us almost every day
in the morning or in the evening.”2
The Marriage Oéer
Two years had passed since the death of Khadija, and the Messenger
of God was living alone with his three daughters. One day, the wife
of Uthman ibn Maz’un, Khawlah bint Hakim, came to God’s
Messenger respectfully and asked:
“Do you not want to marry?”
The Messenger of God was fifty years old, feeling the sadness of
Khadija’s death together with his three daughters, he responded:
“Alright, but with whom?”
Already prepared, Khawlah answered his question with another
question and asked whether he preferred to marry a widow or
someone who hadn’t married before. Her attitude was that of a
woman capable of finding both. God’s Messenger asked about the
latter option.
“It is Aisha, the daughter of Abu Bakr, a friend whom you love
the most among people.” Then he asked Khawlah about the other
option. It turned out to be Sawdah bint Zam’a, one of the earliest

--- Sayfa 11 ---
8
Muslims. Sawdah had accepted Islam during the most difficult days
in Mecca and had even migrated to Abyssinia to escape being
persecuted. Unfortunately, her husband as-Sakran ibn ‘Amr had died
in Abyssinia and so she returned. Both of them were possibilities, so
he told Khawlah to find out the ladies’ opinions.
First Stop
Khawlah was happy because she hoped to lessen the Prophet’s
troubles. Sawdah was a mature, trustworthy woman. Though she
still mourned for her husband in her heart, this offer was of a nature
that could cease her pains. Sawdah had an elderly father and she
decided to receive his blessings first. This duty was also given to
Khawlah.
So, Khawlah went to Sawdah’s elderly father and told him that
Muhammad, the son of Abdullah, was asking for her daughter’s
hand in marriage. When the old man heard the name “Muhammad,
the son of Abdullah,” he straightened up and said:
“He is a generous man and a good match. But how does your
friend feel about this?”
Khawlah quickly responded:
“She likes the idea, too.”
Even though Sawdah consented, some of her relatives opposed
the marriage. Her brother Abdullah ibn Zam’a, who heard the news
later on, protested his father’s decision.3 Sawdah’s uncle, too,
screamed in poetic verse, objecting to this marriage.
Second Address
Then Khawlah went to the house of Abu Bakr and spoke to his wife
Umm Ruman:
“The Messenger of God sent me to ask for your daughter Aisha’s
hand in marriage.”
Umm Ruman was speechless with pleasure. But she remembered
something that threatened to overshadow her joy. She remembered
Abu Bakr’s promise long-ago to Mut’im ibn ‘Adiy. So Umm

--- Sayfa 12 ---
9
Ruman suggested that they wait for Abu Bakr. When Abu Bakr
arrived home, Khawlah told him the news. He certainly wished to
become a relative of the Prophet, but there was a doubt in his mind.
According to pre-Islamic traditions, it was not appropriate to marry
a child with the child of a close friend. When the Messenger of God
heard about that, he said that theirs’ was brotherhood in religion,
thus there was no problem with this marriage. Abu Bakr was so
happy that his eyes overflowed with tears. However, he had not
forgotten the other problem. He went to the house of Mut’im ibn
‘Adiy to be relieved of a promise that would have caused him
misery. As Abu Bakr had thought, it was clear that they expected no
betrothal.
Khawlah and Umm Ruman each took a deep breath when they
heard the news. Abu Bakr said to Khawlah, “Now, you can go and
invite the Messenger of God.”
It was the month of Shawwal in the twelfth year of revelation and
an engagement was made between the Prophet and Aisha. Four
hundred drachma, which was considered a little generous for that
time, was settled on as the mahr (bridal due).4
From that day, a new period began for Aisha. She was the
happiest of young women, since she would become the wife of the
most beloved servant of God. At the same time, a huge
responsibility - being a mother of believers5 - was placed onto her
shoulders at a young age. Let into the secret fold of God’s most
beloved servant, she was given intimate knowledge that no one else
could reach.
Aisha was aware of her responsibilities. The process of revelation,
which she had followed carefully until that day, would now be
approached even more meticulously, recording every event like a
photograph in her mind.
The Advice Given to Umm Ruman
Aisha’s mother, Umm Ruman, felt a heavy burden on her shoulders
because her daughter was going to become the wife of the Prophet.

--- Sayfa 13 ---
10
She became very sensitive to her daughter’s energetic behavior.
When she saw something she did not like, she condemned Aisha,
sometimes quite harshly. God’s Messenger, who came to visit after
such an incident had taken place, felt the chilly atmosphere in the
home and asked the reason for it. Umm Ruman was embarrassed
but explained what had happened between herself and her daughter.
The Prophet turned to Umm Ruman and said:
“O, Umm Ruman! Treat Aisha properly and preserve her rights,
please, for my sake!”6
The Holy Migration
Aisha continued to reside in her parents’ home. During that time,
the Messenger of God visited other tribes and invited them to Islam.
He was looking for open hearts that would submit to God and went
to Ta’if with that intention but returned with enormous troubles. But
then, something happened to the Messenger of God which made
him forget all his troubles.
The Night Journey and the Ascension (Isra and Miraj) were the
product of these days of hardship. God’s Messenger was taken to al-
Masjid al-Aqsa in Jerusalem in one night, where he traveled up
through the heavens and came back the same night. When the
idolaters of Mecca heard of the Ascension, they rejoiced thinking
the impossibility of such a tale was the perfect opportunity to make
people disbelieve in the Messenger of God. But the incident pulled a
curtain between belief and unbelief, allowing believers to reach a
higher level of faith. Abu Bakr reached the rank of loyalty. As a
member of Abu Bakr’s house and as the future wife of the
Messenger of God, Aisha followed what happened very closely.
The idolaters in Mecca continued persecuting the believers. The
Prophet and his Companions were close to the end of their time in
Mecca. In fact, the Messenger of God had a dream showing his
Companions the ways of Medina to overcome the troubles in
Mecca. But it was not easy.
For the Messenger of God, Abu Bakr’s home was like his own

--- Sayfa 14 ---
11
home; hardly a day passed in which he did not visit Abu Bakr’s
home.
One day, he came in the middle of the day, which was an unusual
time. Everyone was surprised and the members of the house quickly
told their father about the visit.
Abu Bakr knew more than anyone about the Prophet’s character.
He knew how sensitive he was about respecting others’ rights, how
he avoided making anyone uncomfortable by visiting at the normal
times of rest. Knowing that the Prophet had visited despite his
sensitivities, Abu Bakr felt it must be a significant matter.
As soon as he entered the house, the Prophet expressed that he
wished to speak in private. Abu Bakr responded: “May my parents
be sacrificed for you, O Messenger of God. They are all from your
community.”
He was right. Both Asma and Aisha were close to the Messenger
of God in the first years of revelation and they could keep secrets.
The two sisters stayed in place to witness this important
conversation. The Prophet said:
“I was given permission to leave Mecca and to emigrate.”
This was the sentence that Abu Bakr had been waiting for. He was
delighted because he knew the persecution in Mecca would finally
end. But was he going to be together with the Messenger of God on
his trip? Anxiously, he asked:
“Will we be together, O Messenger of God?”
Abu Bakr waited for the answer with bated breath. The Prophet
turned to him and the following words came out from his blessed
lips:
“Yes, together!”
Abu Bakr shed tears of joy.7 From that point on, Abu Bakr’s
household talked of nothing else other than the upcoming migration.
Aisha and her sister, Asma, had already started travel preparations
with their mother, Umm Ruman.

--- Sayfa 15 ---
12
This meant that Asma8 and her younger sister by ten years, Aisha,
were the first witnesses of the holy migration. They were the first to
know the travel plans of their father and the Messenger of God.
They followed closely the scheme that included issues such as the
route, the arrangement of guides, the places on the Mount of Light
where they would hide and wait for three days until everything
became calm, as well as information about who would visit them
and what responsibilities they would take.
When the unbelievers in Mecca heard that the Messenger’s
community was migrating to Medina, they attempted to stop it in
various ways. They kept watch on various routes to Medina and
made some emigres return; they physically barred people from
leaving, took the wealth of some believers, and even separated some
believers from their families. But in the end, they were not able to
make the Muslims stay.
In the end, the unbelievers got together and made a final decision
to kill the Prophet.
The same day, the pale streets of Mecca, where death had fallen,
were preparing to say goodbye to the two travelers. When the time
came, a deep sorrow filled the hearts of Abu Bakr’s family. Surely,
Aisha was experiencing twice as much sorrow as Asma. Everyone
felt sad to be separated from the Messenger of God, but Aisha’s
sadness was very different. From that day on, Aisha’s ears pricked
up to listen for any news that came from around. Her anxieties were
heightened in response to the incomprehensible reactions of
polytheists in Mecca; she looked for news from any source. The
pagans of Mecca became furious when they could not catch and kill
the Prophet, so they promised a reward of one hundred camels to
anyone who could bring the travelers, dead or alive. Not
surprisingly, the leader of the pagans was Abu Jahl; he went angrily
to Abu Bakr’s home and asked them where their father was. They
did not know, but this was no excuse for Abu Jahl. Furious, he
slapped Asma, who was six months pregnant.9

--- Sayfa 16 ---
13
The two travelers had left, keeping their destination a secret. But a
crowd forming around the Ka’ba attracted the attention of Asma,
and she ventured closer to hear what they were saying. A man had
witnessed two people with incredible perfections travelling toward
Medina. When Asma shared what she had heard with the others of
Abu Bakr’s home, they all breathed a sigh of relief and thanked God
for protecting their father and the Messenger of God despite the
efforts of the pagans in Mecca.
Hijra
Three months had passed and yet there was no news of Abu Bakr
and the Messenger of God. One day, Aisha and Asma saw their
brother Abdullah, happily coming towards them. Instantly, they
understood and ran to him in joy. Their father, Abu Bakr, had sent a
letter which invited the family members to Medina.
The letter was brought by Zayd ibn Harithah and Abu Rafi.
Abdullah ibn Urayqit, the guide of the holy migration, also joined
these two in their journey. At the end of the letter written to his son,
Abdullah was told by his father to take his sisters and mother to
Medina.10
The tasks of Abu Rafi and Zayd ibn Harithah were defined; it was
the Messenger of God who had sent them. He had given them two
camels and five hundred drachmas and assigned them to bring the
Prophet’s household, together with Abu Bakr’s family, to Medina.
A short time later, preparations were complete and both families
started to migrate together while the unbelievers of Mecca were
unaware. They were going to Medina, the center of civilization, and
to the Messenger of God, with the intention that they would never
be separated from him again. They had begun a journey that would
leave every problem behind.
Their path was full of different surprises. They had just left Mecca
and came to Mina, where they came across Talha ibn Ubaydullah,
who was migrating too. Their happiness increased from having
found this trustworthy man who had been involved with the mission

--- Sayfa 17 ---
14
of the Prophet since the first days. Their joy was apparent in their
shining eyes. The group continued going on their way. Then Aisha’s
camel became nervous, refusing to follow the caravan. This
concerned Umm Ruman because the camel was carrying the future
wife of God’s Messenger. The camel kept going the way it wanted.
It seemed there was nothing they could do. Umm Ruman, whose
fear increased as, with every step the camel took her daughter
further away, screamed:
“Give up its halter!”
She hoped her advice could help where her actions could not. She
hoped that the halter would get caught up in a branch while it
dragged on the ground, which would keep the camel from going
further.11
And that’s exactly what happened. The camel that Aisha was
riding, whose rope she tossed following her mother’s advice,
stopped without going much further. Its halter had tangled itself in a
branch, keeping the intractable camel from wandering away.
Other members of caravan ran over and helped calm the camel.
Everything was placed back on the right track and their journey
toward Medina resumed once more.
The journey meant a different hardship for Aisha’s sister, Asma,
who was pregnant. Asma’s labor pains increased gradually, and
when they came to Quba, she had no more endurance left. Although
they were very close to their destination, they had to stop, and Asma
delivered a baby boy. They took the baby to the Messenger of God.
He held the infant and named him Abdullah.12
The Medina Pestilence
Their three-month long journey ended when they arrived in Medina.
By this time, the Messenger of God was busy with the construction
of his mosque—Al-Masjid an-Nabawi.
Their problems in Mecca seemed to have ended. Yet, they were
about to experience a scene that would overshadow their happiness:

--- Sayfa 18 ---
15
emigrants, who were not accustomed to Medina’s conditions, were
suffering from an unfamiliar disease. Abu Bakr was one of them. He
slept feverishly, awaiting a merciful hand that would guide him to
health. They had fallen ill with the Medina pestilence. Some of them
did not even have the energy to stand, and for this reason, they did
their Daily Prayers, which they had never given up, while sitting
down. The Messenger of God turned to them and said:
“You should know that the one who prays while sitting gets half
of the good deeds than the one who prays while standing.”13
After that, the Companions used all of their effort to pray while
standing.
After getting permission from the Messenger of God, Aisha came
to visit her father, who was still very sick. Bilal al-Habashi and
Amir ibn Fuhayra were sharing the same room with Abu Bakr.
Aisha went towards her father, but her heart was deeply grieved by
the scene that she saw: it was as if her father had gone and someone
else had taken his place. The active man was now, in turns, writhing
with fever or sleeping unconsciously. She came nearer and said:
“O my dear father, how are you? How do you feel?”
Abu Bakr’s eyes glittered. It seemed as if a light appeared from
inside him, emanating from his daughters’ nearness. Yet his soul
was far from her question. He gave a meaningful look to his
daughter whom he had been away from for months and said:
“Everyone wakes up in their home, but death is closer than one’s
shoelaces.”
Aisha was shocked. Yes, death was always near, but life still
continues for a sick man. Abu Bakr wanted to give advice with the
language of sickness, first to Aisha, then to everyone else. She
thought:
“Surely, my father does not know what he is saying.”
Amir ibn Fuhayra and Bilal al-Habashi were not fully conscious
either. Homesickness had placed a permanent mark on their hearts,
making their sickness in their new home worse.

--- Sayfa 19 ---
16
Aisha left them sadly. She couldn’t pretend that something minor
had happened. Aisha went to the Prophet and told him what she had
seen and heard, for he had always solved every problem. Aisha said:
“They are delirious with high fevers and they are talking to
themselves, unconsciously.”
The Messenger of God was very upset. He held his hands up to
sky and prayed against those who had caused this situation by
persecuting Muslims for years:
“My Lord! I leave Utbah ibn Rabi’ah, Shayba ibn Rabi’ah and
Umayya ibn Khalaf to you; as they made us leave our city and come
to this place where sickness has spread, you too give them what they
deserve!”
Then he turned and prayed for his society and said:
“My Lord! Make us love Medina as much as or more than you
made us love Mecca. Make this city a land of health and grant
abundance. Then take this disease and send it toward Juhfa.”14
The Messenger of God had a dream that night: a gloomy woman
with a messy appearance was traveling from Medina toward Juhfa.
The dream meant that his prayers were accepted. After that time, the
emigrants never again suffered from high fevers or any other
sickness due to the Medinan environment.15

--- Sayfa 20 ---
17
1 Mut’im ibn ‘Adiy was the leader of the Banu Nawfal tribe. He was the person who gave
protection to the Prophet on his return from Taif. Likewise, Ibn ‘Adiy was the leading
figure in ending the three-year boycott against Muslims.
2 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6/198; Bayhaqi, Sunan 6/204.
3 Later on, Abdullah ibn Zam’a would become a Muslim and express his regret for the
reaction he showed that day.
4 Nasa’i, Nikah, 66 (3350); Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6/427 (27448)
5 It is stated in the Qur’an (al-Ahzab 33:6) that the Prophet’s wives are mothers of
believers.
6 Hakim, Mustadrak, 4:6 (6716).
7 Tabari, Tarikh, 1:569; Ibn Hisham, Sira, 3:11.
8 Asma was twenty-seven years old, and married to Zubayr ibn Awwam.
9 Abu Nuaym, Hilyatul Awliya 2:56; Ibn Hisham, Sira, 3:14.
10 It is stated that the Prophet took five drachmas as a debt from Abu Bakr. When they
came to the place named Qadid, Zayd bought the three camels to be used during the
journey. See Abu Nuaym, Hilyatul Awliya 9:227; Dhahabi, Siyar 2:152.
11 Tabarani, al-Mujamu’l Kabir, 23:183 (296); Haythami, Majmuatu’z Zawaid, 9:366;
Tahmaz, as-Sayyidatu Aisha, 27.
12 Bukhari, Manaqibu’l Ansar, 45 (3909, 3910); Muslim, Adab, 25-26 (2146); Musnad Ibn
Hanbal, 6:54, 206.
13 Tirmidhi, Salat, 247; Ibn Majah, Salat, 141; Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 2:192, 203,
214; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya, 3:224.
14 Bukhari, Fadailu’l Medina, 11, Fadailu’s Sahaba, 75, Marda, 8.
15 Ibid.

--- Sayfa 21 ---
18
CčĆĕęĊė 2
A HOME FULL OF PEACE AND VIRTUE

--- Sayfa 22 ---
19
A
The Marriage
isha, who had migrated with her family members, had
naturally settled in her father’s home. The house was in the
Banu Harith ibn Khazraj neighborhood. At that time, the Messenger
of God was staying as a guest in the house of Khalid ibn Zayd.
Then Aisha fell ill. Her body was weak; the conditions of the
journey and Medina were difficult for her. She had lost a lot of
weight and her hair had started to fall out. Her mother, Umm
Ruman, tried everything to make her daughter regain her health.
Abu Bakr, who was well by this time, visited his sick daughter, and
he stroked her head with compassion. He prayed to God for his
daughter’s health to return.
After a month had passed in sickness, Aisha started to feel better,
and she even gained some weight as a result of her mother’s special
attention.
By this time, the Prophet’s Mosque had been constructed and the
civilization that would grow around it started to flourish in Medina.
Gabriel came to the Messenger of God and brought the message:
“Marry her, since she is your wife.”
Then Abu Bakr came and asked too:
“O Messenger of God, is there a reason preventing you from
staying with your wife, Aisha?”
The Messenger of God responded:
“Sadaq!”
Sadaq was the money that needed to be given directly to the bride
upon marriage. For Abu Bakr, no material value could be compared
to the Messenger of God. Abu Bakr gave the necessary amount to
the Prophet, who gave the money to Aisha without delay.
Previously, women’s rights were disregarded completely. The
money sent by the groom was customarily used by the bride’s father
and not the bride. With every passing day, the Prophet’s practices
corrected a wrong and established Islamic principles.16

--- Sayfa 23 ---
20
Abu Bakr had more things to do, and he initiated the construction
of a one-bedroom house near the mosque, using his own money.
Then a small room was finished for Aisha. It was so small that when
the Messenger of God stood up, his head nearly touched the ceiling
and when Aisha laid down to rest, the remaining area was not
enough for prostrating. Physically, it was small and unadorned, but
spiritually, the room was large enough to enlighten the entire world.
This meant the end of the Messenger being a visitor in Khalid ibn
Zayd’s home, which he had been for seven months.
Eight months had passed since the Hijra. Choosing the month of
Shawwal for marriage was also meaningful, since people thought
marrying in that month was a cause of ill fortune. Many years later,
Aisha recommended Shawwal marriages in order to kill the remains
of this pre-Islamic superstition, saying:
“The Messenger of God and I were engaged in the month of
Shawwal and again, we married in the month of Shawwal. Now tell
me, who among his wives is loved more by the Messenger of
God?”17 The time had come, and Umm Ruman took Aisha to a place
where the women of Helpers (Ansar, the native Medinan Muslims)
had gathered. They walked so quickly that both were out of breath.
Examining the most treasured bride in the world, the women said:
“May her good deeds and blessings be in abundance and may her
happiness increase.”18
It was two or three hours before noon. With friends such as Asma
bint Yazid, Aisha took her first step into her new home, a home that
would later be known as ‘the school of Prophethood’. Everything
was different, and Aisha, who had been nervous and frightened
before, felt quite calm. When she entered, the Messenger of God
gave her a bowl of milk. Aisha felt shy; she bowed her head, lacking
the courage to look at the shining face of the Prophet. Her friends
said:
“Take the bowl from his hand; do not turn down his offer.”
Hearing that, Aisha took the bowl from the hand of the most

--- Sayfa 24 ---
21
beloved servant of God and started to drink. The Prophet told her to
give some to her friends.
But they declined, saying:
“We do not want to drink.”
The Messenger of God again insisted:
“Lies and hunger cannot be together.”
Hearing that, Asma said:
“O Messenger of God, if someone says, ‘I do not want
something,’ when he does want it, is this considered a lie?”
The Prophet answered:
“Yes. While a lie is recorded as a lie, a little lie is recorded as a
little lie, too.”19
Without any ostentation, the simple wedding was finished.
According to Aisha’s narration, the Messenger of God sacrificed
neither a camel or a sheep that day; instead, Khazraj’s leader, Sa’d
ibn Ubadah, had brought a meal to the Prophet’s home, so this
became their wedding dinner.
From then on, there was Aisha, a woman in the Prophet’s
household who would follow the Prophet closely when he was apart
from society and attaining decisions for mankind. She was a woman
of her time, who helped things progress, a brilliant mind who
followed incidents and understood them, and a wonderful storyteller
who explained what she had seen and heard in the home of the
Prophet. God’s most beloved and merciful Prophet, who was sent as
a guide to mankind, was followed closely by a talented person who
opened doors that may have stayed shut, particularly about family
life and issues related to women. He was a guide for all, male and
female, and a gracious adviser everyone should follow.
Her Father’s Attitude after the Wedding
In the Qur’an, God stated the privilege of those who were married
to the Prophet: O wives of the Prophet! You are not like any of the
other women… (Ahzab 33:32). This specialty was a merit, but if

--- Sayfa 25 ---
22
unfulfilled, carried many risks. While great rewards could be gained
for putting forth effort, possible sins would be twice as worse. Yet,
the wives of God’s Messenger were poised to fulfill their duties, and
would die in purity and go to Paradise.
Though Abu Bakr was the father of Aisha, he called her mother
and showed even more respect to her than he did to his own mother.
He heard that Mistah ibn Usasa had said negative things about
Aisha when she was slandered. He was disappointed and stopped
sending the money that he had formerly given to Mistah for his
daily needs. A short time later, when the verses (an-Nur 24:22) were
revealed about giving charity to needy people in every
circumstance, and about forgiving people by blinding yourself to
their faults as the most significant invitation for Holy forgiveness,
he changed his attitude, repented, and said:
“I swear to God, I surely want the forgiveness of God.”
He then started to give Mistah the money that was necessary for
his daily bills.
Abu Bakr made an oath to himself:
“I swear to God, I am going to continue to give this money
without delay.”20
The Physical Conditions of Aisha’s house
Aisha was not living in a large palace. Her room was only big
enough for her needs. Her place was on the eastern side of the
Prophet’s Mosque and its door opened toward the west side. The
mosque was like the garden of Aisha’s home. When the Messenger
of God stayed in the mosque for worship, particularly during
Ramadan, Aisha could reach from her place to comb his hair or
quickly fetch something for him from her room.21 The walls of her
room, which were plastered with mud, measured six or seven arms’
length. Its ceiling, which anyone could touch with one arm raised,
was covered by date-palm leaves filled with wool to prevent
rainwater from leaking down. The house’s only wooden door was

--- Sayfa 26 ---
23
never closed to anyone.22
Aisha explained the size of her room in this way:
“If the Messenger of God were performing Prayer when I was
sleeping, he used to touch my foot when he was about to prostrate, I
would pull my legs in and only then could the Messenger of God
perform his prostration.”23
The homes of the other wives were no different than Aisha’s,
except their doors opened outwards and not into the mosque.
Describing the simplicity of their rooms, Hasan said:
“I was visiting the wives of the Messenger of God during the
Caliphate of Uthman and when I raised my hand a little, I could
reach the ceiling.”24
When it was necessary to enlarge the Prophet’s Mosque and the
deconstruction of Aisha’s house was discussed, the famous imam
Said ibn Musayyab stood up and said to the Caliph, Walid ibn
Abdulmalik:
“I wish you didn’t have to destroy this room and that people could
be content with what they have. Thus future generations could
understand what kind of life the Messenger of God was pleased
with, even though he had in his hand the key to the world’s
treasures.”25
There was a divan, matting, a leather pillow filled with fiber, a
piece of leather hung to a hook, a waterskin, a bucket to put water
and dates in, and a bowl for drinking water. There was no light in
this little home. Aisha once said:
“At the time of the Messenger of God, we would spend forty
nights in succession without a burning lamp or anything to give
light.”26
In those days, the oil used for lighting was also used for cooking.
Aisha said:
“Surely if we had an oil lamp, then we would have used it for
cooking.”27

--- Sayfa 27 ---
24
Aisha checked the room whenever she felt worried that the
Messenger of God had left. The conditions of the women were
consistent with their homes. According to Aisha, the members of
the Prophet’s household never ate wheat bread three days in a row28
until he passed away and reached his Merciful Lord. Most of the
time, they did not eat bread; they would go over a month without
baking food or cooking over fire.29 Sometimes, three full moons
would pass and they would eat only dates and drink zamzam
water.30
When they ate, they sat together at the table and ate from the same
bowl. Sometimes their relatives shared in what they ate as well. The
reality was that nothing changed in this house of felicity; neither the
booty received in later years or the gifts sent by his supporters
altered the simplicity of his life. When he passed through the veil
between this world and the hereafter, the Messenger of God
remained the purest and most humble of people.
Regarding the day he passed away, Aisha said:
“On the day that the Messenger of God passed away, there was
only a little barley on the shelf for food. There was nothing more. I
ate it and thus managed to stand on my feet. But after weighing how
little was left over, the blessing of abundance was lost and it
finished soon.”31
While the circumstances of her life with the Messenger of God
were difficult, the 50 years she lived as a widow were no different;
she distributed charity from whatever she possessed to others, and
usually kept herself content with zamzam water and dates. She said:
“I never ate enough to become full, even after the Messenger of
God.”32
She continued to practice what she had seen and heard from the
Prophet. One day, the Messenger of God said:
“O Aisha, save yourself from hellfire, even if it means giving just
half a date in charity, since it would both ease one’s hunger and
serve an enormous need.”33

--- Sayfa 28 ---
25
A poor and needy person came to Aisha’s home and she gave
whatever she had as charity. Later, she asked people around her to
bring back the person that she had helped. When the Messenger of
God saw this, he interrupted and said:
“Give and do not calculate; this is so that calculation will not be
made against you.”34
On another day, she heard the Messenger of God praying:
“My Lord! Enable me to live as a poor man, take my life as a poor
man and resurrect me with poor people on the Day of Judgment!”
Aisha asked:
“Why, O Messenger of God?”
He replied:
“Because the poor will enter heaven more than forty years before
the rich. O Aisha! Love the destitute and needy people and always
keep them nearby, because on the Day of Resurrection, God will
exalt you.”35
One day, Prophet Muhammad, peace and blessings be upon him,
entered Aisha’s room and noticed that she was wearing silver rings.
He asked, in a displeased tone:
“What are those, O Aisha?”
Aisha said:
“I wore them to look nice for you, O Messenger of God.”
In the same tone, he asked:
“Then did you pay zakah (prescribed purifying alms) for them?”
She knew that zakah was not obligatory for such rings, which
were worth very little. But it seemed this was another situation in
which being near to the Prophet meant being different from others;
deeply grieved, she replied in the negative.
After her reply, the Messenger of God, who wanted those around
him to live an ascetic life like his own, stated that this minor
incident could be enough to lead her to Hell.36

--- Sayfa 29 ---
26
His words hit her very hard, depriving her of her senses. After
that, Aisha never kept any possession, no matter how small, without
thinking about the afterlife. She gave away whatever she had. She
learnt that her most vital wealth, in this world and the Hereafter, was
her closeness to the Messenger of God; to lose this wealth was
unthinkable for a woman so clever. One day, God’s Messenger
asked her to do something after his death:
“If you want to reunite with me, be in this world like a traveler!
Keep away from being near the rich and do not think about buying a
new dress before the present one becomes so old that it cannot be
used anymore.”37
The Messenger of God was a man of moderation who balanced
the needs of this world and the next in the best possible way.
Through the message that was revealed to him, God Almighty made
him realize that he must continually seek rewards in the afterlife,
without forgetting his duties in this world (al-Qasas 28:77).There is
an unsatisfiable degree of ambition in human nature; humans were
created to remain dissatisfied with the world and everything in it.
This ambition is meant to be used to earn the Hereafter, for the
Qur’an indicates that individuals who live for this world and do not
consider the Hereafter will lose everything. God’s Messenger was
well aware of this, and when he came home, he turned to his wives
and encouraged them to embrace the same sensitivity:
“If a man had two valleys filled with wealth, he would ask for a
third. Only soil can fill up his mouth. Nevertheless, wealth is given
to make daily worship possible and to fulfill the requirements of
zakah. There is no doubt that God accepts the repentance of the
people who ask.”38
While his wives never considered their poverty as a problem, the
Messenger of God, too, tried to be comforting about it. When he
visited their rooms, he asked:
“Is there anything to eat at home?” Upon learning that there was
nothing, he would say “I am fasting” and direct himself towards

--- Sayfa 30 ---
27
worship.39
The Helpers of Medina sometimes tried to lessen the worries of
the Prophet by sending him food and drink.40 But it was the life that
he had chosen; he preferred to live in an ascetic way. What the
Companions did, however, was a kindness that would be rewarded.
The Messenger of God was sensitive; he never wanted to risk
consuming even a tiny blessing in this world that belonged to the
Hereafter. He had only a plain mattress filled with rough fibers.
When a female Companion from the Helpers noticed it, she
presented Aisha with a new mattress filled with wool as a gift.
When the Messenger of God came home, he immediately asked:
“What is this, O Aisha?”
Aisha answered:
“O the Messenger of God! A woman from the Helpers saw your
bed when she came to our home and sent this after going back to her
house.”
Although the kindness of the Medinan woman was nice, his
preference for the plain bed was nicer. He turned to Aisha and said:
“Send it back. I swear to God, if I wanted, God would put
mountains at my disposal and turn them into gold and silver.”41
Although silk and gold are allowed for women, the Messenger of
God wanted the women closest to him to be more careful and asked
them to remain distant even from everyday blessings. One day, he
saw two golden bracelets on Aisha’s wrist, and said:
“Do you want me to tell you what is better than these? If you take
them off and buy two silver bracelets instead and then color them
with saffron; that would be better.”42
The Messenger of God not only gave advice, he also closely
followed the changes happening around him. It was obvious from
the simplicity he had chosen for himself that he also wanted similar
things for the people who were closest to him. He wanted them to
keep away from anything that bound them to this world or caused
them to forget the afterlife. When he and his army went to Tabuk,

--- Sayfa 31 ---
28
the meeting place of the Byzantine empire, the world’s supreme
kingdom at the time, Aisha procured a piece of cloth that had a
picture on it and hung it up as a curtain on one side of the house.
When the Messenger of God returned from Tabuk and saw it, he
ordered:
“Take it away from my sight. Change it, because when I enter the
house and see it, I remember this world.”43
After the Battle of Khaybar, the Messenger of God allocated
eighty wasks44 of dates and twenty wasks of barley to be given
annually to his pure wives. But because of Aisha’s generosity and
their large number of visitors, the amount was not enough to meet
the need.
On the day that God’s Prophet ascended to the Exalted Friend (ar-
Rafiq al-Ala) there was nothing more than half a bowl of barley in
his home. And even that had been borrowed from a Jewish neighbor
after giving the Messenger’s armor as collateral.45
Aisha was living in this house under austere conditions. Her
simple lifestyle, showing that real pleasure and happiness do not
stem from worldly wealth, was sustained meticulously after the
passing away of the Prophet. Her room, tiny in terms of area,
continued to serve generations of Muslims, like a spring that flows
into many rivers. In later days, just like those when the Messenger
of God was alive, Aisha’s first responsibility was to feed the hearts
and minds of people.
Enduring Austerity
Aisha’s nights were as bright as her days; she spent her nights in
Prayer and her days in fasting. Her stance was clear: she observed
every detail of asceticism and piety. Some, such as Qasim, one of
her closest pupils and a leader of the following generation of
Muslims (Tabiun), said that she fasted the whole year except Eid al-
Fitr and Eid al-Adha46 (the feast of Ramadan and the feast of
Sacrifice). Aisha spent every day in repentance, asking forgiveness
from God, thinking of the previous day with remorse. Her example

--- Sayfa 32 ---
29
was the Messenger of God, and she believed in her heart that it was
necessary to use given opportunities to make progress every day.
Aisha also thought that continuing every single act of worship
was obligatory for herself. She was quite determined; no one was
able to deter her. When some found her enthusiasm strange, Aisha
said:
“If my father rose from his grave, and told me not to do even one
supererogatory Prayer that I had begun to perform in the time of
God’s Messenger, I would still not quit.”47
Aisha barely met her own needs but she still gave whatever she
had to the needy. One day, Jabir came to visit her. She wore a worn-
out dress, with parts covered in patches. Wanting to fulfill his
responsibility, Jabir said:
“Why don’t you wear another dress?”
However, as the mother of believers, Aisha did not think like Jabir
and said:
“One day, the Messenger of God said, ‘If you seek a reunion with
me, do not change your dress until it becomes unusable, and do not
think about what you need more than a month in advance.’ Tell me,
do you think I should change what he ordered me to do until the
time I will meet with him again?”48
Still not content, whenever Aisha saw the heart-wrenching state of
the poor and needy, she gave whatever she had, or sold something
of some worth at the market, and sent the money to them. While she
was giving, she never thought about her own needs, but always tried
to lessen the troubles of others. One day, she literally gave
everything she had to the poor, and had no more money for that day.
She still did not quit giving; she sold some of her belongings at the
market, and without hesitation, gave that money as charity. In the
evening, when the time came to break her fast, she only had a piece
of barley bread to eat.
Aisha’s intentional humility represented a singular type of
lifestyle for the people around her and she continued to live the

--- Sayfa 33 ---
30
same way after the Messenger of God passed away. Genuine
freewill is that of a person who is powerful and has limitless
opportunities; it was this willpower that Aisha, until the end of her
life, chose to carry in the same humble way that she had shared with
the Prophet, living with delicacy and sensitivity until her last breath.
Aisha could have lived however she wanted. Yet, she chose the
Messenger of God. This choice led to her other choice: to live
humbly, just as he had.
Surely, this was a voluntary choice. Aisha was one of the closest
people to the Messenger of God, yet their closeness was different to
others. Even after his death, Aisha followed his ways, even though
she had many opportunities to do otherwise. Yet she never changed
the lifestyle they had shared. Her wealth was in her Muslim
asceticism and piety.
Women’s Representative
Aisha considered life from this humble perspective and lived plainly
in every detail. Her responsibility stemmed from the time she
married the Messenger of God. Undoubtedly, the serious
responsibility she carried on her shoulders had different
repercussions. She became a representative for women when she
entered the Prophet’s home, acting as an intermediary between the
Messenger of God and women of every kind. Her situation made
her a vital confidant, especially for female Companions.
The women of that society had been second-class citizens, the
result of many centuries of tradition. Aisha’s sensitivities to women,
including her attempts to impart meaningful information to her close
friends in her home and the allocation of most of her time to
women, were aimed at providing solutions to these age-old
traditions.
The Messenger of God sometimes witnessed her efforts. In fact,
when he arrived home, Aisha’s friends would try to run away, but
the Messenger of God would call them back. Not wanting to disturb
them, he would leave the women alone together.49

--- Sayfa 34 ---
31
Aisha sometimes kept toys in her house to allow children to
amuse themselves. One day, the Messenger of God saw a two-
winged horse and asked:
“What is this, O Aisha?”
She replied, without hesitation:
“A horse.”
The Messenger of God asked:
“Does a horse have wings?”
Aisha had an answer prepared, one which showed that she
considered the Qur’an even in mere children’s games and
entertainment:
“Didn’t Solomon’s horses have wings too?”
The Messenger of God responded with a smile to this witty
reply.50
From the day she joined the house of felicity, Aisha was at the
center of eliminating the ignorant pre-Islamic habits of their
ancestors formed during the Age of Ignorance (Jahiliyya). Her
closeness to the Messenger of God, her knowledge of the Qur’an,
and her amiable attitude toward the troubles of women, both before
and after her marriage, were an advantage to all women.
In the Age of Ignorance, women were generally treated with
contempt; they were barely even considered human. Though many
were converting to Islam, the old attitudes in society were not
entirely erased overnight. Many women had neither rights or value,
and remained in a state worse than slavery.
However, women now had an influential representative at the side
of God’s Messenger. Aisha was like a consultant for women. They
came to her, confessed their secret problems, and returned home
with solutions. They had been reluctant to share intimate details.
One woman came to Aisha with great sorrow and said:
“My husband neither divorces me or leaves me on my own, or has
marital relations with me.”

--- Sayfa 35 ---
32
The woman wept, unable to suppress the tide of emotions
erupting inside her soul. Crying, she explained the heartbreaking
condition that she had lived in for many years. She was nothing
more than a toy under her husband’s control. First, he said that he
was divorcing her ,but before the waiting period finished, he
returned to her claiming to have changed his mind. From that point
on, he persisted in going back and forth, playing with her emotions.
His real intention seemed to be to prevent his wife, whom he wanted
to divorce, from being married to someone else.
When the Prophet came home, Aisha informed him of the
situation. He felt uneasy. It seemed like a marriage of tyranny;
however, no holy verse or decision on this issue had come forth
from the Angel Gabriel. So he decided to wait.
Then Gabriel appeared and brought a verse that warned believers
that marriage was a serious matter, not to be trifled with:
“Divorce must be pronounced twice and then (a woman) must be
retained in honor or released in kindness” (al-Baqarah 2:229).
It then became clear that a second statement of divorce meant that
the husband and wife separated. This matter was more serious than
suspected, for a man was now forbidden from returning to a wife
that he had divorced three times. Even if he felt regret, that
possibility would be closed to him. The only exception was if the
wife married and divorced another man; only then could she be
married once again. This put an end to arbitrary divorce practices.51
Another day, Khawlah bint Tha’labah visited Aisha. She was
miserable. Years of suffering and hardship were apparent from her
appearance. She explained her troubles, one by one. Her husband
had divorced her, according to a pre-Islamic custom. A husband
would say to his wife, “You are henceforth as my mother’s back to
me,” thus forbidding himself from marital relations with her. Under
this condition, a woman was not allowed to re-marry. The only one
who could solve her problem was the Messenger of God. When he
came home, Khawlah turned to him and said:

--- Sayfa 36 ---
33
“O Messenger of God, he exhausted my youth; I gave him
whatever I had. When I got older and was unable to give birth, he
divorced me by saying ‘be as my mother’s back to me.’”
It was a difficult situation. She said that her children had grown
up and she lived alone with her husband. So if her husband left her,
she would have been left alone, without any protection. She added
that her husband would have agreed to re-accept her as his wife, but
according to custom he was not able to do so. Holding her arms up,
she prayed about what was weighing on her heart:
“O my Lord! I am complaining to you about my situation!”
The merciful Prophet’s heart ached. But her oppression would not
last forever; even as Khawlah prayed, God sent verses to clarify the
matter. A message carried by Gabriel explained fully the situation of
Khawlah and solved similar problems for all women. The verses
explained that these wrong practices belonged to the pre-Islamic era
of Jahiliyya and were entirely renounced. It also explained what
women in this situation should do and what the punishment for
anyone who persisted in this kind of behavior was:
God has indeed heard the words of the woman who pleads with you
concerning her husband and refers her complaint to God. God hears the
dialogue between you. Surely God is All-Hearing, All-Seeing. Those
among you who declare their wives to be unlawful for them by using
against them the expression, “Be as my mother’s back to me,” (should
know that) their wives are not their mothers. Their mothers are none
other than the women who gave them birth. Such men certainly utter a
word abhorred and a falsehood. Yet God is surely All-Pardoning (He
overlooks the faults of His servants), All-Forgiving. Those who declare
their wives unlawful for them (by using against them that abhorred
expression) and thereafter wish to go back on the words they have
uttered must free a slave before they (the spouses) touch each other.
This is what you are urged to do. And God is fully aware of what you
do (so do not seek to evade this act of penance and expiation for your
wrong). Whoever does not find (means to do that), let him fast two
(lunar) months consecutively before they (the spouses) touch each
other. And he that is not able to do so, (his penance shall be) to feed
sixty destitute ones (two meals). This is in order that you may perfect
your faith in God and His Messenger (so that you believe in the truth of
whatever God has enjoined and His Messenger has conveyed to you,

--- Sayfa 37 ---
34
and live accordingly). These are the bounds of God. And for the
unbelievers there is a painful punishment. (al-Mujadilah 58:1-4)
On another occasion, Thabit ibn Qays’ wife, Habiba bint Sahl,
came to visit Aisha, saying that she wanted to divorce her husband
and asked for Aisha’s help. Habiba was the daughter of Abdullah
ibn Ubayy ibn Salul, the leader of hypocrites; she married Thabit
ibn Qays one day after the death of her husband, Hanzalah, in the
Battle of Uhud. She was distinguished both in beauty and manners,
and was treated with great care by her family. Although Thabit was
well-known for his speaking abilities, he was short and unattractive.
Most likely, Habiba felt social pressure to divorce her husband.
When the Messenger of God came, Habiba explained:
“O Messenger of God. I am not criticizing my husband for his
religion or his character. Yet I am afraid of forsaking my belief, after
having accepted Islam. I want to divorce my husband.”
Habiba seemed very decisive. The Messenger of God asked:
“Are you going to give his garden back to him?”
Without any hesitation, she replied:
“Yes.”
After that, the Messenger of God called Thabit and asked him
about the marriage. Thabit had no solution either. Apparently, the
unrest had grown and the wound had festered and become incurable.
The marriage could not be sustained under these circumstances.
Although divorce was known to be the permissible act that God
hates the most, there was no other solution. Thabit’s opinion was the
same. The Messenger of God said:
“Take the garden and divorce her.”52
Considered within the context of the time, the incident meant an
important expansion of women’s rights—a woman could exercise
her will and choose to divorce her husband.
When it was seen that such matters were resolved with authority,
the number of people knocking on the door of the Prophet with
similar reasons increased. Khawlah bint Hakim, the wife of Uthman

--- Sayfa 38 ---
35
ibn Madun, who was among the first believers of Islam, found her
way to Aisha’s door. She was distraught. The Messenger of God
knew Khawlah; years before, she had arranged the marriage
between himself and Aisha. When God’s Messenger came home
and saw her in such a state, he turned to Aisha and asked:
“O Aisha, what made her become this way? What has happened
to her?”
Aisha, explained the following about Khawlah’s husband,
Uthman ibn Madun:
“O Messenger of God, it is as if she is unmarried; in fact, she is a
married woman without a husband. For her husband spends his days
in fasting and his nights in Prayer. Therefore she is unable to control
herself, and as you can see, she is ruined.”
Uthman ibn Madun had devoted himself to worship entirely and
thus had neglected his family’s rights over him. Though, like a
shepherd, he was responsible for the people under his control, he
had neglected his wife. But these sad circumstances became a cause
for a revelation of truth from God.
The Messenger of God then sent a message to Uthman ibn
Madun. He came to God’s Prophet soon afterwards. The Messenger
of God said:
“O Uthman, we are not ordered to live as monks. Am I not
enough for you as an example? Or do you break off from my
Sunnah?”
Uthman ibn Madun was confused. His aim, in performing so
much worship, had been for a religious life, and he thought that
what he did was for the Hereafter. Uthman replied:
“No, O Messenger of God. On the contrary, I am trying to
practice your Sunnah, letter by letter.”
But of course there could be no doubt that the Messenger of God
knew exactly what the Sunnah was. Upon Uthman’s words, God’s
Messenger gave the following advice:

--- Sayfa 39 ---
36
“I am the one who, at the highest level, fears God and observes
the boundaries of God’s religion among you. Yet I pray and sleep,
fast and break my fast, and at the same time, I am married to
women. Be afraid of God, O Uthman. Because your family
members have rights over you. Your visitors have rights over you.
Your own self has rights over you. Therefore you should fast some
days, but do not fast others, and you should pray at a certain part of
the night, but also sleep at certain parts.”53
There were female Companions, too, who never slept during the
night; they attracted the attention of others and were talked about in
society. Khawlah was one of them. When she came to Aisha,
Khawlah mentioned her habits and Aisha shared them with the
Messenger of God. When he heard that she prayed all night, his
reaction was negative—such habits could not be sustained
indefinitely, and small but constant worship was more pleasing to
God.
“What? Does she not sleep at night?” He asked again, as if he did
not want to believe what he had heard. Then he said:
“Oh why do you burden yourself with more than you can bear?
Do not forget, you become tired and exhausted; it is only God who
never needs rest.”54
One day, a young girl came to Aisha with great sorrow and said
that her father wanted her to marry his cousin even though she did
not want to.
In those days, girls were not permitted to state their opinion on
whom they were going to marry; their feelings were considered
irrelevant. The final decision always belonged to the father; what he
said, happened. But another wrong custom would be changed by
God’s Prophet—this was what the girl hoped for.
Aisha listened to her, and as she had said to many others, said:
“Wait here until the Messenger of God returns.” Aisha was going
to inform the Prophet of the situation and through this young girl, a
widespread problem from the era of Jahiliyya was going to be

--- Sayfa 40 ---
37
clarified.
When the Messenger of God came, Aisha explained the girl’s
situation to him immediately. Prophet Muhammad, peace and
blessings be upon him, then sent a message to the girl’s father,
calling him to his home. When the Messenger of God invited
someone, it was unthinkable not to respond to his request.
The Messenger of God asked the father about the issue. What the
girl had related turned out to be accurate and God’s Messenger gave
advice to the father. When he spoke to him, it was as if he was
speaking to society at large. Listening to the Messenger, the father
began to understand what he had done wrong and announced that he
would not force his daughter to marry against her wishes, and the
matter was settled pleasantly. For the first time, a young girl’s wish
had been treated seriously. The two would not marry - at least that’s
what everyone expected. However, the situation ended differently.
When the Messenger of God turned to the girl and told her that the
decision was her own, the girl, contrary to what was expected, said:
“O Messenger of God, I do accept the marriage that my father
arranged. By asking you to intervene, I was trying to show women
that fathers did not have any right to force their daughters into
marriage.”55
Certainly, these were not the only women who came to Aisha and,
through her, shared their problems with the Messenger of God.
Many of these women ultimately learned of a solution to their
problems, and went home pleased and at rest.56
Hers was not a useless and blind justification of women; Aisha
defended them because they were right. She did not refrain from
admonishing women who were wrong, who went too far, who were
trying to force the boundaries of religion. Justice and equity were
the essence of her decision-making. When it was necessary, she
criticized women sharply and did not hesitate to warn them, helping
them see and correct their faults.
After many years had passed, and with newly conquered

--- Sayfa 41 ---
38
territories, believers had come into contact with different societies
and ideas. Many women were also affected by the new situation. In
particular, some women did not protect their former sensitivity and
began to show different attitudes. Poignantly, Aisha summarized her
grief as follows:
“If the Messenger of God saw the current state of women, he
would prohibit them like the women of the children of Israel and
ban them from coming to the mosques.”57
Her words show how well she knew the Messenger of God. At the
same time, her words were an indication that time can change
decisions; the conditions in the time of God’s Messenger were
perhaps more suitable for women to attend congregational Prayer
and it was recommended for them. But the situation in later days
was different.
Aisha was very sensitive on the issue of hijab and she
admonished women who did not show the necessary concern.
Meticulous and critical, she wanted everyone to show the same care
on religious issues and often underlined that there should be no
sluggishness about a religious practice.
One day, the daughter of her brother, Abdurrahman, came to visit
her. As soon as she saw the sheer headscarf of Hafsah bint
Abdurrahman, she took it and folded it in half. Then she brought
Hafsah to her side and warned her:
“Do you not know what God revealed in the chapter An-Nur?”
From the people nearby, Aisha asked for a thicker scarf and
covered her niece’s head with it, showing her how to cover, and thus
putting an end to the matter.58
Aisha explained how they used to cover in the time of the
Messenger of God by relating personal memories:
“At the time of God’s Messenger, if horsemen rode toward us
while we were wearing pilgrim’s garments, we covered our faces
right away, and when they passed by, we uncovered our faces
again.”

--- Sayfa 42 ---
39
Pilgrim’s garments are worn for the Hajj (pilgrimage), and
distinguished scholars, such as Abu Hanifa, said that a woman could
uncover her face while in pilgrim’s garments, because they are worn
in a place of worship and the possibility of evil thoughts are low
compared to other times. Yet, Aisha was very sensitive, explaining
that they covered their faces when they saw a stranger coming, even
though they were wearing pilgrim’s garments. Furthermore, she
mentioned the difficulties that she encountered while she wore the
hijab and stated that a fearless struggle was necessary. When she
became ill during the Farewell Pilgrimage and had no choice but to
go to Tanim with her brother in pilgrim’s garments, she had many
difficulties, but never lost her sensitivity. She showed people that
what she said was what she believed—not fiction but real life.59 Her
life was a kind of lesson, from beginning to end. Aisha did as much
as she could for those who visited her, but when there was a male
visitor, she separated herself behind a curtain, as approved in the
Qur’an, even though she was the mother of believers.60 When she
witnessed social changes, she remember the era of God’s Messenger
with yearning; she would tell her female Companions about how
deep their belief was, how sincere their practices. She would sigh
and say:
“May God bestow mercy to the immigrant (muhajir) female
Companions of former days! They competed to fulfill the order as
soon as God commanded them to draw their veils over their
bosoms, wrapping themselves up in their garments.”61
She heard that some women in the recently conquered provinces
walked around unrestrictedly compared to the past and that they
acted rather carelessly outside their homes. She started to grieve.
One day, when a group of women from Homs came to visit her,
Aisha scolded them saying:
“Are you one of the women who go to public baths? Do not forget
that I heard the Messenger of God saying that ‘a woman who takes
her clothes off in a place other than her husband’s home means to

--- Sayfa 43 ---
40
tear the curtain between her and God’.”62
Witnessing that the clothing of the woman who visited her had
changed and become less covered, Aisha warned:
“A woman who believes in the chapter An-Nur cannot cover like
this. If you are believer, do not forget that the garments you are
wearing are not the garments of believing women.”63
When someone came to visit her, Aisha could decipher their
intentions from their behavior and attitude. Before they even asked a
question, she knew their real purpose and answered with that
perspective. One woman who visited her asked the opinion of the
Prophet about henna and she replied:
“God’s Messenger liked its color but not its smell!”64
Her dialogue with women not only consisted of such details; she
directed them to a state with which God and His Messenger would
be content and advised them to establish peace within their homes.
She believed that harmony within the home consisted of peace in
this world and the next. She said that both husband and wife should
fulfill their responsibilities and expect to make sacrifices. Aisha
showed the proper respect to the ones who were close to the
Messenger of God and supplied them with what they needed.
Though she tried her hardest to please everyone, she expected the
women who visited her to show the same concern as herself —
expecting other women to behave towards their husbands the way
she had behaved towards the Messenger of God. When a woman
came and asked for advice, Aisha said:
“If you had the opportunity of removing your irises to replace
them with more beautiful ones in order to please your husband, do it
without hesitation.”65
To Aisha, family happiness was to be regarded above everything
else, and to meet this objective, the wife played an invaluable role.
A wife is the source of family contentment, and for this reason, she
ought to act more carefully when fulfilling her responsibilities
toward her husband. To the women who had questions regarding

--- Sayfa 44 ---
41
these issues, Aisha gave longer and more thoughtful answers than
they expected. If they asked related questions, she gave other advice
as well. One of them asked:
“I have hair on my face; should I pull it out in order to be
attractive to my husband?”
Aisha answered:
“Just as you wear jewelry and adorn yourself when you visit
someone, clean up whatever troubles you and make yourself
beautiful to your husband. When he orders you, obey him; if he asks
you for something, do not neglect his request. Moreover, do not
accept someone that your husband does not like inside your
home.”66
Her Love for the Messenger of God
Aisha loved the Messenger of God very much. He was the most
beloved servant of God, and God had asked His servants to love his
faithful Messenger: “Say (to them, O Messenger): If you indeed love
God, then follow me, so that God will love you and forgive you your
sins. God is All-Forgiving, All-Compassionate.” (Al-Imran 3:31).
She was not keen to share her time with the Messenger of God
with others and wanted to spend all that time with him alone.
However, he was a Messenger and everyone’s Prophet. The
Messenger of God wanted to reach all people, however inaccessible,
and aimed to open doors that had not been entered before. His later
marriages probably happened for this reason. Aisha had understood
that. People lined up to sacrifice their lives for the sake of his
mission. They were devoted to him, and their devotion made Aisha
anxious. Her anxiety persisted until the following verse was
revealed: “… you can defer the turn of visiting any of them (your
wives) you please, and take to you whomever you please. There is
no blame on you if you give precedence to one whom you deferred
before” (al-Ahzab 33:51).
After the revelation of the verse, she turned to the Messenger of
God and said:

--- Sayfa 45 ---
42
“As I see it, your God always bestows on you what your heart
wants.”
Hers was a reflection of love, an expression of intimacy. She
wanted to be with him all the time, but conditions did not allow it,
and again, it was she who made the sacrifice. Each wife of God’s
Messenger took her husband away from her for a day. The
Messenger of God made a schedule for his wives and divided his
days equally among them. While she had enjoyed the opportunity to
be with him fairly often, now her turn came only every nine days.
The Messenger of God did not change his attitude after these
verses were revealed. Even if he had a preference that deviated from
the planned schedule, he always got permission from his wives.
Aisha specifically focused on this point when she reiterated the
attitude of God’s Messenger:
“The Messenger of God continued to ask for permission about our
schedule even after the verse (al-Ahzab 33:51) was revealed: you
can defer the turn of visiting any of them (your wives) you please,
and take to you whomever you please.”
Aisha, on her day, wanted to spend all of her time with the
Messenger of God and was sensitive to anything that interfered with
their togetherness. One night, she woke up and realized that the
Messenger of God was not with her. Since there was no light, Aisha
was not able to see. She was worried that he had left her to visit one
of his other wives. She fumbled around with agitation. Then her
hand touched one of his feet; she was relieved to discover that he
was prostrating. She calmed down and took a deep breath. The
Messenger of God had not left her; he was in tears praying to God
on the other side of the room. Aisha was touched, and as she
listened, she heard his sincere supplications:
“O Lord, I seek refuge in Your pleasure from Your wrath, and in
Your forgiveness from Your punishment; I also seek refuge in
Yourself from You. I cannot praise You as You praise Yourself.”
Aisha was ashamed of her worries; turning to the Messenger of

--- Sayfa 46 ---
43
God, she said:
“May my parents be sacrificed for you. How did I think about you
when you were busy with this?”67
Aisha was faced with the same situation another day. When the
Messenger of God was going to bed, he left his sandals near it and
hung his clothes nearby, as if he would be getting up and leaving
immediately. Normally he got permission from his wives even to get
up for the Night Prayer, since he considered other people’s rights
over him as essential.68 He was acting differently that day and Aisha
did not understand why, and so she became suspicious. He started to
rest.
After some time had passed, the Messenger of God slowly got up
from his bed. He walked quietly on tiptoe, in order to not awaken
Aisha. But Aisha was not sleeping; she was watching him with
curiosity. The Messenger of God put on his sandals and clothes with
careful movements, then opened the door and left. Aisha was upset.
She rose instantly and covered her face with her veil. Then she
started to follow God’s Messenger. He went to the Medina cemetery
(Al-Baqi Cemetery) and raised his palms to the heaven and started
to pray with longing. When his arms grew tired he lowered them,
and then a little while later, he raised them to continue praying.
Then the time came to leave the cemetery and he started to return
home. Aisha started to walk too in order to hide herself. When the
Messenger of God walked faster, so did she. When he walked even
faster, Aisha ran.
She arrived home before God’s Messenger, but she was out of
breath. She laid down immediately trying to pretend she had never
left the room.
But when the Messenger of God came in soon after, he noticed
her agitation and asked:
“What happened to you, O Aisha?”
She replied, “Nothing.”

--- Sayfa 47 ---
44
As God’s Messenger, he knew better, so he asked:
“Are you going to explain yourself or do you want God the All-
Knowing and the Gracious to tell me about it?”
Her heart pounded. Turning to the Messenger of God, she said:
“O Messenger of God, may my parents be sacrificed for you.”
It was an indirect way of confessing her guilt. The Messenger of
God asked:
“Were you the indistinct figure I saw in front of me while I was
walking?”
“Yes,” she confessed.69
These incidents showed her that the Messenger of God was
beyond reproach and that she had nothing to fear.
Her love for him ran so deep that she could not allow anything
negative to be said about him. One day, someone said:
“May God grant death70 over you.”
When Aisha heard this she stood up immediately and said:
“Who would dare to wish for the death of God’s Messenger? On
the contrary, may God bring both death and curses on you.”
God’s Messenger understood her sensitivity and appreciated the
generous motive behind her words, but as a Prophet, he needed to
consider everyone as a potential believer. A potential believer’s
unkindness should not be repaid with unkindness. So the Messenger
of God turned to Aisha and said:
“Be calm, O Aisha! God the Almighty is the most Gentle (Rafiq)
and He loves us to be kind in all matters. He does not bestow His
blessings to those who act without kindness.”71
Aisha was not able to say no if someone asked her for something.
Though she fretted inwardly about being away from the Prophet,
she could not have acted differently.
When the Messenger of God prepared for a military expedition,
he drew lots among his wives to determine who would accompany
him. One time, Hafsah and Aisha were drawn. Their journey began,

--- Sayfa 48 ---
45
and they made much progress on their first day. When night fell and
they took a break, the Messenger of God sat and began to chat with
Aisha. Hafsah took this to mean that the first night would not be
hers, but Aisha’s instead.
After some time had passed, Hafsah approached Aisha and
suggested:
“You mount my camel and I will mount yours and let’s see what
the Messenger of God will do.”
It seemed like a fine joke. Aisha was sure that the Messenger of
God would choose her camel and she would have bragging rights so
she agreed.
When the army began to depart, the Messenger of God went to
Aisha’s camel, though Hafsah was inside of the palanquin instead of
Aisha. Thus Aisha, who had received proof of her worth to God’s
Messenger, was actually deprived of traveling with him.
She had said yes to the game, but it was not easy to tolerate the
result. The Messenger of God had chosen her, but she was not with
him. She felt miserable and did not know what to do. Digging her
feet into the grass, she felt sorry for herself and unburdened herself
to God:
“O My Lord, send a scorpion or a snake to bite me! Your
Messenger is going and I am not able to say anything to him.”
Inside her home with the Prophet, which was warm and full of
mutual love, there was not even the smallest problem that could
damage their relationship. Every passing day increased their love by
two and every incident served to feed their affection for one another.
Aisha did not abuse her love for the Prophet, and thus, he didn’t feel
the need to take certain measures into his hands. This was the
Prophet’s general state; his affection for his other wives was similar.
He understood their wishes before they expressed them, and
fulfilled their requests as he always had. Aisha said:
“The Messenger of God neither hit a woman or a servant or
anyone else with his hand.”72

--- Sayfa 49 ---
46
Her love for him continued even after his death. The mother of
believers, who sustained the humble lifestyle she had shared with
the Prophet after his death, reacted against anyone who brought
endowments into her home, and kept herself far from worldly
blessings. Those who viewed her as the mother of believers were
competing to do good deeds, too, and so she gave away what was
given to her as a gift to the needy; most of the time, she kept
nothing for herself. At first, Aisha wanted to return the gifts when
they were given, but a phrase that she had heard from the Messenger
of God made her unable to do this, and so she was obliged to accept
whatever was offered.
One day, Abdullah ibn Amir’s emissary came to bring clothing
and food to Aisha. She turned to him and said:
“O dear son! I accept nothing from anyone.”
She returned the gifts to him. Even though he was only the envoy,
he was sad. Their intention was merely to do good, because when
they gave something to Aisha, they felt as if they had given to the
Messenger of God. They respected her as their own mother and
wanted to meet her needs, but it was necessary to respect her choice.
As Abdullah walked home, he felt desperate, worrying about what
he would say had happened.
At the same time, Aisha was reconsidering what she had done.
Immersed in deep thought, she wondered whether she had acted in
opposition to the Messenger of God. Rashly, she said to those
around her:
“Call him back!”
When they reached him, the envoy was shocked. He returned to
Aisha’s home with anxiety, wondering what she was going to say.
Aisha’s former anger had disappeared, as if blown away by a sea
breeze. In the gentlest manner she said:
“I remembered something that the Messenger of God told me. He
said, ‘O Aisha, if someone gives you something without you asking,
never return it; always take it. For it is a blessing God has offered to

--- Sayfa 50 ---
47
you!’”73
The meaning of the hadith was clear and the envoy returned with
a smile.
The Prophet’s Love
The love Aisha had for the Prophet was not one-sided; the
Messenger of God, who set an example for society on every issue,
also loved Aisha deeply. As he did in every arena, the Prophet of
God lived with excellence in terms of family relations. He said:
“The best among you is he who behaves best toward his family. I
am your leader in this.”74
The basis of this was mutual love. The Messenger of God helped
Aisha understand his love for her and made it clear to others. Of
course, the Prophet represented justice, but love cannot be
constrained by human will. His love for Aisha was a reflection of
human nature. He never discriminated against any wife, equally
cared for each one’s provisions, and behaved with kindness to them.
Yet, he could not help how he felt. Because of this, after spending a
day with any wife, the Messenger of God turned to God and prayed
to Him to erase any deficiency that may have arisen from his
differing emotions:
“O my Lord! This is the share that I can do; do not judge me by
the share that You can do which I am not able to do.”75
This prayer was about Aisha. God’s Messenger had a rare
intimacy with her compared to his other relationships. The
Messenger of God, the most sensitive of people, wanted to be
perfectly just, but took refuge in the most Merciful God from any
injustice that might occur. A revelation that God sent shed light on
this matter:
(O husbands!) You will never be able to deal between your wives with
absolute equality (in respect of love and emotional attachment),
however much you may desire to do so. But do not turn away
altogether (from any one of them), so as to leave her in a dangling state
(uncertain if she has or does not have a husband). If you act
righteously (between them) and act in piety (fearful of doing any

--- Sayfa 51 ---
48
deliberate wrong to any of them), then surely God is All-Forgiving, All-
Compassionate. (an-Nisa 4:129)
Some Companions began calling Aisha the “darling of God’s
Messenger.” When something negative about Aisha was said in the
presence of Ammar ibn Yasir, he got angry and shouted:
“How could you talk about the ‘darling of God’s Messenger’ like
that and hurt her?”76 Ammar commanded the person who had said
the negative remark to get out of his sight. Their love for each other
was so obvious that the Companions preferred to give gifts to him
on the day that the Messenger of God was with Aisha, since the
smile on his face was more special on those days.77
It was a situation well understood, and in order to avoid problems,
everyone warned and tried to help one another. One day, Umar
advised his daughter, Hafsah:
“O my dear daughter! I hope the state of your companion does not
mislead you if she is more graceful and dearer to God’s Messenger
than you.”78
Umar was trying to impart to his daughter the special status of
Aisha and hoping he could convince her to avoid competing for the
Prophet’s affection.
A Persian neighbor of theirs cooked very delicious soup and one
day, he invited the Messenger of God for a meal. God’s Messenger
never thought of accepting the invitation by himself and wanted to
take Aisha, who was suffering greatly from hunger. Indicating
Aisha, God’s Messenger asked:
“Are you inviting her, too?”
The man replied in the negative. Perhaps he had only a small
amount of soup to share or perhaps he did not understand that the
Prophet wanted him to invite Aisha. So the Prophet declined the
invitation.
After awhile, the man returned and repeated his invitation. God’s
Messenger gestured to Aisha and asked:
“Are you inviting her, too?”

--- Sayfa 52 ---
49
Again, the man said no, and again, the Messenger of God said no.
Finally, the man came for the third time and repeated his
invitation once more. Finally, the man understood that God’s
Messenger did not want to attend without Aisha. So he invited her,
too, and the Messenger of God and Aisha went to the Persian man’s
house together.79
The love between Aisha and the Prophet was so clear that people
sent Aisha to him to help him forget conflicts and make him happy
again. One day, Safiyya took Aisha aside and said:
“O Aisha, can you make the Messenger of God pleased? If you
can, I will give you my day.”
Aisha replied in the affirmative and then went and sat down near
the Messenger of God. Knowing this day was not hers, and that he
never changed the schedule, he found the arrival of Aisha strange,
and told her to go to her room.
Since he had started the conversation, she continued it by saying:
“O Messenger of God, this is a blessing which is bestowed from
God to the ones He wants.”
She had gained the undivided attention of God’s Messenger.
Aisha explained to the Messenger of God a detailed account of the
talk she’d had with Safiyya, sharing the grief the latter had felt. It
was an attempt at peace and Aisha’s sensitivity delighted the
Messenger of God. The serenity he felt inside was reflected on his
face.80
Once, on a trip together, Aisha’s camel lost its way and departed
from the others, becoming lost in a place called Kharra. The
Messenger of God became anxious and immediately everyone
started to look for her. Worried about losing the one closest to him
while she was under his care, he shouted, “Wa arusah,” an
expression of sadness used by someone who has lost his wife.
Another time, a well-known Companion, Amr ibn al-As, came
and asked the Messenger of God:

--- Sayfa 53 ---
50
“Whom do you love most among people?”
He had hoped to find out his own significance in the eyes of the
Messenger of God and expected to hear himself named. But God’s
Messenger, without hesitation, replied:
“Aisha.”
Amr ibn al-As continued, expecting to hear his own name and
asked:
“Then among men?”
And he replied:
“Her father.”
Amr ibn al-As discerned that he was not the Prophet’s top priority,
and that asking further questions was risky. Considering the
possibility that he could be last, Amr ibn al-As gave up asking any
questions like this again.81
The events witnessed by everyone were embedded in their
memories; every preference of God’s Messenger made people love
him even more. When he went to an expedition and stayed away
from his wives for a month, he would first go to Aisha’s home.82
Similarly the Messenger of God asked Aisha’s opinion first
during the incident of tahyir:83
When the Muslims of Medina began to extricate themselves from
the poverty that they had been suffering for years, some of his wives
(there were four at that time) asked him: “Couldn’t we live a bit
better, like other Muslims do?”
The Messenger reacted to their question by going into retreat. He
excused himself, saying: “I cannot afford what they want.” The
Messenger was preparing them to be exemplars for all present and
future Muslim women. He was especially worried that they might
enjoy the rewards for their good deeds in this world, and thereby he
included in the verse:
You consumed in your life of the world your (share of) pure, wholesome
things, and enjoyed them fully (without considering the due of the

--- Sayfa 54 ---
51
Hereafter, and so have taken in the world the reward of all your good
deeds). (al-Ahqaf 46: 20).
Thus, these special women were put to a great test. The Prophet
allowed them to choose his poor home or the world’s luxury. If they
chose the world, he would give them what he could afford and then
dissolve his marriage with them. If they chose God and His
Messenger, then they had to be content with their lives. This was the
peculiarity of his family. Since this family was unique, its members
had to be unique. The head of the family was chosen, as were the
wives and children. Thus, the Messenger first called Aisha and said:
“I want to discuss something with you.
“It’s best if you talk with your parents before making a decision.”
Then he recited the verses:
O (most illustrious) Prophet! Say to your wives: “If you desire the
present, worldly life and its charms, then come and let me make the
necessary provision for you (in return for divorce), and release you
with a handsome release. But if you desire God and His Messenger, and
the abode of the Hereafter, then it is a fact that God has prepared a
tremendous reward for those among you who act in a good manner,
aware that God is seeing them.” (al-Ahzab 33:28-29)
Aisha’s decision was exactly what would be expected from the
truthful daughter of a truthful father: “O Messenger of God, do I
need to talk with my parents? By God, I choose God and His
Messenger.”84 Aisha herself tells us what happened next: “The
Messenger received the same answer from all his wives. No one
expressed a different opinion. They all said what I had said.”
All these incidents made society more careful when it came to
Aisha. His preference would continue until the day he died. On the
day his fatal illness started, he asked:
“Where am I now? Who will I will be with tomorrow?” and he
expressed his wish to be with Aisha during his sickness. It was the
last proof of his intimacy with Aisha, which she described in this
way:
“He died on the day when the turn was mine. God took his soul

--- Sayfa 55 ---
52
when his head was on my bosom.”85
It was with all this in mind that Anas ibn Malik said that the first
great love in Islam was the love of God’s Messenger for Aisha.
When Imam Masruq narrated a hadith transmitted by Aisha, he
would say:
“This was narrated to me by the beloved one of the most beloved
servant of God and by the woman whose chastity was approved by
the heavenly revelation, and who was the truthful daughter of the
most truthful one.”86
The Real Reason for this Love
One cannot help but wonder about the reason for the Prophet’s
abundant love for Aisha compared to his love for his other wives.
First of all, the Messenger of God often reminded the others that
Aisha was his closest friend, Abu Bakr’s, daughter.87 Without a
doubt, Aisha was an attractive woman. Her mother Umm Ruman,
once consoled her when she was grieved, saying:
“Wait a little while! God will give you ease. I swear to God that
there is no woman who is as beautiful as you, and who is loved by
her husband as you are, and has such good relations with her fellow
wives, and who no one aims to defame. A woman in your situation
is normally slandered often!”88
It was like the warning Umar had given his daughter Hafsah about
never competing with Aisha or making her sad: a result of the same
sensitivity towards Aisha, who had a special place at the side of
God’s Messenger.89
When the narrations are analyzed generally, the cause of the
Prophet’s overflowing love for her was her religion. Aisha led her
family in brilliance and knowledge, and was the distinguished
teacher of the members of the Prophet’s family.
While many witnessed the public behavior of God’s Messenger,
Aisha saw both his public and private sides. She became the most
important interpreter of the Qur’an and the main teacher of hadith,

--- Sayfa 56 ---
53
becoming the foremost transmitter of Islam. The Messenger of God
advised Muslims to learn the details of religion from her. In a hadith
that Aisha narrated, the Messenger of God said:
“A woman is married for three things—her wealth, her beauty and
her religion. Yet, you should prefer the religion aspect so that you
could attain serenity.”90
The Messenger of God first practiced and then advised what
people ought to do in any given situation.
Several other wives of his were also known for their beauty. So
clearly, his particular affection for Aisha cannot be explained only
by beauty. Their beauty was narrated to us by Aisha herself. For
example, when Aisha saw Juwayriya during the War of Banu
Mustaliq, her beauty grabbed her attention and she became anxious.
Aisha said:
“She was a very beautiful and nice person with an attractive
posture. She came and asked the Messenger of God to determine a
ransom for her emancipation. I swear that when I first saw her, I had
a gnawing suspicion, and I was concerned from the moment she
walked up to God’s Messenger.”91
Aisha also felt a similar concern when she first saw Safiyya.
Safiyya, who came to Medina after the conquest of Khaybar and
who stayed as a guest in the house of Haritha ibn an-Numan,
quickly attracted the attention of women of the Helpers and they
rushed to see her. Covering her face with her scarf, Aisha was
among them. Some time after she had left the house, the Messenger
of God left too. While the Messenger of God had planned to marry
Safiyya, and thus please a large number of people with whom he
had fought, he did not want to hurt his wives. He asked Aisha her
opinion, and she expressed disapproval about her traditions.
In order to avoid problems similar to those of the past arising in
the future, it became necessary to think and behave differently.
Whatever the thoughts and attitudes of a group were, it was not
correct to judge individuals according to the thoughts and attitudes

--- Sayfa 57 ---
54
of others. Just as there were good and virtuous people in society,
there were also people who had been deprived of these values. Even
if this was the case, they were still the children of Adam. It was
necessary to make a clean break from the prejudices of the past.
Goodness begets goodness, and goodness ultimately softens the
hardest heart, like stones reshaped by rushing water. Every incident
was an opportunity to make progress among the Companions and
the mothers of the believers. Turning to Aisha in a compassionate
manner, the Messenger of God said:
“O Aisha ... She became a Muslim and her conversion was
wonderful.”92
Aisha was special in all respects. It was as if she was created to
accomplish this mission in the Prophet’s house. She saw Gabriel
twice and received greetings from him through the Prophet.
Revelation came when God’s Messenger was alone or when he was
with Aisha, in her room.93 Considering the status of God’s
Messenger and the fact that he was directed by revelations from
God, it is possible that the basis of their love was the Divine. We
must not deny her role in the time of God’s Messenger or in the time
after his death. Aisha was so invaluable to the Messenger of God
that he once said:
“There are many men who attained spiritual perfection; however
no women, save Imran’s daughter Mary, and Pharaoh’s wife Asiyya,
reached that point. Comparing Aisha’s virtue to other women is like
the superiority of meat tharid to other meals.”94
Aisha inside the Home
The house of felicity was a place of serenity and reciprocal love. In
that house, there was a tenacious bond constructed on sacrifices.
Relationships did not exist merely in the present and future, but
considered the journey toward eternal life.
In her home, Aisha sacrificed herself to fulfill every wish of
God’s Messenger. Hers was absolute obedience; she was satisfied
only in fulfilling his wishes, and at the same time, tried to anticipate

--- Sayfa 58 ---
55
his feelings before he stated them. She continued to do this, even
after his death and until her last breath. Aisha evaluated every step
before she took it and made decisions according to what she knew
of him. One day, she bought a pillow for the Prophet to sit on. Yet
she did not know his opinion about its decorative painting, or
perhaps the painting on the pillow did not grab her attention. But
everything that happened had a purpose. Through this incident, an
unknown fact would be revealed and his thoughts on the issue
would be clarified. When the Messenger of God arrived, he stayed
in front of the door and did not enter. The mother of the believers
became anxious and asked immediately:
“O Messenger of God! I repent God and ask forgiveness from His
Messenger; did I commit a sin?”
The tone of her voice indicated that her heart was melting with
worry. She feared she had done something that God and His
Messenger were against. The Messenger of God stated that he did
not like the new pillow she bought and explained:
“The painters of these pictures will be tormented and be asked to
bring to life what they tried to create. Angels do not enter into a
house in which there are such pictures (depicting living beings).”
When his feelings became clear, Aisha took away the painted
pillow that prevented angels from entering their house.95
Aisha did housework on her own. With effort and hardship, she
would grind flour by hand and cooked her own meals. She lifted all
the bed linens and pillows, and prepared the water for the Prophet’s
ablution on her own. Aisha spun the string used for his sacrificial
camels, laundered his clothes, combed his hair and would
sometimes sprinkle a fragrant odor on it. She softened and prepared
the miswaq (a special stick or root from the arak tree that is used to
cleanse the teeth) that the Messenger of God used and always kept it
clean.
She hosted their visitors, trying to supply their necessities and
please the Messenger of God. One day, the Messenger of God took

--- Sayfa 59 ---
56
some of the people of the Suffah96 to Aisha’s home, the house of
felicity.
Then he asked Aisha:
“O Aisha, why don’t you offer us something to eat?”
The only thing cooked in the house was from the hashisha plant
and she offered it to the visitors. The Messenger of God addressed
her again:
“O Aisha, bring some more things to us.”
Pleasing the visitors meant pleasing the Messenger of God, and
pleasing God’s Messenger meant pleasing God. How could she not
do whatever the Messenger of God wanted? But it was like trying to
create a meal from nothing. Finally she made a meal by mixing
cottage cheese, dates and oil. When the people of Suffah had
satisfied their hunger a little, the Messenger of God said:
“O Aisha, serve us something to drink.”
Aisha brought milk to the visitors in a large bowl. But it was clear
there wasn’t enough milk for all of them. So God’s Messenger asked
for more milk. There was a tiny amount remaining, and it would be
odd if she served it in the large bowl. So she served it in a small
bowl to the visitors.97 Aisha came from such a home where she
knew very well that giving the little amount in one’s possession for
the sake of God would be a means for an eternal reward, and so she
behaved accordingly.
The Messenger of God joined in his family members’ social lives
and watched their entertainment. He took them on social outings.
From time to time, he encouraged playful competitions among
them. The Messenger of God was the ideal husband and father. One
day, Aisha was narrating something to the Messenger of God and
she used the word hurafa (superstition). He asked:
“Do you know what hurafa means?”
But he knew that she did not know and added without waiting for
her response:

--- Sayfa 60 ---
57
“Hurafa was a man from the Uzra community, he was kidnapped
by demons during the era of Ignorance. He stayed with them for a
long time and one day they set him free. He started to explain the
strange things that he had witnessed while among the demons and
the people who heard his stories began to call them ‘Hurafa’s
statement.’”98
In the days before God’s Messenger passed away, his head started
to ache. He knew he would leave this world soon. He began to make
amends for all that had passed, not only with those who were living,
but also with those Companions he had buried before. Visiting their
graves in the cemetery, he returned with the hope that he would
meet them the next day. One day, Aisha’s head also started to ache
and she moaned, “Oh my dear head!”
God’s Messenger responded, “Why are you moaning like that?”
which meant: “compared with my ache what can yours be?”
His words rang true. The Messenger of God continued:
“What will you gain if you die before me? I will wash you, shroud
you, perform your Funeral Prayer and bury you in your grave.”
Hearing such unexpected words, her eyes opened wide. Was he
telling a joke or was he expressing a truth? Seeing that his attitude
was gentle and full of mercy, she understood that he was teasing her.
So she teased him back saying:
“Yes, I should die so that when you are done with my burial, you
could do whatever you want with your other wives after I am gone,
right?”99
Her words made the Messenger of God smile, as they conveyed
the depth of her love.
Aisha sometimes felt distressed. On one such day, her father Abu
Bakr came to her room. She was cranky and spoke loudly. Although
Abu Bakr considered her as the mother of the believers since the
time she had been betrothed to the Messenger of God, he could not
consent to anything she might do that would hurt the Messenger. As
soon as he saw her state, he took her aside and scolded her:

--- Sayfa 61 ---
58
“O so-and-so’s daughter, how can you talk so loudly in the
presence of God’s Messenger?”
As Abu Bakr spoke, he held up his hand to indicate that she must
endure his lecture. He felt he had the right to scold her since she was
his daughter; for nothing could hurt him as much as his own
daughter causing sadness to the Messenger of God. Then Abu Bakr
realized that the Messenger of God had witnessed his scolding, and
he felt ashamed for intervening in the private matters within the
Prophet’s home. He knew that he had been wrong, but he felt he had
to do it to prevent something worse. Still, the anger he felt towards
Aisha did not lessen—how could she talk to the Messenger of God
in such a tone? He remained annoyed but the presence of God’s
Messenger prevented him from saying anything else. He presumed
this from the Prophet’s attitude, and he left quietly.
After his departure, the Messenger of God went to Aisha, who
was feeling ashamed. Her father had told the truth; nobody should
raise their voice in the presence of God’s Messenger. She looked at
him with embarrassment.
It was time to end the moment happily. Since the matter had been
understood, the Messenger of God took a step to turn grief into
pleasure. Indicating where Abu Bakr had recently stood, he said:
“See how I interfered with the issue between you and this man
and how I rescued you from his anger?”100
That day, Abu Bakr left full of sadness, but when he came back a
short time later, he saw a different situation entirely. The Messenger
of God and Aisha welcomed him with smiles on their faces. The
previous situation had been temporary and had left only pleasure.
Abu Bakr was an expert on expressions and guessed how the mood
had softened but he wanted to hear it from them. With a smile on his
face, he said:
“Why not share your pleasures with me just like you shared your
troubles?”101
Sometimes, there were arguments among the wives which the

--- Sayfa 62 ---
59
Messenger of God reconciled with humor. But sometimes verbal
quarrels turned into physical attacks. One day, Aisha cooked a meal
using flour and milk and offered it to the Messenger of God while
Sawdah was sitting next to him. But Sawdah did not want to eat her
food. Aisha threatened:
“You will eat this meal or I will spread it on your face.”
Sawdah still refused to eat, possibly because they were of a
similar age. It was the perfect chance to turn the threat into a joke.
So Aisha did what she had threatened and spread some of the meal
on Sawdah’s face.
This made the Messenger of God smile. Then he, who always
tried to heal the disagreements that sometimes happened between
his wives, used the scene as a pretext for solidarity. He took some of
the food into his hand, and holding it toward Sawdah, he said:
“Why don’t you do the same thing to her?”
So Sawdah spread the flour meal on Aisha’s face, which made
everyone smile.
Outside, they heard Umar’s loud voice calling his son:
“O Abdullah! O Abdullah!”
Umar, who was nearby, would never leave without seeing the
Prophet. Since the Messenger of God thought he might come inside,
he said:
“Let’s get up so you both can wash your faces.”
Although it was a joke, it had happened in the privacy of their
family and did not need to be shared with anyone else, even with
Umar, who had a special place at the side of God’s Messenger.
Aisha made the following remark about this memory:
“After I saw the attitude of God’s Messenger toward Umar that
day, I hold Umar in awe.”102
There were even times when the Messenger of God was angry,
and sometimes, the reason for his anger was Aisha. One day, he
came home with a captive who he left in Aisha’s room. At that time,

--- Sayfa 63 ---
60
there were other women visiting and talking with Aisha. As their
conversation deepened with time, they forgot about the captive.
Seizing the chance, the man escaped.
Sometime later, the Messenger of God came back and the slave
was missing. He became very angry. Granting slaves their freedom
was his normal behavior, and he had probably planned to set this
one free as well, but the timing was important. Turning to Aisha, he
asked:
“O Aisha, what happened to the captive? Where is he?”
There was nothing Aisha could say. With enormous sadness, she
said:
“I was lost in conversation with the other women.”
As there was no chance to catch the captive, the Messenger of
God said:
“Shame on you; may your hands break.”
The Messenger of God’s anger was enough to make Aisha
distraught. She knew she should have been more careful with what
had been entrusted to her, no matter the circumstances. Then the
Messenger of God left and started to ask people to find the captive.
He was found and brought to God’s Messenger. The problem was
resolved. Sometime later, the Messenger of God came home. Aisha
was gazing at her upturned hands and then flipping her palms down
over and over again. When God’s Messenger saw Aisha in that
state, he asked:
“What is wrong? Do you need to take ablution?”
“You cursed me so I am waiting to see which of my hands will
break.”
It was like the return of a child to his mother after he was
chastised. She was both scared of his curse but at the same time,
hoping to turn his curse into a prayer for herself. The Messenger of
God opened his hands to heaven and after many prayers exalting
God, added:

--- Sayfa 64 ---
61
“O My Lord! I am human and I become angry like a human.
Whichever believer, man or woman, that I have cursed; please
consider the curse as a reason for them to be cleansed of their
material and spiritual sins.”103
Like any family, there were times when Aisha was discontented
or times when the Messenger of God was angry. God’s Messenger
understood her displeasure and immediately intervened to settle the
matter amicably. One day, he said:
“You understand immediately whether I am pleased or angry with
you and I understand immediately whether you are pleased or angry
with me.”
Aisha was surprised and asked:
“How do you know that?”
The Messenger of God said:
“You use the expression, ‘I swear to Muhammad’s God’ when
you are pleased with me; you prefer to say ‘I swear to Abraham’s
God’ when you are angry with me.”
Aisha responded:
“That’s true. O Messenger of God, I swear to God, you tell the
truth. I promise you that from now on I will not take any name other
than yours to my mouth.”104
One day, eleven women sat down and they promised to tell each
other their real opinions of their own husbands. Each of them, in
order, talked first about the most well-known feature of her
husband. Some honored their husbands while others listed their bad
habits. Aisha listened carefully, sometimes smiling, and other times
feeling sad. When Umm Dharr’s turn came, she explained that she
was the daughter of a shepherd when Abu Dharr married her. She
said that he had done many kindnesses for her and that she had
tasted every type of pleasure with him. She also listed the favors of
her mother-in-law as well as the virtues of her stepson from Abu
Dharr’s previous wife, and of her maid. But her beloved husband
had divorced her and she was now married to another man. Her new

--- Sayfa 65 ---
62
husband was good and generous, but his kindness and generosity
did not equal Abu Dharr’s. Although Abu Dharr had divorced her,
she still could not forget him, for her new husband’s benevolence
did not overshadow that of Abu Dharr.
Though the other women told their stories, what Umm Dharr said
stuck with Aisha and she later shared it with God’s Messenger.
The Messenger of God turned to Aisha and said:
“You see, you and I are like Abu Dharr and Umm Dharr with one
difference; he divorced his wife but I will not do that.”
It was a compliment that pleased Aisha and she said:
“May my mother and father be sacrificed for you. You are better
for me than Abu Dharr.”105
Entertainment
The Messenger of God allowed moderate levels of entertainment.
When he saw Aisha came to his place without any show or
ceremony on the day they were married, he asked:
“O Aisha, haven’t you got any amusement? The Helpers like
amusements.”106
There were certain instances where the Prophet let his family
members watch some games. Later Aisha explained:
“I remember God’s Messenger was screening me with his clothes
when the Habashi (Abyssinian) people came to do a display in the
mosque. I watched them until I got tired.”107
On the festival of Eid, a group came with shields and spears to
entertain the crowds. People gathered and were watching and Aisha
came near to see what was going on. Because she was at the back,
she wasn’t able to see the action. Turning to God’s Messenger,
Aisha said she wanted to see what was happening. The Prophet
asked:
“Do you really want to see?”
Aisha nodded.
So the Prophet lifted her behind his shoulders, her cheek resting

--- Sayfa 66 ---
63
against his cheek, and the Messenger of God called:
“Come on, O Banu Arfida!”
After some time had passed, the Prophet asked:
“Are you satisfied?”
Aisha had become tired and replied in the affirmative.
So God’s Messenger said:
“Then you can go.”108
However, it is true that the Messenger of God also intervened
when limits were exceeded, and kept to the boundaries of
reasonable entertainment. One day, a female musician came to play
for Aisha. The Prophet asked:
“Aisha, do you know her?”
Aisha looked at the unknown woman and responded in the
negative.
He explained that she was a musician from some tribe and added:
“Do you want her to play for you?”
Naturally, as no one says no to an offer from God’s Messenger,
she said yes.
Taking out her instrument, the woman started to play and Aisha
noticed some signs of discontent on the Prophet’s face. Aisha had
seen this look before when the Messenger of God found two girls
dancing in Aisha’s room. When people got out of hand, a warning
came. Today, both the voice and the attitude of the musician did not
coincide with the seriousness of belief. Soon, the Messenger of God
turned to Aisha and said:
“Satan has made his way to the vocal cords of this woman.”109
Competition
The Messenger of God sounded out the people around him and took
steps according to theirs. It was his general attitude and he advised
his people to do the same:
“Walk in step with the weakest among you.”110

--- Sayfa 67 ---
64
He was a person of moderation and knew how to act in every
environment. As a Prophet, he was occupied with the most sensitive
work and carried out his duty with care. He did not however, hold
his family to his own standards of sensitivity. As regular people, it
would have been impossible for them to endure. And he was there
to make life easier.
Once, when there was a military expedition, Aisha was drawn by
lots.111 At a certain point in the journey, the Messenger of God told
his army to continue on while he stayed back with Aisha.
Then the Messenger of God said:
“Let’s race.”
Aisha was small and naturally more agile so she won the race.
Years later, they were on a different journey together. The time that
had passed had made her forget their earlier competition. But the
Prophet had not forgotten, and again told the others to keep going
while he stayed behind with Aisha. He said:
“Let’s race.”
As before, Aisha accepted the challenge. They started to run again
but this time, the Messenger of God won. Aisha had gained some
weight and lost some of her speed. God’s Messenger turned to
Aisha and, with a smile, said:
“This is pay-back for our earlier race!”112
Request for a New Name
One day, Aisha asked for a new nickname from God’s Messenger.
Mature people in Arabian society were not called by their birth
name, but were named in relationship to someone else. It was
common practice and an important sign of rank and honor. There
was competition in virtue among people in terms of their names.
Some people became so well-known by their nicknames that people
forgot their real names. Generally, these names were given in
relation to their first-born child; a father became Abu (father of) so-
and-so, and a mother became Umm (mother of) so-and-so. People

--- Sayfa 68 ---
65
without children were called ibn (son of) so-and-so or bint (daughter
of) so-and-so.
Actually, the Messenger of God called her by a number of names,
such as Humayra, Uwaysh, Aish, Bint Siddiq, Muwaffiqa and Binta
Abu Bakr. But none of them could be a permanent nickname. Since
everyone she knew had a nickname, Aisha expected to have one too.
Depressed, she wailed:
“O, Messenger of God, all of my friends have nicknames!”
Though this was all she said, the Messenger of God understood
her silent request for one of her own. Most likely, this was the polite
way to ask for something. Perhaps Aisha was asking for a baby,
who would automatically supply her with a new name, and who
would continue the progeny of God’s Messenger.
But perhaps the Prophet had concluded from his own poignant
experiences that having a child was not his destiny. All three of his
sons had died in early childhood, and three of his four daughters
would precede him in death—Ruqayyah had died during the Battle
of Badr, and neither Umm Kulthum nor Zainab would outlive him.
A discerning and wise person such as God’s Messenger would
have drawn a conclusion from such events: perhaps God did not
want any of his children to live on the earth after him.
It was necessary to explain it to Aisha in a kind and delicate way.
He chose a response that neither made Aisha sad or avoided a reply,
and said:
“Then you should take the nickname of your sister’s son,
Abdullah.”
His words probably meant ‘that path is closed to you.’ The astute
Aisha understood immediately and never made the same request
again. From that time, Aisha was called by the nickname of her
sister’s son Abdullah ibn Zubayr and was known as Umm
Abdillah.113
Sensitivity

--- Sayfa 69 ---
66
The Messenger of God was sent to perfect morality. His wives were
influenced by his moral instructions the most. Witnessing all of his
directions and declarations, and all his actions and behavior, they
learnt his good manners and shared them with others. They gained
new wisdom and learnt a new path for high morals. Every person
who came to the house of felicity, every gift that was brought there,
or every incident that happened, resulted in novel judgments from
God’s Messenger, the representative of the morality of the Qur’an.
One night, Aisha had baked a small bun of barley for the
Messenger. But when he came, he closed the door as soon as he
entered, which meant he wanted to rest. He always covered the rim
of the water jug, covered the top of the food bowl, and turned off
any lights that were on.
As he rested, Aisha also became sleepy and fell asleep. Then the
Messenger of God felt a little cold and came near to Aisha, warming
himself by putting his head in her lap and falling back asleep.
Meanwhile, a sheep that belonged to their neighbor came inside
the room and took the barley bun. Aisha tried to frighten the sheep
from where she was sitting, but it did not work. Her movement
awakened the Prophet, so Aisha jumped up and started to run after
the sheep. Looking on, the Messenger of God shouted after her:
“If you catch it take only the bun, don’t hurt our neighbor for
what the sheep did!”114
In those times, many ate the meat of kalar, a type of lizard the
Messenger of God did not choose to eat because of its nature.
However, eating lizards was halal (permitted) and the Prophet made
it clear to his Companions that it was permissible.115 One day, a gift
of kalar meat was brought to their home which the Prophet did not
eat. Aisha asked:
“Should I give it to needy people?”
Her intention was sincere; others could eat what they chose not to,
since there was no statement that banned the meat’s consumption.
But the Messenger of God did not share Aisha’s opinion, because he

--- Sayfa 70 ---
67
thought of aspects that Aisha was not considering. He felt he should
not discriminate against others because if it was to be known that he
disliked this meat, other people would not like it either. He would be
giving meat that he did not like to someone else. So he turned to
Aisha and said:
“No, never give the things that you do not eat to others.”116
Her Worship
Aisha was living an exemplary life in every regard. She was at the
height of her service to God. Aisha was consistent during the life of
the Messenger of God and after his death. She saw God’s
Messenger as a man who loved worship and who served with the
attitude of a lover. Aisha spent the most fruitful times of her life
with the person who was closest to God—a man who reached new
heights in his knowledge of God, who was the most beloved servant
of God. He prayed during the nights until his feet were swollen—
during just one rakah (Prayer cycle), he stood long enough to recite
hundreds of pages of the Qur’an. His bows and prostrations at
Prayer were as long as the time he spent standing. Aisha said:
“Neither can you ask or can I explain the beauty of his
Prayers.”117
Aisha witnessed hundreds and thousands of miracles; she even
saw the revelation of the Qur’an where God’s Messenger and
Gabriel met. She considered the life of the world like the shade
under a tree where people rest for a while, and then continue on
their way. She directed her earthly life toward the life of the
Hereafter. The world and everything in it held no value for her, for
God’s Messenger had taught her to value the other world. During
the nine years that she lived with the Messenger of God, Aisha
followed him and attempted to put his example into practice.
The Prophet went to his room after he finished the Isha (Night)
Prayer, brushed his teeth and went to bed. At midnight, he got up
and performed the Tahajjud Prayer, which was obligatory only for
him. After two-thirds of the night passed, he awakened Aisha and

--- Sayfa 71 ---
68
asked her to pray. Aisha also got up and performed the Tahajjud
Prayer followed by the Witr Prayer.118
Sometimes, Aisha joined the Messenger of God and prayed with
him all night until sunrise. On such a night, God’s Messenger
recited the chapters Al-Baqarah, Al Imran, and An-Nisa in just one
rakah. When he recited a verse that made someone quiver with fear,
he prayed to take refuge from God’s wrath and when he recited a
verse of good news, he again turned toward God and asked for
mercy.119
Before the Morning Prayer, the Messenger of God performed a
short two-unit Prayer and slept on his right side if he needed rest, or
talked with Aisha until the muezzin called to Prayer. Aisha followed
the congregational Prayer from her room adjacent to the mosque.
Basically, her nights were brighter than her mornings.
Aisha joined the Messenger of God in fasting too. God’s
Messenger spent the last ten days of Ramadan on retreat in the
mosque (itiqaf) and Aisha joined in the Prayers from her room.
Sometimes, he placed a tent inside the mosque and after he led the
congregational Prayer, he continued his retreat inside his tent.120
At the Farewell Pilgrimage, Aisha was with him and witnessed
the large crowd where the Messenger of God said farewell to his
society. During the pilgrimage, he fell ill and his society learnt how
to perform the pilgrimage rites in illness.121
Having learnt how to worship directly from the most beloved
servant of God, Aisha knew, explained, and continued to perform all
the recommended Prayers.
One day, Aisha took Abdullah ibn Qays to her side and said:
“Do not neglect to get up at night and pray. The Messenger of
God never abandoned the Night Prayer. When he was sick or very
tired, he prayed while sitting, but he never gave it up.”122
Even for non-obligatory, recommended Prayers, Aisha made them
up if she missed performing them on time. After witnessing God’s
Messenger performing the Duha Prayer, she considered it

--- Sayfa 72 ---
69
indispensable and would not abandon it.123
Very early one morning, Aisha’s nephew, Qasim ibn Muhammad,
came to her home while she was praying. It was not yet time for the
Morning Prayer and the time for the Night Prayer had passed. He
asked:
“What is this Prayer?”
With the attitude of one who seeks to hide their good deeds, she
replied reluctantly:
“I missed my habitual Prayer tonight so I am performing a
compensatory Prayer.”
Abdullah ibn Abu Musa once came to ask her the principal points
about Islam; again, he arrived while she was performing the Duha
Prayer. When he said, “I will wait until you are finished with your
Prayers,” in a voice loud enough to be heard by others, the other
residents of the house who were familiar with the length of her
Prayers said:
“Alas!”124
The one who intended to wait for the end of Aisha’s Prayer should
expect to wait for a very long time. When she started to pray,
absorbed in her deep reverence for God, it was as if she lost
connection with the world and everything in it.
Aisha led an ascetic life. She performed the Night Prayer until
morning and spent her days fasting. When Aisha recited a verse that
included a warning or threat, she hesitated, then went back to the
beginning and recited it again in order to feel deeper grief. The
people around her witnessed that her scarf often became wet with
her tears.
One day, when Aisha recited the verse “Then God bestowed His
favor upon us, and protected us from the punishment of the
scorching fire,” (at-Tur 52:27) she could not hold back her tears and
began to sob. It was an explanation of the state of those who had left
the world and lived in the peace of salvation in the hereafter. But
Aisha remained concerned about her position in the afterlife and

--- Sayfa 73 ---
70
never thought of herself as guaranteed such mercy. When she
recited the verse, she took refuge in her Lord and begged:
“O Lord, please bless me and keep me away from the hell fire!”125
Her nephew and student, Urwa, who saw this and was waiting for
her to finish, grew tired of waiting and left to work at the bazaar. He
said:
“When I came back from the bazaar after finishing my business, I
swear to God, I found her continuing the same Prayer in tears.”126
Aisha always tried to perform her Prayers in congregation,
following the imam (the leader in the Prayer) from her room which
was adjacent to the mosque or praying with women who came to
her room.127 Other times, she asked Zakwan, her emancipated slave,
to lead her in Prayer.128
Her sensitivity about fasting continued; she spent almost everyday
in fast.129 On the Day of Arafa one year, which was the day before
Eid al-Adha, the weather was suffocatingly hot. Aisha was fasting.
Her brother, Abdurrahman, visited her, and when he saw that she
was fasting despite the weather and that she was tired and soaked in
sweat, he said:
“Why do you not break your fast?”
But Aisha, who aimed to follow the Messenger of God, replied:
“How could I break my fast when I heard God’s Messenger say:
‘Certainly, the fast of the Day of Arafa is atonement for the sins of
the year before.’?”130
Aisha fasted during the days in Mina; though eating and drinking
during those times were permitted,131 she never gave up her fast,
even during journeys when breaking one’s fast was allowed.132
Aisha once performed the pilgrimage with the Messenger of God
—it was his last. She went to Mecca several times after he died and
showed a different sensitivity on those pilgrimages.
During the early years, the Ka’ba was not crowded. In later years,
because of the increasing crowd of believers, Aisha circled the

--- Sayfa 74 ---
71
Ka’ba very carefully to avoid mixing with men, doing her rotation
on a wider scale. It took longer and increased her hardships, but
despite that, she looked for chances to be alone. When she saw that
it was crowded around the Ka’ba, she left and circled Ka’ba from as
far away as the middle of Sabir Mountain.133
Following God’s Messenger was her goal. In the early years, she
took a break in Mina, in a place called Namira, but later, because of
the crowds, she set up her tent in a deserted region called Arak.
Sometimes, she even set up her tent in the region of Sabir Mountain.
Aisha was meticulous about the minor pilgrimage, too. Before she
saw the moon for the month of Muharram, she went to Juhfa and
waited there until moonrise. When she saw the moon, Aisha started
to prepare for the minor pilgrimage by reciting the invocations and
then, without losing time, she went to Mecca.134
When it was time to break her fast on the night of Arafa, she
requested only water.135
Her asceticism and humility
Aisha did not meddle in any issues other than those which had
religious decrees and did not spend time nagging other people for
their mistakes. Among the hundreds and thousands of hadiths that
she narrated from the Prophet, it is impossible to find a distorted or
negative expression. She warned those who abused others, and did
not shy away from pointing out what was clearly wrong. When
Hassan ibn Thabit was charged by a religious law and started to
condemn himself, Aisha consoled the old Companion by saying:
“Yet you are not as bad a person as you are saying.”136
She comforted him even though Hassan had hurt her years ago
with similar statements. Aisha did not return slander and did not
hold grudges. Until her death, she was an example of forgiveness
toward those who openly worked against her. One day, when her
nephew and student, Urwa, denounced Hassan ibn Thabit, Aisha
became angry and said:

--- Sayfa 75 ---
72
“Do not condemn him; he was an important man who defended
the Messenger of God.”137
When people around her engaged in gossip or backbiting,
particularly about someone who was deceased, Aisha flew into a
rage and then prayed to God for the forgiveness of the person that
had been talked about. Aisha would say:
“The Messenger of God said, ‘only speak well of your dead.’”
She practiced her religion precisely. One day, while walking on a
road, she heard a bell ring and stayed where she was. The ringing of
a bell was an unwelcome sound and so she tried to avoid it. A little
while later, she heard it behind her and began to walk faster to
escape the sound disliked by God’s Messenger.138
One day she heard that the orphans staying with her in her home
had brought a game similar to backgammon. She became angry and
sent a message saying:
“Either you throw it out or I will come and take you out.”139
Aisha felt anxious, even about her dreams. She never thought they
were meaningless and thought perhaps they contained important
messages about the interpretation of hadiths. A single nightmare
either made her give sadaqa (voluntary charity) or emancipate a
slave the next day.140
She habitually used any small excuse to emancipate a slave. Once,
she gave in to the demands of others and broke a certain oath; she
emancipated forty slaves as expiation, instead of just one, but she
still did not forgive herself and shed tears over it for the rest of her
life. Upon realizing that her female slave was of the Tamim tribe,
which God’s Messenger had said descended from the lineage of
Prophet Ishmael, she gave her her freedom.141
There was no one who did not know of her unwavering resolve on
this issue; Aisha emancipated a total of sixty-seven slaves.142
She spoke to everyone and did not look down on anyone. One
day, she gave a small bag of bread to a man who had asked for food.
After he had gone, another man, who was destitute and who

--- Sayfa 76 ---
73
appeared to be mentally ill, came. Aisha called him near and offered
him her own food. When the man had satisfied his hunger and left,
Aisha was asked why she behaved this way, and she answered:
“How could I act differently when the Messenger of God said
‘Treat people in accordance with their condition’?”143
Despite every hardship she experienced, Aisha lived frugally and
never thought of obligating someone for a kindness she rendered.
She hesitated to waste anything. Aisha wanted the people around
her to exercise the same discipline. She never complained about her
ascetic life because she had chosen it out of her own free will and
lived a life that centered on the Hereafter.
This choice wasn’t a result of poverty, because even in times of
plenty, she chose the same lifestyle. When Umar sent a bag of gold
to her, she could not hold back her tears, and gave away the gold to
those around her immediately. She still did not think she had done
enough, so she prayed to God that she would never be subjected to
such a blessing again.144
A special student of hers, Aisha bint Talha, said:
“Those of us who were close to her, based on our positions, young
and old, came from all around and wrote letters and brought armfuls
of gifts. I would present them to her saying: ‘O dear aunt! This is
so-and-so’s letter and this is her gift,’ and she would tell me: ‘O my
dear girl! Write a letter and send a gift in response. If you do not
have a gift, I will give it to you.’ And then she would give me a gift
to send.”145
Aisha had amazing willpower. Neither the people around her or
the changing times were able to change her. She never gave up
treating others justly, even those who hurt her, oppressed people
around her, or gossiped about her. She never based her actions on
the wrongdoings of others.146
Aisha had only one dress. When it was dirty, she would wash and
dry it, and then wear it again. This was a general practice among the
wives of God’s Messenger.147 But during her first years in Medina,

--- Sayfa 77 ---
74
when she first began to live in the house of felicity with God’s
Messenger, Aisha owned a high-quality garment worth five
drachmas. She made Medinan women happy by lending it to them,
temporarily, for weddings or special occasions.148
She never thought to buy a new dress until the one she wore
became completely worn-out. Her nephew, Urwa, confirmed this:
“Aisha did not replace the garment that she wore with a new one
until the one she had was threadbare and covered in patches.”
In those days, many people said to her:
“God gives you much; why do you not benefit from it?”
Aisha gave a short and direct answer:
“The new will not fit the ones who are not created for the new.”149
Aisha said she would not give up her habits. When a gift was sent
to her, Aisha remembered the plain lifestyle of the Messenger of
God and his statements on the issue, so she would shed tears and
allocate the gifts to the needy. During his Caliphate, Muawiya sent
her garments, silver, and other things that she could use. When she
saw them, she started to weep and said:
“The Messenger of God was not able to have any of these.”
Aisha separated them into parts and gave them to needy people.
By night time, nothing remained of what the Caliph had sent.150
One day, baskets full of grapes were brought to her as a gift.
Aisha immediately started to give them to the poor. The female
slave who helped with her housework accompanied her. By
nightfall, the woman came over to her with some grapes. Aisha was
surprised, because she thought that she had given away all the
grapes. She asked:
“What is this?”
The slave did not know what to say. She had kept the grapes
without Aisha’s knowledge in order to offer her to them at night.
Aisha scolded her and said:
“One bunch, huh?”

--- Sayfa 78 ---
75
Her attitude surprised the slave, who then understood the
sensitivity of her mistress. Aisha added:
“I swear to God that I will neither touch or eat it,” and she went
away.151
Aisha continued to give away gifts that were brought to her
throughout her life, always helping the poor. Aisha knew that when
she gave even a little, she would receive abundant blessings from
God, Who has infinite treasures to bestow. Aisha never thought of
her own benefit. Caring for the destitute, she hoped to supply their
needs. There was nothing that pleased her more than a smile from a
needy person.
At the times when she had no money, Aisha sold her belongings
and gave the money as charity. Aisha’s nephew, Abdullah ibn
Zubayr, said:
“I swear to God, either our beloved mother Aisha will give up her
attitude or I will stop her.”
Aisha heard this from someone and asked:
“Did he really say this?”
Then she said:
“I swear not to talk with ibn Zubayr until the afterlife.”
So she did not speak to him. This hurt Abdullah ibn Zubayr and
he looked for a solution to restore their past relationship. Although
he came to Aisha’s door many times, he did not hear anything other
than:
“No! I swear that I will neither go back to this issue or give up my
promise.”
The passing of time hurt his conscience. Abdullah asked two
leaders, Miswar ibn Mahrama and Abdurrahman ibn Abd al-Aswad,
to intercede on his behalf. It was a duty for every believer to make
peace between two believers.
They made a plan and went to Aisha’s door and said:
“May God’s mercy and blessings be upon you. Are we allowed to

--- Sayfa 79 ---
76
come inside?”
Abdullah ibn Zubayr was with them but the two did not say that.
A voice from inside said:
“Welcome, come in.”
They were happy, and said:
“All of us?”
“Yes, all of you.”
Their plan got Abdullah ibn Zubayr inside. As soon as he entered,
he implored her for forgiveness from the other side of the curtain.
Miswar ibn Mahrama and Abdurrahman ibn Abd al-Aswad
supported him and asked Aisha’s forgiveness for him. Despite all
their pleading, Aisha did not change her mind and forgive Abdullah,
who was in tears.
The two intercessors, as part of their plan, said:
“You know that The Messenger of God said ‘It is not allowed for
one Muslim to stay angry at another Muslim for more than three
days’.”
Then Aisha started to cry, remembering the statement of God’s
Messenger, and replied:
“But I swore an oath, and you know that swearing an oath is
serious.”
Her heart was softening and she had no option but to follow the
Messenger of God’s statement. She did not reject the requests of the
intercessors and accepted Abdullah ibn Zubayr’s apology. From
then on, she spoke to him but this cost Aisha forty slaves because
she had broken an oath. Aisha cried when she remembered her oath
and what she had experienced; people witnessed that her scarf
became wet with tears.152
One day, during the lifetime of the Prophet, a woman came to
Aisha with her two daughters in her arms. It was apparent that they
were needy and that their life was full of hardships. Aisha did not
have much in her home, but it was her nature to be content with

--- Sayfa 80 ---
77
what she had and to not worry about what she did not have. She
brought three dates from her home to them. The mother gave two of
the dates to her daughters. The children, who had long felt the
absence of food, ate the dates with pleasure. Their mother watched
them with grief, as Aisha looked on. When the children had finished
their dates, their eyes focused on the remaining date in their
mother’s hand. With maternal love, she divided the date that she had
kept for herself into two and gave half to each daughter. They ate
happily. Nothing remained for the mother, who was satisfied with
her daughters’ joy, whose eyes were shining.
As soon as the Messenger of God came home, Aisha shared the
incident with him. She was touched and expressed the mother’s
sacrifice. Then God’s Messenger gave the following good news:
“For what she did, God bestowed heaven to that woman or saved
her from hell!”153
Most of the time, Aisha’s eyes were filled with tears and her heart
was delicate. She was not able to keep herself from crying and wept
until her tears dried up. She always sobbed when she did not do her
duty or when she was not able to keep her word, and she always
paid its atonement. Aisha spent her day and night in lamentation
when she was treated unjustly.
But her tears were not restricted to herself. Disappointed with
Muslim society, she wept for future generations as well. One day,
she remembered the Antichrist (Dajjal) and started to weep thinking
of the troubles and disasters that Muslims would experience. Aisha
cried so fervently that she did not realize that God’s Messenger had
come to her side, and he asked:
“Why are you crying?”
Aisha turned to God’s Messenger and said sadly:
“O Messenger of God! I remembered the Antichrist!”154
Her Generosity
Aisha lived for others. Whenever she saw needy people, she forgot

--- Sayfa 81 ---
78
her needs and gave whatever she had to them. She knew well the
hadith of the Messenger of God:
“Save yourself from the hell-fire even by giving half a date-fruit
in charity.”155
Aisha was also the daughter of Abu Bakr, the most generous of
men. Being generous was a general characteristic of her family.
When Aisha’s nephew, Abdullah ibn Zubayr, described the
characteristics of his mother, Asma, and his aunt, Aisha, he said that
they were like competitors when it came to giving charity.156
When Aisha had nothing to give, she sometimes borrowed from
someone else and gave it as charity. Some found this strange and
asked:
“Where did you get this idea to borrow and give as charity?”
She referred to a hadith of the Messenger of God, who said:
“Any servant of God, who had the intention and effort to repay
his debt, will be given help by God Almighty.”157
Her nephew, Urwa, said:
“I witnessed that she gave seven thousand drachmas of charity
while she was wearing a patched garment.”158
Aisha sold her house to Muawiya for one hundred and eighty
thousand or two hundred thousand drachmas. Before getting up
from where she sat, she had given it all to the poor, with nothing
remaining for herself.159
One day, a needy person came to her and asked for a bite of food.
Aisha had some grapes and asked a woman nearby to give them to
the person at the door. The woman looked at her strangely, implying
that Aisha needed the grapes herself. Aisha reminded her that even
the tiniest of good deeds will be rewarded:
“Why are you hesitating? Do you know how many atoms are in
this grape?”160 alluding to the verse “whoever does an atom’s weight
of good will see it” (az-Zilzal 99:7).
One day a needy woman with two daughters came to Aisha and

--- Sayfa 82 ---
79
asked for something to eat. There was nothing; Aisha looked
everywhere but found only one date, which she gave to the woman
with embarrassment. Then her eyes were caught by the woman’s
reaction —she divided the date into two and gave half to each of her
daughters. Aisha was reminded of the mother who had divided her
own share into two for her daughters.
Aisha was deeply moved by what she saw. After the woman left,
she continued to think about her. When the Messenger of God came
home, Aisha shared the story with him. The Messenger of God was
also affected and said:
“There is no doubt that such daughters will be a shield against
Hellfire for those who treat them kindly.”161
Another day, a poor woman came to Aisha, who searched
everywhere and found only one piece of bread. It was the bread she
was going to break her fast with, but Aisha gave it to the woman
without hesitating. Aisha’s housekeeper tried to warn her:
“But there is nothing for you to break your fast with.”
Still, Aisha ordered:
“Give the bread to the woman.”
The housekeeper had no choice but to give. Close to sunset, some
gifts of lamb meat and bread were brought to Aisha. God blesses
those who give for His sake. When it was time to break the fast,
Aisha joked with the housekeeper:
“Take this and eat; it is better than your dried bread.”162
Something similar happened when one of her nephews, Abdullah
ibn Zubayr, brought gifts valued at one hundred thousand drachma,
and saw her giving it all away. It was a day of fasting for Aisha, but
she gave until nothing remained. When it was sunset, Aisha asked
her housekeeper, Umm Dharr:
“O Umm Dharr why don’t you bring something for us to break
our fasts?”
Umm Dharr brought some olive oil and bread and said:

--- Sayfa 83 ---
80
“O mother of the believers, why didn’t you keep something, even
just one drachma from what you gave away so that we could buy
some meat?”
In the housekeeper’s words were embarrassment about being
unable to set a good table for Aisha and bewilderment that she never
benefitted from so many opportunities. Aisha understood her and
said gently:
“Do not pressure me. If I had remembered at that time, I might
have done that.”163
Aisha knew that she would benefit from what she gave away and
so she gave endlessly. She had learnt this from God’s Messenger.
One day, they sacrificed an animal and Aisha gave away meat
from the entire animal until only its shoulder blade remained in her
hands. When the Messenger of God came home, he asked:
“What did you do with the sacrificed animal? What remains for
us?”
“I distributed all of it, only its shoulder blade remains,” Aisha
said.It was what the Messenger of God expected, because God the
Almighty had promised that He would increase the value of
anything given for His sake. The good deed that is recorded for
charity given for God’s sake will never be removed and is
permanent. The Messenger of God said:
“No dear Aisha, on the contrary, every part of it except its
shoulder blade remains (as an eternal reward).”
Her Attention to Hijab
While Aisha warned others about hijab, she too paid strict attention
to it. As a wife of the Prophet, she was a mother to other Muslims.
In spite of this, she behaved carefully and kept a distance between
herself and men who were not close relatives.
She covered even around blind men. One day, Ishaq, a leader of
the Tabiun, came and Aisha removed herself to the other side of the
curtain. Ishaq, being blind, found her behavior strange and said:

--- Sayfa 84 ---
81
“Are you covering in order to protect yourself from me? But I am
not able to see you.”
Aisha responded:
“It may be true that you are not able to see me, but I can see
you.”164
Aisha felt uncomfortable even when her wet nurse’s husband
came inside, though he was considered an uncle near whom she did
not have to wear hijab. To those who found this odd, she said:
“His wife was the one who breast-fed me, not him.”
Perhaps the decision on this issue had not been made clear yet, so
Aisha was erring on the side of caution. When the Messenger of
God came and she asked him, he told her:
“He is your uncle. Allow him into your place.”165
It was said by ibn Abbas that Aisha used to cover even when the
Prophet’s two grandsons, Hasan and Husayn, visited her home.
Hasan and Husayn, because of her caution, did not always go near
the wives of the Messenger and behaved more carefully as well.166
Even while worshipping, she did not mix with the crowd and
circled the Ka’ba at more serene times. Once, when Aisha was
circling the Ka’ba, a woman asked her to go together to the Hajar
al-Aswad (the Holy Black Stone):
“O mother of the believers, why do we not kiss or touch the Hajar
al-Aswad?”
Aisha told the woman to stay away from her and expressed that it
was improper for women to move into such a crowd.167
Knowing her cautious ways, people often tried to make her more
comfortable while she was circling the Ka’ba, by clearing the area
of men. The circling area was prepared for Aisha in this way. She
even covered her face while circling the Ka’ba, never wanting
anyone to see her face.168
She was meticulous even during a visit to the cemetery. After
Umar was martyred and buried, Aisha conducted her visits more

--- Sayfa 85 ---
82
carefully to the graves of the Messenger of God and her father, Abu
Bakr.169
Her sensitivity was even reflected in her lectures. Aisha allowed
everyone to come and benefit from her knowledge and had students
from every region. Her foremost students were her nephews and her
relatives. Though it was easier for them to visit her home, she kept a
curtain between herself and distant relatives and strangers, and
taught her lessons from the other side of that curtain. If she had to
interfere, Aisha corrected mistakes by signaling with her hands. Her
disciple, Imam Masruq, said:
“I used to hear the noise of her clapping from the other side of the
curtain.”170
With care, Aisha constructed a beneficial environment for classes.
She made sure the ones who always came to take lectures had been
breast-fed by her closest relations so she could see them more for
the sake of knowledge. She knew that the Messenger of God had
given similar permission to Abu Hudayfa’s wife, Sahla bint Suhayl,
and although Salim had been an adult, she had given milk to him so
they became close relatives.171
If it was necessary, she taught what she knew through practice to
her students, who were her relatives. One of her close relatives had
a servant named Salim, who wanted to learn how to perform
ablution. She taught him how the Messenger of God had - by
performing ablution herself. Since Salim was the slave of one of her
close relatives, she also accepted him like a relative.
After some time had passed, the same man came to Aisha again
and told her:
“O mother of the believers, please pray for me.”
Aisha asked why.
Wanting to share his happiness with her, he said:
“God Almighty bestowed me freedom.”
She responded:

--- Sayfa 86 ---
83
“May God give you blessings.”
As soon as she had said this short prayer, Aisha hid herself behind
the curtain. From then on, he did not have the status of a close
relative, and so she talked with Salim from the other side of the
curtain.172
Guiding Others and Conveying the Message
Conveying the message and guiding others truly constituted the
center of Aisha’s life after the days of God’s Messenger; she
intervened in mistakes she witnessed to explain how an issue was
resolved during his lifetime. Aisha enjoined the good and forbade
the evil in every circumstance; she did whatever she could to guide
her people. The motive behind her efforts was her serious concern
for putting the teaching of the Qur’an and the Sunnah into practice.
Aisha once saw a woman while she was walking between Safa
and Marwa wearing a hijab painted with pictures. Aisha warned her:
“Get rid of these pictures on your clothing. The Messenger of God
got angry when he saw clothing like that.”173
Aisha insisted on sharing the knowledge that she had and felt
anxious that something would remain restricted only to her. Among
them were things that she felt ashamed to share because of her
modesty, so Aisha told wives to share them with their husbands.
One day she said:
“Since I feel ashamed to say this to them, tell your husbands that
they should use water to clean themselves after using the rest room.
This is what the Messenger of God did.”174
She warned girls, even little ones, who wore jewelry on their
hands and feet when they visited her, explaining that excessive
adornment would invite Satan and their house would be deprived of
angels.175
Whenever she saw a fault, she wanted it to be corrected. One day,
she saw her brother, Abdurrahman, performing ablution in a hurry
to attend the Funeral Prayer of Sa’d ibn Abi Waqqas, and warned

--- Sayfa 87 ---
84
him:
“Abdurrahman, be more careful washing your feet while
performing ablution. I heard the Messenger of God say: ‘what a pity
for heels (burning) in fire!’”176
Aisha’s Attendance to Military Campaigns
Aisha’s bravery was immense and she did not shy away from being
on the front lines, even when others withdrew. Though she was a
woman, she was often found on the battlefield with the Messenger
of God. She never hesitated, even in fierce battles.
Aisha was beside the Messenger of God during significant turning
points at Uhud, al-Khandaq, Banu Qurayza, Banu Mustaliq,
Hudaybiya, and the Meccan conquest.177 She supported the ones
who were fighting in battle, and at the same time, served God’s
Messenger. Anas ibn Malik said:
“At the Battle of Uhud, I saw Aisha bint Abu Bakr and Umm
Sulaym carrying water on their shoulders; they competed with each
other to carry water in a hurry for wounded veterans. They went
back and forth to Medina from Uhud to refill their waterskins.”178
Aisha was on the battleground of al-Khandaq when the Meccans
laid siege on Medina. She served the Prophet and carried water for
men together with other Muslim women.
Close to the conquest of Mecca, the Messenger of God said:
“O Aisha, something important happened with the Huza’as!”
When Muslims made the peace treaty of Hudaybiya with the
Meccans, the Huza’a tribe was among the Muslims’ allies.
Immediately Aisha guessed that the Quraysh had violated the treaty
of Hudaybiya. Yet she knew that the Meccans were not powerful
enough to do that with impunity; it would be foolish of them. So she
asked whether the Prophet thought that the Quraysh would venture
to violate the treaty. But it was true: the Meccans had attacked the
Huza’a tribe by night and killed twenty-three people, including
children. It was a gross violation of the Hudaybiya treaty. Still, the

--- Sayfa 88 ---
85
Messenger of God drew attention to the divine wisdom behind the
happenings and stated that the Quraysh violated the treaty because
God willed something else to be realized.
Aisha knew that if God willed something to happen, its result
would be good. Still, she asked:
“O Messenger of God, will the result be good?”
“Yes, it will be good.”
After some time had passed, God’s Messenger told Aisha to
prepare for journey and keep the issue secret.
This journey would be different than the previous ones—it would
be to their birth home, a place God Almighty gave particular value.
As she was preparing for their journey, Abu Bakr came and asked
the reason for her activity. Since Aisha was determined to do as the
Prophet told her, she did not say one word, even to her father.
Aisha also strived to find financial support when necessary. The
Muslim women gave whatever jewelry they had - earrings, anklets,
bracelets, and gold - as charity to serve God and his Messenger’s
cause.179 Before Tabuk, Aisha laid a blanket in her room and the
women competed to bring valuable things from their houses to place
on the blanket.
Performing ablution with sand or earth
Because of Aisha, the verses about tayammum (using earth for ritual
purity in the absence of water) were revealed. During a halt while
the army was returning from the Banu Mustaliq campaign, Aisha
realized she had lost a necklace belonging to her sister, Asma. She
felt she should do whatever she could to find it and return it to its
owner. She looked around in the darkness, but could not find it. She
went to God’s Messenger and together, they started to look for it.
When others saw that God’s Messenger was looking for something,
they joined in the search.
But the necklace was not there. When everyone understood that
they would not be able to find it, they started to rest again. The

--- Sayfa 89 ---
86
Messenger of God put his head on Aisha’s lap and closed his eyes.
Some went to Aisha’s father, Abu Bakr, and said:
“Do you see what your daughter did? She kept God’s Messenger
and his people in this place without even a sip of water!”
It was true. There was no water in their waterskins, or any sign of
a well or spring nearby. They would rise at dawn to perform the
Morning Prayer, but how could they perform their ablutions without
water? They thought about it and were not able to solve the
problem.
Abu Bakr became angry. If his daughter’s necklace had not been
lost, they would not have stayed there, and would have likely rested
near a spring. With anger, he entered Aisha’s tent, prepared to
lecture her. Then he saw that the Messenger of God was resting in
her lap, so he stopped, and then came closer slowly. Angrily, but
quietly, he said:
“You made people and God’s Messenger stay here, and they
neither have a sip of water nor a chance to find water.”
Aisha was in a difficult situation, as she had no reply and could
not move because the Messenger of God was still resting. But
suddenly, he woke up and quickly realized there was no water. He
thought of his people who were suffering and who had to pray but
did not have any water. Just then, the state of revelation descended
on God’s Messenger. From Gabriel came a verse declaring a
different way of performing ablution in the absence of water:
“…if you are ill, or on a journey, or if any of you has just satisfied a
call of nature, or you have had contact with women, and can find no
water, then betake yourselves to pure earth, passing with it lightly over
your face and hands (and forearms up to and including the elbows).
Surely God is One Who grants remission, All-Forgiving.” (an-Nisa
4:43)
The new revelation had solved their problem. Now, when they
were without water, they would not feel anxiety, knowing they
could perform ablution with clean dust and do their Prayers until
water was found.

--- Sayfa 90 ---
87
Abu Bakr witnessed what God had bestowed on them, and where
he had scolded and been angry, he now looked with great
admiration. It was her mistake that had created an opportunity for
revelation. Abu Bakr said:
“O my daughter, what a blessed person you are. As a result of the
delay that you caused, God bestowed Muslims with ease and
blessings.”180
Others too, understood this superiority. A short time later, Usayd
ibn Khudayr came to Abu Bakr and said admiringly:
“This was not your first blessing, dear family of Abu Bakr.”181
After the Prayer was performed, their journey started again. As
Aisha’s camel stood up, she noticed a shiny object that had been
underneath it. She bent over and looked closer, and saw with joy
that it was the necklace she had borrowed from Asma.182

--- Sayfa 91 ---
88
16 Tabarani, al-Mujamu’l Kabir, 23:25 (60); Ibn Abdilbarr, Istiab, 4:1937; Ibn Sa’d,
Tabaqat, 8:63.
17 Muslim, Nikah, 73 (1423).
18 Bukhari, Fadailu’s Sahaba, 73 (1423).
19 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:438 (27511).
20 Bukhari, Shahadat 15 (2518), Ayman, 17.
21 Bukhari, Itiqaf, 4 (1926).
22 Bukhari, Adab al-Mufrad, 1:272 (776).
23 Bukhari, Salat, 21 (375).
24 Ibn Sa’d, Tabaqat, 1:506; Tahmaz, as-Sayyidatu Aisha.
25 Ibn Sa’d, Tabaqat, 1:500, 8:167; Suyuti, ad-Durru’l Mansur, 7:554.
26 Tayalisi, Musnad, 207 (1472).
27 Harith ibn Abi Usama, Musnadu’l Hadith, 2:996; Tabarani, al-Mujamu’l Awsat, 8:360
(8872); Ishaq ibn Rahuya, Musnad, 3:1000.
28 Bukhari, At’ima, 73 (5059); Muslim, Zuhd, 20 (2970).
29 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:217.
30 Bukhari, Riqaq, 17 (6094).
31 Bukhari, Khums, 3 (2930).
32 Abu Nuaym, Hilyatu’l Awliya, 2:46; Tahmaz, as-Sayyidatu Aisha, 38.
33 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:79 (24545).
34 Ibn Hibban, Sahih, 8:151; Bayhaqi, Sunan, 2:38 (3436)
35 Tirmidhi, Zuhd, 37 (2352); Bayhaqi, Sunan, 7:12 (12931)
36 Abu Dawud, Zakah, 3 (1565); Hakim, Mustadrak, 1:547 (1437); Bayhaqi, Sunan, 4.
37 Tirmidhi, Libas, 38 (1780); Hakim, Mustadrak, 1:547 (1437).
38 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:55, 5:218 (24321, 21956).
39 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:49 (24266); Ibn Hibban, Sahih, 8, 393 (3630).
40 Bukhari, Hiba, 1 (2428); Ibn Majah, Zuhd, 10 (4145).
41 Bayhaqi, Shuabu’l Iman, 2:173 (1468); Tabarani, Mujamu’l Awsat, 6:141.
42 Nasa’i, Zina, 39 (5143).
43 Ibn Hibban, Sahih, 2:447 (672); Nasa’i, Sunanu’l Kubra, 5:502 (9781).
44 One wask is the equivalent of 165 liters.
45 Bukhari, Jihad, 88 (2759), Tirmidhi, Buyu, 7 (1214).
46 Ibn Jawzi, Sifatu’s Safwa, 2:31.
47 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6: 138 (25122).
48 Tabarani, al-Mujamu’l Awsat, 7:113 (7010).
49 Bukhari, Adab, 81 (5779).
50 Abu Davud, Adab, 62 (4932); Bayhaqi, Sunan, 10:219 (20771).

--- Sayfa 92 ---
89
51 Abu Dawud, Talaq, 9 (2194); Ibn Majah, Talaq, 13 (2039).
52 Ibn Majah, Talaq, 22 (2056); Muwatta, Talaq, 11 (1174).
53 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad 6:226 (25935); Ibn Hibban, Sahih, 1:185, 2:19.
54 Bukhari, Tahajjud, 18 (1100).
55 Ibn Majah, Nikah 12 (1874); Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:136 (25087).
56 Bukhari, Libas, 23 (5825).
57 Bukhari, Sifatu’s Salat, 79 (831); Muslim, Salat, 144 (445).
58 Muwatta, Libas, 4; Bayhaqi, Sunan, 2:235; ibn Sa’d Tabaqat, 8:72.
59 Bukhari, Hayd, 15 (310, 311, 313).
60 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:219 (25883).
61 Bukhari, Tafsir, 31 (4480).
62 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:41, 173 (24186); Tirmidhi, Adab, 43 (2803).
63 Qurtubi, al-Jami, 14:57.
64 Abu Dawud, Tarajjul, 4, (4164); Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:117 (24905).
65 Ibn Sa’d, Tabaqatu’l Kubra, 8:70-71; Dhahabi, Tarikhu’l Islam, 1:537.
66 Abdurrazzaq, Musannaf, 3:146 (5104).
67 Muslim, Salat, 221 (485, 486, 512); Tirmidhi, Da’awat, 76 (3493), Abu Dawud, Salat,
152 (879).
68 Bayhaqi, Shuabu’l Iman, 3:383 (3837).
69 Muslim, Janaiz, 102 (974); Nasa’i, Janaiz, 103 (2037); Ishratu’n Nisa, 4 (3963-3964).
70 Instead of saying “salaam” (greeting, peace) be upon you, certain adversaries of Islam
deliberately greeted the Prophet by saying “saam” (death) be upon you.
71 Bukhari, Adab, 38 (5683).
72 Muslim, Fadail, 79.
73 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:77 (24524).
74 Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 64 (3895); Ibn Majah, Nikah 50 (1977).
75 Tirmidhi, Nikah, 41 (1140); Abu Dawud, Nikah, 39 (2134).
76 Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 63 (3888); Hakim, Mustadrak, 3:444 (5684).
77 Bukhari, Hiba, 6, 7 ((2435-2441).
78 Muslim, Talaq, 30 (1479); Tirmidhi, Tafsiru’l Qur’an, 387 (4629).
79 Muslim, Ashriba, 139 (2037); Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 3:123 (12265).
80 Bukhari, Hiba, 14; Shahadat, 30 (2542).
81 Bukhari, Fadailu’s Sahaba, 5 (3462).
82 Bukhari, Nikah, 83 (4895).
83 Bukhari, Mazalim, 26, (2336).
84 Bukhari, Mazalim, 26 (2336); Tafsiru’s Sura, 276 (4507); Muslim, Talaq, 22 (1475).
85 Bukhari, Janaiz, 94 (1323).
86 Bayhaqi, Sunan, 2:458; Ibn Sa’d, Tabaqat, 8 (66); Ibnu’l-Athir, Usdu’l-Ghaba, 1 (1384).

--- Sayfa 93 ---
90
87 Muslim Fadailu’s Sahaba, 83, (2442); Nasa’i, Ishratu’n Nisa, 3 (3944); Ahmad ibn
Hanbal, Musnad, 6:88 (24619); Bayhaqi, Sunan, 7:299 (14526).
88 Bukhari, Shahadat, 15.
89 Bukhari, Mazalim, 25 (2336).
90 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:152 (25232)
91 Hakim, Mustadrak, 4:28 (6781); Ibn Sa’d Tabaqat, 8:116, 117.
92 Ibn Sa’d, Tabaqat, 8:126; Dhahabi, Siyar, 2:227.
93 Bukhari, Fadailu’s Sahaba, 30.
94 Bukhari, Ahadithu’l Anbiya, 33 (3230). Tharid is a special dish in Arab cuisine and the
Prophet liked it very much.
95 Muslim, Libas, 87 (2107).
96 The people who stayed in the antechamber of the Prophet’s Mosque, devoted to
mastering religious knowledge.
97 Abu Dawud, Adab, 103 (5040); Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 5:426 (3666).
98 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:157 (25283).
99 Bukhari, Marda, 16 (5342).
100 Abu Dawud, Adab, 92 (4999); Nasa’i, Sunanu’l Kubra, 5:139 (8495).
101 Ibid.
102 Abu Ya’la, Musnad 7/449; see also: Tahmaz, as-Sayyidatu Aisha, 42, 43.
103 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:52 (24251)
104 Bukhari, Nikah, 107 (4930).
105 Bukhari, Nikah, 82 (4893).
106 Bukhari, Nikah, 63 (4868).
107 Bukhari, Iydayn, 2 (907).
108 Ibid.
109 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 3:449 (15758); Tabarani, Mujamu’l Kabir, 7:158 (6686).
110 Ajluni, Kashf al-Khafa, 2:503.
111 When there was a military expedition, the Prophet decided which wife would
accompany him by drawing lots, in order not to break their hearts.
112 Abu Dawud, Jihad, 68 (2578). Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:39 (24164).
113 Abu Dawud, Adab, 78 (4970); Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:260 (26285).
114 Bukhari, al-Adabu’l Mufrad, 1:54 (120).
115 Bukhari, Tamanni, 15; Muslim, Sayd, 42.
116 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:123 (24961); Bayhaqi, Sunan, 9:325 (19208).
117 Bukhari, Tahajjud, 16; Manaqib, 21.
118 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:55 (24320).
119 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:92 (24653).
120 Bukhari, Itiqaf, 18 (1940).

--- Sayfa 94 ---
91
121 Bukhari, Hajj, 76 (1557).
122 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:125 (24989)
123 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:138 (25112), Nasa’i, Sunanu’l Kubra, 1:181 (482).
124 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:125 (24989).
125 Ibn Abi Shayba, Musannaf, 2:25 (6036).
126 Ibid.
127 Tahmaz, as-Sayyidatu Aisha, quoted in Abdurrazzaq, Musannaf, 2:82, 126, 141.
128 Bukhari Jama’a, 26 (659).
129 Ibn Sa’d, Tabaqat, 8:68.
130 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:128 (25014).
131 Bukhari, Sawm, 67 (1893).
132 Abdurrazzaq, Musannaf, 2:560-561 (4459-4461); Bayhaqi, Sunan, 4:301 (8266).
133 Malik, Muwatta, Hajj, 13 (750).
134 Ibid.
135 Ibid, Hajj, 43 (836).
136 Bukhari, Maghazi, 32 (3915).
137 Muslim, Fadailu’s Sahaba, 155 (2488).
138 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:152 (25229).
139 Bukhari, Adabu’l Mufrad, 1:435 (1274).
140 Haythami, Majmuatu’z Zawaid, 1:484 (419).
141 Bukhari, Itq, 13 (2405).
142 San’ani, Subulu’s Salam, 4:139.
143 Abu Dawud, Adab, 23 (4842).
144 Hakim, Mustadrak, 4:9 (6725).
145 Bukhari, Adabu’l Mufrad, 1:382 (1118).
146 Muslim, Imara, 19 (1828).
147 Bukhari, Hayd, 11 (306).
148 Bukhari, Hiba, 32 (2485).
149 Bukhari, Adabu’l Mufrad, 1:166.
150 Abu Nuaym, Hilyatu’l Awliya, 2:48.
151 Ibid.
152 Bukhari, Adab, 62, (5725).
153 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:92 (24655).
154 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:75 (24511).
155 Bukhari, Zakah, 8, 9 (1347, 1351).
156 Bukhari, Adabu’l Mufrad, 1:106 (280).
157 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:99 (24723); Hakim, Mustadrak, 2:26 (2202).
158 Ibn Sa’d Tabaqat, 8:67; Dhahabi, Siyar, 2:187.

--- Sayfa 95 ---
92
159 Ibn Sa’d Tabaqat, 8:165; Abu Nuaym, Hilyatu’l Awliya, 2:47, 48.
160 Malik, Muwatta, 2:997 (1811).
161 Bukhari, Adabu’l Mufrad, 1:59 (132).
162 Malik, Muwatta, 2:997 (1810).
163 Ibn Sa’d, Tabaqat, 8:67; Dhahabi, Siyar, 2:187.
164 Ibn Sa’d, Tabaqat, 8:69.
165 Bukhari, Shahadat, 7 (2501).
166 Ibn Sa’d, Tabaqat, 8:58.
167 Bukhari, Hajj, 63 (1539).
168 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:85 (24592).
169 Hakim, Mustadrak, 4:8 (6721).
170 Bukhari, Adahi, 15 (5246).
171 Muwatta, Rada, 2 (1265); Abu Dawud, Nikah, 10 (2061).
172 Nasa’i, Tahara, 83 (100).
173 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:225.
174 Tirmidhi, Tahara, 15 (19); Nasa’i, Tahara, 41 (46).
175 Abu Dawud, Hatam, 6 (4231).
176 Muwatta, Tahara, 35.
177 Nadawi, Siratu’s Sayyidati Aisha, 170.
178 Bukhari, Fadailu’s Sahaba, 48 (3600).
179 Waqidi, Maghazi, 1:992.
180 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 2:272 (26384); Ibn Majah, Tahara, 90 (565).
181 Bukhari, Tayammum, 1 (327, 329).
182 Bukhari, Fadailu’s Sahaba, 5 (3469).

--- Sayfa 96 ---
93
CčĆĕęĊė 3
AISHA THE IMMACULATE

--- Sayfa 97 ---
94
I
The Slander
t was also during the same expedition that Aisha experienced her
greatest sadness. Abdullah ibn Ubayy ibn Salul, the leader of the
Hypocrites, was on the lookout for an opportunity to reinstate the
esteem he felt he had lost by the migration of the Muslims to
Medina. He sought revenge against the Muslims, especially God’s
Messenger and Abu Bakr. He had thought of many different
scenarios, but without the right opportunity, he had not been able to
succeed. The Meccans had sent many letters to provoke him against
the Medina Muslims and Ibn Salul had replied that he was prepared
to give support, in the form of the soldiers and weapons that they
wanted. He had planned to shatter the spirits of the Muslim army
during the Battle of Uhud by leaving the battleground with a throng
that constituted one-third of the army. He had helped and harbored
the Meccan army by joining with several Jewish tribes, such as
Banu Qurayza. Many of his plans had been executed but he had not
been able to reach his goal. Every passing day worked against him
and his followers. His allies, such as Banu Nadr, Banu Qaynuqa,
and Banu Qurayza, had not obeyed the Medina treaty and had been
forced to leave Medina. In short, Abdullah ibn Ubayy started to lose
his base of support, and day by day, he saw his power diminish.
These events had deeply affected the Hypocrites, and seeing the
success of their enemies produced hatred and rancor in their hearts,
and directed them toward traitorous thoughts. Although unexpressed
in words, Ibn Salul’s real goal was to weaken the reputation of the
Messenger of God and keep people away from him. Abu Bakr, the
closest Companion of God’s Messenger, was his first target. Ibn
Salul found his chance in the region of the Muraysi Spring.
Abdullah ibn Ubayy and his closest friends voluntarily attended
the Battle of Banu Mustaliq, though they had looked for excuses to
stay in Medina during previous battles. They hoped to exaggerate
small tensions that had erupted by chance at the Muraysi Spring to
cause a rift in the bond between the Helpers and the Emigrants. Still

--- Sayfa 98 ---
95
not satisfied, Abdullah ibn Salul then took careful steps to offend
the Messenger of God. The Helpers and the Emigrants, who had
sacrificed their lives for each other without hesitation, were nearly
made into enemies because of their plotting. If the Messenger of
God had not intervened, an unending feud would have been ignited.
Ibn Salul, seeing that his first attempt had failed, continued to
plot. About the Emigrants, among who was the Messenger of God,
he went so far as to talk about biting the hand that fed them.183 He
also made threats, both publicly and privately:
“I swear to God, when we return to Medina, the dignified one will
get the despicable one out of Medina.”184 This meant himself and
the Messenger of God.
When some perceptive Companions recognized his plotting, and
it seemed as if he could not continue, he denied what he had said
and behaved as if he were as pure as snow. It came to the point
where Umar proposed to kill him, but the Messenger of God said:
“No, Umar! Why? Then wouldn’t people say, ‘Muhammad is
killing his friends’? Never!”
So it was best to set off immediately on their journey and the
Prophet ordered so. Despite the high temperatures, they would
return to Medina without having rested.
Then Gabriel came and informed the Messenger of God, one by
one, about what the hypocrites had done and said, and then revealed
the chapter al-Munafiqun (the Hypocrites).
Ibn Salul, who had thought he would walk away with all his
plotting, was then ostracized by his tribe and he abandoned all hope
after the verses were revealed. Sincere people from his tribe, whom
he had convinced to follow him, reproached him sharply and left
him. His own son, Abdullah, was among them - he felt ashamed of
what his father had done. But when a man told him that his father
was going to be killed, Abdullah became upset. He waited for a time
and then came to God’s Messenger with sorrow and said:
“O Messenger of God, I heard that you want to kill Abdullah ibn

--- Sayfa 99 ---
96
Ubayy ibn Salul because of the information you got. If you plan to
do that, please order me to kill him instead, and I will bring you his
head. The Khazraj tribe knows that no one is as sensitive as I about
doing good to his father. If you give this order to a man other than
me, I could not endure seeing he who executed Abdullah ibn Ubayy
ibn Salul living among my people, and I might kill him. Then I
would be killing a believer in exchange for an unbeliever, and I am
worried that I would be thrown into the hellfire.”
It was a suggestion to freeze blood in one’s veins. Even though he
was his father, he would kill the man who had hurt God’s
Messenger. But the Messenger of God was merciful and said:
“No! On the contrary, as soon as he is among us we will treat him
well and try to make him content.”
Despite the reassurance from God’s Messenger, his heart was not
yet satisfied. He waited for his father, and first made his father’s
camel lie down, and then held his father by the shirt and said:
“I will not let you go until you say, ‘The Messenger of God is
dignified and I am despicable’.”185
After this chain of negative events, they continued on their
journey without resting until they were exhausted by the severity of
the heat. Finally, a break was given, but it did not last long, and
soon after, the Messenger of God gave the order to keep going.
They rapidly approached Medina.
Nothing disturbed God’s Messenger or his Companions until they
saw Safwan ibn Muattal186 catching up from behind with Aisha atop
his camel. Aisha had been forgotten in the region where they had
rested. She had left to answer the call of nature, and again noticed
her sister’s necklace was lost and had searched for it. Because Aisha
was very slender, the palanquin that she traveled in had been
replaced on her camel without anyone noticing the difference in
weight. When she had come back, there was no sign of the army. At
first, she called for them but no one could hear her and she heard no
one. She had no choice, so she squatted and started to wait for her

--- Sayfa 100 ---
97
people to notice her absence and come back for her. Before much
time had passed, Safwan ibn Muattal, who had lagged behind the
army came. When he saw an indistinct figure in the distance, he led
his camel near it and was surprised to see she was the mother of the
believers, Aisha. He said:
“God’s Messenger’s family has been left behind!”
Startled at the voice, Aisha quickly covered her face with her veil.
But she was happy, since someone had come to guide her back to
the army.
Safwan could not understand how the wife of God’s Messenger
and the mother of the believers had been left behind alone. He
asked:
“May God grant His mercy on you. Who left you here?”
As he asked his question, he led his camel close. For the
Companions, the mother of the believers deserved respect beyond
their own mothers. In order to help her get on the camel
comfortably, he jumped off, lowered the camel, stepped aside and
said:
“Please, you can get on.”
He held the halter of the camel while Aisha rode it. In this way,
they approached the rear of the army.
Ibn Salul had seen the scene of Aisha’s arrival with Safwan; it
was precisely a scene that someone could use to cause discord. His
eyes met with the eyes of others and together they started to slander
Aisha. It was not the first time that a monument of chastity had been
vilified— now Aisha was like the Virgin Mary.
The Hypocrites planned to wear out the Messenger of God by
attacking him indirectly. Whispering furtively, they spread the
slander secretly, hoping to cause a new rift among the Muslims. Ibn
Salul’s fear had grieved him deeply but now his eyes were shining
with pleasure. It was his chance to take revenge on the Messenger of
God and to cover his own mistakes by keeping people busy with the
slander of Aisha. He hoped too, that it would confuse people about

--- Sayfa 101 ---
98
the message of God’s Prophet and shake their faith in him. All at
once, he was brazen and peeling back the shame that had covered
him; his real personality shone through.
It was a systematic slander. Before they had reached Medina,
there was no one left who had not heard it. If the same lies were
spoken everywhere, people would not know what to believe. In this
way, the Hypocrites thought to take the revenge they had sought for
years, and dreamed of the pleasure they would experience in the
future from the opportunity that had fallen into their hands.
The Sickness of Aisha
Twenty-eight days had passed since they had started the journey for
the Battle of Banu Mustaliq. When they returned to Medina, Aisha’s
weak body, unable to endure a month of privations, became sick.
She alone remained unaware of the slander circulating about her.
But the Hypocrites worked with speed. The Messenger of God and
the family of Abu Bakr had heard the slander and were grieved.
Perhaps because neither the Messenger of God nor Abu Bakr’s
family believed what had been said, they did not feel it was
necessary to tell Aisha about the slander. But Aisha felt a difference
in the behavior of God’s Messenger. In her illness, he had not fussed
over her as he had during previous sicknesses. Once, when her
mother Umm Ruman was with her, he asked slightly about her
health.
Aisha felt hurt and said:
“O Messenger of God, why don’t you let me go to my mother’s
during my illness so she may take care me?”
The Prophet said:
“You know what is best.”
Though Aisha did not understand why the Prophet was behaving
coldly, her feelings led her to her family’s home. She stayed with
her mother, Umm Ruman. Twenty days later, she was able to pull
herself together. She rose from bed, but remained ignorant of what

--- Sayfa 102 ---
99
was being said about her.
Some people came to visit her during her illness and one night she
went outside with one of them, Umm Mistah, a close relative, to
answer the call of nature. Just then, Umm Mistah’s foot got stuck
and she stumbled and fell. When she got up and tidied herself, she
cursed:
“Damned Mistah!”
Aisha was shocked, wondering how a woman could curse her
own son, who was virtuous. Aisha, known for the depth of her
Islamic knowledge, felt she should intervene about the mistake. She
said:
“For God’s sake! What a terrible thing to say about a man who is
among the Emigrants and the soldiers of the Battle of Badr.”
Umm Mistah looked with confusion and surprise at Aisha. Her
son, Mistah, was among those who was spreading the slander. A
moment later, she replied:
“O daughter of Abu Bakr, don’t you know what he said about
you? It is possible that you are among the believing women who
consider situations naively. Or do you really not know what
happened?”
Even the question was confusing. Aisha was genuinely ignorant
of all that had happened. She asked:
“What has he said? What situation? I am not informed about
anything.”
And she looked into Umm Mistah’s face. Her look said, ‘Tell me
as soon as possible what is going on.’ So Umm Mistah began to
speak:
“There are some rumors about you.”
And at length she explained the slander and resulting discord from
the beginning.187
It was impossible to believe. The sickness which had been about
to end was doubled; her eyes were filled with tears and her heart

--- Sayfa 103 ---
100
was filled with sorrow. She had difficulties breathing, and her sobs
were suffocating.
She didn’t have the energy to move her legs, and she was about
faint. She asked:
“Is it true that all this has happened?”
It was her last sentence before she fainted.
After some time, with great effort, she regained consciousness.
Yet she was not fully in control of herself. She said:
“Glory be to You O God! How can people talk like that?”
She got up with the help of Umm Mistah and went back to her
father’s house. She was exhausted, and though she wanted to arrive
quickly by taking fast steps, her legs did not comply.
When she arrived home, she went to her mother and reproached:
“May God bestow mercy on you. Why didn’t you tell me people
were talking amongst themselves about me?”
Umm Ruman was a calm and mature person with a strong
character. Under these circumstances, it was necessary to be cool-
headed. She began to console her daughter tenderly:
“O my dear child, slow down a little. God will show you ease. I
swear to God there is no woman as beautiful as you, who is as loved
by her husband, and who also has fellow wives: are there not people
against her and who slander to disgrace her? Of course there is
much gossip in such a situation.”188
Umm Ruman had a point, but the slander that was circulating was
not the kind that could be tolerated. Many nights passed, but Aisha
was unable to sleep.
Safwan had heard the slander of which he was accused and had
learnt that some Muslims believed it. He went to one of them,
Hassan ibn Thabit, and they argued. Their disagreement escalated to
the point that it was shared with the Messenger of God.
Abu Bakr, who had helped and given charity to Mistah, changed
his mind. When he heard that Mistah had spread the slander, he said

--- Sayfa 104 ---
101
that he would never give charity to him again.
The Hypocrites, following the progress of events, were very
pleased; in the near past, while coming back from Banu Mustaliq,
they had been a target, but now they were forgotten.
The Companions’ Reaction and Belief
The gossip confused the Companions as well, though very few of
them even considered believing the slander. The overwhelming
majority said:
“Glory be to God! This is terrible slander.”
Many did not even comprehend the notion that Aisha could have
committed adultery. Those who believed in the chastity and purity
of Aisha in their hearts defended her constantly. At the end of a
busy day, Abu Ayyub al-Ansari’s wife asked him:
“Did you hear what people are saying about Aisha?”
Though he had heard, he behaved as if he had not heard anything
because he knew who had started the slander and why. He knew that
a woman who had become the wife of God’s Messenger would
never attempt such a thing. He said:
“I heard, but it is a lie!”
Perhaps he thought his wife could be affected by the slander, or
perhaps he wanted her to fight against it. He said:
“O Umm Ayyub, for the sake of God please tell me, would you do
such a thing?”
She was horrified, for those who believe in God and the Hereafter
would never fall into such depravity, and she replied vehemently:
“I swear to God, I would never do that.”
Abu Ayyub, with a sharp look, said:
“Do not forget that Aisha is more auspicious than you.”
In the verses that would later be revealed, God the Almighty
expressed that He was pleased with those, like Abu Ayyub, who
firmly spoke against the slander, and that believers should always

--- Sayfa 105 ---
102
react strongly against slander.
The Messenger of God was worried about the absence of Gabriel;
he was deeply sad because revelation had still not come. Usually
divine revelations came quickly under circumstances such as these,
and fully explained everything. Perhaps God Almighty was
preparing the ground for the revelation to come, so that the message
would be cemented in their minds.
The silence encouraged the slanderers and they even convinced
some believers. The situation necessitated intervention. One day,
after the Prayer, the Messenger of God turned to his Companions
and said:
“O my people, society of believers, what excuse could a man have
who has caused such trouble to me because of his slander about my
family? I swear to God, I do not know anything but goodness about
my family. The man who was also slandered never came to my
house when I was not there.”
The Messenger of God was hurt deeply and the Companions did
not want to tolerate it anymore, but not everyone knew who the man
was. The leader of the Aws, Sad ibn Muadh, stood up and said:
“O Messenger of God. I can solve this problem and bring you
relief. If this man is from my tribe, I will cut off his head! If he is
from Khazraj, who are our brothers, we will do whatever you
order.”
Affected by a statement that implicated his tribe, Sad ibn Ubada
became tense and stood up, apparently knowing who was guilty. He
replied to the leader of the Aws:
“You don’t have the power to kill a man! You only say this
because you know the guilty one is from Khazraj. If he were of your
tribe, you would not say this.”
The Messenger of God had delivered his sermon at the Friday
Prayer, and now a quarrel was breaking out. Then Sad ibn Muadh’s
cousin, Usayd ibn Khudayr, stood up and replied to Sad ibn Ubada,
accusing him of protecting the hypocrites:

--- Sayfa 106 ---
103
“We would surely kill them! I swear to God that the ones who did
this deserve to be beheaded!”
The atmosphere became tense, as if a hundred years of tension
had built up. The real issue was nearly forgotten as tribal pride
appeared among the Aws and the Khazraj. It was impossible for
people to think clearly when feelings were so heightened. That day,
no one could tolerate such statements, even briefly; sides were
chosen and a quarrel began. It would be another war between the
Aws and the Khazraj - which, of course, was the real aim of the
Hypocrites.
Calming them down was the duty of God’s Messenger. He told
both sides to be silent. Then he concluded his sermon and went
home.
He called Usama and Ali to his house to consult with them. He
was not confused about the innocence of his wife, Aisha, because it
was as open and clear as the light of the sun. But the Messenger of
God wanted to include the beliefs of others in his decision, because
he wanted her purity to be acknowledged in front of everyone.
Usama spoke decisively:
“O Messenger of God. We do not know anything but good deeds
about your wife Aisha. These are definitely baseless lies and
slander!”
God’s Messenger’s gaze then fell on Ali. Ali understood that
God’s Messenger was awaiting his response, but was not able to
think of anything other than the sadness the Prophet was feeling,
which he wanted to relieve. He felt the pleasure of God’s Messenger
was more valuable than the world and everything in it, and said:
“O Messenger of God, why are you giving yourself a hard time?
May God Almighty protect you from experiencing more difficulties.
There are many women other than her. Why don’t you ask this
servant girl, I am sure that she will say something that makes you
feel better.”
His words also included the meaning, ‘I am thinking only of you,

--- Sayfa 107 ---
104
not myself; perhaps you can ask about Aisha with the ones who
know her better.” So the Messenger of God called over the servant,
Barira, and asked her:
“Did you see anything that made you suspicious about Aisha?”
Barira felt burdened to be the object of such an inquiry and her
face turned red. She responded quite seriously:
“I swear to the God who sent you in justice, no. I do not know
anything about her but goodness. I never witnessed even a tiny
imperfection that I could criticize her about. The only thing I know
is that one day, I left dough with her and she fell asleep near it, and a
sheep came and ate that dough. For the sake of my ear and eyes, I
swear that Aisha is as pure, clean, and unadulterated as gold!”
It was a perfect testimony, but the Messenger of God did not
allow himself to be satisfied; he would seek other opinions too.
The Messenger of God decided to consult with his other wives,
and he chose Zaynab bint Jahsh, with whom Aisha had a bit of
rivalry. He also selected Zaynab because her sister, Hamnah, had
believed the rumors about Aisha. He asked:
“O Zaynab, what do you say? Have you ever seen anything
negative about her?”
She also replied that she knew nothing but goodness about
Aisha.189
The Good News
After some days passed, the Messenger of God came to the house of
Abu Bakr and sat down after expressing his greetings. It was his
first visit to them after he had returned from Banu Mustaliq.
At that time, Aisha was in the other room with her mother, crying
and praying to their Merciful Creator about the slander. A woman
from the Helpers was with them, from whom Aisha was trying to
get details which she was unable to get from her mother and father.
After performing his Prayer there, the Prophet turned to Aisha and
spoke.

--- Sayfa 108 ---
105
He asked her to tell him the truth and that if she really did such a
thing, he would ask forgiveness from God for her. He also said that
if such a thing never happened and there was no doubt, then God
Almighty would send news confirming her purity. He concluded by
saying that if a servant accepts his fault, and repents to God, the
Almighty accepts his servant’s repentance.
Each word of God’s Messenger hit Aisha like a sledgehammer.
Although his speech emphasized the good news, it devastated her
that he could mention adultery as even a possibility when she would
willingly sacrifice her life for him. She felt exhausted. No tears were
left to shed, and the blood in her veins felt dried up.
Aisha wondered who she could talk and share her problems with
if the Messenger of God considered the matter this way.
Tongue-tied, Aisha felt numb and thought her heart might stop.
She looked at the faces of her father and mother, silently begging
them to defend her. But they remained quiet, and only said:
“We swear to God, we do not know how to respond to God’s
Messenger.”
Even her own parents were affected by the slander.
Finally, Aisha turned to the Messenger of God, and mustering her
bravery, she said:
“I swear to God, I will never repent or ask for forgiveness on this
matter; God knows the slander is not true and I am innocent of all of
it. If I repented for what people said about me, I would be repenting
for something that did not happen. If I deny it, saying, ‘this incident
did not happen,’ you will not believe me either. Nothing comes to
my mind but the situation of Joseph’s father, so I will say what he
said: ‘So (the proper recourse for me is) patience. God is Whose
help is sought against (the situation) you have described’” (Yusuf
12:18).
She had only one option. She begged to the One, Who is everyone
for those who have no one. She wanted her innocence to be known
by the Prophet. She believed completely she would not return

--- Sayfa 109 ---
106
empty-handed, so she kept supplicating to God.
A short time later, the change in God’s Messenger caught her
attention; beads of sweat appeared on his face. It could be
understood from his state that he was receiving a message from
Gabriel, who had not spoken for one month. He looked as if his soul
would be crushed by the burden of receiving the message. Aisha
started to hope. The door of the firmament had opened; a new
message to settle the issue was coming. She couldn’t look at her
parents, whose faces had become pale with anxiety. Their hearts
were skipping beats, worrying that a declaration confirming the
truth of the slander would be revealed. But Aisha was relaxed
because she knew that divine justice would be manifested.
Then the state of God’s Messenger returned to normal and he
looked at Abu Bakr’s family, wiping away the sweat droplets that
had gathered on his forehead. The grief that had filled the house
until then would be replaced by pleasure, and they would watch the
dark clouds overhead disperse because the Messenger of God was
smiling. He had the serenity that had been absent since the
Hypocrites had tried to set the city in an uproar. He addressed Aisha
in a kind voice:
“I have good news for you, Aisha! God the Almighty revealed a
verse that you are pure and that the slander is not true. Get up and
praise God!”
A month of trouble was ending; what she had expected was
revealed. Aisha’s eyes shone with joy. She said:
“Glory be to God!”
Both Abu Bakr and his wife Umm Ruman felt relieved.
Witnessing the delight of God’s Messenger, Umm Ruman turned to
Aisha, her daughter and the mother of the believers, and said:
“Come on! Get up and give thanks to the Messenger of God.”
But at that moment, Aisha was full of tumultuous feelings. Her
chastity and honesty had been announced directly by God Almighty
and would remain permanent until the end of the world. The verses

--- Sayfa 110 ---
107
directly disproved the slander that had been spread about her for
about a month. She felt thankful for the help of God alone, and said:
“No, I will not thank him. I thank only God the Almighty and
praise Him.”190
From then on, there were verses in the Qur’an acquitting Aisha,
informing the believers of every era about the purity of her life.
The Messenger of God, excited to share the revealed verses with
his people, recited them as follows:
Surely those who invented and spread the slander are a band from
among you. However, do not deem this incident an evil for you; rather,
it is good for you. (As for the slanderers,) every one of them has
accumulated sin in proportion to his share in this guilt, and he who has
the greater part of it will suffer a tremendous punishment.”(An-Nur
24:11)
The Companions took a deep breath, because everyone knew who
was in the band. But they had held their tongues and never dirtied
their hearts. But the verses that followed were concerning them too:
“When you heard of it, why did the believing men and women not
think well of one another and declare: “This is obviously slander!”?
Apparently, choosing a good opinion was essential. It was
necessary to close your ears to a rumor before its veracity was
known. The safest route for Muslims was to believe in innocence
unless guilt was proven. The continuing verses addressing the
slanderers were like a slap in the face:
Why did they not produce four witnesses (in support of the accusation)?
Now that they have not produced witnesses, it is indeed they who are
the liars in God’s sight. (an-Nur 24:13)
In order to accuse a woman of adultery, one should have at least
four witnesses or the accuser is assumed to be guilty of slander,
which would be punished in this world and the next. Even on the
Day of Judgment, an indelible mark on his brow will indicate that
he is a liar, to be remembered as a liar forever. Though Aisha had
suffered greatly for one month, she had gathered heavenly blessings
for her undeserved grief. Through this incident, many injunctions of

--- Sayfa 111 ---
108
the religion were revealed, particularly for Muslim social life.
Basing judgments on suspicion would be eliminated, and a new
social model based on virtue would be established.
It was important for the Companions to show solidarity in
controversial environments because God’s Messenger was among
them. For the Prophet’s sake, they were safe from the natural
disasters that befell other rebellious societies. The verses continued
as follows:
Were it not for God’s grace and favor upon you, and His mercy in the
world and the Hereafter, a mighty punishment would certainly have
afflicted you (who got involved in circulating rumors) on account of
what you indulged in. (an-Nur 24:14)
Then the Companions understood that they should praise God for
those blessings that had been bestowed. They also perceived that all
sins should be taken seriously and never considered insignificant;
they should be stopped in their infancy, before they reached
adulthood.
The Qur’an addressed those who had heard the slander but paid
little attention:
Just think how you welcomed it with your tongues from one another
and uttered with your mouths something about which you had no
knowledge. You deemed it a trifle whereas in God’s sight it was most
grave. Why did you not say, when you heard of it, “It is not for us to
speak of this. All-Glorified are You (O God)! This is an awesome
slander.” God admonishes you lest you ever repeat anything like this, if
you are (truly) believers. He clearly expounds to you His instructions
and the signposts of His way. God is All-Knowing, All-Wise. (an-Nur
24:15)
The Qur’an describes both Joseph and Mary as examples of
chastity and purity who were slandered. Aisha was similar. She was
called ‘the loyal woman’ and addressed as ‘the loyal daughter of the
loyal man’ referring to her father, Abu Bakr. Her disciple, Imam
Masruq, gave her the latter title. Others called her “the loyal woman
(Siddiqa), Aisha.”
As with Joseph and Mary, Aisha was tested by being accused of

--- Sayfa 112 ---
109
adultery, despite her chastity, and showed she deserved her title with
her loyalty and patience. Like Mary, Aisha was born in a home
where the worship of God was woven into the daily fabric of life.
Then she became the wife of God’s Messenger, the most beloved
servant of God, and never married any man other than him, even
after his death. She was the target of Hypocrites and their allies,
who wanted to soil her spotless reputation. Her troubled month
ended with an acquittal. Like the others, her innocence was made
clear by God Almighty —though in the case of Joseph, he was
justified by one close to him, and in the case of Mary, she was
acquitted by her infant son; Aisha was declared innocent by the
direct words of God in the Qur’an. It bestowed on her a particular
significance as the wife of God’s final Messenger.
The wives of God’s Messenger and Aisha
The women who had the good fortune to become the wife of the
most beloved servant of God were the mothers of believers, a title
bestowed on them directly by God Almighty. But the wives were
human beings too. They sometimes thought differently from each
other and their relations with each other were thus affected. But
each had a reason for her behavior and each should be considered
within her time and situation. Otherwise, everything—from how
people addressed each other, to how they communicated, to manners
and more—could all be misunderstood, and the worth of these
fortunate women cannot be perceived.
These blessed women were the confidants of God’s Messenger
and voluntary comrades on God’s path. There was wisdom in their
speech, as well as in their silences. Any evaluation which does not
recognize their value, or any interpretation that does not draw from
a full contextual understanding, has no benefit other than to show
the ignorance of such evaluators and interpreters. Now, when we
analyze Aisha’s conversations and relationships with the wives of
God’s Messenger, two separate situations arise—one with Khadija,
and the other with the rest of the mothers of the believers.

--- Sayfa 113 ---
110
Khadija
Khadija passed away before God’s Messenger married Aisha, so
they did not live a joint life, and they never shared his days. Despite
this, Aisha envied Khadija most among the wives of God’s
Messenger because she was the sweetheart of his youth and his only
means of consolation during those difficult years. During the fifteen
years they shared before revelation, she was his loyal partner. In the
chaotic environment of the first revelation, she was his greatest
supporter. At the end, being a strong and unshakable woman, she
was his helper. Her death coincided with the end of the difficult
period. The Messenger of God never forgot his first wife, with
whom he was so close and with whom he spent his most troubled
days. Every chance he got, he turned a conversation toward Khadija,
even during critical times.
Once, he hesitated when he saw the necklace that his daughter,
Zaynab, had sent to save his son-in-law, Abu’l-As, who was among
the captives of the Battle of Badr. The Prophet was moved because
he remembered that it was a wedding gift to them from Khadija.
The sight of the necklace took the Prophet into a reverie, and he
remembered Khadija as she was in those days. After a little while,
he turned to the people around and suggested they set Zaynab’s
husband free and give the necklace back to her.191 Abu’l -As was set
free for the sake of a memory from Khadija.
The situation did not change in later years. During the conquest of
Mecca, while he was walking with thousands of people to the city,
people realized that he had changed his direction and was going to
Khajun. The people watched him curiously and again witnessed an
example of his fidelity, because the Prophet was visiting the grave
of his dear wife Khadija. Before the conquest of Mecca, an event
that changed history, he prayed before her grave at great length.
His love and fidelity continued until his death. When a gift was
given to him, he first sent it to Khadija’s relatives. He honored them
and showed them respect, giving them even the pillow on which he

--- Sayfa 114 ---
111
was sitting. When someone asked why, he replied:
“I love the ones she loves, too.”192
He never allowed anything to be said against her and immediately
interfered if someone said something negative. One day, when the
conversation turned to Khadija, Aisha coyly said:
“As if there is no one in this world but Khadija!”
These words offended the Messenger of God, and he turned to
Aisha and swiftly started to recount Khadija’s qualities, one by one.
Then he added that, at the same time, he had children who reminded
him of her.193
One day, while God’s Messenger was sitting at home, someone
knocked on the door. He ran and opened it, saying:
“O my God, Halah, Khuwaylid’s daughter, Halah, came!”
He had recognized the voice of Khadija’s sister, Halah. Again, the
Messenger of God was taken into the past by the sound of her voice
and her way of asking permission; apparently he saw Khadija in the
personality of her sister.
Aisha, who had witnessed his excitement, watched with
wondering admiration. The Messenger of God still loved Khadija so
wholeheartedly. If he’d had such worthiness at his side, would she
ever need to worry in this world or the hereafter? It was a love
worth striving for, so there had to be a way to gain it, which would
be possible if the real reason behind his love was known. So Aisha
asked:
“What is the reason for your concern for this woman, who died
years before and left you? God the Almighty has bestowed on you
even more auspicious ones than her since then!”
Her question explained what was going on in her mind; Aisha
wanted him to explain his love for Khadija. It was impossible that
someone as acute as herself would not know how he felt, so likely
she was aiming to hear Khadija’s worth directly from the Messenger
of God’s tongue.

--- Sayfa 115 ---
112
The Messenger was again displeased with her words, and in a
voice indicating his discontent, he asked:
“Was there someone like her? I swear to God that He never
bestowed me one better than her! When people persisted in unbelief,
she came and believed me. When people accused me of lying, she
confirmed what I said. When people withheld their possessions
from me, she brought whatever she had and gave it to me. And God
granted me children with no one but her.”194
Aisha got the answer she expected. At the side of God’s
Messenger, everyone had a special place, and loving one of them
did not mean that he did not love the others. Because of Aisha’s
question, Khadija became known by all of Muslim society as a
woman about whom nothing negative should be said.
Then it fell to Aisha to apologize to God’s Messenger and ask
forgiveness. She promised to never again say anything about
Khadija.195 God the Almighty bestowed the merit to Khadija of
enjoying a love the others could never attain. She remained with the
Messenger of God even after her death. Aisha would express her
feelings about Khadija as follows: “Although I did not share the
same days with Khadija, I did not envy any other wives of God’s
Messenger as I did Khadija. The Messenger of God mentioned her
so often and spoke of her always with praise and admiration.
Whenever he slaughtered a sheep, he would send some meat to
Khadija’s friends.”196
Other wives of God’s Messenger
Years after Khadija passed away, Sawdah was the first woman to
have the honor of becoming the Prophet’s wife. Actually, the
woman who arranged the marriages mentioned the names of Aisha
and Sawdah at the same time. Sawdah married God’s Messenger ten
years after the revelation; Aisha married him four years after that
marriage..
All the women he eventually married joined his household after
the Emigration. They became the mothers of the believers as

--- Sayfa 116 ---
113
follows: Hafsah was in the third year; Umm Salama in the fourth
year; Juwayriya and Zaynab bint Jahsh in the fifth year; Umm
Habiba in the sixth year; Maymuna and Safiyya in the seventh year.
God’s Messenger was fifty-four when he married Aisha, fifty-six
when he married Hafsah, fifty-seven when he married Umm
Salama, fifty-eight when he married Juwayriya and Zaynab, fifty-
nine when he married Umm Habiba, and sixty when he married
Maymuna and Safiyya.
These fortunate women, who shared a home with God’s
Messenger, became the mothers of believers. Once, Sawdah was
afraid that the Messenger of God was displeased and planned to
divorce her, and she said:
“I beg you, do not divorce me and do not leave me far away from
you. My time is not important; assign my days with you to
Aisha.”197
But the Prophet did not divorce her, and she would keep her title
as mother of believers until the Day of Judgement.
Aisha’s Status
But fate placed extraordinary roles on some of the Messenger’s
wives. Aisha’s status, in particular, was special and acknowledged
by the other wives.
It was because of Aisha that the Qur’an revealed the punishment
for slander, and the sentence was applied directly by the Messenger
of God. In other ways, too, Aisha was different than the other wives.
Because of Aisha, the verse about tayammum (performing ablution
with sand or earth) was revealed, and Muslims learnt how to cleanse
themselves in a place where there was no water. In Mecca, she was
shown to the Messenger of God in a dream, and he was told directly
by Gabriel that she would be his wife.
Aisha was the only wife of God’s Messenger who was a virgin
when they married. His other wives were widows.
Aisha was also the only one whose mother and father were

--- Sayfa 117 ---
114
Emigrants. Another distinction of her family was that four
generations of the same family—including her grandfather, father,
brother and two nephews—believed in God’s Messenger and
became Companions.
Aisha was the only wife who witnessed a revelation as it came to
the Prophet. The Companions who wanted to bring a gift to the
Messenger of God preferred to give it on his day with Aisha,
believing he would be happier and more likely to accept it.
Aisha was the only one who saw Gabriel (in human form) and
Gabriel greeted her as well.
Aisha’s bridal due was higher than the others. Years later, she
explained this and accepted only Umm Habiba, whose wedding was
held in Ethiopia:
“Her marriage ceremony was done by a king.”
After the day that Sawdah gave her turn to Aisha, the time that
Aisha spent with God’s Messenger was double that of the others.
Aisha had a different kind of relationship with the Messenger of
God, who wanted to make her content. Sometimes, she behaved
coyly as a result of her favored position, and enjoyed how the
Messenger of God tried to please her.
The Messenger of God raced against her twice during his life.
God’s Messenger said that he had seen Aisha in heaven, and
described the shining whiteness of her palms. She was surely the
best among the mothers of believers, with whom God’s Messenger
was content when he died.
Aisha became distinguished in knowledge—no other wife, and no
woman among the Companions, narrated as many hadiths as she.
The depth of her knowledge had a stronger influence than any other
woman, including the other wives of God’s Messenger. When those
who were unable to decide on an issue came to ask her about the
matter, they left her place without worry and with an answer.
When his sickness worsened, God’s Messenger wanted to spend

--- Sayfa 118 ---
115
his last fourteen days with her. He passed away with his head in her
lap. Aisha continued to share the same room with God’s Messenger
after his death. After he passed away, God’s Messenger was buried
into the soil in Aisha’s room, where the soil was the most auspicious
on earth. After his death, Aisha became the best source for
information about his behavior. Everyone, even the leading
Companions, applied to her, and everyone left with an answer.
Her submission in worship, her sensitivity in fasting and Prayer,
her asceticism and devotion to God, and her desire to give away
whatever she had were the unique characteristics that showed her
virtue.
People who considered her according to her innate superiority
respected her more, and competed with each other to please her in
order to receive her prayers on their behalf. Umar treated her even
more respectfully than the other mothers of the believers, including
his own daughter, Hafsah, and reserved more for Aisha than anyone
else when he divided the spoils during his Caliphate.
Considering her situation from the outside, and taking feminine
characteristics into account, it would have been normal for Aisha to
envy Sawdah, whom the Messenger of God had married four years
before her. But this was not true; on the contrary, Sawdah was one
of the mothers of the believers with whom Aisha found intimacy
and friendship. Aisha said:
“What a noble woman she was! I did not see a more likable
woman than Sawdah, whom I desired to be.”198
Umar’s daughter, Hafsah, became Aisha’s closest friend, almost
as if the alliance between their fathers was reflected in them, as
well. They spent time together, consulted each other, and understood
and respected each other’s opinions.
Umm Salama was known for her clever, keen intellect. Her role in
decreasing the tension at Hudaybiya was so crucial that it cannot be
undervalued.199
Aisha praised the good fortune of Juwayriya:

--- Sayfa 119 ---
116
“I do not know anyone but her who was so beneficial to her
society.”200
Aisha used many similar kind expressions to speak about the
other mothers of the believers, but of course each of them kept the
Messenger of God away from the others for one day. Under normal
circumstances, someone in her position could have considered those
who kept the most beloved servant of God away from her with
displeasure. With the exception of some minor incidents, Aisha’s
attitude did not change, and she never had difficulty accepting the
preference of God’s Messenger.
Before God’s Messenger even expressed his desire, she
understood what he wanted. Aisha cared about meeting his needs
before he asked. She knew there were various reasons for each of
his marriges—with some, he aimed to create ties with the Meccans;
with others, he hoped to solve problems with Jewish tribes; and with
others, he wanted to help some tribes warm to Islam. His aim was
often successful, too - partly due to his marriages, there were mass
conversions to Islam.
Some of his marriages resulted from revelation, such as his
marriages to Umm Habiba and Zaynab. It is possible to say that the
conquest of Mecca started on the day when the Messenger of God
married Umm Habiba,201 and that as a result of his marriage with
Zaynab,202 many erroneous problems and practices were eliminated
without strife and replaced by the beauty of Islam.
Their home was like a school; it was continually producing
answers to questions that people might come across in the future.
Examples of all the feelings that could arise in women were shown,
and people examined the Messenger of God’s life to determine their
own approach. From a visionary perspective, perhaps it should be
said that these occurrences in the house of felicity needed to happen
to be an example for future Muslims. Otherwise, it would have been
impossible to find the best way to solve similar problems among
women, whose sensitivity is innate. Their feelings were the

--- Sayfa 120 ---
117
temporary and transitory results of a variety of situations. God’s
Messenger was the object of jealousy and envy, too.
It was not forbidden to point out a distinction approved by God.
Aisha sometimes did this to win God’s Messenger’s approval for
herself. One day, she went to the Messenger of God and coyly said:
“O Messenger of God, if you came to a valley full of fruit trees
and saw some trees in which their fruits had been eaten and others
that had never been touched, where would you choose to take a
break and tie your mount?”
Her meaning was clear, and God’s Messenger understood her; she
was his only wife who was a virgin upon their marriage. The
Messenger of God gave her the answer she expected:
“Near the trees whose fruit still had not been touched!”203
The women of the Prophet’s home each had a different nature,
and of course some preferred the company of each other. While
Aisha was close to Hafsah, Sawdah, and Safiyya, Zaynab was closer
to Umm Salama and a few others.204
Next to Aisha, Zaynab had perhaps the most influence in the
house; she was the daughter of the Prophet’s aunt on his father’s
side, and the sister of Abdullah ibn Jahsh, a loyal Companion. Her
marriage with the Prophet was arranged directly by revelation.
The preferences of some wives over others were not like cliques.
Being close to someone did not mean being distant from someone
else. Though they held different opinions and had different feelings,
all it took was remembering the preference and attitude of God’s
Messenger, and their issues were resolved peacefully.
Despite everything, there was mutual respect among them.
Zaynab was the foremost among those who prepared Aisha for her
wedding after Hijra and among those who defended her when she
was slandered.205
Most of the time, the Prophet’s wives competed to earn good
deeds and heavenly rewards; they wanted for themselves as many
good deeds as the others, but without lessening the others’ good

--- Sayfa 121 ---
118
deeds.
When the Messenger of God wanted to seclude himself in the
mosque (itiqaf), a tent was pitched in the Prophet’s Mosque and he
stayed in the tent during the last ten days of Ramadan. Once, a tent
was pitched for Aisha in the courtyard of the mosque, too. Then the
desire to worship similarly appeared in the other mothers of
believers, who wanted to be close to God and His Messenger, and
they also asked for tents. First Hafsah, and later Zaynab, requested
permission to have tents, too. When the Messenger of God saw the
tents in the courtyard of the mosque, he asked:
“What are these?”
After he heard the answer, God’s Messenger was somewhat
unhappy and asked:
“Now, do all of you intend to create good deeds with all of these
tents?”
It was impossible for the women to enjoy worship if their
competitive feelings were piqued. Intervening, God’s Messenger
ordered them to dismantle the tents, and quit his seclusion in the
middle, intending to complete it in the next month (of Shawwal).206
On one of God’s Messenger’s journeys, Zaynab and Safiyya drew
lots to accompany him. The journey was long and conditions were
severe, and the camel that Safiyya was riding became tired and
unable to walk. Since Zaynab had an additional camel, God’s
Messenger said:
“Since Safiyya’s camel is not able to walk, I want you to give her
a camel.”
It was a perfectly reasonable suggestion. But the Arabs harbored
grievances against the Jewish tribes, primarily those of Banu
Qaynuqa, Banu Nadr, Banu Qurayza, Khaybar, and Wadi al-Qura.
Safiyya’s father, Huyayy ibn Akthab, had led many campaigns
against the Muslims, which had led to deep-seated prejudices
against Jews. Without thinking, she said:
“Me? Give to that Jew?”

--- Sayfa 122 ---
119
Her thoughtless words injured the Messenger of God deeply and
he became angry. He determined that this was not the attitude of a
believer and it belonged to the dust of history. He adopted a very
serious stance against Zaynab, and to make his feelings even more
evident, he avoided her for several months. Zaynab was in great
distress, and paid severely for what she had said. She lost the
pleasure of being together with God’s Messenger, her greatest
happiness in the world. Zaynab repented and asked for forgiveness
to God, and prayed to return again to the past days. When the period
of estrangement had lasted so long, she began to think it was only a
dream that they could ever be reconciled. She even started to pack
up her pillow and mattress. As a last resort, she visited Aisha and, to
save herself from the gloomy situation, asked Aisha to mediate
between herself and God’s Messenger.
It was a suitable idea, and Aisha’s mediation was sure to result in
a solution because Aisha pleased God’s Messenger. One day, not
long after, the Messenger of God came to Zaynab in the middle of
the day. Thus ended her gloomy days, and the black clouds over her
home dispersed as the shining face of God’s Messenger appeared in
her place again. But there would be one difference—there would not
be any discriminatory talk against anyone from then on.207
Although Aisha was envied without malice because of her
favored position at the side of God’s Messenger, Aisha said the
following praising Zaynab:
“I did not see any woman more sensitive to religious issues than
Zaynab. Surely, she was the most pious and fearful of God; her
conversation was the most truthful, and she cared the most for her
relatives. Zaynab led in giving sadaqa (voluntary charity),
sacrificed herself the most to help others, and was the most
unreachable in her closeness to God. Though she had a hot-
tempered nature, her anger subsided very quickly.”208
One day, the Messenger of God told them:
“The one among you who will first reunite with me is the one

--- Sayfa 123 ---
120
who has the longest arm.” After he passed away, his wives
remembered his words and came together to figure out who would
be the first to die after God’s Messenger. They stretched their arms
and tried to measure whose arm was the longest, but were unable to
reach a conclusion. Aisha explained:
“We continued to measure our arms until Zaynab bint Jahsh died.
When she passed away, we understood that the one who had the
longest arm was Zaynab, and the real meaning of ‘the longest arm’
was the charity she gave to help needy people. We all gave to the
needy, but she gave so much with her own hand, saving any money
she had little by little, to give for the sake of God as charity.”209
One day, Aisha indicated the petite height of Safiyya to God’s
Messenger, and coyly said:
“What you spare to her is enough for her.”
Her meaning was that he did not need to allocate more time for
her. Her attitude angered God’s Messenger and he said:
“If what you said was poured into an ocean, it would surely
become turbid.”
Upon hearing this, Aisha became sad. She had not meant to make
God’s Messenger angry, or to criticize Safiyya. She said:
“I only wanted to describe her.”
But the Messenger of God turned to her and said:
“Even if the world were given in return, I would never be pleased
with that kind of description!”210
After that, to keep her heart away from any kind of negativity,
Aisha took Safiyya into her room and became her friend, and they
worked together on important things.
Safiyya, who was known for her talent at cooking as well as her
beautiful face, and who was envied by the other wives because of
her cooking skills, left one hundred thousand drachmas as an
inheritance when she passed away, bequeathing one-third to her
sister’s son. Aisha, upon learning that some did not want to give

--- Sayfa 124 ---
121
such a large amount to the nephew because he was Jewish,
immediately intervened:
“Fear God and give him what was bequeathed to him!”211
The wives of the Prophet strived to be fair, and when one of them
was hurt, they immediately tried to please her and help her forget
what had happened. As the wives of God’s Messenger, it was
impossible not to desire the simplicity and purity of their lives.
When Umm Habiba was dying, she turned to Aisha, who was
with her and said:
“Since both of us were the wives of God’s Messenger, it is
possible that there were certain rights you had over me and vice
versa. May God the Almighty forgive both you and me for this
reason.”
Available sources do not indicate even a small problem between
Aisha and Umm Habiba. But these blessed women were sensitive
because they enjoyed the pleasure of being the wife of God’s
Messenger, and they were so conscious of their responsibilities that
they did not want to leave anything unfinished or broken as they
passed from this world to the next. In response, Aisha prayed:
“May God the Almighty forgive you for everything, pardon your
imperfections and keep you away from troubles.”
Umm Habiba became very happy. She looked at Aisha and said:
“You have made me happy, may God make you happy, too!”212
They were the best examples of virtue and their relationships with
each other were also virtuous. We must indicate once more that
small jealousies and envies that occasionally erupted were never
permanent. The Messenger and his revelations and behavior caused
them to ponder deeply and return to moderation and justice.
One day, the wives came together in Sawdah’s room and
discussed Aisha’s status with God’s Messenger. After long
conversations, they concluded:
“O Umm Salama, we swear to God you see that people wait for

--- Sayfa 125 ---
122
Aisha’s day to bring a gift to the Messenger of God. As Aisha wants
nothing but good deeds, we also want nothing but good deeds. Why
don’t you visit God’s Messenger and tell him to tell his people to
bring gifts whenever they want and however they wish instead of
having this preference.”
This was the general consensus, so Umm Salama told God’s
Messenger. He was displeased and turned away. Returning in
misery, Umm Salama explained what had happened, but they
insisted she go again. His reaction was the same—God’s Messenger
was displeased by this suggestion. Umm Salama again returned
dispirited. Still, they wanted her to return and ask again, and when
Umm Salama went to God’s Messenger for the third time with the
same request, he became angry and said:
“O Umm Salama, do not give me a hard time about Aisha. I swear
to God I never receive a revelation when I am with any of you, but
only her.”
Realizing the gravity of the issue, Umm Salama immediately
changed her attitude and gave up the request:
“I ask forgiveness from God since I gave you a hard time about
Aisha, O Messenger of God.”
The other wives, who had felt neither the atmosphere or the
strength of the Prophet’s reply, probably thought she had not been
able to express their opinion clearly. This time, they asked Fatima to
mediate:
“Go to the Messenger of God and tell him about our situation,
saying, ‘your wives expect justice from you about the daughter of
Abu Bakr, for the sake of God’.”
Probably not aware of what had happened, Fatima passed on the
message from the wives to the Messenger of God. She witnessed a
great change in his countenance—he suddenly became angry and
asked:
“O my daughter, do you love the one I love?”
It was a rhetorical question, and she answered yes without

--- Sayfa 126 ---
123
hesitation.
It seemed God’s Messenger did not like third parties to interfere
with an issue between himself and his wives. His tone froze Fatima
in her place, and she gave up her request; she explained the situation
to his wives. They wanted her to return and explain their intention
more clearly, but Fatima refused. For the Prophet’s daughter, this
door was closed, and all their insistence was in vain, for they were
not able to change her mind.
The wives next decided to send Zaynab with the message. She
had distinction among his wives, for their marriage had been
revealed to God’s Messenger by Gabriel, in a verse that is recited.
Her kinship with God’s Messenger, too, gave her maturity and
standing. Zaynab came and insisted:
“Your wives ask for justice about the daughter of Abu Quhafa’s
son, for the sake of God.”
She raised her voice a little, and Aisha heard it as well. Noticing
that Aisha had overheard, God’s Messenger glanced at Aisha, and
was guided by her reaction. Then Aisha and Zaynab started to talk
amongst themselves. Aisha was brilliant, and had a well-known
talent for discussion and persuasion, and finally Zaynab gave up her
argument. Watching all that unfolded, the Messenger of God looked
at Aisha and praised her:
“After all, you are Abu Bakr’s daughter!”213
The Prohibition (tahrim)
The Messenger of God got into the habit of visiting his wives after
the Afternoon Prayer. He asked about their well-being and spent
some time with them. He established a regular time for each of
them, to just be with them. After the visits became habit, the
Prophet’s wives began to expect his arrival, and began to await the
visit of God’s Messenger after every Afternoon Prayer.
One day, as they sat and waited for God’s Messenger, the time
became late and they did not hear from him. Every passing minute

--- Sayfa 127 ---
124
made them anxious because they were concerned they would miss
the time with the Messenger of God to which they were
accustomed.
God’s Messenger suddenly appeared, and they became excited
and welcomed him immediately. Even though it was late, his
shining face appeared, honoring their home with his presence. But a
suspicion lurked in their hearts. Aisha spoke on behalf of the other
wives and asked the reason for the delay. The Prophet said:
“A woman from Zaynab’s tribe brought me a bowl of honey as a
gift.”
The women understood that the reason for the delay was Zaynab.
They were slightly envious, but they did not reveal this to God’s
Messenger.
Speaking amongst themselves, they remembered that the
Messenger of God was sensitive to bad smells and avoided them.214
So they decided to ask when God’s Messenger came near, “What
did you drink?” and “What is this smell?” Then, when he
responded, “I drank honey sherbet,” each wife would reply
something to the effect of, “perhaps that bee gathered pollen from
malodorous flowers.”
It happened as they planned. Whomever he approached, the
Messenger of God got the same reaction. Each time, he said:
“No, I only drank honey sherbet near Zaynab.”
Though his reply was mild, God’s Messenger was offended and
saddened, and he even swore that he would never drink honey
sherbet again.215
Such a minor oath by an ordinary person would mean very little,
but the Messenger of God was not ordinary. He was the sole
recipient of revelation, which was ongoing. The religion was shaped
under the light of revelation. Therefore, a judgment was established
on every sentence that passed his lips, and would become an
example for his followers.
A short time later, Gabriel came with a new revelation. The

--- Sayfa 128 ---
125
Messenger of God was sweating and seemed to be suffering under
the burden of responsibility settled on his shoulders, almost as if he
were crippled.
Afterward, a smile appeared on his face again. God the Almighty
had addressed him:
O Prophet! Why do you forbid (yourself) what God has made lawful to
you, seeking to please your wives? And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful (at-
Tahrim 66:1).
From the verse, the warmth of being close to God was felt, and
revealed new aspects of religion to humanity on the behalf of God’s
Messenger. The first was that a person should never regard
something that God permitted as unlawful. The second was that
such a position would require forgiveness, and the knowledge that
we can only be forgiven by God, through His All-Forgiving and All-
Merciful attributes. The third was to clarify that those who swore an
oath to give up a permissible thing could revoke it by paying its
atonement. The verse continued:
“God has already decreed for you (O believers) on the breaking of
your oaths (of not fulfilling what is not just and right, and the
expiation thereof). God is your Guardian, and He is the Knowing,
the Wise.”
Aisha and Fatima
Among the daughters of God’s Messenger, Fatima had the closest
relationship with Aisha. They lived together in the same house for
awhile, until Fatima married Ali. Aisha was among those who
prepared Fatima for her wedding. Though their lives were very
simple, their pleasure was immense. In telling us of that day, Aisha
passed on the following lessons:
“The Messenger of God told us to prepare Fatima since she was
going to marry Ali. We went to the home immediately and brought
an amount of soft soil from Batha, which we spread on the ground.
We filled two pillow sheets with fiber. Then we prepared bowls of
dates and grapes and spring water to drink, and placed a stake at one

--- Sayfa 129 ---
126
edge of the house for clothes, pots, and pans to be hung. I have not
seen any wedding better than Fatima’s!”216
Only a wall separated the room where Fatima lived with Ali from
Aisha’s room, and that wall had a window. Sometimes, they came
together and talked through this window.217
Aisha was Fatima’s best friend and shared nearly everything with
her. Fatima talked of her joy, her sadness, and her goals she was not
able to achieve. One day, when her hands became swollen from
grinding wheat into flour, Fatima asked God’s Messenger for a
maid. She returned without one, and Aisha was the one with whom
she shared her problems.218
Fatima loved Aisha very much. Their love and respect was
mutual, because for Aisha, Fatima held a unique place. One day
Aisha was asked:
“Who was the most beloved at the side of God’s Messenger?”
Without thinking, she responded, “Fatima.”219
Aisha also said:
“After her father, I have never seen anyone more beautiful than
Fatima.”220
She never looked at Fatima with malice. She said:
“I did not see anyone, more than Fatima, who looked more like
the Messenger of God in terms of the dignity and serenity of her
behavior, and the elegance and politeness of her posture and manner
of walking… When she entered the Messenger of God’s place, he
used to stand up for her, kiss her and make her sit near him. When
God’s Messenger came to Fatima’s place, she would do the same
thing.”221
The virtue of Fatima was conveyed to Muslim society through
Aisha. During the incident of Ahl al-Bayt (household members),
taking first Fatima, then Ali, Hasan and Husayn under his wool
blanket, the Messenger of God said:
“These are my Ahl al-Bayt.”222

--- Sayfa 130 ---
127
It was the days before the death of God’s Messenger. His wives
came together and sat in his presence. Then Fatima came, and her
style did not depart from her father’s; even her steps were parallel to
his. Upon seeing her, the Messenger of God said:
“Welcome, my daughter.”
With great respect and concern, he bade her to sit near him. It was
as if there had been something missing and her arrival allowed the
scene to become complete.
Then the wives witnessed that the Messenger of God bent to
Fatima’s ear and whispered something to her secretly. The room was
filled with a deep silence. She started to cry. Her weeping
apparently touched God’s Messenger, and to stop it, he came closer
and again said something in her ear. Shockingly Fatima, who had
been sobbing, began to smile. Aisha could not stand not knowing
what made her cry first and smile later, so she went to Fatima and
asked:
“The Messenger of God preferred to say something only to you,
despite the presence of his wives, and you started to cry. Could you
please tell me what he said?”
Fatima responded:
“I cannot reveal the secret of God’s Messenger.”
Fatima would not share what the Messenger of God had told her
with anyone, not even Aisha. Yet, Aisha would not give up until she
satisfied her curiosity.
After the Messenger of God had passed away, Aisha asked Fatima
again:
“For the sake of my rights over you, what did the Messenger of
God whisper to you that day?”
When Fatima responded, “I can tell you now,” Aisha became very
happy, as if the whole world had been given to her, because she
would learn a secret only Fatima knew, information that was related
to the Messenger of God’s feelings for his society. Fatima said:

--- Sayfa 131 ---
128
“The first time when he whispered in my ear, he told me that
although Gabriel usually came once every Ramadan to recited the
whole Qur’an, this year he came twice. He said, ‘I guess my death is
near!’ and he advised me to ‘Be patient, fear God, and to not give
up piety.’
“When he saw that I had started to cry, he leaned in again and told
me the good news that I would be the first one among his family
who would be reunited with him. He said, ‘O Fatima! Do you want
to be the first lady among believing women or the first lady of this
world?’ This was the reason for the smile you saw.”223
The Last Days with the Messenger of God
Days had passed. The day that Aisha married the Messenger of God
was fresh in her memory, as if it were yesterday, though ten years
had passed. She had been living a completely different life for a
decade—she was the mother of believers; the open door for the
weak, the needy, orphans, women, and those who sought
knowledge. But signs indicated her time with the prophet was
coming to an end. For the last year, there had been a sense of saying
farewell.
It was the last Monday of the month of Safar. The Prophet went to
the Baqi Cemetery to perform a final duty for his Companions—
again making amends for all that had passed with those in their
graves.
While he walked back, his head started to ache severely, and he
became feverish. His temperature was so high it could be felt
outside the turban he wrapped around his head.
At the same time, Aisha’s head began to ache, too. To express that
they were together even in difficulties, Aisha turned to the
Messenger of God and said:
“Oh, how bad my headache is!”
She hoped to make the Messenger of God talk a little and forget
his troubles a bit. But she got a response she did not expect:

--- Sayfa 132 ---
129
“How bad my headache is!”224
Everyone looked at the Messenger of God with compassion. His
was clearly a different kind of headache that they had not noticed at
first, and one whose pain did not seem to ease.
His state did not improve for the next eleven days. But he
continued to come to the mosque to lead his society in
congregational Daily Prayers.
Even while dying, his good manners and sense of justice made
him abide the daily schedule for his wives. Yet his wives understood
that both his heart and mind were with Aisha. Everything they had
experienced until that day elevated their understanding to a point
where they started to consider his preference as natural. Aisha, who
had an unparalleled perception and acuity, should witness his final
days, to accurately record what she saw and heard. All of his wives
gave up their turns, and because their voluntary preference made the
Messenger of God happy, it pleased Aisha even more. The
Messenger of God spent his last days with Aisha, until he would
reunite with the ultimate beloved one.225
The Messenger of God had difficulty standing up, and most of the
time, he could only walk by dragging his feet. He went to Aisha’s
room with the help of two people. He would stay there until his last
breath.
He appeared among the people again on Thursday, and despite his
pain, he wanted them to write down what he said to keep them away
from taking wrong steps after his death. He told those near to
himself:
“Come close to me and let me dictate something, and in this way,
you will not fall into heresy after me.”
It was a touching scene, but many who saw his suffering said:
“Don’t you see how the Messenger’s pains have increased and
how he suffers! We have the Qur’an, and God’s book is enough for
everything.”
The Companions were divided in two. Some felt this way, others

--- Sayfa 133 ---
130
thought they should do as he asked and record what he said. As the
conversion continued, the Prophet looked uncomfortable, and he
turned to them and said:
“Keep away from me!”
He returned to Aisha’s room. Despite his high fever and the
severity of his pain, he continued to appear in society and perform
Prayers with them. He went to the mosque for the Evening Prayer
and recited the entire chapter of Al-Mursalat during the Prayer.
Then he returned home again, and the scene frightened Aisha,
because his illness increased with every minute. He looked as if he
did not have the strength to stand up. He turned to Aisha and asked:
“Has the congregational Prayer been performed?”
It had not been. Until that day, they had performed every
congregational Prayer in the mosque following God’s Messenger.
Since the Messenger of God had not come yet, they had waited for
him, without performing the Prayer before his arrival. Aisha said:
“No, O Messenger of God. They are waiting for you.”
He forced himself to stand up and said:
“Prepare water so that I may perform ablution.”
What had been said was done. He raised himself, and with
difficulty, performed the ablution. As he was leaving for Prayer, he
fainted. The Messenger of God was unable to go to the mosque
where he had gone every day. To the house of felicity came a
terrible agitation and Aisha ran around in desperation. Fortunately,
he came around soon after and asked:
“Did the people perform the Prayer?”
Aisha replied:
“No, O Messenger of God. They are waiting for you.”
Though it was nice they had waited for God’s Messenger, he did
not think he had the strength to lead them. To Aisha, he said:
“Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in Prayer.”
This was also understood to be an approval of his closest

--- Sayfa 134 ---
131
Companion to become the leader of his society after he was gone.
But Aisha said:
“O Messenger of God, my father is a tenderhearted person. He
cannot hold back his tears when he starts to recite the Qur’an! Why
not assign someone other than him?”
Behind her answer was anxiety that no one could fulfill the
leadership position of God’s Messenger. She felt that people would
criticize any person who attempted to fill his absence, because they
would feel the Messenger of God’s absence, and Aisha wanted to
protect her father from criticism. But the Messenger of God insisted:
“Tell Abu Bakr to lead people in Prayer!”
Aisha asked again, but his answer did not change. Her insistence
annoyed the Messenger of God, and to indicate that her persistence
was irrelevant, he said:
“It’s as if you are like the women who quarreled about Prophet
Joseph. Tell Abu Bakr he should be the imam and lead the people in
Prayer.”226
Aisha understood. Leading the people after the death of the
Messenger of God would be difficult, but God’s Messenger was
choosing his successor. It meant her father, Abu Bakr, would
manage his duties properly. So she sent a message to Abu Bakr and
he led the Prayer. But his leadership would not be restricted to only
one Prayer. After that time, the Messenger of God could never again
attend the mosque, and Abu Bakr would lead the Prayers from then
on.227
On Sunday, the Prophet was distributing whatever he owned,
apparently aiming to leave this world as he had entered it. He gave
to such an extent that Aisha sent their empty oil lamp to a woman
and asked for a few drops of oil, in order not to leave God’s
Messenger in the dark.228
In their house, no food remained. They gave the Prophet’s suit of
armor, worn in battle, as collateral to a Jewish neighbor for thirty
units of barley.229

--- Sayfa 135 ---
132
On Monday, the Messenger of God moved aside the curtain that
opened into the mosque from Aisha’s room and looked upon his
society. He was pleased with the scene—the congregation was
orderly, following its imam, and performing their duties of worship.
He closed the curtain with pleasure and returned to Aisha’s room.230
After the Messenger of God whispered to his daughter, Fatima, he
called his grandsons, Hasan and Husayn, kissed them and advised
them to have good manners. At this time, the other wives went to
Aisha’s room, to witness the final moments of God’s Messenger.
The wives of God’s Messenger were among those in his presence;
he gave them advice in his last moments.
He turned to Aisha and asked:
“O Aisha, what did you do with the gold?”
Aisha went and immediately brought the gold to which he
referred.
Taking the pieces in his hand, he counted, “… five, six, seven.
How can Muhammad enter the presence of God while these gold
pieces are with him? Take them and give them as charity!”231 His
pains grew more severe and he turned to Aisha and said:
“O, Aisha, you should have no doubt that I still feel the suffering
of the meal that I ate at Khaybar. I feel as if my veins are being torn
today as a result of that poison!”232
He covered his face with a piece of black wool cloth. When he
felt hot and drowsy, he uncovered his face. Meanwhile, he spoke of
Prayer:
“Prayer, Prayer.” He repeated the word many times. He told his
people to be sensitive and behave humanely toward slaves and
servants.233 On any issue in which he was afraid for his people’s
possible negligence, he gave advice.
Meanwhile, Aisha sat close to him and recited An-Nas and Al-
Falaq, and stroked his holy body with her hand in the way she had
learned from him.234 After each recitation, she blew her breath over
him, and asked God to heal him.

--- Sayfa 136 ---
133
The signs were clear that the Messenger of God would soon
depart this world for the Hereafter. He rested his head on Aisha’s
bosom and fixed his eyes on the ceiling. Abu Bakr’s son,
Abdurrahman, entered the room with a miswaq in his hand. The
Messenger of God’s eyes followed the miswaq. Our perceptive
mother understood that he liked using the miswaq and asked:
“Should I take that for you?”
He nodded. She took it from her brother to give to God’s
Messenger. But the miswaq was so hard that Aisha asked:
“Should I soften this for you?”
He nodded again.
She softened it and then gave it to the Messenger of God.235
After cleaning his teeth, he held his finger up. His eyes were
directed to the ceiling and his lips were moving. To hear him, Aisha
brought her ear close to his mouth:
“Please forgive and embrace me with Your mercy together with
the Prophets, the martyrs, and the true believers upon whom You
bestowed blessings. Accept me to Your highest abode.”236
Aisha had a gnawing suspicion, because once when he was
healthy, she had heard him say:
“No Prophet’s soul is ever captured unless he is shown his place
in Paradise. After that point, he either continues to live or is given
the option to die.”
As soon as she heard that he was asking for the highest abode,
Aisha remembered his statement and told herself, “he will not be
with us anymore.”237
This was a time when there were no words. Asking God from the
heart was the most vital action for the believer. Aisha implored God
while holding the hand of the Prophet. She did not expect it, but just
then he pulled his hand away. It was time to depart, and it was not
proper to hold on to the world.
When he gave his last breath, his blessed head was on her

--- Sayfa 137 ---
134
bosom.238
It was Aisha’s saddest day. Covering her face with her hands, she
sobbed. She tried to stay strong, and placed a pillow under the head
of God’s Messenger. Then she called people to give them the sad
news.
For the Companions who had waited for the time when he would
return among them, it was a catastrophe. Medina was filled with
mourning. Some, like Umar, who considered it impossible to live in
a world without the Prophet, did not know what to do. But death
was God’s order. It had come and taken the Messenger of God to the
other side of the thin curtain that separates this world from the
Hereafter.
It was time to perform the final duty for the Messenger of God.
The Companions, who did not know what to do in their suffering,
were indecisive about where to bury his pure body. Then Aisha’s
father ,Abu Bakr, recalled something in a flash:
“I remembered something that I had heard from the Messenger of
God but had forgotten; the Messenger of God said, ‘No doubt, God
the Almighty takes the soul of a Prophet in the place where he
would love to be buried!’ So, we must bury him where his bed
is.”239
God’s Messenger would thus be laid to rest in Aisha’s room.
Touched by the scene, Abu Bakr said to Aisha:
“See, this is the first and most auspicious of your moons, O
Aisha.”
It was the statement that only Aisha could understand.
Years before, Aisha had had a dream in which three moons, in
succession, rose over her room. When she had told Abu Bakr of her
dream, he said:
“If this was a truthful dream, the most auspicious three people on
earth will be buried in your room.”240
Now, the most auspicious moon was rising over her room, as the

--- Sayfa 138 ---
135
Prophet was being buried there.
The Messenger of God would stay near her. The place was filled
with so much warmth that she left only when she came to Mecca for
a pilgrimage, or for short visits. This practice would continue until
the end of her life.

--- Sayfa 139 ---
136
183 Ibn Hisham, Sira, 2:290; Ibn Sa’d, Tabaqat, 2:107.
184 Al-Munafiqun, 63:8.
185 Bukhari, Manaqib, 9 (3330).
186 Safwan ibn Muattal was praised by the Prophet with the words: “I know nothing but
goodness about him” and “The person God clothed in clothes of Paradise.”
187 Ibn Hisham, Sira, 4:464.
188 Bukhari, Shahada, 15, (2518).
189 Bukhari, Shahada, 15 (2518).
190 Bukhari, Shahada, 15
191 Abu Dawud, Jihad, 121 (2692); Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:276.
192 Yamani, Ummu’l Muminin, 13.
193 Bukhari, Fadailu’s Sahaba, 50 (3607).
194 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:117 (24908).
195 Tabarani, Mujamu’l Kabir, 23:11.
196 Bukhari, Nikah, 107 (4931).
197 Bukhari, Nikah, 97 (4914).
198 Muslim, Rada, 47 (1463).
199 Bukhari, Shurut, 15 (2581).
200 Abu Dawud, Itq, 2 (3931); Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:277 (26408).
201 It is known that the Prophet married Umm Habiba after the revelation of the verse
meaning: “…it may be that God will bring about love and friendship between you and
those of them with whom you are in enmity.” (al-Mumtahana 60:7)
202 “We united you with her in marriage…” (al-Ahzab 33:37).
203 Bukhari, Nikah, 9 (4789).
204 Bukhari, Hiba, 7 (2442).
205 Bukhari, Tafsir, 18 (4473, 4479)
206 Bukhari, Itiqaf, 6 (1928).
207 Abu Dawud, Sunan, 4 (4602); Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:131 (25046).
208 Muslim, Fadailu’s Sahaba, 83 (2452); Nasa’i, Ishratu’n Nisa, 3 (3944).
209 Bukhari, Zakah, 10 (1354).
210 Abu Dawud, Adab, 40 (4875); Tirmidhi, Sifatu’l Qiyama, 51 (2502).
211 Ibn Sa’d, Tabaqat, 8:128.
212 Hakim, Mustadrak, 4:24 (6773); Ibn Sa’d, Tabaqat, 8:100.
213 Bukhari, Hiba, 7 (2442).
214 Bukhari, Hiyal, 11 (6571).
215 Bukhari, Tafsiru’s Sura, 386 (4628).
216 Ibn Majah, Nikah, 24 (1911).

--- Sayfa 140 ---
137
217 Nadawi, Siratu Sayyidati Aisha, 122.
218 Bukhari, Khums, 6 (2945).
219 Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 61 (3874); Hakim, Mustadrak, 3:171 (4744).
220 Tabarani, Mujamu’l Awsat, 3:137 (2721); Abu Ya’la, Musnad, 8:153 (4700).
221 Abu Dawud, Adab, 155: (5217).
222 Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 61 (3871); Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:304 (26639).
223 Bukhari, Manaqib, 22 (3426).
224 Ibn Sa’d, Tabaqat, 2:206, 233.
225 Bukhari, Janaiz, 94 (1323).
226 Bukhari, Jama’a, 11 (633), 18 (646, 647).
227 From the Isha Prayer on Thursday until the Fajr Prayer on Monday, Abu Bakr led
seventeen Prayers in total before the Prophet passed away.
228 Ibn Sa’d, Tabaqat, 2:239.
229 Bukhari, Jihad, 88 (2759).
230 Bukhari, Sifatu’s Salat, 12 (721).
231 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:49 (24268).
232 Bukhari, Maghazi, 78 (4165).
233 Hakim, Mustadrak, 3:59 (4388); Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:311 (26699).
234 Bukhari, Maghazi, 78 (4175), Tib, 31 (5403).
235 Bukhari, Khums, 4 (2933).
236 Bukhari, Tafsir, 69 (4310).
237 Bukhari, Maghazi, 79 (4194).
238 Bukhari, Janaiz, 94 (1323).
239 Tirmidhi, Janaiz, 33 (1018).
240 Hakim, Mustadrak, 3:62 (4400); Malik, Muwatta, Janaiz, 1:232 (548).

--- Sayfa 141 ---
138
CčĆĕęĊė 4
AFTER THE PROPHET

--- Sayfa 142 ---
139
T
THE ERA OF THE FOUR RIGHTLY GUIDED CALIPHS AND
MUAWIYA
hough they suffered, life continued. Though the Messenger of
God was absent, Aisha, who had spent the most time with him,
and who had carefully observed him in a variety of situations,
remained.
In her presence was a two-sided communication—people came
and asked Aisha questions, or Aisha intervened when something
wrong happened. Conveying the message continued, with Aisha as
the teacher. She shared the knowledge that she had acquired from
the Messenger of God, and was reassured that future generations
would have healthy information about the religion.
One day, there was a land dispute between one of the
Companions, Abu Salam, and others. The two sides could not agree
to whom the land belonged. Abu Salam shared his troubles with
Aisha, probably expecting her support. But after she had listened to
him, Aisha told Abu Salam to keep away from that land since she
had heard from the Messenger of God that whoever behaves
unjustly, even for one unit of land, will be tormented after death.241
Another day, someone came to her and said that a number of
people recited the whole Qur’an in one night, in one or two
sessions, and wanted to know whether that was proper. She said:
“They recite, but in reality, they do not understand! The
Messenger of God and I used to get up and perform Prayer nearly
the whole night. He recited Al-Baqara, Al Imran and An-Nisa.
When he came to a verse that had a threatening expression in it, he
immediately sought refuge in God from that punishment. When he
recited a verse that included good news, he turned to God and asked
for that reward.”242
As before, people continued to bring their newborn children to the
house of felicity to ask for prayers and blessings, and Aisha prayed
and asked for God’s blessings. One such day, while she was putting
the baby back on his pillow, she noticed an amulet used for fortune

--- Sayfa 143 ---
140
telling on the pillow. She looked at it carefully and put it aside, and
asked:
“What is this?”
They said:
“It will protect the baby from an evil spirit.”
Aisha became angry. It was a deviation, and such a deviation so
early after the death of God’s Messenger meant an open invitation to
many mistakes in the future. She threw away the amulet and said:
“There is no doubt that the Messenger of God banned fortune-
telling, and was very angry with those who practiced his, too.”243
After the conquest of new lands, people wondered about the
permissibility of beverages that they had recently encountered, and
so they asked Aisha. She approached each issue carefully, and
reminded them of the statements of God’s Messenger about
intoxicants, and advised them to avoid drinking beverages of an
unknown nature.244
During the season of Hajj, when all roads led to Mecca, women
gathered around Aisha to ask any questions on their minds. It
happened so frequently, that she would walk with a group of women
who gathered around her. She considered their talks as a time to
convey the message and advise them.245
When she was in Mina, Aisha witnessed some teenagers laughing
together amongst themselves. Pointing to them, she asked those
around her what made them laugh.
They said:
“Someone was tangled up in the tent’s rope and fell down, and he
was about to break his neck and lose his eye.”
She warned them:
“Beware, do not laugh. I once heard the Messenger of God
saying, ‘a Muslim is given a (higher spiritual) rank because of the
thorn that pierced his foot or any suffering worse than this, and one
of his sins is forgiven’.”246

--- Sayfa 144 ---
141
Aisha always had the goal of representing justice without
considering who addressed her. People knew she was a treasure
trove of knowledge, and continued to visit her often to receive the
maximum benefit.
The Caliphate of Abu Bakr
After the passing of God’s Messenger, Abu Bakr became the Caliph
(leader of the Muslim community). Although he was a sensitive and
tenderhearted person, Abu Bakr regarded the consent of God above
everything else. Uthman came to him during the early days of his
Caliphate and mentioned that some of the Messenger’s wives had
requested their inheritance. But the Messenger of God had really left
no wealth behind. Abu Bakr decided to ask his daughter, Aisha,
whether she had any additional knowledge about the issue, because
he knew that she was not among those asking for an inheritance.
Hearing this, Aisha shuddered and said:
“Glory be to God! There cannot be an inheritance when the
Messenger of God said, ‘We Prophets do not leave inheritance; we
leave alms.’”
The other wives and the Caliph then understood; no new
judgment was needed on an issue that already had a clear judgment.
The wives of God’s Messenger gave up their request and returned to
their plain lives.247
From then on, Aisha was a significant source of information for
Caliph Abu Bakr. When impure people tried to confuse or muddle
issues, he often consulted Aisha. In those days, Abu Bakr had many
troubles, some of which were large enough to crush mountains into
dust. Aisha’s knowledge had been invaluable. Nearly two and a half
years had passed quickly. There were apostates and false prophets.
Abu Bakr became tired, but had the serenity of fulfilling the trust of
the Messenger of God.
But Abu Bakr fell ill. He continued to show the same sensitivity
during his sickness. He kept his daughter nearby and shared his
confidential thoughts. His general demeanor seemed to indicate that

--- Sayfa 145 ---
142
he had received an invitation from heaven—it was understood that
his time on earth was ending. Abu Bakr had been able to endure the
loss of God’s Messenger for only for two years, three months and
ten days.
Aisha, who had witnessed the last days of God’s Messenger, also
took care of her father during his sickness.
Abu Bakr was as sensitive in his dying as in his life. He called
Uthman to his side to write a pact. Then he asked Aisha to give his
remaining wages to the state’s treasury upon his death. He said:
“Umar asked me and I was obliged to take six thousands
drachmas from the treasury. All of them are hidden under the wall in
a certain place. Please find them and return them to Umar.”248
His words conveyed his perception and intelligence, and indicated
whom he chose as his successor, as well.
He had something else to tell Aisha, and told her to come closer
as he advised:
“I have spent neither a drachma or a dinar of the Muslim people’s
money since I have taken on the responsibility of caring for them.
On the contrary, I stayed hungry and dressed in the oldest clothes.”
Abu Bakr’s excitement and the beating of his heart increased with
each passing minute, and he made haste to give up the burden on his
shoulders. He looked at his daughter with compassion. He treated
her like his own mother, since she had married God’s Messenger.
The warmth of his looks showed how much he loved her. His love
did not stop him from sharing the difficult problem that he had held
back, and he said:
“My precious daughter, you know that I love you and admire you
most among people. Do you remember that I gave land to you, but
could you give it back to me since I am not fully satisfied with how
I allocated it? I want the division of wealth among my children to be
aligned with God’s Book. In the presence of God, I do not want to
be in the position of he who has preferred some of his children over
others.”

--- Sayfa 146 ---
143
Without hesitation, she answered that she would fulfill his wish at
once.249
Abu Bakr asked his daughter:
“On which day did the Messenger of God die?”
“A Monday.”
By his posture she understood he was thinking. He asked:
“What is the day today?”
“Monday.”
He took a deep breath, and the following wish poured from his
lips:
“I ask and beg of God that there will not be one more night after
this!”
Then he asked:
“How many shrouds were wrapped around the Messenger of
God?”
Aisha replied:
“We shrouded his body with three new white cloths, which are
called sahuliyya. His turban and shirt were not among them.”
Indicating the cloth he wore, he said:
“Wash this cloth of mine, because there is a saffron stain on it.
Add two more cloths to it and shroud me with them.”
The gravity of the situation had become apparent. Her father and
the Caliph of the Muslim people was about to die. Aisha felt
confused and had forgotten her own grief because she was so busy
with the requests, coming one after the other. She generally showed
great sensitivity in fulfilling her father’s dying requests, but she did
not approve of this one. He was not just anyone; he was the Caliph
and leader of the believers, the trusted successor to the Messenger
of God. She objected:
“But that one is old.”
But Abu Bakr was determined and said:

--- Sayfa 147 ---
144
“That is okay. Living people have more need for new clothes than
dead ones. Either way, the shroud of death will decay.”250
He had another request. He wanted to continue the togetherness
with God’s Messenger that had started with revelation and lasted
twenty-three years. He wanted to be buried near the Messenger of
God, away from display and ostentation. He wanted his wife, Asma
bint Umays, to wash his body and his son, Abdurrahman, to help
her. Aisha’s eyes filled with tears.
As he had hoped, he was reunited with God’s Messenger that
night, and was buried near him. The second moon, which Aisha had
dreamt of and which Abu Bakr had interpreted, rose over her room.
Aisha’s house of felicity hosted the moon of the first Caliph next to
the moon of the Prophet.
The Caliphate of Umar
During the Caliphate of Umar, Aisha remained an important
authority to consult on issues that arose. Though he bestowed
respect on all the widows of God’s Messenger, Aisha’s knowledge
made her unique. He addressed her as “the beloved of God’s
Messenger.”
Umar first considered the Prophet’s widows when he was
allocating the wealth gained in territorial expansions, giving each of
them ten or twelve thousand drachma annually. He gave two
thousand more than this to Aisha, because of her position at the side
of God’s Messenger.251
Umar carried a heavy responsibility. He intervened immediately
when he saw someone incorrectly deducing religious rulings, and he
did not allow religious matters to be discussed randomly. Surely, he
wanted to avoid mixing the Qur’an and the Sunnah with other
matters. In light of his era, it was a wise decision. In Medina, during
the time of Umar, when people did not lightly or capriciously
discuss religion, Aisha was a leader issuing fatwas (rulings) when
issues were uncertain.
Umar was a regular visitor of Aisha’s; he asked her about

--- Sayfa 148 ---
145
anything of which he had no knowledge, and made decisions based
on Aisha’s responses. His attitude toward her was equally true for
the other widows; he attended to them and always gave priority to
them. He asked if they needed anything, and preferred for them to
benefit first from any opportunities or wealth he gained. When he
received some out-of-season fruits, he put them in separate baskets
and sent them to the wives of the Prophet.252 When he slaughtered a
sacrificial animal, he first remembered them. Aisha said:
“Umar thought of every detail, without discriminating, and never
neglected to send each of us our share from a sacrificed animal.”
When the land of Mesopotamia (modern-day Iraq) was
conquered, it was time to divide the gains of war. The leading
Companions came together in a gathering to discuss the allocation.
After some brainstorming, Umar said:
“In my opinion, their spoils belong to those who worked hardest
in the conquest, and must be shared among them.”
Everyone replied in agreement. So Umar asked:
“Then with whom should we start?”
They replied:
“Who may deserve this more than you? Surely, you should start
with yourself first.”
As the Caliph, it probably seemed to the others he was most
deserving because of his status. Yet, he had never witnessed the
Messenger of God behave in this way. God’s Messenger preferred
being last when wages were allocated, even though he was at the
frontline when there was service to be done. Thus he replied:
“No, I will start with the people of God’s Messenger’s home.”253
Again, after the same conquest, a small cloth bag full of jewelry
was brought to the Caliph. He asked the people around him:
“Do you know the value of this?”
They did not know. Since no one was sure of its value, Umar
(may God be pleased with him) could not allocate it fairly. So he

--- Sayfa 149 ---
146
asked:
“Would you allow me to send it to the most beloved of God’s
Messenger?”
The Messenger of God’s beloved was loved by everyone and
without hesitation, they replied in the affirmative.
With emissaries, Umar sent the small cloth bag to Aisha. In a self-
possessed way, she opened the bag carefully. When she saw the
jewelry, she shuddered and pondered. Most likely, she was
contemplating the austere life of the Messenger of God. She
muttered:
“Why does Umar do this to me after the death of God’s
Messenger?”
With her palms turned up, she prayed: “My God, do not give me
even one more chance to experience his benevolence; please take
my soul before I see another such gift!”254
Umar displayed the same sensitivity when allocating the gains
after the conquest of Khaybar. He did not forget the Prophet’s
wives, giving them the chance to choose between lands or a
monthly wage.255
Aisha was shy in front of Umar because she had seen that God’s
Messenger behaved differently with Umar, and God’s Messenger
had said that even the devil was frightened by Umar. Mutual respect
was preeminent between them. When knowledge of religion was
under consideration, Aisha’s status was indisputable for Umar. He
also continued Abu Bakr’s tradition of visiting Aisha or sending an
emissary to consult her about problems he faced. It was not only this
way for the Caliphs; this consideration reflected the general attitude
of the Companions and the following generation of Muslim
scholars, particularly when an issue related to knowledge of hadiths
arose.256
One day, Umar heard that Amr ibn Umayya had given a roll of
cloth to prostitutes, who were excluded from society because of
their morals, and he became very angry. Umar told Amr that such

--- Sayfa 150 ---
147
charity would not be accepted as charity by God. But Amr insisted,
saying that the Messenger of God had said, of prostitutes:
“The things that you give to them are considered as alms for you,
too.”
His defense increased Umar’s anger, and Umar said he was
slandering the Messenger of God. As their quarrel grew, they agreed
to come to Aisha for the solution. Amr said:
“For the sake of God, I want you to tell us: didn’t you hear the
Messenger of God saying ‘the things that you give to them are
considered as alms for you, too’?”
Aisha’s reply was clear:
“As God is my witness, yes, I heard.”
Her response made Umar step back in shock, because his
judgment was notable. He started to question himself and thought,
“Who knows how much I missed hearing from God’s Messenger
while I was busy in my business?”257
Days followed days, and then ten years had passed. It was time
for the predestined journey of Umar—the Caliph was assassinated,
and he lay down in his blood. A short curved dagger had been
poisoned, and the Caliph was about to say goodbye to this world.
He was agitated because he had lacked the courage to tell Aisha he
wanted to be buried near God’s Messenger, at his feet. Aisha’s
permission was necessary. But time was working against Umar and
he was about to lose his chance. He called his son, Abdullah, near to
him and said:
“Go to the mother of the believers, Aisha, and be careful not to
say that the Caliph sent you. From now on, I am not the leader of
believers. Say ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab sent me’ and then say, ‘he is
asking permission to be buried near his two former friends.’”
It was a very delicate message. The good manners of the
community
addressed
by
God’s
Messenger
were
beyond
comparison. Though Umar’s heart was in favor of his request, he
did not want to put pressure on Aisha by using his title. He wanted it

--- Sayfa 151 ---
148
to be received as the request of an ordinary person. Abdullah went
to Aisha immediately. Aisha had heard the poignant news, and was
crying for what had happened to Umar. Greeting her first, Abdullah
asked for permission to speak, and said:
“Umar sends his greetings to you. He wants to be buried near his
two friends.”
Who did not want to be buried near the Messenger of God and his
loyal friend? It was what Aisha wanted too. But she knew she must
prefer her Muslim brothers and sisters to her own self. She turned to
Abdullah ibn Umar and said:
“I was planning that for myself, but today I prefer Umar to
myself.”
On learning about the answer, Umar took a deep breath. The
worry he had felt was gone, and his eyes were smiling. It was time
to leave. Then, a final anxiety appeared in his mind. Perhaps
permission had been granted under the influence of his authority as
Caliph. He decided to confirm it once more, and called his son to
him and said:
“O Abdullah, when I die lay me down over my cedar, and take me
to Aisha’s door and say, ‘Khattab’s son Umar asks permission from
you.’ If she gives her permission again, bury me there. If you realize
that she changed her mind, beware and do not insist. Instead, bury
me in the public cemetery like everyone else. I am worried that she
felt pressured by the authority of the Caliphate when she gave her
permission.”
Umar showed thoughtfulness, even while he struggled against
death. With his last breath, Umar had set off for his eternal journey.
Medina felt a painful grief; it was almost as if the city had never
experienced disaster until that day. It was time to fulfill his last
request.
Abdullah ibn Umar came to Aisha and said what his father had
asked. Aisha paused for a moment with wondering admiration—
what a lesson in courtesy he had given while leaving this world.

--- Sayfa 152 ---
149
Surely, Umar showed greatness, courtesy and delicacy, but it was
not unique to him.
But she had already given her word, and she considered it
unnecessary to grant permission again. She repeated herself to be
clear and make the people feel better. And so Umar began his
eternal rest in the place that Aisha had chosen for herself.258 As a
result, Aisha’s dream became complete, and the third moon rose
over her room.
Umar’s burial meant the beginning of a new era for Aisha, for she
no longer felt the same comfort visiting the Messenger of God and
her father. After Umar was buried, she covered her face as she had
not on her previous visits. Although Umar was dead, she remained
veiled in the place where Umar was buried. Because her room was
not large enough for a fourth person, Aisha moved to a place
nearby.259
The Caliphate of Uthman
The status afforded Aisha during the previous two Caliphs
continued during the era of Uthman. People from the outlying areas
of the Caliphate’s expanding borders came to Aisha for information
that would enlighten them. Though Uthman was their leader, his
attitude was no different than Umar regarding the wives of God’s
Messenger, especially Aisha. He tried to fulfill their wishes and
make them comfortable when they worshiped, and tried to improve
their conditions.
Aisha’s attitude toward Uthman attracted notice, for she was shy
in front of Uthman, because the Messenger of God had felt shy
around him, as well. About Uthman, the Messenger of God had
said:
“How could I not feel shy around the person whom the angels feel
shy?”260
The Messenger of God had married two of his daughters with
him, and had prayed for him many times.261

--- Sayfa 153 ---
150
There was safety, serenity and tranquility in the first six years of
his Caliphate, which lasted twelve years. But in the seventh year,
signs of trouble arose, and some groups of people started to voice
their objections. The door into fitnah (discord) was broken and some
people began to think differently of the Caliph. Some began talking
offhandedly and tactlessly about him, and as a result, the Caliph
became a target. Some, such as Ibn Saba, wanted to defame Islam
through the Caliph.
Aisha was saddened by this internal strife, and warned those who
were behind the discord:
“People who curse Uthman are not aware that they will be the
target of every kind of curse. Surely God will curse them, too. One
day, I saw the Messenger of God sitting with his knees touching
Uthman’s. He was receiving a revelation and I was wiping the sweat
from his brow. Moreover, God’s Messenger married two of his own
daughters to him. He affectionately called Uthman, ‘my little
Uthman.’ Do not forget that the man who was so worthy to God’s
Messenger was also a valuable servant of God.”262
She also narrated that the Messenger of God told Uthman three
times:
“O Uthman, when the day comes, God will make you wear an
important shirt by making you leader; if the Hypocrites want to take
that shirt off you, beware and do not take it off!”
Even during the Messenger of God’s sickness, he turned to Aisha
and said:
“I want some people from my society to come to me.”
Aisha asked:
“O Messenger of God, should I call Abu Bakr?”
He stayed silent. Aisha asked:
“Should I call Umar?”
His silence continued. It was clear that there was someone he
wanted to see but would not say it. Aisha asked:

--- Sayfa 154 ---
151
“Should I call Uthman?”
A smile appeared on his holy face immediately and he said yes.
Uthman was called to the presence of God’s Messenger and they
talked at great length. God’s Messenger apparently reminded him of
the significance of the responsibility that would be on his shoulders
when discord appeared. By slightly opening the curtain to the
unknown future, he advised him to bear the discord with patience.
Many years later, after everything had come to pass, Uthman said:
“The Messenger of God promised me I should bear it by being
patient!”263
Aisha was surely the one who had best understood Uthman’s
position at the side of God’s Messenger. However, she did not
refrain from pointing out any mistakes she saw. She was not
embarrassed to express these mistakes, particularly in political
decisions, and did not abstain from warning the friend of God and
His Messenger.
During these times, when the borders had expanded and internal
problems arose, some notable tribes appeared at the opposition’s
forefront, which increased the desire of others to oppose the
Caliphate. It was the perfect environment for those who thrived on
discord, such as Abdullah ibn Saba. He started a rumor that God’s
Messenger had left the position of Caliphate to Ali. The territories
controlled by Muslims had expanded, from the Byzantine Empire to
Africa, and he gathered and provoked people and invited them to
rebel. These rebels chose Egypt as their home.
The turmoil spread to other areas and caused sincere people to
turn indecisive. Muharik ibn Thumama, a leader in Basra, hesitated
in response to what he had heard. He sent his sister, Umm Kulthum
bint Thumama, to Aisha to ask a question:
“Go to Aisha and ask her opinion about Uthman ibn Affan,
because people here say many things about him.”
He also sent a letter detailing what he had heard, asking Aisha’s
opinion of Uthman. Umm Kulthum delivered the letter and said:

--- Sayfa 155 ---
152
“O my dear mother, some of your children sent me to you. They
give their greetings and their respect and ask your opinion of
Uthman ibn Affan.”
Aisha started by saying:
“God curses the one who curses Uthman.”
Detail by detail, Aisha explained Uthman’s honorable place in the
sight of God’s Messenger. Then she said that those who said offhand
or tactless things about him would be cursed.264
One day, Uthman heard the news that thousands of people from a
different region were gathering and starting to move toward the
Hejaz, “to perform the pilgrimage.” Though it looked innocent, their
real aim was the Caliphate. Interpreting the matter correctly,
Uthman assigned Ali to turn them back. Ali went and talked with
them in great detail.
These were people who had transgressed all limits and they
praised Ali to the skies. Yet Ali’s sermon clearly indicated that they
were wrong. Aiming to control the situation, they pretended to calm
down at first, though they would later return to take the Caliphate.
Aisha’s own brother, Muhammad ibn Abu Bakr, was among them.
His choice made Aisha very sad. She told him that he was on the
wrong path, but was not able to make him listen. She even asked
him to perform pilgrimage with her, to take him away from the
rebellious people, but he did not agree to go with her. The Caliph of
God’s Messenger was forced to surrender; the rebels did not let even
allow one sip of water reach him. Even an attempt by Umm Habiba
failed that day—she was about to be killed for bringing water to the
Caliph, and was only able to escape in a large crowd.265 The
situation continued like this for three weeks.
When Medina’s atmosphere was as dark as it could be, pilgrimage
season came. Aisha went to Mecca to perform the pilgrimage. Even
when people told her it was better to stay in Medina in peace, Aisha
remembered what had happened to Umm Habiba and said:
“If I had been there, I would have spoken against them and I

--- Sayfa 156 ---
153
would be subjected to what happened to Umm Habiba.”266
After Hajj, she was returning to Medina when the sad news was
conveyed to her that the third Caliph of God’s Messenger had been
martyred. Her first response was to those who had criticized
Uthman:
“The reason for this was your criticizing all that the Caliphate had
done!”
Their criticisms of Uthman, who had tried to bring some of the
leaders who had caused discord to his own side, had gone too far.
Uthman had wanted to decrease the tensions within his society by
bringing opponents to his side and assigning them notable roles. But
people did not understand his attempts for peace. They continued to
open say that the Caliph was doing wrong.
When Aisha met Talha and Zubayr, she asked them:
“What news do you have?”
They had escaped from the poisonous atmosphere of Medina to
the peaceful city of Mecca. The people who filled the streets were
far from righteousness or just, and what they might do next was not
clear. Aisha recited a part of the chapter al-Hujurat:
If two parties of believers fall to fighting, make peace between them
(and act promptly). But if one of them aggressively encroaches the
rights of the other, then fight you all against the aggressive side until
they comply with God’s decree (concerning the matter). If they comply,
then make peace between them with justice and be scrupulously
equitable. Surely God loves the scrupulously equitable. The believers
are but brothers, so make peace between your brothers and keep from
disobedience to God in reverence for Him and piety, so that you may be
shown mercy. (al-Hujurat 49:9-10)
She then added:
“How people need to hold fast to this verse at this moment.”267
Aisha started to think; her mouth was sealed in grief. Instead of
returning to the disorder in Medina, she stayed in Mecca, and went
to the Ka’ba. She said nothing, and did not want to hear anything
from anyone. She came to the door of the Ka’ba and then to Hijr

--- Sayfa 157 ---
154
Ismail, where she prostrated, weeping for what had happened to
Muslim society.
When people heard she was there, they came and gathered around
her in a large crowd. They waited for Aisha to speak:
“O people!”
She summarized what had happened and advised them to act
perceptively.
“They put so much pressure on Uthman that even if the
defamatory claims about him were true, he would be as pure as the
gold gathered from dust, or as pure as clothes soaked in water, and
would go to the presence of God thus purified.”268
Though there was no benefit in realizing yesterday’s mistakes, she
hoped to impart a lesson from the past to help them avoid the same
mistakes in the future.
Aisha’s feelings were deeply wounded and she had difficulty
accepting reality. Ashtar al-Nahai came during the early days when
the shock of the incident had not yet passed, and asked:
“What is your opinion on the martyrdom of the Caliph?”
She replied:
“God forbid! How can I consent to the bloodshed of Muslims’
leader? How can my heart accept it?”269
But past troubles stayed in the past, and it was time to take a new
step forward. Being able to control the streets depended on a new
Caliph. Aisha’s candidate for Caliphate was Ali, and she said so to
whomever came to her.
Building the Muslim state after Uthman was significant in its own
right, and careful plans needed to be made. But the discordant
environment was an obstacle to sound thinking and good planning;
the purity of the Messenger of God’s time fell further into the past
with every passing day, leaving everything murky and muddled. It
was a precursor of more troubles. The fitnah that had turned life
upside-down continued and no one could guess when it would end.

--- Sayfa 158 ---
155
Under such clouded circumstances, secret hands intervened, hoping
to misguide even the most sincere believers. As the Messenger of
God had indicated years before, they were stepping into a new era.
Aisha wanted to postpone her return to Medina until the discord had
settled.
This turmoil resulted in the murder of the Caliph Uthman. They
had shed blood forbidden to be shed, in the city where bloodshed
was forbidden, and tried to take wealth that was forbidden to them
during the holy months. Aisha said that even if the rebels were
numerous enough to fill the whole world, she did not consider all of
them equal to even one finger of Uthman, because of the malice of
their actions.270
The Caliphate of Ali
In order to stop the turmoil and re-establish safety, Ali started by
replacing the provincial governors who had been involved in the
fitnah. But this would create endless new problems for Ali.
Aisha was becoming more anxious about Medina; bad news
arrived constantly. People gathered around her, including provincial
governors from the Uthman era. Although they had acknowledged
the Caliphate of Ali, leaders such as Talha and Zubayr came to
Aisha in Mecca, unable to endure their grief alone, which attracted
the notice of others.
Mecca became the meeting place for those who were anxious
about recent events. The city became a central location for those
who wanted to avenge Uthman, whose assassins had not been
brought to justice. The idle crowds seemed anxious about the
destruction of many years’ work; those who were sincere stayed
together to find peace again. Though the pilgrimage season was
over and people were expected to leave Mecca, they did not. The
voices rising up from the crowd said:
“We will not leave here until Uthman’s murderer is found.”
The leaders gathered to share their thoughts. While some
proposed to stay in Mecca, some of them thought they should go

--- Sayfa 159 ---
156
back to Medina. The majority believed their target should be Basra,
because it was thought that the people who had murdered Uthman
were from Basra. Thus, Basra became their goal. Their intention
was to avenge Uthman’s murder and re-establish the system that had
fallen apart.
An army that would punish ibn Saba and his rebellious supporters
was established at a headquarters in Abtah; some donated hundreds
of horses and camels, while others procured war supplies, and
others still donated silver and gold.
Aisha and the other wives of God’s Messenger were together. But
they stayed behind when the crowd went to Basra, and with tears,
wished them a safe journey.
Ali set out on a military expedition toward Mesopotamia (Iraq) in
order to re-establish his authority. But when he received the news
about Aisha and the crowd moving toward Basra, he returned. Ali
wanted to pacify the crowd, which included leading Companions,
primarily Aisha. One Companion, Imran ibn Husayn, the leader of
Abu al-Aswad ad-Duali, went to Aisha. Basra’s governor, Uthman
ibn Hunayf, had sent a party to learn the intentions of the group
coming toward them. They said:
“Our leader sent us to you in order to learn your intentions.” They
awaited Aisha’s reply.
Aisha said:
“I swear to God, a person like me does not act secretly or by not
telling the truth to her children.” She explained at length her worry
over the chain of mistakes, and how she had begun on this journey
to enjoin good and forbid evil.271
Talha and Zubayr had a similar response. Everyone wanted to find
the murderers of Uthman and put an end to the turmoil.
They held fast to re-establishing peace. Aisha’s sermons had a
profound effect on those who listened. The crowd divided into two,
and a large group of them stopped opposing her.272
To those who followed her, Aisha advised them never to draw

--- Sayfa 160 ---
157
their swords unless they were forced to do so. Despite the tension,
she explained that no one had permission to fight or hurt another
person, except in self-defense. Aisha wanted for Uthman ibn
Hunayf, who had been captured at the riot that broke out during the
turmoil, to be set free. She said he should be given the choice to go
wherever he wanted.273
Aisha had sent similar letters to the people of Kufa, asking them
to assist in creating a peaceful environment. Many leaders received
her letters; she directly asked them to show sensitivity.274
To Muhammad ibn Abu Bakr and Muhammad ibn Talha, who
asked Aisha how to act in situations where Muslims fought their
Muslim brothers, she reminded them of the sad story of the two sons
of Adam. Though Cain intended to kill him, Abel promised not to
raise a hand against him. Aisha said:
“O my dear son! If you are able to do what the most auspicious
son of Adam did, do it!”275
Muslims’ Test with Their Brothers: The Battle of the Camel
While just seven hundred people were with Ali when he left
Medina, this number swelled to seven thousand by the time he
arrived in Kufa. When the people from Basra joined, the total
number was around twenty thousand. On the other hand, those who
were with Aisha numbered thirty thousand. It was as if they were
going down a path with no exit - only a dead end. It was possible
that the swords which had been drawn to fight unbelievers and bring
justice were to be drawn against beloved brothers who prayed
beside each other. It was a sad day for both groups. The Battle of the
Camel would be the hardest test that the Muslim community had yet
faced.
The two crowds met at Zakar. First, the envoy of Ali, Qaqa ibn
Amr, came to Aisha and said:
“O my dear mother, could you please tell me the reason why you
came to this city, and what drove you to take such a step?”

--- Sayfa 161 ---
158
Aisha replied with the same politeness:
“Assuring peace among our people.”
They had used the same language and had the same aim. Ali
asked Talha and Zubayr to come and mediate. When they came, he
asked the same question and added Aisha’s words. Their own
replies were no different. Perhaps the matter could be solved before
it really began. The envoy Qaqa addressed them:
“Could you please tell me how this peace will be?”
They said:
“Avenging the murder of Uthman by punishing his murderers,
because not doing this means not following the order of the
Qur’an!”
They were right, but there were other truths to consider. The
envoy Qaqa said:
“Let’s say you kill the murderers from Basra who assassinated
Uthman. But wouldn’t your situation before you kill them be better
than your situation after you kill them? You would be killing six
hundred people, and as a result six thousand people would rush into
the streets against you. The man you want is Hurqus ibn Zuhayr,
who killed Uthman, but six thousand men have agreed not to give
him to you. If you leave them to their own devices, isn’t that going
to be a step against peace? If you kill them, isn’t it a bigger problem
than it is now? If you take steps to punish Hurqus ibn Zuhayr, you
will find six thousand people who do not want to deliver the real
murderer to you. This matter cannot be solved so easily. Should you
not excuse Ali? He certainly wants to find and punish the murderer
of Uthman, but he is waiting for the turmoil to calm down, in order
to not shed more blood. He is waiting for the right time to exercise
the punishment.”
Aisha interrupted him:
“Then what do you think, O Qaqa?”
“It is true there is an unsolved matter, which is only possible to

--- Sayfa 162 ---
159
solve under serene conditions. When the turmoil lessens, everything
will be made right. I advise you to choose peace without acting
hastily, to renew your acknowledgement of Ali as Caliph, and by
being the leader in good deeds as you have been before, and not to
inadvertently help those who seek to create discord.”
Aisha said:
“You are right. You have spoken well. Go back, and if Ali shares
your opinion, know that the matter is over and that peace is essential
to us.”
As the turmoil decreased, Qaqa went back to Ali and explained
everything. His words pleased Caliph Ali, who expected that the
problems would die down. It seemed the matter would be settled
without unnecessary bloodshed. Ali was very pleased and wanted to
share his pleasure with his army. He stood before them and shared
his happiness about the truce.276
It was a time of serenity, as Ali and his people, and Aisha and her
people, met in peace and agreed to delay the solution for the right
time. Since the Caliph did not think differently about punishing the
murderers of Uthman, the responsibility was left to him. Aisha and
her people prepared to return.
Talking with Talha and Zubayr, Ali addressed them, “O my
brothers,” and said:
“I am not someone who is ignorant of what you know. But how
could I do this to the community that dominated the streets and over
whom we do not have authority? Here, look at them—our slaves go
with them, and even some Arabs we never expected, accompany
them. You see them walking among you as they like. Tell me, is it
possible for me to fulfill your request immediately under these
conditions?”
It was time to return with a satisfied soul. As the preparations
continued, suddenly every eye was turned to Aisha. Something had
happened to her, and it was clear that she felt regret; her every
movement indicated remorse.

--- Sayfa 163 ---
160
When some time had passed, she asked those nearby:
“Where are we?”
They responded, “Haw’ab.”
With sadness, she said:
“Haw’ab? “Surely, we belong to God and to Him we are bound to
return!” (as Muslims are supposed to say when a disaster befalls
them).
She grew even more dejected. Her anxiety became agitation and
then she was frantic with sorrow. People gathered around her and
could not understand her behavior. With curiosity and impatience,
they watched the change in Aisha.
Then words of misery and regret poured out from her lips:
“I swear to God, it has turned out that I am of the one mentioned
about the dogs of Haw’ab. We should return immediately.”
The people still understood nothing. Her behavior became even
more elusive and their curiosity increased. With their looks, they
indicated they would not take one more step unless they were told
what was going on. Desperately, Aisha said:
“I heard the Messenger of God say to us, ‘One among you will
come to her senses when she hears the barking of Haw’ab dogs.’
That day, I smiled on hearing this, and he warned me by saying,
‘Beware O Humayra, you might be that person!’”277
As the dogs’ voices echoed in her ears, she wanted to scream:
“O Messenger of God, you spoke the truth!”278
That day, Zubayr told Aisha:
“While God would bring peace through you, are you going to give
up and go back?”
Others revealed similar thoughts:
“On the contrary, you should continue on your path so that God
Almighty grants peace among people.279”
The desire for peace and serenity was a common feeling among

--- Sayfa 164 ---
161
Aisha’s people.
Once more, they felt the rightness of the decision not to fight.
They planned to rest during the night and return to Medina with the
first light of dawn.
But there were other plans, too. The Hypocrite Abdullah ibn Saba
and his friends, who enjoyed creating discord, were not pleased with
peace. During the night, they concocted a wretched plan to make the
two groups fight each other. During the darkest hour of the night,
they attacked both sides at the same time. Those who attacked Aisha
and her people pretended to be Ali’s soldiers, while those who
assaulted Ali and his army used Aisha’s name.
A great panic started. As armed people attacked them
unexpectedly, people awakening from their sleep hastily found their
weapons and naturally tried to protect themselves. At the same time,
there were cries of help from actors according to the planned
scenario, saying that they had been betrayed. It was a battle and it
was difficult to understand what was going on.280
Both groups began to think that the other side had betrayed them.
In a situation where feelings were so heightened, thinking and
reasoning were impossible. They were unable to see who attacked
them or who asked for help. If they had been more careful and
inquiring, they would have realized that their attackers were those
who took to the streets, saying, “We killed Uthman.” If only they
had realized.
It was a matter of life and death. It was unknown who killed
whom. But they drew their swords on each other, and many were
killed.
Neither the advice of Caliph Ali or the efforts of Aisha, Talha, and
Zubayr were helpful. Hope vanished with every drop of blood and
hearts broke with every injured limb. If they had not used the sword
to protect themselves, they would have been beheaded. Acting in
self defense, they had their brother’s blood on their hands. It was a
difficult and terrible test.

--- Sayfa 165 ---
162
Ibn Saba and his men even turned toward Aisha, and made her
palanquin the target of their arrows. Aisha said:
“O God! O God! Be afraid of God! Remember the Day of
Judgment.”
But no one heard her. Ali’s heart skipped a beat. To rescue Aisha,
an open target on the standing camel, it was necessary to make the
camel sit down. Every second was important. In order to save
Aisha, they hit the camel’s feet with swords to make it sit down.
Aisha was saved, for there was a fleshy castle around her. Her
palanquin began to look like a hedgehog, with the many arrows
sticking out of it.
In the riot, seventy people became martyrs to protect Aisha. At
the end, Ammar ibn Yasir and her brother, Muhammad ibn Abu
Bakr, took her out of the palanquin. At that time, her brother’s hand
touched her back. She turned immediately, and despite being close
to warfare and death, she scolded:
“Whose hand is this? Take it off my body. No one else’s hand
other than the Messenger of God’s has touched me until today.”281
Even when she realized it was only her brother’s hand, she was
still offended and said:
“You rascal you!”282
Ali, who became greatly upset when he heard what had happened,
went to Aisha and asked:
“How are you, O my dear mother?”
He ordered his men to construct a tent in a safe region for Aisha.
Aisha replied:
“Thanks be to God, I am fine.” Then Ali prayed for her:
“May God the Almighty grant you His forgiveness.”
Aisha replied:
“For you as well.”
Ali took a great risk, because Aisha was the target of ibn Saba and
his men. It seemed that there was no possible way to solve this

--- Sayfa 166 ---
163
crisis. It could not be solved by the sword, and the power of
diplomacy became necessary. Ali tried to stop the turmoil by
addressing those who were open-minded. He talked to Talha and
Zubayr, with whom Ali had fought side by side since the first days
of revelation. They were brave like Ali, and it was impossible not to
respond to the Caliph. Both of them went to the front lines. Ali said:
“O Talha, how could you consent to fight with the family of
God’s Messenger while your own family was safe at home?”
Ali spoke as an intimate friend who was hurt, and the statements
of an intimate friend may sting sometimes. But who could have a
response to this true, sincere question?
Then he said:
“You, O Zubayr! Do you remember the day you saw me entering
the presence of God’s Messenger and smiled at my arrival?
Thereupon, meaning me, the Messenger of God asked you, ‘Do you
love him?’ And you replied, ‘yes.’ Then he said: ‘But one day you
will behave unjustly to him and fight against him, on the opposite
side.’”
The statements were exactly as Zubayr remembered. Ali’s words
were like skillful weapons, and made people put their own swords
back in their sheaths. Zubayr’s world was upside down, and there
was only one thing that he could say:
“You are right! You made me remember what I forgot.”
It was the decision of a just person. He put down his sword and
left the battlefield. Talha, too, left the battle.
Coming to battle was straightforward, but leaving did not come
easily. Destiny would make the decision for both of them. Some
people targeted Zubayr, who was returning with great regret. They
lay in ambush for him, and killed him on the spot.283 Talha’s destiny
was not different. Soon, an arrow hit him and he, too, left this world.
Their sense of justice and leaving the field of battle displeased those
who set their hopes on chaos, and Zubayr and Talha paid with their
lives.

--- Sayfa 167 ---
164
The efforts of Aisha, who had watched what had happened with
confusion and grief, were useless, for Talha and Zubayr were no
more. Many people gathered around Aisha’s palanquin in mourning.
They were looking for guidance for the future, and had good
intentions, but their gathering also indicated a different danger.
Then Ali called Aisha’s brother, Muhammad. He had prepared a
safe place for her and invited her there by sending a message
through her brother. Both were deeply hurt. Ali assured Aisha that
she could go in safety to Mecca, and that no one would be able to
harm her.
Ali prepared for Aisha’s journey to Mecca and assigned forty
female leaders of Basra to accompany her, so she would not feel
alone.
Despite the sorrow they had experienced, both sides were careful
to be just. Though the times were emotional, which made
reasonable behavior almost impossible, both Aisha and Ali
demonstrated that it was not necessary to give into chaos. On the
day when Aisha was leaving, she said to those around her:
“O my sons, unfortunately we hurt each other, experienced
painful incidents, and became very tired. After this moment, no one
should look at each other with malice or fight about what happened
or the wrong statements others made. Surely, there is no problem
between Ali and I that is greater than any normal matter between a
woman and her brother-in-law. Although I experienced some
troubles, he is the most auspicious man for whom I wish goodness
and well-being.”284
Aisha was grave, knowing that Ali had a special place at the side
of God’s Messenger. Years before, she had not allowed anything to
be said against Hassan ibn Thabit, who had been trapped during the
slander campaign, and she still considered him as a “defender of
God’s Messenger.” Aisha would treat Ali as she always had, and
thus destroyed the hopes of those who wanted to exaggerate the
incident. Ali was touched, because the speaker had been taught by

--- Sayfa 168 ---
165
God’s Messenger. But he was hurt, too, because many of his
relatives were killed in order to assure peace. Responding to the
statement that had mollified the injuries in his heart, Ali said:
“She is telling the truth and I swear to God, how beautiful she
expressed it.”
It was the most eloquent way to heal the wound. It was necessary
to calm both sides, in order not to be attacked a second time in the
same place. Aisha could not be left unsupported, so Ali turned to
those nearby and said:
“There is only this small distance between her and me. Surely, she
is the most benevolent wife of God’s Messenger, both in this world
and the Hereafter.”285
Their journey started again. Ali led the people who walked with
Aisha to wish her a safe journey. His sons accompanied her as well,
and Ali told them to walk with her for awhile.
Aisha aimed to go to Mecca, to stay until the Hajj (pilgrimage)
season. She felt as if she had lived many years and grown old in a
very short time; she had experienced so much sorrow that she
regretted saying yes to the requests of the crowd. She expressed her
regret in the following words: “If only I had not been created and
had no body; if only I had been a tree, a rock or a sun-dried brick
that glorifies God in its language! If only I had died twenty years
before!”286
Aisha became ashamed to even visit the Messenger of God. Until
recently, she had been planning to be buried near God’s Messenger,
but now she said: “After the death of God’s Messenger, I have been
involved in many sad incidents,” and she wished to be buried in the
Baqi Cemetery, like the other wives.287
When praying or reciting the Qur’an, when she came to the verse
meaning “remain in your homes…” (al-Ahzab 33:32), which
particularly addressed the wives of the Prophet, she stopped and
cried until her clothing became soaked with tears.288
One day, Uqba ibn Sahban visited her and asked what was meant

--- Sayfa 169 ---
166
by the verse:
… among them are those who wrong their own selves, and among them
are those who follow a moderate way, and among them are those who,
by God’s leave, are foremost in doing good deeds. That is the great
favor. (Fatir 35:32)
He hoped to hear Aisha’s interpretation. She said:
“O my dear son, all of them are the people of heaven. The ones
who outstrip each other through good deeds were the people that
lived together with God’s Messenger during his era; the moderate
ones were the people who followed them; and the ones who wrong
themselves are the people like you and me.”289
They had survived a poignant experience. Aisha grew sad, as all
believers were. It would not be enough to restore the past. There is
no doubt that they did not judge their world through past events;
they continued their relationship on the grounds that they should
live together. From this perspective, we see that Ali came to Aisha
on every matter he had not been able to solve, while Aisha
consulted Ali when she was indecisive on an issue.
However, the gates of discord and sedition had been broken in
their era and slanderous news had circulated, destroying the peace
and serenity of the people. Some said the Messenger of God had
made Ali Caliph before he died. When Aisha heard this rumor, she
reacted to it like a door slamming in the face of one who expects it
to be opened:
“When did this happen? The Messenger of God rested his head on
my bosom or lap when he was passing away. Then he wanted a rock
from me, and took his last breath in the same position. I was with
him during his last minutes. So when did he give this testimony for
Ali?”290
The Caliphate of Muawiya
After Ali had been murdered, Muawiya became Caliph.
It was a time when many sorrowful incidents occured, and
although Aisha felt deeply grieved about what had happened, she

--- Sayfa 170 ---
167
could not do anything. What had happened during the Incident of
the Camel became an important lesson for her; she did not want to
be bitten in the same wound. She tried to pacify those who came
and asked for her help, and advised them to behave carefully and
thoughtfully. She was plunged into a deep, silent contemplation, as
if she had closed her door to the world and the people in it, and she
started to live entirely focused on the Hereafter. She took no break
from worship, and spent all the rest of her time pursuing knowledge.
Aisha was like a sun, enlightening everyone who consulted her.
She was like a safe harbor, a peaceful cove for those uncomfortable
in the grief and anger of modern society. The sad news continued.
God’s Messenger’s grandson, Hassan, whose head he had patted and
who had been brought up carefully, was murdered. His greatest wish
had been to be buried near God’s Messenger. One day he had asked
his brother to ask Aisha:
“If I die, you go to her and ask for her permission to bury me near
the Messenger of God. If she allows it, bury me there in her house.
But perhaps people will not consent to what you ask. If they reject
the idea, do not insist; otherwise, it might cause sedition. In that
case, take me to the Muslim cemetery and entrust me there!”
When Husayn attempted to fulfill his brother’s final wish, he was
met with hostility from Medina’s governor, Marwan ibn al-Hakam,
even though Aisha had replied yes to his request. People were
gathered around Husayn, and the governor and his men, and it
seemed like a riot was about to break out. Then the leader, Abu
Hurayra, spoke up and reminded them of Hasan’s own words about
sedition, and so they decided to bury him in the Baqi Cemetery.
Hasan would lie next to his mother, Fatima, instead.291
One day a man from Mesopotamia, Abdullah ibn Shaddad, visited
Aisha to ask some questions and to ask her to pray for him. But
Aisha wanted to ask him about something as well:
“O Abdullah, do you promise to tell only the truth in response to
what I ask? For the sake of God, why and how did they kill Ali?”

--- Sayfa 171 ---
168
Abdullah ibn Shaddad said:
“Why wouldn’t I tell the truth?”
“Then tell us!”
Abdullah ibn Shaddad started to explain. Ali had tried to convince
those who had opposed him and they had refused to listen to him.
They had mounted a campaign against the Caliphate’s authority by
calling an arbitrator. Ali recited the Qur’anic verse that requires two
arbitrators from each side’s family in order to solve the problem
between a husband and a wife. Then he asked, “Isn’t the problem of
Muhammad’s society more important than the problem between a
couple?” Then Ali reminded them of the treaty signed with Suhayl
ibn Amr at Hudaybiya. But no one listened. Abdullah ibn Abbas had
tried to pacify the situation; and though this affected some people,
generally the group would not back down. Ali did not change his
firm stance on the path of the Qur’an and the Sunnah, and said,
“God and his Messenger tell the truth!”
Aisha asked:
“For God’s sake, are you sure he did not say anything more?
Didn’t he say anything else?”
“In God’s Name, no, he did not say anything other than that.”
“How beautifully he spoke. God and His Messenger tell the truth.
May God Almighty bestow his mercy upon Ali. Surely, God and
His Messenger tell the truth. The people of Mesopotamia (Iraq)
went too far, saying many things about him that made me sad.”292
It was an era when people were split into sects. The people of
Egypt and Mesopotamia opposed Uthman, while the people of
Damascus were unanimous against Ali. Both groups decried the
Caliphs. The Kharijites rebelled against both Caliphs and spoke
openly against them. Aisha, deeply upset, said:
“They are ordered to repent for the friends of God’s Messenger,
and yet, they make vulgar statements about them!”293
Though it was a difficult time, like the previous Caliphs,

--- Sayfa 172 ---
169
Muawiya was sensitive to Aisha. He showed great respect, always
inquired about her well-being, and asked Aisha about the problems
he had been unable to solve. He frequently sent gifts, too, but Aisha,
who preferred to live humbly, always gave away the gifts, no matter
who had sent them.
One day, Caliph Muawiya’s men visited her and brought clothing,
silver and other beautiful things. When Aisha saw them, she started
to cry. She murmured something in a low voice that the envoys were
not able to hear, but the people nearby heard her say:
“The Messenger of God never touched any of this, nor owned
anything like it.”
Aisha turned to the people around her and asked them to give all
of the gifts to needy people. How could anything Aisha wanted not
be fulfilled? By that night, nothing remained, not even one drachma.
One day, the Caliph sent a letter to her asking for advice. In her
response, Aisha wrote:
“May God’s peace be upon you! To put it briefly, I heard the
Messenger of God say, ‘Whoever is after the consent of God despite
people’s opposition, God the Almighty will protect him against the
troubles caused by people. Whoever is only after the consent of
people without taking God’s wrath into consideration, God
Almighty will manifest His wrath and leave that person to his
people, and to their anger.’ Peace be upon you, too.”294
Aisha did not abstain from criticizing Muawiya, despite his
generous gifts and his respect toward her. She felt ashamed to
express his wrong actions, but did so in the hopes that he would
give them up. She criticized the murders of Hujr ibn ‘Adiy and his
seven friends who, like Ali, were killed after various periods of
unrest. In a letter she sent with Abdurrahman ibn Harith, Aisha
requested the following from Muawiya:
“If your promise has value and we are able to change the progress
of affairs, we want to prevent the assassination of Hujr. This is a
hard test for us.”

--- Sayfa 173 ---
170
But her efforts were not enough to save Hujr and his friends. She
was shaken by the news of their martyrdom while Abdurrahman
was on the way to Muawiya. It was already too late; Aisha, upset
because she had been late, acquitted Hujr and talked about him with
gratitude.
When Aisha came into the presence of the Caliph, she said:
“Where is the gentleness and good temper of Abu Sufyan? Where
are you?”
She tried to indicate the difference between Muawiya and his
father.
Later Muawiya came to Mecca to perform the pilgrimage. He
visited Aisha. Aisha, always the one to speak frankly, immediately
brought the conversation around to Hujr and asked:
“O Muawiya, did you never fear God when you killed Hujr and
his friends? Why didn’t you have mercy on Hujr; why did you
withhold it from him?”
Muawiya was embarrassed and said:
“I did not kill Hujr and his friends.”
It did not tranquilize Aisha. He was Caliph, and this murder had
happened on soil under his control. Truthfully, Muawiya felt his
responsibility and was depressed under its burden:
“We cannot judge this matter here, in this world. Please leave the
matter between them and me until the day we will reunite with our
God!”

--- Sayfa 174 ---
171
241 Bukhari, Mazalim 14 (2321).
242 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:92 (24653).
243 Bukhari, Adabu’l Mufrad, 1:314 (912).
244 Bukhari, Ashriba, 7 (5273).
245 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:225 (25923).
246 Muslim, Birr, 46 (2572).
247 Bukhari, Khums, 1 (2926, 2927).
248 Ibn, Sa’d, Tabaqat, 3:193.
249 Ibn Sa’d, Tabaqat, 3:195.
250 Bukhari, Janaiz, 92 (1321).
251 Hakim, Mustadrak, 4:9 (6723)
252 Malik, Muwatta, 1:279 (618).
253 Imam Shafii, Musnad, 1:326 (1519).
254 Hakim, Mustadrak, 4:9 (6725); Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Fadailu’s Sahaba, 2:875 (1642).
255 Bukhari, Muzaraa, 7 (2203).
256 Ibn Sa’d, Tabaqat, 2:375.
257 Zarkashi, al-Ijaba, 20.
258 Bukhari, Fadailu’s Sahaba, 8 (3497).
259 Nadawi, Siratu Sayyidatu Aisha, 154, 155.
260 Bukhari, Adabu’l Mufrad, 1:211 (603).
261 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:261 (26290).
262 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:250 (26173).
263 Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 19 (3711).
264 Bukhari, Adabu’l Mufrad, 1:288 (828).
265 Tabari, Tarikh, 2:672.
266 Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya, 7:187.
267 Malik, Muwatta, Siyar, 1002; Hakim, Mustadrak, 1:168 (2664).
268 Tabari, Tarikh, 3:6.
269 Ibn Sa’d, Tabaqat, 8:485.
270 Tabarani, Musnadu’sh Shamiyyin, 2:75.
271 Tabari, Tarikh, 3:14.
272 Tabari, Tarikh, 3:15. In spite of everything, the two sides opposed the next day and
swords were drawn. However, even some of the people who opposed her opinion did
not tolerate any insults against Aisha, by other people in their own ranks (Nadawi,
Siratu’s Sayyida Aisha, 180).
273 Tabari, Tarikh, 3:15.
274 Ibid, 3:20, 21.

--- Sayfa 175 ---
172
275 Ibn Abi Shayba, Musannaf, 7:544 (37823).
276 Tabari, Tarikh, 3:29; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya, 7:238.
277 Hakim, Mustadrak, 3:129 (4610). After having said this, the Prophet turned to Ali and
told him to treat her kindly if he overtakes an issue about her in the future.
278 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:52 (24299).
279 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:92 (24299).
280 Tabari, Tarikh, 3:39, 40; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya, 7:240.
281 Tabari, Tarikh, 3:55.
282 Ibid.
283 Tabari, Tarikh, 3:55.
284 Tabari, Tarikh, 3:60-61.
285 Tabari, Tarikh, 3:61. Years later, when Aisha met someone who had been there in the
ranks of Ali, she asked some questions about that day, and she could not help crying on
hearing the answers she received (see: Tabari, Tarikh, 3:47-48).
286 These remarks of Aisha were probably made in different times and places. (Ibn Abi
Shayba, Musannaf, 7:544 (37818); Ibn Sa’d, Tabaqat, 8:73-74.)
287 Bukhari, Janaiz, 94 (1327).
288 Ibn Sa’d, Tabaqat, 8:80; Abu Nuaym, Hilyatu’l Awliya, 2:49.
289 Hakim, Mustadrak, 2:462 (3593); Haythami, Majmuatu’z Zawaid, 7:96.
290 Bukhari, Wasaya, 1 (2590).
291 Ibn Abdilbarr, Istiab, 1:392; Suyuti, Tarikhu’l Khulafa, 1:170; Ibnu’l Athir, al-Kamil
fi’t-Tarikh, 3/460
292 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 1:86, 87 (656); Hakim, Mustadrak, 2:165 (2657).
293 Muslim, Tafsir, 15 (3022).
294 Tirmidhi, Zuhd, 64 (2414).

--- Sayfa 176 ---
173
CčĆĕęĊė 5
AISHA AND KNOWLEDGE

--- Sayfa 177 ---
174
I
Aisha was the Source of Knowledge for Everyone
t was not only Caliphs who came to Aisha for information and
insight; a great number of people visited her often, considering
her advice as the safest way to learn. Those who were not able to
visit either sent messages through someone else or sent her a letter.
Ziyad ibn Abu Sufyan, the governor of Basra and Kufa during
Muawiya’s Caliphate, wrote one day to ask whether a statement
made by Abdullah ibn Abbas was true. Abdullah ibn Abbas asserted
that until an animal was sacrificed, the prohibitions of pilgrimage
were applicable even to the person who did not go to pilgrimage
himself, but sent his sacrificial animal there.
Aisha wrote:
“This is not true. I prepared the ropes for sacrificial animals of
God’s Messenger and he tied them up with his own hands, and then
sent them to Mina with my father. Until the time that the animals
were slaughtered, nothing that God permitted was forbidden to the
Messenger of God!”295
Some Companions had thought wearing perfume was forbidden
while doing the Hajj rites, after cutting their hair, and during the
stoning in Mina. But Aisha did not consider perfume a problem
based on the behavior during the era of God’s Messenger.296 When
they heard from Aisha, Abdullah ibn Abbas and the others left
behind their preference and did as Aisha said.
Another day, ibn Abbas was incorrect about when to take off the
pilgrimage garb, and when it reached her, she again revealed the
truth through examples from God’s Messenger’s life.
The exchange of knowledge between them was so natural that
Abdullah ibn Abbas, who had problems with his eyes toward the
end of his life, asked Aisha whether to apply the treatment that
doctors had recommended, and did not start using it until he became
unable to perform ablution and Daily Prayers.
One day Abu Hurayra said:

--- Sayfa 178 ---
175
“There is no fasting for someone who wakes up with the necessity
of making ghusl in the morning.”
He had probably not been informed of the new judgment or
depended upon incomplete information. When Abu Bakr ibn
Abdurrahman heard this, he said it to Abdullah ibn Harith. The
questioning continued, because the people of that era considered
nothing they heard as fact, until they heard its confirmation. This
sensitivity was especially observed on issues that appeared to go
against general knowledge. Abdullah ibn Harith told his father, who
also found the information strange. Finally, they went to Aisha to
clarify the confusion.
Umm Salama was with Aisha, and both were asked. They
responded:
“On the mornings when the Messenger of God woke up like that,
he still fasted those days.”
The matter was clarified. The two went to the governor of
Medina, Marwan ibn al-Hakam to tell him. Because incorrect
information was circulating that needed correction, Marwan said:
“It is your duty to go and tell Abu Hurayra what you told me; I
demand it.”
Leaving Marwan, the two went directly to Abu Hurayra, who
asked:
“Is this really true?”
They responded in the affirmative.
“Our two mothers know better.”
From then on, he began to fast as he had learned from the wives
of the Prophet.297
On another day, Imam Shurayh visited Aisha and expressed his
discomfort over something that had been said:
“O mother of the believers, I heard Abu Hurayra narrating a
hadith from God’s Messenger that, if it is true, means all of us will
perish.”

--- Sayfa 179 ---
176
“Whoever perished has already perished, but tell me, what is the
real reason for your worry?” asked Aisha.
“The Messenger of God said, ‘Whoever desires to reunite with
God and likes this idea, God wants to reunite with him; but whoever
considers reuniting with God undesirable, God considers him
undesirable, too.’ But who among us does not fear death and see it
as undesirable?”
Aisha then understood the reason for the transformation in
Shurayh and asked him to recite the following to relieve all
believers:
“Yes, the Messenger of God said this, but it is not how you think.
May God bestow mercy on Abu Hurayra, for he narrated you the
ending of the hadith but not the beginning. The Messenger of God
said, ‘When God the Almighty wishes to reward one of His
servants, He sends him an angel in the year that he is going to die
and gives good news by supporting him for the Hereafter. In this
way, when the angel of death comes to him, and says, ‘O soul at rest
(nafs al-mutmainna), let you set forth toward the mercy and good
pleasure of God,’ and stays near him. Then the servant feels the
excitement to leave as soon as possible, and this means God loves to
reunite with that servant. When God the Almighty wills to punish
one of His servants, He sends him a devil in the year that he is going
to die and the devil misleads him. When the angel of death comes to
him, and says, ‘O evil-commanding soul (nafs al ammara), come on
prepare for the wrath and displeasure of God.’ At that moment, the
servant shakes like a leaf and starts to gulp. He never wants to
reunite with God and God does not wish to reunite with him, either.
When death is faced and it stares without blinking, the soil starts to
part and moves from the chest; the fingers become paralyzed, and
the hair on the skin stings like a prick. Whoever wants to meet with
God, God wants to reunite with him; whoever doesn’t want to meet
with God, God doesn’t want to reunite with him.”298
When an important Companion, Abu Said al-Khudri was on his

--- Sayfa 180 ---
177
deathbed, he made his final preparations to go into the presence of
God. He changed his old clothes for new ones, remembering the
following statement from the Messenger of God:
“No doubt that the dead person will be reborn with the clothes he
was wearing at the time of death.”299
He thought the hadith meant the burial shroud, the last clothing
one wears after dying. But the opinions of others, including Aisha’s,
were different, and she said:
“May God bestow mercy upon Abu Said.”
The duty of revealing the truth again fell on her shoulders. Aisha
had interpreted the hadith differently, because she had analyzed it
generally and combined it with what she already knew. The clothing
of this world did not have any value in the Hereafter, and being
reborn was like one’s first birth into the world. She explained:
“In this hadith, the Messenger of God meant the deeds of a person
when he died, because God’s Messenger also said, ‘On that day (the
day of Resurrection), people will be reborn without clothes, naked
like they were when they were born of their mothers.’”300
It is also true that Aisha’s brilliance did not only benefit those
who lived during her time, but her legacy continued to illuminate
the world after her death. This will continue until the Last Day. She
was sough by those who know the value of correct knowledge.
Umar ibn Abdulaziz sometimes sent letters to Muhammad ibn Amr
ibn Hazm and in these letters, he wrote:
“Explore and search around yourself closely. If you find a hadith
of God’s Messenger, a tradition that remained after him, or a
statement belonging to Amra, tell me about it. During the times
when the people of knowledge are leaving us, one by one, I am
afraid that some knowledge may be lost.”301
Amra was a special student of Aisha’s, and the aunt of Medina’s
governor, Abu Bakr ibn Muhammad.
Aisha and Transmission of Knowledge

--- Sayfa 181 ---
178
There is no doubt that among the Companions, Aisha was a leader
in knowledge. From the beginning, she analyzed everything that
happened, assimilated new information, clarified obscure issues by
asking questions, and learnt intimate details that others could not
witness by directly asking the Messenger of God. God’s Messenger
was at the centre of her life, and she dedicated her life to his cause.
Her conditions supported her work, for she shared his room. Day
and night, Aisha went to his well of fresh water and filled her
bucket until it overflowed. She asked about everything, even
intimate things that other people could not ask out of modesty, and
received answers directly from the Messenger of God. She used the
advantage of having a room which was adjacent to the Prophet’s
Mosque, and was able to follow the Messenger of God’s sermons.
Whenever something stuck in her mind and bothered her, she
resolved it by asking God’s Messenger when he returned to the
house of felicity. She never quit asking until she fully understood.302
Aisha’s inner nature enjoyed questioning and contemplation. She
was uncomfortable, and never believed anything she saw or heard
until she learnt the reality behind it.
Describing her, Ibn Abu Malayka made the following statement:
“When she was faced with something that she did not know, she
was not able to stand it without learning more.”303
Perceptive scholars, such as Hakim, have said that one-fourth of
the body of religious knowledge was transferred to us through
Aisha.304 In her time, people came to her for guidance about their
problems; today, she is still the source of much authentic
information.
Expressing her superiority, Abu Musa al-Ashari said:
“As the Companions of God’s Messenger, whenever we came
across a complicated issue, we took it to Aisha, because she always
had the information that could solve a difficult question.”305
Ata Abu Rabah confirmed this assessment, saying:
“Aisha was the most intelligent, scholarly person, and the one

--- Sayfa 182 ---
179
who had the best thoughts and opinions.”306
Elders, such as Hisham ibn Urwa, confessed:
“I did not see anyone more well-informed than Aisha about the
medical sciences, fiqh (classical jurisprudence), or poetry.”307
Imam Masruq expressed:
“I saw the leading Companions of God’s Messenger asking
questions to Aisha about obligatory duties related to division of
inheritance.”308
Another leading imam, Muhammad ibn Shihab al-Zuhri, said:
“She was the most knowledgeable of people. For this reason, the
most important Companions of God’s Messenger learnt things by
asking her309… if the knowledge of Aisha was put on the right scale,
and the knowledge of all the women, including the other wives of
God Messenger was put on the left scale, Aisha’s knowledge would
be vastly superior.”310
Abu Salama, the son of Abdurrahman ibn Awf, said:
“I did not see anyone who knew the Sunnah better than Aisha. No
one possessed more knowledge about fiqh or was better acquainted
with where each verse or declaration was revealed.”311
Her nephew and special student, Qasim ibn Muhammad,
underlined the depth of her knowledge about Islamic theology
(kalam) and eloquence:
“I did not meet anyone as eloquent as Aisha, or anyone who was
as cognizant of Islamic theology as her, either among men or
women, or before and after her.”312
Her unique knowledge did not only attract the attention of
scholars; almost everyone agreed on her merits. One day, Caliph
Muawiya called Ziyad, a key name of the era, to his presence and
asked:
“Who is the most knowledgeable among the people?”
“Certainly you, O leader of believers.”
But Muawiya, who was aware that this response reflected flattery

--- Sayfa 183 ---
180
more than truth, insisted:
“For the sake of God, tell the truth.”
“For God’s sake, it is Aisha.”313
Whole books, such as Al-Ijaba by Zarkashi, were written about
just the superiority of her knowledge. Her intellectual curiosity was
unequaled. When God’s Messenger told Fatima a secret before his
death, Aisha learned what it was after his passing. If she had not
insisted on learning it, no one would ever have learnt what the secret
was.
Her inquisitive personality had not changed since the day she had
entered the house of felicity; she recognized early on that the door
of knowledge would be opened by asking questions, and thus asked
the Messenger of God about every matter that occurred to her. It
was her defining characteristic. She judged what she had heard or
seen, and was discriminating about adding to her knowledge. She
compared and contrasted new information to what she knew, and
asked God’s Messenger about any inconsistencies.
A living witness of revelation, Aisha had arranged her copy of the
Qur’an, placing chapters and verses according to Gabriel’s
recitation of the whole. This copy would become the standard in the
times to come, and people from outlying parts of Islam’s expanding
borders wanted to learn the ordering of the Qur’an from her.
Interpretation (Tafsir)
The major interpreter of the Qur’an was the Messenger of God. He
was the only one who knew the divine purpose and recognized
when to give this information to the people. Aisha closely followed
the explanations of God’s Messenger related to the Qur’an and
learned the obscure points directly. She acquired the ability to
understand the purpose of the Qur’an, and to interpret general
principles within the framework of Islam. She was not only a
narrator who conveyed what she had heard and seen, but also an
interpreter of meaning. Narrations related to understanding the
Qur’an generally passed through Abdullah ibn Abbas and Aisha,

--- Sayfa 184 ---
181
which proved Aisha’s importance as an interpreter.
One day, Aisha’s nephew Urwa, asked her about the verse:
If you fear that you will not be able to observe their rights with exact
fairness when you marry the orphan girls (in your custody), you can
marry, from among other women who seem good to you, two, or three,
or four. However, if you fear that (in your marital obligations) you will
not be able to observe justice among them, then content yourselves
with only one, or the captives that your right hands possess. Doing so is
more likely that you will not act rebelliously. (an-Nisa 4:3)
She answered:
“O my nephew! The orphans mentioned in the verse are those
under the care of their guardian and after some time, when they
grow up and attract attention because of their beauty, the guardians
may start to desire them and want to keep them without giving a
bridal due, or by giving a very small one. In this verse, the
guardians were forbidden from their former behavior, and directed
to marry other women.”
After the explanation of the above verse, people questioned God’s
Messenger further. Then another verse came:
They ask you to pronounce laws concerning women. Answer them:
“God pronounces to you the laws concerning them, and it is recited to
you in this Book concerning female orphans, to whom you do not give
what has been ordained for them (as bridal-due or for their
maintenance), and yet desire to marry them (out of greed to get their
charms or wealth for yourselves, or by refusing to let them marry to
continue benefiting from their wealth); and also concerning the weak,
helpless children (whose rights should be protected), and you must be
assiduous in observing the rights of orphans.” Whatever good you do –
surely God has full knowledge of it. (an-Nisa 4:127).
In those days, a female orphan would be desired if she was
beautiful and wealthy. She was engaged according to her bridal due
and genealogy. But problems arose if there were some deception
about her beauty or wealth. In these circumstances, men had nothing
to do with orphans and married other women. It was therefore
ordered to give the exact amount of bridal due that orphans
deserved, whether they were desired or abandoned.314

--- Sayfa 185 ---
182
Aisha’s Qur’anic knowledge was beyond the comprehension of
other Companions, although they were also leaders in knowledge.
Abdullah ibn Abbas said the verse:
“If the guardian is rich (enough to support himself and his
family), let him abstain (from his ward’s property); but if he is poor,
let him consume thereof in a just and reasonable manner” (an-Nisa
4:6) was abrogated by revelation of the verse: “Surely those who
consume the property of orphans wrongfully, certainly they consume
a fire in their bellies; and soon they will be roasting in a Blaze” (an-
Nisa 4:10).
In response, Aisha indicated that whoever abused the wealth of
orphans would be punished, but not those poor guardians who
needed the orphan’s wealth to care for them. She said there was no
contradiction between the two verses. The punishment is reserved
for those who take the wealth of orphans although they do not need
or deserve it.315
Aisha’s uniqueness in interpreting the Qur’an was her closeness
to God’s Messenger. Some Companions concluded that the middle
Prayer expressed in the verse, “Be ever mindful and protective of the
prescribed Prayers, and the middle Prayer, and stand in the
presence of God in utmost devotion and obedience” (al-Baqarah
2:238), was the Morning Prayer, while other Companions, such as
Zayd ibn Thabit and Usama, asserted it to be the Noon Prayer. But
Aisha said the Asr (Afternoon) Prayer was intended, based on what
the Messenger of God himself had said. In the copy of the Qur’an
she kept, near the mentioned verse, she noted it as the Asr Prayer.316
Her approach reflected the majority of the Companions’ opinion,
primarily Ali, Abdullah ibn Mas’ud, and Samurah ibn Jundub.317
Something similar happened about the verse: “Whether you reveal
what is within yourselves (of intentions, plans) or keep it secret,
God will call you to account for it” (al-Baqara 2:284). Leading
imams, such as Abdullah ibn Umar, Abdullah ibn Abbas and Ali,
asserted that this verse was abrogated by the verse, “God burdens no

--- Sayfa 186 ---
183
soul except within its capacity,” which was revealed after the earlier
verse. But Aisha said this wasn’t true:
“No one has ever asked me about the verse since I asked the
Messenger of God. He said, ‘It is for those who have a high fever or
illness, or any kind of disaster or wealth that he was afraid to lose
after possessing it, which is bestowed on a servant by God. By the
cause of those things, a servant can be purified of his sins like gold
is purified from dust and rust.’”318
Hadith
Surely the house of felicity was the primary school of knowledge
about the hadiths. A broad range of people - masters and servants,
children and women, young and old, Arabs and non-Arabs -
frequently visited this school. And Aisha was the most frequently
addressed teacher. Her room was adjacent to the Prophet’s Mosque,
so she knew what took place in the mosque, even when she was in
her room. She frequently went to the mosque and regularly attended
the Prophet’s congregational Prayers, and never missed his sermons.
She followed all religious principles (ahkam) and new revelations.
Before nearly anyone else, Aisha knew of the most up-to-date
information on Islam.
In hadith science, some Companions, such as Abu Hurayra,
Abdullah ibn Umar, and Anas ibn Malik, narrated so many hadiths
from the Messenger of God that they were called “Mukthirun”
(those who reported many hadiths). Even so, Aisha’s position
among the Mukthirun was special, because in most of those she
narrated, she was the only one to do so. This was the natural result
of her being with God’s Messenger in places where it was
impossible for others to be. Such hadiths are termed fard
(individual) or munfarid (individually). And it was not only her
intimacy that allowed this: Aisha is the resource for information
about the family life of God’s Messenger, his private state, his Night
Prayers, and how he spent his time alone. From this perspective, it
can be said that if Aisha had not been there, much knowledge about

--- Sayfa 187 ---
184
the private life of God’s Messenger would have been lost and the
Ummah (community) would have been deprived of a treasure trove
of information.
If she had attended every gathering where the Messenger of God
was present, like the other mukthirun, and had attended many
journeys, and if she had not spent most of her time at her home, she
would have narrated even more hadiths. As it is, she narrated more
than two thousand hadiths from the Messenger of God.
When making a healthy decision, the true reason should be
known. Aisha always learnt the reason behind the judgment, by
witnessing what happened or directly asking the person. The
Messenger of God recommended performing ghusl (full body
ablution) on Fridays. While other Companions who narrated this
hadith said it in a general way, Aisha’s narration includes details
that explain the reasoning. The Messenger wanted believers who
were soaked with sweat from the morning’s work to cleanse
themselves of their dirt and wear perfume when they came to the
congregational Prayer that purified them spiritually. Aisha’s
narration stated:
“On Fridays, people, particularly those who came from far away,
were covered in dust and dirt, and were sweating heavily. When I
was near the Prophet, such a man came to the mosque, and the
Prophet asked the man: ‘Why don’t you clean yourself for this
day?’”
Another hadith that Aisha narrated stated:
“People were working at their businesses and came to the Friday
Prayer in the same condition that they were in while working. At
that time, I said to them, ‘I wish you came after you performed
whole-body ablutions’.”319
During a Feast of Sacrifice (Eid al-Adha), the Messenger of God
said:
“No one among you should eat the meat of a sacrificed animal for
more than three days.”

--- Sayfa 188 ---
185
While leading Companions, such as Abdullah ibn Umar and Abu
Said al-Khudri, thought of this as an absolute judgment that meant
storing meat more than three days wasn’t permitted,320 Aisha had a
different opinion. Since, storing the meat of a sacrificed animal by
salting it was a common practice in that day, she believed the
Prophet’s statement was an encouragement to instead give more
meat to needy people. As it was possible to preserve the meat for
more than three days, the meaning of the hadith needed to be
clarified. To Rabia, who asked:
“Is it true that the Messenger of God banned the meat of a
sacrificed animal?”
Aisha replied:
“No. In those days, the number of people in society who
sacrificed animals was very few and they were asked to give some
of the meat as charity to those who were not able to sacrifice an
animal. We ate the front leg of a lamb even ten days after Eid al-
Adha.”321
While some people thought that the Messenger of God liked the
shoulder meat of lamb, Aisha attracted attention to this detail:
“The lamb’s shoulder was not the portion that God’s Messenger
enjoyed most. In those days, meat was so scarce that when they had
it, they rushed to offer it to the Messenger of God. The shoulder
meat was simply the part that could be cooked easily and quickly.”
Each year, the Messenger of God sent a civil servant to collect
alms from Khaybar. Narrations indicate that the civil servant was
guessing the amount of fruit produced there without offering a
reason why. But Aisha’s narration offers a reason:
“God’s Messenger ordered the civil servant responsible for
collecting alms to estimate the amount of possible alms based on the
amount of fruit some had eaten.”
The completeness of Aisha’s narrations is attributable to multiple
factors, including witnessing similar incidents many times, and
asking about the matters that she did not witness or that contradicted

--- Sayfa 189 ---
186
her previous knowledge. Aisha was very sensitive and was always
searching. She followed up on any information that she had heard,
attempting to get confirmation from its original source.
One day, two visitors told her of a hadith:
“There is bad luck in three things: woman, mount, and house.”
And they asked her, “What do you think of that?” The words made
Aisha angry, and her wrath was apparent in her behavior. Looking
around, she said:
“I swear to the One who revealed the Qur’an to Abu Qasim that
this matter is not like what Abu Hurayra said. While the Messenger
of God was talking, Abu Hurayra entered. At that moment, God’s
Messenger was stating:
‘During the Age of Ignorance, people used to say, “There is bad
luck in three things: woman, mount and house”!’”
Abu Hurayra had heard the end of the hadith, but not the
beginning. After explaining it, Aisha recited the verse (al-Hadid
57:22) meaning, “No affliction occurs on the earth, or in your own
persons, but it is recorded in a Book before We bring it into
existence...”
With the verse, Aisha explained that there cannot be such
misunderstandings in the presence of Absolute Will and drew
attention to the domain of human will.
During the Age of Ignorance, family structure had changed; many
different forms of marriage were practiced. The practice of mut’a,
temporary marriage, was very common.
Islam’s final judgment of mut’a was revealed in the seventh year
of Hijra, during the conquest of Khaybar. The Messenger of God
firmly told his society that mut’a was forbidden. There were some
who had not heard this yet and who favored mut’a. When some
people witnessed this and told Aisha, she flew into a towering rage:
“They guard their private parts, except for their wives or those
(bondmaids) whom their right hands possess…” (al-Muminun 23:5-
6).

--- Sayfa 190 ---
187
Once, Aisha heard a ruling that women should undo their hair
braiding when they performed the ritual full-body ablution.
Abdullah ibn Amr ibn As asserted this, and she immediately said:
“I am surprised with Abdullah ibn Amr ibn As’ statement. He
orders women to undo their hair braiding while they are performing
the ritual full-body ablution! Why doesn’t he order them to shave
their heads, too? Nonetheless, the Messenger of God and I used to
perform ritual full-body ablution in the same place, and I used to
pour water onto my head only three times.”322
Another day, Aisha heard the fatwa of Abdullah ibn Umar, who
asserted that kissing one’s spouse invalidated ablution. He was
making a judgment according to general principles in a field in
which he was not well-informed. But Aisha felt she must correct his
statement. She explained how God’s Messenger himself had
behaved:
“The Messenger of God used to kiss some of his wives and go for
the Daily Prayer without performing ablution again.”323
She also taught others about the Prophet’s manner of speaking and
how a hadith should be reported. Someone had asked about the
speaking style of God’s Messenger, and Aisha answered:
“He used to speak so slowly and distinctly that whoever wanted to
count his words could do so easily.”324 At another time, while Aisha
was performing Prayer, she heard someone outside narrating hadith.
He passed on the statements of God’s Messenger, but was speaking
very quickly and almost none of his sayings were understood.
Aisha, naturally, was bothered by the narration of the hadith in
this manner. She said:
“A man came and narrated hadith from God’s Messenger in front
of my room in a way that I could hear, and then disappeared
instantly. I was busy reciting my invocations, and he finished the
hadith before I finished my invocations. If I had been able to catch
him, I would have told him, ‘God’s Messenger would have never
put forward a hadith like you did!’”325

--- Sayfa 191 ---
188
Fiqh: Muslim Canonical Jurisprudence
Aisha was one of the few who could make novel rulings based on
her previous knowledge of the Qur’an and the Sunnah. Fiqh
depends on comprehending the reasoning and justification for
judgments. Called illa (real cause) in jurisprudence, it explains the
principal aim in religious judgments. When there is no clear
statement, a ruling could only be made by reasoning, and Aisha’s
knowledge was advanced compared to her peers.
As explained before, Aisha asked the Messenger of God for the
reasoning behind many issues when she was unable to comprehend
their lawful cause; she received the answers directly from him. She
corrected misunderstandings with examples from the Prophet’s own
life.
Aisha, who expressed that a divorced or widowed pregnant
woman could marry someone else when she gave birth, concluded
that the waiting period of the woman ended with the birth of the
baby. She based this on an incident she had witnessed, when the
Messenger of God allowed Subaya al-Aslamiyya, who gave birth
after the death of her husband, to marry someone else.326
Explaining why the obligatory part of the Sunset Prayer is three
cycles, Aisha said, “Because it is the witr of day!” She knew why
the Morning Prayer is two units, and considered it akin to reciting
the Qur’an —expressing that the quality, not the quantity, was
essential.327
Aisha, who warned people not to get stuck on the physical aspects
of pilgrimage, stated that actions such as the circling of the Ka’ba,
the going back-and-forth between Safa and Marwa, and the stoning
of the devil were causes to remember God.328 She also explained
that visiting Muhassab Valley, which was called Abtah, was not
required in pilgrimage, and expressed that since the aforementioned
valley was on the closest route during that time, it was the preferred
road.329
Aisha questioned the Messenger of God whether the Hatim, a

--- Sayfa 192 ---
189
crescent-shaped place adjacent to the Ka’ba, would be considered
part of the Ka’ba and asked, “Why isn’t it included in the Ka’ba?”
God’s Messenger replied:
“During those days, your people were struggling financially.
Thinking of their own means of survival did not let them do that.”
She asked:
“Why is the door of the Ka’ba so high?”
He said:
“Your people did so in order to allow those people they wanted to
enter, and to prevent those people they did not want.”330
She asked:
“O Messenger of God, don’t you think you should reconstruct it
on the foundation of Prophet Abraham?”
God’s Messenger said:
“If your people had not recently been saved from paganism, I
would have done it.”331
Such a brilliant mind as hers would conclude many results from
these expressions. She learned not to insist obstinately on a matter
that people would not be able to accept before the right time and
place, and that it was sensible to postpone some issues for later days
or years, or even centuries. Aisha was one of the few who
understood the essential point that judgments may change according
to time and conditions. For example, she believed that the ruling
encouraging women to attend congregational Prayers at the mosque
had changed in later years. She said the conditions had changed, and
the purity of the Prophet’s time had not been maintained. Thus, the
judgment should be rethought according to current conditions and a
fresh conclusion should be reached.332
Aisha’s knowledge of fiqh originated directly from the Qur’an
and the Sunnah, as did her knowledge about tafsir and hadith. She
drew conclusions by reshaping information from those resources,
and expressed her opinion when it was time. When a matter was

--- Sayfa 193 ---
190
brought before her, she first resorted to the Qur’an and the Sunnah
and searched for a similar or comparable judgment. On matters
where she could not find any support, Aisha would interpret it
according to logic. When she was asked whether the meat of
animals that fire worshippers slaughtered could be eaten, Aisha
reminded them of the Qur’anic prohibition on eating the meat of an
animal that was not slaughtered in God’s Name. She indicated that
since the Persians slaughtered animals without the Name of God,
their meat was forbidden.333
Aisha differed from others too, by differently interpreting the
length of the obligatory waiting period for divorced women as
stated in the Qur’an. If the divorced woman wants to marry another
man, she must wait to make sure she is not pregnant. Aisha
interpreted this length as the end of three menstrual cycles, not their
beginning, and told others to act accordingly. Abu Bakr ibn
Abdurrahman said, “I did not see any fiqh scholar other than her,
who interpreted and explained this issue like that.”334
While some Companions considered a separation as a divorce,
Aisha asserted there had been no divorce. Her support for the
assertion came from her own experience. To those who wondered
about her reasoning, she said:
“God’s Messenger gave us the choice to leave or stay and we
preferred to stay with him. He never considered this a divorce.”335
One day, Sad ibn Hisham asked:
“I wanted to ask you about celibacy. What do you say about
leading a celibate life?”
Aisha, without hesitation, replied:
“Do not do it! Did not you hear God the Almighty say, ‘… We
sent Messengers before you, and (like every other man) appointed
wives and children for them’ (ar-Ra’d 13:38). Keep away from
celibacy.”336
Many appreciated her knowledge of fiqh as well. Scholars like
Abu Salama ibn Abdurrahman337 expressed that they never saw

--- Sayfa 194 ---
191
someone more knowledgeable than Aisha. While people like Abu
Umar ibn Abdul Barr thought Aisha was a unique product of her
era,338 others, like Qasim ibn Muhammad, said she had become like
a self-governing fatwa (legal pronouncement) office during the
Caliphates of Abu Bakr, Umar, and Uthman.339 In those days, people
from Basra to Damascus, from Kufa to Egypt, were surging in large
crowds to Medina to ask Aisha questions about religion. Those
unable to attend sent letters and gifts. Aisha’s special student, Aisha
bint Talha, wrote replies to their letters and gifts.340
Islamic Theology (Kalam)
Aisha was very sensitive to information that contradicted the
Qur’an. After the Ascension (Miraj), some Companions, such as
Abdullah ibn Abbas, had the opinion that the Messenger of God had
seen God. They asserted some proofs and claimed that the following
verses proved this: “Indeed, he saw him on the clear horizon” (at-
Takwir 81:23), “Assuredly he saw him during a second descent, by
the lote-tree of the utmost boundary,” (an-Najm 53:13-14), “Indeed,
he saw one among the greater revelations of his Lord” (an-Najm
53:18). The famous scholar Abdullah ibn Abbas said:
“God Almighty, who raised Prophet Ibrahim to the rank of
Khalilullah (friend of God) by making His relationship to him
unique, and who elevated Prophet Moses to the rank of Kalimullah
(one to whom God talked) by honoring him with His speech, surely
exalted Prophet Muhammad, peace and blessings be upon him, with
the blessing of seeing Him.”341
Not everyone agreed with him, namely leaders such as Aisha,
Abu Dharr, Abdullah ibn Mas’ud and Ubayy ibn Ka’b, who said the
one who God’s Messenger had seen was Gabriel, and said that the
hadith about the Ascension should be considered from this
perspective. Hearing this, Abdullah ibn Abbas found himself at
Aisha’s door, and he asked:
“O my dear mother, did the Messenger of God see his Lord?”
Aisha answered:

--- Sayfa 195 ---
192
“When I heard your words, I felt as if my blood froze. There are
three points. First, whoever tells you ‘Muhammad saw his Lord,’
does not tell the truth: ‘Eyes comprehend Him not, but He
comprehends all eyes. He is the Subtle (Latif), the Aware’ (al-
An’am 6:103) and, ‘And it is not for any mortal that God should
speak to him unless it be by revelation or from behind a veil…’
(ash-Shura 42:51). Second, whoever tells you ‘the Messenger of
God knows what will happen tomorrow’ is lying,342 because God
the Almighty says, ‘No soul knows what it will reap tomorrow’
(Luqman 31:34). Third, whoever says, ‘Muhammad concealed some
parts of revelation,’ you should know this person is lying, because
God the Almighty clearly orders His Messenger: ‘Convey and make
known in the clearest way all that has sent down to you from your
Lord…’ (al-Maedah 5:67). However, he saw Gabriel in his true
form twice.”343
Aisha’s literary skills
Aisha was a master of the Arabic language. She knew what to say
and how to say it. When she spoke, she commanded the attention of
others. Her power of description was strong, and she showed
sensitivity in choosing words. For example, while she described the
first revelation of God’s Messenger, she used the expression
meaning, “He never had a dream, but it came up like the morning
light.”344 When Aisha expressed the troubles the Messenger of God
had when he received verses, she said, “Then the conditions that
appeared during revelation were seen as he received the Divine
word. He was sweating because of the burden of the revealed Word.
Though it was winter, beads of sweat, like pearls, poured down his
face.”
When she learnt that she was being slandered by the Hypocrites, she
expressed her troubles:
“That day, I mourned so much that no tears remained in my eyes, as
if my tear ducts dried up. I did not sleep, nor close my eyes long
enough to put on kohl.”345

--- Sayfa 196 ---
193
Aisha was poetic, not satisfied to use everyday expressions, but
choosing words that conveyed a depth of meaning and the ability to
persuade.
Aisha learnt the sciences of genealogy and history from her father,
Abu Bakr. Her sense of poetry, eloquence, and aesthetics came from
the same source.346 Abu Bakr was a resource of knowledge for even
the most distinguished scholars of the time.347 Once, the Messenger
of God directed the famous poet, Hassan ibn Thabit, to Abu Bakr,
saying:
“Go to Abu Bakr; since he knows genealogy of other tribes more
than you do.”
From the knowledge that Hassan acquired from Abu Bakr, he was
able to make statements to answer the pagans. Witnessing that he
recited poems of depth and knowledge, the Quraysh expressed their
confusion and approved the superiority of Abu Bakr:
“Only ibn Abu Quhafa (Abu Bakr) can know the contents of these
poems to such an extent. There is no doubt that these are ibn Abu
Quhafa’s poems.”348
Classical and modern scholars say that Aisha was the most fluent
and eloquent of her time.349 The tutelage and guidance of God’s
Messenger, who would leave an indelible mark on the future with
his statements, and growing up under the protection of a master of
language such as Abu Bakr, made her a child of destiny.
Musa ibn Talha, an important scholar and student of Aisha’s, said:
“I saw no one better than Aisha in eloquence or clarity of
speech.”350
Another leading scholar, Ahnaf ibn Qays, said:
“I heard the sermons of Abu Bakr, Umar ibn al-Khattab, Uthman
ibn Affan and Ali ibn Abi Talib and all other Caliphs who have been
Caliphs up until today. Yet from them, I did not hear such fluent and
beautiful utterances as I heard from Aisha!”351
While visiting Aisha, Muawiya leaned over to Zakwan, who was

--- Sayfa 197 ---
194
with him, and said:
“I swear to God, except for the Messenger of God, I have never
seen anyone more eloquent than Aisha!”352
Besides the superior literacy of her father Abu Bakr, the reasons
for Aisha’s outstanding expressiveness were her knowledge of the
Qur’an, attending the sermons of God’s Messenger, a willingness
and aptitude for understanding and memorizing the statements of
God’s Messenger, and the emphasis on oral tradition, poetry, and
storytelling of the Bedouin culture of seventh-century Arabia. She
also witnessed Muslim poets who traveled to Medina from other
places.
She chose words carefully, and recommended others to use the
phrases of the Qur’an. When Yazid ibn Babnus and his friend
visited her, he addressed her from the other side of the curtain. He
asked her about a husband’s relations with his wife while she was
menstruating.
In his explanation of the situation, Aisha realized there were
expressions that the Qur’an did not use, so she warned him:
“Use the words that God prefers.”353
She always warned those who broke off their relationship with the
Qur’an, and never approved of being busy with something other
than God’s Book. Her words invited others to regain their
conscience when she witnessed them using disliked phrases.
One day, ibn Abu Saib came to her. When she saw him, Aisha
said:
“There are three things on which you must submit to me, or I will
struggle against you until the end.”
“O mother of believers, if you tell me what they are, surely I will
submit to you!”
“While you are praying, do not have an attitude and behavior that
would infringe on the seriousness of being in God’s presence,
because I never witnessed the Messenger of God or his Companions

--- Sayfa 198 ---
195
doing that. Instead of doing it every day, advise people only once,
on Fridays, or if you want to do so more frequently, perhaps twice,
or at most, three times. Do not cause people to lose their enthusiasm
for this book, the Qur’an. I hope I won’t see you interrupting when
people are talking in a gathering. When you come across such a
situation, leave them alone. If they show respect and ask you to
advise them, then talk to them.”354
Aisha spoke distinctly and clearly, as she had witnessed in God’s
Messenger. Her manner of speaking carried significance,
particularly when she addressed crowds. When minds are confused
or muddled by conflicting information, one must speak with
authority, and perhaps even repeat some phrases to convey what
needs to be understood. Aisha objected to those who spoke
hurriedly. She said words should be pronounced carefully, and used
God’s Messenger as an example. Aisha insisted that words should
be chosen to affect hearts.
Aisha
described
God’s
Messenger’s
generosity
as
an
uninterrupted wind that took everything with it.355
Her words answered the deepest troubles existing in her society:
“Certainly, engagement is like service to God. You should be
careful with whom you engage your daughter.”356
Poetry and Oratory
Poetry was the gift of the Arabs; they expressed themselves in its
language. Aisha was born in an era when her father, Abu Bakr, was
able to recite poetry for days without stopping. During that time, the
most valued commodity in the market was poetry; they noted
history in poetry, explained themselves through poetry, and livened
up their gatherings with poetry. According to Aisha, poetry came in
two forms: good and beautiful poetry, and bad and ugly poetry. She
recommended: “Leave the bad and ugly and be in search of
goodness and beauty.” She had heard this directly from the
Messenger of God.357
One day the Shurayh asked Aisha:

--- Sayfa 199 ---
196
“Has the Messenger of God ever recited a poem?”
She answered that God’s Messenger had recited a poem written
by Abdullah ibn Rawaha and did not neglect to give examples from
the poem.358
Aisha had a photographic memory. She never forgot what she had
heard, and could always recall it at the right time, in the right place.
Years later, she passed on what she had heard from the Meccans
about the rout they had experienced in the Battle of Badr; she told
believers about the hatred and rancor that the Meccans felt against
Islam.359 Aisha had the sincere feelings of an old woman who, years
later, was saved from the darkness of the pagan world, and entrusted
herself to the warm climate of the Prophet’s Mosque.360 Aisha
presented some of them to the Messenger of God. And it was Aisha,
again, who passed on the poems full of nostalgia that had belonged
to Abu Bakr, Bilal, and Fuhayra, whom she had visited after the
Emigration.361
One day, when she was near the Messenger of God, Aisha recited
two couplets from a poet of the Time of Ignorance, Abu Kabir al-
Huzali. In the poem, Abu Kabir al-Huzali wrote of his son and his
legendary bravery. Then Aisha said:
“If Abu Kabir al-Huzali had seen you, he would have surely
deemed you worthy of being the subject for his poems.”
At Aisha’s words, the Messenger of God stood up and kissed her
forehead, and said:
“May God Almighty reward you with the most beautiful and
beneficial prize, O Aisha. May God please you as you have pleased
me!”362
Aisha related how Sa’d in Muadh had recited a poem on the day
of the Battle of the Trench. In response to unbelievers who maligned
Islam and the Muslims, the Messenger of God asked Abdullah ibn
Rawaha, Ka’b ibn Malik, and Hassan ibn Thabit to defend Islam.
Aisha was the one who passed along these poems.363 She also
shared poems that the Muslim women of Medina recited during

--- Sayfa 200 ---
197
weddings.364
Surely, Aisha’s poems were not restricted to these. She was a
woman with a treasure trove of poetry stored in her memory,
sharing them when it was time, and able to use the beauty of poetry
to declare the values she believed in.365
She said:
“Feed your children poetry so that their tongues shall be sweet.”
She thought it was vital to teach poetry to children to help them
speak more fluently, and express themselves well. 366
It is a fact that poetry has both a beautiful and an ugly face. The
important thing for believers is to use language in good and
beneficial ways. Aisha explained that language could be used to hurt
people, like a biting snake:
“The most sinful person is he who ridicules a tribe or a group of
people in his poetry without any distinction.”367
This was also the advice of the Prophet, because Abdullah ibn
Umar narrated from the Prophet that, “poetry resides in speech; the
beauty of it is like the beauty of speech; the ugliness of it is like the
ugliness of speech, too.”368
When Abu Bakr passed away, Aisha heard that some people were
lobbying against her father and she became even more upset.
Evidently, it was a deliberate effort by the Hypocrites. The truth
needed to be told, to warn people before they believed the lies. She
called together a group of people who would listen to her advice.
She made a speech to make clear the position of the late Caliph,
with the details that some may have overlooked.
She had finished her remarks and awaited the people’s opinion.
She asked:
“For the sake of God, please tell me: is there anything that you
found odd or untrue in what I have told you?”
The reply arose from the fair people gathered there:
“No, we swear to God that everything you said was true!”369

--- Sayfa 201 ---
198
When Aisha received the news that Uthman had been
assassinated, she asked whether it was true. Then she said:
“May God the Almighty bestow His mercy upon him and forgive
him. Nevertheless, he was saved from the troubles of this world.
Since in the past you raised no objection to those who opposed and
resisted him and you submitted to them, today you should support
justice once more, and you should work to augment Islam’s strength
by exalting it. In return for so much benevolence from God, who
bestowed on you blessings upon blessings in your religion, you still
greedily desire this world and left behind the idea of helping His
religion. You know very well that destroying something is much
easier than constructing it. Do not forget that when you expect
thanks for your ingratitude, the blessings that you earned will
vanish.”370
On another day, Uthman ibn Hunayf asked her:
“O my dear mother, what is the reason for your visit here? Is it a
duty that the Messenger of God promised to you or is it your own
interpretation?”
She replied:
“On the contrary, I came here out of my own volition when I
heard that Uthman was murdered. By killing Uthman, you violated
three prohibitions and conducted three forbidden acts at the same
time. You ignored the sacredness of this area, violated the honor of
the Caliphate, and defied the holy months. Although he had fulfilled
your wishes, you caused him problem after problem, and killed him,
thus purifying him like a white cloth made spotless. Your tyranny
made him suffer, and I am angry with you because of what you did
to him. Do you think that this is too much, that I became angry with
you for wielding a sword against Uthman?”371
Although Aisha was a small woman, she had a resonant voice.
She lessened the tension in a crowd by increasing her volume.
During the Incident of the Camel, Aisha often used her considerable
powers of expression to achieve peace. In one of her sermons,

--- Sayfa 202 ---
199
which was marvelous in its language, she said:
“As surely as I have the rights of motherhood over you, I have the
right to advise you.”
She explained that her intention was peace—she spoke of the
blessings that God Almighty had bestowed on her because of God’s
Messenger, and her father’s efforts to ensure justice during his
Caliphate.
She addressed them with gratitude:
“As you know, only the ones who rebel against God accuse me.
The Messenger of God passed away while he was on my bosom. I
am one of his wives in heaven. My Lord prepared me especially for
him by protecting and securing me from negativity. You know that I
really believed, and the Hypocrites tried to cause discord among
you. Because of me, God Almighty bestowed on you the ease of
taking ablution with clean dust. You know that my father was one of
the two people, whose third was God. He was the fourth Muslim.
He received the title of The Loyal. The Messenger of God was
content with him while he was passing away, and he surely gave
strength to the Caliphate. When the unity of Islam was shaken, it
was he who gathered the two sides together and strengthened them.
But the fitnah (discord) fire had been set, and some became
unbelievers after having believed.”
These sermons left a deep impression on the listeners. The people
of Basra were split into two, and a significant number of them gave
up their oppostion to her. Those who had listened to the sermon later
said they had never before heard such clear and eloquent speech,
and gave up obeying Uthman ibn Hunayf, who had been leading
them.372
Medicine
Aisha also had expertise in medicine. Comparing the science and
medicine in modern and premodern times is, of course, impossible.
Cures were mostly obtained by using different mixtures from herbs,
plants ,and animals. Usually, a master-apprentice relationship was

--- Sayfa 203 ---
200
necessary for the transfer of this knowledge to future generations.
Those who had knowledge of this science handed over knowledge
and expertise to the next generation, and so on.
But Aisha was unusual in that she neither took studied medicine
or was an apprentice. The most well-known doctor of Aisha’s era
was Harith ibn Kalda, called “the doctor of the Arab people.”373
Women were known for being able to cure young children. Looking
at the general state of society, we see that there was a sharing of
duties between men and women. While men fought on the
battleground, women undertook the duty of treating the wounded.
Because Aisha was present at many battles, it is not difficult to
guess how the experiences affected a keen intellect like hers.
As mentioned before, Aisha never forgot what she heard or saw,
and was not at ease until her questions were answered. Aisha
investigated everything that happened around her.
The home of the Prophet was a multipurpose school. Not only did
she follow knowledge, but knowledge came to her. This was how
she learnt about medicine.
Her information attracted notice, and people came to ask her
about many things. Of course, there were some, even among her
relatives, who found her knowledge of medicine strange, and asked
how she had obtained it. Urwa ibn Zubayr, the son of her older sister
Asma, came to Aisha one day and asked:
“O my dear mother, I am never amazed about your intelligence,
depth of knowledge, comprehension or memory; because I said to
myself, ‘She is the wife of God’s Messenger and also the daughter
of Abu Bakr,’ and considered it normal. I never found your
knowledge of poetry or history strange, and accepted it by saying,
‘She is the daughter of Abu Bakr, the most learned of all people and
the scholar of the Quraysh.’ But I do not understand your
knowledge of medicine at all. Please tell me, how did you learn it
and where did you get the education for it?”
Aisha rested her hand on his shoulders and said:

--- Sayfa 204 ---
201
“O my Urwa, during the very last days of God’s Messenger, he
became sick so often and there were groups of doctors all around,
both Arab and Persian, who came to him to provide different kinds
of treatments. Applying the treatments was my duty and I practiced
them on God’s Messenger. This is the source of my knowledge.”374
From her own statements, Aisha learnt treatment methods from a
range of sources and applied them. Many wanted to benefit from her
experience, and referred to her as the authority on healing. But it is
also possible to say that this issue remained secondary, because
during this period of social unrest, the necessity of seeking and
applying Aisha’s religious knowledge was primary. On one
occasion, Urwa lamented the fact that Aisha was questioned so
often about the religious sciences that there was no time for medical
science, and untold volumes of information on medicine had been
lost with her death.375
Her Students
Aisha had a special talent for passing her information to others.
With no child of her own to raise and educate, she was the mother of
all. She found orphans and needy people, and fought to educate
useful members of society. She not only provided their material
needs, but aimed to turn them into stores of knowledge.
During those days, Medina was the heart of the Muslim world in
terms of knowledge. And Aisha was the city’s foremost scholar. She
was visited frequently by one and all who sought information. When
she came to Mecca to perform the pilgrimage, a tent was set up
between the Hira and Sabir mountains, and people visited her there
and returned to their homes with enlightenment.376
Aisha, who used all her days on earth to learn and teach, taught
many students in various areas, primarily in the field of hadith.
Because of her, thousands of authentic hadiths are available to every
single Muslim.
Her door was open to everyone, whether free men or slaves, from
intimate to distant relatives. There was only one condition: that each

--- Sayfa 205 ---
202
must observe the essentials of religion. They came into her presence
and listened to her lessons with great attention, and left with the
intention to pass their knowledge to others.
About religious matters, Aisha followed a path that anyone could
pursue, and answered questions in a way that was easy to
understand. When she saw that someone was shy to ask a question,
she encouraged them and made it easier to ask and learn about the
thing they were hiding inside.377
Aisha started a wave of knowledge that would reach more people
and would become more valuable in future generations.
The environment of the Messenger of God was felt within her
teachings. To her regular visitors, Aisha passed on the matters that
she had witnessed in the conversations between God’s Messenger
and his Companions, using the Messenger’s own style. She avoided
hastiness, and adopted a specific attitude to those who thought they
could acquire everything immediately in the first lesson. She told
them that God’s Messenger had not behaved that way.378
Aisha’s school of knowledge was frequented by Umar and his
son, Abdullah ibn Umar, Abu Hurayra, Abu Musa al-Ashari,
Abdullah ibn Abbas, Abdullah ibn Zubayr and by other well-known
Companions, such as Amr ibn As, Zayd ibn Khalid al Juhani, Rabia
ibn Amr al-Jurayshi, Saib ibn Yazid, and Harith ibn Abdullah.
The scholars of the next generation competed with each other to
benefit from this spring of knowledge. It is said that around one-
hundred and fifty scholars attended her lectures and listened to her
teachings. Urwa ibn Zubayr, Qasim ibn Muhammad, Abdullah ibn
Yazid, Alqama ibn Qays, Mujahid, Iqrima, Shabi, Zirr ibn Hubaysh,
Masruq ibn al-Ajda, Ubayd ibn Umayr, Said ibn al-Musayyib,
Aswad ibn Yazid, Tawus ibn Kaysan, Muhammad ibn Sirin,
Abdurrahman ibn Harith ibn Hisham, Ata ibn Abi Rabah, Sulayman
ibn Yasar, Ali ibn Husayn, Yahya ibn Ya’mar and ibn Abi Malaika
were among the scholars. These are the distinguished names that
enlightened not only their own times, but also the eras after them.

--- Sayfa 206 ---
203
Abu Amr, Zakwan, Nafi, Abu Yunus, ibn Farruh, Abu Mudilla,
Abu Lubaba Marwan, Abu Yahya and Abu Yusuf were freed slaves
(called mawali) and were also among Aisha’s students.379
Not only men benefitted from her school of knowledge. In the
gatherings, there were important women, such as her sister Umm
Kulthum bint Abu Bakr, Amra bint Abdurrahman, Amra bint Aisha
bint Talha, Asma bint Abdurrahman, and Muaza al-Adawiya, Aisha
bint Talha, Jasra bint Dajaja, Hafsah bint Abdurrahman ibn Abu
Bakr, Safiyya bint Shayba, Barira, Sayiba, Marjana and Hasan al-
Basri’s mother, Hayra. Around fifty women total attended her
lectures.
Being a student of Aisha’s was a special virtue. The people closest
to her were envied, but without malice. Her nephew Urwa’s position
attracted the notice of almost everyone.380
Urwa ibn Zubayr
Urwa ibn Zubayr was young, born in the twenty-third year of the
Islamic calendar, during the last year of Umar’s Caliphate. He
sought knowledge since the earliest days of his childhood. We see in
him the desire to become a store of knowledge which could benefit
other people.
We see evidence of this when he and three friends he met on the
Hijr, adjacent to the Ka’ba, were talking about the future. Although
Musab ibn Zubayr, Abdullah ibn Zubayr, and Abdullah ibn Umar
each had different wishes, Urwa asked:
“O my Lord, bestow on me knowledge that people will benefit
from after my death.”381
Perhaps as a result of his Prayer, a short time later he became one
of Medina’s scholars, respected by the elderly in spite of his youth.
He stayed close to Aisha, hardly ever leaving her alone, trying to get
more information from her. Kabisa ibn Zuayb said:
“Surely Urwa was the one among us who best knew Aisha’s
hadith knowledge, because he was the only one among us who

--- Sayfa 207 ---
204
entered the presence of Aisha without any difficulty.”382
Ibn Shihab al-Zuhri, himself a leader in hadith science, expressed
Urwa’s knowledge as an ocean whose bottom was unreachable.383
Urwa himself said:
“During Aisha’s last four or five years, I thought to myself, ‘If our
mother Aisha passes away, there is no hadith in her knowledge
treasure trove that I do not know.’”384
One day, Urwa ibn Zubayr and his son Muhammad went to visit
Walid ibn Abdul Malik in their barn. While they were in the barn,
the startled horses got out of control. Muhammad died in the
turmoil. Urwa himself received a serious blow to his leg, which later
had to be removed because the injury turned into gangrene. The
fortitude that he showed while his leg was amputated before his
eyes, without anesthetic, was impressive. When the surgery was
complete, he read the verse meaning, “We had some difficulties in
this journey of us.” There was no one holding him, and finally, he
fainted.
When he came to his senses, he wiped the sweat from his brow
and asked those who were there to give him the amputated leg.
Holding it in his hand, he said:
“I swear to God, who exalted me by walking with you, I neither
gave in to a sin with you nor stepped into it.”385
Then the people around him heard him pray:
“O my Lord! I had four limbs, two hands and two legs. You took
one of them and left the other three to me; surely, as always, praise
be upon you! I had four sons. You took one of them and left the
other three to me; surely, as always, praise be upon you! Aren’t the
ones that become everlasting the ones you take?”386
Urwa had inherited the perfect manners of Aisha in worship,
generosity, and benevolence. It was he who transferred her habits
about worship to future generations. He spent his nights reciting the
Qur’an, finishing one-quarter of it in one night, and kept long vigils
at Prayer. Even after his leg was amputated, Urwa never shortened

--- Sayfa 208 ---
205
his worship. Only one night was he not able to spend his night in
Prayer and recitation—the night his leg was removed—but he
performed the worship the following night. He never wanted to lose
his place in his spiritual life. He advised his family to pray all the
time.
“When any of you see something worldly that you like, you
should go home and advise the family to perform Prayers; you
should incline towards worshipping because God Almighty advises
his Prophet: ‘Do not strain your eyes toward what We have given
some groups among them to enjoy, the splendor of the present,
worldly life, so that We may test them thereby. The provision of your
Lord is better and more lasting!’” (Ta-Ha 20:131).
Of Urwa, his son Hisham said:
“My father fasted his whole life and he was fasting on the day that
he died.”387
Urwa inherited Aisha’s generosity, too. In the season when the
dates were ripening, he picked them from trees, spread them on his
wall, and invited people to his garden to take some. People came
from all around to visit his house and none left empty-handed.
Whenever he entered his garden, he said Mashallah (how
beautifully God made!) and recited the verse (al-Kahf 18:39)
meaning, “What Allah wills (will come to pass)! There is no
strength save in Allah!”388
The following statements express his depth and are very
meaningful:
“When you see someone doing a good deed, know that there are
brothers of the good deed near that person too. Similarly, if you
witness someone doing a bad deed, know that there are brothers of
the bad deed near that person as well. Thus, a good deed is the
forerunner of other good deeds; a bad deed is a sign of more bad
deeds.”
Urwa died in the ninety-fourth year of the Muslim calendar. Since
there were many other scholars who started their eternal journey in

--- Sayfa 209 ---
206
the same year, this year started to be called “the year of Fiqh
scholars (sanatul fuqaha).”389
Qasim ibn Muhammad
Since his father had become a martyr, Qasim ibn Muhammad grew
up near Aisha and acquired all his knowledge from her presence.
She took care of him, placed him under her own protection, and
concerned herself with his education. Aisha even cut his hair and
dressed him up for festivals herself.
But surely the most important inheritance that Aisha left to him
was knowledge. It is said that Qasim, together with Urwa and Amra,
was one of the three people who had learnt Aisha’s extensive
knowledge of the hadiths.390 At the same time, he was humble. He
disliked being regarded as important, and did not think himself
superior than others.
One day, someone from Badiya asked him whether he was more
knowledgeable than the famous scholar Salim.
Qasim ibn Muhammad thought neither of exalting Salim with
false modesty, or of stroking his own ego by bragging. In response
to the man’s insistence, Qasim told the man to ask this question to
Salim.391
Like Urwa, Qasim lived without asking for anything from other
people and never inclined, even slightly, toward any behavior that
might damage his morality and gravity. One day, Umar ibn
Ubaydullah sent him one thousand drachmas, but he returned them
all. Some people insisted that he should keep just one hundred of
them, but his attitude did not change. Qasim would not eat one bite
of the benevolence that was offered to him.
The Caliph of the time, Umar ibn Abdul Aziz, treated Qasim with
great respect and regard throughout his life. He even recommend
Qasim as a Caliph candidate after himself, and did not hesitate to
say this openly.392
When
Qasim
saw
people
speculating
about
different

--- Sayfa 210 ---
207
interpretations of destiny, he warned them:
“You too should behave carefully on the points that God avoided
expounding on.”
He interpreted the conflicts of the people who had lived before
him, primarily the Companions, as God’s great mercy for the
following generations. 393 When he lost his vision at the age of
seventy, he called his son near him when his death was close and
told him his will:
“Use the clothes that I performed Prayer in, including my shirt,
izar and rida394 as my burial shroud.”
His son asked:
“Oh my dear father, why don’t we prepare a two-piece shroud for
you?”
His answer was like Abu Bakr’s, whom he considered an
example:
“O my dear son, Abu Bakr left this world with three pieces of
cloth. Do not forget that those who live need new clothes more.”395
Amra bint Abdurrahman
Amra bint Abdurrahman was sister of As’ad ibn Zurara of the Banu
Najjar, one of the leaders of Ansar, and the granddaughter of Sad
ibn Zurara. She was a relative of God’s Messenger on his mother’s
side.
Aisha, who took Amra and her siblings under her protection,
turned this family into distinguished scholars. She felt responsible
for spreading the knowledge that she had accumulated during the
era of God’s Messenger among the children whose talents she had
noticed.
Like her siblings, Amra appreciated Aisha’s consideration and
took her place in history as the leading scholar of her time. The
well-known ibn al-Madini said, “Amra was among the most reliable
scholars who were cognizant of Aisha’s hadith knowledge,”396 and
“Amra bint Abdurrahman understood this matter and had the

--- Sayfa 211 ---
208
incredible vision to comprehend the knowledge of Aisha.”
Ibn Hibban said: “She was the most knowledgeable of people
about Aisha’s hadith knowledge.”
Sufyan Sarwi called her, “the most well-informed person who
comprehended Aisha’s hadith knowledge.”397
The people of Amra’s time liked her very much. Everyone who
was interested in Aisha’s knowledge was likewise interested in
Amra’s, and showed their love with gifts. But she sent the gifts to
the needy, just as she had learned from Aisha. And she never sent
gift-senders home empty-handed, either.398
After Aisha, the duty of correcting interpretation errors fell to
Amra. She corrected judgments and tried to explain the truth,
together with its reasoning.399
One day, Qasim ibn Muhammad asked Imam Zuhri:
“I see you are very desirous for learning. Do you want me to show
you a bowl full of knowledge?”
“Yes.”
“You should go directly to Amra bint Abdurrahman because she
was educated by Aisha.”
Zuhri, who went to Amra bint Abdurrahman following Qasim ibn
Muhammad’s recommendation, later said:
“I realized that she was like an ocean where it was impossible to
reach the bottom.”400
Though people sought knowledge in those days, Amra went well
beyond what was usual. When she opened her eyes to the world,
Aisha was next to her; from early childhood, she was surrounded by
Aisha’s treasure trove of information. Amra was one of the few who
followed the path of Aisha, in searching for knowledge and
applying it to her life, primarily in the hadith and fiqh sciences. She
narrated hadiths from Rafi ibn Hadij, Ubayd ibn Rifa’a, Marwan ibn
al-Hakam, Habiba bint Sahl, Hamna bint Jahsh, Umm Hisham bint
Haritha, and Umm Salama, as well as Aisha.

--- Sayfa 212 ---
209
During an age when the well-informed continually sought
information, people visited her often. She turned her home into a
madrasa, a place of teaching and learning, and educated many
students. Among the students she taught were: Haritha ibn Abi
Rijal, Ruzayq ibn Hakim, Sa’d ibn Said, Sulayman ibn Yasar,
Abdullah ibn Abu Bakr ibn Muhammad ibn Amr, Abdirabbih Ibni
Said, Urwa ibn Zubayr, Amr ibn Dinar, Malik ibn Abi Rijal,
Muhammad ibn Abu Bakr ibn Muhammad ibn Amr, Muhammad
ibn Abdurrahman, Muhammad ibn Muslim, ibn Shihab al-Zuhri,
Yahya ibn Said, Yahya ibn Abdullah, Abu Bakr ibn Muhammad,
Raita al-Muzani, Fatima bint Munzir.
She passed away in the ninety-eighth year of the Muslim calendar.
Her death caused great sadness among scholars and people looked
for the information she had left behind. The Caliph of Umayyad,
Umar ibn Abdulaziz, who had showed a special deference to Amra
while she lived, and consulted her on matters that confused him,
said:
“No one who knows Aisha’s hadith knowledge remained among
us after Amra’s death.”
He assigned a team of people to search for any information,
hadith, or application that she had passed to future generations.401
Muaza al-Adawiyah
Muaza al-Adawiyah, known by her nickname Umm Sahba, was the
widow of Sila ibn Ashyam, who had been murdered on a
battleground near Qabil with his son, Sahba. Muaza, who had
inherited the good manners and knowledge of Aisha, had such
strength of character that upon hearing the death of her husband and
son, she told the women who came to offer their condolences:
“If you are coming to congratulate me, you are welcome. But if
you have some other intention, it would be better not to come.”
This great woman, who promised to spend her life in worship,
kept vigil every night, particularly after the martyrdom of her
husband. She was known as one of the most pious people of that

--- Sayfa 213 ---
210
time. Muaza, who attracted notice because of her depth of faith and
worship, one day told those around her:
“I swear to God that my love for this world is not about making
myself prosperous or about enjoyment or happiness. I swear to God,
I love this world only because I want to get closer to my God while
here. In this way, I hope that God Almighty will let me meet with
my son and Abu Sahba in heaven.”402
She performed Prayers from night until morning, and when she
felt sleepy or lazy, she walked around a little to restore her vigor,
and said to herself:
“O my nafs (soul)! Here sleep is, right in front of you; if you
submit to it, you should know that you will sleep in your grave at
great length. But there is one difference—this sleep will bring you
either yearning in regret or happiness in mercy.”403
When her time approached and the signs of death started to be
seen, those nearby witnessed that she wept in great sorrow, and then
smiled. They asked:
“Why did you cry and why are you smiling?”
“I thought that my illness would draw me away from fasting,
Prayers and remembrance of God, so I became sad and cried. But
then Abu Sahba, in a two-piece green cloth, together with a group of
people, appeared in the garden. I swear to God, I never saw beauty
like their’s in this world, so I smiled. I do not think that I will be
here for even one more Prayer.”
As she had foretold, Muaza al-Adawiyah died that day, in the
eithy-third year of the Muslim calendar, before it was time for
another Prayer.404

--- Sayfa 214 ---
211
295 Muslim, Hajj, 39 (1190).
296 Bukhari, Ghusl, 12, 13 (264, 267).
297 Muwatta, Siyam, 4 (639); Bayhaqi, Sunan, 4:214 (7785); Nasa’i, Sunanu’l Kubra,
2:180.
298 Muslim, Dhikr, 17 (2685); Nasa’i, Janaiz, 10 (1834); Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad,
2:346 (8537). The information from two different narrations are combined.
299 Abu Dawud, Janaiz, 18 (3114); Hakim, Mustadrak, 1:490 (1260).
300 Bayhaqi, Shuabu’l Iman, 1:318 (359). See also: Bukhari, Riqaq, 45 (6162); Muslim,
Janna, 56 (2859).
301 Ibn Sa’d, Tabaqat, 8:480; Ibn Abdilbarr, Tamhid, 17:251; Ibn Hajar, Tahzibu’t Tahzib,
12:466 (2850).
302 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:75 (24507, 24511, 24514).
303 Tafsiri Baghawi, 1:374; Ayni, Umdatu’l Qari, 2:136.
304 Tahmaz, Sayyidatu Aisha, 174.
305 Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 63 (3883).
306 Hakim, Mustadrak, 4:15 (6748), Dhahabi, Siyar, 2:185, 200.
307 Hakim, Mustadrak, 4:12 (6733).
308 Hakim, Mustadrak, 4:12 (6736); Darimi, Sunan, 2:442 (2859).
309 Ibn Sa’d, Tabaqat, 2:374.
310 Hakim, Mustadrak, 2:12 (6734); Ibn Hajar, Isaba, 4:349.
311 Ibn Sa’d Tabaqat
312 Isbahani, Aghani, 20:331.
313 Hakim, Mustadrak, 4:15 (6747).
314 Bukhari, Nikah, 1, 38 (4777, 4838).
315 Bukhari, Buyu, 95 (2098), Wasaya, 23 (2614), Tafsir, 81 (4299).
316 Muslim, Masajid, 207 (629).
317 Abu Dawud, Salat, 5 (409), Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 5:205 (21840); Tirmidhi,
Tafsir, 3 (2984, 2985).
318 Tirmidhi, Tafsir, 3 (2990-2992).
319 Bukhari, Jumu’a, 13, 14 (860, 861).
320 Muslim, Adahi, 26 (1970).
321 Tirmidhi, Adahi, 14 (1511); Ibn Majah, At’ima, 30 (3313).
322 Muslim, Hayd, 59 (331); Ibn Majah, Tahara, 108 (604).
323 When the person who reported the hadith asked Aisha whether it was her, she smiled
and replied in the affirmative. See Abu Dawud, Tahara, 69 (178, 179); Tirmidhi, Tahara,
63 (86).
324 Bukhari, Manaqib, 20 (3374).
325 Bukhari, Manaqib, 20 (3375).

--- Sayfa 215 ---
212
326 Muslim, Talaq, 36 (1480); Tirmidhi, Nikah, 37 (1195).
327 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:241 (26084).
328 Abu Dawud, Manasiq, 51 (1888); Tirmidhi, Sawm, 64 (902).
329 Bukhari, Hajj, 146 (1676).
330 Muslim, Hajj, 405 (1333); Bukhari, Ilm, 48 (126).
331 Bukhari, Ilm, 48 (126).
332 Bukhari, Sifatu’s Salat, 79, (831).
333 Al-Baqarah 2:173; Qurtubi, al-Jami, 2:224.
334 Malik, Muwatta, Talaq, 1198.
335 Bukhari, Talaq, 4 (4962, 4963).
336 Tirmidhi, Nikah, 2 (1082); Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:97 (24702).
337 Ibn Sa’d, Tabaqat, 2:375.
338 Zarkashi, al-Ijaba, 9.
339 Ibn Sa’d, Tabaqat, 2:375.
340 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:93 (24667), 95 (24685); Bukhari, Adabu’l Mufrad,
1:382 (1118).
341 See the Tafsirs of Ibn Kathir and Tabari (an-Najm 13-15).
342 If God Almighty wills, He may let His Messengers know about events to happen in the
future. Otherwise, they have no ability to know anything about the future as they wish.
343 Concerning this “seeing,” see Bukhari, Badu’l Khalq, 7 (3062); Tabarani, Mujamu’l
Kabir, 12:90 (12565). Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:241 (26082).
344 Bukhari, Badu’l Wahy, 1 (3).
345 Bukhari, Shahadat, 15 (2661), Maghazi, 34 (4141).
346 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:67 (24425).
347 Muslim, Fadailu’s Sahaba, 157 (2490).
348 Ibn Abdilbarr, Istiab, 1:342.
349 Zarkashi, al-Ijaba, 57; Buti, Aisha, Ummu’l Muminin, 79.
350 Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 62 (3884).
351 Hakim, Mustadrak, 4:12 (6732).
352 Dhahabi, Siyar, 2:183.
353 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:219.
354 Zarkashi, Ijaba, 176.
355 Bukhari, Badu’l Wahy, 1 (6).
356 Said ibn Mansur, Sunan, 1:191; Ibnu’l Jawzi, Zadu’l Maad, 5:189.
357 Bukhari, Adabu’l Mufrad, 1:299 (865).
358 Bukhari, Adabu’l Mufrad, 1:300 (867).
359 Bukhari, Manaqibu’l Ansar, 45 (3921).
360 Bukhari, Salat, 57 (439); Manaqibu’l Ansar, 26 (3835).

--- Sayfa 216 ---
213
361 Bukhari, Fadailu’l Medina, 12 (1889); Manaqibu’l Ansar, 46 (3926); Marda, 8, 22
(5654, 5677).
362 Bayhaqi, Sunan, 7:422 (15204).
363 Muslim, Fadailu’s-Sahaba 156 (2489, 2490).
364 Bayhaqi, Sunan, 7:289 (14466).
365 For more detailed examples about the poems Aisha recited, see: Bayhaqi, Sunan, 7:289
(14466); Tabari, Tarikh, 3:7, 47; 10:3; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya, 7, 244; Tabarani, al-
Mujamu’s Saghir, 1:214 (343); al-Mujamu’l Awsat, 3:360 (3401).
366 Ibni Abdirabbih, al-Ikdu’l Farid, 5:239.
367 Bukhari, Adabu’l Mufrad, 1:302 (874).
368 Bukhari, Adabu’l Mufrad, 1:299 (865).
369 Ibn Abdirabbih, al-Ikdu’l Farid, 2:206; Kalkashandi, Subhu’l Asha, 1:248; Nuwayri,
Nihayatu’l Arab, 7:230.
370 Abu Hayyan, Imta, 511; Ibn Tayfur, Balaghatu’n Nisa, 5; Buti, Aisha, 81.
371 Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya, 7:232.
372 Ibni Asakir, Tarikh Dimashq, 30;390; Muttaqi, Kanzu’l Ummal, 12:224, 225 (35638).
373 Bukhari, Wasaya, 2; Faraiz, 6.
374 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:67 (24425); Hakim, Mustadrak, 4:218 (7426).
375 Dhahabi, Siyar, 2:183.
376 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:40 (24170); Ibn Sa’d, Tabaqat, 5:595; 8:68.
377 Ibn Majah, Tahara, 111 (610); Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:97, 265 (24699, 26332).
378 Bukhari, Manaqib, 20 (3375).
379 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:32 (24845), 258; Tirmidhi, Da’awat, 129 (3598).
380 Ibn Hajar, Tahzibu’t Tahzib, 12:463.
381 Abu Nuaym, Hilyatu’l Awliya, 1:309; 2:176; Ibn Asakir, Tarikh Dimashq, 40:267.
382 Ibn Hajar, Tahzibu’t Tahzib, 7:165; 12:463.
383 Ibn Sa’d Tabaqat, 5:181.
384 Ibn Hajar, Tahzibu’t Tahzib, 7:165.
385 Ibn Asakir, Tarikh Dimashq, 61:410.
386 Abu Nuaym, Hilyatu’l Awliya, 2:179.
387 Ibn Sa’d, Tabaqat, 5:180.
388 Abu Nuaym, Hilyatu’l Awliya, 2:180.
389 Ibn Sa’d, Tabaqat, 5:181.
390 Ibn Hajar, Tahzibu’t Tahzib, 8:300.
391 Ibid.
392 Dhahabi, Tazkiratu’l Huffaz, 1:97.
393 Ibn Sa’d, Tabaqat, 5:188, 189.
394 An izar is a wrapper covering the body below the waist and a rida is a cloak covering
the upper body.

--- Sayfa 217 ---
214
395 Ibn Sa’d, Tabaqat, 3:204.
396 Ibn Hajar, Tahzibu’t Tahzib, 12:466.
397 Ibn Hibban, Siqat, 5:288 (4881).
398 Bukhari, Adabu’l Mufrad, 1:382 (1118).
399 Malik, Muwatta, Hudud, 11 (1531).
400 Dhahabi, Tazkiratu’l Huffaz, 1:112; A’lam, 4:508; 5:347.
401 Ibn Sa’d, Tabaqat, 8:480; Dhahabi, Siyar, 4:507, 508.
402 Ibnu’l Jawzi, Sifatu’s Safwa, 4:23.
403 Ibid, 4:22.
404 Ibid.

--- Sayfa 218 ---
215
W
At What Age Did Aisha Marry the Prophet?
hen covering the life of the Prophet, one of the most
debatable topics is that of the age of his wife, Aisha, when
the two married. Her alleged young age has been used in smear
campaigns against the Prophet.
Reports showing that Aisha bint Abu Bakr was 6 or 7 years old
when she became engaged, and 10 when she married,405 have been
the generally accepted assumptions regarding her age of marriage. It
should not be forgotten that such practices were extremely
widespread at the time, and children developed earlier in those
times. For these reasons, this subject was not made into a
contentious issue until recently.
Orientalists, who do not consider the context of the time period in
which an action occurred and who examine Islam from the
“outside,” have made this a current issue. The Muslim world’s
reaction to this different stance has been mixed. While some have
insisted that Aisha’s afore-mentioned age at marriage is correct,406
others are of the opinion that Aisha was older.407 In this situation,
where it is not always possible to maintain a balanced view, various
approaches have developed to answer the Orientalists’ claims,
including those that choose to deny the reports or ignore the
existence of other alternatives.
First of all, it should be known that everyone is a child according
to the standards and norms of their time; therefore, any questions
about cultural norms must be evaluated within these specific
contexts.There are certain values that form a society’s customs, and
when a society is evaluated, these values have to be taken into
consideration. Otherwise, if we were to attempt to evaluate
historical events within today’s conditions, we should remember
that we are bound to make mistakes in judgment.
It is known that during the time of the Prophet, young girls were
married at an early age408 and that age difference was not important
in marriage.409 Especially in regard to young girls, it should not be

--- Sayfa 219 ---
216
forgotten that there was social pressure for this - that they matured
earlier due to climatic and geographical conditions, and that they
were seen as goods that needed to grow in their husband’s house.
Moreover, this is not a matter just related to girls; boys were also
married at ages 8, 9 and 10, and they became heads of a family at an
age that is perceived as very young today.410 It should be
remembered that during this time, many people did everything they
could to slander the Prophet, be it questioning his marriage with
Zaynab bint Jahsh or slandering Aisha after the Murayso expedition.
If Aisha’s age was not questioned by these people, it’s a sign that,
within the context of historical circumstances, it was a common
practice.
In the verses of the Qur’an that came at the same time, the age for
marriage was mentioned and it was emphasized that children should
be married when they come of age.411 Opposing a divine suggestion
was not an option. Using the mentality of Umar, if intervention had
been a matter of consideration here, the Prophet would surely have
been warned in a coming revelation and a step would have been
taken to resolve the issue. At any rate, the Prophet’s wedding to
Aisha took place in accordance with direction from divine will.412
Putting the extremes aside and using moderate criteria, the
sources related to Aisha’s age at marriage are examined as follows:
1. While listing the names of Muslims during the first days of
Islam, Aisha’s name, together with her older sister, Asma, are listed
immediately after the names of the Sabiqun al-Awwalun (the first
and foremost representatives) like Uthman ibn Affan, Zubayr ibn
Awwam, Abdurrahman ibn Awf, Sa’d ibn Abi Waqqas, Talha ibn
Ubaydullah, Abu Ubayda ibn Jarrah, Arqam ibn Abi’l Arqam, and
Uthman ibn Mad’un. Being the 18th person to accept Islam, Aisha’s
name precedes the names of Umayr ibn Abi Waqqas, Abdullah ibn
Mas’ud, Salit ibn Amr, Ja’far ibn Abi Talib, Abdullah ibn Jahsh,
Abu Hudayfa, Suhayb ibn Sinan, Ammar ibn Yasir, Umar ibn
Khattab, Hamza ibn Abdilmuttalib, Habbab ibn Arat, Said ibn Zayd,

--- Sayfa 220 ---
217
and Fatima bint Khattab.413
This means she was living then and was mature enough to make
such a choice and exercise her will. In addition, the information in
the reports that indicates “she was a small girl then” shows that her
name was mentioned in a conscious way.414
This date refers to the early days of Islam. For it is known that
Aisha’s sister, Asma, who was born in 595, was 15 when she
became a Muslim.415 This indicates the year 610, when the Prophet
started to receive the revelation, and this shows that Aisha was at
least 5, 6, or 7 that day, and that she was at least 17 or 18 when she
married the Prophet in Medina.
2. In regard to the days in Mecca, Aisha said, “I was a girl playing
games when the verse, ‘Indeed, the Last Hour is their appointed
time (for their complete recompense), and the Last Hour will be
more grievous and more bitter’416 was revealed to God’s
Messenger.”417 This information opens other doors regarding her
age.
The verse under consideration is the 46th verse of Surah Qamar,
the 54th chapter of the Qur’an, which explains the miracle of the
split moon [the splitting of the moon is one of the miracles
performed by the Prophet]. Revealed as a whole, this surah came
while the Prophet was in Ibn Arqam’s home in the fourth (614),418
eighth (618), or ninth (619)419 year of his mission, according to
differing reports. Looking especially at necessity, some scholars
focused on the date being 614; if this date is taken, Aisha either had
not been born or had just been born. Thus, if 614 is the accepted
date, it appears that she must have been born at least eight or nine
years earlier.
The situation does not change much when 618 or 619 are taken as
the date. On either date, she would have only been 4 or 5 years old,
neither of which is an age at which she would have been able
understand this event and relate it years later.
According to this second possibility, she was probably born when

--- Sayfa 221 ---
218
Muhammad’s Prophethood had just begun.420
Another matter worth mentioning here is that while describing
that day, Aisha stated, “I was a girl playing games.” The word she
used to describe herself, jariya, is used to describe the passage into
puberty.
If we look at the issue, using 614 as the year that Surah Qamar
was revealed, Aisha would have been born at least eight years
before the Prophetic mission - or in 606. If we accept 618, then her
year of birth would have been 610; this event alone makes it
impossible for her to have been 9 when she married.
When this information is combined with her name being on the
list of the first Muslims, we can conclude that Aisha’s date of birth
was probably 606. Consequently, she would have been at least 17
when she married.
3. Of course, Aisha’s memories of Mecca are not limited to this
one event. In addition to this, the following memories confirm the
matter:
a) She talked about having seen two people begging who had remained from
the Year of the Elephant (the year in which Yemeni King Abraha sent an
army of elephants to Mecca in order to destroy the Ka‘ba; the elephants were
pelted with pebbles dropped on them by birds), which occurred 40 years
before the Prophetic mission and is accepted as a milestone for determining
historical dates. Her sister, Asma, was the only person Aisha handed this
information down to.421
b) She described, in detail, that during difficult times in Mecca, God’s
Messenger had come to Abu Bakr’s house, morning and evening, and that
her father, who could not endure this hardship, attempted to migrate to
Abyssinia.422
c) She stated that first it was mandatory to offer two cycles of obligatory Prayer
and that later it was changed to four cycles for residents, but that during
military campaigns two cycles were performed.423
d) In reports about the early days, she made statements like, “We heard that Isaf
and Naila had committed a crime at the Ka‘ba and for this reason God turned
them into stone, as a man and woman from the Jurhum tribe.”424

--- Sayfa 222 ---
219
4. Being betrothed before the engagement: Another factor that
supports Aisha being older is that at the time when the Prophet’s
marriage was a topic of discussion, Aisha was engaged to Mut’im
ibn Adiyy’s son, Jubayr. The suggestion for the Prophet to marry
Aisha came from Hawla bint Hakim, the wife of Uthman ibn
Mad’un, someone not from the family. Both situations show that she
had come to the age of marriage and was known within the
community as being ready for marriage.
As is known, this betrothal was broken by the Ibn Adiyy family
due to the possible religious conversion of their son to Islam, and it
was only after this that Aisha’s engagement to Muhammad, peace
and blessings be upon him, took place.425 Consequently, the
marriage agreement was either made before the Prophetic mission
or when the call to Islam was being made openly (three years after
the Prophet began receiving revelation). If it was made before the
mission, it implies that Aisha was born even earlier than has been
thought. For this reason, some say that she was a 13- or 14-year-old
girl by then.426
It should not be overlooked that this decision was made during the
period when the call to Islam had begun to be made openly. In
regard to time, this means 613-614. If it is assumed that Aisha was
born four years after the mission, it has to be accepted that she had
not yet been born; had she not been born, it would’ve been
impossible to talk about an engagement. In this case, it has to be
accepted that she was at least 7 or 8 when her engagement was
broken, so the year of her birth would probably be 605.427
Here, another possibility can be mentioned: namely, an agreement
of arranged future marriage similar to “cradle tallying,” an
agreement between parents in the early years after the birth of a
baby. However, there are no details in any texts to confirm this.
5. The age difference of Aisha’s siblings should be taken into
account. As is known, Abu Bakr had six children. Asma and
Abdullah were born from Qutayla bint Umays, Aisha and

--- Sayfa 223 ---
220
Abdurrahman from Umm Ruman, Muhammad from Asma bint
Umays, and Umm Kulthum from Habiba bint Harija. Asma and
Abdullah have the same mother, as do Aisha and Abdurrahman. The
age difference between children from the same mother can enlighten
our subject matter.
a) Abu Bakr’s first daughter, Asma, was born in 595, 27 years before Hijra, the
Prophet’s emigration to Medina.428 At the time of Hijra, she was married to
Zubayr ibn Awwam and was six-months pregnant.429 Her son, Abdullah,
was born three months later, in Quba, while she was migrating to Medina.
She died in the 73rd year of Hijra at the age of 100; her teeth had not even
fallen out.
Here there is another critical piece of information. The age difference between
Aisha and her sister Asma was 10 years.430 According to this, Aisha’s year
of birth was 605 (595+10=605) and her age at the time of Hijra was 17 (27–
10=17). Since her marriage took place six, seven or eight months after Hijra,
or just after Badr,431 this means Aisha was 17-18 years old at that time.
b) The age difference between Aisha and her brother Abdurrahman is also
striking. Abdurrahman became Muslim after the Treaty of Hudaybiya was
signed, six years after Hijra. He was careful not to encounter his father at the
Battle of Badr, in the second year after Hijra, and that day, Abdurrahman
was 20 years old.432 In other words, he must have been born in 604. Taking
into consideration the conditions of that time, the probability is low that the
sister of a child born in 604 would be born 10 years later in 614. Put another
way, at a time when the age difference between brothers and sisters was
usually one or two years, a large difference, such as 10 years, between Aisha
and her brother is highly unlikely.
6. Reports regarding Aisha’s death can also help to illuminate the
issue. The year in which she died is listed as the 55th, 56th, 57th, 58th
or 59th year after Hijra433 and her age at that time as 65, 66, 67 or
74.434 Just as there is no agreement regarding her date of birth, there
is no agreement regarding her date of death.
Reports to the effect that she died in the 58th year after Hijra and
that she was 74 when she died give the impression that they are
sounder than others because they give detailed information - such as
the day she died being Wednesday, that it corresponded to the 17th

--- Sayfa 224 ---
221
day of Ramadan, that upon her request she was buried at night after
the Witr Prayer in the Jannat al-Baqi Cemetery, that again upon her
last request the Funeral Prayer was lead by Abu Hurayra, and that
she was lowered into the grave by persons like her sister Asma’s
two sons, Abdullah and Urwa, her brother Muhammad’s two sons,
Qasim and Abdullah, and her brother Abdurrahman’s son,
Abdullah.435 Therefore, when calculations are made according to
this date, we see she lived 48 years after the Prophet’s death
(48+10=58+13=71+3=74). This means she was born three years
before his Prophethood and, in view of this information, she was 17
when she married (74–48=26–9=17).
There are other issues that support this conclusion: She was at the
battle front at Uhud, in the third year after Hijra; this was a battle
where even boys were turned away. Her scholarly knowledge was
incredible, as was her mature response to claims of slander. The age
difference between her and the Prophet’s daughter, Fatima, suggests
she was around 17; so, too, does her knowledge and awareness of
Hijra and later developments. After arriving in Medina, her
marriage was consummated at her father’s suggestion and after the
mahr had been paid.436 There were many differing reports about the
date of marriage;437 also, dates of birth and death were not clearly
determined in that society, as they are today.
All this information strengthens the probability that she was born
before the commencement of Islam, was engaged at 14 or 15 years
of age, and was married to the Prophet at the age of 17 or 18.
In this situation, it is up to us to attribute the meaning “I appeared
to be” to the report “I was 6 or 7 when I was engaged and 9 when I
married” and to reconcile the two.438 The fact that Aisha was
physically thin strengthens this interpretation. She was affected by
physical events faster and had a smaller body than her peers. Her
small stature is supported by events: she became ill during the
migration to Medina;439 her mother showed her special attention;440
and when she lost her necklace after the Muraysi expedition, she

--- Sayfa 225 ---
222
was so light that when her palanquin was placed on the camel, her
guards thought she was in it.441
In short, regardless of whether Aisha’s age at marriage was 9 or
17 or 18, there was nothing strange about it in those times. It is
necessary to evaluate every society according to its own rules.
When we look at examples, it was quite a widespread custom to
marry both boys and girls at a young age. However, when we look
at information passed down to us, it should not be forgotten that the
information suggesting that Aisha, may God be pleased with her,
was born in 605, engaged at the age of 14 or 15, and married at the
age of 17 or 18, is too strong to be ignored or discarded.

--- Sayfa 226 ---
223
405 Bukhari, Manaqibu’l Ansar, 20, 44; Muslim, Nikah, 71; Fadailu’s Sahaba, 74; Abu
Dawud, Adab, 55; Ibn Majah, Nikah, 13; Nasa’i, Nikah, 78; Darimi, Nikah, 56.
406 Azimli, Mehmet, “Hz. Aişe’nin Evlilik Yaşı Tartışmalarında Savunmacı Tarihçiliğin
Çıkmazı,” İslami Araştırmalar, Vol. 16, Issue 1, 2003.
407 See Doğrul, Ömer Rıza. Asr-ı Saadet, Istanbul: Eser Kitabevi, 1974, 2/141; Nadwi,
Sayyid Sulayman. Hazreti Aişe, (trans. Ahmet Karataş), Timaş, Istanbul: 2004, p. 21;
Savaş, Rıza. “Hz. Aişe’nin Evlenme Yaşı ile İlgili Farklı Bir Yaklaşım,” D. E. Ü.
İlahiyat F. Dergisi. Issue 4, Izmir: 1995, pp. 139-144; Yüce, Abdülhakim, Efendimiz’in
Bir Günü, Istanbul: Işık Yayınları, pp. 82-83, 2007.
408 Abdul Muttalib, the grandfather of the Prophet, married Hala bint Uhayb, who was
young then. Since he married off his son, Abdullah, to Amina at an early age at around
the same time of his own marriage with Hala, the Prophet was almost of the same age as
his uncle, Hamza.
409 In order to have family relationship with the Prophet and thus further his close relation
with God’s Messenger, Umar ibn al-Khattab married Ali’s daughter, Umm Kulthum,
and this marriage was not found strange, at that time.
410 Amr ibnu’l As, for instance, was 12 years older than his son, Abdullah. This means that
he was around 10 when he got married. For further information see Ibn Athir, Usudu’l
Ghaba, 3:240.
411 Nisa 4:6.
412 Bukhari, Ta’bir, 21, Manaqibu’l Ansar, 44, Nikah, 9; Muslim, Fadailu’s Sahaba, 79; Ibn
Hanbal, Musnad, 6:41, 128.
413 Ibn Hisham, Sira, 1:271; Ibn Ishaq, Sira, Konya, 1981, 124.
414 Ibn Hisham, Sira, 1:271; 124.
415 Nawawi, Tahzibu’l Asma, 2:597; Hakim, Mustadrak, 3:635.
416 Al-Qamar 54:46.
417 Bukhari, Fadailu’l Qur’an, 6; Tafsiru’s Sura, (54) 6; Ayni, Badruddin Abu Muhammad
Mahmud ibn Ahmad, Umdatu’l Qari Sharh Sahih Bukhari, 20:21; Asqalani, Fathu’l
Bari, 11:291.
418 Suyuti, Itqan, Beirut, 1987, 1:29, 50; Doğrul, Asr-ı Saadet, 2:148.
419 The month difference stems from the lunar calendar.
420 Taking this information into account, some people calculate Aisha’s age at marriage as
at least 14 or 22, even up to 28. We have not focused on these as they are not supported
by the sources.
421 Ibn Hisham, Sira, 1:176; Haythami, Majmatu’z Zawaid, 3:285; Ibn Kathir, Tafsir,
4:553; Bidaya, 2:214; Qurtubi, Tafsir, 20:195.
422 Bukhari, Salat, 70, Kafala, 5, Manaqibu’l Ansar, 45, Adab, 64; Ibn Hanbal, Musnad,
6:198.
423 Muslim, 3:463; Mujamu’l Kabir, 2:285, 286; Mujamu’l Awsat, 12:145; Ibn Hisham,
Sira, 1:243.

--- Sayfa 227 ---
224
424 Ibn Hisham, Sira, 1:83.
425 Bukhari, Nikah, 11; Ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 6:210; Haythami, Majmuatu’z Zawaid,
9:225; Bayhaqi, Sunan, 7:129; Tabari, Tarikh, 3:161-163.
426 Savaş, Rıza, D. E. Ü. İlahiyat F. Dergisi, Issue 4, Izmir, pp. 139-144, 1995.
427 Berki, Ali Hikmet, Osman Eskioğlu, Hatemü’l Enbiya Hz. Muhammed ve Hayatı, 210.
428 Nawawi, Tahzib al-Asma, 2:597.
429 Ibid.
430 Bayhaqi, Sunan, 6:204; Ibn Manda, Marifatu’s Sahaba, Köprülü Kütüphanesi, No: 242,
p. 195; Ibn Asakir, Tarikh Dimashq, Tarajimu’n Nisa, Damascus, pp. 9, 10, 28, 1982;
Mas’udi, Muruju’z Zahab, 2, 39; Ibn Sa’d, Tabaqatu’l Kubra, Beirut, 8:59, 1968.
431 Ibn Sa’d, Tabaqat, 8:58; Ibn Abdilbarr, Istiab, 4:1881; Nadwi, Siratu’s Sayyidati Aisha,
Edition critique by Muhammad Rahmatullah Hafiz al-Nadwi, Daru’l-Kalam, Damascus,
40, 49, 2003.
432 Ibn Athir, Usudu’l Ghaba, 3:467.
433 Ibn Abdilbarr, Istiab, 2:108; Tahzibu’l Kamal, 16:560.
434 Ibn Sa’d, Tabaqat, 8:75; Nadwi, Siratu’s Sayyidati Aisha, 202.
435 Ibn Abdilbarr, Istiab, 2:108; Doğrul, Asr-ı Saadet, 2:142.
436 Tabarani, Kabir, 23:25; Ibn Abdilbarr, Istiab, 4:1937; Ibn Sa’d, Tabaqat, 8:63.
437 For such differences in narrations see, “one and a half or two years before Hijra,”
“when she was 6 or 7 years old,” “when Khadija passed away or three years after
Khadija passed away,” “seven or eight months after the Emigration or the first year of
Hijra,” “Right after the Battle of Badr,” see Bukhari, Manakibu’l-Ansar, 20, 44; 36.
438 There are even those who attribute this information to a mistake of the narrator,
claiming that it should be, “I was 6 or 7 when the first revelation came.”
439 Bukhari, Manaqibu’l Ansar, 43, 44; Muslim, Nikah, 69; Ibn Majah, Nikah, 13.
440 Bukhari, Manaqibu’l Ansar, 44; Muslim, Nikah, 69; Abu Dawud, Adab, 55; Ibn Majah,
Nikah, 13; Darimi, Nikah, 56; Tabarani, Kabir, 23:25; Ibn Abdilbarr, Istiab, 4:1938; Ibn
Sa’d, Tabaqat, 8:63; Ibn Ishaq, Sira, Konya, 239, 1981.
441 Bukhari, Shahada, 15; Maghazi, 34; Tafsir, (24) 6; Muslim, Tawba, 56; Tirmidhi, Tafsir,
(63) 4; Ibn Sa’d, Tabaqat, 2:65; Ibn Hisham, Sira, 3:310.

--- Sayfa 228 ---
225
A
ALI AND AISHA
nother falsehood produced against Aisha is that she was
offended by Ali, and even became angry with him.
Supposedly, Aisha was aloof toward Ali until the end of her life as a
result of the slander incident (because of what he had said that day);
it is also claimed that the Incident of the Camel was a consequence
of this offense.
The only proof of this was Aisha’s use of the expression, “the
other man”442 to refer to Ali, as one of the two people who helped
God’s Messenger walk when he came to the mosque during his final
illness. They claimed that Aisha could not bear to have the name of
Ali on her lips because of her anger towards him.
What is the real extent of the incident? Is it true that Aisha was
really angry with Ali and offended by him? Is there any other
information or evidence here, as there was about Aisha’s age? What
was the Aisha’s general approach regarding anger and offense? How
did she react when faced with such incidents?
First of all, other than this event, there is not the slightest
indication that there was an dispute between Aisha and Ali.
Second, the authenticity of the expressions allegedly said by Ali
during the slander incident is doubtful. The narrations were weak,443
and it is unscholarly to base such an important matter on a weak
narration, especially while there exists stronger evidence.
Third, while it is still possible that Aisha meant Ali with the
words “the other man,” hadith scholars say that the person indicated
could have been Usama or Fadl ibn Abbas.444 Other scholars
mention the possibility of two others, named as Burayra and Nuba.
It is also suggested that “the other man” was a slave whose name
was unknown.445
There are two possibilities—either this incident happened more
than once, or the second person who took the arms of God’s
Messenger changed. The only one who did not change was Abbas,

--- Sayfa 229 ---
226
the uncle of God’s Messenger; since he was close to the Prophet, he
stayed near him constantly and held his arm at all times. If the
person taking the other arm of God’s Messenger rotated, it could
have been Usama, Ali, Fadl, Burayra, Nuba, or another slave whose
name was not known.446
Perhaps, instead of saying the names of all five people who
rotated positions, Aisha described those who took turns as “the other
man.” Then, Ali was not the only one whose name was not
mentioned—there were also Usama, Fadl, Burayra, Nuba and an
unknown slave. It is unlikely that Aisha had a negative attitude
toward all five of those people, which makes her description of Ali
not pointed or intentional.
Fourth, during the slander incident, Ali said, “O Messenger of
God, why are you giving yourself a hard time? May God Almighty
protect you from experiencing more difficulties! There are so many
women other than her! Why don’t you ask this servant girl? I am
sure that she will tell you something that makes you feel better.”447
His words were clearly aimed at saving the Messenger of God
from his troubles, and ought to be interpreted as, “I am worried only
about you; on the occasion when you are hurt, every other matter is
secondary to me.”
Perhaps Ali, directing the matter to Barira, also hoped to have
Aisha acquitted by someone who knew her extremely well.
Moreover, Ali knew Islam very well. A month after the slander of
Aisha began to circulate, the verse (an-Nur 24:11) was revealed:
When you heard of it, why did the believing men and women not
think well of one another and declare: “This is obviously a
slander!”? These words demonstrate how believers must react to
baseless slanders and lies. History shows us that many Companions
exhibited the correct attitude that day, and there is no evidence that
Ali was not one of them.
Fifth, that day, Ali used clear expressions to defend the innocence
of Aisha. Umar, Uthman, and Ali, who entered the house of felicity

--- Sayfa 230 ---
227
while the Messenger of God was talking over the matter with his
Companions, each acquitted Aisha and said there was no doubt that
these words were slanders. Ali approached the matter with
steadiness and precision, and acquitted Aisha in the following way:
“O Messenger of God, I understand that she is pure and innocent
from an incident. Do you remember, one day you were leading us in
Prayer in your shoes and at one point you took off one of your
shoes. It was a puzzling point for all of us and so we asked you if
that was the Sunnah. You answered no and explained that Gabriel
came to you and told you that one of your sandals had dirt on it that
would invalidate your Prayer. O Messenger of God, if God
Almighty protects you on such minor matters, is it even possible
that he leaves you alone about your own family?”448
Here, the real character and attitude of Ali is shown, and like the
words of Umar and Uthman, he also said that Aisha was innocent.
While his position pleased God’s Messenger, it was also the attitude
that the Qur’an applauded.
Sixth, we are otherwise forced to accept that Ali believed the
slander about Aisha, even though historical incidents clearly deny
this. The Messenger of God punished Hassan ibn Thabit, Mistah ibn
Usasa and Hamnah bint Jahsh, who each repeated the slander at
some point, after the verses about Aisha’s chastity were revealed. If
it were possible to interpret the words of Ali as believing in the
slander, he would have been punished as well. The Messenger of
God clearly stated that he would punish anyone who really deserves
it, no matter who the person was.449 It is impossible to imagine that
he bestowed a privilege upon Ali by excluding him from
punishment.450
Furthermore, there was no place for old hatreds or grudges in
Aisha’s life. It would have been impossible for her to carry such
anger in her heart when she was the closest person to the Prophet,
whose mission included ending the vendettas of Jahiliyya by ripping
out the seeds of revenge in Bedouin society. Aisha was the one who

--- Sayfa 231 ---
228
told us that the Messenger of God never thought of revenge.451
Aisha, arguably the most important conveyer of the religion in
which responding to hate with hate was consistently criticized,452
and the most special student of the Prophet, was surely free of this
kind of personal flaw. There are many examples of this. For
instance, when the truth of her purity appeared in the verses about
the slander, Aisha never took a negative stance against Hassan ibn
Thabit, who was actually punished for accompanying the
Hypocrites in their slander and being deceived by them. Instead, she
became his leading defender. When Aisha heard someone speaking
badly about Hassan, she intervened swiftly for the Companion who
had defended God’s Messenger in his poetry.453
Examples of Aisha’s forgiveness are not limited to this; the
attitude she took against those who had killed her brother was also
striking.454 When he visited her, Aisha asked questions of
Abdurrahman ibn Shumasa. When she realized they were pleased
with Muawiya as Caliph, she told him, “What he did to my brother
Muhammad ibn Abu Bakr is not an obstruction for me to tell you
what I heard from God’s Messenger.” She then imparted those
narrations of God’s Messenger in which he praised the governor
under whom his people were pleased.
It becomes impossible to think that Aisha despised a person like
Ali, who was always at the side of God and His Messenger, while
she defended and behaved so gently toward the ones who killed her
brother, and who took a part in the most sorrowful time of her life.
It’s improbable to think that she maintained such hatred until the
end of her life.
Seventh, Aisha wrote a letter to Muawiya about Hujr ibn ‘Adiy,
who was murdered together with his seven friends because of his
closeness to Ali. In the sectarian violence that occurred after the
Jamal incident, she used every opportunity to end these murders.
She expressed the sorrow and anxiety that she felt with reproachful
words to Muawiya, “Did you never fear from God while you killed

--- Sayfa 232 ---
229
Hujr and his friends? Why did not you have mercy on Hujr; why did
you withhold this from him?”455
Eight, we witnessed that Aisha put Ali forward at the most critical
points.456 After Uthman, she said that he should be the one to
shoulder the Caliphate and directed others to believe in him, too.457
Aisha also directed people to Ali when they had questions which he
was better suited to answer.458
Even on the day when her grief at Jamal was at its peak, Aisha
turned to those around her and said:
“O my sons, unfortunately, we have hurt each other. We
experienced upsetting incidents and became very tired. No one
should look at each other maliciously or fight because of what has
happened or believe the lies others will say after this day. Surely,
there is no problem between Ali and I that is greater than any matter
between a woman and her brother-in-law. Although I experienced
some troubles, he is the most auspicious person, upon whom I wish
goodness and excellence.”
The above statements prove Aisha’s generosity of spirit. She
knew that Ali had a special place at the side of God’s Messenger,
and she disappointed those who wanted to exploit the issue. Ali
himself even walked together with Aisha to see her off to Medina,
and advised his sons to accompany her during the trip, showing the
same familial sensitivity.459
They were both excellent people in every sense. Despite what had
happened the day before, they protected each other’s rights and did
not allow anything to be said against the another. One day, a man
came to Aisha and began to complain about Ali and Ammar. She
intervened immediately and did not let him speak more, and did not
neglect to express the virtues of both Ali and Ammar, one after the
other.460 Though she knew what the Messenger of God had said of
Ammar, Aisha was also aware that Ammar was fighting with the
supporters of Ali. Ammar, who had been informed by God’s
Messenger that he would be killed by an ebullient and ferocious

--- Sayfa 233 ---
230
community, was murdered at Ali’s side.
On the other hand, people like Dhu as-Sudayya, known to have
gone astray with cruelty, took their last breath on the opposite side.
Aisha closely examined current events and knew that the incidents
justified Ali. Seeing his troubles, she often expressed what a good
person he was and prayed for him in his absence. She stood against
the Kharijites who acted against Ali, even after what they had done
to Uthman and said, “While they were ordered to ask for the
forgiveness of God’s Messenger’s friends, now they make even
more malicious statements about them.”461
Aisha, who was deeply grieved by Ali’s murder, asked Abdullah
ibn Shaddad about his last days. After she had listened to the
accounts of zeal and effort that Ali had shown for Islam, she prayed
for him and made it clear that his murderers were transgressors.462
Aisha even described the city of Harura, where they resided, as the
center of evil. It is known that in later days, whenever she witnessed
someone’s negative attitude, she asked, “I wonder if you are from
Harura, too?”463
Nine, Ali’s attitude was no different than Aisha’s. He never
allowed anything to be said against her in his presence, and never
gave up behaving respectfully. After the Incident of the Camel, one
of the most severe tests of his life, he became sad, and described the
grief he felt because he had been tested with Aisha.464 When the two
armies met as a result of ibn Saba’s plotting, Ali became frightened.
He had saved Aisha from being the target of the Hypocrites, and
when he saw that Aisha’s palanquin was the target of a downpour of
arrows, he ran to her and risked his own life to protect her. He had
his men pitch a tent for her and moved her to a safe place.465 That
day, Ali gave advice to Aisha’s brother, Muhammad ibn Abu Bakr,
who was in his army. He sent Aisha to Medina with her brother and
his soldiers, along with forty women from Basra. He insisted his
soldiers not harm anyone with Aisha.466 He said, “Today, I hope that
God Almighty will place all those who are able to control their

--- Sayfa 234 ---
231
feelings in Paradise,” and led the Prayers for martyrs that day.467
This superiority did not only belong to Ali and Aisha. It was the
same sensitivity seen in the attitudes of those in Ali’s army as
well.468 Together, these proofs demonstrate that there was neither
anger or offense between Ali and Aisha. It is impossible to assert
that as a reason for Jamal.
442 Bukhari, Wudu, 44 (195); Muslim, Salat, 91-91 (418).
443 Ibn Hibban, Sahih, 10:13; 16:13; Abu Ya’la, Musnad, 8:322, 339.
444 Ayni, Umdatu’l Qari, 3:92; 5:188; Ibn Hajar, Fathu’l Bari, 1:263; 8:141.
445 Ibn Hajar, Fathu’l Bari, 8:141; Ayni, Umdatu’l Qari, 3:92; 5:188.
446 Nawawi, Sharhu Muslim, 4:137, 138; Ibn Hajar, Fathu’l Bari, 8:141; Umdatu’l Qari,
3:92, 5:188.
447 Bukhari, Shahadat, 15 (2518), Maghazi, 32 (3910, 3911); Itisam, 28 (6935); Muslim,
Tawba, 56 (2770).
448 That day, Umar ibni Khattab and Uthman ibn Affan made similar remarks. See: Halabi,
Sira, 2:624; Bursevi, Ruhu’l Beyan, 6:89.
449 He clearly stated this about a noble woman who had committed theft. See: Bukhari,
Anbiya, 52 (3288).
450 Buti, Aisha Ummu’l Mu’minin, 60.
451 Bukhari, Manaqib, 20 (3367).
452 See al-Furqan 25:72.
453 Bukhari, Maghazi, 32 (3914); Adab, 91 (5798).
454 Aisha’s brother Muhammad ibni Abi Bakr sided with Ali at Jamal and Siffin.
455 We preferred to combine different narrations here: Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 4:92
(16878). For the details of the event, see Tabari, Tarikh, 3:220, 232; Ibn Abdilbarr,
Istiab, 1:332.
456 Tirmidhi, Manaqib, 61 (3874); Nasa’i, Hasais, 35 (8496); Hakim, Mustadrak, 3:167
(4731).
457 Ibn Abi Shayba, Musannaf, 7:545 (37831); Ibn Hajar, Fathu’l Bari, 13:57.
458 Muslim, Tahara, 85 (276); Nasa’i, Tahara, 99 (129); Ibn Majah, Tahara, 86 (552);
Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 1:96 (748); Abdurrazzaq, Musannaf, 3:128 (5029).
459 Tabari, Tarikh, 3:61.
460 Zarkashi, al-Ijaba, 863-864.
461 Muslim, Tafsir, 15 (3022); Ishaq ibn Rahuya, Musnad, 2:321 (847).
462 Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, 1:86-87 (656); Hakim, Mustadrak, 2:165 (2657);
Bayhaqi, Sunan, 8:180; Abu Ya’la, Musnad, 1:367 (474).
463 Bukhari, Hayd, 20 (315).

--- Sayfa 235 ---
232
464 Fathu’l Bari, 13:55; Tabari, Tarikh, 3:61; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya, 7:246.
465 Tabari, Tarikh, 3:29; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidaya, 7:238.
466 Bayhaqi, Sunan, 8:181.
467 Tabari, Tarikh, 4:534; Ibn Haldun, Tarikh, 2:606.
468 Nadawi, Siratu’s Sayyida Aisha, 180.

--- Sayfa 236 ---
233
BIBLIOGRAPHY
ABDURRAZZAQ IBN HAMMAM, Abu Bakr as-San’ani, al-Musannaf, Edition critique
by Habiburrahman al-A’zami, al-Maktabu’l Islami, Beirut 2003.
ABU DAWUD, Sulayman ibn Ash’as as-Sijistani al-Azdi, Sunan, Edition critique by
Muhammad Muhyiddin Abdülhamid, Talik: Kemal Yusuf Hut, Daru’l-Fikr, Beirut,
undated.
_____, Aisha bint Abi Bakr as-Siddiq, Edition critique by Abdulghafur Husayn, Daru’l-
Aqsa, Kuwait, 1985
_____, Sualatu Abi Dawud Li’l Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal fi Jarhi’r Ruwat, Edition critique
by Ziyad Muhammad Mansur, Maktabatu’l Ulum wa’l-Hikam, First edition, Medina:
1414.
ABU HAYYAN, Asiruddin Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Andalusi, Bahru’l Muhit, Daru’l
Fikr: 1983.
ABU HAYYAN AT-TAWHIDI, Ali ibn Muhammad ibn Abbas, al-Imta wa’l Muanasa,
http://www.alwarraq.com
ABU NUAYM, Ahmad ibn Abdillah al-Isfahani, Hilyetu’l Awliya wa Tabaqatu’l Asfiya,
Daru’l Kitabi’l Arabi, Beirut: 1405 ah.
_____, Musnadu Abi Hanifa: http://www.alsunnah.com
ABU YA’LA, Ahmad ibn Ali al-Mawsıli, Musnad, Daru’l Ma’mun li’t Turas, Edition
critique by Husayn Salim Asad, Damascus: 1984.
ABU’L FARAJ AL-ISFAHANI, al-Agani, Edition critique by Samir Jabir, Daru’l Fikr,
Beirut.
ABU’L HASAN ALAADDIN ALI IBN BALABAN, al-Ihsan bi Tartibi Sahihi ibn
Hibban, Edition critique by Yusuf Hut, Daru’l Kutubi’l Ilmiyya, Beyrut, undated.
AHMAD IBN HANBAL, Abu Abdillah ash-Shaybani, al-Musnad, Zayl: Shuayb Arnawut,
Muassasatu Qurtuba, Cairo, undated.
AL-AJLUNI, Abu’l-Fida Ismail ibn Muhammad, Kashfu’l Khafa, Daru’l Kutubi’l Ilmiyya,
Beirut: 1988.
ALI AL-MUTTAQI AL-HINDI, Kanzu’l Ummal, Muassasatu’r Risala, Beirut: 1989
ALUSI, Ruhu’l Maani, Daru Ihyai’t Turasi’l Arabi, Beirut, undated.
AYNI, Abu Muhammad Mahmud ibn Ahmad, Umdatu’l-Qari, Daru Ihyai’t Turasi’l Arabi,
Beirut, undated.
AZIMABADI, Abu’t Tayyib Muhammad, Shamsu’l-Haq, Awnu’l-Ma’bud Sharhu Sunan-i
Abi Dawud, Daru’l-Kutubi’l Ilmiyya, Beirut, 1415 ah.

--- Sayfa 237 ---
234
AZİMLİ, MEHMET, “Hazreti Âişe’nin Evlilik Yaşı Tartışmalarında Savunmacı
Tarihçiliğin Çıkmazı”, İslâmî Araştırmalar, Vol. 16, Issue 1, 2003.
BAGHAWI, Abu Muhammad Husayn ibn Mas’ud, Sharhu’s Sunnah, Edition critique by
Shuayb Arnawut and Muhammad Zuhayr Shawish, al-Maktabu’l Islami, Beirut:
1983.
BAYHAQI, Abu Bakr Ahmad ibn Husayn ibn Ali ibn Musa, Sunanu’l Kubra, Edition
critique by Muhammed Abdulqadir Ata, Maktabatu Dari’l Baz, Mecca: 1994.
_____, al-Madhal ila Sunani Kubra, Matbaat’u Dairati’l Maarifi’n Nizamiyya, First
Edition, Haydarabad, 1344 ah.
_____, Shuabu’l Iman, Daru’l Kutubi’l Ilmiyya, Beirut, 1410 ah.
BERKİ, ALİ HİKMET, OSMAN ESKİOĞLU, Hatemu’l Enbiya Hazreti Muhammed ve
Hayatı, Diyanet İşleri Başkanlığı, Ankara: 1981.
BUKHARI, al-Jamiu’s Sahih, Istanbul, 1401 ah.
_____, at Tarikhu’l Kabir, Daru Ihyai’t Turasi’l Arabi, Beirut, undated.
_____, Tarikhi Saghir, Maktabatu Dari’t Turas, Cairo: 1977
_____, Adabu’l Mufrad, Edition critique by Muhammad Fuad Abdulbaqi, Daru’l Bashairi’l
Islamiyya, Beirut: 1989.
BURSEVİ, İsmail Hakkı, Ruhu’l Beyan, Darü’t Tıbaati’l Amire, Bulak, 1255 ah.
BUTİ, Muhammad Said Ramazan, Aisha: Ummu’l Mu’minin, Daru’l Farabi li’l Maarif,
Damascus: 1997.
DARAKUTNI, Ali ibn Umar Abu’l Hasan, Sunan, Daru’l Marifa, Beirut: 1966.
DARIMI, Abu Muhammad Abdullah ibn Abdirrahman, Sunan, Daru’l-Kitabi’l Arabi,
Beirut: 1407.
DHAHABI, Abu Abdillah Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn Uthman, Siyaru A’lami’n Nubala,
Muassasatu’r Risala, Ninth edition, Beirut: 1993.
_____, Tarikhu’l Islam, Maktabatu Qudsi, Cairo: 1367 ah.
_____, Tazkiratu’l Huffaz, Daru Ihyai’t Turasi’l Arabi, Beirut, undated.
DOĞRUL, Ömer Rıza, Asr-ı Saadet, Eser Kitabevi, Istanbul: 1974.
FAWZI, Jihan Raf’at, as-Sayyidatu Aisha wa Tawsiquha li’s Sunnah, Maktabatu’l Hanji,
Cairo, 2001.
FIRUZABADI, Abu’t Tahir Majduddin Muhammad ibn Ya’qûb ibn Muhammad Shirazi,
al-Kamusu’l Muhit, Matbaa-i Hasaniyya al-Mısriyya, Second edition, 1344 ah.
AL-GHAZZALI, Abu Hamid Muhammad ibn Muhammad, Ihyau Ulumiddin, Daru Ihyai’l
Kutubi’l Arabiyya, Beirut, undated.
GÜLEN, M. Fethullah, Emerald Hills of the Heart: Key Concepts in the Practice of
Sufism, Tughra Books, NJ, 2011.
_____, M. Fethullah, Messenger of God, Tughra Books, NJ, 2011.
HAFNA, Abdulmin’im, Mawsuatu Ummi’l Mu’minin Aisha bint-i Abi Bakr, Maktabatu

--- Sayfa 238 ---
235
Madbuli, 2003.
HAKİM AN-NAYSABURI, Abu Abdillah Muhammad ibn Abdillah, al-Mustadrak Ala’s
Sahihayn, Edition critique by Mustafa Abdülqadir Ata, Daru’l Kutubu’l Ilmiyya,
Beirut: 1990.
HALABI, as-Siratu’n Nabawiyya, Daru’l Marifa, Beirut: 1400 ah.
HANNAD, Zuhd, Daru’l Khulafa Li’l Kitabi’l Islami, Kuwait: 1406 ah.
HATIB AL-BAGHDADI, Abu Bakr Ahmad ibn Ali ibn Sabit, al-Jami’ Li Akhlaqi’r Rawi
wa Adabi’s Sami’, Edition critique by Mahmud Tahhan, Maktabatu’l Maarif, Riyad,
1403 ah.
_____, al-Kifaya fi Ilmi’r Riwaya, Edition critique by Abu Abdillah as-Sawraki and
İbrahim Hamdi al-Madani, al-Maktabatu’l Ilmiyya, Medina, undated.
_____, Tarikh Baghdad, Daru’l Kitabi’l Arabi, Beirut, undated.
HAYTHAMI, Majmuatu’z Zawaid wa Manbau’l Fawaid, Daru’l Fikr, Beirut, 1412 ah.
_____, Mawaridu’z Zam’an, al-Maktabatu’sh Shamila, Daru’s Sakafati’l Arabiyya, Beirut:
1990.
HAYTHAMI, NURADDIN AND HARITH IBN ABI USAMA, Musnad-i Harith, Markaz-
i Hidmati’s Sunnah, Medina al-Munawwara: 1992.
IBN ABDILBARR, Istiab fi Marifati’l Ashab, Daru’l-Kutubi’l Ilmiyya, Beirut: 1995.
_____, at-Tamhid, Wizaratu Umumi’l Awqaf wa’sh Shuuni’l Islamiyya, Morocco: 1387 ah.
IBN ABDIRABBIH, al-Iqdu’l Farid, http://www.alwarraq.com.
IBN ASAKIR, Abu’l Qasim Ali ibn Husayn ibn Hibatillah, Tarikh Dimashq, Daru’l Fikr,
Beirut, 1998.
IBN ABI’D DUNYA, Makarimi’l Akhlaq, Maktabatu’l Qur’an, Cairo, undated.
IBN ABI HATIM, al-Jarh wa’t Ta’dil, Matbaatu Majlisi Dairatu’l Maarifi’l Uthmaniyya,
First Edition, Haydarabad, 1371 ah.
IBN ABI SHAYBA, Abu Bakr Abdullah ibn Muhammad al-Kufi, al-Musannaf fi’l Ahadith
wa’l Asar, Edition critique by Kamal Yusuf Hut, Maktabatu’r Rushd, Riyad: 1409 ah.
IBN HAJAR, Abu’l Fadl Shihabuddin Ahmad ibn Ali al-Asqalani ash-Shafii, Fathu’l Bari
Sharhu Sahihi’l Bukhari, Daru’l Marifa, Beirut: 1379 ah.
_____, Hadyu’s Sari, Daru’l-Marifa, Second edition, Beirut, undated.
_____, al-Isaba fi Tamyizi’s Sahaba, Edition critique by Ali Muhammad Bujawi, Daru’l Jil,
Beirut: 1412 ah.
_____, Taqribu’t Tahzib, Dirasa wa muqabala: Muhammad Awwama, Daru’r Rashid,
Fourth edition, Syria: 1992.
_____, Tahzibu’t Tahzib, Daru’l Fikr, First edition, 1404 ah.
IBN HALDUN, Tarikh, Daru Ihyai’t Turasi’l Arabi, Beirut, undated.
IBN HIBBAN, Muhammad ibn Hibban Abu Hatim al-Busti, Sahih, Muassasatu’r Risala,
Edition critique by Shuayb Arnawut, Beirut: 1993.

--- Sayfa 239 ---
236
_____, as-Siqat, Dairatu’l Maarifi’l Uthmaniyya, Haydarabad: 1973
IBN HISHAM, as-Siratu’n Nabawiyya, Daru’l Jil, Beirut: 1411.
IBN HUZAYMA, Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Ishaq as-Sulami, Sahihi Ibn Huzayma,
Edition critique by Muhammad Mustafa al-A’zami, al-Maktabu’l Islami, Beirut,
undated.
IBN ISHAQ, Sira, Konya: 1981.
IBN JA’D, Abu’l Hasan ibn Ubayd al-Jawhari, Musnad, Edition critique by Amir Ahmad
Haydar, Muassasatu Nadir, Beirut, 1990.
IBN KATHIR, Abu’l Fida Ismail ibn Umar al-Kurashi Ad-Dimashqi, Tafsiru’l Qur’ani’l
Azim, Edition critique by Sami ibn Muhammad Salama, Daru Tayba, Second edition,
1999.
_____, al-Bidaya wa’n Nihaya, Maktabatu’l Maarif, Beirut, undated.
IBN MAJAH, Sunan, Daru’l Fikr, Beirut, undated.
IBN MANDA, Ma’rifatu’s-Sahaba, Köprülü Library, No: 242, Varak: 195b.
IBN MANZUR, Abu’l Fadl Muhammad ibn Mukarram ibn Ali al-Ansari Jamaluddin. al-
Ifriki, Lisanu’l Arab, Daru Sadir, First edition, Beirut, undated.
IBN QAYYIM AL-JAWZIYYA, Abu Abdillah Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr, I’lamu’l
Muwakkian, Daru’l-Jil, Beirut, 1973.
_____, al-Manaru’l Munif fi’s Sahihi wa’d-Daif, Maktabu’l Matbuati’l Islamiyya, Aleppo:
1983.
_____, Zadu’l Maad fi Hadyi Khayri’l Ibad, Edition critique by Shuayb Arnawut
Abdulqadir. Arnawut, Muassasatu’r Risala, Beirut: 1986.
IBN SA’D, Tabaqat, Daru Sadir, Beirut, undated.
IBN TAYFUR, Balaghatu’n Nisa, Daru’l Fadila, Cairo, undated.
IBNU’L ATHIR, Usdu’l Ghaba fi Marifati’s Sahaba, Daru’l Fikr, Beirut: 1995.
IBNU’L JAWZI, Sifatu’s Safwa, Edition critique by Fahuri and Kal’aji, Daru’l Marifa,
Beirut, 1979.
IBRAHIM MUSTAFA et al, al-Mujamu’l Wasit, Çağrı Yayınları, Istanbul: 1990.
ISHAQ IBN-I RAHUYA, Musnad, Maktabatu’l Iman, Medina: 1991.
JAHIZ, Abu Uthman Amr ibn Bahr, al-Bayan wa’t Tabayyun, Daru Sa’b, Beirut: 1968.
JAWHARI, Abu Nasr Ismail ibn Hammad al-Farabi, as Sihah Taju’l Lugha wa Sihahi’l
Arabiyya (Taju’l Lugah), Edition critique by Ahmad Abdulghafur Attar, Daru’l Ilm,
Fourth edition, Beirut: 1990.
KALKASHANDI, Ahmad ibn Ali, Subhu’l A’sha fi Sinaati’l Insha, Daru’l Fikr,
Damascus: 1987.
KANDAHLAWI, Hayatu’s Sahaba, Haydarabad: 1959.
KAYRAWANI, Zahru’l Adab, http://www.alwarraq.com
LALAKAI, Hibatullah Abu’l Qasim, I’tiqadu Ahli’s Sunnah, Edition critique by Ahmad

--- Sayfa 240 ---
237
Sa’d Hamdan, Daru Tayba, Riyad: 1402 ah.
MAHMUD SAID MAMDUH, Is’afu’l Mulihhin bi Tartibi Ahadithi Ihya-i Ulumu’d Din,
Daru’l Bashairi’l Islamiyya, Lebanon: 1986.
MALIK IBN ANAS, Muwatta, Daru Ihyai’t Turasi’l Arabi, Egypt, undated.
MAQDISI, al-Ahadithu’l Mukhtara, Maktabatu Nahda, Mecca: 1410.
MAS’UDI, Muruju’dh Dhahab, http://www.alwarraq.com
MIZZI, Abu’l Hajjaj Yusuf ibn Zaki Abdi’r Rahman ibn Yusuf, Tahzibu’l Kamal. Edition
critique by Bashshar Awwad Maruf, Muassasatu’r Risala, First Edition, Beirut: 1980.
MUNAWI, Zaynuddin Muhammad Abdurrauf, Fayzu’l Qadir Sharhu’l Jamii’s Saghir,
Daru’l Kutubi’l Ilmiyya, Beirut: 1994.
MUNZIRI, at-Targhib wa’t Tarhib, Daru’l Kutubi’l Ilmiyya, Beirut, 1417 ah.
MUSLIM, Abu’l Husayn Ibn Hajjaj al-Kushayri an-Naysaburi, Sahihu Muslim, Edition
critique by Muhammad Fuad Abdulbaqi, Daru Ihyai’t Turasi’l Arabi, Beirut,
undated.
NADAWI, Sayyid Sulayman, Hazreti Âişe, translated by Ahmet Karataş, Timaş, Istanbul:
2004.
_____, Siratu’s Sayyidati Aisha Ummu’l Mu’minin, Edition critique by Muhammad
Rahmatullah Hafiz an-Nadawi, Daru’l Qalam, Damascus: 2003.
NASAI, Abu Abdirrahman Ahmad ibn Ali ibn Shuayb, Sunanu’l Kubra, Edition critique by
Abdulghaffar Sulayman al-Bundari, Daru’l Kutubi’l Ilmiyya, First edition, Beirut:
1991.
_____, Sunan, Edition critique by Abdulfattah Abu Ghudda, Maktabatu’l Matbuati’l
Islamiyya, 1968.
NAWAWI, Tahzibu’l Asma, Edition critique by Mustafa Abdulqadir Ata, al-Maktabatu’s
Shamila, undated.
NUWAYRI, Nihayatu’l Arab, http://www.alwarraq.com
QURTUBI, Tafsir (al-Jami Li Ahkami’l Qur’an), Daru Ihyai’t Turasi’l Arabi, Beirut: 1985.
RAGHIB AL-ISFAHANI, Abu’l Qasim, Husayn ibn Muhammad ibn Mufaddal, al-
Mufradat fi Gharibi’l Qur’an, Edition critique by Safwan Adnan, Daru’l Qalam,
Second edition, 1418 ah.
SAID IBN MANSUR, Abu Uthman ibn Shuba, al-Hurasani, Sunan-i Said ibn Mansur,
Edition critique by Sa’d ibn Abdillah ibn Abdilaziz Al-i Humayyad, Daru’s Sami’i,
First edition, Riyad: 1993.
SAHAWI, Abu’l Khayr Shamsuddin Muhammad ibn Abdirrahman, al-Maqasidu’l Hasana
fi Bayani Kathirin mina’l Ahadithi’l Mushtahira Ala’l Alsina, Edition critique by
Muhammad Uthman al-Husht, Daru’l Kitabi’l Arabi, Second edition, Beirut: 1994.
SALAFI, Abu Tahir Ahmad ibn Muhammad, Mu’jamu’s Safar, al-Maktabatu’t Tijariyya,
Mecca, undated.
SAM’ANI, Adabu’l Imla wa’l Istimla, Daru’l Kutubi’l Ilmiyya, Beirut: 1401.

--- Sayfa 241 ---
238
SAMHUDI, Hulasatu’l Wafa, Cairo: 1908.
SAN’ANI, Subulu’s Salam, Daru’l Kitabi’l Arabi, Beirut: 1987.
SAVAŞ, Rıza, “Hazreti Âişe’nin Evlenme Yaşı İle İlgili Farklı Bir Yaklaşım”, D.E.Ü.
İlâhiyât Fakültesi Dergisi, Issue 4, Izmir: 1995.
_____, al-Itqan fi Ulumi’l Qur’an, Beirut, 1987.
SHALABI, Mahmud, Hayatu Aisha, undated.
SHAWKANI, Muhammad ibn Ali ibn Muhammad, Naylu’l Awtar min Ahadithi Sayyidi’l
Abrar, 6/170, Idaratu’t Tibaati’l Mudiriyya, undated.
_____, al-Fawaid-i Majmua, al-Maktabu’l Islami, Beirut: 1407.
SUYUTI, Abu’l Fadl Jalaladdin Abdurrahman ibn Abi Bakr, al-Jamiu’s Saghir fi
Ahadithi’l Bashiri’n Nazir, Daru’l Kutubi’l Ilmiyya, Beirut: 1990.
_____, ad-Durru’l Mansur fi’t Tafsiri bi’l Ma’sur, Daru’l Fikr, Beirut: 1993.
TABARANI, Abu’l Qasim Sulayman ibn Ahmad, al-Mujamu’l Awsat, Edition critique by
Tariq ibn Iwadullah, Daru’l Haramayn, Cairo: 1415 ah.
_____, Mujamu’s Saghir, Daru Ammar, al-Maktabu’l Islami, Beirut: 1985.
_____, Mujamu’l Kabir, Maktabatu’l Ulum wa’l-Hikam, Mosul: 1983.
TABARI, Tarikhu’l Umam wa’l-Muluk, Daru’l Kutubi’l Ilmiyya, Beirut: 1407.
TAHAWI, Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Salama ibn Abdilmalik ibn Salama Abu Jafar,
Sharhu Maani’l Asar, Edition critique by Muhammad Zuhri an-Najjar, Daru’l
Kutubi’l Ilmiyya, Beirut: 1399 ah.
_____, Sharhu Mushkili’l Asar, Shuayb Arnawut, Beirut: 1994.
TAHMAZ, Abdulhamid Mahmud, as-Sayyidatu Aisha, Daru’l Qalam, Damascus, 1999.
TANTAWI, Abu Bakr as-Siddiq, Daru’l Manar, Jeddah: 1986.
TAYALISI, Abu Dawud, Musnad, Daru’l Marifa, Beirut, undated.
TIRMIDHI, Abu Isa Muhammad ibn Isa, al-Jamiu’l Kabir (Sunan), Tahqiq tahrij wa taliq:
Bashshar Awwad Maruf, Daru’l Gharbi’l Islami, First Edition, Beirut: 1996.
ÜNAL, Ali, The Qur’an with Annotated Interpretation in Modern English, Tughra Books,
New Jersey: 2008.
VEHBE ZUHAYLİ, İslam Fıkhı Ansiklopedisi, Risale Yayınları, Germany: 1994.
WENSINCK et al, al-Mujamu’l Mufahras Li Alfazi’l Hadithi’n Nabawi, Çağrı Yayınları,
Istanbul: 1988.
YAQUT AL-HAMAWI, Abi Abdillah Shihabu’d Din ibn Abdillah, Mujamu’l Buldan,
Edition critique by Farid Abdulaziz al-Jundi, Daru’l Kutubi’l Ilmiyya, Beirut,
undated.
YÜCE, Abdülhakim, Efendimiz’in Bir Günü, Işık Yayınları, Istanbul: 2007.
ZAGHLUL, Abu Hajar Muhammad Said Abu Hajar Muhammad Said ibn Basyuni,
Mawsuatu Atrafi’l Hadithi’n Nabawiyyi’sh Sharif, al-Maktabatu’t Tijariyya, Mustafa
Ahmad al-Baiz, Daru’l Fikr, Beirut: 1994.

--- Sayfa 242 ---
239
ZABIDI, Abu’l Fayz Murtaza Muhammad, Taju’l Arus min Jawahiri’l Qamus, Daru’l Fikr,
Beirut: 1414.
ZARKASHI, Badruddin, al-Ijaba Lima Istadrakathu Aisha ala’s Sahaba, Maktabatu
Mishkati’l Islamiyya, undated.
ZAYLAI, Abu Muhammad Abdullah ibn Yusuf al-Hanafi, Nasbu’r Raya Li Ahadithi’l
Hidaya, Edition critique by Muhammad Yusuf al-Bannuri, Daru’l Hadith, Egypt:
1357 ah.
ZIRIKLI, A’lam, Daru’l Ilm li’l Malayin, Beirut: 1980.
COMPUTER PROGRAMS AND WEB SITES
1. “Mawsuatu’l Hadithi’sh Sharif” 2.00, Sahr Company (Shirkatu Harf li Takniyati’l
Malumat, Egypt.
2. “al-Maktabatu’sh Shamila” 2.11, http://www.waqfeya.net/shamela
3. “al-Maktabatu’sh Shamila” 1.5, http://www.waqfeya.net/shamela
4. “al-Jamiu’l Kabir Li Kutubi’t Turasi’l Arabi wa’l Islami” 2.0, Turas Computer Services,
Jordan, 2005.