--- Sayfa 2 ---
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER
ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY

--- Sayfa 3 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Sayfa 4 ---
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER
ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
Mulla Sadra on Existence,
Intellect and Intuition
IBRAHIM KALIN
2010
1

--- Sayfa 5 ---
Oxford University Press, Inc., publishes works that further
Oxford University’s objective of excellence
 in research, scholarship, and education.
Oxford New York
Auckland Cape Town Dar es Salaam Hong Kong Karachi
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi
New Delhi Shanghai Taipei Toronto
With offices in
Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece
Guatemala Hungary Italy Japan Poland Portugal Singapore
South Korea Switzerland Thailand Turkey Ukraine Vietnam
Copyright © 2010 by Oxford University Press, Inc.
Published by Oxford University Press, Inc.
198 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10016
www.oup.com
Oxford is a registered trademark of Oxford University Press
All rights reserved.  No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
without the prior permission of Oxford University Press.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Kalin, Ibrahim.
Knowledge in later Islamic philosophy: Mulla Sadra
on existence, intellect, and intuition/Ibrahim Kalin.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-19-973524-2
1. Sadr al-Din Shirazi, Muhammad ibn Ibrahim, d. 1641.
2. Knowledge, Theory of (Islam) 3. Philosophy, Islamic.  I. Title.
B753.M84K24 2010
297.261—dc22     2009031637
1 3 5 7 9 8 6 4 2
Printed in the United States of America
on acid-free paper
1

--- Sayfa 6 ---
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I owe thanks to a large number of people who have been part of
the writing of this book in one way or another. Some of them
are aware of this, some not.

I am deeply indebted to my advisor and mentor Seyyed
Hossein Nasr. With his ‘ilm, ‘irf an and hilm, Prof. Nasr has been
a source of knowledge and inspiration for much of what I have
done over the last decade. I thank Prof. Peter Caws of George
Washington University for the wonderful exchanges during our
reading sessions of Plato and Aristotle. My thanks go to Mahdi
Aminrazavi who made valuable comments on my doctoral
dissertation on which the present work is based. I also thank my
friends and colleagues Caner Dagli and Joseph Lumbard for the
conversations we have had throughout our rihlat al-‘ilm in
different parts of the world. I thank Zohra Sirat for her unfailing
help during the initial stages of the present book.

Many people have been part of my intellectual upbringing and
shaped the way I came to understand things. Our conversations
from philosophy, metaphysics and science to history and politics
have found their way into my thinking and, by derivation, into
the pages of this book. Among the people I have had the privilege
of knowing and learning from, I should mention Rahim Acar,
Alparslan Açikgenç, Waleed al-Ansary, Cemil Aydin, Ghulam
Riza A’wani, David Burrell, William Chittick, Ahmet Davutoˆglu,
John Esposito, Ekmeleddin Ihsanoˆglu, Ghasem Kakaie, Ismail
Kara, Mahmud Erol Kiliç, Oliver Leaman and Mustafa Özel.

I would like to thank the TDV Center for Islamic Studies
(ISAM) for granting me a doctoral scholarship and supporting
me both in Turkey and abroad. I am thankful to the College of
the Holy Cross and particularly my colleagues at the Religious
Studies Department for the two wonderful years my family and

--- Sayfa 7 ---
I spent there. The book took its present form mostly during the
cold yet serene days of Worcester. I thank Prof. Nomanul Haq
for his helpful comments and suggestions on the manuscript.

My deepest gratitude is to my wife Neriman who has always
stood by me during the moments of joy and frustration of my
academic life. As the mother of our three beautiful daughters
Rumeysa, Dilruba and Yaren, she has provided the comfort of a
loyal friend all seekers of knowledge yearn for. It is with an
immense sense of indebtedness that I dedicate this book to her.
vi
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

--- Sayfa 8 ---
CONTENTS

Key to Mulla Sadra’s Works
ix

Introduction
xiii
Chapter I
The Problem of Knowledge and the Greco-Islamic
Context of the Unification Argument
1
1.1. The Greco-Alexandrian Background
7

a. Plato’s bios theoretikos
7

b. Aristotle and the ‘Intellect from Without’
11

c. Alexander of Aphrodisias: Beyond

Orthodoxy and Innovation
17

d. Plotinus Islamicus and the Unification Argument
25
1.2. Islamic Philosophy
34

a. Al-Kindi: The Beginning of the Problem

in the Islamic Milieu
35

b. Al-Farabi: Problem Restated
37

c. Ibn Sina: Sadra’s Greatest Challenge
46

d. Suhrawardi: On the Way to Sadra
59
Chapter II
Mulla Sadra’s Theory of Knowledge and the
Unification Argument
86
2.1. Sadra’s Ontology
86

a. Essence and Existence
89

b. The Primacy and Gradation of Existence
96

--- Sayfa 9 ---
2.2. Existence, Intelligibility and Knowledge
102

a. Disembodiment as Intelligibility

and Gradation in Knowledge
108

b. Four Theories of Knowledge and Their Critique
118

c. Modes of Perception and the Simple Intellect
135

d. Active Intellect, Intuition, and Peripatetic

Intellectualism
148

e. Unification of the Intellect and the Intelligible
159

f. Self-Knowledge and Knowledge-by-Presence
165

g. Knowledge-by-Presence and God’s Knowledge

of Things
173
Chapter III
Sadra’s Synthesis: Knowledge as Experience,
Knowledge as Being
195
3.1. Epistemology Spiritualized: Is Mystical

Knowledge Possible?
198
3.2. Knowledge as Finding Existence
227
Appendix
Treatise on the Unification of the Intellector
and the Intelligible
256
(Risalah fi ittihad al-‘aqil wa’l-ma‘qul)

Bibliography
292

Index: Arabic and Persian Terms
305

Index: Proper Names
313
viii
CONTENTS

--- Sayfa 10 ---
KEY TO MULLA SADRA’S
WORKS
Asalah
 Asalat ja’l al-wujud in Majmu‘a-yi rasa’il-i
falsafi-yi Sadr al-Muta’allihin, ed. Hamid Naji
Isfahani (Tehran: Intisharat-i Hikmat, ah
1375).
Asfar
 al-Hikmat al-muta‘aliyah f i’l-asf ar al-‘aqliyyat
al-arba‘ah, (Beirut: Dar Ihya’ al-Turath al-
‘Arabi, 1981), 9 Vols.
‘Awisah
Ajwibat al-masa’il al-‘awisah in Ajwibat al-
masa’il, ed. Abdullah Shakiba (Tehran: Bunyad-
i Hikmat-i Islami-yi Sadra [SIPRIN], ah 1378)
Hashr
Risalat al-hashr, ed. with Persian translation by
M. Khwajawi (Tehran: Intisharat-i Mawlawi,
1998).
Huduth
Huduth al-‘alam, ed. S. H. Musawiyan (Tehran:
Bunyad-i Hikmat-i Islami-yi Sadra [SIPRIN], ah
1378).
Iksir
 Iksir al-‘arif in, ed. and tr. William Chittick, The
Elixir of the Gnostics, (Provo, Utah: Brigham
Young University Press, 2003).
Ittihad
Ittihad al-‘aqil wa’l-ma‘qul in Majmu‘a-yi
rasa’il-i falsaf i-yi Sadr al-Muta’allihin, ed.
Hamid Naji Isfahani (Tehran: Intisharat-i Hikmat,
ah 1375).

--- Sayfa 11 ---
Kashaniyya
Ajwibat al-masa’il al-kashaniyyah in Majmu‘a-yi
rasa’il-i falsaf i-yi Sadr al-Muta’allihin, ed.
Hamid Naji Isfahani (Tehran: Intisharat-i Hikmat,
ah 1375)
Kasr
 Kasr asnam al-jahiliyyah, ed. N. Jihangiri
(Tehran: Bunyad-i Hikmat-i Islami-yi Sadra
[SIPRIN], ah 1381).
Mafatih
Maf atih al-ghayb (Beirut: Mu’assasat al-Tarikh
al-‘Arabi, 1999), 2 Vols.
Masha’ir
Kitab al-masha‘ir, ed. and tr. Henry Corbin, Le
Livre des pénétrations métaphysiques (Téhéran:
Institut Francais d’Iranologie de Téhéran,
1982).
Mazahir
al-Mazahir al-ilahiyyah f i asrar al-‘ulum al-
kamaliyyah, ed. S. M. Khamanei (Tehran:
Bunyad-i Hikmat-i Islami-yi Sadra [SIPRIN], ah
1378).
Qudsiyyah
al-Masa’il al-qudsiyyah in Seh Risala-i Falsaf i,
ed. S. J. Ashtiyani (Qom: Markaz-i Intisharat-i
Daftar-i Tablighat-i Islami, ah 1379).
Sharh
 Sharh-i ilahiyyat-i shif a’, ed. Najafquli Habibi
(Tehran: Bunyad-i Hikmat-i Islami-yi Sadra
[SIPRIN], ah 1382), 2 vols.
Shawahid
al-Shawahid al-rububiyyah, ed. S. J. Ashtiyani
(Mashhad: al-Markaz al-Jami‘ li’n-Nashr, 1981
[2nd edition]).
x
KEY TO MULLA SADRA’S WORKS

--- Sayfa 12 ---
Tafsir
 Tafsir al-qur’an al-karim, ed. M. Khwajawi
(Qom: Bidar Press, 1987–1990), 7 Vols.
Tasawwur
Risalat al-tasawwur wa’l-tasdiq in Risalatan f i’-
tasawwur wa’l-tasdiq, ed. Mahdi Shari‘ati
(Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah, 2004).
Usul
Sharh usul al-kafi (Kitab al-‘aql wa’l-jahl), ed.
M. Khwajawi (Tehran: ah 1366) 5 Vols.

KEY TO MULLA SADRA’S WORKS
xi

--- Sayfa 13 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Sayfa 14 ---
INTRODUCTION
Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Yahya al-Qawami al-Shirazi (1571–
1640),1 known as Sadr al-Din al-Shirazi and more popularly as
Mulla Sadra, is one of the most prominent figures of post-
Avicennan Islamic philosophy. His school of thought called
‘transcendent wisdom’ (al-hikmat al-muta‘aliyah) has made a
deep impact on Islamic philosophy in Persia, Sadra’s homeland,
and the subcontinent of India. Like his predecessors, Sadra
worked and composed his works from within the Islamic
intellectual tradition and sought to combine the major strands of
that tradition. As a diligent student, he dealt with all of the
central problems of Islamic philosophy handed down from the
Greeks to his own time. As a master, he made a number of
important contributions to the form and content of those
problems and introduced several new concepts. His relentless
effort to dovetail revealed knowledge, (i.e., the Qur’an),
philosophical demonstration (burhan) and realized or mystical
knowledge (‘irfan) has led him to span through the entire
spectrum of classical and medieval philosophy from the question
of existence and causality and to self-knowledge and knowledge
of God.

This makes Sadra an invaluable resource for the later history
of Islamic philosophy. Tracing the sources of Sadra’s thought is
also a search for the soul of Islamic philosophy. The rich tapestry
of ideas we find in this history bespeaks the resilience of the
Islamic intellectual tradition after the influence of Hellenistic
lore had considerably dwindled and many homegrown problems
of Islamic philosophy had taken the center stage. To read Sadra
is to read the history of how persisting philosophical problems
can be re-discussed, restated, and reformulated in new contexts.
The fact that Sadra was born into a world imbued with what we

--- Sayfa 15 ---
xiv
INTRODUCTION
might call ‘Shiite spirituality’ and became the student of Ibn
Sina, Suhrawardi, and Ibn al-‘Arabi all at once is indicative of
the general tendency of post-Avicennan Islamic philosophy to
move ever closer to a grand synthesis. The synthesis in question
is one that aims at securing a harmonious relationship between
the mind and the heart while taking both concepts to their logical
ends to avoid a soulless philosophy on the one hand, and a
groundless spirituality, on the other. Sadra’s intellectual journey
is in many ways parallel to the intellectual journey of the Islamic
world after the twelfth and thirteenth centuries.

No grand synthesis is possible without choosing an anchor
point. Sadra takes existence (wujud) as his anchor point and
revises the entire history of Islamic philosophy in light of what
he calls the primacy of existence (asalat al-wujud). As I discuss
in Chapter II, Sadra was extremely critical of Suhrawardi’s
defense of the primacy of essence (asalat al-mahiyyah) and had
considered it a philosophical error leading to an essentialist
metaphysics. He was also critical of Ibn Sina for failing to fully
grasp the centrality of the problem of existence and for producing
an incomplete metaphysics. Even though Sadra incorporated
many elements from both the Peripatetic and Illuminationist
traditions, he eventually seems to have found himself at home
in Ibn al-‘Arabi’s thought and the elaborate vocabulary of
existence developed by his students Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi and
Dawud al-Qaysari.

With this tradition in mind, Sadra developed his basic claim
that no problem of philosophy can be addressed accurately in the
absence of a proper ontology. If existence, as Sadra understands
it, is the most comprehensive of all concepts and the most real
of all realities, then all philosophical problems will have to be
revised after formulating a thorough ontology. For Sadra,
defining existence as a secondary intelligible or as a property of
things is to make a category mistake and place the cart before
the horse. Sadra’s overall concern is to avoid the trap of taking
existence to be a sum of existents (mawjudat) and make it one
of the constituents of what we call reality. Instead, Sadra seeks

--- Sayfa 16 ---
INTRODUCTION
xv
to place existence at the center of everything from the corporeal
to the intellectual, from the mundane to the divine. ‘Transcendent
wisdom’ is an ambitious attempt to formulate such a being-
centered metaphysics where all philosophical analysis begins
with existence and eventually ends with it.

One area in which Sadra has applied this view of existence to
the fullest extent is his theory of knowledge. As I discuss in
greater detail in the following pages of this book, Sadra rejects
all of the major theories of knowledge before him for having
subjectivist tendencies. For him, the Peripatetic definition of
knowledge as ‘abstraction’ (tajarrud) and ‘impression’ or
representation (irtisam) gives us only the contents of the mind,
not the true knowledge of what we know. Fakhr al-Din al-Razi’s
formulation of knowledge as a ‘relation’ (idafah) makes all
cognitive acts dependent on relationality and thus jeopardizes
the intrinsic intelligibility of the objects of knowledge.
Furthermore, it runs the risk of making knowledge a property of
the knower. Even Suhrawardi’s concept of knowledge as
presence (hudur) and illumination (ishraq), since it was based
on an essentialist metaphysics, falls short of drawing out the
existential dimension of cognitive acts.

Against these well-established notions of knowledge, Sadra
launches numerous attacks and attempts to shift the focus from
knowledge as a mental act of representation to knowledge as
unveiling existence. Once we establish existence as the ground
of all meaning and reality, then we realize, according to Sadra,
that knowing is nothing but a cognitive interaction with existence
that reveals itself in countless modalities, forms, shapes and
colors. In knowing things, we unveil and decipher an aspect of
existence. By defining knowledge as a ‘mode of existence’
(nahw al-wujud), Sadra subsumes all cognition under the rubric
of existence and makes epistemology an exercise in ontology.
He mobilizes a number of arguments to substantiate this point.
Understanding these arguments and the way Sadra develops
them will be the main task of this book.

--- Sayfa 17 ---
xvi
INTRODUCTION

Among these arguments, the unification of the intellector and
the intellected (ittihad al-‘aqil wa’l-ma‘qul) stands out as a
central theme in Sadra’s works. In a rather untypical way, Sadra
has resuscitated an old problem in Greek and Islamic philosophy
while formulating an epistemology of what we might call
intellectual mysticism. His robust defense of the unification
argument is unique in the history of philosophy with almost no
equal approaching his care and passion for it. As I discuss in
Chapter I, the long history of the unification debate, which goes
back to the Greeks, is also a history of competing metaphysical
and epistemological systems. Those who rejected the unification
argument were aware of its far-reaching implications and
rejected it as mere poetry, mystical utterance, and even sophistry.
Those who defended it with a passion seem to have had a
philosophical mission to overcome the limits of Peripatetic
rationalism.

Sadra, too, was aware of the consequences of the unification
argument. He held that for knowledge to be a means of disclosing
the ‘gradational’ (tashkik) and ever-dynamic reality of existence,
it must be more than some cognitive constructions of my mind
and a mental picture of the world outside me. It must be related
to the essential reality of what I know, i.e., existence manifested
in a particular form. Furthermore, it must be related to some
essential features of existence, i.e., presence, light, clarity,
witnessing. To say that true knowledge comes about when the
knower unites with the intellective form of what is known is to
deny any central role to the knowing subject, and place all
meaning and cognition within a larger context of intelligibility.
For Sadra, this context is provided by the all-inclusive reality of
existence, which not only makes things real but also saturates
them with meaning.

These and a host of other premises lead our philosopher to
develop an epistemology comprehensive enough to do justice to
representational-discursive knowledge on the one hand, and
intuitive and mystical knowledge on the other. Sadra takes these
two forms of knowledge not as alternate explanations of the

--- Sayfa 18 ---
INTRODUCTION
xvii
same reality but as belonging to different orders of intelligibility.
While knowledge as correspondence can explain how I know
with a certain degree of certainty that the tree in front of me has
x number of branches, it cannot account for the fact that I know
I am in pain. For Sadra, the mistake of the previous philosophers
was to take the former as a substitute for the latter and think that
one general theory of knowledge can explain all phenomena.
Sadra’s main goal is to show why different orders of being call
for different orders of intelligibility. The onus of Sadra’s
‘transcendent wisdom’ is to work out the implications of the
multiple states of existence and what sorts of knowledge claims
they give rise to.

These claims have far reaching consequences even within the
parameters of traditional Islamic philosophy. Once existence is
defined as the sole reality upon which all philosophical analyses
must be based, we no longer operate in a world in which
meaning moves from a knowing subject to the world outside it.
Instead, both terms, i.e., the self and the world derive meaning
from the fact of having some share of existence. That is why the
‘self,’ as the term is understood today, does not even emerge as
a major concept except within the context of what I call a
‘metaphysics of relations’. The self in Sadra is a thoroughly non-
subjectivist term in that it does not stand over against a world
which is devoid of meaning, intelligibility and intrinsic relations,
and with which it comes a posteriori to have a cognitive
relationship. Placing the self outside the all-inclusive reality of
existence, which is a logical absurdity anyway, and construing
it to be a ‘disengaged agent,’ to use Charles Taylor’s suggestive
expression, is to set a world-less subject over against a subject-
less world.

There is no question that something like the Cartesian self
could not have emerged from Sadra’s elaborate discussions of
self, soul or spirit for the simple fact that none of these terms
could have a claim of independence outside the various contexts
of relations and intelligibility provided by existence. Sadra could
not have imagined a self that could step outside existence and

--- Sayfa 19 ---
xviii
INTRODUCTION
look over the world from a position of what Thomas Nagel has
called the ‘view from nowhere.’ Nor could he envision a self that
would make a display of absolute hubris by calling itself the sole
ground of intelligibility and claiming to impart meaning to all
things. In its modern context, such a notion of the self conjures
up images of mastery and domination over the non-self. Sadra’s
gradational ontology preempts such a possibility and presents
instead a view of the self that remains anchored in existence as
all other things are.

The present book is comprised of three chapters and an
appendix. The first chapter traces the history of the unification
argument from the Greeks to Mulla Sadra. I begin with the
earliest statements of the problem in Plato and Aristotle. Even
though Plato’s works do not contain any clear formulation of the
unification argument, his attempt to posit existence and
knowledge as a single experience of participation makes him a
part of the history of the debate. Aristotle, whom the Muslims
knew through the eyes of the Theology of Aristotle, provides the
first clear statement of the problem. Like in many other key
issues, however, Aristotle lends himself to multiple readings, and
Sadra does not miss the opportunity to read him as supporting
the unification argument. Sadra takes a similar approach in
reading Alexander of Aphrodisias and Plotinus.

The Muslim Peripatetics and Ibn Sina chiefly among them
rejected the unification argument as a remnant of Plotinian
mysticism for a number of ontological and epistemological
reasons. They, however, accepted the idea when it applied to God
only. Suhrawardi, who is the last figure taken up in Chapter I,
follows suit and denies the unification argument any epistemic
legitimacy. It is against this long and complicated tradition that
Sadra tries to make his case for unification. While the debate
over unification has many defenders and detractors in Islamic
philosophy, in tracing its history, I have confined myself to those
whom Sadra mentions explicitly in the Asfar and his other
writings.

--- Sayfa 20 ---
INTRODUCTION
xix

Chapter II is devoted to a detailed analysis of Sadra’s theory
of knowledge. As Sadra insists on the principiality of existence
in all philosophical problems, I begin with a survey of his
elaborate vocabulary of existence. Sadra revises many of the
erstwhile discussions of existence and rejects essence or quiddity
(mahiyyah) as having no reality of its own. Instead, he proposes
the ‘gradation’ (tashkik), ‘primacy’ (asalah) and unity (wahdah)
of existence as the main terms of his analysis. I then turn to the
relationship between existence and intelligibility—a relationship
which Sadra masterfully examines. Sadra holds that existence is
intrinsically intelligible and does not need an outside agent such
as a knower to be predicated of meaning-properties. Furthermore,
existence is value-laden in that it is the source of such axiological
qualities as goodness, perfection, and plenitude. His analysis
thus ties together the three aspects of classical philosophy:
ontology, epistemology and axiology.

After discussing Sadra’s critique of the four theories of
knowledge developed by Peripatetics and Kalam thinkers, I turn
to the concept of the intellect (‘aql) in general and the simple
and active intellects in particular. While Sadra focuses on
knowledge as a mode of existence, he also admits active intellect
as an agent of knowledge. He even goes so far as to define it as
the content of knowledge, i.e., universal knowledge. With this,
he appears to agree with the Peripatetic notion of the active
intellect as providing the principle(s) of universal knowledge.
There is, however, a discrepancy between the unification
argument and the active intellect as the storehouse of intelligible
forms, and I argue that Mulla Sadra could have developed a fairly
complete theory of knowledge without requiring or endorsing the
active intellect of the Peripatetics. Having discussed this tension
in Sadra, I analyze self-knowledge and God’s knowledge of
things as two paramount cases of the unification argument.

Chapter III draws out the implications of Chapter II and seeks
to bring out the ontological and mystical element in Sadra’s
thought. Here I focus on two issues. The first is the question of
mystical knowledge and the extent to which such a term applies

--- Sayfa 21 ---
xx
INTRODUCTION
to Sadra’s epistemology. While Sadra accepts the analytical
aspects of representational knowledge for certain types of
phenomena, he rejects it as inadequate for higher orders of being.
Instead, he argues that existence can be known only intuitively
and that intuition is not only an epistemic but also a spiritual act
of encounter and witnessing. In exploring the question of
mysticism, I also discuss Sadra’s relation to traditional Sufism
within the context of Safavid Shiism and the Akhbari opposition
to Sufism and philosophy.

The second issue is the definition of knowledge as finding
existence. Sadra establishes a close link between degrees of
existence and levels of consciousness. A logical result of this is
a doctrine of ‘ontological vitalism’ according to which all things,
animate and inanimate, have some degree of consciousness by
virtue of the fact they exist. It is within this context that Sadra
develops his central thesis that when we interact with the world
around us, we interact with the various modalities and degrees
of existence. What we know or claim to know is always an
aspect of existence.

The appendix is a translation of Sadra’s treatise devoted to an
analytical treatment and defense of the unification argument. The
treatise is titled Risalah fi ittihad al-‘aqil wa’l-ma‘qul and has
been written after the Asfar. While the Risalah reiterates many
of the points made in the Asfar, it is a more elaborate and
sophisticated discussion and defense of the unification argument.
Sadra begins with a general statement of the problem and then
moves to a point-by-point response to Ibn Sina, his arch rival in
the debate. The Risalah ends with several important quotations
from the Theology of Aristotle.

There is no translation without distortion. In translating the
Risalah as well as the other passages throughout the book, I have
tried to use a generally accessible language. I avoided verbosities
and tried to remain loyal to the original text. Neologisms,
however, are inevitable when translating someone like Mulla
Sadra into English. This is due not only to the differences
between the Arabic and English philosophical vocabularies but

--- Sayfa 22 ---
INTRODUCTION
xxi
also to Sadra’s highly sophisticated and nuanced language.
Anyone translating classical Arabic philosophical texts is also
faced with the problem of the absence of a well-established and
widely accepted vocabulary of terms in the English language. I
cannot claim to have overcome this problem in my translations.
But I have tried my best to produce a consistent and lucid
translation.

A few examples will clarify my point. Sadra uses the word
‘aql and its derivatives extensively and with commendable
cogency. Most of the times, I used ‘intellect’ rather than ‘reason’
to render it. The word ‘reason’ (ratio) and its derivatives
including reasonable, rational, rationalization, etc., are heavily
loaded with the modern usage of the term. The word ma‘qul, for
instance, hardly makes any sense when translated as ‘rational’
or ‘reasonable.’ The word intellect, I admit, is not perfect either
for it conveys a more mystical and non-discursive meaning than
the Arabic ‘aql. The Arabic language does not have the reason-
intellect bifurcation even though it has an array of words to
express the various modes of rational and mystical knowledge.
Such words as ‘intellective’ (for ‘aqli), ‘intellective-ness’ (for
‘aqliyyah) and ‘intelligible-ness’ (for ma‘quliyyah) sound rather
quaint in modern English. But there is no way of getting around
such neologisms if we are to bring out the nuances in Sadra’s
philosophical vocabulary.

Writing a doctoral dissertation on Mulla Sadra and turning it
into a book in the present form was an intellectual journey filled
with agonizing frustrations and humbling rewards. To fully
understand Sadra, I had to switch between his world and ours
and live most of the time somewhere between the two. My
journey was one by which I tried to understand that of Sadra. Its
happiest moments were when the two journeys crisscrossed and
led to wonderful moments of unification.

--- Sayfa 23 ---
xxii
INTRODUCTION
NOTE
 1. For Sadra’s life and works, see my ‘An Annotated Bibliography of the
Works of Mulla Sadra with a Brief Account of His Life,’ Islamic Studies
Vol. 42, No. 1 (Spring 2003), pp. 21–62. For an extensive survey, see Sajjad
H. Rizvi, Mulla Sadra Shirazi: His Life and Works and the Sources for
Safavid Philosophy (Journal of Semitic Studies, Supplement 18 published
by Oxford University Press, 2007).

--- Sayfa 24 ---
Mulla Sadra’s claim that knowledge comes about as a result of
the unification of the intellect with its object of intellection has
a surprisingly long history in both Greek and Islamic philosophy.
The earliest phase of the debate can be traced back to the Greeks,
namely to Aristotle and his chief commentators Alexander of
Aphrodisias and Themistius on the one hand, and Plotinus, on
the other. For Muslim philosophers, Aristotle’s short and rather
cryptic remark in the De Anima 429b–430a1 that immaterial
substances are both intellecting and intelligible in themselves
represents the first clear statement of the problem. Plotinus’
Enneads, which was translated into Arabic as the Uthulujya
aristutalis and attributed falsely to Aristotle, appears to have
played even a larger role in carrying the unification argument to
the centre stage. As I shall discuss below, this ‘historical mistake’
had a lasting impact on the way in which Aristotle was read in
the Islamic world and brought in conformity with the broad
outlines of the Neoplatonic tradition.
Lest we think that the contested history of the unification
argument was confined to a handful of Peripatetic and
Neoplatonic philosophers as a minor issue of medieval noetics,
it should be pointed out that the Mutakallimun and the Sufis have
not shied away from getting their feet wet in the debate. Just like
the philosophers, they have taken positions depending on their
I
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
AND THE GRECO-ISLAMIC
CONTEXT OF THE UNIFICATION
ARGUMENT

--- Sayfa 25 ---
2
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
epistemic postulates and philosophical taste. This is by no means
surprising because if Sadra is right in claiming that knowledge
as unification is the best way to describe what ‘realized
knowledge’ should eventually be like, then our countenance or
denial of it should say something about our overall philosophical
outlook. If we are mystically inclined in our considerations of
knowledge, as Sadra is, then we would have little or no qualms
about embracing the idea of unification. This is presumably what
prompted Shahrazuri, Suhrawardi’s biographer and loyal disciple,
to give a mystical exposition of what he called the ‘school of
unification’ (madhhab al-ittihad) in his al-Shajarat al-ilahiyyah.
While calling ‘unification’ only a metaphor (majaz) and
eventually rejecting it, Shahrazuri explains rather lucidly how
the idea of unification is linked up with the Sufi tradition:
What they mean by the unification of the souls with the intelligible
forms or with the active intellect is the kind of unification to which
the people of spiritual detachment (arbab al-tajrid) and Sufi masters
(mashayikh al-sufiyyah) refer when the soul reaches conjunction
(ittisal) with some detached lights (al-anwar al-mujarradah) in
some moments of discharge and dispossession from the body. The
soul vanishes from itself as well as from the consciousness of itself
because of the power of what reaches it from intellective joys and
spiritual pleasures and because of the intensity of radiant
illuminations. It is overcome by the dominion of detached
intellective lights, which leads it to be extinguished from itself. They
call this state unification.2
Shahrazuri adds that the souls that have reached this stage
become so drunk in their contemplation of the ‘overpowering
lights’ (al-anwar al-qahirah) that they begin to utter such words
of ecstasy as ‘I am the Truth!’, ‘Praise be to me!’, ‘How great
is my affairs!’ and ‘There is nothing under my robe except God
and me!’. He also quotes the famous hadith that a believing
‘servant does not cease to get closer to God through supererogatory
prayers (al-nawafil) and rituals until God becomes the ear
through which he hears, the eye with which he sees, the hand

--- Sayfa 26 ---
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
3
with which he strikes, and the feet with which he walks.’ In
short, Suhrawardi’s great biographer and commentator considers
unification a rightly claimed property of the Sufis. The issue at
hand, however, is never so simple because if unification is a
ground for mystical union in terms of a spiritual epistemology,
then we cannot explain why Suhrawardi of all people should
reject it as vehemently as Ibn Sina and Ibn Rushd. As we shall
see later, Sadra appears to be extremely frustrated with this
situation, and tries his best to read his predecessors in a favorable
light.
Sadra mentions his sources for the unification argument in
several places, sometimes agreeing and sometimes disagreeing
with them. This chapter will focus on those sources which Sadra
mentions explicitly. No attempt will be made to cover the entire
history of the unification argument, its diverse interpretations
and applications vis-à-vis the active intellect, and its meaning
for the immortality of the soul in the various philosophical,
theological and mystical schools. As a result, I shall not discuss
Ibn Bajjah, Ikhwan al-Safa’, Abu Hamid al-Ghazali, Abu’l-
Hasan al-Amiri and few other philosophers who could have been
included in such a history. Our main task is to follow the history
of the argument as Sadra saw it.3
The unification argument has been discussed by various
thinkers with diverse points of view. Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi
(d.1274), the first prominent expositor of the school of Ibn al-
‘Arabi, for instance, defines ‘true knowledge’ as a complete
unity between the subject and object of knowledge—a definition
that comes very close to Sadra’s defense of knowledge as
presence and unification.
Know that obtaining the knowledge of something as it is and
through the perfection of its knowledge hinges upon unification with
what is known. And unification with something is based on the
disappearance of all [those qualities] that distinguish the knower
from the known. In [the world of] existence, there is a Real Divine
element (amr) between a thing and others, which necessitates
participation (al-ishtirak) without differentiation. And there are

--- Sayfa 27 ---
4
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
other things that distinguish this particular thing from what is other
than itself. This is one [of the doctrines] in which there is no doubt
according to the school of those who affirm the truth (mashrab al-
tahqiq). Qunawi, al-Nafakhat al-ilahiyyah, p. 32
Qunawi’s significance for Sadra is clear enough: he is one of
Sadra’s major sources for his intellectual affiliation with the
school of Ibn al-‘Arabi.4 Even though Sadra does not quote from
him directly on the unification of the knower and the known, Ibn
al-‘Arabi himself has a lot to say on the subject throughout his
magnum opus al-Futuhat al-makkiyyah.5 Ibn al-‘Arabi notes that
we cannot know God in the same way we know things. Our
knowledge of sensate and mental objects is based on sensation,
logical necessity, or simple experience. None of these, however,
applies to God because God is neither a thing nor a concept. The
only way there is to know God is through what he calls the
‘proof of existence’ (al-burhan al-wujudi), which is a direct act
of intuition and which does not admit any separation between
the knower and the known.6
Another important figure among Sadra’s indirect sources is
Afdal al-Din Kashani (d.1213–14), also known as Baba Afdal
Kashani. His importance for the development of Sadra’s thought
is evident from the fact that one of Sadra’s major works on self-
knowledge called Iksir al-‘arifin is based in large part on
Kashani’s Jawidan-nama written in Persian.7 In his major
philosophical works, most of which deal with the question of
self-knowledge as a key to spiritual awareness and salvation,
Kashani explicitly defends the unification of the knower and the
known. For him, the perfect state of perception (idrak) takes
place when the intellector, the intellect, and the intelligible are
united in a single state of consciousness. Kashani says that ‘…
there can be no tool and intermediary between the intellecter, the
intellect, and the intelligible, such that an intellecter through
intellect would grasp his own intelligible with the tool.’8 To
prove the unity of the intellect and the intelligible, Kashani uses
the argument of the actuality of intellectual substances—an
argument of which Sadra makes profuse use. Since the intellect

--- Sayfa 28 ---
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
5
is by definition actual when it perceives something and it can
never be bereft of such perception in view of its self-knowledge,
it is always united with the intelligible. Furthermore, Kashani
(and later Sadra) considers the unity of existence and knowledge
as an existential state whereby one reaches ‘complete existence’
through consciousness and self-realization. Not surprisingly,
Kashani turns to a decidedly mystical language when he
describes this state by saying that ‘…the perfection of the act of
perception and intellection is in the unification of the intellector,
the intellect, and the intellected. It is this that is complete being,
perpetual joy, and subsistent enjoyment…’9
Arguments for and against unification have not been confined
to Muslim thinkers alone. Some Jewish and Christian
philosophers writing in Arabic have also been part of the debate,
using the unification argument as a support for their particular
philosophical assertions. Moses Maimonides, known in Arabic
as Ibn Maymun, for instance, devotes several pages to the
problem in his Dalalat al-ha’irin. In a language as clear as that
of Sadra, he states that the al-‘aql, al-‘aqil and al-ma‘qul are one
and the same in God ‘for ever’ (abadan) and in fact in every
intellect in actus.10 Maimonides asserts that the ‘intellect in
actuality is nothing but what it intellects’ because the ‘reality and
essence of the intellect is perception.’ It is not the case that the
intellect is one thing standing on its own and perception is
another thing standing as separate from the intellect. When the
intellect perceives the form of a piece of wood, to use
Maimonides’ example, it becomes that form. Thus the intellect
and the intelligible are the same thing. The same rule applies to
the process of intellection or perception because ‘the act of the
intellect, which is its perception, is its very reality and essence.’
If the conceptual identification of the intellect and the intelligible
is true for all intellects in actuality, it must be so for God as well
because God or the Divine intellect contains no potentiality.11
The unification argument is also taken up by a certain
Christian theologian with the name of Muhy al-Din al-Isfahani
(11th or 12th century). In his short treatise on unity and trinity,

--- Sayfa 29 ---
6
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
Isfahani uses the unification argument as one of the philosophical
proofs of the Christian trinity, and tries to give a unitarian
interpretation of the trinity presumably in view of his
predominantly Islamic environment.12 Even this ostentatiously
apologetic thesis betrays something of the pertinence of the
unification debate among medieval intellectuals.
In the Asfar, Mulla Sadra gives his own history of the idea
tracing it primarily from al-Farabi’s Risalah fi’l-‘aql back to the
Uthulujya:
In this treatise [i.e., al-Farabi’s Risalah fi’l-‘aql], there are parts that
clearly point to the unity of the intellect with the intelligibles and
to the possibility of man’s becoming a simple active intellect in
whom all intelligibles are united. In addition to the clear writings of
this teacher [al-Farabi], there is also the book Uthulujya attributed
to the first teacher Aristotle and what the Chief Master [Ibn Sina]
narrates from some of the students of this great philosopher. [By
this], I mean Porphyry who wrote a book on the intellect and the
intelligibles, which has a section on the unity of the intellect with
the intelligibles and its union with the active intellect. There is also
a book on this very subject by Alexander of Aphrodisias whom the
Chief Master describes as a virtuous and knowledgeable philosopher
among the ancients.13 In spite of all these, they permitted, in a
surprising way, the denial of this sublime matter and allowed the
[level of] exaggeration with which those who did not examine the
matter carefully rejected it just as some later philosophers and Ibn
Sina and those who came after him did until our own day. Anyone
who has not reached this state [of knowledge] should follow Ibn
Sina’s will which he states at the end of the Isharat. Asfar, I, 3, p.
42714
Although this short historical genealogy does not mention Plato
by name and traces the idea as far back as Aristotle only, Plato’s
ideas loom large in Sadra’s defense of the unification argument.
For Sadra, the Platonic Forms (al-muthul al-aflatuniyyah)
provide a rigorous ontological basis for the independence of the
intelligible world and turn knowledge into a mode of participation
and appropriation.15 Shrugging off the critiques of Plato and his

--- Sayfa 30 ---
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
7
explanation of the intelligibles, Sadra says that ‘the view of Plato
and those who came before him among the pillars of wisdom
concerning the existence of ‘intellective similes’ (al-muthul al-
‘aqliyyah), which the natures of corporeal species have, is the
most firmly established and sound argument, to which none of
the critiques of later philosophers apply.’16 To see the relevance
of this aphorism, we need to look briefly at Plato’s attempt to
ground knowledge in the Forms (eidos), and how it may or may
not give credence to Sadra’s reconstruction of it as a basis for
the unification argument. This will be followed by a discussion
of Aristotle, his Alexandrian commentators, and Plotinus, all of
whom played a crucial role in the creation of Aristoteles Arabus.
Then I shall turn to Muslim philosophers and their uneasy
relationship with the idea of unification.
1.1. THE GRECO-ALEXANDRIAN BACKGROUND
a. Plato’s bios theoretikos
The fact that in the historical accounts of the unification debate
Plato has been either totally absent or scantily mentioned is
somewhat surprising because the later Peripatetics have denied
the unification argument on strictly Aristotelian grounds, and
attributed it to a rather Platonic way of thinking, implying that
unification as defended by the Platonists lends itself to a more
or less mystical concept of knowledge. Furthermore, the Platonic
theory of knowledge as the noetic appropriation of the Forms
appears to be in perfect agreement with the intentions of the
defenders of the unification argument. At least, this is how Sadra
incorporates Platonic Forms into his theory of knowledge.17 In a
seminal essay, Jean Pépin has addressed this very issue and
attempted to show the roots of the doctrine in the Platonic
Dialogues. Pépin argues that although the Dialogues do not
present a full-fledged statement of the problem, they contain

--- Sayfa 31 ---
8
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
important indications for its later development by Plotinus and
Proclus.18
It will serve us well to remember that one of Plato’s perennial
concerns was to explain the relation between Forms (eidos) and
nous (mind/intellect) as primary agent of intellection. If
knowledge is the perception of Forms and can be achieved only
when the soul comes to recognize and ‘appropriate’ them, then
there must be a relation of sorts between the two. For Plato, it
is the intellective nature of the nous that enables it to ‘draw near
(pleesiasas) [to] and mingle’ with the world of the Forms.
…the true lover of knowledge is always striving after being—that
is his true nature; he will not rest in the multiplicity of individuals…
until he have [sic] attained the knowledge of the true nature of every
essence by a sympathetic and kindred power in the soul, and by that
power drawing near (pleesiasas) and mingling (migeis) and
becoming incorporate with very being (too onti ontos), having
begotten mind and truth, he will have knowledge. The Republic, VI,
490 b–c.19
This typical description of the Platonic philosopher is based on
the psukhe’s innate ability to align itself with the intelligible
world, which, in turn, creates a ‘solidarité d’existence’ between
nous and eidos. The isomorphic unity between nous and
intelligible forms renders the soul an intelligible reality in and
of itself. In the Phaedo 76–77, Plato gives a vivid description of
this unity and refers to a relationship of homoios between the
essence (ousia) of things and the nous. At this point, the
homogeneity of nous and eidos becomes one of Plato’s forceful
arguments for the prenatal existence of eidos in us, and provides
an anchor point for the theory of knowledge as recollection.20
The psukhe or, depending on the context, nous, as the principal
agent of intellection in humans, shares an essential unity with
the ousia of things. It is this unity to which Plato refers when he
says that ‘…the existence of the soul before birth cannot be
separated from the existence of the essence.’ Since ‘…beauty,
goodness, and the other notions…have a most real and absolute

--- Sayfa 32 ---
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
9
existence’ (Phaedo, 76 d–77 a), the soul is able to unite with
them not as mental states but as actual experiences.21
The essential unity of which Plato speaks makes the soul
superior to the body on the one hand, and ontologically akin to
the intelligible world, on the other. The soul ‘resembles’ the
Forms for it is simple, indivisible, immortal, and permanent and,
given proper conditions, finds no difficulty in participating in
the ousia of things—an assertion to which we shall return when
we look at Sadra’s theory of knowledge. This view of the soul,
which has left an indelible mark on all medieval philosophers,
is predicated upon the idea that the nous knows the intellibilia
by virtue of its belonging to the Divine order:
Then reflect, Cebes: of all which has been said is not this the
conclusion?—that the soul is in the very likeness of the divine, and
immortal, and intellectual, and uniform, and indissoluble, and
unchangeable: and that the body is in the very likeness of the
human, and mortal, and unintellectual, and multiform, and
dissoluble, and changeable. Phaedo, 80b.22
Disengagement of the soul from the world of matter is a pivotal
doctrine of Platonism and weaves together classical psychology
and epistemology.23 While the senses perceive the sensible,
material, and continuously changing substances and can yield
only doxa, the nous can perceive the intelligible, non-material,
and permanent eidos that are the true basis of episteme.24 The
nous, however, can do this when it is disengaged from the
limitations of material existence.
To further buttress the ontological realism of the Forms, Plato
makes a distinction between aistheton (sensible) and noeton
(intelligible), which is another way of distinguishing the Forms
from sensible objects.25 Defined as universals, the Forms are
independent of their material embodiments and sensible
imitations—a theme that runs through the Phaedo and Plato’s
other works.26 The nous, by virtue of its being a disengaged
reality, which Sadra would later call the ‘disembodiment of the
soul’ (tajarrud al-nafs),27 is considered more akin to the world

--- Sayfa 33 ---
10
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
of Forms. In other words, the soul and its objects of intellection
belong to the same order of reality. This view forms the basis of
the Platonic concept of anamnesis (recollection) but works
equally well for the unification argument: knower, knowledge,
and what is known all belong to the world of the intelligibilia
(al-ma‘qulat)28 making knowledge a mode of participation in the
intelligible realm, viz., the Platonic Forms. As we shall see later,
Mulla Sadra incorporates these basic assumptions of Platonic
noetics into his defense of the unification argument. In fact,
Sadra’s definition of the soul as ‘corporeal in origination,
spiritual in subsistence’ (jismaniyyat al-huduth ruhaniyyat al-
baqa’) provides a noetic basis for the soul’s proximity to and
eventual unification with the intelligible world.
Plato’s metaphysical theory of knowledge provides further
material for a cogent statement of the unification argument.
Given the fact that Plato does not draw any clear line between
ontology and epistemology,29 the question of what and how we
know is intimately linked up with the question of what there is.
For Plato and his medieval followers, the objective reality of the
contents of intellection, which are, properly speaking, nothing
other than the Forms, precedes the act of intellection. An
intelligible form remains intelligible whether an intellect has
ever intellected it or not. Now, this view reverses the relation
between ontology and epistemology as we know it today, and
turns knowledge into an effect of existence. Since the ontological
reality of what there is is an a priori given and since this is the
basis of all intellection, knowing implies taking a certain position
toward existence.30 In a Platonic sense, to understand the
concept of X is to understand its Form of which the concept is
only an approximation and a deficient imitation.31 In other
words, the reality of X can be perceived by standing in a
cognitive relation to the Form of X, and this, for Plato, entails
‘participation’ (methexis) in the eidos, i.e., the intelligible
archetype of X. The senses can yield important data about the
perceptible properties of X. The knowledge (episteme) of X,
however, is made possible by the participation of the ‘intellector’

--- Sayfa 34 ---
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
11
in the intelligible reality of X. The definition of something as
‘square,’ for instance, implies that the object defined partakes of
the eidos of square-ness. This radically realist ontology of
Platonic Forms underscores how we know, and asserts that all
knowledge entails ‘une assimilation à l’object connu.’32
This is the basis of bios theoretikos (‘a life based on theoria/
vision’) Plato speaks about: intellection in relation to the Forms
is contemplation in the full sense of the term33—a viewpoint
shared by both Neoplatonist and Muslim philosophers. As we
shall see later, knowledge as participation has a number of
implications for Mulla Sadra’s theory of knowledge, and
functions as a frame of reference for the unity of metaphysics,
epistemology, and psychology. But it also takes us to philosophy
as ‘spiritual exercise’34 where the line between being and
knowing is deliberately and consistently blurred. I shall return
to this subject in Chapter 3 when I discuss the epistemic
possibility of mystical knowledge.
b. Aristotle and the ‘Intellect from Without’
If Plato’s noetics and metaphysics has played an indirect yet
important role in the development of the unification argument,
Aristotle, the ‘first teacher’ (al-mu‘allim al-awwal) of the
Muslim philosophers, has provided its first full-fledged
formulation. This reading of Aristotle, again, goes back to Sadra
and not necessarily to the ‘orthodox’ Peripatetics because Sadra,
like his other medieval predecessors, knew and read Aristotle as
the author of the Uthulujya. The numerous references Sadra
makes to Aristotle show his desire to see Aristotle as a disciple
of Plato, not as an intellectual renegade in spite of the fact he
was fully and perhaps disappointedly aware of Aristotle’s
rejection of Platonic Forms as untenable.35 Whether Sadra
discusses the temporal origination of the cosmos (huduth al-
‘alam), eternity of the soul, or substantial motion, his view of
Aristotle is one that conforms to his overall concern to
reconstruct philosophy as being illuminated by the ‘niche of

--- Sayfa 35 ---
12
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
prophecy’ (mishkat al-nubuwwah). Aristotle fits in this picture
rather nicely as one of the ‘pillars of wisdom’ (asatin al-
hikmah).36
With this caveat in mind, let’s turn to Aristotle himself. The
principal passage that contains Aristotle’s ambiguous and
extremely condensed view on the issue is the De Anima 429–
430, which has been singled out by some of his Greek and
Muslim commentators as the most significant evidence for
Aristotle’s endorsement of the active intellect (nous poietikos).
After discussing the psukhe, sensation and phantasia (rendered
into Arabic as khayal), Aristotle, who was still struggling to
disassociate himself from his mentor Plato, turns to intellection
as the highest form of perception, and asserts the radical
incorporeality of the intellect. But he does this in such a way as
to keep both Plato and his medieval followers wondering if he
was really making a break. He establishes a similitude between
sense and its sensible object on the one hand, and intellect and
its intelligible object on the other:
If thinking is indeed like sensing, then it would either be a process
of being affected in some way by the object of thought or be some
other thing such as this. So [the thinking part of the soul] should be
incapable of being affected but capable of receiving the form [of the
object of thought] and be potentially such as that [form] but not the
[form] itself and the intellect should be related to the object of
thought in a manner similar to that in which a sense is related to its
sensible object. And, since the intellect [can] think every [object of
thought], it must exist without being blended [with something else]
in order that, as Anaxagoras says, ‘it may rule,’ that is, in order that
it may know. […] So the part of the soul which is called ‘intellect’
(by ‘intellect’ I mean that [part] by which the soul [can] think and
believe) is actually none of the things prior to thinking. In view of
this, it is not even reasonable that it should be blended with the
body. De Anima, 429a37
If the intellect is absolutely free of matter, then it does not share
any corporeal commonality with the particular physical objects
it knows.38 The intellect knows only the forms, i.e., the

--- Sayfa 36 ---
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
13
intelligible forms that reside in material bodies implicitly and
contingently. Before intellecting these forms, the intellect is not
an actual reality. It is only potentially able to know things;
otherwise we would have to claim that the intellect knows all
things a priori. To emphasize this point, Aristotle gives the
celebrated example of a wax tablet (De Anima, 429b), which
potentially contains what is later to be written on it.
These assertions can be taken to be a logical result of the
Aristotelian notion of hylomorphism, which underlies Aristotle’s
natural philosophy as well as epistemology. The fact that the
intellect extracts universal forms from their material embodiments
is predicated upon the hylomorphic idea that everything is
composed of matter and form. As the principle of unity,
intelligibility and universality in corporeal things, form is the
medium by which the intellect knows, and eventually acts upon
the world. By defining the intellect as a non-material substance,
Aristotle takes an important step toward placing it in the world
of forms, which are always defined as incorporeal. For some of
Aristotle’s Greek commentators and certainly for Sadra, this is
a position not far from asserting the unity of the intellect and the
intelligible.39 In fact, Aristotle says that in the case of ‘objects
without matter,’ viz., the forms that are not conjoined with
matter, the intellect and what it intellects are one and the same
thing.
We stated…that the intellect, prior to thinking, is in a certain way
potentially the intelligible objects but is none of them actually; and
it should [be regarded potentially] as [being] in a tablet which has
no actual writing. This is indeed the case with the intellect. Moreover
the intellect itself is intelligible like the [other] intelligible objects.
For in the case of objects without matter, that which thinks and that
which is being thought are the same, for theoretical knowledge and
its knowable object are the same. De Anima, 429b–430a.40
The intellect as a substance disembodied from matter knows
something when it perceives its form because the ‘essence’ of
things is contained in their form. As Aristotle insists, we cannot

--- Sayfa 37 ---
14
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
know matter (hylé) because it is pure potentiality.41 All we can
know is the form. As a matter of fact, all we need to know is the
form because it is what makes things what they are. Furthermore,
intelligible substances are intrinsically intelligible regardless of
a subject intellecting them because they are always actual, i.e.,
they are never bereft of cognitive content. This explains partly
why Aristotle defines knowledge as a case of ‘being acted upon’:
what acts upon is the actual intelligible form and what is acted
upon is the intellect, which is potentially capable of knowing all
intelligible substances.42 These plainly Aristotelian premises
bring us to the shores of Platonism for it is an easy shift from
extracting and appropriating forms-in-matter to participating in
them. Some of Aristotle’s later commentators and Muslim
readers did not hesitate to take this step and interpreted even the
most orthodox Aristotelian writings as lending support to the
unification argument.43
There is further evidence to justify such a reading. In the De
Anima, 430a 16–17, Aristotle gives his celebrated analogy of
light to explain the relationship between vision and colors. This
analogy has been singled out by later commentators as the most
important clue for a proper understanding of the role of the
active intellect in Peripatetic noetics. Simply put, the analogy
explains how light makes vision possible: whether we are
capable of vision or blind from birth, we cannot see in pitch
darkness. We need the presence and agency of light, which is
always visible by itself. The potential intellect needs a similar
agency vis-à-vis the things it is capable of knowing. This is
where the active intellect comes in and enables the potential
intellect to know things in actuality by ‘touching’ them with its
power of illumination. Just as light makes it possible for us to
see the things around us, the light of intelligibility shed by the
active intellect turns our potentiality to know into an actual state
of knowing. In this model, we are prompted to know conceptually
by the agency of something outside us, and the active intellect
is accorded an ontological and epistemic priority in the process
of intellection—a theme to which we shall return later.44

--- Sayfa 38 ---
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
15
In De Generatione Animalum, 2.3, 736b 13–20 and 2.6, 744b
22, Aristotle uses the expression ‘intellect from without’ (nous
thurathen), translated into Arabic as al-‘aql al-ladhi min kharij,
to demonstrate the pre-discursive existence and ever-present
actuality of the active intellect.45 This seemingly simple assertion
has led to one of the greatest controversies of the Middle Ages
about the way in which the active intellect makes something
potential actual. It is worth noting that the active intellect was
introduced by Aristotle to fill in the gap created by his rather
unsuccessful rejection of Platonic Forms as separate substances.
Plato did not have to posit anything like an active intellect for
he held that his Forms were already actual in the intelligible
world and that we know them by participating in them.46 Now,
once we define forms only as forms-in-matter, then we have to
explain how they can be ‘distilled’ or extracted, i.e., ‘abstracted’
(tajarrud) from their enmattered locations. Only an agent that is
already removed from material embodiment can help us do that.
This is what the active intellect does, and this is why ‘abstraction’
is so crucial to Aristotelian epistemology.
To recapitulate, the in actu intelligibility and independence of
substances that can be known is an important component of the
doctrine of the active intellect. Whether we envision a relation
of unification (ittihad) or conjunction (ittisal) between the active
intellect and the individual human intellects or assume the active
intellect to be completely independent of us or found partially
in our souls,47 the essential unity of that which thinks and that
which is thought in the case of things that have no matter
remains a solid argument in the Peripatetic tradition. In the
Metaphysics, Aristotle reiterates this point:
If thinking and being thought of are different, in respect of which
does goodness belong to thought? For to be an act of thinking and
to be an object of thought are not the same thing. We answer that
in some cases the knowledge is the object. In the productive
sciences, it is the substance or essence of the object, matter omitted,
and in the theoretical sciences, the definition or the act of thinking
is the object. Since, then, thought and the object of thought are not

--- Sayfa 39 ---
16
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
different in the case of things that have not matter, the divine
thought and its objects will be the same, i.e., the thinking will be
one with the object of its thought. Metaphysics, XII, 1074b–
1075a48
One last point to which I shall return in Chapter II is the
establishment of immateriality as a condition of intelligibility.
Aristotle’s claim that the knowledge of things is obtained when
their forms are ‘abstracted,’ viz., detached from matter, creates
a reciprocal relation between intelligibility and non-materiality:
the more removed a thing is from its material conditions, the
more intelligible it becomes. We may take this to be an
endorsement of the idea that the realm of the intelligibilia is
marked by its distinct non-materiality whereas the world of
matter is construed to be in darkness and devoid of cognition or
intelligibility. In Islamic philosophy, this idea would receive a
more precise formulation but also generate a major problem for
the defenders of ‘abstraction’ as a condition of knowledge. Ibn
Sina, for instance, states that the further removed a thing is from
its material accidents (‘awarid) and attachments (lawahiq), the
more real it is because it is closer to its ‘formal’ (al-suri) reality.
For Ibn Sina, ‘all perception is the taking of the form of the
perceived’.49 Intelligibility as ‘abstraction,’ however, brings up
a host of other problems. In fact, Mulla Sadra, following
Suhrawardi, would launch relentless attacks on the Peripatetic
notion of knowledge as ‘abstraction’ (tajarrud), to which I shall
turn in the next Chapter. As far as Aristotle is concerned,
however, his version of the unification argument ‘in the case of
things that have no matter’ has undoubtedly become a major
source of inspiration for the posterity in their attempt to restate
the Peripatetic system within the framework of a new
philosophical outlook shaped by Alexander of Aphrodisias and
Themistius (d.388) on the one hand, and by Plotinus, on the
other.

--- Sayfa 40 ---
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
17
c. Alexander of Aphrodisias: Beyond Orthodoxy and

Innovation
Alexander of Aphrodisias’s decisive role for the later development
of Aristotelian noetics is well documented. With his commentaries
on Aristotle’s Metaphysics and De Anima as well as his own
independent works, Alexander shaped largely the way the First
Teacher was read and understood in the Islamic and Christian
worlds during the Middle Ages. In addition, he is of particular
importance to us because the first section (fasl) of the first
discourse (maqalah) of Sadra’s Treatise on the Unification of the
Intellector and the Intelligible, whose translation is given at the
end of the present work, bears the subtitle ‘On the Degrees of
the Theoretical Intellect According to the Account Given by
Alexander of Aphrodisias’ (fi darajat al-‘aql al-nazari
muwafiqan lima dhakarahu iskandar al-afridusi). Many other
references to Alexander in the Sadrean corpus testify to Sadra’s
interest in Alexander as a truthful expositor of Arsitotle’s
teachings.50 Yet the name Alexander has always evoked
controversy as he has been on a pendulum between orthodoxy
and innovation. Arguably, we owe this curious situation not only
to Alexander as an individual philosopher but also to the city of
Alexandria where a serious reconstruction of Peripatetic
philosophy was already under way. We should remember that
Alexandria, founded by Alexander the Great, was the center of
Hellenistic culture where Pythagoreanism had a long history. Not
surprisingly, such early neo-Platonists as Numenius (d. c.180
bce), Ammonius Saccas (d. c.242), Plotinus (d.270), Porphyry
(d.301), and Iamblichus (d. c.320) all hailed from Alexandria.51
Little is known about the life and intellectual career of
Alexander of Aphrodisias. In all likelihood, he was from the city
of Aphrodisias in Caria in southwestern Anatolia and flourished
at the end of the second and beginning of the third century.52 In
spite of the scarcity of knowledge about his life and intellectual
upbringing, his deep influence on the later interpretations of
Corpus Aristotelicum is unmistakable.53 This is borne out

--- Sayfa 41 ---
18
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
especially by the wide popularity of his Peri Nous or De
Intellectu,54 to which Sadra makes a number of references.
Porphyry reports that Alexander, along with Numenius, was
among the most important authorities on philosophy in the circle
of Plotinus.55 While modern scholarship considers Alexander to
be a mainstream commentator loyal to Aristotle’s philosophy in
essence,56 there are significant divergences and new themes in
Alexander that herald the emergence of a new and even
‘mystical’ interpretation of the First Teacher.57 One scholar of
Islamic philosophy goes so far as to attribute the ‘mysticisme
rationaliste’ of the Muslim Peripatetics-cum-Neoplatonists to
Alexander’s countenance of the conjunction (ittisal) of the
individual human intellect with the active intellect.58 In fact, the
doctrines of the passive and active intellects, unification (ittihad)
of individual human intellects with the active intellect, Divine
Intellect as the sum of all intelligible realities, and finally the
identification of the active intellect with God are among the most
controversial issues which have become part of the Peripatetic
tradition with Alexander.59
It would not be a stretch to say that Alexander of Aphrodisias
was the last Aristotelian ‘pure and simple.’ Yet, he also marks
the beginning of something new. In a rather ironic way, the
‘Neoplatonist turn,’ which begins with the ‘Ammonian syntesis’60
and reaches a climax with the compilation of the Enneads, owes
a great deal to Alexander as the commentator.61 What is
fascinating is how some of Alexander’s Muslim readers and
certainly Sadra among them found no discomfort in reproducing
him as a philosopher and commentator who could very well be
read along with other Neoplatonists. This is precisely what Sadra
did vis-à-vis Alexander’s defense of the unity of the intellect and
the intelligible: instead of interpreting it as part of Aristotelian
noetics with no (neo)Platonic overtones, Sadra sees it as
anticipating the Neoplatonist synthesis which he seeks to achieve
through his defense of the unification argument. In fact, the
findings of modern scholarship suggest that the Muslim
philosophers were not at all off the mark in their reading of the

--- Sayfa 42 ---
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
19
two systems of Platonism and Aristotelianism as two schools
destined to be synthesized in one way or another.62 In short, what
happened to Aristotle happened to Alexander as well: they both
were reconstructed literally, conceptually and textually within
the matrix of the Neoplatonist turn.63 Once this was done, it was
relatively easy to reproduce an ‘orthodox’ Aristotelian
metaphysics within the context of Neoplatonism without giving
up Aristotle in toto.64 To see the extent to which this is true or
not, however, we have to turn to Alexander Islamicus as Sadra
saw him.
In the Islamic philosophical tradition, the works of Muslim
Peripatetics are replete with references to Alexander of
Aphrodisias. His most celebrated title was ho exegetes,65 ‘the
chief interpreter’ of the First Teacher. The title was used
exclusively for him by both Simplicius and Philoponus and
faithfully translated into Arabic as ‘the exegete’ (al-mufassir).66
His name has been mentioned in relation to the transmission of
not only Peripatetic but also Stoic ideas into the Islamic world.
Ibn Abi Usaybi‘ah, for instance, attributes a number of works to
Alexander that either discuss or respond to various Stoic themes
and questions.67 Sa‘id al-Andalusi, the author of Tabaqat al-
umam, mentions three names among Aristotle’s most prominent
successors: Themistius, Alexander of Aphrodisias, and
Porphyry.68 Alexander’s Peri Nous, considered his most
important work on noetics, was translated into Arabic in the
school of Hunayn ibn Ishaq, most probably by Hunayn himself,
as early as the ninth century under the title Fi’l-‘aql, and
remained an important text for the study of Aristotle’s De
Anima.69 The wide popularity of the Peri Nous is to be seen in
the works of Muslim Peripatetics as well as in several works of
Mulla Sadra who quotes Alexander in support of his own
interpretation of Aristotle’s theory of the intellect.70 That
Alexander’s works were ‘best sellers’ in the philosophical circles
of the time is attested by Yahya ibn ‘Adiyy’s lamentation that he
was not quick enough to buy Alexander’s two commentaries on

--- Sayfa 43 ---
20
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
Aristotle in a collection of books, ‘all of which were then sold
to a man from Khurasan for three thousand dinars!’71
There is no easy way to map out Alexander’s influence on
Muslim philosophers. The current scholarship on the subject is
still marred by the relative absence of comparative textual
studies and the sketchy outlines of the patterns of transmission
from Greek into Arabic. Insofar as pre-Sadrean noetics is
concerned, there is a sizable literature that argues for a historical
connection between Alexander’s Peri Nous and al-Kindi’s
Risalah fi’-l ‘aql, the first authoritative text on the intellect by a
Muslim Peripatetic. According to this hypothesis, al-Kindi must
have used Alexander’s work without naming it.72 On one hand,
this is justified in part by the obvious similarities between the
two texts. The discrepancy between the tripartite division of the
intellect by Alexander and the quadripartite division proposed
by al-Kindi can be seen as a matter of difference in expression
rather than in substance.73 On the other hand, any direct relation
between Alexander and al-Kindi has been called into question in
view of a number of major differences between the two.74 Among
these, we can mention the classification and types of the intellect
and Alexander’s identification of the active intellect with God—
a view that has become a major source of controversy among the
later Peripatetics.75 Al-Kindi, for instance, does not use the
expression al-‘aql al-fa‘‘al. Instead, he uses the phrase al-‘aql
al-ladhi bi’l-fi‘l abadan.76 Even though al-Kindi’s al-‘aql al-
awwal can be interpreted as a version of the Aristotelian active
intellect, he does not seem to have ever needed an active intellect
to complete his noetics. It is therefore difficult to establish any
direct link between Alexander of Aphrodisias and al-Kindi on
this particular issue. At any rate, Alexander’s authority on how
to interpret Aristotelian noetics appears to be fairly established
for the ‘Kindi-circle.’77
The situation is not any different when we turn to Ibn Sina.
The Chief Master’s major works, especially his early writings,78
contain references to Alexander in places where Aristotle’s text
appears to be in need of clarification or simply open to multiple

--- Sayfa 44 ---
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
21
readings. In the Najat, Ibn Sina, when talking about logical
categories, discusses two views concerning the mutlaqat
(‘unconditional propositions’) and describes Alexander as a
muhassil, i.e., the philosopher who has achieved the verification
of logical truths.79 Ibn Sina’s reliance on Alexander for the
critical issue of the active intellect and how it is related to
individual human intellects shows beyond any doubt the
honorable position he assigns to Alexander.80 We find a similar
situation in al-Farabi to whom I shall return shortly. Sadra
presents Ibn Sina as both revering and struggling with Alexander
on a number of issues. He notes that Ibn Sina had leaned toward
Aristotle’s view of the soul, as narrated by Alexander ‘the
Roman’ (al-rumi), that those souls that have stayed at the level
of potential intellect cannot attain immortality after death. In one
instance, Sadra attributes the same view to Alexander himself.81
But he hastens to add that Ibn Sina rejected this view in his other
‘books and compilations.’82
The most notable and probably the only exception to the rule
of treating Alexander as the commentator for the Muslim
Neoplatonists is the commentator for the Latins, i.e., Ibn Rushd.
Ibn Rushd has no qualms about accusing almost all of the later
commentators of Aristotle including al-Farabi and Ibn Sina of
being ‘Alexandrist’ because of their distortion of the true spirit
of Aristotle’s philosophy.83 For him, the Alexandrian interpretation
of Aristotle, especially on the question of the active intellect and
its relation to individual souls, is grounded in a spurious
mysticism unwarranted by Aristotle’s texts.84 There are many
other issues in Peripatetic logic, physics and cosmology over
which Ibn Rushd remonstrates with Alexander and his Muslim
‘students.’ One such issue is the way Alexander interprets the
Milky Way.85 Compared to the celebrated question of an
individual soul’s relation to the active intellect, however, this is
still a minor issue. Ibn Rushd seems to suggest that Alexander
mysticus was the primary source of Aristoteles mysticus.86 That
this is no small matter is clear from the fact that Ibn Rushd
wishes to go back to the pre-Alexandrian Aristotle and certainly

--- Sayfa 45 ---
22
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
to the time before the Neoplatonists forced Aristotle to become
his teacher’s loyal student again. One could very well argue that
it was not so much a specific view of Ibn Rushd as his overall
concern to ‘bypass’ the Neoplatonist turn, to the extent such a
thing was possible for any philosopher during the Middle Ages,
that made him such a forgotten figure in the subsequent
development of Islamic philosophy in the eastern lands of Islam.
Sadra appears to have no taste for any kind of rationalism pure
and simple, and this explains, in part, why the Sadrean corpus
contains virtually no references to Ibn Rushd.
Coming back to Alexander, his contribution to the development
of Peripatetic noetics has been decisive, to say the least. We
cannot venture into the history of this epochal event here as this
would be an entirely different enterprise. As far as Sadra’s
reliance on Alexander is concerned, this much can be asserted:
Alexander presents an interpretation of Aristotle that can easily
be reconciled with the Neoplatonist turn mentioned above. In a
sense, Alexander is the gateway to the only Aristotle the Muslim
philosophers knew or wanted to know: Aristoteles Arabus.87 A
significant phase in this process is the way Alexander turns the
active or ‘productive’ intellect into a depository of all
intelligibilia. In his own De Anima, Alexander makes full use of
the light analogy used by Aristotle, and ascribes to the active
intellect the onto-epistemic role of bringing the potential human
intellect into full actuality and completion:
In all things, that which is especially and supereminently what it is
is the cause for other things of being such as they are. That which
is especially visible, such as light, is the cause for other things of
their being visible and that which is especially and primarily good
is the cause for other things of their being good. Other things are
judged good by their contribution to this. That which is especially
and by its own nature object of thought is, it is reasonable to
maintain, the cause of the intellection of other objects of thought.
Such an entity would be the productive [i.e., the active] intellect.
De Anima 88.26–89.688

--- Sayfa 46 ---
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
23
Ibn Sina translates Alexander’s somewhat verbose language into
a clearer statement about the causal agency of the active
intellect:
We say that the human soul may be intellecting (‘aqilah) in potentia.
Then it becomes intellecting in actus. Everything that emerges from
the state of potentiality to actuality does so by virtue of a cause that
is already actual. Here we have a cause that brings our souls vis-à-
vis the intelligibilia from potentiality to actuality. It is the cause that
bestows intellective forms and it can be only an intellect in actus
that has the principles of intellective forms in a disembodied
manner. Its relation to our souls is like the relation of the sun to our
vision: just as the sun is visible in actus and by its own nature and
through its light renders things visible that are not visible in actus,
so is the relation of this intellect to our souls. Thus when the
intellective power dawns upon the particulars that are in the faculty
of imagination and the light of the active intellect in us which we
have already mentioned shines upon them, they become disembodied
from matter and their [material] relations. al-Najat, pp. 234–23589
The light analogy, already known to Peripatetics from
Aristotle’s De Anima in a rather cryptic manner, is now used
in full force by Alexander and his followers to demonstrate,
inter alia, that the proper locus of the intelligibilia is the active
intellect as a separate substance. This is something new and
not easily traceable to Aristotle’s text. Alexander’s unorthodox
novelty lies in his ingenious combination of the two types of
intellect introduced in Aristotle’s Metaphysics 12 and De
Anima 3.5.90 This identification leads Alexander to cast the
active intellect as the First Cause (proton aition) and eventually
identify it with God or the Divine Intellect—a conclusion which
the Muslim philosophers have consistently resisted for obvious
theological reasons.91 The two types of the intellect, i.e.,
intellect as an agent of permanent actuality and intellect as part
of the human soul correspond to two types of intelligibles:
Plato’s transcendent Forms and Aristotle’s immanent forms-in-
matter or simply nous as dunamis and nous as ousia.92 What

--- Sayfa 47 ---
24
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
Aristotle’s Greek commentators and his Muslim followers have
done with these two types of intelligibles is a watershed event in
the history of philosophy. Instead of reading Aristotle’s forms-
in-matter as replacing Platonic Forms, they treated them as two
separate kinds of forms or ideas.93 Plato’s eidos thus comes back
from the backdoor, and this is a most rewarding development for
the Muslim Neoplatonists because a noetics that is not revised
along some transcendent-Platonic lines would have landed them
in a materialistic theory of the soul. Needless to say, Alexander
plays a crucial role in this process. It is this creative synthesis,
or distortion depending on how you look at it, that makes the
active intellect the meeting point of noetics and theology. This,
in turn, paves the way for a neat formulation of the so-called
psychological and cosmological intellects of Neoplatonism as
emerging from one single philosophical outlook.
Alexander’s role does not end here. He goes on to present a
further formulation of the unification idea and couches his
argument in a language that gives support not just to conjunction
(ittisal) of some sorts but to unification (ittihad) proper. The
simplest way of putting this is to say, as Alexander does, that
‘intellect in act knows itself, because it becomes what it knows;
and the objects it knows are forms independent of matter.’94 This
leads to the conclusion that ‘any intellect that knows these pure
forms [disembodied intelligibles] becomes identical with them
in the moment of its knowing them.’95 If by form we understand
nothing more than Aristotle’s forms-in-matter in a minimalist
way, then the kind of unity Alexander formulates here would not
take us to Sadra’s definition of unification. It would be only a
case of perceptual abstraction. The moment we define perception
of forms-in-matter as having a special proximity to the active
intellect as the storehouse of the intelligibilia, however, we begin
to walk on a new terrain. When the intellect in act perceives the
active intellect through ‘intellective vision,’ it becomes ‘identical’
with it: ‘At the moment when [our] intellect comprehends this
supreme [i.e., the active] intellect in its act of intellective
vision—when, I mean, it is actually knowing it—it becomes in

--- Sayfa 48 ---
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
25
some way that supreme intellect. This is because knowing
consists in a likeness to the form known [which the cognitive
faculty assumes] in its act of apprehending that form.’96
Alexander thus argues for an essential unity between nous, noein
and noeton known in Latin as the unity of intellectus, intellectere
and intelligibile. Interestingly enough, he repeats the same
argument for sensation twice and constructs a similar pattern of
unity between aisthesis, aisthanestai and aistheton translated
into Latin as the unity of sensus, sentire and sensible.97 This is
exactly the same vocabulary as the Arabic ‘aql, ‘aqil and ma‘qul
on the one hand, and hiss, hass, and mahsus, on the other.
It is important to stress that in all of these processes of
knowing, the active intellect remains ‘separate’ (mufariq) and
outside the soul.98 The Muslim Neoplatonists including our own
Sadra accepted this interpretation of the active intellect without
reservations notwithstanding the fact that Aristotle’s other
readers such as Themistius and St. Thomas Aquinas continued
to hold that the active intellect is part of the soul and not a
separate substance.99 At any rate, the reworking of the notion of
the active intellect along the foregoing lines brought Aristotle’s
legacy closer to Plato, paving way for Plotinus. In some curious
ways, the Alexandrian interpretation of the unification argument
became a subtext of Plotinus’ celebrated doctrine that ‘the
intellectual beings are not outside the Intellectual-Principle.’ Our
next stop is thus Plotinus because of his rigorous reformulation
of the unification argument as well as his deep influence, a lá
Theology of Aristotle, on Sadra.
d. Plotinus Islamicus and the Unification Argument
Plotinus (205–270) was virtually unknown in the Islamic world.
His name, which could have been something like Aflutin,
Aflutinus or Flutinus, rarely appears in the Arabic sources, one
of the known exceptions being Ibn al-Nadim’s al-Fihrist. The
occasional references to ‘the Greek Master’ (al-shaykh al-
yunani) in such classical sources of intellectual history as Abu

--- Sayfa 49 ---
26
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
Sulayman al-Sijistani’s Siwan al-hikmah, Shahrastani’s al-Milal
wa’l-nihal and Miskawayh’s Jawidan khirad have been identified
with some certainty as references to Plotinus.100 In spite of his
decisive role in the emergence of a Neoplatonizing Aristotle in
the Islamic world, however, Plotinus has enjoyed the ‘power of
anonymity’ more than any other major philosopher throughout
the Middle Ages.101 We owe this rather curious situation to a
‘creative mistake’102 that occurred when ‘Abd al-Masih ibn ‘Abd
Allah ibn Na‘imah al-Himsi103 translated parts of Plotinus’
Enneads into Arabic as Kitab uthulujya aristutalis (The Theology
of Aristotle) with extraneous material culled from Proclus’
Elements of Theology and probably some other sources.104 We
also know that al-Kindi improved upon Himsi’s translation.105
The attribution of this work and the Kalam fi mahd al-khayr,
known in Latin as Liber de Causis,106 to Aristotle appears to be
a crucial step in the creation of the Aristoteles Arabus. The
numerous references to Aristotle in the works of Muslim
philosophers including those of Mulla Sadra are as much
references to Aristotle as they are to Plotinus.107 By the same
token, the term al-shaykh al-yunani is no less a reference to
Plotinus himself than the Uthulujya is to the Enneads.
What is important for our purposes, however, is that both the
Enneads itself and the Enneads known to Muslims as Uthulujya
contain a rigorous defense of the unification argument. Since any
full-scale analysis of Plotinian metaphysics is beyond the limits
of the present work, the following remarks will be limited to the
role Plotinus Islamicus of the Uthulujya has played in Sadra’s
construction of knowledge as a unity between intellect and its
objects of cognition. The principal passages Sadra quotes from
the Uthulujya in both the Asfar and the Treatise on the
Unification contain a fairly complete presentation of Plotinus’
views on the One, the intellect and the intelligible world. There
are, however, two major divergences to be noted. The first is the
absence of the Plotinian scheme of emanation in Sadra. Sadra
spends an enormous amount of time on the temporal origination
of the world (huduth al-‘alam), and his own formulations leave

--- Sayfa 50 ---
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
27
virtually no room for emanation.108 This is also in tandem with
the gradual disappearance of Plotinian emanationism in post-
Avicennan Islamic philosophy. The second important point of
divergence is how Plotinus’ notion of the Divine Intellect as
composite is redressed to avoid a serious theological problem.
The first important premise the Uthulujya establishes for
Sadra is what we might call the ‘principle of simplicity.’ Plotinus
held that an absolutely simple being or principle is necessary for
the world to be what it is, viz., an organized, intelligible, unified,
and integral structure. For a Platonist like Plotinus (and Sadra),
it was impossible to conceive the world in any other terms, the
opposite of which would lead to chaos and disorder.109 This
simple being called the ‘pure one’ (al-wahid al-mahd), which
corresponds to Plotinus’ One, generates things by intellecting
them and sustains them in existence and orderliness by
‘expanding’ (mabsut) into them. Even in terms of these two
functions alone, the importance of absolute simplicity cannot be
overemphasized: simplicity is what keeps together the composites
which make up the world of sensible beings.110 Without such an
absolute simplicity, there would be no order, no intelligibility,
hence no being. The passage Sadra quotes from the Uthulujya
reads as follows:
The pure one is the cause of all things but not a single one of
them. It is the beginning [i.e., principle] of things, not all things.
Rather, all things are in it whereas it is not in any thing.111 Thus
it is such that all things gush forth from it; their permanence and
subsistence are with it; their return is to it. Someone may say: how
can things derive from the expanding one in which there is no
duality and multiplicity from a certain point of view? We say:
because it is a pure expanding one, none of the things is in it.
Since it is a pure one, all things gush forth from it. Thus it itself
has not become an ipseity (huwiyyah)112 but the ipseity has issued
forth from it.

I say that I shorten the [discussion of the] discourse about the
fact that it is not one of the things, [because] I have seen all things
[coming] from it. Even though things have gushed forth from it,

--- Sayfa 51 ---
28
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
the first ipseity, by which I mean the ipseity of the intellect, has
gushed forth from it without an intermediary. Then have gushed
forth from it all of the ipseities of things in the higher as well as
lower world through the medium of the ipseity of the intellect and
the intelligible world.

Thus I say that the pure one is above completion (tamam) and
perfection (kamal). As for the sensible world, it is imperfect
because it is generated from a complete thing, which is the
intellect. The intellect is complete and perfect because it has
generated from the true pure one, which is above completion. A
thing that is above completion cannot be a deficient thing without
an intermediary. Nor is it possible for a complete thing to generate
its own like completely because generation (ibda‘) signifies
deficiency. What I mean by this is that that which is generated
cannot be at the same level as that which generates. It can only be
below it. Asfar, III, 2, pp. 272–273; Enneads, V.2.1 with
variations.
What this quote in its Arabic adaptation does is another fine
example of hermeneutic adjustment that we see quite often in
traditional philosophy. The text does not simply translate into
Arabic whatever Greek material was available to the ‘adaptor’
al-Himsi. Rather, it glosses over and eventually bypasses a major
theological challenge that arises from Plotinus’ description of the
Divine Intellect as a composite being. We should remember that
Plotinus had made a distinction between the One or Good and
the Divine Intellect. While attributing the terms of absolute
simplicity to the One, he had introduced a duality or rather
multiplicity in the Divine Intellect. Even though there is a unity
of noesis, noeton, and nous in the Divine, this is still not the
same kind of pure and absolute simplicity that belongs to the
One. The Divine Intellect still thinks in terms of multiplicities
because thinking is thinking of something and entails some sort
of ‘otherness.’ Thinking is going out toward something.
Whether directed at the self or the world outside the self,
thinking implies duality and multiplicity.113 In Plotinus’ terms,
‘this Intellect needs to see itself, or rather to possess the seeing

--- Sayfa 52 ---
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
29
of itself…for the existence of something else is a necessary
condition of seeing, and if there is nothing else, seeing is
useless.’114 This is predicated upon the idea that thinking implies
some kind of a desire and thus deficiency: ‘Knowledge is a kind
of longing for the absent, and like the discovery made by a
seeker. But that which is absolutely different remains itself by
itself, and seeks nothing about itself; but that which explicates
itself must be many.’115
In this sense, the Plotinian One or Good remains beyond being
and thus ineffable,116 because being implies something qualified
by form or essence,117 whereas the intellect, whether Divine or
human, is bound to be multiple. This absolutely unconditional
and ineffable nature of the One is the basis of Plotinus’ via
negativa: the One is always beyond what we can say of it. The
basic question that one can ask about all negative theologies thus
holds true for Plotinus as well: how can a principle so central to
reality be something about which we cannot say anything? While
this is a major issue for both Plotinus and his theistic followers
in the Islamic and Christian worlds, he makes every effort to
assert the One not as a negation but as ‘something supremely
positive’118 so much so that it gives things their essence and
existence, keeps them as they are but never becomes completely
exhausted by them. This problem would continue to resonate in
Islamic philosophy centuries later as Muslim thinkers, like their
Jewish and Christian counterparts, sought to secure the Divine
essence to be beyond the limitations of existence or language.
At any rate, the theological challenge that this line of thinking
poses for any theistic philosopher is obvious enough because to
conceive multiplicity in the Divine Intellect is to jeopardize the
absolute unity of the Divine itself. This challenge, however, does
not seem to arise for the reader of the Uthulujya because the
Divine Intellect is constructed as an aspect of the One, which is
now transformed into God.119 For Sadra, the self-imposed
multiplicity of the Divine, which comes about through the
degrees of manifestation, does not taint the absolute purity,
oneness, and simplicity of the One God.

--- Sayfa 53 ---
30
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
In spite of this seemingly ‘minor’ theological problem, the
above passage asserts the independent existence of the intelligible
world, and this is an important step toward the unification
argument for it is eventually this world, rather than the active or
the Divine intellect, with which the intellect is supposed to be
united. This is borne out by the fact that Sadra quotes one more
long passage from the Uthulujya under a section of the Asfar
subtitled ‘Concerning the View of the Ancients that the Soul
Intellects Through its Unification with the Active Intellect.’ This
theme, already known to us from the other Neoplatonists,
underscores Sadra’s defense of the unification argument in ways
that are more important than the Aristotelian-Alexandrian
affirmation of the unity of the individual intellect with the active
intellect. Sadra never admits any tension between unification
with the world of Forms on the one hand, and unification with
the active intellect on the other. Even in places where his
considerations appear to allow some difference between the two,
they never give us any clear idea as to how Sadra continues to
uphold both views without making some major adjustments. One
point implicit in Sadra’s defense of the unification argument,
however, is the collapse of the Peripatetic active intellect into
the Platonic world of intelligible substances. Yet again, Sadra
never explains how he resolves this tension.
Coming back to the Uthulujya and what Sadra makes of it,
the long passage that he quotes and which is worth translating
in its entirety reads as follows:
The higher world is the perfect living [reality] in which everything
is contained because it has originated from the first perfect source.
In it is to be found every soul and every intellect, and there is
absolutely no indigence and need here since things therein are filled
with richness and life as if it is life that exceeds and gushes forth.
The life of these things issues forth from one single source, not just
from one single heat (warmth)120 or one single wind (smell). Rather,
all of them are one single quality in which is to be found every
taste.

--- Sayfa 54 ---
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
31
The difference between life and the intellects here is due to the
difference of the changes of life and the intellect. That is how
different animals [or life forms]121 and different intellects have come
about except for the fact that some of them are more luminous and
perfect than others. Some intellects are therefore closer to the first
intellect for which reason they have become more intense in
luminosity, and some of them are second and third in rank. Some
intellects that are found here have become divine, some rational
(natiqah), and some non-rational because of their aloofness from
these exalted intellects. As for here [i.e., this level], all of them have
intellect. That is why the horse has become an intellect, and the
intellect of the horse is a horse. It is impossible for that which
intellects the horse to be an intellector for man since this is not
possible in the primary intellects. Therefore when the first intellect
intellects something, it and what it intellects are one and the same
thing. The first intellect does not intellect something that does not
have an intellect [i.e., something that is unintelligible] but intellects
it as a species of intellect and as a species of life. Therefore the
particular life is not the nonexistence of [i.e., does not cease to be]
life in a certain way. In the same way, the particular intellect is not
the nonexistence of [i.e., does not cease to be] intellect in a certain
mode.
 If this is the case, then the intellect that we find in some living
beings is not the nonexistence of the first intellect. Every single part
of the intellect is all of that with which the intellect can be divided.
Therefore the intellect of something, which is an intellect for that
very thing, is all things in potentiality. When it becomes actualized,
it becomes specific and then actualized. And when it becomes
actualized in the last stage, it becomes a horse or another animal.
Whenever life journeys into the lowest level, it becomes a living
thing in the lowest and basest level. That is why whenever animal
faculties reach lower levels, they become weak and some of their
acts disappear, from which a meek and weak animal emerges. When
it becomes further weak, the intellect existing in it deceits it, and
the strong faculties become a substitute for its power just as some
animals have nails and claws, and some have horns and some have
fangs according to the degree of lack of power in them. Asfar, I, 3,
pp. 340–341; Uthulujya, pp. 150–151 with minor variations;
Enneads, 6, VII, 9 with significant variations.122

--- Sayfa 55 ---
32
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY

Commenting on the above passages, Sadra says that they
‘clearly contain the investigation and illumination of all the
points we argued for and established in this section except for
the fact that some of his words [i.e., arguments] need explanation
resulting from the ignorance of those who consider it [i.e., his
view] and from the lack of their ability to grasp it.’123 Among the
points which Sadra mentions and which is of interest to us is the
generation of the intelligible world or the world of Forms as a
separate realm of existence. As Sadra’s extensive discussion of
the Platonic Forms (al-muthul al-aflatuniyyah) shows, he follows
the main outlines of the Uthulujya in securing the independent
existence of the world of transcendent Forms. For Plotinus, the
ideas (eide) represent the reality of things and establish them in
concrete existence: ‘It is clear that, being Intellect, it really thinks
the real beings and establishes them in existence. It is, then, the
real beings.’124 In asserting that the intellect is the real beings,
Plotinus is apparently trying to avoid an old problem in Platonic
theology, i.e., whether the Forms are the thoughts of the Divine
Intellect or not. This is an issue we cannot go into here.125 It is,
however, clear that Plotinus’ ‘ideas’ or intelligibles are not mere
concepts. As Plotinus puts it, the intelligibles ‘are certainly not
“premises” or “axioms” or “expressions.”’126 Rather, the
intelligibles as ‘thought’ by the Intellect are real beings. In the
world of the Forms, every intellect is a being and every being is
an intellect.127 After quoting another long passage from the
Uthulujya about the relationship between the intelligible and
sensible worlds, Sadra concludes that ‘every cosmological being
has a luminous and intelligible form in the world of the
intelligibilia which man can attain only when he perceives the
intelligibles as universals. If his perception of them is through
the body, opaqueness, and darkness, then his perception would
be deficient.’128 The establishment of the intellect and intelligible
forms as real beings thus underlies the unity of existence and
knowledge in Sadra’s thought.
The last point I shall consider here briefly pertains to the way
in which the unification argument is set up by its defenders to

--- Sayfa 56 ---
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
33
combat the representational theory of knowledge as a rival view
in classical epistemology. If Plotinus’ premise that the intellect
thinks real beings is warranted, then these beings or forms cannot
be impressions or representations of something outside the
intellect. There must be a unification of some sort between the
intellect and what it thinks insofar as its self-intellection is
concerned otherwise we will have to admit that the intellect
receives its objects of intellection from outside. In Plotinus’
words, ‘…if there must be a ‘maker of this All,’ he will not think
what is in the not yet existent universe in order to make it. The
objects of his thought must exist before the universe, not
impressions from other things but archetypes and primary and
the substance of Intellect…Intellect therefore really thinks the
real beings, not as if they were somewhere else: for they are
neither before it nor after it.’129
It seems clear that in articulating this view, Plotinus was
arguing against a representational or ‘impressional’ theory of
knowledge whereby intellection is made contingent upon the
pre-existence of things from which the intellect abstracts
intelligible forms ex post facto. As we shall see when we analyze
Sadra’s relentless critique of knowledge as representation or
‘picturing’ (al-‘ilm al-irtisami), which he attributes to the
Muslim Peripatetics, he makes profuse use of this argument.
While allowing knowledge as representation for the type of
knowledge that requires a clear demarcation between subject and
object, he dismisses it as totally inappropriate for self-knowledge
on the one hand, and God’s knowledge of things, on the other.
As we shall see later, Sadra comes back to these two types of
knowledge over and over again to show the inadequacy of any
concept of knowledge that is not based on knowledge-by-
presence (al-‘ilm al-huduri).130
As far as God’s knowledge of things is concerned, a major
point of convergence between Plotinus and Sadra is their shared
notion that Divine intellection implies ontological production. If
God’s knowledge of things precedes the existence of actual
beings, then the impressionist model cannot apply to Him. Here

--- Sayfa 57 ---
34
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
the idea of unification takes on a heavily theological significance.
A similar position is developed vis-à-vis self-knowledge: true
knowledge of the self is one in which there is no epistemic
distance between knower and known. Intermediacy in self-
knowledge implies deficiency and absence of presence and
certainty. If we are to have true knowledge, which always comes
back to self-knowledge, we have to investigate the conditions of
unification in knowing ourselves and things outside us.131
To see how Sadra develops these arguments and the extent to
which he succeeds or fails in this, however, we will have to wait
until we have completed our survey of Sadra’s sources of the
unification argument in the Islamic philosophical tradition.
1.2. ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
The Muslim Peripatetics took a somewhat ambivalent position
toward the idea of unification. Al-Farabi and Ibn Sina endorsed
it when applied to God’s knowledge of things. But they strongly
denied it if it meant identification between the individual human
intellect and the active intellect on the one hand, and the
intelligible world, on the other. There are, however, important
variations. Al-Farabi, for instance, asserts the unity of the
intellect, the intellector, and the intelligible in the case of God
more forcefully than Ibn Sina on the ground that the Divine
cannot admit multiplicity. While vehemently denying unification
between any two things, Ibn Sina leans toward accepting it in
both the Najat and his later work al-Mabda’ wa’l-ma‘ad. Mulla
Sadra draws attention to this ‘contradiction’ in Ibn Sina.132 But
as I shall discuss later, this may not necessarily be a contradiction.
Ibn Rushd joins Ibn Sina in denying the unification of the
intellect with the intelligible with his usual precision on the
grounds that this is a clear deviation from the true spirit of
Peripatetic philosophy. This part of our story, however, begins
with al-Kindi for two reasons. First of all, al-Kindi was the first
philosopher to produce a major work on the intellect in the

--- Sayfa 58 ---
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
35
Islamic philosophical tradition. Secondly, he was acutely aware
of the far reaching implications of accepting or denying
unification.
a. Al-Kindi: The Beginning of the Problem in the

Islamic Milieu
In the Asfar, Sadra mentions al-Kindi only three times and never
cites him among the defenders of the unification argument. The
only place where he quotes from al-Kindi is when he talks about
God’s knowledge of the particulars. This leaves a lot of room
for speculation as to why Sadra gives such a small place to al-
Kindi in his discussions of the intellect. Putting aside the quote
that appears twice in the Asfar,133 it is not clear if Sadra was
aware of al-Kindi’s main works on the intellect. At any rate, al-
Kindi has left us a short and condensed treatise called Fi’l-‘aql
(‘On the Intellect’). The treatise is one of the foundational texts
of Peripatetic noetics and was widely used by the posterity. In
On the Intellect, al-Kindi elaborates on the Aristotelian idea that
the soul as a cognitive capacity unites with the First Intellect
(al-‘aql al-awwal), and becomes an actual intellect, i.e., the in
actu cognitive faculty that knows. The First Intellect represents
full actuality and perfection, and brings the potential intellect
into actuality. When the soul unites with the intellective form
(al-surat al-‘aqliyyah) through the medium of the First Intellect,
it becomes identical with the intelligible form. In other words,
when the soul appropriates the intelligible form of a tree, no
epistemic distance is left between its cognitive act and the
intelligible reality of the tree. In this sense, the soul as the
intellect in actuality is both the intellect and what is intellected
(ma‘qulah). As al-Kindi puts it,
When the intellective form is united with it [the soul], the soul and
the intellective form do not become two separate things because the
soul is not divisible and thus does not allow difference [between
itself and what it perceives]. When the intellective form unites with
the soul, the soul and the intellect become one and the same thing.

--- Sayfa 59 ---
36
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
It is thus both the intellector (‘aqil) and the intellected (ma‘qul).
Therefore, the intellect and the intellected are one and the same from
the point of view of the soul. al-Kindi, Fi’l-‘aql in J. Jolivet,
L’Intellect, p. 159134
This can easily be regarded as a straightforward endorsement of
the unification argument. The last provision inserted at the end
of the quote, however, prevents any such hasty conclusions
because al-Kindi takes great care in defining his terms of
unification. Insofar as the knowing soul is concerned, there is a
relation of isomorphism between the intellect and the intelligible.
In this minimal sense, the intellect is at once an intellecting
subject and an intellected (i.e., intelligible) substance. But the
First Intellect, which al-Kindi takes to be the totality of
intelligibilia,135 does not allow such a unity since it would imply
the unity of a single soul with the whole range of the intelligible
world, and land us in the notorious problem of monopsychism
that there is only one nous or intellect (unitas intellectus), which
all of the medieval philosophers were eager to reject.136 From
the standpoint of the First Intellect, the actual intelligible in the
soul and the First Intellect are not identical in that the soul as
the knowing subject does not become one with the First
Intellect:
As for the intellect which is always actual and which renders the
soul an actual intellect after its being a potential intellect, it and its
intellector (‘aqiluhu) are not identical. Therefore the intelligible in
the soul and the First Intellect are not one and the same from the
point of view of the First Intellect. But from the point of view of
the soul, the intellect and the intelligible are identical. al-Kindi,
Fi’l-‘aql in J. Jolivet, L’Intellect, p. 159137
We may presume that the distinction introduced by the clause
‘from the point of view of the First Intellect’ is intended to pre-
empt any identification between the individual soul and the First
Intellect. But then how do we explain the precise relationship
between the two? If the First Intellect, as al-Kindi appears to

--- Sayfa 60 ---
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
37
take it to be, is the depository of all intelligibilia and the intellect
knows intelligible forms by becoming identical with them
through the agency of the First Intellect, then a partial, if not
complete, unification between the soul and the First Intellect is
to be admitted. But it is precisely this conclusion that al-Kindi
seeks to avoid otherwise, as Ibn Sina and Ibn Rushd would later
insist, we would have to admit the unification (ittihad) as
opposed to conjunction (ittisal) of the human soul with the active
intellect and the intelligible realm all at once. But then this
would bring us back to the problem of monopsychism. We find
no easy solution to this problem in al-Kindi. Neither does he
pursue the issue any further. To see a much more elaborate
discussion of the problem, we will have to wait until al-Farabi.
Al-Kindi’s distinction between the intellect and the intelligible
vis-à-vis the First (later, active) Intellect, however, heralds the
beginnings of a chequered problem in Islamic philosophy: how
does the individual human soul know things through its
conjunction with the active intellect? Although both al-Farabi
and Ibn Sina insist on the active intellect as the primary agent
of knowledge, they disallow any unification between it and
individual human souls. With al-Farabi, the intellect takes on an
ontological and cosmological significance in that it functions as
a causal agent between the individual soul and the cosmos. This
makes both ontology and cosmology part and parcel of Farabian
epistemology. Al-Farabi restates Aristotelian noetics within the
framework of Plotinian emanationism, and assigns to the intellect
the cosmological function of connecting the transcendent to the
corporeal.
b. Al-Farabi: Problem Restated
There are two principal texts in the Farabian corpus that contain
an elaborate discussion of the intellect. They are Mabadi’ ara
ahl al-madinat al-fadilah (‘Principles of the Views of the People
of the Virtuous City’), cited hereafter as al-Madinah, and Risalah
fi’l-‘aql (‘Epistle on the Intellect’). Both texts are extremely

--- Sayfa 61 ---
38
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
important and complement each other.138 While al-Madinah
places the intellect within the context of al-Farabi’s cosmology
and ontology, the Risalah fi’l-‘aql focuses on the intellect in
relation to noetics and psychology. And they both contain
important references to the unification argument. Unlike Ibn Sina
who was adamant to keep the word ittihad out of his discussions
of the active intellect, al-Farabi uses the word muttahid several
times and attributes to Aristotle a loosely defined notion of
partial identification between the human soul and the active
intellect.139 He even says that this idea ‘has been referred to in
the De Anima,’140 While it is not at all clear which De Anima
al-Farabi is referring to here, it is presumably to that of Aristotle.
But neither Aristotle’s nor Alexander’s De Anima ever use the
term conjunction or unification.141 This appears to be a case
where al-Farabi is reading a clearly Neoplatonic terminology
into Aristotle, and in all likelihood the Uthulujya, which we
know for sure he made use of, was among his sources for this
particular reading. All of this is important and admittedly
puzzling because al-Farabi eventually rejects the unification
argument while adopting its vocabulary.
Al-Farabi’s theory of the intellect is predicated upon a
principle accepted almost unanimously by Muslim philosophers:
knowing is not only a noetic but also a cosmological process.
Following Aristotle’s extremely short and ambiguous remarks
about the ‘intellect from without,’ al-Farabi posits the active
intellect as the penultimate agent of all conceptual knowledge.
Every potentiality, he reasons, needs an active agent to realize
it. Since the active intellect is always fully actualized because it
never ceases to have cognitive content, the active intellect itself
is the necessary, if not sufficient, condition for the actualization
of the potential intellect. Consequently, all conceptual knowledge
is reducible to the agency of the active intellect. In the context
of Islamic philosophy, this assertion is not without religious
ramifications: the active intellect, when translated into the
language of theology, would correspond to Archangel Gabriel,
the angel of revelation, whom al-Farabi denotes by using two

--- Sayfa 62 ---
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
39
other names taken from the Qur’an, viz., al-ruh al-amin (‘the
Trusted Spirit’) and ruh al-quds (‘the Sacred Spirit’).142
Having established the active intellect as the penultimate
agent and content of knowledge, al-Farabi redefines Peripatetic
noetics within the framework of Plotinian cosmology and
identifies the active intellect as the tenth intellect. According to
the emanationist model,143 which al-Farabi adopts from the
Uthulujya, the Divine Intellect thinks Its own essence out of Its
abundance in infinitude and perfection. The world of manifestation
overflows (fayd) from the Divine Being by a ‘necessity of nature’
for it is in the nature of the Divine not to be jealous and give of
itself. For al-Farabi, this Neoplatonic ‘necessitarianism’144 proves
the utter richness and independence of the First to which the
existence or non-existence of the universe adds nothing.145 Out
of the self-intellection of the Divine, the first intellect is
generated, which is now capable of conceiving both itself and
its creator. The two-fold ability of the first intellect to conceive
itself and its origin leads to the generation of the second intellect
on the one hand, and to the generation of the outermost sphere,
on the other. The second intellect, by intellecting its author, i.e.,
the First Being, generates the third intellect, and by intellecting
itself, the sphere of the fixed stars. This process continues in
successive stages until the ten intellects and the corresponding
spheres of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, the Sun, Venus, Mercury, and
the moon are created.146
In this familiar framework of emanation, the tenth intellect
functions as the cosmological link between the celestial spheres
that correspond to the world of the intelligibilia, and the sublunar
world that corresponds to the corporeal world. al-Farabi states,
on the authority of Alexander the Commentator, that ‘it appears
to follow from Aristotle’s view that the active intellect not only
governs man, but that it also governs the natural bodies below
the sphere of the moon, with the aid of the heavenly bodies. And
also that it is the heavenly bodies that provide these natural
bodies with motion, while the active intellect provides them with
the forms towards which they move.’147 With the tenth intellect,

--- Sayfa 63 ---
40
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
we step into the essence of Farabian noetics in which intellect
as a disposition of the soul is now linked to the intelligible world
through the medium of the active intellect. As al-Farabi explains
in the Risalah fi’l-‘aql in greater detail, the potential intellect
(al-‘aql bi’l-quwwah), also called the material or hylic intellect
(al-‘aql al-hayulani), becomes actualized when it conceives an
actual intelligible. When the potential intellect perceives the
intelligibilia in actuality, it becomes an actual intellect (al-‘aql
bi’l-fi‘l), now able to ‘abstract’ intelligible forms.
It is important to note that the intelligible forms, when
disembodied by the actual intellect, obtain a higher mode of
existence and become disembodied substances (al-jawahir al-
mujarradah). When they exist as actual intelligibles in the
intellect, they gain a mode of existence proper to the disembodied
world of the intellect. Once this level of disembodiment is
reached, the actual intellect rises to even a higher level of
intellection, which al-Farabi calls the ‘acquired intellect’ (al-‘aql
al-mustafad).148 The difference between the actual and the
acquired intellects is that whereas the former thinks substances
that have some attachment to matter, the latter can perceive
intelligible forms that have absolutely no connection with
matter.149 The acquired intellect is the final stage of human
intellection and paves way for conjunction with the active
intellect. When the acquired intellect conjoins with the active
intellect, it partakes of the intelligible world in a more substantial
way and becomes ‘united (muttahidah) with the active intellect
in a certain way (‘ala’l-wajh).’150 This is the ultimate goal of all
cognition and the highest degree of human perfection and
happiness, which al-Farabi describes as the point at which the
Prophet reaches revelation from Archangel Gabriel.151 This is
also what secures the immortality of one’s personal soul. The
souls that have not reached this level run the risk of not enjoying
immortality.152
In al-Madinah, al-Farabi summarizes these points as
follows:

--- Sayfa 64 ---
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
41
Since the First is not matter and has no matter in any way
whatsoever, it is an intellect in actuality in its substance; for what
prevents the form from being an intellect and from intellection in
actuality is the matter in which a thing exists. When a thing in its
wujud does not need matter, it becomes, in its substance, an intellect
in actuality; and this is the case with the First. It is, then, an intellect
in actuality (‘aql bi’l-fi‘l) and an intelligible (ma‘qul) through its
substance because what prevents something from becoming an
intelligible in actuality (bi’l-fi‘l ma‘qulan) and an intelligible in its
substance is matter (maddah). It is thus intelligible from the point
of view of its being an intellect; for the One whose ipseity is
intellect is intellected by the One whose identity is intellect. And,
in order to become an actual intelligible, it does not need another
essence outside itself, which would intellect it, but, in fact, it by
itself intellects its own essence. It becomes an intellector (‘aqilan)
and an intellect in actuality by intellecting its own essence, and an
intelligible in actuality by virtue of its essence intellecting. al-
Farabi, al-Madinah, p. 70
The framework that al-Farabi adopts to account for his version
of the unification argument is unmistakably both Aristotelian and
Neoplatonic in that it is based on the idea that whatever is
disembodied from matter is capable of abstraction and thus
intellection. In this view, the more removed a thing is from the
confines of material existence, the closer it is to self-intellection.
The sensibles are imperfect imitations of intelligibles because
they are, unlike the universals, subject to change and corruption.
Sense-perception changes according to the individual, climatic
conditions, the position of what is sensed, and so on. By contrast,
the intelligible substances including concepts and judgments go
by the principle of constancy and universality. They gain
universal validity and application to the degree to which they are
disembodied from matter and corporeality. That is why, from an
epistemological point of view, the Platonic Ideas or Forms are
cognitively more reliable than sensible objects.153 In fact, al-
Farabi goes so far as to say that we cannot ‘know’ sensible
objects through intellectual perception because the mind can
conceive only the forms that have been disengaged from material

--- Sayfa 65 ---
42
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
objects: ‘As for the occurrence of the form in the intellect, it
happens when the form of a thing exists in the intellect as
singular and unattached with matter…and as disengaged from
all with which it is connected. In short, sensible objects are not
known; sensibles are parables for what can be known.’154
Intellection as immateriality underlies the innate ability of the
self-thinking of disembodied substances. This establishes self-
intellection as the basis of the unity of the intellector and the
intelligible in the case of the First which, due to its pure
immateriality, is in a perpetual state of self-intellection. al-Farabi
makes his case as follows:
By the same token, in its being an intellect in actuality and an
intellector in actuality, it does not need an essence which it would
intellect and acquire from the outside. Rather, it is an intellect and
an intellector by intellecting its own essence. Thus the essence that
is intellected is that which intellects, and it is an intellect from the
point of view of its being an intelligible. Therefore it is intellect,
intelligible, and intellector, all being one single essence and one
indivisible substance. Man, for instance, is intelligible, but what is
intelligible in his case is an intelligible not in actuality but only in
potentiality. He then becomes an intelligible in actuality after the
intellect has intellected him. What is intelligible in the case of man
is not always that which intellects. Nor is the intellect, in his case,
always what is intellected. Our intellect, insofar as it is an intellect,
is not what is intellected. We are intellectors not because our
substance (jawharuna) is an intellect but because what we intellect
through the intellect is not what constitutes our substance. But the
First is not like this; in the case of the First, the intellect, intellector,
and the intellected have one meaning and are one single indivisible
substance. al-Madinah, pp. 70–72155
In the Risalah fi’l-‘aql, al-Farabi identifies six meanings of the
word ‘aql and points to its various uses. The first meaning is
what the ‘majority of people’ (al-jumhur) understand by the
word intellect or reason, viz., someone being rational, logical,
understanding, and so on.156 Al-Farabi links this meaning of
intellect to ‘being good’ and making the right ethical choice

--- Sayfa 66 ---
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
43
between good and evil. In this sense, ‘what the majority mean
by the word intellect is the same as what Aristotle means by al-
ta‘aqqul’, i.e., phronesis, which can be translated as prudence
and thoughtfulness. Accordingly, the rational or intelligent man
(al-muta‘aqqil) is the one who has the ‘right view.’157 Closely
linked to this definition is the second meaning of intellect, which
the Mutakallimun use in their arguments. By and large identical
with common sense, intellect as prudence leads the intelligent or
rational person to make morally right choices or prevents him
from committing evil.
The third meaning of intellect can loosely be described as
natural or innate perception. It refers to the intuitive ability of
the soul to know with certainty the universals and principles of
demonstration without having recourse to rational analysis or
analogy. Here, al-Farabi invokes the Qur’anic term al-fitrah or
primordial nature according to which God has created human
beings. He traces this meaning of intellect to Aristotle’s Posterior
Analytics (Kitab al-burhan) and states that these intuitive and
non-discursive principles are the foundations of all theoretical
sciences.158 Intellect as innate and intuitive perception is further
developed into a full faculty of moral and rational choice. This
is the fourth meaning of the word al-‘aql, which al-Farabi traces
back to Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics (Kitab al-akhlaq). This
intellect is a part of the soul (al-nafs) and fully articulated into
an actual faculty when the universal principles of intellectual-
moral prudence are combined with long experience.159
The fifth meaning of intellect is without doubt the most
important and most comprehensive of all the six. Al-Farabi
divides this intellect into four categories as potential (al-‘aql
bi’l-quwwah), actual (al-‘aql bi’l-fi‘l), acquired (al-‘aql al-
mustafad), and active intellect (al-‘aql al-fa‘‘al). Athough al-
Farabi’s treatment of the four intellects does not differ in any
essential way from that of al-Kindi, it presents a more articulate
and detailed analysis. Al-Farabi’s masterly analysis of the four
meanings of the so-called psychological intellects as opposed
to the ‘cosmological intellects’ has had such an enduring impact

--- Sayfa 67 ---
44
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
on Islamic philosophy that Mulla Sadra quotes, almost verbatim,
a good part of the Risalah fi’l-‘aql in the Asfar when discussing
the various meanings of intellect.160
Since Sadra is eager to incorporate al-Farabi’s elaborate
analysis of the intellect into his own noetics and enlist him as a
defender of the unification argument, what al-Farabi has to say
about these four intellects is of particular importance to us. Now,
the idea that the intelligibles are to be disembodied from material
objects implies that sense data as the basis of empirical
knowledge are intrinsically imbued with an intelligibility of
sorts. When these intelligible forms are disembodied from their
material carriers by virtue of an intellect already in full actuality,
the potential intellect becomes an actual intellect. The potential
intellect assumes a higher mode of being proper to the ontological
mode of intelligibles in actuality. We may consider this to be the
first phase in the intellect’s becoming assimilated into the world
of the intelligibilia. Al-Farabi’s ‘acquired intellect’ points to a
higher mode of intellectual exercise where the intellect can
perceive the intelligible forms of things completely free of any
material and sensual attributes: it can form concepts and
judgments without the agency of the senses. This places the
person who has reached the acquired intellect over those who
have not, and this is not without political implications in al-
Farabi.161 In short, human intellection is completed and perfected
by the direct agency of the active intellect.162
An important component of al-Farabi’s concept of the intellect
is the framework of potentiality and actuality. This clearly
Aristotelian notion underlies a good part of the ontological and
epistemological considerations of Muslim philosophers, and
asserts that actuality implies perfection and, by derivation,
hierarchy.163 In his commentary on the De Anima, Ibn Rushd says
that the ‘words ‘capability,’ ‘reception,’ and ‘perfection’ are used
as synonyms when applied to material bodies.’164 Consequently,
intellectual perception implies actuality and actuality, in turn,
signifies perfection. This makes the role of the active intellect

--- Sayfa 68 ---
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
45
all the more important, and ties it to Peripatetic physics and
cosmology.
Al-Farabi’s discussion of the six types of the intellect
culminates in the Divine Intellect or what he calls the ‘First
Intellect’ (al-‘aql al-awwal)—an expression most probably taken
from al-Kindi.165 All other intellects are interlocked to the Divine
intellect in a hierarchical way. Here the actuality-potentiality
framework fits in perfectly with the Divine Intellect operating
through the entire spectrum of knowledge. Al-Farabi posits the
First Intellect as the beginning and end of all intellection,
whether human or celestial, by defining the Divine Being as the
epitome of self-intellection that results in cosmological
production. Furthermore, the First Intellect is the ‘principle of
all principles (mabda’ al-mabadi) and the first principle of all
beings. This is the intellect that Aristotle mentions in letter lam
(Book Lambda) of Metaphysics. Each one of these [intellects
mentioned above] is an intellect but this one is the First Intellect,
the First Existent (al-mawjud al-awwal), the First One (al-wahid
al-awwal), the First Truth (al-haqq al-awwal). Others become
intellect only by virtue of it in a certain order.’166
After quoting a good part of al-Farabi’s Risalah fi’l-‘aql,
Sadra refers to al-Farabi as lending support to the unification
argument. This conclusion, however, is not necessarily warranted
by al-Farabi’s texts. As far as the unification argument is
concerned, al-Farabi does not go any further than admitting
unification for the First Intellect as a condition of the self-
intellection of the Divine. Furthermore, his appropriation of the
Peripatetic notion of knowledge as ‘impression’ (irtisam) poses
serious challenges for Sadra. In fact, Sadra severely criticizes
al-Farabi for proposing such a ‘fallacious’ theory about God’s
knowledge of things.167
Yet, Sadra, who makes every effort to construct a genealogy
for his own purposes, makes the most out of al-Farabi’s partial
endorsement of unification. What is particularly important for
Sadra is to prove the idea that man is capable of becoming a
‘simple active intellect’ (‘aql basit fa‘‘al) in whom all intelligibles

--- Sayfa 69 ---
46
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
are united.168 Al-Farabi’s view of the Divine Intellect makes an
arguably convincing case for the principle of simplicity according
to which a simple intellect contains all levels of intelligibility in
a ‘simple manner.’ As the depository of intelligibles (ma‘qulat)
and beings (mawjudat), the Divine Intellect encapsulates
intelligible substances without jeopardizing its own absolute
unity. The idea of unification is thus asserted one more time.
This is also underlined by the essential identification of God’s
Essence with His Names and Qualities.169 The end result is the
unification of the Divine Intellect with Its own contents without
there being any trace of multiplicity.170 Sadra takes this
conclusion a step further and applies it to human intellection,
which al-Farabi appears to be hesitant to do. Al-Farabi’s
reluctance to apply the idea of ontological simplicity to human
intellect becomes even more resolute with Ibn Sina and Ibn
Rushd. Sadra, however, insists on reading al-Farabi as agreeing
with what he himself has to say about the matter, thus giving us
another example of his hermeneutic appropriations.
c. Ibn Sina: Sadra’s Greatest Challenge
Ibn Sina’s concept of the intellect (al-‘aql) does not differ in any
essential way from that of al-Farabi. As it is the case with Ibn
Sina in many other instances, however, he represents a turning
point for the history of the unification argument in Islamic
philosophy. He explains and rejects the theory with a sense of
urgency, for its acceptance or denial has far-reaching consequences
for a host of issues in traditional philosophy including the
immortality of the individual soul, its relation with the intelligible
world, and the unity and integrity of God as the simplest of all
beings.171 Ibn Sina’s interest in the issue is more than historical.
His criticism of unification as a general philosophical concept
constitutes perhaps the most serious objection against it.
Considering Ibn Sina’s authority in Islamic philosophy, this
presents a special challenge for any advocate of the idea of
unification. This explains in part why Sadra spends an enormous

--- Sayfa 70 ---
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
47
amount of time to come up with a point-by-point response to Ibn
Sina’s criticisms. On his part, Ibn Sina is ruthless in his
derogation of the defenders of the unification argument. If Sadra
is to maintain unification as a meaningful idea at all, he has to
overcome the barrier of the Chief Master.
According to Ibn Sina, it is nothing more than a poetical
uttering to claim that something becomes identical with
something else without either the former or the latter being
destroyed. Here is how he formulates his position:
A group of people who [claim to] pass on172 [the teachings of
Aristotle] thought that the intellecting substance, when intellecting
an intelligible form, becomes [identical with] it. Suppose that the
intellecting substance thinks A. According to their claim, it becomes
identical with A, viz., the object of intellection (al-ma‘qul). Is it then
the same as it did not think A? Or, this did not happen to it. If it is
like before [i.e., before its intellection], then it does not make any
difference whether it intellected it or not. If this did not happen to
it, then it has not changed into it or it is the same as itself. If it did
change into it and [its] identity (al-dhat) remained the same, then,
in contrast to their claim, this is like other transformations (istihalat).
If it remains itself, then its identity has disappeared and something
else has come about, not that it has become something else. When
you ponder over this, you would realize that this [transformation]
requires a common matter (hayulah mushtarakah) and a composite
rather than simple renewal.

Also, when it intellects A, then B, does it remain the same as
when it intellected A? Unless [we were to say that] it does not make
any difference whether it intellected B or not, or it becomes
something else, in which case what was mentioned [as a problem]
will necessarily come back.

(…)

Learn this well: to claim that something becomes something else
neither by way of transformation from one state to another, nor by
way of conjoining with something else so that a third thing may
come out of it, but in such a way that a single object becomes

--- Sayfa 71 ---
48
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
another single object, is poetical nonsense with no meaning. Al-
Isharat wa’l-tanbihat, Vol. 3, pp. 292–295173
The gist of Ibn Sina’s objection can be glimpsed from his
definition of ‘something becoming something else (yasiru).’ As
Sadra notes, Ibn Sina allows only two kinds of ‘becoming.’ The
first is the kind of change where a substance, while preserving
its essential identity, takes on a new quality or quantity when,
for instance, a black object becomes white or a hot object
becomes cold. This is what Ibn Sina means by ‘transformation
from one state to another.’ When applied to quantitative change,
this corresponds to ‘rarefication’ (takhalkhul) and ‘condensation’
(takathuf).174 The same analogy applies to water becoming ice or
evaporating into air.175 It is important to note that this kind of
change applies primarily to cases of increase or decrease in the
accidental qualities of substances. It does not imply a total
transformation whereby a substance ceases to be what it is and
becomes something else due to some radical change in its
quantity. In this sense, substances, as long as they are substances,
do not change but take on new and additional qualities. To
emphasize this point, Ibn Sina distinguishes ‘transformation’
(istihalah) from generation (kawn) and corruption (fasad). He
then hastens to add that taking on new qualities does not imply
transformation in substance: ‘Since this transformation does not
cancel out the nature of the species [to which a particular
substance belongs], this is not a transformation that takes place
in the substance.’176
The second kind of change can be described as a more radical
version of the first whereby two substances conjoin and a third
substance, essentially different from the first two, emerges. This
entails the destruction of the two initial substances and the
emergence or generation of a new one.177 Ibn Sina reasons as
follows:
When something becomes something else, then, when it becomes
that something, it is either existent or non-existent. If it is [assumed
to be] existent, then the second thing too is either existent or non-

--- Sayfa 72 ---
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
49
existent. If it is existent, then they are two [separate] existents, not
one existent. If it is non-existent, then this existent has become non-
existent, not some other existent. And this is absurd. If the first thing
has become non-existent, then it has not become something else but
non-existent and a different thing has come about. In this case, how
can the soul become the forms of things?’178
It is precisely this kind of change that Ibn Sina invokes here to
reject the claim that when the soul knows intelligible substances,
it becomes identical with them. The two definitions of ‘becoming’
proposed by Ibn Sina imply the physical destruction of a
substance when it undergoes a substantial transformation.
Obviously, this is more than taking on new accidents.179
At this point, Ibn Sina draws a sharp distinction between
unification (ittihad) and conjunction (ittisal)—a distinction that
runs through the entire Avicennan corpus. For him, the precise
meaning of unification is the ‘occurrence of a numerically single
entity from the conjoining (ijtima‘) of multiple entities’ and the
‘conjoining of the subject with the predicate in a single essence
like the composition of man from body and soul.’180 In addition,
Ibn Sina accepts unification as logical predication as in the case
of the ‘participation of multiple things (al-ashya’) in a single
essential or accidental predicate.’181 This last quote refers
specifically to the logical context in which Ibn Sina accepts
unification. While Sadra insists on an ontological framework
centred around the primacy of existence (asalat al-wujud), Ibn
Sina confines his remarks to a strictly logical and predicative
frame of reference in which to define something as having more
than one quality does not involve the idea of ontological
intensification (tashaddud), which is precisely what Sadra wants
to establish as the proper ontological meaning of unification. By
confining unification to logical predication, Ibn Sina avoids
attributing any ontological significance to it.
Ibn Sina further argues that the soul cannot become ‘identical’
with any intelligible form; otherwise there would be no room left
in it to receive other forms. In such a scenario of unification
without differentiation, both the soul and the intelligible form

--- Sayfa 73 ---
50
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
cease to be what they are. For Ibn Sina, to claim otherwise is to
forsake reason and take refuge in mere poetry, ‘mystical
utterances’ and sophistry. While these qualifications convey Ibn
Sina’s radical opposition to the principle of unification, they also
allude to the fact that the unification argument is not without
mystical implications. After all, Ibn Sina’s insistence on ittisal
as opposed to ittihad can be seen as a carefully calculated
reaction to Plotinus and Porphyry.182 In fact, Ibn Sina identifies
Porphyry and the ‘Porphyrians’ as the source of this ‘metaphysical
deception’:
There was a man among them known as Porphyry who wrote a book
on the intellect and the intelligibles, which is praised by the
Peripatetics. All of it is gibberish. And they know very well that
neither they nor Porphyry himself understand it. al-Isharat wa’l-
tanbihat, Vol. 3, p. 295

The soul conceives itself and this conception makes it an intellect,
intellector, and intelligible. But its conception of these forms does
not make it so. Because the soul [as long as] its substratum is in the
body always remains a potential intellect even though it becomes
actual in regards to some [intelligibles]. What is said about the soul
becoming the intelligibles themselves is in my view impossible. And
I have never understood their claim that something becomes
something else [in terms of essential identification], nor have I
grasped how this happens.

(…)

The person who has deluded183 people the most concerning this
matter is the person who has composed the Isagogy for them. He
[i.e., Porphyry] was bent on speaking words of fantasy and Sufi
poetry and contenting himself and others with imagination.184 For
this, the people of discernment point to his books on the intellect
and the intelligibilia and his other writings on the soul. True, the
forms of things inhere in the soul and contain and embellish it. And
the soul becomes like a place for them through the medium of the
material intellect. Now, if the soul were to become a form for an
existent in actuality and the form become the intellect, which is by
its essence in actuality, and furthermore if the form were to have no

--- Sayfa 74 ---
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
51
capacity to receive anything, for the capacity of reception is in the
receiver, then it would follow of necessity that the soul has no ability
of accepting another form or any other thing whereas you see it
receiving a form other than this one. If this other [i.e., first form]
does not contradict this [i.e., second] form, then this is really strange
for in this case receiving and non-receiving would become one and
the same thing. If it does contradict it, then the soul, if it is the
intelligible form, has become something other than itself. Quoted
from the Shifa’ in Ittihad, Majmu‘ah, pp. 81–82.185
Before we look more closely at Ibn Sina’s objections, it should
be noted that according to Sadra, Ibn Sina’s denial of unification
(ittihad) between any two things results from his univocal
ontology which does not allow intensification and diminution in
the wujud of things. Within the context of Avicennan ontology,
when something becomes something else, this takes place
through the destruction (fasad) of the original substance and the
emergence of a new one (kawn) rather than through the
ontological intensification or diminution of the existence (wujud)
of that thing. Being aware of this point, Sadra restates the
primacy (asalah) and gradation (tashkik) of existence before
responding to Ibn Sina’s specific arguments against unification.
Here is how he defends his position against the Chief Master’s
attack:
There are two points we have to know before delving into the
critique of what the Master and others have said to reject the
unification between the intellector and the intelligibilia in a general
and specific way. The first is that existence in everything is the
principal reality in existentiation, and it is the principle of its
particularity, the source of its quiddity, and the measure of its
essence. Existence belongs to the category of things that allow
intensification and diminution in terms of perfection and
imperfection, and it has essential qualities and modes in every
degree of intensification and diminution other than what it had
before.

The second [point]: as motion and transformation take place in
quality and quantity, it also occurs in the formal substance (al-

--- Sayfa 75 ---
52
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
jawhar al-suri),186 which is connected to matter in a certain way.
Motion in every category is necessitated by a single existence that
is continuous, individual and gradual, and has, in every presumed
moment of the time of this motion, a specific delimitation among
the limits of existence, which exists neither before nor after it [i.e.,
motion]. Ittihad in Majmu‘ah, p. 82
Having rejected unification as illogical, Ibn Sina proposes the
model of ‘conjunction’ (ittisal) to explain the relation of identity
between any two things. In contrast to unification, conjunction
consists of the juxtaposition and coming together of two or more
things without being transformed to one another or something
else. In the context of logical predication, it simply refers to the
existence of a ‘common definition’ (hadd mushtarak) between
two things that are conjoined in this way.187 In this regard,
conjunction stresses continuity while its opposite disjunction
(infisal) expresses discontinuity.188 Ibn Sina makes full use of
this concept to explain the relationship between the soul and the
active intellect. In fact, he accepts the idea that the soul knows
intelligible forms through its conjunction with the active intellect.
This, however, does not go as far as unification:
They [i.e., those who uphold unification] may also say that the
rational soul, when intellecting something, intellects it through its
conjunction (ittisal) with the active intellect. This is certainly true.
[But] they claim that its conjunction with the active intellect is such
that it itself becomes the active intellect since it becomes the
acquired intellect (al-‘aql al-mustafad). This is so because the active
intellect conjoins with the soul and the soul [as potential intellect]
becomes acquired intellect. They thus stand between either making
the active intellect divisible, with which one thing is conjoined after
another, or making it a single conjunction by which the soul
becomes a perfect being able to attain every intelligible [present in
the active intellect]. al-Isharat wa’l-tanbihat, Vol. 3, p. 294
This passage reveals the main outlines of Ibn Sina’s concerns
about the unification argument. If the soul is allowed to become
ontologically united with the active intellect in the way the

--- Sayfa 76 ---
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
53
‘Porphyrians’ understand it, then we have to accept two grave
consequences.189 First of all, if we attain unification with the
active intellect, then we would be in a position to know the entire
range of intelligible realities present in the active intellect.190 But
this goes against common sense because no finite being can
know everything there is to know. Furthermore, if complete
unification with the active intellect grants us the possibility of
appropriating the intelligible world in its entirety and since
intelligibles are not devoid of ethical content, then we would also
attain all the virtues attainable by human beings all at once. It is
not difficult to see the eschatological consequence of this
premise: if unification with the active intellect enables us to unite
with all of the forms, knowledge and virtues present in the active
intellect, then we would also be united with all of the ‘perfect
souls’ that have united with the active intellect before us. If, as
Nasir al-Din al-Tusi says, we become ‘united with all the
intellecting beings,’191 then we would be united with the prophets
and the philosophers who have attained unification with the
active intellect.192
The second consequence pertains to a possibility that no
medieval philosopher has ever wanted to concede, and it is the
divisibility of the active intellect. If every rational soul, i.e.,
material intellect which becomes an acquired intellect (‘aql
mustafad) through the agency of the active intellect attains
unification with it, then the active intellect becomes divisible
according to the number of potential intellects that are supposed
to unite with it. But since the active intellect is totally free of
matter and division applies only to things-in-matter, this
conclusion must be rejected. Just like the previous conclusion
which Ibn Sina rejects in toto, this view is also fraught with
theological implications. If the active intellect is allowed to be
divisible, then all other separate beings (al-mufaraqat) will be
susceptible to division. This would not only render a good part
of Ibn Sina’s metaphysics dysfunctional, because the basis of
intelligibility is incorporeality, but also endanger the unity of
God who is the highest of the separate beings.193 After all, the

--- Sayfa 77 ---
54
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
active intellect, which is one, does not become ‘many’
numerically when multiple intellects conjoin with it. At this
point, the analogy of light used by Aristotle and repeated by Ibn
Sina comes quite handy: just as light remains ‘one’ when it
shines upon multiple objects and is not affected by them, the
active intellect maintains its oneness when ‘[its] light…dawns
upon…the faculty of intellection.’194
The foregoing objections by Ibn Sina should not lead us to
think that he rejects the unification of the potential intellect with
the active intellect when it is understood as a state of the mind
or as ‘happening in the mind.’ Ibn Sina was certainly aware of
Aristotle’s endorsement of this meaning of unification in the De
Anima in the case of ‘things that have no matter.’ As a result, he
does not hesitate to apply unification in this limited sense to the
individual human intellect on the one hand, and to the Divine
Intellect, on the other. In the ‘Notes,’ he says that
what they [those who defend the unification argument] say about
the intellect, the intellector, and the intelligible being one thing is
true only in the case of the intellect. In other things, the intellect is
one thing, the intellector is one thing, the intelligible is one thing,
and the conception of the intellect of the intelligible is another thing.
As for Aristotle’s view found here and in other places that knowledge
and what is known are one and the same thing, it refers to the
[mental] form of what is known, which is impressed upon the
knower just as the form of what is sensed (al-mahsus) is impressed
upon the sense. Ta‘liqat, p. 105195
Yet, in all of this, the acquired intellect represents the highest
level of intellectual perfection the soul can attain because ‘with
the acquired intellect, the genus of animality and the species of
mankind are completed whereby the human faculty (of
intellection) becomes akin to the primary principles of existence
in its entirety’.196 In short, there is conjunction, ‘touching,’
dawning and affecting but no ontological identification between
the active intellect and individual human soul.

--- Sayfa 78 ---
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
55
The matter, however, does not end here. Ibn Sina takes a
somewhat different approach toward Divine self-intellection
and, like al-Farabi, asserts the essential unity of the Divine
Intellect with its objects of intellection. Elaborating on the
Aristotelian idea that anything that is not in matter has intrinsic
intelligibility, he describes the Divine both as a self-intellect
(‘aql bi’l-dhat) and self-intelligible (ma‘qul bi’l-dhat). The
Divine knows Himself and other things through Himself or, more
accurately, through His self-knowledge. God is not a subject
intending to some objects; otherwise we would have to attribute
ignorance to God before He intends to objects of knowledge
outside of His essence. Ibn Sina draws attention to this point in
al-Mabda’ wa’l-ma‘ad when he writes that ‘the Necessary Being
is self-intelligible and intellect by itself…every form that is not
in matter is like this, and the intellect, the intellector, and the
intelligible are one.’197
Furthermore, in both the Najat and al-Risalat al-‘arshiyyah,
Ibn Sina comes back to this point and uses a language that
prefigures Suhrawardi’s concept of self-knowledge and
knowledge-by-presence (al-‘ilm al-huduri). Here, Ibn Sina uses
the term knowledge (‘ilm) and its derivatives. But as he points
out, in this particular context the words ‘knowledge’ and
‘intellect’ are interchangeable. The passage is worth quoting in
its entirety.
Know that He knows by His essence and that His knowledge, His
being known (ma‘lumiyyatuhu), and His knowing (‘alimiyyatuhu)
are one, and He knows all other than Himself and everything there
is to know. He knows everything by a single knowledge, and He
knows them in such a way that His knowledge does not change
according to the existence and [or] non-existence of what is
known.

The explanation of this is that, according to what we have already
mentioned, He is one and above all causes. The meaning of
knowledge (‘ilm) is the establishment of a truth disembodied from
the veils of corporeal existence. When it is firmly established that
He is one and disembodied from the corporeal body and its

--- Sayfa 79 ---
56
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
attributes, then this truth is in a certain way established for Him,
and for whosoever such a disembodied truth is established, he is a
knower (‘alim). This [knowledge] does not have to be His essence
or anything other than Him because His essence is not absent from
Him. It then follows that He knows His own essence.

The fact that He is knowledge (‘ilm), knower (‘alim), and what
is known (ma‘lum) can be explained as follows: knowledge consists
of the disembodied truth. When this truth is disembodied [from
matter], it becomes knowledge. When this disembodied truth
belongs to Him, is present to Him, and is not veiled from Him, then
it follows that He is a knower. When this disembodied truth is
established only through Him, then he is known by various
expressions. Insofar as His essence is concerned, knowledge,
knower, and the known are one. al-Risalat al-‘arshiyyah, p. 8
Having stated God’s knowledge of things on the basis of the
concept of truth as ‘presence in the knower,’ Ibn Sina turns to
self-knowledge as a paradigm case of the unification of the
knower and the known. One’s unmediated consciousness of
oneself establishes a perfect epistemic unity.
Your self is capable [of proving this point]: when you know yourself,
what you know is either yourself or something else. If what you
know is other than yourself, then you do not know yourself. If what
you know is yourself, it follows that both the knower and the known
are your own self. When the form of your self is pictured in your
soul, then your self becomes knowledge. When you turn and look
back upon your self through reflection, you will not find a
representation of the truth and the quiddity of your self for a second
time so as to lead you to the consciousness of multiple selves.198
When it is firmly established that He intellects His essence, and that
His intellecting His essence does not add anything to His essence,
it follows that He is knower, knowledge, and the known without
there being any multiplicity attached to Him through these attributes.
There is no difference between knower (‘alim) and intellector (‘aqil)
since both consist of the absolute negation of matter. al-Risalat al-
‘arshiyyah, p. 8199

--- Sayfa 80 ---
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
57
This quote seems to establish Ibn Sina’s wholesome acceptance
of the unification idea. Considering Ibn Sina’s passionate
refutations of the ‘Porphyrians,’ however, there seems to be
some kind of a disconnect in his thought. If unification is to be
rejected without qualifications as mere sophistry and poetical
non-sense, then how are we to understand Ibn Sina’s eventual
endorsement of it in the case of self-knowledge and Divine
intellection? Three possibilities can be considered here. The first
is to say that Ibn Sina contradicted himself and eventually
accepted the unification argument. This is the view shared by
Suhrawardi and Sadra.200 In the Talwihat, Suhrawardi discusses
Ibn Sina’s view on the possibility, or lack thereof, of the
unification of the intellect with the intelligible and says that ‘Ibn
Sina, the greatest of all the later philosophers, narrated this view
from Porphyry and dishonoured him in a way that does not suit
the nobility of either of them. In spite of this, he clearly claimed
the unity of the soul with the intelligible form in al-Mabda’ wa’l-
ma‘ad and in some of his other books. Then he finally realized
the fallacy of this view.’201 In a similar vein, Mulla Sadra
expresses his puzzlement over Ibn Sina’s contradictory position
and claims that Nasir al-Din al-Tusi approved Ibn Sina’s view
because his main purpose in his commentary on the Isharat was
to explain the principles of Aristotelian philosophy rather than
criticize the Chief Master.202
The second possibility is to see this as an evolution of Ibn
Sina’s thinking on the issue. The fact that the unification
argument as applicable to self-knowledge and to God appears in
Ibn Sina’s later works seems to support this hypothesis. There
are instances where Ibn Sina’s thought does display such an
evolution. But this hypothesis is marred by the fact that in the
Shifa’ Ibn Sina makes several references to the unity of intellect,
intelligible and intellection as long as the soul is in the body, i.
e., as long as the unification in question refers to an internal state
of the mind, not its unification with the active intellect.
Furthermore, Ibn Sina’s objections against the ‘Porphyrians’
remain unchanged to the end.

--- Sayfa 81 ---
58
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
The third possibility, which seems to be more reasonable than
others, is that Ibn Sina distinguished between two meanings and
applications of the unification argument from the very beginning
and held them valid at two different levels. It is clear that he
rejects unification when it is applied to soul as potential intellect
because, in addition to the arguments mentioned above, there
must always be some potentiality in the soul. The acquired
intellect does not become one with the intelligibles if this is
understood to be unification with the active intellect itself. But
if what we mean is the unification of the acquired intellect with
the intelligible in view of its own perception of an actual
intelligible, then this is allowed because this does not cause any
of the problems Ibn Sina cites.203 This is clearly stated in the
examples Ibn Sina gives about the self’s knowledge of itself and,
by derivation, God’s knowledge of things. In short, once Ibn
Sina’s major concerns about unification as ontological
identification are removed, it is only natural for him to fall back
on unification as epistemic conjunction. In this sense, Ibn Sina
seems to go back to the initial baptism of the problem at the
hands of the First Teacher, which was a simple idea of the
unification of the soul with its objects of intellection at the
moment of perception. Yet what Aristotle had to say about it,
which was incidentally secondary to his whole argument in the
De Anima, became so complex in the wake of the Neoplatonist
turn of Greek and Islamic philosophy that Ibn Sina could not
remain indifferent to it.
Before closing this section on the Muslim Peripatetics, we
should discuss briefly Ibn Rushd the ‘commentator.’ Sadra does
not mention Ibn Rushd in his genealogy of the unification
argument. As a matter of fact, the name Ibn Rushd is virtually
non-existent in Sadra’s corpus. The reason for this deliberate
absence of Ibn Rushd in most of the later Islamic philosophy is
too complicated to consider here. Ibn Rushd’s lonely struggle to
create a pre-Neoplatonic Aristole on the one hand, and the course
of post-Avicennan Islamic philosophy on the other seem to have
contributed to Ibn Rushd’s diminishing popularity among the

--- Sayfa 82 ---
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
59
posterity. Ibn Rushd was extremely suspicious of the ‘mystical’
tendencies which he believed the Alexandrian commentators of
Aristotle introduced into the mainstream Peripatetic thought. He
was so critical of this ‘distortion’ that he occasionally accused
both al-Farabi and Ibn Sina of being ‘Alexandrist’ and distorting
the true teachings of the First Teacher.204 Like Ibn Sina, Ibn
Rushd accepts the idea of conjunction with the active intellect
as a condition of human knowledge. Yet he remains undecided
as to whether the active intellect is also the formal and final
cause of the material intellect. He was probably concerned that
having the active intellect as an object of thought may lead to
the much stronger notion of ittihad rather than ittisal—a
distinction he maintains throughout his writings.
At the end, Ibn Rushd concurs with the possibility of
conjunction with the active intellect but never fully works out
how the soul is supposed to have a relation with the active
intellect in the same way matter is conjoined with form.205 In
addition to the counter-arguments which we already have in Ibn
Sina, Ibn Rushd introduces an argument from causality against
unification. The soul cannot have perfect union with the active
intellect for the active intellect is a cause for the material
intellect. A cause generates an effect but does not replace it. The
question thus turns into how a potential and perishable substance
becomes substantiated and immortal through its conjunction with
an actual and separable substance.206
d. Suhrawardi: On the Way to Sadra
Outside the Peripatetic tradition, the most important challenge
to the unification argument came from Shihab al-Din Suhrawardi,
the founder of the School of Illumination. The fact that
Suhrawardi joined the battle as an articulate ally of the
Peripatetics is somewhat surprising because the concepts of self-
knowledge and knowledge-by-presence which make a forceful
entry into the Islamic philosophical scene with Suhrawardi
appear to entail, at least according to Sadra, a wholesale

--- Sayfa 83 ---
60
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
acceptance of unification. This point is well noted by Sadra, and
his first reaction is to downplay the significance of Suhrawardi’s
objections as no more than Peripatetic ruminations, implying that
Suhrawardi’s own illuminationist views on the issue lend support
to the unification argument. In fact, Suhrawardi himself says
when discussing God’s knowledge of things that he has written
al-Mashari‘ wa’l-mutarahat as a Peripatetic work and his own
views on the issue are to be found in the Hikmat al-ishraq.207
This may prompt us to think Suhrawardi’s properly ishraqi
works may contain an entirely different approach. As we shall
see shortly, however, we find little assurance in Suhrawardi’s
most important ishraqi work Hikmat al-ishraq that he upholds
unification (ittihad) as a possibility in the process of
knowledge.
In his Peripatetic works, Suhrawardi, following the broad
outlines of Peripatetic physics and ontology, clearly rejects any
unification between two things. We can talk about admixture
(imtizaj), conjunction (ittisal) or ‘unitive composition’ (tarkib
majmu‘i) between two entities, says Suhrawardi, but not
unification (ittihad). When I know the tree in front of me, i.e.,
when I have a direct vision of the intelligible form of the tree, I
do not cease to be myself nor does the tree cease to be a tree.
Both of us remain distinct and intact throughout the process.
Suhrawardi states this essentially Avicennan point in the Talwihat
as follows:
[54] Some people have thought that when the perceiver perceives
something, he becomes [identical with] it. Some other people have
thought that the soul perceives things through its unification (ittihad)
with the active intellect. You have already learnt from the previous
arguments that two things do not become one except through
admixture, conjunction, or unitive composition. This is one of the
qualities of [physical] bodies. When we say that A becomes B, does
A remain the same and then we have B, thus both of them becoming
multiple entities? Or is it rather that A is destroyed and B has not
come into being, in which case there is no unification (ittihad)
between the two? …When the soul thinks of A, does it remain the

--- Sayfa 84 ---
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
61
same as it was before [it thought of it]? If so, then there is no union
or the establishment [of a new being]. Or, perhaps the soul is
destroyed and something else has come into being, in which case
there is again no unity [obtained between the soul and its object of
intellection]. Kitab al-talwihat, pp. 68–69
In the al-Mashari‘ wa’l-mutarahat, another Peripatetic work,
Suhrawardi reiterates the same point in a similar way, focusing
this time on perception itself:
[201] A group of people have thought that perception is of such a
nature that when someone perceives something, he himself becomes
the form of that thing. You know the fallacy of this from what has
passed before by way of allusion to the fact that a thing by itself
does not become something else. If the first thing remains together
with the origination of the second, then we have two separate things.
If the first ceases to exist and the second comes about—or the first
remains and the second does not come about—then neither of them
has become the other. It might be objected that black becomes white
and air becomes water. But black-qua-black does not become white
or water-qua-water air. Rather, this form disappears from the carrier
of the form for water-ness, and the form of air-ness comes about in
it. In the same way, blackness disappears from the body qualified
with blackness, and whiteness comes about in it. In both cases, the
locus (of the forms) is the same. Now, if a form has come about but
not a soul—or the soul has remained the same and not a form—then
there is no perception (idrak). If both of them have remained, then
there are two of them. Furthermore, your self-conscious substance
does not change all the time. It is rather one single permanent thing
before [perceiving] a form, or with it, or after it, and the form comes
about through its permanence. You are yourself with or without
perception. Hence, no such thing as unification (ittihad). Kitab al-
talwihat, pp. 68–69208
The two passages above make clear in what sense Suhrawardi
interprets the word ‘unification’ (ittihad). For him, unification
between two things entails the destruction of two discrete
substances and the origination of a new one. In this sense,
unification cannot be allowed without generation (kawn) and

--- Sayfa 85 ---
62
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
corruption (fasad).209 Applying the same set of principles to how
the mind comes to perceive things, Suhrawardi makes another
patently Avicennan salvo and repeats by and large what Ibn Sina
has to say about the unification of the soul with the active
intellect:
[202] A group of people thought that when our souls perceive
something, they perceive them through unification with the active
intellect so much so that our souls become the active intellect. This
[view] is false. We have already explained that two things do not
become one except through conjunction (ittisal) or admixture, or
taking [the form of] unitive composition. No other way is possible.
We shall mention the meaning of unification in the case of the
disembodied beings (al-mufaraqat) and what they require. As for
the view about the particularization of the active intellect, [it claims]
that the soul conjoins with the active intellect one part after another
and it perceives one thing after another. Or still, when the soul
perceives one thing and becomes one [with the active intellect],
through this [perception] it perceives other things. Both options are
false. al-Mashari‘ wa’l-mutarahat, p. 475
A similar point is made toward the end of al-Mashari‘ wa’l-
mutarahat where Suhrawardi inserts a separate section (paragraph
221) just before concluding the book with his testament
(wasiyyah), and calls it ‘Concerning the Path of the Divine
Philosophers’ (al-hukama’ al-muta’allihin). This paragraph is of
particular importance for our current discussion, for Suhrawardi
comes back to the question of unification after making an
Illuminationist liaison between ‘tasting’ and ‘perception’: ‘Some
people have thought that by these lights (anwar), we mean the
conjunction and unification of the soul with the Originator (al-
mubdi‘). It was already demonstrated that unification is
impossible except [if] what is meant by it is a spiritual state
(halah ruhaniyyah) proper to the disembodied beings (al-
mufaraqat), not physical conjunction and mixture, neither of
which is in itself false.’210

--- Sayfa 86 ---
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
63
Both quotes above may lead us to think that Suhrawardi holds
a different view on unification insofar as disembodied and purely
spiritual beings are concerned. He even says that ‘the unification
that exists among the disembodied lights is certainly an
intellective unification (al-ittihad al-‘aqli), not a physical one
(jirmi).’ But he does not explain what he means by ‘intellective
unification.’ Furthermore, he quickly qualifies his statement in
the following paragraph:
Do not think that the disembodied lights (al-anwar al-mujarradah)
become one after being disengaged [from matter], for two things do
not become one. If both of them have remained [the same], then
there is no unification. If both of them have ceased to be, there is
no unification. If one of them has remained [the same] and the other
has ceased to be, then there is no unification again. There is no
conjunction (ittisal) or admixture (imtizaj) except in corporeal
bodies. The disengaged realities do not cease to be, and they are
distinguished intellectively through their consciousness of
themselves and their lights and their illuminations. Hikmat al-
ishraq, pp. 228–229211
The foregoing quotes make a convincing case for our initial
assertion that Suhrawardi rejects unification even in his
Illuminationist works especially if what is meant by unification
is substantial identification. As in the case of Ibn Sina,
Suhrawardi’s forceful rejection is not a fortuitous decision; it has
everything to do with the fundamental presuppositions that
underlie his essentialist ontology. That is why Suhrawardi, just
like Ibn Sina, allows unification as denoting the ‘intellective
state’ of the mind at the moment of actual perception. The prime
cases of this are the knowledge of the self and, by extension,
God’s knowledge of things. In both cases, there is no epistemic
gap between the knower/perceiver and the known/perceived. To
state briefly, Suhrawardi’s argument from self-knowledge rests
on the idea that one’s consciousness of oneself is based on a
first-order knowledge in that my consciousness of my ‘I-ness’
(ana’iyyah) is not different from my actual I-ness.212 I know

--- Sayfa 87 ---
64
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
‘my-self’ through this essential I-ness, not through a secondary
image or form (mithal) except when I reflect upon this image
itself as a second-order concept. Otherwise, as Qutb al-Din al-
Shirazi points out, I would have to refer to my-self as a ‘he/it,’
not as an ‘I.’213
Furthermore, since knowledge is the presence (hudur) of what
is known to the knower without any veils and since one can
never be absent to oneself ontologically, all self-knowledge is
based on the essential identity of the knower and the known.
That is why Suhrawardi says that ‘whoever perceives himself is
a pure light, and every pure light is manifest (zahir) to itself and
perceives its essence,’214 Commenting on this paragraph,
Shahrazuri, Suhrawardi’s biographer and first commentator, says
that ‘perceiver, perceived and perception are one here just as
intellect, intellector and intelligible are one.’215 Qutb al-Din al-
Shirazi whose Durrat al-taj is clearly more Avicennan than
Suhrawardian, concurs with Shahrazuri’s conclusion but uses a
more suggestive analogy: ‘His [i.e., the Necessary Being’s]
relation to other things is like the relation of the ray of the sun
to things other than itself, by virtue of which they become
illuminated. But He is not in need of other things…. It should
be known that a being disembodied from matter is not veiled to
itself. Therefore, its own existence is exactly the same as its own
intelligible-ness (ma‘quliyyah) and its intellect-ness (‘aqliyyah)
is the same as its own essence. Thus its existence is intellect,
intellector, and intelligible.’216
What we have here is a case very similar to what we
encountered in Ibn Sina: unification as an internal state of the
mind at the moment of perception is a necessary component of
both Peripatetic and ishraqi epistemologies. Since God does not
think or know things through ‘images’ apart from their essences
but knows them directly and ‘presentially,’ unification also
applies to God.217 One important novelty in Suhrawardi is that
since unification with the active intellect does not play a major
role in the Ishraqi tradition, Ibn Sina’s passionate rebuttals
against the ‘Porphyrians’ do not make any appearance in

--- Sayfa 88 ---
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
65
Suhrawardi and his commentators. What remains as a major
problem for Sadra is then the fact that Suhrawardi develops a
theory of knowledge that has no references to and, in fact, need
for the unification idea. Sadra’s great challenge is to show that
his theory of knowledge, which depends largely on Suhrawardi’s
masterful analyses of knowledge by presence, does require
unification. The only way Sadra can do this is to link the
unification argument to his ontology. It is in this sense that Sadra
takes Suhrawardi’s denial of unification to be a necessary
outcome of his essentialism which allows gradation only in
quiddities. One way of broaching this rather extensive subject is
to explain how differentiation or disparity comes about in the
first place. In his commentary on Suhrawardi’s Hikmat al-ishraq,
Sadra states this point as follows:
The Shaykh (i.e., Suhrawardi) has assumed that disparity (tafawut)
takes place between two things in terms of perfection and deficiency
in their shared quiddities without regard to any other condition
concerning difference (fasl) or accident. The truth is that a single
concept (mafhum) does not possess disparity from the point of view
of its meaning (ma‘na). Disparity can be only in reference to more
intensity and weakness through the modes of actualization (al-
husulat) and concrete beings (al-wujudat) because existence allows
disparity in [terms of] perfection and deficiency.218
Mulla Sadra thus comes back to the notion of ontological
intensification and argues that the differences between him and
Suhrawardi stems from different ontologies. Sadra introduces a
number of new formulations to overcome the stiff categories of
Peripatetic and Suhrawardian physics and attempts to ‘de-
solidify’ the physical world-order to fully work out his
gradational ontology. That is why he comes back to existence
(al-wujud) to explain the failure or unwillingness of previous
philosophers to accept the idea of unification. Implicit in this is
the pivotal Sadrean idea that the unification argument can be
defended if knowledge is re-cast in terms of existence and its
modalities (anha’ al-wujud). In a typical passage of the Asfar,

--- Sayfa 89 ---
66
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
Sadra posits gradation-in-existence (tashkik al-wujud) as the sine
qua non of the unification argument:
The realization of this matter [i.e., the unification of the intellect
and the intelligible] is impossible except through the principles that
were mentioned in the beginnings of this book [i.e., the Asfar]
concerning the view that wujud is the principal reality in existence
and the quiddity is derived from it. It is certain that wujud allows
intensification and diminution, and whatever is strong in
existentiation (qawiyy al-wujud) becomes more inclusive and
encompassing of universal meanings and abstract intellective
quiddities. When wujud reaches the level of the simple intellect
which is completely disengaged from the world of corporeal bodies
and quantities, it becomes all of the intelligibilia and all things in a
manner more virtuous and nobler than what they are based upon.
Whoever has not tasted this path cannot understand the simple
intellect which is the source of all detailed sciences. That is why
you see most of the virtuous people finding it very difficult and
unable to verify it in spite of their deep involvement in following
the sciences of wisdom such as Shaykh Suhrawardi in the Mutarahat,
Talwihat, and Hikmat al-ishraq, who has clearly rejected this view,
and Imam [Fakhr al-Din] al-Razi and those who are in their state
and class. Asfar, I, 3, pp. 373–374
* * * *
The goal of this chapter has been to show that the concept of
knowledge as unification has been a constant challenge for both
classical and medieval philosophers. Its definition and application
to different fields of philosophy varies from one philosopher to
another. Taking a position for or against the unification argument,
however, does not always follow a steady logic. A particular
philosopher’s approval or rejection of it in itself may or may not
reveal much about his larger metaphysical presuppositions. In
spite of its central place in traditional noetics, it is not a reliable
measure against which one’s philosophical predilections can be
discerned. The examples of Alexander of Aphrodisias, who
defended the idea, and Suhrawardi, who rejected it with as much

--- Sayfa 90 ---
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
67
force as that of Ibn Sina, attest to this point. Furthermore, for
some philosophers, the unification idea was not essential at all.
They either had nothing to say about it or simply discussed it as
a secondary issue.
With Sadra, however, the history of the unification argument
reaches a climax. Many of Sadra’s major philosophical claims
either lead to the unification argument or issue from it. In fact,
Sadra’s ambitious attempt to define knowledge in terms of
existence and its modalities could not have been possible without
the unification argument. Sadra is so acutely aware of this that
every one of his detailed analyses and defense of unification is
preceded by a restatement of his gradational ontology. This
shows, among other things, that Sadra could not have bridged
the gap between existence and knowledge in his thought without
articulating and defending some version of the unification
argument. His historical references to those who either defended
or rejected the idea of unification underscore this point. Our
interest in the history of this idea, of which I gave only a sketchy
account here, is then mainly the same as that of Sadra: history
is relevant to the extent to which it helps us understand the
philosophical problem we are grappling with. We will take up
this issue in the next chapter and see how the idea of unification
is closely interwoven into Sadra’s ontology.
NOTES
 1. Also in the Metaphysics, 1072b and 1074b–1075a.
 2. Shams al-Din al-Shahrazuri, Rasa’il al-shajarat al-ilahiyyah fi ‘ulum
al-haqa’iq al-rabbaniyyah, ed. Necip Görgün (Istanbul, Turkey: Elif
Publications, 2004), Vol. III, p. 405.
 3. I shall make one exception to this rule and mention Ibn Rushd briefly as
he represents another major challenge to the unification argument.
 4. See, for instance, Asfar, I, 2, pp. 329–335, 342–346, and 353.
 5. The third section of the second part of the al-Futuhat al-makkiyyah is
entitled ‘Of Knowledge, Knower, and Known.’ Cf. Ibn al-‘Arabi, al-
Futuhat al-makkiyyah, ed. M. ‘Abd al-Rahman alMar‘ashli, (Beirut,
Lebanon: Dar Ihya’ al-Turath al-‘Arabi, 1997), Vol. I, pp. 137–138.

--- Sayfa 91 ---
68
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
 6. Futuhat, Vol. I, p. 138.
 7. Cf. Chittick’s Introduction to his translation of Iksir al-‘arifin in Mulla
Sadra, The Elixir of the Gnostics, (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young
University Press, 2003).
 8. Afdal al-Din Kashani, ‘First Letter to Shams al-Din’ translated in William
Chittick, The Heart of Islamic Philosophy: The Quest for Self-Knowledge
in the Teachings of Afdal al-Din Kashani (Oxford/New York: Oxford
University Press, 2001), p. 148.
 9. Kashani, ‘First Letter,’ p. 270.
 10. For the quotes, see Ibn Maymun, Dalalat al-ha’irin, ed. Ahmad Farid
al-Mazidi (Beirut, Lebanon: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, 2007), pp. 102–
103; for the English translation see The Guide for the Perplexed, tr. M.
Friedlander (New York, 1956, 2nd edition), Part 1, sec. 68, pp. 100–
102.
 11. Philo of Alexandria, the Jewish theologian and philosopher of the 1st
century ad, holds a similar view concerning God’s mode of intellection.
For Philo, ‘inasmuch as God is absolute simplicity, His mind and His
thinking and the objects of His thought are all one and identical with His
essence.’ Harry Austryn Wolfson, Philo: Foundations of Religious
Philosophy in Judaism, Christianity, and Islam (Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 1948), Vol. I, p. 231.
 12. Muhy al-Din al-‘Ajami al-Isfahani, Êpitre sur l’unité et la trinité, traite
sur l’intellect, fragment sur l’âme, ed. and tr. M. Allard and G. Troupeau,
(Beyrouth, Lebanon: Imperium Catholique, 1962), pp. 53–61.
 13. The same reference by Ibn Sina to Alexander of Aphrodisias as the
‘virtuous of the ancients’ (fadil al-mutaqaddimin) is repeated in Huduth,
p. 231.
 14. The will at the end of the Isharat, to which Sadra refers, exhorts those
who are serious about gaining knowledge to examine philosophical
matters with utmost care and diligence. See al-Isharat wa’l-tanbihat,
with the commentaries of Nasir al-Din al-Tusi and Qutb al-Din al-Razi,
(Tehran, Iran: Matba‘at al-Haydari 1958), Vol. 3, pp. 419–421.
 15. Asfar, I, 1, p. 300; I, 2, p. 46 ff.
 16. Asfar, I, 1, p. 307. See also Shawahid, p.158 where Sadra, after
enumerating several criticisms of Plato, defends him by saying that the
‘majesty of Plato’s power is greater than any doubts these rational
considerations may cause about him.’
 17. Cf. Sadra’s extensive discussion of the Platonic Forms in the Shawahid,
pp. 154–178.
 18. Jean Pepin, ‘Elements pour une histoire de la relation entre l’intelligence
et l’intelligible chez Platon et dans le neoplatonisme,’ Revue
Philosophique de la France et de l’etranger 146 (1956), pp. 39–64.
 19. Tr. B. Jowett. Cf. Badawi, Aflatun fi’l-islam (Beirut, Lebanon: Dar al-
Andalus, 1980, 2nd edition), p. 126.

--- Sayfa 92 ---
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
69
 20. Cf. A. J. Festugiére, Contemplation et vie contemplative selon Platon
(Paris: Librairie Philosophique J. Vrin, 1975), pp. 105–117 and Kenneth
Dorter, Plato’s Phaedo: An Interpretation (Toronto: University of
Toronto Press, 1982), pp. 50–51.
 21. Echoing the same theme, Sadra says that ‘the human soul has a world of
its own and a dominion (mamlakah) similar to the domain of its creator,
encapsulating the species of substances and accidents both detached and
material.’ Qudsiyyah, p. 219.
 22. Cf. the Arabic version of the Phaedo in Badawi, Aflatun fi’l-islam, p.
127.
 23. In the Phaedo, 66d–67a, Plato says that ‘…if we would have pure
knowledge of anything, we must be quit of the body—the soul in herself
must behold things in themselves…. In this present life, I reckon that we
make the nearest approach to knowledge when we have the least possible
intercourse or communion with the body….’
 24. Cf. Timaeus, 37 c. On the ‘affinity’ between the nous and the Forms, see
David Bostock, Plato’s Phaedo (Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press, 1986),
pp. 116–121. Consider also the following: ‘And the soul is like the eye:
when resting upon that on which truth and being shine, the soul perceives
and understands and is radiant with intelligence; but when turned towards
the twilight of becoming and perishing, then she has opinion only, and
goes blinking about, and is first of one opinion and then of another, and
seems to have no intelligence.’ The Republic, VI, 508
 25. Norman Gulley, Plato’s Theory of Knowledge (London: Methuen & Co
Ltd., 1962), pp. 23–34.
 26. Francis M. Cornford, Plato’s Theory of Knowledge, (Indianapolis: The
Bobbs-Merrill Company, Inc., 1957), pp. 4–5. Cf. also Asfar, I, 2, pp.
46–81 where Sadra examines the Platonic Forms and their interpretation
by al-Farabi, Ibn Sina, Suhrawardi and others.
 27. Asfar, I, 3, p. 478 and IV, 1, pp. 303–310 where Sadra quotes a number
of arguments from the Greek philosophers, the Qur’an, and hadith to
prove the disembodiment of the soul (tajarrud al-nafs)—an assertion of
crucial significance for the unification of the intellect and the
intelligible.
 28. Throughout this book, I use the Latin intelligibilia to translate al-
ma‘qulat in the plural when Sadra uses it as a single term. I also use the
Latin sensibilia to translate the word al-mahsusat in the plural. I believe
both terms convey Sadra’s intended meaning better than their standard
English translations.
 29. For more on this, see Nicholas P. White, ‘Plato’s Metaphysical
Epistemology’ in The Cambridge Companion to Plato, ed. Richard Kraut
(Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1992), pp. 277–310.
 30. This is the fundamental insight of Heidegger’s critique of Cartesian
subjectivism that has dominated, according to him, the modern Western

--- Sayfa 93 ---
70
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
philosophy since Descartes. Cf. Charles B. Guignon, Heidegger and the
Problem of Knowledge (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1983). For the primacy of
existence over knowing in Plato, see Léon Robin, Les rapports de l’être
et de la connaissance d’après Platon (Paris: Presses Universitaires de
France, 1957), especially, Chapter 3.
 31. Cf. Asfar, I, 1, p. 440 where Sadra restates the same Platonic position by
saying that ‘the substances of this lower world are the shadows of the
substances of the higher world, by which they mean that the former are
caused by the latter. Thus the caused is like a shadow vis-à-vis its
cause.’
 32. A. J. Festugière, Contemplation, p. 98.
 33. A. J. Festugière, Contemplation, p. 89.
 34. Pierre Hadot, Philosophy as a Way of Life: Spiritual Exercises from
Socrates to Foucault, tr. M. Chase, (Oxford, UK: Blackwell, 1995), p. 81.
 35. See for instance Asfar, I, 2, pp. 48–51.
 36. Asfar, II, 2, pp. 205–6.
 37. Tr. Hippocrates G. Apostle, Aristotle’s On the Soul (De Anima), (Grinnell,
Iowa: Peripatetic Press, 1981), pp. 49–50.
 38. Consider Alexander of Aphrodisias’ following remarks: ‘…so far as the
intellect is concerned, it does not become matter with respect to its forms
in order to receive them; its forms in fact are not bound up with material
conditions as are the objects with which sensation deals. On the contrary,
intellect separates its forms from any possible material circumstance and,
thus apprehending them as they are in themselves, it beholds them in
their complete isolation. For if the intellect apprehends white by a
cognitive act, it does not cognize it as existing together with shape or
magnitude. And the reason for this fact is that intellect makes no use of
any bodily organ in its apprehension of its intelligible objects, since it is
totally self-sufficient for the act of knowing the intelligible.’ De Anima,
3.10, 84, tr. Athanasios P. Fotinis, The De Anima of Alexander of
Aphrodisias: A Translation and Commentary (Washington, DC:
University Press of America, 1979), p. 108.
 39. Themistius, the most important commentator of Aristotle along with
Alexander of Aphrodisias, reiterates this key point in his commentary on
the De Anima: ‘[97,34 (430a 2–5, 6–9)] But how is [the potential
intellect] at the same time both intellect and object of thought? And is it
so in the same respect, or does it become intellect and object of thought
in distinct respects? Now in the case of the [forms] that are without
matter, what thinks and what is being thought are identical (for
knowledge that involves contemplation is identical with what is known
in that way) but in the case of the enmattered forms the object and the
intellect are distinct. For, as we know, these (enmattered forms, I mean)
are also not by nature objects of thought, but the intellect makes them
such objects by severing them from matter, and they are [themselves]

--- Sayfa 94 ---
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
71
potential, not actual, objects of thought.’ Themistius, On Aristotle’s On
the Soul, tr. Robert B. Todd (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1996),
p. 122. For the Arabic version of Themistius’ Commentary, see An Arabic
Translation of Themistius’ Commentary on Aristotle’s de Anima, ed. M.
C. Lyons (Columbia, S: University of South Carolina Press, 1973), p.
167.
 40. Apostle, Aristotle’s On the Soul, p. 51.
 41. Sadra reiterates the same point, among other places, in his commentary
on the Metaphysics of Ibn Sina’s Shifa’. Cf. Sharh, Vol. I, p. 613.
 42. Aristotle, De Anima, 429b 25–30.
 43. Cf. David Ross, Aristotle (London and New York: Routledge, 1995, 6th
edition), pp. 153–156. Cf. Asfar, I, 3, pp. 317–318 where Sadra quotes
from the Theology of Aristotle to prove Aristotle’s acceptance of the
unification argument.
 44. Themistius explains the analogy of light as follows: ‘[98,35 (430a 15–
17)] As light when supervening on potential sight and potential colors
produces both actual sight and actual colors, so too this actual intellect
advances the potential intellect, and not only makes it an actual intellect,
but also constitutes its potential objects of thought as actual objects.
These are the enmattered forms, i.e., the universal thoughts assembled
from particular objects of perception. […] when the productive intellect
encounters it [i.e., the potential intellect] and takes over this ‘matter’ of
thoughts, the potential intellect becomes one with it, and becomes able
to make transitions, and to combine and divide thoughts, and to observe
thoughts from [the perspective of] one another.’ Themistius, On
Aristotle’s On the Soul, p. 123; for the Arabic, see An Arabic Translation
of Themistius’ Commentary, p. 181.
 45. Sadra quotes the term from Alexander’s De Intellectu as al-‘aql alladhi
min kharij. See Asfar, IV, p. 433.
 46. This is how St. Thomas Aquinas explains the difference between the two
philosophers in the Summa Theologica, I, Q, 79. Cf. also Majid Fakhry,
Averroes (Oxford, UK: Oneworld, 2001), pp. 152–153.
 47. Cf. Herbert A. Davidson, AlFarabi, Avicenna, and Averroes on Intellect:
Their Cosmologies, Theories of the Active Intellect, and Theories of
Human Intellect (New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1992),
pp. 13–18.
 48. See also the following statement by Aristotle: ‘…and thought thinks on
itself because it shares the nature of the object of thought; for it becomes
an object of thought in coming into contact with and thinking its object
so that thought and object of thought are the same. For that which is
capable of receiving the object of thought, i.e., essence, is thought.’
Metaphysics, 1072b 19–23.
 49. Kitab al-najat, ed. Majid Fakhry (Beirut, Lebanon: Dar al-Ufuq al-Jadidah,
1985), pp. 207–209. The same view is stated in the Shifa’. Cf. Avicenna’s De

--- Sayfa 95 ---
72
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
Anima: Being the Psychological Part of Kitab al-Shifa’, ed. Fazlur Rahman
(London: Oxford University Press, 1959), pp. 58–60.
 50. See Asfar, I, 3, 427; II, 2, 221; III, 1, 97; IV, 2, 180.
 51. See De Lacy O’Leary, How Greek Science Passed to the Arabs (London;
1949), pp. 21–29.
 52. Cf. R. W. Sharples, ‘Alexander of Aphrodisias: Scholasticism and
Innovation’ in Aufstieg und Niedergang der Römischen Welt, W. Haase
and H. Temporini (eds.), (Berlin-New York: W. de Gruyter, 1987), Part
II, 36.2, pp. 1177–1178.
 53. H. B. Gottschalk provides a valuable discussion of Alexander’s
intellectual environment and his place among the Greek commentators
of Aristotle in his ‘Aristotelian Philosophy in the Roman World From the
Time of Cicero to the End of the Second Century ad’ in Aufstieg und
Niedergang der Römischen Welt, Part II, 36.2 (1079–1174), especially
pp. 1154–1164.
 54. The attribution of the De Intellectu to Alexander of Aphrodisias is not
without controversy. Schroeder, Todd and Moraux doubt its authorship
by Alexander. See Frederic M. Schroeder and Robert B. Todd, Two Greek
Aristotelian Commentators on the Intellect, the De Intellectu Attributed
to Alexander of Aphrodisias and Themistius’ Paraphrase of Aristotle’s
De Anima 3.4-8 (Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Medieval Studies, 1990),
pp. 6–7.
 55. Porphyry, Vita Plotini, (Napoli, Italy: G. Machiaroli, 1946), 14.13.
 56. Schroeder and Todd, Two Greek Aristotelian Commentators, p. 5; F. E.
Peters, The Harvest of Hellenism (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1970),
p. 375; Fazlur Rahman, Avicenna’s Psychology (London: Oxford
University Press, 1952), p. 5.
 57. Cf. Phillip Merlan, Monopsychism, Mysticism, Metaconsciousness (The
Hague, 1963), p. 122 and ‘Greek Philosophy from Plato to Plotinus’ in
The Cambridge History of Later Greek and Early Medieval Philosophy,
ed. A. H. Armstrong (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press,
1967), pp. 117–120.
 58. Ibrahim Madkour, La Place d’al-Farabi dans l’école philosophique
musulmane (Paris: Librairie d’Amerique et d’Orient, 1934), p. 186.
 59. Cf. Peri Nous/De Intellectu 106.19–110.7 in Schroeder and Todd, Two
Greek Aristotelian Commentators, pp. 46–52. Peri Nous is also translated
in Alexander of Aphrodisias, Supplement to ‘On the Soul,’ tr. R. W.
Sharples (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2004), pp. 24–44. For
Alexander’s role in the transition from Aristotelianism to neo-Platonism,
see Blumenthal, Aristotle and Neoplatonism in Late Antiquity (Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press, 1996), pp. 7–19 and 151–170.
 60. I borrow the term from Robert Wisnovsky, Avicenna’s Metaphysics in
Context (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2003), Introduction.
 61. Cf. Sharples, ‘Alexander of Aphrodisias,’ pp. 1220–1223.

--- Sayfa 96 ---
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
73
 62. In this limited sense, Duhem is right in citing Alexander, Themistius,
John Philoponus and Simplicius among the ‘sources of the Neoplatonic
philosophy of the Arabs.’ Cf. Pierre Duhem, Le système du monde:
Histoire des doctrines cosmologique de Platon à Copernic (Paris:
Librairie Scientifique Hermann, 1954), IV, pp. 405–422.
 63. A good example of this is how parts of Proclus’ Elements of Theology
made their way into the Arabic works of Alexander. See Fritz
Zimmermann, ‘Proclus Arabus Rides Again,’ Arabic Science and
Philosophy, Vol. 4 (1994), pp. 9–51. For Zimmerman’s equally important
thesis that the ‘circle of al-Kindi’ treated Plotinus and Proclus, the two
great champions of Neoplatonism, as commentators of Aristotle and
Alexander, see his ‘The Origins of the So-Called Theology of Aristotle’
in J. Kraye, W. F. Ryan and C. B. Schmitt (eds.) Pseudo-Aristotle in the
Middle Ages: The Theology and Other Texts (London: The Warburg
Institute, 1986), pp. 110–240. On Proclus Arabus and his role in the
consolidation of Islamic Neoplatonism, see Gerhard Endress, Proclus
Arabus: Zwanzig Abschnitte aus der Institutio Theologica in arabischer
Übersetzungen (Beirut and Wiesbaden: Orient-Institut der Deutschen
Morgenländischen Gesellschaft 1973).
 64. Cf. Richard Walzer, ‘Aristotle’s Active Intellect in Greek and Early
Islamic Philosophy’ in Plotino e il Neoplatonismo in Oriente e in
Occidente (Rome, Italy: Accademia Nazionale Dei Lincei, 1974), p. 431.
 65. H. J. Blumenthal, Aristotle and Neoplatonism, p. 15.
 66. This is how al-Farabi refers to him in the Mabadi’ ara’ ahl al-madinat
al-fadilah, ed. and tr. Richard Walzer as On the Perfect State (Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press, 1985), p. 54.
 67. Ibn Abi Usaybi‘ah, ‘Uyun al-anba’ fi tabaqat al-atibba’, ed. M. Basil
‘Uyun al-Sud (Beirut, Lebanon: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah, 1998), pp.
93–4. For more on this, see Fehmi Jadaane L’Influence du stoïcisme sur
la pensée musulamane (Beyrouth, Lebanon: Dar el-Machreq Editeurs,
1968), pp. 48–50. The Stoic challenge of the 2nd and 3rd centuries ad
is evident from the fact that Alexander did not write a commentary on
the Nicomachean Ethics but authored his own Ethical Problems as well
as a treatise on destiny. Cf. Arthur Madigan, ‘Alexander of Aphrodisias:
The Book of Ethical Problems’ in Aufstieg und Niedergang der
Römischen Welt, Part II, 36.2, pp. 1260–1279; and Gottschalk,
‘Aristotelian Philosophy in the Roman World’, pp. 1161–1162.
 68. ‘After Aristotle there was a group who followed his path and commented
upon his books. Among the brightest were Themistius, Alexander of
Aphrodisias, and Porphyry. These three are the most learned in the books
of Aristotle and the most established in [the understanding of] the books
of philosophy.’ Sa‘id al-Andalusi, Tabaqat al-umam ed. Husayn Mu’nas
(Cairo, Egypt: Dar al-Ma‘arif, 1998), p. 39. Cf. Sadra’s reference to
Themistius on the temporal origination of the world in Huduth, p. 201.

--- Sayfa 97 ---
74
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
 69. Moritz Steinschneider, Die Arabischen Űbersetzungen aus dem
Griechischen (Austria: Akademische Drück—U. Verlagsanstalt, 1960),
p. 96; F. E. Peters, Aristoteles Arabus: The Oriental Translations and
Commentaries on the Aristotelian Corpus (Leiden, Holland: E. J. Brill,
1968), pp. 58–61; A. Badawi, La Transmission de la philosophique
grecque au monde arabe (Paris: Librairie Philosophique J. Vrin, 1987),
p. 112. For the Arabic text of the Peri Nous/De Intellectu see A. Badawi,
Shuruh ‘ala aristu mafqudah fi’l-yunaniyyah wa rasa’il ukhra (Beirut,
Lebanon: Dar al-Mashriq, 1971), pp. 31–42; for the Greek text, see pp.
273–280. See also J. Finnegan, ‘Texte arabe du PERI NOU d’Alexandre
d’Aphrodise’ in Mélanges Louis Massignon (Damas, 1957), pp. 133–152.
Cf. the Greek original in Alexandri Aphrodisiensis praeter Commentaria,
Scripta Minora, I, ed. Ivo Bruns (Berolini, Lebanon: G. Reimer, 1997–
1892), pp. 106–113.
 70. For Alexander’s short treatises in Arabic translation see Badawi, Shuruh
‘ala aristu, pp. 19–82 and Aristu ‘ind al-‘arab (Cairo, Egypt: Maktabat
al-Nahdat al-Misriyyah, 1947), pp. 253–308. Alexander’s three treatises
(1) ‘fi al-surah wa annaha tamam al-harakah wa kamaluha ‘ala ra’y
aristu’, (2) ‘fi anna al-fi‘la a‘ammu min al-harakah ‘ala ra’y aristu’, and
(3) ‘fi ibtal qawl man qala annahu la yakunu shay’ illa min shay’ wa
ithbat anna kulla shay’ innama yakunu la min shay’’ have been thoroughly
reviewed in Ahmad Hasnawi, ‘Alexandre d’Aphrodise vs Jean Philopon:
Notes sur Quelques Traités d’Alexandre ‘Perdus’ en Grec, Conservé en
Arabe,’ Arabic Science and Philosophy, Vol. 4 (1994), pp. 53–109.
 71. Ibn Abi Usaybi‘a, ‘Uyun al-anba,’ p. 93.
 72. G. Théry, Autour de décret de 1210. II: Alexandre d’Aphrodise: Aperçu
sur l’influence de sa noétique (Le Saulchoir Kain, 1926), pp. 34–36; E.
Gilson, ‘Les sources gréco-arabes de l’augustinisme avicennisant’
Archives d’Histoire Doctrinale et Littéraire du Moyen Âge IV (1929),
pp. 22–26; and Duhem, Le système du monde, IV, p. 405. A. M. Goichon
describes al-Kindi’s Risalah fi’l-‘aql as simply ‘inspired by Alexander
of Aphrodisias’ in her La Philosophie d’Avicenne et son influence en
europe médiévale (Paris: Librairie d’Amerique et d’Orient, 1951), p.
11.
 73. Fazlur Rahman is of this opinion; Avicenna’s Psychology, pp. 90–93.
 74. For those who oppose the previous assumption, see M. Abu Rida, Rasa’il
al-Kindi al-falsafiyyah (Cairo, Egypt: Dar al-Fikr al-‘Arabi, 1978), Vol. I,
p. 313; Jean Jolivet, L’Intellect selon Kindi (Leiden, Holland: E. J. Brill,
1971), p. 32; George Atiyeh, al-Kindi: The Philosopher of the Arabs
(Islamabad, Pakistan: Islamic Research Institute, 1967), p. 118. Jolivet’s
work (pp. 31–46) contains a well-informed discussion of the controversy.
 75. In his ‘Notes’ on Aristotle’s De Anima entitled al-Ta‘liqat ‘ala hawashi
kitab al-nafs li-aristutalis, Ibn Sina, in criticizing the defenders of the
unification argument, refers to a group of people who ‘make the active

--- Sayfa 98 ---
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
75
intellect the first deity (al-ilah al-awwal).’ Ibn Sina does not mention any
names in the passage. This is probably a reference to some ‘Alexandrist’
philosophers or perhaps more accurately to the ‘Porphyrians’ whom Ibn
Sina criticizes severely. For the passage, see Ta‘liqat in Badawi, Aristu
‘ind al-‘arab, p. 92.
 76. Risalah fi’l-‘aql, in Jean Jolivet, L’Intellect selon Kindi, p. 158. But the
Arabic translation of the Peri Nous says that li-anna’l-‘aql bi’l-fi’l huwa
abadan ma‘qul. Cf. Badawi, Shuruh ‘ala aristu, p. 34.
 77. For Alexander’s place in al-Kindi’s cosmology, see Silvia Fazzo and
Hillary Wiesner, ‘Alexander of Aphrodisias in the Kindi-Circle and in
al-Kindi’s Cosmology.’ Arabic Sciences and Philosophy, Vol. 3 (1993),
pp. 119–153.
 78. Gutas draws attention to the fact that the references to specific Greek
philosophers in Ibn Sina’s later philosophical works decrease sharply,
which points to Ibn Sina’s desire to dissociate himself from the Greco-
Alexandrian commentators of the First Teacher. Cf. Gutas, Avicenna and
the Aristotelian Tradition: Introduction to Reading Avicenna’s
Philosophical Works (Leiden, Holland: E. J. Brill, 1988), pp. 290–292.
 79. Najat, p. 61. According to Gutas, Ibn Sina uses the word muhassil ‘to
describe the most accomplished philosophers in the Aristotelian tradition,
and in particular Alexander of Aphrodisias.’ Avicenna and the Aristotelian
Tradition, p. 189.
 80. Cf. L. E. Goodman, Avicenna (London: Routledge, 1992), pp. 134–
138.
 81. Mafatih, Vol. II, p. 638: ‘As for the souls that have not reached actuality
after potentiality, the philosophers have disagreed about its subsistence
and perishing. Some among them like Alexander of Aphrodisias have
held that they perish with the perishing of the body.’
 82. Huduth, p. 193.
 83. Averroes, De Anima, I. III, comm. 15, 159, d–e, p. 158 in Alain de
Libera, L’intelligence et la pensee: grand commentaire du De Anima:
Livre III (429a 10–435b 25) (Paris: Flammarion, 1998). Yet, Alexander
is not totally absent from Ibn Rushd’s theory of the intellect, which, as
G. Théry points out in Autour du decrèt de 1210, p. 41, is geared in many
ways toward establishing a harmony between Alexander and Themistius.
Cf. Talkhis kitab al-nafs (‘Averroes’ Middle Commentary on Aristotle’s
de Anima’) ed. Alfred L. Ivry, rev. Muhsin Mahdi (Cairo, Egypt: Majlis
al-‘Ala’ li’l-Thaqafah, 1994), pp. 123, 125, 128. See also Arthur Hyman,
‘Aristotle’s Theory of the Intellect and its Interpretation by Averroes’
in Studies in Aristotle, Dominic J. O’Meara (ed.), (Washington, DC:
Catholic University of America Press 1981), pp. 161–191.
 84. Madkour draws attention to this point and links al-Farabi’s concept of
conjunction (ittisal) with the active intellect to the tradition of Islamic
mysticism represented by Junayd al-Baghdadi and Mansur al-Hallaj on

--- Sayfa 99 ---
76
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
the one hand, and to the School of Illumination, on the other. See his La
Place d’al-Farabi, pp. 196–209.
 85. Cf. Dominique Urvoy, Ibn Rushd (Averroes) (London and New York:
Routledge, 1991), p. 43; also pp. 95–96. It would make for a fascinating
study to investigate the precise relationship between Ibn Rushd,
Alexander and the other philosophers Ibn Rushd accuses as ‘followers
of Alexander.’
 86. Merlan, Monopsychism, p. 20.
 87. Cf. Merlan, Monopsychism, p. 20. See also his From Platonism to
Neoplatonism (The Hague: M. Nijhoff, 1953), pp. 54–55.
 88. Quoted in Schroeder and Todd, Two Greek Aristotelian Commentators,
p. 14. Cf. Fotinis, The De Anima, p. 117. Cf. the Arabic translation of
the Peri Nous in Badawi, Shuruh ‘ala aristu, p. 32.
 89. Cf. also L. E. Goodman, Avicenna (London: Routledge, 1992), pp.
135–136.
 90. This reading of Alexander depends largely on that of Merlan, ‘Greek
Philosophy from Plato to Plotinus,’ p. 117. See also Jean Jolivet, ‘Étapes
dans l’histoire de l’intellect agent’ in Perspectives arabes et médiévales
sur la tradition scientifique et philosophique grecque, ed. A. Hasnawi,
A. Elamrani-Jamal and M. Aouad (Paris: Peeters, 1997), pp. 572–575.
 91. Ibn Sina, for instance, criticizes Alexander on this point. See his Risalah
fi ithbat al-nubuwwah, ed. M. Marmura (Beirut, Lebanon: Dar al-Nahar
li’n-nashr, 1991, 2.nd edition), p. 52, par. 30. For Sadra’s reaction, see
Asfar, IV, 1, p. 399.
 92. Cf. Francois Nuyens, L’évolution de la psychologie d’Aristote (Louvain,
Belgium: Editions De L’Institut Superieur de Philosophie, 1948), p. 310.
 93. Merlan, ‘Greek Philosophy,’ p. 65.
 94. Alexander, De Anima, 3.19, 86, p. 113.
 95. Ibid. 3.19, p. 115. Cf. the Arabic translation in Badawi, Shuruh ‘ala
aristu, p. 35. Alexander further states that ‘intellect which is [always] in
act became one with the pure intelligible from the very first moment that
it began to know it, in virtue of the principle that in every cognitive act,
the intellect, in its act of knowing, takes on a likeness to the thing known
and consequently becomes itself of the same sort as the thing known.’
De Anima, 3.29, 90, p. 119.
 96. De Anima, 3. 19, p. 118.
 97. Peri Nous, 108.7; Schroeder and Todd, Two Greek Aristotelian
Commentators, p. 49.
 98. Peri Nous, 113.18; Schroeder and Todd, Two Greek Aristotelian
Commentators, p. 58; Badawi, Shuruh ‘ala aristu, p. 42.
 99. Cf. Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologica, I, Q, 79; also De Unitate
Intellectus Contra Averroistas, tr. B. H. Zedler, On the Unity of the Intellect
Against the Averroists (Milwaukee, WI: Marquette University Press, 1968),
Chapter I. Cf. also Franz Brentano’s old yet still valuable survey

--- Sayfa 100 ---
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
77
in ‘Nous Poietikos: Survey of Earlier Interpretations’, translated from
Brentano’s Die Psychologie des Aristoteles (1867) in Essays on Aristotle’s
De Anima, ed. Martha C. Nussbaum and Amelie O. Rorty (Oxford, UK:
Clarendon Press, 1992), pp. 313–341.
 100. Franz Rosenthal, ‘As-ŝayĥ al-yunani and the Arabic Plotinus Source’
Orientalia 21, (1952,), pp. 461–492; 22 (1953), pp. 370–400 and 24
(1955), pp. 42–66; Badawi, La Transmission, p. 46; Badawi, Aflutin ‘ind
al-‘arab, (Cairo, Egypt: Dar al-Nahdat al-‘Arabiyyah, 1966), pp. 1–2. In
the Huduth, p. 228, Sadra quotes from Shahrastani’s Milal where the
expression al-shaykh al-yunani appears between the names of Aristotle
and Diogenes.
 101. Franz Rosenthal, ‘Plotinus in Islam: The Power of Anonymity’ in Plotino
e il Neoplatonismo in Oriente e in Occidente (Rome: 1974), pp. 437–
446.
 102. I borrow the term from Pierre Hadot. What he has to say about the place
of ‘creative mistakes’ in Hellenistic and Scholastic philosophy holds true
for similar cases in Islamic philosophy. Cf. His ‘Philosophy, Exegesis,
and Creative Mistakes’ in Philosophy as a Way of Life, pp. 71–77.
 103. For purposes of style, see the reference to al-Himsi in al-Safadi’s al-
Ghayth al-mujassam where al-Safadi describes al-Himsi along with
Yuhanna ibn al-Bitriq as belonging to the school of literalist translators,
for which he criticizes them. The other school, which he praises, is that
of Hunayn ibn Ishaq where the translator ‘considers a whole sentence,
ascertains its full meaning and then expresses it in Arabic with a sentence
identical in meaning, without concern for the correspondence individual
words.’ Quoted in Franz Rosenthal, The Classical Heritage in Islam
(London and New York: Routledge, 1975), p. 17. The reference to
al-Himsi as a literalist translator is interesting in view of the fact that
al-Himsi’s work on the Uthulujya is a fine example of adaptation rather
than straightforward translation.
 104. Cf. Peter Adamson, The Arabic Plotinus: A Philosophical Study of the
Theology of Aristotle (London: Duckworth, 2002), pp. 17–21.
 105. Sadra takes note of al-Kindi’s role in the refinement of the Arabic
translation of the Enneads. See Asfar, I, 2, p. 68. The full text of the
Uthulujya has been edited and published by Badawi in his Aflutin ‘ind
al-‘arab. The English translation is in Plotini Opera II, ed. P. Henry and
H.-R. Schwyzer (Paris and Brussels: Desclée de Brouwer, 1959). For the
history of the Uthulujya, see Badawi, Aflutin ‘ind al-‘arab, pp. 1–66; F.
W. Zimmermann, ‘The Origins of the So-Called Theology of Aristotle,’
pp. 110–240; and M. Aouad, ‘La ‘Théologie d’Aristote’ et autres texts
du Plotinus Arabus’ in Dictionnarie des philosophes antiques (Paris:
Editions du CNRS, 1989), pp. 541–590.
 106. Kalam fi khayr al-mahd, a work by Proclus, is as important as the
Uthulujya for the Neoplatonic interpretation of Aristotle in the Islamic

--- Sayfa 101 ---
78
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
and Medieval Latin worlds. The work is also known under the name
Kitab al-idah fi’l-khayr al-mahd. It is not clear why and how the Latin
title Liber de Causis was adopted. The full text of the Kalam fi khayr
al-mahd has been edited and published in Badawi, Aflatuniyyat al-
muhdatha ‘ind al-‘arab (Cairo, Egypt: Maktabat al-Nahdat al-Misriyyah,
1955), pp. 1–33. For an evaluation of al-Khayr al-mahd and its place in
Islamic philosophy, see Richard C. Taylor, ‘The Kalam fi Mahd al-Khair
(Liber de Causis) in the Islamic Philosophical Milieu’ in Pseudo-Aristotle
in the Middle Ages, pp. 37–52. See also Badawi, La Transmission, pp.
60–72.
 107. Cf. Badawi, La Transmission, pp. 47–59.
 108. Cf. Asfar, I, 3, 156–158; II, 2, 196–272; III, 1, 310–312. Sadra has also
devoted several treatises to the temporal origination of the world. See,
for instance, Huduth, especially Chapters 9 and 11.
 109. Cf. Sadra’s remarks on this, Asfar, I, 3, pp. 112–113.
 110. Ibn Sina concurs: ‘…corporeal bodies are the primary particulars of the
world through which this [universal] whole (al-kull), which is one, is put
in order, and the primary particulars of the world are without doubt the
simples (basa’it)’. Shifa’, Tabi‘iyyat, ed. I. Madkour and M. Qasim
(Cairo, Egypt: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Arabi, 1960), p. 77.
 111. Extract number 3 in Badawi, Aflutin ‘ind al-‘arab, p. 185, repeats the
same argument.
 112. As Sadra notes, what is meant by huwiyyah here is existence (al-wujud).
Cf. Asfar, III, 2, p. 273. This reading is in keeping with the Greek
original where the expression to on is used. Obviously, this is a reference
to Plotinus’ central concern to define the One as the ‘beyond-being.’
 113. Cf. Dominic J. O’Meara, Plotinus (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press,
1995), p. 50.
 114. Enneads, V. 3. 10. Tr. Armstrong, p. 105.
 115. Enneads, V. 3. 11, p. 109.
 116. Cf. Enneads, V. 3. 14 and VI. 9. 3 where the idea of the ineffability of
the One is developed.
 117. Cf. A. H. Armstrong, ‘Plotinus’ in The Cambridge History of Later Greek
and Early Medieval Philosophy, ed. A. H. Armstrong (Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, 1967), p. 237. See also Kenny, Mystical
Monotheism, pp. 100–102.
 118. Armstrong, ‘Plotinus,’ p. 238.
 119. Adamson, The Arabic Plotinus, pp. 112–115.
 120. This is a reference to Zeno’s definition of God as ‘warmed breath.’ Cf.
Pierre Hadot, Plotinus or the Simplicity of Vision, tr. M. Chase (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1993), p. 37, n. 5.
 121. The etymological continuity between ‘life’ (hayat) and ‘animal’
(hayawan) is lost in English.
 122. The same passage is also quoted in the Shawahid, pp. 175–178.

--- Sayfa 102 ---
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
79
 123. Asfar, I, 3, p. 341.
 124. Enneads, V, 9, 5, tr. J. P. Kenny, Mystical Monotheism, p. 113.
 125. For more on Plotinus’ controversial idea in the Enneads, V. 5 that
‘intellectual beings are not outside the Intellectual-Principle’ (hoti ouch
exo tou nou ta noeta) and an evaluation of the charges of solipsism
against Plato and Plotinus, see A. H. Armstrong, ‘The Background of the
Doctrine that the Intelligibles are not Outside the Intellect’ in Les Sources
de Plotin (Vandoeuvres-Geneve, 1957), pp. 393–413; Kenny, Mystical
Monotheism, pp. 93–96.
 126. Enneads, V. 5. 1; tr. Armstrong, p. 159.
 127. Cf. also Enneads, V. 9. 5.
 128. Asfar, I, 2, p. 68.
 129. Enneads, V.9.5; tr. Armstrong, p. 299.
 130. Cf. Asfar, I, 3, pp. 280, 284, 297, 451, 465.
 131. Cf. Enneads, V. 3.5 and O’Meara, Plotinus, pp. 40–41.
 132. Fakhr al-Din al-Razi makes a note of the same point in al-Mabahith al-
mashriqiyah (Beirut, Lebanon: Dar al-Kitab al-‘Arabi, 1990), Vol. I, p. 448.
 133. Asfar, I, 1, p. 114; the same quote appears in Asfar, I, 3, 395.
 134. Cf. the English translation by Atiyeh in al-Kindi, p. 213.
 135. Jean Jolivet, L’Intellect, pp. 18–19.
 136. Merlan, Monopsychism, p. 1.
 137. Cf. the English translation by Atiyeh in al-Kindi, p. 214.
 138. One should mention also al-Siyasat al-madaniyyah, which is also known
as Mabadi’ al-mawjudat. Cf. Kitab al-siyasat al-madaniyyah, ed. Fawzi
Najjar (Beirut, Lebanon: al-Matba‘ah al-Katulikiyyah, 1964). Al-Farabi’s
epistemology in general is outlined in his other works including Ihsa’
al-‘ulum and Kitab al-huruf. Cf. Ian Richard Netton, Al-Farabi and His
School (London and New York: Routledge, 1992), pp. 36–37.
 139. Falsafat Aristutalis, ed. Muhsin Mahdi (Beirut, Lebanon: 1961), p. 128.
Cf. Miriam Galston, Politics and Excellence: The Political Philosophy of
Al Farabi (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1990), pp. 82–83.
 140. al-Farabi, al-Siyasat al-madaniyyah, p. 79.
 141. Cf. Davidson, AlFarabi, Avicenna, and Averroes on Intellect, p. 55.
 142. al-Madinah, p. 52.
 143. al-Farabi’s emanationism has been a subject of debate in modern
scholarship. Muhsin Mahdi argues that emanationism appears only in
al-Farabi’s ‘popular’ works such as the Political Regime and therefore is
not a main tenet of his philosophy. Cf. Muhsin Mahdi, AlFarabi’s
Philosophy of Plato and Aristotle (Ithaca, NY: Cornell Paperbacks,
1962), pp. 3–4. See also Miriam Galston, ‘A Re-examination of al-
Farabi’s Neoplatonism,’ Journal of the History of Philosophy 15 (1977),
pp. 13–32 and Therese-Anne Druart, ‘al-Farabi and Emanationism’ in
Studies in Medieval Philosophy, ed. John F. Wippel (Washington, DC:
The Catholic University of America Press, 1987), pp. 23–43 where she

--- Sayfa 103 ---
80
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
proposes a tripartite division of al-Farabi’s works as ‘Aristotelian,’
‘Programmatic’, and ‘Emanationist’. That emanationism has been a
controversial issue even among the Muslim Peripatetics is evinced by
the fact that Ibn Rushd criticizes al-Farabi for adopting emanationism as
an Aristotelian idea. Cf. Averroes’ Tahafut al-tahafut (The Incoherence
of the Incoherence), tr. Simon Van Den Bergh (London: Luzac and Co.,
1969), p. 87 ff. See also Barry S. Kogan, ‘Averroes and the Theory of
Emanation,’ Medieval Studies 43 (1981), pp. 384–404.
 144. I adopt the term ‘necessitarianism’ from Norman Kretzmann, ‘A General
Problem of Creation: Why Would God Create Anything at All?’ in Scott
MacDonald (ed.), Being and Goodness: The Concept of the Good in
Metaphysics and Philosophical Theology (Ithaca and London: Cornell
University Press, 1991), pp. 208–228. Creation of the universe by a
necessity of the Divine Nature has been criticized by later theologians
and philosophers on the grounds that this model overlooks the Divine
Will. Such theologians as Ghazali and Fakhr al-Din al-Razi on the one
hand, and Mulla Sadra on the other, have raised a number of objections
against the emanationist model. Cf. Asfar, III, 2, p. 111. I have dealt with
this problem in relation to Sadra’s defense of the ‘best of all possible
worlds’ (ahsan al-nizam) argument in my ‘Mulla Sadra on Theodicy and
the Best of All Possible Worlds,’ Oxford Journal of Islamic Studies, 18:2
(2007), pp. 183–201.
 145. al-Madinah, pp. 90–91.
 146. al-Madinah, pp. 100–104. A more elaborate analysis of the scale of
emanation is to be found in Ibn Sina, Isharat, Vol. 3, pp. 242–260.
 147. al-Madinah, p. 54.
 148. Cf. Fazlur Rahman, Prophecy in Islam: Philosophy and Orthodoxy
(London: George Allen and Unwin Ltd.), pp. 12–14.
 149. al-Farabi, Risalah fi’l-‘aql, ed. Maurice Bouyges (Beyrouth, Lebanon:
Dar el-Machreq, 1983), pp. 20–24.
 150. al-Madinah, p. 244. Walzer’s translation of ‘ala’l-wajh as ‘as it were,’
which is also adopted by Davidson, would do well too. Cf. al-Madinah,
p. 245 and Davidson, AlFarabi, Avicenna, and Averroes on Intellect, p.
54.
 151. al-Madinah, pp. 52–53.
 152. At least this is what al-Farabi has been accused of on the basis of a report
by Ibn Bajjah who claims to have drawn his conclusion from al-Farabi’s
lost commentary on the Nichomachean Ethics. Interestingly enough, this
is one of the few points for which Sadra criticizes al-Farabi. Cf. Asfar,
IV, 2, pp. 150–151. Sadra criticizes Alexander ‘the Roman’ (al-rumi) on
this point in Huduth, p. 193. On al-Farabi and the immortality of the
personal soul, see Majid Fakhry, al-Farabi: Founder of Islamic
Neoplatonism (Oxford, UK: Oneworld, 2002), p. 119; Oliver Leaman, An
Introduction to Classical Islamic Philosophy (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge

--- Sayfa 104 ---
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
81
University Press, 1985), pp. 111–112; and Davidson, AlFarabi, Avicenna,
and Averroes, on Intellect, pp. 70–73.
 153. Kenny, Mystical Monotheism, p. 4.
 154. al-Farabi, Jawabat li-masa’il su’ila ‘anha in Risalatan falsafiyyatan ed.
Ja’far Al-i Yasin (Beirut, Lebanon: Dar al-Manahil, 1987), p. 104.
 155. In his ‘Uyun al-masa’il, al-Farabi adds the adjective ‘pure’ (mahd): ‘[The
Necessary Being] is pure goodness; it is pure intellect, pure intelligible,
and pure intellector; and all these three things are one and the same in
it.’ ‘Uyun al-masa’il in al-Majmu,’ ed. Ahmad Naji al-Jamali and M.
Amin al-Khanji (Cairo, Egypt: Matba‘at al-Sa‘adah, 1907), p. 67.
 156. Risalah fi’l-‘aql, p. 4. A shorter discussion of the multiple meanings of
the word intellect appears in Ibn Sina’s Kitab al-hudud. See the English
translation in Kiki Kennedy-Day, Books of Definition in Islamic
Philosophy (London and New York: RoutledgeCurzon, 2003), pp. 102–
104.
 157. Risalah fi’l-‘aql, p. 7.
 158. Risalah fi’l-‘aql, pp. 8–9.
 159. Risalah fi’l-‘aql, pp. 9–12.
 160. Asfar, III, pp. 421–427.
 161. This is how al-Farabi’s philosopher-ruler claims supremacy over others
and establishes order in the political body: ‘This is the Sovereign (al-
ra’is) over whom no other man rules in any way. He is the Imam. He is
the first sovereign of the virtuous city, the sovereign of the virtuous
ummah, and the sovereign of the entire inhabited world,’ al-Madinah,
p. 246. Cf. Muhsin Mahdi, AlFarabi and the Foundations of Islamic
Political Philosophy, p. 132.
 162. Cf. Davidson, AlFarabi, Avicenna and Averroes on Intellect, pp. 52–55.
 163. St. Thomas Aquinas reiterates this very point when he says that ‘what
acts is nobler than what is acted on, an active principle is nobler than its
material’ and ‘intelligibility depends upon actuality.’ See his commentary
on the De Anima in Aristotle’s De Anima in the Version of William of
Moerbeke and the Commentary of St. Thomas Aquinas, tr. K. Foster and
S. Humphries (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1954), paragraph
725, pp. 424 and 733, p. 428.
 164. Averroès: L’intelligence et la pensée, tr. Alain de Libera (Paris: GF
Flammarion, 1998), p. 97. The original of Ibn Rushd’s commentary on
Aristotle’s De Anima is lost in Arabic and exists only in Latin. The
French translation by Libera is based on the extant Latin version of Ibn
Rushd’s commentary on the De Anima, Book III (429 a10–435 b25).
 165. Cf. Kindi, Fi’l-‘aql, p. 2, in Jolivet, L’Intellect, p. 159.
 166. Fi’l-‘aql, pp. 35–36. Cf. also ‘Uyun al-masa’il in al-Majmu,’ p. 67.
 167. Cf. Asfar, III, 1, p. 180.
 168. Asfar, I, 3, p. 427.

--- Sayfa 105 ---
82
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
 169. This is where Sadra invokes al-Farabi in support of the view that
multiplicity of names does not mean multiplicity of essence. Cf. Asfar,
III, 1, p. 121.
 170. Cf. Sadra’s quote from al-Farabi to this effect; Asfar, III, 1, p. 217.
 171. J. Finnegan, ‘Avicenna’s Refutation of Porphyrius’ Avicenna
Commemoration Volume, (Calcutta, 1956), p. 197.
 172. The word mutasaddirin appears in some manuscripts as mutaqaddimin,
i.e., the ancients. In his quote from the Shifa’, Sadra uses the latter; Cf.
Ittihad in Majmu‘ah, p. 80. Finnegan reads it simply as ‘Porphyrians’;
‘Avicenna’s Refutation of Porphyrius,’ p. 187.
 173. In his gloss over this paragraph, Nasir al-Din al-Tusi notes that it was
the general view of the Peripatetic School to establish a unity between
intellect and its objects of intellection. Isharat, Vol. III, p. 293.
 174. Ibn Sina, Najat, pp. 186–187. Cf. also Kitab al-hudud in Kennedy, Books
of Definition, p. 112.
 175. Ibn Sina, Shifa’, Tabi‘iyyat, pp. 81–82.
 176. Tabi‘iyyat, p. 129. Cf. Goichon, Lexique de la langue philosophique
d’Ibn Sina (Avicenne) (Paris: Desclée de Brouwer, 1938), pp. 99–100.
 177. The second book of the Tabi‘iyyat of the Shifa’ (pp. 77–198) is devoted
to generation and corruption where Ibn Sina provides an extensive
analysis of the various views and theories about qualitative and
quantitative change, which has notoriously created problems for the
Peripatetics ever since Aristotle. Ibn Sina’s frustration with the whole
issue is clear from the following: ‘We cannot say anything comprehensive
about the attribution of these matters to one another. This is a disputed
issue without precision. Whoever wishes to encapsulate the whole matter
would run into difficulty. What we have heard about it has not convinced
us and we have not understood the matter fully. Let us hope someone
other than us understands it as it [should be understood].’ Tabi‘iyyat, p.
195.
 178. Avicenna’s De Anima, pp. 239–240.
 179. Cf. Rahman, Prophecy in Islam, pp. 16–17.
 180. Ibn Sina, Kitab al-hudud, p. 99, quoted in Goichon, Lexique, p. 428.
 181. Goichon, Lexique, p. 429.
 182. Cf. Walzer, ‘Aristotle’s Active Intellect,’ p. 433.
 183. In Sadra’s quote of this passage, the verb ‘hawwasa’ (Avicenna’s De
Anima, p. 240) is replaced by the verb ‘bayyana.’ Cf. Ittihad in
Majmu‘ah, p. 21.
 184. This is in sharp contrast to what Sadra has to say about Porphyry: ‘This
meaning—that is, the unification of the intellector and the intelligible—
was unveiled to the foremost of the Peripatetics, Porphyry, who was the
most excellent student of the most ancient teacher and the greatest
philosopher, Aristotle.’ Iksir al-‘arifin, 4.1.9, p. 58. For a similar
description of Porphyry, see Huduth, pp. 232–233. It is interesting to note

--- Sayfa 106 ---
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
83
that Ibn Sina uses the word ‘Sufi’ in relation to Porphyry, thus intimating
a relationship between the Greek Porphyrians and the Sufis.
 185. Cf. Fazlur Rahman, Prophecy in Islam, p. 16.
 186. This is a reference to Sadra’s theory of substantial motion (al-harakat
al-jawhariyyah) according to which change takes place in all categories
including substance.
 187. al-Mubahathat, par. 777 and 778, p. 268.
 188. Goichon, Lexique, pp. 434–435.
 189. In addition, Sadra mentions one more problem. According to him, if
‘…the active intellect or any of the separate substances become a form
for the soul with their own actual existence,’ then, since the actual
existence of the active intellect can unite with only one existence at a
time, all other souls would be deprived of it and become ignorant all at
once. Cf. Sharh, Vol. I, p. 606. For Sadra’s summary of the two points
mentioned above, see Asfar, I, 3, pp. 335–336.
 190. Ibn Sina brings up the same argument in al-Ta‘liqat, p. 93.
 191. Isharat, Vol. 3, p. 295.
 192. This is where the unification argument brings us to the shores of
monopsychism which, as attributed to Ibn Rushd and his Latin followers,
claims that there is only one soul for humanity. This view has caused
such a long controversy in Latin scholasticism that St. Thomas Aquinas
must have felt obliged to write a separate treatise to refute it. One
interesting incident illustrates the precarious nature of the matter: a
certain soldier in Paris, who had heard the argument of the Averroists
and was unwilling to atone for his sins, has said that ‘if the soul of the
blessed Peter is saved, I shall also be saved; for if we know by one
intellect, we shall share the same destiny.’ Quoted from William of
Tocco, an early biographer of Thomas Aquinas, in Saint Thomas Aquinas,
On the Unity of the Intellect Against the Averroists (Milwaukee, WI:
Marquette University Press, 1968), Preface.
 193. In the Mubahathat, par. 713, p. 242, Ibn Sina mentions another criticism
of the defenders of the unification argument without elaborating on it. In
response to the claim that the Necessary Being does not know other
things through its own essence, Ibn Sina says that he does not know any
such theory by the Mu’tazilites or the Greeks but attributes it to some
later philosophers. In his view, this ‘new’ theory which precludes God
from knowing things through His Essence comes close to the unification
argument.
 194. Avicenna’s De Anima, p. 235.
 195. Cf. Avicenna’s De Anima, p. 48.
 196. Avicenna’s De Anima, p. 50.
 197. Ibn Sina, al-Mabda’ wa’l-ma‘ad, ed. ‘Abd Allah Nurani (Tehran, Iran:
Danishgah-i Tehran, ah 1363), p. 6. Ibn Sina’s student Bahmanyar
concurs with his teacher. See his Kitab al-tahsil ed. M. Murtada

--- Sayfa 107 ---
84
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
Mutahhari (Tehran: The University of Tehran Press, 1375 (ah), 2nd
edition), pp. 573–574.
 198. Cf. al-Mubahathat, par. 427, p. 106; Ibn Sina’s De Anima, p. 241.
 199. For a partial English translation of the ‘Arshiyyah, see A. J. Arberry,
Avicenna on Theology (Westport, CT: Hyperion Press, INC., 1994,
Reprint edition), pp. 33–34. The Najat pp. 280–281 contains a section
almost identical to the ‘Arshiyyah quoted above. See also Isharat, Vol.
2, p. 292 where the question of self-knowledge is taken up again.
 200. Cf. Sadra, Iksir al-‘arifin, 4.1.10 in the Chittick edition, p. 58.
 201. Suhrawardi, Talwihat, in Ouevres philosophiques et mystiques, ed. Henry
Corbin, (Tèhèran-Paris, 1976), Tome I, p. 69.
 202. Ittihad in Majmu‘ah, pp. 91–92.
 203. Bahmanyar’s remarks confirm this point. Cf. Kitab al-tahsil, pp. 573–
574. In this sense, Gardet’s attempt to read Ibn Sina’s endorsement of
the first meaning of unification as lending support to his alleged
mysticism is rather misplaced. Cf. Louis Gardet, La Pensée religieuse
d’Avicenne (Ibn Sina) (Paris: Librairie Philosophique J. Vrin, 1951), pp.
153–157. See Rahman’s response to Gardet in Prophecy in Islam, pp.
27–28, note 29. Also Davidson, AlFarabi, Avicenna, and Averroes, on
Intellect, p. 105, note 125.
 204. Cf. Averroes, De Anima, I. III, comm. in Alain de Libera, L’intelligence
et la pensée, pp. 101 and 261, note 389. For more on Ibn Rushd’s critical
and occasionally ambiguous attitude toward Aristotelian commentators,
see Goffredo Quadri, La Philosophie arabe dans l’Europe medievale:
Des Origines à Averroès, (Paris: Payot, 1960), pp. 158–160 and Arthur
Hyman, ‘Averroes’ Theory of the Intellect and the Ancient Commentators’
in Averroes and the Aristotelian Tradition, ed. Gerhard Endress and Jan
Aersten (Leiden, Holland: Brill, 1999), pp. 188–198.
 205. For more on this, see Ibn Rushd, Talkhis kitab al-nafs (‘Averroes’ Middle
Commentary on Aristotle’s de Anima’), p. 128ff; The Epistle on the
Possibility of Conjunction with the Active Intellect by Ibn Rushd with the
Commentary of Moses Narboni, ed. Kalman P. Bland (New York: The
Jewish Theological Seminary of America, 1982); Averroes, Epitome of
Parva Naturalia, tr. Harry Blumberg (Cambridge, MA: The Medieval
Academy of America, 1961), pp. 43–44; Edouard H. Weber, ‘L’Identité
de l’intellect et de l’intelligible selon la version latine d’Averroés et son
interprétation par Thomas D’Aquin’, Arabic Sciences and Philosophy,
Vol. 8 (1998), pp. 233–257; Oliver Leaman, Averroes and His Philosophy
(Oxford, UK: Clarendon press, 1988), pp. 102–103; Ovey N. Mohammed,
Averroes’ Doctrine of Immortality: A Matter of Controversy (Ontario:
The Canadian Corporation for Studies in Religion, 1984), pp. 123–125.
 206. See Davidson, Al Farabi, Avicenna, and Averroes on Intellect, pp.
323–324; Arthur Hyman, ‘Aristotle’s Theory of the Intellect and Its
Interpretation by Averroes’ pp. 183–185; Paul Sydney Christ, The

--- Sayfa 108 ---
THE PROBLEM OF KNOWLEDGE
85
Psychology of the Active Intellect of Averroes (Philadelphia, 1926), pp.
34–56; Richard Taylor, ‘’The Future Life’ and Averroes’s Long
Commentary on the De Anima of Aristotle’ in Averroes and the
Enlightenment, ed. M. Wahba and M. Abousenna (New York: Prometheus
Books, 1996), pp. 263–277.
 207. Kitab al-mashari‘ wa’l-mutarahat, in Ouevres philosophiques et
mystiques, Tome I, p. 483. At the beginning of the al-Mashari‘,
Suhrawardi advises his readers to read his ‘Peripatetic’ works before
delving into Hikmat al-ishraq. Cf. Ibid., p. 194.
 208. Cf. Suhrawardi, Kitab al-mashari‘ wa’l-mutarahat, in Ouevres
philosophiques et mystiques, Tome I, pp. 474–475. For an evaluation of
this point in Suhrawardi’s thought, see Hossein Ziai, Knowledge and
Illumination, pp. 143–145.
 209. One can get a glimpse of this view from Suhrawardi’s treatment of
qualitative transformation (istihalah): ‘What is called ‘transformation’
takes place when a quality associated with a certain body ceases and
another quality takes its place. What is called ‘generation and corruption’
occurs when one form [associated with a thing] leaves it and another
form takes its place.’ Suhrawardi, The Book of Radiance (Partawnama),
tr. Hossein Ziai, (Irvine, CA: Mazda Publishers, 1998), p. 20.
 210. Suhrawardi, al-Mashari‘ wa’l-mutarahat, in Ouevres philosophiques et
mystiques, Tome 1, p. 501.
 211. In Oeuvres philosophiques et mystiques, Tome II, pp. 228–229. Cf.
English tr. J. Walbridge and H. Ziai, The Philosophy of Illumination
(Provo, UT: Brigham Young University Press, 1999), p. 148.
 212. Hikmat al-ishraq, par. 115 and 116.
 213. Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi, Durrat al-taj, ed. Muhammad Mishkat (Tehran,
Iran: Intisharat-i Hikmat, ah 1369, 2nd edition), p. 694. Cf. Mehdi
Aminrazavi, Suhrawardi and the School of Illumination, pp. 102–117;
H. Ziai, Knowledge and Illumination, pp. 147–166; John Walbridge, The
Leaven of the Ancients: Suhrawardi and the Heritage of the Greeks
(Albany: State University of New York Press, 2000), pp. 164–171.
 214. Hikmat al-ishraq, par. 118.
 215. Shams al-Din Muhammad Shahrazuri, Sharh hikmat al-ishraq, ed. H.
Ziai (Tehran, Iran: Institute for Cultural Studies and Research, 1993), p.
301.
 216. Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi, Durrat al-taj, p. 830.
 217. Cf. Hikmat al-ishraq, pars. 160–12 where Suhrawardi criticizes the
Peripatetic concept of knowledge-through-abstraction as ‘negation’
(salbi). This is one of the major criticisms Sadra levels against Ibn Sina,
to which I shall turn in the next chapter.
 218. Sadra, Hashiyah sharh hikmat al-ishraq, (Lithographed edition) p. 210,
quoted in Ghulam Husayn Ibrahim Dinani, Falsafa-yi Suhrawardi
(Tehran, Iran: Intisharat-i Hikmat, 1376 (ah), 4th edition), p. 217.

--- Sayfa 109 ---
2.1. SADRA’S ONTOLOGY
Sadra’s defense of the unification argument is rooted in his
general ontology. Definition of knowledge as a mode of existence
is an attempt to redefine epistemology in terms of existence and
its modalities. In this sense, Sadra’s theory of knowledge is an
exercise in his ‘gradational ontology.’ Very often we find Sadra
reverting back to his ontology before discussing a particular
problem in epistemology. His constant references to the
principality of existence (asalat al-wujud) over against essence
confirm the ontological weight of his thought. Therefore, we will
begin with Sadra’s ontological assumptions and work our way
to his theory of knowledge and the unification argument.
The first observation Sadra makes concerning existence
(wujud) is that it is self-evident (badihi). Although a common
theme in Islamic philosophy, this has a particular significance
for Sadra’s overall purpose to establish existence as the primary
reality over against quiddity (mahiyyah). He develops a line of
argument that can be summarized as follows: in everyday
thinking, existential propositions do not present any particular
problem. When we say ‘there is a tree in the garden’ or ‘stars
exist,’ we have an intuitive grasp about the meaning of these
statements: a tree, a horse, stars, my neighbor, the school
building down the block ‘exist.’ i.e., they are within the realm
of concrete and detectable existence. This minimal intuition
II
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF
KNOWLEDGE AND THE
UNIFICATION ARGUMENT

--- Sayfa 110 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
87
about the concrete reality of things is a prerequisite of the human
mind, for all of our propositions and judgments depend on it. To
stress this point, Sadra borrows the term ‘inscription’ or
‘impression’ (murtasimah) from Ibn Sina1 and states that the
meaning of such self-evident statements is inscribed in our minds
without the help of second-order conceptualizations. I know that
the tree of which I speak here is an existent out there, presenting
itself to me in some cognitive fashion. I have no need to explain
the meaning of the existence of the tree in front of me other than
assuring myself of its concrete existence if it really exists. Since
all attempts to define primary concepts result in either infinite
regression (tasalsul) or tautology (dawr), we take such concepts
as self-evident.2
In this ordinary way of knowing things around us, the
existence of things does not arise as an epistemic problem. We
simply know that something exists. When we want to explain
the meaning of the words ‘is’ and ‘exist,’ i.e., the copula,
however, we are faced with a formidable task. First of all, as
Kant would later state, the copula does not furnish us with any
new knowledge about our subject. When I say that the tree in
front of me exists, this does not say anything about the properties
of the tree which distinguish it from other natural beings.
Secondly, the absence of the copula in Arabic makes it even
further compelling that we can talk about existence and its
modalities without employing the copula at all. Thirdly, Sadra
argues that we can know something unknown to us by comparing
it to more familiar things. But he hastens to add that there is
nothing intuitively more known than existence. As Sadra’s great
commentator Sabzawari states, ‘the notion of existence is one of
the best-known things, but its deepest reality is in the extremity
of hiddenness.’3
We run into a similar difficulty when we try to make existence
known (ta‘rif) through logical definition (hadd) and description
(taswir).4 A logical definition is based on genus (jins) and
specific differentia (fasl). When we define man as rational
animal, for instance, we refer to his genus ‘animal’ (hayawan)

--- Sayfa 111 ---
88
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
and his differentia ‘rational’ (natiq). Keeping in mind that
definitions apply to classes and not to individuals, a genus
designates the general category to which ‘man’ belongs whereas
differentia denotes his specific attributes or difference from other
members of the category of ‘animal.’ This, however, does not
apply to existence because it has no genus or differentia. The
reason is that to have a genus and/or differentia means to include
something and exclude others. In logical terms, to be an ‘animal’
means to exclude the possibility of being a stone or star. But as
we intuitively know, there is nothing outside existence, and as
the ground of all there is, existence does not leave anything out.
Sadra’s conclusion is that ‘since existence is the most general
and inclusive of all things, it has no genus, no differentia and no
definition.’5 Therefore, whoever has thought of explaining
existence with some other things has made a grave mistake
because existence is more evident than them.’6
Nor can existence be described, for description is based on
more evident concepts and definitions than the definiendum. As
Sadra insists, there is no term or concept known to be more
evident and clear than existence despite the fact that we may not
always be able to articulate it in such definitive terms. This
suggests that existence can be explained only by itself. It is,
however, obvious that this is a petitio principi and not a
definition because defining something by itself begs the question.
This leads Sadra to conclude that existence has neither definition
nor proof (burhan).7 In short, existence is the most evident of all
concepts. This conclusion, however, is misleading if not wrong
because it construes existence as a concept rather than a reality
in concreto. But this is precisely what Sadra ought to avoid if he
is to ground all cognition in existence and its modalities.
Furthermore, it is by positing existence as a concrete reality that
we can make sense of Sadra’s claim that the only proper access
to the reality of existence is ‘illuminative presence’ (hudur
ishraqi) and ‘direct witnessing’ (shuhud ‘ayni).8

--- Sayfa 112 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
89
a. Essence and Existence
In Sadra, the distinction between the concept (mafhum) and
reality (haqiqah) of existence is of paramount significance and
can be considered an extension of the distinction between the
order of thought and the order of being. As a mental concept,
existence can be compared to a universal: it is applicable to a
multitude of objects univocally, remains abstract and generic,
and denotes a category and/or class rather than an individual.9
‘Existence as a concept is a generic term predicated of concrete
existents univocally (bi’l-tafawut), not equivocally (bi’l-
tawati’).’10 Existence applies to all things that exist whereas an
essence applies to a limited number of things as in the case of a
genus or species. The essence of man, for instance, applies only
to human beings. ‘Humanity’ as an essence includes certain
things and excludes others. But this is not the case with existence.
By definition, existence cannot leave anything out. Sadra
considers even non-existence (‘adam) and mental existence (al-
wujud al-dhihni) as a special instance of existence. That is why
God has no essence. Essence or quiddity (mahiyyah) is shared
by a multitude of subjects. But God is the only instance of His
kind and no other being can partake of whatever we may
conceive of as God’s quiddity.
What the mind perceives of the reality of existence is only its
mental representation, and this further removes us from the
actual reality of things as they are. This is something we cannot
escape but perhaps grasp once we understand the distinction
between the concept and reality of something:
Every concrete being represented in the mind with its reality ought
to maintain its quiddity despite the change in its modality of
existence. The reality of existence is such that it is in the extra-
mental world (fi’l-a‘yan). Everything whose reality is such that it is
in the extra-mental world cannot be found in the mind [as it is]
otherwise this would lead to the alteration (inqilab) of something
from its own reality [into something else]. Therefore the reality of
existence cannot be found in any mind. What is represented of

--- Sayfa 113 ---
90
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
existence in the soul whereby it takes on universality and generality
is not the reality of existence but one of the aspects of its constitution
and one of its names. Asfar, I, 1, pp. 37–8
The reality of existence in the extra-mental world defies such
second-order conceptualizations. Sadra holds that every
individual substance is a unique being that participates in the
all-inclusive reality of existence. Everything is an instantiation
and ‘particularization’ (takhassus) of existence which unfolds
itself in a myriad of ways, modes, states, and degrees.11 The
universals which we use to designate existence as a concept do
not belong to existence itself; they apply only to its ‘degrees of
descent.’ Sadra’s extremely critical attitude toward representation
(irtisam) is a result of his concern that representation becomes
a substitute for reality and that we are somehow deluded into
thinking that our mental representation of things through
‘meanings’ and concepts reveal their true nature:
The reality of existence-qua-existence is not limited by generality
and delimitation, universality and particularity, and inclusiveness
and specificity. It is neither one [numerically] by a oneness added
to it, nor many…. In its essence, it is nothing but full realization,
actuality and manifestation. These meanings of contingency,
concepts of universality, attributes of rational consideration, and
terms of mental analysis are attached to it on account of its degrees
and stations. Asfar, I, 1, p. 259
Sadra analyzes the concept and reality of existence from two
closely related standpoints. The first corresponds to the common-
sense view of existence mentioned above, i.e., to look at
existence through its individual instances. Obviously this
includes everything because nothing can be outside the realm of
existence. The two frequent examples given to illustrate this are
the mathematical and natural sciences where the particular
aspects of things rather than their universal qualities are
investigated. Sadra states this obviously Aristotelian point12 as
follows: ‘Mathematical objects and their specific qualities are

--- Sayfa 114 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
91
studied in mathematics (al-riyadiyyat)…natural objects have
their own accidents and are studied in the natural sciences (al-
tabi‘iyyat). By the same token, the existent-qua-existent has its
own specific aspects and they are studied in metaphysics (al-‘ilm
al-ilahi).’13
This brings us to the second context of analysis where the
proper subject matter of metaphysics is existence-qua-existence
(al-wujud bima huwa’l-wujud).14 In the first case, we deal with
existence through its instances that partake of it univocally.
Anything that exists can be taken to be an instance of existence,
and this yields some information about existence, its states and
modes. The reality of existence, however, cannot be relegated to
the sum-total of its instantiations. Existence is not a property of
things by which we define them; rather it is the very reality by
virtue of which things exist. If this is warranted, then existence
is more than what its particular instances amount to. In contrast
to Quine and Rorty, existence is neither a thing nor a property
of things and thus cannot be construed as the ‘value of a
variable.’15 Things do have attributes but as far as their existence
is concerned, they can only be. Sadra’s following description of
existence makes this point clear: ‘Existence, insofar as it is
existence, has no agent from which it emanates, no matter into
which it transforms, no subject in which it is found, no form by
which it is clothed, no goal for which it is [established]. Rather,
it itself is the agent of all agents, the form of all forms, and the
goal of all goals.’16
Treatment of existence as an absolute term in and of itself is
a common theme in the classical ontology of Greek and Islamic
philosophy. We should remember that Aristotle had introduced
the notion of existence-qua-existence17 without pursuing it in any
helpful way. This was in part due to the peculiar nature of the
verb ‘to be’ in Greek. The Greeks did not have a distinct verb
meaning ‘to exist’ as a generic term. Instead, they used the verb
‘to be’ in a predicative context, i.e., in relation to a particular
being. ‘To be’ always meant to be a tree, a pen, a wall, a
woman.18 To use Kahn’s example, ‘for a particular tree to exist

--- Sayfa 115 ---
92
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
is for it to be a living oak or chestnut. For white to exist is to be
a color, that is a quality, belonging to some particular
substance.’19 Existence does not arise as a distinct philosophical
problem in Greek thought because the predicative context of the
Greek verb ‘to be’ allows us to translate all existential
propositions that have the form ‘x is’ into ‘x is something.’ In
other words, we always speak of existence through its particular
instances. This explains to a large extent the reason why for
Aristotle the primary subject matter of ‘first philosophy,’ i.e.,
metaphysics was substance, for substance is a definite and
definable entity to which various existential properties can be
attributed.20 In sharp contrast, Sadra insists that existence is
neither a substance nor an accident ‘because both are parts of
what actually exists (al-mawjud) but existence is not what exists
in actuality.’21
At this juncture, Islamic philosophy represents a major break
away from the Greek concept of existence. It is true that the
Muslim philosophers have preserved the predicative context of
existence in logic and physics. We find elaborate discussions of
substances and their accidental properties in Sadra as well as the
other philosophers before him. In fact, a good part of classical
philosophy of nature revolves around these concepts. Existence
as a distinct philosophical problem, however, arises fully when
Greek philosophy is revised in light of what Kahn calls ‘a
metaphysics of creation.’22 Within the purview of this new
metaphysical vision, contingent beings ultimately borrow their
existence from another source by virtue of being created.
Historically speaking, this took place in full force when
Muslim philosophers introduced the idea of the ontological
contingency of the world as part of the Islamic doctrine of
creation. Whether we define creation as emanation with Muslim
Peripatetics, creatio ex nihilo with the theologians, or perpetual
creation and ‘theophany’ (tajalli) with the Sufis, the idea of
radical contingency takes precedence over the Greek notions of
the world as a given. Something fundamental is gained in
philosophy from this obviously religio-theological principle:

--- Sayfa 116 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
93
existence as the reality or principle which makes the world what
it is cannot be relegated to its modalities (anha’) or concomitants
(lawazim). We have to look somewhere else to understand what
it means to exist in the first place. This leads us to two important
conclusions. First, it affirms the ontological contingency of the
world in a radical way: not only that things might have been
different than what they actually are but, more importantly, they
may not have existed at all. Second, it confirms once more that
existence cannot be taken to be a property of individuals or
classes to which they belong. Substance is no longer the proper
starting point for the study of existence. Instead of construing
existence as an effect of substances that exist in actuality, as
Aristotle has done, Sadra reverses the picture and turns all
substances into a modality of existence.
A further distinction is made between existence and essence.
A preliminary version of this distinction can be traced back to
Plato (Phaedo 74a, Republic 509b, Timaeus 50c) and Aristotle
(Posterior Analytics 92 b–93a and Metaphysics 1003–1004). Yet
the distinction does not assume any philosophical significance
until al-Farabi and Ibn Sina.23 With them, the distinction becomes
a cornerstone of the metaphysical study of beings, and rests on
two basic questions: is it and what is it? The first question
concerns the reality of things in the external world and confirms
their existence in concreto. When I think of a mountain, the first
question I ask is whether it exists or not. The same question can
be asked even of things that subsist in the mind. In either case,
my question is one of ontological assertion or lack thereof.
The second question pertains to the what-ness of the mountain,
i.e., what it is that I am investigating. Granted that the mountain
in question does really exist in some detectable way, my next
question will be about its attributes, size, color, location, etc. It
is here that we enter the domain of essences or quiddities
(mahiyyah).24 The questions we ask about things and their
attributes help us assert the existence of something and state its
differences from others.25 In this broad sense, existence is a
generic term in which all things participate: man, tree, horse, and

--- Sayfa 117 ---
94
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
the sun share the quality of existence univocally. What
distinguishes them from one another is their quiddity given in
the form of such definitions as ‘man is a rational animal’ and
‘accidents do not subsist by themselves.’
Actually existing things, however, are not composed of two
things, ‘existence’ on the one hand, and ‘quiddity’ on the other,
which we antecedently put together and turn into a single unity.
It is the opposite: they are single units and we divide them into
compartments through conceptual analysis. Therefore the
distinction is not a real one. It is rather what Sadra calls a
‘rational operation of the mind’ (i‘tibar al-‘aql).26 It is imposed
by the mind which can perceive only quiddities as universal
properties of things.27 Actually existing beings are not affected
by these universal properties:
Beings (wujudat) are actual identities particularized by themselves.
They are not qualified by genus, species, universality and
particularity in the sense that they belong to a species or genus or
in the sense that they become particular through something added
to them from outside. Rather, they are differentiated by themselves,
not through differentia (fasl) or accident (‘arad). In this sense, they
have no genus, differentia or definition.28
In the case of actually existing beings, what we have is not
concepts but actualization (tahassul), actuality (fi‘liyyah), and
disclosure (zuhur).29
Sadra takes a further step and argues that quiddities are
nothing but various modes and particularizations of existence,
which the mind constructs as abstract and generic qualities.
Sadra’s radical claim is that in mental analysis, essence precedes
existence because the mind can conceive only the universal
properties of things. Going back to our example of the mountain,
I can conceptualize a mountain in my mind without ‘establishing’
(ithbat) its concrete existence in the extra-mental world. I can
speak of it in many different ways, analyze and describe it
without ever asking the ‘is-it?’ question.30 The reality of things,
however, is such that existence precedes essence because an

--- Sayfa 118 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
95
essence that is not existentiated in one way or another cannot be
said to be an essence in the first place. Sadra summarizes his
arguments as follows:
…essence is united with existence in concreto in a kind of essential
unity (ittihad). When the mind analyzes them into two things, it
asserts the precedence of one over the other in concreto. Now, this
[reality that precedes the other] is existence because it is the
principle in being the reality emanating from the [First] Principle
(al-mabda’). As for the essence, it is united with and predicated of
existence not like an attached accident but in its own reality [as
essentially united with existence]. Insofar as the mind is concerned,
the essence precedes the latter [i.e., existence] because essence is
the principle in mental judgments. Asfar, I, 1, p. 56
There is a sense in which we can say that existence refers to the
actual reality of things whereas essence refers to their existence
in the mind. Sadra insists that ‘the reality of existence and its
truth is not found in the mind; what arises in the mind concerning
existence is a kind of mental abstraction. But this is also one of
the aspects of existence.’31 Yet, what we have is not two different
beings but a single reality seen from two different points of view.
They correspond to what Sadra calls the two modes of external
and mental existence, and the relation between them is
comparable to the relation between a universal that applies to a
multitude of individuals and an individual that partakes of that
universal. In Sadra’s words, ‘the relation of abstracted conceptual
existence (al-wujud intiza‘i) to real existence (al-wujud al-
haqiqi) is like the relation of ‘humanity’ (al-insaniyyah) to an
individual human being (al-insan), and of whiteness to a white
object. Its relation to essence is like the relation of humanity to
he who laughs and whiteness to snow.’32 While particular
existents are constructed in the mind as essences with a number
of universal qualities, they remain particular and real existents
as they are. The source of such ‘mental effects’ is nothing but
‘real existences which themselves are actual ipseities (huwiyyah
‘ayniyyah) existing by themselves, not conceptual existences

--- Sayfa 119 ---
96
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
which are intellectual things with no concrete existence in the
external world.’33
The fact that knowing the essence of something conceptually
is not the same as knowing its reality is further corroborated by
the limits of mental existence. To quote Sadra again: ‘It is
rationally clear that nobility, happiness, and joy are not found in
perceiving the essences of particulars but in their existence. By
the same token, taste is not perceiving the essence of what is
tasteful but its actual realization by the faculty of perception. Not
everyone who thinks of the essence of power is a king and not
everyone who thinks of the essence of might is a hero.’34 This
underscores the essential difference between the concept and
reality of things. But they also point to another distinction Sadra
draws between mental existence and ‘something being in the
mind.’
The meaning of something existing in the external world is that it
has an existence from which particular effects result and specific
states (ahkam) emanate. Its being in the mind is not like this. [But]
the meaning of the mental existence of something is not merely its
being in the soul or in the faculty of perception otherwise such
qualities that exist in the soul as knowledge and power for those
who know and those who have strength will be mental entities.
Obviously this is not the case; otherwise it would be a contradiction.
Asalah in Majmu‘ah, p. 191
The upshot of the foregoing considerations is the ultimate
reducibility of essence to existence. As we shall see shortly,
Sadra’s notion of the primacy of existence (asalat al-wujud)
invites this conclusion, and it plays a pivotal role in his definition
of knowledge as a mode of existence.
b. The Primacy and Gradation of Existence
The primacy of existence over essence is one of the central
themes of Sadra’s ontology and has important consequences for
his concept of knowledge. The word asalah, meaning to be

--- Sayfa 120 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
97
principal and primary, refers to that which is real and which
gives actual reality to existents in the extra-mental world.35 It
accounts for both ontological affirmation and epistemic
credibility—the two qualities that the really existing beings have.
Existence as principal reality establishes things in concrete
existence and saturates them with meaning. If this is true, then
deciding on this ‘principal reality’ is no trivial matter since it can
land us in an ‘existentialist’ metaphysics as in the case of Sadra
or an ‘essentialist’ one as in the case of Suhrawardi and most of
the Mutakallimun.
Sadra asks whether existence or essence has a corresponding
reality in the external world. Before turning to Sadra’s response,
however, it is important to note that in defending existence as
the principal reality, Sadra works against the backdrop of both
the Peripatetic and Illuminationist traditions. Ibn Sina had simply
stated the distinction between existence and essence without
bringing up the question of asalah, for his primary concern was
to lay out a tripartite division of existents as impossible
(mumtani‘), contingent (mumkin) and necessary (wajib), and
draw a categorical distinction between the last two, i.e., the
created and the Creator.36
While Ibn Sina’s works do not contain a clear discussion of
the primacy of existence, they can be read to support either
position. The key issue for Ibn Sina’s medieval interpreters
especially in the Latin West was his alleged espousal of the
accidentality of existence. The problem stems from Ibn Sina’s
somewhat recondite analysis of how existence is related to
essence.37 In the Mubahathat, for instance, he says that ‘existence
is an accident in things with quiddities to which existence is
attached as we see in the case of ten categories.’38 He then adds
that ‘but in the case of that which exists by itself, it does not
have an existence by which it exists apart from being an accident
for it. It is therefore a necessity that it exist by itself.’ In spite of
this clarification, St. Thomas Aquinas and other Scholastic
philosophers read Ibn Sina as arguing that existence is an
accident conferred upon things antecedently: things exist and

--- Sayfa 121 ---
98
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
their quiddities require existence only as an accident or attribute.
Interestingly enough, this (mis)reading of Ibn Sina goes back to
Ibn Rushd.39
Sadra and his followers, however, took a different approach
and interpreted Ibn Sina as saying that existence is a ‘special
accident’ in the case of contingent beings (mumkin al-wujud)
because the existence of contingent beings is a ‘borrowed
existence’ and depends on the Necessary Being for their
subsistence.40 This implies that contingent beings ‘receive’ their
existence from another source, namely from the Necessary Being
or, to use the language of theology, from ‘high on.’ In this onto-
theological scheme, existence is an ‘attribute’ granted to created
things by God who, as the Necessary Being, sustains them in
existence. We may also conceive existence as an accident (‘arad)
‘happening’ to things because their concrete existence is not
required by mental abstraction or, as Aristotle would say, by
definition. As we shall see shortly, existence is an accident only
when considered from the point of view of logical analysis. As
far as extra-mental existence (al-wujud al-‘ayni) is concerned,
however, existence is not added to things a posteriori, otherwise
we would have to say that things can ‘exist’ without ‘existence’
because it is only an accident—a logically absurd conclusion.
Sadra thus concurs with Ibn Sina that the existence of something
is its actual existence (mawjudiyyah) in the extra-mental world,
not something added to its essence.41
When we turn to Suhrawardi, whom Sadra has once called the
‘Divine master’ (al-shaykh al-ilahi) and ‘the possessor of
lights,’42 the problem receives a different treatment. Suhrawardi
founded a metaphysics of essences when he defined essence as
the sole agent that constitutes the reality of things. He proposed
two objections against the primacy of existence. First, if we take
existence as a real attribute of essence, he argued, then essence,
in order to have this attribute, has to exist prior to existence in
which case existence would be a quality of something which
already exists.43 Secondly, if existence is taken to be the real
constituent of reality, then existence will have to exist before

--- Sayfa 122 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
99
being a constituent of external reality and this second existence
will have to exist, and so on ad infinitum.44 In conclusion,
existence cannot constitute the reality of things.
Suhrawardi’s conclusion was a turning point in the history of
Islamic metaphysics. He argued that existence is only a generic
term, a secondary intelligible (ma‘qul thani) applicable to a
multitude of objects but to which nothing concrete corresponds
in the extra-mental world. In a sense, this is a reformulation of
the peculiar nature of the copula mentioned above: ontologically
speaking, the copula is dysfunctional in that it does not add
anything to our knowledge of things. Sadra rejects this deduction
by saying that we cannot logically say ‘existence exists’ just as
we do not say ‘whiteness is white.’ Existence exists by itself and
the actualization of existence in the external world takes place
by itself, not by virtue of something else.45 Therefore existence
is not something that has existence just as whiteness is not
something that has whiteness.46 Whiteness is that reality by
virtue of which things are white. By the same token, existence
is that very reality by virtue of which things exist.
For Sadra, Suhrawardi’s false conclusion arises out of his
failure to distinguish between the concept and reality of
existence.47 It is true, Sadra reasons, that existence, when
conceived by the mind, is a general notion without any
corresponding reality in the extra-mental world. It is at this level
of abstraction that we take existence as an attribute of something.
That is why we can think of essences without their actual
existence in the physical world.48 It is then logical to conclude
that existence as a secondary intelligible cannot be a basis for
the reality of actually existing things.49 The reality of existence,
however, defies such a definition. Even though at the level of
conceptual analysis one is allowed to say that existence is
‘something that has existence’ (shay’ lahu al-wujud), its basic
structure is such that it is existence by itself or existent par
excellence (al-wujud huwa al-mawjudiyyah).50 Existence is
‘reality and realization (tahaqquq) itself, not something that is
realized.’51 Sadra’s conclusion is thus diametrically opposed to

--- Sayfa 123 ---
100
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
that of Suhrawardi: existence is not an extraneous quality
imposed upon existent entities but the very reality thanks to
which they exist.52
In rejecting Suhrawardi’s essentialist ontology, Sadra reiterates
an old issue in Islamic philosophy and asks whether existence is
a predicate or not. The word ‘predicate’ is used here in its logical
sense as denoting some property or attribute of actually existing
things. Muslim philosophers have usually answered this question
in the negative and made a distinction between the logical and
ontological senses of existential propositions.53 From a logical
point of view, we can analyze the sentence ‘this table is brown’
into a subject and predicate. The subject of the sentence, ‘this
table,’ is a noun and the predicate, ‘brown’ also a noun and an
attribute qualifying the table.54 We can turn this sentence,
composed of a subject and a predicate, into an existential
proposition by saying that ‘the table is,’ ‘the table exists,’ or ‘the
table is an existent.’ When we look at these sentences from a
logical point of view, existence, stated by the copula ‘is,’ turns
out to be a predicate and attribute qualifying the table. From the
ontological point of view, however, the conclusion is absurd
because it assumes the existence of the table prior to its having
existence as an attribute.
Al-Farabi was the first to note this difficulty. He proposed two
ways of looking at such propositions. In the proposition ‘man
exists,’ existence, al-Farabi says, is both a predicate and not a
predicate. From a ‘logical point of view’ (al-nazir al-mantiqi),
the sentence has a predicate because it is composed of two terms,
subject and predicate, and is liable of being true or false. From
a ‘natural point of view’ (al-nazir al-tabi‘i), which here means
the ontological point of view, however, it does not have a
predicate because the ‘existence of something is nothing other
than itself.’55 The most important conclusion that Sadra derives
from this analysis is that existence is not an attribute conferred
upon things antecedently. It is their very reality and makes them
what they are. For Sadra, this is another proof for the primacy
of existence.

--- Sayfa 124 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
101
Having established existence as the principal reality, Sadra
turns to the question of how it applies to individual entities,
which he calls ‘shares of existence’ (khisas al-wujud). We can
summarize his analysis as follows. Existence is predicated of all
things that exist in concreto. In this most generic sense, existence
applies to things univocally (haml bi’l-tawati’). Predication,
however, takes place with varying degrees of intensity. To give
an example, light is predicated of the candle, the moon and the
sun univocally in that they all participate in the quality of light,
luminosity and brightness. Each of these beings, however,
displays different degrees of intensity in reflecting light. Light
is the most intense and brightest in the sun and weakest in the
reflection of the moon on the pool. By the same token, existence
is predicated univocally of necessary and contingent beings.
Their share of existence, however, is not the same because a
necessary being, say God, is ontologically prior and superior to
contingent beings. Having the most intense state of existence,
God has more ‘existence’ than other things. The same analogy
holds true for cause and effect since cause, by definition,
precedes effect: it causes the effect to be what it is, and this
imparts on it a higher ontological status. Sadra calls this kind of
predication ‘equivocal predication’ (haml bi’l-tashkik).56 When
applied to existence, it is called the ‘gradation of existence’
(tashkik al-wujud).57
As for its equivocal predication by primacy, priority, precedence and
intensity, this is so because, as we shall explain, existence requires
itself in some beings, has precedence in some in terms of its nature,
and is more perfect and stronger in some others. A being that has
no cause has priority in existence compared to others, and is by
definition prior to all other beings. By the same token, the existence
of each one of the active intellects has a priority over the existence
of other intellects, and the existence of substance is prior to the
existence of accident. Asfar, I, 1, p. 36
This paragraph, which is taken almost verbatim from Bahmanyar,58
shows how Sadra uses tashkik as a term of ontology rather than

--- Sayfa 125 ---
102
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
logic. This helps Sadra construct a hierarchical view of existence
whereby things are defined in proportion to their ‘ontological
intensity’ or lack thereof. Since equivocality implies different
degrees and grades of existence, I shall call this ‘gradational
ontology.’ Sadra applies gradation to the entire spectrum of
existence: things partake of existence with different degrees of
intensity and diminution, strength and weakness, priority and
posterity, perfection and imperfection. As we shall see below,
this hierarchy also applies to the order of intelligibility. In fact,
Sadra explains degrees of knowledge in the same way he
explains degrees of existence. There is nothing surprising about
this because Sadra defines intelligibility as an aspect of existence:
the more ‘beingful’ something is, the more intelligible it is.
2.2. EXISTENCE, INTELLIGIBILITY AND

 KNOWLEDGE
Before embarking upon a full discussion of knowledge, Sadra
broaches the subject with a number of observations on the
elusive and ‘mysterious’ nature of knowledge. In a condensed
section of the Asfar entitled ‘Concerning That Intellection
Consists of the Unification of the Substance of the Intellector
(al-‘aqil) with the Intellected (al-ma‘qul),’ he identifies our
ability to know as the most difficult and baffling problem of
philosophy. The fact that we are able to know ourselves and the
world around us is a mystery, Sadra states, and the riddle cannot
be solved within the matrix of sense-perception or knowledge as
representation. The difficult question is not what kind of a
relation, say a relation of correspondence or coherence, we can
establish between the intellect and its object of intellection.
Rather, it is the soul’s ability to perceive the intelligibilia in the
first place. Sadra appeals to a historical aphorism to make his
point:

--- Sayfa 126 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
103
The fact that the soul is able to intellect the forms of intelligible
things is the most mysterious and obscure problem of philosophy,
which none of the scholars of Islam has been able to solve up to our
own day. When we looked at the difficulty of this problem and
pondered over the question that knowledge of substance is substance
and accident, we did not find what cures the disease and what
quenches the thirst in the books of the people [i.e., philosophers],
especially those of their master Abu ‘Ali [Ibn Sina] like the Shifa’,
al-Najat, al-Isharat, ‘Uyun al-hikmah and others. Rather, what we
have found among his group, peers and followers such as his student
Bahmanyar,59 the master of the followers of the Stoics (al-
riwaqiyyin),60 Nasir al-Din al-Tusi, and others who came after them,
is that they did not propose anything on which one could rely. If this
is the case with those who are considered the most respected [in
philosophy], think of the situation of the people of fanciful thoughts
and imaginations, and those who are the first and foremost in
discussions and dialectical argumentation. Asfar, I, 3, pp. 312–313
The difficulty is further augmented by the fact that knowledge,
like existence, does not lend itself to easy definitions. Definition
of knowledge is circular in that every time we try to define it,
we are bound to do it through knowledge. We cannot exclude
the term ‘knowledge’ from its definition. Sadra points to a strong
parallel between knowledge (‘ilm) considered from this point of
view and existence that defies definition. He takes this to be a
first step toward constructing knowledge as a ‘mode of existence’
(nahw al-wujud):
It seems that knowledge is among those realities whose ipseity
(inniyyah) is identical with its essence (mahiyyah). Realities of this
kind cannot be defined because definition consists of genus and
difference, both of which are universals whereas every being is a
particular reality by itself. It cannot be made known through
complete description either because there is nothing more known
than knowledge as it is an existential state of consciousness (halah
wijdaniyyah)61 which the knower, being alive, finds in his essence
from the very beginning without veil or obscurity. It is not [in the
nature of knowledge] to allow itself to be known by something more
apparent and clear because everything becomes clear to the intellect

--- Sayfa 127 ---
104
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
by the knowledge it has. How does then knowledge become clear
by anything other than itself? Asfar, I, 3, p. 278
Even though the tautological and non-definitional nature of
knowledge represents common sense epistemology in Islamic
thought and is shared by various schools,62 this is where Sadra
takes his departure from the tradition when he subsumes
knowledge (‘ilm) and other related terms under the intrinsic
intelligibility of existence. For Sadra, the ultimate object of
knowledge is existence for when we say that we know something,
we affirm or deny a particular aspect of existence presented as
an object of knowledge.63 This is underlined by Sadra’s radical
identification of existence and truth/reality (haqiqah): ‘The
reality of every thing is its existence through which it receives
the effects specific to it, for the ‘being-ness’ (mawjudiyyah) of
something and its having a reality/truth have one single meaning
and one single subject, there being no difference between the
two except in expression (lafz).’64 Existence is thus the standing
condition of knowledge and precedes the discursive considerations
of the knowing subject.65
Furthermore, to know something is to grasp and appropriate
its intelligible form (al-surat al-ma‘qulah). Sadra’s conceptual
realism leads him to define intelligible forms as substances that
belong to the world of the intelligibilia rather than as mere
concepts, notions or contents of the mind.66 The key issue is to
understand the ontological status of the intelligible world from
which the intellect obtains intelligible forms. Following the neo-
Platonist tradition, Sadra establishes the world of the intelligibilia
as an independent realm of existence where the archetypal
realities of individual beings reside. In a strictly hierarchical
scale of existence, the sensate objects are placed at a lower
ontological plane because they are dim reflections of the world
of Platonic Ideas. In Sadra’s terms ‘material forms are nothing
but icons and moulds of these disembodied [i.e., intelligible]
forms.’67 Similarly, ‘the disembodied existence (al-wujud al-
mufariqi) is stronger [in actualization] than the material existence

--- Sayfa 128 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
105
(al-wujud al-maddi).’68 Since ‘intelligible forms’ exist in an
immutable world above the world of generation and corruption,
they enjoy universality and permanence. The radical distinction
that Plato and his followers had drawn between the sensibilia
and the intelligibilia is fully incorporated with a clear sense of
ontological superiority: since the intelligibilia are not bound by
such material conditions as generation and corruption or
movement and rest, they enjoy a higher ontological status. The
sensible world is too ephemeral and fragile to be a ground for
the enduring identity of things. The epistemological corollary of
this view is no less significant: since the intelligibilia are
grounded in the immutable world of the Forms, they are
cognitively more reliable than the senses. The senses through
which we come to experience the sensibilia help us establish the
corporeal reality of things. Their meaning, i.e., intelligible
structure, however, is disclosed by the intellect when it turns to
the world of the intelligibilia.
Sadra draws a good part of his conclusions concerning the
intelligibilia from a realist ontology of intelligible forms. For
him, the mode of existence proper to intelligible forms is higher
than the mode of existence proper to material substances. At its
face value, this is nothing more than a refined statement of the
distinction between sensibilia and intelligibilia just mentioned.
The way Sadra uses it, however, reveals the extent to which he
wants to formulate the question of knowledge in terms of
existence and its modalities.
Now, it is further assumed that the order of intelligibility
enjoys a higher ontological status because it transcends the
limitations of corporeality. Intelligible forms have a concrete
existence of their own; in fact, they are more concrete and
‘powerful’ than corporeal substances. In Sadra’s terms, ‘the
realization of perceptual forms in the perceiving substance is
stronger in terms of actualization (tahsil) and perfection (takmil)
than the realization of natural forms in matter and its kinds.’69
This explains why for Sadra and the Platonists before him, the
‘intellective horse’ (al-faras al-‘aqli), i.e., the intelligible reality

--- Sayfa 129 ---
106
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
of the horse is more ‘real’ than the physical horse in the barn:
the intellective horse is a simple unique being containing in its
simplicity the lower species and instances of ‘horse-ness.’70 The
‘real’ horse is not the physical horse composed of flesh and
bones but the archetypal horse detached and disembodied from
the entanglements of material existence. An individual horse may
die, disappear, and come in various colors, sizes, and types, all
of which lend themselves to impermanency and imperfection
whereas the intellective horse remains constant and provides the
context within which we attribute various ‘meaning-properties’
to the physical horse. Sadra states this as follows:
These forms [i.e., the archetypal forms] are more exalted and nobler
than what is to be found in lower existents. This animal in flesh,
composed of contradictory qualities and forms in constant change,
is a parable and shadow for the simple animal while there is still a
higher [animal] above it. Now, this is the intellective animal which
is simple, singular, and containing in its simplicity all of the
individual instances and classes of material and mental existence
under its species. And this is its universal archetype, i.e., the
intellective horse. This holds true for all species of animals and other
existents…. When the existence of something intensifies, it passes
from its present species to a higher one even though every
intensification takes place with full involvement in its current
species. Asfar, I, 3, p. 304
To establish the ontological status of intelligible beings as ‘more’
and ‘higher,’ Sadra adopts a well-established Aristotelian
principle71 and defines intelligibility as incorporeality and
disembodiment (tajarrud). In the Peripatetic ontology of
disembodiment, the more removed a thing is from corporeality,
the closer it is to have more meanings or meaning-properties.
Put differently, the further removed a thing is from its material
accidents (‘awarid) and attachments (lawahiq), the more real it
is because it is closer to its ‘formal’ (al-suri) reality. The
possibility of a substance becoming more intense in intelligibility
is proportionate to its being disengaged and disembodied from

--- Sayfa 130 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
107
the limitations of material existence. Such a thing is more real
in the sense that it contains more qualities of intelligibility.72 The
symmetrical relationship between ontological intensity and
epistemic credibility is borne out by the fact that ‘every existent
is a witness to its own existence because it is a glimpse of it.
And whatever is closer to existence [in terms of actualization]
is a more complete witness to it.’73
The difficulties posed by individual substances versus their
universal properties are notorious. Aristotle admits the difficulties
of accepting true universal knowledge as based on corresponding
universal principles of existence.74 This can be interpreted as a
paradigm case of the unity of the ontological and the noetic
mentioned above but the question that demands answer is this:
how can a substance, which, for Aristotle, is what really and
primarily exists, become more intelligible and thus more ‘real’
when it is less of an individual and more of a universal? If ‘every
perception is particular and through a corporeal instrument,’ as
Ibn Sina says,75 then how do we account for the uniqueness of
individual beings against the fact that some universal attributes
are predicated of them? It is not always easy to find a satisfactory
answer to this conundrum either in Aristotle or in his Muslim
followers. After all, this is the perennial challenge of the
empiricists.76
The asymmetrical relationship between disembodiment and
intelligibility leads to a tripartite division of knowledge, whose
formulation in Islamic philosophy goes back to Ibn Sina. When
a substance is completely immersed in matter and corporeality,
it is called sensation (hiss) and forms the basis of sense-
perception. For Ibn Sina and Sadra, this level represents the
minimal definition of existence and knowledge: sense-perception
is not only the ‘weakest’ form of perception but also corresponds
to the lowest level of existence. When a substance is partially
disembodied from matter, it is called ‘imagination’ (khayal) and
represents the intermediary stage or isthmus (barzakh) between
matter and pure intelligibles. This corresponds to mundus
imaginalis (‘alam al-khayal) through which we move from the

--- Sayfa 131 ---
108
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
purely sensate and material to the intelligible and the spiritual.
Finally, when something is completely disengaged from material
attachments, it becomes a pure intellect (‘aql) and intelligible
(ma‘qul), making intellection (ta‘aqqul) possible.77
a. Disembodiment as Intelligibility and Gradation

in Knowledge
To further elaborate this point, Sadra returns to the gradation of
existence and argues that things are subject to intensification
(tashaddud) and diminution (tada‘‘uf) in accord with their level
of existentiation. Sadra tries to do this by redefining the
Aristotelian framework of potential and actual substances within
the context of his gradational ontology. The principle of gradation
establishes a hierarchical world-order within which substances
belong to differing degrees of existence and intelligibility. When
a being realizes its dormant potentialities and becomes actual, it
does not simply acquire more material or sensate properties.
Rather, it intensifies in existence. To bring this into sharper
focus, Sadra reverses common-sense ontology. Instead of
defining the necessary existential properties of things (lawazim
al-wujud) as qualities acquired by a substance, he construes them
as various modes and states of existence. When a red apple
ripens, its existence ‘increases in’ redness rather than becoming
‘more red’ in quantity. By the same token, when substances
actualize their potentialities and become more perfect, they
eventually increase in existence. This is predicated upon the
Platonic principle that actuality implies perfection while
potentiality signifies privation and imperfection. In the language
of Greek and Muslim Neoplatonists, actuality means full
realization because such a substance is not deprived of any real
qualities it may possess. By contrast, a potential substance is
marred by imperfection because it can be really what it is only
to the extent to which it realizes its potentialities, and it would
need an external agent, a more actualized substance, to reach this
state of actuality.78 Obviously, it is only God who can be properly

--- Sayfa 132 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
109
called actual and perfect because unlike contingent beings, there
is no distinction between God’s essence and existence.79
The potentiality-actuality framework, which Sadra adopts
with some revisions, is also underlined by the Peripatetic idea
of hylomorphism. Hylomorphism identifies two principles in
things: matter (hylé) and form (morphos). Matter refers to the
physical constitution of things while form is the principle that
gives structure, order and meaning to them. It is important to
emphasize that Aristotelian hylomorphism does not posit matter
and form as ‘things’ or entities but rather as principles of
existence thanks to which actual substances become what they
are. In Sadra’s revised version, assuming a form and becoming
actual is the same as assuming a new mode of existence. This is
evinced by the fact that matter as the hylé or prime matter (al-
maddat al-ula) is not an aggregate of material stuff out of which
corporeal things are made. Rather, it is pure capacity (isti’dad
mahd)80 and can be actualized only when united with its proper
form.81 Similarly, form is not shape but that which imparts upon
a thing its meaning by making it what it is.82 This definition of
form, which is ontological and Platonic in essence, comes close
to the meaning of essence (mahiyyah): it is that which makes a
thing what it is. Sadra does not shy away from equating form
with a particular aspect of existence.
In our view, what is meant by the form of a thing is its existence,
not its concept and universal meaning. [In this sense], form is one
and simple for everything. But it may become applicable to various
meanings and attributes of perfection. Or, it may not be so, and this
is because existence can be strong and intense or weak and deficient.
Whenever existence is stronger and more intense, it contains in itself
more meanings and effects (athar) and vice versa. Ittihad in
Majmu‘ah, p. 9083
It is these ‘meaning and effects’ that the mind can properly claim
to know for they correspond to what is universal in individual
beings. It is only the forms that the mind can know because they
are both actual and disengaged from matter. Form as a mode of

--- Sayfa 133 ---
110
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
disembodiment and intelligibility underlies Sadra’s assertion that
the further removed a thing is from corporeal existence, the
closer it is to pure intelligibility. The intelligibilia are
distinguished by their disembodiment and universality whereas
the sensibilia are defined as belonging to matter.84 In a typical
passage, Sadra explains this as follows:
Forms of things are of two kinds. The first is the material form that
subsists with matter, position, space, and so on. This kind of form,
due to its mode of material existence, can be neither intelligible in
actuality nor sensible (mahsusah) except accidentally. The second
kind is the form that is disengaged from matter, position and space
either completely, in which case it is an intelligible form in actuality,
or partially in which case it is an imaginal or sensate form in
actuality. It has become clear in the view of all the philosophers that
the existence of the intelligible form in actuality and its existence
for the intellector are one and the same thing from one point of view.
In the same way, the existence of a sensible, insofar as it is a
sensible, is identical with its existence for the sensate substance.
Asfar, I, 3, pp. 313–314
Disembodiment as a condition of intelligibility is thus an
important step toward subsuming all cognitive terms under the
rubric of existence. There is, however, another side to it, which
should be briefly mentioned here. An ontologically higher
substance is defined as simply ‘more’ in terms of its existential
constitution. But such a substance is also more perfect, more
real, more reliable, and more likely to be the immediate concern
of the philosopher. We can even say that ontologically higher
beings are closer to meeting the criteria of the Platonic trinity of
being true, good, and beautiful, corresponding to knowledge,
ethics, and aesthetics, respectively. This explains the reason why
Sadra defines existence as pure light (al-nur) and says that
‘existence and light are one and the same thing.’85 Light
represents ‘goodness’ and this is always in sharp contrast to
darkness that corresponds to non-existence and relative evil.
Using another vocabulary taken from Ibn Sina and Ibn al-‘Arabi,

--- Sayfa 134 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
111
Sadra defines existence as goodness par excellence (khayr mahd,
summun bonum) because existence is not only the ontic ground
of sensate objects but also the source of such valuational qualities
as reality, meaning, goodness, beauty and perfection. This means
that the language of ontological states is saturated with qualitative
and valuational terms. Ontological states are intertwined with
axiological qualities.
The following depiction of the world of the intelligibilia,
which Sadra quotes from the Theology of Aristotle, provides a
neat summary of the axiological content of existence:
The higher world is the perfect living [reality] in which everything
is contained, for it has originated from the first perfect source. In it
is to be found every soul and every intellect, and there is absolutely
no indigence and need here since things therein are all filled with
richness and life as if it is life that exceeds and gushes forth. The
life of these things issues forth from one single source, not just from
one single heat (warmth) or one single wind (smell). Rather, all of
them are one single quality in which is to be found every food [i.e.,
livelihood for them]. Ittihad in Majmu‘ah, p. 10086
Sadra gives his version as follows:
There are two worlds: the world of disengaged substances that
pertain to the intellect and the soul, and the world of luminous and
dark bodies. The world of disembodied substances is the world of
knowledge and vitality in which God created a perceptual,
intellective and imaginal form vis-à-vis what is to be found in the
world of physical bodies, which is their life and the mirror of their
appearance. The Divine Book refers to this: ‘For those who of their
Lord’s Presence stand in fear, two gardens [of paradise are readied]’
(Qur’an 55:46). Concerning this matter, the noble Plato has said that
the world is of two kinds: the world of the intellect in which are to
be found the intellective Forms (muthul), and the world of sense
(hiss) in which are to be found the obscurities of sensation87…. The
existence of the world of the intellect is the principle of all other
beings and their sustainer, active principle, and ultimate goal. Their
clear vision is hidden to man because of the excess of their

--- Sayfa 135 ---
112
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
manifestation and our veiling from them because of the distraction
of material bodies. We can reasonably point to the unity of this
world and the simplicity of everything in it and the multiplicity of
this world [of physical bodies] in view of the number of individuals.
It should be known that the luminous Platonic Forms are substances
in themselves and their existence is the source of the substances of
this world and their quiddities. They are also the realities of these
sensate bodies. Asfar, I, 3, pp. 503–50488
As a source of meaning and value, the intelligible world signifies
plenitude, perfection, actuality, and comprehensiveness. Sadra
occasionally uses a language of personal beings to refer to the
intelligible world as, for instance, when he says that ‘celestial
spheres [as the locus of intelligible forms] have noble spirits.’89
In this sense, Sadra’s gradational ontology is founded upon what
Leslie calls ‘axiarchism,’ i.e., the view that the world is grounded
in value and that the reality of existence can be explained
primarily in valuational terms.90
This meeting between the ontological and the axiological is a
common theme in Sadra and has important implications for his
theory of knowledge. Since existence is intrinsically intelligible
and ultimately the source of all cognitive terms, it is only natural
that it should be grounded in value. Sadra uses a number of
examples to demonstrate the relevance of this premise for his
concept of knowledge. One such example he is fond of using is
man and his relation to plant and animal kingdoms. As a higher
state of existence, ‘humanity’ contains everything that belongs
to the species of plant and animal existence. Vegetation is the
most important differentia the plants have. Animals possess the
vegetative faculty with a host of other qualities missing in plants
such as mobility and sensation. Finally, man contains all of these
qualities in addition to speech, intelligence and free will, in
which plants and animals lack. To express this higher state of
existence, Sadra introduces the concept of ontological simplicity
(basit). Simplicity denotes a concentrated state of existence
whereby a substance contains multiple existential qualities
without a break or fissure. Man contains the totality of plant and

--- Sayfa 136 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
113
animal attributes in a simple manner, and being a simple
substance vis-à-vis the lower states below it, man gains a higher
ontological status. Sadra’s celebrated phrase that ‘a simple
reality is all things’ (basit al-haqiqah kull al-ashya’) expresses
this simplicity.91 Although a general principle meant to apply to
all things, the exact meaning of this phrase can be clarified only
within the specific context in which it is used. When we apply
it to the concept of man, for instance, it signifies that ‘man-ness’
contains all qualities and properties that belong to ‘plant-ness’
and ‘animal-ness.’ Another example is light and its degrees of
intensification. A candle light is imperfect compared to moon
light and moonlight is imperfect compared to the light of the sun.
The sun, the most condensed source of light, is ontologically
higher than all other forms of light.
It is not difficult to see the relation between this notion of
ontological simplicity and the gradation of existence (tashkik
al-wujud),92 and Sadra applies it to intelligible substances
without any reservations. Like the order of existence, the
intelligible world allows gradation in terms of intensification and
diminution: an intelligible substance becomes more intense and
higher when it contains all intelligible realities under its species.
To use our previous example, man contains in himself all levels
of intelligibility and meaning available to animal and vegetative
states. When we talk about the essence of man-ness or humanity,
we do not exclude from it anything that belongs to the definitions
of animal-ness and plant-ness. Man-ness as an intelligible form
contains all of the lower and imperfect states of meaning ‘in a
simple manner.’ In applying this principle of ontological
simplicity to the intelligible world, Sadra simply replaces
existence with intellect: ‘A simple intellect is all intelligibles’
(‘aql basit kull al-ma‘qulat).93 This implies that a simple
substance such as man vis-à-vis a tree or horse is more meaning-
laden and has a higher level of intelligibility. The noetic
superiority of man in intelligibility is not simply a result of his
intelligence, in which plants and animals lack. Rather, it is a
necessary corollary of the fact that man is more ‘beingful’ than

--- Sayfa 137 ---
114
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
others. Here, again, Sadra defines intelligibility in terms of the
degrees of existence rather than the knowing subject’s mastery
of a discourse.
There is another principle that warrants this conclusion. If
knowledge is to be universal, as the Peripatetics argue, it has to
correspond to a reality of an equal value. In this case, the three
modes of perception, accepted unanimously by Muslim
philosophers, have to correspond to three different modes of
existence. Following Ibn Sina, Sadra introduces a tripartite
division of existence with three corresponding stages of
disembodiment.94 Sensible forms apply to corporeal bodies in
that their disembodiment (naz‘) from matter is conditioned by
such attributes as quantity, change, time, etc. Sadra calls this type
of disembodiment ‘imperfect and conditioned.’ Imaginal forms
apply to things that are suspended between matter and
intelligibility. Sadra calls their mode of disembodiment ‘medial’
(mutawassit). Finally, intellective forms denote the intelligible
reality of things, which are above the limitations of corporeal
and imaginal existence. Their mode of disembodiment is called
‘perfect’ or ‘complete’ (tamm) because at this level of gradation
nothing is left out of the ontological definition of things.95 When
the soul or the intellect in actuality reaches this stage, it becomes
ready for even a higher journey to the world of Proximate Angels
(al-mala’ikat al-muqarrabun):
These meanings are such that it is in the nature of the soul to become
a knowing intellect through them in an intellective order from the
First Principle to the intellects which are the Proximate Angels [that
are close to the Divine Throne]96 and to the souls that are the angels
after the First and to the heavens and the elements (al-‘anasir)…and
the soul becomes knowing and intellecting by being illuminated
with the light of the First Intellect. Asfar, I, 3, p. 362
In an important gloss on the first part of Ibn Sina’s Ilahiyyat
where Ibn Sina discusses the subject matter of metaphysics,
Sadra explains the meaning of the ‘science of metaphysics’ (‘ilm
ma ba‘d al-tabi‘ah) in terms of disembodiment. The ascending

--- Sayfa 138 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
115
and descending orders of existence and perception confirm the
point mentioned above: for any perception to be reliable, it must
correspond to a reality of similar value. Sensation corresponds
to what is sensible in physical objects. Intellection corresponds
to what is intelligible in them. But the way they possess these
qualities and the way we come to perceive them are asymmetrical.
The first aspect of perceivable things in themselves is their
intelligibility, i.e., their intelligible form. For us, however, it
comes last in the order of perception because the human mind
begins with sensible forms and works its way up to the world of
the intelligible.
Things have an existence in themselves and in relation to us. As far
as the order of their existence in themselves is concerned, the first
is the intelligibles, then imaginable and estimative forms, and then
the sensibles. As for the order of their existence in relation to us,
the first is the sensibles, then the imaginable and estimative forms,
and then the intelligibles. That is why it has been said that ‘whoever
has lost [his] sense has lost [his] knowledge.’97 The reason for this
is that our existence starts with the sensibles; when our perception
of the sensible is completed, we receive from the effusing principle
(al-mabda’ al-fayyad) the lights of life and the powers of the animal
soul capable of perceiving imaginative and estimative particulars.
When we complete the state of animal [soul] in a gradual manner,
we receive the lights of the intellect and the powers of the rational
soul capable of perceiving universals and disembodied intellective
[forms].

The perceiver cannot be other than the kind of what is perceived.
Since the order of man’s existence is the opposite of the order of
things emanating from the actual reality (al-haqq al-waqi‘ah) in the
chain of beginning from the principle of existence because in the
chain of return he moves towards the utmost reality of existence,
then it is not surprising that his knowledge of things is in proportion
to his existence. In fact, knowledge of something is nothing but its
existence for the knower. It is then natural that for him the existence
of sensible and imaginative forms comes before the existence of the
intelligibles. That is why his knowledge of these things has been
called the ‘knowledge of what comes after physics’ (‘ilm ma ba‘d
al-tabi‘ah). Sharh ilahiyyat, Vol. I, p. 90

--- Sayfa 139 ---
116
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
An important conclusion Sadra derives from this view of
existence and intelligibility is what he calls the ‘penetration of
knowledge’ (sirayat al-‘ilm) in all things including animals,
plants and minerals. Just as existence penetrates all things,
intelligibility as an epiphenomenon of existence is to be found
in things with varying degrees of intensity and reality. Although
‘rocks and material bodies’ represent the lowest level of
existence, they nevertheless partake of intelligibility in some
way: ‘Knowledge is a single reality. It is necessary in the
Necessary Being and contingent in contingent beings in
accordance with the reality of existence. As we have pointed out
before, the source of knowledge, volition and the like is existence
but some people among the intelligent are incapable of
understanding the penetration of knowledge, power, and volition
in all existents even in rocks and material bodies just like the
penetration of existence into them.’98 The simple intellect (‘aql
basit) is thus closely tied to simple existence. Sadra states this
as follows:
When the soul passes from potentiality to actuality, it becomes a
simple intellect, which is all things. This is a matter that has been
firmly established in our view. The explanation of this is as follows:
knowledge and intellection (al-ta‘aqqul) are a mode of existence,
and existence is united with quiddity. In the same way, knowledge
is united with what is known (al-ma‘lum). Some beings are low in
degree and weak and some lofty and strong. Those that are low [in
degree] have very little share in meanings (ma‘ani) and confined to
one single meaning like a single quantity (…) whereas those that
are noble [in rank] are the essence of the plenitude of meanings even
if they are small in quantity or have no quantity at all like the
rational soul. By the same token, knowledge has various kinds some
of which are low in degree such as sense-perception [since] it is
impossible to sense multiple sensibles through a single sensation.
[But] some are higher in rank such as intellection in that a single
intellect is sufficient to intellect an infinite number of intelligibles
as in the case of the simple intellect. In short, whatever as knowledge
has a higher status in existence, it is more capable of [attaining]
what can be known (ma‘lumat) and more intense in containing

--- Sayfa 140 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
117
quiddities…when we know something through its perfect definition,
we know it with its full truth and reality even if we cannot know all
of its parts at once due to the impossibility of knowing the very truth
and reality of something at once. Asfar, I, 3, pp. 377–379
A similar point is made in the following paragraph which
concludes with a historical note:
The realization of this matter [i.e., the unification of the intellect
and the intelligible] is not possible except by having recourse to the
principles that were mentioned in the beginnings of this book
concerning the view that existence is the principal reality in
existentiation (mawjudiyyah) and quiddity is derived from it. It is
certain that existence allows intensification and diminution, and
whatever is strong in existence (qawiyy al-wujud) becomes more
inclusive and encompassing of universal meanings and disembodied
intellective quiddities. When existence reaches the level of the
simple intellect, which is completely disengaged from the world of
corporeal bodies and quantities, it becomes all of the intelligibilia
and all things in a manner more virtuous and nobler than whatever
they are based upon. Whoever has not tasted this path cannot
understand the simple intellect, which is the source of all detailed
knowledge (al-‘ulum al-tafsiliyyah). That is why you see most of
the virtuous people finding it very difficult and unable to verify it
in spite of their deep involvement in the sciences of wisdom as in
the case of Shaykh Suhrawardi in the Mutarahat, Talwihat, and
Hikmat al-ishraq who has clearly rejected this view, and Imam
[Fakhr al-Din] al-Razi and those who enjoy their ranks. Asfar, I, 3,
pp. 373–37499
In the end, Sadra returns to his initial assumption concerning the
correlative relationship between the terms of existence and the
terms of intelligibility. Since intelligibility corresponds to a
particular level of existence, it is no longer conceived to be a
property of the mind. We shall return to this issue below when
we discuss Sadra’s criticism of the previous theories of
knowledge. Sadra’s radical claim is that intelligibility is
constitutive of reality. Intelligible forms are not just conceptual

--- Sayfa 141 ---
118
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
instruments by which we know the extra-mental world. Rather,
they are coterminous with the world and that is why we can
conceptually know it. There is a sense in which we can say that
without intelligible forms, there would be no such thing as the
‘world.’ This implies that ‘reality’ does not precede intelligibility.
What we call reality is not an aggregate of objects devoid of
intelligibility to which clusters of meaning and signification are
attributed a posteriori. Sadra uses the example of physical
instruments and light to illustrate this point. Intelligible forms,
he argues, are not like manual instruments with which we
operate but which are dispensable in themselves. Rather, they
are like light that makes vision possible:
One cannot say that these forms are instruments for the soul’s
intellecting things other than itself. Rather, they are intelligible for
the soul by themselves in the sense that whatever corresponds to
them outside the soul [i.e., in the extra-mental world] becomes
intelligible for the soul through them. Because we say that if these
forms were not intelligible for the soul in the first place, they would
not be perceived by it. The mediation of these forms in perceiving
things is not like the mediation of manual instruments (alah
sina‘iyyah) in carrying out bodily works (al-a‘mal al-badaniyyah)
but rather like the sensate light in perceiving visible things whereby
light is seen first and then everything else is seen through it. Asfar,
I, 3, p. 318
b. Four Theories of Knowledge and Their Critique
Sadra launches a relentless attack against the Peripatetics and the
Mutakallimun for failing to see the connection between the
ontological and the noetic. While he criticizes the four major
theories of knowledge which he attributes to various philosophers
and theologians before him, his primary target remains the
representational knowledge (al-‘ilm al-irtisami) advanced chiefly
by the Muslim Peripatetics. What Sadra finds as most troubling
is Ibn Sina’s definition of knowledge as a negative term and
privation on the one hand, and representation, on the other. His

--- Sayfa 142 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
119
critique of ‘abstraction’ (tajarrud)100 as privation is based on the
application of his gradational ontology to knowledge and
intellection (ta‘aqqul) whereby he asserts the primacy of self-
knowledge and what Suhrawardi has called ‘knowledge-by-
presence’ (al-‘ilm al-huduri). In fact, a good part of Sadra’s
criticisms rely on knowledge-by-presence and how knowledge
as representation and correspondence fails to account for a
strongly ontological noetics.
The four theories of knowledge that Sadra criticizes can be
summarized as follows. The first is knowledge as abstraction,
which turns cognition into a ‘negative affair’ (amr salbi). The
second is the representational theory of knowledge which argues
for the ‘imprinting’ of intelligible forms in the mind. According
to Sadra, this view, closely related with the first view, turns
knowledge into a mental construction and fails to account for its
relation with existence. The third theory is the definition of
knowledge as a relation (idafah) obtaining between subject and
object, which Sadra attributes mainly to the Mutakallimun. The
fourth theory defines knowledge as an accident (‘arad) residing
in the mind. Of these four theories, Sadra spends the most time
with the second one for his primary target remains the Peripatetic
concept of knowledge as abstraction. As for Suhrawardi’s
definition of knowledge as manifestation or appearance (zuhur),
he accepts it with revisions on the grounds that it reveals an
essential aspect of knowledge, which is presence (hudur).101
To begin with the first theory, the Peripatetic concept of
‘abstraction’ (tajarrud) is based on the idea that when intelligible
forms are ‘disengaged’ from their material properties, they are
deprived of certain qualities and become abstract notions in the
mind. For instance, the concept of horse, when abstracted from
the actual horse, becomes a mental representation and image,
which, in turn, occupies a lesser ontological position compared
to the actually existing horse. Sadra takes this to be a minimalist
definition of knowledge for this makes intellection a process of
privation (amr salbi), turning knowledge into something less
than the actual object of knowledge (ma‘lum). The purpose of

--- Sayfa 143 ---
120
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
knowledge, however, is to know things as they are, i.e., as
concrete, unique individual beings with universal meaning-
properties.
In contrast to this meaning of ‘abstraction’ as privation, Sadra
defines it as ‘disembodiment,’ i.e., as a process of existential
intensification through the gradation of existence on the one
hand, and substantial motion on the other. In this process of
elevated disembodiment, intelligible forms become more
‘condensed,’ viz. able to contain more meanings. When we know
something through its intelligible form, our knowledge cannot
be less than its actual reality, for it is assumed that the reality of
that particular being is contained in its intelligible form in a
simple manner. Sadra insists that we can know things in and of
themselves when we perceive and appropriate their intelligible
forms which are more real and concrete than their corporeal
existence: ‘It is obviously false to define intellection as privation.
When we turn to our consciousness in intellecting something,
we find out in our consciousness that something has occurred
for us, not that something has ceased from us.’102 In his
commentary on the Metaphysics of Ibn Sina’s Shifa’, Sadra
restates his position in similar terms: ‘When we know something
after we did not know it, this must have an effect on our selves.
Otherwise our state would remain the same before and during
the perception [of something]. This effect is nothing but a matter
of existence (amr wujudi). We know through our consciousness
that when we know something, some kind of perfection (amr
kamali) happens to us, not that something disappears from
us.’103
There are two primary reasons for Sadra’s relentless denial of
tajarrud as negation and privation. First of all, Sadra defines
knowledge in terms of positive ontological qualities. In knowing
something, we come to conceive and attain (idrak) a particular
aspect of existence. Since existence is the most concrete, perfect
and actual of all realities, its perception can only lead to a higher
state of consciousness, which, in turn, leaves no space for terms
of negation. For Sadra, every act of perception implies moving

--- Sayfa 144 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
121
a step closer to the reality of the existence of what is perceived
provided that it is not obstructed by the presence of such gross
qualities as matter, sensation, ignorance, desire or error. In this
sense, all veritable perception that yields knowledge is a positive
exercise in existence.104 Secondly, when Sadra criticizes the
Peripatetic concept of intellection as privation, he has in mind
knowledge-by-presence, which is foundational to Sadra’s attempt
to define knowledge as arising out of the unification of the
intellect and the intelligible.
To exemplify the primacy of this kind of knowledge, Sadra
refers to God’s knowledge of things and the self-knowledge of
human beings. Insofar as God’s knowledge is concerned, it can
contain no imperfections, potentialities and negations. It is based
on existential plenitude, affirmation, and comprehensiveness.
The Qur’anic verse, which Sadra quotes, states that ‘nothing
escapes His knowledge.’ In an important section of al-Mazahir
al-ilahiyyah titled ‘On God’s Knowledge of Himself and Other
Things,’ Sadra equates existence with Light (al-nur) and quotes
several verses from the Qur’an:
Existence is neither mixed with non-existence nor concealed by
cover, veil or obscurity. No darkness veils it. It is thus uncovered
by itself, present to and never absent from itself. Its essence is
knowledge, knower by itself and known to itself. Therefore existence
and Light are one and the same thing: ‘God is the Light of the
heavens and the earth’ (Qur’an 24:35). It is never veiled except
through non-existence and imperfection…. Since the Necessary
[Being], exalted be His Name, is above the veil of non-existence,
corporeality, composition and potentiality, He is in the highest
degree of being a perceiver and perceived and being an intellector
and intellected: ‘Should He not know—He that created? And He is
the One that understands the finest Mysteries (and) is Well-
acquainted (with them)’ (Qur’an 67:14).105 ‘[Nothing] is hidden from
Thy Lord (so much as) the weight of an atom on the earth or in
heaven. And not the least and not the greatest of these things but are
recorded in an evident book’ (Qur’an 10:61). al-Mazahir al-
ilahiyyah, pp. 88–89

--- Sayfa 145 ---
122
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
This emphasis on ‘presence’ and ‘perfection’ as a condition of
intelligibility is in tandem with the above definition of knowing
as a positive exercise in cognition. As for self-knowledge, it is
based on the Aristotelian-Suhrawardian principle that one never
ceases to be conscious of oneself.106 As a first-order state of
experience, self-knowledge enjoys permanence and continuity
whereas its articulation as a second-order concept leads to
representation, which, for Sadra, signifies an epistemic rupture
between the subject and its self-consciousness.
In short, Sadra’s main concern is to show that in knowing we
gain something, and this signifies a process in positive terms
whereby we increase in knowledge and appropriate the
intelligible reality of what we know. It is true that in abstracting
intelligible forms we leave out certain properties that account for
the corporeal constitution of things. The concept of hot-ness, for
instance, is not itself hot; otherwise we would be hot when we
think of it in our minds. This is another way of stating the
difference between the concept and reality of things. Sadra,
however, insists that the meaning of things contained in their
intelligible forms does not diminish in epistemic value. Instead,
it becomes more intense by leaving behind such imperfect
qualities as materiality, darkness, grossness, etc. It is in this sense
that knowledge is ‘a matter of affirmation’ (amr thubuti). Sadra
makes this point clear in his countenance of Suhrawardi’s
definition of knowledge as clarity and presence.
As for the Shaykh al-maqtul [Suhrawardi], the author of the Hikmat
al-ishraq, he argued that knowledge consists of ‘appearing’ (zuhur),
and appearing is light itself. But light can be a light for itself or for
something else. If it is for itself, then it is perceiving of itself; if it
is for something else, then this [light] is either a light for itself or
for something other than itself…he thus reasoned that the knowledge
of something by itself consists of its being a light for itself and the
knowledge of something by something else consists of an
illuminative relation between luminous things. At their face value,
these views are contradictory but they can be interpreted in such a
way as to relegate them to one point of view, and it is the idea that

--- Sayfa 146 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
123
knowledge is comprised of the existence of a disembodied thing
whereby existence is conditioned by the privation of obscurities
whether it is knowledge for itself or for something else. If this
disembodied being from which obscurities are removed is existence
for itself, then it is an intellect by itself. If it is a being for something
else like the accidents, then it is an intellect or an imaginal (khayal)
or sensate [form] for something else. Asfar, I, 3, pp. 285–286
The representational theory which construes knowledge as
mental impression is the basis of what we might call common-
sense epistemology. For Sadra, it accounts only for certain types
of objects for it is based on subject-object bifurcation. When the
mind encounters actually existing objects, it creates images and
representations by utilizing universals and generic terms. This,
in turn, lands us in the celebrated correspondence theory of truth:
true knowledge of things obtains when mental images sustained
by the knowing subject corresponds to the objects in the extra-
mental world. But this view, which Sadra attributes to Ibn Sina
in particular, cannot apply to knowledge of concepts for concepts
are not in the external world in the way physical objects are.107
Furthermore, the correspondence theory is predicated upon the
subject-object dichotomy and cannot explain self-knowledge
which transcends the binary opposition of the knowing subject
and the object known. Self-consciousness and self-knowledge
entail the idea that we operate in a first-order conceptual scheme
in which the subject, the I, and the attributes predicated of it are
one and the same thing. As Wittgenstein would later elaborate,
when I say that ‘I am in pain,’ there is no distinction between
the I who utters this sentence and the I/person who is in pain.108
The self-conscious I is a unique existent to which universals or
generic properties are attributed only antecedently, and the same
holds true for self-knowledge.
This is where knowledge as representation fails to explain the
essential unity of subject and object in self-knowledge. The
following is Sadra’s response to knowledge as ‘impressions in
the mind’:

--- Sayfa 147 ---
124
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
As for the second school that considers knowledge as consisting of
a form impressed (muntabi‘ah) upon the intellect, it is to be rejected
as well from three points of view.

First of all, if intellection were to consist of the occurrence of a
form in the intellector, we would not have intellected our own
essences. The conclusion is false as is the premise as necessitated
by [our] consciousness. Our self-intellection is either our very
essence or [not in which case] another form arises in ourselves from
ourselves. Both parts are false…. Secondly, this is necessitated by
a single thing’s being a substance and an accident because the form
of ourselves is like our very selves…. Thirdly, all mental forms are
universals even if they are particularized a thousand times, and this
does not prevent them from being universals and being shared by
multiple subjects. But we know ourselves as a particular identity
without the possibility of sharing [it with other subjects]. Whatever
is superadded to ourselves, we refer to it as ‘it’ whereas we refer to
ourselves as ‘we’ [‘I’]. If our self-knowledge were through a form
added to ourselves, we would have referred to ourselves as ‘it.’ The
conclusion is false as is the premise. Asfar, I, 3, pp. 288–289
Sadra makes a similar point when he argues against the concept
of knowledge as a relation or attribution (idafah) between subject
and object. Sadra’s general principle about relational terms rules
out the possibility of defining knowledge as a relation because
‘the attributed (al-mudaf) is dependent and not independent. It
moves if its subject moves and remains still if its subject remains
still. It increases if its subject increases and decreases if its
subject decreases. It intensifies if its subject intensifies and
diminishes if its subject diminishes.’109 What this means for
knowledge as relation is that we cannot conceive intelligibility
without a knower. There must be a knower for anything to be
known. At its face value, the proposition seems to make sense.
We gain knowledge at the point where the knower meets the
object of his knowledge. This is what Fakhr al-Din al-Razi claims
when he defines intellection (ta‘aqqul) as a relation between a
knower and the mental representation of what it knows.110 A closer
look, however, reveals that the proposition is fallacious, for it
makes intelligibility dependent on the cognitive act of the knower.

--- Sayfa 148 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
125
Sadra’s working principle is that intelligibility as the proper basis
of all meaningful statements has an existence of its own and does
not impart any privileged position to the knower. Sadra sees
knowledge and intelligibility as interchangeable, and the content
of what is known precedes the knower. If knowledge and
intelligibility can exist only with the knower or when the knower
meets the object of his knowledge, this turns all knowledge into
a property of the knower or what Sadra calls a ‘quality of the
soul’ (kayfiyyah nafsaniyyah). This, in turn, makes knowledge ‘a
purely mental thing among the category of things known
(ma‘lumat). But the knowledge of every category is nothing other
than this category without its having an existence in and of
itself.’111
There are further difficulties with defining knowledge as a
relation. Divine knowledge is a case in point. If knowledge were
to be a relation, then God’s knowledge of things would be an
accidental and a posteriori state between Him and objects of His
knowledge. God’s knowledge of contingent beings would be ‘a
quality superadded to His Essence which subsists as one and is
more exalted than having one of His attributes of perfection
coming from one of the weakest created [i.e., contingent]
beings.’ But perhaps the most pernicious result, theologically
speaking, is that this view makes God a non-knower before He
encounters His objects of knowledge. God’s existence precedes
all of His other attributes, which means that if knowledge is
nothing but a relation between subject and object, then God
‘would not be knowing anything before receiving this attribute
[of knowledge].’ Moreover, this would make God’s knowledge
dependent upon contingent beings which His very existence
creates. This is absurd for ‘it is impossible for that which is the
source of all perfection for other things to receive perfection
from others.’112 In a similar way, knowledge designates a state
of perfection whereby we gain something whereas ‘relationality
alone is not a quality of perfection for anything.’113 Lastly, even
if we accept knowledge as relation, it does not always depend
on the two terms of a relation but requires a third term by which

--- Sayfa 149 ---
126
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
we judge the relationship between them. Therefore ‘when we
judge that the moving body is different from the mover, father
from son or an angry person from the person he is angry with,
we know all these through a demonstration outside the concepts
of the two sides [of attribution].’114 In other words, a relationship
between two things does not always yield knowledge about
them.
The following paragraph provides a concise summary of
Sadra’s general criticism of knowledge as relation:
As for the third view that knowledge is a relation between the
knower and the known without there being any other state beyond
it, it is also false. As it was explained in the section on attribution
(idafah), the terms of a relation have no independent existence and
do not come about except in the case of two relational terms.
Furthermore, much of what we perceive does not have concrete
existence in the outside world. When we perceive ourselves, there
is no attribution between ourselves [that perceives] and ourselves
[that is perceived] except from the point of view of mental analysis
(al-i‘tibar). If the knowledge of ourselves were to consist of an
attribution of ourselves to ourselves, our knowledge of ourselves
would not be obtained except as mental analysis and comparison.
But this is not the case for we are incessantly conscious of ourselves.
Asfar, I, 3, p. 290
It follows then that the knowledge we have of ourselves is not
different from ourselves. In self-knowledge, that which knows
and that which is known are one and the same. It is true that we
can have a conception of the self through conceptual analysis.
This, however, is only a second-order conceptualization and does
not state the actual self which is both the subject and object of
self-cognition. Such an analysis does not overcome the subject-
object bifurcation for it treats self-knowledge as a kind of object-
knowledge. What Sadra wants to affirm is that we cannot
objectivize self-knowledge in the way we do the representational
knowledge of things that exist in the external world. Sadra
generalizes this rule to knowledge as both relation and
representation:

--- Sayfa 150 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
127
…what needs to be investigated is how something knows itself when
we say that perception (idrak) is a relational state (halah idafiyyah)
or when we say that it consists of the representation of the perceived
in the perceiver. If knowledge were to be a relational state, then
relation happens between two things whereas one single thing
cannot be attributed to itself, in which case it would not know itself.
If we say that it consists of representation, a thing is represented for
something else, in which case it would not be known to itself. Asfar,
I, 3, pp. 353–354
In summary, Sadra’s overall concern is to formulate a substantive
rather than relational concept of knowledge. For an ontologist
like Sadra, ‘relation’ is too weak a term to do justice to
knowledge as a mode of existence. That is why he also criticizes
the idea of knowledge as an accident (‘arad) on similar grounds.
First of all, when we define knowledge as an accident, we define
it as an accident in the mind. As we said before, this makes
knowledge a property of the knower, which Sadra rejects as a
subjective view of knowledge. Sadra’s insistence on this point
stems from the fact that ‘the existence of intelligible forms in
the mind’ is not like ‘the existence of accidents in their
substratum.’115 Otherwise, we would have to say that all we
perceive is accidents. Or, everything we know becomes an
accident when they take on the status of mental existence in
which case ‘there would be no difference between substance and
accident in mental existence; the difference would hold only in
external existence.’ This, however, does not apply to such things
as God, ourselves, actual substances116 and separate intellects for
they cannot be conceived of as accidents. The basic question is
then how a substance becomes an accident when it is known in
the mind. Fakhr al-Din al-Razi, who remains Sadra’s main target
here, sees no problem with ‘something being an accident from
the point of view of its mental existence and a substance from
the point of view of its actual essence.’117 By contrast, Sadra
asserts that ‘knowledge of substance is substance and knowledge
of accident is accident.’118 What we know as substance in the
external world remains a substance in the mind. The only

--- Sayfa 151 ---
128
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
difference is the new mode of existence that a ‘substance-in-the-
mind’ (fi’l-dhihn) assumes.
At this point, it is important to clarify the expressions ‘in the
external world’ (fi’l-kharij) and ‘in the mind’ (fi’l-dhihn). In
Sadra’s vocabulary, neither of these expressions refers to some
place ‘in which’ things reside. Rather they denote different
modes of existence. The ‘external world’ is not a ‘place’ in which
things exist. Otherwise we will have to place this place in
another place, and that place in another and so on ad infinitum.
That is why it is more appropriate to understand fi’l-kharij as
‘externally’ rather than ‘in the external world’ and fi’l-dhin as
‘mentally’ rather than ‘in the mind.’ As the following statements
show, they refer to different modes and levels of existence.
What we mean by actual [i.e., external] existence (al-wujud al-‘ayni)
is that the concomitants (lawazim) of an [actual] essence follow
from it. When blackness is found in the external world, its proper
nature is to cause absence of sight. The proper effect of hotness is
to cause hotness. But when they occur in the soul, these concomitants
do not follow from them. We call the former actual [external]
existence and the latter mental existence. Asfar, 1, 3, p. 312119

It is clear that what we mean by ‘the external’ and in ‘the mind’
when we say ‘this exists in the external world’ and ‘that exists in
the mind’ is not one of substratum, place or subject. Instead, the
meaning of something existing in the external world is that it has
an existence to which effects and states (of existence) occur. Its
existing in the mind means the opposite. If existence had no reality
except the actualization of a quiddity, then there would remain no
difference between the external and the mind. Masha‘ir, par. 22, p.
12
What Sadra means by the ‘subsistence of a form in the mind’ is
not that the soul creates the forms themselves. This would make
all cognition and knowledge a creation of the mind. Instead,
what the soul creates is the mode of existence proper to things
that exist in the mind.120 This is borne out by the general principle
that what we perceive is not the physical object itself but the
form proper to it when the necessary conditions are met. To

--- Sayfa 152 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
129
quote Sadra, ‘what is in the external world has no presence in
the perceiver. Instead [perception] takes place through the soul’s
conceptualization of a form which, when the necessary conditions
are actualized, corresponds to what is in the outside world and
which exists also in the world of the soul.’121 As I mentioned in
Chapter I, Sadra, following the Peripatetics, admits that we
cannot know matter itself, for matter is pure potentiality and can
be known only when coupled with a particular form. Since what
is intelligible in things is not matter but their form, we can only
perceive the forms.122 This, however, does not mean that when
we know something, what we know is only an abstract form, not
the thing itself. Such a conclusion would lead us to radical
conceptualism and eventually to skepticism whereby our relation
with the external world would be confined to the contents of our
mind. Sadra refers to this as one of the consequences of Ibn
Sina’s concept of knowledge according to which ‘the knower,
whether a soul, an intellect or God, can intellect only itself or a
property of itself.’123 Instead, Sadra insists that even though we
know things through their form or a particular form ‘representing’
(mumaththilah) the actual beings in the extra-mental world, what
we know is not an abstract notion but a particular being with
existential qualities. Sadra compares the function of these forms
to the perception of colors as follows: ‘The relation of colours
in the external world to the eye is like the relation of quiddities
in the external world to their intellective forms.’124 In other
words, what we know is not a mere concept but the thing itself
for its form is its very reality. When I perceive a mountain, the
mountain as a physical being is not transplanted into my mind.
Yet, what I know as the mountain is no less than the reality of
the mountain.125
Sadra is rather relentless in reiterating this point. In his
commentary on the Metaphysics of the Shifa’, he says that ‘the
retention of essences is as follows: when the mind conceptualizes
something, it looks at this mental form not from the point of
view of its mental determination (ta‘ayyun) but from the point
of view of its external existence by which the category to which

--- Sayfa 153 ---
130
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
it belongs is particularized such as its being a substance, a
corporeal body and a sleeping being and through which the
concomitants of its actual reality are predicated of it.’126 This
suggests that the fundamental nature of things is retained by their
‘essence’ even when they are conceived in the mind as abstract
and general notions. The essence of a substance does not change
when it is transferred to the mind: a father is a father, i.e., the
father of a son, both in the external world and in the mind. The
physical properties of a magnet are not transferred to the mind.
But its essence, i.e., that metal object that attracts other metal
objects, remains the same in the mind. Even if the magnet is in
one’s pocket and thus prevented from attracting things, i.e.,
performing its essential function in the external world, it is still
a magnet. It is then concluded that ‘the intellective forms of
substances that exist externally are the very meanings of these
beings and their essence.’127
It must be clear by now why we cannot claim to create the
form, i.e., the essence and meaning of the horse that we see in
the field. For Sadra and for all Platonists before him, the
intelligible form of the horse exists independent of our perception
of it. Otherwise, we cannot explain the meaning of abstracting
intelligible forms from sensible, i.e., physical objects. In this
limited sense, even the Peripatetic tradition accepts the
independent existence of intelligible forms. The mind knows
things by extracting their intelligible forms from their matter.
That is why Sadra’s choice of the word ‘subsistence’ is by no
means fortuitous: subsistence denotes the mode of existence of
physical objects in the mind, not their generation by it. It is also
here that the analogy of light comes in handy: just as light makes
vision possible, intelligible forms make cognition possible. In
Sadra’s words, ‘[intelligible forms] are in fact the dawning of an
intellective light on the soul by which the essences are seen just
like the dawning of sunlight on the faculty of sight by which
visible things are seen.’128
This brings us to an aspect of Sadra’s concept of the soul that
needs to be understood properly. In a broad sense, the soul is the

--- Sayfa 154 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
131
ideas it contains. It is not the case that the soul is an essence on
the one hand, and the concepts and ideas it embodies are separate
beings on the other. ‘The soul by its essence consists of its
perceptual cognitions (masha‘ir idrakiyyah).’129 The soul’s
intellecting of other things and ‘its being intelligible to itself is
the same thing as its own very existence.’130 In Sadra’s words,
‘when the soul perceives sensible and imaginal [substances], it
intellects131 the forms that subsist with it. But this is like the
subsistence of a passive agent with an active agent, not like the
subsistence of an accident in a subject. In this regard, what is
established in the mind is that very thing which subsists with it,
not that they are two separate things in essence.’132 Sadra insists
that the ‘subsistence of sensible and imaginal forms in the soul
is not through incarnation (hulul).’133 It is more appropriate to
say that perception takes place not through the ‘incarnation of
an intelligible form in the soul but through archetypes (muthul)
that reside in the mind and through the soul’s unification with
them.’134
Coming back to his criticism of knowledge as relation, Sadra
makes a distinction between two kinds of relation. The first is
the relation that obtains both in the external world and in the
mind, an example of which is the relation between father and
son. The second is the relation that obtains in the mind but not
in the external world. The distinction between essence and
existence is a relation of this kind. There is a third kind where
no distinction occurs either in the mind or in the external world,
and this is what Sadra seeks to present as yet another argument
against knowledge as relation.
Knowledge consists of the existence of an actual thing for something
else. We further say that it is the existence of something disengaged
from matter whether this existence belongs to itself or to something
else. If it is for something else, then it is knowledge for something
other than itself; if it is not for something else, then it is knowledge
for itself. This is what we call relation (idafah) like the relation of
existence. Existence in and of itself can be an existent for itself or
for something else. The latter is like the existence of accidents

--- Sayfa 155 ---
132
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
vis-à-vis their subjects and the former like the existence of
substances. The existence of [those substances] is unchanging for
themselves but not for other things. The relation between existence
and quiddity, however, is only metaphorical and as such there is no
differentiation between the two except by way of mental analysis.
Therefore if the relation in question necessitates the differentiation
of two sides, it necessitates it in terms of actualization (tahaqquq)
in the external world. If relation occurs in the extra-mental world as
in the case of father-son and writer-writing, the differentiation
[between them] comes about in the external world. It is thus
impossible for father and son, who is related to that father, to be one
single existent. But when the relation takes place only in the mind
without being in the external world, then the differentiation of the
two sides takes place also only within the context of this relation
(nisbah). Asfar, I, 3, pp. 354–355
In contrast to these kinds of relations, however, there is another
kind of relation that does not presume duality in existence in
concreto or in the mind. Sadra’s working principle is that one
single existent can be the subject of multiple meanings without
there being the duality or multiplicity of attribution and
predication. A frequently used example is man having the
attributes of vitality/animal-ness (hayawan) and speech/
rationality (nutq) at the same time. When we define man as
rational animal, we do not refer to three discrete things called
‘man,’ ‘rational,’ and ‘animal.’ As a whole, they give us the
concept of ‘man.’ Insofar as the actual reality of man is
concerned, there is again no separation between ‘man,’ ‘rational’
and ‘animal.’ What we have before us is a single unit. That is
why Sadra insists that when we talk about ourselves as knowing
and known on the one hand, and as the locus of knowledge on
the other, this does not lead to ‘multiplicity in reality or in mental
analysis.’135
According to this line of argument, the ability to intellect and,
by extension, intelligibility is the standing condition of agency,
for we cannot conceive the human agent without affirming of
him the qualities of speech and intelligence. When applied to
knowledge, this implies that a thing that exists is intelligible and

--- Sayfa 156 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
133
can be known by itself in proportion to its share of existing:
‘Knowledge is neither a negative thing like abstraction from
matter nor a relation. Rather, it is existence. Not every kind of
existence but actual, not potential existence. Not every kind of
actual existence but existence pure and unmixed with non-
existence. It becomes more intense in knowledge [i.e.,
intelligibility] in proportion to its level of purity from the
blemish of non-existence.’136 In such cases, there is no
relationality between a thing and its intelligibility. In the case of
God, knowledge is necessitated by His very existence, which is
simple (basit), for existence by definition implies consciousness
and is the proper locus of intelligibility. As a general rule, one
cannot speak of the plenitude of existence without acknowledging
its cognitive content. To drive this point home, Sadra returns to
the question of how multiple meanings are predicated of God
without jeopardizing His absolute unity:
When the Sublime, exalted be His Invocation, is qualified as
existing by Himself and subsisting and knowing through His own
essence or when we say that He has Power, Will or Life, there is in
reality no relation, attribution, connection, accidentality or any kind
of attribution and relation but only a pure existence which is itself
the locus of knowledge, power, volition, life, and other qualities of
perfection.137 Just as His existentiality (mawjudiyyah) does not
necessitate in Him an attribute and a subject of attribution (mawsuf),
He has in reality no accident, subject of accident and thus no
accidentality either in concrete reality or in the mind. The same
applies to other names whose judgment is the same as existence
because they are nothing but existence. But the mind presumes here
an attribute, a subject of attribution, and a relation between the two.
Thus we say [falsely] that He the exalted has Being, Knowledge,
and Will…. This relation between Him the Exalted and His essence
is what the mind extrapolates by way of comparison with what it
sees in things other than the Divine…the relation here is only
metaphorical, and it goes back to the absence of attributing
composition and multiplicity to Him. Asfar, I, 3, pp. 355–356

--- Sayfa 157 ---
134
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
We can paraphrase Sadra’s point as follows: in cases where a
single being assumes multiple meanings, relation is a mental
concept. The mind conceives a set of relations between a being
and its various attributes but in reality what we have is a single
unitary being. This is most obvious in the case of self-knowledge.
It is true that I can establish a relation between myself and my
knowledge of myself when I retroactively think upon the
proposition that ‘I know myself.’ This relation, however, ought
to be mental otherwise I would have to say I have a relation
between myself and myself. Occasionally, Sadra compares this
to the distinction between essence and existence. The distinction
is purely mental and does not correspond to anything real in the
external world. What really exists is a single being with multiple
meanings and attributes. It is in this sense that ‘relation is only
a metaphor.’
This conclusion is also warranted by Sadra’s general principle
that perfect disembodiment and, by extension, pure intelligibility
enable higher beings to take on multiple attributes and
‘meanings.’ It goes without saying that the word ‘meaning’
(ma‘na) is to be understood here in the light of Sadra’s realist
ontology of Platonic Forms. When such beings reach higher
levels of disembodiment through gradation of existence and
substantial motion, they increase in existence rather than simply
having more accidents added to them. This, in turn, reduces all
dualities and relations to mental distinctions. The duality of
name and the named, for instance, takes place only for those
beings that remain attached to material existence and thus lack
in complete transparency and luminosity. Such dualities
disappear as beings become ontologically simpler and more
condensed. Qualities such as knowledge, intelligibility, life,
volition, and so on are constitutive of simple substances, not
mere attributes residing in them.
In our view, knowledge is existence that is disengaged from matter.
As this being exists by itself, it is also intelligible by itself. Just as
the existentiality (mawjudiyyah) of existence by itself does not

--- Sayfa 158 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
135
require duality either in essence or in the consideration of essence
except only as pure mental analysis, by the same token its
intelligibility by itself does not lead to differentiation in its essence,
aspects (jihat) or considerations except as difference in concept [i.
e., in the mind]. As you have seen before, different concepts can
unite in one being and reality, and a being that is one and simple
without any obscurities can rightly be the locus of multiple concepts
all of which are united in existence despite the fact that they may
exist in different loci with multiple beings in concreto or with
different concepts in the mind. Since a disembodied and simple
essence is disengaged from being the locus [of one single attribute],
the concept of substance is affirmed of it. Since it is a form
disengaged from matter, the concept of the intellect is affirmed of
it; since it is a form by itself, the concept of the intelligible is
affirmed of it; since it is existent by itself and not by something else,
the concept of the intellector (‘aqil) is affirmed of it; since it is a
being beyond all evils, it becomes the subject of love; since it
perceives this goodness, it loves its own essence, and so on. In this
way, it is possible to affirm these relational meanings of one single
essence without there being multiplicity and difference in actual
reality except in concepts. Asfar, I, 3, pp. 356–357
The gist of Sadra’s above criticisms is that knowledge should be
conceived as a substantive rather than an instrumental and
relational term. For Sadra, the definitions of knowledge as
abstraction, impression, relation and accident all fall short of the
substantive nature of cognition and intelligibility.
c. Modes of Perception and the Simple Intellect
Following the Peripatetic tradition,138 Sadra divides perception
(idrak) into four modes as sensation (ihsas), imagination
(takhayyul), estimation (tawahhum) and intellection (ta‘aqqul).
Each of these modes corresponds to a level of existence or, more
properly, to a level of disembodiment. Sadra works from these
levels of existence toward the mind rather than moving from
the mind to how it perceives things as mental representations.
The four modes of disembodiment denote both the types and

--- Sayfa 159 ---
136
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
levels of perception. We can hardly overemphasize the
significance of this point because for Sadra our epistemic contact
with things is mediated through a hierarchy of perception: in its
cogitations, the mind knows things in stages and degrees rather
than simply in different ways and through different means.139
This hierarchy is essentially ontological as each level of
perception corresponds to a particular mode of existence. In
defining perception as an onto-epistemic encounter with things,
Sadra’s intent remains thoroughly ontological: instead of
construing perception as a state pertaining to the knower, he
places it within the larger context of ontological disembodiment
(tajrid and naz‘), luminosity, and clarity (wuduh), and situates
perception ‘somewhere’ between the mental plane of the knowing
subject and the non-subjective domain of existence. This is a
decisive move away from a subjectivist-psychological notion of
perception to a mainly ontological context in which the knowing
subject, i.e., the ‘intellector’ (‘aqil) is no longer seen as the sole
locus of perception.
With this point in mind, we can now turn to how these modes
of perception function in Sadra’s epistemology. The first kind is
called sensation and acquired through the medium of the five
senses. In discussing sensation, Sadra focuses not so much on
the senses as on the kind of disembodiment that makes sense
experience possible. Sensation is the perception of existence as
‘mixed with matter’ and conditioned by such determinants as
place, time, position, quality, and quantity.140 Since sensate
objects are conditioned by these material qualities without which
they cannot exist, their disembodiment and, by extension,
perception is ‘incomplete.’ In this sense, the senses are necessary
but not sufficient for arriving at the form, i.e., the meaning of
sensate qualities.
Imagination (takhayyul) corresponds to a higher level of
perception despite the fact that it shares similar characteristics
with sensation.141 The difference between the two lies in the fact
that the imaginal faculty can retain forms or ideas in the absence
of a sensate object without being able to generate universal

--- Sayfa 160 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
137
concepts apart from sensate objects and qualities.142 When
perceiving heat as a property of corporeal beings, for instance,
sensation remains completely dependent on the hot object
whereas imagination can preserve the concept of heat after
having a first experience of the hot object perceived. In this
sense, imagination acts as an intermediary and isthmus (barzakh)
between the purely material and purely intellective, and Sadra,
following Ibn al-’Arabi, uses imagination as an ontological state
connecting the two spheres of existence.143
Estimation (tawahhum) refers yet to a higher level of
perception whereby the estimative faculty (quwwah wahmiyyah)
can sustain forms as ideas and notions in the absence of sense
experience and sensate objects. But it falls short of constructing
these forms as universal qualities applicable to multiple objects.
Since the estimative faculty perceives meanings only in relation
to particular sensate objects, it represents a lower level of the
intellective faculty. At the end, however, Sadra drops estimation
from his list of the modes of perception by saying that the
‘estimative faculty is like an intellect that has fallen from its
[higher] state.’144
Intellection (ta‘aqqul) is the highest mode of perception
whereby a ‘thing is perceived from the point of view of its
essence only and not from the standpoint of any other
[consideration] whether taken by itself or by other perceptual
attributes.’145 Intellection pertains to the essences of things which
contain in themselves all other sensate and perceptual qualities
‘in a simple manner.’ This is how the intellect is able to retain
meanings and concepts in the absence of sensate objects to
which such meanings are applied. As a condition of intelligibility,
disembodiment reaches its highest level of intensity and
incorporeality in intellection. This is the way of looking at things
‘as they are’ or as ‘things-qua-essences’ (min hayth mahiyyat).
At this juncture, knowing things through their essences reverses
the process of representational knowledge: instead of abstracting
forms/meanings inherent in things in an ascending order, the
intellect knows them by uniting with their intelligible essences

--- Sayfa 161 ---
138
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
in a descending order. Obviously, this does not suggest anything
like ‘knowing things without things.’ Rather, it refers to
perceiving things through their essential properties stored in their
intelligible forms which enjoy a higher ontological status than
sensate qualities.
Thus Sadra reduces perception to three modes and classifies
them according to their level of disembodiment and ontological
intensity. In essence, this is a restatement of Ibn Sina, to which
Sadra adds very little. His attempt to collapse all modes of
perception into modes of existence, however, is no small
matter:
In fact, perception is of three kinds as there are three worlds [viz.,
the sensible, the imaginal, and the intellectual], and estimation is
like an intellect that has fallen from its [higher] state. In every
perception, there is a disengagement (naz‘) of the realities of things
and their spirits from the moulds of physical existence and temples
of matter. The sensible form is disengaged from matter only
imperfectly, being conditioned by the presence of matter. The
imaginal form is disengaged medially, and that is why it falls
between the world of the sensibilia and the world of the intelligibilia.
The intellective form is disengaged completely in the case of forms
that are taken [i.e., disengaged] from matter. As for that which is an
intellect by itself, it does not need any of these disengagements in
its intellection. Asfar, I, 3, p. 362146
In its act of intellection, the soul does not simply abstract and
discard certain qualities from sensate objects. Rather, it
undergoes an intellective transformation and becomes ‘more’ in
existential attributes through substantial motion. The soul’s
intellectual and existential journey is predicated upon Sadra’s
view that the ‘soul is corporeal in its origination but spiritual in
its subsistence’ (jismaniyyat al-huduth ruhaniyyat al-baqa’). To
clarify this point, he returns to his view of disembodiment
discussed above. He states that the
meaning of disengagement (tajrid) in intellection and other kinds of
perception is not like the common view of jettisoning certain

--- Sayfa 162 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
139
additional qualities (zawa’id). It is not the case that the soul remains
stationary147 and the perceptuals are transported from their material
positions to the senses, from the senses to the imaginal faculty, and
from the imaginal faculty to the intellect. Rather, both the perceiver
and the perceived are disengaged together, pass from one being to
another together, and travel from one mode of existence to another
and from one world to another until the soul becomes an intellect,
intellector, and intelligible in actuality after having been only
potential in all of them. Asfar, I, 3, p. 366
By reaching a level of disengagement proportionate to its
ontological state, the intellect, once a potential agent of knowing,
becomes fully actualized and is called the ‘simple intellect’ (al-
‘aql al-basit). The simple intellect is preceded by several other
intellects or levels of intellection, which Sadra divides into three.
The first is the domain of the potential or hylic intellect (al-‘aql
al-hayulani) whereby the intellect remains a dormant potentiality
until it is united with an intelligible.148 Like the Peripatetics,
Sadra postulates that the potential intellect needs an external
agent to actualize it. This agent is the intelligible (al-ma‘qul) that
is fully actual and intelligible regardless of the presence or
absence of an intellect that perceives it. Since an intelligible is
essentially a disembodied substance, it is also self-intellecting,
and this, in tandem with the Platonic ontology of ideas, makes
intelligibilia independent of the knowing subject.
The second level of intellection pertains to the imaginal world
whereby the disembodied forms of things become established in
the faculty of imagination in such a way that ‘as if it looks at the
forms in a detailed manner [i.e., knows them in full detail].’149
The third and highest level of intellection obtains when the
potential intellect becomes a simple intellect in which the
intelligibilia are established as ‘meaning properties’ that are fully
actualized. In principle, the simple intellect can conceive ideas
and concepts without further analysis and investigation of
specific instances. This is what Ibn Sina calls ‘knowledge in
detail’ (al-‘ilm bi’l-tafsil) as opposed to ‘knowledge in summary’
(al-‘ilm bi’l-ijmal). The latter form of knowledge requires further

--- Sayfa 163 ---
140
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
articulation and is usually brought to its full extent in a dialogue.
According to Ibn Sina, we know many things but only in a
cursory manner. Our cognition reaches the level of the simple
knowledge (al-‘ilm al-basit) when we further articulate our
conceptions through questioning and deliberation. Suhrawardi
joins Ibn Sina in drawing a distinction between the two forms of
knowledge and states that when we think of the concept of
humanity (al-insaniyyah), we think of all of its conceptual
concomitants (lawazim). In other words, we do not exercise an
additional second-order analysis to perceive the full extent of the
concept of humanity.150 This explains the possibility of knowing
many things through a single mind or intellect. Continuing this
discussion, Fakhr al-Din al-Razi interprets the simple intellect
as perspicacity and ‘quick wit,’ viz., the intellect’s ability to
know things all ‘at once’ (daf‘ah wahidah) whereas ‘intellection
in detail’ (al-ta‘aqqul al-tafsili) refers to the gradual cognition
of things ‘one after another’ (wahidah ba‘d wahidah).151
For Sadra, the simple intellect represents full actuality and
functions in a way similar to the active intellect. Sadra, however,
does not say in any clear manner if his simple intellect is a
cognitive counterpart of the active intellect in the soul. Instead,
he criticizes Ibn Sina for failing to see the connection between
the simple intellect and the unification argument:
Proving this simple intellect is not possible except by having
recourse to the idea of the unification of the intellect and the
intelligibles as we have demonstrated before. What is strange is that
the Master [Ibn Sina] should grant these matters that he mentions
in this context and then be extremely stubborn in denying the idea
of unification. If we do not acknowledge the existence of the simple
intellect in man and in substances completely disengaged from
corporeal bodies and matter in which there are intelligible meanings
(al-ma‘ani al-ma‘qulah), how can that which is not actualized
emanate upon the souls from the simple intellect? How can it bring
the souls from potentiality to actuality by virtue of something that
is not established in it [i.e., when it does not function as a fully
realized agent]? By the same token, how can the forms of the
intelligibilia be stored in it despite its simplicity while the soul,

--- Sayfa 164 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
141
having forgotten them, can find them stored in the simple intellect
when it returns to its store of the intelligibles (khazanat al-‘aqliyyah)
just like the Master has demonstrated? Asfar, I, 3, p. 372
Simple intellect as the storehouse of intelligible forms is a
logical result of the ‘perfect disembodiment’ of higher intellective
beings because the simple intellect stands for the highest rung
of intellection at which level one can know things in their
‘totality.’ In contrast to sense experience where one’s access to
physical objects is conditioned by the available sense data and
hence limited to particular instances of sensate objects, the
simple intellect signifies intellectual cognition that comprises in
principle everything there is to know about perceivable objects.
When knowing the ‘concept’ of humanity, for instance, the
simple intellect can know what it means to be human and all of
the modes and secondary properties that belong to it. The mind
as simple intellect can have such a perfect and complete
perception without having to run through the entire spectrum of
individual human beings, for to know something in a simple
manner is to unite with its intelligible essence. Needless to say,
one can grant this conclusion only if one accepts Sadra’s initial
assumptions about existence and its gradation. We are once again
reminded that the intelligible reality of things is ontologically
more real and epistemologically more reliable than their
corporeal templates, and this applies mutatis mutandis to the
simple intellect that yields ‘simple knowledge.’
Sadra assigns to ‘simple intellection’ such an importance that
he presents it as the only proper way of knowing God. Since God
is the ultimate source of all existence, the perception of even
sensate beings ends up being a perception of an aspect of the
Necessary Being. To avoid the seemingly inescapable conclusion
that all cognition leads to knowledge of God, Sadra first makes
a distinction between simple and composite knowledge:
Know that knowledge, just like ignorance, can be simple, and it
consists of the perception of something without the awareness of
this perception and without the affirmation of what is being

--- Sayfa 165 ---
142
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
perceived. Or it can be composite and it consists of the perception
of something with the awareness of this perception and the
awareness of what is being perceived. Once you understand this, we
add that the perception of the Real the Exalted One is based on this
kind of simplicity and it obtains for everyone in the root of his
innate nature (fitrah). This is so because what is perceived by itself
in everything [we know]…is nothing but a mode of the existence of
this thing whether this perception is sensual, imaginal, or rational,
and whether it is by presence (hudur) or by coming-into-being
(husul). Asfar, I, 1, p. 116
After this prelude, Sadra turns to his main argument to subsume
all cognitive acts under the perception of existence. Ultimately,
‘all perception is through a mode of existence higher and more
luminous than the [level of] existence clouded with non-existence
and material darkness.’152 This innate and intuitive perception of
existence is found in all human beings whether they are aware
of it or not.
According to the verifiers (muhaqqiqin) among the sages (‘urafa’)
and the theosophers (muta’allihin) among the philosophers
(hukama’), it is clear and firmly established that the existence of
everything is nothing but the reality of its identity (huwiyyah), which
is related to the existence of the Real and Self-Subsisting One and
which is the basis of judgment for the being-ness (mawjudiyyah) of
things. The most appropriate way to describe this is to say that [their
existence] is a mode of their actual identity, which is related to the
Divine Existence. We will establish further proofs for the fact that
existential identities are among the degrees of the manifestation of
His Essence and rays of His Majesty and Beauty.

The perception of everything is therefore nothing but a
consideration (mulahazah) of this thing in a way that is related to
the Necessary [Being] from this point of view, i.e., the fact that [the
Necessary Being] is its existence (wujud) and being-ness
(mawjudiyyah). And this is not possible without perceiving the
essence of the Real One the Exalted…. Whoever perceives anything
in any mode of perception, he has perceived the Creator. People may
be ignorant of this perception except for the elect (al-khawass) from
among the Friends of God the Exalted as it was reported from the

--- Sayfa 166 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
143
Commander of the Believers [‘Ali ibn Abi Talib] who said: ‘I have
seen nothing but God before it, after it, with it, and in it.’ All of
these [perceptions] are correct. It is thus obvious that this simple
perception of the Real One the Exalted obtains for every one of His
servants. But this does not lead to the perception of God with all of
His Essence because this is impossible as it was proved before.
Asfar, I, 1, pp. 116–117
While simple knowledge or perception is a first-order experience
given to us in our ‘natural’ encounter with things, composite
perception requires a second-order conceptualization whereby
we reflect upon perception itself.
As for composite perception, it does not arise for everyone whether
it is based on unveiling (kashf) or witnessing (shuhud) in the case
of the elect of the Friends of God and the sages or whether it is
based on demonstrative knowledge as it obtains for intelligent
thinkers concerning His Qualities and Effects. Furthermore, this is
the place of responsibility (taklif) and message (risalah) in which
both error and truth have their way, to which the judgment of
thought and faith return, and where there is a hierarchy of virtuosity
among the sages and degrees among the people. This is in contrast
to the former mode [of perception] in which there is no room
whatsoever for error and ignorance. As it is said in Persian:

Knowing the Truth itself is innate (fitri)

The knowledge of this knowing is but a thought

It is therefore clear that the five perceptions (i.e., the five senses)
just like the other kinds of perceptual powers manifest the Divine
Identity, which is the First Beloved and the Perfect Goal of man.
Asfar, I, 1, p. 118
While the three modes of perception are interrelated in a
hierarchical way, all perception takes place ultimately through
the soul as the simple intellect. The senses function primarily as
‘preparatory conditions’ for the soul’s reception of sensate
objects because the senses cannot ‘know’ by themselves what
they perceive. Sense-perception is governed by the intellect in

--- Sayfa 167 ---
144
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
that what enables the mind to perceive a sensation as a
meaningful experience is not the senses but the intellect: ‘The
senses or the sensate soul as sensate soul cannot know if the
sensible object has an existence of its own in the external world.
This can be known only through experience and it belongs to
the intellect or the thinking soul and not to the faculty of
sensation or imagination [to make this judgment].’153 Conversely,
what prevents the soul as a simple intellect from perceiving
intelligible essences on a continuous basis or ‘all at once’ is the
intervention of sensible and imaginal faculties and, by derivation,
their corresponding levels of existence. The faculty of
imagination, for instance, acts as an intermediary between the
sensible and the intelligible and cannot sustain incorporeal forms
at the same level as the intellect. But since the intellect belongs
essentially to the world of the intelligibilia, it is capable of
making multiple meanings present (istihdar) all at once. As the
saying goes, ‘it is in the nature of the intellect to make many
one (tawhid al-kathir) and of the senses [to make] one many
(takthir al-wahid).’154
At this point, the question is how the soul as a single
substance can know an infinite number of things. We can
anticipate that the answer will be to say that the intellect is an
incorporeal disembodied substance, contains multiple meanings,
and thus can know many things. Sadra, however, goes further
and creates an isomorphic relation between the intellect and the
intelligible world—a conclusion that has deep repercussions for
his cosmology. Stated briefly, this isomorphic relation suggests
that the anthropos that knows and the cosmos that is known
share the same domain of reality. In a sense, this is what
Aristotle had in mind when he said that ‘only the like can know
the like.’155 The soul or the simple intellect remains a single
and unitary substance (jawhar basit) in knowing various things,
and multiplicity in intellection is attributed to such ‘epistemic
tools’ as sensation and imagination. This leads Sadra once more
to assert the definition of knowledge as presence and
unveiling:

--- Sayfa 168 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
145
The soul that knows a multitude of things through intellectual
realization and disembodiment from the garment of being human
does not become destitute of their knowledge but rather more
[intense] as unveiling and clearing (wuduh). In spite of this, when
the soul goes above the differences of time and space, its knowledge
of things becomes present in it completely all at once as in the case
of the knowledge of separate substances whose knowledge [of
things] is fully present in them in actuality without the obscurity of
potentiality. Asfar, I, 3, p. 379
The argument for the simplicity of the soul brings us to an
important aspect of Sadra’s epistemology. We can call this the
particularity of first-order perceptions. We have already stated
that disembodiment as a condition of intelligibility does not
make knowledge an abstract concept but rather establishes it as
a concrete state of consciousness due to its higher level of
ontological intensity. In this sense, knowledge, like existence, is
a ‘particular and simple identity’ (huwiyyah shakhsiyyah basitah)
despite the fact that the mind at the level of second-order
analysis considers all knowledge under the rubric of universals
(kulliyyat). Our ‘ordinary’ encounter with the world is given in
first-order experiences. The second-order analyses of universals
enter the picture through a process of self-reflection. In
perceiving the tree in front of me, for instance, my knowledge-
experience is a direct act of ‘seeing,’ which involves an intuition
of some kind and which is not predicated upon such universals
as species, genus and difference. It is only at the level of second-
order conceptualization that we talk about intelligible realities
as abstractions, concepts and notions. This is also what is meant
by the presence of something to itself and to other things:
‘presence’ (hudur) implies something concrete and particular.
We can contrast this view of knowledge with the Aristotelian
idea that true knowledge is characterized by its generality and
universality.156 For Aristotle and his Muslim followers, a
scientific proposition is important and useful not because it
corresponds to a particular sensory object but because it makes
a general claim about the class to which this particular object

--- Sayfa 169 ---
146
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
belongs.157 That is partly why the Peripatetics insist on
‘abstraction’ as the standing condition of knowledge for this is
the only way we can arrive at universal and general propositions.
Logic and metaphysics supply us with this sort of knowledge,
and we need both to be able to go beyond the particular sensory
entities that make up the physical world. As Ibn Sina asserts, the
discrete and piecemeal descriptions of physical entities does not
give us the ‘world’ because ‘all perception is particular’ and
possible ‘by means of a corporeal instrument.’158
Sadra does not deny ‘abstract’ and general knowledge as part
of our knowledge about the world. But he insists that this
concept of knowledge misses a substantial aspect of what it
means to know. In knowing a thing, we have the direct experience
of something concrete, particular and specific. Our ‘ordinary’ or
natural encounter with the world, including our own selves, is
not mediated through second-order concepts but given in first-
order experiences. It then follows that our most intimate and
primary standing toward the world remains particular and
specific. It is only at the level of second-order conceptualization
that we talk about intelligible realities as abstractions, concepts,
meanings, notions, universals. Sadra uses the language of
presence (hudur) to state this point: when something is defined
as ‘present,’ it refers to something concrete and particular.
To emphasize the immediacy and self-evidentiality of
perception, Sadra adopts Suhrawardi’s language of illumination
and uses the words ‘vision’ (ibsar) and ‘witnessing’ (mushahadah)
to describe the particularity of knowledge-experience.159
Suhrawardi says that ‘perception takes place only when the soul
has a [concrete] vision [of something] and vision is through a
particular form, not through a universal. It then follows that the
soul has an illuminative and presential knowledge not mediated
through a [representational] form.’160 Sadra complements
Suhrawardi’s point by saying that ‘perception is nothing more
than the soul’s attention to and witnessing of that which is
perceived. Witnessing takes place not through a universal but a
particular form. Therefore the soul by necessity has an

--- Sayfa 170 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
147
illuminative and presential knowledge and not a form superadded
to it [antecedently].’161 What Sadra seeks to do here is to
establish intellection in terms that we would normally attribute
to sense-experience without the limitations of corporeal
existence. His main concern is to construe intellection as a
unique, simple and particular encounter with things in a manner
as concrete and real as sense-perception. He says that
…knowledge, as we have explained before, is non-material
existence, and existence in itself is not a universal nature belonging
to a particular genus or species even if it is divided into species
through the differentia or into individuals through individual
properties or into classes through accidental conditions. Every
knowledge is a particular and simple identity not to be grouped
under a universal meaning [i.e., concept] that belongs to an essence.
Asfar, I, 3, p. 382
This leads us to another premise of the Sadrean noetics:
universality and concreteness do not contradict one another. The
perception of completely disembodied substances is a prime
example of how something can be both concrete and universal
at the same time. Speaking of the relationship between the
human intellect and the world of the spirit, Sadra defines all
cognition in terms of the soul’s participation in the spiritual
world of actual beings whose reality makes them both concrete
and universal at the same time: ‘…a concept (al-mafhum) is a
name for particular things whereas this active principle [of
knowledge] (al-mabda’ al-fa‘ili) has a reality by itself, and is its
carrier and protector. By the same token, the universal natures
are names for luminous essences (dhawat nuriyyah), intellective
identities (huwiyyah ‘aqliyyah), sacred angels, and the lords of
the species of nature (arbab anwa‘ tabi‘iyyah).’162
Sadra’s implicit argument here is that all perception is
ultimately a concrete and first-order experience whether it is
based on sensation or intellection. That is why he sees ‘no
difference between intellective particularization (al-tashakhkhus

--- Sayfa 171 ---
148
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
al-‘aqli) and universality and participation (ishtirak) among
many individuals.’163
d. Active Intellect, Intuition, and Peripatetic Intellectualism
Sadra’s discussion of the active intellect is largely based on the
views of al-Kindi, al-Farabi and Ibn Sina. Although he offers
some new perspectives and revises parts of the Peripatetic view,
he remains by and large loyal to the traditional four-fold division
of the intellect into potential (bi’l-quwwah), actual (bi’l-fi‘l),
acquired (al-mustafad) and active (fa‘‘al). There are, however,
two important novelties in Sadra. First of all, he discusses the
so-called psychological intellects of the Peripatetics as stages of
uncovering the modes of existence. Instead of simply abstracting
intelligible forms from things in concreto and constructing
mental images through them, the intellect is now placed in a
position to reach out to the intelligible world and unite with it
in a way that leaves no epistemological rupture between the
intellect and the intelligible. This takes place through what we
might call ‘appropriation’ and ‘participation.’ Secondly, Sadra
assigns a less prominent role to the active intellect in the process
of intellection. Even though he accepts the conventional
definition of the active intellect as an agent source of human
thought, the active intellect becomes somewhat sidelined in view
of his concern to construct knowledge as a mode and direct
witnessing of existence. This second point is also supported by
Sadra’s implicit rejection of emanation (sudur) as a principle of
creation and cosmology.
Since I have already discussed the four types of the intellect
in Chapter I, I shall focus here on the revisions Sadra makes to
dovetail the traditional four-fold division with his concept of
knowledge. As a general rule, Sadra’s hermeneutic strategy is
not so much to reject the Peripatetics in toto as to show that they
eventually concur with the unification argument.164 When the
soul passes from potentiality to actuality, Sadra argues, it
undergoes an existential transformation and becomes ‘more

--- Sayfa 172 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
149
intense’ and ‘powerful’ in receiving meanings (ma‘ani). This is
due to the intellect’s being subject to gradation which ‘enables
an individual substance to move from its species to another [i.
e., higher] species in a gradual and continuous manner as we see
in the case of the intensification of blackness and hotness.’165
Here Sadra differs from his Peripatetic predecessors when he
insists that the soul-intellect does not remain unchanged in the
process of intellection. It becomes more intense, i.e., assumes a
higher mode of being and becomes more capable of receiving
new meanings. Furthermore, the soul, having gone through the
gradual stages of intensity, becomes a ‘simple intellect’ and
develops an innate capacity to know all things in a ‘simple
manner.’ What makes the soul an agent of knowledge is
something outside the soul, viz., the intelligible substance. This
is predicated upon the Aristotelian principle that only an actual
substance can bring a potential being into actuality.166
This is where the active intellect comes in. As we know from
Aristotle’s Alexandrian and Muslim commentators, the active
intellect refers to the highest level of intelligibility in actuality.
When the soul begins to understand intelligible substances, it
becomes ‘the acquired intellect, which is very close to the active
intellect. The difference between the two is that the acquired
intellect is a non-material form which was once close to matter
and then disengaged from it after going through various stages
whereas the active intellect is a form that has never been in
matter and can only be non-material.’167 If we understand the
active intellect as the principle of universal knowledge and not
a kind of knowledge, then the emphatic expression ‘never been
in matter’ can be interpreted as another way of saying that the
principles of universal knowledge cannot be derived from
sensate experience. When we state such mathematical truths as
2+2=4, we partake of a universal axiom that is not derived from
sense data. For Ibn Sina and Sadra, such a priori truths are
actualities that the intellect comes to discover rather than
generate by itself. This suggests that the intellect can be said to
exist properly to the extent to which it becomes related to

--- Sayfa 173 ---
150
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
intelligible forms and substances. To that effect, Ibn Sina says
that ‘the universal intellect does not exist alone as an established
state; rather the universal intellect exists in conceptualization.’168
The philosophers call our relationship with such a priori truths
‘conjunction with the active intellect.’ As a principle of
knowledge and cognition, the active intellect is seen as both an
epistemic and metaphysical term. Sadra states this very point
when he says that ‘the study of the active intellect in and of itself
falls more properly within the domain of metaphysics (al-
ilahiyyat) which investigates the states of the principles [of
things] (ahwal al-mabadi’).’169
There are, however, shifting languages of personal and non-
personal being used for the active intellect. Whether we conceive
of the active intellect as a cosmological principle or noetic idea,
it forms the backbone of the Greco-Islamic metaphysics of
actuality.170 More often than not, Sadra uses a non-personal
language when referring to it. In one of his summary definitions,
he says that ‘intellectual perception takes place through the
unification of the soul with the active intellect which is the form
of things or that in which these forms are found.’171 In another
passage, he says that ‘the majority of the philosophers called
these rays and lights active intellects; the Peripatetics, who are
the followers of the First Teacher, called them the forms of
knowledge (al-suwar al-‘ilmiyyah) subsisting in the Essence of
God; the Platonists and their group called them illuminating
similes (al-muthul al-nuriyyah) and divine forms (al-suwar al-
ilahiyyah).’172 As these quotes clarify, the active intellect is more
of a principle of actual-disembodied thought than an individual
being or packet of knowledge. Conjunction or unification with
the active intellect does not suggest acquiring from it bits of
universal knowledge such as ‘2+2=4’ or all ‘human beings are
mortal.’ The active intellect does not supply the philosopher with
that kind of information or deduction, or prediction of any kind.
As ‘the form of things or that in which these forms are found,’
it refers to the principle of thought and disembodied (‘abstract’)
knowledge. In this sense, the active intellect is the universal

--- Sayfa 174 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
151
principle of intellection that enables the mind to connect 2 to 2
and induce it to arrive at the right conclusion. Thus it is said that
‘the active intellect that is in us is all things in the sense that it
is by itself the depository of all universal meanings found in
existential forms in the universe.’173
Sadra makes a similar point when he talks about how error is
possible when one unites with the active intellect. We know the
process by which we ascertain the truth or falsity of an empirical
statement: we compare facts with ideas and pass a judgment. In
such cases, we employ the correspondence theory of knowledge.
In the case of intellectual knowledge where our main concern is
not the relationship between facts and ideas but between ideas
and ideas, i.e., concepts, we apply a different criterion of
correspondence. Sadra’s quote from ‘Allamah Hilli’s Sharh
tajrid al-‘aqa’id makes it clear that the truth value of such
propositions is determined according to their correspondence to
what is contained in the active intellect. The quote in question
reads that ‘every form or established judgment in the mind
corresponds to the forms engrained in the active intellect. [When
this is the case], it is true; otherwise it is false.’174 Sadra concurs
with this view by making all universally true propositions a part
of the active intellect. This is possible only when we understand
the active intellect as the depository of intelligible forms where
all such universally true propositions are given as the a priori
‘knowledge of all first principles’ as opposed to ‘description’
(tasawwur) and ‘judgment’ (tasdiq), both of which are derived
from logical syllogism.175 In this sense, the active intellect is ‘all
intelligibles; in fact it is all beings insofar as its intellective
existence is concerned.’176
The unity of the active intellect is an important premise of the
Peripatetic tradition and underscores the universal nature of
purely intellectual knowledge. The very same premise, however,
has given rise to two major problems for the Muslim and
Christian philosophers of the Middle Ages. The first is how the
active intellect remains one as the depository of all intelligibles.
If we are to imagine a case of unity-in-multiplicity, how would

--- Sayfa 175 ---
152
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
it apply to the active intellect? The second problem is what
happens when a multitude of human intellects conjoin or unite
with the active intellect at the same time. Does the active
intellect still remain one? If yes, how is the unity of intellectual
knowledge maintained when a true proposition is known by two
or more knowers?
Sadra’s answer to both of these questions is based on the
gradation of existence. As stated before, ‘meanings’ (ma’ani) as
ontological properties exist as a single unity in incorporeal
beings. The multiplicity of such meanings should not be confused
with the kind of differentiation we see in corporeal substances.
It is rather an internal enrichment and intensification of existence
in the form of various modalities.
The contingent beings that can be perceived are of four kinds: the
first is the kind that is perfect in existence and known fully. These
are the intellects and the intelligibles in actuality. Because of their
intense existence, light and purity, they are above corporeal
properties, shapes, and numbers. In spite of their multiplicity and
abundance, they exist as one single total being with no distinction
between their realities, for all of them are sunk in the sea of the
Divine. Asfar, I, 3, p. 502

The intellective world is one single being with which all things
in this world are conjoined. It is their beginning and end. It is the
source of intelligibles and all essences without there being any
multiplicity and division. Nothing is substracted from it with the
effusion of something from it nor does it increase with the
conjunction of something with it. Asfar, I, 3, p. 336
In regards to the second question, Sadra introduces two kinds of
oneness (wahdah): ‘numerical oneness’ (wahdah ‘adadiyyah)
denotes something’s being one as opposed to being two or three.
When such numerical units are added up, they increase in
number: two trees are more than one tree or five horses are less
than seven horses. ‘Intellective oneness’ (al-wahdat al-‘aqliyyah)
refers to a different kind of oneness where oneness is defined in
terms of simplicity and does not increase or decrease when
things are added to or detracted from it. An example of this is

--- Sayfa 176 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
153
the concept of humanity (al-insan): no matter how many
accidental qualities we may add to it, humanity remains a single
unit. There can be many humans, as there really are, with many
different qualities. But this does not lead to two or three
‘humanities.’ The same applies to existence in that the existence
of even an infinite number of beings does not affect the essential
oneness of existence. Sadra claims that the soul knows through
this kind of epistemic or intellectual oneness. The crucial point
is then to show how the soul remains one even when it knows a
thousand things. Similarly, thanks to ‘intellective oneness,’ what
the soul knows as an intelligible reality does not become many
when it is known by more than one soul. That is why Sadra says
that ‘the intellective horse that is in the active intellect and the
intellective horse that is in the soul, when it becomes an actual
intellect through it, does not become multiplied from the point
of view of meaning and reality. It becomes multiplied only from
the point of view adding something to its definition and
conceptual reality. What is in the soul and what is in the active
intellect are therefore one and the same thing.’177 In short, neither
the multiplicity of intellective forms in the active intellect nor
the multiplicity of minds that know these forms blemishes the
unity of conceptual knowledge.
One last issue concerning the active intellect is the use of the
language of a personal being when the active intellect is
presented as the Archangel Gabriel—a tradition that goes back
to al-Farabi. After stating that God knows things either through
‘His Essence or through the agency of His sublime command
(amr),’ Sadra says that this is called ‘the active intellect and the
spirit. It is the proximate angel encompassing many angels who
are the soldiers of the Lord as God pointed to it in His words
that “no one knows the soldiers of your Lord save He.” ’ 178 It is
also in this context that the active intellect is occasionally used
in the plural when, for instance, Sadra says that ‘the active
intellects (uqul fa‘‘alah)…are God’s words (kalimat Allah).’179
This can be seen as an attempt to legitimize the active intellect
within the Islamic religious discourse. Regardless of the

--- Sayfa 177 ---
154
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
philosophers’ intentions, however, positing the active intellect as
the angel of revelation is consistent with Peripatetic intellectualism
in that it is only by the intervention of an agent outside the
knowing subject that one attains the true knowledge of things.
As I shall discuss in the next chapter, this notion plays a crucial
role in the ‘rational mysticism’ of the Muslim Peripatetics and
gives Sadra further reason to make a rigorous case for mystical
knowledge.
Even though the active intellect is the locus of intelligible
forms and thus indispensable for knowing concepts, there are
several other stages involved. Following Ibn Sina, Sadra defines
all conceptual knowledge as coming from what he calls the
‘world of the sacred’ (‘alam al-quds). Human beings display
different degrees of perspicacity in receiving illumination from
this world. This leads to a hierarchy of perception whereby some
people are endowed with an innate capacity to know a priori
truths without much effort and study. This power or capacity is
called intuition (hads)—a term Sadra borrows from Ibn Sina.
For Ibn Sina, hads signifies the mind’s ability to know the
middle term in a logical syllogism without much effort: it is ‘to
remember the middle term without demanding it.’180 That is why
the word hads can legitimately be interpreted as ‘quick wit.’
Sadra presents it as an exceptional faculty of the soul, which
connects it to the ‘Sacred Angelic world.’ This establishes a
direct link between the intuitive perception of primary
intelligibles and receiving light and blessings from the Angelic
world.
Know that the source of all knowledge is the world of the sacred
but the capacities of human souls are different. In the case of perfect
capacity, there is no difference in abundance between the primary
and secondary intelligibles. In perceiving the primary intelligibles,
man is like when he understands the middle term in perceiving
theoretical matters in such a way that understanding takes place as
if without a cause whereas the existence of something without a
cause is impossible. But the cause is sometimes outward and visible
and sometimes inward and hidden. That which dictates knowledge

--- Sayfa 178 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
155
to capable souls is in reality the very cause hidden from the senses…
and its act on the souls is completely hidden but it may sometimes
appear from the inward to the outward and become manifest from
the abode of the Invisible (al-ghayb) to the world of the Visible
(al-shahadah). The former is like the case of the prophets and the
latter like the case of saints, peace be upon them all.

As for such external causes as study, repetition, listening to a
human teacher, these are only preparatory conditions, not what calls
for them. This can be explained as follows: every passage from
primary intelligibles to theoretical concepts (al-nazariyyat) is either
through the instruction of a human teacher or not. If it is through
the instruction of a teacher, this will have to end eventually with
that which does not come about in this way, [in which case] one
reaches the conclusion from one’s own self. Otherwise the regression
of teaching and learning will continue ad infinitum. Asfar, I, 3, pp.
384–385181
Having ruled out the possibility of infinite regression, Sadra
attributes one’s ability to perceive the primary intelligibles to an
inner faculty of the mind, which only a limited number of people
possess. He calls this ability ‘intuition’ (hads), which leads to
the apprehension of intelligible forms in an immediate and direct
manner. This exceptional quality enables one to be illuminated
by Angelic light (nur al-malakut) and is called ‘sacred power’
(quwwah qudsiyyah).
Now, you know that definitions that correspond [to their objects]
cause the mind to establish a relationship between the two. In most
cases, the mind looks at the definition of a subject because it senses
its particular qualities when its definition is present in it [i.e., the
mind]. When this happens, the mind necessarily establishes this
predicate for this subject without the aid of a teacher, narration,
learning from a master or a just and reliable witness. Thus it is clear
that man can learn by himself and whenever this happens, it is called
intuition. This capacity displays great variety among people…when
the degrees are unequal and the hearts different in purity and
cloudiness, in intellectual power and weakness, plenitude and
destitute in intuition, it does not affect, on the part of the higher
[world], the existence of that noble and powerful soul which is fully

--- Sayfa 179 ---
156
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
illuminated by the light of the Angelic world and quick in receiving
emanations from the source of goodness and mercy. Such a man,
due to the intensity of his capacity, perceives most of the truths in
the shortest time possible and comprehends the realities of things…
and his piercing mind reaches at conclusions without assiduously
studying the middle terms. In the same way, he passes from these
conclusions to others until he encircles the ultimate goal and final
stage of humanity. This capacity is called sacred power. Asfar, I, 3,
pp. 385–386
These and similar remarks we find in Ibn Sina and Sadra may
lead us to think that a kind of mysterium is involved in the
process of intellection. Although such terms as ‘sacred intellect’
(‘aql qudsi) and ‘sacred spirit’ (al-ruh al-qudsi) used by Ibn Sina
do suggest something of a mystical nature, a close reading of the
Shifa’ and al-Najat, which Sadra uses in extenso, reveals that Ibn
Sina does not go beyond establishing ‘quick apprehension’ and
perspicacity as an exceptional quality of certain minds. In one
place, Sadra describes intelligence or perspicacity (zaka’) as the
‘most intense form of intuition.’182 The same point is also borne
out by the fact that both Ibn Sina and Sadra discuss intuition as
an important yet intermediary stage in logical syllogism. The
following paragraph from the Najat illustrates this point:
Know that learning, whether acquired without a teacher or from a
teacher, is of different kinds. A particular learner can be closer to
the [logical] description (tasawwur) [of a term] because his
[individual] capacity before [receiving] the capacity that we
mentioned before can be stronger. If such person becomes capable
of perfecting what is between description and himself [i.e., having
a perfect understanding of logical description], this strong capacity
is called intuition. This capacity may be stronger in some people so
much so that he does not need anything significant or takhrij,183 or
study in his conjunction with the active intellect. Furthermore, he
becomes even more capable of this and as if a second capacity
occurs for him and as if he knows everything by himself. This is the
highest degree of this capacity. This state of the potential intellect
should be called the sacred intellect.184 Although this is a kind of the

--- Sayfa 180 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
157
habitual intellect (al-‘aql bi’l-malakah), it is [a] much higher
[intellect] of which not all people partake. al-Najat, p. 205
Few lines later, Ibn Sina returns to intuition and explains its role
in logical syllogisms. At the end of his discussion, he refers to
intuition as a ‘prophetic capacity’ and calls it a ‘sacred capacity.’
He says that ‘intuition is a work of the mind whereby it deduces
the middle term by itself. Perspicacity is thus a power of
intuition.’ Still, it is defined as a ‘divine effusion and intellective
conjunction (ittisal ‘aqli) that obtains without (intentionally)
acquiring it, and reaches only some people.’185 Some people have
this exceptional quality in them in such a way that they come to
have a ‘union with intellectual principles’ (al-mabadi’ al-
‘aqliyyah). While knowledge based on imitation (al-taqlidiyyat)
does not bring about ‘intellective certitude’ (yaqiniyyah
‘aqliyyah), intuition based on perspicacity is ‘a kind of
prophethood (al-nubuwwah). In fact, it is the highest faculty of
prophethood. It is more appropriate to call this ability a sacred
capacity (quwwah qudsiyyah). And this is the highest degree of
human capacity [to know].’186
Even though Ibn Sina remains within the boundaries of
‘rational mysticism’ when he talks about intuition and the ‘sacred
world,’ Sadra does not miss the opportunity to interpret intuitive
perception eventually in terms of mystical knowledge. In a
section of the Asfar where mental existence is discussed, Sadra
states that what the mind creates through its imaginative power
(khayal) has no effect in the external world, and he invokes Ibn
al-’Arabi’s support to substantiate his claim. He, however, makes
an important exception to this and assigns a special power to
certain people to create actual effects in the extra-mental world.
Even though Sadra does not state it explicitly, it is not difficult
to see that this is a reference to miracles performed by saints.
Some of the people of ascent (mi’raj) who have completely
disembodied themselves from the human garment are capable of
generating (ihdath) things that exist in the external world to which
(existential) effects occur. This is due to the intensity of their

--- Sayfa 181 ---
158
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
conjunction (ittisal) with the sacred world, the abode of munificence
(mahall al-karamah), and the perfection of their power. As for the
kind of existence to which existential effects do not occur and which
emanates from the soul in this mode of appearance (zuhur), it is
called mental and shadow existence. Asfar, I, 1, p. 266
In conclusion, the active intellect brings us back to what I called
the metaphysics of actuality. The active intellect terminates the
infinite regression of potential substances and relates the soul to
the a priori axioms of logic and metaphysics. There, however,
remains a tension between the active intellect as the source of
human thought and Sadra’s overall concept of knowledge as a
mode of existence. It seems that Sadra could easily dispense with
the active intellect as an agent of knowledge for his robust
defense of the unification argument contains virtually no
references to the active intellect in the process of human
intellection. As I shall discuss below, when Sadra talks about
unification, he has in mind unification between intellect and
intelligible, not between human and active intellects. As a matter
of fact, he discusses conjunction with the active intellect (ittisal
bi’l-‘aql al-fa‘‘al) only indirectly, and what he has to say about
it is not any different from Ibn Sina. Unless we equate the active
intellect with the intelligible, Sadra’s desire to retain the active
intellect seems to be out of place.
There is, however, another way of looking at the active
intellect, i.e., as an instrument of thought. If the active intellect
is an agent that brings about unification between the intellect and
the intelligible, then it can be related to knowledge as a way of
unveiling the modalities of existence. In this case, unification
between intellect and intelligible would also be a unification
with the active intellect, and the active intellect would be
subsumed under the intelligible. And yet, Sadra tells us very little
about how these two are related.

--- Sayfa 182 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
159
e. Unification of the Intellect and the Intelligible
Sadra’s defense of the unification argument is found in many of
his works. In addition to the relevant sections of the Asfar and
al-Shawahid al-rububiyyah, his Risalah fi ittihad al-‘aqil wa’l-
ma‘qul is devoted entirely to the subject. Throughout his
extensive discussions, Sadra’s main target is Ibn Sina and his
attacks on Porphyry. Since the translation of the Ittihad is given
as an appendix at the end of the present work, I shall mention
only Sadra’s main points against Ibn Sina. As it is clear from
Sadra’s analyses, Ibn Sina’s denial of unification was a result of
his ontological considerations. To that effect, Sadra returns to his
gradational ontology before answering Ibn Sina in detail.
Ibn Sina’s rejection of unification between the intellect and
the intelligible was an extension of his rejection of unification
between any two things. For him, unification had meant the
dissolution of the subject in question and the generation of a new
substance. It is not possible within the context of the Aristotelian-
Avicennan notion of quantitative change to accept the view that
when A and B are united, the result is a higher mode of A or B
rather than a different substance called C. For the Peripatetics,
when two things are united, they are transformed into a new
substance and lose their initial identity. Ibn Sina’s radical
conclusion was that unification as understood by Porphyry and
his followers amounts to nothing but ‘poetic metaphors’—an
expected conclusion within the precincts of Peripatetic
ontology.187 Historically speaking, this goes back to Aristotle’s
denial of change in the category of substance. Aristotle’s working
principle was that no matter what accidental qualities a particular
substance may have, they do not infringe upon the essential
identity of the substance. Following Aristotle, Kindi goes so far
as to say that substance ‘is not receptive to generation and
corruption.’188 A similar problem arises when substances increase
or decrease in quantity. Sadra notes the notorious difficulties
caused by quantitative change, and says that Suhrawardi was
forced to deny it altogether: ‘The problem of motion [i.e.,

--- Sayfa 183 ---
160
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
change] in the category of quantity…caused later thinkers many
problems so much so that the author of [Hikmat] al-ishraq
[Suhrawardi] and his followers denied it by saying that adding
a definite quantity to another quantity necessitates its
dissolution.’189 Ibn Sina had faced similar difficulties, for he had
accepted quantitative change in substances as a subcategory of
generation and corruption rather than as intensification in
existence.
To respond to these criticisms, Sadra mentions three types of
unification between two or more things. Before giving specific
answers to Ibn Sina, however, he reiterates the primacy and
gradation of existence. For Sadra, it is only by accepting
gradation in degrees of existence and its multiple modes that one
can conceive unification between any two things as ‘existential
fulfilment.’ In this sense, Sadra’s response to Ibn Sina entails
also a critique of Avicennan ontology:
Two things need to be known before we embark upon rejecting the
Master’s (Ibn Sina’s) denial of unification between two things in
general and between the intellect and the intelligible in particular.
First of all, it is existence that is the principal reality in all things,
principle of its own particularity and source of its own quiddity.
Existence allows intensification and diminution, perfection and
deficiency. And the individual is what it is. Do you not see that from
the beginning of his being a sperm and drop to the height of his
being an intellectual and intelligible reality, man goes through many
stages and undergoes many changes while preserving his mode of
existence and personality? Secondly, unification can be described in
three ways.

First, an existent (mawjud) is united with another existent in that
the beings of two things become one. There is no doubt that this is
impossible as the Master said in his proofs for the denial of
unification.

Second, a concept or quiddity becomes another concept or
quiddity different from itself in that the first concept becomes
identical with the [second] concept and the first quiddity with the
[second] quiddity through essential primary predication (haml dhati
awwali).190 This is also impossible. Different concepts do not

--- Sayfa 184 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
161
become one nor some of them become [united with] others insofar
as they are concepts because every meaning is necessarily different
from others insofar as they are meaning. For instance, the concept
of the intellector cannot become the concept of the intelligible in
spite of the fact that a simple and single being can be the subject of
[the propositions] that it is an intellector and that it is an intelligible.
As a result, existence can be one and meanings [predicated of it]
many without necessitating the multiplicity of existential aspects
[qualities].

Third, it is the transformation of an existent in that an intellective
meaning and universal quiddity that was not available to it before
is predicated of it as a result of the perfection that takes place in its
existence. Now, this [meaning of unification] is not impossible. On
the contrary, it is an actual reality since all intelligible meanings
found separately in material, plant, and animal beings are found
united in one single human being. Asfar, I, 3, pp. 324–325
Sadra understands unification in the sense that one single being
can take on multiple meanings without losing its essential
identity. The multiplicity of meanings as ‘ontological properties’
does not lead to an entity with discrete properties, causing it to
lose its essential unity. Rather, it results in a single unity that
obtains a higher ontological state thanks to the intensity of
meanings and concepts contained in it. The key point for Sadra
is therefore the possibility of containing multiple meanings
(ma‘ani) and states of intellective existence while preserving
one’s identity and unity. Sadra’s frequent example is again ‘man’
who contains the states of mineral, plant, and animal existence
in a simple manner, all of which grant him a higher ontological
status. The definition of man as ‘rational animal’ (hayawan
natiq), for instance, is composed of two separate concepts, i.e.,
‘rational’ and ‘animal.’ When combined in the existence of man,
they assume one single existence without any duality. Thus Ibn
Sina’s objection that when two things conjoin, they lose their
previous existence and become a new entity does not apply to
such ‘meanings.’191
Sadra mentions another reason for Ibn Sina’s objection: the
Peripatetic concept of change or transformation (istihalah) is

--- Sayfa 185 ---
162
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
based on the idea that gradual change, whether quantitative or
qualitative, takes place through a series of instant generations
(kawn) and corruptions (fasad). It is the successive stages of
generation and corruption that account for change in physical
objects. The Peripatetics had denied change in the category of
substance for the same reason: change in substance entails the
generation of a new existent. Furthermore, it breaks the
continuity of substances as ontological actualities.192 In short,
Aristotelian ontology of substances disallows a dynamic,
transformative and existential concept of the universe because it
visions a world made up of solid and rigid substances. By
contrast, Sadra argues for ontological continuity through
existence and its modalities and states that things change from
one state to another due to their intensification in existence. This
is called ‘substantial motion’ and Sadra applies it to everything
from the most corporeal to the angelic beings. What distinguishes
Sadra from Ibn Sina is that while the Peripatetics consider the
world as a structure of actual and unbroken substances, Sadra
seeks to desolidify substances into states and ‘instances’ of
existence with varying degrees of intensity.
As we would expect, this view of substantial-cum-ontological
change dissolves any strong boundaries between the physical and
the non-physical. In a sense, Sadra turns the entire system of
existence into a transparent structure in which ‘existence-as-
graded’ (al-wujud bi’l-tashkik) weaves the physical and the
metaphysical together. Things become ‘material’ or ‘non-
material’ in accordance with their proximity to or distance from
existence. The physical and the metaphysical exist through an
ontological continuum, the only distinguishing factor being the
level of intensity or lack thereof. This makes the physical order
an extension of existence at a lower level, not the opposite of
what is beyond the physical. An important problem to which
Sadra applies this view is the relation between the soul and the
body. According to Sadra’s celebrated formula, the human soul
(or the self)193 is material in its origination and spiritual in its
subsistence. What transforms the soul from being a material

--- Sayfa 186 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
163
substance into something incorporeal is the existential-substantial
journey it undergoes. Needless to say, this establishes an
ontological continuity between soul and body and holds true for
all souls from the insane to the prophet.194 Sadra describes this
process as follows:
…when the soul first dawned upon the matter of the body, it was
one of the forms of corporeal existents. It was like the sensible and
imaginal forms, not one of the intelligible forms. It is impossible
that a single corporeal species should come out of an intellective
form and a corporeal existent without this corporeal existent
undergoing [a series of] perfections and transformations…. The soul
in its initial stages of disposition (fitrah) is simply one of the forms
of this [corporeal] world except for the fact that it has the potentiality
of journeying into the Angelic world in a gradual manner. It is first
a form of corporeal existents with the potentiality of receiving
intelligible forms, and there is no contradiction between this
actuality and receiving perfection. As it was quoted from the Master
[Ibn Sina], [the origination of] something from something else can
be either through perfection, which is the series of vertical journeys
(suluk al-silsilah al-tuliyyah) or through mutual corruption and
dissolution, which is the series of horizontal journeys. Asfar, I, 3,
pp. 330–331
Having answered Ibn Sina’s ‘general proof’ (al-hujjat al-
‘ammah) against the unification of any two things, Sadra turns
to his ‘specific proof’ (al-hujjat al-khassah). Ibn Sina’s specific
objection was that if we allow the soul to be united with an
intellective substance, it becomes dissolved in it, and this
undermines the continuity of the self. Instead, Ibn Sina argued,
intelligible forms come to reside in the soul as separate
substances without destroying its unity. This takes place through
conjunction (ittisal) rather than unification (ittihad). Sadra
accepts the charge that something becomes dissolved in any
process of unification but hastens to add that this does not alter
the essential nature of the knowing intellect because what
becomes dissolved is nothing other than the ‘negative existential
qualities’ of the self which prevent it, or any other substance for

--- Sayfa 187 ---
164
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
that matter, from evolving into a higher state of existence.195
When such ‘negative qualities’ are left behind, the self does not
become something less. Instead, it attains a higher level of
existence and consciousness. When the soul appropriates an
intelligible form, it becomes something ‘more’ thanks to the
existential cognition it undergoes. Moreover, what enables the
soul to know things other than itself is its isomorphic unity with
the non-subjective world.
This is an extension of Aristotle’s celebrated dictum that ‘only
the like can know the like,’ of which Sadra makes full use when
he explains how the self is linked to what it knows. In the
Aristotelian language of actuality and potentiality, this is stated
as the soul’s predisposition to know things before it receives an
intelligible form. When the soul extracts a form, it does not cease
to be itself but attains a higher level of cognition. This, in turn,
establishes a strong link between the ‘self’ and the ‘world,’ and
places the self within a larger context of existential relations. In
other words, the knowing self encounters a world made up of
relations of existence and structures of meaning. Unification
between intellect and intelligible makes the self a reality whose
meaning can be made explicit only by articulating its relation to
the non-subjective world.
From the point of view of the self (al-nafs), how can an essence
[essentially] separate from the intellect think of an intellective form
whose essence (al-dhat) is different from it and whose existence is
outside its existence?… The intellective being as completely
disengaged from matter and its relations cannot be established for
anything unless there is something like this being in it by which it
becomes an intellect and intelligible in actuality. An intelligible in
actuality can be established only for an intelligible that is already
actual. By the same token, the potential intelligible, which is the
form of material beings, can be established only for a potential
intelligible like corporeal beings (ajsam) and measures (maqadir),
which are the material positions (awda‘) themselves. You have
already learnt that the soul, before it becomes an intelligible, is not
the subject of any intellective forms except potentially. We see this
in the case of imaginal and estimative forms before the light of the

--- Sayfa 188 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
165
active intellect shines upon the imaginal faculty and these forms. As
for the intellective forms themselves, you have learnt from the proof
with which God has inspired me that they are of an intelligible
nature in and of themselves whether or not there is anything in the
universe that intellects them. Therefore, when these forms are
intelligible and self-intellecting in themselves regardless of the soul
[that intellects them], then it is not impossible that the soul be united
with them. Asfar, I, 3, p. 334
By establishing an isomorphic unity between intellect (‘subject’)
and intelligible world (‘object’), Sadra takes a crucial step
toward asserting the primacy of self-knowledge on the one hand,
and knowledge-by-presence, on the other. Sadra’s radical claim
is that all knowledge is mediated through self-knowledge and,
by the same token, all true knowledge is obtained through
knowledge-by-presence. By placing knowledge of self in the
intelligible world, Sadra de-centers the self, and shifts the focus
from the knowing subject as a disengaged agent presiding over
the world to a self placed within a larger context of ontological
intelligibility.
f. Self-Knowledge and Knowledge-by-Presence
What is known as ‘knowledge-by-presence’ or ‘presential
knowledge’ (al-‘ilm al-huduri) in Islamic philosophy was
developed by Suhrawardi to overcome certain difficulties of the
representational theory of knowledge. Sadra agrees with
Suhrawardi’s assumption that self-knowledge cannot be a
representation (irtisam) of the self in the mind because
representation cannot overcome the subject-object dichotomy.
When the self expresses its knowledge of itself in terms of first-
order propositions such as ‘I am in pain’ or ‘I feel hot,’ subject
and predicate are the same. As Sadra puts it, ‘if the perception
of something were to consist of the presentation of its form in
the perceiver, whoever perceives himself would be different from
the locus [of perception, i.e., from himself]…this is a clear
contradiction.’196 In short, ‘knowledge of self is nothing but the

--- Sayfa 189 ---
166
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
self itself.’197 In the case of second-order propositions, however,
the judgment is translated into a statement about the self, leading
to a distinction between the self and its judgment. Thus Sadra
says that ‘the perception of one’s identity (huwiyyah) and his
reception of his own essence through presential unveiling (al-
kashf al-huduri) is one thing; the perception of his essence
(mahiyyah) is another.’198 As Wittgenstein says, the difference
between the propositions ‘I am in pain’ and ‘I know I am in pain’
can be stated as a difference between first- and second-order
propositions. Insofar as the subject expressing his pain is
concerned, the expression ‘I know I am in pain’ amounts to
saying ‘I am in pain.’ In the case of first-order propositions, I
state the fact that ‘I am in pain’ whereas in second-order
propositions I make a statement about the fact that I know I am
in pain.
As in many other key issues, Ibn Sina seems to have planted
the first seed of the debate. Responding to a question in the
Mubahathat (question number 433), Ibn Sina makes a distinction
between our knowledge of things outside the self and the
knowledge of the self. The question is formulated as follows: ‘If
intellection is the obtaining of the truth of what is known for the
knower, when we intellect God and the active intellects, then
their truth obtains in us. In this case, they have two truths. Why
are we not allowed to say the same thing, i.e., that two [separate]
truths obtain for us also?’ Ibn Sina answers by saying that ‘when
we are able to intellect disembodied beings, their truth is
represented in us. In this case, they have two truths: their own
truth in and by themselves, by which they are disembodied
beings, and the truth represented in us. But this does not apply
to [our] intellects.’199 Continuing the same argument, Ibn Sina
adds that ‘it is part of our nature to know ourselves, whether
through innate (tab’) or acquired (kasb) knowledge. Some things
know their own essence and substance. Whoever knows
something, the truth of that thing obtains for him. In the same
way, the truth of ourselves obtains for us but not twice because
the truth of something is only once.’200

--- Sayfa 190 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
167
This suggests that everything we know has two truths: its truth
in itself and its representation in us. This conclusion, however,
seems to go against Ibn Sina’s previous assertion that the ‘truth
of something obtains only once.’ Ibn Sina is aware of this
contradiction and hastens to add that our knowledge of ourselves
is not like the knowledge of other things. In the case of self-
knowledge, we know ourselves directly. In other words, the
‘truth of ourselves’ is only one, and this applies not only to
‘intellection (ta‘aqqul) or consciousness (shu‘ur) but to all
perception (idrak) because we consider the truth of something
not insofar as it is in the external world but insofar as it is in us.
This consideration is not a third existence for it but its very
imprint in us. Otherwise it would lead to infinite regression.’
Stated rather abstrusely, Ibn Sina’s point is to draw a distinction
between the way we know things and the way we know
ourselves.
The primacy of first-order experiences is also confirmed by
the way we relate to our bodily organs. I do not refer to my
seeing something as ‘my eyes seeing’ or hearing as ‘my ears
hearing.’ The proper way of referring to these experiences is to
say that ‘I see this’ or ‘I hear that.’201 Thus we cannot substitute
second-order propositions for first-order experiences. Sadra
asserts this point for self-knowledge when he says that our ‘self-
knowledge’ or self-awareness (‘ilmuna bi-dhatina) is different
from the ‘knowledge of our self-knowledge’ (‘ilmuna bi-‘ilmina
bi-dhatina).202 Furthermore, second-order concepts apply
primarily to representational knowledge whereby the subject
predicates certain properties to things in the extra-mental world.
Although this is a theme shared by both Sadra and Suhrawardi,
there is a fundamental difference as to how the two philosophers
justify knowledge-by-presence.
We have already discussed the major differences between
Suhrawardian ‘essentialism’ (asalat al-mahiyyah) and Sadrean
‘existentialism’ (asalat al-wujud). As a general rule, Sadra turns
to the primacy of existence and draws attention to a contradiction
in Suhrawardi’s relegation of existence to a mental concept:

--- Sayfa 191 ---
168
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
If someone is ignorant about the question of existence, he is of
necessity ignorant about all of the principles and foundations of
knowledge for it is through existence that everything is known, and
it is the beginning of all description (tasawwur) and more known
than anything that provides description. When someone ignores it,
he ignores everything besides it. As we have mentioned before, the
true knowledge of existence comes about only through unveiling
(kashf) and witnessing (mushahadah). It has thus been said that ‘he
who has no unveiling has no knowledge.’ It is strange that this great
master [i.e., Suhrawardi], after establishing a number of arguments
in the Talwihat that existence is a mental concept (i‘tibari)
possessing no form and reality in the external world, explained
towards the end of this book that the human souls and what is above
them are simple beings without quiddity. Is this not a clear
contradiction on his part? Shawahid, p. 14
It is clear that Sadra understands ‘simple beings without quiddity’
as a description of existence and wonders how Suhrawardi could
have possibly missed this point. What this implies for knowledge
is not difficult to see: definition of knowledge as a ‘mode of
existence’ (nahw al-wujud) defines the ultimate object of
knowledge not as facts, concepts, relations or even a priori
judgments but as existence. In this regard, what is known even
in the mind as a concept is nothing but existence, though in a
different modality. Suhrawardi’s failure results from not seeing
this point. Yet, despite this essential difference, Sadra accepts
much of what Suhrawardi has to say about knowledge-as-light
and knowledge-by-presence. By avoiding the language of
essences, Sadra translates Suhrawardi’s essentialist language of
light (al-nur) into his language of existence: ‘The truth is what
he has to say concerning the knowledge of the disengaged
substance of itself in that it is a light for itself—and light is
existence—, and this goes back to our previous view that
knowledge is existence.’203
To see how Sadra dovetails Suhrawardi’s self-knowledge with
his own knowledge-as-existence, first we have to look at
Suhrawardi’s discussion of self-knowledge as a case of unity

--- Sayfa 192 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
169
between self and knowledge. Suhrawardi broaches the subject as
follows:
When we perceive our own selves, this perception does not come
about through a [representational] form for several reasons. First of
all, the form that is in the soul is not the same as the soul, and the
perceiver perceives something that is identical with its ‘I-ness’
(ana‘iyyah), not something that corresponds to it. Every form that
the perceiver has is superadded to it and remains as an ‘it’ (huwa)
in that it does not become an ‘I’ (ana’) for it. Thus we conclude that
perception is not through representational form. al-Mashari‘ wa’l-
mutarahat, p. 484204
The first part of the argument, which sums up much of what
Sadra has to say about the subject, considers self-knowledge as
a perfect example of non-representational knowledge. To take
self-knowledge as a representation of the self to itself is to deny
the possibility of knowing oneself directly. The second part of
Suhrawardi’s argument pertains to the concrete and particular
nature of self-awareness: we perceive ourselves not as a universal
but as concrete individual beings. Suhrawardi continues:
Secondly, if the self’s perception of itself were through
representational form and since every form that obtains in the soul
is universal, then it would correspond to many subjects. Even if we
take all of the universals particularized through a single individual,
they would not cease to be universals. But everybody perceives
himself in a way that does not allow commonality (shirkah) [with
others]. Thus his intellection of his particular self can never be a
representational form. Furthermore, the self perceives its body,
estimation (wahm) and imagination (khayal). If it were to perceive
these things through a representational form in itself—and these
forms are universals—then the self would be moving a universal
body and acting upon a universal potentiality and would not have a
perception of its own body and its potentialities. This is definitely
false. al-Mashari‘ wa’l-mutarahat, p. 484205

--- Sayfa 193 ---
170
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
Suhrawardi gives the example of pain as a paradigm case of
sense perception and argues that perception of pain is its very
‘presence’ (hudur) in the perceiver.
One of the points that support our claim that we have perceptions
that do not need a form other than the very presence of what is
perceived is the following: one is in pain of a cut in one of his
organs and feels it. But this cut does not assume another form of
representation in this organ or another. Rather, what is perceived is
this very cut, and it is what is sensed and pain by itself, not by
another form that issues from it. This proves that among the things
perceived it is sufficient for their essence, in order for them to be
perceived, to be in the soul or to have a relation of presence
particular to the soul. al-Mashari‘ wa’l-mutarahat, p. 485
It is interesting to note that pain as a form of sensation is also
used by Wittgenstein to address the dichotomy between subject
and object.206 Speaking of sensations as states of existence rather
than mental or verbal representations, Wittgenstein argues for
the identification of being in pain and consciousness of pain.207
In the case of pain, the I that is in pain and the I that says that
it is in pain are one and the same thing. We cannot possibly claim
to have a representation of pain to ourselves in the way we
represent the form of a tree in our minds. This we can do only
by reflecting about the fact that I am in pain.
Even though the example above establishes the essential unity
of being in pain and knowledge of pain, it is confined to sense
perception only. But sensation does not yield universal
knowledge and thus cannot be considered a reliable basis for
veritable knowledge. It is with this caveat in mind that Sadra
seeks to formulate knowledge-by-presence as a primary mode of
knowing that can account for both sense-perception and
conceptual knowledge.208 Unification of intellect and intelligible
already implies this very premise: perfect cognition obtains when
there is no epistemic rupture between knowledge and knower.
Sadra makes his case as follows:

--- Sayfa 194 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
171
Knowledge does not simply consist of the concept of the disengaged
form (al-surat al-mujarradah) of something in that when we
represent this form [in our minds], we necessarily obtain its
knowledge. Rather, knowledge is the mode of the existence of
something that is disengaged from matter. Existence cannot be
represented through a mental image in its entirety and thoroughly
except through its own existing identity (huwiyyah).209 […]
Our knowledge of ourselves is the same as our existence whereas
the knowledge of our knowledge of ourselves is not our own
existence but a mental form added to it. [This mental form] is not
our personal identity, and has its own mental identity. By the same
token, the knowledge that we have through this knowledge is a form
added to the two former identities of knowledge, and this continues
until mental consideration and representation come to an end. This
does not necessitate the conjoining of the two [mental] images at
the same level because, as it was repeated before, existence, whether
in concreto or in the mind, does not have an epistemic image or
form that corresponds to it through its essence and identity. When
we know our individual existential identity (huwiyyatuna al-
shakhsiyyah al-wujudiyyah) through an extraneous knowledge (‘ilm
za’id), this knowledge is only an accident that subsists through and
is different from our existence, not comparable to ourselves. The
same [principle] holds true for all knowledge about knowledge
because all knowledge is a mode of existence and can be obtained
not through another [mental] form but by itself. Asfar, I, 3, pp.
295–296210
It is against this background that Sadra takes a further step and
makes the bold claim that knowledge-by-presence applies not
only to sensation and self-knowledge but to all intellection. Just
as sense-perception is predicated upon the unity of the subject
who says ‘I am in pain’ and the subject who actually is in pain,
intellectual perception implies the presence of the intellective
form in the knower. As we have seen before, this signifies a
higher mode of perception and a higher level of intelligibility
whereby the ‘mind’ appropriates the true meaning of things, i.e.,
their intelligible reality by uniting with their essences in the
world of the intelligibilia.

--- Sayfa 195 ---
172
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
From the point of view of unification, the intellect does not
become one with the corporeal tree or horse but unites with their
intelligible form, thus overcoming the dichotomy between
subject and object—the ultimate goal of knowledge-by-presence.
It may be argued against Sadra that this process of intellection
takes place in the intellect and thus reduces knowledge eventually
to the internal workings of the knowing mind. This criticism,
however, does not hold up because Sadra defines intellection as
a ‘reaching-out’ of the intellect to the intelligible world which is
already outside the individual intellect. This conclusion is also
warranted by Sadra’s oft-repeated view that the intelligible
reality of things is more real and concrete than their physical
embodiments. Sadra says that
the intellective forms of substances that exist in concreto are the
very meanings of these realities and their real essences. A substance
or a physical body, for instance, has a meaning (ma‘na) and a
sensible form. Now, its sensible form is the sensate substance and
its intellective form the meaning of substance. It is this intellective
meaning that the intellect perceives by itself. Asfar, I, 3, pp. 307–
308
As for Sadra’s claim that self-knowledge is co-terminus with all
types of cognition, it is based on the idea that self-consciousness
as described above underlies all knowledge because I cannot be
said to know something without knowing myself first in some
fashion. Whether related to self or to objects in the external
world, knowledge is mediated through self-knowledge and
consciousness.211 In Sadra’s words, ‘the self-perception of
something is its very essence and its essence perceives itself
continuously…man’s knowledge of himself and his essence
precedes all knowledge and is always present to himself.’212 By
the same token, ‘knowledge of self (obtained) through its
faculties and specific effects such as its own self-knowledge
takes place through presence (hudur); but it may also take place
through attainment (husul). Yet the former is necessary and
continuous whereas the latter depends on appropriate time and

--- Sayfa 196 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
173
conditions’.213 Furthermore, the soul, since it is free from matter,
knows itself through its own existence, not through an abstract
form.214 We thus come full circle from the universality and
generality of conceptual knowledge to the particularity of
presential knowledge. This, it seems, is the synthesis that Sadra
seeks to achieve—a synthesis between the Peripatetic and
Illuminationist traditions on the one hand, and between
knowledge as concept and knowledge as presence, on the
other.
g. Knowledge-by-Presence and God’s Knowledge of Things
In addition to self-knowledge, Sadra applies knowledge-by-
presence to one of the most disputed problems of Islamic
philosophy and theology, i.e., God’s knowledge of things.
Sadra’s analysis is very elaborate and detailed as he tries at one
stroke to dovetail the views of Plato, Ibn Sina, Suhrawardi, Nasir
al-Din al-Tusi, Ibn al-‘Arabi, and Fakhr al-Din Razi. I shall
discuss this problem here only to the extent to which it is
relevant to the problem of knowledge-by-presence.215 The
problem can be stated as follows: does God know things through
representation as the Peripatetic philosophers seem to claim? Or
does He have a mode of knowing different than ours, something
like a direct vision? When we accept the first assumption, we
run into a serious theological problem: representation entails the
posterior presence of the form of things in the knowing mind
and, when applied to God, amounts to claiming that God knows
things as objects external to Himself. If the way God knows
things is not essentially different from the way we know objects
in the external world, then we define God’s knowledge of things
as following rather preceding their existence. But since the
existence of things precedes our knowledge of them, this cannot
apply to God who as the Creator grants them their existence.
Furthermore, if God knows things through representation,
then we have to admit that forms appear in God’s mind as object
of knowledge only after God has thought them. But this, in turn,

--- Sayfa 197 ---
174
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
assumes an epistemological distance between God and His
creation, which goes against God’s being omnipotent (al-qadir)
and omniscient (al-‘alim). If God knows what He creates, then
His knowledge of things cannot be a derivative one. Moreover,
the imprinting of representational forms in the mind of human
beings or God takes place only through universal and abstract
concepts whereas real knowledge is always particular and
concrete. Finally, there is the problem of change that comes
about as a result of knowing something. If God’s knowledge of
changing things leads to a change in His knowledge, then how
can we maintain His unity? If it is admitted that ‘knowledge of
change is change of knowledge,’ then all Divine knowledge leads
to change in the Divine essence.
Ibn Sina had proposed the notion of God knowing in a
‘universal’ or ‘general manner’ (nahw kulli) to avoid introducing
change in the Divine.216 Ibn Sina’s rather unsatisfactory solution
was to absolve God of the need to know certain things, i.e., the
particulars (juz’iyyat). If God as the creator of things knows
them in a universal manner, he will not be subject to the
particular conditions of sensation or imagination. This, however,
seems to suggest that the only proper knowledge available to
God is His knowledge of Himself. But if God is said to know
only Himself and everything else through this unchanging
knowledge, then how can He be called al-‘alim, i.e., the knower
in a theological sense? Given these theological difficulties, Sadra
attempts to articulate a theory of knowledge in which God as
both creator and knower can be legitimately said to know
things.
Sadra broaches the subject with a useful summary of the
views of previous philosophers, and cites seven of them in some
detail. The first view held by al-Farabi, Ibn Sina, Bahmanyar and
Abu’l-‘Abbas al-Lawkari argues that the forms of contingent
beings are imprinted upon God’s Essence through mental
representation in a universal manner. The second view is that of
Suhrawardi and the School of Illumination, which holds that ‘the
existence of the forms of things in the external world—whether

--- Sayfa 198 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
175
they are separate substances or composite or simple corporeal
bodies—are the modes of His knowledge of things.’217 The third
view attributed to Porphyry asserts God’s unification with
intelligible forms. The fourth view ascribed to Plato holds that
the separate forms and intellective archetypes (muthul) are the
Divine knowledge by which God knows things. The fifth view
held by the Mu‘tazilites, which Sadra says is comparable to the
view of certain Sufis, states that God knows contingent beings
in eternity. This view has some affinity with that of the Sufis
because they hold that things exist in God’s knowledge before
they are actualized in the external world. This can be taken to
be a reference to Ibn al-‘Arabi’s famous saying that ‘eternal
archetypes have not smelled the perfume of [material] existence.’
The sixth view, shared by most of the later theologians (al-
muta’akhkhirun), attributes two modes of knowledge to God:
summary (ijmali) and detailed (tafsili). God’s universal and
summary knowledge of things precedes their concrete existence
whereas His detailed mode of knowledge is simultaneous with
their existence in concreto. The last view, which is a variation
of the previous theory, holds that God knows the first effect in
detail and everything else in a universal and summary fashion,
which can be interpreted as a middle position between the
Peripatetic and Ash’arite views.218
In giving his overall evaluation of the views above, Sadra
divides them into two main groups: those that consider God’s
knowledge of things separate from His Essence and those that
do not. The distinction is simple yet essential, and helps Sadra
place the problem within an ontological context. He develops his
position as follows:
This is a detailed description of the views common among people.
In affirming God’s knowledge of things, there are two possible
ways: either we say that it is separate from His Essence or not.
Those who hold the view of separation either argue for the
affirmation of non-existents (al-ma‘dumat) or not, i.e., whether they
are attributed to external existence as in the case of the Mu’tazilites
or to the mind as in the case of some Sufi masters like the master

--- Sayfa 199 ---
176
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
sage and verifier (al-muhaqqiq) Muhy al-Din al-‘Arabi and the
perfect master Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi from whose famous books
benefits are derived. According to the second view, we either have
to say that God’s knowledge of external beings is forms that subsist
by themselves and is separate from Him and other things—and these
are the Platonic Archetypes and separate forms—or we have to say
that His knowledge of external beings is the things themselves…as
for those who argue for the non-separation [of God’s knowledge
from His Essence], they either have to say that it is other than His
Essence, which is the view of the two Masters al-Farabi and Ibn
Sina, or they have to say that it is the same as His Essence. In the
second case, they either have to admit, like Porphyry and his
followers among the Peripatetics, that His Essence is united with
intellective forms or to say that His Essence by Itself has the
summary knowledge of everything other than Himself and other
than the first effect [i.e., the first created being] in the manner to
which we have already alluded. Asfar, III, 1, pp. 181–182
Keeping this historical background in mind, Sadra develops two
main arguments. The first is based on ontological causality
according to which knowledge of cause is superior to knowledge
of effect. Just as substance has ontological priority over accident,
our knowledge of substance precedes that of accident in degrees
of truth and intelligibility because, as a typical Aristotelian
argument (Posterior Analytics, 71b 10), we can know an effect
fully when we know its cause. Furthermore, according to Sadra’s
oft-repeated principle, knowledge of cause leads to knowledge
of effect but not vice versa. In terms of ontological hierarchy,
effect has no impact on its cause whereas cause is the raison
d’être of the effect.219 When we affirm the existence of a
building, for instance, we intuitively conclude that ‘the
knowledge of the building does not necessitate the knowledge
of the builder but leads to the knowledge of the need of the
building for its builder.’220 When applied to God’s relation to the
world which He has created, the language of causality argues
that God as the ultimate substance knows and sustains things
through His existence. God is the ground of all beings but, more
importantly, His knowledge is the source of all knowledge. If

--- Sayfa 200 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
177
everything is known fully when its cause is known, then God,
as the cause of all things, knows things by knowing Himself.
If God’s existence precedes all other existents and existence
implies knowledge and consciousness, then there is no reason
why His knowledge should not precede knowledge per se.
The occurrence221 of knowledge to its individual (carriers) is like the
occurrence of existence to them through gradation, i.e., priority and
non-priority, posteriority and non-posteriority, and intensity and
weakness. God’s knowledge is the most primary in being a
knowledge [that comprehends everything] outside Himself. It is the
most prior knowledge for it is the cause of all other knowledge and
the most intense in clarity and most powerful in manifestation. As
for its being veiled to us, it is, as you have learnt before, because
of the excess of its manifestation and the weakness of our eyes in
perceiving Him. Therefore the aspect of His veiling is His very
clarity and manifestation. The same principle holds true for all of
the knowledge of the reality of a cause vis-à-vis the knowledge of
the reality of its effect. By the same token, the knowledge of the
reality of every substance is more intense than the knowledge of the
reality of every accident, and it is more prime and prior than the
knowledge of the reality of the accident whose existence depends
on this substance. Asfar, I, 3, pp. 383–384
Sadra asserts the same point with a slightly different argument,
using this time God’s absolute existence and independence. Just
as God’s existence does not depend on things other than Himself,
His omniscience holds a similar ontological superiority in
encapsulating every possible object of knowledge:
…in reality, knowledge of something is its very existence but this
is one of the most mysterious problems of metaphysics, which no
one understands except those who have attained the station of
perfection. We shall explain this for you when, God willing, we
analyze God’s knowledge. As for that which is not in need of a cause
and sustainer, its knowledge is either primarily evident or hidden
from its own knowledge or there is no way of affirming it except
by demonstration through its effects and concomitants in which case
the very essence of its truth and quiddity remains unknown. But the

--- Sayfa 201 ---
178
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
Necessary Being has no proof, no definition and therefore no reason
from a number of different points of view. It has no reason for
existence like an active [agent] and ultimate goal, no reason for
constitution (al-qiwam) like matter and form and no reason for
quiddity like genus and differentia. In spite of this, nothing is hidden
from It and It is the proof of everything and closest to everything
as He the Exalted said: ‘And we are closer to you than your jugular
vein’ (Qur’an 50:16). And He said: ‘And He is with you wherever
you are’ (Qur’an 57:4). And He is the proof of His own Essence as
He said: ‘God testifies that there is no god but He’ (Qur’an 3:18).
He also said: ‘Is your Lord not sufficient [as a proof] that He is a
witness to all things’ (Qur’an 41:53) and ‘Say: What is greater as
witness? Say: Allah’ (Qur’an 6:19). Asfar, I, 3, pp. 399–400
The second argument that Sadra advances is knowledge-by-
presence, which he considers to be the only way to avoid the
‘pernicious results’ (umur shani‘ah)222 of the representational
theory of knowledge. The gist of the argument is that God knows
things through their ‘presence’ in His all-inclusive knowledge:
‘God knows His Essence and all things from His Own
Essence.’223 This, however, does not mean to say that they
‘become’ present in God’s knowledge because their presence
depends on God as the Necessary Being. Rather, God’s
knowledge of things is their very existence and presence. God’s
knowledge is an ontologically generative act by which God
creates things by ‘knowing’ them. It is not the case that God first
thinks things as potentialities and then grants them existence, for
there is no potentiality in God. As mentioned before, such a
claim would reverse the ontological relationship between God
and His creation. Instead of denoting God as coming to know
things, we should look at His knowledge as a generative act
toward creation.
Whoever attempts to prove His knowledge of things through one of
his creations (maj‘ulatihi) such as the intellect and the soul, or says
that His detailed knowledge is posterior to his Essence, this is due
to the imperfection of his vision and weakness of his knowledge.
The person who is deep in philosophy in our opinion is the person

--- Sayfa 202 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
179
who proves His knowledge of all things with their multiplicity and
detail in His Essence which is prior to all concomitants and external
beings without there being any change in His Essence. Asfar, III, 1,
pp. 248–249
Sadra’s argument that God’s knowledge of things is their very
existence is based on his ontology on the one hand, and
knowledge-by-presence, on the other. The simple syllogism that
Sadra adopts reveals the weight of his gradational ontology: God
knows things through His Essence and His Essence is never
absent to Himself; therefore God knows things essentially,
primarily and hence without time interval. That is why Sadra
does not find even Suhrawardi’s ‘illuminative relation’ (idafah
ishraqiyyah) convincing to explain God’s relation to objects of
His knowledge. The principle of illuminative relation, which
Sadra endorses for other types of relational knowledge, still
assumes a relationship of some kind and allows separation
whereas God can never be absent from Himself and from His
knowledge.224 Sadra reiterates the notion of presence and sums
up his argument by returning to knowledge-by-presence.
There is nothing firmer and stronger than our knowledge of
ourselves because our self-knowledge is our very essence. And
nothing can be established for something more firmly than for itself.
Therefore our knowledge of the source of ourselves and in fact the
source of our existence goes back to the Necessary Being. As we
have explained before, only the Necessary Being itself can have the
knowledge of the reality of the Necessary Being. As He said: ‘And
they do not compass Him with their knowledge and all faces are
humbled before the Living and the Self-Subsisting’ (Qur’an 20:110–
111).

Some of the fuqara’225 have found a solution for this problem but
the expressions fall short of stating it in a manner that it deserves
because of the subtlety of its path and secrecy of its route.
Nevertheless, we point to it by saying that our self-knowledge is the
existence of ourselves, and therefore the knowledge of the source
of ourselves, on which our self-knowledge depends, is the existence
of this source. This does not refer to our own existence but to the

--- Sayfa 203 ---
180
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
existence of the source, which is the source itself. Its reality,
however, does not depend on us because the existence of the effect
depends on the existence of the cause, not its own existence. The
same holds true for two kinds of knowledge because they are like
the two kinds of existence. When our self-knowledge comes from
the knowledge of our source, our knowledge of our source is the
existence of our source. When the relation of our source to us is a
relation of creation (al-ijad) and activity (al-fa‘iliyyah), our
knowledge of our source consists of the existence of our source
together with its relation of creation and activity to us. Our
knowledge of our source thus precedes our self-knowledge for it is
prior to us through its creative agency.

In short, the scale of knowledge is just like the scale of existence
in terms of strength and weakness and cause and effect. Things have
their existence in their caused essences but their existence in their
source and cause is stronger than their own existence in themselves.
Something exists in its creator more firmly than in itself because its
self-existence is only contingent whereas its existence in the creator
is necessary. Thus the relation of necessity is stronger than the
relation of contingency and everything has an existence in [their]
universal source in a manner more supreme and nobler than anything
else. As it is said in the prayer of the Prophet, may the most perfect
benedictions be upon him and his family: ‘O He who was an existent
and self-existing before all existence and self-existing after all
existence! O He who existentiates all existence!’ Asfar, I, 3, pp.
400–403
In short, Sadra follows Suhrwardi’s insight that it is only by
placing God before things and within an ontological hierarchy
that we can save God’s unity and omniscience at the same time.
Couched in the language of existence, the question becomes one
of relating the ‘eternal’ (qadim), God, to the ‘temporally created’
(hadith) which comprises everything other than God (ma
siw’Allah). Since God’s knowing is a generative act, His
knowledge of temporally created beings is the same as their
existence. For Sadra, this is enough of a proof for the absence
of any duality in God’s mode of knowing.

--- Sayfa 204 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
181
NOTES
 1. Asfar, I, 1, p. 27. Cf. Ibn Sina, Shifa’, Ilahiyyat, p. 29. Al-Farabi uses
the term markuzah fi’l-dhin. al-Farabi, ‘Uyun al-masa’il in al-Majmu,’
p. 65.
 2. Asfar, I, 1, p. 83. Cf. also Sharh, Vol. I, pp. 66 and 101.
 3. The Metaphysics of Sabzawari, tr. M. Mohaghegh and T. Izutsu, (New
York: Caravan Books, 1977), pp. 31–32.
 4. Asfar, I, 1, p. 25.
 5. Asfar, I, 1, p. 25.
 6. Asfar, I, 1, p. 26.
 7. Asfar, I, 1, p. 26. The meaning of Sadra’s statement that ‘whatever has
no definition has no proof’ is that any reality defying definition needs
no proof or demonstration for its ‘why-ness’ (limma) but itself is a proof
for others. The idea goes back to the Muslim Peripatetics. Cf. al-Farabi,
‘Uyun al-masa’il in al-Majmu‘, p. 67 and Ibn Sina Shifa’, Ilahiyyat, p.
29. It is also in this sense that Sadra says that ‘existence has no purpose
beyond itself and it is the ultimate agent of all agents, the form of all
forms, and the aim of all aims. Hence it is the ultimate aim and khayr
al-mahd in which all realities come to an end.’ Asfar, I, 1, p. 54; also p.
340.
 8. Kitab al-masha‘ir, p. 24. Shuhud ‘ayni can also be translated as ‘essential
seeing’ if we take ‘ayn to mean to be the essence of something.
 9. Asfar, I, 1, p. 49.
 10. Asfar, I, 1, p. 37.
 11. Cf. Asfar, I, 1, pp. 44–46. See also the short discussion of this point in
Sadra’s Qudsiyyah, pp. 207–208.
 12. Cf. Aristotle, Metaphysics, 1003 a, and Ibn Sina, Najat, p. 235.
 13. Asfar I, 1, p. 24. For a similar statement, see Sharh, Vol. I, p. 16 where
Sadra uses the term ‘the science of disembodied beings’ (fann al-
mufaraqat) to describe the study of existence as an absolute term.
 14. Sadra, Asfar I, 1, p. 24. Although Sadra uses the word mawjud which is
‘existent’ rather than existence, it gives the meaning of existence in this
context because, as Zanjani points out in his commentary on this phrase
(Asfar, I, 1, p. 24, note 2), Sadra employs the words wujud and mawjud
interchangeably in some cases. Moreover, both words give the same
meaning for the real existent, i.e., the ‘thing that really exists’ (al-mawjud
al-haqiqi) is ultimately nothing but existence (wujud): ‘The existent is
existence and its modes (atwar), affairs (shu’un) and modalities (anha’).’
Asfar, I, 2, p. 341. We find a similar usage in Bahmanyar who says that
‘the subject-matter of this science is the general matter that includes all
things, and it is the existent-qua-existent, i.e., existence (al-wujud)’;
Kitab al-tahsil, p. 279.

--- Sayfa 205 ---
182
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
 15. W. V. Quine, ‘On What There Is’ Review of Metaphysics, 2 (1948),
reprinted in E. D. Klemke (ed.), Contemporary Analytic and Linguistic
Philosophies (New York: Prometheus Books, 1983), p. 385. For Rorty’s
pragmatist vindication of the same point, see his Consequences of
Pragmatism (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1982), pp.
xiv–xxi.
 16. Asfar, I, 1, p. 54.
 17. Cf. Metaphysics, 1003a.
 18. Kenny, Mystical Monotheism, p. 6.
 19. Charles H. Kahn, ‘Why Existence Does not Emerge as a Distinct Concept
in Greek Philosophy’, in Parviz Morewedge (ed.), Philosophies of
Existence: Ancient and Medieval (New York: Fordham University Press,
1982), p. 15.
 20. Metaphysics, 1028 a.
 21. Asfar, I, 1, p. 258.
 22. Kahn, ‘Why Existence….’, p. 7.
 23. For Ibn Sina, see Shifa’, Ilahiyyat, Vol. II, pp. 344 and 347.
 24. At this point, the two meanings of the word mahiyyah should be
explained. ‘Mahiyyah in the particular sense’ (mahiyyah bi’l-ma‘na al-
akhass) is the answer to the question ‘what is it?’ (ma hiya?). In Ibn
Sina’s terms (Shifa’, Ilahiyyat, p. 31), this meaning of quiddity denotes
the particular reality of something. ‘Mahiyyah in the general sense’
(mahiyyah bi’l-ma‘na al-‘amm) is that by which a thing is what it is (ma
bihi al-shay huwa huwa). The second meaning of mahiyyah is eventually
nothing other than the existence of something. The first meaning, which
concerns the logical essence, is usually translated as ‘quiddity’ to
distinguish it from ‘essence’ in the general and ontological sense. Cf.
Toshihiko Izutsu, The Concept and Reality of Existence, (Tokyo: Keio
Institute of Cultural and Linguistic Studies, 1971), p. 75.
 25. Asfar, I, 1, pp. 55–56, 61.
 26. Asfar, I, 1, p. 46.
 27. Asfar, I, 1, p. 54.
 28. Asfar, I, 1, p. 53; cf. also, p. 55 and 61.
 29. Asfar, I, 1, p. 259.
 30. Cf. Asfar, I, 1, p. 59.
 31. Asfar, I, 1, p. 61.
 32. Asfar, I, 1, p. 65.
 33. Asfar, I, 1, p. 65.
 34. Asalah in Majmu‘ah, p. 190.
 35. Asfar, I, 1, pp. 38–39.
 36. Shifa’, Ilahiyyat, p. 38. Cf. also David B. Burrell, Knowing the
Unknowable God: Ibn-Sina, Maimonides, Aquinas (Notre Dame, IN:
University of Notre Dame Press, 1986), pp. 24–25.

--- Sayfa 206 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
183
 37. As a representative of the school of Ibn Sina, consider the following
remarks by Bahmanyar: ‘The particularization of every existent is
through its attribution to its subject. In other words, it subsists through
its attribution to its subject and cause; not that the attribution is attached
to it from outside. The existence of the caused (al-ma‘lul) is an accident
(‘arad) and every accident subsists through its existence in its subject.
The same holds true for existence as the existence of man, for instance,
subsists through its attribution to man and the existence of Zayd subsists
through its attribution to Zayd’. al-Tahsil, p. 282. (Emphases added).
Sadra quotes a paraphrased version of Bahmanyar’s statement in
Qudsiyyah, p. 207.
 38. Ibn Sina, Mubahathat, ed. Muhsin Bidafar (Qom, Iran: Intisharat-i Bidar,
ah 1413), p. 154.
 39. For Ibn Rushd’s objections against Ibn Sina, see his Tahafut al-tahafut,
ed. Sulayman Dunya’, (Cairo, Egypt: 1964), vol. II, p. 80; English tr.
Van den Bergh The Incoherence of the Incoherence, (London: Luzac,
1978), p. 118. St. Thomas followed Ibn Rushd and criticized Ibn Sina
through the eyes of this misreading. Cf. St. Thomas Aquinas, On Being
and Essence, tr. A. Maurer, (Toronto: The Pontifical Institute of
Mediaeval Studies, 1983). Etienne Gilson follows the Thomistic
interpretation of Ibn Sina on this particular point in his Being and Some
Philosophers, (Toronto: The Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies,
1952), p. 52 and History of Christian Philosophy in the Middle Ages,
(London: Sheed and Ward, 1989), pp. 190–191. See also F. Rahman,
‘Essence and Existence in Avicenna,’ Mediaeval and Renaissance
Studies, IV (1958), 1–16 and P. Morewedge, ‘Philosophical Analysis and
Ibn Sina’s ‘Essence-Existence’ Distinction’ Journal of the American
Oriental Society, 92.3 (1972), pp. 425–435.
 40. Asfar, I, 1, p. 48. In another place, however, Sadra attributes the view of
existence as an accident to Ibn Sina and his followers, and rejects it as
being ‘utterly far from the truth.’ Cf. Asfar, I, 1, p. 258
 41. Asfar, I, 1, p. 49.
 42. Asfar, I, 1, p. 252.
 43. Asfar, I, 1, pp. 54–55.
 44. Asfar, I, 1, pp. 40, 48. Cf. also Mehdi Aminrazavi, Suhrawardi and the
School of Illumination, 33–35.
 45. After saying that existence realizes itself by itself, Sadra makes some
cautionary remarks. The potentially dangerous idea is the following: If
the realization of existence depends on itself, then one may object that
existence assumes a status similar to the Necessary Being (wajib al-
wujud). Sadra replies by saying that ‘the meaning of the Necessary Being
is that it necessitates its own existence and reality by itself without being
in need of any active agent and performer whereas the meaning of the
realization of existence by itself is that when it is realized, it is either by

--- Sayfa 207 ---
184
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
itself like the Necessary Being or through an active agent whose
realization is not in need of another existence by which it subsists. This
realization takes place only after the effect of the agent with its existence
and its qualification with existence.’ Asfar, I, 1, pp. 40–41
 46. Asfar, I, 1, p. 40.
 47. Asfar, I, 1, pp. 250–251.
 48. Asfar, I, 1, p. 59.
 49. Asfar, I, 1, p. 61. See also Tabataba’i’s footnote on page 49.
 50. Asfar, I, 1, p. 41; also p. 120.
 51. Asfar, I, 1, p. 66; also p. 57.
 52. This principle finds an interesting expression in Sabzawari’s Sharh al-
manzumah (Qom, Iran: Nab Publications, 1995), Vol. II, p. 60, where he
says that ‘existence is the source of all explanations in which all descriptions
come to an end. And it is the source of all sources and descriptions. When
the Prophet, may peace and blessing be upon him, was asked ‘by what
did you know your Lord?’ he replied that ‘I knew everything by Him.’’
 53. The same position is held in modern philosophy. Cf. John E. Smith, ‘Is
Existence a Valid Philosophical Concept?’ in his Reason and God (New
Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1961), p. 122.
 54. Toshihiko Izutsu, The Concept and Reality of Existence, p. 3.
 55. al-Farabi, al-Masa’il al-mutafarriqah, ed. F. Dieterici, (Leiden, 1890), p.
90 and Jawabat in Risalatan falsafiyyatan, p. 91. See also N. Rescher,
‘al-Farabi on the Question: Is Existence a Predicate?’ in Studies in the
History of Arabic Logic, (University of Pittsburgh Press, 1963), pp.
39–42 and ‘The Concept of Existence in Arabic Logic and Philosophy’
in Studies in Arabic Philosophy, (University of Pittsburgh Press, 1966),
pp. 69–80.
 56. Asfar, I., 1, pp. 36–37.
 57. Fazlur Rahman translates tashkik as ‘systematic ambiguity’ (The
Philosophy of Mulla Sadra, p. 11), which I find to be ambiguous. The
meaning of tashkik is quite clear in Sadra’s writings: it refers to any order
of hierarchy and gradation in terms of priority and posteriority, cause and
effect, intensification and diminution, and so on. In the case of existence,
it refers to the various degrees, states, modes and levels of existence.
Hence my choice of gradation for tashkik.
 58. Compare the following paragraph: ‘Know that existence is predicated of
what is under it equivocally, not univocally. This means that an existence
that has no cause precedes by nature an existence that has a cause. By
the same token, the existence of substances precedes the existence of
accidents. Similarly, some beings are stronger and some weaker. One
cannot say that existence is a generic term predicated, for instance, of
the existence of man, donkey, and stars univocally like the colors yellow
and red. As you shall learn, some things are prior to others, and the
meaning of this is that the existence (wujud) of those things is prior to

--- Sayfa 208 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
185
the existence of other things; not that thing-ness (al-jismiyyah) itself is
prior to thing-ness. Therefore when we say that cause is prior to effect,
it means that its existence is prior to the existence of the effect.’
Bahmanyar, al-Tahsil, p. 281.
 59. This reference to Bahmanyar is indicative of Sadra’s familiarity with his
work, especially al-Tahsil. Bahmanyar was certainly more lucid than his
master Ibn Sina in articulating key Peripatetic positions, and Sadra quotes
freely and at some length from his work. Cf. Asfar, I, 1, p. 39 and 48
where Sadra presents Bahmanyar’s view of the ‘actuality of existence’
as concurring with the primacy of existence.
 60. A reference to Suhrawardi as it is repeated also in Asfar, III, 1, p. 181.
It is in more than one place that Sadra refers to Suhrawardi as a ‘Stoic’
(riwaqi). Cf. Asfar, I, 3, p. 291. For a discussion of Suhrawardi’s
‘Stoicism,’ see Walbridge, The Leaven of the Ancients, pp. 187–190.
 61. I translate wijdan as an existential state of consciousness to bring out the
etymological connection between wujud and wijdan, both of which come
from the Arabic root w-j-d meaning to ‘find’ and ‘to be found.’ It is
sometimes translated into Persian by the classical authors as yaftan,
‘finding,’ a word which is also used to translate wujud. Cf. Chittick, The
Sufi Path of Knowledge, p. 214. The word wajd, which can be translated
as ‘ecstasy,’ comes from the same root. The implied meaning is that
‘finding’ existence results in a state of ecstasy. Together with Ibn al-
‘Arabi, we can also say that existence is found in a state of ecstasy.
 62. Cf. Franz Rosenthal, Knowledge Triumphant: The Concept of Knowledge
in Medieval Islam (Leiden, Holland: E. J. Brill, 1970), pp. 48–49.
 63. Cf. Asfar, I, 1, p. 114.
 64. Asalah in Majmu‘ah, p. 182.
 65. Cf. Shawahid, p. 14.
 66. Cf. Huduth, pp. 177–8 where Sadra the Platonist gives a short defense
of the Platonic Forms. As Sabzawari points out, the word ‘form’ (al-
surah) has two meanings. One is the form in the Aristotelian sense, i.e.,
that to which abstracted concepts correspond in the representational
theory of knowledge (al-‘ilm al-husuli). The second meaning is ‘essence’
but not in the sense of quiddity (mahiyyah) as an abstraction of the mind
but in the sense of concrete essences that belong to the intelligible world.
See Asfar, III, p. 284, note 3. See also Fazlur Rahman, The Philosophy
of Mulla Sadra, p. 214.
 67. Asfar, I, 3, p. 304.
 68. Asfar, I, 1, p. 36.
 69. Asfar, I, 3, p. 321.
 70. ‘The mental form of something could be nobler than its external reality,’
Kashaniyyah in Majmu‘ah, p. 131.
 71. Cf. Aristotle’s discussion of substantial forms as universal (Metaphysics,
XII, 1034–1035). See also Ibn Sina, Najat pp. 207–209 where he

--- Sayfa 209 ---
186
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
discusses perception (idrak) in relation to the ‘classes of disembodiment’
(asnaf al-tajrid). The same theme is taken up in the Shifa’; see Avicenna’s
De Anima, pp. 58–60.
 72. Sadra applies the same principle to the knower: one has to be detached
from the limitations of material existence in order to perceive intelligible
forms. This is where Sadra gracefully blends philosophical speculation
with the purification of the soul. As he states in various aphorisms, one
cannot unite with the intelligible world, the ultimate goal of philosophy,
without disengaging oneself from the gross states of existence. Matter is
an obstacle for the soul to unite with the intelligible world through the
agency of the active intellect. Cf. Sadra’s remarks in Asfar, I, 3, p. 369.
I shall discuss this issue in greater detail in the next chapter.
 73. Sharh, Vol. I, p. 81.
 74. Metaphysics, 1087b where he says that ‘the statement that all knowledge
is universal, so that the principles of things must also be universal and
not separate substances, presents indeed, of all the points we have
mentioned, the greatest difficulty.’ Cf. Edward Booth, Aristotelian
Aporetic Ontology in Islamic and Christian Thinkers (Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, 1983), pp. 5–6.
 75. Ibn Sina, Najat, p. 210.
 76. Cf. L. E. Goodman, Avicenna, pp. 129–131.
 77. Asfar, I, 3, p. 286.
 78. Asfar, I, 3, pp. 343–344. See also Baqillani who places the potential in
the category of non-existence. Kitab al-tawhid, pp. 34–44, quoted in
Rosenthal, Knowledge Triumphant, p. 216. Perfection as actuality is the
common wisdom of medieval philosophy. Thus Thomas Aquinas says
that ‘…a thing is said to be perfect in proportion to its actuality.’ Cf.
Summa Theologica, Part I, Question 4, Article, 1.
 79. St. Anselm’s argument that God as the Most Perfect Being must exist
rather than not because perfection implies existence is based on the same
intuition of the Neoplatonists about the ‘metaphysics of actuality.’
 80. Asfar, II, 2, p. 67. The other term Sadra uses more frequently is al-
qabiliyyah; Asfar, II, 2, p. 70.
 81. William Charlton has argued against the notion of prime matter in
Aristotle. Charlton’s criticism of the conventional readings of Aristotle
on this issue merits serious consideration for prime matter signifies ‘an
ultimate indeterminate matter, to be discovered by conceptual analysis,’
which goes against the central concern of Aristotle’s quest for
metaphysics of actual substances. For Charlton’s discussion, see his ‘Did
Aristotle Believe in Prime Matter?’ in Aristotle’s Physics Books I and II
(Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press, 1970), pp. 129–145.
 82. Cf. Asfar, I, 3, p. 434.
 83. Cf. also Sharh, Vol. I, p. 40.

--- Sayfa 210 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
187
 84. Sadra says that a substance whose form is not disengaged from matter
cannot be known since matter means ‘darkness’ and thus ignorance as
opposed to ‘light’ and ‘presence,’ which signifies knowledge. Cf. Asfar,
I, 3, p. 387 and IV, 1, p. 69.
 85. Mazahir, p. 88.
 86. Cf. Asfar, I, 3, p. 340.
 87. Cf. Shawahid, p. 205.
 88. See also Shawahid, pp. 156–162 for Sadra’s detailed discussion of
Platonic Forms. Sadra’s Platonic Forms are real individuals: ‘…for every
existent, he (Plato) established an individual (shakhsan) in the divine
world and called these individuals the Platonic Forms.’ Huduth, p. 177.
 89. Shawahid, p. 239.
 90. Plotinus offers a rigorous analysis of this point. Cf. Kenney, Mystical
Monotheism, p. 104. For a fuller exposition and defense of ‘axiarchism,’
see John Leslie, Value and Existence, (New Jersey, 1979).
 91. Asfar, I, 3, pp. 324–325 and Ittihad in Majmu‘ah, pp. 93–94. See also
Asfar, I, 2, p. 368; I, 3, p. 338; II, 2, pp. 216–218 where Sadra traces the
idea back to Plato; and III, 1, p. 110 where the principle is applied to
God’s knowledge of things.
 92. Cf. Asfar, I, 3, p. 373.
 93. Asfar, I, 3, p. 377.
 94. Like Ibn Sina, Sadra uses disembodiment as a criterion for the division
of the subject-matter of metaphysics. Cf. Sharh, Vol I, pp. 69–70.
 95. Asfar, I, 3, p. 362 and also 416.
 96. Muqarrabun refers to Angels, Prophets and saints, who are described in
the Qur’an as being closest to the Divine. Cf. the Qur’an 4:172, 7:114,
26: 42, 56:11, and 83:21.
 97. Ibn Sina attributes this saying to an unknown figure whereas Nasir al-Din
al-Tusi attributes it to Aristotle. Cf. Ibn Sina, Shifa’, Mantiq, p. 22 and
Tusi, Asas al-iqtibas, ed. Taqi Mudarris Radwah (Tehran, Iran: Danishgah-i
Tehran, 1988), p. 375.
 98. Asfar, III, 1, pp. 335–336. Cf. also Asfar, IV, 1, pp. 163–164.
 99. The same criticism of Suhrawardi is repeated in Asfar, IV, 1, p. 26.
 100. Tajarrud is a notoriously difficult term to translate. The root verb j-r-d
means to denude, strip and divest. As a technical term, it refers to a state
where things are ‘freed from the limitations of material existence.’ The
English word ‘abstraction’ works only in some contexts where tajarrud
means to isolate something from some other things such as its accidental
properties. Cf. Ibn Sina, Najat, pp. 205–210; Rahman, Avicenna’s
Psychology, pp. 35–42. Ghazali also uses the term in this sense. Cf. Farid
Jabre, Essai sur le lexique de Ghazali (Beyrouth, Lebanon: Publications
de L’Université Libanaise, 1970), p. 52. But ‘abstraction’ falls short of
conveying the intended meaning of ‘immaterial reality’ especially if it is
understood as the opposite of ‘concrete.’ A mujarrad being is not

--- Sayfa 211 ---
188
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
necessarily something that exists as an abstraction in the mind. It can be
a concrete reality as in the case of God, the angels or the intellect. For
Sadra, such a being is more real and concrete than physical substances.
For this meaning of tajarrud in Sadra, see Asfar, I, 3, pp. 360–366. The
Latin translations of Ibn Sina’s works use two words for tajarrud:
abstractio and denudata. Goichon rightly translates tajarrud as ‘l’état de
non-mélange avec la matiére’. Cf. Goichon, Lexique, p. 38. Ibn Sina uses
it in this sense when he says that mujarradat are intrinsically intelligible
because they are freed from the limitations of material existence. Cf.
al-Mabda’ wa’l-ma‘ad, pp. 15 and 96. In contemporary scholarship, the
word tajarrud and its derivations have been translated variously.
Abstraction is the most common term. See Rahman, The Philosophy of
Mulla Sadra, pp. 211 and 233–234. Given the problems with the word
‘abstraction’ as something that is less than real, I think the word denudata
comes closer to tajarrud especially in the sense in which Sadra uses it.
I have kept abstraction when tajarrud is used in the Peripatetic sense.
Where appropriate, I have used disengagement when tajarrud means
denuding and separating something from others. In general, I have
translated it as disembodiment especially when Sadra uses it in
accordance with the gradation (tashkik) of existence.
 101. Asfar, I, 3, pp. 284–285.
 102. Asfar, I, 3, pp. 286–287.
 103. Sharh, Vol. I, pp. 618–619.
 104. Asfar, I, 3, pp. 278, 297, and 317.
 105. This Qur’anic verse, as interpreted by Sadra and other philosophers, is
also an allusion to the generative power of God’s knowledge of things:
Divine knowledge of things is their very existence. Cf. Suhrawardi, Kitab
al-mashari‘ wa’l-mutarahat, Vol. I, p. 488.
 106. Asfar, I, 3, pp. 451 and 465.
 107. Asfar, I, 3, p. 292.
 108. Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations, tr. G. E. M. Anscombe (New
York: Macmillan Publishing Co., Inc., 1968), par. 246.
 109. Asfar, I, 3, p. 186; also p. 79.
 110. al-Razi, Mabahith, Vol. I, p. 450.
 111. Sharh, Vol. I, p. 569.
 112. Asfar, I, 3, p. 291.
 113. Asfar, I, 3, p. 345.
 114. Asfar, I, 3, p. 346.
 115. Asfar, I, 3, p. 309.
 116. ‘The higher genuses are actual essences (dhatiyyat) for their species and
individuals. Actual essences cannot change their mode of existence
otherwise an actual essence would not be itself.’ Asfar, I, 3, p. 311
 117. al-Razi, Mabahith, Vol. I, p. 458.
 118. Sharh, Vol. I, p. 571.

--- Sayfa 212 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
189
 119. The paragraph is taken verbatim from al-Razi’s Mabahith, Vol. I, p. 459
without any reference. On the same theme, see Asfar, I, 1, pp. 287, 289,
311; Rahman, The Philosophy of Mulla Sadra, pp. 215–216.
 120. Rahman gives a minimalist interpretation of Sadra when he says that the
soul ‘…creates forms from within itself or, rather, is these forms. This
is the meaning of the identity of thought and being.’ The Philosophy of
Mulla Sadra, p. 213. He seems to correct (or contradict?) himself two
pages later (p. 215) when he describes the forms the soul knows as
‘exist(ing) in their own right in a Platonic sense.’
 121. Sharh, Vol. I, p. 596.
 122. Asfar, I, 3, p. 360; Sharh, Vol. I, p. 613.
 123. Sharh, Vol. I, p. 617.
 124. Asfar, I, 3, p. 463. For a similar example, see Shawahid, p. 246.
 125. Sadra mentions ‘eight aspects’ to state the difference between the
‘presence of perceptual forms in the soul and their actual reality in
matter.’ Cf. Asfar, I, 3, pp. 300–304. The first five are taken almost
verbatim from al-Razi’s al-Mabahith, Vol. I, pp. 453–454.
 126. Sharh, Vol. I, p. 601.
 127. Asfar, I, 3, p. 307.
 128. Sharh, Vol. I, p. 585.
 129. Tasawwur, p. 59. The same theme is developed in Asfar, 8, 221 and 9,
56.
 130. Sharh, Vol. I, p. 605.
 131. Reading taf‘alu as ta‘aqqalu, which makes more sense in this context.
 132. Sharh, Vol. I, pp. 575–576.
 133. Sharh, Vol. I, p. 581. This is an obvious reference to al-Razi who uses
the word hulul for the presence of intelligible forms in the mind and in
the external world. Cf. al-Mabahith, p. 453. By contrast, Sadra uses the
words hudur and husul.
 134. Asfar, I, 3, p. 382.
 135. Asfar, I, 3, p. 346.
 136. Asfar, I, 3, p. 297.
 137. Cf. Masha’ir, pp. 54–58 where Sadra reiterates his view that God’s
names and qualities are not attributes added to His essence a posteriori
but different modes and states of His Essence which is not affected by
His self-conscious and voluntary delimitation through His own names,
qualities, and acts.
 138. Cf. Ibn Sina, Najat, pp. 207–210.
 139. The hierarchical view of perception leads Sadra to divide knowing
subjects into three classes: the ‘sensate man’ (al-insan al-hissi) perceives
only sensible objects; the ‘imaginal man’ (al-insan al-khayali) perceives
sensible objects and imaginal forms; and finally the ‘intellective man’
(al-insan al-‘aqli) perceives the first two as well as intelligible forms as
disembodied substances. Cf. Sharh, Vol. I, pp. 614–615

--- Sayfa 213 ---
190
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
 140. Asfar, I, 3, p. 360.
 141. Cf. Ibn Sina, Najat, pp. 208–209 where Ibn Sina emphasizes that the
imaginal faculty does not need matter to retain forms. For Rahman’s
English translation, see Avicenna’s Pscychology, pp. 39–40. See also
Rahman, Avicenna’s De Anima, pp. 59–60 and A. M. Goichon, Lexique,
pp. 442–444.
 142. Asfar, I, 3, p. 360 and IV, 1, pp. 211–212. In the Mafatih, Vol. I, p. 181,
Sadra rejects the suggestion of some Peripatetic philosophers that all of
the imaginal forms conjured up by the soul belong to the ‘alam al-khayal.
Evil and satanic feelings, images and thoughts are creations of the soul,
not illuminations from the world of imagination.
 143. Ibn al-‘Arabi uses the word barzakh in a wider sense and applies it to
any intermediary state. Cf. Chittick, The Sufi Path of Knowledge, pp.
117–118.
 144. Asfar, I, 3, p. 362.
 145. Asfar, I, 3, p. 361. Cf. Shawahid, pp. 208–209.
 146. See also Asfar, III, 1, p. 258.
 147. Cf. Sharh, Vol. I, pp. 617–618.
 148. Asfar, I, 3, p. 368.
 149. Asfar, I, 3, p. 369.
 150. See Asfar, I, 3, pp. 374–375 where Sadra quotes from Suhrawardi’s al-
Mashar‘i wa’l-mutarahat.
 151. Asfar, I, 3, p. 376.
 152. Sharh, Vol. I, p. 615.
 153. Asfar, I, 3, p. 498.
 154. Asfar, I, 3, p. 380.
 155. De Anima, 405b.
 156. Cf. Aristotle, Metaphysics, 1087.
 157. Cf. Goodman, Avicenna, p. 136.
 158. Ibn Sina, Najat, p. 210.
 159. Asfar, I, 3, pp. 296, 316–317, and 385.
 160. Suhrawardi, al-Mashari‘ wa’l-mutarahat, p. 485.
 161. Asfar, III, 1, p. 162.
 162. Asfar, IV, 2, p. 144.
 163. Asfar, I, 3, p. 365.
 164. Asfar, I, 3, pp. 418–427.
 165. Asfar, I, 3, p. 434.
 166. Asfar, I, 3, p. 462.
 167. Asfar, I, 3, 461. Cf. Sadra’s treatment of the active intellect as an active
agent for the soul, Asfar, IV, 2, pp. 140–144.
 168. Kitab al-hudud in Kennedy-Day, Books of Definition, p. 104.
 169. Shawahid, p. 245.

--- Sayfa 214 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
191
 170. Cf. Sadra’s quote from Ibn Sina, Asfar, I, 1, p. 419. Along the same lines,
Ibn Sina defines the active intellect as ‘a formal substance.’ Cf. Kitab
al-hudud in Kennedy-Day, Books of Definition, p. 103.
 171. Asfar, I, 3, p. 510.
 172. Asfar, II, 2, p. 204.
 173. Asfar, I, 3, p. 326; see also p. 461. This view belongs in essence to Ibn
Sina. Cf. Shifa’, Ilahiyyat, p. 414; and Najat, p. 231. See also Herbert A.
Davidson, AlFarabi, Avicenna, and Averroes on Intellect, pp. 78 and
91.
 174. Asfar, III, 2, p. 276.
 175. Asfar, III, 2, p. 278.
 176. Asfar, IV, 1, p. 398 where Sadra cites three reasons why the active
intellect has been called ‘active.’
 177. Asfar, I, 3, p. 339.
 178. Asfar, I, 3, p. 127. The verse is from Qur’an 74: 31. In another place,
Sadra says that what the philosophers call the active intellect in the
language of theoretical wisdom is called the ‘sacred spirit’ in the
language of the Shari’ah. Asfar, III, 2, p. 24.
 179. Asfar, IV, 2, p. 130. See also Huduth, p. 139 where the Platonic Forms
are treated as the contents of the Divine mind.
 180. Ibn Sina, Mubahathat, p. 107.
 181. Cf. also Asfar, I, 3, pp. 443–446.
 182. Asfar, I, 3, p. 516.
 183. Lit. ‘bringing out.’ A reference to a branch of the science of hadith where
one investigates the sources of a particular narration.
 184. Cf. Avicanna’s De Anima, p. 239.
 185. Ibn Sina, Mubahathat, p. 107.
 186. Najat, p. 206. Cf. Avicenna’s De Anima, pp. 249–250. See also Peter
Heath, Allegory and Philosophy in Avicenna (Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Press, 1992), pp. 87–89. For the translation of relevant
material on intuition in the Avicennan corpus, see Gutas, Avicenna and
the Aristotelian Tradition, pp. 159–176. See also Gutas, ‘Intuition and
Thinking: The Evolving Structure of Avicenna’s Epistemology’ in Robert
Wisnowsky (ed.), Aspects of Avicenna, (Princeton, NJ: Markus Wiener
Publishers, 2001), pp. 1–38.
 187. Asfar, I, 3, pp. 322–324 where Sadra quotes the relevant sections of the
Shifa’. Interestingly enough, the expression ‘poetic metaphors’ has been
used by Aristotle to refer to the Platonic eidos. Cf. Taylor, Aristotle, p.
32. al-Razi concurs with Aristotle in Mabahith, Vol. I, p. 459.
 188. Quoted in Kennedy-Day, Books of Definition, p. 23.
 189. Asfar, I, 3, pp. 89–90. Cf. Rahman, The Philosophy of Mulla Sadra, pp.
99–100. I have dealt with this particular problem in Sadra’s natural
philosophy in my ‘Between Physics and Metaphysics: Mulla Sadra on
Nature and Motion’ Islam and Science Vol. I, 2003, pp. 65–93.

--- Sayfa 215 ---
192
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
 190. Essential primary predication refers to predication where the predicate is
an essential part of the definition of the subject. In this kind of
predication, subject and predicate are one and the same both in concept
and in reality. Existential propositions such as ‘man is man’ are of this
kind. Although existential propositions are tautological and yield no new
knowledge about the predicate, they play an important role in logic.
Having said that, essential primary predications are also applied to such
propositions as ‘man is a rational animal’ whereby ‘rational animal’ is
essential for the definition of ‘man.’ The second kind of predication
called ‘common predication’ (haml shai‘ sina‘i) or simply secondary
predication (haml thani) refers to predication where the predicate is not
an essential property of the subject. The proposition ‘man is a writer’ is
of this kind in that being a writer is a quality shared by some human
beings but not an essential part of the definition of man.
 191. This is how Sadra explains the multiple states of existence and
consciousness in man: the human self is a simple substance that has the
qualities of knowledge, volition, movement, hearing, sight, life, etc., all
at once, and for Sadra this is the best example of how a single being can
take on multiple ‘meanings,’ i.e., modes and states of existence in a
simple manner. Cf. Asfar, I, 3, p. 326.
 192. Ibn Sina’s famous example is how water becomes air by ‘shedding from
its matter (hayula) the form of water-ness (surat al-ma’iyyah) and there
comes about the form of air-ness (surat al-hawa’iyyah).’ See the quote
from the Shifa’ in the Asfar, I, 3, pp. 327 and 329.
 193. Unless specified by the context, the word nafs in Arabic means both self
and soul. In his Ma‘arij al-quds fi madarij ma‘rifat al-nafs, (Baghdad,
Iraq: al-Maktabat al-‘Alamiyyah, 1988), pp. 18–19, Ghazali points out
that the word nafs is used in the Qur’an to refer to the human self as the
heart (al-qalb), the spirit (al-ruh), and the intellect (al-‘aql).
 194. In commenting on the gradual perfection of the human self from infancy
to adulthood, Sadra states that ‘the souls of the prophets, peace be upon
them, and the souls of the insane and the infants are of the same degree
in the wombs of [their] mothers insofar as the human self and its reality
is concerned. The difference is in the proximate accidents that are
attached to their existence.’ Asfar, I, 3, p. 328.
 195. Asfar, I, 3, pp. 327 and 328.
 196. Shawahid, p. 211.
 197. Kashaniyyah in Majmu‘ah, p. 127.
 198. Kashaniyyah in Majmu‘ah, p. 128.
 199. Mubahathat, pp. 157–158.
 200. Mubahathat, pp. 155–156.
 201. Gilbert Ryle, The Concept of Mind (Harmondsworth, UK, 1966), p. 160.
 202. Asfar, I, 3, p. 295.
 203. Asfar, I, 3, p. 291; and p. 378.

--- Sayfa 216 ---
MULLA SADRA’S THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
193
 204. See also Amin Razavi, Suhrawardi and the School of Illumination, pp.
103–105.
 205. Cf. also Hikmat al-ishraq, p. 111 and Partawnama, ed. and tr. Hossein
Ziai as The Book of Radiance (Costa Mesa, CA: 1998), p. 39 where
Suhrawardi says that ‘any thing whose essence is absent from you, so
you cannot perceive its essence, then you cannot [also] perceive its
form.’
 206. Wittgenstein’s remarks on ‘pain language’ have led to the notorious
‘private language argument’ debate. The debate itself does not concern
us here. It should be mentioned, however, that Wittgenstein’s rejection
of a private language knowable only to its speaker was an attack on
Cartesian dualism on the one hand, and a reaffirmation of the primacy
of language-games, on the other. On both ends, Wittgenstein’s main
concern is to show that even sense experience as our ‘primitive’ and
natural encounter with the world is shaped by the rules of language.
Accordingly, language is constitutive, not a mere instrument, of
sensations. That is why Wittgenstein rejects the proposition ‘Sensations
are private’ (Philosophical Investigations, par. 248) and insists that ‘only
of what behaves like a human being can one say that it has pains’
(Philosophical Investigations, par. 283). If there is no such thing as a
private language, then there is no such thing as private sensation either.
 207. ‘In what sense are my sensations private?—Well, only I can know
whether I am really in pain; another person can only surmise it.—In one
way this is wrong, and in another nonsense. If we are using the word ‘to
know’ as it is normally used (and how else are we to use it?), then other
people very often know when I am in pain.—Yes, but all the same not
with the certainty with which I know it myself!—It can’t be said of me
at all (except perhaps as a joke) that I know I am in pain. What is it
supposed to mean—except perhaps that I am in pain?’ Wittgenstein,
Philosophical Investigations, par. 246.
 208. Cf. Mahdi Ha’iri Yazdi, The Principles of Epistemology in Islamic
Philosophy: Knowledge by Presence (Albany: State University of New
York Press, 1992), pp. 61–64.
 209. Commenting on this paragraph, Sabzawari has the following to say: ‘That
is, only through knowledge by presence. And this is possible only when
we have the knowledge of the essence of something and its cause. Thus
man’s knowledge of the reality of existence (haqiqat al-wujud) can
primarily be in his extinction in it (bi’l-fana’ fihi).’ Asfar, I, 3, p. 294,
note 3. It is pertinent here to draw attention to Sabzawari’s use of the
Sufi term fana’, spiritual extinction, to explain the knowledge of
existence through knowledge-by-presence.
 210. The same theme is developed in Sadra’s ‘Awisah, pp. 26–28.
 211. Cf. Shawahid, pp. 242–243.
 212. Asfar, I, 3, p. 469.

--- Sayfa 217 ---
194
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
 213. Kashaniyyah in Majmu‘ah, p. 130.
 214. Asfar, I, 3, p. 451.
 215. For Sadra’s detailed criticism of the representational view of God’s
knowledge and his revision of the views of previous philosophers, see
Asfar, III, 1, pp. 189–237.
 216. Najat, p. 283.
 217. Asfar, III, 1, p. 181. For Sadra’s critique of Suhrawardi’s position, see
Asfar, III, 1, pp. 249–263.
 218. Asfar, III, 1, pp. 180–181.
 219. Asfar, I, 3, pp. 387–395.
 220. Asfar, I, 3, p. 397.
 221. Here I deliberately adopted a literal translation to stress Sadra’s
ontological concern: knowledge ‘happens to someone’ (wuqu‘ al-‘ilm)
rather than is mentally acquired by the knowing subject. This unique
vocabulary, which is at times admittedly difficult to follow, is a result of
Sadra’s relentless effort to ground all knowledge in existence. Cf. also
Sadra’s definition of perception as ‘meeting’ (liqa’) and ‘arrival’ (wusul),
Asfar, I, 3, p. 507.
 222. Asfar, I, 3, p. 317.
 223. Masha‘ir, p. 50.
 224. Asfar, III, 1, pp. 256–261.
 225. Sadra’s use of the word fuqara’, plural of faqir meaning poor and taken
from the Qur’an (35: 15), is not simply for stylistic reasons. It clearly
alludes to a subtle point Sadra wants to bring up within a Sufi context.

--- Sayfa 218 ---
Within the Islamic philosophical tradition, two problems proved
to be the most challenging for Sadra: the critique of essentialism
and the representational theory of knowledge. The ‘polemical’
aspect of Sadra’s thought centers, inter alia, around these two
issues. The ultimate challenge of Sadra’s ‘transcendent wisdom’
is to formulate a being-centered metaphysics and apply it to the
problems of traditional philosophy. The definition of knowledge
as a mode of existence is an important application of this concern
whereby Sadra tries to overcome the dichotomy between the
order of existence and the order of cognition. In contrast to the
subjectivist tendencies of both classical Kalam and modern
rationalism, Sadra begins with existence as his starting point, and
works his way back to the manner in which it unfolds itself in
our knowing processes of sensation, imagination, estimation, and
intellection. The mind as the locus of the intelligibilia and the
world as representation are non-starters for a proper ontological
analysis. The task at hand is to start out with existence and
eventually end with it.
Sadra’s relentless effort to ground all knowledge in existence
and its modalities has led some scholars to make comparisons
between his thought and some trends in modern philosophy.
Heidegger’s revival of the question of existence is the first that
comes to mind. Attempts have been made to bring out the
similarities between Heidegger’s Dasein and Sadra’s wujud.1
Although there are fundamental differences between the two,
III
SADRA’S SYNTHESIS:
KNOWLEDGE AS EXPERIENCE,
KNOWLEDGE AS BEING

--- Sayfa 219 ---
196
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
Heidegger’s attempt to overcome the misdeeds of modern
epistemology, which he attributes to the Cartesian cogito, shares
the main thrust of Sadra’s ambitious project to ground all
cognition in existence. This is predicated upon Sadra’s oft-
repeated premise that it is impossible to know existence from a
purely epistemological point of view, for there is no way we can
stand outside existence to know it ‘objectively.’ Nor can we see
existence and its modalities from the standpoint of a ‘world-less
subject’ who, then, looks at a ‘subject-less world.’2 Although
starting with different premises and arriving at different
conclusions, both Heidegger and Sadra conclude that knowledge
is not the exclusive property of the knower. Knowledge defined
as an ‘effect’ and modality of existence denies any central role
to the knowing subject as the sole locus of intelligibility. Sadra’s
defense of the unification of the intellect and the intelligible is
essentially non-subjectivist in the sense that it places knowledge
not in the internal procedures of the mind but in the interactions
between the knowing subject, the world, and the intelligibilia,
all of which are subsumed under the all-inclusive reality of
existence.
The comparisons between the two philosophers, however, stop
here. Sadra’s analysis of existence is a far cry from the main
thrust of modern philosophy. For one, Sadra’s philosophy is
grounded in a concept of transcendent that retains and expands
the fundamental vision of traditional metaphysics. The knowing
subject or the ‘individual’ never stands out as a major concern
of the traditional philosopher. The individual does not arise as a
proper term of philosophical analysis for it is seen as part of the
larger framework of existence and intelligibility. There is an even
greater contrast between what Sadra means by transcendent and
how it is used in modern philosophy. Sadra defines the
transcendent as that which not only goes beyond the individual
but also reaches out to the Divine. By contrast, a common
tendency in modern philosophy is to see the transcendent as that
which lies beyond the sense-experience of the individual but
which does not involve necessarily any references to the Divine

--- Sayfa 220 ---
SADRA’S SYNTHESIS
197
in the religious and metaphysical sense of the term. The
transcendent can be defined as a system of relations, history,
memory, the hermeneutic circle, and so on, and it will be
perfectly logical to use the term without assigning to it a
religious connotation.3 It goes without saying that Sadra’s use of
the term transcendent is based on both the philosophical and
religious senses of the term. Any comparisons between Sadra
and other philosophers will have to keep these points in mind.
In discussing Sadra’s transcendent metaphysics, two main
issues stand out. The first is the question of mystical knowledge
and the extent to which Sadra’s transcendent wisdom lends
support to mysticism. Sadra’s defense of the unification of the
intellect and the intelligible and a host of other epistemic
concepts which he borrows from Suhrawardi and Ibn al-‘Arabi
make him a good candidate for a mystic. Yet, Sadra was neither
a mere Peripatetic-Illuminationist philosopher nor a Sufi in the
conventional sense of the term. His ‘synthesis’ calls for a
different typology to locate him within the Islamic intellectual
tradition. The second issue is Sadra’s claim to present knowledge
as a way of finding existence. I shall explore Sadra’s idea that
in claiming to know ourselves and other beings, we respond to
something larger than us, and that this larger context is provided
by existence and its various modes of ‘expansion,’ ‘relationality,’
‘flow,’ and ‘self-delimitation.’ A metaphysics that prioritizes
existence over other considerations leads to a concept of the self
situated in a framework of relations. This is contrasted to the
disengaged agent of Cartesian philosophy which is privileged to
see things from the point of view of a ‘world-less subject.’ The
kind of epistemology that Sadra advocates pre-empts such a
possibility, and leads to a notion of the self that is engaged in
the larger context of ontological relations. In Sadra, the ‘self’
never arises as a self-enclosed entity in the first place, and this
makes self-knowledge more than a mere knowledge of the self.
Any discussion of the self already presupposes the existence of
the non-self.

--- Sayfa 221 ---
198
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
3.1. EPISTEMOLOGY SPIRITUALIZED: IS MYSTICAL

 KNOWLEDGE POSSIBLE?
In modern scholarship, Sadra’s concept of transcendent wisdom
has been the subject of two divergent readings.4 The first
considers Sadra a ‘mainstream’ philosopher with interests in Sufi
themes. Those who subscribe to this view focus on the analytical
aspects of Sadra’s thought and present him as an Illuminationist-
Peripatetic thinker. Much of Sadra’s elaborate discussions of
such traditional subjects as existence, essence, substance,
accident and causality are seen as original yet eventually
Peripatetic deliberations.5 This line of interpretation is tenable
only to a certain extent and can be defended only when we
confine Sadra’s thought to the dense analyses of the Asfar. While
the Asfar itself contains many passages that easily place Sadra
within the ranks of Muslim mystics, his other works reveal him
even more as a man in search of mystical knowledge. In the
introduction to his al-Mabda’ wa’l-ma‘ad, Sadra says that he
wrote the Asfar with the ‘people of philosophical investigation’
(arbab al-nazar) in mind.6 In the Kasr asnam al-jahiliyyah, he
launches a virulent attack on what he considers to be ‘pretentious
mystics (‘ammat al-mutasawwifah) and ordinary preachers’
(‘awamm al-wu‘‘az)7 while distinguishing them from the
‘community of God and people of the heart.’8 Therefore, it is not
surprising that many of Sadra’s works contain clearly Sufi
references when Sadra is talking about such overtly religious
issues as the purification of the soul, spiritual wayfaring,
resurrection, the hereafter, and the ways of knowing God.9
The second line of interpretation treats Sadra as a straight Sufi
thinker and ‘gnostic’ (‘arif). Those on this camp adduce as
evidence Sadra’s passionate endorsement of Ibn al-‘Arabi on all
of the key points of philosophy and his use of a distinctively Sufi
vocabulary when talking about intuitive knowledge.10 Sadra is
fond of bringing up various Sufi themes in the middle of a
straightforward philosophical discussion, and does it with
considerable frequency. Furthremore, Sadra’s works contain

--- Sayfa 222 ---
SADRA’S SYNTHESIS
199
numerous references to practically all the major figures of
classical Sufism including Bayazid Bastami, Junayd al-Baghdadi,
Abu Mansur al-Hallaj, Abu Talib al-Makki, Ghazali, Abu Sa’id
Abi’l-Khayr, Farid al-Din ‘Attar, Abu Hafs ‘Umar Suhrawardi,
Ibn al-Farid, Jalal al-Din al-Rumi, Ibn al-‘Arabi, Sadr al-Din
al-Qunawi, Dawud al-Qaysari and Mahmud Shabistari. One can
also mention the occasional use of Arabic and Persian mystical
poetry in Sadra’s Arabic writings as well as his diwan of poetry
in Persian.11 While these references point to Sadra’s strong
predilections toward Sufism, in the final analysis they are not
sufficient to declare him a purely Sufi writer. The analytical
aspect of his thought is too strong and ubiquitous to brush
aside.
One can say that both views offer valuable possibilities for an
engaged reading of Sadra. Yet they fail to bring out the ‘synthetic’
nature of his thought and overlook his unrelenting effort to
dovetail the various strands of classical Islamic thought. While
Sadra cannot be considered a mainstream Peripatetic like al-
Farabi or Ibn Sina for his transcendent wisdom claims to
overcome both the Peripatetic and Illuminationist metaphysics,
he cannot be regarded a Sufi either in the traditional sense of the
term. His works not only contain elements that are clearly
Avicennan but also disagree with certain views that are
traditionally associated with classical Sufism. Furthermore,
neither Sadra’s autobiography nor the available hagiographical
sources indicate that Sadra was initiated into Sufism. Nor do we
have any indication in Sadra’s works that he advocated following
a particular Sufi order (tariqah) as a condition or end-result of
his transcendent wisdom. Even his discussion of nubuwwah,
imamah and shuyukhah as the three stages of the ‘great, middle
and lesser guidance’ (riyasah) falls short of pointing toward any
formal attachment.12
This disparity between philosophical and practical Sufism
appears to be in tandem with the Safavid context in which Sadra
lived and composed his works. It is during this period that we
see the rise of a new distinction between ‘theoretical wisdom’

--- Sayfa 223 ---
200
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
(‘irfan nazari) and ‘practical wisdom’ (‘irfan ‘amali)—a
distinction that will be the hallmark of philosophical thought in
Persian Islam to this day. This interesting distinction can be
attributed to the Shiitization (tashayyu‘) of Persia at the hands
of the Safavids on the one hand, and the peculiar and somewhat
uneasy relationship between Sufism and (Safavid) Shiism, on the
other. The Safavids’ conscious effort to make Persia a ‘Shiite
land,’ which began after the second half of the sixteenth century
and reached a peak in the seventeenth century, resulted in the
diminishing presence of Sunni scholars, philosophers and Sufi
orders in the predominantly Shiite-Persian territories. While such
common Sufi themes as the purification of the soul and the
default nobility of an ascetic life found their way into the works
of many Persian-speaking philosophers, an important outcome
of the official wedding between the Safavid power and the
Twelve Imam Shi’ism was the eastward migration of major Sufi
orders to India. Given the deliberate efforts of the Safavids to
consolidate their rule as a Shiite power against their archrival
the Sunni Ottomans, it was only a matter of time before the
Sunni Sufi orders diminished in power and population as they
were the only organized network of Sunni Islam in Persia in the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.13
The critical attitude of some Shiite scholars toward a number
of Sufi ideas and practices seems to have contributed to the
interpretation of Sufi orders as deviations from what we might
call a typically Shiite spirituality centered around a passionate
devotion to the Family of the Prophet (ahl al-bayt) and the
twelve Imams. This peculiar aspect of Shiite spirituality appears
to have left little or no space for traditional Sufism that preached
a different kind of spiritual allegiance and which could be seen
as rivalling the centrality of Shiite Imams. Even in cases where
established Sufi organizations were accepted by Shiite
communities, they had to take on a Shiite color by incorporating
such elements of Shiism as Shiite hadith, the twelve Imams and
their spiritual-esoteric function. During and after the seventeenth
century, the Sunni Sufi orders diminished in number and

--- Sayfa 224 ---
SADRA’S SYNTHESIS
201
influence in Safavid Persia, and the distinction between
theoretical and practical wisdom, which we do not find anywhere
else in the Islamic world, became further established.
Sadra’s career paralleled another important development in
Safavid Persia: the rise of the Akhbari-Usuli bifurcation in
Shiism. The Akhbaris, spearheaded by Mulla Muhammad Amin
ibn Muhammad Sharif of Astarabad (d.1623–4), rejected all
sources of knowledge other than what has been transmitted from
the revelation, i.e., the Qur’an, and the traditions of the Prophet
and the Shiite Imams. For them, the role of the ‘ulama’ was to
interpret these established texts according to their internal logic
and literal meaning. Even ijtihad as understood by the fuqaha’
was redundant as they claimed to add something to the sources
that was not in them. This line of thinking led the Akhbaris to
reject speculative philosophy, metaphysics, and much of Sufism.
To prove that akhbar, i.e., the reports of the previous imams and
scholars were enough a foundation for interpreting religion, the
famous Akhbari scholar Muhammad Baqir Majlisi wrote his
famous Bihar al-anwar—a monumental work collecting in 176
volumes all of the available reports transmitted from the Shiite
Imams and other Shiite ‘ulama.’
The robust anti-intellectualism of the Akhbaris, which is
comparable to some of the ahl al-hadith, however, does not seem
to have deterred either Sadra or his mentor Mir Damad from
undertaking a serious study of theology, philosophy, mysticism.
Sadra’s attack on the pseudo-Sufis in his Kasr asnam al-
jahiliyyah is as much directed at what he considered to be
pretentious ascetics as at the self-proclaimed pietism of the
Akhbaris. Furthermore, Sadra was openly critical of the strict
literalism of certain Hanbali scholars,14 and this can be seen as
an indirect reference to the Akhbaris of the time with whom
Sadra had obvious differences. Even though by the end of the
eighteenth century the Usulis had re-established themselves,
thanks to the work of Aqa Muhammad Bihbahani, and certain
Sufi orders come back to Persia, the primary interest of the great
majority of Shiite intelligentsia remained confined to ‘theoretical

--- Sayfa 225 ---
202
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
wisdom.’ It is fair to say that the situation has not changed in
any substantial way in the Persian speaking world of philosophy
today.15
This short background may help us understand the absence of
institutional or ‘practical’ Sufism in Sadra and his likes during
the Safavid period. None of the above, however, is sufficient for
us to write off the claim of mysticism in Sadra’s thought. This
is not only because Sadra’s strong predilection toward Sufi
metaphysics cannot be explained simply in terms of Safavid or
Shiite history but also because Sadra’s concept of existence and
knowledge leads to a mode of thinking that is bound to be
mystical. As I shall argue below, philosophical mysticism flows
naturally and almost necessarily from Sadra’s carefully
articulated deliberations on existence and knowledge. This is
where Sadra’s thought is closely linked to both the Sufism of Ibn
al-‘Arabi and the mystical-Neoplatonic tendencies of Ibn Sina
and Suhrawardi.
Before going any further, however, a word must be said about
mysticism itself. The difficulties involved in any definition of
mysticism require little explanation. In a broad sense, mysticism
includes a wide range of ideas and practices from an ascetic life
and supplications to miracles, metaphysics, and intuitive
knowledge. It is commonly contrasted to what Russell has called
the ‘scientific impulse,’ and presented by its critics as a form of
poetic imagination devoid of cognitive content.16 It is also
described as a closed system not available to the non-initiate.
The kind of mysticism that we find in Sadra does not exactly
correspond to any of these definitions. Nor can Sadra be
considered a mystic like a Shankaracharya, Hallaj or St. Francis
of Asisi. His mode of thinking is ‘philosophical mysticism’:
mysticism as a mode of cognition and pure consciousness, as a
way of overcoming the subject-object bifurcation, and finally
finding the Divine in the order of existence through intuitive
knowledge.
There is a sense in which we can say that the kind of
mysticism we find in Sadra is a logical extension of the ‘rational

--- Sayfa 226 ---
SADRA’S SYNTHESIS
203
mysticism’ of al-Farabi and Ibn Sina. Recognizing the possibility
of obtaining knowledge through means other than rational
procedures and sense data, the Muslim Peripatetics had admitted
that knowledge gained from a source outside the individual is a
first step toward accepting a notion of knowledge broad enough
to recognize mystical knowledge as a valid epistemic claim. The
critical philosopher may disagree with the content of such
claims. In fact, the skeptical philosopher may reject the mystic’s
claim to knowledge on account of two main objections: first, the
impossibility of gaining knowledge from any source(s) outside
reason and experience and second, the impossibility of proving
the validity of intuitive knowledge through rational demonstration
(burhan).
At any rate, the role of mystical experience in the mystic’s
attempt to make an epistemic claim works in a way similar to
the indispensable function of the active intellect as a condition
of gaining knowledge. In this regard, Ibn Sina’s working
principle that knowledge is based on syllogism on the one hand,
and some incorrigible and universal principles that can be neither
constructed rationally nor derived from experience on the other,
makes the appellation ‘rationalist’ a tenuous one for most
Muslim philosophers.17 In fact, Ibn Sina attempts to construct a
theory of mystical knowledge in a famous section of the Isharat
called Maqamat al-‘arifin where he explores and eventually
approves of the legitimacy of the mystics’ claim to veritable
knowledge. Here Ibn Sina presents himself as a philosopher who
can perfectly understand, appreciate, and give a ‘demonstrative’
account of what the mystic claims to have as veritable knowledge.
As he puts it, the ‘mystics’ (‘arifin) have ‘some exterior states
(umur zahirah) denied by those who deny them but praised by
those who really know them.’18 The crucial point is that Ibn
Sina’s overwhelmingly positive attitude is extended to mysticism
not merely as asceticism and devotion but as a mode of
knowledge.
The central role played by the active intellect in Peripatetic
epistemology opens up further avenues for ‘intellectual

--- Sayfa 227 ---
204
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
mysticism,’ and Sadra makes full use of it in his more mystical
expositions. As a principle of intellection that remains outside
the knowing subject, the active intellect, and conjunction with
it, confirms the possibility of obtaining knowledge from a supra-
rational and supra-individual source. The active intellect’s
intervention into the process of knowledge as a principle of
cognition external to the mind prevents intellection from
becoming an internal procedure of the mind. It is not hard to see
the underlying link between this delineation of the active intellect
and Sadra’s more elaborate language of presence, unveiling,
illumination and intuition. It will be wrong, however, to think of
the active intellect only in terms of epistemology. As I have
discussed in Chapter II, Sadra places the active intellect within
the domain of metaphysics and does not shy away from assigning
a clearly mystical and even ecstatic function to it. This is borne
out by the fact that Sadra joins al-Farabi in associating the active
intellect with the Archangel Gabriel called with various names
including the ‘rays, lights, and effects’ of the Divine Essence
(al-dhat al-ilahiyyah).19 In short, the function of the active
intellect as a principle of metaphysics and a condition of
knowledge provides a basis for making a cogent case for intuitive
knowledge.
Finally, we should briefly touch upon the place of revelation
(wahy) in Sadra’s epistemology. If the mystic can demonstrate
that there is a kind of knowledge that falls outside the limited
scope of reason and sense-data and that he can verify the content
of such knowledge through rational analysis (burhan), then he
will be on a safer ground. As we have seen before, Sadra presents
numerous arguments to establish this very point. Now, the case
for a mystical theory of knowledge has a better chance of success
in a theistic context because the tenets of a religion contained in
revelation already go beyond the limited scope of reason and
experience. If there is one valid form of knowledge outside
reason and sense-data already established through the Divine
word, why not another one? While Sadra holds fast to the
categorical distinction between revelation (wahy) and inspiration

--- Sayfa 228 ---
SADRA’S SYNTHESIS
205
(ilham), he is aware of the implications of revealed knowledge
for the validity of non-rational forms of knowledge. As a Muslim
philosopher, he could not have remained indifferent to the
epistemic challenge of revelation to philosophy. Unlike the
Farabian attempt to humanize the process of revealed knowledge,
Sadra takes revelation to be a special case of knowledge to be
understood in its own terms. This, of course, is not without
consequences for inspirational or intuitive knowledge. That is
why Sadra sees God as the true founder of the science of
metaphysics: ‘This science is nobler than it can be established
by a human because God has established it through revelation
and inspiration given to the prophets—peace be upon them—,
and the previous philosophers have taken the principles of this
science from the niche of prophecy (mishkat al-nubuwwah).’20
In short, the foundation of metaphysics is neither reason nor even
intuition but revelation and what the prophets and philosophers
have deduced from it.21
With the exception of revelation that stands on its own as a
special kind of knowledge, there is an element of Platonic
intellectualism in all of the above. Once we accept Plato’s basic
insight that the true knowledge of things lies outside and above
them, it becomes logical to say that knowledge is not only
constructed but also received and discovered. This provides an
important raison d’etre for non-rational and non-discursive
forms of knowledge in Islamic philosophy. All that a philosopher
like Sadra needs to do is to take the next step and declare the
source of this special kind of knowledge, i.e., mystical vision
and experience to be more real and reliable than what is available
to us through rational analysis and sense data. Both the
intelligibilia and the sensibilia bring us to the threshold of non-
rational knowledge in that they are ultimately based on some
kind of an intuition which makes both rational and empirical
knowledge adequate for our cognitive dealings with the world.
This ‘rational’ explanation for the veracity of mystical
knowledge, however, does not nullify the fact that a mystic’s
claim to a particular form of knowledge can be contested on

--- Sayfa 229 ---
206
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
various grounds. The differences among the Sufis themselves
regarding epistemic claims are notorious. One such celebrated
case is Ahmad Sirkhindi’s rejection of wahdat al-wujud as a
lower state of the understanding of tawhid and his proposal to
correct it with wahdat al-shuhud. Among the philosophers who
claim to base the principles of their central teachings on some
sort of a mystical experience and intuition, one particularly
revealing case is the contrast between Sadra and Suhrawardi.
Both philosophers work from a similar concept of ‘tasted’ and
‘realized’ knowledge and structure their philosophical conclusions
around similar if not identical experiences of ‘witnessing.’ The
result, however, is two different ontological systems:
Suhrawardian ‘essentialism’ versus Sadrean ‘existentialism.’ So,
there is no question that particular cases of mystical knowledge
based on mystical experience are subject to multiple readings.
That different and even contradictory conclusions can be drawn
from similar or identical experiences, however, does not negate
the legitimacy of mystical knowledge. It simply underscores its
fragile nature when it is articulated into a second-order
proposition. This is where the philosopher with a claim to
mystical experience re-enters the domain of discursive reasoning
and attempts to demonstrate the rational basis of his visions.
Sadra’s claim that ‘knowledge as experience’ cannot be gained
through reason alone but can be explained in terms that are
intelligible to the non-initiate underlies his concern to provide
an intellectual basis for all mystical experiences. Sadra’s oft-
repeated principle that ‘true demonstration (al-burhan al-haqiqi)
does not contradict witnessing based on unveiling (al-shuhud
al-kashfi)’22 underscores an important fault line between mystical
experience and the way it is articulated in philosophical
language.
Now, let us turn to how Sadra makes a case for mystical
experience as a basis for knowledge. In Chapter II, I focused on
the philosophical aspects of Sadra’s epistemology and stated that
Sadra considers representation as a legitimate form of knowledge
only when it applies to second-order conceptualizations. Against

--- Sayfa 230 ---
SADRA’S SYNTHESIS
207
knowledge as representation, he proposes two alternatives:
unification of the intellect and the intelligible, and knowledge-
by-presence. Both views are derivatives of Sadra’s gradational
ontology and culminate in knowledge as a form of witnessing
and unveiling—the two terms of mystical epistemology
employed by Suhrawardi and Ibn al-‘Arabi. When the soul
passes from one state of being to another, say, from sensation to
imagination, it not only acquires a higher epistemic ability to
analyze concepts but also becomes ‘more’ in an existential sense.
By reaching a higher ontological status, the self becomes a
‘simple intellect’ (‘aql basit), and contains in itself ‘all
intelligibles.’
What enables the soul to become a receptive agent of the
intelligible form of things is its isomorphic unity with the
intelligible world. But how does the soul reach this stage? How
can something material and sensate become a container for
something non-material? Sadra’s answer lies in his spiritual
intellectualism, which is summed up in his oft-repeated idea that
the soul is a physical entity in its origination and a spiritual-
intellectual being in its subsistence. Through its trans-substantial
movement, the soul emerges as a material substance and
gradually sheds its qualities of physical existence as it progresses
toward the perception of intelligible forms. The idea that the soul
is material in its origin is pre-Sadrean and goes back to Aristotle.
With Sadra, however, it assumes a far more significant role and
accounts for the soul’s intellectual and spiritual transformation
through knowledge: the more the soul knows, the more intense
and simple it becomes in terms of ontological proximity to the
world of the intelligibilia. Knowledge is a way of participating
in the intelligible world, and for Sadra, this has a transforming
effect on the knower because such a participation or unification
elevates the soul to higher levels of cognition.
This elevation in the hierarchy of existence and intelligibility
is closely related to Sadra’s doctrine of disembodiment
(tajarrud), which I have already analyzed at some length. The
definition of intelligibility as disembodiment entails non-

--- Sayfa 231 ---
208
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
attachment from the material world: the soul becomes a simple
being and finally unites with the active intellect through the
stages of gradation and disembodiment. The key idea here is
‘disengagement’ from the material in the broadest sense of the
term. This not only calls for the unadulterated and uninterrupted
concentration of the mind on the pure intelligibles but also
requires the soul’s detachment from material pleasures that
hinder it from a full-fledged participation in the ‘world of the
sacred.’ When describing the stages of the ‘knowers’ (al-‘arifun),
Ibn Sina stipulates ‘non-attachment’ as a condition of attaining
happiness: ‘If the knowers and those who are above imperfection
shed themselves of the pollution of relation to the body and are
released from preoccupation with it, they will reach the world
of saintliness and happiness, and the highest perfection will be
engrained in them.’23 Not surprisingly, Ibn Sina’s description of
how knowers reach intellectual and spiritual realization is in
perfect harmony with what Muslim mystics will have to say
about the subject. But Sadra takes the step Ibn Sina does not—a
step that establishes realized knowledge as superior to other
forms of cognition. This is where disengagement as a condition
of intelligibility is rendered into a method of spiritual purification.
As Sadra repeatedly states, the meaning of things is revealed to
the knower through his unification with the intelligible world on
the one hand, and with the world of separate spiritual realities
(mujarradat), on the other.24 All this hinges upon releasing
oneself from the limitations of material existence in both the
epistemic and spiritual senses of the term.
By applying this principle to human knowledge, Sadra
establishes a strong link between epistemology and mystical
knowledge: one’s state of spiritual perfection is proportionate to
one’s proximity to the world of the intelligibilia. This is also the
philosopher’s gateway to ‘true happiness.’ Following the
Neoplatonic tradition, Sadra defines detachment from the
material world as a condition and end result of happiness
(sa‘adah). It is to be remembered that happiness is traditionally
contrasted with sensual pleasure and defined as a spiritual state

--- Sayfa 232 ---
SADRA’S SYNTHESIS
209
of consciousness. In Ibn Sina’s terms, ‘the internal pleasures are
higher than those of the senses.’25 The fully realized and virtuous
souls reach a pinnacle in death whereby they leave the body—
their main obstacle to unification with the world of pure
intelligibles and spiritual substances. One’s state of consciousness
and happiness is at its highest after physical death provided that
the soul in question has already reached a state of spiritual and
moral perfection. In Sadra’s words, ‘as long as the soul’s
existence is attached to the body, it cannot reach the perfect
intellective state and cannot exercise power except on the animal
faculties.’26
Now, the word ‘death’ (al-mawt) in this context is to be
understood in both physical and spiritual senses. In the case of
physical death, which applies to all mortal beings, it refers to the
transfer of the soul to the next world in which the soul meets
God, the ultimate source of truth and happiness. In the case of
spiritual death followed by spiritual rebirth, the mystic considers
it to be a possibility ‘here and now.’ Spiritual death is thus
defined as the detachment of the soul from the lower levels of
existence and the carnal desires of the ego. The famous Socratic-
Platonic saying ‘die before you die,’ which is also a saying
attributed to the Prophet of Islam,27 expresses the same idea.
Sadra defines the ‘pleasure of our intellective life’ to be higher
and nobler than other forms of happiness:
Our self-consciousness is more intense when we leave the body
because [at that moment] our presence to ourselves becomes more
complete and firm. Since most people are immersed in their material
bodies and occupied with them, they forget themselves. As God the
Exalted said: ‘They forgot God and God made them forget
themselves’ (Qur’an 59:19). They do not perceive themselves
because of this intense relationship except as mixed with their
bodies. This is so because the conjunction of the soul with the body
and its relation to it is like the conjunction of light with shadow,
torch with smoke, and a person with his image in the mirror (…)

When this relationship between the soul and the body is
terminated and this obstacle disappears, the intelligibles become

--- Sayfa 233 ---
210
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
visible, their consciousness present, their knowledge real (‘aynan),
and [their] perception an intellectual vision (ru’yah ‘aqliyyah). Thus
the pleasure of our intellective life becomes more perfect and nobler
than all other forms of goodness and happiness. You have already
learnt that real pleasure is existence (wujud) and especially
intellective existence due to its detachment from the mixture of non-
existence. This is particularly true for the Real Beloved and the most
perfect Necessary Being for it is the reality of existence that contains
in itself all aspects of existence. Partaking of Its pleasure is the
highest pleasure and repose. In fact, it is the repose in which there
is no worry. Asfar, IV, 2, pp. 124–125
Detachment from the limitations of sensual and material
existence as a condition of happiness is an old idea in classical
philosophy, going back to Plato and other ancient philosophers.
Before Sadra, the Muslim philosophers had considered
intellectual happiness possible only in the absence of material
hindrances. Ibn Sina, for instance, goes so far as to say that
‘every evil results from attachment to matter and non-being.’28
This view, Platonist in spirit, is based on two sets of distinctions:
one between sensation and intellection in epistemology, and the
other between becoming and being in ontology. For Plato, sense
data, reserved for the transient world of becoming, could only
yield opinion (doxa), which is ontologically imperfect and
epistemologically unreliable whereas episteme, the true
knowledge of things, can only be obtained from the world of the
Forms for it has a higher ontological status and warrants
epistemic credibility.29 True and enduring happiness is derived
from knowing these Forms. Furthermore, detachment from the
world of becoming ‘represents a demand for universal rationality’
and elevates the individual to a position of spiritual discernment
higher than one’s limited, often passionate and thus erroneous
point of view. This ‘universal rationality’ is grounded in ‘a world
of immutable norms, which are opposed to the perpetual state of
becoming and changing appetites characteristic of individual,
corporeal life.’30

--- Sayfa 234 ---
SADRA’S SYNTHESIS
211
At this point, the opposite of existence is not non-existence
(‘adam) but becoming, for becoming signifies what is potential,
thus imperfect and incomplete in things. This is a crucial point
for understanding Sadra.31 As the classical philosophers insist,
existence is reality, perfection, existential plenitude, completion,
comprehensiveness, permanence, light, clarity, goodness and
order whereas becoming is imperfection, confusion, cloudiness,
transience and illusion. Sadra sums up this radical distinction by
saying that ‘the good (al-khayr) in things comes from the fact
that they are actual whereas evil (al-sharr) stems from what is
potential. A thing cannot be evil in every respect; otherwise it
would be non-existent. And no being, in so far as it is something
existent, is evil. It becomes evil as a privation of perfection such
as ignorance, or it necessitates its own non-existence in other
things such as oppression (al-zulm).’32
While this axiological description of existence characterizes
a good part of medieval philosophy, it takes on a special meaning
with Sadra. For the mystic of a philosophical bent, the above
qualifiers of existence are not mere reports of metaphysical facts
but rather what Rudolf Otto calls ‘saving actualities.’33 The
mystics’ interest in questions of existence lies in the fact that the
problem of existence is not ‘metaphysics but a doctrine of
salvation.’34 Quoting ‘Ala’ al-Dawlah al-Simnani, one of Ibn al-
‘Arabi’s important commentators, Sadra defines the meaning of
the study of existence not as an investigation of actual substances
and their properties, as Aristotle would say, but as a Divine
theophany (tajalli): ‘The True Existence (al-wujud al-haqq) is
God the Exalted, the absolute existence (al-wujud al-mutlaq) is
His act (fi‘l), and the conditioned existence (al-wujud al-
muqayyad) is His work (athar). And what we mean by the
absolute existence is not existence as a generic abstract term but
expanding existence.’35 Sadra completes Simnani’s statement by
asserting one more time that ‘the first existence that has
emanated [from God] is the expanding absolute existence.’36
Approaching existence and knowledge from such an axiological
point of view, Sadra takes the distinction between being and
becoming to be foundational for his spiritual epistemology and

--- Sayfa 235 ---
212
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
cites Ibn al-‘Arabi’s ‘five Divine presences’ (al-hadarat al-
ilahiyyah al-khamsah) as intermediary stages linking the two
worlds in a hierarchical manner.37
Defined as both intellectual pleasure and spiritual refinement,
happiness rests on an axiology of existence. In Kitab al-millah,
Farabi explains happiness as proximity to the intelligible world.38
Ibn Sina concurs: ‘Happiness cannot be attained except through
perfection in knowledge.’39 Ghazali bases happiness on the
‘noble nature of the intellect,’ reasserting the link between
intelligibility as disembodiment and happiness as spiritual
detachment.40 In his Abkar al-afkar, the theologian Sayf al-Din
al-Amidi (d.1233) defines the end of human life as spiritual
perfection (kamal), and spiritual perfection means the
comprehensive knowledge of the intelligibilia.41 In a similar
vein, the Andalusian mystic and philosopher Ibn Sab‘in (d.1268)
describes the stages of happiness as the ‘taste of wisdom which
is to grasp the realities of things’ at the beginning and ‘the
knowledge of God’ (ma‘rifat Allah) and ‘proximity to the First
Truth’ at the end.42 Perhaps the best example of this approach is
to be found in Abu Bakr al-Razi’s (d.925) famous treatise al-
Sirat al-falsafiyyah in which al-Razi states that ‘the most
virtuous matter for which we were created and towards which
we are moved is not getting bodily pleasures, but the acquisition
of knowledge and the practice of justice; through these two
comes about our deliverance from this world of ours to the world
in which there is neither death nor pain.’43
Sadra joins this tradition by construing happiness within the
context of his gradational ontology. He reaffirms existence as the
source of existential and axiological qualities: existence is what
gives meaning, intelligibility, and order to everything from the
angelic to the mineral world. Happiness as the ‘consciousness of
existence’ (al-shu‘ur bi’l-wujud) is true felicity, for it is found
not in the fleeting reality of becoming but in the permanent
habitat of the intelligibilia. In one of his bold contrasts, Sadra
says that ‘the pleasure of the angels of the spirit in perceiving
the light is above the pleasure of the donkey’s perception of

--- Sayfa 236 ---
SADRA’S SYNTHESIS
213
sexual pleasure and nuts.’44 The soul finds its true identity by
‘shedding’ the imperfections of material existence, i.e., worldly
pleasures, and by becoming a part of the intelligible world. In a
similar way, it comes to know things as they are through their
intelligible forms, which are ontologically more real and
cognitively more reliable than their sensate properties. Knowing
as appropriation and participation in the intelligible world gives
us a mystico-philosophical concept of happiness.
Know that existence is goodness and happiness, and the
consciousness of existence is also goodness and happiness.45 But
existents are of varying degrees in terms of perfection and
imperfection. Whenever existence is more perfect, its detachment
from non-existence is more [real], and happiness in it is more
immediate. And whenever it is imperfect, its mixture with evil and
misfortune is more. Now, the most perfect and noble of all existents
is the First Truth/Reality (al-haqq al-awwal), which is worthy of
[comprehension] first by the separate intellective existents and then
by the souls. The lowest of existents is prime matter, time, and
motion, and then material forms, then natural forms (al-taba‘i), and
then souls…. Since existents are of different degrees, happiness,
which is their perception, also allows different degrees of superiority.
The existence of intellective faculties is thus superior to the
existence of animal faculties of desire and anger…. When our souls
become stronger, terminate their relations with the body, and return
to their true identity and source, they acquire a joy and happiness
incomparable to sensual pleasures. This is so since the cause of this
pleasure [i.e., the consciousness of existence] is the strongest, most
complete and immediate of all joyous pleasures. Asfar, IV, 2, pp.
121–12246
The critical question here is how Sadra makes a transition from
disembodiment as a condition of intelligibility to disembodiment
as a state of spirituality. It is to be noted that non-materiality by
itself is not sufficient for the kind of spirituality Sadra advocates;
otherwise we would have to accept everything immaterial as
spiritual. It does, however, suggest that such beings meet the
initial criterion of spirituality, i.e., the detachment from the

--- Sayfa 237 ---
214
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
limitations of corporeal existence. And yet, this is not enough to
ground spirituality in intelligibility. What is needed is to redefine
intelligibility in terms of onto-spiritual qualities. To do this,
Sadra has to treat the world of the intelligibilia as a domain of
spiritual actualities and construct an ontology of spiritual beings.
This can be done only when we blur the demarcation line
between the ontological and the spiritual and ultimately
overcome it.
This is precisely what Sadra does when he alternates between
the demonstrative language of the Peripatetis, the gnostic
mysticism of Ibn al-‘Arabi, and the various Qur’anic terms.47 As
part of his general epistemology, Sadra repeatedly comes back
to the definition of true knowledge as one obtained through
unveiling (mukashafah), confirmed by revelation (wahy), and
proved through demonstrative arguments (burhan).48 This is
where Sadra parts ways with the Peripatetic tradition: while
disembodiment as a condition of intelligibility carries no spiritual
and mystical overtones in al-Farabi or Ibn Sina, it does become
a cornerstone of Sadra’s claim that true knowledge always points
to perfection of an onto-spiritual kind because the levels of
existence are nothing but stages of spiritual refinement. This is
also in tandem with the Neoplatonic idea of treating the ‘stages
of spiritual progress’ as corresponding to ‘different degrees of
virtue.’49
In one of his personal testimonies, Sadra describes his journey
to certainty as follows:
I used to busy myself with investigation (al-bahth) and repetition,
referring constantly to the study of the books of the philosophers of
theory so much so that I believed that I had gained something. When
my vision began to open a little bit and looked at myself…[and saw
that I was] far from having the knowledge of the truths and the real
truths, which cannot be perceived except through tasting (dhawq)
and consciousness (wijdan). These are explained in the Book [i.e.,
the Qur’an] and the Sunnah concerning the knowledge of God, His
attributes and names, books, prophets, and the knowledge of the soul
and its states in the grave, the resurrection, the reckoning, the scale,

--- Sayfa 238 ---
SADRA’S SYNTHESIS
215
the bridge (al-sirat), and the heaven and hellfire, whose truth cannot
be known except through the teaching of God and cannot be
unveiled except through the light of prophethood and sanctity.
Commentary on the Chapter al-Waqi‘ah, Tafsir, Vol. 7, p. 10
Furthermore, Sadra considers knowledge essential for performing
religious duties as well as for attaining virtues. This is an
important step toward assigning an ethico-spiritual function to
knowledge whereby intellective knowledge becomes a further
step toward spiritual realization. For instance, Sadra says that
‘obedience to God is not complete without knowledge and
knowledge is not attained except through the intellect.’50
Obviously, this is a familiar theme in Islamic history, and one
can cite numerous examples of it. Socrates, for instance, is
reported to have said that ‘all virtues come into being only
through knowledge (ma‘rifah).’51 The proposition is true also
when reversed: knowledge leads to virtue insofar as virtues are
seen as having a cognitive value. Ibn Sina stipulates the
purification of the soul as a condition of attaining knowledge
and defines purification as obtainable by the ‘assiduous
performance of religious duties.’52 This not only assigns
knowledge a religious function but also sees religious duties as
saturated with epistemic value. In a similar vein, Sadra describes
the acquisition of ‘desirable sciences’ (al-‘ulum al-matlubah) as
a conduit for happiness even in the hereafter.53 All these
provisions assign to knowledge not only an epistemic but also
spiritual significance in that knowledge as bliss transforms the
soul and brings it closer to the intelligible-spiritual world.54 The
philosophical justification of this premise therefore lies in the
epistemic process itself: disembodiment as the sine qua non of
intellection denotes the absence of impediments, imperfections,
and darkness whereby the knowing subject is illuminated by a
vision of the intelligible world.
The traditional definition of philosophy as ‘the perfection of
the soul by gaining the knowledge of the reality of things as they
are through investigation and proofs, not through opinion and

--- Sayfa 239 ---
216
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
imitation’ confirms the ethical and spiritual function of
philosophical knowledge.55 As Plato says, the ultimate goal of
philosophy as wisdom is to be theomorphic, i.e., ‘God-like’ (al-
tashabbuh bi’l-bari’ ta‘alah).56 This definition cannot be written
off as turning philosophy into theology. Rather, it should be seen
as challenging philosophy to elevate itself to the level of applied
ethics and wisdom. There is, however, something deeper
involved in asking philosophy to be more than what it is: to
recognize the validity of that which is beyond the purview of
speculative philosophy since, as Sadra explains in his short
autobiography, speculative philosophy by itself will not ‘satisfy
the heart, tranquil the soul, ease the intellect.’57 The ‘Divine
sage’ is the person who sets out on a journey toward God by
climbing the ladder of intellectual and spiritual perfection: ‘The
expansion of the breast is the goal of practical wisdom, and the
light is the goal of theoretical wisdom. The Divine sage (al-
hakim al-ilahi) is the one who combines both and is the true
believer in the language of the Shari‘ah, and this is a great
triumph.’58 Knowledge as a ‘spiritual exercise’59 is a step in the
direction of drawing near unto God because to know the forms
is to know an aspect of the Divine, i.e., ‘what is in God’s
knowledge,’ and thus attain proximity with It:
Every celestial or elemental nature has an intellective substance as
its principle and a substance that changes its existence. The relation
of this intellective substance to these corporeal natures is like the
relation of the perfect to the imperfect and of the principle to the
derivative. God is ever closer to us than anything else, and these
intellective substances are like the lights and rays of the First
Necessary Light for they are the forms of what is in God’s
knowledge. Furthermore, they do not have an independent existence
by themselves; their very essence is related to the Truth. Asfar, I, 3,
pp. 95–96.
The knowledge of existence as a concrete state of consciousness
is attained not in the mind, which perceives only the universals,60
but in the ‘heart’ (al-qalb). This conclusion should not come as

--- Sayfa 240 ---
SADRA’S SYNTHESIS
217
a surprise since the kind of knowledge Sadra has in mind here
is not conceptual knowledge based on universals and categories
but knowledge as unveiling and witnessing. While the mind
perceives forms as universal and abstract concepts, realized
knowledge, which is always singular and concrete, is revealed
in what Sadra calls ‘direct witnessing’ (shuhud ‘ayni),
‘illuminative presence’ (hudur ishraqi), and ‘unveiling’ (kasfh
and mukashafah).61 He further states that ‘the knowledge of
existence can be acquired either by presential witnessing (al-
mushahadah al-huduriyyah) or through rational argumentation
(istidlal) by analyzing its effects and concomitants. The latter,
however, is nothing but flimsy knowledge.’62
In his Commentary on the Usul al-kafi, Sadra refers to the
‘spiritual heart’ (al-qalb al-ma‘nawi) as the intellect.63 He further
says that ‘the noblest part of man is the real heart (al-qalb al-
haqiqi).’64 This terminology of ‘heart-knowledge’ has its roots
in the Islamic sources. Several Qur’anic verses, which Sadra
quotes more than once, refer to the heart as an instrument of
understanding: ‘They have hearts but do not understand with
them; they have eyes but do not see with them’ (Qur’an 7:179);
‘Do not they travel on earth so that they have hearts with which
they intellect? Verily, it is not the eyes that are blind but the
hearts which are in the breast’ (Qur’an 22:46); ‘Do not they
ponder over the Qur’an or are there locks on their hearts?’
(Qur’an 47:24). Following Ibn al-‘Arabi’s concept of the heart
in broad outlines,65 Sadra refers to the heart as ‘the intellective
power, the locus of the perception of the Divine (mash‘ar al-
ilahi), which is the abode of [Divine] signs and inspiration.’66
The heart is thus the depository of the spiritual reality of
existence when the veils of imperfection and ignorance are
removed from it:
…These are the obstacles that prevent the soul from the knowledge
of the reality of things. Otherwise every soul with its natural
disposition is good and capable of knowing the true nature of things
because it is a Divine command (amr) nobler and distinct from all
the other substances of this world. As for the Prophet, peace be upon

--- Sayfa 241 ---
218
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
Him, who said that demonic powers (shayatin) hover over the heart
of the children of Adam [to turn them away from] seeing the angelic
world, it is an allusion to this capacity and to these veils that come
between human souls and the angelic world. When these veils and
impediments are removed from the heart of man, which is his
rational soul,67 the form of the world of Dominion (al-mulk) and
Angelic presence (al-malakut) and the structure of existence, as it
is, become manifest in it. Asfar, IV, 2, p. 139
Sadra’s use of this Qur’anic terminology provides an important
clue for the kind of knowledge obtained through the epistemology
of the heart.68 To state briefly, this knowledge comes in the form
of a ‘descent’ rather than construction and discovery. The heart
does not simply process knowledge but functions as a place of
‘revelation’ or unveiling. This is where the analogy between
heart-knowledge and revelation becomes further accentuated:
revelation is sent down to the heart, not the mind, of the prophet
as the human receptacle of the Divine word. In the case of the
perfect man (al-insan al-kamil), whom we can take as the
penultimate mystic, knowledge as vision becomes so powerful
that ‘when the perfect man looks at this world and sees the
heaven and earth and what is in them, its form becomes manifest
in his heart so much so that even if his sight becomes obscured
he still sees this form fully represented in his imagination and
present in himself in a way that is more complete than the
presence of external forms in his sensation.’69 Obviously, this is
not to suggest that all such knowledge is entitled to be religious
revelation. But the process by which revelation reaches the heart
of the prophet is similar to the way heart-knowledge functions
in the mystic’s claim to have spiritual knowledge. Sadra’s
explanation of the process of revelation is worth quoting in
full:
The reason for the descent of the Word [of God] and the sending of
the Book is that when the spirit of man is disengaged from the body
and goes out of the shackle of the house of its mold and its natural
place, journeying towards its Lord to witness His great signs, and

--- Sayfa 242 ---
SADRA’S SYNTHESIS
219
is cleaned from the dirt of rebellion, material pleasures, desires,
wicked thoughts and attachments, the light of knowledge and faith
in God and His exalted dominion begins to shine for it. When this
light is firmly established and substantiated, it becomes a sacred
substance, which is called the active intellect by the philosopher-
sages in the language of wisdom, and the Holy Spirit in the language
of the Prophetic Law.

Through this intense intellective light the secrets of what is on
earth and heaven begin to shine in it [i.e., the spirit of man]. Then
the truths of things begin to be seen just like the blurred images in
the power of sight begin to be seen clearly through the light of
sensate vision when it is not hindered by a veil. The veil here is an
effect of nature and the dealings of this lower world. This is so
because the hearts and the spirits, by account of their primordial
disposition, are perfectly capable of receiving the light of wisdom
and faith when darkness like disbelief, which corrupts it, does not
overtake it or when a veil such as disobeying [the Divine] and the
like does not cover it. Asfar, III, 2, pp. 24–25
It is not difficult to see what Sadra is seeking to combine here
in one single epistemology: intellectual truth and moral
perfection. The soul’s detachment from corporeal limitations is
both an intellectual and spiritual exercise. It is an intellectual
exercise because, as we discussed before, the highest form of
intelligibility is obtained through the mind’s detachment from
the conditions of corporeality. Yet it is also a spiritual process
because detachment has strongly ethical and religious overtones.
Whether we define spirituality as having a cognitive experience
or posit intellection as an essentially ethico-spiritual undertaking,
the point remains that moral rectitude and spiritual discipline is
a condition of epistemic veracity.70 Sadra’s point is that the
character of our epistemic search has a direct impact on what we
can and cannot find. That is why he gives a long list of
‘intellectual vices’ that include ‘false views and corrupt beliefs…
that plague the soul and torture the heart.’71 In one of his ruthless
attacks on the Mutakallimun, he scolds them for opposing al-
‘urafa’ and says that ‘what they know about the religious
sciences is nothing but issues of controversy. Their goal in

--- Sayfa 243 ---
220
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
knowledge is not the betterment of the soul, refinement of the
inner, and cleansing of the heart.’72 While these remarks concern
the Kalam arguments and reveal Sadra’s overall attitude toward
the Mutakallimun, they also convey something of what Sadra
considers to be the ultimate goal of knowledge.
The four degrees of attaining knowledge complement the
essential unity of the intellectual and the spiritual:
There are four degrees of perfection [in knowing things]: the first
is the refinement of one’s outward state (al-zahir) by following
Divine orders and Prophetic law. The second is the refinement of
one’s inward state (al-batin) and cleaning the heart from dark and
despicable habits and behavior.73 The third is the illumination [of
the soul] by the forms of knowledge and favorable qualities. The
fourth is the [spiritual] extinction (fana’) of the soul from itself and
fixing its gaze (al-nazar) upon contemplating the First Lord and His
Magnificence. This is the end of journeying towards God by
following the path of the soul. After these stages, there are still many
stations (manazil) and degrees (marahil), which are no less than
what one has followed before. But one should prefer to shorten [the
discussion of] what one does not perceive except through witnessing
and presence. This is due to the inability to explain what one does
not comprehend except through light. As for those who have attained
spiritual perfection (al-kamilun), after they have journeyed to God
and reached Him, there are other journeys [for them], some of which
are in the Truth (al-haqq) and some of which are from the Truth but
with the Truth. Shawahid, pp. 207–208.
By assigning to the heart an epistemic function, Sadra attempts
to overcome the dichotomy between rational and mystical types
of knowledge. The goal is to define rational cogitation as a step
toward knowledge as unveiling and witnessing. This is where
Sadra the philosopher meets Sadra the mystic: what the
philosopher establishes through rational proofs does not
contradict what the mystic attains through spiritual realization.
To quote Sadra’s famous phrase: ‘True demonstration does not
contradict witnessing based on unveiling (al-shuhud al-kashfi).’74
The difference between the two modes of knowing is that

--- Sayfa 244 ---
SADRA’S SYNTHESIS
221
whereas rational proofs belong to second-order conceptualization,
witnessing is a first-order experience which the mystic attains
through spiritual realization, purification of the soul,
contemplation and meditation. ‘The difference between the
sciences based on theory and the sciences based on vision,’ says
Sadra, ‘is like the difference between someone who knows the
definition of sweetness and someone who has actually tasted
sweetness; and someone who understands the definition of health
and power and someone who is actually healthy and powerful.’75
Articulating this point further, Sadra introduces three types of
knowers, and his tone turns into one of philosophical mysticism
in no ambiguous terms.
From the point of view of their intellectual potentialities, the
knowers (al-‘ulama’) are of three kinds. The first are those who are
complete in their perfection with their dispositions as in the case of
the detached intellects (al-‘uqul al-mufaraqah). The second (group)
requires perfection but does not need an extraneous element and
agent of perfection from outside as in the case of the celestial souls.
Insofar as their natural disposition is concerned, the souls of the
Prophets, may peace be upon them, belong to this group. After
reaching perfection, however, they usually join the first group. The
third are imperfect in their natural dispositions and need for their
perfection agents from outside themselves such as the dispensation
of Divine books and messengers. Asfar, I, 3, p. 503
In construing knowledge as unveiling and witnessing, Sadra
follows Ibn al-‘Arabi’s celebrated maxim that ‘he who has no
unveiling has no knowledge’ (man la kashfa lahu la ‘ilma
lahu).76 Unveiling as seeing or witnessing is by definition based
on three premises. First of all, it asserts the unique and particular
nature of seeing. As discussed in Chapter II, seeing is a concrete
act of cognition and involves the ‘presence’ of the object seen.
Unveiling connotes a concrete experience of intelligible and
spiritual realities as opposed to the ‘abstract’ nature of knowledge
as representation and mirroring.

--- Sayfa 245 ---
222
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
Secondly, unveiling as the disclosure of existence and
intelligibility presupposes meaning to be a given quality of
things because the mind unveils and discovers meaning inherent
in things by removing the barriers of material embodiment and
ignorance. The mind does not ‘create’ meaning but lets things
manifest themselves and their intrinsic meanings through
presence, illumination, witnessing, and clearing.77 Thirdly,
unveiling as a higher faculty of cognition rests on the knower’s
conscious and volitional act of removing the veils of imperfection
and obscurity. This third condition is predicated upon the
implementation of such spiritual exercises as the purification of
the soul, attainment of virtues, daily prayers, contemplation, and
so on, all of which can easily be quoted from a classical Sufi
manual for the novices, and which underscore Sadra’s Sufi
leanings. This, in turn, transforms the soul of the knower into a
higher state of spiritual consciousness whereby the acts of being,
knowing, and doing good become one. Thus the process of
knowing becomes a process of intellectual and spiritual
perfection. This view is in tandem with Sadra’s concept of the
evolving soul which he construes as undergoing ‘substantial
motion’ at all times from the corporeal to the spiritual.78 This is
how the soul reaches the Angelic World and becomes the cosmos
or what Sadra calls the ‘great man (al-insan al-kabir) in whom
all beings are to be found.’79 This is also how the ‘Divine Gnostic
(al-‘arif al-rabbani)’ becomes ‘effaced in the light of [Divine]
oneness.’80
It must be clear by now that the kind of mystical knowledge
that Sadra advocates rests on the idea of knowing as participation.
Since Sadra is eager to define the world of the intelligibilia in
terms of spiritual substances, the intellect’s participation in the
intelligible world and its eventual unification with it is an
important step toward blurring any clear-cut distinctions
between the intellectual and the spiritual. When the soul as both
intellect and heart attains perfect disembodiment and moral
perfection, it can perceive things by seeing (ibsar), witnessing
(shuhud), unveiling (kashf), and illumination (ishraq and tanwir).

--- Sayfa 246 ---
SADRA’S SYNTHESIS
223
This alternation between the two realms of consciousness is
predicated upon Sadra’s attempt to combine his spiritual ontology
with mystical epistemology.
But what is the precise nature of this mystical knowledge?
Can we define its content? Is it communicable? As it is the case
with all mystical literature, we find no handy answers to these
questions. To begin with the first, we may describe mystical
knowledge as a special kind of knowledge about God. We can
add to this the divine mysteries available only to a select group
of people such as prophets and saints. Defined as such, mystical
knowledge is the knowledge of the mysterious and thus to be
protected against the ignorance of the non-initiate. This makes
mystical knowledge a purely religious act. But, as we have seen
so far, the mystic’s claim to sound knowledge is not limited to
God. It extends to existence, the soul, the cosmos, the hereafter,
and a host of other theological and philosophical issues. That is
why Sadra is never tired of presenting witnessing and unveiling
as the most reliable tools of knowing the reality of things.
We may say that the claim of mysticism is one in which an
attempt is made to formulate a holistic view of reality and a
vision of unity (tawhid) in such a way as to open up a space for
non-discursive forms of knowledge. To the extent to which
mysticism in this general sense is applicable to Sadra, he begins
with knowledge as a ‘report’ about the way things are and ends
in knowledge as experience and participation. In presenting the
heart-intellect as the proper instrument of grasping this holistic
reality, he appeals to both rational and non-rational types of
knowledge. Quoting ‘Ayn al-Qudat Hamadani, the famous Sufi
of the twelfth century, Sadra agrees that ‘reason is a sound scale,
and its judgments are sound and certain containing no
falsehood.’81 Yet, the non-discursive forms of knowing are
accorded a higher epistemic status for it is through them that we
are able to see the whole. Sadra considers the essence of the
mystical understanding of the transcendent unity of existence
(wahdat al-wujud) as a move toward seeing things through the
eyes of unity. To bring this point home, Sadra quotes al-Ghazali

--- Sayfa 247 ---
224
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
this time. ‘The fourth level of Divine unity,’ says Ghazali, ‘is to
see nothing but one in existence.’ But how can one see nothing
but oneness when we continue to see the heavens, the earth, and
all other beings that point to multiplicity rather than unity? The
answer is that ‘this is the penultimate goal of the sciences of
unveiling. Verily, what really exists is only one. The multiplicity
[that you see] in it is only for the one who separates his vision.
But the vision of the unifier (al-muwahhid) is not separated
[from oneness] by the multiplicity of the heaven, the earth, and
other beings. He sees all things as one single thing. But the
secrets of the sciences of unveiling cannot be jotted down in a
book.’82
The goal is not only to attain this vision of oneness but also
to articulate it as a philosophical truth. Sadra presents this as a
prerogative of his ‘transcendent wisdom’ when he says, after
quoting the views of the Sufis on God’s knowledge of things,
that ‘thus we have indeed made their unveiling, based on tasting,
correspond to the principles of demonstration.’83 This articulation
also extends to religious knowledge. In a typical sentence, Sadra
says that ‘the religious law (al-shar‘) combined with reason is
light upon light.’84 He sees no contradiction between physical
analysis which grants us access to the knowledge of existence
as delimited through matter and form, logical analysis which
enables us to know existence through universals, and mystical
knowledge which supplies us with a direct vision and experience
of existence. Lest we think that Sadra is alone in this enterprise,
we should remember that even Ibn Sina ended up admitting the
validity of those who ‘engage in philosophy through tasting’ (ahl
al-hikmat al-dhawqiyyah) in addition to those who ‘engage in
philosophy through research’ (ahl al-hikmat al-bahthiyyah).85
Furthermore, the experiential aspect of illuminative knowledge
brings out the ‘subjective’ element in knowledge—an aspect that
the logician-philosopher dreads as arbitrary, whimsical,
unreliable. It is at this point that mysticism becomes a most
troubling enterprise for the reason-bound philosopher, a kind of
poetical imagination and even sophistry devoid of cognitive

--- Sayfa 248 ---
SADRA’S SYNTHESIS
225
content. While philosophy seeks to account for reality through
clearly defined terms, not through subjective experiences,
mysticism embraces human subjectivity as a sine qua non of the
objective reality of who we are. More importantly, existence
itself, as Sadra relentlessly reminds us, defies any easy
conceptualizations. Ibn al-‘Arabi, who is a major source of
inspiration for Sadra’s philosophical mysticism, asserts that ‘the
reason/intellect is a limitation and it delimits what is at hand in
a single manner. But truth abhors such a delimitation.’86 This is
where the barriers between philosophy, logic, mysticism, heart,
reason, intellect, and emotions are rendered loose. For the
philosopher, this is too high a price to pay. For the mystic, this
is a risk we are bound to take.
Sadra rejects the charges of unintelligibility against mystical
knowledge on several counts. One persistent argument is that the
opponent of illuminative knowledge lacks the epistemic tools to
understand the cognitive content of spiritual experience. The
opponent fails to understand the epistemology of mystical
knowledge for he does not possess the necessary vocabulary.
According to Ibn al-‘Arabi, ‘a person whose reason is sound
(salim), that is, he who is not overcome by any obfuscation
deriving from imagination and reflection, an obfuscation which
would corrupt his consideration’87 would recognize the
plausibility of the mystic’s claim to veritable knowledge even
though he may lack any corresponding experience. This argument
is interesting because, contrary to what we may expect, Sadra is
not arguing for a reciprocal experience in order to understand
the content of mystical experience. All he has to say as a
response to the critic is that he does not operate on a proper
epistemology to make sense of the mystic’s experiential
knowledge. After analyzing the relationship between substance
and accident according to the views of the gnostics (al-‘urafa’),
Sadra makes the following remarks:
You may think that the intentions [arguments] of these great
gnostics, their concepts and symbolic words are devoid of
demonstrative proof (al-burhan) and based on adventures of

--- Sayfa 249 ---
226
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
conjecture or poetic imaginations, from which they are to be exalted.
The inability to apply their arguments to sound and demonstrative
principles and established rules of philosophy is due to the
imperfection of those who discuss their views, their lack of
understanding them, and their weakness to comprehend those
principles. In fact, the degree of their unveiling (mukashafah) is
above the degree of demonstrative proof in expressing certainty (al-
yaqin)…. True demonstration does not contradict witnessing based
on unveiling. If in these matters discussed here there are points that
seem to contradict theoretical philosophy, they are in reality their
outward and visible spirit [in meaning and emanate] from the lights
of prophecy and niche of sanctity that are cognizant of the degrees
of existence and their concomitant qualities. That is why we do not
abstain from explaining them even if those who pretend to be
philosophers (mutafalsifun) and their imitators disdain their
examples. Asfar, I, 2, p. 315
Whether mystical knowledge is communicable or not presents
another set of problems. If mystical knowledge is neither
communicable nor susceptible to public scrutiny, then it should
be discarded as a non-starter for philosophical inquiry.
Furthermore, since mystical knowledge as unveiling is based on
a special kind of experience that cannot be further explained in
terms of another series of experiences, it does not lend itself to
conceptual analysis in the conventional sense of the term. After
all, the gnostic, as Sadra tells us, is not simply after conceptual
knowledge about God. The goal of the ‘gnostic theosopher sages
(al-hukama’ al-muta’allihun al-‘arifun)’ is to witness God’s
beauty and perfection.88 Mystical knowledge as witnessing does
not therefore meet the criteria of philosophical investigation.
Nonetheless, since our knowledge of the world, as Ibn Sina
shows us, is based on non-communicable types of intuitions, i.e.,
primary concepts, which cannot be further explained but must
be taken as the foundation of all explanation, we cannot push the
argument of non-communicability too far.89
But how does the mystic convey his experience? He does this
by employing tropes, allegories, and similes. Here we are
confronted with a perennial dilemma of language-versus-

--- Sayfa 250 ---
SADRA’S SYNTHESIS
227
experience. The dilemma is that mystical knowledge and all
other comparable forms of experiential knowledge are
communicable only as second-order concepts. The mystic can
have a genuine experience. But he cannot present it as an
unmediated state of consciousness. What an interlocutor can
perceive of the mystic’s experience is this mediated form of
thought, which is a kind of public knowledge and no longer the
experience itself. The moment we turn experience into a
statement of any kind, whether poetical, allegorical or didactic,
it loses its immediacy and becomes a conceptual representation.
Given Sadra’s belief that concepts, while indispensable for
organizing human thought, distort reality for reality is always
more than what we can say of it conceptually, we can understand
his relentless effort to give his reasons for going beyond the
merely rational. Yet, this is where the words fail the mystic. This
is also where we run up against the limits of language. Hence
the mystic’s utter disappointment with human language. But this
is a price the mystic should be prepared to pay otherwise he will
have to revert back to the original meaning of the word ‘mystic’
and ‘keep his mouth shut.’
3.2. KNOWLEDGE AS FINDING EXISTENCE
The definition of knowledge as a ‘mode of existence’ (nahw al-
wujud) points to another direction in Sadra’s epistemology. By
casting knowledge in terms of existence and its modalities, Sadra
tries to achieve several goals. The first is to draw out the
implications of a metaphysics based on the centrality of
existence. This makes all philosophical thinking an exercise in
ontology. The second goal is twofold, and it is to overcome the
subjectivist tendencies of the Mutakallimun on the one hand, and
the representational theory of knowledge of Ibn Sina, on the
other.
To begin with the latter, Sadra’s first objection to the Kalam
view of knowledge as a ‘relation’ (idafah) is that it reduces

--- Sayfa 251 ---
228
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
knowledge to a property of the knower.90 Sadra believes that the
Mutakallimun are mistaken in holding that knowledge is ‘a
quality related to the soul (kayfiyyah nafsaniyyah).’91 This
definition goes against Sadra’s concept of knowledge as
unification and participation. Knowledge as relation runs the risk
of depriving intellection of any substantial content because
‘relation lies outside the essence of everything’92 and it is ‘one
of the weakest accidents to exist; in fact, it has no existence in
the external world.’93 Secondly, it assumes a non-cognitive
content for objects of knowledge prior to their intellection by the
mind, which goes against the definition of existence as inherently
intelligible and axiological. As for the representational theory of
knowledge, it not only fails to adequately address such issues as
self-knowledge and God’s knowledge of things but also falls
short of bringing out the existential-spiritual dimension of
knowledge.
Instead of working through the vocabulary of representation,
impression and relation, Sadra defines knowledge as a modality
of existence: ‘Knowledge is a kind of existence. As a matter of
fact, knowledge and existence are one and the same thing.’94 We
have already seen that the essential identity of existence and
knowledge is a logical extension of Sadra’s axiological ontology.
As the source of all valuational terms, existence is consciousness
and intelligibility par excellence. The etymology of the word
wujud provides additional support for this interpretation. The
word wujud comes from the root verb ‘w-j-d’ and means
‘finding’; its fourth form awjada means ‘to be found.’ The
Persian word yaftan, meaning ‘to find,’ is used as a synonym for
wujud.95 In both cases, ‘finding’ implies consciousness and
awareness: one has to have consciousness to be able to find
something. Furthermore, consciousness, in the Husserlian sense
of the term, is always the consciousness of something, and this
entails an ‘openness, directedness to the other, and denial of
self-foundation. In this way consciousness appears to be not pure
interiority, but should be understood as a going-out-of-itself, as
ek-sistence.’96

--- Sayfa 252 ---
SADRA’S SYNTHESIS
229
The word wujud is also related to two other key terms, wajd
and wijdan. Wajd literally means ecstasy and refers to the finding
of the Real (al-haqq). Ibn al-‘Arabi goes so far as to say that ‘in
the view of the Tribe, wujud is finding the Real in ecstasy.’97
Wijdan is a particular case of both finding (wujud) and ecstasy
(wajd) in that it refers to the ‘unexpected occurrence of God’ and
His manifestations.98 While wijdan signifies knowledge and
consciousness, the plural wijdaniyyat refers to the soul and its
internal faculties (al-quwwah al-batinah) when the soul attains
the state of the pure intellect.99 There is also the word ijad, God’s
bestowal of existence upon contingent beings, which entails the
idea that things cannot be devoid of meaning because they have
been created by an intelligent agent for a purpose. This is where
Sadra unites the argument of ‘what-ness’ (ma-huwa) with the
argument of ‘why-ness’ (lima-huwa) because to be able to say
properly what a thing is, is to say why it is and acknowledge its
source.100 The unassailable relationship between the existence
and meaning of something is established by the intrinsically
intelligible reality of existence.
While the identification of existence and consciousness plays
a central role in Sadra’s cosmology, it also leads him to develop
what we might call a doctrine of ontological vitalism. In this
view, all things including inanimate objects have some degree
of consciousness by virtue of the fact that they exist. Not to be
confused with a Bergsonian élan vital, attributing some kind of
life and consciousness to the entire cosmos including inanimate
objects is an old idea in cosmological thinking.101 In Sadra, the
issue is thoroughly ontological, and rests on a simple syllogism:
existence entails consciousness; existents partake of some aspect
of existence; therefore all things have some degree of life and
consciousness. As he puts it, ‘whatever is established in existence
is capable of being intelligible even potentially,’102 Sadra believes
that existence and knowledge penetrate the whole scale of being
but ‘the majority of intelligent people are incapable of
understanding the penetration of knowledge, power, and volition
in all things including stones and inanimate objects just like the

--- Sayfa 253 ---
230
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
penetration of existence in them.’103 Just as individual existents
partake of existence in differing degrees of existentiation, their
degree of vitality and intelligence depends on their ontological
intensity. In short, the more ‘beingful’ a thing is, the more life
and consciousness it has. The entire cosmos is alive and has
awareness, Sadra insists, but each individual being participates
in this cosmic vitality at different levels. Thus ‘the intellect in
man is different from the intellect in other living beings.’104
Everything is interrelated through the penetration and expansion
of existence: ‘The abode of existence is one, and the whole
universe is a big living being. Its dimensions are conjoined with
one another but not in the sense of the conjunction of
measurement and the unification of surfaces and environs.
Rather, what is meant is that each degree of existential perfection
must be adjacent to a degree that befits it in (a similar) existential
perfection.’105
In a section of the Asfar entitled ‘Of the proof that all things
are in love with God the Exalted, yearn for meeting Him, and
how they reach the abode of His munificence,’ Sadra expands
on the ontological vitalism of things and ties it with cosmological
love. Love here refers to the innate tendency of things to reach
their natural perfection. This perfection changes in every being
depending on their mode and state of existence. Yet, the essential
trait of love and yearning for perfection remains unchanged
because ‘no caused being can subsist except through its cause,
for it is its perfection and completion.’106 In the hierarchical order
of things, all things yearn for their perfection which functions as
their perfect form and final telos. This hierarchy of ‘gradual
completion’ underlies the cosmological journey of all beings
from stones and animals to separate intellects and angels. Thus
‘the hylé is completed through its form, the form through its
forming agent (musawwir), the sense through the soul, the soul
through the intellect, and the intellect subsists through the
Necessary Being.’ In Sadra’s words, ‘love (al-‘ishq) penetrates
all beings’ because

--- Sayfa 254 ---
SADRA’S SYNTHESIS
231
life penetrates all beings due to the penetration of existence in them.
We have also stated before that existence as a single reality is the
same as knowledge, power and life. An existing being cannot be
conceived without the nature of existence in a general way. By the
same token, an existing being cannot be thought of as having no
knowledge and action, and whatever knows and does, regardless of
how, has life. In conclusion, according to the sages (al-‘urafa’)
everything is alive. But when the majority of people look at an
animal, all they see is nothing but its external senses and its
volitional movement from one place to another. Asfar, III, 2, p.
150
There is a clearly religious component in assigning life to all
things. The Qur’an (17: 44) describes the world of nature in
vitalistic terms when, for instance, it refers to ‘what is in heavens
and earth’ as praising God and prostrating before Him. Referring
to this, Sadra says that ‘in our view, existence in a general sense
is identical with knowledge and consciousness in a general way.
Because of this, the Divine Gnostics hold that all beings are
cognizant of their Lord and prostrate before Him.’107 In
responding to a question about how animals and plants exercise
certain actions and why we do not perceive their consciousness,
Sadra expresses his dissatisfaction with the views of the
‘philosophers of Persia and many of the ancients’ on the issue,
and goes on to say that ‘we argue that all animal, plant and
inanimate natures have knowledge and consciousness by
themselves, through the necessities of their essences, and their
particular effects on account of their partaking of existence
because existence is identical with light and manifestation.
Existence is therefore united with the qualities of the perfection
of existence in knowledge, power, volition, life, and the like.’108
Not surprisingly, Sadra criticizes Suhrawardi for holding that ‘no
corporeal being (al-jism) is alive by itself; every corporeal being
in itself is dead and dark.’109
The upshot of Sadra’s cosmological vitalism is the construction
of life and intelligibility as an effect of existence. In the processes
of knowing through intuition, experience or simple syllogism,

--- Sayfa 255 ---
232
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
we respond to this penetrating aspect of existence and articulate
its various modalities. Existence-qua-existence precedes objects
as well as their meaning-properties. Sadra takes this to mean that
the philosopher has to begin with existence and work his way
back to the various modalities of cognition. This projection is
underlined by the relegation of knowing, one of our prime modes
of interacting with the world, to one of the modalities of
existence. In this framework, every act of knowing is a step
toward disclosing a particular aspect of existence. True, we
create mental depictions of things through abstract and universal
concepts. We may even follow Aristotle’s lead and construe
knowledge as conceiving universal patterns by which the world
is constituted.110 Our primary encounter with the world, however,
is a concrete and particular one, and cannot be reduced to
abstractions. This is so because ‘perception is nothing more than
the soul’s attention to and witnessing of what is perceived. [But]
witnessing takes place not through a universal but a particular
form.’111
In a similar vein, existence defies conceptualization for its
ever-expanding and dynamic act cannot be captured in the
abstract and discursive deliverances of the mind. This is why
‘the concept of existence in things is that it is something that has
existence whereas in itself it is existence itself.’112 As a second-
order statement, I can divide actual entities into essence and
existence, and attribute abstract-universal properties to them. But
existence, as we perceive it through its particular modalities,
does not lend itself to such a schematization because ‘the reality
of existence cannot be obtained in the mind. What obtains in the
mind concerning existence is only a mental consideration [i.e.,
concept], and it is an aspect [of existence] among its aspects.
The true knowledge of existence is based on witnessing and
presence.’113 The danger of mistaking the concept of existence
for its reality is to turn it into an object, and then talk about it
as if it was an object to which various properties can be assigned
a posteriori. For Sadra, this is the fundamental error of

--- Sayfa 256 ---
SADRA’S SYNTHESIS
233
Suhrawardi’s metaphysics of essences as well as the fallacy of
the representational theory of knowledge.
In knowing things, we interact with the world but this
interaction does not begin or end with the mind. Nor can this
experience be relegated to objects-qua-objects. Rather, what we
interact with is the myriad of the modalities, states, degrees, and
relations of existence. In knowing and articulating things through
second-order concepts, we are responding to something that is
not us, viz., our subjective deliberations about the world, but a
realm of existence of which we are a part. It is the all-inclusive
and ‘dynamic’ reality of existence that provides this context for
us. To explain how existence penetrates all things while
remaining the main point of reference in them, Sadra borrows
several key terms from Ibn al-‘Arabi including the ‘flow of
existence’ (sarayan al-wujud),114 ‘expanding existence’ (al-wujud
al-munbasit),115 and the ‘Breath of the Compassionate’ (nafas
al-rahman).116 Each of these designates a particular ‘act’ of
existence and indicates the various modalities and contexts
within which existence as a singular reality comes to be
particular. Its ‘encapsulation’ (shumul) of all things is also a
particular act of existence not to be confused with the generality
of a universal: ‘The existence’s encapsulation of things is not
like the universal’s encapsulation of particulars but through
expansion (inbisat) and flow (sarayan) in the temples of essences
in such a way that no full description of it can be given.’117 That
is why existence cannot be limited to any of its modalities:
It is firmly established that the Necessary Being by itself is
necessary from all points of view. There is no contingency in its
all-inclusive essence. It is found with all beings without any
delimitation and multiplicity. Therefore it is in everything and not
in anything, at every moment and not in time, in every place and in
no place; it is all things and not anyone of them. Asfar, III, 2, p.
332118
At this juncture, Sadra divides existence into three categories:
things either belong to ‘pure existence’ (al-wujud al-sirf),

--- Sayfa 257 ---
234
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
‘attached existence’ (al-wujud al-muta‘alliq), or ‘expanding
existence’ (al-wujud al-munbasit):
There are three levels for things in their existentiation (al-
mawjudiyyah):
The first is the pure existence whose existence is not mixed with
anything else. Existence which is not conditioned by anything is
called by the sages (al-‘urafa’) the Invisible Identity, the Absolute
Invisible, and the Absolute One. It has no name and attribute, and
no knowledge or perception is attached to [i.e., comprehends] it. All
that is attributed to it as name and representation is only a concept
existing in the mind and or estimation…. Things that are attached
to Its Essence are the conditions of Its manifestation, not the causes
of Its existence…

The second level is the existent that is related to other things. It
is conditioned existence with an additional attribute [attached to it],
and qualified by limited conditions such as intellects, souls, celestial
spheres, elements, and other composite beings including man,
animals, trees, inanimate objects and other particular beings. Asfar,
I, 2, p. 327
These two levels of existence pertain to the Absolute Existence,
which is ultimately God and to the world of contingent
substances, respectively. To connect the two levels of reality,
Sadra introduces a third category, the ‘expanding existence,’
which penetrates all existence and makes things what they are
while it itself remaining unchanged and unaffected.
The third level is the absolute expanding existence whose
comprehensiveness (‘umum) is not based on abstract universality
(kulliyyah) but on a different mode. Existence is sheer realization
and actuality whereas a universal (kulli), whether natural or
intellectual, is ambiguous and needs the addition of something to it
for its realization and existence. The unity of expanding existence
is not numerical (‘adadi), which is the beginning of numbers. It is
a reality that expands in the temples (hayakil) of contingent beings
and the tablets of quiddities. It is not confined to a single particular
attribute nor a determinate definition such as eternity and temporal

--- Sayfa 258 ---
SADRA’S SYNTHESIS
235
origination, priority and posterity, perfection and deficiency, cause
and effect, substantiality and accidentality, disembodiment and
corporeality.

Rather, it becomes determined by itself without the addition of
anything else with all of the existential determinations and external
realizations. It is better to say that external realities are generated
from the degrees of its essence and modes of its determinations and
states. It is the principle of the cosmos, the sphere of life, the Throne
of the Merciful, The Real Through Whom Creation Takes Place (al-
haqq al-makhluq bihi)119 in the tradition of the Sufis, and the truth
of all truths. In its very unity, it becomes many with the multiplicity
of existents united with quiddities. Thus it becomes eternal with
eternal, temporally originated with temporally originated, intelligible
with intelligible, and sensible with sensible. In this regard, people
think that it is a universal but it is not. Expressions used to explain
its expansion on the quiddities and its comprehensiveness of
existents are deficient signs [and it cannot be expressed] except
through symbol and similitude. Asfar, I, 2, p. 328
Speaking of accident as that which depends on something else
for its existence, Sadra states that ‘we cannot imagine the
independence of something from existence in its subsistence and
realization.’120 In fact, nothing escapes the penetration of
existence including non-being because existence is the ‘most
comprehensive of all things on account of its inclusiveness and
penetration of the quiddites to the extent that it is even predicated
of the concept of the absolute non-being (al-‘adam al-mutlaq),
addition, potentiality, capacity, poverty, and other concepts of
non-being.’121
This leads us to what we might call a ‘metaphysics of
relations’: everything in its essential constitution is related to the
larger reality of existence. Sadra goes so far as to say that
contingent beings vis-à-vis the Necessary Being are nothing but
‘pure relations’ (rawabit mahdah).122 Sadra’s metaphysics of
relations places meaning within the context of ontological
gradation: things have intelligibility in proportion to their state
of existence. Meaning is revealed within the larger framework
of existence and its modalities. The term ‘relational existence’

--- Sayfa 259 ---
236
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
(al-wujud al-rabiti and al-wujud al-ta‘alluqi) underlies this
point, and refers to existence as particular instances of its self-
delimitation (ta‘ayyun),123 as opposed to ‘absolute existence’
(al-wujud al-mutlaq), which refers to existence-qua-existence
(wujud bima huwa wujud).124 That is why Sadra insists on
determining the ontological status of things as weak or strong,
prior or posterior, actual or potential, and perfect or imperfect to
reveal their meaning and intelligibility. This brings us one more
time to the threshold of defining knowledge as disclosing
existence. In a rather lucid passage, Sadra comments on man’s
place in the universe as an act of disclosure, and knits the
microcosms and the macrocosms into one single whole:
All existence from its highest to the lowest and from its lowest to
the highest is [united] in a single relationship by which some parts
of it are related to some others. Everything is united in spite of their
external diversity. Their unity is not like the conjunction of corporeal
bodies whereby their goals are conjoined and their surfaces linked.
Rather, the whole universe is one single animate being (hayawan
wahid) just like a single soul, and its active potencies are like the
intelligences, the souls and the like as the potencies of a single
soul…man is the last being with which the world of nature is
sealed…in man are gathered the truths of the higher and lower
worlds and it is he who has added to the total truth of the world the
truths of the True One (al-Haqq) from His Names and Attributes
with which man’s great vicegerency in the macro-cosmos is affirmed
after his lesser vicegerency in the world of nature. Asfar, II, 2, pp.
349–350
Rather than being discrete and atomistic units, things, both
animate and inanimate, are linked to the ‘relational existence’ on
the one hand, and to ‘absolute existence,’ on the other. In this
view, the world is no longer an aggregate of individual entities
and a collection of independent objects set against the knowing
subject that presides over them. Rather, these ontological
relations are constitutive of reality itself.125
One important conclusion we can draw from the premise that
the immediate subject of knowledge is ‘relational existence’ is

--- Sayfa 260 ---
SADRA’S SYNTHESIS
237
that meaning is now reconstructed as a ‘state’ that comes about
in the various modalities of existence. When I perceive the tree
in front of me and analyze its properties, I do not simply examine
a physical object but disclose a particular aspect of existence as
it is related to this particular object in the form of relative and
limited existence. The nexus of ontological relations determines
the context within which a particular aspect of existence is
disclosed, and this applies mutadis mutandis to the process of
knowing: the knowing subject does not interact with the world
as a tabula rasa shorn of relations and meanings. Instead, it
encounters a world which is already derivative of relational
existence. While relationality is an essential function of particular
objects, it is also a ubiquitous component of how we perceive
things. Since existence is involved in every act of perception as
expanding, delimited or relational existence, we cannot perceive
particular objects in complete isolation from the sets of relations
within which we find them.
Taken to its logical end, this view breaks down the
conventional barrier between ‘perceiving through particulars’
and ‘thinking through universals.’126 For instance, I cannot think
of a tree as a particular object without knowing what it means
to call something ‘tree’ and ‘particular object.’ By the same
token, I cannot think of particular objects without placing them
within a larger context of relations within which the meaning of
being ‘a particular object’ is obtained. In short, we fall back on
a kind of ‘aporetic ontology’ where we perceive individuals as
individuals and as instances of a whole, i.e., as both a particular
and part of a universal at the same time.127 This lends support to
Sadra’s claim that the world is given to us as initially structured
and saddled with universal patterns, attributes, and relations. In
contrast to the radical distinction between ‘facts’ and ‘values,’ it
is by explicating these structures and relations that the knower
can grasp the reality of things as they are, thus overcoming any
radical boundary between ‘bare facts,’ for which Sadra has no
words in his vocabulary, and meanings. Given the extreme
significance of this metaphysics of relations, we can see why

--- Sayfa 261 ---
238
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
Sadra is never tired of discussing the relationship between
contingent and necessary, lower and higher, body and soul, soul
and the intelligible world, and finally the intelligible world and
God.
We have already seen that sense perception provides us with
the raw material of intelligibility, and the mind peruses the world
through this material. If this is true, then we can not be in a
position to perceive the world as ‘empty,’ or as nothing more that
what Galileo had called ‘primary qualities.’ In contrast to
epistemological subjectivism which holds that all we can know
in sense perception are our own ‘states of mind,’ or ‘ideas’ in the
Lockean sense of the term, Sadra’s epistemological realism
would not allow such a radical cleavage between perception and
reality. Rather, it would argue for what Mandelbaum calls ‘naïve
realism’ which holds that ‘the actual qualities of such [physical]
objects are not different from those which we ascribe to them on
the basis of sense perception.’128 This strongly pre-modern view
is consistent with the view that existence and its particular
modalities are saturated with meaning already before they are
processed in sense perception.
Aristotelian hylomorphism, which was a cornerstone of
medieval realism, lends support to this conclusion. If ‘sensation
is the disengagement of form from matter’129 and form is what
gives meaning and structure to things,130 then some kind of
intelligibility must be operative in sense perception by which we
sense what Locke calls the ‘bare facts’ of the world. It is
impossible to conceive such a thing as ‘pure matter,’ for all
experience is mediated through intellection, memory, recollection,
estimation, and so on. This suggests that the world presents itself
to us through forms that are themselves structures of meaning,
and these structures are first perceived and processed in sense
perception. This is not to suggest that the senses themselves
create meaning; Sadra’s Platonic conceptualism would not allow
that. As Plato argues, ‘perception…can never be the same as
knowledge.’131 The senses convey units and packages of meaning
contained in sensible objects without actually knowing them:

--- Sayfa 262 ---
SADRA’S SYNTHESIS
239
‘All external senses are like a messenger conveying its message
without realizing that it is conveying a message. The sense of
sight carries the message of the form of colors and conveys
them. But it perceives neither the meaning of color nor the fact
that it is conveying it’ (emphasis added).132 Thus it has been said
that ‘whoever has lost sense has lost knowledge.’133
Here we are faced with the biggest challenge of the skeptic:
if the mind can only perceive the universals (i.e., quiddities), and
the senses cannot know what they perceive (i.e., the physical
objects), then how do we know that what we know as the world
in our minds is the same as the world itself? If, as Hume says,
‘nothing can ever be present to the mind but an image or
perception, and…the senses are only the inlets, through which
these images are conveyed, without being able to produce any
immediate intercourse between the mind and the object,’134 then
all the mind can know is itself or its internal states, not the
physical world. Al-Farabi seems to have no qualms about this
when he says that ‘in short, the sensible objects cannot be
known, and the sensibles are parables for what is known’ and ‘a
parable is different from what it is a parable of.’135 If this is the
case, then how can we be sure that what we perceive in sense
perception is not the internal states of our minds but a world
independent of us?
Skepticism had never had a fashionable history in Islam. The
Muslim philosophers hardly took the skeptic’s questions
seriously as meriting much philosophical reflection. Ibn Sina is
known for suggesting to throw the skeptic into the cold waters
of a river to realize his foolishness. Sadra’s advice to the skeptic
is to see a doctor before making more blunders in philosophy.136
Wittgenstein appears to agree in a more moderate voice: ‘A
doubt without an end is not even a doubt.’137 This can be
attributed to the confidence of medieval realism which not only
believed in the reality of a world independent of our minds but
also insisted that the world is essentially intelligible because it
is ultimately derived from existence. This medieval optimism was
also coupled with the religious outlook of Abrahamic monotheism

--- Sayfa 263 ---
240
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
which conceived the world as a teleological work of art by a
benevolent and intelligent artisan.
Having said that, Ibn Sina addresses this very question posed
by the skeptic, and admits the difficulties of overcoming the
difference between what the mind perceives as concept, which
is all it can do, and what the world is like in itself. He begins by
reiterating the commonly accepted view that what is involved in
perception is not the physical object itself but a representation
(tamthil)138 of it in the mind due to the ‘impossibility of the
transposition of [corporeal] natures in and of themselves from
one matter to another.’139 I can perceive a tree only as a
representation, not as an actual physical object inside my mind.
When we say that ‘I have sensed an external object,’ what we
mean is that ‘its form is represented in my sensation.’140 What I
am able to transmit through my senses is not a physical object
but its abstract form. Ibn Sina admits that ‘because of this it is
difficult to affirm the existence of sensate qualities in physical
entities.’ He even cites Democritus and his students who ‘have
not accepted the existence of these qualities’ in physical entities
but, instead, relegated the differences in sense perception to the
differences caused by the ‘shapes’ (ashkal) of atoms.
This suggests that we are trapped in the internal states of our
minds and cannot prove that what we perceive is actually the
world itself, not some stimuli or sense-data caused by it. Ibn
Sina’s answer is short and at first appears to be a badly
formulated one. He works out what appears to be a moderate
version of the causal theory of perception, and says that ‘we
know with certainty’ that different objects cause different
sensations in us. This means that sensate qualities cannot be
attributed only to my sensation of them. Even if we accept
Democritus’ view, we would still be affirming the independent
existence of sensate qualities because we cannot empirically
prove that these ‘shapes,’ which are supposed to account for
different types of sensations such as seeing, smelling and
hearing, are interposed between physical objects and my
perception of them.141 The atomistic view of perception can be

--- Sayfa 264 ---
SADRA’S SYNTHESIS
241
true only for the sense of touching where we touch the different
configurations of the atoms to which Democritus refers. But, as
Ibn Sina warns, the Democritan view cannot be accepted without
reducing ‘all sensation to touching.’142
Ibn Sina does not spend too much time to prove the fallacy
of epistemic subjectivism because he, like Sadra, believes that
there is no such thing as ‘pure experience’ available for sense
perception. Both philosophers implicitly reject the empiricist
myth of the Given that sensation is based on the raw material of
experience unaltered and unaffected by a priori processes of
thought, intellection, ordering, estimation, and so on. The sense-
data that we receive from the external world are not mere
‘impressions’ devoid of contexts of intelligibility. In contrast to
Locke’s ‘simple ideas’143 and Hume’s ‘impressions,’ the sense-
data do not enter the mind as the ‘raw material’ of the world,
which then enables us to form an idea about it. As Kant would
argue through his ‘transcendental deduction,’ these simple ideas
or impressions come to us as structured units about the world
within the coordinates of time and space.144 Kant’s maxim that
‘thoughts without content are empty, intuitions without concepts
are blind’145 stresses the same point: we cannot intend to the
world as ‘pure fact’ through some sort of pure sensation.
Sadra shrugs off the skeptic’s epistemic attack by mobilizing
his Platonic conceptualism. For him, neither our subjectivity
vis-à-vis the world nor the all-inclusive and penetrating reality
of existence would allow the possibility of seeing the world as
a kind of pure sensation in the empiricist sense of the term. The
question of whether we can ever cross the gap between what I
perceive through sense-data and what the world is in and of itself
never arises for him. He insists that ‘the intellective forms of
substances that actually exist in the external world are the very
meanings of these realities and their essences.’146 He goes so far
as to equate the Peripatetic concept of the form (surah) with
existence (wujud), thus overcoming the hylomorphic duality of
matter and form.147 The ‘meaning’ (ma‘na) and ‘sensate
form’ (surah mahsusah) of physical objects cannot then be two

--- Sayfa 265 ---
242
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
separate ontological realities but two different aspects of
corporeal beings insofar as how we perceive them. In short, the
skeptic’s question is an ill-formulated one because sense
perception already takes place within a larger context of relations
and structures of meaning. To explain this, Sadra introduces the
concept of ‘illuminative and perceptual form’ supplied by the
‘giver of forms’ (wahib al-suwar), whose function is to mediate
between the ‘world’ and the ‘mind’:
Sensation (ihsas) comes about through the emanation of an
illuminative and perceptual form from the Giver (al-wahib)148 by
which perception and consciousness are made possible. Therefore it
is sensing (hass) in actuality and sensible in actuality before which
there is neither a sensing nor sensible [object] except potentially. As
for the existence of the form in a particular matter, it is one of the
preparatory conditions (al-mu‘iddat) for the dawn of this form
which is the sensible and the sensor in actuality. The argument for
this form’s being a sense, sensing and sensible is the same as the
argument for the intellective form’s being an intellect, intellector
and intelligible. Asfar, I, 3, p. 317
All of this suggests that we encounter the world as saddled with
meaning already at the level of sense-perception because we
cannot perceive physical objects without their sensate forms, and
these forms are themselves structures of meaning. More
importantly, the difference between the two modes of existence,
sensate-material and intellectual, is not one of category but
degree.149 Sadra quotes an interesting passage from the Theology
of Aristotle, which states that ‘these senses are weak intellects
and these intellects strong senses,’ implying a strict hierarchy in
the faculties of knowledge.150 Sadra employs the Peripatetic
language of ‘capacity’ (isti‘dad) to make his point:
There is no doubt that sense perceptions necessitate the act of sense
organs and the acquisition of sensible forms either in the sense
organs themselves as it is unanimously accepted or in the soul
through their manifestation, which is the right view. This takes place
thanks to the capacity of the matter of sensation. The touching of

--- Sayfa 266 ---
SADRA’S SYNTHESIS
243
our hands, for instance, feels the heat and is affected by it because
of the capacity in it. Sensation takes place in seeing through the
form of what is seen thanks to the capacity in it. Likewise, sound
comes about in the ear thanks to the capacity in it. Sense organs
have nothing but sensation and it is due to the occurrence of the
sensible form in them or in the soul because of their effect. Sense
organs or the sensate soul, insofar as they are sense organs, cannot
know that the sensible has an existence of its own in the external
world. This can only be known through experience. Thus it is the
function of the intellect or the thinking self and not that of sensation
or imagination [to know the independent existence of things outside
the mind]. Asfar, I, 3, p. 498
In this context, every act of knowing calls for a prior grounding
of things in existence, and this leads us to another key aspect of
Sadra’s philosophy. In contrast to Descartes who would place the
mind as ‘a pure substance that thinks’ over against a world of
pure matter, Sadra takes our primary way of interacting with
things as ‘finding existence,’ i.e., disclosing existence in its
various manifestations. Knowing the world as concept or as
experience cannot therefore dodge the question of the penetration
of existence for ‘existence is what constitutes things. If there was
no existence, there would be nothing in the mind or in the
external world.’151 Consequently, Sadra agrees with Dawud al-
Qaysari’s explanation of how existence is related to
knowledge:
The occurrence of knowledge in every knowing subject comes about
only by means of it (i.e., existence). In this, it claims priority over
anything else. Furthermore it is existence which necessitates all
perfection and through which such qualities as life, knowledge, will,
power, hearing, seeing and the like take place. And it is living,
knowing, free in its choice, powerful, hearing and seeing by itself,
not by means of something else. Thus, everything acquires its
perfection through it. Dawud al-Qaysari, Muqaddimat, p. 31
There is nothing revolutionary about the idea that things must
exist in some fashion before we can know them. Making

--- Sayfa 267 ---
244
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
existence a condition of all cognition, however, goes beyond
common sense realism and subsumes all knowledge under
existence, which is what Sadra seeks to achieve. We can state
this point as follows: to grasp the reality of X is to stand in a
certain cognitive relation to the existence of X, which is
ultimately existence particularized in the form of X. Knowledge
is not so much cognition of some kind, although it is that too, as
encounter with existence through witnessing, seeing, unveiling,
and presence. The primacy of existence as developed into an
epistemology prevents Sadra from the danger of forging a
‘subjectivizing ontology,’ and pre-empts the possibility of
positing a disengaged subject that can interact with the world as
a ‘pure substance’ without itself being a part of it. Reversing this
process has been the course of modern philosophy since
Descartes, and has led to what Charles Taylor calls the
‘ontologizing of rational procedure.’ Defining existence in terms
of how we know the world has resulted in an ontology of
subjectivism where ‘…what were seen as the proper procedures
of rational thought were read into the very constitution of the
mind, made part of its very structure.’152 As a result, the attempt
to provide an epistemological ground for ideas without a prior
ontological grounding is bound to result in a philosophy of
subjectivism, which posits the knowing subject as the ‘objectified’
criterion of external reality.153
In conclusion, Sadra’s ambitious attempt to define knowledge
as a mode of existence allows him to place noetics under
ontology and prevents his epistemology from collapsing into a
philosophy of subjectivism. This Sadra achieves by holding fast
to his gradational ontology. Instead of defining existence as
something fused with ‘intelligibility,’ he reverses the picture and
posits the intellect as something filled with ‘existence’ for it is
the all-inclusive reality of existence that generates the world of
corporeal bodies on the one hand, and the world of pure
intelligibles, on the other. When ‘existence reaches the level of
the simple intellect completely disengaged from the world of
physical objects and quantities, it becomes all of the intelligibles

--- Sayfa 268 ---
SADRA’S SYNTHESIS
245
and all things in a way that is superior and nobler than its
previous state.’154 It is this aspect of existence that turns
knowledge into a mode of disclosing existence in its myriad
modalities. This makes knowledge an act of participation rather
than representation, an experience of witnessing rather than
abstraction. And this asserts once more the futility of
epistemology without a proper ontology.
NOTES
 1. See, inter alia, Henry Corbin, Kitab al-masha‘ir/Le Livre des pénétrations
métaphysiques, pp. 62–79; Alparslan Açıkgenç, Being and Existence in
Sadra and Heidegger, (Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia: International Institute
of Islamic Thought and Civilization, 1993); and Toshihiko Izutsu, The
Concept and Reality of Existence (Tokyo: Keio Institute of Cultural and
Linguistic Studies, 1971).
 2. Or what Ernest Gellner calls ‘a transcendental ego that is not in the
world.’ See his Words and Things (Boston: Beacon Press, 1960)
p. 134.
 3. Habermas’ notion of the transcendent as the context of communicative
action is a case in point. See, inter alia, his The Future of Human Nature
(Cambridge, MA: Polity Press, 2003), pp. 10–11. Kant’s ‘transcendental
philosophy’ seeks to secure the non-empirical basis of human knowledge
and thus carries little resemblance to Sadra’s ‘transcendent philosophy’
especially when it is considered with its religious implications. This is
borne out in Kant’s discussion of ‘the idea of a transcendental philosophy’
in his Critique of Pure Reason, tr. F. Max Muller (New York: Anchor
Books, 1966), pp. 1–7. The same holds true for Husserl’s otherwise
profound analyses of the ‘transcendent’ as a framing concept of
phenomenology. See his The Crisis of European Sciences and
Transcendental Phenomenology: An Introduction to Phenomenological
Philosophy, tr. with an introduction by David Carr (Evanston, IL:
Northwestern University Press, 1970).
 4. This is part of a larger debate about how to read Islamic philosophy. The
debate about Ibn Sina and whether he was a loyal Aristotelian, a closet
Platonist or something different from both is well known and requires
little explanation. A similar situation exists in regards to Suhrawardi and
the School of Illumination. In contrast to the ‘gnostic’ readings of Corbin
and Nasr, for instance, Hossein Ziai adopts an analytic approach in his
readings of Suhrawardi. See his Knowledge and Illumination. For a
similar yet more moderate point of view, see Mahdi Aminrazavi,

--- Sayfa 269 ---
246
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
Suhrawardi and the School of Illumination, pp. xvii–xxi and Chapter 4.
John Walbridge concurs with Aminrazavi in broad outlines. See his The
Leaven of the Ancients, Chapter 3.
 5. A good example of the first view is Fazlur Rahman. See his The
Philosophy of Mulla Sadra, pp. 3–7. Oliver Leaman takes a similar
approach in his A Brief Introduction to Islamic Philosophy (Cambridge,
MA: Polity Press, 1999), pp. 96–100.
 6. al-Mabda’ wa’l-ma‘ad, p. 5.
 7. Kasr, p. 44.
 8. Kasr, p. 11.
 9. See, for instance, Sadra’s introduction to the Mazahir, p. 8, where he
mentions God-fearing (taqwa), piety (wara‘), and true asceticism (al-
zuhd al-haqiqi) as conditions for attaining true wisdom, i.e., knowledge
of God. See also his discussion of invocation (dhikr) in Kasr, p. 43.
 10. Seyyed Hossein Nasr is the most prominent defender of the second view.
See his Sadr al-Din al-Shirazi and His Transcendent Theosophy (Tehran,
Iran: Institute for Humanities and Cultural Studies, 1997), pp. 85–97;
‘Mulla Sadra: His Teachings’ in S. H. Nasr and O. Leaman (eds.), History
of Islamic Philosophy, (London/New York: Routledge, 1996) Vol. I, pp.
643–644; ‘Mulla Sadra and the Full Flowering of Prophetic Philosophy’
in his Islamic Philosophy from Its Origin to the Present: Philosophy in
the Land of Prophecy (New York: State University of New York Press,
2006).
 11. Analysis of Sadra’s poetry is beyond the scope of this study. His poems
have been edited first by Seyyed Hossein Nasr in Seh Asl (Tehran, 1961).
Muhammad Khajawi has collected and published more poems of Sadra
in his Majmu‘a-yi ash‘ar (Tehran, 1997). The most complete edition of
Sadra’s poems is Mustafa Faydi’s Mathnawi-yi Mulla Sadra (Qom,
1997). Sadra’s poems combine philosophical, theological and mystical
themes. For an analysis of Sadra’s poem on Ali ibn Abi Talib, for
instance, see Muhammad Ali Amir-Moezzi, ‘Le Combatant du ta’wil. Un
poeme de Molla Sadra sur Ali (Aspects de I’imamologie duodecimaine
IX), in Reason and Inspiration in Islam, ed. Todd Lawson (London: I.
B. Tauris, 2005), pp. 432–454.
 12. Kasr, p. 21.
 13. For more on the intellectual climate of the Safavids, see Said Amir,
Arjomand, The Shadow of God and the Hidden Imam: Religion, Political
Order, and Societal Change in Shi’ite Iran from the Beginning to 1890
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984) and Hamid Dabashi, ‘Mir
Damad and the Founding of the “School of Isfahan”’ in A History of
Islamic Philosophy, Oliver Leaman and Seyyed Hossein Nasr (eds.), Vol.
1, pp. 597–634.

--- Sayfa 270 ---
SADRA’S SYNTHESIS
247
 14. Asfar, I, 2, p. 344 where Sadra groups the Hanbalis together with the
Mujassimah school of Kalam in their falsely literalist interpretation of
the allegorical expressions (mutashabihat) of the Qur’an.
 15. For the Akhbari-Usuli debate, see E. G. Browne, A Literary History of
Persia (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1953), Vol. IV, pp.
374–376; David Morgan, Medieval Persia: 1040–1797 (London and New
York: Longman, 1988), pp. 159–161; Heinz Halm, Shiism (Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press, 1991), pp. 97–103; Kathryn Babayan,
Mystics, Monarchs and Messiahs: Cultural Landscapes of Early Modern
Iran (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2002), pp. 403–412;
and Robert Gleave, Scripturalist Islam: The History and Doctrines of the
Akhbari Shi‘i School (Leiden, Holland: Brill, 2007).
 16. Bertrand Russell, Mysticism and Logic (New York: Doubleday Anchor
Books, 1957), p. 1.
 17. Cf. Goodman, Avicenna, pp. 147–8. One Ibn Sina scholar goes so far as
to claim that ‘…the foundations of Avicenna’s theory of knowledge, like
those of al-Ghazali before him, are rooted in faith rather than in reason,’
which I find to be too simplistic and unsubstantiated. See Sari Nuseibeh,
‘al-‘Aql al-Qudsi: Avicenna’s Subjective Theory of Knowledge,’ Studia
Islamica, LXIX (1989), p. 41. For Ibn Sina’s defense of intuition (hads)
as the foundation of all cognition, see his texts quoted in Gutas, Avicenna
and the Aristotelian Tradition, pp. 161–168. For Sadra’s defense of the
primary intelligibles (al-awwaliyyat) as irreducible to any other concepts
and/or experience, see Asfar, I, 3, pp. 443–445 where he rejects
skepticism as an ‘illness.’
 18. Ibn Sina, Isharat, p. 48. For the English translation of Maqamat al-
‘arifin, see Shams Inati, Ibn Sina and Mysticism: Remarks and
Admonitions (London and New York: Kegan Paul International, 1996),
especially, pp. 81–95. Ibn Sina develops a similar theme in Risalat al-
tayr by using an allegorical language. For the Arabic edition of the text,
see Shokoufeh Taghi, The Two Wings of Wisdom: Mysticism and
Philosophy in the Risalat ut-tair of Ibn Sina (Stockholm: Uppsala
University Library, 2000), pp. 63–69; English translation, pp. 70–74. See
also H. Corbin, Avicenna and the Visionary Recital (New York: Pantheon
Books, 1960).
 19. Asfar, II, 2, p. 204.
 20. Sharh, Vol, I, p. 99. Sadra then adds that Aristotle ‘seems to be’ the first
to found the science of metaphysic with all of its parts.
 21. For an analysis of Sadra as a ‘philosopher of revelation,’ see Christian
Jambet, The Act of Being: The Philosophy of Revelation in Mulla Sadra
(New York: Zone Books, 2006).
 22. Asfar, I, 2, p. 315. In the Kasr, p. 13, Sadra quotes Hallaj’s response to
a question about burhan: ‘It is what descends (waridat) upon the heart
which the souls are incapable of denying.’

--- Sayfa 271 ---
248
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
 23. Ibn Sina, Isharat, Vol. III, pp. 353–354.
 24. Cf. Sadra’s fourfold division of the realms of perception, Asfar, I, 3,
pp. 502–503.
 25. Inati, Ibn Sina and Mysticism, p. 70.
 26. Asfar, IV, 1, p. 139.
 27. Sadra quotes the saying in his commentary on Kulayni’s Usul al-kafi. He
also refers to the spiritual extinction (fana’) and subsistence (baqa’) of
the soul as the last stages of the spiritual path: ‘The last degree of those
who follow the spiritual path is extinction in God by volitional death as
it is said in the saying of the Prophet, may God’s benedictions be upon
Him: ‘Die before you die.’ Then it is subsistence with God and
submerging in the vision of His Essence.’ Usul, p. 458. The idea of
spiritual death and rebirth is clearly formulated in Pheado 67e where
Socrates says that ‘those who go about philosophizing correctly are in
training for death.’ For more on death as a spiritual exercise among the
ancient Greeks, see Hadot, Philosophy as a Way of Life, pp. 93–101.
 28. Ibn Sina, ‘A Treatise on Love.’ tr. Emil L. Fackenheim, Medieval Studies,
Vol. VII (1945), p. 212.
 29. Cf. Nicholas P. White, ‘Plato’s Metaphysical Epistemology’ in The
Cambridge Companion to Plato, ed. Richard Kraut (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1992), p. 284.
 30. Pierre Hadot, Philosophy as a Way of Life, p. 93.
 31. Including Plotinus; cf. The Enneads, VI, 5.2.6–22.
 32. Asfar, I, 3, p. 58.
 33. Rudolph Otto, Mysticism East and West (New York: The Macmillan
Company, 1960), p. 34.
 34. Otto, Mysticism, p. 33.
 35. Asfar, I, 2, p. 330.
 36. Asfar, I, 2, p. 332. Having established God as the True Being, Sadra
quotes three verses, all in Persian, from the three mystical poets of Islam.
He quotes from Farid al-Din ‘Attar, the author of the Conference of the
Birds (Mantiq al-tayr), the following verse: ‘The Lord is one whose
existence is His very Essence/All things are nothing but the book of His
Signs.’ From Firdawsi: ‘The universe is Thy sublimity and humility/I
know not what is Thy being.’ From Rumi: ‘We are non-beings pretending
to be/Thou art the Absolute being appearing as our existence.’
 37. Asfar, I, 3, p. 504.
 38. al-Farabi, Kitab al-millah, ed. Muhsin Mahdi (Beirut, Lebanon: Dar al-
Mashriq, 1991, 2nd edition), p. 52. Cf. also his Tanbih ‘ala sabil al-sa‘adah,
ed. Sahban Khalifah (‘Amman, Jordan: al-Jami‘at al-Urduniyyah, 1987).
 39. Ibn Sina, Isharat, Vol. III, p. 327.
 40. al-Ghazali, The Book of Knowledge, tr. Nabih Amin Faris (New Delhi, India:
International Islamic Publishers, 1988; original edition 1962), p. 221.
 41. Cf. Rosenthal, Classical Heritage, p. 219.

--- Sayfa 272 ---
SADRA’S SYNTHESIS
249
 42. Ibn Sab’in, Budd al-‘arif, ed. George Kattura (Beirut, Lebanon: Dar al-
Andalus and Dar al-Kindi, 1978), pp. 320 and 324.
 43. Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Zakariyya’ al-Razi, The Book of the
Philosophic Life, tr. Charles E. Butterworth, Interpretation, (Spring
1993), Vol. 20, No. 3, p. 229. See also Butterworth’s analysis ‘The
Origins of al-Razi’s Political Philosophy’ following the translation of
al-Razi’s treatise; pp. 237–257.
 44. Asfar, IV, 2, p. 123.
 45. Compare this with the following quote from Dawud al-Qaysari: ‘And it
[i.e., existence] is pure goodness, (khayr mahd). Whatever is good is
good by and through it. And it is the constitutive ground of things in and
of itself. (…) And it is pure light (nur mahd) because it is visible by itself
and makes other things visible. Everything is perceived through it. (…)
All perfection becomes conjoined with things only through the medium
of existence in and of itself. And it is living, self-subsisting, knowing,
willing, and powerful by itself, not by an attribute added to it a
posteriori.’ al-Muqaddimat in al-Rasa’il ed. Mehmet Bayraktar (Kayseri,
Turkey: Kayseri Metropolitan Municipality, 1997), pp. 31 and 39.
 46. See also Shawahid, pp. 258–260.
 47. In the Shawahid, pp. 217–222, Sadra gives an interesting genealogy of
the idea of the disembodiment of the soul and its superiority to the body.
After quoting a number of verses from the Qur’an, traditions of the
Prophet of Islam, and the sayings of Greek and Islamic philosophers, he
ends with several quotes from the Sufis. He presents the quote ‘the Sufi
is with God without time’ as a good explanation for the meaning of
‘disembodiment,’
 48. Cf. Usul, p. 461.
 49. Hadot, Philosophy as a Way of Life, p. 99.
 50. Usul, p. 373.
 51. Kitab al-sa‘adah, p. 412, quoted in Rosenthal, Classical Heritage, p.
202.
 52. Ibn Sina, ‘On the Rational Soul’ in Gutas, Avicenna and the Aristotelian
Tradition, p. 75.
 53. Asfar, IV, 2, p. 138.
 54. Cf. Usul, pp. 383–386.
 55. Asfar, I, 1, p. 20.
 56. Asfar, I, 1, p. 20. Abu Bakr al-Razi defines philosophy in the same way,
which is the aim of his ‘philosophic life’: ‘…This whole speech is what
is meant by the statement of all philosophers: ‘Philosophy is making
oneself similar to God, may He be glorified and magnified, to the extent
possible for a human being.’ And this is the sum of the philosophic life.’
‘The Book of the Philosophic Life,’ p. 234.
 57. Asfar, I, 1, p. 11.
 58. Asfar, IV, 2, p. 140.

--- Sayfa 273 ---
250
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
 59. Hadot, Philosophy as a Way of Life, p. 101.
 60. ‘Every mental form is a universal even if it is particularized through a
thousand particularizations.’ Kashaniyyah in Majmu’ah, p. 128.
 61. Masha‘ir, p. 24. This is what al-Ghazali means by the ‘science of
unveiling’ (‘ilm al-mukashafah). Cf. The Book of Knowledge, p. 223 and
Ma‘arij al-quds, pp. 99–105
 62. Asfar, I, 1, p. 53. This echoes Ibn al-‘Arabi: ‘As for the relation of our
knowledge to God the Exalted, it is of two kinds. Knowledge of the
Divine essence is based on witnessing and vision (ru’yah) but this is not
a comprehensive vision.’ Futuhat, I, p. 217
 63. Usul, p. 357.
 64. Kasr, p. 33.
 65. In the Fusus, Ibn al-‘Arabi devotes a full section to the heart under the
section on Prophet Shu’ayb. See Fusus al-hikam, ed. Nawaf al-Jarrah
(Beirut, Lebanon: Dar Sadir, 2005), pp. 74–79. For the English
translation, see The Ringstones of Wisdom, tr. Caner Dagli (Chicago:
Great Books of the Islamic World, 2004), pp. 125–138. For an analysis
of heart as an epistemic and spiritual faculty in Ibn al-‘Arabi, see James
Winston Morris, The Reflective Heart: Discovering Spiritual Intelligence
in Ibn ‘Arabi’s Meccan Illuminations (Louisville, KY: Fons Vitae, 2005),
pp. 46–100.
 66. Asfar, IV, 2, p. 133. This is very much in line with what Ibn al-‘Arabi
has to say about the relationship between heart and knowledge in
Futuhat, I, p. 137.
 67. Cf. Asfar, IV, 1, p. 137 where Sadra refers to sense organs and faculties
of perception as the ‘soldiers of the heart’ (junud al-qalb).
 68. The notion of heart as a faculty of knowledge is not confined to
philosophers like Sadra. The later Ash‘arites consider the heart in a
similar way. A good example of this is al-‘Iji and his commentator
Taftazani, both of whom define the ‘locus of knowledge’ (mahall al-‘ilm)
as the heart. But unlike Sadra, who assigns a more mystical function to
the heart, Iji and Taftazani base their analysis solely on the Qur’anic
verses mentioned above. See the section called ‘the locus of knowledge
is the heart’ in Sa‘d al-Din al-Taftazani, Sharh al-maqasid, ed. A.
‘Umayra (Beirut: ‘Alam al-Kutub, 1989), Vol. 2, pp. 330–331.
 69. Asfar, III, 2, p. 18.
 70. There is an apparent contradiction here: if being virtuous is a condition
of attaining true knowledge, then how can we be virtuous without
knowledge in the first place? Sadra answers this question by appealing
to degrees and stages of knowledge. See Asfar, IV, 2, p. 231.
 71. Asfar, IV, 2, p. 134.
 72. Asfar, IV, 2, p. 201.
 73. Cf. Asfar, IV, 2, p. 139.
 74. Asfar, I, 2, p. 315.

--- Sayfa 274 ---
SADRA’S SYNTHESIS
251
 75. Commentary on the Chapter al-Waqi‘ah, Tafsir, Vol. 7, p. 10.
 76. ‘Sound knowledge is not given by reflection, nor by what the rational
thinkers establish by means of their reflective powers. Sound knowledge
is only that which God throws into the heart of the knower. It is a divine
light for which God singles out any of His servants whom He will,
whether angel, messenger, prophet, friend, or person of faith. He who
has no unveiling has no knowledge.’ Ibn al-‘Arabi, Futuhat, I, 218, 19,
quoted in Chittick, The Sufi Path of Knowledge, p. 170.
 77. Compare Afdal al-Din Kashani’s remarks: ‘Know that intelligible
meanings endure by their own essences. It is not simply that they have
a joining with the knower’s soul. Rather the knower has a joining with
them. Were they attached to the knower’s soul, no knower would be able
to teach someone what he has come to know, and were he to teach it, his
knowledge would be nullified. It would not be possible for anyone to
reach the meaning and know it; but all this is possible and likely. Hence,
none of the meanings and mental things are joined with and endure with
the knower’s essence. Rather, meanings are realities through their own
essences. This is why they are called ‘meanings’—they are what is
‘wanted’ from and ‘signified’ by the words. In respect of the essences,
they are realities; but in respect of having a relation with the souls, they
are forms.’ Musannafat, 645, quoted in William Chittick, The Heart of
Islamic Philosophy, p. 174.
 78. According to Sadra, Ibn Sina sees the soul as a fixed substance because
he denies ‘transformation (inqilab) in substances, especially in those that
do not have matter.’ See Asfar, I, 3, p. 442. This makes the Avicennan
concept of abstraction even less suitable for explaining how the soul
reaches higher stages of intellectual and moral perfection. Cf. Ittihad in
Majmu‘ah, p. 74. See also Asfar, IV, 1, pp. 135–136 where Sadra
attributes Ibn Sina’s static concept of the soul to his ontology.
 79. Asfar, IV, 1, p. 132.
 80. Asfar, IV, 2, p. 180. In speaking of man as a being destined to become
a pure spiritual substance, Sadra makes profuse use of another typically
Sufi term and refers to the perfect man (al-insan al-kamil) as the epitome
of the mystic’s journey toward God. ‘The vertical ascent towards the
Exalted One does not terminate until [one undertakes] the spiritual
wayfaring (suluk) of the universal man.’ See Asfar, IV, 2, p. 284. On
Sadra’s use of the concept of the perfect man, see also Asfar, II, 1, p.
294; III, 2, pp. 7, 17, 20–21, 32, 40, 103, 181–191; IV, 1, p. 140; and IV,
2, p. 41.
 81. Asfar, I, 2, p. 323 quoting from Hamadani’s Zubdat al-haqa’iq.
 82. Asfar, I, 2, pp. 323–324.
 83. Asfar, III, 1, p. 263.
 84. Usul, p. 438.

--- Sayfa 275 ---
252
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
 85. Ibn Sina, ‘On the Rational Soul’ in Gutas, Avicenna and the Aristotelian
Tradition, pp. 77–78.
 86. Ibn al-‘Arabi, Fusus, p. 76.
 87. Ibn al-‘Arabi, Futuhat, I, 261, quoted in Chittick, The Sufi Path of
Knowledge, p. 169.
 88. Asfar, I, 1, p. 115; Sadra quoting from Shahrazuri’s al-Shajarat al-
ilahiyyah.
 89. Sadra concurs that primary concepts cannot be derived from experience.
As a typical Platonic intellectualist, he defines the sensibilia (al-
mahsusat) as intelligibles in potency. Cf. Shawahid, p. 205.
 90. Cf. Asfar, I, 3, p. 376 where Sadra responds to Fakhr al-Din al-Razi’s
view of ‘knowledge as relation’ (halah idafiyyah).
 91. Asfar, I, 3, p. 311.
 92. Kashaniyyah in Majmu‘ah, pp. 130–131.
 93. Shawahid, p. 243.
 94. Asfar, III, 1, p. 150; also I, 3, p. 291.
 95. Cf. Chittick, The Heart of Islamic Philosophy, pp. 42–43.
 96. Joseph J. Kockelmans, ‘Some Fundamental Themes of Husserl’s
Phenomenology’ in Phenomenology: The Philosophy of Edmund Husserl
and Its Interpretation, edited by Joseph J. Kockelmans (New York;
Anchor Books, 1967), p. 36.
 97. Quoted in Chittick, The Sufi Path of Knowledge, p. 212. See also Sajjad
H. Rizvi, ‘Mysticism and Philosophy: Ibn ‘Arabi and Mulla Sadra’ in
Peter Adamson and Richard Taylor (eds.), The Cambridge Companion
to Arabic Philosophy (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press,
2005), pp. 224–246.
 98. Muhammad ‘Ali ibn Muhammad al-Tahanawi, Kashshaf istilahat al-
funun, (Beirut, Lebanon: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah, 1998), Vol. 4, p.
292. The words ‘existence’ and ‘ecstasy’ in European languages have a
similar etymological history. The Latin existere means to ‘stand out.’ If
existence signifies ‘ek-sistence,’ viz., ‘going out of’ non-existence,
ecstasy signifies going out of one’s ordinary consciousness. Heidegger
takes up this meaning of existence in his Letter on Humanism.
 99. al-Tahanawi, Kashshaf, p. 293.
 100. Sadra’s commentary on the Chapter al-Sajdah in Tafsir, Vol. 6, p. 45.
 101. Aristotle, however, is notoriously opposed to attributing any intelligence to
animals. Cf. De Anima, 404b, 433a and Metaphysics, 980b. For the historical
development of this theme in Western philosophy, see Richard Sorabji,
Animal Minds and Human Morals: The Origins of the Western Debate
(Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1993), especially, pp. 12–16.
 102. Ittihad in Majmu‘ah, p. 71.
 103. Asfar, III, 1, pp. 335–336.
 104. Shawahid, p. 176.
 105. Asfar, II, 2, p. 342.

--- Sayfa 276 ---
SADRA’S SYNTHESIS
253
 106. Asfar, III, 2, p. 149.
 107. Asfar, IV, 1, p. 164.
 108. Kashaniyyah in Majmu’ah, p. 137.
 109. Asfar, IV, 1, p. 26.
 110. Cf. Goodman, Avicenna, p. 136.
 111. Asfar, III, 1, p. 162; also pp. 250–251.
 112. Asfar, I, 1, p. 41.
 113. Asfar, I, 1, p. 61. See also Asfar, I, 1, p. 412–413; I, 3, p. 388; and II, 1,
p. 230.
 114. Cf. Asfar, I, 1, pp. 67, 146, 381 and I, 2, p. 327.
 115. Asfar, I, 2, pp. 328, 331–333 and III, 2, pp. 10–11.
 116. Asfar, 3, II, p. 5; I, 1, p. 47, 164, and 381. The term ‘Breath of the
Compassionate’ has been used by Ibn al-‘Arabi to explain the creation
and subsistence of the universe with God’s ‘breath.’ See, Chittick, The
Sufi Path of Knowledge, pp. 127–130 and The Self-Disclosure of God:
Principles of Ibn al-‘Arabi’s Cosmology (Albany: State University of
New York Press, 1998), pp. 69–70.
 117. Mazahir, pp. 26–27.
 118. Sadra gives a similar endorsement of the transcendent unity of existence
when he says that ‘His ipseity (inniyyah) the Exalted is His essence
(mahiyyah) the Exalted, and His existence the Exalted is the existence
of everything. His existence is the truth of existence without there being
in it any stain of non-existence and multiplicity.’ Mazahir, pp. 24–25.
 119. For this term in Ibn al-‘Arabi, see Chittick, The Sufi Path of Knowledge,
p. 133.
 120. Asfar, I, 1, p. 258.
 121. Asfar, I, 1, p. 260.
 122. Cf. Asfar, I, 3, p. 37 where Sadra discusses the ontological status of
relational beings (al-idafat) as completely dependent upon the Necessary
Being.
 123. Compare Dawud al-Qaysari’s following remarks: ‘Existence, insofar as
it is being, is predicated of all relational beings (al-wujudat al-mudafah)
because we say that: [this particular] being exists. And whatever is
predicated of things has to have a relationship of unity and difference
towards them. In the case of existence [as predicated of things], that
which unites [i.e., the principle of unity] is nothing but existence, and
that which differentiates [i.e., the principle of difference] is again
existence itself.’ Muqaddimat, p. 36.
 124. Cf. Asfar, I, 1, p. 141, 291, 327; I, 3, p. 249; II, 1, p. 217. Dawud al-
Qaysari has the following comment on this aspect of existence: ‘Know
that existence in so far as it is existence, viz., existence-qua-existence
(min haythu huwa) is different from external and mental existence. Each
of these (modes) is a species of it. Therefore existence in so far as it is
existence, namely existence not conditioned by anything (la bi-shart

--- Sayfa 277 ---
254
KNOWLEDGE IN LATER ISLAMIC PHILOSOPHY
shay’) is not limited by absoluteness and delimitation. [In this sense], it
is neither universal nor particular, neither general nor specific, and
neither one with a [numerical] oneness added to its essence [a posteriori
and from outside] nor many. On the contrary, it necessitates these things
[i.e., these qualities] in accordance with its degrees and stages to which
God refers as ‘He is the one who raises the degrees and possesses the
Throne.’ And it becomes absolute, conditioned, universal, particular,
general, specific, one and many without being any change in its essence
and reality.’ Muqaddimat, p. 29.
 125. Cf. Asfar, III, 2, pp. 113–114 where Sadra also provides a short argument
for this world as being the best of all possible worlds.
 126. For a defense of this view, see Brian John Martine, ‘Relations,
Indeterminacy, and Intelligibility’ in R. C. Neville (ed.), New Essays in
Metaphysics (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1987), pp.
237–252. See also his Individuals and Individuality (Albany: State
University of New York Press, 1984).
 127. Booth, Aristotelian Aporetic Ontology, p. 5.
 128. Maurice Mandelbaum, Philosophy, Science, and Sense Perception
(Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins Press, 1966), p. 118.
 129. Shawahid, p. 208.
 130. Cf. Asfar, I, 3, pp. 313–314.
 131. Thaetetus, 184–187.
 132. Kashaniyyah in Majmu‘ah, p. 132. Cf. Avicenna’s Psychology, p. 43
where Ibn Sina expresses the same idea in more economical terms.
 133. Kashaniyyah in Majmu‘ah, p. 134.
 134. Quoted in Mandelbaum, Philosophy, Science, and Sense Perception, p.
124
 135. al-Farabi, Jawabat, p. 104.
 136. Asfar, I, 3, p. 445.
 137. L. Wittgenstein, On Certainty, (New York: Harper Torchbooks, 1969),
Paragraph 625.
 138. Cf. Asfar, I, 3, p. 360.
 139. Asfar, I, 3, p. 316.
 140. Shifa’, Ilahiyyat, p. 62.
 141. This objection has been raised against the causal theory of perception as
defended by Russell and Price. See, Winston Barnes, ‘The Myth of
Sense-Data’ in R. J. Swartz, Perceiving, Sensing, and Knowing (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1965), pp. 143–145.
 142. Shifa’, Ilahiyyat, p. 63.
 143. John Locke, An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, ed. Peter H.
Nidditch (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1975), Book II, Chapter
2, 1–3.
 144. Immanuel Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, tr. Norman Kemp Smith
(London: Macmillan, 1973), Part I, Book I, Chapter II, 22–23. Cf. also

--- Sayfa 278 ---
SADRA’S SYNTHESIS
255
Charles Taylor, Philosophical Arguments, (Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1995), pp. 71–72. This view would later be called
intentionality.
 145. Kant defines intuitions as ‘bits of experiential intake,’ which are our
channels of knowledge to the physical world. In modern philosophy, this
has led to the well-known ‘dualism of scheme and given’ (or content).
Cf. John McDowell, Mind and World (Harvard University Press, 1994),
pp. 4–7.
 146. Asfar, I, 3, p. 306.
 147. Ittihad in Majmu‘ah, p. 90.
 148. al-Wahib refers to wahib al-suwar, the giver of forms, which is ultimately
God and which supplies things with their intelligible forms and
ontological meanings. Cf. Shawahid, p. 242.
 149. Cf. Asfar, I, 3, pp. 298–299. Sadra’s view of the soul as ‘corporeal in its
origination, spiritual in its subsistence’ is in tandem with his attempt to
define material and non-material (i.e., mental) states as modalities of
existence: ‘In its primordial disposition (fitrah), the human soul is at the
penultimate end of the corporeal world in terms of sensate perfection and
at the beginning of the spiritual world in terms of intellective perfection.’
Shawahid, p. 204. Sadra further develops the same theme in Mafatih,
Vol. II, pp. 622–623 and says that ‘the soul of man is like a bridge extended
between the two worlds (of corporeal and spiritual existence).’
 150. Shawahid, p. 167.
 151. Asfar, I, 1, p. 260.
 152. Charles Taylor, Philosophical Arguments, p. 61.
 153. Cf. Guignon, Heidegger and the Problem of Knowledge, p. 58.
 154. Asfar, I, 3, p. 373.

--- Sayfa 279 ---
A Note on Translation
The following translation of Mulla Sadra’s treatise entitled Risalah fi ittihad
al-‘aqil wa’l-ma‘qul is based on Hamid Naji Isfahani’s critical edition
published in Majmu‘a-yi rasa’il-i falsafi-yi Sadr al-muta’allihin (Tehran, Iran:
Intisharat-i Hikmat, ah 1375), pp. 63–103. Nineteen manuscripts of the Risalah
have been found in the libraries of Tehran, Qom, Mashhad, Najaf, and
Hamadan.1 The editor has used the manuscripts found in the Kitabkhana-yi
Markaz-i Danishghah, Kitabkhana-yi Mulk, and the personal libraries of
Quddus Radawi and Ayat Allah Sayyid ‘Izz al-Din Zanjani. In paragraphing
the translation, I followed the Arabic edition. The page numbers in brackets
correspond to Isfahani’s pagination.
[1] Treatise on the Unification of the Intellector2 and the Intellected3
[3] In the Name of God, the Infinitely Good, the All-Merciful
Gratitude is for the Giver of knowledge and wisdom, and benediction is upon
the instrument of generosity and compassion, and upon his family of Imams
who are the treasury of the secrets of the Shari‘ah and religion, and the
protectors of the lights of knowledge and certitude.
After that, this [tract] is a magnificent sign from among the signs of God’s
wisdom and providence, and a perfect pearl from among the ocean of the
jewelry of His generosity and mercy, concerning the critical investigation
(tahqiq) of the question of unity between the intellector and the intelligibilia,
and the question that the active intellect is all existents (mawjudat). These two
noble issues are among the most difficult problems of metaphysics so much so
that they are like the two eyes and two ears through the power of which the
forms of things are seen. Or, they are like two luminous stars by which
everything in the world and the heavens is illuminated. Both of these issues
have been mentioned in the language of some of the ancients (al-mutaqaddimin).
APPENDIX
Treatise on the Unification of the Intellector
and the Intelligible
(Risalah fi ittihad al-‘aqil wa’l-ma‘qul)
Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Yahya al-Qawami al-Shirazi

--- Sayfa 280 ---
APPENDIX
257
The minds of all the later philosophers were incapable of understanding them
as they sharpened the teeth of their language in accord with the approach of
those who debased these two matters and drew the weapons of defamation and
repudiation. They tormented themselves in [order to] rebuke [this view], openly
declaring [their] censure and hate. But they do not listen to the word of
(certainty)4 nor is it clear to anyone of them the reason [why they do this] so
that this could be a deliverance for them from their vilification, and an
abstention for those who have participated in this defamation. But alas! They
have increased their denial and insisted on this in the most stubborn way.
Attributing this grave error about what inhibited the perception of the great
majority of the people of learning to those who have some experience in the
art of learning is a kind of [4] heedlessness and haste, and abstention from the
path of proper direction, patience, and fairness. The haste for man is the act of
Devil: ‘Do not approach be in haste with the Qur’an before it has been revealed
unto thee in full’ (Qur’an 20:114).
Clinging to the robe of firm standing and asking for the descent of the rain
of mercy in the world of lights is by far preferable to promptitude in denial.
And commencing [one’s inquiry] with the grace of the One who possesses the
key of mercy and salvation is worthier than sealing the path of deliverance to
the face of students capable of attaining happiness and grasping the truth and
what is right. In this tract, we are going to present in a summary form what
we have explained concerning the truth of this problem in our great book called
The Four Journeys as an approximation of the matter to the minds [of readers]
and explanation of our purpose for ‘everyone who has a heart, or everyone who
lends ear, and he is a witness’ (Qur’an 50:37). God is surely the guardian of
innocence and confirmation.5
In regard to the organization of what we mention in the [following] two
discourses (maqalah), we say that each of them comprising several chapters is
pillars and principles for the sciences.
[5] The First Discourse Concerning the Unity of the Intellector and the
Intelligible, and It Is Comprised of Several Chapters
Section (1)
On the Degrees of the Theoretical Intellect in Tandem with the View of
Alexander of Aphrodisias.6
The intellect has several stations7:
One [of them] is the material intellect (al-‘aql al-hayulani). The philosophers
mean by the material a subject which can transform into something else either
as a sensible or intellectual [substance] through the being of a form in it. The

--- Sayfa 281 ---
258
APPENDIX
essence of everything, which has the potentiality of becoming something else,
has to be actual from the point of view of what it is as a [concrete] thing. Even
if such a thing were to contain the potentiality of all things, its essence will
have to be itself so that there would not be [another] form for it among the
forms. [6] And it would be pure potentiality with no actuality except what
occurs to it from outside. When it assumes a form through [an actual] form, it
becomes united with it in such a way that there is no duality between the two.
This holds true for the sensibilia as we see in the case of the matter (hayula)
of physical bodies, which are in and of themselves denuded of all forms. As it
is explained in the science of metaphysics, this matter is also identical with
these physical species and their simple and composite individuals. It has
already been demonstrated that composition between matter and form is a kind
of unity as this is the accepted view among the verifiers (al-muhaqqiqin).8
The same holds true for the material intellect in comparison to the
intelligibilia. The material intellect in itself is not an intelligible substance in
actus nor one of the intelligible things before it comes into actuality. It is,
however, one of the sensible things in actus and all of the intelligible things in
potentia.9 The soul is thus the form of perfection for the species of the sensible
body such as man, which, in contrast to the primary matter, is capable of
perceiving all things together. The primary matter in itself is not a sensate
(hissiyyah) or intellective (‘aqliyyah) thing. It has to represent every sensate
object one after another. The human soul is therefore [like] a form in relation
to the matter of the sensibilia, and matter in comparison to the form of the
intelligibilia. In itself, viz., before it perfects [i.e., actualizes] itself into a
sensate entity, it is not an intellective thing as it is said in the word of He the
Transcendent: ‘People of the Book! You have no valid ground’ (Qur’an 5:68).10
It is therefore a sensate form and intellective matter, and a material intellect in
itself. Thus it is potentially all of the intelligibilia for it is capable of perceiving
them all.
The percipient (mudrik) must be one of its own objects of perception in
actuality and because of its nature otherwise its particular form would be an
obstacle for perceiving anything other than this nature. This is like the [7]
senses that do not perceive things that have a part of them in what they
perceive. The faculty of sight, for instance, perceives colors but not its own
color. Therefore the instrument in which this faculty is found and by which
perception takes place does not have a particular color. The instrument of
smelling, by which smelling objects are perceived, does not have a smell. In
the same way, touching, through which the elementary forms of the sensibilia
are perceived, has to be in balance in such a way that it is not conjoined with
any [of the sensibilia] in an excessive and complete way so that everything can
be perceived by it. It has been said that whatever is in balance between
opposites is the same as being free from them. These instruments, however, do
not perceive things that are similar to them in hotness or coldness, moisture or
dryness, softness or roughness. This is due to the fact that nothing can be a

--- Sayfa 282 ---
APPENDIX
259
body, especially an elemental body (‘unsuriyyah), unless it has a share in the
opposites. Every natural body is without doubt tangible, and it cannot perceive
its like or its opposite because opposites cancel each other out. This difficulty,
however, is resolved in the case of touching, as we have pointed out before.
We have explained this matter in its respective place, and this is not the place
to go into its exposition again.
In sum, the goal is [to show] that since in [the domain of] the sensibilia
nothing can have potentially only one relationship to the whole because it
cannot be free from the actuality of some of them in itself, there cannot be one
[single] external sense perceiving all of the sensibilia. For every sense is one
single form in actuality. But there is among the existents something which is
a potential intellect in relation to all of the intelligibilia.11 This is the case
before it becomes an intellective form. Then its existence is a sensate existence,
a material form, and an intellective matter. When it is actualized in one of the
intelligibilia, it becomes united with it, and becomes one of the intellective
entities (al-ashya’ al-‘aqliyyah).
[8] Know that there is a difference between the matter of the sensibilia and
the matter of the intelligibilia, which is the following: in contrast to the matter
of the sensibilia, it is a characteristic of the matter of the intelligibilia to come
into actuality in all intelligibilia at once whereas the matter of the sensibilia,
in its passage from potentiality to actuality in these forms, is a new thing not
in an instant but in time and motion. And this is so for two reasons.
The first reason: the sensible-qua-sensible has a weak existence, in which
the opposites take place. A sensible object cannot be a horse, tree and stone [at
the same time] because its existence cannot contain two realities [simultaneously]
and [cannot accept] the unity of two forms, let alone [accepting] all realities
and forms. Rather, it takes on only one form because of its being a measured
thing, each measured parts of which are separate from its other measured
parts.
The second reason: sensate natures are in constant renewal, passage and
cessation from one being to another. If it were possible for them to be all things
in one single substance, they would not remain moving, could not have had
the expected perfection [in them], and would have had the intellective rather
than the bodily form.
It has been firmly established and proven that whenever the matter of the
sensibilia in a certain form has come into actuality from potentiality, it has
returned from actuality to potentiality in some other things. This is like the
parts of motion and time, some of whose existence necessitate the non-
existence of the other,12 or like the parts of physical bodies and space, the
presence of which requires the absence of the other. But this is not the case
with the matter of the intelligibilia, which, whenever it arises from potentiality
into actuality in a particular thing, assumes a stronger relation and proximity
to other intelligibilia.

--- Sayfa 283 ---
260
APPENDIX
The second degree [of meaning] for the intellect is that by which the soul
achieves the capacity of passing from primary to secondary [intelligibles], and
from self-evident truths to theoretical statements through these primary
[intelligibles] obtained by means of [9] senses and imagination. It is through
the occurrence of this capacity in it that the soul is able to take the forms of
the intelligibilia from the objects of imagination and obtain theoretical
statements from self-evident truths just like those who have the capacity of arts
and crafts and who are able to know their own work by themselves.
The first one, I mean the material [intellect] is like these people. [A better
example] is rather those who have a latent [lit., ‘distant’] capacity by which
they accept the[ir] ability for arts and crafts until they become artisans as in
the case of children and those who are as yet incomplete in their development.
As for this capacity, it is found in those who have perfected themselves and
become counted among the people with intelligence (‘uqala’).
The third degree [of meaning] is the active intellect, and it is through it that
the material intellect comes to possess the capacity of passing [from potentiality
to actuality]. As Aristotle says, this active [intellect] can be compared to the
ray of light because the ray is the cause of visible colours in potentia in that
they become visible in actuality [through it]. By the same token, this intellect
affects the material intellect, which is potential, in such a way that the faculty
of intellectual conception (tasawwur ‘aqli) becomes established in it, and then
turns material forms, which are potential, into intelligibles in actuality. This
third [i.e., the active intellect] is intelligible by its own nature, and it is in
actuality whether an intellect intellects it or not. This is so because it is the
agent of intellectual conception,13 and it transfers material intellect into an
actual intellect. As such, it is the active intellect because the material [i.e.,
potential] forms, which are intelligible only in potentia, become actually
intelligible through it when this intellect disembodies them from the matter
that is co-existent with them. Before this, they are neither intelligible [in
actuality] nor is it in their nature to be so. Similarly, it is by virtue of light,
which makes vision possible and emanates upon the faculty of sight that this
capacity becomes seeing in actuality and a source of existence for physical
bodies and colours, which are visible in view of it and which were visible
before only potentially. In the same manner, light, by definition, is visible and
makes things visible. It is impossible for it to be otherwise or in potentia. In
fact, it is always actual in this way.
When this illuminating and intellective light shines upon the potential
intellect, it becomes an intellect in actuality, and when it shines upon the
imaginal or sensible forms that correspond to it, they all become [10]
intelligible in actuality. This is simply impossible not to be so. Because of this,
as it shall become clear to you, God willing, there has to be an intellector
here.

--- Sayfa 284 ---
APPENDIX
261
Section (2)
Concerning that Intellection Consists in the Unification of the Intellector
with the Intelligible.
I say, and success is from God: forms of things are of two kinds. The first
is the form whose existence is supported by bodily matter. The forms of this
kind can neither be intelligible nor sensible for their existence is the same as
veiling and absence because of their sharing in the meaning of non-existence
whereby the existence of everything in this [category] is equal to the non-
existence of the other, and the presence of each part necessitates the absence
of the other. Knowledge consists of the existence of something for something
else, and its presence in it.14 How can then something that does not have an
existence in itself be existent for something else? Therefore this kind of forms
cannot be perceived except through the acquisition of another form whose
likeness is to be found only in concept [i.e., in the mind] and whose opposite
is in the order of existence.
The second kind is the forms whose existence is not supported by matter
but rather disembodied from it whether it has a relational connection to matter
or not. This has two aspects. As for the carrier of the capacity of perception
concerning its external matter such as the sensibilia, the instrument in which
we find the capacity of the existence of this actual sensible form has a
positional relation to its external matter, and this relation becomes particular
through the attainment of this form for the sense[s]. Thus, these forms are
related to their particular and sensate forms as we see in the case of estimations
(mawhumat) and imaginations. Or, this form has no connection and relational
or positional attachment to matter. This is because of its extreme purity and
disembodiment from matter, and also because of its individuation by its
particular existence and the existence of its perfect instaurer (ja‘il)15 which does
not need any aides from outside and extraneous accidents added to it.
[11] Don’t you see that when something from among the physical bodies
and their forms is taken to be an individuated unit, it would neither have
anything extraneous to its essence nor the other things around it would remain
existent! An example of this is the following. If we were to suppose a sky or
an encircling object with nothing in it, it would not exist because of the
necessity of void. If we were to suppose a land or an encircled thing with no
sky to raise it up, it would not exist because this being would of necessity have
nothing to make it something determinate whereas existence [as determined in
the external world] is a physical body with extension. Or, physical bodies
would have aspects and extensions without something making their aspects and
extensions determinate. All of this is impossible.
It has become clear that things of this kind need accidental and coincidental
(ittifaqiyyah) causes as they are in need of essential causes. That is why this
world has been called the world of coincidences (‘alam al-ittifaqiyyat). As for

--- Sayfa 285 ---
262
APPENDIX
the intellective existence, it is not in need of accidental causes that are
extraneous to its nature and which distinguish its substance [from others].
Once this is established, we say: it is certain according to the philosophers
that the disembodied form as a universal is an actual intelligible form. In the
same way, the disembodied form as disembodied in general is either a sensible
in actuality or an imaginal [object] in actuality. The proof [for the assertion]
that every disembodied form as a universal is an intelligible in actuality is that
if it were not to be so, it would be impossible for it to intellect actually or
potentially, or it would be possible for it to do so. The first is not tenable
because whatever is established in existence is capable of being intelligible
even potentially. The second is not tenable either because that which can
receive something as an accident is not established for it in actuality. In the
same manner, non-existence is something among the causes of the existence
of this thing, either because of the absence of something from the side of the
agent or because of the inability of the receptor. The first is impossible because
the agent acting upon intellective forms is a complete reality and essence, in
which there can be no shortcoming, deficiency or inability. The second is also
impossible because disembodied forms do not have a specific locus. They do
not accept or allow change, nor permit the possibility of something that has
not been already actualized. This is due to the fact that things of this order are
to be found only in the world of motions, [12] changes, matters, and potencies.
Our initial assumption, however, was that this form is a disembodied one with
no relation to matter, change, transformation, or movement.
It has thus been established that the existence of every disembodied form
in itself is its actual intelligible existence. It is also known on the basis of sound
intuition that the existence of every sensible form in itself is its very sensible-
ness (mahsusiyyah), which is its existence for the sensate substance. Also, the
existence of every imaginal form in itself is its existence for imagination. Even
if we suppose that intelligibility is removed from the forms which we had
assumed to be intelligible, this does not make them a thing among other things
like a planet, tree, animal or plant.
The same holds true for imaginal and sensible objects. Their intellective
existence is nothing but the manifestation of things in the mind or in the soul,
and their existence becomes an intellective and intelligible light, not that
through which existential quiddities [i.e., quiddities in concreto] become
intelligible in actuality. The same analogy can be made concerning the imaginal
or sensate form in that it is an imaginal light by which things are imaginalized,
or a sensate light by which the sensibilia are manifested and become sensible
in actuality.
When this is the case, viz., the intelligibility of the intelligible is of the very
kind of the existence of the intellector and nothing else and, by the same token,
the existence of the sensibleness of the sensible is exactly the same as the
sensate substance and nothing else, it becomes necessary that the intellector be
just like this intelligible, not different from its existence. If there were to be an

--- Sayfa 286 ---
APPENDIX
263
existence for the intellector and another existence for the intelligible form,
which is intelligible in actuality, and thus we have two beings totally different
from one another, each having a separate existence for itself, as most people
assume, then this would lead to an impossible situation. Because when we look
at the intellective form and consider it [in itself] and then turn our eyes from
the intellecting substance, [then we have to ask]: is it, in this consideration,
intelligible—as it was in and of itself—or not? If it is not intelligible in this
consideration, then its mode of existence is not the same as its intelligibility,
which means that it is intelligible only in potentiality, not in actuality. What
we have considered to be correct, [namely the view] that its being is the same
as [13] its intelligibility, is contrary to this [conclusion]. If, in this regard, only
this [form] is intelligible as considered in isolation from all other things whose
existence is different from it, then in this consideration it certainly is an
intellector. Intelligibility is not separable from intellector-ness (‘aqiliyyah)
because both belong to the category of attribution (al-mudaf). None of the
attributed elements can have a meaning without its corresponding part.16
Therefore one single being is both an intellector and an intelligible. Every form
that is disembodied from matter is both intelligible and intellecting without
there being any difference between the two meanings from the point of view
of existence. But there is a difference insofar as meaning and conception is
concerned because the concept of intellector-ness is different from the concept
of intelligibility. Otherwise, the two words would be synonymous.
As for the fact that one single being is the subject of two different or even
more meanings, this is not to be repudiated as in the case of the essence of the
exalted One who, with His absolute unity, is the subject of the meanings of
His Names and Attributes without there being any stain of multiplicity. It then
follows that when one single intellector can have multiple intelligibles, its very
existence becomes identical with the existence of those intelligibilia insofar as
they are intelligibilia in themselves without there being any multiplicity and
differentiation in existence. The same analogy applies to the unity of the
sensate substance with all of its sensible forms as well as to the unity of the
faculty of imagination with all of the imaginal forms.
The fact that various perceptual forms, whether intellective, imaginal, or
sensate, have one single identity, existing by virtue of one single existence, in
spite of their disparity and difference, is one of the wonders of the secrets of
existence. A rigorous proof has been established for this and it cannot be denied
by anyone engaged in [this discussion] on the basis of the judgments of sound
thinking unless one drifts away from this way to another such as dialectic
(jadal), imitation (taqlid) and the like. ‘And whosoever for whom God has not
created a light has no share of light’ (Qur’an 24:40).

--- Sayfa 287 ---
264
APPENDIX
[14] Section (3)
Concerning the Finalization of What We Have Substantiated and the
Confirmation of What We Have Established
Know that the state of the soul in its stages of sensate, imaginal and
intellective perceptions is not like what has become common among the
majority [of philosophers]. It is mentioned in the[ir] books that the soul is one
in its essence and degrees whereas the perceptibles (al-mudrakat) are different
in their existence and opposite in their disembodiment (tajarrud) and bodily
existence. The truth, however, is that every potency of perception is itself the
very form of what it perceives when it is perceived in actuality.
It is a common view among them that the soul disembodies sensate forms,
separates them from their matter with a kind of disembodiment, and becomes
sensible in actuality. After that, it disembodies them with a more complete
disembodiment and becomes imaginal in actuality. Then it disembodies them
with a complete disembodiment and becomes intelligible in actuality. And the
soul in itself remains the same as in the beginning without passing from being
sensate to being imaginal and from being imaginal to being intellective. In this
way, they make the soul unchanging, and its objects of perception passing and
transforming.17 The truth of the matter, however, is not like this. It is rather the
opposite of what they have mentioned. It is closer to truth to make the
differences of perceptual forms in various degrees of disembodiment and
perfection subject to the transformations of the perceiver. That which is
immersed in the veil of matter cannot perceive a form with which it is not
covered. The fact that every reality related to a species, such as man for
instance, becomes manifest to the potency of intellection at one time through
one single intelligible form and to the senses through multiple opposite forms
at other times, does not lead to the conclusion that in its existential modes the
soul is subject to its own changes. Nor does it warrant the idea of making its
differences and changes subject to the different states and transformations of
the soul itself. This [view] is more fundamental and more appropriate.18
O the intelligent and smart one! Look at the soul, its existential modes and
states, and its being united with a group of existents from this mode of
existence [15] in every existential mode. It is of a bodily nature with the body,
a sense with the senses, an imaginal [reality] with imagination, and an intellect
with the intellect. ‘And no soul knows where it shall die’ (Qur’an 31:34). When
the soul is united with nature, it becomes the organs. When it is united with
the senses in actuality, it becomes the very sensibilia that have come about for
the senses in actuality. When it is with imagination in actuality, it becomes the
imaginal forms that it has. This continues until it reaches the station of the
actual intellect, and becomes the intellective forms that have obtained for it in
actuality.
The wisdom behind this is that when God instaured in existence an
intellective unity, which is the world of the intellect, and a physical multiplicity,

--- Sayfa 288 ---
APPENDIX
265
which is the world of the senses and imagination with degrees, the Divine
Providence made it necessary to create a comprehensive being (nash’ah
jami‘ah), by which everything in the two worlds is perceived. And it designated
for it a subtle potency corresponding to this all-encompassing unity. It is
through this correlation that the perception [of the two worlds] is possible. And
this [subtle potency] is nothing but the active intellect.19 It also designated
another physical or material capacity corresponding to this physical multiplicity
whereby it perceives multiplicity as it is. But the soul in the initial stages of
its origination is succumbed to the aspect of physical multiplicity due to its
deficiency and imperfection, and as such its intellective unity is only potential
whereas its physical multiplicity is actual. When its essence becomes strong
and its activeness intensifies, the aspect of unity takes precedence over it, and
it becomes an intellect and an intelligible after having been a sense and a
sensible. The soul thus undergoes substantial motion from this first origination
to the second and to what comes after it.
[16] Section (4)
Concerning the Close Examination of This Method and Allusion to God’s
Knowledge of Contingent Beings
You have already seen that the analogy of the intellect to the intelligibilia
is like the analogy of the sense to the sensibilia even though it is not the case
that the senses—faculty of sight, for instance—consist of the acquisition of the
sensible form from matter. It is not true that sight takes something from what
is seen, which passes from matter to the matter of sight because, as explained
before, natural qualities cannot pass from one subject to another. Likewise, it
does not mean that the faculty of sensation, such as vision, moves towards the
form of the sensible that exists in matter as the defenders of the view of
‘extromission’ (shu‘a’) have assumed on the question of vision (basar).20 It is
to be noted that vision is neither a mere positional relation to the sensing
subject nor a relation of knowledge that the soul has to this material form, as
it was defended by the school of Illumination on the question of vision and by
people like Fakhr al-Din al-Razi concerning perception in a general sense. As
we have explained in its due course, all of these three views are false in our
opinion, especially the view [that defines vision] as relation. The positional
relation concerning physical bodies and what is in them is neither their
knowledge nor their perception. The relation of knowledge to intellective
substances cannot be conceived in comparison to the essences of material
subjects. We have already pointed to a general demonstration that nothing
among the essences of material subjects can be a percipient of anything
whatsoever except through a knowledge that encompasses their reasons and
causes.21
The truth in our opinion concerning vision and all other forms of perception
is that it comes about through the generation of a luminous and perceptual form

--- Sayfa 289 ---
266
APPENDIX
from the world of the soul by means of creative emanation (al-fayd al-ibda‘i).
It is through this [form] that the perception and consciousness of things comes
about. When these forms are related to the senses, they are both sensing and
sensed [17] in actuality. The forms of vision are neither an external matter nor
they are imprinted in the instrument of vision. They are rather like hanging [in
between], subsisting not in a locus and matter but through an active and
luminous principle. As for the existence of the form in the external world, it
is one of the conditions and preparatory circumstances for the coming about
of this disembodied form at the level of the soul. The argument about this form
being a sense, sensing, and sensed is like the argument about the intelligible
form being an intellect, intellector, and intelligible. The same holds true for all
other kinds of perception, sensible, imaginal, and intelligible.
The First Teacher [Aristotle] has said in the Theology: ‘It is necessary to
know that vision reaches physical bodies outside of it, and it does not reach
them until it becomes identical with them. Then it senses and knows them with
a sound knowledge in accord with the mode of its capacity [to perceive]. In
the same way, when the person who intellects turns his eye to things in
concreto, he does not reach them until he and the things [he sees] become one
and the same thing except for the fact that sight falls upon the external form
of things whereas the intellect falls upon the inner reality of things. For this
reason, its unity with them is of various kinds. In some cases, it is more intense
and stronger than the unity of the sense with the sensibilia. Every time the sight
fixes its gaze upon a sensible object, what is sensed is effected by it until it
becomes external to the sense, i.e., until it does not sense anything anymore.
As for the intellectual vision, it is just the opposite.’22 End of his words.
Know that through this method that we have followed on the question of
knowledge—providence is by God the Exalted and His confirmation—many
problems are resolved, and the objections that have been raised against the
representation of the forms of things in His Essence the Exalted and their
impressions in Him do not arise. The same holds true for the impression of
these forms upon the essences of these intellects in the perception of the
intellects. If intellection were through the impression of intellective forms upon
the essence of the intellector, this would lead to horrible consequences for
God’s knowledge—His name be exalted—, which are mentioned in the books.23
The fact that the form of a substance is impressed upon the intellecting
substance would also necessitate the existence of one single form grouped
under two categories, the category of substance and the category of quality. In
the same way, the impression of [18] quantity, position and relation would of
necessity lead to the inclusion of each one of them under two categories, and
to many other problems mentioned in their due course.

--- Sayfa 290 ---
APPENDIX
267
Section (5)
Another Way of Explaining What We Wish to Establish
An established fact among the majority [of the philosophers] is that the
faculty of intellection in man obtains the forms of the intelligibilia from outside
of its essence after having not been an intellector in actuality. [According to
them], this takes place without [the intellect] uniting with the forms, and
transforming into them. This view is simply not tenable. When the soul is
devoid of knowledge, ignorant in actuality, has the capacity of being effected
by the intelligibilia, and meets the intellective forms and perceives them with
an intellective perception, we say: when this capacity of being effected [by the
intelligibilia] comes upon an intelligible form, with what does it perceive it
and become related to it? Does it perceive an intelligible form by its own
essence, which is bereft of knowledge and intellect? I wish I could understand
how an essence denuded of [knowledge], ignorant and not illuminated by the
light of the intellect can perceive a form outside of its essence, which is in the
darkness whereas, in fact, it is a luminous form in itself and a pure
intelligible!
If such an essence has perceived the forms with its denuded essence, then
it follows of necessity that an ignorant and blind essence has perceived a pure
intelligible, which is essentially separate from the essence of the percipient, in
which case we have two essences separate from one another, an intellector in
potentiality and an intelligible in actuality. But the two subjects of predication,
insofar as they are the subjects of predication, have to be in one way or another
equal in existence and non-existence and in potentiality and actuality. It is
impossible for one of them to be potential and for the other to be actual. How
can the blind eye look and see? With what light does it look at the visible lights
and colours? Likewise, with which intellective light does the intellect see the
intelligible and luminous objects of perception? ‘And for whosoever God has
not created light has no share of light’ (Qur’an 24:40).
If it has perceived them through an intellective form by which its essence
has been illuminated, then the discussion turns into the relation of its [19]
denuded essence to these forms in that its essence is dissimilar to these forms
or subsistent through and united with them. Now, if it is dissimilar, then the
difficulty mentioned before comes right back, and the forms are multiplied ad
infinitum, which is impossible. If it is not dissimilar, then these forms are by
themselves intellector in actuality as they are intelligible in actuality without
there being the medium of any other form. This is exactly what we wanted [to
establish].
It is not possible for the opponent to say that perhaps these forms are a
means in the soul’s being an intellector for things other than itself, and that
they are intelligible for the soul itself, meaning that everything beyond the soul
that has a correspondence with it becomes intelligible for the soul through this
form.24 We respond by saying that had this form not been an intelligible in the

--- Sayfa 291 ---
268
APPENDIX
first place, it would be impossible for it to perceive anything other than itself.
The mediation of this form is not like the mediation of the instruments of arts
and crafts in accomplishing bodily works.25 Their example is rather like the
sensible light in perceiving visible objects whereby first the light is seen and
then through its medium other things are seen in a secondary and accidental
way. We have already explained with a decisive proof that intelligible form is
intelligible in actuality whether an intellect other than itself intellects it or not.26
In the same way, one cannot assume a being for the sensible form which is
itself not sensible. It is thus sensible in actuality even if there was no substance
in the universe to sense it. The existence of intellective or sensate perceptual
forms for the soul is not like the existence of a house, various possessions, and
children in relation to the owner of the house, the possessions, and the father
in that all of these have an existence in themselves and an existence for things
other than themselves, and their existence in themselves is not by itself the
same being for things other than themselves. Transformation of the soul into
an intellector in actuality is not like the transformation of Zayd into having a
property, a field and a child, in which case his existence does not change into
another existence.
[20] Section (6)
Repudiating the Objection Against the Unification of the Intellector and the
Intelligible, and Resolving the Doubt Mentioned in the Books of the Master
[Ibn Sina]27 and Others.
Know that the Master stipulated the rejection of this unification in most of
his books, and insisted on it in a strong way. In the Isharat, he said: ‘A group
among the ancient [philosophers]28 held that when the intellecting substance
intellects an intellective form, it becomes [identical with] it. Supposing that an
intellecting substance intellects A. According to their view, it itself becomes
cognizant of A. Now, has the intellecting substance remained the same before
it intellected A or this has not happened to it [i.e., did it remain the same]? If
it has remained the same, then it is the same whether it intellected A or not. If
it did not happen to it, then it is not valid [to say] that it has changed into A
or that it has become [identical with] its essence. If it has changed into A and
its essence has remained the same, then this is like the other kinds of
transformation, not like what they claim. If it is [identical with] its essence,
then its essence has been dissolved and another thing has come about, not that
it has turned into something else. When you ponder over this carefully, you
will know that this [transformation] requires a common hylé and a composite
rather than simple renewal.’29
He also said: ‘A further warning: when it intellects A and then B, has it
remained the same before it intellected A so that it would be the same whether
it intellected B or not, or it has become something else? This leads to what was
mentioned before.’ End [of quotation].

--- Sayfa 292 ---
APPENDIX
269
This is a specific argument for refuting the unification between the
intellector and the intelligible. They also have a general argument for rejecting
any kind of unification between two things which the Master and others have
mentioned in their books. It can be stated as follows: ‘If two united things are
two separate existents, then there is no unification. If one of them has ceased
to be what it is and a new being has emerged, then there is no unification. If
the two together have become non-existent and a third being has come about,
then again there is no unification.’
[21] Then he said in the Isharat: ‘There was a man among them known as
Porphyry who wrote a book on the intellect and the intelligibilia, which is
highly praised by the Peripatetics. All of it is gibberish. And they know very
well that neither they nor Porphyry himself understand it. Someone among his
contemporaries contradicted him. And he criticized this contradiction with [an
argument] lower [i.e., weaker] than the first one.’30
He said in a section of the Shifa’ on the science of the soul: ‘One cannot
say that the soul becomes the intelligibilia. In my opinion, this is something
impossible. I have never understood their claim that something transforms into
something else, and never figured out how this takes place.’
Then he mentioned the general argument for rejecting the unification [of
the intellect with the intelligibilia], and begun to slander and repudiate any one
who has accepted this unification by saying that ‘the man who has explained31
to people this matter the most is the person who has composed the Isagogie
for them. He [i.e., Porphyry] was bent on speaking words of fantasy and Sufi
poetry and contenting himself and others with imagination. For this, the people
of discernment point to his books on the intellect and the intelligibilia and his
other writings on the soul. True, the forms of things inhere in the soul and
contain and embellish it. And the soul becomes like an abode for them through
the medium of the material intellect. Now, if the soul were to become a form
for an existent in actuality and this form an intellect, which is in actuality by
its essence, and furthermore if the form were to have no capacity to receive
anything, for the capacity of reception is in the receiver, then it would follow
of necessity that the soul has no ability of accepting another form or any other
thing. But in fact you see it receiving a form other than this one. If this other
[i.e., first form] does not contradict this [i.e., second] form, then this is really
strange for in this case receiving and non-receiving become one and the same
thing. If it does contradict it, then the soul, if it is [22] the intelligible form,
has become something other than itself. And this is of no avail….’32
I say: this is another proof of his for the repudiation of this view. Its answer
will come to you shortly. Thus we say: there are two points we have to know
before delving into the critique of what the Master and others have said in
rejecting the unification between the intellector and the intelligibilia in a
general and specific way. The first is that existence in everything is the
principal reality in existentiation, and it is the principle of its particularity, the
source of its quiddity, and the measure of its essence. Existence belongs to the

--- Sayfa 293 ---
270
APPENDIX
category of things that allow intensification and diminution in terms of
perfection and imperfection, and it has essential qualities and modes in every
degree of intensification and diminution as different from what it had before.
The second [point]: as motion and transformation take place in quality and
quantity, it also occurs in the formal substance, which is connected to matter
in a certain way. Motion in every category is necessitated by a single being
that is continuous, individual and gradual. [Such a being] has a specific
delimitation among the delimitations of existence in every presumed moment
of this motion. And it has [this specific delimitation] neither before nor after
this [moment].
Once these two principles are established, whose investigation and defense
we have presented in detail in our longer books, we say that unification
between two things is considered to be of three kinds:
First is the unification of an existent with another existent after it becomes
multiple or in such a way that the beings of two things become one single
being. As the Master and others have mentioned among their proofs for the
rejection of unification, this is not plausible, and its impossibility is
obvious.33
The second [kind of unification] is that a quiddity among quiddities and a
meaning among meanings becomes another quiddity by itself and another
meaning through essential primary predication.34 This is also impossible
because separate concepts cannot become one single concept. Hence no
quiddity-qua-quiddity [23] can be another quiddity by itself unless the existence
of one of the quiddities ceases to exist and another existence comes about.
The third is that something becomes existent insofar as an intellective
meaning and universal quiddity apply to it. This [meaning and universal
quiddity] is not applicable to it in the first place because of an intensification
that has occurred in its existence, and because of a perfection that has come
about in its continuous individual identity through conjunction (ittisal). Now,
this is not impossible. Don’t you see that the form of a single man is the subject
of numerous modes from the state of embryo and even sperm all the way to
the state of being an intellect and intelligible? [Don’t you see also] that all
intelligible meanings whose different instances are found in inanimate beings,
plants and animals are found together in man in a simple manner?
One cannot say that these multiple meanings are found in man because of
the multiplicity of his capacities or because of a single capacity [in him]. We
argue that this is because of the form of his essence, which is already one and
implied in his capacities. All of man’s perceptual faculties and animal and
natural motion emanate upon the matter of the body. The subjects of sense
organs come from one single source, and it is [the person] himself and the
reality of his essence. All of these faculties are derivatives of this principle,
and it is the sense of senses and the actor of all actions just as the simple
intellect, which the philosophers have firmly established, is the principle of the
intelligibilia conjoined with the human soul. In this tract, it will become clear

--- Sayfa 294 ---
APPENDIX
271
to you that the active intellect in our souls is all of the meanings that exist in
caused beings (ma‘lulat) in terms of veracity (sidq) and verification (tahqiq).
In short, it is not impossible for a single essence to be the subject of a
meaning which it did not have before. By the same token, it is not impossible
for an essence to be transformed in such a way that what is applicable to
dissimilar and multiple essences becomes applicable to it also.
As it was said:
It is not to be denied for God
To gather the entire universe in one
Now let us turn to responding to their arguments. Concerning the general
proof which the Master has mentioned in the [24] Isharat by saying that ‘if
each one of the two entities exists, then they are two separate beings,’ we say
the following: this is obviously not admitted owing to the fact that two concepts
can have one single existence. Sensing and speaking are two different meanings
that can be distinguished from one another. But they become a single being in
man.
The same applies to the general proof mentioned in the Shifa’. His argument
states that ‘when a thing becomes something else, it becomes that thing either
as an existent or non-existent.’ We opt that it becomes as an existent. He also
says that ‘if it exists, then the second one is either an existent or non-existent.’
We say: we opt for the view that it is an existent. As for his claim that ‘thus
the two are two [separate] existents, not a single being,’ we say that they are
two existing meanings with one existence, and it is not impossible for multiple
meanings to have one single existence.
As for the two specific arguments about the intellector and the intelligible,
which the Master mentions in the Isharat, his argument runs as follows: ‘Has
C remained the same before it intellected A?’ We say: we choose that it is what
it is insofar as the principle of existence is concerned. But it is not what it is
from the point of view of potency and perfection just like the hylé when it
becomes a physical entity. The hylé does not cease to be matter when it
becomes formed by the form of perfection except from the point of view of
imperfection and defection. This is like a child becoming a grown-up person
because nothing has vanished from him except what is [already] a matter of
non-existence (amr ‘adami).35 This is also acknowledged by the Master in the
Eighth Chapter of the Metaphysics of the Shifa’ where he explains the
generation of something from something else. It is, therefore, firmly established
that the transformation of something into something else is of two kinds:
‘First: the first [thing], insofar as it is what it is, moves by its nature into
perfection [as caused] by the second [thing]. This is like the child who, when
he becomes a grown man, does not vanish but is rather perfected, and no
substantial and accidental quality has disappeared from him except what is
related to deficiency and potentiality.

--- Sayfa 295 ---
272
APPENDIX
Second: the nature of the first [thing] does not permit it to move into the
second [thing] even though this might be necessitated by [25] its ability to
accept its form not from the standpoint of its quiddity but from the standpoint
of the carrier of its quiddity. Water, for instance, becomes air in such a way
that the form of water-ness leaves its matter and the form of air-ness obtains
for it.’ Then he said: ‘In the first part, the substance, which belongs to the first
[thing], comes about in the second [thing]. But the second part does not bring
about that which belongs to the second [thing] by itself but only a part of it.
Therefore it destroys this substance.’
This is the summary of his argument. It is obvious that the generation of
something from something else can be in such a way that the first becomes
united with the second and it remains the same as it was before. How does he
deny this? Then comes [the point] which he explains concerning the difference
between the two parts in the generation of something from something else: ‘In
the first part, the form, by virtue of its nature and quiddity, changes into
something else like the transformation of the child into adulthood. In the
second case, it does not change because of its nature and quiddity but because
of the carrier of its quiddity, viz., by virtue of another cause such as coercion
or the like as in the case of water when it becomes air.’ This [point] is quite
obvious in the demonstration of substantial motion and essential perfection like
the sperm becoming an embryo, then an animal, then a baby, and then a man.
Without doubt, it has these transformations and perfections not because of the
compulsion of a coercing subject or a casual or accidental will but because of
an essential and substantial transformation whereby the transformed is not
destroyed by the influx of the transformer. Rather, its existence is intensified
and its identity and essence perfected.
The same applies to the case where a non-intellecting subject becomes an
intellector in actuality, from which only what is imperfect and defective is
detracted. This transposition in these modes does not take place from the point
of view of the second part, which happens after generation and corruption,
because this did not and does not happen from the standpoint of the necessity
of essential nature in terms of coercion and the like. This is like the fact that
the transformation of some elements into others takes place because of causes
external to their nature.
It is also permitted that the human soul continues to be one single soul from
its generation out of a sperm to its potentiality in every thing and in every
perception including sense-perception, imagination, and all the way to its being
an intelligible and an intellector [26] in actuality as a single substance. It has
only one definition in terms of substantiality (jawhariyyah) and existence. And
it does not become different except through accidents outside the category of
perceptions and changes (lit., ‘motions’). But the human soul goes further and
contains in itself the souls of the perfect Prophets, peace be upon them, together
with the souls of the insane and the children and even the embryo in the wombs
of mothers, all of which are at one single level in terms of the substantiation

--- Sayfa 296 ---
APPENDIX
273
of the essence of humanity (al-insaniyyah) and its reality. The difference comes
about only as a result of the extraneous attachments that accompany its
existence.
Now, if it is said that these existential perfections are like the principle of
existence added to the meaning of humanity and to the quiddity of man, then
this requires us to know how existence is added to quiddity. This [addition] is
true only in terms of mind and mental analysis, not in terms of external reality
in spite of the fact that it is existence that exists in the external world, and that
quiddity is united with it and subject to it without the quiddity being instaured
by itself. It is not [accurate] to imagine an instauration between quiddity and
its existence because that which is instaured by itself is the existence of every
thing, quiddity being thereby subject to it like a shadow.
He says that ‘if this [quality] has ceased from it, then it invalidates [the
conclusion] that it [i.e., the first thing] has changed into it [i.e., the second
thing], in which case the essence has remained the same and this is like the
other kinds of transformation, not like what they say.’ We respond: nothing has
ceased from its constitutive elements or from the existence of its essence except
what is related to imperfection and deficiency. If it had an imperfect substance,
it has now become perfected and intensified in its substantiation. This is not
like the other types of transformation that fall under the second kind [mentioned
by Ibn Sina], like water when it becomes air and black when it becomes
white.
He says that ‘if it has remained the same in its essence, then its essence has
ceased to exist and a new thing has originated and come about, not that it itself
has become something else.’ We respond: it was already explained that what
ceases to exist belongs to what is a matter of non-existence such as the potential
aptitude and deficiency.
He then says that ‘it is incumbent upon you to ponder over this and learn
that this [transformation] requires a common matter and a compound, not
simple, renewal.’ We respond: we do not disallow that such a substance, which
is renewed [27] existentially and whose essence changes continuously, has a
kind of relationship with a material substance because of motion and time. As
for his admission of compound (murakkab) but not simple renewal, this is not
allowed if he means by this the external compound (al-tarkib al-khariji) in
itself because no formal being (wujud suri) has a compound outside that which
prepares it to become an intellect in actuality. If he means by this the analytical
mental compound or compound not in itself but between it and the external
matter—such as the body until a natural species comes out of it like the natural
man—, then this is allowed as it does not contradict the simplicity of the
form.
As for the other specific argument which he mentioned in the Shifa’, he
says that ‘if the soul were to be the form of something among the concrete
existents in actuality—according to his statement—, and we see it taking on
another form […].’ The gist of his argument is that the aspect of actuality is

--- Sayfa 297 ---
274
APPENDIX
different from the aspect of receptivity and that something’s being a form
terminates its being matter unless it becomes an external composition. We say
that the way this difficulty is resolved has two aspects.
First: something’s being a form for a sensate thing does not prevent it from
being a matter for an intellective thing. What is implausible is that one single
being becomes both actual and potential as compared to one single source and
one single level [of existence]. The soul is therefore the form of sensate forms
in this world and the matter of intellective matters in the other world.
The second: we have already mentioned the difference between the matter
of physical bodies and the matter of intellective beings. The former is capable
of carrying only one single form, and multiple forms accumulate in it because
of the narrowness of the existence of sensate matter in regards to joining the
forms of multiple things together. This is in contrast to the matter of intellective
forms in that whenever a form among them is brought forth from potentiality
into actuality, it becomes more intensified in accepting other [forms] and
stronger in having a relationship with other things.
Then I say the following for the further clarification of this matter: the soul
is the first to emanate upon the matter of the body, which is like the structure
of corporeal existents and sensate and imaginal forms. As such, in its initial
stage of existence, it is not [28] an intellective form for any [concrete] thing.
Thus, in our opinion, it is impossible for a single physical species—such as
man—to come about from the conjunction of an intellective form and natural
and corporeal matter without the intermediacy of perfections and transformations
for this [particular] matter. For me, this is the most implausible thing. Therefore
the relation of matter to its proximate form is the relation of the potential to
the actual, of the imperfect to the perfect; and the relation of forms to it is like
the relation of differentia that obtains for the genus.
At the beginning of its primordial nature (al-fitrah), the soul is the form of
one single thing from among the existents of this corporeal world. Nevertheless
it contains in its potency the power to journey to the angelic world in a gradual
manner. The reason for this journey is the weakness of its sensate constitution.
In its state of animality, the soul is the weakest of all animals just as the
animal’s vegetative power is weaker than [the vegetative power] of other
plants. In the same way, the plants are weaker than material elements (jamadat)
in their natural power to preserve the composition of all elements. Similarly,
the elemental natures that exist in minerals are weaker in terms of quality, and
more defective in terms of form than the discrete simple elements (al-basa’it).
This is so because the nature of a physical body that moves from one degree
to another is such that its state within the confines of its movement is to be
between sheer potentiality and complete actuality in order for it to move from
one state [of existence] to another as we see in other motions and changes. Due
to this weakness and imperfection in the animal aspect of man, as God the
exalted has said ‘and man has been created weak’ (Qur’an 4:28), he has been
given the possibility of walking from this world to the supreme angelic
world.

--- Sayfa 298 ---
APPENDIX
275
The human soul is corporeal in its origination and spiritual in its
subsistence.36 Therefore it is first a natural form for sensate matter, and it has
the capacity of accepting the intellective form that actualizes it as an intellect
in actuality and with which it is united as an intellective unity. There is no
contradiction between this sensate actuality and the acceptance of intellective
perfection since it has been transformed in its perfection and reached in its
transformation all of the natural boundaries from the most coarse to the most
subtle until it has obtained the first degree of [29] life in the power of touching.
After this, the soul journeys through the boundaries of corporeal animal reality
all the way to the [stage of] imagination and estimation (wahmiyyah), and to
the last degree of estimative animal,37 which can be found in beings other than
man, and from there to the first degree of intellective animal.38 The form of the
sensate soul is like matter for the imaginal form, which is, in turn, like matter
for the intellective form. The first to shine upon it are the beginnings of the
intelligibilia and the general common knowledge followed by the secondary
intelligibilia and what comes after them in a gradual manner.
He says that ‘the essence of forms does not possess the power of accepting
anything.’ We say: we do not accept this view. Rather, the aspect of acceptance
is implicit in it, which entails the differentia for simple species.
He says that ‘the [capacity of] acceptance is certainly for the receptor of
something.’ We say: yes, but in a different sense. And this is the passive
(infi‘al) potential renewal that generates the counterpart of something such as
when something conjoined becomes disjoined and when water becomes air. As
for reception (qabul) in the sense of being perfected, an entity that has form
(al-shay’ al-suri)39 can have a reception that completes its perfection as
compared to that by which its existence is intensified and its essence is
perfected. It was already mentioned in narrating the Master’s statement that
the [generation of the] existence of something from something else can be by
way of perfection. This is the vertical series of existential wayfaring. Or, it can
be by way of corruption. And this is the horizontal series of accidental
wayfaring as [we see] in the case of preparatory conditions (mu‘iddat).
In short, the reception of something can be accompanied by its external
non-existence, and this requires an external composition between the receptor
and its receptacle. Or it can be accompanied by its mental non-existence within
the confines of mental analysis. The former holds true for matter that receives
sensate forms whereas the latter holds true for the form attached to it in a
certain way.
As for the form free from matter in all regards, it does not have the expected
perfection [in it] in an essential way. Furthermore we say that when the soul,
which is potentially an intellect, is united with another intelligible other than
itself, this other is not its own otherness because it is a form in actuality
existing with another being. This is rather an intellective meaning (ma‘na
‘aqli). [30] This meaning is not applicable to the soul in the first place for it

--- Sayfa 299 ---
276
APPENDIX
has come about because of the intensification that has occurred in its existence
whereby it has become applicable to its carrier, corresponding to its truth.
In our view, what is meant by the form of a thing is its existence, not its
concept and universal meaning. [In this sense], form is one and simple for
everything. But it may become applicable to various meanings and attributes
of perfection. Or, it may not be so, and this is because existence can be strong
and intense or weak and deficient. Whenever existence is stronger and more
intense, it contains in itself more meanings and effects (athar), and vice
versa.40
When the soul becomes stronger, it becomes the locus of multiple meanings.
Each of these meanings, when found by themselves as a weak existence, is a
form for a deficient corporeal species such as the intelligible [reality of the]
horse, the intelligible [reality of the] tree, and the intelligible [reality of the]
earth. Each one of these has a form. When this form is found in the extra-
mental world, it is the form of a material species with an essence different from
any other material species. When it is found in the intellect, its intellective
form is existentially united with an intellective substance because the
intellective existence is an exalted and noble being in which all of the
intelligibilia can be found with one single existence in contrast to the unity of
the hylé and forms of corporeal things in it.41
He says: ‘And if it is different [from its previous state], then the soul, even
though an intelligible form, has become other than its own essence.’ We
respond: it has become other than itself not in terms of number but in terms of
perfection and imperfection. And the perfection and completeness of something
is the thing itself that has simply become nobler (afdal).
Then he says: ‘But rather the soul is the intellector. What is meant by the
intellect is either its potencies through which intellection takes place, or the
form of these intelligibilia. Since they become intelligible in the soul, the
intellector, the intelligible, and the intellect cannot be one and the same thing.’
I respond: as for the first matter concerning the intellect in actuality, this is not
true because this potency, whether what I mean by it is the capacities of the
soul or its simple essence separate from [31] the forms of the intelligibilia,
cannot be the intellect in actuality. Otherwise the same thing would be both
potency and actuality, ignorance and knowledge. The knowledge (‘ilmiyyah)42
of something about something else is not a relation between the two as it is
the view of the Master and some other philosophers.
As for the view that this intelligible form is an intellect in actuality, his
assumption is based on the claim that the ensouled substance (al-jawhar al-
nafsani), which is the form of perfection for the human sensate animal,
becomes an intellect for it and that it is what it is in itself without any change.
We have already discovered the impossibility [of this assumption] and
explained its fallacy in two ways:
[I]. From the standpoint of the soul: how can an essence, which is denuded
of intelligence, know intellective forms that are separate from its essence and

--- Sayfa 300 ---
APPENDIX
277
whose existence is extrinsic to its own existence? In the same way, the
establishment (thubut) of something for something else in a general sense is
secondary to the establishment of what has already been established [i.e., the
thing itself]. By the same token, the presence of an intellective existence to
something else is secondary to its own intellective existence, or a concomitant
of it. The intelligible in potentiality, which is the material form, cannot be
established except for an intelligible in potentiality as in the case of physical
bodies and quantities with a physical location. In a similar manner, the
intelligible in actuality cannot be established except for an intelligible in
actuality.
It was already made known and explained that before becoming an
intelligible essence, the soul is not the subject of a form among the intelligibilia
except potentially as in the case of the imaginal and estimative forms before
the light of the active intellect shines upon the faculty of imagination and these
imaginal forms.
[II]. From the standpoint of these forms, you have already learned with the
proof that God has bestowed upon us out of His mercy that these forms
themselves are intelligible essences regardless of an intellect extrinsic to their
essence and whether another intellect intellects them or not. Therefore they are
intellectors for themselves. But we know from our own selves that they are
intellectors and the soul can be united with them. This is what we wanted to
prove.
Know that even though the Master is one of the most persistent people in
denying the unification of the intellector with the intelligible in his other
writings, he has accepted this matter in his book called al-Mabda’ wa’l-ma‘ad.
I do not [32] know if this [denial of his] was a matter of describing their way
of thinking or it was his real belief [that he arrived at] through a vision that
befell him as an emanation of the light of the truth from the horizon of the
Angelic reality. The verifier (muhaqqiq) [Nasir al-Din] al-Tusi—may God bless
his secret—has mentioned this [point] in his commentary on the Isharat,
apologizing for the Master’s exposition of the matter there [i.e., in al-Mabda’
wa’l-ma’ad]. In fact, this commentator called this [view] a fallacious path. [But
in reality] he (i.e., Tusi) composed this book [of commentary] to explain the
path of the Peripatetics whereby his exposition was conditioned by this [main
goal]. Know that had it not been for that by which God has blessed some of
the followers of the path of spiritual poverty (al-fuqara’ al-salikin) and
expanded their breasts by the power of the Exalted and the Sovereign One, the
realization of this extremely difficult matter would have been completely
dependent upon the ancients (al-awa’il) and would not have been inherited by
any of the previous philosophers indulged in discursive thinking. ‘And praise
be to God who has guided us to this; never could we have found guidance had
it not been for the guidance of God’ (Qur’an 7:43).

--- Sayfa 301 ---
278
APPENDIX
[33] The Second Discourse
Concerning that the Simple Intellect Is All the Intelligibilia and that in Its
Intellection of Something It Is United with the Active Intellect, and the Related
Matters. This Part Consists of Several Chapters.
The First Section
Concerning that Every Simple Reality Is All Existential Things Except What
Belongs to Deficiencies and Negations.
Know that every simple reality is all things by its own ipseity (huwiyyah)
from all points of view. Otherwise the existence of its essence would be
constituted by the ipseity of something and not something else, and its essence
would be composite even in the mind from the point of view of mental
analysis.
The explanation of this is as follows: when we say that man is negated of
horse-ness (farasiyyah) or that he is not a horse, this does not apply to him
from the point of view of human-ness (al-insaniyyah).43 Insofar as he is man,
he is man and nothing else. If he were to be man insofar as he is man and not
horse, his relation as man would necessitate this negation. Then this is not pure
negation but the negation of a mode of existence. And existence-qua-existence
is neither non-existence nor a potentiality for something unless there is [34] a
composition (tarkib) in it.
Every subject, since it is a composite, is [the locus of] corroboration
(misdaq) and does not require the negation of a predicate either univocally or
derivatively. When you represent in your mind the form of such a subject and
the form of this negative predicate either univocally or derivatively, and then
compare the two whereby one is negated from the other and necessitates its
negation from it, then the proposition which is predicated of the subject that it
is so and so becomes united with the proposition which is not predicated of
the subject that it is not so and so. This holds true whether the difference is
from the point of view of external reality, in which case it becomes necessary
to have an external composition of matter and form, or from the point of view
of the intellect, in which case it becomes necessary to have an intellective
composition of genus and difference or of quiddity and existence.
When, for instance, you say that ‘Zayd is not a writer,’ this does not mean
that the form of Zayd is the form of the non-writer otherwise Zayd, insofar as
he is Zayd, would be pure non-existence. But the subject of this proposition
has to be composed of the form of Zayd and something else by which the
quality of ‘writer-ness’ is negated of him in terms of either potentiality or
capability. Therefore a general actuality44 cannot be the non-existence of
something else unless there be in it a composition of act on the one hand, and
potentiality, on the other, even if it is in terms of mental analysis. Thus every

--- Sayfa 302 ---
APPENDIX
279
reality which is simple from all points of view is the Necessary Being—exalted
be His Remembrance—, and it is the plenitude (tamam) of everything in the
most exalted, superior and virtuous way, from which nothing is negated except
deficiencies and imperfections. Thus It is the plenitude of all things. And the
plenitude of something is more real and firmer in itself. The pure separate
realities (al-mufaraqat) that come after It are in proportion to their simplicity
and proximity to the Necessary Being, and they are the plenitude and joining
of all causal beings below them. The same holds true for every higher reality
in comparison to what is below it, for every cause in comparison to its effect,
and for every complete being in comparison to its deficiency.
Thus the vegetative soul is the plenitude of natural powers that include
attraction, defense and transformation (ihalah). The animal soul is the plenitude
of perceptual, vegetative, animal and natural powers. And the rational soul is
the plenitude of everything [35] below it. Let this be firmly preserved by
you.
The Second Section
Concerning the Investigation of the Saying of the Ancients that the Soul
Intellects Things Through Its Unification with the Active Intellect45
It is a well-known view in the books of such philosophers of the Islamic
period as the Chief Master [Ibn Sina] and those who follow his way that the
view such as the one mentioned before [about the unification of the soul with
the active intellect] is false and that it is like the first view [about the simple
intellect being all of the intelligibilia]. Concerning its fallacy, they mentioned
that the active intellect is either a single unitary thing above multiplicity or
something with parts and divisions.
The first argument states that since that which is united with it [the active
intellect] intellects one thing, it should intellect all of the intelligibilia.46 [The
second argument states that] if it is united with some but not all parts of it, it
then follows that the active intellect should have a part insofar as man’s
intellection of every contingent being is concerned. But human intellections
are infinite. Then [it is falsely concluded] that It [i.e., the active intellect] is
composed of infinite parts with different realities and species.
Then each of these intelligibilia would occur for an infinite number of souls,
and Zayd’s intellection of blackness would be like ‘Amr’s intellection [of
blackness]. In this case, the active intellect by itself would have infinite parts
united with the species not once but infinite times, [and] each of these would
be infinite and united with [a particular] species. This, in addition to the
impossibilities already contained therein, leads to an impossibility from another
point of view, which is the following: those that are united with the species are
distinguished from each other not by their quiddity and concomitants but by
contingent and separate accidents, [36] and this is not permitted except for

--- Sayfa 303 ---
280
APPENDIX
matter and its external effects (infi‘alat). The active intellect is free from this,
and its parts are better suited for disembodiment. It is neither distinguishable
by accidents nor multipliable. Thus the active intellect is simple whereas it was
supposed to be composite, and this is a clear contradiction. Therefore the view
concerning the unification of the soul with It is impossible.
This is what the later philosophers have mentioned [in their books
concerning the fallacy of this view],47 to which the Master has alluded in the
Isharat after describing [the views of] this school by saying that ‘they have
made the active intellect either composed of parts with which one thing after
another can be conjoined, or one single conjunction, which makes the soul
perfect and able to reach every intelligible.’
I say: this path, just like the one mentioned before, has been attributed to
the virtuous scholars rooted in wisdom and knowledge. Without doubt, it has
a veritable yet hidden aspect, whose investigation requires intense study and
serious scrutiny combined with the cleansing of the mind and the refinement
of one’s inner state as well as supplicating to God and soliciting His success
and aid. We have prayed to Him in humility with our intellects and raised to
Him not only our perishing hands but also our inner hands, and expanded our
souls between His hands, supplicating to Him for the unveiling [of the solution]
of this problem and its likes with the request of an untiring refugee seeking
refuge until our intellects were illuminated by His luminous light and some of
the veils and obstacles were removed for us. Then we witnessed the intelligible
world to be a single being with which all beings in this world are conjoined in
accord with their differences. From Him is their beginning and to Him is their
return, and He is the principal source of the intelligibilia and all quiddities
without His being multiplied and parted, without His being deficient with the
deficiency [of the negation] of anything from Him, and without His being
augmented with the return of anything to Him and its conjunction with Him.
This is not the place to prove these substances and explain their states and
conditions. All that befits to be mentioned here is what will silence the attack
of the denial of the denier concerning the conjunction of the soul with this
[intelligible] world in the perception of every intelligible, and what will destroy
the vehemence of their drifting away from the wide path of truth. There are
three points here.
[37] First: it was mentioned that when the soul intellects something, it
becomes identical with its intellective form. We have already completed its
demonstration with firm proofs, and resolved the doubts about it. Then [it was
proven that] the intellective form is one of the things that cannot be multiple
insofar as it is an intellective form. Therefore every reality which is one and
belongs to a species does not become multiple when its members become
multiple except through material accidents. Since the intellective form in
actuality is disengaged from matter, its disengaged members cannot be multiple
either. It was already demonstrated that the intelligible in actuality from the

--- Sayfa 304 ---
APPENDIX
281
species of quiddity cannot be but one single intellective [reality] even if it is
intellected by a thousand intellects.
Second: oneness is of many modes, and the oneness of intellects is not
numerical, which is the source of numbers, such as the oneness of body and
blackness, movement, and so on among the material things. The oneness of the
intellect is rather like the oneness that belongs to the species. The difference
between numerical and other kinds of oneness is the following: oneness in
material bodies, like their existence, accepts augmentation and diminution, and
it is different from its like when it is considered to be [increased or decreased].
[In this way] the sum total is greater and more than one. Therefore two bodies
are more than one of them. In the same way, the state of these two blacknesses
in their being two is not like the state of one in its oneness, and this is in
contradiction to intellective oneness. If we suppose, for instance, the existence
of one thousand homogenous intellective forms, the state of one [intellect] in
its oneness would be like this one thousand in its multiplicity.
An example of this is the man-qua-man. When you add to this meaning a
meaning similar to it in terms of its specific reality after its being disembodied
from [its] additional qualities (al-zawa’id), you would find neither it nor the
whole [of man and the meaning added to it] in their second [state] except in
the way you have found the first one in its oneness. For this reason it is
mentioned in discussions of quiddity that when additional qualities that
individuate [a quiddity] are cut off from each meaning, which is related to its
species with multiple members in the external world, an intellective form of it
is inscribed in the soul. When it is cut off from another individual that
distinguishes it [from others] in external existence, what is added to the shared
quiddity does not affect the soul with a different effect except the first [one].
The author of the Talwihat [Suhrawardi] has pointed to this meaning when he
said: ‘Whenever you consider (the pure existence than which there is nothing
[38] more perfect)48 for the second time and look at it again, [you see that] it
is what it is; thus there is nothing that distinguishes (mayyiz) a pure thing [other
than itself].’49
Third: as explained before, the simple intellect is all of the intelligible things
from the point of view of its differentiating meanings in a single being. The
meaning of its being all of the intelligibilia is not that these things have become
unified insofar as the unification of their external and specific existence with
each other is concerned. This is impossible and known to anyone with even
the slightest knowledge. The quiddity of the horse has a being in the external
world with extraneous attachments such as quantity, position and color in a
specific matter. It also has a specific quiddity with mental concomitants and
corresponding meanings existing through an intellective being, with which its
definitive parts and constituent elements are united. And it is the function of
the mind to analyze it into these parts.
Therefore we say: each of the realities of these species has a mode of
existence as a material body by which its members are differentiated, through

--- Sayfa 305 ---
282
APPENDIX
which its individuals are multiplied, and in which they are found closely tied
to one another in terms of space or time. In the same way, each of them has a
specific intellective existence, differentiating its species in meaning and
concept. Thus the intelligible [reality] of the horse is one thing and the plant
is another in terms of quiddity and meaning, which is based on primary
essential predication. But the aim is [to show] that multiple quiddities can be
multiple in meaning and concept, and manifold in the external world in terms
of existence and instauration (ja‘l), existing with one single intellective
existence. Existence by itself is inclusive of all these meanings with its
simplicity and unity.
Once these premises are established, we say that it is in the nature of the
human soul to perceive all of the existential realities and unite with them
through a conceptual unification (ittihad ma‘nawiyyah). It is also in its nature
to become a simple intellect and an intellective knower,50 in whom resides the
form of every intellective existent and the meaning of every physical being in
a way higher than [39] their mode of physical existence. In the same way, the
five senses are contained in one single sense as in the case of common sense,
when we suppose, for instance, that the form of the intellective horse is found
in the soul. We have already established that the meaning of species concerning
a single entity cannot, by definition, be multiple in terms of its intellective
being or in terms of the concept and quiddity except through something added
to its intellective being and definitional concept. Therefore the intellective
horse that exists in the active intellect does not contradict the intellective horse
that exists in another intellective substance that we have assumed. This is just
like the soul that has become an intellect in actuality through [the active
intellect] from the point of view of [its] reality and meaning. What is in the
soul and what is in the active intellect as the quiddity of the horse is one single
reality as an intellective unity. It has already been mentioned that the soul
becomes united with every intellective form that it has intellected in actuality.
It follows from this that it is united with the active intellect, in which everything
exists from this point of view except that which has not yet been perceived
from among intellective realities.
It is thus established and verified that every soul that has perceived an
intellective form has become united with the intellect in the form of an
intellective unity from this point of view. When all meanings exist in the simple
intellect through a single being without requiring any multiplicity in it, it is
possible for them to be found in external material beings as multiple
[meanings]. In the same way, the transformation of these meanings in other
places—for instance in the external world, the senses, and imagination—as
having multiple beings does not lead to [the conclusion that] its likes in the
intellect become divisible insofar as its existence is concerned. Rather, it is
found in the intellect as a being exalted from any taint of divisibility and
partition. This does not necessitate the unification of multiple souls with the

--- Sayfa 306 ---
APPENDIX
283
active intellect from the point of view of their lower perfections nor does it
imply that every soul reaches every perfection and every virtue.
Whoever has difficulty in understanding this does so because he has
neglected the critical investigation of intellective unity (al-wahdat al-
‘aqliyyah), and compared it with numerical unity (al-wahdat al-‘adadiyyah).
Don’t you see that such intellective meanings as being rational, braying and
neighing are united with one single meaning of genus as in the case of the
animal? In spite of this, it does not necessitate the division of the meaning of
the horse-qua-horse into parts nor does it lead to the transformation of every
individual and [40] species of animal into the totality of other individual
animals. This is so because the unity of the animal-qua-animal is a unity-in-
general, and unity-in-general allows the unification of differences in itself. The
same applies to the intellective unity, which does not preclude the union of
multiple meanings within itself. Thus the intellective animals (al-hayawanat
al-‘aqliyyah) can be united in the intellective animal just like the animal-in-
general that belongs to a species.
The Third Section
The Quotation of What We Have Mentioned from the Word of the Ancient
Philosopher [the Author of the Theology]
Aristotle said in the Book of Theology: ‘The higher world is the perfect
living [reality] in which everything is contained, for it has originated from the
first perfect source. In it is to be found every soul and every intellect, and there
is absolutely no indigence and need here since things therein are all filled with
richness and life as if it is life that exceeds and gushes forth. The life of these
things issues forth from one single source, not just from one single heat
(warmth)51 or one single wind (smell). Rather, all of them are one single quality
in which is to be found every food [i.e., livelihood for them].’52
He also said in it [i.e., the Theology]: ‘The difference between life and
intellects here [in the higher world] is due to the difference of changes in life
and intellect. This is how different animals and different intellects have come
about.53 The only difference is that some of them are more luminous and perfect
than others. Therefore some intellects are closer to the first intellect (for which
reason they have become more intense in luminosity),54 and some of them are
second and third in rank. Some intellects that are found here have become
divine, some rational (natiqah), and some non-rational because of their
aloofness from these exalted intellects. As for here [i.e., this level], all of them
have intellect [41]. For this reason the horse has become an intellect, and the
intellect of the horse is a horse. It is impossible for that which intellects the
horse to be an intellector for man since this is not possible in the primary
intellects. Therefore when the first intellect intellects something, it and what it

--- Sayfa 307 ---
284
APPENDIX
intellects are one and the same thing. The first intellect does not intellect
something that does not have an intellect [i.e., something that is unintelligible]
but intellects it as a species of intellect and a species of life. And the individual
life is not the non-existence of the continuous life. In the same way, the
individual intellect is not the non-existence of the intellect in a certain mode.
If this is the case, then the intellect that we find in some living beings is
not the non-existence of the first intellect. Every part from the parts of the
intellect is all of that with which the intellect can be divided. Therefore the
intellect of something, which is an intellect for that very thing, is all things in
potentiality. When it becomes actualized, it becomes specific and then
actualized. And when it becomes actualized in the last stage, it becomes a horse
or another animal. Whenever life journeys into the lowest level, it becomes a
living thing in the lowest and basest level. That is why whenever animal
faculties reach lower levels, they become weak and some of their acts
disappear, from which a meek and weak animal emerges. When it becomes
further weak, the intellect existing in it deceits it, and the strong faculties
become a substitute for its power just as some animals have nails and claws,
and some have horns and some have fangs according to the degree of lack of
power in them.’55 The end of the quote from the words of the philosopher.
In this quote, there is clearly the verification and illumination of all the
points we have made and established except for the fact that some of his words
need explanation as a precaution for the lack of understanding on the part of
those who look at it. We have already explained this issue in the Four Journeys
and clarified what he wanted to convey by some of these statements.56 We leave
it here for fear of fatigue, and also rely on the understanding of some of the
sharp minded, especially those who have heard from me some of the concepts
of this book.57
Among these [concepts] is the word ‘potentiality’ (al-quwwah), which is
used here not in the popular sense of the term [as the opposite of actuality] but
rather as what is referred to in [42] the language of the ancients, namely that
a single being with its unity comprises quiddities and multiple meanings. It
can be found in various beings with different quiddities as in the case of intense
blackness. Thus when it is said that weak blacknesses are found in it potentially,
what is meant by this is not that these blacknesses in it exist by potential
contingency (al-imkan al-isti‘dadi) without them being [actually] existent. In
the same way, when it is said of the simple intellect that it is all the intelligibilia
in potentiality, what is intended by potentiality is not the meaning attributed to
non-existence but its being existent with a single intellective being.
The philosopher has pointed to this meaning by saying: ‘The actual is
superior to the potential in this world whereas in the higher world, the potential
is superior to the actual. This is so because the potential in the intellective
substances does not need to come into actuality from anything other than itself
since it is complete and perfect in perceiving spiritual things just like the
perception of sensate things by the faculty of sight. What is potential here [i.e.,

--- Sayfa 308 ---
APPENDIX
285
the higher world] is like the sight here [i.e., the lower world] whereas in the
sensible world they need to come into actuality, perceive sensible things, and
know the covers of substances, which are their clothes in this world. Therefore
they cannot reach the substances of things and their proximity to the
disembodiment of covers. In this, they need an act. When substances are
disembodied and potentialities are unveiled, however, what is potential
becomes sufficient by itself and does not need what is actual in the perception
of substances.’ End of the quote.58
Among [the terms he has used] is the word ‘part’ (al-juz’), and what is
meant by it is not what you have in the case of external parts, or mental parts,
or definitional parts such as genus and differentia. What is meant by the
attribution of parts to intellect is the fact that the intellect is united with external
realities in a simple way.
Among these is also the word ‘movement and rest, and journey to the lowest
level.’ What is meant by these is origination (al-ijad) and causality. And the
rest [of the concepts] are like the way we have explained them.
In another context, he also said in the Theology: ‘All things are in the
intellect and from the intellect, [43] and the intellect is all things. When there
is intellect, there are all things, and when there are no things, there is no
intellect. The intellect has become the totality of all things because in it are
contained all of the attributes of things. There is no attribute in it that does not
intellect something. This is so because there is nothing in the intellect which
is not in conformity with the existence (kawn) of something else.
If it is said that the attributes of the intellect are for itself and not for
something else, and [as such] it can never go beyond itself, we say: if you
look59 at the intellect as such and in this way, you have disparaged it and made
it a low, inferior and earthly substance since it does not go beyond itself, and
its attributes become its totality only. In this case, there remains nothing that
distinguishes between the intellect and the senses. This is despicably
impossible: the intellect and the senses cannot be one and the same thing.’60
He also said: ‘All intellects and living beings are contained in the intellect.
They are divided [into various classes] within it, and the division in the intellect
is not that these things subsist in it or that they are inserted into it. Rather it is
the agent of all things even though it acts on them one by one and according
to an order and rule. As for the first [primary] agent, it acts on things all at
once without an intermediary. We further say that just as the intellect comprises
all of the sensate things, the universal sensate (al-hissi al-kulli) comprises all
of the natures of living beings [animals]. And in every living being [animal]
are contained many living beings [animals] except for the fact that they are
meeker and weaker than the living being [animal] which is higher [in rank].
The living beings [animals] do not cease to become less and weaker in their
senses which befit them until they reach the [level of] small and weak living
beings [animals] where it finally stops.’61

--- Sayfa 309 ---
286
APPENDIX
The treatise has been completed. The praise and grace is to God, and the
benediction of God is upon Muhammad and his pure family.
NOTES
 1. Cf. my ‘An Annotated Bibliography of the Works of Mulla Sadra with a Brief
Account of His Life,’ Islamic Studies Vol. 42, No. 1 (Spring 2003), pp. 21–62.
 2. I translate the word al-aqil as ‘intellector’ instead of simply as intellect (al-‘aql) to
convey Sadra’s intended meaning. At times, Sadra uses the terms ‘intellect,
intellector and intellected’ together as a more comprehensive title for the unification
argument. He occasionally uses the words al-‘aql and al-‘aqil interchangeably but
there is a subtle difference between the two. While al-‘aql conveys the generic
meaning of intellect, al-‘aqil refers to the subject in whom the intellect functions
as the agent of unification with the intelligible world. Not only the intellect but also
the person who intellects is united with the intelligible world. This allows Sadra to
tie together his ontology and noetics in a more direct way.
 3. I translate the world al-ma‘qul as ‘intellected’ rather than simply ‘intelligible.’
Depending on the context, al-ma‘qul can be translated as intelligible, and I have
done so throughout the book. Where possible, I tried to spare the reader such clumsy
neologisms as ‘intellector-ness’ (al-‘aqiliyyah) and ‘intellected-ness’ (al-
ma‘quliyyah).
 4. The editor’s addition in parenthesis.
 5. This prelude is a reference to those including Ibn Sina and Suhrawardi who have
rejected the unification argument as mere sophistry. Sadra’s call for ‘proper
direction, patience, and fairness’ indicates the extent to which the issue has been
passionately debated. Cf. Asfar, I, 3, pp. 321–322.
 6. In the Asfar, I, 3, p. 427, Sadra says that he had a copy of a treatise by Alexander
of Aphrodisias on the unification of the intellect and the intelligible without
mentioning its title. This must be a reference to Alexander’s De Intellectu discussed
in Chapter I. It is important to note that Sadra mentions Alexander’s work after he
mentions the Theology of Aristotle and Porphyry’s treatise on the intellect. This
confirms one more time that Sadra reads Alexander through the eyes of
Neoplatonism and as supporting the unification argument.
 7. This section is a paraphrase of Asfar, I, 3, pp. 428–433 where Sadra’s discussion of
Alexander of Aphrodisias follows almost verbatim his De Intellectu 106–108.7.
 8. The term ‘verifier’ (al-muhaqqiq) and its plural appear many times in Sadra’s
writings. Sadra uses it when he refers to a specific group of philosophers whom he
considers closer to the perspective of his transcendent wisdom. Ibn al-‘Arabi
employs the same term to refer to his own school of thought. In its singular form,
it is also used as a nickname like ‘the verifier’ Nasir al-Din al-Tusi. For its usage
in different contexts see Asfar, I, 1, pp. 55, 59; I, 2, pp. 12, 38; I, 3, p. 311; II, 1,
p. 85; II, 2, pp. 35, 87, 95.
 9. This essentially Aristotelian idea refers to the innate potency of sensible objects to
assume various forms.
 10. Literally ‘you are not on a thing’ (shay’). Sadra is making use of the multiple
meanings of the word shay’ in Arabic.
 11. This contrast between the senses and the intellect is a reference to the fact that while
the senses can perceive only one sensate object at any given time, the intellect can

--- Sayfa 310 ---
APPENDIX
287
conceive multiple concepts. In this regard, ‘the senses multiply and the intellect
unifies.’
 12. As Sadra explains in great detail in the Asfar, this is a confirmation of the absolute
contingency of possible beings vis-à-vis the Necessary Being: they are hung between
existence and non-existence.
 13. Sadra’s choice of words here is extremely important for a proper understanding of
how the active intellect functions in classical philosophy. The active intellect is not
a ‘thing’ but a principle or principles of conceptual thinking. Just as light makes
things visible, these principles make thinking possible. Unification with the active
intellect means to learn these principles and ‘participate’ in them. The active intellect
moves the potential intellect from mere appearances and sensation to principles of
thinking. Sadra’s phrase ‘the agent of intellectual conception’ captures this meaning
quite accurately. Cf. Asfar, I, 3, pp. 431–432.
 14. Sadra draws a distinction between the ‘presence of perceptual forms for the soul
and their actualization in matter.’ Cf. Asfar, I, 3, pp. 300–304. The presence of
something to itself signifies the absence of any epistemic obstacle. Cf. Asfar, I, 3,
p. 449.
 15. The word ja‘l, which I translate as ‘instauration,’ and its derivatives ja‘il and maj‘ul
occupy a special place in Sadra’s philosophical vocabulary. Briefly stated, it
signifies putting something into a specific state or condition in conformity with its
essential properties. Sadra divides it into two: simple and composite. Simple
instauration refers to the construction of something by itself when we say, for
instance, ‘man is man.’ In logic, this corresponds to ‘essential primary predication’
(al-haml al-dhati al-awwali). Composite instauration refers to cases where the
definition of a quiddity involves the convergence of both essential and accidental
properties such as when we say ‘man is rational animal’ and ‘man is writer.’ For
Sadra, what is ‘instaured’ by itself (al-maj‘ul bi’l-dhat) is not essence but existence
because existence does not need an external agent to make it a specific substance
whereas all essences need some cause external to them to exist in the external world.
In this sense, essences are ‘instaured’ or produced ‘by accident’ (al-maj‘ul bi’l-
‘arad). Cf. Asfar, I, 1, pp. 65–66; Asalat ja‘l al-wujud in Majmu‘ah, pp. 184–185;
Sharh, Vol. II, p. 805. See also Sadra’s extensive analysis in Asfar, I, 1, pp. 396–423
where he talks about concept (tasawwur) and judgment (tasdiq) as two cases of
simple and composite instauration. In using the old English word ‘instauration,’ I
follow Corbin and Nasr to distinguish ja‘l from ‘causation.’
 16. al-Farabi distinguishes attribution (mudaf) from necessity (luzum). The ‘day’
necessitates the sunrise but the two are not ‘attributed’ to one another in the logical
sense. See Jawabat, p. 92.
 17. Another consequence of this is what Sadra calls the ‘privative’ (salbi) view of
knowledge. Cf. Asfar, I, 3, pp. 286–287.
 18. As Sadra explains in the following paragraph, his main point is to show the dynamic
nature of the soul vis-à-vis the sensate, imaginal and intelligible forms that it
appropriates. Essentially, this is a criticism directed at the Peripatetic notion of the
soul as a passive receptacle of abstract forms. Sadra attributes this view to Ibn Sina’s
belief in the absolute ‘disembodiment of the soul from matter in its original state
of being (fitrah)—a view that needs to be corrected.’ Asfar, I, 3, p. 443. Ibn Sina
states the same view in various places. See, inter alia, his short treatise ‘On the
Rational Soul’ in Gutas, Avicenna and the Aristotelian Tradition, p. 74. Even though
Sadra bases his criticism on this absolutely non-corporeal view of the soul, he fails
to explain why this particular view should lead to a passive concept of the soul. See

--- Sayfa 311 ---
288
APPENDIX
also Shawahid, pp. 195–196, 199–200 and 221–222 where Sadra reiterates his view
of the soul as arising out of material conditions. For Sadra’s proofs, which he calls
sam‘i, i.e., ‘heard’ or transmitted, from the Qur’an, hadith and other reported sayings
about the disembodiment of the soul from matter, see Asfar, IV, 1, pp. 303–324.
Sadra begins this section by saying that ‘most people benefit from the transmitted
arguments (sam‘iyyat) more than they do from the intellectual arguments
(‘aqliyyat).’
 19. Cf. Shawahid, pp. 245–246 where Sadra, following Ibn Sina in broad outlines,
defines the active intellect as the fundamental principles of thinking. As mentioned
before, this meaning is sufficiently clear in Ibn Sina’s description of the active
intellect as the ‘principles of intellective forms.’ Cf. Najat, p. 234.
 20. Sadra is referring to the celebrated controversy between the two theories of vision
in the Middle Ages. While the defenders of the ‘intromission’ theory argued that
the vision of physical objects takes place by something coming into the eye, the
defenders of ‘extromission’ explained vision by something going out of the eye and
contacting the object seen. While the first view is usually associated with Aristotle
and the ‘naturalists,’ the second view is attributed to ‘the mathematicians.’ The
difficulties and inconsistencies of both views can be followed from David Lindberg,
Theories of Vision from al-Kind to Kepler (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1976). For the significance of this debate in the School of Illumination, see,
Walbridge, The Leaven of the Ancients, pp. 157–164. Sadra rejects both theories
and opts for Suhrawardi’s idea that vision takes place through an ‘illuminative and
presential knowledge’ (‘ilm ishraqi huduri). Cf. Asfar, I, 1, p. 301. See also Asfar,
IV, 1, pp. 178–200 and Sharh, Vol. I, p. 589. For Suhrawardi, see his Kitab al-
mashari‘ wa’l-mutarahat, p. 486, par. 209.
 21. This is a reference to Sadra’s view á la Suhrawardi that perception does not come
about as a result of the juxtaposition of the organ of perception and what is
perceived. Perception of sensate objects involves consciousness and goes beyond
the kind of mere ‘relationality,’ which Sadra criticizes.
 22. Cf. Uthulujya, p. 117. The first part of the quote corresponds, with some variations,
to the Enneads, 5, VIII, 11.
 23. Sadra does not mention the books to which he is referring here. It could be a
reference to the books that advocate the view that Sadra criticizes here or to his
own books in which he provides his alternative account.
 24. This is a response to the possible charge of solipsism where the only thing the soul
can know is its own being. Sadra rejects the idea of treating perceptual forms as
‘conceptual garments’ which the mind puts on things in the external world. Instead,
he insists on the autonomous intelligibility of substances outside the mind.
 25. The kind of work that requires the actual involvement of the body. This point is
made clear few lines later in the same paragraph.
 26. Cf. Asfar, I, 3, p. 315.
 27. Sadra uses Ibn Sina’s conventional title al-Shaykh throughout the treatise as he does
in his other works. I kept to the word ‘Master’ to translate it. Sadra occasionally
uses Ibn Sina’s full title al-Shaykh al-ra’is, which I have rendered as ‘Chief
Master.’
 28. In the above quotation from the Shifa’, Sadra uses the word mutaqaddimin rather
than mutasaddirin which is the word used in the Sharh, Vol. 3, p. 292. Mutasaddir,
which Ibn Sina uses only when referring to a specific group of people, comes from
the root ‘s-d-r’ meaning to come forth, to put forward, to emanate, etc. Goichon
translates it as those ‘philosophers who advance things that have not been proven’

--- Sayfa 312 ---
APPENDIX
289
and more specifically those who believe, contrary to Ibn Sina, that the soul becomes
the object of its intellection. See A. M. Goichon, Lexique, p. 177. Massignon
translates it as simply ‘professors of philosophy.’ See Louis Massignon, Recueil de
texts inédit concernant l’histoire de la mystique en pays d’Islam (Paris: Librairie
orientaliste Paul Geunthner, 1929), p. 189.
 29. For the quote see Sharh, Vol. 3, pp. 292–293. This is a reference to Ibn Sina’s denial
of change in the category of substance. It is to be remembered that for Ibn Sina,
when a substance is transformed, it does not ‘evolve’ into another substance while
preserving its essential identity. Instead, it undergoes generation and corruption
(kawn wa fasad) and thus becomes something new.
 30. Cf. Sharh, Vol. 3, p. 295.
 31. The Rahman edition of Kitab al-nafs (Avicenna’s De Anima) has the word ‘hawwasa’
instead of ‘bayyana’ which is what we have in Sadra’s quote here. I used Sadra’s
quote for the translation above rather than the original passage from the Shifa’.
 32. The quote is from Avicenna’s De Anima, pp. 239–240 with slight variations.
 33. Like Ibn Sina and Suhrawardi, Sadra considers unification between two corporeal
objects as a physical impossibility. In a section of the Asfar where he gives an
elaborate discussion of love and its kinds, Sadra reiterates his arguments against the
essential unification of two objects, and applies them to love as unification between
lover and beloved. He mentions this particular view of love as correct but in need
of qualification. Since love, like intelligence, is a quality of the soul not the body,
unification between the lover and the beloved can only be spiritual and
‘metaphorical.’ Lest we think of ‘metaphorical’ as unreal, Sadra hastens to add that
‘metaphor is an archway to reality’ (al-majaz qantarat al-haqiqah). Cf. Asfar, II, 3,
pp. 175–177.
 34. As mentioned before, essential primary predication (al-haml al-dhati al-awwali) is
the kind of predication that is true in both concept and reality. Sadra is referring to
particular objects that can be distinguished from one another both in concept and
in reality.
 35. The expression amr ‘adami translated here as ‘a matter of non-existence’ has a
specific referent in Sadra’s ontology and noetics. Sadra defines non-existence as the
absence of existence, not as a state or term on its own because ‘the universal and
expanding shadow of existence falls on all essences and concepts including the
concept of non-existence, the partner unto God, and the unity of opposites.’ Asfar,
I, 1, p. 146. Non-existence refers to a state of deficiency and privation. Furthermore,
according to the theory of substantial motion, when things shed some of their
attributes to reach their final telos, they do not lose anything from their essential
identity. When a child becomes a grown-up person, he becomes ‘more’ in his
substantial motion by leaving the traits of childhood behind. This ‘loss’ does not
detract anything from his new state of existence as a fuller human being. All of the
essential properties of a child and an adult person are present in the reality of
humanity (al-insaniyyah). The reason why Sadra inserts this passage here seems to
prove to Ibn Sina and his students that a being can transform into something else
without losing its essential identity. In fact, the final telos of a being contains all of
its previous stages of growth and transformation without a residue. Sadra believes
that this is what Ibn Sina has failed to recognize. In spite of this fundamental
difference, it is obvious that in the quotes from the Shifa’ Sadra is having a
conversation with Ibn Sina and trying to read his own view of gradational change
into Ibn Sina’s text.
 36. Cf. Shawahid, pp. 221–222.

--- Sayfa 313 ---
290
APPENDIX
 37. Meaning an ‘animal that estimates.’
 38. Meaning an ‘animal that intellects.’
 39. This Avicennan term may refer to a substance or accident. Cf. Asfar, II, 1, p. 186.
 40. Cf. Asfar, I, 3, p. 332. The definition of form as existence or a modality of existence
is one of the ways in which Sadra tries to overcome Ibn Sina’s hylomorphic
ontology. In contrast to the Peripatetic notion of the form as a fixed entity, Sadra
defines it as undergoing substantial change in terms of ontological intensity or lack
thereof. Cf. Asfar, I, 3, pp. 105–107. For the various uses of the term form in Ibn
Sina see Goichon, Lexique, pp. 185–191. In some ways, this is a version of the
Platonic Forms as revised from the point of view of Sadra’s gradational ontology.
In the Shawahid, Sadra gives a detailed discussion of the Platonic Forms from Plato
and Aristotle to al-Farabi, Ibn Sina and Suhrawardi. See Shawahid, pp. 154–178.
 41. Cf. Asfar, I, 3, p. 333.
 42. Lit. ‘knowledgeness.’ What Sadra has in mind is the state of being known by
something else, and this, he insists, is not a relation (idafah).
 43. Translating al-insaniyyah as human-ness rather than as humanity to maintain the
etymological connection between ‘human-ness’ and ‘horse-ness.’
 44. Translating al-fi‘l al-mutlaq as ‘general’ rather than ‘absolute’ actuality. This is a
reference to Zayd as a person who is not a writer. The negation does not make Zayd
non-existent. Saying that A is not B does not make A non-existent.
 45. This section appears also in Asfar, I, 3, p. 335.
 46. ‘Because whatever is united with the [active] intellect and all of the intelligibilia
necessarily intellects whatever the active intellect intellects.’ Asfar, I, 3, p. 335.
 47. Asfar, I, 3, p. 336.
 48. The addition is in the Asfar, I, 3, p. 337.
 49. As Sabzawari explains in his gloss, the gist of Sadra’s argument is the following:
what distinguishes pure whiteness as a quiddity from other quiddities is not a white
object but whiteness itself. Cf. Asfar, I, 3, p. 338. The other part of the argument
pertains to what happens to an intellective form when it is perceived by multiple
intellects. Sadra’s reponse is a reiteration of the unification argument: ‘When the
soul becomes an intellect in actuality, the intellective horse (al-faras al-‘aqli) which
is in the active intellect and the intellective horse which is in the soul cannot be
multiple from the point of view of meaning and truth but only from the point of
view of what is added to the definition and truth [of horse-ness]. Therefore what is
in the soul and what is in the active intellect as the intellective horse is one and the
same thing’. Asfar, I, 3, p. 339.
 50. That is, a knower that knows through the simple intellect.
 51. This is a reference to Zeno’s definition of God as ‘warmed breath.’ Cf. Pierre Hadot,
Plotinus or the Simpliciy of Vision, tr. M. Chase (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1993), p. 37, n. 5.
 52. Asfar, I, 3, p. 340. The quote is from the Uthulujya, p. 94 and the Enneads, 6, VII,
12. For Geoffrey Lewis’ translation, see Plotiniana Arabica in Plotini Opera, Tomvs
II, Enneads IV–V (Paris-Bruxelles: Desclee de Brouwer, 1959), p. 467. The quote
Sadra uses here shows some important variations from the original Greek. Cf.
MacKenna’s translation: ‘[To ask how those forms of life come to be There is simply
asking how that heaven came to be; it is asking whence comes life, whence] the
All-Life, whence the All-Soul, whence collective Intellect: and the answer is that
There no indigence or impotence can exist but all must be teeming, seething, with
life. All flows, so to speak, from one fount not to be thought of as one breath or

--- Sayfa 314 ---
APPENDIX
291
warmth but rather as one quality englobing and safeguarding all qualities—sweetness
[with fragrance…].’
 53. As mentioned before, the etymological connection between the words life (hayat)
and animal (hayawan) is lost in English. It would be closer to the text to translate
these two words as ‘animation’ and ‘animality.’
 54. The addition is in the Asfar, I, 3, p. 340.
 55. Cf. Asfar, I, 3, pp. 340–341. The quote is from the Uthulujya, pp. 150–151 with
minor variations. Cf. the Enneads, 6, VII, 9 whose original differs slightly from the
quote used by Sadra. The same passage is also found in the Shawahid, pp. 175–178.
Cf. Lewis’ translation in Plotiniana Arabica, pp. 457–459.
 56. Cf. Asfar, I, 3, p. 341. Sadra states that what the author of the Theology means by
‘motion here is not change or alteration (al-taghayyur) but emanation (al-sudur) in
a certain way.’ For Sadra’s commentary on the passage quoted, see Asfar, I, 3, pp.
341–344.
 57. This is probably a reference to Sadra’s students Kashani, Lahiji and his son.
 58. Cf. the Uthulujya, pp. 99–100 with some variations. The quote in Arabic is a
freelance translation of the Enneads, 6, VII, 13–14 with some sentences not found
in the Greek original. Cf. Plotiniana Arabica, pp. 467–469.
 59. The Badawi edition of the Uthulujya has the verb ‘turned into’ (sayyarta) instead
of ‘looked’ (basarta). G. Lewis translation reads as ‘if you make the mind in this
condition….’ Plotiniana Arabica, p. 471.
 60. Cf. Uthulujya, pp. 96–97; Plotiniana Arabica, p. 471.
 61. Cf. Uthulujya, p. 98. This quote and the one before are freelance translations from
the Enneads, 6, VII, 13–14 with some material from other sources. Cf. Plotiniana
Arabica, p. 473.

--- Sayfa 315 ---
Açıkgenç, Alparslan, Being and Existence in Sadra and Heidegger (Malaysia:
International Institute of Islamic Thought and Civilization, 1993).
Adamson, Peter, The Arabic Plotinus: A Philosophical Study of the Theology
of Aristotle (London: Duckworth, 2002).
Alexander of Aphrodisias, De Anima, tr. Athanasios P. Fotinis (Washington,
DC: University Press of America, 1979).
Aminrazavi, Mahdi, Suhrawardi and the School of Illumination (Surrey, UK:
Curzon, 1997).
Amir-Moezzi, Muhammad Ali, ‘Le Combatant du ta’wil. Un poeme de Molla
Sadra sur Ali (Aspects de I’imamologie duodecimaine IX), in Reason and
Inspiration in Islam, ed. Todd Lawson (London: I. B. Tauris, 2005), pp.
432–454.
Amoretti, B. S., ‘Religion in the Timurid and Safavid Periods’ in The Cambridge
History of Iran, eds. Peter Jackson and Laurence Lockhart (Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, 1986), Vol. VI, pp. 610–655.
al-Andalusi, Sa‘id, Tabaqat al-‘umam, ed. Husayn Mu’nas (Cairo, Egypt: Dar
al-Ma‘arif, 1998).
Aouad, M., ‘La ‘Théologie d’Aristote’ et autres texts du Plotinus Arabus’ in
Dictionnarie des philosophes antiques (Paris: Editions du CNRS, 1989),
pp. 541–590.
Aquinas, St. Thomas, Aristotle’s De Anima in the Version of William of
Moerbeke and the Commentary of St. Thomas Aquinas, tr. K. Foster and S.
Humphries (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1954).
, On Being and Essence, tr. A. Maurer (Toronto: The Pontifical
Institute of Mediaeval Studies, 1983).
, On the Unity of the Intellect against the Averroists, tr. B. H. Zedler
(Milwaukee, WI: Marquette University Press, 1968).
Aristotle, De Anima, tr. Hippocrates G. Apostle, Aristotle’s On the Soul (Des
Moines, IA: Peripatetic Press, 1981).
, Metaphysics, tr. W. D. Ross (Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press, 1958).
Arjomand, Said Amir, The Shadow of God and the Hidden Imam: Religion,
Political Order, and Societal Change in Shi’ite Iran from the Beginning to
1890 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984).
Armstrong, A. H., ‘The Background of the Doctrine that the ‘Intelligibles are
not Outside the Intellect’’ in Les Sources de Plotin (Vandoeuvres-Geneve,
1957), pp. 393–413.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

--- Sayfa 316 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY
293
, ‘Plotinus’ in The Cambridge History of Later Greek and Early
Medieval Philosophy, ed. A. H. Armstrong (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press, 1967), pp. 195–264.
Atiyeh, George, al-Kindi: The Philosophers of the Arabs (Islamabad, Pakistan:
Islamic Research Institute, 1967).
Babayan, Kathryn, Mystics, Monarchs and Messiahs: Cultural Landscapes of
Early Modern Iran (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2002).
Badawi, ‘Abd al-Rahman, Aflatuniyyat al-muhdatha ‘ind al-‘arab (Cairo,
Egypt: Maktabat al-Nahdat al-Misriyyah, 1955).
, Aflutin ‘ind al-‘arab (Cairo, Egypt: Maktabat al-Nahdat al-Misriyyah,
1955).
, Aflatun fi’l-islam (Beirut, Lebanon: Dar al-Andalus, 1980, 2nd edition).
, Averroés (Ibn Rushd) (Paris: Librairie Philosophique J. Vrin, 1998).
, Aristu ‘ind al-‘arab (Cairo, Egypt: 1947).
, La Transmission de la philosophique grecque au monde arabe (Paris:
Librairie Philosophique J. Vrin, 1987).
, Shuruh ‘ala aristu mafqudah fi’l-yunaniyyah wa rasa’il ukhra
(Beirut, Lebanon: Dar al-Mashriq, 1971).
Barnes, Winston, ‘The Myth of Sense-Data’ in R. J. Swartz (ed.), Perceiving,
Sensing, and Knowing (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1965), pp.
138–167.
Blumenthal, H. J., Aristotle and Neoplatonism in Late Antiquity (Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press, 1996).
Booth, Edward, Aristotelian Aporetic Ontology in Islamic and Christian
Thinkers (Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University Press, 1983).
Bostock, David, Plato’s Phaedo (Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press, 1986).
Brentano, Franz, ‘Nous Poietikos: Survey of Earlier Interpretations’ in Essays
on Aristotle’s De Anima, ed. Martha C. Nussbaum and Amelie O. Rorty
(Oxford, UK: Clarendon Press, 1992), pp. 313–341.
Browne, E. G., A Literary History of Persia (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press, 1953).
Butterworth, Charles, ‘The Origins of al-Razi’s Political Philosophy’
Interpretation (Spring 1993), Vol. 20, No. 3, pp. 237–257.
Chittick, William, The Heart of Islamic Philosophy: The Quest for Self-
Knowledge in the Teachings of Afdal al-Din Kashani (Oxford/New York:
Oxford University Press, 2001).
, The Self-Disclosure of God: Principles of Ibn al-‘Arabi’s Cosmology
(Albany: State University of New York Press, 1998).
, The Sufi Path of Knowledge: Ibn al-‘Arabi’s Metaphysics of
Imagination (Albany: State of University of New York Press, 1989).
Christ, Paul Sydney, The Psychology of the Active Intellect of Averroes
(Philadelphia, 1926).
Cornford, Francis M., Plato’s Theory of Knowledge (Indianapolis: The Bobbs-
Merrill Company, Inc., 1957).

--- Sayfa 317 ---
294
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Dabashi, Hamid, ‘Mir Damad and the Founding of the “School of Isfahan”’ in
A History of Islamic Philosophy, Oliver Leaman and Seyyed Hossein Nasr
(eds.) (London: Routledge, 1996), Vol. 1, pp. 597–634.
Davidson, Herbert A., AlFarabi, Avicenna, and Averroes on Intellect: Their
Cosmologies, Theories of the Active Intellect, and Theories of Human
Intellect (New York/Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1992).
Dorter, Kenneth, Plato’s Phaedo: An Interpretation (Toronto: University of
Toronto Press, 1982).
Druart, Therese-Anne, ‘al-Farabi and Emanationism’ in Studies in Medieval
Philosophy, ed. John F. Wippel (Washington, DC: The Catholic University
of America Press, 1987), pp. 23–43.
Duhem, Pierre, Le systéme du monde: Histoire des doctrines cosmologique de
Platon à Copernic (Paris, 1916). Vol. IV.
Endress, Gerhard, Proclus Arabus: Zwanzig Abschnitte aus der Institutio
Theologica in arabischer Übersetzungen (Beirut and Wiesbaden: Orient-
Institut der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft, 1973).
Fakhry, Majid, Averroes (Oxford, UK: Oneworld, 2001).
, al-Farabi: Founder of Islamic Neoplatonism (Oxford, UK: Oneworld,
2002).
al-Farabi, Falsafat aristutalis, ed. Muhsin Mahdi (Beirut, 1961).
, Jawabat li-masa’il su’ila ‘anha in Risalatan falsafiyyatan ed. Ja’far
Al-i Yasin (Beirut, Lebanon: Dar al-Manahil, 1987).
, Kitab al-millah, ed. Muhsin Mahdi (Beirut, Lebanon: Dar al-Mashriq,
1991, 2nd edition).
, Mabadi’ ara’ ahl al-madinat al-fadilah, ed. and tr. Richard Walzer as
On the Perfect State (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1985).
, al-Majmu‘, ed. A. N. al-Jamali and M. Amin al-Khanji (Cairo, Egypt:
Matba‘at al-Sa‘adah, 1907).
, al-Masa’il al-mutafarriqah, ed. F. Dieterici, (Leiden, 1890).
, Risalah fi’l-‘aql, ed. Maurice Bouyges (Beyrouth, Lebanon: Dar el-
Machreq Sarl, 1983).
, Tanbih ‘ala sabil al-sa’adah, ed. Sahban Khalifat (‘Amman, Jordan:
al-Jami‘ah al-Urduniyyah, 1987).
Fazzo, Silvia and Wiesner, Hillary, ‘Alexander of Aphrodisias in the Kindi-
Circle and in al-Kindi’s Cosmology’ Arabic Sciences and Philosophy, Vol.
3 (1993), pp. 119–153.
Festugiére, A. J. Contemplation et vie contemplative selon Plato (Paris:
Librairie Philosophique J. Vrin, 1975).
Finnegan, J. ‘Texte arabe du PERI NOU d’Alexandre d’Aphrodise’ in Mélanges
Louis Massignon (Damas, 1957), pp. 133–152.
, ‘Avicenna’s Refutation of Porphyrius’ in Avicenna Commemoration
Volume (Calcutta, 1956), pp. 187–203.
Flew, Anthony, An Introduction to Western Philosophy (New York: Thames
and Hudson, 1989).

--- Sayfa 318 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY
295
Galston, Miriam, ‘A Re-examination of al-Farabi’s Neoplatonism,’ Journal of
the History of Philosophy 15 (1977), pp. 13–32.
, Politics and Excellence: The Political Philosophy of AlFarabi
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1990).
Gardet, Louis, La Pensée religieuse d’Avicenne (Ibn Sina) (Paris: Librairie
Philosophique J. Vrin, 1951).
Gellner, Ernest, Words and Things (Boston: Beacon Press, 1960).
al-Ghazali, Abu Hamid, The Book of Knowledge, tr. Nabih Amin Faris (New
Delhi, India: International Islamic Publishers, 1988; original edition 1962).
, Ma‘arij al-quds fi madarij ma‘rifat al-nafs (Baghdad, Iraq: al-
Maktabat al-‘Alamiyyah, 1990).
Gilson, Etienne, History of Christian Philosophy in the Middle Ages (London:
Sheed and Ward, 1989).
, Being and Some Philosophers (Toronto: The Pontifical Institute of
Medieval Studies, 1952).
, ‘Les sources gréco-arabes de l’augustinisme avicennisant,’ Archives
d’histoire doctrinale et littéraire du moyen age, IV (1929), pp. 5–107.
Gleave, Robert, Scripturalist Islam: The History and Doctrines of the Akhbari
Shi‘i School (Leiden, Holland: Brill, 2007).
Goichon, A. M., La Philosophie d’Avicenne et son influence en europe
médiévale (Paris: Librairie d’Amerique et d’Orient, 1951).
, Lexique de la langue philosophique d’Ibn Sina (Avicenne) (Paris:
Desclée de Brouwer, 1938).
Goodman, L. E., Avicenna (London: Routledge, 1992).
Gottschalk, H. B., ‘Aristotelian Philosophy in the Roman World from the Time
of Cicero to the End of the Second Century AD’ in Aufstieg und Niedergang
der Römischen Welt, eds. W. Haase and H. Temporini (Berlin-New York:
W. de Gruyter, 1987), Part II, 36.2, pp. 1079–1174.
Griswold, Charles L., Self-Knowledge in Plato’s Phaedrus (New Haven and
London: Yale University Press, 1986).
Guignon, Charles B., Heidegger and the Problem of Knowledge (Indianapolis:
Hackett, 1983).
Gulley, Norman, Plato’s Theory of Knowledge (London: Methuen & Co Ltd.,
1962).
Gutas, Dimitri, Avicenna and the Aristotelian Tradition: Introduction to Reading
Avicenna’s Philosophical Works (Leiden, Holland: E. J. Brill, 1988).
, ‘Intuition and Thinking: The Evolving Structure of Avicenna’s
Epistemology’ in Aspects of Avicenna, ed. Robert Wisnowsky (Princeton,
NJ: Markus Wiener Publishers, 2001), pp. 1–38.
Habermas, Jurgen, The Future of Human Nature (Cambridge, UK: Polity Press,
2003).
Hadot, Pierre, Philosophy as a Way of Life (Oxford, UK: Blackwell, 1995).
, Plotinus or the Simplicity of Vision, tr. M. Chase (Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 1993).

--- Sayfa 319 ---
296
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Hasnawi, Ahmad, ‘Alexandre d’Aphrodise vs Jean Philopon: Notes sur
Quelques Traités d’Alexandre ‘Perdus’ en Grec, Conservé en Arabe,’ Arabic
Science and Philosophy, Vol. 4 (1994), pp. 53–109.
Heath, Peter, Allegory and Philosophy in Avicenna (Philadelphia: University
of Pennsylvania Press, 1992).
Heinz, Halm, Shiism (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1991).
Hyman, A. ‘Averroes’ Theory of the Intellect and the Ancient Commentators’
in Averroes and the Aristotelian Tradition ed. Gerhard Endress and Jan
Aersten (Leiden, Holland: Brill, 1999), pp. 188–198.
, ‘Aristotle’s Theory of the Intellect and its Interpretation by Averroes’
in Studies in Aristotle, ed. Dominic J. O’Meara (Washington, DC: Catholic
University of America Press, 1981), pp. 161–191.
Ibn Abi Usaybi‘a, ‘Uyun al-anba’ fi tabaqat al-atibba’, ed. M. ‘Uyun al-Sud
(Beirut, Lebanon: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah, 1998).
Ibn al-‘Arabi, al-Futuhat al-makkiyyah, ed. M. ‘Abd al-Rahman al-Mar‘ashli
(Beirut, Lebanon: Dar Ihya’ al-Turath al-’Arabi, 1997), 4 Vols.
, Fusus al-hikam, ed. Nawaf al-Jarrah (Beirut, Lebanon: Dar Sadir, 2005).
Ibn Marzuban, Bahmanyar, Kitab al-tahsil ed. Murtada Mutahhari (Tehran,
Iran: The University of Tehran Press, ah 1375, 2nd edition).
Ibn Maymun, Dalalat al-ha’irin, ed. Ahmad Farid al-Mazidi (Beirut, Lebanon:
Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, 2007).
Ibn Rushd, Epitome of Parva Naturalia, tr. Harry Blumberg (Cambridge, MA:
The Medieval Academy of America, 1961).
, L’intelligence et la pensée, tr. Alain de Libera (Paris: GF Flammarion,
1998).
, Talkhis kitab al-nafs (‘Averroes’ Middle Commentary on Aristotle’s
de Anima’) ed. Alfred L. Ivry, rev. Muhsin Mahdi (Cairo, Egypt: 1994).
, The Epistle on the Possibility of Conjunction with the Active Intellect
by Ibn Rushd with the Commentary of Moses Narboni, ed. Kalman P. Bland
(New York: The Jewish Theological Seminary of America, 1982).
, Tahafut al-tahafut, ed. S. Dunya’, (Cairo, Egypt: 1964), 2 Vols.;
English translation, Van den Bergh, The Incoherence of the Incoherence
(London: Luzac, 1978).
Ibn Sab’in, Budd al-‘arif, ed. George Kattura (Beirut, Lebanon: Dar al-Andalus,
1978).
Ibn Sina, ‘A Treatise on Love,’ tr. Emil L. Fackenheim, Medieval Studies, Vol.
VII (1945), pp. 208–228.
, Shifa’, Ilahiyyat, ed. G. Anawati, M. Y. Moussa, S. Dunya’, and S.
Zayed (Cairo, Egypt: 1960), Vols. I–II.
, Shifa’, Tabi‘iyyat, ed. I. Madkour and M. Qasim (Cairo, Egypt: Dar
al-Kutub al-‘Arabi, 1960).
, al-Isharat wa’l-tanbihat, with the commentaries of Nasir al-Din al-
Tusi and Qutb al-Din al-Razi, (Tehran, Iran: Matba‘at al-Haydari 1958).
, al-Mabda’ wa’l-ma’ad, ed. ‘Abd Allah Nurani (Tehran, Iran:
Danishgah-i Tehran, ah 1363).

--- Sayfa 320 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY
297
, al-Risalat al-‘arshiyyah fi tawhidihi ta‘ala wa sifatihi, ed. S. Zayn
al-‘Abidin al-Musawi (Haydarabad: Da’irat al-Ma‘arif al-Uthmaniyyah, ah
1353); partial English translation by A. J. Arberry, Avicenna on Theology
(Westport, CT: Hyperion Press, Inc., 1994).
, Avicenna’s De Anima: Being the Psychological Part of Kitab al-
Shifa’, ed. Fazlur Rahman (London: Oxford University Press, 1959).
, Kitab al-najat, ed. Majid Fakhry (Beirut, Lebanon: Dar al-Ufuq al-
Jadidah, 1985).
, Risalah fi ithbat al-nubuwwah, ed. M. Marmura (Beirut, Lebanon:
Dar al-Nahar li al-Nashr, 1991, 2nd edition).
al-Isfahani, Muhy al-Din al-‘Ajami, Êpitre sur l’unité et la trinité, traite sur
l’intellect, fragment sur l’âme, ed. and tr. M. Allard and G. Troupeau
(Beyrouth, Lebanon: Imperim Catholique, 1962).
Ivry, Alfred L., ‘Averroes’ Three Commentaries on De Anima’ in Averroes and
the Aristotelian Tradition, ed. Gerhard Endress abd Jan Aersten (Leiden,
Holland: Brill, 1999).
Izutsu, Toshihiko, The Concept and Reality of Existence (Tokyo: Keio Institute
of Cultural and Linguistic Studies, 1971).
Jabre, Farid, Essai sur le lexique de Ghazali (Beyrouth, Lebanon: Publications
de L’Université Libanaise, 1970).
Jadaane, Fehmi, L’Influence du stoïcisme sur la pensée musulamane (Beyrouth,
Lebanon: Dar el-Machreq Editeurs, 1968).
Jambet, Christian, The Act of Being: The Philosophy of Revelation in Mulla
Sadra (New York: Zone Books, 2006).
Jolivet, Jean, L’Intellect selon Kindi (Leiden, Holland: E. J. Brill, 1971).
, ‘Étapes dans l’histoire de l’intellect agent’ in Perspectives arabes et
médiévales sur la tradition scientifique et philosophique grecque, ed. A.
Hasnawi, A. Elamrani-Jamal and M. Aouad (Paris: Peeters, 1997), pp.
569–582.
Kahn, Charles, ‘Why Existence Does Not Emerge as a Distinct Concept in
Greek Philosophy’ in Philosophies of Existence, Ancient and Medieval, ed.
Parviz Morewedge (New York: Fordham University Press, 1982), pp. 7–
17.
Kalin, Ibrahim, ‘Mulla Sadra on Theodicy and the Best of All Possible Worlds,’
Oxford Journal of Islamic Studies, 18:2 (2007), pp. 183–201.
, ‘Between Physics and Metaphysics: Mulla Sadra on Nature and
Motion,’ Islam and Science Vol. I, (2003), pp. 65–93.
, ‘An Annotated Bibliography of the Works of Mulla Sadra with a Brief
Account of His Life,’ Islamic Studies Vol. 42, No. 1 (Spring 2003), pp.
21–62.
Kant, Immanuel, Critique of Pure Reason, tr. Norman Kemp Smith (London:
Macmillan, 1973).
Kennedy-Day, Kiki, Books of Definition in Islamic Philosophy (London and
New York: Routledge, Curzon, 2003).

--- Sayfa 321 ---
298
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Kenny, John P., Mystical Monotheism: A Study in Ancient Platonic Theology
(Hanover & London: Brown University Press, 1991).
al-Kindi, Risalah fi’l-‘aql (‘On the Intellect’), ed. Jean Jolivet in L’Intellect
selon Kindi.
, Rasa’il al-Kindi al-falsafiyyah ed. Muhammad Abu Ridah (Cairo,
Egypt: Dar al-Fikr al-‘Arabi, 1978), 2 Vols.
Khurram-dashti, Nahid Baqiri with Fatimah ‘Asghari, Kitab shinasi-yi jami‘i
Mulla Sadra (Tehran, Iran: Bunyad-i Hikmat-i Islami-yi Sadra (SIPRIN),
1378/1999).
Kockelmans, Joseph, ‘Some Fundamental Themes of Husserl’s Phenomenology’
in Phenomenology: The Philosophy of Edmund Husserl and Its
Interpretation, ed. Joseph J. Kockelmans (New York: Anchor Books, 1967),
pp. 24–36.
Kogan, Barry, ‘Averroes and the Theory of Emanation,’ Medieval Studies 43
(1981), pp. 384–404.
Kretzmann, Norman, ‘A General Problem of Creation: Why Would God Create
Anything at All?’ in Scott MacDonald ed., Being and Goodness: The
Concept of the Good in Metaphysics and Philosophical Theology (Ithaca
and London: Cornell University Press, 1991), pp. 208–228.
Leaman, Oliver, Averroes and His Philosophy (Surrey, UK: Curzon, 1998).
, An Introduction to Classical Islamic Philosophy (Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, 1985).
Leslie, John, Value and Existence (New Jersey, 1979).
Lindberg, David, Theories of Vision from al-Kindi to Kepler (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1976).
Locke, John, An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, ed. Peter H.
Nidditch (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1975).
Madigan, Arthur, ‘Alexander of Aphrodisias: The Book of Ethical Problems’
in Aufstieg und Niedergang der Römischen Welt, ed. W. Haase and H.
Temporini (Berlin-New York: W. de Gruyter, 1987), Part II, 36.2, pp.
1260–1279.
Madkour, Ibrahim, La Place d’al-Farabi dans l’ecole philosophique
musulumane (Paris: Librairie d’Amerique et d’Orient, 1934).
Mahdi, Muhsin, AlFarabi and the Foundations of Islamic Political Philosophy
(Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press, 2001).
, AlFarabi’s Philosophy of Plato and Aristotle (Ithaca, NY: Cornell
Paperbacks, 1962).
Maimonides, Moses, The Guide for the Perplexed, tr. M. Friedlander (New
York, 1956, 2nd edition).
Mandelbaum, Maurice, Philosophy, Science, and Sense Perception (Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1966).
Martine, Brian John, ‘Relations, Indeterminacy, and Intelligibility’ in R. C.
Neville ed., New Essays in Metaphysics (Albany: State University of New
York Press, 1987), pp. 237–252.

--- Sayfa 322 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY
299
, Individuals and Individuality (Albany: State University of New York
Press, 1984).
Massignon, Louis, Recueil de texts inédit concernant l’histoire de la mystique
en pays d’Islam (Paris: Librairie orientaliste Paul Geunthner, 1929).
McDowell, John, Mind and World (Harvard University Press, 1994).
Merlan, Phillip, From Platonism to Neoplatonism (The Hague: M. Nijhoff,
1953).
, Monopsychism, Mysticism, Metaconsciousness (The Hague: M.
Nijhoff, 1963).
, ‘Greek Philosophy from Plato to Plotinus’ in The Cambridge History
of Later Greek and Early Medieval Philosophy, ed. A. H. Armstrong
(Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1967), pp. 14–132.
Mohammed, Ovey N., Averroes’ Doctrine of Immortality: A Matter of
Controversy (Ontario: The Canadian Corporation for Studies in Religion,
1984).
Morewedge, Parwiz, ‘Philosophical Analysis and Ibn Sina’s ‘Essence-
Existence’ Distinction’ Journal of the American Oriental Society, 92.3
(1972), pp. 425–435.
Morgan, David, Medieval Persia: 1040–1797 (London and New York:
Longman, 1988).
Morris, James Winston, The Reflective Heart: Discovering Spiritual Intelligence
in Ibn ‘Arabi’s Meccan Illuminations (Louisville, KY: Fons Vitae, 2005).
Nagel, Thomas, The View from Nowhere (Oxford/New York: Oxford University
Press, 1986).
, Mortal Questions (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1979).
Nasr, Seyyed Hossein, Sadr al-Din Shirazi and His Transcendent Theosophy
(Tehran, Iran: Institute for Humanities and Cultural Studies, 1997).
, Three Muslim Sages (New York: Caravan Books, 1997).
, ‘Existence (wujud) and Quiddity (mahiyyah) in Islamic Philosophy,’
International Philosophical Quarterly 29, No. 4 (December 1989), pp.
409–428.
, ‘Spiritual Movements, Philosophy and Theology in the Safavid
Period’ in The Cambridge History of Iran, eds. Peter Jackson and Laurence
Lockhart (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1986), Vol. VI, pp.
656–97.
, ‘The School of Isfahan’ in A History of Muslim Philosophy, ed. M.
M. Sharif, Vol. 2 (Wiesbaden, Germany: O. Harrasowitz, 1966), pp. 904–
932; reprinted in The Islamic Intellectual Tradition in Persia, ed. Mehdi
Amin Razavi (Curzon Press, 1996), pp. 239–270.
, ‘Mulla Sadra and the Full Flowering of Prophetic Philosophy’ in his
Islamic Philosophy from its Origin to the Present: Philosophy in the Land
of Prophecy (New York: State University of New York Press, 2006).
, ‘Mulla Sadra: His Teachings’ in S. H. Nasr and O. Leaman (eds.),
History of Islamic Philosophy (London/New York: Routledge, 1996).

--- Sayfa 323 ---
300
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Netton, Ian Richard, al-Farabi and His School (London & New York:
Routledge, 1992).
Nuseibeh, Sari, ‘al-‘Aql al-qudsi: Avicenna’s Subjective Theory of Knowledge,’
Studia Islamica, LXIX, 1989, pp. 39–54.
Nuyens, Francois, L’évolution de la psychologie d’Aristote (Louvain, Belgium:
Editions De L’Institut Superieur de Philosophie, 1948).
O’Leary, De Lacy, How Greek Science Passed to the Arabs (London: Routledge
and K. Paul, 1949).
O’Meara, Dominic J., Plotinus (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1995).
Otto, Rudolph, Mysticism East and West (New York: The Macmillan Company,
1960).
Pepin, Jean, ‘Elements pour une histoire de la relation entre l’intelligence et
l’intelligible chez Platon et dans le neoplatonisme,’ Revue Philosophique
de la France et de l’etranger 146 (1956), pp. 39–64.
Peters, F. E., Aristoteles Arabus: The Oriental Translations and Commentaries
on the Aristotelian Corpus (Leiden, Holland: E. J. Brill, 1968).
, The Harvest of Hellenism (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1970).
Plotinus, The Enneads, tr. A. H. Armstrong (Cambridge, UK: Harvard University
Press, 1989).
, The Six Enneads, tr. Stephen MacKenna and B. S. Page (Chicago:
Encyclopedia Britannica, 1952).
Plotini Opera II, ed. P. Henry and H.-R. Schwyzer (Paris and Brussels: Desclée
de Brouwer, 1959).
al-Qaysari, Dawud, al-Rasa’il ed. Mehmet Bayraktar (Kayseri, Turkey: Kayseri
Metropolitan Municipality, 1997).
Quadri, Goffredo, La Philosophie arabe dans l’europe medievale: des origines
à Averroès (Paris: Payot, 1960).
Quine, W. V., ‘On What There Is’ in ed. E. D. Klemke, Contemporary Analytic
and Linguistic Philosophies (New York: Prometheus Books, 1983), pp.
318–330.
al-Qunawi, Sadr al-Din, al-Nafakhat al-ilahiyyah, ed. Muhammad Khwajawi
(Tehran, 1375/1417).
Rahman, Fazlur, ‘Essence and Existence in Avicenna,’ Mediaeval and
Renaissance Studies, IV (1958), 1–16.
, Prophecy in Islam Philosophy and Orthodoxy (London: George Allen
and Unwin Ltd., 1958).
, The Philosophy of Mulla Sadra (New York: State University of New
York Press, 1976).
, ‘Mir Damad’s Concept of Huduth Dahri: A Contribution to the Study
of God–World Relationship Theories in Safavid Iran’ Near Eastern Studies
39 (1980), pp. 139–151.
al-Razi, Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Zakariyya,’ ‘The Book of the Philosophic
Life’, tr. Charles E. Butterworth, Interpretation, (Spring 1993), Vol. 20, No.
3, pp. 227–236.

--- Sayfa 324 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY
301
al-Razi, Fakhr al-Din, al-Mabahith al-mashriqiyyah (Beirut, Lebanon: Dar
al-Kitab al-‘Arabi, 1990), 2 Vols.
Rescher, Nicholas, ‘al-Farabi on the Question: Is Existence a Predicate?’ in his
Studies in the History of Arabic Logic (Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh
Press, 1963), pp. 39–42.
, ‘The Concept of Existence in Arabic Logic and Philosophy’ in his
Studies in Arabic Philosophy (Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press,
1966), pp. 69–80.
Rizvi, Sajjad H., Mulla Sadra Shirazi: His Life and Works and the Sources for
Safavid Philosophy (Journal of Semitic Studies, Supplement 18 published
by Oxford University Press, 2007).
, ‘Mysticism and Philosophy: Ibn ‘Arabi and Mulla Sadra’ in Peter
Adamson and Richard Taylor (eds.), The Cambridge Companion to Arabic
Philosophy (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2005), pp. 224–
246.
Robin, Léon, Les rapports de l’etre et de la connaissance d’apres Platon
(Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1957).
Rorty, Richard, Consequences of Pragmatism (Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press, 1982).
Rosenthal, Franz, ‘As-ŝayĥ al-yunani and the Arabic Plotinus Source’
Orientalia XXI (1952), pp. 461–492.
, Knowledge Triumphant: The Concept of Knowledge in Medieval
Islam (Leiden, Holland: E. J. Brill, 1970).
, ‘Plotinus in Islam: The Power of Anonymity’ in Plotino e il
Neoplatonismo in Oriente e in Occidente (Rome: Accademia nazionale dei
Lincei, 1974), pp. 437–446.
Ross, David, Aristotle (London and New York: Routledge, 1995).
Russell, Mysticism and Logic (New York: Doubleday Anchor Books, 1957).
Ryle, Gilbert, The Concept of Mind (Harmondsworth, 1966).
Sabzawari, Mulla Hadi, Sharh al-manzumah (Qom, Iran: Nab Publications,
1995), 5 Vols.
, The Metaphysics of Sabzawari tr. M. Mohaghegh and T. Izutsu, (New
York: Caravan Books, 1977).
Schroeder, Frederic M., and Todd, Robert B., Two Greek Aristotelian
Commentators on the Intellect, the De Intellectu Attributed to Alexander of
Aphrodisias and Themistius’ Paraphrase of Aristotle’s De Anima 3.4–8
(Toronto, 1990).
Shahrazuri, Shams al-Din Muhammad, Sharh hikmat al-ishraq, ed. Hossein
Ziai (Tehran, Iran: Institute for Cultural Studies and Research, 1993).
, Rasa’il al-shajarat al-ilahiyyah fi ‘ulum al-haqa’iq al-rabbaniyyah,
ed. Necip Görgün (Istanbul, Turkey: Elif Publications, 2004), 3 Vols.
Sharples, R. W., ‘Alexander of Aphrodisias: Scholasticism and Innovation’ in
Aufstieg und Niedergang der Römischen Welt, ed. W. Haase and H.

--- Sayfa 325 ---
302
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Temporini (Berlin-New York: W. de Gruyter, 1987), Part II, 36.2, pp.
1177–1243.
al-Shirazi, Qutb al-Din, Durrat al-taj, ed. Muhammad Mishkat (Tehran, Iran:
Intisharat-i Hikmat, ah 1369, 2nd edition).
Sorabji, Richard, Animal Minds and Human Morals: The Origins of the
Western Debate (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1993).
Steinschneider, Moritz, Die Arabischen Ubersetzungen aus dem Griechischen
(Austria: Akademische Druck—U. Verlagsanstalt, 1960).
Suhrawardi, Shihab al-Din Yahya, Hikmat al-ishraq (The Philosophy of
Illumination), ed. with English translation, John Walbridge and Hossein Ziai
(Provo, UT: Brigham Young University Press, 1999).
, Partawnama (The Book of Radiance), tr. Hossein Ziai (Irvine, CA:
Mazda Publishers, 1998).
, Ouevres philosophiques et mystiques, ed. Henry Corbin (Teheran-
Paris, 1976), 2 Vols.
al-Taftazani, Sa‘d al-Din, Sharh al-maqasid, ed. A. ‘Umayra (Beirut, Lebanon:
‘Alam al-Kutub, 1989), 5 Vols.
Taghi, Shokoufeh, The Two Wings of Wisdom: Mysticism and Philosophy in
the Risalat ut-tair of Ibn Sina (Stockholm: Uppsala University Library,
2000).
al-Tahanawi, Muhammad, Kashshaf istilahat al-funun (Beirut, Lebanon: Dar
al-Kutub al-Milliyyah, 1998), 4 Vols.
Taylor, Charles, Philosophical Arguments (Cambridge, UK: Harvard University
Press, 1995).
Taylor, Richard C., ‘The Kalam fi Mahd al-Khair (Liber de Causis) in the
Islamic Philosophical Milieu’ in J. Kraye, W. F. Ryan and C. B. Schmitt
(eds.), Pseudo-Aristotle in the Middle Ages: The Theology and Other Texts
(London: The Warburg Institute, 1986), pp. 37–52.
, ‘The Future Life’ and Averroes’s Long Commentary on the De Anima
of Aristotle’ in Averroes and the Enlightenment, ed. M. Wahba and M.
Abousenna (New York: Prometheus Books, 1996), pp. 263–277.
Themistius, On Aristotle’s on the Soul, tr. Robert B. Todd (Ithaca, NY: Cornell
University Press, 1996).
, An Arabic Translation of Themistius Commentary on Aristotle’s de
Anima, ed. M. C. Lyons (Columbia: University of South Carolina Press,
1973).
Théry, G., Autour de décret de 1210. II: Alexandre d’Aphrodise: Aperçu sur
l’influence de sa noétique (Le Saulchoir Kain, 1926).
Urvoy, Dominique, Ibn Rushd (Averroes) (London and New York: Routledge,
1991).
Walbridge, John, The Leaven of the Ancients: Suhrawardi and the Heritage of
the Greeks (Albany: State University of New York Press, 2000).

--- Sayfa 326 ---
BIBLIOGRAPHY
303
Walzer, Richard, ‘Aristotle’s Active Intellect in Greek and Early Islamic
Philosophy’ in Plotino e il Neoplatonismo in Oriente e in Occidente (Rome,
Italy: Accademia Nazionale Dei Lincei, 1974), pp. 423–436.
Weber, Edouard H., ‘L’Identité de l’intellect et de l’intelligible selon la version
latine d’Averroés et son interprétation par Thomas D’Aquin’, Arabic
Sciences and Philosophy, Vol. 8 (1998), pp. 233–257.
White, Nicholas P., ‘Plato’s Metaphysical Epistemology’ in The Cambridge
Companion to Plato, ed. Richard Kraut (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press, 1992), pp. 277–310.
Wisnovsky, Robert, Avicenna’s Metaphysics in Context (Ithaca, NY: Cornell
University Press, 2003).
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, Philosophical Investigations tr. G. E. M. Anscombe
(New York: Macmillan Publishing Co., Inc., 1968).
, On Certainty, tr. Dennis Paul and G. E. M. Anscombe (New York:
Harper Torchbooks, 1969).
Wolfson, Harry Austryn, Philo: Foundations of Religious Philosophy in
Judaism, Christianity, and Islam (Cambridge, UK: Harvard University
Press, 1948), 2 Vols.
Yazdi, Mehdi Ha’iri, The Principles of Epistemology in Islamic Philosophy:
Knowledge by Presence (Albany: State University of New York Press,
1992).
Ziai, Hossein, Knowledge and Illumination: A Study of Suhrawardi’s Hikmat
al-ishraq (Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1990).
Zimmermann, F. W., ‘The Origins of the So-Called Theology of Aristotle’ in J.
Kraye, W. F. Ryan, and C. B. Schmitt (eds.) Pseudo-Aristotle in the Middle
Ages: The Theology and Other Texts (London: The Warburg Institute, 1986),
pp. 110–240.
, ‘Proclus Arabus Rides Again,’ Arabic Science and Philosophy, Vol.
4 (1994), pp. 9–51.

--- Sayfa 327 ---
This page intentionally left blank

--- Sayfa 328 ---
A
abadan  5
‘adadi  234
adam  89, 211, 235
al-’adam al-mutlaq  235
afdal  276
ahkam  96
ahl al-bayt  200
ahl al-hadith  201
ahl al-hikmat al-bahthiyyah  224
ahl al-hikmat al-dhawqiyyah  224
ahwal al-mabadi’  150
ajsam  164
akhbar  201
alah sina‘iyyah  118
‘alam al-ittifaqiyyat  261
‘alam al-khayal  190
alam al-quds  154
‘alim  174
‘alimiyyatuhu  55
a’mal al-badaniyyah  118
ammat al-mutasawwifah  198
amr  3, 153, 217
amr ‘adami  289
amr kamali  120
amr salbi  119
amr thubuti  122
amr wujudi  120
ana’  169
ana’iyyah  63, 169
anasir  114
anha’  181
anwar  62
al-anwar al-mujarradah  2, 63
INDEX
Arabic and Persian Terms
al-anwar al-qahirah  2
‘aqil  286
‘aqilah  23
‘aqiliyyah  286
‘aql  192, 286
al-‘aql al-awwal  20, 35, 45
al-‘aql al-fa‘‘al  20, 43
al-‘aql al-hayulani  40, 139, 257
‘aql al-ladhi bi’l-fi‘l abadan  20
‘aql al-ladhi min kharij  15
‘aql al-mustafad  40, 43, 52
‘aql basit  45, 113, 116
‘aql bi’l-fi‘l  43
‘aql bi’l-malakah  157
‘aql bi’l-quwwah  40, 43
‘aqliyyah  xxiii, 7, 35, 64, 141, 147,
152, 157, 210, 258, 259, 283
‘aqliyyat  288
‘aql qudsi  156
‘arad  183, 287
arbab al-nazar  198
arbab anwa‘ tabi‘iyyah  147
‘arif  198, 208, 222
asalah  xxi, 51, 96
asalat al-mahiyyah  xvi, 167
asalat al-wujud  49, 86, 96, 167
asatin al-hikmah  12
ashkal  240
ashya’  49
al-ashya’ al-‘aqliyyah  259
asnaf al-tajrid  186
athar  211
athar  109, 276
atwar  181
awa’il  277

--- Sayfa 329 ---
306
INDEX (ARABIC AND PERSIAN TERMS)
‘awamm al-wu‘‘az  198
‘awarid  16, 106
awda‘  164
awjada  228
awwaliyyat  247
a’yan  89
B
badihi  86
bahth  214
baqa’  248
barzakh  107, 137
basa’it  78, 274
basar  265
basit  112, 133
batin  220
bi’l-fi‘l  148
bi’l-quwwah  148
burhan  xv, 88, 203, 204, 214, 225,
247
al-burhan al-haqiqi  206
al-burhan al-wujudi  4
D
daf‘ah wahidah  140
dawr  87
dhat  47, 164
al-dhat al-ilahiyyah  204
dhatiyyat  188
dhawat nuriyyah  147
dhawq  214
dhikr  246
F
fa‘‘al  148
fa‘iliyyah  180
fana’  193, 220, 248
al-faras al-‘aqli  105, 290
farasiyyah  278
fasad  48, 51, 62, 162
fasl  17, 65, 87, 94
al-fayd al-ibda‘i  266
fi‘l  211
fi‘l al-mutlaq  290
fi‘liyyah  94
fi’l-‘aql  19, 35
fi’l-dhihn  128
fi’l-kharij  128
fitrah  43, 142, 163, 255, 274, 287
fuqara’  179, 194
fuqara’ al-salikin  277
G
ghayb  155
H
hadarat al-ilahiyyah al-khamsah  212
hadd  87
hadd mushtarak  52
hadith  2, 180, 200
hads  154, 155, 247
halah idafiyyah  127
halah ruhaniyyah  62
halah wijdaniyyah  103
haml bi’l-tashkik  101
haml bi’l-tawati’  101
haml dhati awwali  160
haml shai‘ sina‘i  192
haml thani  192
haqiqah  89
haqiqat al-wujud  193
haqq  220, 229, 236
al-haqq al-awwal  45, 213
al-haqq al-makhluq bihi  235
al-haqq al-waqi‘ah  115
al-harakat al-jawhariyyah  83
hass  25, 242
hayakil  234
hayawan  87, 132, 161, 236, 283
hayula  192, 258
hayulah mushtarakah  47
hiss  25, 107, 111, 258
al-hissi al-kulli  285

--- Sayfa 330 ---
INDEX (ARABIC AND PERSIAN TERMS)
307
hudur  xvii, 64, 88, 119, 142, 145,
146, 170, 189, 217
huduth al-‘alam  11, 26
al-hujjat al-‘ammah  163
al-hujjat al-khassah  163
hukama’  142
hukama’ al-muta’allihin  62
hukama’ al-muta’allihun al-‘arifun
226
hulul  131, 189
husul  142, 172, 189
husulat  65
huwa  169
huwiyyah  27, 78, 95, 142, 145, 147,
166, 171, 278
huwiyyatuna al-shakhsiyyah al-
wujudiyyah  171
I
i’tibar al-‘aql  94
i’tibari  168
ibda‘  28, 266
ibsar  146, 222
idafah  xvii, 119, 124, 126, 131, 179,
227
idafat  253
idrak  186
ihalah  279
ihdath  157
ihsas  135, 242
ijad  180, 229, 285
ijmali  175
ijtihad  201
ijtima‘  49
ilahiyyat  114, 150
ilham  205
‘ilm  33, 55, 103, 118, 139, 165, 167,
171
al-‘ilm al-huduri  33, 55, 119, 165
al-‘ilm al-ilahi  91
al-‘ilm al-irtisami  33
al-‘ilm bi’l-ijmal  139
‘ilmiyyah  276
‘ilm ma ba‘d al-tabi‘ah  114
‘ilmuna bi-‘ilmina bi-dhatina  167
imamah  199
al-imkan al-isti‘dadi  284
imtizaj  60, 63
inbisat  233
infi‘al  275, 280
inniyyah  253
inqilab  251
insan  95, 140, 153, 218, 222, 273,
278
al-insan al-‘aqli  189
al-insan al-hissi  189
al-insan al-kamil  251
al-insan al-khayali  189
‘irfan  xv
‘irfan ‘amali  200
‘irfan nazari  200
irtisam  xvii, 33, 45, 90, 118, 165
‘ishq  230
ishtirak  3, 148
isti‘dad  242
isti’dad mahd  109
istidlal  217
istihalah  48, 161
istihalat  47
istihdar  144
ithbat  94
ittifaqiyyah  261
ittihad  15, 18, 24, 38, 49, 50, 59, 61,
95, 109, 111, 163, 282
ittihad al-‘aqil wa’l-ma‘qul  xviii
al-ittihad al-‘aqli  63
ittisal  2, 15, 18, 24, 37, 49, 50, 52,
59, 60, 62, 63, 75, 157, 158, 163,
270
ittisal ‘aqli  157
ittisal bi’l-‘aql al-fa‘‘al  158
J
ja’il  261, 287
ja’l  282, 287
jadal  263

--- Sayfa 331 ---
308
INDEX (ARABIC AND PERSIAN TERMS)
jamadat  274
al-jawhar al-nafsani  276
al-jawhar al-suri  51
jawhar basit  144
jawhariyyah  272
jawharuna  42
jawidan khirad  26
jihat  135
jins  87
jirmi  63
jism  231
al-jismiyyah  185
jismaniyyat al-huduth ruhaniyyat al-
baqa’  10, 138
jumhur  42
junud al-qalb  250
juz’  285
juz’iyyat  174
K
kalam  xxi, 195, 220, 227
kalimat Allah  153
kamal  28, 212
kamilun  220
kasb  166
kashf  143, 168, 217, 222
al-kashf al-huduri  166
kawn  48, 51, 61, 162, 285
kayfiyyah nafsaniyyah  125, 228
khawass  142
khayal  12, 107, 123, 157, 169
khayr  211
al-khayr al-mahd  78, 111, 181, 249
al-khazanat al-‘aqliyyah  141
al-kull  78
kulli  234
kulliyyah  234
kulliyyat  145
L
lafz  104
lawahiq  16, 106
lawazim  93, 108, 128, 140
lima-huwa  229
limma  181
liqa’  194
luzum  287
M
ma-huwa  229
ma‘ani  116, 149, 152, 161
al-ma‘ani al-ma‘qulah  140
ma‘dumat  175
ma‘lul  183
ma‘lulat  271
ma‘lum  55, 116, 119, 125
ma‘lumiyyatuhu  55
ma‘na  65, 172, 241, 275
ma‘qul  10, 25, 36, 46, 47, 64, 102,
108, 139, 286
ma‘qulat  46, 69
ma‘qul bi’l-dhat  55
ma‘quliyyah  xxiii, 64, 286
ma‘qul thani  99
ma‘rifah  215
ma‘rifat Allah  212
ma’na  134
mabadi’ al-‘aqliyyah  157
mabda’  95, 115, 147
mabda’ al-mabadi  45
mabsut  27
maddat al-ula  109
mafhum  65, 89, 147
mahall al-‘ilm  250
mahall al-karamah  158
mahiyyah  182, 185, 253
mahsus  25, 54, 110, 262
mahsusat  69, 252
mahsusiyyah  262
maj‘ul  287
maj‘ulatihi  178
majaz  2
al-mala’ikat al-muqarrabun  114
malakut  218
mamlakah  69

--- Sayfa 332 ---
INDEX (ARABIC AND PERSIAN TERMS)
309
manazil  220
man la kashfa lahu la ‘ilma lahu
221
maqadir  164
maqalah  17, 257
marahil  220
al-mash‘ar al-ilahi  217
masha’ir idrakiyyah  131
mashhad  256
ma siw’Allah  180
mawhumat  261
mawjud  xvi, 45, 46, 92, 160, 181,
234, 256
al-mawjud al-haqiqi  181
mawjudiyyah  98, 99, 104, 117, 133,
142, 234
mawsuf  133
mawt  209
mayyiz  281
mi’raj  157
misdaq  278
mishkat al-nubuwwah  12, 205
mithal  64
mu‘iddat  242, 275
mubdi‘  62
mudaf  287
mudrakat  264
mudrik  258
mufaraqat  53, 62, 279
mufariq  25
mufassir  19
muhaqqiq  286
muhassil  75
mujarradat  208
mukashafah  214, 217, 226
mulahazah  142
mulk  218
mumaththilah  129
mumkin  97
mumtani‘  97
muqarrabun  187
murakkab  273
murtasimah  87
musawwir  230
mushahadah  146, 168
al-mushahadah al-huduriyyah  217
mustafad  148
muta’akhkhirun  175
muta’allihin  142, 256
mutafalsifun  226
mutakallimun  1, 43, 97, 118, 119,
219, 227
mutaqaddimin  68, 82, 288
mutasaddirin  82, 288
mutawassit  114
muthul  6, 32, 111, 131, 150, 175
al-muthul al-‘aqliyyah  7
al-muthul al-aflatuniyyah  6, 32
mutlaqat  21
muttahid  38, 40
muwahhid  224
N
nafas al-rahman  233
nafs  43, 164, 192
nahw al-wujud  xvii, 103, 168, 227
nahw kulli  174
nash’ah jami‘ah  265
natiq  161
natiqah  31, 283
naz‘  114, 136, 138
nazar  220
nazariyyat  155
al-nazir al-mantiqi  100
al-nazir al-tabi‘i  100
nisbah  132
nubuwwah  157, 199
nur  110, 121, 168
nur al-malakut  155
nur mahd  249
nutq  132
Q
qabul  275
qadim  180
qadir  174

--- Sayfa 333 ---
310
INDEX (ARABIC AND PERSIAN TERMS)
qalb  192, 216
al-qalb al-haqiqi  217
al-qalb al-ma‘nawi  217
qiwam  178
quwwah  284
al-quwwah al-batinah  229
quwwah qudsiyyah  155, 157
quwwah wahmiyyah  137
R
rawabit mahdah  235
riwaqi  103, 185
riyadiyyat  91
riyasah  199
ru’yah  210, 250
ruh  192
ruh al-amin  39
ruh al-quds  39, 156
S
sa‘adah  208
salbi  85, 287
salim  225
sam‘i  288
sam‘iyyat  288
sarayan  233
sarayan al-wujud  233
shahadah  155
shakhs  187
shar‘  224
shari‘ah  216, 256
sharr  211
al-shay’ al-suri  275
shayatin  218
shaykh al-ilahi  98
shaykh al-yunani  25
shu‘a’  265
shu‘ur  167, 212
shu’un  181
shuhud  143, 222
shuhud ‘ayni  88, 217
al-shuhud al-kashfi  206, 220
shumul  233
shuyukhah  199
sidq  271
sirat  215
sirayat al-‘ilm  116
siwan al-hikmah  26
sudur  148, 291
suluk  251
suluk al-silsilah al-tuliyyah  163
surah  185, 241
surah mahsusah  241
surat al-hawa’iyyah  192
surat al-ma‘qulah  104
surat al-ma’iyyah  192
surat al-mujarradah  171
suri  16, 106
suwar al-ilahiyyah  150
suwar al-‘ilmiyyah  150
T
ta‘aqqul  108, 116, 119, 124, 135,
137, 140, 167
ta‘ayyun  129, 236
ta‘rif  87
tab’  166
taba‘i  213
tabi‘iyyat  91
tada‘‘uf  108
tafawut  65, 89
tafsili  175
taghayyur  291
tahaqquq  99, 132
tahassul  94
tahqiq  256, 271
tahsil  105
tajalli  92, 211
tajarrud  187
tajarrud al-nafs  69
tajrid  136, 138
takathuf  48
takhalkhul  48
takhassus  90
takhayyul  135

--- Sayfa 334 ---
INDEX (ARABIC AND PERSIAN TERMS)
311
takhrij  156
taklif  143
takmil  105
takthir al-wahid  144
tamam  28, 279
tamm  114
tamthil  240
taqlid  263
taqlidiyyat  157
taqwa  246
tariqah  199
tarkib  60, 273, 278
al-tarkib al-khariji  273
tarkib majmu‘i  60
tasalsul  87
tasawwur  151, 156, 168, 287
tasawwur ‘aqli  260
tasdiq  151, 287
tashabbuh bi’l-bari’ ta‘alah  216
tashaddud  49, 108
al-tashakhkhus al-‘aqli  147
tashayyu‘  200
tashkik  xviii, xxi, 51, 66, 101, 113,
162, 184
taswir  87
tawahhum  135
tawati’  89
tawhid  206, 223
tawhid al-kathir  144
thubut  277
U
‘ulama’  201, 221
‘ulum al-matlubah  215
‘ulum al-tafsiliyyah  117
‘umum  234
umur shani’ah  178
umur zahirah  203
‘unsuriyyah  259
‘uqala’  260
‘uqul al-mufaraqah  221
‘uqul fa‘‘alah  153
‘urafa’  142, 219, 225, 231, 234
usuli  201
‘uyun al-hikmah  103
W
wahdah  xxi
wahdat al-‘adadiyyah  283
wahdat al-‘aqliyyah  152, 283
wahdat al-shuhud  206
wahdat al-wujud  206, 223
wahib  242, 255
wahib al-suwar  242, 255
wahidah ba‘d wahidah  140
wahid al-awwal  45
wahid al-mahd  27
wahm  137, 169, 275
wahy  204, 214
wajib al-wujud  183
wara‘  246
waridat  247
wasiyyah  62
wijdan  185, 214, 229
wijdaniyyat  229
wuduh  136
wujud  65, 78, 86, 89, 91, 95, 98-103,
108, 113, 117, 120, 128, 142, 162,
168, 181, 184, 195, 206, 210-12,
223, 228, 229, 233, 236, 241,
273
wujudat  51, 65
al-wujud al-maddi  105
al-wujud al-mufariqi  104
al-wujud al-munbasit  233
al-wujud al-muqayyad  211
al-wujud al-muta‘alliq  234
al-wujud al-mutlaq  211, 236
al-wujud al-rabiti  236
al-wujud al-sirf  233
al-wujud al-ta‘alluqi  236
al-wujudat al-mudafah  253
wujud bima huwa wujud  236

--- Sayfa 335 ---
312
INDEX (ARABIC AND PERSIAN TERMS)
wuqu‘ al-‘ilm  194
wusul  194
Y
yaftan  185, 228
yaqin  226
yaqiniyyah ‘aqliyyah  157
yasiru  48
Z
zahir  64, 220
zaka’  156
zawa’id  139, 281
al-zuhd al-haqiqi  246
zuhur  94, 119, 122, 158
zulm  211

--- Sayfa 336 ---
A
Abu’l-‘Abbas al-Lawkari  174
Abu’l-Hasan al-Amiri  3
Abu Sa’id Abi’l-Khayr  199
Abu Sulayman al-Sijistani  25
Alexander Islamicus  19
Alexander mysticus  21
Alexander of Aphrodisias  xx, 1, 6,
16-25, 38, 39, 66, 68, 70, 73, 257,
286
‘Ali ibn Abi Talib  143
‘Allamah Hilli  151
Aminrazavi, Mehdi  245, 246
al-Andalusi, Sa‘id 19
Aqa Muhammad Bihbahani  201
Aquinas, St. Thomas  71, 81, 83, 183,
186
Aristoteles Arabus  7, 22, 26
Aristoteles mysticus  21
Aristotle  71, 73, 77, 82, 186, 191,
247, 252, 288, 290
Armstrong, A.H.  79
‘Ayn al-Qudat Hamadani  223
B
Baghdadi, Junayd 75, 199
Bahmanyar  83, 174, 181, 185
Bayazid Bastami  199
Brentano, Franz  76
C
Charlton, William  186
INDEX
Proper Names
Chittick, William  185, 251
Corbin, Henry  245, 287
D
Democritus  240
Descartes  69, 243, 244
Diogenes  77
Druart, Therese-Anne  79
Duhem, Pierre  72
F
Farabi 79, 80, 287, 290
Farid al-Din ‘Attar 199, 248
Firdawsi 248
G
Galileo 238
Gellner, Ernest 245
Ghazali, Abu Hamid  3, 80, 187, 192,
199, 223, 224, 247, 250
Gilson, Etienne  183
Gottschalk, H.B.  72, 73
Gutas, Dimitri  75, 191, 247, 287
H
Habermas, Jurgen  245
Hadot, Pierre 77, 78, 248
Hallaj, Abu Mansur  75, 199
Isfahani, Hamid Naji 256
Heidegger 69, 195, 196, 252

--- Sayfa 337 ---
314
INDEX (PROPER NAMES)
al-Himsi, Abd al-Masih ibn ‘Abd
Allah ibn Na‘imah  26, 77
Hume 239, 241
Hunayn ibn Ishaq  19, 77
Husserl 245
I
Ibn Abi Usaybi‘ah  19
Ibn al-‘Arabi, Muhy al-Din  176, 185,
190, 250, 253, 286
Ibn al-Farid  199
Ibn al-Nadim  25
Ibn Bajjah  80
Ibn Rushd  67, 75, 80, 83, 183
Ibn Sab‘in  212
Ibn Sina  68-85, 181-92, 245, 247-54,
286-90
‘Iji  250
Ikhwan al-Safa’  3
Isfahani, Muhy al-Din  5
Izutsu, Toshihiko  182
J
Jambet, Christian  247
John Philoponus  72
K
Kahn, Charles  91, 92
Kant 87, 241, 245, 255
Kashani, Baba Afdal  4, 5, 251
Khajawi, Muhammad 246
al-Kindi  73, 74, 77
Kretzmann, Norman  80
Kulayni  248
L
Leaman, Oliver  246
Locke 238, 241
M
Madkour, Ibrahim  75
Mahdi, Muhsin 75, 79, 81
Maimonides, Moses 5
Majlisi, Muhammad Baqir 201
al-Makki, Abu Talib  199
Mandelbaum, Maurice 238
Merlan, Phillip  76
Miskawayh  26
N
Nagel, Thomas xx
Nasr, Seyyed Hossein  245, 246, 287
Numenius  17
O
Otto, Rudolf 211
P
Pépin, Jean 7
Philo  68
Philoponus  19, 72, 189
Plato  xx, 6-15, 23, 25, 68-72, 76, 79,
93, 105, 111, 173, 175, 187, 205,
210, 216, 238, 248, 290, 293-99,
302
Plotinus  xx, 1, 7, 8, 16, 25-33, 50,
73, 78, 79
Porphyry  6, 17, 19, 50, 57, 73, 82,
159, 175, 176, 269, 286
Proclus  8, 26, 73, 77
Q
al-Qaysari, Dawud  xvi, 199, 243,
249, 253
Qom  256
Quddus Radawi  256
Quine, W. V.  91, 182

--- Sayfa 338 ---
INDEX (PROPER NAMES)
315
al-Qunawi, Sadr al-Din  xvi, 3, 176,
199
R
Rahman, Fazlur 74, 184, 246
al-Razi, Abu Bakr  212, 249
al-Razi, Fakhr al-Din  xvii, 66, 79, 80,
117, 124, 127, 140, 173, 189, 191,
252, 264
al-Razi, Qutb al-Din  68
Rorty, Richard  91, 182
Rosenthal, Franz  77, 186
Rumi, Jalal al-Din  199, 248
S
Sabzawari  184, 193, 290
al-Safadi  77
Sayf al-Din al-Amidi 212
Shabistari, Mahmud  199
Shahrastani  26
Shahrazuri  64
Shankaracharya  202
al-Shirazi, Qutb al-Din  64
Simplicius  19, 72
Socrates  215
St. Anselm  186
St. Fransis of Assisi  202
Suhrawardi, Abu Hafs ‘Umar  xvi,
xvii, 2, 16, 55-63, 66, 85, 97, 99,
117, 119, 122, 140, 146, 159, 165-
9, 173, 179, 185, 193, 197, 199,
202, 206, 231, 245, 281, 286,
288
T
Tahanawi, Muhammad ‘Ali ibn
Muhammad 252
Taftazani  250
Taylor, Charles  xix, 244
Themistius  1, 16, 19, 25, 70, 71, 73
ThŽry, G.  75
Tusi, Nasir al-Din  68, 82, 187, 286
U
Urvoy, Dominique  76
W
Walbridge, John  246, 288
William of Tocco  83
Wisnovsky, Robert  72
Wittgenstein  123, 166, 170, 193,
239
Y
Yahya ibn ‘Adiyy  19
Yuhanna ibn al-Bitriq  77
Z
Zanjani, Ayat Allah Sayyid ‘Izz al-
Din 181, 256
Ziai, Hossein  245
Zimmermann, Fritz  73, 77