--- Sayfa 1 ---
WAR AND
PEACE
IN ISLAM
Te Uses and Abuses of Jihad
▶◁
Edited by
HRH Prince Ghazi bin Muhammad
 Professor Ibrahim Kalin
Professor Mohammad Hashim Kamali

--- Sayfa 5 ---
Edited by
HRH Prince Ghazi bin Muhammad
 Professor Ibrahim Kalin
Professor Mohammad Hashim Kamali

WAR AND
PEACE
IN ISLAM

--- Sayfa 6 ---
Copyright © 2013 Te Royal Aal al-Bayt Institute for Islamic Tought
 (unless otherwise indicated.)
Tis ﬁrst edition published 2013 by
MABDA (Te Royal Islamic Strategic Studies Centre)
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
installed in retrieval systems, or transmitted in any form
or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording, or otherwise, without the prior written
permission of the publishers.

Cover Design by Besim Bruncaj
Set in Minion
Printed in Jordan by National Press
COSPONSORS:
Te International Institute of Advanced Islamic Studies (IAIS), Malaysia,
and MABDA (Te Royal Islamic Strategic Studies Centre), Jordan and
Te Institute of Strategic Tinking (SDE), Turkey.

--- Sayfa 7 ---
CONTENTS
Acknowledgements  vii
A Note on the Translation of the Qur’an  viii
Foreword by HE the Sultan of Sokoto  ix
Introduction by Professor Mohammad Hashim Kamali  xi
About the Contributors  xviii
Part I: War and Its Practice
Chapter 1
Te Qur’an and Combat
1

HE Grand Imam Mahmoud Shaltut

(Translation: Lamya Al-Khraisha)
Chapter 2
Warfare in the Qur’an
28

Professor Joel Hayward
Chapter 3
Jihad and the Islamic Law of War1
56

Dr Caner Dagli
Chapter 4
Te Myth of a Militant Islam2
99

Dr David Dakake
Chapter 5
Te Spirit of Jihad3
132

Dr Reza Shah-Kazemi
Chapter 6
A Fatwa on Jihad
153

HE Shaykh Ali Gomaa
Chapter 7
Body Count: A Comparative Quantitative
165

Study of Mass Killings in History4

Dr Naveed Sheikh
Part II: Peace and Its Practice
Chapter 8
Islam and Peace: A Survey of the Sources
217

of Peace in the Islamic Tradition

Professor Ibrahim Kalin
Chapter 9
Te Concept of Peace/Security (Salm) in Islam
250

Dr Karim Douglas Crow

--- Sayfa 8 ---
vi
Chapter 10
Human Dignity from an Islamic Perspective
269

Professor Mohammad Hashim Kamali
Chapter 11
Te People of the Book (Ahl al-Kitāb)
282

in the Qur’an

Professor Ismail Albayrak
 Chapter 12
Dhimmī and Musta’min: A Juristic and
304

Historical Perspective

Professor Mohammad Hashim Kamali
Part III: Beyond Peace: Forbearance,
Mercy, Compassion and Love
Chapter 13
Te Uncommonality of ‘A Common Word’
317

Dr Joseph Lumbard
Chapter 14
Divine Mercy and Love in the Qur’an5
348

HRH Prince Ghazi bin Muhammad
Chapter 15
Love of Others in the Qur’an
378

HRH Prince Ghazi bin Muhammad
Chapter 16
Mercy in the Hadith
392

Shaykh Sayyid Hassan Saqqaf and

HRH Prince Ghazi bin Muhammad
Appendix
Te Conditions Necessary for Just War
409

in the Holy Qur’an

HRH Prince Ghazi bin Muhammad
Notes  427
Qur’anic Index  491
General Index  501

--- Sayfa 9 ---
vii
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
All praise be to God, for allowing us to bring together this book. Te
editors also wish to thank the authors of the articles and those institutes
or publishing houses that have allowed their writings to be reproduced
herein. Particular thanks go to the MABDA staﬀ for working on this
book in various ways: Lamya Khraisha, Afab Ahmad, Sulayman Hart,
Besim Bruncaj and Zeinab ‘Asfour. Fiona O’Brien also did excellent
copy-editing.

--- Sayfa 10 ---
viii
A NOTE ON THE TRANSLATION OF THE QUR’AN
Tere are a number of English translations of the Qur’an; authors in this
volume have not speciﬁed which they have used, and indeed in some
cases may have provided their own translations. Some have translated
the Divine Name ‘Allah’ as ‘God’, and some have lef it as ‘Allah’—we
have respected this. Te chapter and verse numbers refer to the origi-
nal Arabic. We have also kept the authors’ own preferences as regards
modern or archaic English in translating the Qur’an.
In addition, aside from standard terms like Qur’an, jihad, etc., we
have not standardised the transliteration throughout the text. Te index
alone has been standardised and fully transliterated.

--- Sayfa 11 ---
ix
FOREWORD
by His Eminence Alhaji Muhammad Sa’ad Abubakar, CFR,
MNI Sultan of Sokoto and President-General Nigerian Supreme
Council for Islamic Aﬀairs
Let me ﬁrst express my profound gratitude to the editors of this impor-
tant volume for giving me the singular honor and privilege to write a
foreword to this immensely valuable collection of researched articles
and works on the very timely issues of war and peace. I have taken time
to go through this wonderful collection of sixteen chapters, spanning
some 400 pages that have literally explored every conceivable aspect of
the subject ‘War and Peace in Islam’. Tis is perhaps the ﬁrst work of
its kind where experts who have excelled in their diﬀerent ﬁelds have
come together to collaborate on such a crucial issue of our time as War
and Peace.
Tis highly enlightening volume is astonishingly comprehensive,
capturing the diﬀerent aspects and perspectives of the subject matter:
legal, philosophical, sociological, theological and indeed military
dimensions of war and peace in Islam against a background of other
major religions in the world. Expectedly the quality of research and
analysis is evidently impressive. Indeed given the level of scholarship
one would not expect any less; the past and present Shaykhs of the
famous al-Azhar, distinguished legal experts like Prof. Hashim Kamali,
Prof. Ibrahim Kalin and HRH Prince Ghazi, who is also a Professor of
Islamic Philosophy, and a host of others all contributed in their diﬀer-
ent ﬁelds of expertise.
It is particularly interesting how each chapter reinforces the other,
generating a compelling moment which demolishes a lot of the stereotyping
that is today associated with war and peace in Islam. Te contribution
of Dr Joel Hayward, who is a scholar of warfare, on ‘Warfare in the
Qur’an’ and that of David Dakake on ‘Te Myth of Militant Islam’ having
marshaled very powerful researched arguments were able to expose and

--- Sayfa 12 ---
war and peace in islam
x
demystify many of the current myths promoted by western media and
other ignorant bigots. Te contribution of Dr Naveed Sheikh on ‘Body
Count: A Comparative Quantitative Study of Mass Killings in History’’
was ingeniously crafed, having assembled almost  ﬁfy pages of empirical
data on religious warfare from the Roman times to date, including such
otherwise obscure groups as the Aztec of 15th Century Mexico and
working out the ﬁgures to put our current discussions on religious conﬂict
and warfare in a historical and global perspective, is simply disarming.
Te systematic, evidence based, unassailably empirical researched
contributions, carefully and painstakingly disentangling and explaining
the prevailing confusion around the discussion on war and peace in
Islam is perhaps the greatest contribution yet to peace in our contempo-
rary troubled world. It recommends itself to all and sundry, but particu-
larly young people, policy makers and political and business leaders. It
is my honor and privilege to be associated with these great strides in the
pursuit of peace in the globe.
Once again I wish to register special appreciation for the editors
and indeed the authors of the various chapters, especially HRH Prince
Ghazi with whom I have had the privilege of sharing a number of peace
platforms.
His Eminence Alhaji Muhammad Sa’ad Abubakar, CFR, MNI
Sultan Of Sokoto and President-General Nigerian Supreme Council
For Islamic Aﬀairs
May 2013

--- Sayfa 13 ---
xi
INTRODUCTION
Professor Mohammad Hashim Kamali
Te book before us is presented in three parts, namely ‘war and its prac-
tice’, ‘peace and its practice’, and ‘beyond peace: forbearance, mercy,
compassion and love’. Tis volume’s range is evidently not conﬁned to
the study of jihad, yet jihad remains its central concern—as indicated
by its title. Te main issue concerning jihad has been eloquently stated
by Seyyed Hossein Nasr, who wrote: ‘In modern times in the West
no vocabulary in the Islamic religion has been so distorted, maligned,
misunderstood, and viliﬁed as the word jihad.’8 Nasr added that this is
due not only to Western media’s demonising epithets and construc-
tions, but also to those extremist Muslims who readily provide the latter
with examples to justify their propagation of the distorted image of this
term.
Taking a balanced approach to the understanding of words and
concepts naturally begins with employing them for their true meanings.
Te essence of this requirement is captured in a Qur’anic directive to
Muslims: And when you speak—speak with justice (Al-An‘ām, 6:152).9
Justice is inclusive of truth. Te Qur’an seems here to be conveying the
awareness that one can tell the truth in diﬀerent ways, and that it is best
if it is moderated with a sense of justice. Te problem before us is one
of widespread distortion in the uses of jihad, not just by the Western
media, but by Muslims themselves, who have become a party to that
distortion. Te concept of Jihad fī sabīl Allāh (striving in the path of
God) as contained in the Qur’an and Hadith has ofen been distorted
and misused by the perpetrators of military violence and terrorism
against Muslims and non-Muslims alike. Matters are made worse by
the fact that the word has gained commercial appeal in Europe and
the United States. A number of writers seeking to make their books
commercially successful have been using jihad in their titles in any
way possible. It is important therefore to explain what jihad stands for,
through a careful reading of the Qur’an and Hadith. Tis is the basic

--- Sayfa 14 ---
war and peace in islam
xii
theme and message of the book before us, one which is articulated in
the writings of a number of outstanding scholars and opinion leaders
on the subject. To restore moderation and balance to a distorted picture,
one needs to begin with what one believes to be the truth about jihad.
Jihad derives from the root word jahada, which means to strive or
to exert eﬀort. Its translation in the Western media as ‘holy war’ would
in Arabic be equivalent to al-ḥarb al-muqaddasah, which is totally unfa-
miliar and unknown to Arabic speakers. Jihad consists of the eﬀort one
makes to do something good and to prevent or oppose evil. Te eﬀort
may be directed towards oneself or the outside world. Te struggle to
control and reﬁne one’s ego, to conquer ignorance, to discipline one’s
own base desires, to excel in the work undertaken to the best of one’s
ability are the jihad of the self (jihad al-nafs). In a similar vein, the
Suﬁ contemplation used to combat the distractions of the soul is called
mujāhadah. To combat poverty and disease, to build housing for the
poor, or to ﬁght corruption and abuse would all qualify as jihad that
serves a social purpose of great beneﬁt. We are cast into a world in
which there is disequilibrium and disorder both externally and within
ourselves. To create a life of equilibrium based on surrender to God
and following His injunctions involves constant jihad. For ordinary
Muslims, praying ﬁve times a day throughout their lives, or fasting from
dawn to dusk during the month of Ramadan are certainly not possible
without great eﬀort, or jihad. A Muslim who works to earn a living and
support his family is also engaged in jihad. It is now common to hear
Muslim intellectuals speak of jihad in business, jihad in the acquisition
of knowledge, and jihad against social ills aﬄicting young people, drug
abuse and AIDS. Understood in its comprehensive sense, jihad is an
inherent aspect of the human condition in facing the imperfections of
this world. Te Prophet Muhammad U has said that ‘the mujāhid is
one who wages a struggle against himself’.10 Te eﬀort to facilitate a just
system of rule is underscored in another hadith: ‘the best form of jihad
is to tell a word of truth to an unjust ruler.’11 In a hadith al-Bukhari and
Muslim have recorded, a young man asked the Prophet: ‘Should I join
the jihad?’ that was apparently in progress at the time. In response, the
Prophet asked him a question: ‘Do you have parents?’, and when the
man said ‘Yes’, the Prophet told him, ‘Ten strive by serving them.’12

--- Sayfa 15 ---
xiii
Introduction
Te Qur’an refers to jihad in twenty-four verses, most of which
emphasise the spiritual and non-violent manifestations of jihad, such
as being steadfast in the faith and sacriﬁce in its cause, migration from
Mecca to Medina, and peaceful propagation of the faith. Te reader will
ﬁnd comprehensive coverage of the Qur’an in the various chapters of
this book. It is worth mentioning, however, that jihad as armed struggle
against the aggressor occurs only in the Medinan verses of the Qur’an.
During the ﬁrst thirteen years of his campaign in Mecca, the Prophet
was not permitted to use force even for self-defence. Islam was propa-
gated only through peaceful methods. Te idolaters of Mecca persecuted
and forced a number of the Prophet’s companions to migrate, initially
to Abyssinia, and later to Medina. Te Meccans not only continued but
stepped up their hostility and attacked the Muslims, some 270km away,
in the battles of Badr (624 CE) and Uhud (625 CE), with superior forces,
inﬂicting heavy casualties on them. Only then was permission granted
to: Fight in the way of God those who ﬁght you, but begin not hostilities.
Verily God loves not the aggressors (Al-Baqarah, 2:190).
When a legitimate jihad is waged, it must not be based on anger and
hatred. Te Qur’an thus warns: Let not your hatred of a people cause you
to be unjust. You must do justice (Al-Mā’idah, 5:8). Te believers were
also directed to repel the evil deed with one that is better, then verily he,
between whom and thee there was enmity (will become) as though he
were a protective friend (Fuṣṣilat, 41:34).
Islamic law provides a clear set of rules that regulate military
engagement, which have not, however, been consistently followed. Te
Prophet U instructed the warriors to avoid harming women and chil-
dren, the aged, monks and priests, the blind and the insane, and refrain
from acts of brutality and maiming. Destruction of livestock, trees and
crops was also forbidden unless it was for the purpose of sustaining
life. Innocent human life should be immune from all forms of unlawful
aggression, as the Qur’an proclaims: Whosoever kills a human being for
other than manslaughter or corruption in the earth, it shall be as if he
had killed all humanity (Al-Mā’idah, 5:32).
Te majority of Sunni and Shi‘i jurists have held that jihad is legiti-
mate only in defence against aggression. Tey also maintain that jihad
must be declared by the legitimate leader. Hence no group, party or

--- Sayfa 16 ---
war and peace in islam
xiv
organisation has the authority to take up arms in the name of jihad
without authorisation by lawful authorities. For there will otherwise be
disorder and anarchy. Tis is the purport of the hadith which provides
that: ‘A Muslim ruler is the shield [of his people]. A war can only be
waged under him and people should seek his shelter [in war].’13
From his reading of the source evidence, Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyyah
(d. 1350 CE/751 AH) divided jihad into four main varieties: i) jihad
against the self; ii) jihad against the unbelievers; iii) jihad against the
hypocrites; and iv) jihad against the agents of corruption.14
Each of these has been subdivided into four types: a) jihad of the
heart; b) jihad of the tongue; c) jihad by wealth; and d) jihad by person.
Tus a total of sixteen varieties of jihad come into the picture, most of
which consist of peaceful struggle for a good cause. Te last variety, that
is, of jihad in person, includes military jihad, but also actions such as
care for the ill and personal service.15 Jihad against the self is the foun-
dation of all jihad, for ﬁghting an external enemy would not be possible
without a successful engagement in inner jihad. Jihad by one’s words
consists of education and advice given to promote good and prevent
evil. Tis is known in the present-day Arab countries as jihad al-tarbi-
yah (the education eﬀort). In the Twelver Imami Shi‘i doctrine, to quote
Nasr again, ‘all the eminent authorities have consequently maintained
that jihad, except for self defence, is forbidden in the absence of the
ma’sum, that is “the inerrant Imam”’.16
Western media is apt to associate war and violence with Islam.
Te book before us forcefully refutes this through a reading mainly of
the Qur’an and Hadith—letting these sources speak for themselves, as
it were, before the learned authors advance their own interpretations
and insights. Some sections of the present volume also review factual
historical evidence on warfare. ‘Te fact is,’ as Ali Mazrui wrote, that ‘in
the last 100 years, western civilisation has killed millions more people
than any other way of life in the annals of man in a comparable unit of
time ... It has also been the West in the last 100 years which had made
warfare less and less respectful of civilian life.’17
Mahmud Shaltut, the late Shaykh of al-Azhar from 1958 to 1963,
and the contemporary Grand Mufi of Egypt, Shaykh ‘Ali Gomaa, have
shown in their writings in the book before us that the Qur’an only

--- Sayfa 17 ---
xv
Introduction
allows war for self-defence. Another Shaykh of al-Azhar, Muhammad
Sayyid Tantawi, issued a fatwa in 2001 to condemn hostage taking in the
Philippines: ‘Islam rejects all forms of violence. Tese acts of violence
have nothing to do with Islam.’ He also condemned the terrorist act
of September 11, 2001 in the United States.ͩ Ͱ Te Chief Mufi of Saudi
Arabia, Abdulaziz bin Abdallah Āl al-Shaykh, similarly declared in 2004:
You must know Islam’s ﬁrm position against all these ter-
rible crimes. Te world must know that Islam is a religion of
peace ... justice and guidance ... Islam forbids the hijacking
of airplanes, ships and other means of transport, and it for-
bids all acts that undermine the security of the innocent.19
Seyyed Hossein Nasr added his voice to say:
Tose who carry out terrorism in the West or elsewhere in
the name of jihad are vilifying an originally sacred term,
and their eﬀorts have not been accepted by established and
mainstream religious authorities as jihad.20
Te Jeddah-based Islamic Fiqh Academy aﬃliated to the
Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC), in its sixteenth session
(5–10 January 2002) vehemently condemned all manifestation of
terrorism and its attributions to Islam:
Terrorism is an outrageous attack carried out either by
individuals, groups or states against the human being. It
includes all forms of intimidation, harm, threats, killing
without a just cause, all forms of armed robbery, banditry,
every act of violence or threat intended to fulﬁl a criminal
scheme individually or collectively, terrify and horrify people
by hurting them or by exposing their lives, liberty, and security
to danger. It can also take the form of inﬂicting damage on
the environment, a public or private utility— all of which are
resolutely forbidden in Islam.
In her article Te Revolt of Islam, Nikkie Kiddie, a US professor of
Middle Eastern history, explains the rise of militancy among Muslims.
She notes that with the exception perhaps of Wahhabism, militant jihad
movements in the modern era began and grew mostly as a response to
Western colonialism. Te earliest examples in the eighteenth century in
Sumatra and West Africa emerged in the face of ‘disruptive economic
change inﬂuenced by the West’. In the nineteenth century, broader waves

--- Sayfa 18 ---
war and peace in islam
xvi
of jihad movements cropped up in Algeria, Sudan, the Caucasus, and
Libya as ‘a direct response to French, British, Russian and Italian colonial
conquest’.21
Te remainder of this Introduction consists of a summary of the
conditions under which military jihad may legitimately be waged. But
it may be said in passing that the relationship of jihad to peace is one of
means and end. Jihad is not an end in itself but a means towards peace,
freedom of conscience and justice. Unlike the Romans, for example, who
subscribed to the notion that silent enim legis enter arma (laws are silent
during wars), Islamic law regulated war and proscribed acts of oppres-
sion and injustice in the name of jihad. A set of rules were thus formu-
lated to be observed before the onset of war, during it, and afer the war
ends—which manifest in principle that laws are not silent during war. Te
book before us is an articulation of the conditions and restraints that the
shari‘ah imposes on jihad, just as it also underlines the message that the
quest for peace and justice must be the overriding purpose of all jihad.
Whereas jihad has been widely covered in the existing literature, this
book is distinguished by the insight it oﬀers into the source evidence, not
only on jihad, but also on Islam’s teachings on peace, fraternity and love.
To summarise the conditions of jihad:
1) First and foremost, every eﬀort must be made to avoid war. War
can only take place afer all peaceful eﬀorts to prevent it fail.
2) All war in Islam is defensive, a struggle for liberation to defend
one’s freedom of conscience, home, property or homeland from
aggression.
3) Jihad must not be waged for ignoble purposes, personal objectives
and revenge. No personal interest or private gain should be the
aim of jihad.
4) Jihad must be declared by a legitimate ruler, but only afer
necessary consultation with people of specialised knowledge and
technical know-how.
5) Justice must prevail during armed jihad. Excessive violence and
acts of     brutality, maiming and dishonouring the human dignity
of the deceased must be avoided.
6) Action may be taken only against armed combatants. Civilians
and persons who are neither involved nor trained to be engaged

--- Sayfa 19 ---
xvii
Introduction
in combat may not be targeted. Killing and harming women and
children is prohibited.
7) Animals, crops and trees are to be spared unless it be for sustaining
life. Polluting the environment, rivers, wells and demolition of
houses is prohibited.
8) Treachery and deception, killing and attacking people by surprise
is prohibited.
9) Looting and plunder are prohibited, and people’s rights and
properties may not be violated.
10) Te enemy must be among those with whom ﬁghting is permitted
as compared  to those with whom at truce has been agreed. Breach
of valid international agreements and treaties is a violation of the
rules of jihad.
11) It is impermissible to use human shields in jihad.
12) Even during conﬂict, all possible eﬀorts must be made to end
war.
13) Prisoners of war (POWs) must be treated humanely and their
lives protected; they are entitled to digniﬁed treatment, and
fulﬁlment of their essential needs.
14) If ransom is paid for a POW, he or she must be freed. Ransom
can consist of teaching ten Muslims to read and write.
15) Religious persecution and forced conversion cannot be the aim
of jihad. On the contrary, jihad must seek to establish freedom of
religion and enable people to practice their religious convictions
freely.
16) Places of worship, churches and synagogues must not be targeted.
Monks and priests who are not involved in violence must not be
harmed.
17) If a prisoner of war embraces Islam freely and willingly, he or
she must be freed.

Mohammad Hashim Kamali
International Institute of Advanced Islamic Studies (IAIS) Malaysia
Kuala Lumpur, May 2013

--- Sayfa 20 ---
xviii
ABOUT THE CONTRIBUTORS (in Alphabetical Order)
Prof. Ismail Albayrak was born in Ankara in 1968. Upon receiving his
primary and secondary education he began to study in the School of
Divinity/Ankara where graduated in 1991. In 1994 he won a scholarship
from the Turkish Higher Education Council to continue his postgradu-
ate studies abroad. For this purpose, in 1995 he went to England. Ismail
received his PhD degree from Leeds University in 2000. Since then he
has been working at Sakarya University, Adapazarı/Turkey, where he
teaches and writes on Qur’anic Studies, classical exegesis, contempo-
rary approaches to the Qur’an and Orientalism. He is also interested
in the place of Muslim communities and their activities in globalisa-
tion, together with the study of interfaith dialogue. In January 2008
he was appointed to the newly established Fethullah Gülen Chair in
the Study of Islam and Muslim-Catholic Relations at the Australian
Catholic University.
Dr Karim Douglas Crow is Principal Research Fellow at the
International Institute of Advanced Islamic Studies (IAIS), Malaysia
in Kuala Lumpur since 2008. He received his Doctorate in Islamic
Studies from the Institute of Islamic Studies at McGill University in
Montreal. Born in Beirut of Lebanese and American parents, he studied
in Damascus and Cairo, and earned his BA and MA from the American
University of Beirut. His research and publications centre on the func-
tions of intelligence and rationality in Islam; metaphysical and spiritual
topics in Asian societies; the Sunni–Shi‘ah schism (his edited volume
Facing One Qiblah, Singapore 2005); and Islamic Peace studies. Current
research examines civilisational implications of globalising trends within
Muslim societies; rationality and modernity; and ethical & philosophic
dimensions of Muslim thinking (his edited volume Islam, Cultural
Transformation and the Re-emergence of Falsafah, Tehran 2009). He
is working on several books: Consuming Islam: In Search of Islamic
Lifestyle; and Lamp of Knowledge: Career & Teaching of Ja‘far al-Ṣādiq
[IIP, forthcoming]. For the past sixteen years Professor Crow has served

--- Sayfa 21 ---
xix
About the Contributors (in Alphabetical Order)
as advisor for non-governmental programs on Islamic peace education
in the Arab world, the Caucasus, Iran, and Indonesia. He participates
regularly in international colloquia in Asia and Europe.
Dr Caner K. Dagli is an Assistant Professor in the Department of
Religious Studies at the College of the Holy Cross in Worcester, MA,
USA. He is a general editor of the forthcoming Study Quran, and has
published in the ﬁelds of Islamic philosophy and Suﬁsm. In 2006–2007
he was an advisor for interfaith aﬀairs to the Hashemite Royal Court
of Jordan.
Dr David Dakake is an American Muslim specialising in compara-
tive religion and Islamic philosophy. He has travelled extensively in
Egypt and Iran and holds an MA in Religious Studies from Temple
University. He has spent many years studying with traditional masters
of Islamic philosophy, while publishing articles on Islamic history and
philosophy. Formerly a consultant for the Islamic Research Institute
in Washington D.C., he is currently employed as an Adjunct Professor
in the Religious Studies Department at George Mason University in
Fairfax, Virginia where he teaches classes on Judaism, Christianity,
Islam and other world religions.
HRH Prince Ghazi bin Muhammad bin Talal (b. 1966) is the nephew
of the late King Al-Hussein bin Talal of Jordan. He was educated at
Harrow School; received his BA from Princeton University in 1988
Summa cum laude; his ﬁrst PhD from Cambridge University, U.K., in
1993, and his second PhD from Al-Azhar University in Cairo 2010.
Prince Ghazi has held many advisory oﬃcial positions in Jordan includ-
ing: Cultural Secretary to H.M. King Hussein; Advisor for Tribal Aﬀairs
to H.M. King Hussein; Personal Envoy of and Special Advisor to H.M.
King Abdullah II, and Chief Advisor for Religious and Cultural Aﬀairs
to H.M. King Abdullah II. In 1996 Prince Ghazi founded the Al-Balqa
Applied University, and in 2008 he founded the World Islamic Sciences
and Education University (WISE). In 1997 he founded the National Park
of the Site of the Baptism of Jesus Christ X, and in 2000 he established
the Great Tafsir Project (www.Altafsir.com), the largest online project

--- Sayfa 22 ---
war and peace in islam
xx
for exegesis of the Holy Qur’an. He was the author of ‘Tree Articles of
the Amman Message’ in 2005; the author of the historic open letter ‘A
Common Word Between Us and You’ in 2007, and the author of the
World Interfaith Harmony Week United Nations General Assembly
Resolution in October 2010. In 2012 he established the Al-Ghazali
Integral Professorial Chair in Al-Aqsa Mosque and Al-Quds University,
and the Al-Razi Integral Professorial Chair in the King Hussein Mosque
and Jordan University. Prince Ghazi is also Chairman of the Board of
Trustees of Te Royal Aal al-Bayt Institute for Islamic Tought. In 2012
he founded the Prince Ghazi Trust for Qur’anic Tought. Prince Ghazi
is the author of a number of books and articles—including the widely-
acclaimed work Love in the Holy Qur’an—as well as the recipient of
a number of awards and decorations including the Eugen Biser Prize
(2008) and the St. Augustine Award for Interfaith Dialogue (2012).
HE Shaykh Ali Gomaa is the former Grand Mufi of the Arab Republic of
Egypt. He was the second highest Sunni authority in Egypt afer Shaykh
Ahmad al-Tayyeb and one of the foremost Islamic scholars in the world.
Gomaa was responsible for Daral Ifa al Masriyyah, a leading institute
for Islamic legal research, and the legal arm of the Egyptian Ministry of
Justice, which is responsible for passing oﬃcial religious rulings.
Prof. Joel Hayward is currently Professor of International and Civil
Security at Khalifa University in Abu Dhabi. Previously he was a Senior
Fellow at the Markﬁeld Institute of Higher Education and a Fellow of
the Cambridge Muslim College. His career highlights include having
been the Dean of the Royal Air Force College for ﬁve years, a Director
of the Royal Air Force Centre for Air Power Studies for four years,
and the Head of King’s College London’s Air Power Studies Division
for six years. Professor Hayward is the author or editor of nine books
and monographs as well as many book chapters and journal articles,
some of which have appeared in German, Russian, Portuguese, Spanish
and Serbian translations. He is a member of the British Armed Forces
Muslim Association and serves as Strategic Policy Advisor to Shaykh
Dr Muhammad Tahir-ul-Qadri. Unusually for a social scientist, he is
also active in the literary arts and has published both ﬁction and poetry.

--- Sayfa 23 ---
xxi
About the Contributors (in Alphabetical Order)
His second collection of poetry was published in 2011. He writes regular
columns in Emel and other Islamic magazines.
Prof. Ibrahim Kalin, PhD, is Chief Advisor to the Prime Minister of
Turkey. Dr Kalin is the founding director of the SETA Foundation for
Political, Economic and Social Research based in Ankara, Turkey and
served as its director from 2005 to 2009. He is a fellow at the Prince
Alwaleed Center for Muslim-Christian Understanding, Georgetown
University. Professor Kalin has a PhD from the George Washington
University and is a broadly trained scholar of philosophy and Islamic
studies. He has taught courses on Islamic philosophy, comparative
philosophy, Islam-West relations and Turkish foreign policy. His ﬁeld
of concentration is post-Avicennan Islamic philosophy with research
interests in comparative philosophy and Muslim-Christian relations.
He has served as spokesperson for the A Common Word Initiative.
Prof. Mohammad Hashim Kamali is the Founding Chairman and
CEO of the International Institute of Advanced Islamic Studies (IAIS)
Malaysia. He was Professor of Islamic Law and Jurisprudence at the
International Islamic University Malaysia (1985-2004), and also Dean
of the International Institute of Islamic Tought and Civilization
(ISTAC) from 2004 to 2006. He was a member and sometime chair-
man of the Constitution Review Commission of Afghanistan (2003)
and also served as a UNDP Advisor on constitutional reform in the
Maldives (2004 and 2007). He advised on the new constitution of Iraq
(2004-2005) and the proposed new constitution of Somalia. Professor
Kamali is a member of the Shariah Advisory Council of the Securities
Commission Malaysia, and also serves on the advisory boards of thir-
teen local and international academic journals. He has addressed over
150 national and international conferences and has published twenty
books and over 140 academic articles. He is an original signatory of A
Common Word Between Us and You (2007). Professor Kamali appears
in Te 500 Most Inﬂuential Muslims in the World, 2009 & 2010. He was
a recipient of the ‘Isma‘il al-Faruqi Award for Academic Excellence’ in
1995 and again in 1997. He received the King Abdullah II bin al-Hussein
International Award 2010 from H.M. King Abdullah of Jordan, in

--- Sayfa 24 ---
war and peace in islam
xxii
recognition of his outstanding academic contributions towards serving
Islam and the Muslims.
Dr Joseph Lumbard is an assistant professor of classical Islam at Brandeis
University. Professor Lumbard researches Islamic intellectual traditions
with an emphasis on Suﬁsm and Islamic philosophy. He is the editor of
Islam, Fundamentalism, and the Betrayal of Tradition (World Wisdom,
2004), a collection of essays that examines the religious, political and
historical factors that have led to the rise of Islamic fundamentalism.
Currently, Professor Lumbard is researching the development of Suﬁ
theories of love in the early Islamic period and their inﬂuence on the
Persian Suﬁ tradition. He completed his PhD at Yale University in 2003.
Shaykh Sayyid Hasan Saqqaf is Hasan ibn ‘Ali ibn Hashim ibn Ahmad,
Abu Hashim al-Saqqaf al-Husayni, a contemporary Shaﬁ‘i scholar and
professor of hadith. Based in Amman, Jordan, his shaykhs include
Hashim Majdhub of  Damascus in Shaﬁ‘i jurisprudence, Muti’ Hammami
in estate division, and Muhammad Hulayyil in Arabic grammar. Shaykh
Saqqaf has been given written authorisation in the Shadhili ṭarīqah and
hadith from Shaykh ‘Abdullah Ghimari of Tangiers. He teaches a circle
of students in Amman and has published over forty-ﬁve books and trea-
tises of tenets of faith, jurisprudence, and heresiology.
Dr Reza Shah-Kazemi is an author who specialises in comparative
mysticism, Islamic Studies, Suﬁsm and Shi’ism. He is the founding editor
of the Islamic World Report and is currently a Research Associate at the
Institute of Ismaili Studies with the Department of Academic Research
and Publications. He received degrees in International Relations and
Politics at Sussex and Exeter University, before receiving his doctorate
in Comparative Religion from the University of Kent in 1994. He later
acted as a consultant to the Institute for Policy Research in Kuala Lampur.
Dr Shah-Kazemi has authored several works including Te Spirit of
Tolerance in Islam (IIS/IB Tauris, 2012); Spiritual Quest: Reﬂections on
Qur’anic Prayer according to the teachings of Imam ‘Ali (IIS/IB Tauris,
2011); Common Ground Between Islam and Buddhism (Fons Vitae, 2010);
Paths to Transcendence: According to Shankara, Ibn Arabi and Meister

--- Sayfa 25 ---
xxiii
About the Contributors (in Alphabetical Order)
Eckhart (World Wisdom, 2006); Justice and Remembrance: Introducing
the Spirituality of Imam ‘Ali (IIS/IB Tauris, 2006) and Te Other in the
Light of the One: Te Universality of the Qur’an and Interfaith Dialogue
(Islamic Texts Society, 2006).
Grand Imam Mahmoud Shaltut was born in 1893 and was a great
Egyptian religious scholar, jurist, Qur’anic exegete and reformer. He was
appointed by Gamal Abdel-Nasser to the prestigious position of Grand
Imam of Al-Azhar at a key time in Egyptian history, from 1958 until
Shaykh Shaltut’s death in 1963. As Grand Imam of Al-Azhar, Shaltut’s
reforms focused on the separation of the state and religious institutions,
particularly Al-Azhar. He also dedicated himself to showing the world
that Islamic shari‘ah law is not at odds with modern society and that it
is a guiding light through the changes and challenges of contemporary
life. Shaykh Shaltut strove to combat sectarianism in Islam and encour-
aged harmony in the interactions between Sunnis and Shi‘ites. He was a
powerful orator and his ﬁnely honed communication skills extended to
his writing, particularly his Qur‘anic exegesis. His writings are known for
their straightforward language, eloquence and accessibility to the layper-
son. Imam Shaltut will always be remembered for his eﬀorts to show the
world that Islam is a religion of unity, ﬂexibility, moderation and reason.
Dr Naveed Sheikh holds a First Class BA (hons) in Politics and Modern
History from the University of Buckingham where he completed his
degree in two years, received ﬁve merit prizes for academic excel-
lence and graduated with the university’s highest honour, the Edgar
Palamountain Medal of Excellence, presented to him by Lady Tatcher
in 1997. He also has an MA in International Relations (with distinction)
from the University of Durham where his dissertation received the high-
est mark since the founding of the Department of Politics. He proceeded
to enrol for a PhD at the Centre of International Studies at the University
of Cambridge, working on a thesis on nuclear non-/proliferation and
identity imaginaries. He has held fellowships at Harvard University
(2001–02) and Hosei University in Tokyo (2003–4). He joined SPIRE
as a permanent lecturer in International Relations in September 2005.

--- Sayfa 27 ---
PART I: WAR AND ITS PRACTICE

--- Sayfa 29 ---
1
chapter one
THE QUR’AN AND COMBAT
Grand Imam Mahmoud Shaltut
Tanks be to God, and peace be upon His Messenger, Muhammad,
who was sent by God as a mercy to all mankind. God revealed the Holy
Qur’an to the Prophet Muhammad to clarify all things; it prescribes
for humanity correct doctrine and high morality and shows us how to
organise our relationships with each other in a manner that wards oﬀ
tyranny and preserves rights.
Tis is a study of combat (qitāl) gleaned from the Holy Qur’an; it
is from a series of lectures I delivered on Egyptian radio. I wished to
present it again in written form so that people may read it and beneﬁt
and so that, if they are so inclined, people may also oﬀer their opinions
on the matter.
In the introduction I include what I see as the ideal approach to
Qur’anic exegesis. I also discuss the reason that drove me to choose this
subject in particular.
Te research discusses the following subjects: the nature of the
call to Islam (da‘wah); the Holy Qur’an and the legitimacy of combat;
and the Holy Qur’an and the organisation of combat and its rules. Te
research concludes that the practical combat which the Prophet U and
his two caliphs undertook was an exact and correct application of what
the Holy Qur’an prescribes in regards to legitimate combat, its organi-
sation and its rules.
Tis is what you will read in this study and it is my fervent hope that
God has inspired me to write with reason and with wisdom.
My success is only with God. In Him I trust and to Him I turn
[repentant]. (Hūd, 11:88)

--- Sayfa 30 ---
war and peace in islam
2
The Ideal Approach to Qur’anic Exegesis
Tere are two approaches to Qur’anic exegesis:
Te First Approach: Te exegete explains the verses and chapters
of the Holy Qur’an in their traditional order and elucidates the mean-
ing of words and the relationships between verses. Tis is the approach
that people have become familiar with, as it is as old as Qur’anic exege-
sis itself. One characteristic of this approach is that exegesis is as varied
as the exegetes who interpret the verses. For example, exegetes who are
immersed in the sciences of rhetoric will employ rhetoric in interpreting
the verses of the Holy Qur’an. Likewise, exegetes who are immersed in
morphology and syntax will employ parsing  words as a means of inter-
pretation. Exegetes who are immersed in history will employ stories and
news; they may even be tempted to take this too far and relate Judaica, or
Isrā’īliyyāt; stories without due investigation or scrutiny. Furthermore,
exegetes who are immersed in philosophy will enjoy discussing creatures
and creation and this will be reﬂected in their exegesis. When they are
immersed in theology and jurisprudence, their interpretation will no
doubt be coloured by these things and so on and so forth. Tese varied
approaches to Qur’anic exegesis may make it diﬃcult for people who turn
to Qur’anic commentaries for Divine Guidance, reassurance and wisdom
to ﬁnd these things.
As a result of this approach, verses are sometimes explained in ways
that alter their true meaning or purpose; sometimes they are even consid-
ered to have been abrogated. Ofen verses are interpreted on the basis
of fundamental rules derived from jurisprudential branches by heads of
madhāhib. Tese rules are taken to be fundamentals, and are referred to
in understanding the Holy Qur’an and the Sunnah and in deriving rules
and laws. Tis does not stop at legislation, or at the Verses of Legislation,
but encroaches into the area of beliefs and diﬀerent groups’ opinions.
Tus we may hear them say: ‘ Tis verse does not agree with the Sunni
madhāhib because its allegorical interpretation (ta’wīl) is such and such.’
Or they may say: ‘ Tis verse does not agree with the Hanaﬁ madhab as
its allegorical interpretation is such and such.’ Or they might say: ‘ Tis
verse, or these verses—around seventy of them—are incompatible with
the legitimacy of combat (qitāl) and are therefore abrogated.’

--- Sayfa 31 ---
3
Te Qur’an and Combat
Tus the Holy Qur’an has become the branch afer it was the root,
a follower afer it was followed, and something weighed on a scale afer
it was the scale on which all things took their measure. God says in the
Holy Qur’an:
If you should quarrel about anything, refer it to God and the
Messenger, if you believe in God and the Last Day. (Al-Nisā’,
4:59)
Referring to God is referring to His Book, and referring to the
Prophet U is referring to his Sunnah. But some have reversed this and
have overturned legislation and referred God's Book and the Sunnah of
His Prophet to their opinions and the madhāhib of their imitators. God
says:
Tey have taken their rabbis and their monks as lords beside
God … (Al-Tawbah, 9:31)
In his exegesis of this verse al-Fakhr al-Razi related that his shaykh
said: ‘I witnessed a group of jurist imitators listen as verses from the
Holy Qur’an were recited to them in relation to particular issues; their
madhāhib were at odds with these verses and they did not accept
them or pay them any heed. Instead, they continued to look at me in
astonishment as if to say: “How can we comply with what these verses say
when the narrative of those who came before us is at odds with them?”’
As Razi related this about his shaykh, so have many other scholars such
as Ghazali, al-Izz bin Abdul-Salaam and many others.
Tese circuitous methods of interpreting the Holy Qur’an, and this
setback that the relationship between the Qur’an and jurisprudence and
beliefs suﬀered, caused a kind of intellectual chaos towards the Holy
Qur’an and the meanings of the Qur’an. Tis chaos had an impact in
making people feel averse to the Holy Qur’an and listening to exegetes.
Te Second Approach: Te exegete collects all the verses pertaining
to a particular subject and analyses them collectively, studying how they
relate to each other. In this way he can arrive at a proper judgement of
the verses and become clear on what the verses are saying. With this
approach the exegete also cannot impose an interpretation on any verse,
rather the verse reveals its meaning; and the exegete does not miss the
wonders of the Divine Word. In our view, this second approach is the

--- Sayfa 32 ---
war and peace in islam
4
ideal approach to Qur’anic exegesis; particularly if the intent is to spread
the Qur’an’s guidance and to show that the topics the Qur’an deals with
are not purely theoretical, with no practical application in everyday life.
Tis approach also enables the exegete to deal with many practical
issues, each one separate and independent. Tis way people may know
the subjects of the Holy Qur’an with their clear titles, and know how
closely linked the Qur’an is to their practical daily lives. Tese subjects
include: the Qur’an and the roots of legislation; the Qur’an and science,
the Qur’an and the family, the Qur’an and the etiquette of social gather-
ings, the Qur’an and tourism, the Qur’an and economics, the Qur’an and
sacriﬁce, the Qur’an and kindness and so on and so forth on subjects that
build a strong and ﬂourishing nation. In this way people are assured, in
a practical and clear manner that the Holy Qur’an is not far removed
from their lives or the way they think or their problems. Tey are assured
that the Holy Qur’an is not just a spiritual book whose sole mission is to
explain how to be closer to the Almighty without concerning itself with
the practical exigencies of daily life. Tis false and pernicious notion is
widespread, not only among the general public, but also among many
people who claim, or whom others claim, to be scholars. In the eyes of
such people the Holy Qur’an becomes merely a collection of texts to recite
or listen to in times of meditation, or a tool through which to invoke God’s
protection or seek healing. Tis is an injustice to the Holy Qur’an, indeed
an injustice to themselves, their minds and their chances for a good life
which they have deprived of an unstinting source of knowledge, wisdom,
legislation, politics, education, reﬁnement and all one needs to manage
the issues that life throws at humans. God says in the Holy Qur’an:
Truly this Qur’an guides to that which is straightest and gives
tidings to the believers who perform righteous deeds that there
is a great reward for them. (Al-Isrā’, 17:9)
Tis approach that we have described bears generous fruit to those
who follow it and protects them from thinking ill of the Holy Qur’an and
its legislation. It also puts the exegete face to face with the subject he wishes
to discuss and places him in an environment steeped in relevant verses; he
may use one to understand another. Te most correct explanation of the
Holy Qur’an is the explanation the exegete absorbs from the Qur’an itself.
It is ofen that an ordinary person perusing the Holy Qur’an misses the

--- Sayfa 33 ---
5
Te Qur’an and Combat
secret in a particular verse, but when he reads a sister verse discussing the
same subject, the secret is unveiled and revealed to him.
It was our wish, and that of some men blessed with religious insight,
to share this new approach to Qur’anic exegesis so that the topics of the
Holy Qur’an may be known and studied purely, in a manner innocent of
the impurities that may veil the Qur’an’s truth or distort its beauty. Our
wish is for the Qur’an to be studied far from the circuitous approach,
and in a manner that transcends extrinsic tales and imaginings that no
sound mind seeking truth could possibly believe. It is my hope that in
this new approach to Qur’anic exegesis people may ﬁnd what their souls
yearn for, in terms of learning about the guidance of the Holy Qur’an
and contemplating its secrets and its wisdom and beneﬁtting from its
principles and teachings.
Years ago, I applied this second approach to the subject of ‘Te Qur’an
and Women’ and I believe that those who read it with good intent met it
with an open and assured heart. Te topic I should now like to discuss,
utilising the second approach, is ‘Te Qur’an and Combat’. Combat is a
very real issue in these troubled times and many people disparage Islam,
with regards to the matter of combat. Learning the Holy Qur’an’s wise
prescriptions and rules regarding combat, its justiﬁable causes and its
purpose has never been more pressing. Te Holy Qur’an proves to us that
Islam loves peace and hates bloodshed and the loss of life for the sake of
the transient and the ephemeral; it also hates greed, gluttony and love
of killing. Tose who terrorise the world with their lethal wars should
know how far they have deviated from Islam, which they believe is the
only religion of peace. Tey should ask themselves if it is logical that a
religion which calls for peace and for people to devote what God has given
them to good and to building, and not to what is harmful and destructive,
would be a religion that approves of its followers terrorising the world
and causing heartache and laying waste to once-ﬂourishing cities and
cultures. Tey even go so far as to say that their religion is the religion
of peace and that other religions are religions of war established by the
sword and coercion.
(Te section ‘Te Nature of Islamic Da‘wah’ has been omitted—an
unabridged version of the text of Shaltut’s Te Qur’an and Combat can be
found at www.mabda.jo.)

--- Sayfa 34 ---
war and peace in islam
6
Tere is absolutely no reason or justiﬁca tion for anyone to believe
or presume that the Islamic da‘wah forces people to believe in Islam
by means of the sword and combat.
First: Te nature of the Islamic da‘wah is free of complexity, ambi-
guity and intellectual hardship that would require manifest or surrep-
titious coercion22.
Second: Islamic shari‘ah law, taken from the Qur’an, is not in
contravention of, or in opposition to, God’s cosmic Sunnah which He
made the basis for the faith of the believers and the basis for the disbe-
lief of the unbelievers i.e. man is free to choose for himself through
examination and conviction.
Tird: Islamic shari‘ah law, taken from the precise and unambigu-
ous verses of the Holy Qur’an, rejects the use of coercion as a means
to call people to God, as do the laws of the other preceding (Divinely
revealed) religions.
Fourth: Te Prophet Muhammad U was the ﬁrst person to take
on the responsibility of da‘wah, and as such he was responsible before
God for the sole task of his Message which the Holy Qur’an expounded
in both its Meccan and Medinan parts. Te task was to convey and
warn, not to use coercion and violence to demand faith from people.23
Fifh: Te Holy Qur’an, which is the source of the Islamic da‘wah,
does not respect faith that has been coerced and forced and denies its
validity on the Day of Resurrection. How then could it enjoin coercion or
allow it as a method of calling people to believe in the Message of Islam?
We know these conclusions from the Qur’an itself and believ-
ing in them is part of believing in the Holy Qur’an. Here one may
ask: ‘Given these conclusions, what is the signiﬁcance of the Verses
of Combat (Ayāt Al-Qitāl) in the Holy Qur’an?’
Tis will be the subject of our next section.
The Verses of Combat (Āyt Al-Qitl)
In this chapter we will review the Verses of Combat in the Holy Qur’an
in order to understand their meaning, signiﬁcance, purpose and their
relation to each other. Ten we shall arrive at a conclusion regarding
the verses which command combat and, together with the conclusions
reached in the preceding section, we shall elucidate the verses.

--- Sayfa 35 ---
7
Te Qur’an and Combat
Te Holy Qur’an expounds two kinds of combat: the ﬁrst is
combat between Muslims and the second is combat between Muslims
and non-Muslims.
First: Combat between Muslims is an internal matter of the
Muslim Ummah and is governed by its own laws, relating only to
the Ummah and no one else. Te Holy Qur’an is clear about how
to handle instances of rebellion and breach of public order, whether
between subjects or between subjects and rulers. It legislates how to
manage such situations in a manner that preserves the unity of the
Muslim Ummah and the authority and standing of the ruling body
in a manner that protects the community from the evils of aggres-
sion and hostility. Tis is clear in the following verses from Sūrat
Al-Ḥujurāt:
And if two parties of believers fall to warfare, make peace
between them. And if one of them aggresses against the
other, ﬁght the one which aggresses until it returns to God’s
ordinance. Ten, if it returns, reconcile them, and act justly.
Surely God loves the just. / Te believers are indeed broth-
ers. Terefore [always] make peace between your brethren,
and fear God, so that perhaps you might receive mercy. (Al-
Ḥujurāt, 49:9–10)
Tese two verses discuss a situation where disagreement that
cannot be solved by peaceful means breaks out between two groups of
believers, and both groups resort to the use of force and the judgment
of the sword. Te verses stipulate that the Ummah, represented by
its government, should investigate the causes of strife between the
two groups and try to reconcile them. If this is achieved through
negotiations, and both parties receive their dues, aggression is warded
oﬀ and security restored; thus God saves the believers from combat.
If, however, one of the groups continues to aggress against the other,
refuses to comply with God’s commands and at tacks the authority of
the believers, then it has become an aggressor that has rebelled against
the rule of law and the system. In this case, the commu nity of Muslims
must ﬁght (qitāl) it until it submits and returns to what is righteous. Te
verses then clarify the secret to successfully resolving any discord that
might arise between diﬀerent groups. Te secret is that when a group

--- Sayfa 36 ---
war and peace in islam
8
returns to what is righteous, they may not be oppressed or deprived of
their rights; indeed, justice must prevail and each group must be given its
dues. Consider the end of the ﬁrst verse (Al-Ḥujurāt, 49:9): Surely God
loves the just. Te verses tell us that the intention behind the legislation
is the preservation of the unity and indivisi bility of the Ummah and the
safeguarding of religious brother hood; one of the important matters of
faith. Te second verse says:
Te believers are indeed brothers. Terefore [always] make
peace between your brethren, and fear God, so that perhaps
you might receive mercy. (Al-Ḥujurāt, 49:10)
Tese wise Qur’anic legislations were revealed by an illiterate
Prophet to ensure peace and bring an end to aggression and violence.
Tey were revealed more than thirteen cen turies before the human
mind came up with the ‘League of Nations’ or the ‘Security Council’ as
means to preserve peace and guarantee liberties and rights for people
and states.
If nations understood these wise legislations properly, gave them
the attention they deserve and followed them, they would never go
astray from the path of wisdom and they would have been spared the
repeated catastrophes caused by aggression and violence on the one
hand and disagreement and division on the other. Tese are the rules
legislated by the Holy Qur’an regarding combat between Muslims. Tis
combat clearly has no bearing on the principles of Islamic da‘wah and
faith in its Message.
Second: Combat between Muslims and non-Muslims. Te Holy
Qur’an expounds in a comprehensive manner, in many verses and
chapters, the legitimate causes and purposes of combat between
Muslims and non-Muslims. It enjoins that when the purposes of legiti-
mate combat are achieved, it must end. Te Qur’an also elucidates what
Muslims should be prepared for, and the necessary cautions they must
take against an unexpected outbreak of war. Te Holy Qur’an clariﬁes
the rules and regulations of this kind of combat, in addition to those of
truces and treaties. In the following we shall discuss the verses dealing
with the causes of this kind of combat, and how it must stop when its
purposes are achieved. We will then discuss the relationship be tween
the Verses of Forgiveness and the Verses of Combat.

--- Sayfa 37 ---
9
Te Qur’an and Combat
Te early Muslims spent many years in Mecca suﬀering the worst
kinds of punishment, they were not free to worship, were persecuted
for believing in a creed that brought them reassur ance and were terror-
ised with regard to property and personal safety. All this continued
until they were forced to emigrate. Tey lef their homes and settled
in Medina, patiently accepting God’s will. Whenever they felt the urge
to resist oppression and seek revenge, the Prophet held them back and
urged them to be patient and await God’s will. Te Prophet U  said: ‘I
have not been ordered to ﬁght (qitāl).’ Tis lasted until they were almost
overcome by despair and doubt. Just then God revealed the ﬁrst Verses
of Combat:
Permission is granted to those who ﬁght because they have
been wronged. And God is truly able to help them; / those who
were expelled from their homes without right, only because
they said: ‘Our Lord is God’. Were it not for God’s causing
some people to drive back others, destruction would have be-
fallen the monasteries, and churches, and synagogues, and
mosques in which God’s Name is mentioned greatly. Assur-
edly God will help those who help Him. God is truly Strong,
Mighty—/ those who, if We empower them in the land, main-
tain the prayer, and pay the alms, and enjoin decency and for-
bid indecency. And with God rests the outcome of all matters.
(Al-Ḥajj, 22:39 –41)
Tese verses discuss and justify permission for combat because
of the injustices the Muslims faced, and because they were expelled
from their homes and forced to emigrate. Te verses then explain that
this permission is in line with the Sunnah of people clashing, which
maintains a cer tain equilibrium and averts oppression. It also allows
the adherents of diﬀerent faiths to perform their religious rituals and
preserve the doctrine of monotheism. Finally, these verses show that it
is God’s Sunnah to help those who help Him, the pious who do not use
war as an instrument for destruction and corruption, for subjugating
the weak and sat isfying their own desires and ambitions. Te verses
make it clear that God helps those who, if they are empowered in the
land, cultivate it with goodness and obey God’s orders, and are causes
for goodness and righteousness and not causes for what is wicked and
corrupt. Indeed, God knows who is destruc tive and who is a cause for

--- Sayfa 38 ---
war and peace in islam
10
good. God says at the end of these verses: And with God rests the outcome
of all matters.
As we have said, these verses are the ﬁrst Verses of Combat. Tey are
very clear and do not contain even the slightest evidence of coercion. On
the contrary, they conﬁrm that people clashing with each other is one of
God’s cosmic Sunnahs, inevitable for the preser vation of order and the
continuation of righteousness and civilisation. Without this principle, the
earth would be corrupted and all the diﬀerent places of worship would
be destroyed. Indeed, that would happen if tyrants had control over reli-
gion, free to abuse it without restraint, coercing people to convert without
anyone standing in their way. Tese verses are not speciﬁc to Muslims,
they are about humanity in general; they state clearly that destruction
would have befallen monasteries, churches and synagogues.
Now let us consider the Verses of Combat in Sūrat Al-Baqarah:
And ﬁght in the way of God with those who ﬁght against you,
but aggress not; God loves not the aggressors. / And slay them
wherever you come upon them, and expel them from where
they expelled you; sedition is more grievous than slaying. But
ﬁght them not by the Sacred Mosque until they should ﬁght you
there; then if they ﬁght you, slay them—such, is the requital of
disbelievers. / But if they desist, surely God is Forgiving, Merci-
ful. / Fight them till there is no sedition, and the religion is for
God; then if they desist, there shall be no enmity, save against
evildoers. / Te sacred month for the sacred month; holy things
demand retaliation; whoever commits aggression against you,
then commit aggression against him in the manner that he com-
mitted against you; and fear God, and know that God is with
the God-fearing. (Al-Baqarah, 2:190–4)
Tese verses command the Muslims to ﬁght (qitāl) in the way of
God those who ﬁght against them, to pursue them wherever they are and
to scatter them as they have scattered the Muslims. Te verses prohibit
unprovoked aggression and emphasise that God does not love aggression
or aggressors. Te verses then explain that expelling people from their
homes, terrorising and preventing them from living peacefully without
fear for their lives or possessions is sedition worse than murder and
bloodshed. Terefore, those who practice or provoke these things must
be fought in the same manner as ﬁghters must be fought. Te verses also

--- Sayfa 39 ---
11
Te Qur’an and Combat
prohibit combat in holy places and during holy periods, unless Muslims
are under attack in holy places or during holy periods. In these cases,
Muslims are allowed to retaliate in equal proportion. Te verses then
clarify that when the purposes of legitimate combat are achieved, it must
end. Tese purposes are that there be no sedition in matters of religion
and that people enjoy religious freedom without oppression or torture.
When these purposes are accomplished and people feel safe, combat must
cease.
Tese verses and the principles they expounded regarding the
reasons and purposes of combat do not contain even the slightest trace
of the idea of coercion. On the contrary, these verses, like the ones that
precede them, state clearly and distinctly that the reason the Muslims
were ordered to ﬁght (qitāl) is the aggression they faced and the fact that
they had been expelled from their homes, and because God’s sacred insti-
tutions had been violated. Another reason explained in the verses is the
many at tempts to create sedition in the faith of the Muslims. Te verses
also clarify the purpose behind such combat, which is to end violence
against Muslims and to establish religious freedom devoted to God, free
from any pressure or coercion.
We see the principles expounded in these verses in many other Verses
of Combat in the following surahs of the Holy Qur’an: Al-Nisā’, Al-Anfāl
and Al-Tawbah. God says in Sūrat Al-Nisā’:
What is wrong with you, that you do not ﬁght in the way of
God, and for the oppressed men, women, and children who say,
‘Our Lord, bring us forth from this town whose people are evil-
doers and appoint for us a protector from You, and appoint for
us from You a helper’. (Al-Nisā’, 4:75)
So ﬁght in the way of God; you are charged only with yourself.
And urge on the believers; maybe God will restrain the might of
the disbelievers; God is mightier and more severe in castigation.
(Al-Nisā’, 4:84)
… And so if they stay away from you and do not ﬁght you, and
oﬀer you peace, then God does not allow you any way against
them. / … So, if they do not stay away from you, and oﬀer you
peace, and restrain their hands, then take them and slay them
wherever you come upon them; against them We have given
you clear warrant. (Al-Nisā’, 4:90–1)

--- Sayfa 40 ---
war and peace in islam
12
Consider the following in these verses: …maybe God will restrain
the might of the disbelievers…and…if they do not stay away from you
…When we reﬂect on these verses we can understand the spirit of sedi-
tion that people harboured against Muslims and on account of which the
Muslims were ordered to ﬁght (qitāl) them. Tis is exactly the same prin-
ciple that is expounded in the verses we sited from Sūrat Al-Baqarah,
Sūrat Al-Anfāl and Sūrat Al-Tawbah. God says in Sūrat Al-Anfāl:
And ﬁght them until sedition is no more and religion is all
for God; then if they desist, surely God sees what they do. (Al-
Anfāl, 8:39)
Tis verse is similar to what God says in Sūrat Al-Baqarah and Sūrat
Al-Tawbah:
But if they break their oaths afer [making] their pact and as-
sail your religion, then ﬁght the leaders of unbelief—verily they
have no [binding] oaths, so that they might desist. / Will you
not ﬁght a people who broke their oaths and intended to expel
the Messenger—initiating against you ﬁrst? Are you afraid of
them? God is more worthy of your fear if you are believers.
(Al-Tawbah, 9:12–13)
… And ﬁght the idolaters altogether, even as they ﬁght you
altogether; and know that God is with those who fear Him.
(Al-Tawbah, 9:36)
Consider the following in these verses: But if they break their oaths
afer [making] their pact and assail your religion … and initiating against
you ﬁrst … and even as they ﬁght you altogether. When we reﬂect on
these verses we can understand that they were revealed about people
who were recalcitrant in their sedition and in whom the elements of
corruption were so deeply rooted that oaths had become of no value to
them and virtue of no signiﬁcance. Tere is no doubt that combat with
these people, purifying the earth from them and ending their sedition is
to serve the common good of mankind.
In Sūrat Al-Tawbah, afer the verses we quoted above, there are
two verses that at ﬁrst consideration seem to contradict the principles
regarding combat. We shall cite these two verses and clarify what they
signify in light of the verses which precede, which are many and clear,
and fundamental to the issue of the legality of combat (qitāl) and the

--- Sayfa 41 ---
13
Te Qur’an and Combat
reasons for it. Terefore, other verses must be compared to the princi-
ples contained in those verses and interpreted accordingly.
Te ﬁrst verse is:
Fight those who do not believe in God, nor in the Last Day,
and who do not forbid what God and His Messenger have for-
bidden, nor do they practice the religion of truth, from among
of those who have been given the Scripture, until they pay the
jizyah tribute, readily being subdued. (Al-Tawbah, 9:29)
Te second verse is:
O you who believe, ﬁght those of the disbelievers who are near
to you, and let them ﬁnd harshness in you, and know that God
is with the pious. (Al-Tawbah, 9:123)
Te ﬁrst verse commands the Muslims to ﬁght (qitāl) a group that
God describes as people who do not believe in God. Tis group has
behaved towards the Muslims in a manner that is cause to ﬁght them:
they broke pacts, attacked the da‘wah and placed obstacles in its path.
However, the verses do not state that unbelief in God and the other
descriptions mentioned are reasons for the Muslims to ﬁght them;
the verses only mention them as descriptions and clariﬁcations. Tese
descriptions are meant to serve as further incitement to ﬁght them
once their aggression materialises. For they changed God’s religion to
suit themselves and took their rabbis and monks as lords beside God
(Al-Tawbah, 9:30), while allowing and forbidding things according
to their whims, unbelieving in what God has decreed as forbidden or
permissible. Nothing deters them from breaking pacts, violating rights
and aggression. Tese are the people who, according to the above verses,
must be fought continuously until they yield and desist from harm and
spreading sedition. Te Holy Qur’an introduces a symbol to signify this
yielding; the payment of a tribute or poll tax (jizyah). Te jizyah was a
means through which people participated in shouldering the burdens
of state and sharing the means for the common good of both Muslims
and non-Muslims.24
Te verse also indicates the reason for combat which we have
already pointed out. Te phrase readily being subdued shows us the
state they will be in when the jizyah is collected from them, a state of
yielding to the authority of the Muslims and living under their laws.

--- Sayfa 42 ---
war and peace in islam
14
Doubtless this means that previously they had been recalcitrant and
that there was good cause for the Muslims to fight them.
This is how this verse should be understood and its context
brings it in line with the other verses. If the intention behind this
verse was to have the Muslims fight them because of their unbe lief
and to show that unbelief was the reason why they were fought, then
the verse would have stated that the purpose of this combat was to
have them convert to Islam. In this case jizyah would not have been
an acceptable result, nor indeed would allowing them to abide by
their own religion.
The second verse, ... fight those of the disbelievers who are near to
you ..., should not be compared with the previous verses which were
revealed to clarify the reasons and causes for combat. This verse was
revealed to show a practical war plan to be followed when legitimate
combat breaks out. The verse guides the Muslims, stating that, when
enemies are manifold, the nearest of them should be fought first
and so on, in order to clear the road from enemies and to facilitate
victory.25
This principle, established in the Holy Qur’an, is one of the prin-
ciples followed today by warring states. No belligerent state attacks
until it has cleared the path before it and until it is sure that all
obstacles in its way have been removed. Thus, it is clear that these
two verses have no link to the reason for combat as formulated by
the other verses.
From what we have discussed one may infer:
—There is not a single verse in the Holy Qur’an that indicates that
the aim of combat in Islam is conversion.
—The causes for combat—as seen in the preceding verses—are
limited to fending off aggression, protecting the da‘wah and safe-
guarding freedom of religion.
—When the Holy Qur’an prescribed combat, it distanced it from
avarice, selfishness and the abasement of the meek. Indeed the Holy
Qur’an intended combat (qitāl) only as a means to peace, security
and a life of justice and equality.
—The jizyah was never intended as payment in return for one’s life
or retaining one’s religion, it was intended as a symbol to signify

--- Sayfa 43 ---
15
Te Qur’an and Combat
yielding, an end of hostility and a participation in shouldering the
burdens of the state.
After this has been explained, nobody can malign Islam or
misinterpret the verses of the Holy Qur’an and assume what other
ignorant people have assumed; that Islam has chosen combat (qitāl)
as a means of propagating its da‘wah, and that its calling was propa-
gated by coercion and the use of force.
We shall now cite a verse from Sūrat Al-Mumtaḥanah that can
be considered an Islamic ordinance regarding how Muslims should
treat non-Muslims.
God does not forbid you in regard to those who did not
wage war against you on account of religion and did not
expel you from your homes, that you should treat them
kindly and deal with them justly. Assuredly God loves the
just. God only forbids you in regard to those who waged
war against you on account of religion and expelled you
from your homes and supported [others] in your expulsion,
that you should make friends with them. And whoever
makes friends with them, those—they are the wrongdoers.
(Al-Mumtaḥanah, 60:8–9)
Read this ordinance then recall Sūrat Al-Mā’idah, one of the last
parts of the Holy Qur’an to be revealed, and note what it says about
the relations between Muslims and non-Muslims:
Today the good things are permitted to you, and the food
of those who were given the Scripture is permitted to you,
and permitted to them is your food. Likewise, the believ-
ing married women, and the married women of those who
were given the Scripture before you, if you give them their
wages in wedlock, and not illicitly, or taking them as lovers.
Whoever disbelieves in faith, his work has indeed failed,
and in the Hereafter he shall be among the losers. (Al-
Mā’idah, 5:5)
When one considers these verses, one understands the sublime
spirit that Islam possesses with regard to its relations with non-
Muslims: kindness, justice, friendship and affinity. It is a relationship
so magniﬁcent that even the most modern principles of international
relations known to man pale in comparison.

--- Sayfa 44 ---
war and peace in islam
16
The Relationship between the Verses of Forgiveness
and the Verses of Combat
It now behoves us to discuss an issue that has occupied the minds of
many people while examining the Holy Qur’an and comparing its
verses. Tese people fall into two categories:
A group that is antagonistic towards Islam and which searches the
Holy Qur’an for faults.
A group of Qur’anic exegetes whose religious zeal drives them to
reconcile between supposed inconsistencies within the Holy Qur’an.
Tis second group is inclined to consider that some verses abro-
gate others, and some of these exegetes allow themselves to get
carried away to such an extent that they seem to have paved the road,
unintention ally, for attacks by those who are antagonistic to Islam and
to the Holy Qur’an.
Te antagonists have examined the relationship between the diﬀer-
ent Verses of Combat (Ayāt Al-Qitāl) and the Verses of Combat as a
whole; they have also examined the Verses of Pardon and Forgiveness.
Teir conclusion is that while some Verses of Combat permit combat,
other verses urge combat and incite it. And while some verses order
combat against those who aggress and forbid instigating aggression,
other verses command that everyone be fought mercilessly, relent-
lessly and without distinction between aggressors and others. While
these verses as a whole order and regulate combat, there are many
other verses found in all surahs of the Holy Qur’an that command
forgiveness, pardon, countering evil with good and a calling to the
way of God with wisdom.
Te antagonists claim that these are all contradictions incompat-
ible with the idea that the Holy Qur’an was divinely revealed to the
Prophet Muhammad U. As for those who love the Holy Qur’an and
serve it, they hold that the Verses of Combat abrogate the Verses of
Forgiveness and Pardon, even verses like (Fuṣṣilat, 41:34): And they
are not equal, the good deed and the evil deed. Repel with that which
is better ... and (Al-Naḥl, 16:125): Call to the way of your Lord with
wisdom and fair exhortation, and dispute with them by way of that
which is best .... Tey also say that (Al-Tawbah, 9:36): ... ﬁght the

--- Sayfa 45 ---
17
Te Qur’an and Combat
idolaters altogether, even as they ﬁght you altogether ... abrogates any
preceding Verses of Forgiveness.
One of their more peculiar opinions is that (Al-Baqarah, 2:191):
And slay them wherever you come upon them ... abrogates the immedi-
ately preceding verse (Al-Baqarah, 2:190): And ﬁght in the way of God
with those who ﬁght against you ...’ Tey also say that (Al-Baqarah,
2:193): Fight them till there is no sedition ... abrogates (Al-Baqarah,
2:191): ... But ﬁght them not by the Sacred Mosque until they should
ﬁght you there ....
Te above Qur’anic pericope from Sūrat Al-Baqarah is made up
of four verses; two abrogating verses and two abrogated verses: the
second verse abrogates the ﬁrst and the fourth abrogates the third.
Al-Imam al-Razi commented on this opinion in his great work on
Qur’anic exegesis al-Tafsīr al-Kabīr: ‘It is improbable that the Wise
One would combine verses in a row where each abrogates the other.’
It is not improbable that this interpretation has paved the road for
antagonists of Islam to say that the Holy Qur’an contains contradic-
tions. Tey do not accept the notion of abrogation as claimed by lovers
of the Holy Qur’an. Indeed how can they accept our claim when even
some of our own schol ars do not?
Afer this explanation, one can see that there is no contradiction
or incompatibility between the diﬀerent Verses of Combat and no
room for the idea that some have been abrogated, because abrogation
is only applied when there is contradiction. Tese verses are therefore
ﬁxed and unassailable; amounting to the same thing and establishing
one rule, one reason and one purpose.
As for the Verses of Forgiveness and Pardon, they aim to shape
morality and are to be followed in a context that does not infringe on
pride and dignity. Every situation has its own legislation and these
verses are also ﬁxed and unassailable.
Legislation that is built upon consideration for diﬀerent situa-
tions, and for the diﬀerent conditions of individuals and groups, and
asks of people that in each situation they follow what is most suitable,
cannot be accused of being a contradictory legislation or that some
parts of it abro gate others. Indeed, to people with sound minds, it is
a wise and extremely precise legislation that promotes the interest of

--- Sayfa 46 ---
war and peace in islam
18
those who fall under its authority and brings happiness to the indi-
vidual and the community.
The Verses that Organise Combat
In the previous sections we concluded that the Holy Qur’an gives only
three reasons for combat: fending oﬀ aggression, protecting the da‘wah
and safeguarding freedom of religion. Tese are the only cases in which
God makes combat (qitāl) lawful, urges it and considers it desirable.
God also reveals many of the ethics and rules that guarantee victory.
In this section we will discuss the verses that expound these aspects of
combat.
When one studies these verses in the Holy Qur’an, one ﬁnds that
Islam stipulates general principles that constitut e an objective law for
combat that is better than any other found in modern civilisation.
Tis objective law for combat for a nation that wishes for itself pride
and dignity is based on three elements:
1) Strengthening the nation’s morale.
2) Preparing material force.
3) Practical organisation for combat.
In outlining the ways in which people may enjoy a good life, the
Holy Qur’an expounds these three elements in a manner that encom-
passes all the institutions and systems that humanity has produced in all
its varied cultures and throughout the ages. Tese elements are power-
ful, extensive and dominate people’s hearts and ﬁll them with mercy,
compassion, devotion and a desire for God’s approval through purify-
ing the earth from corruption and clearing it from tyranny and aggres-
sion. Tese notions are present in all three elements.
(A section here has been omitted regarding the details of strengthen-
ing the nation’s morale, preparing material force and practical details for
combat. An unabridged version of the text of Shaltut’s ‘Te Qur’an and
Combat’ can be found at www.mabda.jo.)
Regarding declaration of war, the Holy Qur’an makes it a duty and
warns against attacking the enemy unawares. God says in the Holy
Qur’an: And if you fear, from any folk some treachery, then cast it back
to them with fairness. Truly God does not love the treacherous (Al-Anfāl,
8:58). Tis verse commands that if there is fear that a party will be

--- Sayfa 47 ---
19
Te Qur’an and Combat
treacherous, any pact that has been made with them may be broken and
cast back to them. Te verse also asks that this be done in an explicit
and clear manner lest the Muslims commit treachery, which God does
not love and does not approve of.
Regarding meeting the call to jihad, the Holy Qur’an warns against
tardiness and behaving as though it were a burden. God says in the
Holy Qur’an:
 O you who believe, what is wrong with you that, when it is
said to you, ‘Go forth in the way of God’, you sink down heav-
ily to the ground. Are you so content with the life of this world,
rather than with the Hereafer? Yet the enjoyment of the life
of this world is in the Hereafer but little. / If you do not go
forth, He will chastise you with a painful chastisement, and
He will substitute [you with] another folk other than you, and
you will not hurt Him at all; for God has power over all things.
(Al-Tawbah, 9:38–9)
Tese verses warn that if we are tardy in meeting the call to jihad,
we will suﬀer painful chastisement, humiliation, substitution and the
transfer of power and authority to another people.
(A section here has been omitted regarding purging the army of
elements of sedition and betrayal. An unabridged version of the text of
Shaltut’s Te Qur’an and Combat can be found at www.mabda.jo.)
Regarding truce and peace treaties, the Holy Qur’an orders us
to heed calls for peace and the termination of war if the enemy is so
inclined and if the enemy shows signs of sincerity and ﬁdelity. God says
in the Holy Qur’an:
And if they incline to peace, then incline to it, and rely on God;
truly He is the Hearer, the Knower. / And if they desire to trick
you, then God is suﬃcient for you. He it is Who strengthened
you with His help and with the believers. (Al-Anfāl, 8:61-62)
Regarding taking prisoners and the treatment of prisoners of war,
the Holy Qur’an says:
It is not for any Prophet to have prisoners until he make wide
slaughter in the land. (Al-Anfāl, 8:67)
If the imam decimates the enemy and takes prisoners, he may
choose between liberating them without ransom and in return for

--- Sayfa 48 ---
war and peace in islam
20
nothing, or liberating them in exchange for money or men. Te choice
should be made based on the common good. God says in the Holy
Qur’an:
So when you encounter [in battle] those who disbelieve, then
[attack them with] a striking of the necks. Ten, when you
have made thoroughly decimated them, bind. Tereafer ei-
ther [set them free] by grace or by ransom, until the war lay
down its burdens ... (Muḥammad, 47:4)
Regarding treaties and honouring them, the Holy Qur’an commands
the honouring of treaties and forbids violating them. It teaches that the
intention behind treaties is for security and peace to reign instead of
disorder and war. It warns against using treaties as an artful means to
deprive the other party of its rights or to oppress the weak. Consider
God’s words in the Holy Qur’an:
And fulﬁl God’s covenant when you made a covenant, and do
not break [your] oaths afer pledging them and having made
God surety over you. Truly God knows what you do. / And
do not be like her who undoes her yarn afer having made
it strong, [breaking it up] into ﬁbres by making your oaths
a [means of] deceit, between you, so that one group may
become more numerous than [another] group ... (Al-Naḥl,
16:91–2)26
If the imam determines that Muslims will come to harm as a result
of a treaty and that the harm exceeds the advantages to be gained by
observing it, he is obliged to reject it. Tis rejection must be declared
openly. God says in the Holy Qur’an:
A proclamation from God and His Messenger to mankind
on the day of the Greater Pilgrimage that God is free from
obligation to the idolaters, and [so is] His Messenger ... (Al-
Tawbah, 9:3)
Tese are the principles we were able to derive from the Holy
Qur’an concerning the practical aspects of combat. Te Holy Qur’an
is an inexhaustible treasure, when we investigate its signi ﬁcations and
examine its meanings, we will always arrive at something new. Te
best aid for the understanding of the Holy Qur’an is the observation of
current events and historical facts, for they are the best interpreters and

--- Sayfa 49 ---
21
Te Qur’an and Combat
the clearest road to comprehension of its purposes and its prin ciples.
If one studies what the Holy Qur’an relates concerning the military
activities of the Prophet U, one grasps many of these purposes and
principles which will strengthen the faith of the believers that the Holy
Qur’an is a revelation by the omnipotent and omniscient Creator who
is cognizant of the intentions of our souls.
The Practical Application of the Qur’anic
Rules of Combat
In this epilogue we shall present the practical application of the prin-
ciples expounded by the Holy Qur’an regarding combat during the
time of the Prophet U  and his two successors (caliphs), Abu Bakr and
‘Umar. Afer this period the Muslims were aﬄicted by internal and
external aﬀairs that pre vented them from observing God’s prescrip-
tions and laws. Tese aﬀairs also compelled them, especially where
combat was concerned, to adopt practices of a much wider range than
those which God had prescribed for jihad in His way.
Te phases of the Prophet’s life and the lives of the believers who
were with him before combat began are due to:
Te clandestine call (da‘wah) which a small group of people
believed in. Tey were bound to the Prophet by close family ties or
friendship which revealed to them the sublime spirit and magniﬁcent
nature of the Prophet.
Te public call (da‘wah) directed to his clan and then to all mankind.
Te temptations with which the Meccans tried to seduce the
Prophet U, oﬀering him as much property, power and sovereignty as
he wished in exchange for him desisting from propagating the call
(da‘wah).
Te violence and oppression which the Prophet and his compan-
ions suﬀered. History has re corded blood-chilling instances of torture.
Te Hijrah to Abyssinia in order to save Islam and preserve lives.
Te malefactions, maliciousness and conspiracies against the
Prophet, the Muslims and even against all the descendants of ‘Abd
Manāf in order to prompt the latter to deliver the Prophet and his
companions, and not to protect them from the aggression of the poly-
theists. One of these actions was the boycott of Abu Talib and his

--- Sayfa 50 ---
war and peace in islam
22
people, which—were it not for the Grace of God—nearly broke their
spirit of resistance.
Seeking refuge in Al-Ta’if and seeking the help of Taqīf who met
the Prophet and his companions with mockery and derision and drove
them away.
Te Hijrah to Medina which was facilitated by delegations that had
visited the Prophet, and by the pains taken by him to call the tribes
to Islam. Both factors helped the spread of the noble calling of Islam
and gained supporters among the Medinan youth who promised the
Messenger they would propagate and protect the call to Islam until
death. One of the consequences of this Emigration was that the fury
and rancour of the polytheists increased as the opportunity to assas-
sinate the Prophet passed them by.
Te role of the enmity between the Muslims and the Jews in
Medina. As soon as the Prophet settled in Medina it became clear to
him that the Jews there denied his call and plotted against him and his
companions. Te Prophet had thought that the Jews would be his clos-
est supporters because they were People of the Book and because they
had previously asked for his assistance in their wars against the poly-
theists. Tis induced the Prophet to ex tend his hand to them in order
to prevent sedition and strife and he con cluded a treaty with them that
lef them to their religion. Afer concluding this treaty, the Prophet
felt more secure and turned his attention to his original enemies who,
afer his Hijrah, were attacking his followers at every turn. His follow-
ers could not emigrate for ﬁnancial reasons and their enemies waited
for opportunities to oppose the call to Islam and scatter its adherents.
Te harassment the Prophet and his companions faced at the
hands of their enemies. Te Prophet foresaw that unless he propa-
gated his Call to Islam in Medina, which was the task entrusted to him
by God, the Meccans would inevitably ﬁnd a way to penetrate Medina
and attack him by surprise, especially since the Jews with whom he had
concluded a treaty were not to be trusted to keep their pledge. It was
not improbable that the Medinan Jews would open up opportunities in
Medina for the enemy outside and that they would subsequently join
forces with them in order to expel the believers from Medina, just as
they had been expelled from Mecca.

--- Sayfa 51 ---
23
Te Qur’an and Combat
For all these reasons the Prophet and his companions pre pared to
resist those who opposed the call to Islam, the people of Mecca. Te
Prophet engaged in skirmishes with them and displayed his strength
and determination to continue with his call and strive for its propa-
gation and pro tection and indeed to save the meek men, women and
children who say as is related in the Holy Qur’an:
 ...‘Our Lord, bring us forth from this town whose people are
evildoers and appoint for us a protector from You, and ap-
point for us from You a helper’. (Al-Nisā’, 4:75)
It was in this spirit that combat between the believers and the
polytheists began and battles between both parties took place; some
of which are related in the Holy Qur’an. And God crowned all these
confrontations with conquest and clear victory.
Te Jews broke their pledge; they were not able to purify their hearts
from rancour and envy. God’s continuous favours to His Prophet and
his faithful companions kindled the ﬁre of antagonism in the hearts of
the Jews until it induced them to break the pledges they had concluded
with the Prophet. Tis was done by Banu Qaynuqā, Banu Al-Nadhīr
and Banu Quraytha. Tey insulted the Prophet U  and the believers
at a time when the Prophet needed to keep enemies and battles at a
minimum. But this was God's will and the Muslims had no choice but
to reject the pledge they had with the Jews and afer a phase of peace
and treaties, enter a new phase in their relations, a phase of hostility
and war.
Tese were the phases that the Prophet went through, before and
afer the Hijrah. From this it becomes clear to us that the polytheists
of Mecca fought the Prophet from the start of his Mission. Tey were
the ﬁrst to commit aggression, chased the believers from their homes,
tyrannised the meek and subjected them to all kinds of mal treatment
and torture. It is also clear that the Jews of Medina were only attacked by
the Messenger afer they had broken their pledge to him and aggressed
against him as the polytheists had done before.
It is also evident that the Prophet only fought those who fought
him, and he only fought to end sedition in religion and to stave oﬀ and
respond to aggression and violence. Tese are exactly the prescriptions
for combat (qitāl) revealed in the Holy Qur’an, as we have discussed.

--- Sayfa 52 ---
war and peace in islam
24
Te wars that took place afer the death of the Prophet were
con ducted by Abu Bakr and Umar and they were a continuation of
something for which the groundwork had been laid by the Byzantines
(Al-Rūm) and the Persians (Al-Furs) during the Prophet’s lifetime.
Tese two caliphs had no choice but to fend oﬀ evil and enable people
to hear the call to Islam and to safeguard the security of the Muslims
with regard to their religion and their homes.
As a Prophet and a Messenger of God, Muhammad U called the
kings of the Byzantines and the Persians to Islam. To the king of the
Byzantines he dispatched his famous missive in which he called him
to Islam and held him, in the event of his refusal, answerable for the
injustice he inﬂicted on his own people by keeping them from Islam.
When the letter was translated for the king of the Byzantines, he assem-
bled his patriarchs and high oﬃcials, submitted the letter to them and
asked for their advice as to whether he should accept the summons
or not. Tey turned stubbornly away and expressed their resentment
of his attitude. Te king of the Byzantines appeased them by saying:
‘I only said what I said to test your resolve concerning religion and
kingship’. So the king of the Byzantines abandoned his original inten-
tion, preferring kingship over Islam. Ten the Byzantine high oﬃcials
and patriarchs began to sow the venomous seeds of hatred against
Islam and its Prophet in the hearts of commanders and subordinates.
One of the consequences was that when Shurhabil al-Ghassani met
the Prophet’s envoy to the Prince of Basra at the Battle of Mu‘tah,
al-Ghassani gave orders to behead him. Te Byzantines surmised
that the Muslims would not tolerate such an attack on their honour.
Tey therefore intensiﬁed their state of alert and assembled a force of
Byzantines and Christian Arabs in an attempt to annihilate the Prophet
U. When the Messenger of God heard about this, he prepared an army
to confront those who rose against him and mocked his call to Islam.
As soon as this army reached the place where the Muslim envoy had
been killed, they found the Byzantine troops in a state of high alert.
Te two armies clashed and fought a ﬁerce battle. Tree Muslim heroes
were killed and had it not been for a strata gem that God disclosed to
Khalid ibn al-Walid, not a single soldier in the Muslim army would
have survived. Tere were continuous reports that the Byzantines were

--- Sayfa 53 ---
25
Te Qur’an and Combat
assembling troops against the Muslims, determined to attack them.
Te Prophet prepared himself and set out with an army before they
could attack him in his own land. When he reached Tabuk, he found
that they had abandoned their plan. Te Prophet remained there a
few days, during which some princes concluded peace treaties with
him. He then returned to Medina, thinking about those who had lost
because of Khalid ibn al-Walid's stratagem and assum ing that they
would deﬁnitely ﬁght back. Terefore, he equipped an army under the
command of Usama ibn Zayd. Immediately afer this army had set
out, the Prophet U died and was succeeded by Abu Bakr who took
over command of the Muslims. Abu Bakr was of the opinion that ﬁrm-
ness, loyalty and wisdom required that he dis patch the army that the
Prophet had assembled to counter the danger of the aggressors. Tis
was followed by a rapid succession of wars between the Muslims and
the Byzantines until the Muslims conquered their lands and enabled
their people to ﬁnd Islam.
Te spirit of hostility displayed by the Byzantines was matched by
the Persians, who were even more arrogant and powerful. For when the
Prophet sent a missive to Khosrau (Kisra), the latter tore it to pieces
and cast it on the ﬂoor. Indeed so haughty and arrogant was Khosrau
that he sent word to his governor in Yemen to send two strongmen
to the Prophet Muhammad U to bring him to Khosrau. Tey actually
reached the Prophet and informed him of the mission they had been
tasked with. Te Messenger then said: ‘Tis day Khosrau will be killed.’
Once the two men learned that the words of the Prophet had come
true, they became Muslims. Teir conversion caused the conversion of
the governor of Yemen to Islam. Following this, Bahrain and Oman—
countries that were under Persian protection—became Muslim.
Te Persians thought that the victory of the Muslims over the
Byzantines was only due to the weakness of the Byzantine armies. Te
Persians began to attack their neighbouring Arab tribes, employing the
kings of Al-Hīrah who attacked the Muslims forcefully. Te Muslim
army then marched to meet them and war broke out until the proxy
of the Persians had to ﬂee to Al-Mada’in and the kings of Al-Hirah
surrendered to the Muslims. Tis ignited hatred for the Muslims in
the hearts of the Persians; they recalled their might and equipped an

--- Sayfa 54 ---
war and peace in islam
26
army to expel the Muslims from their lands. Fighting broke out and in
the end the Muslims advanced to the lands of the Persians. Khosrau’s
throne fell and all the Persian lands yielded to the Muslims.
From this brief description it will be clear that, in the ﬁrst period,
the Muslims only attacked people afer they had shown hostility and
opposition to the call (da‘wah). It also shows that when such hostility
became manifest and once the Muslims were convinced of its danger
to themselves and to the call to Islam, they hastened to put out its
ﬁre and eliminate it before it became pervasive. Te Muslims did not
wait for their enemies to attack them in their own lands. Tis is in
accordance with a natural and instinctive sociological rule: ‘When
people are attacked in their own home, they are inevitably humili-
ated.’ Nevertheless, according to Islamic prescriptions, whenever the
Muslims arrived in the land of an enemy whose hostility to them was
evident, they let him choose one out of three things: conversion to
Islam, poll-tax (jizyah) or combat (qitāl). Tese choices were oﬀered
in the hope that the enemy would come to his senses, look into his
heart and replace aggression and antagonism with wisdom. Te
Prophet U enjoined the commanders of his army: ‘If you meet your
polytheist enemy, call on him to choose one of three things.’ Tis
shows us that the enemy’s spirit of animosity preceded the dispatch-
ing of the Muslim army and that oﬀering him choices was done in
the hope for peace and the abandonment of hostility. It is also clear
that the wars the Muslims fought in the ﬁrst period of Islam were not
aimed at forcing people to convert to Islam, nor at subjugating or
humiliating them, neither were they prompted by greed for money
or greater power.
It behoves us to return to the Qur’anic prescriptions regarding
our behaviour with, and treatment of, the ahl al-dhimmah, who are
not adherents of Islam. One must also read how the Rightly Guided
Caliphs and the righteous army commanders dealt with those who
were not adherents of Islam. Ten we can learn, based on reason and
evidence not supposition and conjecture, how lenient and magnani-
mous Islam is in the treatment of its non-Muslim subjects and how
deeply it loves universal peace and human solidarity. We can also
see how exalted Islam’s universal human laws are; laws that have

--- Sayfa 55 ---
27
Te Qur’an and Combat
attracted people to the faith of Islam of their own free will and under
the protection of which non-Muslims have lived for centuries, without
any complaints of injustice.
Afer reading this, it is my fervent hope that the reader be lef in
no doubt that the Holy Qur’an and the life of the Prophet U together
establish a theory concerning combat, as I have described in this trea-
tise. May God guide us in spreading His laws and guid ance which
guarantee the dignity and honour of Muslims. He is the All-Hearing,
the All-Answering.
Originally published as an unabridged booklet by the Royal Aal
al-Bayt Institute for Islamic Tought in November 2012
(Translation: Lamya Khraisha).

--- Sayfa 56 ---
28
chapter two
WARFARE IN THE QUR’AN
Professor Joel Hayward
A frequently quoted saying, with slight variations, insists that, while
not all Muslims are terrorists, all terrorists are Muslims. Tis is a great
untruth. According to the American Federal Bureau of Investigation,
Muslims have not been responsible for the majority of terrorist attacks
identiﬁed and prevented, or committed throughout the world in the
last twenty years.27 Yet it is true that, even before the Bush administra-
tion initiated a concentrated campaign against anti-American terrorists
around the world in 2001—a campaign which quickly came to be known
as the War on Terror—several states including the United States and
Israel had already experienced terrorism undertaken unmistakeably by
Muslims. For example, the bombings of US embassies in Nairobi and
Dar es Salaam in 1998 brought Osama bin Laden and Ayman al-Zawahiri
to the focused attention of US security services for the ﬁrst time. Tese
terrorists and their ideological bedfellows embraced an extreme minor-
ity opinion within Islam. According to that opinion, militant opposi-
tion to any ostensibly oppressive political activity that weakens Islamic
states and their interests constitutes a righteous struggle (jihad) on God’s
behalf (fī sabīl Allāh, literally ‘in the path of Allah’). Yet these ‘jihadists’
(a phrase not widely used in those pre-9/11 days) did not garner much
public interest until that dreadful day when nineteen of them hijacked
four aircraf and carried out history’s worst single terrorist attack.
No one can doubt that Western attitudes towards Islam changed
for the worse at that time and have not returned to the way they were
before 2001. Among widely held negative views of Islam is a percep-
tion (or at least a concern) that, while Western states adhere to the Just
War tenets, other states and peoples, particularly Muslims in general

--- Sayfa 57 ---
29
Warfare in the Qur’an
and Arabs in particular, have no comparable philosophical framework
for guiding ethical behaviour during international disputes and during
warfare itself. According to this perception, the Western code of war
is based on restraint, chivalry and respect for civilian life, whereas the
Islamic faith contains ideas on war that are more militant, aggressive
and tolerant of violence.
Tis article analyses the Qur’an and attempts to explain its codes
of conduct in order to determine what the Qur’an actually requires or
permits Muslims to do in terms of the use of military force. It concludes
that the Qur’an is unambiguous: Muslims are prohibited from under-
taking oﬀensive violence and are compelled, if defensive warfare should
become unavoidable, always to act within a code of ethical behaviour
that is closely akin to, and compatible with, the Western warrior code
embedded within the Just War doctrine. Tis paper attempts to dispel
any misperceptions that the Qur’an advocates the subjugation or killing
of ‘inﬁdels’ and reveals that, on the contrary, its key and unequivocal
concepts governing warfare are based on justice and a profound belief
in the sanctity of human life.
The Importance of the Qur’an
Sadly, people do not tend to read the holy scriptures of other faiths
so it is not surprising that, although Muslims constitute one-quarter
of the world’s population,ͪ Ͱ very few Muslims have studied the Jewish
Tanakh, the Christian Bible or the Hindu Vedas, and equally few non-
Muslims have taken the time to study the Qur’an. Not many people
ever even ‘dip’ into other holy books to get a quick feel for the language,
tone and message. Yet, given the geographical location of our major
wars throughout the last two decades, the strategic importance of the
Middle East and the cultural origin of some recent terrorist groups, it
is surprising that very few non-Muslim strategists and military person-
nel have taken time to read the Qur’an alongside doctrine publications
and works of military philosophy. Te Qur’an is certainly shorter than
Clausewitz’s widely read and constantly quoted Vom Kriege (On War)
and far easier to understand. Te Qur’an is a relatively short book of
approximately 77,000 words, which makes it about the size of most
thrillers or romance novels and roughly half the length of the New

--- Sayfa 58 ---
war and peace in islam
30
Testament or one-seventh the length of the Old.ͪ ͱ It is not deeply complex
in its philosophy or written as inaccessible poetry or with mystical and
esoteric vagueness.
Muslims understand that the Qur’an was revealed episodically by the
Angel Jibril (the biblical Gabriel) to Muhammad, a Meccan merchant
in what is now Saudi Arabia, through a series of revelations from Allah
(Arabic for ‘the God’), over a period of twenty-three years beginning in
the year 610. Muhammad’s companions memorised and wrote down the
individual revelations almost straight away and compiled them into the
Qur’an’s ﬁnal Arabic form very soon afer his death in 632. Tat Arabic
version has not changed in the last fourteen hundred years. Te Qur’an
is therefore held by Muslims to be the very words of Allah, recorded
precisely as originally revealed through Muhammad. Tis explains why
most of the world’s 1.6 billion Muslimsͫͨ endeavour to learn at least the
basics of Qur’anic Arabic so that they can read and more importantly
hear Allah’s literal words as originally revealed. Tis is also why they
consider all translations into other languages to be decidedly inferior
to the original Arabic. Muslims usually explain that these translations
convey the ‘meaning’ of the revelations, and are therefore still useful, but
not the exact word for word declarations of Allah.ͫͩ
A fair and open-minded reading of the Qur’an will draw the reader’s
eyes to hundreds of scriptures extolling tolerance, forgiveness, concilia-
tion, inclusiveness and peace. Tese are the overwhelming majority of the
scriptures and the central thrust of the Qur’anic message. A clear indica-
tion of that message is found in the fact that every one of the 114 surahs
(chapters) of the Qur’an except one opens with a reminder of Allah’s
loving and forgiving attitude towards humans: bism Allāh al-Raḥmān
al-Raḥīm (In the name of God the All-Compassionate and the Ever-
Merciful). Muslims understand that the compassion and forgiveness
extended by God to humans must be mirrored as much as is humanly
possible by their compassion and forgiveness to each other.
Yet readers will also ﬁnd a few scriptures in the Qur’an that seem
to be ‘Old Testament’ in tone and message and are more warlike than,
for example, Christians are used to reading in the words of Christ and
the New Testament writers. Critics of the Qur’an who advance what I
consider to be an unsustainable argument that Islam is the world’s most

--- Sayfa 59 ---
31
Warfare in the Qur’an
warlike major faith—among whom the US scholar and blogger Robert
Spencer is both the most proliﬁc and inﬂuentialͫͪ —routinely highlight
those Qur’anic passages to support their argument that Islam has a clear
tendency towards aggressive war, not inclusive peace.ͫͫ
Such writers commonly focus their attention on a few passages within
the Qur’an which seem to suggest that Allah encourages Muslims to
subjugate or drive out non-Muslims—and even to take their lives if they
refuse to yield. Te critics especially like to quote surah 9, āyah (verse) 5,
which has become known as the ‘Verse of the Sword’ (Āyat Al-Sayf). Tis
verse explicitly enjoins Muslims to kill pagans wherever you ﬁnd them,
and seize them, beleaguer them, and lie in wait for them in every stratagem
(of war). (Al-Tawbah, 9:5)34
Te critics ofen add to their condemnation of the aforementioned
surah 9:5 with equally strong attacks on surah 9:29. Tis verse directs
Muslims to ‘ﬁght those who believe not in Allah’ and the Day of Judgment,
who do not comply with Muslim laws, as well as those Jews and Christians
who reject the religion of Islam and will not willingly pay a state tax afer
their submission.35 Many critics assert that this verse directs Muslims to
wage war against any and all disbelievers anywhere who refuse to embrace
Islam or at least to submit to Islamic rule.36
Te critics also place negative focus on surah 2:190–4, which states:
Fight in the cause of Allah those who ﬁght you, but do not
transgress limits: for Allah loves not the transgressors. / And slay
them wherever you catch them, and turn them out from where
they have turned you out; for tumult and oppression are worse
than slaughter; but ﬁght them not at the Sacred Mosque [al-
Masjid al-Ḥarām, the sanctuary at Mecca], unless they (ﬁrst)
ﬁght you there; but if they ﬁght you, slay them. Such is the re-
ward of those who suppress faith. / But if they cease, then Allah
is Of-forgiving, Most Merciful. / And ﬁght them on until there
is no more tumult or oppression, and there prevail justice and
faith in Allah; but if they cease, let there be no hostility except to
those who practise oppression. (Al-Baqarah, 2:190–4)
You could not imagine gentle Buddha or the peaceful, cheek-turn-
ing Jesus ever saying such things, the critics of Islam assert, ignoring the
heavily martial spirit and explicit violence of some sections of the Old
Testament; a revelation passionately embraced in its entirety by Jesus.

--- Sayfa 60 ---
war and peace in islam
32
Tey also brush oﬀ some of Jesus’ seemingly incongruous statements as
being allegorical and metaphorical—such as Luke 22:36, wherein Jesus
encourages his disciples to sell their garments so that they can purchase
swords, and Matthew 10:34 (‘Do not think I come to bring peace on earth.
I did not come to bring peace, but a sword’).37
When they read the Qur’an, the opponents of its message place little
importance on the obvious diﬀerences of experiences and responsibilities
between Jesus and Muhammad. Jesus was the spiritual leader of a small
and intimate group of followers at a time of occupation but relative peace
and personal security throughout the land. He suﬀered death, according
to the Christian scriptures, but his execution by the Rome-governed state
came afer a short burst of state anger that actually followed several years
of him being able to preach throughout the land without severe opposi-
tion and with no known violence. By contrast, the Prophet Muhammad
(in many ways like Moses or Joshua) found himself not only the spiritual
leader but also the political and legislative leader of a massive community
that wanted to be moderate, just and inclusive but suﬀered bitter, organ-
ised persecution and warfare from other political entities which were
committed to his community’s destruction. His responsibilities (includ-
ing the sustenance, education, governance and physical protection of tens
of thousands of children, men and women) were very diﬀerent.
A double standard also seems to exist. Many of the scholars and
pundits who dislike the fact that Muhammad had to ﬁght military
campaigns during his path to peace, and who consider his religion to be
inherently martial, overlook the fact that many biblical prophets and lead-
ers—including Moses, Joshua, Samson, David and other Sunday School
favourites—were also warriors through necessity. Despite our children’s
book image of these warriors, their actions included frequent killing and
were sometimes couched in highly bloodthirsty language. For example,
the Book of Numbers (31:15–17) records that Moses ordered war against
the Midianites, but was gravely disappointed when, afer having slain all
the men, his warriors chose not to kill the women. He therefore instructed
his warriors to kill every male child and to leave alive no females except
virgins, whom the Israelites were allowed to keep as slaves. Tis hardly
ﬁts with our Charlton Heston-esque view of a very popular Jewish and
Christian prophet.

--- Sayfa 61 ---
33
Warfare in the Qur’an
It is worth observing that among the scriptures that form the bedrock
and bulk of the Judeo-Christian tradition—the Old Testament—one can
ﬁnd numerous verses like these that explicitly advocate (or at least once
advocated) large-scale violence incompatible with any codes of warfare
that Jews and Christians would nowadays condone. For instance, when
Joshua led the Israelites into the Promised Land and promptly laid siege
to Jericho, which was the ﬁrst walled city they encountered west of the
Jordan River, ‘they destroyed with the sword every living thing in it—men
and women, young and old, cattle, sheep and donkeys’ (Joshua 6:21).
Te lack of what we would today call discrimination between combat-
ants and non-combatants accorded with God’s earlier commandment
that, in areas which God had set aside for their occupation, the Israelites
were to ensure that, ‘without mercy’, they did not leave alive ‘anything
that breathed’.38
Te ancient world was certainly brutal at times, with military excesses
sometimes involving deliberate widespread violence against whole civil-
ian communities. ‘It is a wonderful sight,’ Roman commander Scipio
Aemilianus Africanus gushed in 146 BC as he watched his forces raze
the enemy city of Carthage to the ground following his order that no trace
of it should remain. ‘Yet I feel a terror and dread lest someone should one
day give the same order about my own native city.’39
No one can doubt that humanity has since made tremendous progress
in the way it conceives the purpose and nature of warfare and the role and
treatment of non-combatants. Yet we would be wrong to believe that the
‘Carthaginian approach’ has disappeared entirely. Te Holocaust of the
Jews in the Second World War, one of history’s vilest crimes, involved
the organised murder of six million Jews by Germans and others who
considered themselves Christians or at least members of the Christian
value system. Other crimes perpetrated by Christians during recent wars
have included the (Orthodox Christian) Bosnian Serb massacre of 8,300
Bosnian Muslim men and boys in and around the town of Srebrenica in
July 1995.
A fair assessment of historical evidence reveals that Christianity is
a faith of justice that cannot reasonably be considered blameworthy in
and of itself for the Crusades, the Holocaust, the Srebrenica massacre or
the Timothy McVeigh terrorist attack in Oklahoma City in 1995, even

--- Sayfa 62 ---
war and peace in islam
34
though Christians committed those horrendous acts and many others.
Similarly, a fair assessment of Islam reveals that it is equally a faith
of justice that cannot fairly be seen as blameworthy in and of itself
for the Armenian Genocide, the Iran-Iraq War, Saddam Hussein’s
invasion of Kuwait or the Al-Qaeda attacks on America in 2001, even
though Muslims committed those disgraceful deeds. Certainly Islam’s
framing scripture, the Qur’an, contains no verses which are as violent
as the biblical scriptures quoted above or any Qur’anic verses more
violent than those already quoted. In any event, even the most osten-
sibly violent Qur’anic verses have not provided major Islamic move-
ments, as opposed to impassioned minority splinter groups, with a
mandate to wage aggressive war or to inﬂict disproportionate or indis-
criminate brutality.
Understanding Abrogation
While Muslims hold the Qur’an to be God’s literal, deﬁnitive and ﬁnal
revelation to humankind, they recognise that it is not intended to be
read as a systematic legal or moral treatise. Tey understand it to be a
discursive commentary on the stage by stage actions and experiences
of the Prophet Muhammad, his ever-increasing number of followers
and his steadily decreasing number of opponents over the twenty-three
year period which took him from his ﬁrst revelation to his political
hegemony in Arabia.40 Consequently, several legal rulings within the
Qur’an emerged or developed in stages throughout that period, with
some early rulings on inheritance, alcohol, law, social arrangements
and so on being superseded by later passages; a phenomenon known
in Arabic as naskh that the Qur’an itself describes. For example, surah
2:106 reveals that when Allah developed any particular legal ruling
beyond its ﬁrst revelation and He therefore wanted to supersede the
original verses, He would replace them with clarifying verses.
Te removal or annulment of one legal ruling by a subsequent
legal ruling in some instances certainly does not mean that Muslims
believe that all later scriptures automatically cancel out or override
everything, on all issues, that had appeared earlier. Te Qur’an itself
states in several surahs that Allah’s words constitute a universally
applicable message sent down for all of mankind and that it was a

--- Sayfa 63 ---
35
Warfare in the Qur’an
reminder (with both glad tidings and warnings) to all of humanity.41
With this in mind, Muslims believe that to ignore scriptures on the
basis of a that-was-then-this-is-now reading would be as mistaken,
as, conversely, would be believing that one can gain meaning or guid-
ance from reading individual verses in isolation, without seeing how
they form parts of consistent concepts which only emerge when the
entire book is studied. Adopting either approach would be unhelpful,
self-serving and ultimately misleading. It is only when the Qur’an’s
key concepts are studied holistically, with both an appreciation of the
context of particular revelations and the consistency of ideas devel-
oped throughout the book as a whole, that readers will be able to
understand the Qur’an’s universally applicable ethical system.
Opponents of Islam take a diﬀerent view. Embracing a view that
all later Qur’anic scriptures modify or cancel out all earlier ones, they
have devised an unusual narrative. Tey have routinely argued that,
in the early years of his mission while still in his hometown of Mecca,
the powerless Muhammad strongly advocated peaceful coexistence
with peoples of other faiths, particularly Jews and Christians. Despite
mounting resistance and persecution, some of it violent and all of
it humiliating, Muhammad had to advocate an almost Gandhian or
Christ-like policy of forbearance and non-violence. Ten, afer he and
his followers ﬂed persecution in 622 by escaping to Medina, where
they had more chance of establishing a sizeable and more inﬂuential
religious community, the increasingly powerful Muhammad became
bitter at his intransigent foes in Mecca and ordered warfare against
them.ͬͪ Finally (the critics claim), following the surprisingly peace-
ful Islamic occupation of Mecca in 630, the all-powerful Muhammad
realised that Jews and others would not accept his prophetic leader-
ship or embrace Islamic monotheism, so he then initiated an aggres-
sive war against all disbelievers.ͬͫ Te critics furthermore claim that,
because Muhammad did not clarify or change his position before he
died two years later, in 632, afer Allah’s revelation to mankind was
complete, the verses encouraging the martial suppression of disbelief
(that is, of the disbelievers) are still in force today. Tese supposedly
include the so-called Verse of the Sword of surah 9:5 (and 29), quoted
above and revealed to Muhammad in the year 631.ͬͬ As scholar David

--- Sayfa 64 ---
war and peace in islam
36
Bukay, a strong critic of Islam, wrote:
Coming at or near the very end of Muhammad’s life …
[surah 9] trumps earlier revelations. Because this chapter
contains violent passages, it abrogates previous peaceful
content.45
Te critics of Islam who hold this view insist that these warlike
verses abrogate (cancel out) the scores of conciliatory and non-
confrontational earlier verses which had extolled spiritual resistance
(prayer and outreach) but physical non-violence.
Tey note that Osama bin Laden and other leading radical
‘Islamists’—who also insist that the later Qur’anic verses on war have
cancelled out the earlier peaceful and inclusive verses—have justiﬁed
their terror attacks on the United States and other states by quoting
from the Verse of the Sword and the other reportedly aggressive scrip-
tures mentioned above.
Bin Laden certainly did draw upon the Verse of the Sword and
other seemingly militant Qur’anic scriptures in his August 1996
‘Declaration of War against the Americans occupying the Land of the
Two Holy Places’ͬͮ as well as in his February 1998 fatwa.ͬͯ Te ﬁrst
of these fatāwā (verdicts) instructed Muslims to kill Americans until
they withdrew from their occupation of Saudi Arabia, and the second
more broadly instructed them to kill Americans (both civilians and
military personnel) and their allies, especially the Israelis, for their
suppression of Muslims and their exploitation of Islamic resources in
various parts of the world.
Of course, the obviously partisan Bin Laden was not a cleric, a
religious scholar or a historian of early Islam. He was an impassioned,
violent and murderous extremist without judgement or moderation.
He was not representative of Islamic belief or behaviour and he had
no recognised status as an authority in Islamic Sciences that would
have allowed him to issue a fatwa. His assertions that the Verse of the
Sword and other martial Qur’anic verses are still in place and univer-
sally applicable therefore do not hold a shred of authority or cred-
ibility, except perhaps among already-radicalised fanatics who share
his world view and consider him worth following. Tankfully they are
very few in number.

--- Sayfa 65 ---
37
Warfare in the Qur’an
Certainly most Islamic authorities on the Qur’an and Prophet
Muhammad U today, as opposed to scholars from, say, the war-ﬁlled
medieval period, are ﬁrm in their judgement that the most warlike
verses in the Qur’an, even those revealed very late in Muhammad’s U
mission, do not cancel out the overwhelming number of verses that
extol tolerance, reconciliation, inclusiveness and peace.ͬ Ͱ For exam-
ple, according to British scholar Dr Zakaria Bashier (author of many
books on early Islam including a thorough analysis of war), all the
beautiful verses throughout the Qur’an which instruct Muslims to be
peaceful, tolerant and non-aggressive are:
Muḥkam [clear in and of themselves] verses, i.e. deﬁnite,
not allegorical. Tey are not known to have been abrogat-
ed, so they naturally hold. No reason exists at all to think
that they have been overruled.49
Bashier adds that even the contextual information revealed within
the Qur’an itself will lead readers to the inescapable conclusion that
the Verse of the Sword related only to a particular time, place and
set of circumstances, and that, in any event, claims of it superseding
the established policy of tolerance are ‘not borne out by the facts of
history’.ͭͨ Proliﬁc British scholar Louay Fatoohi agrees, arguing that an
‘overwhelming number’ of Muslim scholars reject the abrogation thesis
regarding war. Fatoohi highlights the fact that throughout history the
Islamic world has never acted in accordance with this extreme view.
Fatoohi observes that Muslims have almost always coexisted very well
with other faith communities and that the 1600 million peaceable
Muslims in the world today clearly do not accept the view otherwise,
if they did, they would all be at war as we speak.ͭͩ Muhammad Abu
Zahra, an important and inﬂuential Egyptian intellectual and expert
on Islamic law, summed up the mainstream Islamic view by rejecting
any abrogation thesis pertaining to conﬂict and stating that ‘War is not
justiﬁed … to impose Islam as a religion on unbelievers or to support
a particular social regime. Te Prophet Muhammad U fought only to
repulse aggression.’ͭͪ
Explaining the Verse of the Sword
It is quite true that, taken in isolation, surah 9:5 (the Verse of the

--- Sayfa 66 ---
war and peace in islam
38
Sword) seems an unusually violent pronouncement for a Prophet who
had for twenty years preached tolerance, peace and reconciliation. Yet
it is equally true that, when read in the context of the verses above and
below surah 9:5, and when the circumstances of its pronouncement
by Muhammad are considered, it is not diﬃcult for readers without
preconceptions and bias to understand it more fully. Here is the verse
again:
But when the forbidden months are past, then ﬁght and slay
the pagans wherever you ﬁnd them, and seize them, beleaguer
them, and lie in wait for them in every stratagem (of war). (Al-
Tawbah, 9:5)
Te fact that the verse actually starts with the Arabic conjunction fa,
translated above as ‘but’, indicates that its line of logic ﬂows from the verse
or verses above it. Indeed, the preceding four verses explain the context.
Verse 1 gives the historical context as a violation of the Treaty of
Hudaybiyyah, signed in 628 by the State of Medina and the Quraysh tribe
of Mecca. In short, this was a peace treaty between Muhammad and his
followers and those Meccans who had spent a decade trying to destroy
them. Two years afer the treaty was signed the Banu Bakr tribe, which
had allied with the Quraysh, attacked the Banu Khuza‘ah tribe, which had
joined the side of the Muslims. Muhammad considered the Banu Bakr
attack a treaty violation, arguing that an attack on an ally constituted an
attack on his own community.ͭͫ Ten, following his extremely peaceful
seizure of Mecca and his puriﬁcation of its holy site (he destroyed no fewer
than 360 idols in the Ka‘bah), the Qur’anic revelation contained a very
stern warning. (Other sources reveal that Muhammad then explained it
publicly from the steps of the Ka‘bah and sent out deputies to the regions
around Mecca to destroy pagan shrines and idols and utter the warn-
ings to local communities.ͭͬ ) Te scriptural warning was clear: anyone
wanting to undertake polytheistic pilgrimages to Mecca (or immoral ritu-
als within it, such as walking naked around the Ka‘bahͭͭ ) in accordance
with existing agreements with the Quraysh tribe or with Muhammad’s
own community should understand that henceforth they would not be
permitted to do so. No polytheism (worship of more than one god) and
idolatry (worship of any man or object instead of the one god) would ever
again be tolerated within Islam’s holy city. From that time on it would be

--- Sayfa 67 ---
39
Warfare in the Qur’an
a city devoted to Allah alone.ͭͮ As surahs 9:17 and 18 say:
It is no longer proper for idolaters to attend Allah’s mosques,
since they have admitted to their unbelief. … Allah’s mosques
should be attended only by those who believe in Allah and the
Last Day, who observe prayer and give alms and fear none but
God. (Al-Tawbah, 9:17–18)
Verses 2 and 3 were revealed through Muhammad to give polytheists
or idolaters living in Mecca and its environs, as well as any polytheistic
or idolatrous pilgrims in transit along Muslim-controlled trade and
pilgrimage routes, a clear warning that they should desist or leave. Te
scriptures generously included a period of amnesty that would last until
the end of the current pilgrimage season. Tus, Arab polytheists and
idolaters would gain a four-month period of grace. Verse 4 makes clear
that during that period of amnesty, polytheists or idolaters were to be
lef untouched so that Muslims would not themselves become promise-
breakers. (So fulﬁl your engagements with them to the end of the term; for
Allah loves the righteous.) Afer clarifying that the threatened violence
would apply only to those who had ignored the warnings and continued
to practice polytheism or idolatry in and around the holy city and its
sanctuary, and were still foolish enough not to have lef afer four months,
verse 5—the Verse of the Sword—clearly warned them that there would
be a violent military purging or puriﬁcation in which they seriously risked
being killed.
Although this is sometimes omitted by critics of the Verse of the
Sword, the verse actually has a secondary clause which, afer the direction
to root out and kill anyone who had ignored the clear and solemn warnings
and continued their polytheism or idolatry, enjoined Muslims to remem-
ber that they must be merciful (to open the way) to those who repented
and accepted their penitent obligations in terms of Islam. Moreover, the
Verse of the Sword is immediately followed by an unusually charitable
one—again ordinarily lef out of Islam-critical treatments—in which any
of the enemy who asked for asylum during any coming violence were
not only to be excluded from that violence, but were to be escorted to a
place of safety.ͭͯ
Te rest of surah 9 contains more explanation for the Muslims as
to why they would now need to ﬁght, and ﬁercely, anyone who broke

--- Sayfa 68 ---
war and peace in islam
40
their oaths or violated the sanctity of holy places, despite earlier hopes for
peace according to the terms of the Treaty of Hudaybiyyah. Te ‘contro-
versial’ verse 29, which talks of killing polytheists and idolaters, actually
comes right afer verse 28, which speaks speciﬁcally about preventing
them from performing religious rituals or pilgrimages in or around
the newly puriﬁed sanctuary in Mecca. Verse 29 thus also refers to the
puriﬁcation of Mecca and its environs as well as to the need to secure
the borders of the Arabian Peninsula from greater external powers
which might smother the Islamic ummah (community) in its infancy.
Te rest of surah 9 also apparently contains scriptures relating to the
later campaign against Tabuk, when some groups which had treaty
obligations with Muhammad broke their promises and refused to join
or sponsor the campaign. It is worth noting that, in this context also,
Muhammad chose to forgive and impose a ﬁnancial, rather than physi-
cal, penalty upon those who genuinely apologised.ͭ Ͱ
It is clear, therefore, that the Verse of the Sword was a context-
speciﬁc verse relating to the puriﬁcation of Mecca and its environs of
all Arab polytheism and idolatry so that the sanctuary in particular,
with the Ka‘bah at its centre, would never again be rendered unclean by
the paganism of those locals and pilgrims who had long been worship-
ping idols (reportedly hundreds of them) there.ͭ ͱ It was proclaimed
publicly as a warning, followed by a period of grace which allowed the
wrongdoers to desist or leave the region, and qualiﬁed by humane cave-
ats that allowed for forgiveness, mercy and protection. It is thus not
bloodthirsty or unjust, as Robert Spencer and his colleagues portray it.
Indeed, it is so context-speciﬁc that, even if it were still in force—and I
share the assessment that it has not abrogated the scriptures encourag-
ing peace, tolerance and reconciliation—it would only nowadays have
any relevance and applicability if polytheists and idolaters ever tried to
undertake and re-establish pagan practices in the Saudi Arabian cities
devoted only to Allah: Mecca and Medina. In other words, in today’s
world it is not relevant or applicable.
Critics apparently fail to grasp the speciﬁc nature of the context—
the puriﬁcation of Mecca from polytheistic and idolatrous pilgrimages
and rituals—and even misquote the famous medieval Islamic scholar
Isma‘il bin ‘Amr bin Kathir al-Dimashqi, known popularly as Ibn Kathir.

--- Sayfa 69 ---
41
Warfare in the Qur’an
Spencer claims that Ibn Kathir understood the Verse of the Sword to
abrogate all peaceful verses ever previously uttered by the Prophet
Muhammad U.ͮͨ Ibn Kathir said no such thing. He quoted an earlier
authority, al-Dahhak bin Muzahim, who only stated that the Verse of
the Sword cancelled out every treaty which had granted pilgrimage
rights to Arab pagans to travel along Islamic routes, enter Mecca and
perform unpalatable rituals there.ͮͩ Because this earlier source referred
to the Verse of the Sword ‘abrogating’ something, Spencer mistakenly
extrapolates this to claim that this one single verse cancelled out all
existing interfaith practices and arrangements and that it forever nega-
tively changed attitudes to non-Muslims in general.
In case any readers are not convinced, there is another verse in the
Qur’an—also from the later period of Muhammad’s life—which (using
words virtually identical to the Verse of the Sword) also exhorts Muslims
to seize and slay wrongdoers wherever you ﬁnd them (Al-Nisā’, 4:89).
Yet this verse, surah 4:89, is surrounded by so many other explanatory
and qualifying verses that its superﬁcially violent meaning is immedi-
ately moderated by its context of tolerance and understanding. First, it
threatened violence in self-defence only against those people or groups
who violated pacts of peace with the Muslims and attacked them, or
those former Muslims (‘renegades’) who had rejoined the forces of
oppression and now fought aggressively against the Muslims. Secondly,
it stated that, if those aggressors lef the Muslims alone and free to prac-
tice their faith, and if they did not attack them, but oﬀered them peace-
ful coexistence, then Allah would not allow Muslims to harm them in
any way (Allah has opened no way for you to war against them (Al-Nisā’,
4:90). Te verse went even further. It not only oﬀered peaceful coexist-
ence to those who formally made peace with the Muslims, but also to
anyone, even Muslims who had slipped backwards and who merely
chose to stay neutral; that is, who did not take either side in the tense
relations between the Muslims on the one hand and the Quraysh and
their allies on the other.ͮͪ
The Origins of Self-defensive Concepts of War
It is worth remembering that, for the ﬁrst fourteen years of his public life
(from 610 to 624), Muhammad had practised and proclaimed a policy

--- Sayfa 70 ---
war and peace in islam
42
of peaceful non-resistance to the intensifying humiliation, cruelty and
violence that the Quraysh, the dominant tribe of Mecca, attempted to
inﬂict upon him and his fellow Muslims. Troughout that period he had
strenuously resisted ‘growing pressure from within the Muslim ranks to
respond in kind’ and insisted ‘on the virtues of patience and steadfast-
ness in the face of their opponents’ attacks’.ͮͫ Te persecution at one
point was so severe that Muhammad had to send two groups of follow-
ers to seek refuge in Abyssinia. Even afer he and the rest of his follow-
ers ﬂed the persecution in Mecca and settled in Medina in 622, the
developing ummah (Islamic community) experienced grave hardship
and fear. Some of the non-Muslims in Medina passionately resented the
presence of Muslims and conspired to expel them. From Mecca, Abu
Sufyan waged a relentless campaign of hostility against Muhammad
and the Muslims, who had now become a rival power and a threat to
his lucrative trade and pilgrimage arrangements. Abu Sufyan sought
no accommodation with Muhammad. In his mind, and according to
the norms of Arabic tribal warfare, the only solution was the ummah’s
destruction.ͮͬ
In 624, two years afer the migration of Muslims to Medina—two
years in which the Quraysh continued to persecute them and then
led armies against them—Muhammad ﬁnally announced a revelation
from Allah that Muslims were allowed physically to defend themselves
to preserve themselves through the contest of arms. Most scholars
agree that surah 22:39 contains that ﬁrst transformational statement of
permission.ͮͭ Including the verses above and below, it says:
Verily Allah will defend (from ill) those who believe: verily,
Allah loves not any that is a traitor to faith, or shows ingrati-
tude. / To those against whom war is made, permission is giv-
en (to ﬁght), because they are wronged—and verily, Allah is
Most Powerful for their aid. / (Tey are) those who have been
expelled from their homes in deﬁance of right (for no cause)
except that they say, ‘Our Lord is Allah’. (Al-Ḥajj, 22:38–40)
Tese verses continue by pointing out that, had not Allah in
previous eras allowed people to defend themselves from the aggression
and religious persecution of others, there would surely have been the
destruction of ‘monasteries, churches, synagogues and mosques, in which

--- Sayfa 71 ---
43
Warfare in the Qur’an
the name of Allah is commemorated in abundant measure’. Te verses
add that Allah will surely aid those who aid him, and that he is truly
mighty and invincible.
Te references to defending the faithful from harm in verse 38,
to those on the receiving end of violence in verse 39 and those who
have been driven from their homes in verse 40 reveal very clearly that
Allah’s permission to undertake armed combat was not for oﬀensive
war, but self-defence and self-preservation when attacked or oppressed.
Interestingly, it even extols the defence of all houses of worship, includ-
ing the churches of Christians and the synagogues of Jews.
Tis permission for self-defensive war-ﬁghting (the Arabic word
is qitāl, or combat) corresponds precisely with the ﬁrst Qur’anic
passage on war that one reads when one starts from the front cover:
surah 2:190, which, as quoted above, states: Fight in the cause of Allah
those who ﬁght you, but do not transgress limits: for Allah loves not the
transgressors (Al-Baqarah, 2:190). Tus, the purpose of armed combat
was self-defence and, even though the need for survival meant that
warfare would be tough, combat was to adhere to a set of prescribed
constraints.ͮͮ Te following verse’s instruction to slay them wherever
they turn up commences with the conjunction wa, here translated as
‘and’, to indicate that it is a continuation of the same stream of logic.
In other words, Muslims were allowed to defend themselves militarily
from the forces or armies which were attacking them wherever that
happened. Tremendous care was to be taken not to shed blood in the
environs of Mecca’s sacred mosque, but if Muslims found themselves
attacked there, they could kill their attackers while defending them-
selves without committing a sin. Tis series of verses actually ends with
instructions that, if the attackers ceased their attacks, Muslims were not
to continue to ﬁght them because Allah is Of-Forgiving, Most Merciful
(Al-Baqarah, 2:192). Tus, continued resistance could—and nowadays
can—only be a proportionate response to continued serious direct
oppression.ͮͯ In every Qur’anic example in which war-ﬁghting (qitāl) is
encouraged for protection against serious direct oppression or violence,
verses can be found that stress that, should the wrongdoers cease their
hostility, Muslims must immediately cease their own ﬁghting.
Te Qur’anic permission for defensive resistance to attacks or seri-

--- Sayfa 72 ---
war and peace in islam
44
ous direct oppression does not mean that Muhammad enjoyed war, or
took pleasure whatsoever in the fact that defensive warfare to protect his
ummah from extinction or subjugation would involve the loss of even
his enemies’ lives. He was no warmonger and forgave and pardoned
mortal enemies whenever he could. Tis ‘reluctant warrior’, to quote
one scholar, urged the use of non-violent means when possible and,
ofen against the advice of his companions, sought the early end of
hostilities.ͮ Ͱ At the same time, in accordance with the revelations he had
received, he accepted that combat for the defence of Islam and Islamic
interests would sometimes be unavoidable. One of Muhammad’s
companions remembers him telling his followers not to look forward
to combat, but if it were to come upon them then they should pray for
safety and be patient.ͮ ͱ
Critics of Islam are fond of quoting surahs that seem to reveal a
certain savagery that today seems bloodcurdling to them. When you
meet the unbelievers, the Qur’an says in surah 47:4, strike at their
necks until you weaken them [that is, defeat them] and then bind the
captives ﬁrmly. Tereafer you may release them magnanimously or for a
ransom (Muḥammad, 47:4). In Sūrat Al-Anfāl, 8:12 the Qur’an likewise
commands soldiers in battle to strike at necks and ﬁngers. Although
these verses may seem out of place in a religious text, they are not out of
place within advice given by a military commander before a battle. Tat
was precisely the context of those particular revelations. Muhammad’s
community had not yet fought a battle or formed an army and those
Muslims who were about to become warriors needed to be taught how
to kill immediately and humanely. Decapitation, as opposed to wild
slashes at limbs or armoured bodies, ensured humane killing instead of
ineﬀective and brutal wounding. Even better, if a soldier could make an
enemy drop his weapon by striking at his hands, he might be able to take
him prisoner. Having him alive as a captive who could later be freed,
even with a wounded hand, was preferable to leaving him as a corpse.
Today all military or security forces in the world teach weapon-
handling skills with the same focus. Recruits and oﬃcer cadets are
taught how to kill or wound on ﬁring ranges where instructors teach
them which target areas will bring humane death and which ones
will cause someone’s incapacitation without death. Te two Qur’anic

--- Sayfa 73 ---
45
Warfare in the Qur’an
passages mentioned above should be read in that light. Moreover, they
do not represent an instruction to all Muslims anytime to kill or wound
all non-Muslims anywhere. Tat would violate every concept of justice
embedded within Islam. Te instructions were to one group of Muslims
(the nascent ummah, which had not yet experienced combat) in antici-
pation of a speciﬁc conﬂict: the Battle of Badr fought in March 624.
Te fact that these combat-related instructions are contained within
a religious book which has powerfully clear central messages of forbear-
ance, toleration and inclusiveness is easily explained by the fact that the
Qur’an, revealed episodically over decades, was (and is) considered by
Muslim’s to be God’s word. Every revelation on every issue was thus
faithfully recorded and retained, including ones dealing with all sorts
of things—war, combat, diplomacy, ﬁnance, marriage, child-rearing,
divorce, death, education, science and so forth—with which the ﬁrst
Muslims had to deal. It is thus a manual for life, with sections on war
and combat which are relevant when Muslims go to war for defensive
reasons, and on, say, pilgrimage when Muslims go on the Hajj for spir-
itual fulﬁlment.
Te Qur’an and the Hadith (the recorded words and actions
of Muhammad) show that Muhammad took no pleasure in the fact
that—as also taught in later Western Just War theory—the regretta-
ble combatant-versus-combatant violence inherent within warfare
would sometimes be necessary in order to create a better state of peace.
Explaining to fellow Muslims the need in some situations to under-
take combat, Muhammad acknowledged Allah’s revelation that warfare
was something that seemed very wrong, indeed a ‘disliked’ activity, yet
it was morally necessary and thus morally right and obligatory under
some circumstances.ͯͨ Warfare was frightening and dreadful, but in
extremis better than continued serious persecution and attack.ͯͩ
Muhammad’s greatest triumph—his eventual return to his home-
town Mecca in 630 at the head of an army of 10,000—was itself a
bloodless aﬀair marked by tremendous forgiveness and mercy. Afer
his forces entered the city, the panicked Quraysh tribe, which eﬀec-
tively surrendered afer realising that resistance to the Muslim army
was futile, anticipated that their leaders and warriors would be slain.ͯͪ
Afer all, for two decades they had humiliated, persecuted and tried to

--- Sayfa 74 ---
war and peace in islam
46
assassinate Muhammad and had maltreated and even waged savage war
against his followers. Yet, aside from four murderers and serious oath-
breakers who were judged to be beyond rehabilitation, Muhammad
chose to forgive them all in a general amnesty. Tere was no blood-
bath. He reportedly asked the assembled leaders of Quraysh what fate
they anticipated. Expecting death, but hoping for life, they replied:
‘O noble brother and son of a noble brother! We expect nothing but
goodness from you.’ Tis appeal must have relieved Muhammad and
made him smile. He replied: ‘I speak to you in the same words as Yusuf
[the biblical Joseph, also one of Islam’s revered prophets] spoke unto
his brothers. … “No reproach on you this day.” Go your way, for you
are the freed ones.’ͯͫ He even showed mercy to Hind bint Utbah, Abu
Sufyan’s wife, who was under a sentence of death for having horriﬁcally
and disgracefully mutilated the body of Muhammad’s beloved uncle
Hamzah during the Battle of Uhud ﬁve years earlier. Hind had cut open
Hamzah’s body, ripped out his liver and chewed it.ͯͬ She then report-
edly strung the ears and nose into a necklace and entered Mecca wear-
ing it as a trophy of victory. When justice ﬁnally caught up with her
ﬁve years later she threw herself upon Muhammad’s mercy. Extending
clemency of remarkable depth, Muhammad promised her forgiveness
and accepted her into his community.ͯͭ
Proportionate Response, Last Resort and
Discrimination
Mercy between humans, based on forgiveness of someone else’s
acknowledged wrongdoing, was something that Muhammad believed
precisely mirrored the divine relationship between the Creator and
humans. Te concepts of patience, forgiveness and clemency strongly
underpinned the early Islamic practice of warfare. Proportionality—one
of the core principals of Western Just War—also serves as a key foun-
dational principle in the Qur’anic guidance on war. Doing no violence
greater than the minimum necessary to guarantee victory is repeatedly
stressed in the Qur’an (and described as ‘not transgressing limits’). So
is the imperative of meeting force with equal force in order to prevent
defeat and discourage future aggression. Deterrence comes by doing to
the aggressor what he has done to the innocent: Should you encounter

--- Sayfa 75 ---
47
Warfare in the Qur’an
them in war, then deal with them in such a manner that those that [might
have intended to] follow them should abandon their designs and may
take warning (Al-Anfāl, 8:57). With this deterrent function in mind, the
Qur’an embraces the earlier biblical revelation to the Israelites, which
permits people to respond to injustice eye for eye, tooth for tooth. Yet,
like the Christian Gospels, it suggests that there is more spiritual value
(bringing ‘puriﬁcation’) in forgoing revenge in a spirit of charity.ͯͮ Tis
passage, interestingly, is from the same period of revelation as the Verse
of the Sword, which further weakens the abrogation thesis mentioned
above. Moreover, even on this matter of matching one’s strength to
the opponent’s strength,ͯͯ the Qur’an repeatedly enjoins Muslims to
remember that, whenever possible, they should respond to provoca-
tions with patience and eﬀorts to facilitate conciliation. Tey should
avoid ﬁghting unless it becomes necessary afer attempts have been
made to achieve a peaceful resolution (which is a concept not vastly
diﬀerent from the Western Just War notion of Last Resort) because
forgiveness and the restoration of harmony remain Allah’s preference.ͯ Ͱ
Dearly wanting to avoid bloodshed whenever possible, Muhammad
created a practice of treating the use of lethal violence as a last resort
which has been imitated by Muslim warriors to this day, albeit at times
with varying emphasis.ͯ ͱ Before any war-ﬁghting can commence—
except for spontaneous self-defensive battles when surprised—the
leader must make a formal declaration of war to the enemy force, no
matter how aggressive and violent that enemy is. He must communicate
a message to the enemy that it would be better for them to embrace
Islam. If they did (and Muhammad liked to oﬀer three days for reﬂec-
tion and decisionͰͨ ) then the grievance ended. A state of brotherhood
ensued. If the enemy refused, then a proposal would be extended that
oﬀered them peace in return for the ending of aggression or disagree-
able behaviour and the paying of a tax. If the enemy refused even that
oﬀer, and did not cease their wrongdoing, they forfeited their rights to
immunity from the unfortunate violence of war.Ͱͩ
Islamic concepts of war do not deﬁne and conceptualise things
in exactly the same way as Western thinking has done within the Just
War framework. Yet the parallels are striking. Te reasons for going
to war expressed within the Qur’an closely match those within jus ad

--- Sayfa 76 ---
war and peace in islam
48
bellum, the Just War criteria which establishes the justice of a decision
to undertake combat. Te criteria include Just Cause, Proportionality
and Last Resort. Te behaviour demanded of warriors once campaign-
ing and combat have commenced also closely match those within jus
in bello, the Just War criteria which establishes the proper behaviour of
warriors that is necessary to keep the war just. Te Qur’an described this
as a prohibition against ‘transgressing limits’.Ͱͪ Ibn Kathir, a famous
and relatively reliable fourteenth-century scholar of the Qur’an, accepts
earlier interpretations that the ‘transgressions’ mentioned in the Qur’an
refer to ‘mutilating the dead, thef (from the captured goods), killing
women, children and old people who do not participate in warfare,
killing priests and residents of houses of worship, burning down
trees and killing animals without real beneﬁt’.Ͱͫ Ibn Kathir points out
that Muhammad had himself stated that these deeds are prohibited.
Another source records that, before he assigned a leader to take forces
on a mission, Muhammad would instruct them to ﬁght honourably,
not to hurt women and children, not to harm prisoners, not to mutilate
bodies, not to plunder and not to destroy trees or crops.Ͱͬ
In the year afer Muhammad’s death in 632, his close friend and
successor Abu Bakr, the ﬁrst caliph, compiled the Qur’an’s and the
Prophet’s guidance on the conduct of war into a code that has served
ever since as the basis of Islamic thinking on the conduct of battle. In a
celebrated address to his warriors, Abu Bakr proclaimed:
Do not act treacherously; do not act disloyally; do not act
neglectfully. Do not mutilate; do not kill little children or
old men, or women; do not cut oﬀ the heads oﬀ the palm
trees or burn them; do not cut down the fruit trees; do not
slaughter a sheep or a cow or a camel, except for food. You
will pass by people who devote their lives in cloisters; leave
them and their devotions alone. You will come upon people
who bring you platters in which are various sorts of food; if
you eat any of it, mention the name of God over it.85
Tere is no explicit statement within the Qur’an that deﬁnes the
diﬀerence between combatants and non-combatants during war, so
readers might think that any man of ﬁghting age (children, women and
the aged having been excluded) is considered fair game. Te Qur’an does

--- Sayfa 77 ---
49
Warfare in the Qur’an
not allow this. Te verses that talk of combat are clear that war is only
permissible against those who are waging war; that is, those in combat.
Aside from those combatants and anyone acting unjustly to prevent
Muslims from practising their faith or trying to violate the sanctity of
Islam’s holy places, no one is to be harmed.
Te rationale for this is clear. Central to the Qur’anic revelation
and stated unequivocally in many passages is the message that the deci-
sions that pertain to life and death are Allah’s alone, and that Allah
has proclaimed that human life—a ‘sacred’ gif—may never be taken
without ‘just cause’.Ͱͮ In the Qur’anic passages narrating the story of
Cain and Abel (surah 5:27–32, revealed very late in Muhammad’s life)
one can read an explicit protection of the lives of the innocent. Sūrat
Al-Mā’idah,  5:32 informs us that, if anyone takes the life of another
human, unless it is for murder, aggressive violence or serious persecu-
tion, it is as though he has killed all of humanity. Likewise, if anyone
saves a life, it is as though he has saved all of humanity. To discourage
war, the very next verse is clear: those who undertake warfare against
the innocent do not count as innocent, nor do those who inﬂict grave
injustice or oppression upon the innocent. Tey forfeit their right to
what we would nowadays call ‘civilian immunity’, and are liable to be
killed in battle or executed if they are caught and have not repented.Ͱͯ
Jihad
It should already be clear that, far from serving as the foundation of a
callous faith in which human life is not respected, or a bellicose faith in
which peace is not desired, the Qur’an presents warfare as an undesir-
able activity. It should be undertaken only within certain constrained
circumstances and in a manner that facilitates the quick restoration of
peace and harmony and minimises the harm and destruction that war
inevitably brings. An analysis of such matters would not, of course, be
complete without making some sense of jihad, that famous word and
concept that nowadays is most controversial and misunderstood.
Interestingly, given that jihad is now associated with extremists who
are full of hatred, like Osama bin Laden and other terrorists, the Qur’an
does not allow hatred to form the basis of a military or other armed
response to perceived injustices. It explicitly states that the hatred of

--- Sayfa 78 ---
war and peace in islam
50
others must not make anyone swerve to [do] wrong and depart from
justice. Be just (Al-Mā’idah, 5:8 and see 5:2). Te Qur’an likewise praises
those who restrain their anger and are forgiving towards their fellow
men (Āl ‘Imrān, 3:134).ͰͰ Tese and other verses communicating the
same message are clear enough to prevent crimes perceived nowadays
by Muslims from turning them into criminals.Ͱͱ Tey certainly made
an impact on Muslims during Muhammad’s lifetime. During the Battle
of Khandaq in 627, for example, ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (who later served
as caliph) reportedly subjugated ‘Amr ibn ‘Abd al-Wudd, a powerful
warrior of the Quraysh. ‘Ali was about to deal a death blow when his
enemy spat in his face. ‘Ali immediately released him and walked away.
He then rejoined battle and managed to slay his enemy. When later asked
to explain why he had released his foe, ‘Ali replied that he had wanted to
keep his heart pure from anger and that, if he needed to take life, he did it
out of righteous motives and not wrath.ͱͨ Even if the verity of this story
is impossible to demonstrate (it is ﬁrst found in a thirteenth-century
Persian Suﬁ poem), its survival and popularity attest to the perceived
importance within Islam of acting justly at all times, even during the
heightened passions inevitable in war.
Despite some popular misperceptions that jihad is based on frus-
tration or anger that many non-Muslims consciously reject the faith of
Islam, the Qur’an is quite clear that Islam can be embraced only by those
who willingly come to accept it. Islam cannot be imposed upon anyone
who does not. Surah 2:256 is emphatic that there must be no compul-
sion in religion (Al-Baqarah, 2:256). Truth is self-evident, the verse adds,
and stands out from falsehood. Tose who accept the former grasp the
most trustworthy hand-hold that never breaks. Tose who accept false-
hood instead will go forth into the depths of darkness: the same hell that
Christ had preached about. Te fate of individuals, based on the choice
they make, is therefore Allah’s alone to decide. Te Qur’an repeats in
several other verses that coerced religion would be pointless because
the submission of the heart wanted by Allah would be contrived and
thus not accepted as genuine. When even Muhammad complained
that he seemed to be surrounded by people who would not believe, a
divine revelation clariﬁed that Muslims were merely to turn away from
the disbelievers afer saying peace to them for they shall come to know

--- Sayfa 79 ---
51
Warfare in the Qur’an
(Al-Zukhruf, 43:88–9). Te Qur’an itself enjoins believers to invite disbe-
lievers to the Way of thy Lord with wisdom and beautiful preaching; and
argue with them in ways that are best and most gracious … if you show
patience, that is indeed the best (cause) for those who are patient. …
For Allah is with those who restrain themselves, and those who do good
(Al-Naḥl, 16:125–8). At no point in Muhammad’s life did he give up
hope that all peoples would want to get along harmoniously. Despite
his grave disappointment whenever communities competed instead of
cooperated, in one of his later public sermons he revealed the divine
message that Allah had made all of mankind into nations and tribes,
that you may know each other (not: ‘that you may despise each other’).ͱͩ
Tis desire for tolerant coexistence even included other faiths and
Muhammad never stopped believing in the commonality of belief
between Muslims and the God-fearing among those who identiﬁed
themselves as Jews and Christians (Ahl al-Kitāb, the People of the Book).
Tey shared the same prophetic line of revelation, afer all. Despite
rejection by several powerful Jewish tribes, and frustration over trini-
tarian concepts, Muhammad remained convinced that the Jewish and
Christian faith communities (as opposed to some individual tribes which
acted treacherously) were eminently acceptable to Allah if they followed
their own scriptures. Verses saying precisely this were revealed very close
in time to the Verse of the Sword. Te verses encourage the Jews and
Christians to believe (submit to God) and act faithfully according to their
own scriptures, the Torah and the Gospel. Te verses state that, if they do
so, they, along with Muslims (fellow submitters (Al-Baqarah, 2:62)), will
have no need to fear or grieve (Al-An‘ām, 5:69). Te revelation of these
religiously inclusive verses late in Muhammad’s life further undermines
the thesis that the verses revealed late in his life undid all of the interfaith
outreach that Muhammad had preached years earlier.
So what, then, is jihad and why does it seem so threatening? Te
answer is that jihad, far from meaning some type of fanatical holy war
against all unbelievers, is the Arabic word for ‘exertion’ or ‘eﬀort’ and
it actually describes any Muslim’s struggle against the things that are
ungodly within him or her and within the wider world. One major form
of jihad is the Muslim’s struggle against his or her nafs: an Arabic word
that may be translated as the ‘lower self’ and refers to the individual’s ego,

--- Sayfa 80 ---
war and peace in islam
52
carnal nature and the bad habits and actions that come from failure to
resist temptation or desire.ͱͪ For example, a Muslim who consciously
strives to break the habit of telling white lies, or the drinking of alcohol,
or who struggles against a bad temper, is involved quite properly in a
jihad against those unfortunate weaknesses. In surah 29:6 the Qur’an
explains this by pointing out that the striving (jihad) of individuals
against their personal ungodliness will bring personal, inner (that is,
spiritual) growth. Yet the very next verse goes further by exhorting
believers not only to work on their personal faith, but also to do ‘good
deeds’ to others. Devoting time and giving money to the welfare of
the poor and needy (of all communities, not just Muslims), and to the
upkeep and governance of the ummah, is mentioned in several scrip-
tures as this type of divinely recommended eﬀort (jihad). Winning
souls to Islam through peaceful preaching is likewise a worthy eﬀort.
Muhammad himself revealed a divine exhortation to strive with all
eﬀort (Al-Furqān, 25:52) (in Arabic it uses two forms of the same word
jihad) using the powerful words of the Qur’an to convince unbelievers.
Jihad
  is also used in the Qur’an to mean physical defensive resist-
ance to external danger. It appears in thirty verses, six of them revealed
during Muhammad’s years in Mecca and twenty-four revealed during
the years of armed attack by the Quraysh tribe and its allies and then
the protective wars to create security within and around the Arabian
Peninsula.93 Critics of Islam claim that this ratio reveals that jihad and
qitāl (war-ﬁghting) are eﬀectively synonymous regardless of context.
Tis is incorrect. Te struggle against ego and personal vice is a greater,
non-contextual and ever-required struggle, as Muhammad revealed.
Afer returning from a battle he told his supporters: ‘You have come
back from the smaller jihad to the greater jihad.’ When asked what the
greater jihad was, Muhammad replied: ‘Te striving of Allah’s servant
against his desires’ (‘mujāhadāt al-‘abd li-hawah’).94
Moreover, the Verse of the Sword and the other supposedly bloody
verses quoted in this article do not use the word jihad for the recom-
mended defensive war-ﬁghting. Tey use qitāl, which simply means
ﬁghting or combat. Yes, qitāl is permitted as part of a defensive strug-
gle against serious oppression or persecution, but that does not mean
that all jihad is ﬁghting. Tat would be using logic similar to saying

--- Sayfa 81 ---
53
Warfare in the Qur’an
that, because all fox terriers are dogs, all dogs are fox terriers. All lawful
qitāl is jihad—a legitimately approved and rigorously constrained mili-
tary struggle against evil—but not all jihad (or even much of it or the
‘greater’ type) is warfare. Questions about who can legitimately call
for or initiate qitāl as part of any jihad, in a world which no longer
has caliphs leading the ummah, are debated by Islamic scholars, with
a vast majority arguing that only state leaders in Islamic (or Muslim-
majority) lands would be legitimately able to do so if a genuine just
cause emerged. Te fact that fatāwā and other calls for ﬁghting made
in recent years by Al-Qaeda and Taliban leaders have not been accepted
by the overwhelming majority of the world’s 1.6 billion Muslims is a
clear sign that few Muslims see them as legitimate leaders or agree that
armed ﬁghting would be a just and appropriate response to the alleged
grievances.
Interestingly, all the verses mentioning jihad as armed struggle in
defence of the Islamic people and polity are exhortative in nature: with
pleas for eﬀort, urgings of courage and a ﬁghting spirit, assurances of
victory and promises of eternal rewards for those who might die in the
service of their community. Tis emphasis reveals that Muhammad
recognised that wars were so unpalatable to his peace-loving commu-
nity that, even though the causes of Muslim war-ﬁghting were just, he
had to go to extra lengths—much as Winston Churchill did during the
dark days of the Second World War—to exhort frightened or weary
people to persevere, to believe in victory and to ﬁght for it. On 4 June
1940 Churchill gave a magniﬁcent speech to inspire the British people
to continue their struggle against the undoubted evils of Nazism, even
though the German armed forces then seemed stronger and better in
battle. His speech includes the fabulous warlike lines:
We shall ﬁght on the seas and oceans,
We shall ﬁght with growing conﬁdence and growing
strength in the air,
We shall defend our island, whatever the cost may be,
We shall ﬁght on the beaches,
We shall ﬁght on the landing grounds,
We shall ﬁght in the ﬁelds and in the streets,
We shall ﬁght in the hills,
We shall never surrender.95

--- Sayfa 82 ---
war and peace in islam
54
No one would dream of calling Churchill warmongering, much
less murderous. Muhammad’s exhortations for Muslims to do their
duty—a phrase used by Churchill in that speech and others—and to
struggle against the threat of defeat at the hands of the Muslims’ enemies
are best seen in the same light. Indeed, most of the verses which urge
qitāl as part of the struggle (jihad) against enemies relate to the self-
defensive wars mentioned above, with the remaining verses relating to
the broader need to protect the nascent ummah from both the local
spiritual pollution of intransigent Arab polytheism and idolatry as well
as the external threat to unsafe borders around the perimeter of the
ummah. No verses in the Qur’an encourage or permit violence against
innocent people, regardless of faith, and no verses encourage or permit
war against other nations or states that are not attacking the Islamic
ummah, threatening its borders or its direct interests, or interfering in
the ability of Muslims to practice their faith. Armed eﬀort against any
states that might do those oppressive things would still be permitted to
this day, at least according to a fair reading of the Qur’anͱͮ —just as it is
within Western Just War theory. Yet such a situation would involve a very
diﬀerent set of circumstances to those existing in the world today; those
which somehow wrongly prompted a very small number of radicalised
terrorists to undertake aggressive and oﬀensive (not justly motivated
and defensive) struggles. Teir reprehensible actions, especially those
that involve the taking of innocent lives, fall outside the behaviours
permitted by a reasonable reading of the Qur’an.
Conclusion
Tis paper is not an attempt at religious apologetics. It is written by a scholar
of military strategy and ethics for a general audience in an endeavour to
demonstrate that the world’s second largest religion (only Christianity
has more adherents) includes at its core a set of scriptures that contains a
clear and very ethical framework for understanding war and guiding the
behaviour of warriors. Tat framework only supports warfare when it is
based on redressing substantial material grievances (especially attack or
serious direct persecution), when it occurs afer other means of address-
ing the grievances have been attempted, and when it includes the cessa-
tion of hostilities and the restoration of peace as soon as a resolution has

--- Sayfa 83 ---
55
Warfare in the Qur’an
been attained. It demands of warriors that they uphold the concepts of
proportionality (doing no more harm than is necessary) and discrimina-
tion (directing violence only at combatants whilst minimising harm to
civilians and their possessions and infrastructure). Tat framework is very
compatible with the Western Just War philosophy that, for example, gave
a moral underpinning to the United Kingdom’s war against Argentinean
troops occupying the Falkland Islands in 1982, the US-led Coalition’s
eviction of Saddam Hussein’s troops from Kuwait in 1991, and NATO’s
seventy-eight-day air war against Slobodan Milošević’s Yugoslavia in order
to protect Kosovars from ethnic violence in 1999.
So, then, if the Qur’an itself condemns any violence that exceeds or
sits outside of the framework for justice revealed within its verses, how
can we explain the barbarous 9/11 attacks, the home-grown 7/7 attacks
and other suicide-bombing attempts within the United Kingdom and
the murder of civilians by terrorists in other parts of the world who
claim to act in the name of Islam? British scholar Karen Armstrong
answered this obvious question so succinctly in the days afer 9/11 that
her words make a ﬁtting conclusion to this article. During the twentieth
century, she wrote, ‘the militant form of piety ofen known as funda-
mentalism erupted in every major religion as a rebellion against moder-
nity’. Every minority fundamentalist movement within the major faiths
that Armstrong has studied ‘is convinced that liberal, secular society
is determined to wipe out religion. Fighting, as they imagine, a battle
for survival, fundamentalists ofen feel justiﬁed in ignoring the more
compassionate principles of their faith. But in amplifying the more
aggressive passages that exist in all our scriptures, they distort the
tradition.’97 Armstrong is correct, but her word ‘distort’ is too weak for
Al-Qaeda-style terrorists. Tey have not merely distorted the Qur’anic
message; they have entirely perverted it and in the process created addi-
tional unhelpful hostility towards Islam—a faith of justice which seeks
to create peace and security for its believers and a state of harmony and
peaceful coexistence with other faiths.
© Joel Hayward. Published by the Royal Aal al-Bayt Institute for
Islamic Tought as a booklet in 2012.

--- Sayfa 84 ---
56
chapter three
JIHAD AND THE ISLAMIC LAW OF WAR
Dr Caner Dagli
Overview
Introduction
1) Does jihad mean ‘holy war’?
2) What is the role of non-violent jihad?
3) Do Muslims go to war against others merely because they are
non-Muslim?
4) What are the Five Basic Rights of Islamic law, and how do they
relate to war?
5) What does the Qur’an say about jihad and ﬁghting?
6) When do Muslims make treaties?
7) What is the distinction between pre-emption and aggression?
8) What is the diﬀerence between ‘Te Abode of Islam’ and ‘Te
Abode of War’?
9) Is forced conversion an Islamic teaching?
10) What is the ‘sword verse’?
11) What are the basic rules of combat as laid down in Islam’s
authoritative texts?
12) What is the status of non-Muslims under Islamic rule?
13) What is the jizyah, or poll tax, on non-Muslims?
14) Does orthodox Islam sanction rebellion against political
authority?
15) How does the Islamic law of war come to be violated?
Conclusion
Further Reading

--- Sayfa 85 ---
57
Jihad and the Islamic Law of War
Introduction
What is the Islamic law of war and peace? Tis crucial question under-
lies all discussion of jihad, perhaps the most misrepresented of ideas in
the West’s understanding of Islam. ‘Holy war’,98 ‘a faith spread by the
sword’,99 ‘Islamo-fascism’,100 ‘inﬁdel’,101 and many of the other catch-
phrases so popular in the uninformed debate on this topic only serve to
muddle the issue. It is therefore useful, and even imperative, to explain
what jihad is, what it means to Muslims, and how it relates to the
concrete issues of war and peace. Since one cannot hope to understand
a law by studying the actions of those who break it, we will not discuss
here the actions of individuals, but focus on the very sources of Islamic
law itself as they relate to jihad, war and peace. Acts of violence and situ-
ations of peace can only be judged, from the point of view of Islam and
the shari‘ah (Islamic law), on how fully they accord with the principles
set down by the Qur’an, the teachings of the Prophet, and the precedent
set by the tradition of religious scholars through the centuries.
Naked assertions by individuals who claim to speak in the name of
Islam without a foundation in these authoritative sources and princi-
ples must be examined in light of these very sources and principles, and
not accepted at face value. What follows is an attempt to describe the
most important issues surrounding the Islamic law of war and peace,
and to lay out the mainstream, traditional Islamic position, comprised
of three essential principles:
r
Non-combatants are not legitimate targets.
r
Te religion of a person or persons in no way constitutes a cause
for war against them.
r
Aggression is prohibited, but the use of force is justiﬁed in
self-defence, for protection of sovereignty, and in defence of all
innocent people.
We will expand upon these principles in what follows.
Question : Does ‘Jihad’ Mean ‘Holy War’?
Although very ofen the Arabic word jihad is glossed as ‘holy war’, if
we were to translate ‘holy war’ back into Arabic we would have al-ḥarb
al-muqaddasah, a term which does not exist in any form in the Islamic

--- Sayfa 86 ---
war and peace in islam
58
tradition. Jihad, both linguistically and as a technical term, means
‘struggle’, and is etymologically related to the words mujāhadah, which
also means struggle or contention, and ijtihād, which is the eﬀort
exerted by jurists to arrive at correct judgments in Islamic law.
‘Holy war’ is actually a term that comes out of Christianity. Until
its acceptance by the Emperor Constantine in the fourth century,
Christianity was a minority religion that was ofen persecuted and
which grew only through preaching and missionary activity. Christians
were in no position to make war, and indeed Christ’s teaching to turn
the other cheek kept them from retaliation against their persecutors
in most cases. When Christians came to possess real military power,
however, they were faced with the task of ﬁghting wars and of deciding
when, if ever, a Christian could ﬁght in a war and still be considered
a true follower of Christ. Augustine was one of the earliest of Church
thinkers to address this question in detail, discussing it under the
general rubric of ‘just war’. Both he and his mentor Ambrose of Milan
described situations in which justice would compel Christians to take up
arms, but without forgetting that war should only be seen as a neces-
sary evil, and that it should be stopped once peace is achieved. Such
ideas were later elaborated upon by such ﬁgures as Tomas Aquinas
and Hugo Grotius.
It was with the rise of the Papal States and ultimately with the
declaration of the Crusades that the concept of ‘holy war’ came to be
an important term. It is noteworthy that the earliest ‘holy wars’ were
ofen wars by Christians against other Christians, in the sense that the
protagonists saw themselves as carrying out the will of God. However,
it was with the ‘taking of the cross’ by the Christian warriors sent by
Pope Urban in the eleventh century that ‘just war’ became ‘holy war’
in its fullest sense. It was only with the authorisation of the Pope that
a knight could adopt the symbol of the cross. ‘Holy war’, as a term,
thus has its origins in Christianity, not Islam.
Tis gradual transition from total paciﬁsm to just war to holy war
did not occur in Islam. Te non-violent period lasted only until the
Prophet emigrated to Medina, afer which the community was forced
to ponder the conduct of war. Te early history of Islam, unlike that
of Christianity, was marked by overwhelming military and political

--- Sayfa 87 ---
59
Jihad and the Islamic Law of War
success. However, rather than stamp a permanently warlike character
on Islam, the very fact that Muslims received revelation and guidance
from the Prophet on matters of war established a set of rules and legal
precedent that set clear and unmistakeable boundaries. As Christians
came to learn afer they had gained political power, in a world full of
evil and human passions war was inevitable, and even followers of
Christ’s teaching of turning the other cheek were forced to formulate
a concept of ‘just war’. Tey lacked, however, the advantage of a clear
and binding precedent that not only provided that jus ad bellum,
or the conditions under which a just war could be waged, but jus
in bellum, the rules on how the ﬁghting itself is carried out. Tis is
precisely what the Qur’an, the life and teachings of the Prophet and the
actions of the early community gave to Islamic law.
Te term ‘holy war’ is thus inaccurate and unhelpful, implying that
for Muslims war has a kind of supernatural and unreasoned quality
removed from the exigencies of the world. On the contrary, Islamic law
treats war as a sometimes necessary evil, whose conduct is constrained
by concrete goals of justice and fairness in this world. If warfare has
any worth (and indeed, those martyred while ﬁghting justly in the way
of God are promised paradise), it comes from what is fought for, not
from the ﬁghting itself. Jurists of Islamic law never ask whether war is
‘holy’. Rather, they determine, based on Islamic teaching, if it is right
and just. An unjust attack by a group of Muslims acting outside of the
law might be called war, but it is not jihad in the eyes of traditional
Islam. Moreover, as the verses of the Qur’an and sayings of the Prophet
below will show, jihad is also a name for a spiritual struggle, or taking
a principled stand in a diﬃcult situation.
Tus, not all war is jihad, and not all jihad is war.
Question : What is the Role of Non-Violent Jihad?
Te history of the Muslim community under the Prophet is normally
divided into two periods, the Meccan and the Medinan. Qur’anic chap-
ters and verses are normally classiﬁed accordingly, depending on when
the verse was revealed. Te Muslim hijri calendar begins with the
emigration (Hijrah) of the Prophet and his companions from Mecca
to Medina, where they established the ﬁrst Islamic political entity. Te

--- Sayfa 88 ---
war and peace in islam
60
Meccan period begins with the Prophet’s ﬁrst revelation from the
archangel Gabriel, and ends thirteen years later with the Hijrah, while
the Medinan period begins with Hijrah and ends ten years later with
the Prophet’s death in 632 of the Common Era.
In the Meccan period the Muslims were a minority religious
community amongst the primarily polytheistic pagan Arabs, and
possessed no political power or protection aside from that which was
provided by their familial bonds. Tey did not constitute a formal
organisation, but rather were a self-selected group of individuals who
were bound to each other spiritually, and who were ofen verbally and
physically abused for their practices and their belief in the one God.
During this period the Prophet was neither judge nor ruler, but guide
and teacher, and brought news of the true nature of things, espe-
cially as it concerned the oneness of God and the inevitable Day of
Judgment. Te commands and prohibitions during these years were
of a spiritual nature, such as performing prayer and keeping away
from unclean things, and there was no earthly punishment for going
against them.
Once the Prophet and his companions emigrated to Medina, the
Prophet took on the power to govern politically over the Muslims and
non-Muslims of Medina. He became both a spiritual and temporal
leader, and as such became responsible for both the spiritual and mate-
rial needs of the people, whereas in the Meccan period his primary
mission was to be a bearer of good tidings, and a warner (Fāṭir, 35:24).
Tese material needs included the defence and maintenance of the
new Islamic state, by force of arms if necessary. While the Muslims in
the Meccan period were expressly forbidden to take up arms against
their persecutors, in the Medinan period they were given permission
to ﬁght their enemies militarily, as will be discussed below.
Some have speculated that the Muslim community was not permit-
ted to take up arms in the Meccan period because they were weak and
outnumbered, but this is to forget that they were outnumbered three
to one at the Battle of Badr, which took place in the Medinan period.
Moreover, this explanation contradicts Qur’anic verses such as,
If there are ten steadfast among you, they will defeat two
hundred, and one hundred among you will defeat one thou-

--- Sayfa 89 ---
61
Jihad and the Islamic Law of War
sand of those who disbelieve, for they are a people who do
not understand. (Al-Anfāl, 8:65)
or,
How many a small party has defeated a larger party by
God’s leave! God is with the steadfast. (Al-Baqarah, 2:249)
Still, we ﬁnd that in this period of non-violent steadfastness, under
the frequently violent persecution of the Meccan pagans to the new
religion, the Muslims are commanded to carry out struggle, or jihad:
Do not obey the disbelievers, and struggle against them with
it a great struggle. (Al-Furqān, 25:52).
Ten indeed your Lord—for those who emigrated afer they
were put through tribulation, then struggled and were pa-
tient—indeed your Lord, afer that, is forgiving, merciful.
(Al-Naḥl, 16:110).
Verse 25:52 is universally considered to be Meccan by traditional
exegetes of the Qur’an,102 and Ibn ‘Abbas pointed out that struggle
… with it means to struggle using the Qur’an, that is, with the truth
contained therein against the false beliefs of the pagans. Verse 16:110
is thought by some to be Medinan, but the majority of exegetes
consider the emigration mentioned to refer to the ﬂight of some of
the Muslim community to seek asylum with the King of Abyssinia,
which occurred in the Meccan period.
Te Prophet himself praised non-violent jihad. He said, ‘Te best
struggle (jihad) is to speak the truth before a tyrannical ruler,’103 and,
‘Te best struggle is to struggle against your soul and your passions in
the way of God Most High’.104 Some have questioned the authenticity
of the hadith which describes the Prophet returning from a battle with
the companions and saying, ‘We have returned from the lesser strug-
gle to the greater struggle’, which is ofen cited by those seeking to
recover the traditional meaning of jihad. If the hadith is indeed inau-
thentic, the meaning is still found in the aforementioned hadith that
places the struggle against the soul above all other struggles. Moreover
there are numerous other hadith which place the eﬀorts required in
the spiritual life above the rewards of physical combat. Te Prophet
once said, ‘Shall I tell you of your best deed, the most pleasing to your
King, the lofiest in your ranks, better than the giving of gold and

--- Sayfa 90 ---
war and peace in islam
62
silver, and better than meeting your enemy in battle, beheading him
whilst he beheads you? Te remembrance of God (dhikr Allāh).’105
Indeed, so important is the spiritual element of struggle that even
when Muslims are commanded to ﬁght they must ﬁrst insure that
the truth does not die with those who put their lives at risk in battle.
It is not for the believers to go forth altogether: why should
not a party of every section of them go forth so that they may
become learned in religion and that they may warn their
folk when they return to them, so that they may beware?
(Al-Tawbah, 9:122)
Te superior and inherent worth of spiritual struggle over armed
struggle is an immutable value in Islam, but placing the spiritual
above the worldly does not erase worldly concerns. It is universally
agreed that Islamic law came to sanction armed struggle and war, but
this sanction came with a law of war which is binding for Muslims.
Tis law of war answers two fundamental questions: Why do we ﬁght?
How should we ﬁght?
In almost all cases during the career of the Prophet, armed combat
and war took place with Muslims on one side and non-Muslims on
the other. Tese were not tribal battles, since members of the same
tribe and ofen the same family fought on opposite sides. Nor were
they religious battles in the sense that Muslims fought non-Muslims
for the mere fact of their being non-Muslims. As we shall see, Muslims
fought for the protection of their basic rights: the right to life, prop-
erty, honour and most importantly the right to believe and practice
their faith. Teir grievances against their enemies were expulsion
from their homes and seizure of their property; persecution in the
form of torture and murder; and pressure to give up their faith in the
one God and the Prophet Muhammad U.
A cursory knowledge of the life of the Prophet will show that
one need not go into theology to explain why Muslims fought their
enemies. Te fact that Muslims were persecuted, reviled, tortured,
pitted against their own families, exiled, ostracised and killed provides
more than enough justiﬁcation for their resort to force.

--- Sayfa 91 ---
63
Jihad and the Islamic Law of War
Question : Do Muslims go to War against Others
Merely Because they are Non-Muslim?
Most scholars agree that the ﬁrst verses to permit ﬁghting were:
Indeed God protects those who believe. Indeed God does not
love the treacherous, the ungrateful. Permission is granted to
those who ﬁght because they have been wronged. And God is
truly able to help them; those who were expelled from their
homes without right, only because they said: ‘Our Lord is
God’. Were it not for God’s causing some people to drive back
others, destruction would have befallen the monasteries, and
churches, and synagogues, and mosques in which God’s Name
is mentioned greatly. Assuredly God will help those who help
Him. God is truly Strong, Mighty—those who, if We empower
them in the land, maintain the prayer, and pay the alms, and
enjoin decency and forbid indecency. And with God rests the
outcome of all matters. (Al-Ḥajj, 22:38–41)106
It is of the greatest signiﬁcance that the verses ﬁnally giving
Muslims permission to use force to defend themselves should make
mention of the houses of worship of other religions. God not only
protects Muslims by repelling some by means of others, He also protects
religion as such, which is described here in terms of the places wherein
the name of God is remembered. As will be made clear below, it is not
the religious identity of people which justiﬁes the use of force against
them, but their aggression and crimes against the Muslim community
and, by extension, other religious communities under Muslim rule.
Question : What are the Five Basic Rights of Islamic
Law, and How Do they Relate to War?
The question of protecting religion in war is a crucial one, for indeed
the law of war in Islam is a subset of all Islamic law (the shari‘ah), and as
such it must conform to the principles of that encompassing law. Jurists
of the (overwhelming majority) orthodox tradition have, in codifying
the law, identiﬁed those fundamentals which the law must protect and
which Muslims cannot violate. Tese are usually called ‘Te Aims of
the Law’ (maqāṣid al-sharī‘ah), but in eﬀect they amount to the Five
Basic Rights. Tey are: (1) Religion; (2) Life; (3) Mind; (4) Honour; (5)
Property. Muslims have always understood the value of the outward

--- Sayfa 92 ---
war and peace in islam
64
(the restrictions and prohibitions of the law) to derive ultimately from
its protection of the inward (the human being’s relationship with God
and his own true nature), hence the traditional place of religion as the
ﬁrst Basic Right before the law. It is one reason why the Prophet placed
the remembrance of God above all other acts. Yet Islamic law, and ipso
facto the law of war, must take into account the other Basic Rights.
Te Right to Life includes safety from murder, torture, terror, and
starvation. Te Right to Mind encompasses the Islamic prohibition of
intoxication, and more generally can be extended to those things which
hinder human objectivity, such as misinformation, mis-education, and
lying in general. Te Right to Honour exists in what has come to be
known in the modern world as ‘human dignity’, which in the Islamic
context begins with the integrity of the family (and particularly of one’s
lineage) and extends to the protection of one’s good name and an envi-
ronment of mutual respect in society. Te Right to Property protects
against thef, destruction, and dispossession.
Tese Five Basic Rights all pertain to the conduct of war, enshrin-
ing the principle that the material is ultimately justiﬁed in light of the
spiritual, and that the spiritual must guide the conduct of the material.
In other words, morality and ethics apply to war, equally and according
to the same principles, as they apply to economic transactions, marriage
and sexuality, and government. Indeed, it is an abuse of good sense to
suppose that a civilisation which developed a highly sophisticated law
and system of justice, an international system of trade and credit, peaks
of art and philosophy and major advances in science and technology—
all within a world view formed by the Qur’an and the teachings of the
Prophet—could somehow have omitted to address justice, harmony,
and fairness when it came to questions of war and peace.
Question : What Does the Qur’an Say about
Jihad and Fighting?
Below are some Qur’anic verses pertaining to jihad and ﬁghting. Care
has been taken to quote these at some length, as the relevant passages
are ofen abbreviated and quoted out of context in much of the discus-
sion about the Qur’an and jihad. When read as a whole, the justice and
fairness of the Qur’anic commands speak for themselves:

--- Sayfa 93 ---
65
Jihad and the Islamic Law of War
And ﬁght in the way of God with those who ﬁght against you,
but aggress not; God loves not the aggressors. And slay them
wherever you come upon them, and expel them from where
they expelled you; sedition is more grievous than slaying. But
ﬁght them not by the Sacred Mosque until they should ﬁght
you there; then if they ﬁght you, slay them—such, is the re-
quital of disbelievers. But if they desist, surely God is Forgiv-
ing, Merciful. Fight them till there is no sedition, and the re-
ligion is for God; then if they desist, there shall be no enmity,
save against evildoers. Te sacred month for the sacred month;
holy things demand retaliation; whoever commits aggression
against you, then commit aggression against him in the man-
ner that he committed against you; and fear God, and know
that God is with the God-fearing. (Al-Baqarah, 2:190–4)
Prescribed for you is ﬁghting, though it be hateful to you. Yet
it may happen that you hate a thing which is good for you;
and it may happen that you love a thing which is bad for you;
God knows, and you know not. Tey ask you about the sacred
month, and ﬁghting in it. Say, ‘Fighting in it is a grave thing;
but to bar from God’s way, and disbelief in Him, and the Sa-
cred Mosque, and to expel its people from it—that is graver
in God’s sight; and sedition is graver than slaying’. Tey will
not cease to ﬁght against you until they turn you from your
religion if they are able; and whoever of you turns from his
religion, and dies disbelieving—their works have failed in this
world and the Hereafer. Tose are the inhabitants of the Fire,
abiding therein. (Al-Baqarah, 2:216–7)
God does not forbid you in regard to those who did not wage
war against you on account of religion and did not expel you
from your homes, that you should treat them kindly and deal
with them justly. Assuredly God loves the just. God only for-
bids you in regard to those who waged war against you on
account of religion and expelled you from your homes and
supported [others] in your expulsion, that you should make
friends with them. And whoever makes friends with them,
those—they are the wrongdoers. (Al-Mumtaḥanah, 60:8–9)
Say to the disbelievers, that if they desist, that which is past
will be forgiven them; but if they return, the way of [dealing
with] the ancients has already gone before! And ﬁght them
until sedition is no more and religion is all for God; then if
they desist, surely God sees what they do. (Al-Anfāl, 8:38–9)

--- Sayfa 94 ---
war and peace in islam
66
Read as a whole, and not selectively quoted out of context, these
verses make it clear that Muslims ﬁght because they have been wronged;
because they have been persecuted, which is seen as worse than killing;
because they have been made to renounce their religion; and because
they have been driven out of their homes. Muslims must ﬁght their
enemies not because of who they are, but because of what they have done
to them and continue to do to them.
It must be remembered that the Prophet began preaching while still a
respected and admired member of his community. It was the teachings he
brought which the Quraysh saw as a threat, not the Prophet himself as a
man, nor his followers as a group. He never threatened the Quraysh (other
than warning them of the Day of Judgment) or used any kind of coercion
whatsoever. Te young Muslim community began to suﬀer persecution
under the Quraysh because Islam was seen as a threat to its own pagan
religion and to Mecca’s role as a place of pilgrimage (and hence to the
tribe’s economic prosperity). Te ﬁrst reactions of the Muslims were to
endure, then to ﬂee, since they were not yet permitted to ﬁght back. It
was only afer the Quraysh had made life unbearable—by ostracising the
Muslims and ﬁnally even attempting to assassinate the Prophet—that the
young community ﬁnally migrated to Medina. Indeed, the Muslims had
exhausted all other options before resorting to force.
Question : When Do Muslims Make Treaties?
Tough Muslims were eventually given permission to retaliate, in Islamic
law the goal of redressing grievances is not mere revenge, but the estab-
lishment of peace. For this reason the Qur’an ofen makes mention of
treaties of peace with non-Muslims, including the polytheists. Te follow-
ing verses are examples from the Qur’an involving treaties and agree-
ments of peace with non-Muslims, again quoted at length so as to show
their context:
Tey long that you should disbelieve as they disbelieve, so then
you would be equal; therefore do not take friends from among
them until they emigrate in the way of God; then, if they turn
away, take them and slay them wherever you ﬁnd them; and do
not take any of them as a patron, or as a helper. Except those
who attach themselves to a people between whom and you there

--- Sayfa 95 ---
67
Jihad and the Islamic Law of War
is a covenant, or come to you with their breasts constricted
about the prospect of ﬁghting you, or ﬁghting their people. Had
God willed, He would have given them sway over you, so that
assuredly they would have fought you. And so if they stay away
from you and do not ﬁght you, and oﬀer you peace, then God
does not allow you any way against them. You will ﬁnd oth-
ers desiring to have security from you and security from their
own people; yet whenever they are returned to sedition, they
are overwhelmed by it. So, if they do not stay away from you,
and oﬀer you peace, and restrain their hands, then take them
and slay them wherever you come upon them; against them We
have given you clear warrant. (Al-Nisā’, 4:89–91)
But if they break their oaths afer [making] their pact and as-
sail your religion, then ﬁght the leaders of unbelief—verily they
have no [binding] oaths, so that they might desist. Will you not
ﬁght a people who broke their oaths and intended to expel the
Messenger—initiating against you ﬁrst? Are you afraid of them?
God is more worthy of your fear if you are believers. Fight them,
and God will chastise them at your hands, and degrade them,
and He will give you victory against them, and He will heal the
breasts of a people who believe. And He will remove the rage in
their hearts. God turns [in forgiveness] to whomever He will.
And God is Knowing, Wise. Or did you suppose that you would
be lef [in peace] when God does not yet know those of you who
have struggled and have not taken, besides God and His Mes-
senger and the believers, an intimate friend? And God is aware
of what you do.(Al-Tawbah, 9:12–6)
Tose of them with whom you have made a pact, and then
break their pact every time, and they are not fearful. So if you
come upon them anywhere in the war, [deal with them so as
to] cause those behind them to scatter, so that they might re-
member. And if you fear, from any folk some treachery, then
cast it back to them with fairness. Truly God does not love the
treacherous. And do not let those who disbelieve suppose that
they have outstripped [God’s purpose]; indeed they cannot es-
cape. Make ready for them whatever force you can and of horses
tethered that thereby you may dismay the enemy of God and
your enemy, and others besides them, whom you know not: God
knows them. And whatever thing you expend in the way of God
shall be repaid to you in full, and you will not be wronged. (Al-
Anfāl, 8:56–60)

--- Sayfa 96 ---
war and peace in islam
68
Te next verse clariﬁes that if they do maintain their treaties, then
the treaties are to be honoured.
 And if they incline to peace, then incline to it, and rely on
God; truly He is the Hearer, the Knower. (Al-Anfāl, 8:61)
Te principles surrounding treaties is also seen in this verse:
Say to the disbelievers, that if they desist, that which is past
will be forgiven them; but if they return, the way of [dealing
with] the ancients has already gone before! And ﬁght them
until sedition is no more and religion is all for God; then if
they desist, surely God sees what they do. (Al-Anfāl, 8:38–9)
To command the state of non-violence through the observance
of an established treaty with non-Muslim polytheists shows that the
Muslim community was willing, and indeed commanded, to live in a
state of peace with its neighbours even if those neighbours practiced a
religion other than Islam. When the Muslims are commanded to ﬁght
those who break their treaties, it is the breaking of the treaty that invites
warfare, not the fact that the treaty-breakers are polytheists.
Te Prophet made several important treaties with the non-Muslim
communities around Medina, and these were of more than one kind.
Perhaps the best known is the treaty of Hudaybiyyah, where the
Muslim community made a truce with the Quraysh tribe allowing
the Muslim community to make a pilgrimage to Mecca the follow-
ing year. Tis treaty was noteworthy for its pragmatism: the Prophet
made certain concessions in favour of a greater good. Tough they had
set out to make a peaceful pilgrimage during the holy months when
ﬁghting was forbidden, they were met on the road by the Quraysh and
ultimately did not reach Mecca that year as part of the treaty terms.
Moreover, the Quraysh even demanded that the Prophet remove the
Divine Name Al-Rahmān and the title of ‘Messenger of God’ from the
treaty, which the Prophet agreed to despite the dismay of prominent
companions such as ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, and even as staunch a Muslim
as ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab bristled at what he saw at the time as humili-
ating terms. Yet the Qur’an referred to Hudaybiyyah in these terms:
Verily We have given you a clear victory (Al-Fatḥ, 48:1). Although the
Muslims did not achieve their immediate aims of pilgrimage, the treaty
of Hudaybiyyah created an environment of free travel and peace which

--- Sayfa 97 ---
69
Jihad and the Islamic Law of War
served to strengthen the Muslim community’s position in Arabia.
Tus Muslims sought peace with non-Muslims, and in no case is the
reason for Muslim armed struggle against non-Muslims the mere fact of
their religious identity. As is made clear in the passages from the Qur’an
cited above, the reason for armed struggle is a state of war (haraba)
originating in the concrete actions taken by the non-Muslims to harm
the Muslim community, not their state of disbelieving in God (kufr) or
of belonging to another religion. As the example of the Prophet shows,
Muslims can make treaties with their enemies, even if they are polytheists,
and they are expected by God to keep to their treaties. If hostilities resume
with treaty-breakers, it is not because the treaty- breakers are non-Muslim
but because they have re-entered a state of hostility. Tis in fact occurred
on more than one occasion, notably the treaty of Hudaybiyyah, which
was meant to last ten years but which was rendered void by Meccans’
actions against the Muslim community.
In short, in Islam treaties are not predicated on theology or religious
identity. Rather, like treaties anywhere, they rely on the two parties faith-
fully adhering to the terms. As in all transactions in Islamic law, such as
buying and selling, and even marriage, the religion of the person making a
treaty has no legal bearing on the force of the treaty. An agreement with a
Muslim is no more or less binding than an agreement with a non-Muslim,
whether it is a rental contract or the United Nations (UN) Charter.
Question : What is the Distinction between
Pre-Emption and Aggression?
Some have sought support for the idea that Muslims can kill disbelievers
for their disbelief in the Prophet’s hadith during the Al-Ahzab campaign,
‘Now we campaign against them but are not campaigned against by
them. We are going to them.’107 A similar type of support is sought in
the battle of Khaybar, where the Muslims mounted a surprise attack
against the Jews there, or at the battle of Mu’tah, where Muslims attacked
the Byzantines.
If one restricted the meaning of hostility to shots being ﬁred, then
these examples might show that Muslims claim the right to unprovoked
attack against others by reason of their being non-Muslims. However,
an enemy need not be storming the gates in order to pose a grave and

--- Sayfa 98 ---
war and peace in islam
70
imminent danger. An enemy can have the intent to cause harm, or can
be planning to cause harm, or can be conspiring with others who are
already causing harm.
Indeed while there were several cases in which the Muslims
‘campaigned when they were not campaigned against’, there were
nevertheless reasons why this cannot be considered aggression but
rather pre-emption against a clear danger coupled with an intention
of future aggression. In the case of Banū Mustalaq, it came to the
Prophet’s attention that they were conspiring against the Muslims. In
the case of Khaybar, the Prophet learned that Banū Khaybar had made
a secret agreement with Banū Ghaṭafān to unite against them. In order
to pre-empt this action, the Prophet staged a surprise attack. In the
case of the attack at Mu’tah, tribes to the north (which were under
the protection of the Byzantines) showed their hostility towards the
Muslims by taking the egregious step of killing the Prophet’s emissary.
In the Tabuk campaign Muslims set out based on information that the
Byzantines were preparing to attack.
Tere exists a saying in Arabic, ‘When the Byzantines are not
campaigned against, they campaign.’ Tis saying should remind us
that the modern concepts of pre-emptive war and aggression must be
understood in their proper context. Until the twentieth century, war
was an accepted right of all states. Indeed, in 1928 the Kellogg-Briand
Pact was the ﬁrst major systematic attempt to renounce war as an
instrument of national policy. Over the course of the twentieth century
the Kellogg-Briand Pact was followed by the Nuremberg Principles,
the Charter of the United Nations, and the Geneva Conventions, all of
which laid the foundation for current  international law. Tese agree-
ments constitute binding treaties between the signatories. Tey make
military aggression between states illegal, and among other things
forbid the acquisition of territory by war, deﬁne war crimes during
the conduct of war, and govern the treatment of prisoners, civilians,
and combatants.
Such questions had already been an important part of Islamic law
for more than a thousand years. Tough the content of the law was
diﬀerent—reﬂecting a diﬀerent international environment—the eﬀort
to regulate relations between states was well-established in Islam long

--- Sayfa 99 ---
71
Jihad and the Islamic Law of War
before the treaties of the twentieth century. Indeed, while Islamic law
ﬂowed from principles laid down in the Qur’an and the life of the
Prophet as part of a larger ethical law, the international treaties of the
twentieth century were, it must be said, fuelled largely by the horror
of the two World Wars and the fear of having such episodes repeated.
Question : What Is the Difference Between ‘The Abode
of Islam’ and ‘The Abode of War’?
From the point of view of Islamic law, any Muslim signatory to the
Charter of the UN and the Geneva Conventions is just as bound to
abide by them as the Prophet was to abide by the treaties he completed
with the pagan Quraysh and with other tribes of Arabia and beyond.
Te military encounters between political entities in the past cannot
be judged by the same standards that we judge such encounters today,
because in the absence of an explicit renunciation of international
agreements all nations are in a de facto treaty with all others, though
the situation is not usually framed in those terms. Te classical laws of
jihad assumed—correctly—that the default position between states was
a state of war, hence the name Dār al-Ḥarb, or Abode of War, which
is usually set in contrast to Dār al-Islām or the Abode of Islam. Tis
has been widely understood to mean that Muslims consider themselves
obligated to wage war on all non-Muslim lands until they become part
of Dār al-Islām, but this is not at all the case. Te label ‘the abode
of war’ signiﬁes that the land in question is not in treaty with the
Muslims and that hostilities can break out at any time. Recall that war
was universally acknowledged as something states did to get what they
wanted; there was no idea of violating international law or of becoming
a ‘rogue’ state. From the point of view of current international law, all
states were in a sense rogue states because there was no mechanism
for enforcing or even deﬁning the rules of war, aside from customary
practices such as the receiving of emissaries.
Tus the explicit rules of the Islamic law of jihad were not imposed
from without, as has been the case for states in the twentieth century,
but were realised from within. Te state of aﬀairs in seventh century
Arabia and the surrounding areas made this ‘state of war’ the rule rather
than the exception. Unless an explicit treaty was made between two

--- Sayfa 100 ---
war and peace in islam
72
groups—in the case of Arabia, these fundamental units were usually
tribes—then one could expect an attack at any time. Te Qur’an reﬂects
the early Muslim community’s awareness of its weak and uncertain
position in this hostile state of aﬀairs:
Or is it that they have not seen that We have appointed a se-
cure Sanctuary, while people are snatched away all around
them? … (Al-‘Ankabūt, 29:67)
And remember when you were few and oppressed in the land,
and were fearful lest men should snatch you away … (Al-
Anfāl, 8:26)
And they say, ‘If we were to follow the Guidance with you, we
will be deprived from our land’… (Al-Qaṣaṣ, 28:57)
Muslims are described as Tose to whom people said, ‘Te people
have gathered against you, therefore fear them’ ... (Āl ‘Imrān, 3:173)
Te Surah of Quraysh also testiﬁes to the risks of living on the
Arabian Peninsula:
[In gratitude] for the security of Quraysh, their security for
the journey of winter and of summer, let them worship the
Lord of this House, Who has fed them against hunger and
made them secure from fear. (Quraysh, 106:1–4)
Te separation of the world into the Abode of Islam and the Abode
of War reﬂects the reality, brutal and unavoidable, that the world was
not always governed by the universal treaties of today. Te terms Dār
al-Islām and Dār al-Ḥarb are not terms from the Qur’an or from the
teachings of the Prophet, but grew out of the work of jurists coming
to terms with the new international proﬁle of Islam. As such, they also
coined terms such as Dār al-Ṣulḥ (‘Abode of Reconciliation’) and Dār
al-‘Ahd (‘Abode of Treaty’), referring to those lands not ruled by Islam
but with which the Islamic state had some sort of peace agreement.
Such designations were common from the Abbasid period all the way
through to the Ottoman Empire in the twentieth century.
From the point of view of Islamic law, the gradual adoption and
advancement of moral principles in international law is a welcome
development, and brings the world closer to the Qur’anic ideal of
non-aggression and peaceful coexistence. And if they incline to peace,
then incline to it, and rely on God; truly He is the Hearer, the Knower

--- Sayfa 101 ---
73
Jihad and the Islamic Law of War
(Al-Anfāl, 8:61). Tis idealisation of peace is also echoed in the Prophet’s
command, ‘Do not be hopeful of meeting the enemy, and ask God for
well-being’.108
Question : Is Forced Conversion an Islamic Teaching?
Some texts exist which would, if misunderstood, seem to contradict the
spirit of the Qur’anic verses and hadith mentioned above regarding the
role of one’s religion in war. One of these is the hadith which reads:
‘I have been commanded to ﬁght the people until they bear witness
that there is no divinity but God and Muhammad is God’s Messenger,
perform the Prayer, and pay the Alms. When they have done this, their
blood and property are safe from me, except by the right of Islam and
their reckoning with God.’109
Tree main questions are raised. First, who are the people whom
the Prophet is commanded to ﬁght? Second, what is the deﬁning char-
acteristic of these people, which makes them subject to the Prophet’s
ﬁghting them? Tird, and less obviously, is this hadith universal in its
temporal scope, or is it limited to a speciﬁc time and situation?
A minority position holds that this hadith points to the fact that
although in the beginning the Muslims were commanded to spread the
truth of Islam peacefully, at a certain point this command was abro-
gated and from that point forward Muslims were commanded to ﬁght
non-Muslims until they accepted Islam. Abrogation (naskh) means
that the legally binding status of a Qur’anic verse is superseded by the
legally binding authority of a verse that is revealed later. For exam-
ple, one verse of the Qur’an prohibits Muslims from praying while
intoxicated, while a later verse abrogates this verse by promulgating
an absolute prohibition on the consumption of alcohol. At issue here
is whether a previous command to preach peacefully is cancelled by a
later command to ﬁght people until they accept Islam.
Among the verses which refer to preaching the truths in the Qur’an
and inviting non-Muslims to Islam are the following:
So remind. For you are only an admonisher; you are not a
taskmaster over them. But he who turns away and disbe-
lieves, God will chastise him with the greater chastisement.
(Al-Ghāshiyah, 88:21-24)

--- Sayfa 102 ---
war and peace in islam
74
But if they are disregardful, We have not sent you as a keeper
over them. Your duty is only to deliver the Message… (Al-
Shūrā, 42:48)
And whether We show you a part of that which We promise
them, or We take you [to Us], it is for you only to convey [the
Message], and it is for Us to do the reckoning. (Al-Ra‘d, 13:40)
And obey God and obey the Messenger, and beware; but if
you turn away, then know that Our Messenger’s duty is only
to proclaim plainly. (Al-Mā’idah, 5:92)
Some of these verses are Medinan, which means that they were
revealed afer permission was given to the Muslim community to
struggle through force of arms.
Tis makes it clear that the preaching of Islam is a question of
allowing the truth to reach the ears of those who have yet to hear it,
not of forcing others to accept it. Indeed, to force another to accept a
truth in his heart is impossible, as acknowledged clearly in the Qur’anic
verse Tere is no compulsion in religion. Te right way has become distinct
from error (Al-Baqarah, 2:256). Tis verse was revealed in Medina and
was in fact directed at Muslims who wanted to convert their children
from Judaism or Christianity to Islam.110 As the Qur’an is so clear that
the Prophet’s only responsibility as regards bringing others to the truth
is only to preach it to them, to bring the good news of paradise and to
warn of hell, we are lef with the hadith which claims that the Prophet
has been commanded to ﬁght until ‘the people’ accept the oneness
of God, the Messengerhood of the Prophet, perform the canonical
prayer, and pay the Alms, all of which is tantamount to their becoming
Muslims. Te majority of the scholars of Qur’anic exegesis and law
hold that the command to preach peacefully and to never coerce a
person in his choice of religion was never abrogated and continued to
hold sway up until the end of the Prophet’s life and beyond. Amongst
this majority there are two main positions. Some hold that the people
referred to in the verse are the Arabian idol-worshippers, while all
others fall into a separate category addressed by such verses as God
does not forbid you in regard to those who did not wage war against you
on account of religion and did not expel you from your homes, that you
should treat them kindly and deal with them justly. Assuredly God loves

--- Sayfa 103 ---
75
Jihad and the Islamic Law of War
the just (Al-Mumtaḥanah, 60:8). A second group of scholars holds
that the command enshrined in ‘Tere is no compulsion in religion’ is
universal and applies to everyone, be they idol-worshippers or Jews
or Christians. In both cases the only possible scope for ‘the people’ is
limited to those with whom the Prophet was engaged in conﬂict at the
time. Te majority of scholars thus do not consider that ‘the people’
in this hadith refers to all people everywhere.
Question : What is the ‘Sword Verse’?
One source of some controversy is the so-called sword verse, which reads:
Ten, when the sacred months have passed, slay the idolaters
wherever you ﬁnd them, and take them, and conﬁne them,
and lie in wait for them at every place of ambush. But if they
repent, and establish prayer and pay the alms, then leave their
way free. God is Forgiving, Merciful. (Al-Tawbah, 9:5)
Tere is no disagreement that indeed this verse commands the
Muslims to kill the polytheists, but the question remains as to whether
they are to be killed because they are disbelievers or because of their
enmity towards the Muslims. Are they to be fought because they are
hostile to the Muslims or because they reject Islam? Te second part of
the verse, which names repentance and the performance of the Prayer
and the giving of alms as a condition by which the polytheists can save
themselves from the Muslims, would seem to indicate that it is their
unbelief, not their hostility, which is the motivation for Muslims to kill
them. However, the next verse reads,
And if any one of the idolaters seeks your protection, then
grant him protection so that he might hear the words of God
and aferward convey him to his place of security—that is be-
cause they are a people who do not know. (Al-Tawbah, 9:6)
Tis second verse commands Muslims to receive a polytheist if he
seeks asylum, to preach the truth to him, and then to let him go safely.
It sets no condition that he should repent or accept Islam. It is not a
condition for the asylum seeker’s safe return that he become a Muslim.
Indeed, these two verses present not one but two possibilities for the
non-Muslim to escape armed conﬂict with the Muslim community: the
ﬁrst is to accept Islam, as mentioned in the ﬁrst verse, and the second is

--- Sayfa 104 ---
war and peace in islam
76
to seek asylum with the Muslims, as mentioned in the second verse.111
Some have tried, creatively and erroneously, to assert that the second
verse is abrogated by the ﬁrst, but this is an abuse of the principles of
abrogation, and twists verses of the Qur’an to mean what we want them
to mean. In fact, it would be impossible for Al-Tawbah, 9:5 to call for
ﬁghting against others solely based on their belief without it abrogating
no less than 140 other verses calling for peace with those who do not
ﬁght against Muslims, even if they are pagans. Indeed, it would have
to abrogate the verse immediately following it, 9:6. Te verse Tere is
no coercion in religion is not a command, but a statement of fact, of the
same grammatical form as Tere is no god but God. Recall that this verse,
according to one account, was revealed in the context of people over
whose religious preferences the Muslims had no control—children of
theirs who were among an exiled tribe. It is a description of what religion
is in relation to the human will. In Qur’anic exegesis, only commands
can be abrogated, not truths. Tus by deﬁnition there is no way that
‘Tere is no coercion in religion’ (a statement, or khabar) can become ‘Let
there be coercion in religion’ (a command, or ‘amr). In fact, among the
four Sunni schools of jurisprudence only one, the Shaﬁ‘i school, contains
the view that a person’s belief can be a reason for ﬁghting against them.
Tis view, however, is mitigated by the fact that an opposite view, in
agreement with the majority, is also attributed to Shaﬁ‘i.
Moreover, it is also important to note that two similar sounding but
distinct words are used in the Qur’anic verse which says slay the idola-
ters wherever you ﬁnd them and the hadith which reads, ‘I have been
commanded to ﬁght with the people until …’. In the Arabic, the two
verbs in question are qatala, which means to ﬁght, kill, or murder, and
qātala, which means to ﬁght, to combat, or to contend with something.
Te resulting verbal nouns are qatl for qatala and qitāl for qātala. Qatl
means killing, while qitāl means combat. Sāḥat al-qitāl, for example,
means ‘battleﬁeld’. Te diﬀerence is crucial and is sadly sometimes
ignored. Tis is a case which demonstrates the importance of mastering
Arabic before deciding on matters of Islamic law.
Te Prophet did not say, ‘I will kill/slay/murder the polytheists until
…’ He said, ‘I will ﬁght with them/ combat them/contend with them …’
Qatl is an action which, both linguistically and practically, requires only

--- Sayfa 105 ---
77
Jihad and the Islamic Law of War
one agent. Qitāl implies two agents, each contending with or resisting
the other. Te use of qitāl implies a state of mutual hostility, or, from
the Prophet’s point of view, of a response to the polytheists’ hostility.
Misunderstanding concerning such texts as these can be corrected
easily by referring to the traditional law. It is one thing to hunt for quotes
which serve a predetermined purpose, and quite another to understand
a text in its proper context and in light of the tradition that has dwelt
upon it for over 1400 years. Such problems become compounded
through mistranslation and, in some cases, deliberate misinformation.
Question : What are the Basic Rules of Combat as Laid
Down in Islam’s Authoritative Texts?
The fundamental rules of combat are not academic extractions clev-
erly derived from history, but are explicitly laid out in Islam’s authori-
tative texts:
And ﬁght in the way of God with those who ﬁght against you,
but aggress not; God loves not the aggressors. (Al-Baqarah,
2:190)
When the Prophet dispatched his armies he would say, ‘Go in the
name of God. Fight in the way of God [against] the ones who disbelieve
in God. Do not act brutally. Do not exceed the proper bounds. Do not
mutilate. Do not kill children or hermits.’112 Once, afer a battle, the
Prophet passed by a woman who had been slain, whereupon he said,
‘She is not one who would have fought.’ Tereupon, he looked at the men
and said to one of them, ‘Run afer Khalid ibn al-Walid [and tell him]
that he must not slay children, serfs, or women.’113 In another hadith
the Prophet says clearly, ‘Do not kill weak old men, small children, or
women.’114
Abu Bakr al-Siddiq, the ﬁrst caliph, gave these instructions to his
armies:
‘I instruct you in ten matters: Do not kill women, children,
the old, or  the inﬁrm; do not cut down fruit-bearing trees;
do not destroy any town; do not kill sheep or camels ex-
cept for the purposes of eating; do not burn date trees or
submerge them; do not steal from the booty and do not be
cowardly’.115

--- Sayfa 106 ---
war and peace in islam
78
Hasan al-Basri, one of the most important and inﬂuential of the
second generation of Muslims, described the following as violations of
the rules of war:
… mutilation (muthla), [imposing] thirst (ghulūl), the kill-
ing of women, children, and the old (shuyukh)—the ones
who have no judgment for themselves (lā ra’yy lahum), and
no ﬁghters among them; [the killing of] monks and hermits,
the burning of trees, and the killing of animals for other than
the welfare [of eating].116
Te principles here are clear. Te Islamic law of war prohibits naked
aggression, the harming of non-combatants, excessive cruelty even in
the case of combatants, and even addresses the rights of animals and the
natural environment.
Question : What is the Status of Non-Muslims under
Islamic Rule?
An integral part of any law of war is the law of peace. It has already been
established that the mere fact of a people being non-Muslim cannot
constitute a legally sanctioned reason to go to war with them, and it thus
follows that there must be a legally sanctioned way of living together
with peoples who are non-Muslim. Mention has already been made of
the possibility and legitimacy of treaties with non-Muslims, even with
pagans who are not enemies and are not planning hostilities. Treaties
can obviously also be made with the People of the Book—a term usually
understood to be Jews and Christians but which in practice has applied
to other religious traditions with which Islam has come into contact, such
as Buddhism, Hinduism, and Zoroastrianism.
In Islamic law the People of the Book who live under the political rule
of Muslims are called ahl al-dhimmah, literally ‘people of protection’, or
ofen simply dhimmī (‘protected person’). Te doctrine of dhimmah is a
natural outgrowth of the verse,
God does not forbid you in regard to those who did not
wage war against you on account of religion and did not ex-
pel you from your homes, that you should treat them kindly
and deal with them justly. Assuredly God loves the just. (Al-
Mumtaḥanah, 60:8)

--- Sayfa 107 ---
79
Jihad and the Islamic Law of War
As mentioned above, that area where Muslims are sovereign and
where Islam provides the law for the rulers is referred to as Dār al-Islām,
usually translated as the Abode of Islam, but sometimes lef untranslated
or referred to, rarely, as Islamdom, to parallel the term Christendom. In
fact, ofen when the term ‘Islam’ is used in Western writings, popular and
scholarly, what is being referred to is in fact Dār al-Islām, which is the
political entity and not the religion itself. Indeed, a population need not
be majority Muslim in order for it to be Dār al-Islām, and a population
may be mostly Muslim without the area they inhabit being a part of Dār
al-Islām.
Broadly speaking, there are two ways in which a given people may be
considered ahl al-dhimmah. In one case, the dhimmis live amongst the
Muslim population and share the same streets, markets, and neighbour-
hoods. In the second case, the dhimmis live in a land which is separate
and where they run most of their own aﬀairs. Tere are naturally degrees
in between these two categories, but these are the two general types.
In the ﬁrst case the dhimmis live under the laws and within the
framework provided by the Islamic state, but with a substantial amount of
autonomy as regards religious and cultural matters, ofen with the power
to adjudicate certain disputes in their own separate system of courts. Tis
was an extremely common arrangement, which began from the time of
the Prophet and the ﬁrst caliphs and continued until the dissolution of
the Ottoman Empire in the twentieth century. Te protected people were
not required to contribute to the military protection of Dār al-Islām, but
they were subject to a poll tax speciﬁc to them, most commonly known
as the jizyah but which had other names as well.
In the second case, there exists an arrangement with the Islamic state
that the dhimmi state will exist in peace with the Islamic state and will not
help or support any enemy of Islam. Examples of this include the Prophet’s
arrangement with the people of Bahrain, who were Zoroastrians, and
with the Christians of Najran. Under such an arrangement, the people
remain completely autonomous and run their own aﬀairs. Tey remain
under the protection of the Islamic state, with no responsibility to provide
active protection in return. Te Islamic state has no right to any of their
wealth or property except for the jizyah. Te following is the text of the
agreement between the Christians of Najran and the Prophet:

--- Sayfa 108 ---
war and peace in islam
80
Najran and their followers are entitled to the protection of
God and to the security of Muhammad the Prophet, the Mes-
senger of God, which security shall involve their persons, re-
ligion, lands, possessions, including those of them who are
absent as well as those who are present, their camels, messen-
gers, and images [amthilah, a reference to crosses and icons].
Te state they previously held shall not be changed, nor shall
any of their religious services or images be changed. No at-
tempt shall be made to turn a bishop, a monk from his oﬃce
as a monk, nor the sexton of a church from his oﬃce.117
Such agreements were commonplace in the early conquests, such as
the agreements that the Muslim commanders made with the Christian
population of Aleppo, Antioch, Ma‘arret Masrin, Homs, Qinnasrin, and
Baalbek. Upon the surrender of Damascus, the general Khalid ibn al-
Walid wrote the following to the inhabitants of the city:
In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful. Tis
is what Khalid ibn al-Walid would grant to the inhabitants
of Damascus, if he enters therein: he promises to give them
security for their lives, property, and churches. Teir city
shall not be demolished, neither shall any Muslim be quar-
tered in their houses. Tereunto we give to them the pact of
God and the protection of his Prophet, the caliphs and the
believers.  So long as they pay the poll tax, nothing but good
shall befall them.118
Perhaps most famous of all is the agreement between ‘Umar ibn al-
Khattab and the people of Jerusalem:
Tis is the assurance of safety (amān) which the servant of
God ‘Umar, the Commander of the Faithful, has granted to
the people of Jerusalem. He has given them an assurance
of safety for themselves, for their property, their churches,
their crosses, the sick and healthy of the city, and for all
the rituals that belong to their religion. Teir churches will
not be inhabited [by Muslims] nor will they be destroyed.
Neither they, nor the land on which they stand, nor their
crosses, nor their property will be damaged. Tey will not be
forcibly converted … Te people of Jerusalem must pay the
poll tax like the people of [other] cities, and they must expel
the Byzantines and the robbers …119
Such agreements also applied to other religions as well. Tis is the

--- Sayfa 109 ---
81
Jihad and the Islamic Law of War
treaty made between the Prophet’s companion Habib ibn Maslamah and
the people of Dabil:
In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful. Tis
is a treaty of Habib ibn Maslamah with the Christians, Mag-
ians [i.e., Zoroastrians], and Jews of Dabil, including those
present and those absent. I have granted for you safety for
your lives, possessions, churches, places of worship, and city
wall. Tus ye are safe and we are bound to fulﬁll our cov-
enant, so long as ye fulﬁl yours and pay the poll tax …120
Te main advantage of the ahl al-dhimmah over Muslims was the
guarantee of their protection without the responsibility to actively
engage in that protection themselves. Tus a dhimmi was not required
to go to war to defend the Islamic state. Te main disadvantage was the
jizyah, a tax which Muslims did not pay.
Dār al-Islām is an Islamic polity ruled by Muslims in accordance with
Islamic law, where the sovereignty and primacy of Muslim power is to
remain undisputed, and the protected peoples live under this arrangement
in a state of mutual agreement, with certain advantages given and others
taken. Under the dhimmi arrangement a protected people is subjected to
Muslim power in terms of political power only, while their identity, their
language, their culture and most importantly their religion remain intact
and under their control. Tis means that aside from paying the jizyah and
obeying the overarching laws applying to people living in Dār al-Islām,
the protected people are lef alone to live their lives as they see ﬁt. Tis
includes the education of their children, the maintenance of their houses
of worship, and even the handling of their own aﬀairs (especially matters
such as marriage, divorce, and inheritance). Under Islamic rule, dhimmis
enjoyed true cultural and religious independence, and were in no way
compelled to adopt the culture or religion of their rulers. Despite their
theological diﬀerences with members of other faiths, Muslims did not
consider the conquered peoples to be fundamentally inferior and in need
of ediﬁcation in order to be truly civilised. Military conquest did not entail
or require the conversion of the conquered people. Islamic law provided
Muslims with a ready-made and legally binding way of dealing with non-
Muslims without robbing them of their selfood, their language, or their
religion.

--- Sayfa 110 ---
war and peace in islam
82
Question : What is the Jizyah, or Poll Tax,
on Non-Muslims?
One source of confusion is the misapplication of the verse … until they
pay the jizyah tribute, readily being subdued (Al-Tawbah, 9:29). A misun-
derstanding similar to the one which aﬀects the Qur’anic verses pertain-
ing to jihad occurs over the phrase wa hum ṣāghirūn, or ‘in a state of
humility, lowness’. That is to say, it is often thought that they pay the
jizyah in a state of humility for being non-Muslims, but the state of
being non-Muslim applies only to the giving of the jizyah, whereas
the state of being humbled is a result of the previous hostility and
enmity exhibited by the group against the Muslim community.
This is not to say that in Islamic history some rulers have not
enforced a kind of humiliation to accompany the paying of the
jizyah by the dhimmi communities, but in doing so they go against
the established precedent and legal opinion. For example, Imam
Nawawi, commenting on those who would impose a humiliation
along with the paying of the jizyah, said, ‘As for this aforementioned
practice (hay’ah), I know of no sound support for it in this respect,
and it is only mentioned by the scholars of Khurasan. The majority
(jumhūr) of scholars say that the jizyah is to be taken with gentle-
ness, as one would receive a debt (dayn). The reliably correct opin-
ion is that this practice is invalid and those who devised it should
be refuted. It is not related that the Prophet or any of the rightly-
guided caliphs did any such thing when collecting the jizyah.121 Ibn
Qudamah also rejected this practice and noted that the Prophet and
the rightly-guided caliphs encouraged the jizyah to be collected with
gentleness and kindness.122
In a letter that ‘Umar ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz sent regarding the jizyah,
he gives the following instructions,
Look to the protected people around you who are old and
weak and who are no longer able to earn a living and pay
them from the treasury of the Muslims such as will do
them good. For indeed I have learned that the Command-
er of the Believers ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab once passed an
old man who was begging at people’s doors. He said, ‘We
have been unfair to you. We used to take jizyah from you

--- Sayfa 111 ---
83
Jihad and the Islamic Law of War
when you were young, then neglected you when you were
old.’ Then he said, ‘Pay him from the treasury of the Mus-
lims such as will do him good.’123
Moreover, the word jizyah itself simply derives from a root
meaning ‘part’, referring to the fact that it is taken as a part of the
wealth of the protected peoples. In fact, the use of the word jizyah is
not even required. The historian al-Tabari relates that some members
of the Christian community asked ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab if they could
refer to the jizyah as ṣadaqah, literally ‘charity’, which he agreed to.
It is also worth noting in this context that in most cases the jizyah
taken was actually less than the zakat, or alms, paid by Muslims,
which the dhimmis were not required to pay since the zakat is a
religious requirement for Muslims only.
Another aspect of the debate over the status of protected peoples
is the practice of requiring protected peoples to dress in some way
that was recognisably distinct from Muslims (such as a sash around
the waist which Muslims would then not be allowed to wear). In
Islamic law such a ruling is the prerogative of the ruler, who may
impose it for reasons of security, order, or for other reasons, though
it is not required by Islamic law. It is worth noting that this practice
was by no means universal and there is no record that the Prophet
himself ever required it.
The classical law governing protected peoples was developed in
a world where religious communities were also political communi-
ties. Some have said that the protected peoples were ‘second-class’
citizens, but this is to assume that all political arrangements can
be compared to the modern nation-state and its concept of ‘citi-
zenship’. Indeed, many of the forms of independence the protected
peoples enjoyed, such as independence of education and having reli-
gious courts, would scarcely be possible in the context of the modern
nation state. In fact, the laws for protected peoples protected the very
same Five Basic Rights (Religion, Life, Mind, Honour, and Property)
which apply for Muslims, and the rights granted to the protected
peoples were generally the most one could expect, short of granting
them total sovereignty, which would negate their connection with
Dār al-Islām in the first place.

--- Sayfa 112 ---
war and peace in islam
84
In previous times Islamic law saw dominance within Dār al-Islām
as the only guarantee for these rights, but the demand for obedience
and deference from the protected people was geared, not towards
some egotistical exaltation of Islam, but towards a just order where
everyone’s rights could be protected without undue advantage being
taken. In the modern context, there is nothing in Islamic law that
would preclude Muslims living as equal citizens in a state run by
a democratically elected government, so long as their fundamental
religious rights were protected.
Question : Does Orthodox Islam Sanction Rebellion
Against Political Authority?
Te relationship of the Muslim believer to those in political power reaches
back to the beginning of Islam, when the Prophet became not only the
spiritual guide of the new community but its political leader as well.
Te question that Muslims have had to wrestle with since then
concerns the legitimacy of political authority. Even though there was
never a separation of church and state in Islam, there has always been,
since the advent of the Umayyad caliphate thirty years afer the death of
the Prophet, a de facto separation of power between the ulama, or schol-
arly class, on the one hand, and the various caliphs, sultans, and kings on
the other. One might call this a separation between court and mosque,
between secretaries and scholars. What connected them was the duty of
the ruler to dispose of the aﬀairs of state in accordance with Islamic law
and not his personal whim, and to do his part in maintaining the reli-
gion. It was the scholars who determined what that law was, and they
functioned in various degrees of independence from the political rulers
throughout most of Islamic history. Tat is to say, the rule of Islam is
not the rule of God directly, nor even the rule of the clerics, but the rule
of law—a law whose form is independent of the ruler whose role it is to
carry it out.
In the context of traditional Islamic law, the question arises as to
when it is permissible or even mandatory to take up arms against political
authority. Spiritual or armed rebellion against the Prophet in the name
of Islam would have been an absurdity, as he was God’s chosen prophet
and ruler and was thus universally acknowledged by anyone who called

--- Sayfa 113 ---
85
Jihad and the Islamic Law of War
himself Muslim. However, afer the Prophet, legitimacy and rebellion
become real questions.
In a situation where a Muslim country is being ruled by a Muslim
according to traditional Islamic law, if a ruler openly declares kufr (‘unbe-
lief’) in a way that is plain and not open to any reasonable doubt, then
traditional Islam holds that it is a duty to rise up against him. Te decla-
ration of kufr must be clear, however. For example, the ruler may openly
deny Islam and the veracity of the Prophet’s claim to being a Messenger
of God. He may openly mock and degrade some fundamental pillar of
religion like the pilgrimage to Mecca or the fasting in Ramadan. He may
also act in a way that conclusively proves his kufr, such as openly worship-
ping an idol. Such words and actions, if not mitigated by other factors,
would constitute proof of the ruler’s state of unbelief.
However, it is crucial to make a distinction, as traditional Islam does,
between apostasy, which is a denial of truth, and sin or even simple error,
which is a failure to live up to it. Tus, rejecting the principle of the ﬁve
daily prayers (which are performed with some variations amongst all
Muslims) constitutes a negation of Islam itself, while being too lazy to
pray is a sin. Mocking and degrading the Prophet is a rejection of Islam,
but calling the mufi a silly fellow is, at worst, a sin. Prostrating before an
idol in worship is a rejection of Islam, but rising when a respected elder
enters the room is religiously neutral or even commendable. In traditional
Islam, the sinner is allowed to respect the law and regret his weakness; by
contrast, the disbeliever disregards the law in order to indulge his weak-
ness. In any ethical system, the ‘should’ or ‘ought’ follows the ‘is’, which
is to say that the truth always precedes and determines moral judgment.
Kufr endangers that truth, and destroys the basis for morality, while sin is
a failure to live up to that truth. Indeed, the very identiﬁcation of an act as
a sin is a kind of aﬃrmation of the truth which that sin fails to live up to.
Having said that, traditional Islam has recognised three ways in
which a ruler may legitimately come to power: (1) through receiving the
allegiance of ahl al-ḥall wa al-‘aqd; (2) by being chosen as a successor
by the previous ruler; (3) or by force, on the condition that this is not
to unseat a legitimate ruler but rather occurs in the absence of one. Ahl
al-ḥall wa al-‘aqd literally means ‘people who untie and bind’ or those
with the authority to contract agreements. In the Islamic context they are

--- Sayfa 114 ---
war and peace in islam
86
those with religious and political authority, namely the ulama and others
who are the de facto representatives of the interests of the people. Imam
al-Nawawi said of political rulers,
‘As for rising up against them and ﬁghting them, this is for-
bidden by the consensus of Muslims, even if they are sin-
ful tyrants (fāsiq, ẓālim) … Te scholars have said that the
reason why one should not separate from him and why it is
forbidden to rise against him is the resulting strife, bloodlet-
ting, and corruption.’124
Tis statement reﬂects the general consensus amongst traditional
scholars, which is based on hadith of the Prophet such as,
‘Afer me there will be rulers (ā’immah, sing. imām) who
will not follow my guidance or practice my Wont (Sunnah).
Among them men will rise with the hearts of devils and the
bodies of men.’ He was asked, ‘What should we do if we en-
counter that?’ He said, ‘Listen and obey their command. Even
if they beat you and take your wealth, listen and obey.’125
In another hadith he was asked, ‘Messenger of God, should we not
oppose him by the sword?’ He said,
‘No, not so long as the Prayer is established among you. If
you see something you hate in your ruler, hate his action,
but do not cease to be obedient.’126
Islamic law does not expound a utopian ideology of a perfect world
order. Te Islamic tradition places paradise in the hereafer, not in this
world, and recognises that it is only within men’s power to maximize
the level of justice in the world while maintaining a balance between
the spiritual and the worldly. In a perfect world, the ruler would be just,
wise, and pious, and would deal fairly with people while doing his part
to protect their spiritual welfare. However, in such cases where a choice
must be made between spiritual well-being and worldly justice, Islam
chooses the former. Man may gain the world and lose paradise, while
a man who gains paradise loses nothing in the ultimate sense. Tus a
tyrant who taxes excessively and unreasonably punishes dissent, while
maintaining the structure and tradition of faith (so long as the Prayer is
established among you), is superior to a ruler who makes the trains run
on time but whose programme uproots the very pillars of faith.

--- Sayfa 115 ---
87
Jihad and the Islamic Law of War
But this perspective is not merely a matter of placing the spirit-
ual over the material. It is based upon a common sense approach that
acknowledges that revolutions ofen bring about a sum total of suﬀering
much greater than the previous order they seek to overturn. Muslims
do not advocate doing nothing in the face of tyranny, but rather believe
that non-violent methods of counsel and protest are ultimately better
ways of improving the existing order. Indeed, Muslim jurists such as
al-Juwayni and al-Ghazali and many, many others have discussed the
conditions under which a ruler could be deposed and replaced by a new
one, and it was typical in Islamic law for this function of replacing an evil
(or insane) ruler to be seen as the role of the ahl al-ḥall wa al-ʿaqd (see
above). Tis is considered diﬀerent from open rebellion by the popula-
tion at large, which would entail not only the replacement of the ruler
but an upheaval aﬀecting the broader society and destroying the order of
that society. In the chapter on ‘Enjoining Right and Forbidding Wrong’
(al-Amr bil-Maʿrūf wa al-Nahy ʿan al-Munkar) in his seminal work
Iḥyāʾ ʿUlūm al-Dīn, al-Ghazali describes the levels of enjoining right and
forbidding wrong: the ﬁrst is the identiﬁcation of a wrong being commit-
ted, followed by friendly counsel and advice for the wrongdoer, beyond
which one can engage in a harsh critique and public protest against the
action, and in the most extreme cases one can resort to physical interven-
tion to stop the wrong, but even in the case of the use of force a distinction
is also to be made between intervening to stop a mugger, for example, and
taking up arms against the sultan. Al-Ghazali states: ‘As for intervening
through force, that is not for subjects to undertake against the sultan,
because it would lead to civil strife (ﬁtnah) and generate harm, and that
to which it would give rise would be worse than the initial diﬃculties.
As for verbal condemnations such as ‘O tyrant!’ or ‘O you who does not
fear God’ and the like, if such words leads to civil strife (ﬁtnah) against
others than this is not permissible, but if one fears only for oneself that is
permissible and indeed commendable.’ He quotes the famous hadith of
the Prophet, ‘Te best struggle (jihad) is a true word spoken in the pres-
ence of a tyrannical ruler’. At the same time, jurists such as al-Mawardi
and others have laid out the ethics of how rulers should deal with those
who oppose them, setting out conditions on what is expected of a ruler
who encounters non-violent resistance, violent rebellion, and situations

--- Sayfa 116 ---
war and peace in islam
88
in between. Such issues are extremely complex, but as a general prin-
ciple force should be used by the ruler against his opponents as a last
resort, when to do otherwise would result in even greater killing, fear,
and harm to the population. If a ruler can bring about a resolution to a
standoﬀ or a conﬂict through persuasion or through addressing griev-
ances then he must do so. Moreover, those who oppose the ruler ‘with an
interpretation’, meaning on the principled basis of their understanding
of what Islam requires, should be treated diﬀerently and more leniently
than those who destabilise the existing order simply for personal gain and
whose legal status would be that of a bandit or highwayman.
Tere is no doubt that some forms of tyranny impose upon the popu-
lation a state of fear, suﬀering, and death that is so extreme that such a
tyranny constitutes that very state of civil strife (ﬁtnah) and social disin-
tegration or ‘corruption in the land’(al-fasād ﬁ al-arḍ) which Islamic law
seeks to avoid by discouraging precipitous revolution or open rebellion.
In cases where there is already so much killing and mayhem that the
conditions are already as bad as that of a civil war or even lawlessness, and
where peaceful means such as counsel and protest have been exhausted
(according to the traditional Islamic ethical principle of ‘enjoining right
and forbidding wrong’), and where the ahl al-ḥall wa al-ʿaqd cannot or
will not intervene, then rebellion may be the only option. Also, some
jurists (such as ʿAbd Allah bin Bayyah and ʿAli Gomaa) have distin-
guished between starting a rebellion on the one hand and joining in one
that is already underway on the other; the initiator bears responsibility for
whatever follows, but in the case of an already ongoing civil war one may
have to choose a side so that justice and order can be established and the
conﬂict and instability can come to an end.
Muslims are expected to resist a ruler insofar as he commands them
to go against the shari‘ah; for example, a Muslim should not obey a
command to refrain from praying the ﬁve canonical prayers. But this is
not the same as rebelling against a ruler who himself does not completely
enact the shari‘ah, especially since Islamic law allows Muslims to live in
a society in which Islamic law is not sovereign so long as their own reli-
gious rights are not violated. Tose who advocate the overthrow of a ruler
who does not rule in accordance with their view of the shari‘ah are a
tiny minority within Islamic law. Tey ofen make a compound error:

--- Sayfa 117 ---
89
Jihad and the Islamic Law of War
ﬁrst they accept only their own vision of Islamic law, then they consider
deviation from this vision to be a sin, and then they conﬂate this sin with
unbelief, thus making the ruler subject to rebellion.
It should also be noted that some have engaged in guilt by associa-
tion or ‘unbelief (kufr) by association’ to the absurd and vicious degree
that employees of the state, and people who simply pay taxes, are consid-
ered to be complicit in the crimes of that state. Others have even gone
so far as to say that anyone who merely lives in a society which does not
conform to their vision of Islamic law is guilty of kufr (unbelief), since
they passively accept it instead of actively ﬁghting against it. Tere is no
basis for this in Islamic law whatsoever.
Question : How Does the Islamic Law of War
Come to be Violated?
Islam is the second largest religion in the world and in history afer
Christianity. It is also today the world’s fastest growing religion, with
1.6 billion adherents all over the world. As of 2007 CE, some 25 percent
or so of the world’s population is Muslim. Tere were, historically, three
main doctrinal and juridical branches of the religion: Sunni, Shi‘ite and
Khawarij. Currently (2007 CE) approximately 90 percent of all Muslims
are Sunni, 9% are Shi‘a, and less than 1 percent are Ibadi. Te Sunnis
(which include the Suﬁs or Mystics) are mostly followers of the four
recognised schools (Hanaﬁ, Maliki, Shaﬁ‘i and Hanbali) of law, and a
minority are Salaﬁ/Wahhabi, who historically arose from one of the four
schools (the Hanbali), but today are Sunnis who sometimes follow their
own interpretations outside of the ‘four schools’. Amongst the Shi‘ites,
the Ja‘faris or Ithna ‘ashari (‘Twelver’) are the biggest group, followed by
the Zaydis and the Isma‘ilis. Te Ibadis are descended from the original
community of Khawarij, but the original radical Khawarij died out and
were replaced by today’s moderate Ibadis.
Aside from Islam’s doctrinal and juridical divisions, a typical under-
standing of the spectrum in Islam, even within the Islamic world itself,
places the fundamentalists on one side and the modernists on the other. Te
modernists are seen as open-minded, tolerant, peace-loving, and respect-
ful of human rights. Te fundamentalists are seen as fanatical, warlike,
obscurantist, backwards, and tyrannical. Above all, from the Western

--- Sayfa 118 ---
war and peace in islam
90
point of view the modernists are ‘like us’ and hence are not threatening,
while the fundamentalists are inherently dangerous and diﬀerent.
In fact, a more helpful and accurate description of the spectrum
of the world’s Muslims would be the following ﬁve categories, from
extreme secularism on one end to extreme sectarianism on the other.
Understanding the diﬀerences is crucial to understanding jihad and the
law of war.
secular fundamentalists: A complete rejection of Islam as a
substantial force in guiding society. At a maximum, religion is a private
aﬀair, and should have nothing to say about human relations. Islamic
civilisation is something to be lef behind, while modern Western civili-
sation is to be emulated, to the extent possible.
modernists and modern secularists: Islam must adjust and
change and learn the lessons of modernity; apologists holding that faith
is valuable as a guide to ethics, but Islamic teachings should ‘change
with the times’. Te values of the modern West are generally seen as the
‘norm’ to which the Islamic world should adjust itself.
traditionalists: Islam is the source of meaning and guidance for
the inward and outward life. Islamic civilisation is a source and treasure
of intellectual, spiritual, and artistic nourishment. Loyalty to this tradi-
tion in no way precludes living sensibly and justly in the today’s world,
and indeed the tradition oﬀers considerable ﬂexibility in terms of forms
of government and is a guarantor of basic rights.
puritanical literalists: (Usually referred to as ‘religious
fundamentalists’ or ‘Islamists’). Both traditional Islamic civilisation and
secular ideologies are failures. Muslims must pass over most of the civi-
lisation and tradition afer the ﬁrst century or two afer the Prophet.
Te state created by the Prophet and his successors was a golden age,
and Muslims must duplicate it to the extent possible. Society must be
cleansed of those elements which are ‘innovations’ from the pure state
of the early Muslim community.
takfiris: (Sometimes called ‘jihadists’ or ‘militant religious funda-
mentalists’). Tose who do not follow true Islamic teaching (as deﬁned
by them) are no longer actually Muslim and fall outside of the protec-
tion of the law. Most self-identiﬁed Muslims and all non-Muslims are
legitimate targets of violence, because they stand in the way of a very

--- Sayfa 119 ---
91
Jihad and the Islamic Law of War
narrowly deﬁned vision of Islam. Takfīr means ‘to declare another to be
an unbeliever/apostate’. Tere are now both Sunni and Shi‘ite takﬁris—
or rather, some takﬁris consider themselves to be Sunnis and others
consider themselves to be Shi‘ites.
In reality the modernists and the puritanical literalists (the ‘funda-
mentalists’) represent only a small percentage of the population of the
Muslim world, perhaps less than 10 percent combined. Te majority
of people—90 percent—in the Islamic world fall within a range which
should be called ‘traditional’ and which itself encompasses a certain
range of religiosity, but which is neither a complete aﬃrmation of the
post-religious values which are so powerful today, nor of the religious
extremism of the fundamentalists. Te takﬁris and the secular funda-
mentalists represent a still smaller sliver of the world’s Muslim popula-
tion. All told, there are no more than 150,000 militant takﬁris (includ-
ing both the Sunni and ‘Shi‘ite strands) worldwide. Tese are thus less
than one hundredth of one percent of all Muslims (that is, less than
0.01 percent), or less than one in every ten thousand Muslims. Secular
fundamentalism also usually has little traction with the general popula-
tion and is—paradoxically—limited to small rebel groups, such as the
Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) in Turkey and the Mujahedin-e khalq
(MEK) in Iran, and various establishment elites in a small number of
Muslim countries.
Tat which we call ‘fundamentalism’ today (puritanical literalism)
has several salient characteristics vis-à-vis traditional Islam. First, puri-
tanical literalists generally ignore or explicitly reject most of the classical
learned tradition of jurists and theologians, and limit themselves to their
own interpretation of the Qur’an, the Hadith, and the ﬁrst three genera-
tions of Muslims, which they take as authoritative (as do all Muslims).
Second, they ignore or reject most of the philosophy, mysticism, and
artistic production of Islamic civilisation. Tis results in a kind of anti-
intellectualism and in a dry literalism. Tird, they view religion almost
entirely as a project of social engineering combined with a rigid obedien-
tialism. Religion is thus reduced to a system of commands and prohibi-
tions, with an excessive emphasis on outward conformity. Even worse,
ofen these ideas are little more than a theological veneer for a crude
ethnic chauvinism which seeks to universalise a tribal culture.

--- Sayfa 120 ---
war and peace in islam
92
Te modernists, for their part, generally share with the fundamen-
talists an aversion to the spiritual, artistic, and intellectual accomplish-
ments of Islamic civilisation, and have an undiscerning ‘West is best’
approach to Islamic reform. Yet they both readily celebrate Islam’s
advances in science in technology and readily accept any modern tech-
nological innovation the West has to oﬀer. Tese shared characteristics
can be explained in light of the fact that both modernism and fundamen-
talism, in the Islamic world, are largely responses to the loss of power to
the West over the last two hundred years. Tus, both modernism and
fundamentalism blame traditional Islam for this failure, and both seek
to re-establish the balance. Te modernists hope to accomplish this by
imitating their conquerors, while the fundamentalists hope to emulate
the successes of the ﬁrst generations of Muslims.
Te secular fundamentalists and the takﬁris, at the two extremes, are
both intrinsically utopian in their outlook, the former striving to create
a yet unseen paradise on earth while the latter hope to emulate a once
realised golden age.
Falling into the fatal trap of any utopian ideology, both the secular
and religious fundamentalists invert the traditional priorities and subju-
gate all values to the attainment of utopia. Robespierre’s notorious state-
ment, ‘You cannot make an omelette without breaking eggs’ enshrines
the notion that the perfect world—here on earth—justiﬁes any crime,
and describes the authoritarian approach of these two extremes to the
rest of the world. Tus, the bombing of innocent Muslims by a Muslim
or non-Muslim state can be justiﬁed in the name of democracy and free-
dom (or in another context the liberation of the world’s workers, or the
ascendancy of the Arian race) which means that some are chosen to die
so that the rest may live ‘in freedom’. Also, the bombing of innocent
Muslims by non-state actors can be justiﬁed because they stand in the
way of establishing an ‘Islamic state’, or, in a perverted twist of spiritual
logic, the killing of innocent Muslims in a terrorist attack is not really
a crime because they will go to paradise as a result of being innocent
victims in an attack justiﬁed by its ends.
Neither secular fundamentalists nor their religious counterparts
can reasonably claim an ultimate set of values by which to act, despite
appearances to the contrary. When one can justify any act in the name of

--- Sayfa 121 ---
93
Jihad and the Islamic Law of War
a worldly utopia then one has passed into pure utilitarianism. Tis utili-
tarianism allows the secular fundamentalist to declare, without a hint of
irony, that freedom (the lives of some) must be sacriﬁced for the sake of
freedom (the liberty of others). It also allows the religious fundamental-
ist to assert, with the same obtuseness, that justice must be suspended
(by taking innocent life) in order to preserve justice (the protection of
innocent life).
What does all this mean for the law of war? In Islamic history, the
law of war, though based on the Qur’an and the life of the Prophet,
was constantly adapted to deal with new situations. Was it permissible
to use ﬁre as a part of a catapult weapon? What does one do in case of
civilians inside of a citadel under attack? What constitutes the violation
of a treaty? Questions such as these were always asked and answered in
the context of the greater law, which was governed by immutable moral
principles. Tis law, moreover, grew and was nurtured in an environ-
ment of spirituality, beauty, and the accumulated wisdom of the centu-
ries beginning with the Prophet and continuing generation afer genera-
tion. Islamic civilisation grew more experienced and sophisticated, and
individuals lived in a world where tradition was alive, and the experience
(and mistakes) of the past were always available to learn from.
Tough the modernists and puritanical literalists do not necessar-
ily espouse the unjust use of violence (and indeed, the vast majority
of modernists and ‘fundamentalists’ are explicitly non-violent in their
methods), their belief system removes the safeguards provided by
centuries of tradition by rejecting that tradition or treating it as irrele-
vant. Even though Islamic law declares attacks against non-combatants,
forced conversion and naked aggression to be illegal, life within tradi-
tional Islamic civilisation, with its integrated spirituality and nobility,
would have made them generally unthinkable as well.
Te case of Osama bin Laden’s fatwa ordering Muslims to kill both
soldiers and civilians is illustrative of the problems involved. Bin Laden
was trained as a civil engineer, not an authority in Islamic law, and it
takes little investigation to uncover that his interpretations of Islamic
law are uninformed and self-serving. He can only draw the conclusions
he draws by utterly ignoring everything Islamic law has had to say about
such questions. Using Bin Laden’s takﬁri cut-and-paste method, one can

--- Sayfa 122 ---
war and peace in islam
94
make the Qur’an and Hadith say anything at all. Tat every top author-
ity on Islamic law in the world rejects both Bin Laden’s conclusions and
his temerity in declaring a fatwa is, lamentably, ofen never mentioned
in the West.
But such condemnation is not necessarily a problem for Bin Laden
and his compatriots, because they never felt obligated to pay attention
to traditional Islamic law in the ﬁrst place. Ostensibly they claim to be
following the Qur’an and the teachings of the Prophet, but their method
amounts to a cherry-picking of sources to arrive at a conclusion that was
decided beforehand. It is misleading to present Bin Laden, and others
like him, as men steeped in their religious tradition who take Islam’s
teachings to their logical conclusions. For all the talk about ‘madra-
sahs’, which is simply the word for ‘schools’, it is important to note that
the terrorists who claim to ﬁght in the name of Islam today are almost
entirely men educated in medicine, engineering, mathematics, computer
science, etc. It is striking how absent graduates of recognised madrasahs
or Islamic seminaries (such as Al-Azhar in Egypt) are among the ranks
of the terrorists. It is not diﬃcult to understand why: anyone who is
exposed to the established traditional law could never, with honesty and
good conscience, conclude that non-combatants are legitimate targets,
or that other Muslims become unbelievers through mere disagreement
with a certain interpretation of Islam.
Indeed, being steeped in the tradition of Islamic law is the best inocu-
lation against the illegal use of force. Traditional Islam would not, and
does not, recognise a civil engineer (Bin Laden) or a physician (Ayman
al-Zawahiri) as competent to decide the rules of combat. Tose who
follow them do so for other reasons, or are much misled as to the ortho-
doxy of their leaders. Unburdened by precedent, whether through igno-
rance or disavowal, these rebellious upstarts are free to pursue their goals
unrestrained by morality or justice. Tis is the sad legacy of both modern-
ism and puritanical literalism: in seeking to reform Islam, they throw the
baby out with the bath water, losing the natural checks against aggression
and injustice in the process of jettisoning those aspects of the tradition
they ﬁnd unhelpful to their projects. Tough not advocating such abuses
themselves, the modernists and puritanical literalists leave the door open
to the violation of basic human rights at the hands of the takﬁris and the

--- Sayfa 123 ---
95
Jihad and the Islamic Law of War
secular fundamentalists. Modernism did not create Hitler, but it removed
the barriers, religious and cultural, which would have made his rise an
impossibility. Similarly, puritanical literalism did not create Bin Laden,
but it weakened the immune system, as it were, of Islamic society, leaving
some within it susceptible to the contagion of takﬁrism.
By marginalising traditional, mainstream Islam, one does not wipe
out the poison. One loses the antidote.
Conclusion
As with any religion or system of law, when it comes to the Islamic
law of war there is a gap between the ideal and its application in the
world. It is possible to sif through the long history of war and peace
in Islamic civilisation and ﬁnd examples where political powers and
even religious scholars have acted and espoused views which are anti-
thetical to the spirit and letter of the teachings of Islam regarding war
and peace outlined above. Indeed, it has happened that Muslims have
created situations amounting to forced conversion, or killed innocents
in battle, or treated the members of other religions with contempt
and cruelty. Yet there is an important diﬀerence between the ﬂouting
of high ideal and the institution of a vicious teaching. If abuses have
occurred in the application of the Islamic laws of war, these exist in
spite of those teachings, not because of them. Moreover, a fair reading
of Islamic history will show that in the majority of cases the Islamic law
of war—with its principles of justice, sparing of innocents, and ideal-
isation of peace—were largely held to, and very ofen the conduct of
Muslims in war exhibited the highest standards of chivalry and nobility.
Moving forward from the time of the Prophet and companions to
the Crusades, we observe the ﬁgure of Salah al-Din al-Ayyubi, known
to the West as Saladin, a ﬁgure of almost proverbial gallantry in battle
and kindness in victory. Te reconquest of Jerusalem by Saladin was
as memorable for its mercy as was the initial Christian conquest for its
brutality, mirroring the mercy the Prophet showed to his enemies when
he entered victorious into Mecca near the end of his life. But one need
not go so far back in history to ﬁnd such examples. In the colonial era
several Muslim resistance movements distinguished themselves by their
high standards of conduct in their opposition to European aggression.

--- Sayfa 124 ---
war and peace in islam
96
Among them were Imam Shamil (d.1871), the ‘Lion of Daghestan’, in
his thirty year war against Russian domination, and Emir ‘Abd al-Qadir
al-Jaza’iri (d.1883), in his battle against French imperialism. Both men
were distinguished scholars of Islam and spiritual leaders, in addition to
being almost legendary military commanders. Steeped in the legal and
spiritual tradition of Islam, these heroes won the grudging admiration
of their enemies. Emir ‘Abd al-Qadir, having fought the French for so
many years, risked his life defending the Christians of Damascus, and
made no distinction between his defence of Algerian Muslims and his
protection of the Christians of Damascus against his fellow Muslims. For
these warriors, their wise courage and stern compassion were necessary
outgrowths of the Qur’an and the teachings of the Prophet. Tey would
not have recognised the Islamic principles of combat they so steadfastly
followed were they to witness some of the aberrations of the modern age.
In Islamic law, the ends do not justify the means, and justice is not
predicated on creating a paradise on earth, whether that paradise is an
imagined future or a recaptured past. Te Islamic law of war has ofen
come to be ignored, sadly, in the name of a totalitarian mindset which seeks
to crush everything in its path for the sake of achieving its ultimate ends.
According to such a view, compassion, nobility, beauty, and fairness are
all to be sacriﬁced and then somehow recaptured later when the ﬁghting
ends. In this respect, the utopian rebels of today—whatever their religion
or ideology—have much more in common with Lenin than with Saladin.
If we have not dwelt on historical battles or the minutiae of legal
discussions through the centuries it is because the principles are so clear,
even self-evident. Te rules of war and peace in Islam can be distilled into
three principles: (1) Non-combatants are not legitimate targets, and as we
have seen this not only includes women, children, and the elderly but also
animals and the natural environment. (2) Te fact of someone’s being
non-Muslim does not make them a legitimate target of attack. Te Islamic
conquests were political in nature, and large areas under Muslim rule
remained non-Muslim for centuries. Te agreements cited above show
that the Muslims’ intention was never to convert by force. (3) Muslims
are expected to live in peace with their neighbours whenever possible, and
must respect treaties, but this never precludes the right to pre-emptive
or responsive self-defence. Indeed, fourteen centuries ago Islam drew a

--- Sayfa 125 ---
97
Jihad and the Islamic Law of War
line between pre-emption and aggression, allowing the former (as in the
Prophet’s campaigns at Khaybar and Mu’tah) and condemning the latter
(And ﬁght in the way of God with those who ﬁght against you, but aggress
not; God loves not the aggressors (Al-Baqarah, 2:190). In sum, God asks
neither that Muslims be belligerent nor that they be paciﬁst. Rather, they
must love peace but resort to force when the cause is just.
FURTHER READING (IN ENGLISH)
David Dakake, ‘The Myth of a Militant Islam’, in Joseph Lumbard, ed.,
Islam, Fundamentalism, and the Betrayal of Tradition (Bloomington,
Indiana: World Wisdom, 2004), pp.3–37. Discusses the Bin Laden
fatwa, the nature of authority in Islam, and the laws of jihad.
Khaled M. Abou El Fadl, The Great Theft: Wrestling Islam from
the Extremists (HarperCollins, 2005). Valuable for its discussion of
puritanical literalism versus traditional law.
Mohammad Hashim Kamali, Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence
(Islamic Texts Society, 2005). One of the most complete and acces-
sible introductions to Islamic law. Also valuable for its discussion
of the ‘sword verse’ (pp. 223–5).
Reza Shah Kazemi, ‘Recollecting the Spirit of Jihad’, in
Joseph Lumbard, ed., Islam, Fundamentalism, and the Betrayal of
Tradition (Bloomington, Indiana: World Wisdom, 2004), pp.121–
42: Addresses the spiritual dimensions of jihad and the case of Emir
‘Abd al-Qadir’s resistance against the French and his protection of
Syrian Christians.
Vincenzo Oliveti, ‘The Myth of ‘the Myth of a Moderate Islam’,
in Islamica Magazine, no.15 (2006). An excellent treatment of
common allegations of Islamic endemic violence.
Rudolph Peters, Jihad in Classical and Modern Islam: A Reader
(Princeton, 1996). A sampling of some classical and contemporary
treatises pertaining to jihad.
FURTHER READING (IN ARABIC)
Abdullah Bin Bayyah, Al-Irhāb, Al-Tashkhis wa’l-hulul.  A discus-
sion of terrorism. See also: www.binbayyah.net
Muhammad
Sa‘id
Ramadan
al-Buti,
Al-Jihad
fi’l-Islam
(Damascus: Dar al-Fikr, 2005): An excellent overall discussion of the
issues pertaining to jihad, from an eminent scholar and recognised

--- Sayfa 126 ---
war and peace in islam
98
authority, including the laws of war, protected peoples, political
rebellion, preaching Islam (da‘wah), treaties, and forced conversion.
Ali Gomaa, Questions and Answers on Jihad in Islam (Egypt:
Supreme Council for Islamic Affairs, n.d.).
Originally published by the Royal Aal al-Bayt Institute for Islamic
Thought as a booklet in 2007. The author wishes to state that his
views have developed further since writing this essay.

--- Sayfa 127 ---
99
chapter four
THE MYTH OF A MILITANT ISLAM
Dr David Dakake
In the post-September 11th environment there is an urgent need for a
clear enunciation of the views of traditional Islam in regard to jihad,
so-called holy war. Te ﬁrst matter which needs to be made clear is that
jihad is not simply ﬁghting or holy warfare. In Arabic, jihad literally
means ‘eﬀort’, that is, to exert oneself in some way or another. Within the
context of Islam, jihad has the meaning of exerting oneself for the sake of
God, and this exertion can be in an inﬁnite number of ways, from giving
charity and feeding the poor, to concentrating intently in one’s prayers,
to controlling one’s self and showing patience and forgiveness in the
face of oﬀences, to gaining authentic knowledge, to physical ﬁghting to
stop oppression and injustice. Generally speaking, anything that requires
something of us—that is, that requires that we go beyond the conﬁnes of
our individual ego and desires—or anything that we bear with or strive
afer for the sake of pleasing God can be spoken of as a jihad in Islam.127
Tis understanding of jihad is such that when the ‘ﬁve pillars’128 of the
faith are taught, jihad is sometimes classiﬁed as a ‘sixth pillar’ which
pervades the other ﬁve, representing an attitude or intention that should
be present in whatever one does for the sake of God.
Tis being said, there is no doubt that jihad has an important martial
aspect. To understand this we should remember that within the Islamic
tradition the term jihad has been understood to possess two poles: an
outward pole and an inward pole. Tese two poles are illustrated in the
words of the Prophet of Islam when he said to his companions, afer
they had returned from a military campaign in defense of the Medinan
community: ‘We have returned from the lesser (aṣghar) jihad to the
greater (akbar) jihad.’129 Here the lesser jihad refers to physical ﬁghting,

--- Sayfa 128 ---
war and peace in islam
100
whereas having come back to the relative physical safety of their city
of Medina, the Muslims faced yet a greater jihad—namely, the struggle
against the passionate, carnal soul that constantly seeks its own self-
satisfaction above all else, being forgetful of God. Tis famous saying of
the Prophet emphasises the hierarchy of the two types of jihad, as well
as the essential balance that must be maintained between its outward
and inward forms,130 a balance ofen neglected in the approach of
certain modern Islamic groups that seek to reform people and society
from without, forcing change in the outward behaviour of men and
women without ﬁrst bringing about a sincere change in their hearts
and minds. Tis is the lesson of the words of the Qur’an when God
says, We never change the state of a people until they change themselves
(Al-Ra‘d, 13:11).131 Tis lesson, as we shall see when we examine the
earliest military jihad, was not lost on the ﬁrst Muslims.
In the present crisis, the pronouncements of many self-styled
Middle East ‘experts’ and Muslim ‘authorities’ who have dealt with
the subject of jihad have generally been of two kinds. Tere have been
those who have sought, in a sense, to brush aside the whole issue and
history of military jihad in Islam in favour of a purely spiritualised
notion of ‘striving’ in the way of God, and there have been those,
both Muslim and non-Muslim, who have provided literal or surface
readings of Qur’anic verses related to jihad and ‘ﬁghting’ (qitāl) in an
attempt to reduce all of Islam to military jihad.132 Te ﬁrst view repre-
sents an apologetic attitude that attempts to satisfy Western notions
of non-violence and political correctness but, in so doing, provides an
‘understanding’ that lacks any real relationship to the thought of the
majority of Muslim peoples throughout Islamic history. Te second
view, which would make Islam synonymous with warfare, is the result
either of sheer ignorance or of political agendas that are served by
the perpetuation of animosity between peoples. Tis second position
ignores entirely the commentary and analysis of the Islamic intellec-
tual tradition that has served for over one thousand years as a key for
Muslims to understand Qur’anic pronouncements related to jihad. In
this essay we will neither water down the analysis of jihad to suit those
modernists who oppose any notions of legitimate religious struggle
and conﬂict, nor disregard, as do the ‘fundamentalists’, the intellec-

--- Sayfa 129 ---
101
Te Myth of a Militant Islam
tual and spiritual heritage of Islam which has deﬁned for traditional
Muslims the validity, but also the limitations, of the lesser jihad.
In carrying out this study we propose to examine those verses of
the Qur’an that deal with ﬁghting, as well as those which deﬁne those
who are to be fought against in jihad. We will also provide, along
with this textual analysis of Qur’anic doctrines of war, an historical
analysis of the actual forms of the earliest jihad and the conduct of
the mujāhidūn, the ﬁghters of jihad, as exempliﬁed by the Prophet of
Islam and his successors, the Rightly-guided Caliphs, given that their
actions have served for Muslims as an indispensable example to clarify
Qur’anic pronouncements.133 In this way, we hope to avoid both the
etherialisation of jihad by Muslim apologists, and the distortion of the
tradition at the hands of the fundamentalists. Lastly, we will examine
fundamentalist interpretations of jihad and compare them with the
traditional understanding of jihad in the early Qur’anic commentaries
and the actual history of Islam.
‘Do Not Take Christians and Jews as Awliy’
Following the events of September 11th there is one verse of the Qur’an
which has ofen been quoted by radio announcers, talk show hosts, and
fundamentalists in both the East and the West. Before we deal with the
actual issue of warfare or military jihad, it is necessary to say something
about this verse which, if not understood correctly, can bias any further
examination. Tis verse appears in chapter 5, verse 51 of the Qur’an:
O, you who believe [in the message of Muḥammad], do
not take Jews and Christians as awliyā’. Tey are awliyā’ to
one another, and the one among you who turns to them is
of them. Truly, God does not guide wrongdoing folk. (Al-
Mā’idah, 5:51)
Te word awliyā’ (sing. walī), which we lef above in the original
Arabic, has been commonly translated into English as ‘friends’.134 Given
this translation, the verse appears to be a very clear statement opposing
what we might term ‘normative’ or ‘kindly relations’ between Muslims
and non-Muslims; but when we look at the traditional Qur’anic
commentaries of medieval times, which discuss the events surrounding
the revelation of this verse, the modern translation becomes suspect.

--- Sayfa 130 ---
war and peace in islam
102
But before examining this issue in depth, it is necessary to clarify the
importance of verse context in the Qur’an. Here a comparison between
the Biblical text and the Qur’an is helpful.
Comparing the Bible and the Qur’an, we can use certain images
to illustrate some of the major stylistic diﬀerences between the two
sacred scriptures. We could say, for example, that the Bible is like a
ﬂowing stream; when one reads the text there is a constant contextu-
alisation of the various verses, stories, chapters, and books. One begins
reading with the story of Genesis, the creation of the world and the
ﬁrst man and woman, and then proceeds on through time, moving
into the stories of the early patriarchs, then the later Hebrew judges
and prophets, the coming of Christ, the post-Jesus community of the
apostles, and ﬁnally the end of the world in the Book of Revelation. As
one reads the Bible there is a historical context established for each of
the major stories and events which enables the reader to situate what is
being said within time and space, and indeed priority. Te orientation
of events as related to the chapters and verses is made explicit through
the historical ﬂow of the stories and, in the case of the New Testament,
the eventual culmination of the text and all history.
In contrast, if we were to use an image to illustrate the Qur’anic
revelation, it would be that of an individual standing upon a moun-
tain at night as lightning ﬂashes on him and in a valley below.135 As
this individual looks out upon the landscape shrouded in darkness, he
would see sudden ﬂashes, sudden illuminations of diﬀerent portions
of the mountain and the valley, but there would not appear to be any
immediate relationship between these diﬀerent illuminated regions,
surrounded as they were by vast shadows. Of course, a relationship
does exist between the diﬀerent areas illuminated by the lightning, but
that relationship is not explicit. It is hidden amid the darkness. Tis is
something like the situation that is faced by the reader upon ﬁrst exam-
ining the Qur’an. One will ofen read sections of the text and wonder
what is the relationship between the various pronouncements that one
encounters, for the Qur’an does not tell ‘stories’ as the Western reader
is accustomed to from the Biblical tradition. In fact, there is only one
full-length story in the Qur’anic text, in the chapter on the prophet
Joseph. Te rest of the Qur’an is a series of verses grouped into chap-

--- Sayfa 131 ---
103
Te Myth of a Militant Islam
ters and sections, and ofen two verses right next to one another will
actually refer to two completely diﬀerent events in the life of the early
Islamic community. It is for this reason that the Qur’anic commentary
tradition (tafsīr) deals so extensively with what is known in Arabic as
asbāb al-nuzūl, or the occasions for God revealing particular Qur’anic
verses. Without reference to these occasions of revelation most of the
verses of the Qur’an would be susceptible to any and all forms of inter-
pretation. Tis issue of the need for knowledge of the commentary
tradition is, of course, further complicated—for those unable to read
the original Arabic text—by translations, which ofen add yet another
layer of diﬃculty for coming to terms with the meaning of the verses.
When we examine verse 5:51, we encounter both these problems of
context and translation.
Te diﬃculties in understanding verse 5:51 begin with the transla-
tion of the Arabic word awliyā’, commonly rendered as ‘friends’. In
the context of this verse, the word awliyā’ does not mean friends at
all, as we use the term in English, and we know this from examining
the occasion for its revelation. While it is true that awliyā’ can mean
friends, it has additional meanings such as ‘guardians’, ‘protectors’ and
even ‘legal guardians’. When we consult the traditional commentaries
on the Qur’an, we are told that this verse was revealed at a particularly
delicate moment in the life of the early Muslim community. To under-
stand this verse it is thus necessary to explain the existential situation
of the Muslims at this time in Arabia.
Before Al-Mā’idah, 5:51 was revealed, the Prophet of Islam and the
Muslims had only recently migrated as a community from Mecca to
Medina, some 400 kilometres to the north. Tey had done so, accord-
ing to Islamic histories, due to the persecution to which they were
subjected at the hands of their fellow tribesmen and relatives in Mecca.
Most Meccans worshipped many idols as gods and feared the rising
interest in the message of Muhammad U within the city, even though
he was himself a son of Mecca. Te Meccans feared the growing pres-
ence of the Muslims amongst them because the Muslims claimed that
there was only one true God, who had no physical image, and who
required of men virtue, generosity, and fair and kind treatment of the
weaker members of society. Tis simple message, in fact, threatened to

--- Sayfa 132 ---
war and peace in islam
104
overturn the order of Meccan society, based as it was upon the worship
of multiple gods and the privilege of the strong and the wealthy. It also
threatened to disrupt the economic beneﬁts of this privilege, the annual
pilgrimage season, when peoples from all over Arabia would come to
worship their many idols/gods at the Ka‘bah—a cubical structure which
the Qur’an claims was originally built by Abraham and his son Ishmael
as a temple to the one God, before the decadence of religion in Arabia.136
Te message of Islam threatened to replace the social and economic
system of Meccan polytheism with the worship of the one God, Who—
as in the stories of the Old Testament—would not allow that others be
worshiped alongside Him. In this diﬃcult environment the Prophet of
Islam peacefully preached the message of monotheism and virtue, but
he and his small band of followers were eventually driven from the city
by torture, embargo, threats of assassination, and various other forms
of humiliation and abuse. Te Muslims then migrated to Medina where
the Prophet had been invited to come and live in safety with his follow-
ers and where the main Arab tribes of the city had willingly accepted
his message and authority.
According to one of the earliest and most famous Qur’anic commen-
tators, al-Tabari (225–310 AH/839–923 CE), it was not long afer this
migration to Medina that verse 5:51 was revealed. Speciﬁcally, al-Tabari
tells us that this verse came down around the time of the battle of Badr
(2 AH/623 CE) or perhaps afer the battle of Uhud (3 AH/625 CE).137 In
these early days the Muslim community constituted no more than a few
hundred people and had already lef the city of Mecca; yet the Meccans
continued to attempt to confront them militarily, and these two early
battles, as well as others, were crucial events in the history of the early
Islamic community. Militarily, the Meccans were a far more powerful
force than the Muslims and they had allies throughout Arabia. Given
the small numbers of Muslims, the Prophet and his ﬂedgling commu-
nity faced the real possibility of utter annihilation should they lose any
of these early conﬂicts. Al-Tabari tells us that within this highly charged
environment some members of the Muslim community wanted to make
individual alliances with other non-Muslim tribes in the region. Within
Medina there were Jewish tribes who constituted a powerful presence
in the town and who were on good terms with the Meccans, and to the

--- Sayfa 133 ---
105
Te Myth of a Militant Islam
north of the city there were also Christian Arab tribes. Some Muslims
saw the possibility of making alliances with one or more of these groups
as a way of guaranteeing their own survival should the Meccan armies
ultimately triumph. Tis was the stark reality of Arabia at that time; it
was only through the protection of one’s tribe or alliances with other
tribes or clans that one’s individual security was insured.
From the perspective of Islam, however, the Prophet realised
that a young community, faced with great peril, could not allow such
dissension in the ranks of the faithful as would be created by various
individuals making bonds of loyalty with other groups not committed
to the Islamic message. Indeed, from the Islamic point of view such
actions, had they been allowed, would have been a kind of communal
suicide that would have seriously undermined Muslim unity, broken
the morale of the community (ummah), and perhaps caused the many
individuals making such alliances to lack fortitude in the face of danger.
Bearing these historical issues in mind, it becomes obvious that the
translation of awliyā’ as ‘friends’ is incorrect. It should be rendered,
in accord with another of its traditional Arabic meanings, as ‘protec-
tors’ or ‘guardians’ in the strict military sense of these terms. Te verse
should be read as, Do not take Christians and Jews as your protectors.
Tey are protectors to one another…. Tis is the true message of the
verse, and the appropriateness of this understanding is supported by the
fact that the Qur’an does not oppose simple kindness between peoples,
as is clear from verse Al-Mumtaḥanah, 60:8, to which we shall now turn.
‘To Deal Kindly and Justly’
Verse 60:8 says, God does not forbid that you should deal kindly and justly
with those who do not ﬁght you for the sake of [your] religion or drive you
out of your homes. Truly, God loves those who are just (Al-Mumtaḥanah,
60:8). Al-Tabari tells us that this verse was revealed on the occasion of
an incident involving the half-sister of one of the Prophet’s wives.138
According to him, Asma’ bint Abi Bakr, who was a Muslim living in
Medina, received some gifs from her mother, Qutaylah, who lived in
Mecca. Qutaylah had refused to convert to Islam and continued to prac-
tice the idolatrous ways of the Meccans. Asma’ said, upon receiving the
gifs, that she would not accept them, given that they came from one

--- Sayfa 134 ---
war and peace in islam
106
who had rejected the message of Islam and indeed one who had chosen
to live among the arch-enemies of the Muslims; but then the above
Qur’anic verse was revealed to the Prophet, indicating that there was
no need to be ungracious towards the one who gave these gifs, even
though she had rejected the message of the Prophet and was living with
the enemies of Islam.
Al-Tabari goes even further in his analysis of the verse by criticis-
ing those Muslims who say that 60:8 was later abrogated by another
Qur’anic verse which says, Slay the idolaters wherever you ﬁnd them’
(Al-Tawbah, 9:5).139 Al-Tabari says that the most proper interpretation
of verse 60:8 is that God commanded kindness and justice to be shown
‘amongst all of the kinds of communities and creeds’ (min jamī‘ asnāf
al-milāl wa’l-adyān) and did not specify by His words some communi-
ties to the exclusion of others. Al-Tabari says that here God speaks in
general of any group that does not openly ﬁght against the Muslims or
drive them out of their homes, and that the opinion that this kindness
was abrogated by later Qur’anic statements makes no sense (lā ma‘nā
li-qawl man qāla dhālik mansūkh).140 Tis understanding may seem to
be in contradiction with our previous statement that the Meccans were
indeed at war with the Muslims; however, Qutaylah, being a woman,
could not technically be considered a combatant according to Islamic
law. Indeed, this shows the essential distinction between combatants
and non-combatants in the rules of Muslim warfare. Tis distinction,
as we see from the example of Qutaylah, is to be upheld even in the
context of engagement with an actively hostile enemy, as were the
Meccans. Terefore, Islam does not oppose friendship and kindness
between peoples who are not at war with one another and, even in the
case of war, clear distinctions are to be made between ‘those who ﬁght’
and ‘those who do not ﬁght’. We shall examine this principle further in
the next section.
‘Slay Them Wherever You Find Them’
Another verse that is related to jihad, and also deals with the subject
of those against whom jihad is to be waged, is 2:190–1. According to
many accounts, these verses represents the ﬁrst command given by
God to the Muslims to carry out military jihad,141 but this command

--- Sayfa 135 ---
107
Te Myth of a Militant Islam
had speciﬁc limitations placed upon it, as we shall see. Te Qur’anic
text reads as follows:
Fight in the way of God against those who ﬁght you, but
transgress not the limits. Truly, God does not love the trans-
gressors [of limits]. / And slay them wherever you ﬁnd them,
and turn them out from where they have turned you out.
(Al-Baqarah, 2:190–1)
Al-Tabari tells us that this verse is not to be read as a carte blanche
to attack any and all non-Muslim peoples; rather, he says, the verse
was revealed speciﬁcally in relation to ﬁghting the idolaters of Mecca,
who are referred to in Arabic sources by the technical term mushrikūn
or mushrikīn (sing. mushrik).142 Tis term comes from a three-letter
Arabic root ‘sh-r-k’ which means ‘to associate’ or ‘take a partner unto
something’, and the word mushrikūn literally means ‘those who take
a partner unto God’, that is to say ‘polytheists’ or ‘idolaters’. It should
be noted that from the point of view of Islamic law, this injunction to
perform jihad against the polytheists does not pertain to either Jews or
Christians. Neither Jews nor Christians are ever referred to within the
Qur’an by the terms mushrik or mushrikūn. Tey have, in fact, a very
diﬀerent status according to the Qur’an, which ofen refers to the two
groups together by the technical term Ahl al-Kitāb or ‘People of the
Book’, meaning people who have been given a scripture by God other
than the Muslims. We shall discuss the status of Jews and Christians
later, but what is important to recognise here is that this call to jihad
was revealed in relation to a speciﬁc group of people, the idolaters
of Mecca, and within a speciﬁc context, a context of persecution and
the driving of Muslims from their homes in Mecca because of their
religion. Indeed, this understanding is accepted not only by al-Tabari
but, he says, it is the view of most Qur’an interpreters.143
In addition to this context for the ﬁrst military jihad, there were also
limits placed upon the early Muslims who carried out jihad against the
mushrikūn. Verse 2:190 speaks of ﬁght[ing] in the way of God but
also of not transgressing the ‘limits’. What are these limits? Al-Tabari
gives many accounts detailing the limits placed upon the mujāhidūn.
He says, for instance, that the cousin of the Prophet of Islam, Ibn
‘Abbas, commented upon verse 2:190 as follows: ‘Do not kill women,

--- Sayfa 136 ---
war and peace in islam
108
or children, or the old, or the one who greets you with peace, or [the
one who] restrains his hand [from hurting you], and if you do this
then you have transgressed’.144 Another tradition related by al-Tabari
comes from the Umayyad Caliph ‘Umar ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz or ‘Umar II
(99/717–101/720 CE), who explained the meaning of 2:191 as: ‘... do
not ﬁght he who does not ﬁght you, that is to say women, children,
and monks.’145
Tese statements quoted by al-Tabari are very much in keep-
ing with other commands given speciﬁcally by the Prophet and the
Rightly-guided Caliphs (Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, ‘Uthman and ‘Ali) to the
Muslim armies involved in jihad. Tese commands are noted in the
various hadith collections, i.e., records of the sayings of the Prophet
and his companions, which along with the Qur’an form the basis for
determining the Islamic nature of any act. Some examples of these
hadith are:
Naﬁ‘ reported that the Prophet of God U found women
killed in some battles, and he condemned such an act and
prohibited the killing of women and children.146
When Abu Bakr al-Siddīq [the trusted friend of the Proph-
et and ﬁrst of the Rightly-guided Caliphs] sent an army
to Syria, he went on foot with Yazid ibn Abu Sufyan who
was the commander of a quarter of the forces…. [Abu
Bakr said to him:] ‘I instruct you in ten matters: Do not kill
women, children, the old, or the inﬁrm; do not cut down
fruit bearing trees; do not destroy any town; do not cut the
gums of sheep or camels except for the purpose of eating;
do not burn date-trees nor submerge them; do not steal
from booty and do not be cowardly.’147
[Te Umayyad Caliph] ‘Umar ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz wrote to
one of his administrators: We have learnt that whenever
the Prophet of God U sent out a force, he used to command
them, ‘Fight, taking the name of the Lord. You are ﬁghting
in the cause of the Lord with people who have disbelieved
and rejected the Lord. Do not commit thef; do not break
vows; do not cut ears and noses; do not kill women and
children. Communicate this to your armies.’148
Once when Rabah ibn Rabi‘ah went forth with the Messen-
ger of Allah, he and [the] companions of the Prophet passed

--- Sayfa 137 ---
109
Te Myth of a Militant Islam
by a woman who had been slain. Te Messenger halted and
said: ‘She is not one who would have fought’. Tereupon, he
looked at the men and said to one of them: ‘Run afer Khālid
Ibn al-Walid149 [and tell him] that he must not slay children,
serfs, or women.’150
Such statements are common throughout the hadith collections and
leave little doubt as to the limits set upon the military jihad, regardless
of the enemy that is faced.
‘Perform Jihad against the Kfirn’
As we noted earlier, the Qur’an does not speak of Jews or Christians as
mushrikūn or polytheists. Terefore, none of the verses of the Qur’an
that pertain to ﬁghting the mushrikūn pertain to them. However, it
must be admitted that the Qur’an does, within a limited context, speak
of Jews and Christians as kāﬁrūn, a term ofen translated into English as
‘unbelievers’, although its literal meaning is, ‘Tose who cover over [the
truth]’ in some form or another. Unfortunately, the common translation
of this term as ‘unbelievers’ gives it nuances of meaning from Western
cultural history that do not necessarily apply to the original Arabic,
such as the fact that ‘unbelief’ in English is synonymous with ‘athe-
ism’. In Arabic, however, kufr or ‘covering’ does not necessarily refer
to lack of faith but to a lack of correct thinking on one or more aspects
of faith. In fact Muslims can also be kāﬁrūn. For instance, according to
the traditional commentaries, verse 9:49, Tere are some who say, ‘Give
me leave to stay behind and do not tempt me.’ Surely they have fallen
into temptation already and hell encompasses the unbelievers (kāﬁrūn)
(Al-Tawbah, 9:49) refers to those Muslims who refused to respond to
the Prophet’s call to go on an expedition to Tabuk.151
Te important question that could be asked, however, is: Does
the Qur’an not speak about ﬁghting against the kāﬁrūn, such as
in the verse O Messenger, perform jihad against the unbelievers
(kāﬁrūn) and the hypocrites (munāﬁqūn) (Al-Tawbah, 9:73)? Does
this verse not imply an essential militancy between Muslims on the
one hand, and Jews and Christians on the other? In answering these
questions we must refer to both Qur’anic pronouncements and to the
historical actions of the early Muslims in jihad. We will deal with the

--- Sayfa 138 ---
war and peace in islam
110
issues of the Qur’an ﬁrst and then turn, in the next section, to what the
Muslims actually did in jihad.
When we look at the comments of al-Tabari regarding verse 9:73,
as well as those of Ibn Kathir (d. 774 AH/1372 CE), perhaps the most
famous of Sunni Qur’an commentators, both seem to condone the idea
that this verse relates to violent or military jihad. Both make a distinc-
tion, however, between the two types of jihad mentioned in verse 9:73:
jihad against the kāﬁrūn, and jihad against the munāﬁqūn. Each states
that the jihad against the munāﬁqūn or hypocrites—i.e., those Muslims
who knowingly disobey the commands of God—is bi’l-lisān, meaning
‘with the tongue’. Tat is to say, one should reprimand the Muslim
hypocrites with critical speech, not with physical violence. Whereas,
in regard to the kāﬁrūn, both commentators make reference to the
idea that the jihad against them is bi’l-ṣayf, or ‘by the sword’.152 Tis
may seem to suggest that violent suppression of Jews and Christians
is demanded, since we have already mentioned that both Jews and
Christians—though never called mushrikūn—are sometimes referred
to as kāﬁrūn. But before drawing this conclusion we must look more
closely at how the Qur’an deﬁnes the kāﬁrūn. Here it is useful to refer
to a series of Qur’anic verses referring to the ‘People of the Book’ such
as Al-Bayyinah, 98:1, 98:6; Al-Mā’idah, 5:78; and Al-Baqarah, 2:105.
Verse 98:1 reads: Those who disbelieved (kafarū) among (min)
the People of the Book and the polytheists (mushrikūn) would not
have left off erring until the clear truth came to them (Al-Bayyinah,
98:1). Tis verse clearly indicates that ‘to disbelieve’ is not a characteris-
tic belonging to all Jews and Christians or People of the Book. Instead,
it declares that disbelief is a characteristic of some ‘among’ the People
of the Book. Tis limiting of the declaration of unbelief is established
by the Arabic preposition min, which serves to distinguish a distinct
species within a genus, namely, those unbelievers present within the
larger believing Jewish and Christian communities. Tis delimitation
is also to be seen in verse 98:6 which says, Those who disbelieved
(kafarū) among the People of the Book are in Hellﬁre (Al-Bayyinah,
98:6). Verses 5:78 and 2:105 are yet further examples of this qualifying
and limiting of kufr or ‘unbelief’ in regard to the People of the Book.
Tey state, respectively:

--- Sayfa 139 ---
111
Te Myth of a Militant Islam
Tose who disbelieved (kafarū) among the Tribe of Israel were
cursed by the tongue of David and Jesus, son of Mary. (Al-
Mā’idah, 5:78)
Neither those who disbelieved (kafarū) among the People of
the Book, nor the polytheists (mushrikūn), love that anything
good should be sent down to you from your Lord. (Al-Baqa-
rah, 2:105)
We see in these verses that the Qur’anic perspective, as regards the
followers of faiths other than Islam, is a subtle one, not simply a blanket
condemnation of all non-Muslims. It is important to recall here the
words of verses 113–5 of chapter 3 of the Qur’an, which say:
Not all of them are alike. Of the People of the Book are a group
that stand (in prayer), rehearse the signs of God throughout the
night and prostrate. / Tey believe in God and the Last Day;
they enjoin what is right and forbid what is wrong, and they
hasten in (all) good works. Tese are among the righteous. /
Of the good that they do, nothing will be rejected of them, and
God knows the God-fearing ones. (Āl ‘Imrān, 3:113–5)
 Keeping these Qur’anic distinctions in mind, the injunction to ﬁght
the kāﬁrūn by the sword does not then apply to all Jews and Christians,
but only to some ‘among’ them. But this raises the question, who, among
the Jews and Christians, are the Muslims to ﬁght? To answer this question
we must now turn to the historical facts of the jihad of the ﬁrst Muslims.
The Jihad of the First Muslims
It is perhaps best to begin our examination of historical jihad by recall-
ing that the ﬁrst jihad in Islam was not martial and had nothing to
do with violence. Te ﬁrst jihad is referred to in the Qur’an in verse
25:52, which states, Do not obey the unbelievers (kāﬁrūn), but strive
against them (jāhidhum) with it, a great striving (Al-Furqān, 25:52).
Tis somewhat enigmatic verse, traditionally understood to have been
revealed at Mecca, i.e., before any divine decree had been given as
regards performance of military jihad (which came only later in the
Medinan period), speaks of striving against the unbelievers by way of
‘it’. Both al-Tabari and Ibn Kathir relate traditions from Ibn ‘Abbās and
from Ibn Zayd ibn Harith, the son of the Prophet’s adopted son, telling

--- Sayfa 140 ---
war and peace in islam
112
us that this ‘it’—the means by which to carry out jihad—is the Qur’an
itself.153 In other words, the earliest command to jihad was a kind of
preaching of the Qur’an to the Meccans, or perhaps a taking solace
or refuge in the divine word from the persecutions that the Muslims
were experiencing at that time in Mecca. It was not military in nature.
Tis brings up our ﬁrst point regarding the historical form of military
jihad and what may be its most misrepresented feature: the notion
that the religion of Islam was spread through military force, that Jews,
Christians, and other peoples of the Middle East, Asia, and Africa were
forced to convert to Islam on pain of death.
‘There is No Compulsion in Religion’
It has been a common view in the West, even to this day, to say that
the religion of Islam spread through conquest. Although this Orientalist
theory is now being shown to be a fallacy by modern scholarship,154 it
is important to mention that the peaceful spread of Islam throughout
most of the Middle East,155 Asia, and Africa was in fact due to princi-
ples ﬂowing from the Qur’anic revelation itself. Here and in the next
section we will discuss some of these principles, beginning with the
injunction found in verse 2:256 which says, There is no compulsion in
religion (Al-Baqarah, 2:256). Our commentators tell us that this verse
was revealed during one of three possible situations.
Te ﬁrst possible context for the revelation of 2:256 has to do with
a practice that was fairly common among the women of Medina before
Islam came to the city. Our commentators tell us that if a woman did not
have any living sons, she would sometimes make a promise that if she
gave birth to a child and the child lived, she would raise the child in the
faith of one of the Jewish tribes of the city.156 Apparently this practice was
somewhat popular; we know this from the events following another of
the early military engagements of Islamic history: the siege of the fortress
of the Medinan Jewish tribe of Nadir (4 AH/625 CE). Te reason for the
siege, according to Islamic sources, was that the Banu Nadir had broken
an alliance that they had concluded with the Prophet by secretly planning
to assassinate him. 157 As a result of this treason, the Muslims besieged
the Banu Nadir for some ten days in their fortress just south of Medina.
At the end of this siege the Banu Nadir accepted a punishment of exile

--- Sayfa 141 ---
113
Te Myth of a Militant Islam
from the region of Medina and the tribe lef with their wealth packed
on their camels, some heading north to the town of Khaybar, others
going on further to Syria. Some of the Medinan Muslims protested the
punishment of exile, saying to the Prophet: ‘Our sons and brothers are
among them!’158 Indeed, some of the children of the Medinans had been
raised within the Jewish faith and were living with their adopted clan.
In response to the dissatisfaction of the Medinan Muslims the words
of the Qur’an were revealed: There is no compulsion in religion, for
truth has been made clear from error, meaning essentially that these
‘sons and brothers’ had made their choice to stay loyal to a treacherous
group against the Prophet, as well as against their own Muslim relatives,
and were party to a plan to murder God’s messenger. In this way, the
words of verse Al-Baqarah, 2:256, although harsh from a certain point
of view, also reveal an essential principle within the Muslim faith: no
one can be compelled to accept a religion, be it Islam or any other faith.
Tis particular narration of the context of 2:256 is highly signiﬁcant for
delineating the attitude of Muslims on this issue, occurring as it does
during the jihad of the siege of the Banu Nadir and rejecting, within that
context, any compulsion in religion.
Another variant on this same story speaks of the people of Medina
desiring to compel those of their ‘sons and brothers’ aﬃliated with
another Jewish tribe in the city, the Banu Qurayzah, into accepting Islam.
Tis version (whose number of narrations in the sources is much fewer
than that of the Banu Nadir narrations) makes no mention of there
being any hostilities at that time between the Muslims and the Jews, but
only recounts the desire of the Medinan Muslims to force their Jewish
relatives into Islam. In these narrations the Prophet responds to their
desire to compel their family members with the words of 2:256,159 again
aﬃrming the absolute necessity of freedom in choosing one’s faith.
Tis principle is also brought out in relation to a third possible
context for the revelation of verse 2:256. Tis is said to be the conversion
to Christianity of the sons of Abu’l-Ḥusayn, a companion of the Prophet.
Te story is told that the two sons of Abu’l-Ḥuṣayn were converted in
Medina by Christian merchants visiting the city from Syria. Tey then
returned to Syria with the merchants.160 Upon hearing of what his sons
had done, Abu’l-Ḥuṣayn went to the Prophet and asked for permission

--- Sayfa 142 ---
war and peace in islam
114
to pursue them and bring them back. Te Prophet then recited to him,
There is no compulsion in religion…. Afer Abū’l-Ḥuṣayn heard the
words of the revelation, the narration concludes, ‘So he let them go their
way’ (fa-khallī sabīlahumā).161
Regardless of the version of the story that we examine, the message
is always the same—to choose one’s own religion is a free choice
whether in time of peace or war. Ibn Kathir’s commentary upon 2:256
also reﬂects this fact when he says:
God, the Exalted, said, ‘Tere is no compulsion in religion,’ that
is to say, you do not compel anyone to enter the religion of
Islam. Truly it is made clear [and] evident. It [Islam] is not
in need such that one compel anyone to enter it. Rather, the
one whom God guides to Islam and expands his breast and
illuminates his vision, he enters into it by way of clear proof. It
is of no use to enter the religion as one compelled by force.162
Although these words are hardly ambiguous, we should also note
that there have been those in the Islamic tradition who have tried to
say that this Qur’anic verse was later abrogated, but this is not the
opinion of either of our commentators. Both al-Tabari and Ibn Kathir
note that 2:256 has never been abrogated by any other verse(s) of the
Qur’an and that although 2:256 descended in regard to a particular case
(khaṣṣ), i.e., in regard to either the Jews of Medina or the Christians
from Syria, nevertheless, its application is general (‘amm).163 Tis is to
say, the verse applies to all People of the Book, who should be free from
being compelled to accept Islam.164
‘Had God not Repelled some Men by
Means of Others …’
A related issue which goes beyond the simple idea of not forcing anyone
into Islam is the fact that one of the essential and expressed elements
of the earliest military jihad was the protection of the rights of worship
of the People of the Book, i.e., not simply avoiding using force to bring
them into Islam, but actively using force to preserve and defend their
houses of worship. Tis characteristic of the military jihad is mentioned
in verses 22:39–40 and, as we shall see, it is conﬁrmed by many histori-
cal examples.

--- Sayfa 143 ---
115
Te Myth of a Militant Islam
We noted earlier that verses 2:190–1 are sometimes claimed to be
the ﬁrst verses revealed relating to military jihad. Tis claim is also made
for verses 22:39–40.165 It is, of course, impossible to determine on the
basis of the narrations given in the sources which group of verses is truly
the ﬁrst to speak of military jihad, but the Islamic tradition in general
has simply accepted ambiguity on this issue. Verses 22:39–40 say:
Permission is given to those who are fought because they have
been wronged. Surely, God is able to give them victory. / Tose
who have been expelled from their homes unjustly only be-
cause they said: ‘Our Lord is God.’ And if it were not that God
repelled some people by means of others, then monasteries,
churches, synagogues, and mosques, wherein the Name of God
is mentioned much would surely have been pulled down. Ver-
ily, God will help those who help Him. Truly, God is powerful
and mighty. (Al-Ḥajj, 22: 39–40)
Our commentators tell us that these verses were revealed just as
the Prophet and his companions were leaving Mecca and migrating to
Medina.166 Both al-Tabari and Ibn Kathir relay the words of Abu Bakr
al-Ṣiddiq upon hearing the new revelation. He is reported to have said,
‘I knew [when I heard it] that it would be ﬁghting (qitāl) [between
the Muslims and the Meccans].’167 It is also interesting to note that al-
Tabari relates traditions that state that the meaning of the phrase ‘if it
were not that God repelled some people by means of others’ is ‘if
it were not for ﬁghting and jihad’ and ‘if it were not for ﬁghting and
jihad in the way of God.’168 Furthermore, Ibn Kathir relates that many
famous early ﬁgures of Islam ‘such as Ibn ‘Abbas, Mujahid, ‘Urwah ibn
al-Zubayr, Zayd ibn Aslam, Muqatil ibn Hayyan, Qatadah and others’
also said that ‘this is the ﬁrst verse revealed concerning jihad’.169 Tese
commentaries are particularly important because all of them refer to
the fact that jihad is to be understood, in its earliest sense, as a means
by which ‘monasteries, churches, synagogues, and mosques’ are to
be preserved and protected.170 Te call to jihad then was not for the
destruction of faiths other than Islam; rather, one of its essential aspects
was the preservation of places of worship belonging to the monotheistic
faiths and protecting them against those polytheists—in this case the
idolaters of Mecca—who might endanger them.

--- Sayfa 144 ---
war and peace in islam
116
Some Applications of Qur’anic Principles to
the Military Jihad
When we turn to the many examples of the early military jihad found
in the sources, we see that the Muslim armies were actually quite
consistent in their application of the Qur’anic doctrines mentioned
in 22:39–40 and 2:256. Although the historical record does not speak
deﬁnitively about the issue of whether or not these endeavours were
strictly defensive—for as with all such undertakings, they involved both
elements of true religious fervor and righteousness, as well as issues of
the realpolitik of the time—what can be said rather deﬁnitively is that
the Muslim forces, in carrying out the early jihad, did act in accord-
ance with the limits established by the Qur’an and Hadith. We know
this from the examination of the accounts presented in the various
Islamic histories, such as al-Tabari’s universal history, Tārīkh al-rusul
wa al-mulūk, as well as other important historical works that specialise
in the events of the early jihad, such as Baladhuri’s (d. 279 AH/892 CE)
Futūḥ al-buldān or ‘Openings of the Nations’. In these accounts, there
is clear evidence of the importance Muslims attached to the idea of ‘no
compulsion in religion’, as well as to the preservation of the places of
worship of the People of the Book. Baladhuri, for instance, recounts a
text written by the Prophet to the Christian community of Najran in
southern Arabia guaranteeing them certain social and religious rights
under Islamic rule. Te text reads:
Najran and their followers are entitled to the protection of
Allah and to the security of Muhammad the Prophet, the
Messenger of Allah, which security shall involve their per-
sons, religion, lands, and possessions, including those of
them who are absent as well as those who are present, their
camels, messengers, and images [amthilah, a reference to
crosses and icons]. Te state they previously held shall not
be changed, nor shall any of their religious services or im-
ages be changed. No attempt shall be made to turn a bishop,
a monk from his oﬃce as a monk, nor the sexton of a church
from his oﬃce.171
Both al-Tabari and Baladhuri make many references to similar
treaties concluded between Muslim commanders during the early

--- Sayfa 145 ---
117
Te Myth of a Militant Islam
jihad eﬀort and the various populations that fell under Islamic political
control. Indeed, such examples are to be found on every major front of
the Islamic conquests from Persia to Egypt and all areas in between.
Within the region of Syria, we have the example of the companion
of the Prophet and commander of Muslim forces Abu ‘Ubaydah ibn
al-Jarrah, who concluded an agreement with the Christian population of
Aleppo granting them safety for ‘their lives, their possessions, city wall,
churches, homes, and the fort’. Abu ‘Ubaydah is said to have concluded
similar treaties at Antioch,172 Ma‘arrat Ma‘rin,173 Ḥoms,174Qinnasrin,175
and Baalbek.176
Baladhuri reports that afer the surrender of Damascus, Khalid ibn
al-Walid wrote for the inhabitants of the city a document stating:
In the Name of Allah, the Compassionate, the Merciful. Tis
is what Khalid would grant to the inhabitants of Damascus,
if he enters therein: he promises to give them security for
their lives, property, and churches. Teir city shall not be
demolished; neither shall any Moslem be quartered in their
houses. Tereunto we give to them the pact of Allah and the
protection of his Prophet, the caliphs and the ‘Believers’. So
long as they pay the poll tax,177 nothing but good shall befall
them.178
In addition to these accounts, al-Tabari records the ‘Covenant
of ‘Umar’, a document apparently addressed to the people of the city
of Jerusalem, which was conquered in the year 15 AH/636 CE. Te
document states:
Tis is the assurance of safety (amān) which the servant of
God ‘Umar, the Commander of the Faithful, has granted to
the people of Jerusalem. He has given them an assurance
of safety for themselves, for their property, their churches,
their crosses, the sick and the healthy of the city, and for all
the rituals that belong to their religion. Teir churches will
not be inhabited [by Muslims] and will not be destroyed.
Neither they, nor the land on which they stand, nor their
crosses, nor their property will be damaged. Tey will not be
forcibly converted…. Te people of Jerusalem must pay the
poll tax like the people of [other] cities, and they must expel
the Byzantines and the robbers….179
Tese conditions, respecting Christian practices and places of

--- Sayfa 146 ---
war and peace in islam
118
worship, were also given to other towns throughout Palestine, according
to al-Tabari.180
In regard to the Armenian front, we have references to treaties
made with Jewish and Christian as well as Zoroastrian inhabitants of
the region. It is noteworthy that both al-Tabari and Ibn Kathir in their
Qur’an commentaries mention Zoroastrians (al-majūs) within the clas-
siﬁcation of ‘People of the Book’181—Zoroastrianism being the other
major faith, besides Judaism and Christianity, that was encountered by
the Muslim armies as they spread out of Arabia and which, like Judaism
and Christianity, possessed a sacred text. Baladhuri mentions the treaty
concluded by the companion of the Prophet, Habib ibn Maslamah
al-Fihri (d. 42 AH/662 CE), with the people of the town of Dabil which
states:
In the Name of Allah, the Compassionate, the Merciful. Tis
is a treaty of Habib ibn Maslamah with the Christians, Mag-
ians [i.e., Zoroastrians], and Jews of Dabil, including those
present and absent. I have granted for you safety for your
lives, possessions, churches, places of worship, and city wall.
Tus ye are safe and we are bound to fulﬁl our covenant, so
long as ye fulﬁl yours and pay the poll tax…182
In addition to this, al-Tabari mentions treaties that the Muslims
made with the Armenians of Al-Bab and Muqan in the Caucasus
Mountains guaranteeing ‘their possessions, their persons, [and] their
religion’.183
When we turn to the region of Persia, Baladhuri mentions two agree-
ments, one with the people of Rayy,184 and the other with the people of
Azerbaijan.185 Te texts of each of these agreements guarantees the safety
of the lives of the inhabitants, as well as oﬀering a promise not to ‘raze any
of their ﬁre temples’, a reference to Zoroastrian ātashkādas. In al-Tabari’s
history as well, treaties are recounted involving the town of Qumis,186
the peoples of Dihistan in the province of Jurjan,187 and the people of
Azerbaijan,188 each treaty granting ‘safety … for their religion’.
Finally, in Egypt we can point to the example of ‘Amr ibn al-‘Ās,
a companion of the Prophet and the commander of Muslim forces on
the Egyptian front. He concluded a treaty with the Bishop of Alexandria
on the orders of the Caliph ‘Umar, guaranteeing the safety of the city and

--- Sayfa 147 ---
119
Te Myth of a Militant Islam
agreeing to return certain Christian captives taken by the Muslims afer
an initial skirmish. According to al-Tabari, ‘Umar’s instructions to ‘Amr
were as follows:
… propose to the ruler of Alexandria that he give you the ji-
zyah in the understanding that those of their people who were
taken prisoner and who are still in your care be oﬀered the
choice between Islam and the religion of their own people.
Should any one of them opt for Islam, then he belongs to the
Muslims, with the same privileges and obligations as they.
And he who opts for the religion of his own people has to pay
the same jizyah as will be imposed on his co-religionists.189
‘Amr also concluded an agreement with Abu Maryam, the Metro-
politan of Mi‘r. Al-Tabari quotes ‘Amr’s words in an apparent face to face
meeting with the Metropolitan: ‘We call upon you to embrace Islam. He
who is willing to do so will be like one of us. To him who refuses, we sug-
gest that he pay the jizyah and we will give him ample protection. Our
Prophet … has determined that we keep you from harm…. If you accept
our proposition, we will give you constant protection.’190 Al-Tabari then
quotes the actual text of the treaty agreed to between them as follows:
In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful.
Tis is the text of the covenant that ‘Amr b. al-‘Ās has grant-
ed the people of Mi‘r concerning immunity for themselves,
their religion, their possessions, churches, cruciﬁxes, as well
as their land and their waterways…. It is incumbent upon the
people of Mi‘r, if they agree on the terms of this covenant and
when the rise of the Nile water comes to a halt to aﬀord the
jizyah…. He who chooses [not to agree to these terms but] to
depart will enjoy immunity, until he has reached his destina-
tion where he can be safe, or has moved out of the territory
where our authority prevails.191
With these treaties in mind we can now return to a question which
we raised earlier: Who, in the opinion of the early Muslims, were the
People of the Book that had to be fought? In short, given this picture of
the history, the answer to this question is that those who were to be fought
among the People of the Book were only those who refused to submit to
Islamic political authority, i.e., who refused to pay the poll tax (jizyah).
Te Muslims made no hair-splitting theological determinations regarding

--- Sayfa 148 ---
war and peace in islam
120
the issue of ‘true belief’, as some might think is implied in certain Qur’anic
verses that we quoted earlier. All People of the Book were simply treated
as ‘believers’ within their respective religious communities, regardless
of whether they followed, for instance, in the case of Christianity, a
Monophysite, Arian, Jacobite, Nestorian, or Catholic rite. Tere was no
litmus test of faith which the Muslims applied to determine true belief on
the part of the people who came under their political control, other than
the self-declarations of those people themselves to be Jews, Christians,
or Zoroastrians, and their willingness to pay the jizyah.192 Te earliest
mujāhidūn, the Prophet, his companions, and their immediate successors,
essentially placed all People of the Book under the general category of
‘faith’. Tis fact played itself out not only in terms of treaties concluded
between Muslims and non-Muslims, which as we have seen demonstrate
no theological scrutiny of non-Muslim communities, but also in terms of
the very composition of the ‘Muslim’ forces involved in the jihad, to which
we will now turn.
The Composition of the Forces of Jihad
In relation to the practice of the military jihad we can see that Islam’s
universal perspective on faith also had an important eﬀect on the make-
up of the ‘Muslim’ armies. Here we can point to the fact that military jihad
was not seen as the exclusive prerogative of Muslims. Tis is particularly
true during the formative years of the Islamic conquests, i.e., from the ﬁrst
command to military jihad in Medina through the early Umayyad period.
Again, this is made clear in various treaties the Muslims concluded with
both the Jewish and Christian populations of the Near East at this time.
Perhaps the most famous of these treaties is the Constitution of Medina,
which was composed during the lifetime of the Prophet himself and
which speaks of the Jews and Muslims ﬁghting together as one ummah
or community.
The Constitution of Medina
Te Constitution of Medina, recorded in Ibn Ishaq’s (d. 151 AH/768
CE) Sīrat Rasūl Allāh (Te Biography of the Messenger of God), the most
important historical account of the life of the Prophet, indicates that
jihad was for any community willing to ﬁght alongside the Muslims

--- Sayfa 149 ---
121
Te Myth of a Militant Islam
(with the exceptions of polytheists). Ibn Ishaq prefaces his account of the
Constitution by saying:
Te Messenger of God U [composed] a writing between the
Emigrants and the Anṣār,193 in which he made a treaty and
covenant with the Jews, conﬁrmed their religion and posses-
sions, and gave them certain rights and duties.194
Te text of the treaty then follows:
In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful.
Tis is a writing of Muhammad the prophet between the
believers and Muslims of Quraysh and Yathrib195 and those
who follow them and are attached to them and who crusade
(jāhada) along with them. Tey are a single community dis-
tinct from other people…. Whosoever of the Jews follows
us has the (same) help and support…, so long as they are
not wronged [by him] and he does not help [others] against
them.196 [emphasis added]
Here we see that the participation in ‘military jihad’, translated
above as ‘crusade’, is open to those ‘attached’ to the Prophet and the
Muslims, and that together they constitute a ‘single community’ (ummah
wāḥidah) in the face of all others. It is interesting to note that the claim
that animosity has always existed between Muslims and Jews does not
accord with this very early document dealing with military cooperation
and mutual protection between the two communities.197 Indeed the
treaty seems not only to form a basis for an important military alliance
between the Muslim and Jewish communities, but it also anticipates
orderly and peaceful interactions on a general social level. Tus the
constitution goes on to say:
Te Jews bear expenses along with the believers so long as
they continue at war. Te Jews of Banu ‘Awf are a community
(ummah) along with the believers. To the Jews their religion
(dīn) and to the Muslims their religion. [Tis applies] both
to their clients and to themselves, with the exception of any-
one who has done wrong or acted treacherously; he brings
evil only on himself and on his household. For the Jews of
Banu’n-Najjar the like of what is for the Jews of the Banu
‘Awf. For the Jews of Banu’l-Harith the like…. For the Jews
of Banu Sa‘idah the like…. For the Jews of Banu Jusham the

--- Sayfa 150 ---
war and peace in islam
122
like…. For the Jews of Banu’l-Aws the like…. For the Jews
of Banu Ta‘labah the like of what is for the Jews of Banu
‘Awf….198
Another portion of the document speaks even more directly to the
social attitudes that should form the basis of interactions between the
two communities:
Between them [Muslims and Jews] there is help (naṣr)
against whoever wars against the people of this document.
Between them is sincere friendship (naṣḥ wa-naṣīḥah) and
honourable dealing, not treachery. A man is not guilty of
treachery through [the act of] his confederate. Tere is help
for the person wronged.199
What this document shows is that early in the life of the Islamic
community, there was the anticipation of normal and ‘friendly’
relations between the Jews and Muslims and indeed, help between
them in terms of war. Tese ideas are also supported by the authenticity
generally accorded to the Constitution by modern scholarship. In
terms of this authenticity, both the language and the content of the
document suggest that it is an early piece of work, i.e., pre-Umayyad.200
Tis is due to the fact that later falsiﬁers, writing during the time of
the Umayyads or the Abbasids, would not likely have included non-
Muslims as members of the ummah (a term later reserved for the
Muslim community exclusively), nor retained the other articles of
the document (from which we did not quote) that speak against the
Quraysh,201 nor made such prevalent and constant use of the term
mu’minūn (believers) rather than muslimūn to refer to the followers
of the Prophet and his message.202 Both Julius Wellhausen and Leone
Caetani placed the writing of the document sometime before the
battle of Badr. Hubert Grimme argued for a date just afer Badr, and
W. Montgomery Watt, a date following siege of the Banu Qurayẓah (5
AH/627 CE).203 In any case, it is clear that we are dealing here with
a document whose early date of composition is claimed both from
within and from without the tradition, suggesting a high degree of
reliability that it does indeed express early Islamic attitudes toward the
openness of the institution of military jihad.

--- Sayfa 151 ---
123
Te Myth of a Militant Islam
Christians in Jihad
Another important point regarding the armies of jihad is that tradi-
tional Islamic histories give accounts of Christians taking part in some
of the early battles alongside the Muslim armies. Tis is discussed by
Fred Donner in his book Te Early Islamic Conquests. He notes that,
according to Muslim historical sources, in the very early period of
jihad, Christian Arabs from tribes such as the Banu Ṭayyi’ of Najd, the
Banu al-Namir ibn Qasiu of the upper Euphrates river valley, and the
Banu Lakhm participated in the jihad with the Muslim armies.204 Other
allusions to this kind of activity can be found in al-Tabari’s Tārīkh
where he notes, for instance, a treaty signed during the reign of the
caliph ‘Umar by Suraqah ibn ‘Amr in 22 AH/642 CE. Suraqah was a
commander of Muslim forces in Armenia, which was predominantly
Christian. Te treaty discusses the poll tax which the Christian popu-
lation is to pay to the Islamic government, unless they are willing to
supply soldiers to the jihad eﬀort, in which case the poll tax would be
cancelled.205 In addition to this account, Baladhuri notes many other
agreements in the Futūḥ al-buldān concluded by Muslim command-
ers with the Christian populations of various regions. Such is the case
of the Jarājimah, a Christian people from the town of Jurjumah.206
Tis town had been under the control of the patrician and governor
of Antioch but surrendered to the Muslim armies, commanded by
Habib ibn Maslamah al-Fihri, when they attacked the town. Baladhuri
recounts the terms of the peace between Habib and the Jarajimah as
follows:
Terms were made providing that al-Jarajimah would act as helpers
to the Moslems, and as spies and frontier garrison in Mount al-Lukam.
On the other hand it was stipulated that they pay no tax, and that they
keep for themselves the booty they take from the enemy in case they
ﬁght with the Moslems.207
Here jihad is an endeavour open to the Christian Jarajimah.
Another treaty concluded with them during the reign of the Umayyad
Caliph al-Walid ibn ‘Abd al-Malik (86–96 AH/705–15 CE), states:
Al-Jarājimah may settle wherever they wish in Syria…;
neither they nor any of their children or women should be
compelled to leave Christianity; they may put on Moslem

--- Sayfa 152 ---
war and peace in islam
124
dress; and no poll tax may be assessed on them, their chil-
dren, or women. On the other hand, they should take part
in the Moslem campaigns and be allowed to keep for them-
selves the booty from those whom they kill…; and the same
amount taken from the possessions of the Moslems should
be taken [as tax] from their articles of trade and the posses-
sions of the wealthy among them.208
Tese agreements, along with the many others that we have
noted in the previous sections, in addition to revealing something of
the martial applications of Islam’s universal perspective on faith, also
demonstrate that historically jihad was directed against those who
stood in opposition to the political authority of the Islamic state.
It was not directed against a people simply because they professed a
faith other than Islam. Te point of the jihad was not to establish a
world populated only by Muslims; it was to create a social order in
which the freedom to practice the worship of God was guaranteed, for
Muslims as well as for the People of the Book. Although military jihad
had as its goal the establishment of this Islamic authority, there were
also certain essential and religiously unavoidable limitations placed
upon the means to achieving this goal. Tese limitations were deﬁned
by the injunctions of the Qur’an and the Hadith and manifested, as
well as clariﬁed, by the conduct of the earliest mujāhidūn, the Prophet,
and his companions. Tese teachings and examples have served as an
indispensable guide to Muslims throughout their 1400-year history,
not only in terms of jihad but in relation to all matters of faith. When
we look at the attempts of certain contemporary ﬁgures to revive the
military jihad, their words and actions must always be judged by way
of the limits and examples mentioned in the early tradition. Tis is the
only way to determine the essential ‘Islamicity’ of their claims and to
know if their actions constitute some form of reprehensible (makrūh)
or forbidden (ḥarām) innovation (bid‘a) upon the tradition.209
Muslims have always been cautioned to exercise the utmost care when
introducing new interpretations or practices, as a famous hadith of the
Prophet states: ‘Beware of newly invented matters, for every invented
matter is an innovation, every innovation is a going astray, and every
going astray is in Hellﬁre.’210

--- Sayfa 153 ---
125
Te Myth of a Militant Islam
Some Contemporary Fundamentalist
Interpretations of Jihad
To begin our analysis it is perhaps best to start with the form of the jihad
envisaged by the modern fundamentalists; that is to say, is the form of
this jihad consistent with the established principles of the Islamic faith
or not? It has been claimed that the jihad which Muslims must now
wage involves killing Americans and their allies, civilian and military.
Any such declaration would immediately place the endeavour outside
the bounds of true jihad whose limits, as we noted earlier, would clearly
exclude, for instance, attacks upon women and children. In fact, the
categories of ‘civilian’ and ‘military’ ofen used by these extremists are
somewhat alien to the Islamic tradition which always speaks on this issue
of warfare in terms of ‘those who ﬁght against the Muslims’ and ‘those
who do not’, the tradition being unanimous in deﬁning ‘those who do
not’ as women and children, with other categories such as monks and
the elderly ofen included. Terefore, the declarations making ‘lawful’
the indiscriminate killing of civilians unequivocally transgress the limits
of warfare deﬁned in the traditional sources. Indeed, some claim that
now is the time for a new ﬁqh or jurisprudence in Islam that would
leave behind such traditional constraints.211 Some have even attempted
to cast their arguments in the guise of religion by calling their declara-
tions of jihad fatwas212 and by quoting liberally from the Qur’an. Of
course, the determination of the ‘Islamicity’ of any fatwa must be in
relation to its content, and yet if we analyse the Qur’anic verses chosen
by extremists to justify their own exegesis, it reveals that, far from being
representatives of traditional Islam and the ‘pious forefathers’ (salaf) of
the Muslim community, their perspective is actually what we might call
the ‘other side of the coin’ of modernism, due to its near total disregard
for the established contexts of the verses they quote.213
One verse ofen mentioned in this regard is verse 9:5:
But when the forbidden months are past, then ﬁght and
slay the polytheists [mushrikūn] wherever you ﬁnd them,
seize them, beleaguer them, and lie in wait for them in
every stratagem [of war] (Al-Tawbah, 9:5).
It is interesting that this verse should be cited in the context of calls

--- Sayfa 154 ---
war and peace in islam
126
for Muslims to ﬁght Jews and Christians, particularly since this verse has
nothing to do with the issue of the People of the Book. As we mentioned
earlier, the Qur’an does not refer to Jews and Christians as mushrikūn
but reserves this term for the idolatrous Arabs of Muhammad’s U time.
In the case of verse 9:5, however, we are not dealing with a reference to
the idolaters of Mecca speciﬁcally because, according to tradition, the
ninth chapter of the Qur’an was revealed afer the conquest of Mecca
by the Muslims, that is to say, at a time when there were no longer any
polytheists in the city as a result of conversion to Islam. Te mushrikūn
referred to in verse 9:5 are therefore the Arab polytheists/idolaters who
remained in other parts of Arabia not yet under Muslim control. Tis
being the case, the use of 9:5 would represent a misappropriation of
this verse to an end other than the one intended from its established
traditional context of ﬁghting the pagan Arabs.
Other verses which have become popular proof texts for the jihadist
position are 9:36 and 2:193. Te verses are, respectively: And ﬁght the
polytheists [mushrikūn] together as they ﬁght you together (Al- Tawbah,
9:36), and Fight them [i.e., the mushrikūn] until there is no more oppres-
sion and religion is for God (Al-Baqarah, 2:193). Tese verses have been
cited as direct support for killing civilians, yet both these verses, as with
verse 9:5, refer directly to ﬁghting the mushrikūn, not Jews or Christians
and certainly not civilians. Neither al-Ṭabari nor Ibn Kathir have much
to say regarding 9:36, except to emphasise that the Muslims should act
together or in unison during warfare against the polytheists. Te injunc-
tion to ‘ﬁght the polytheists together as they ﬁght you together’, which
has sometimes been taken to mean that Muslims should respond in
kind to the attacks of an enemy, cannot be understood as an invitation
to transgress the established Islamic rules of warfare. It is telling in this
regard that al-Ṭabari and Ibn Kathir only refer in their comments on
9:36 to the verse’s meaning in relation to the ‘unity’ of the ummah, and
do not mention issues of responding in kind to oﬀenses, which would
seem to be a subject worthy of at least some comment, if indeed that
was the verse’s intended meaning.
In terms of verse 2:193, Ibn Kathir sees it as part of a series of
related verses beginning with 2:190. Like al-Ṭabari, he mentions that
these verses refer to the ﬁrst military jihad against the mushrikūn of

--- Sayfa 155 ---
127
Te Myth of a Militant Islam
Mecca, and he also emphasises the fact that these verses are in no way
an invitation to kill non-combatants, even those who live among the
communities of the enemies of Islam. Like al-Ṭabari, Ibn Kathir in his
comments quotes many narrations about the ‘transgressing of limits’
in warfare, such as the words of the famous Qur’an commentator and
theologian Hasan al-Basri (d. 728 CE), who said that the acts which
transgress the limits of war are:
… mutilation (muthla), [imposing] thirst (ghulūl), the
killing of women (nisā’), children (ṣibyān), and the old
(shuyūkh)—the ones who have no judgment for themselves
(lā ra’yy lahum), and no ﬁghters are among them, [the kill-
ing of] monks and hermits (aṣḥāb al-ṣawāmi‘), the burning
of trees, and the killing animals for other than the welfare
[of eating].’214
In addition to this, Ibn Kathir mentions various sayings of the
Prophet with meanings similar to the words of Hasan al-Basri, such as:
When he [the Prophet] dispatched his armies, he said, ‘Go
in the Name of God! Fight in the way of God [against] the
ones who disbelieve in God! Do not act brutally!215 Do not
exceed the proper bounds! Do not mutilate! Do not kill chil-
dren or hermits!’216
As if such statements were not enough, from the Islamic point of view,
to reject the indiscriminate violence endorsed by many fundamentalists,
Ibn Kathir also relays another hadith in which the Prophet tells the
story of a community of people who were weak and poor and were
being fought by a stronger group who showed animosity and harshness
towards them. Te Prophet says that the weaker group was eventually
given help by God to overcome their enemies, but in their success, these
weak ones became oppressors of those who had ﬁrst tried to oppress
them. He concludes with the words, ‘And God was displeased with them
till the Day of Resurrection’. Te meaning of this prophetic story says
Ibn Kathir, is: ‘When they [the weak] possessed power over the strong,
then they committed outrageous/unlawful/brutal acts (a‘tadū) against
them ... and God was displeased with them by reason of this brutality
(i‘tidā’).’ Tus, Ibn Kathir points out an important principle of warfare in
Islam: acts of brutality committed against Muslims are not an excuse for

--- Sayfa 156 ---
war and peace in islam
128
Muslims to respond in kind. Tis idea, so clear in the traditional sources,
stands in direct contrast to the positions of the fundamentalists, which
through their use of Qur’anic citations seek to hide what ultimately can
only be described as disobedience to these teachings of the Prophet.
Another Qur’anic verse ofen quoted is 4:75:
And why should you not ﬁght in the way of God and those
who are weak—men, women, and children, whose cry has
been: ‘Our Lord, rescue us from this town, whose people are
oppressors, and raise for us, from you, one who will help.’
(Al-Nisā’, 4:75)
Tis verse has been mentioned as justiﬁcation for open warfare
against the West and to inspire Muslims to ﬁght the United States and
its allies who threaten the Muslim lands in particular. According to our
commentators, however, the reason for the revelation of 4:75 was the
fact that even afer the Prophet had made his migration to Medina, there
were still some Muslims who remained in Mecca although they could
not practice their religion, and some Meccans who wished to be Muslims
but would not convert out of fear of their fellow tribesmen.217 In both
cases these diﬃculties were due to the weakness of these people vis-à-
vis the polytheistic members of their own clans who sought to oppress
them with threats and even torture. Terefore, verse 4:75 was revealed to
call the Muslims of Medina to a twofold jihad: (1) to free their brethren
who were lef behind in Mecca from religious oppression, and (2) to give
those Meccans who desired to convert the ability to do so without fear
of reprisals from the enemies of Islam. Tis clearly established context
is very diﬀerent from the manner in which the verse is understood by
extremists, for the least that can be said is that in the West, unlike many
places in the Islamic world itself, Muslims are basically free to worship
as they see ﬁt, nor is there any attempt to stop men or women from
converting to Islam. Clearly then, the use of 4:75 as a proof text for
jihad against the West and America is at best disingenuous considering
the traditional understanding of the circumstances surrounding its
revelation.
In addition to these verses, some cite verses 3:139 and 4:89 in their call
for each Muslim to kill Americans and plunder their wealth in any place
he ﬁnds them. Verse 3:139, which says, Do not lose heart, and do not

--- Sayfa 157 ---
129
Te Myth of a Militant Islam
be sad. For you will gain mastery if you are believers (Āl ‘Imrān, 3:139)
like so many misplaced quotations, actually occurs in the context of the
ﬁght against the Meccan polytheists at the battle of Uhud, while Al-Nisā’,
4:89 refers to the munaﬁqūn or ‘hypocrites’ among the early Islamic
community. Te munaﬁqūn, as mentioned earlier, were those Muslims
who disobeyed God’s commands knowingly. Many of them converted to
Islam only out of a sense of the advantage that could be gained from not
openly opposing the Prophet while his power was waxing. Secretly they
hoped for and worked toward victory for the polytheists. It is in regard
to these traitors within the Muslim community that the verse speaks with
such harshness, not in reference to those outside of the ummah. One last
verse that is popular in modern jihadist literature is verse 9:38:
O you who believe, what is the matter with you that when you
are asked to go forth in the way of God, you cling heavily to the
Earth. Do you prefer the life of this world to the Hereafer?…
Unless you go forth, He will punish you with a grievous tor-
ment and put others in your place. (Al-Tawbah, 9:38)
According to our commentators, this verse relates to the military
expedition (ghazwah) led by the Prophet to Tabuk, a region in what is
today northwestern Saudi Arabia. During this expedition the Muslims
went out in search of Byzantine military in the region. It is said that the
Muslims stayed, manoeuvring in the ﬁeld some ten days, but did not
encounter any Byzantine forces. As regards the use of this verse, it has
been quoted with the hope of encouraging Muslims today to ‘go forth’
against the United States and its allies, as the early mujāhidūn did against
another world power, the Byzantines. Te expedition to Tabuk, however,
did not constitute some kind of special case in which the Islamic limits
of warfare were neglected. Although the Muslims potentially would
be facing a foe far more capable and powerful than any they had yet
encountered, namely, the standing army of the Byzantine Empire which
had only recently conquered much of Persia, this did not constitute an
excuse for transgression. Despite the danger, at no time in the expedition
did the Prophet ever give orders to his army to transgress or discard
the limits set upon jihad. Terefore, any such use of this verse within
the context of encouraging such transgression is inconsistent with the
historical reality of the ghazwah to Tabuk. In fact, the expedition was an

--- Sayfa 158 ---
war and peace in islam
130
occasion for establishing treaties of protection very similar to those we
have mentioned in previous sections of this essay, those concluded with
the people of Ayla and the Christians of Duma.218
In the case of each of these verses we have cited, extremists have tried
to apply them in ways which entail clear innovations from their generally
accepted meanings. Such ‘exegesis’ not only goes against basic aspects of
the science of Qur’anic commentary, it also introduces innovation into
the very practice of Islam itself, by making jihad into a path of unbounded
bloodshed. In this manner, the ‘fundamentalists’ violate the fundamental
principles of warfare in Islam and betray the example of the Prophet,
as well as that of the ﬁrst Muslims engaged in jihad, and as Reza Shah-
Kazemi shows in a following essay, many generations into the modern
era. In fact their teachings are a not-so-subtle perversion of the very
Islam they claim to want to preserve. So systematic is their disregard of
the facts of early Islamic history and the circumstances surrounding the
revelations of the Qur’an that one is lef wondering what of Islam, other
than a name, would they claim to save?
Conclusion
We have attempted to show in this paper that, properly understood, the
traditional doctrine of jihad leaves no room for militant acts like those
perpetrated against the United States on September 11th. Tose who
carried out these crimes in the name of God and the Prophet, in fact,
followed neither God nor the Prophet, but followed their own imagin-
ings about religion without any serious understanding of the traditional
sources of the Islamic faith. No textual justiﬁcations for their acts can
be found in the Qur’an, nor can one cite examples of such brutality and
slaughter of innocents from the life of the Prophet or the military jihad
of the early decades of Islam. Te notion of a militant Islam cannot be
supported by any educated reading of the source materials, be they the
Qur’an and its commentaries, the Hadith tradition, or the early Islamic
historical works. On the contrary, what is clear when looking at these
texts is the remarkable degree of acceptance and, indeed, respect that
was shown to non-Muslims, Jews and Christians in particular, at a
time—the early medieval period—when tolerance and acceptance of
religious diﬀerences were hardly well known attitudes. Even in cases

--- Sayfa 159 ---
131
Te Myth of a Militant Islam
of warfare, the Muslim armies acted with remarkable dignity and prin-
ciple, irrespective of the weakness or strength of their opposition. In
short, the early Islamic community was characterised not by militancy,
but primarily by moderation and restraint.
Tese traits were not in spite of the religion of Islam but because of
it. Tis can be seen in the Qur’an in Chapter 2, verse 143, where God
says to the Muslims, We have made you a middle people (Al-Baqarah,
2:143), that is, a people who avoid extremes, and in another famous
verse which says, … and He [God] has set the Balance [of all things].
Do not transgress the Balance!’ (Al-Raḥmān, 55:7-8). Traditional
Muslims saw all of life in terms of balance, from simple daily activities
to ﬁghting and jihad. Each activity had its limits and rules because God
had set the balance for all things. It has primarily been certain modern-
ised Muslims, whose inﬂuences are not the traditional teachings of the
faith, but the attitudes and excesses of modernity (only cloaked with
turbans and beards), who have transgressed all limits and disregarded
the Balance that is true Islam.
Originally published by World Wisdom in Islam, Fundamentalism
and the Betrayal of Tradition. Reproduced with the kind permission of
the author and World Wisdom Press.

--- Sayfa 160 ---
132
chapter five
THE SPIRIT OF JIHAD219
Dr Reza Shah-Kazemi
When we think how few men of real religion there are, how
small the number of defenders and champions of the truth—
when one sees ignorant persons imagining that the principle
of Islam is hardness, severity, extravagance and barbarity—
it is time to repeat these words: Patience is beautiful, and
God is the source of all succour. (Sabr jamīl, wa Allāhu al-
musta‘ān—Yūsuf, 12:18)

     Emir Abd al-Qadir al-Jaza’iri220
If these words were true in 1860, when the emir wrote them, they are sadly
even truer today. In the afermath of the earth-shaking events of September
11 many in the West and in the Muslim world are rightly appalled by the
fact that the mass murder perpetrated on that day is being hailed by some
Muslims as an act of jihad. Only the most deluded souls could regard the
suicide attacks as having been launched by mujāhidīn, striking a blow in the
name of Islam against ‘legitimate targets’ in the heartland of ‘the enemy’.
Despite its evident falsity, the image of Islam conveyed by this disﬁgura-
tion of Islamic principles is not easily dislodged from the popular imagi-
nation in the West. Tere is an unhealthy and dangerous convergence of
perception between, on the one hand, those—albeit a tiny minority—in the
Muslim world who see the attacks as part of a necessary anti-western jihad,
and on the other, those in the West—unfortunately, not such a tiny minor-
ity—who likewise see the attacks as the logical expression of an inherently
militant religious tradition, one that is irrevocably opposed to the West.
Although of the utmost importance in principle, it appears to
matter little in practice that Muslim scholars have pointed out that the
terror attacks are totally devoid of any legitimacy in terms of Islamic
law and morality. Te relevant legal principles—that jihad can only be

--- Sayfa 161 ---
133
Te Spirit of Jihad
proclaimed by the most authoritative scholar of jurisprudence in the
land in question; that there were no grounds for waging a jihad in the
given situation; that, even within a legitimate jihad, the use of ﬁre as a
weapon is prohibited; that the inviolability of non-combatants is always
to be strictly observed; that suicide is prohibited in Islam—these princi-
ples, and others, have been properly stressed by the appropriate shari‘ah
experts; and they have been duly ampliﬁed by leaders and statesmen
in the Muslim world and the West. Nonetheless, here in the West, the
abiding image of ‘Islamic jihad’ seems to be determined not so much by
legal niceties as by images and stereotypes; in particular, in the immedi-
ate afermath of the attacks, the potent juxtaposition of two scenes: the
apocalyptic carnage at ‘Ground Zero’, where the Twin Towers used to
stand, and mobs of enraged Muslims bellowing anti-western slogans to
the refrain of Allāhu Akbar.
In such a situation, where the traditional spirit of Islam, and the
meaning, role and signiﬁcance of jihad within it, are being distorted
beyond recognition, it behoves all those who stand opposed both to
media stereotypes of jihadism and to those misguided fanatics who
provide the material for the stereotypes to denounce in the strongest
possible terms all forms of terrorism that masquerade as jihad. Many,
though, will understandably be asking the question: if this is not jihad,
then what is true jihad? Tey should be given an answer.221
Whilst it would be a relatively straightforward task to cite tradi-
tional Islamic principles which reveal the totally un-Islamic nature of
this ideology of jihadism, we believe that a critique on this plane of prin-
ciple will be much more eﬀective if it is complemented with images,
actions, deeds, personalities, and episodes that exemplify the principles
in question, thereby putting ﬂesh and blood on the bare bones of theory.
Te salience of intellectual argument, especially in the domain being
considered here, is immeasurably deepened through corroboration by
historically recorded cases in which the spirit of authentic jihad is vividly
enacted; and the pretensions of the self-styled warriors of Islam can be
more acutely perceived in the light cast by true mujāhidīn.
Tere is a rich treasure of chivalry in Muslim history from which to
draw for this purpose. What follows is a series of scenes drawn from this
tradition which might serve as illustrations of key Qur’anic and prophetic

--- Sayfa 162 ---
war and peace in islam
134
values which pertain to principled warfare. For it is one thing to quote
Qur’anic verses, and quite another to see them embodied.
As regards the virtue of chivalry itself, it is no exaggeration to say
that, throughout the Middle Ages, the very name ‘Saladin’ (Salah al-Din
al-Ayyubi) was a byword for chivalry, and this remains to some extent
true even to this day. Te contemporary chronicles—by Muslims and
Christians alike—which describe his campaigns and his consistent ﬁdel-
ity to the most noble principles of digniﬁed warfare speak volumes. Again
and again, ofen in the face of treachery from his adversaries, Saladin
responded with magnanimity. Suﬃce it to draw attention to his forbear-
ance, mercy, and generosity at the moment of his greatest triumph: the
reconquest of Jerusalem on Friday 2 October, 1187, a memorable day
indeed, being 27 of Rajab, the anniversary of the Prophet’s Laylat al-Mi‘rāj,
his ascent through the heavens from Jerusalem itself. Afer detailing many
acts of kindness and charity, the Christian chronicler Ernoul writes:
Ten I shall tell you of the great courtesy which Saladin
showed to the wives and daughters of knights, who had ﬂed
to Jerusalem when their lords were killed or made prisoners
in battle. When these ladies were ransomed and had come
forth from Jerusalem, they assembled and went before Sala-
din crying mercy. When Saladin saw them he asked who they
were and what they sought. And it was told him that they
were the dames and damsels of knights who had been taken
or killed in battle. Ten he asked what they wished, and they
answered for God’s sake have pity on them; for the husbands
of some were in prison, and of others were dead, and they
had lost their lands, and in the name of God let him coun-
sel and help them. When Saladin saw them weeping he had
great compassion for them, and wept himself for pity. And he
bade the ladies whose husbands were alive to tell him where
they were captives, and as soon as he could go to the prisons
he would set them free. And all were released wherever they
were found. Afer that he commanded that to the dames and
damsels whose lords were dead there should be handsomely
distributed from his own treasure, to some more and others
less, according to their estate. And he gave them so much that
they gave praise to God and published abroad the kindness
and honour which Saladin had done to them.222

--- Sayfa 163 ---
135
Te Spirit of Jihad
Saladin’s magnanimity at this deﬁning moment of history will always
be contrasted with the barbaric sacking of the city and indiscriminate
murder of its inhabitants by the Christian Crusaders in 1099. His lesson
of mercy has been immortalised in the words of his biographer, Stanley
Lane-Poole:
One recalls the savage conquest by the ﬁrst Crusaders in 1099,
when Godfrey and Tancred rode through streets choked with
the dead and the dying, when defenceless Moslems were
tortured, burnt, and shot down in cold blood on the towers
and roof of the Temple, when the blood of wanton massa-
cre deﬁled the honour of Christendom and stained the scene
where once the gospel of love and mercy had been preached.
‘Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy’ was a
forgotten beatitude when the Christians made shambles of
the Holy City. Fortunate were the merciless, for they obtained
mercy at the hands of the Moslem Sultan … If the taking of
Jerusalem were the only fact known about Saladin, it were
enough to prove him the most chivalrous and great-hearted
conqueror of his own, and perhaps of any, age.223
Saladin, though exceptional, was but expressing essentially Islamic
principles of conduct, as laid down by the Qur’an and the Prophet. Tese
principles of conduct were exempliﬁed in another telling incident which
occurred some ﬁfy years before Saladin’s victory: a mass conversion of
Christians to Islam took place, as a direct result of the exercise of the
cardinal Muslim virtue of compassion. A Christian monk, Odo of Deuil,
has bequeathed to history a valuable record of the event; being openly
antagonistic to the Islamic faith, his account is all the more reliable. Afer
being defeated by the Turks in Phyrgia in 543 AH/1147 CE, the remnants
of Louis VII’s army, together with a few thousand pilgrims, reached the
port of Attalia. Te sick, the wounded and the pilgrims had to be lef
behind by Louis, who gave his Greek allies 500 marks to take care of
these people until reinforcements arrived. Te Greeks stole away with
the money, abandoning the pilgrims and the wounded to the ravages
of starvation and disease, and fully expecting those who survived to
be ﬁnished oﬀ by the Turks. However, when the Turks arrived and saw
the plight of the defenceless pilgrims, they took pity on them, fed and
watered them, and tended to their needs. Tis act of compassion resulted

--- Sayfa 164 ---
war and peace in islam
136
in the wholesale conversion of the pilgrims to Islam. Odo comments:
Avoiding their co-religionists who had been so cruel to them,
they went in safety among the inﬁdels who had compassion
upon them … Oh kindness more cruel than all treachery!
Tey gave them bread but robbed them of their faith, though
it is certain that, contented with the services they [the Mus-
lims] performed, they compelled no one among them to re-
nounce his religion.224
Te last point is crucial in respect of two key Islamic principles: that
no one is ever to be forced into converting to Islam; and that virtue must
be exercised with no expectation of reward. On the one hand, Tere
is no compulsion in religion (Al-Baqarah, 2:256), and on the other, the
righteous are those who feed, for love of Him, the needy, the orphan, the
captive, [saying] we feed you only for the sake of God; we desire neither
reward nor thanks from you (Al-Insān, 76:8–9).
Mercy, compassion, and forbearance are certainly key aspects of the
authentic spirit of jihad; it is not simply a question of ﬁerceness in war,
it is much more about knowing when ﬁghting is unavoidable, how the
ﬁght is to be conducted, and to exercise, whenever possible, the virtues
of mercy and gentleness. Te following verses are relevant in this regard:
Warfare is ordained for you, though it is hateful unto you. (Al-
Baqarah, 2:216)
Muhammad is the messenger of God; and those with him are
ﬁerce against the disbelievers, and merciful amongst them-
selves. (Al-Fatḥ, 48:29)
And ﬁght in the way of God those who ﬁght you, but do not
commit aggression. God loves not the aggressors. (Al-Baqarah,
2:190)
Te Prophet is told in the Qur’an: It was by the mercy of God
that thou was lenient to them; if thou had been stern and ﬁerce
of heart they would have dispersed from around thee. (Āl
‘Imrān, 3:159)
Repeatedly in the Qur’an one is brought back to the overriding
imperative of manifesting mercy and compassion wherever possible.
Tis is a principle that relates not so much to legalism and as to the
deepest nature of things, for, in the Islamic perspective, compassion is

--- Sayfa 165 ---
137
Te Spirit of Jihad
the very essence of the Real. A famous saying of the Prophet tells us
that, written on the very Trone of God are the words, ‘My mercy takes
precedence over My wrath’. Mercy and compassion (raḥmah) express
the fundamental nature of God. Terefore nothing can escape from
divine mercy: My compassion encompasses all things (Al-’Arāf, 7:156).
Te name of God, al-Raḥmān, is coterminous with Allah: Call upon
Allāh or call upon al-Raḥmān (Al-’Isrā’, 17:10). Te divine creative force
is, again and again in the Qur’an, identiﬁed with al-Raḥmān; and the
principle of revelation itself, likewise, is identiﬁed with this same divine
quality. Te chapter of the Qur’an named Al-Raḥmān (55) begins thus:
Al-Raḥmān, taught the Qur’an, created man.
Tis ‘ontological imperative’ of mercy must always be borne in mind
when considering any issue connected with warfare in Islam. Te exam-
ples of merciful magnanimity given above are not only to be seen as
instances of individual virtue, but also, and above all, as natural fruits
of this ontological imperative; and no one manifested this imperative so
fully as the Prophet himself. Indeed, Saladin’s magnanimity at Jerusalem
can be seen as an echo of the Prophet’s conduct at his conquest of Mecca.
As the huge Muslim army approached Mecca in triumphal procession,
a Muslim leader, Sa‘d ibn Ubada, to whom the Prophet had given his
standard, called out to Abu Sufyan, leader of the Quraysh of Mecca, who
knew that there was no chance of resisting this army:
‘O Abu Sufyan, this is the day of slaughter! Te day when the
inviolable shall be violated! Te day of God’s abasement of
Quraysh.’ … ‘O Messenger of God,’ cried Abu Sufyan when
he came within earshot, ‘hast thou commanded the slaying
of thy people?—and he repeated to him what Sa‘d had said.
‘I adjure thee by God,’ he added, on behalf of thy people,
for thou art of all men the greatest in ﬁlial piety, the most
merciful, the most beneﬁcent.’ ‘Tis is the day of mercy,’ said
the Prophet, ‘the day on which God hath exalted Quraysh.’225
Te Quraysh, having full reason to be fearful, given the intensity—
and the barbarity—of their persecution of the early Muslims, and
their continuing hostility and warfare against them afer the enforced
migration of the Muslims to Medina, were granted a general amnesty;
many erstwhile enemies were thereby converted into stalwart Muslims.

--- Sayfa 166 ---
war and peace in islam
138
Tis noble conduct embodied the spirit of the following verse: Te good
deed and the evil deed are not alike. Repel the evil deed with one which is
better, then lo! He, between whom and thee there was enmity [will become]
as though he were a bosom friend. (Fuṣṣilat 41: 34)
Te principle of no compulsion in religion was referred to above.
It is to be noted that, contrary to the still prevalent misconception that
Islam was spread by the sword, the military campaigns and conquests of
the Muslim armies were on the whole carried out in such an exemplary
manner that the conquered peoples became attracted by the religion
which so impressively disciplined its armies, and whose adherents so scru-
pulously respected the principle of freedom of worship. Paradoxically,
the very freedom and respect given by the Muslim conquerors to believ-
ers of diﬀerent faith communities intensiﬁed the process of conversion
to Islam. Arnold’s classic work Te Preaching of Islam remains one of
the best refutations of the idea that Islam was spread by forcible conver-
sion. His comprehensive account of the spread of Islam in all the major
regions of what is now the Muslim world demonstrates beyond doubt
that the growth and spread of the religion was of an essentially peaceful
nature, the two most important factors in accounting for conversion to
Islam being Suﬁsm and trade. Te mystic and the merchant, in other
words, were the most successful missionaries of Islam.
One telling document cited in his work sheds light on the nature of
the mass conversion of one group, the Christians of the Persian province
of Khurasan, and may be taken as indicative of the conditions under
which Christians, and non-Muslims in general, converted to Islam.
Tis is the letter of the Nestorian Patriarch, Isho-yabh III to Simeon,
Metropolitan of Rev-Ardashir, Primate of Persia:
Alas, alas! Out of so many thousands who bore the name
of Christians, not even one single victim was consecrated
unto God by the shedding of his blood for the true faith …
(the Arabs) attack not the Christian faith, but on the con-
trary, they favour our religion, do honour to our priests and
the saints of our Lord and confer beneﬁts on churches and
monasteries. Why then have your people of Merv abandoned
their faith for the sake of these Arabs?226
Tis honouring of Christian priests, saints, churches and monasteries

--- Sayfa 167 ---
139
Te Spirit of Jihad
ﬂows directly from the practice of the Prophet U—witness, among other
things, the treaty he concluded with the monks of St Catherine’s monastery
in Sinai;227 it is likewise rooted in clear verses relating to the inviolability
of all places wherein the name of God is of-invoked. Indeed, in the verse
giving permission to the Muslims to begin to ﬁght back in self-defence
against the Meccans, the need to protect all such places of worship, and
not just mosques, is tied to the reason for the necessity of warfare:
Permission [to ﬁght] is given to those who are being fought, for
they have been wronged, and surely God is able to give them
victory; those who have been expelled from their homes un-
justly, only because they said: Our Lord is God. Had God not
driven back some by means of others, monasteries, churches,
synagogues and mosques—wherein the name of God is of-
invoked—would assuredly have been destroyed. (Al-Ḥajj, 22:
39–40)
Te long and well-authenticated tradition of tolerance in Islam
springs directly from the spirit of this and many other verses of similar
import. We observe one of the most striking historical expressions of
this tradition of tolerance—striking in the contrast it provides with the
intolerance that so frequently characterised the Christian tradition—
in the fate of Spanish Jewry under Islamic rule. Before looking at this
particular case, we should note that, in general terms, active, systematic
persecution of Jews is virtually unknown under Muslim rule. It is
important to stress this fact in the strongest possible terms in the present
context, and to debunk the pernicious lie that is circulating in our times,
the lie that there is in Islam an inherent, deep-rooted, theologically
sanctioned hostility to Judaism. One must not regard the present anger
on the part of most Muslims against particular policies of the state of
Israel as some atavistic resurgence of a putative anti-Semitism ingrained
in the Islamic view of the world. Today, it is the extremists on both
sides—that is the ‘jihadists’ and the Zionists—who share an interest in
promoting this myth of an intrinsically and eternally anti-Jewish Islam;
it is of the utmost importance to show the falsity of this notion.
One should also add here that it is not just the ‘moderates’ on both
sides who come together, for the sake of peace and justice, in opposing
this false characterisation of Muslim-Jewish relations; it is also the lovers

--- Sayfa 168 ---
war and peace in islam
140
of traditional, orthodox Judaism that come together, from all religions,
to denounce, for the sake of veracity, that deviation from Judaism which
Zionism is. Tus we ﬁnd such groups as the Naturai Karta—traditional
Jews opposed to Zionism on irrefutable theological grounds—joining
hands with Muslim human rights groups to defend the legitimate rights
of the Palestinians against the injustices perpetrated against them in
the Holy Land. One must take care to distinguish, therefore, not only
between Judaism and Zionism, but also between legitimate opposition to
particular policies of the state of Israel—policies that reﬂect and embody
Zionist aspirations in diﬀerent degrees—and illegitimate jihad against
Jews or Westerners simply on account of the fact that they are Jews or
Westerners. Te ﬁrst expresses a legitimate grievance; the second makes
of this grievance the pretext for terrorism.
As regards the refutation of the myth that Muslim-Jewish relations
have traditionally been antagonistic and oppressive, a cursory perusal of
the historical record suﬃces. Even so ﬁerce a critic of Islam as Bernard
Lewis cannot but conﬁrm the facts of history as regards the true charac-
ter of Muslim-Jewish relations until recent times. In his book Te Jews
of Islam, he writes that even though there was a certain level of discrim-
ination against Jews and Christians under Muslim rule, ‘Persecution,
that is to say, violent and active repression, was rare and atypical. Jews
and Christians under Muslim rule were not normally called upon to
suﬀer martyrdom for their faith. Tey were not ofen obliged to make
the choice, which confronted Muslims and Jews in reconquered Spain,
between exile, apostasy and death. Tey were not subject to any major
territorial or occupational restrictions, such as were the common lot of
Jews in premodern Europe.’228 He then adds the important point that
this pattern of tolerance continued to characterise the nature of Muslim
rule vis-à-vis Jews and Christians until modern times, with very minor
exceptions.
It is not out of place to note here that the phenomenon of anti-Semi-
tism has absolutely nothing to do with Islam. It was, as Schleifer notes,
‘Church Triumphant’—that is the Byzantine Church which triumphed
over the Roman Empire, and founded its new capital in Constantinople
in the fourth century—it was this Church that was to ‘unleash upon the
world the phenomenon of anti-Semitism. For if we are to diﬀerentiate

--- Sayfa 169 ---
141
Te Spirit of Jihad
between the vicissitudes which any minority community may endure,
and a principled and systematic hostility, then one can boldly state, with
the consensus of modern historians, that anti-Semitism originated as a
Christian phenomenon.’229
Te story of anti-Semitism in Europe—the violent episodes of what
today would be labelled ethnic cleansing—is too well known to need
repeating here. But it should be borne in mind that at the same time as
the Christian West was indulging in periodic anti-Jewish pogroms, the
Jews were experiencing what some Jewish historians themselves have
termed a kind of golden age under Muslim rule. As Erwin Rosenthal
writes, ‘Te Talmudic age apart, there is perhaps no more formative
and positive time in our long and chequered history than that under the
empire of Islam.’230
 One particularly rich episode in this golden period was experienced
by the Jews of Muslim Spain. As has been abundantly attested by historical
records, the Jews enjoyed not just freedom from oppression, but also an
extraordinary revival of cultural, religious, theological and mystical crea-
tivity. As Titus Burckhardt writes, ‘Te greatest beneﬁciaries of Islamic
rule were the Jews, for in Spain (sephārād in Hebrew) they enjoyed their
ﬁnest intellectual ﬂowering since their dispersal from Palestine to foreign
lands.’231 Such great Jewish luminaries as Maimonides and Ibn Gabirol
wrote their philosophical works in Arabic, and were fully ‘at home’ in
Muslim Spain.232 With the expulsion, murder or forced conversion of
all Muslims and Jews following the reconquista of Spain—brought to
completion with the fall of Granada in 1492—it was to the Ottomans that
the exiled Jews turned for refuge and protection. Tey were welcomed
in Muslim lands throughout North Africa, joining the settled and pros-
perous Jewish communities already there, while also establishing new
Jewish communities.
It was at this time also that Jews were suﬀering intense persecu-
tion in central Europe; they likewise looked to the Muslim Ottomans
for refuge. Many Jews ﬂeeing from persecution in central Europe would
have received letters like the following, from Rabbi Isaac Tzarfati, who
reached the Ottomans just before their capture of Constantinople in
1453. Tis is what he replied to those Jews of central Europe who were
calling out for help:

--- Sayfa 170 ---
war and peace in islam
142
Listen, my brethren, to the counsel I will give you. I too was
born in Germany and studied Torah with the German rabbis.
I was driven out of my native country and came to the Turkish
land, which is blessed by God and ﬁlled with all good things.
Here I found rest and happiness … Here in the land of the
Turks we have nothing to complain of. We are not oppressed
with heavy taxes, and our commerce is free and unhindered
… every one of us lives in peace and freedom. Here the Jew
is not compelled to wear a yellow hat as a badge of shame, as
is the case in Germany, where even wealth and great fortune
are a curse for the Jew because he therewith arouses jealousy
among the Christians … Arise, my brethren, gird up your
loins, collect your forces, and come to us. Here you will be
free of your enemies, here you will ﬁnd rest …233
Given the fact that so much of today’s jihadist propaganda is directed
against Jews, it is important to stress that this tolerance of Jews under
Muslim rule is one expression of an underlying theological harmony
between the two religions—a harmony that is conspicuously absent
when one compares Christian and Jewish theology. Islam was never
considered the messianic fulﬁlment of Judaism, as was Christianity;
it was put forward as a restoration of that primordial Abrahamic faith
of which both Judaism and Christianity were alike expressions. Islam
calls adherents of both faiths back to that pristine monotheism; far from
rejecting their prophets, the Qur’an asserts that all the prophets came
with one and the same message, and that therefore there should be no
distinction made between any of them:
Say: We believe in God and that which is revealed unto us,
and that which is revealed unto Abraham and Ishmael and
Isaac and Jacob and the tribes, and that which was given unto
Moses and Jesus and the prophets from their Lord. We make
no distinction between any of them, and unto Him we have
submitted. (Āl ʿImrān, 3:84)
Te consequences of this acceptance of the pre-Qur’anic scriptures—
albeit conditioned by the need to beware of certain distortions
(taḥrīf), distortions which, however, the Qur’an does not specify—
these consequences were far-reaching as regards theological relations
between Muslims and Jews. As the Jewish scholar Mark Cohen notes:
‘Rabbinic exegesis of the Bible—so repugnant to Christian theologians—

--- Sayfa 171 ---
143
Te Spirit of Jihad
bothered Muslim clerics only insofar as it distorted pristine Abrahamic
monotheism. Tus the Islamic polemic against the rabbis was much less
virulent and had far less serious repercussions. Te Talmud was burned
in Paris, not in Cairo or Baghdad.’234
Terefore, the refusal of the Jews to follow the shari‘ah was not a
challenge to Islamic belief; this in contrast to the Jewish rejection of
Christ as messiah, which not only challenged a cardinal tenet of Christian
dogma, it also deeply insulted Christian faith and sensibility. Whereas in
Christendom, the Jews were reviled as the killers of Jesus, in Islam, the
Jews were ‘protected’, as ahl al-dhimmah, by the very law that they refused
to follow for themselves. To quote Cohen again, ‘More secure than their
brethren in the Christian West, the Jews of Islam took a correspondingly
more conciliatory view of their masters. In Europe, the Jews nurtured a
pronounced hatred for the Christians, whom they considered to be idola-
tors, subject to the anti-pagan discriminatory provisions of the ancient
Mishnah … Te Jews of Islam had a markedly diﬀerent attitude towards
the religion of their masters. Staunch Muslim opposition to polytheism
convinced Jewish thinkers like Maimonides of Islam’s unimpeachable
monotheism. Tis essentially ‘tolerant’ view of Islam echoed Islam’s own
respect for the Jewish “people of the Book”…’235
Te tolerance extended by Islam to Jews (and, indeed, all believers,
including Hindus, Buddhists and Zoroastrians) should be seen, again,
not as arising only out of a sense of virtue or justice or expediency on
the part of the majority of the rulers and dynasties throughout Muslim
history—and thus as some kind of interesting historical preﬁguration
of modern, secular tolerance; rather, the fact that this phenomenon
of Muslim tolerance is so clearly deﬁned must be seen as organically
connected to the spirit of the Qur’anic revelation, a spirit grasped in
depth by traditional Muslims, and deliberately ignored or subverted by
modern ‘jihadists’. Tis spirit is well expressed in the following verses:
Truly those who believe, and the Jews, and the Christians, and
the Sabeans—whoever believes in God and the Last Day and
performs virtuous deeds—surely their reward is with their
Lord, and no fear shall come upon them, neither shall they
grieve. (Al-Baqarah, 2: 62)
Of the People of the Scripture there is a staunch community

--- Sayfa 172 ---
war and peace in islam
144
who recite the revelations of God in the watches of the night,
falling prostrate. / Tey believe in God and the Last Day, and
enjoin right conduct and forbid indecency, and vie with one
another in good works. Tese are of the righteous. / And what-
ever good they do, they will not be denied it; and God knows
the pious. (Āl ‘Imrān, 3: 113–4)
Te lifeblood of terrorism is hatred; and this hatred is ofen in
turn the disﬁgured expression of grievance—a grievance that may be
legitimate. In the present day, few doubt that the ongoing injustices in
Palestine and other parts of the Muslim world give rise to legitimate
grievances, but there is nothing in Islam that justiﬁes the killing or
injuring of civilians, nor of perpetrating any excess as a result of hatred,
even if that hatred is based on legitimate grievances. Te pursuit of
justice must be conducted in accordance with justice; the means should
not undermine the end:
O ye who believe, be upright for God, witnesses in justice; and
let not hatred of a people cause you to be unjust. Be just—that
is closer to piety. (Al-Mā’idah, 5:8)
Te principle here established is perfectly exempliﬁed in the
conduct of Emir Abd al-Qadir, leader of the Algerian Muslims in their
heroic resistance to French colonial aggression between 1830 and 1847.
Te French were guilty of the most barbaric crimes in their ‘mission
civilisatrice’; the emir responded not with bitter vengefulness and
enraged fury but with dispassionate propriety and principled warfare. At
a time when the French were indiscriminately massacring entire tribes,
when they were oﬀering their soldiers a ten franc reward for every pair
of Arab ears, and when severed Arab heads were regarded as trophies
of war, the emir manifested his magnanimity, his unﬂinching adherence
to Islamic principle, and his refusal to stoop to the level of his ‘civilised’
adversaries, by issuing the following edict:
Every Arab who captures alive a French soldier will receive
as reward eight douros … Every Arab who has in his posses-
sion a Frenchman is bound to treat him well and to conduct
him to either the khalifa or the emir himself, as soon as pos-
sible. In cases where the prisoner complains of ill treatment,
the Arab will have no right to any reward.236

--- Sayfa 173 ---
145
Te Spirit of Jihad
When asked what the reward was for a severed French head, the
emir replied: twenty-ﬁve blows of the baton on the soles of the feet.
One understands why General Bugeaud, governor-general of Algeria,
referred to the emir not only as ‘a man of genius whom history should
place alongside Jugurtha’, but also as ‘a kind of prophet, the hope of
all fervent Muslims’.237 When he was ﬁnally defeated and brought to
France, before being exiled to Damascus, the emir received hundreds
of French admirers who had heard of his bravery and his nobility; the
visitors by whom he was most deeply touched, though, were French
oﬃcers who came to thank him for the treatment they received at his
hands when they were his prisoners in Algeria.238
Also highly relevant to our theme is the emir’s famous defence of
Christians in Damascus in 1860. Now defeated and in exile, the emir
spent his time praying and teaching. When civil war broke out between
the Druze and the Christians in Lebanon, the emir heard that there
were signs of an impending attack on the Christians of Damascus. He
wrote letters to all the Druze shaykhs, requesting them not to ‘make
oﬀensive movements against a place with the inhabitants of which you
have never before been at enmity’. Here we have an expression of the
cardinal principle of warfare in Islam: never to initiate hostilities. And
ﬁght in the way of God those who ﬁght you, but do not commit aggression.
God loves not the aggressors (Al-Baqarah, 2: 190).239
Te emir’s letters proved to no avail. When the Druze were approach-
ing the Christian quarters of the city, the emir confronted them, urging
them to observe the rules of religion and of human justice.
‘What,’ they shouted, ‘you, the great slayer of Christians,
are you come out to prevent us from slaying them in our
turn? Away!’
‘If I slew the Christians,’ he shouted in reply, ‘it was ever
in accordance with our law—the Christians who had de-
clared war against me, and were arrayed in arms against
our faith.’240
Tis had no eﬀect upon the mob. In the end, the emir and his
small band of followers sought out the terriﬁed Christians, giving
them refuge, ﬁrst in his own home, and then, as the numbers grew, in
the citadel. It is estimated that no less than ﬁfeen thousand Christians

--- Sayfa 174 ---
war and peace in islam
146
were saved by the emir in this action; it is important to note that in
this number were included all the ambassadors and consuls of the
European powers. As Churchill prosaically puts it:
All the representatives of the Christian powers then re-
siding in Damascus, without one single exception, had
owed their lives to him. Strange and unparalleled destiny!
An Arab had thrown his guardian aegis over the outraged
majesty of Europe. A descendant of the Prophet had shel-
tered and protected the Spouse of Christ.241
Te French consul, representative of the state that was still very
much in the process of colonising the emir’s homeland, owed his life
to the emir; for this true warrior of Islam, there was no bitterness,
resentment or revenge, only the duty to protect the innocent, and all
the ‘People of the Book’ who lived peacefully within the lands of Islam.
It is diﬃcult to conceive of a greater contrast than that between the
emir’s conduct and the present-day self-styled mujāhidīn, who indis-
criminately portray the West as the enemy tout court, and perpetrate
correspondingly illegitimate acts against Westerners. Te emir’s action
exempliﬁes well the Qur’anic verse:
God forbids you not from dealing kindly and justly with
those who fought not against you on account of your re-
ligion, nor drove you out of your homes. Truly God loves
those who are just. (Al-Mumtaḥanah, 60:8)
It is interesting to note that another great warrior of Islam, Imam
Shamil of Dagestan, hero of the wars against Russian imperialism,242
wrote a letter to the emir when he heard of his defence of the Chris-
tians. He praised the emir for his noble act, thanking God that there
were still Muslims who behaved according to the spiritual ideals of
Islam:
I was astonished at the blindness of the functionaries who
have plunged into such excesses, forgetful of the words of
the Prophet U, ‘Whoever shall be unjust towards a tribu-
tary,243 who shall do him wrong, who shall lay on him any
charge beyond his means, and finally who shall deprive
him of anything without his own consent, it is I who will
be his accuser in the day of judgement’.244

--- Sayfa 175 ---
147
Te Spirit of Jihad
While the emir fought French colonialism militarily, in the following
century another great Suﬁ master in Algeria, Shaykh Ahmad al-Alawi,
chose to resist with a peaceful strategy, but one which pertained no
less to jihad, in the principal sense of the term. One has to remember
that the literal meaning of the word jihad is ‘eﬀort’ or struggle, and that
the ‘greater’ jihad was deﬁned by the Prophet as the jihad al-nafs, the
struggle against the soul. Te priority thus accorded to inward, spiritual
eﬀort over all outward endeavours must never be lost sight of in any
examination of jihad. Physical ﬁghting is the ‘lesser’ jihad, and only has
meaning in the context of that unremitting combat against inner vices,
the devil within, that has been called the greater jihad.
One contemporary Suﬁ master vividly contrasts the kind of inner
warfare that characterises the true ‘warriors of the spirit’ from the
mass of ordinary believers. He does so in connection with the Qur’anic
distinction, within the category of those who are saved in the hereafer,
between the companions of the right (aṣḥāb al-yamīn) and the foremost
(al-sābiqūn) (Al-Wāqi‘ah, 56: 8–10):
Every Muslim is at war with the devil. As regards those of
the right, however, this warfare is desultory and intermittent,
with many armistices and many compromises. Moreover
the devil is aware that as fallen men they are already to a
certain extent within his grasp, and having by deﬁnition no
faith in the Divine Mercy, he cannot foresee that they will es-
cape from his clutches in the life to come. But as regards the
foremost, he feels them actually throwing oﬀ his domination
in the present, and they even carry the war into his territory.
Te result is a terrible retaliation …245
Te individual’s moral and spiritual eﬀort in this inner struggle is
a necessary but not suﬃcient condition for victory; only by means of
heaven-sent weapons can the war be won: sacred rites, meditations,
incantations, invocations—all of which are summed up in the term
‘remembrance of God’. In this light, the strategy of Shaykh al-Alawi can
be better appreciated. It was to put ﬁrst things ﬁrst, concentrating on the
‘one thing needful’ and leaving the rest in God’s hands. It might be seen,
extrinsically, as an application, on the plane of society, of the following
esoteric principle, enunciated by one of his spiritual forbears, Mulay Ali
al-Jamal: ‘Te true way to hurt the enemy is to be occupied with the love

--- Sayfa 176 ---
war and peace in islam
148
of the Friend; on the other hand, if you engage in war with the enemy, he
will have obtained what he wanted from you, and at the same time you
will have lost the opportunity of loving the Friend.’246
Shaykh al-Alawi concentrated on this love of the Friend, and of all
those values connected to this imperative of remembrance, doing so
to the exclusion of other, more overt forms of resistance, military and
political, against the French. Te Shaykh’s spiritual radiance extended
not just to a few disciples but also, through his many muqaddams, to
hundreds of thousands of Muslims whose piety was deepened in ways
that are immeasurable.247 Te Shaykh was not directly concerned with
political means of liberating his land from the yoke of French rule, for
this was but a secondary aspect of the situation: the underlying aim of
the French ‘mission civilisatrice’ in Algeria was to forge the Algerian
personality in the image of French culture,248 so in the measure that one
perceives that the real danger of colonialism was cultural and psycho-
logical rather than just territorial and political, the spiritual indomita-
bility of the Shaykh and his many followers assumes the dimensions of
a signal victory. Te French could make no inroads into a mentality that
remained inextricably rooted in the spiritual tradition of Islam.
Lest this approach be regarded as a prescription for unconditional
quietism, one should note that the great warrior, the emir himself, would
have had no diﬃculty whatsoever in asserting its validity, for even while
outwardly engaging with the enemy on the battleﬁeld, he was never
for a moment distracted from his remembrance of the ‘Friend’. It was
without bitterness and rage that he fought, and this explains the absence
of any resentment towards the French when he was defeated by them,
submitting to the manifest will of God with the same contemplative
resignation with which he went into battle with them in the ﬁrst place.
One may suspect us of romanticising somewhat, and of overstating the
emir’s capacity to deal with the exigencies of a brutal war whilst simul-
taneously plumbing the depths of contemplative experience; it is there-
fore useful to present the following account, written by a Frenchman,
Léon Roche, who entered the inner circle of the emir’s entourage by
pretending to have converted to Islam. During the siege of Ayn Madi
in 1838, Roche was traumatised by the ﬁghting and killing, and sought
out the emir; entering his tent, he pleaded with the emir to help him.

--- Sayfa 177 ---
149
Te Spirit of Jihad
He calmed me and had me drink an infusion of schiehh (a
kind of absynthe common in the desert). He supported my
head, which I could no longer hold up, on one of his knees.
He was squatting in the Arab fashion. I was stretched out
at his side. He placed his hands on my head, from which
he had removed the haik and the chechias, and under this
gentle touch I soon fell asleep. I awoke well into the night. I
opened my eyes and felt revived. Te smoky wick of an Arab
lamp barely lit the vast tent of the amir. He was standing
three steps away from me. He thought I was asleep. His two
arms were raised to the height of his head, fully displaying
his milky white bernous and haik which fell in superb folds.
His beautiful blue eyes, lined with black lashes, were raised.
His lips, slightly open, seemed to be still reciting a prayer
but nevertheless were motionless. He had come to an ec-
static state. His aspirations towards heaven were such that
he seemed no longer to touch the earth. I had on occasion
been granted the honour of sleeping in Abd al-Kader’s tent
and I had seen him in prayer and been struck by his mysti-
cal transports, but on this night he represented for me the
most striking image of faith. Tus must the great saints of
Christianity have prayed.249
From this account one sees that the following ‘oﬃcial’ description of
the emir, given as the conclusion to a pamphlet deﬁning army regulations
in 1839, was not simply pious propaganda:
Il Hadj Abdel Kader cares not for this world, and withdraws
from it as much as his avocations permit … He rises in the
middle of the night to recommend his own soul and the
souls of his followers to God. His chief pleasure is in praying
to God with fasting, that his sins may be forgiven … When
he administers justice, he hears complaints with the greatest
patience … When he preaches, his words bring tears to all
eyes, and melt the hardest hearts.250
Tis remarkable combination of roles—warrior and saint, preacher
and judge—recalls perhaps the greatest model of all Muslim mujāhidīn,
Ali ibn Abi Talib, son-in-law and cousin of the Prophet, the fourth caliph
of Islam and ﬁrst Shi’i imam, unrivalled hero of all the early battles of
Islam. Te Prophet U said: ‘I am the city of knowledge and Ali is its
gate’. He also said, in a hadith bearing the highest degree of authenticity

--- Sayfa 178 ---
war and peace in islam
150
(mutawātir): ‘For whoever has me as his master (mawlā), Ali is his
master.’ And the Prophet U referred to Ali as having the same rank
in relation to him as Aaron had in relation to Moses, except that Ali
was not a prophet. Tis paragon of wisdom and virtue stands forth as
the most compelling holy warrior in the Islamic tradition. As Frithjof
Schuon puts it, ‘Ali appears above all as the “Solar Hero”, he is the
“Lion” of God; he personiﬁes the combination of physical heroism on
the ﬁeld of battle with a sanctity wholly detached from the things of
the world; he is the personiﬁcation of the wisdom, both impassive and
combative, which the Bagavad-Gita teaches.’251
One of the great lessons of principled warfare, of ‘ﬁghting in the
path of God’, imparted by Ali was immortalised by Rumi in his poetic
rendering of the famous incident in which Ali sheathed his sword
instead of ﬁnishing oﬀ his defeated enemy, who had spat at him in a
last gesture of deﬁance. Although the immediate spiritual signiﬁcance
of the action is clearly Ali’s refusal to kill on the basis of personal
anger—the warrior must be detached from self, and ﬁght wholly for
God—it is also given a deeper metaphysical meaning by Rumi. In his
Mathnawi, Rumi turns the incident into a sublime commentary on
the Qur’anic verse, Ye slew them not, but God slew them. And thou
(Muhammad) didst not throw when thou threwest, but God threw
(Al-Anfāl, 8:17). Te last part of the verse refers to the throwing by
the Prophet of a handful of dust in the direction of the enemy before a
battle. But the verse as a whole alludes to the reality that the true, onto-
logical agent of all actions is God Himself; man’s actions are good only
if he is conscious of this, and insofar as he is eﬀaced in this conscious-
ness. Rumi puts the following words into the mouth of Ali, who replies
to the question of the baﬄed, defeated warrior on the ground: why
did you not kill me?
He said, ‘I am wielding the sword for God’s sake, I am the
servant of God, I am not under the command of the body.
I am the Lion of God, I am not the lion of my passion: my
deed bears witness to my religion.
In war I am (manifesting the truth of) thou didst not
throw when thou threwest: I am (but) as the sword, and
the wielder is the (Divine) Sun.

--- Sayfa 179 ---
151
Te Spirit of Jihad
I have removed the baggage of self out of the way, I have
deemed (what is) other than God to be non-existence.
I am a shadow, the Sun is my lord; I am the chamberlain, I
am not the curtain (which prevents approach) to Him.
I am ﬁlled with the pearls of union, like a (jewelled) sword:
in battle I make (men) living, not slain.252
Blood does not cover the sheen of my sword: how should the
wind sweep away my clouds?
I am not a straw, I am a mountain of forbearance and pa-
tience and justice: how should the ﬁerce wind carry oﬀ the
mountain?’253
Te true warrior of Islam smites the neck of his own anger with the
sword of forbearance;254 the false warrior strikes at the neck of his enemy
with the sword of his own unbridled ego. For the ﬁrst, the spirit of Islam
determines jihad; for the second, bitter anger, masquerading as jihad,
determines Islam. Te contrast between the two could hardly be clearer.
Te episodes recounted here as illustrations of authentic jihad
should be seen not as representing some unattainably sublime ideal, but
as expressive of the sacred norm in the Islamic tradition of warfare; this
norm may not always have been applied in practice—one can always
ﬁnd deviations and transgressions—but it was continuously upheld in
principle, and, more ofen than not, gave rise to the kind of chivalry,
heroism and nobility of which we have oﬀered a few of the more striking
and famous examples here.
Tis sacred norm stood out clearly for all to see, buttressed by the
values and institutions of traditional Muslim society. It can still be
discerned today, for those who look hard enough, through the clouds
of passion and ideology. Te emir bewailed the paucity of ‘champi-
ons of truth’ in his time; in our own time, we are confronted with an
even more grotesque spectacle: the champions of authentic jihad being
blown to pieces by suicide bombers claiming to be martyrs for the faith.
One of the truly great mujāhidīn in the war against the Soviet invad-
ers in Afghanistan, Ahmed Shah Massoud, fell victim to a treacherous
attack by two fellow Muslims, in what was evidently the ﬁrst stage of
the operation that destroyed the World Trade Center. It was a strategic
imperative for the planners of the operation to rid the land of its most

--- Sayfa 180 ---
war and peace in islam
152
charismatic leader; a hero who could credibly be used by the West as
a ﬁgurehead for the revenge attack on Afghanistan that was provoked,
anticipated, and hoped for, by the terrorists. But, politics aside, the
reason why Massoud was so popular was precisely his ﬁdelity to the
values of noble warfare in Islam; and it was this very ﬁdelity to that
tradition that made him a dangerous enemy of the terrorists—more
dangerous, it may be said, than that more abstract enemy, ‘the West’.
To present the indiscriminate murder of Western civilians as jihad, the
values of true jihad needed to be dead and buried.
Te murder of Massoud was thus doubly symbolic: he embodied
the traditional spirit of jihad that needed to be destroyed by those who
wished to assume its ruptured mantle; and it was only through suicide—
subverting one’s own soul—that this destruction, or rather, this appar-
ent destruction, could be perpetrated. Te destruction is only apparent
in that, on the one hand:
Tey destroy [but] themselves, they who would ready a pit of
ﬁre ﬁercely burning [for all who have attained to faith]. (Al-
Burūj, 85:4–5) 255
And on the other hand:
Say not of those who are slain in the path of God: Tey are
dead. Nay, they are alive, though ye perceive not. (Al-Baqarah,
2:154)
Finally, let it be noted that, while it is indeed true that the martyr
is promised paradise, a shahīd is one whose death truly bears ‘witness’
(shahādah) to the truth of God. It is consciousness of the truth that must
animate and articulate the spirit of one who ‘ﬁghts in the Path of God’;
ﬁghting for any cause other than the truth cannot be called a jihad, just
as one who dies ﬁghting in such a cause cannot be called a ‘martyr’. Only
he is a martyr who can say with utter sincerity:
Truly my prayer and my sacriﬁce, my living and my dying are
for God, Lord of all creation. (Al-An‘ām, 6:162)
© Reza Shah-Kazemi. Tis article was originally published
in Seasons: Semi-annual Journal Zaytuna Institute.

--- Sayfa 181 ---
153
chapter six
A FATWA ON JIHAD
HE Shaykh Ali Gomaa
(Former Grand Mufi of Egypt)
Te concept of jihad in Islam is one of the topics that causes the most
confusion and is surrounded by a cacophony aiming at equating jihad
with mass murder and random shooting sprees.
All concepts have roots in a group of beliefs that nourish the concept
into full bloom. By applying this deﬁnition to jihad, we would ﬁnd that
its roots are not the same as infamous propaganda would have us believe,
namely that Islam instils bloodlust and a desire to terrorise people and
massacre them in cold blood or convert them at the point of a sword.
The Relationship between Jihad and Islam
Te roots of jihad are in Islam, and to understand the concept we need to
take a broader look at the message of Islam and the messenger who carried
it from heaven to earth. Muslims consider the Prophet Muhammad U to
be the carrier of the last revelation from God to all mankind. Tis idea
gives rise to the universality of Islam which does not conﬁne itself to a
certain place or limit itself to a speciﬁc time, nor,  more importantly target
a particular race or ethnicity, be it Arab or Turk or Anglo-Saxon or Asian.
Te reality is that Islam transcends the boundaries of space, time and race
to encompass all of humanity in its fold.
Te most important characteristic of the Prophet Muhammad U
mentioned in the Holy Qur’an, is that he is a ‘mercy’ to the worlds. Te
idea that the Prophet Muhammad U was sent by God to be a mercy to the
worlds reinforces the universal characteristic of the message of Islam, as the
Prophet is not a mercy to Muslims alone but to all people, animals, plants,
stones, indeed to all creatures; this is what is meant by ‘all the worlds’.

--- Sayfa 182 ---
war and peace in islam
154
Tis overarching characteristic of the Prophet being a mercy to all the
worlds encompasses all the concepts and/or ideologies which stem from
Islam and are promoted by it, including the concept of jihad.
The Linguistic Origin of Jihad
Before delving deeply into the concept of jihad, it is vital to deﬁne the term
itself its root in the Arabic language. Te word jihad comes from the root
j/h/d, which in Arabic means to exert the most eﬀort. Tis deﬁnition is
general: as one can exert eﬀort in studying or fulﬁlling goals and ambitions
in a variety of areas.
In Islam the idea of exerting eﬀort has two levels, a major level and a
minor one. Te major level of jihad is jihad al-nafs or struggling against
one’s lower self and its demeaning lustful desires. Tis jihad is the hardest
because it needs discipline and hard work. Te lesser, or minor jihad, is
al-qitāl or armed struggle. Tis is the jihad that has been attacked by unjust
and misleading propaganda in an eﬀort to equate it with mere bloodshed.
Qur’anic Verses and Prophetic Traditions on jihad
Keeping in mind that ‘mercy’ is the backbone and root of all Islamic legis-
lation and rulings, one must understand that jihad is no diﬀerent. God
in the Qur’an and the Prophet Muhammad U in his prophetic traditions
have laid out the purpose of jihad, and laid down the rulings and foun-
dational bases which condition this concept, and through which it can be
deﬁned.
God says in the Holy Qur’an:
We ordained for the children of Israel that if any one kills a per-
son—unless it be for murder or for spreading mischief in the
land—it would be as if he killed the whole people, and if anyone
saved a life, it would be as if he saved the life of all people. (Al-
Mā’idah, 5: 32)
Te Qur’an forbids murder whilst extolling the sanctity of human life,
 Life, which Allah has made sacred (Al-An‘ām, 6: 151)
God also says in the Holy Qur’an:
Fight in the cause of Allah those who ﬁght you but do not transgress
limits; For Allah loveth not transgressors. (Al-Baqarah, 2: 190)

--- Sayfa 183 ---
155
A Fatwa on Jihad
In his commentary, Imam al-Taher Ibn ‘Ashur reported through Ibn
‘Abbas and ‘Umar Ibn ‘Abdul ‘Aziz and Mujahid that this verse is deﬁnite
and has not been abrogated. He went on to say: ‘the purport is to ﬁght
those who are set to ﬁght you, i.e. do not attack the old, women or children.’
Sulaymān Ibn Burayda narrated through his father that whenever the
Prophet used to send an army to battle, he would brief its commander
and remind him to fear Allah in his actions and those with him and say:
‘Fight in the name of Allah, ﬁght those (who ﬁght you) from among the
disbelievers and do not exceed your limits, do not transgress, deceive,
mutilate [the dead] and do not kill a child.’ (Al-Tirmidhi)
Ibn ‘Umar W said: ‘I saw the messenger of Allah U circling the Ka‘bah
saying: “How great and sacred you are, and how pleasant your fragrance!
By He in whose hand is the life of Mohammed, the sanctity of a believer,
his property, life and to think well of him is greater in the sight of Allah
than yours.”’ (Ibn Majah). Consider also: ‘Te ﬁrst cases to be adjudicated
against on the Day of Judgment will be those of bloodshed’ (Bukhari), and
his strikingly stark threat that: ‘Whoever kills one (non-Muslim) under
contract (of Muslim protection) will never smell the scent of paradise’
(Ibn Majah).
The Purpose of Jihad in Islam
Te purpose or the aim of jihad or conducting wars for the sake of God
is as follows:
1) Self-defence and ﬁghting back against aggression.
2) Alleviating religious persecution and establishing freedom of
religion so that people may have the opportunity to think freely
and practice their religious convictions.
The Conditions and the Rulings for Jihad
1) Te nobility of purpose, meaning that no personal interests or
private gains should be the aim behind which jihad is being
waged.
2) Fighting should be only against combatants not defenceless
civilians who are not in the battleﬁeld and are not equipped or
trained to be engaged in combat.
3) Te killing or harming of women and children is strictly

--- Sayfa 184 ---
war and peace in islam
156
prohibited. Al-Bukhari and Muslim reported through Abdullah
ibn ʿUmar W that a woman was found dead in one of the battles
fought by the Prophet U; thereupon he condemned killing
women and children. Another phrasing of the hadith states:
‘Te Messenger of Allah U forbade killing women and children.’
Imam al-Nawawi said: ‘Tere is a scholarly consensus on putting
this hadith in practice as long as the women and children do not
ﬁght [the Muslims]. If they do, the majority of scholars maintain
that they should be killed’ (Sharḥ Muslim 12/48).
4) Preserving the lives of captives and treating them humanely.
5) Preserving the environment, which includes a prohibition on
killing animals or cutting trees or destroying harvests or polluting
rivers or wells or demolishing houses.
6) Preserving religious freedom for worshippers in their homes,
churches or synagogues.
7) Killing and attacking people by surprise is prohibited. Abu
Hurayrah W narrated that the Messenger of Allah U said: ‘A
believer is not to kill [others]. Faith is a deterrent to killing.’ Ibn
al-Athir said: ‘Killing [here] means taking others by surprise and
killing them while they are unprepared’ (Al-Nihāyah fī Gharīb
al-Ḥadīth wa al-Athār 3/775). Te hadith means that faith is a
deterrent to attacking others suddenly while they are unprepared.
Te Prophet’s words: ‘A believer is not to attack [others] by
surprise’ is a clear prohibition against deception in combat.
8) Permission to enter a country is considered a non-verbal security
agreement not to cause corruption in the host country. Imam
al-Khurqi said in his Mukhtasr: ‘Whoever enters enemy lands in
safety is not allowed to cheat them of their money.’ Commenting
on this statement, Ibn Qudama said that ‘it is prohibited to betray
them [non-Muslims in non-Muslim countries] because there is
an unspoken covenant to enter in safety on the condition that
the person who seeks permission to enter a foreign country does
not betray or oppress them. So whoever enters our lands in safety
and betrays us violates this security agreement. Tis is prohibited
because it involves treachery which is forbidden in our religion’
(Al-Mughnī 9/237).

--- Sayfa 185 ---
157
A Fatwa on Jihad
9) Te enemy must be from among those whom Muslims are
permitted to ﬁght, rather than the enemy with whom Muslims
have a truce. It is impermissible to attack the enemy under the
cover of night because it is a violation of the security pact between
them in terms of lives, wealth, and honour.
10) It is impermissible to use human shields save in a state of war
and under speciﬁc conditions detailed by jurists. (Bahr Ra’iq
80/5, Hashiyat ibn ‘Abn Abdin 223/3, Rawdat al Talibin 239/10,
Mughnī al Muhtaj 223/4, Mughnī ibn Qudama 449/8, 386/10).
Who Has the Right to Call for Jihad
and Declare War?
1) Te principle in war is that it should be launched with the
authorisation of, and under the banner of, the Muslim ruler; it is
imperative that the decision to declare war be based on his own
reasoning, and his subjects must obey him. A ruler is authorised to
declare war due to his knowledge of evident and hidden matters,
the consequences of actions and the interest of his people. For
this reason, a ruler is authorised to declare war and agree to
domestic or international treaties as soon as he assumes oﬃce.
In turn, he does not issue decisions based on (personal) whims.
Te Muslim ruler declares war only afer consulting special-
ists in every relevant ﬁeld, such as technical and military special-
ists and political consultants who are indispensable to military
strategy. Te luminary al-Bahuti said in Sharḥ Muntahā al-Iradāt:
‘It is prohibited to [launch an] attack without the ruler’s permis-
sion because he is responsible for making the decision of declar-
ing war. [Tis is because] he has access to all the information
pertaining to the enemy. [His permission is mandatory] except
if [Muslims] are taken by surprise by non-Muslim enemies and
fear their threat. [Only] then is it permissible to ﬁght the attack-
ers without the ruler’s permission because of the general beneﬁt
therein.’
2) Breach of international agreements and treaties: Islamic states
must abide by the agreements and treaties that they have
acknowledged and entered into of their own accord; standing

--- Sayfa 186 ---
war and peace in islam
158
ﬁrmly with the international community towards achieving
global peace and security (only) to the extent of the commitment
of the signatory countries. Allah says:
O you who believe, fulﬁll [all] contracts (Al-Mā’idah, 5:1)
In the above verse, the term ‘contract’ refers to all commitments
between two parties on a particular issue. In his interpretation of the
above verse, the erudite Tunisian scholar, Ibn ‘Ashur says: ‘“Contracts” in
this verse refers to one of a genus denoting the totality [of contracts]. It
includes covenants that Muslims made with their Lord such as to follow
the shari‘ah … pacts of allegiance between the believers and the Prophet
U, not to associate partners with Allah, steal, or commit fornication …
agreements between Muslims and non-Muslims … and agreements
between one Muslim and another’ (Al-Tahrīr wa al-Tanwīr, 6/74).
Amr ibn ޏAwf al-Muzna W narrates that the Prophet U said:
‘Muslims are bound by the conditions [they stipulate] except those that
are unlawful or those that make unlawful matters lawful’ (reported by
al-Tirmidhi).
Commenting on this hadith, al-Jass said: ‘It is a general obligation
to fulﬁl all the conditions man holds himself to as long as there is noth-
ing (in Islamic law) to restrict them.’ (Aḥkām al-Qur’ān, 2/418)
Ali W narrated that the Prophet U said: ‘Te protection granted
by the weakest Muslim to a non-Muslim is tantamount to that of the
entire [community]. Whosoever violates it incurs the curse of Allah, the
angels, and all the people.’ (Reported by al-Bukhari)
Abdullah ibn ‘Umar W narrated that the Prophet U said: ‘Te signs
of hypocrisy are four: when he is entrusted with something he betrays
the trust, when he speaks he lies, when he makes a promise he breaks it,
when he quarrels he behaves in an immoral manner. Whoever possesses
all four is a hypocrite and whoever possesses one of them possesses an
element of hypocrisy until he gives it up.’ (Reported by al-Bukhari in
his Ṣaḥīḥ).
ʿUmar ibn al-Hamq al-Khaza‘i narrated that the Prophet U said: ‘If
a man entrusts another with his life and is killed by him, I have nothing
to do with the murderer, even if the murdered man were a non-Muslim’
(Reported by al-Bayhaqi). Consequently, the parties to international

--- Sayfa 187 ---
159
A Fatwa on Jihad
treaties and agreements are committed to end war and enjoy a state of
peace by virtue of the agreement they entered into. Allah Almighty says:
And if they incline towards peace, then incline to it [also] and rely upon
Allah. Indeed, it is He who is the Hearing, the Knowing (Al-Anfāl, 8:61).
Free Choice vs. Coerced Conversion
Te concept of ‘free choice’ is central in the teachings of Islam as God
stated in the Qur’an that ‘there is no coercion in religion’. Muslims
grasped this concept well and realised that God does not want the mere
submission of bodies but the real surrender of hearts. Te heart is the
main target of God’s Message because mercy is the all-encompassing
nature of Islam, and the heart is where it resides.
In contemplating these stipulations we would ﬁnd that none of the
current incidents of terrorism which happen to involve Muslims claim-
ing to be performing jihad are actually jihad, because they fail to meet
any of the conditions laid out above. Te sole aim of stipulating these
conditions is to ensure that the concept of mercy and justice are at the
forefront of Muslims’ hearts and minds while conducting warfare.
Te aim of jihad is not to steal people’s property or to shed their
blood or to alter their values and force them to convert. Te aim is to
free people from persecution so they may have the opportunity to think
freely and choose their religion based on informed decisions.
All of the these terrorist attacks have probably one thing in common:
the cowardice of the perpetrators who betray and target civilians and
cause nothing but the bloodshed of innocents, Muslim and non-Muslim.
What breaks the heart the most is that while jihad in Islam teaches
Muslims to be noble knights who defend the rights of the weak and
ﬁght back against transgressors who are warriors in combat, today we
ﬁnd the people who claim that they are performing jihad and attach
themselves to this noble concept are those who are the furthest from
Islam and jihad in letter and spirit.
Te true noble knight jihadist is the one who lays the foundation of
justice and freedom for all people, regardless of their personal religious
convictions. Terefore, the concept of jihad being a legitimate war is a
true and well-deﬁned one even by our modern deﬁnitions of just wars
according to the United Nations’ charter on wars.

--- Sayfa 188 ---
war and peace in islam
160
Te Prophet Muhammad U was the role model who applied the
diﬀerent concepts of mercy, justice and freedom laid down in the
Qur’an. He showed Muslims how to conduct and abide by these
concepts practically.
The Prophet Muhammad U and Jihad
Before delving directly into the Prophet’s conquests and contemplat-
ing the way it which they were conducted and the goals they strived
to achieve, we need to take a broader look at the concept of war in
ancient times and how it is a social phenomenon as old as humanity
itself.
It is innate in human beings to preserve their lives and fend oﬀ
death. Te survival instinct causes human beings to defend what
belongs to them even if this leads to struggle and combat in order to
survive.
Tis primitive level of ﬁghting for the basic needs of life, such as
food or shelter, can become more sophisticated and develop into a
higher level of war, such as the wars that are waged for gaining free-
dom or restoring dignity or ﬁghting oppression.
Moving to the holy books and divine scriptures, namely the Torah
and the Bible, we ﬁnd that new reasons were added for waging war,
reasons more advanced in nature and more civilisational in purpose.
Tese new types of war were not waged to secure food for the next
day, but with the aim of alleviating injustice and securing freedom of
worship for all people, and helping the helpless and destitute.
Humanity witnessed a shift in the paradigm of conducting wars,
which now aimed to move away from fulfilling the needs of the ‘self’
towards fulfilling ‘divine ideals’ for which people are ready to sacri-
fice their lives.
This shift in paradigm continued in the tradition of Islam and
took the name of jihad. In jihad one finds himself or herself more
than ready to sacrifice his life for his religious beliefs and for fulfill-
ing a higher calling that advocates alleviating injustice and persecu-
tion and establishing freedom of religion and thought.
When the Prophet Muhammad U immigrated to Medina and
established the nascent Muslim state after suffering thirteen years of

--- Sayfa 189 ---
161
A Fatwa on Jihad
violent opposition and anguish, the tribe of Quraysh in Mecca was
angry at the huge success that the message of Islam had achieved,
without coercion or bloodshed. The Quraysh felt threatened by
the new power of Islam which would undermine their authority in
Mecca, where idol worship was the centre of religious life and where
the Quraysh were the religious leaders whom people from the rest of
Arabia would come to visit and present their offerings.
Muslims patiently endured persecution for thirteen years in
Mecca and abided by the Prophet’s command to not respond to the
aggression which they endured at the hands of the Meccan idolaters.
When the Muslims emigrated to Medina and established their new
state, they found themselves in a position where they had to defend
the boundaries of their nascent state against the attacks of Quraysh
who hoped to destroy this new religion in its infancy. It was at this
time that God permitted Muslims to fight back against those who
fought them, and to protect themselves against aggression. This
indicates that jihad in the sense of armed struggle was not a self-
embedded concept which originated with Islam. It is more likely
that the circumstances into which the nascent Islamic state was born
gave rise to jihad.
These same circumstances surrounded the message of the
Prophet Jesus who called the Jews to peace and reform, even though
they hunted him down and wanted to crucify him, except that in
the Prophet Muhammad’s U case, God saved his Prophet U from
his persecutors.
Jihad vs. Terrorism
Terrorism, therefore, cannot be the outcome of any proper under-
standing of religion. It is, rather, a manifestation of the immorality of
people with cruel hearts, arrogant souls, and warped logic. Islam by
its nature is a religion of moderation, not of extremes. In his famous
saying, the Prophet of Islam advised Muslims to always choose the
middle ground and not seek extremes on either side. Tis modera-
tion in religion means that one neither exaggerates, transgressing the
limits set by God, nor neglects them altogether, thereby falling short of
His expectations. While calling upon all Muslims to exercise modera-

--- Sayfa 190 ---
war and peace in islam
162
tion with all permissible things, Islam clearly and categorically rejects
all forms of extremism, including ghulū (excessiveness), tanatu‘ (zeal-
otry) and tashaddud (extreme practices). Tese forms of extremism
do not ﬁnd a home in Islamic teachings, because Islam recognises that
extremism is morally ﬂawed and unproductive. It is against human
nature, and has always been a short-lived phenomenon which does
not work.
Te problem faced by Muslims today—and indeed religious
communities across the globe—relates to the issue of authority. In
both Islam and other religions we are witnessing a phenomenon in
which laypeople without a sound foundation in religious learning have
attempted to set themselves up as religious authorities, even though
they lack the scholarly qualiﬁcations for making valid interpretations
of religious law and morality. In many cases, they have been facilitated
in this by the proliferation of new media and irresponsibly sensation-
alistic journalism. It is this eccentric and rebellious attitude towards
religion that clears the way for extremist interpretations of Islam that
have no basis in reality. None of these extremists have been educated
in Islam in genuine centers of Islamic learning. Tey are, rather, prod-
ucts of troubled environments and have subscribed to distorted and
misguided interpretations of Islam that have no basis in traditional
Islamic doctrine. Teir aim is purely political—to create havoc and
chaos in the world.
Unfortunately, terrorists ofen invoke the Islamic concept of jihad to
justify their crimes. Tis has led to much confusion and the tendency to
misinterpret this important Islamic idea by linking it to violence and
aggression. Military jihad, by contrast, is the antithesis of terrorism. It
is a just war of the sort that can be found in every religious law and civil
code. As the Qur’an says, Fight in the way of God against those who ﬁght
against you, but avoid aggression for God does not like the aggressor. But
if they cease [ﬁghting], then God is Forgiving, Merciful. Tis statement
has been repeated many times throughout the second chapter of the
Qur’an and forms the fundamental parameters for the Islamic law of
warfare: namely, that it is permissible only for the purpose of repelling
an attack, and protecting one’s self, one’s home and one’s family.
Terrorism does not come close to fulﬁlling any of the many condi-

--- Sayfa 191 ---
163
A Fatwa on Jihad
tions which are necessary for a just jihad. Among these is the fact that
war can only be launched upon the authorisation of the Muslim ruler,
afer consultation with specialists and consultants. Vigilantism has
been clearly forbidden throughout Muslim history.
Similarly, terrorism involves killing people and taking them by
surprise. Te Prophet has instructed: ‘A believer is not to kill [others].
Faith is a deterrent to killing.’ Similarly, he has said: ‘A believer is
not to attack [others] by surprise.’ Clearly, terrorists can only accom-
plish their goals by going against these Islamic teachings, which are
fundamental to the type of chivalrous character Muslims must always
exhibit, whether in wartime or during periods of peace.
Moreover, terrorism kills and harms women and children. A tradi-
tion of the Prophet relates that a woman was found dead in one of the
battles. Te Prophet found out about this, and thereupon forbade the
killing of women and children. Another phrasing of this hadith states:
‘Te Messenger of Allah U forbade killing women and children.’ Te
great scholar of Islam, Imam al-Nawawi commented on this: ‘Tere is
a scholarly consensus on acting on this tradition as long as the women
and children do not ﬁght.’ It is clear once more that this is counter to
the practice of terrorists.
As such, it is clearly a mistake to label the terrorists practitioners
of jihad, or mujāhidīn. Tis is a lofy Islamic concept which bears no
resemblance to the lawlessness practiced by terrorists.
Te word commonly used in modern Arabic for terrorism, irhāb,
though an improvement, also poses its own set of problems. Indeed,
irhāb and the related Arabic root (r/h/b) ofen contain positive reso-
nances for those conversant with classical Islamic vocabulary. For
example, the Qur’an uses a word in the semantic range spawned by
(r/h/b) to explain the proper awe with which humans ought to relate
to God. O Children of Israel, remember my favour wherewith I favoured
you; and fulﬁll my covenant and I shall fulﬁll your covenant, and have
awe of Me (Al-Baqarah, 2:40). Similarly, the Qur’an uses a related word
(rahbān) to refer to monks and monasticism (rahbaniyyah), and their
manner of interacting with the Divine. Finally, and more concretely,
the root (r/h/b) is used to refer to a praiseworthy deterrence against
those enemies who would seek to aggressively intimidate the Muslim

--- Sayfa 192 ---
war and peace in islam
164
community. Make ready for them whatever force you can and of horses
tethered that you may thereby awe the enemy of God and your enemy
(Al-Anfāl, 8:60). Tis term therefore is ofen used to refer to a concept
of deterrence aimed at securing an advantage that will lead to peace
with an enemy that would otherwise transgress against the Muslim
community.
Te term irjāf as the proper translation into Arabic for terrorism is
preferable. Tis word, which denotes subversion and scaremongering
to bring quaking and commotion to society is derived from the root
(r/j/f), which means to quake, tremble, be in violent motion, convulse,
or shake. Tis term occurs in the Qur’an in this context in one tell-
ing verse: Now; if the hypocrites do not give over, and those in whose
hearts there is sickness and they make commotion (murjifūn) in the
city, We shall assuredly urge thee against them. (Al-Aḥzāb, 33:60). In
the context of this verse, al-Qurtubi, the renowned thirteenth-century
Qur’anic commentator and Maliki jurist, explains the meaning of irjāf
with respect to ‘shaking of the hearts (taḥrīk al-qulūb),’ noting the
root’s corresponding application to ‘the shaking of the earth (rajafat
al-arḍ)’. Within an Islamic context, connecting this metaphor of creat-
ing commotion on earth (murjifūn) with that of shaking hearts (taḥrīk
al-qulīb) connotes that those who do wrong are in fact acting against
the wishes of the Divine.
Te term murjifūn (singular, murjif), as well as the equivalent
rendering irjāﬁyyūn (singular, irjāﬁ), is a far better translation of
terrorists ... Of course, there are multiple ways to bring about such
intense commotion to society, but all of these fall under the term irjāf.
From a linguistic perspective, the term unambiguously connotes the
cowardice, deceit, and betrayal associated with terrorism in striking
from behind.

--- Sayfa 193 ---
165
chapter seven
BODY COUNT: A Comparative Quantitative Study of
Mass Killings in History256
Dr Naveed Sheikh
Introduction
In his seminal work Te Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of World
Order (1996), Harvard political scientist Samuel Huntington reformu-
lated Arnold Toynbee’s understanding of history as driven not only by
impersonal material structures—territory, capital, population, and natu-
ral resources—but equally by interpersonal ideational structures such as
culture, identity, communal solidarity and civilizational association. Tis
perception seemed supported by empirical observation, and soon ﬁlled
the intellectual and political lacunae which had attained particular salience
in the wake of the collapse of Soviet-backed communism. Ofentimes, the
reinstatement of religion—as the single most stable ideational structure
in human history—was referred to as ‘the revenge of God’, but for social
scientists and historians alike it became impossible to scientiﬁcally isolate
the divine variable from terrestrial imperatives in the muddled socio-
political praxes of earthlings. A casual observation, nonetheless, would
suggest that discursive constructions about God (in politics, shorthand
for absolute truth) have been a necessary corollary to nearly all conﬂictual
formations, from the sub-state to the trans-state levels. Te intensity of
this linkage, and its constancy, is tested in this study.
Objectives
Te present study attempts to quantify the human death toll of religious
and political violence throughout the last two millennia and relate these to
religio-cultural civilisations. Adopting a modiﬁed version of Huntington’s

--- Sayfa 194 ---
war and peace in islam
166
civilisational taxonomy, the study progresses along the following lines:
First, a comprehensive data list of over 3,000 violent clashes in history,
0–2008 CE was developed. We then proceeded to identify 276 of the
most violent conﬂicts in history, all with estimated human death tolls
over 10,000, and ranked them by death toll. Te result was then organised
along civilisational lines, in order to attain a comparative understanding
of socio-religiously conditioned violence. Te ﬁndings are represented in
four tables, leading to a comparative evaluation of violence in diﬀerent
religious and civilizational traditions
Methodology
Te study has ﬁrst produced an aggregate list of major violent conﬂicts in
the last two millennia, incorporating four categories of violence, namely
war, civil war, democide, and structural violence. Tis shows the extent
to which violence has been an almost universal form of ‘doing politics’ in
all parts of the inhabited world for as long as history has been recorded.
Te study then proceeded to quantify the death tolls in the most violent
episodes to produce a list of the most violent conﬂicts in the last two
millennia. Tese conﬂicts were then organised along civilisational lines,
thereby quantitatively delineating the frequency of major conﬂict per
civilisation. Separately, we analysed genocidal violence (which may have
been part of war or democide in the ﬁrst analysis) to seek to gauge the
level of intensity of violence.
Definitions
civilisations: Te social construct of civilisation denotes the histori-
cally conditioned and intersubjectively shared norms—cultural, religious
and societal—whereby a substantial group of people develop a common
cultural in-group identity by means of socialisation, paciﬁc interaction
and isomorphism. Civilisations are aggregates of local and regional
cultures and are bound by shared religious or ethical values.
war: War is understood as large-scale acts of aggression and violence
between two diﬀerent (but equal) political units, such as states. According
to Clausewitz’s classic, On War, warfare has three dimensions: political
objectives, strategy, and popular passion, whereas the equilibrium between
the three (by way of the subordination of passion to strategy and strategy

--- Sayfa 195 ---
167
Body Count: A Comparative Quantitative Study of Mass Killings in History
to policy objectives) determines the success or otherwise of any mission.
Quantitatively, statisticians insist that the death toll must exceed 1,000
direct deaths (combat related and collateral) in order for an armed conﬂict
to count as a war. Subcategories include interstate wars, continental wars,
colonial wars.
civil war: Civil wars are systematised acts of violence perpetuated
mutually by members of the same nation. By nation in turn is under-
stood adherence to the same ethno-linguistic group or, in modern times,
members of the same territorial state. Subcategories include revolutions,
rebellions, ethnic strife.
democide: Democide is meant to convey politically motivated murder
by government forces or institutions. It can take collective forms (most
notably in the form of genocide or lesser forms of mass murder) or indi-
vidual forms (such as the systematic liquidation of opposition ﬁgures or
political/ethnic threats to the established order). Democide is, moreover,
enacted not only in direct action but also in ‘Structural Violence’.
genocide: Genocide is a form of democide, where the aggressor aims to
eliminate a substantial portion of an ethnic, linguistic, or religious group
from a substantial territory.
structural violence: As opposed to direct violence (direct physi-
cal harm), structural violence is a concept promoted by Scandinavian
Peace Research to denote the violence perpetuated by malign structure—
whether they be of institutional or normative character (for example
apartheid as institution vs. racism as norm). Structural violence is thus
the suﬀering which follows from exploitative or repressive forms of social
or political organisation.
World Civilisations
Te social construct of ‘civilisation’ conveys a meaning of common
identity. Tis identity, in turn, entails shared social norms, societal
values and cultural mores—all repeatedly iterated in public discourses
and institutions of socialisation. Organised religion thus emerges as the
chief signiﬁer of civilisation, both directly (as the repository of identity
and values) and indirectly (as shaper of institutions and discourses).
While a ‘civilisation’ is not coterminous with a religion, the latter is a
necessary (but not suﬃcient) component of the former. Where religion

--- Sayfa 196 ---
war and peace in islam
168
is relatively homogenous (as in much of the Muslim world), we allow
for the conceptualisation of a single civilisation in the name of Islam
(or the ummah, the Muslim community in a global sense). Likewise,
‘associate’ members of the Muslim civilisation are found in Africa as
well as Europe. Te diﬀerence between a core member and an associ-
ate member of a civilisation is the civilisational identity’s location on
a spectrum from contestedness to hegemony. Likewise, some civilisa-
tions (as the Primal-Indigenous) may simply be a residual category,
which lacks formal association and membership.
Te following seven civilisations are suggested and their respective
locales indicated:
CIVILISATION
LOCALE
Antitheist
Communist block
Buddhist
East Asia, parts of South Asia
Christian
Europe, the Americas,
parts of Africa
Indic
India, Nepal, Mauritius
Islamic
Middle East, parts of Asia,
parts of Africa
Primal-Indigenous
Parts of Africa, the Americas
before colonialism
Sinic
China, some neighbouring states
Table : A Death-Toll Ranking of Major Violent
Conflict (– CE)
A note on methodology: estimating the death toll of conﬂicts is ofen
fraught with dangers that derive both from the absence of data as
well as its (un)reliability. Governments or other political groups ofen
have vested interests in suppressing information or releasing partial

--- Sayfa 197 ---
169
Body Count: A Comparative Quantitative Study of Mass Killings in History
or misleading information which either exaggerates or omits death
ﬁgures. Te problem is augmented by the longevity of the present study,
as the reliability of information tends to deteriorate over time. We have
in each case attempted to corroborate numbers from several sources
and estimated a reasonable range, supported by scholarly accounts.
Although it generally holds true that the older the conﬂict, the less reli-
able the data, even recent events sometimes have death toll estimates
that diﬀer by a factor of ten (for example Operation Desert Storm of
1991). Where possible, we have tried to narrow down the range, but
on occasions the range has been set wide in order to accommodate
diverse opinions and sources. A second-order problem arises from a
monocausal allocation of blame for acts of political violence, which
ofen emerge out of complex historical and political antecedents. Here
we have not classed all engaged parties as belligerent, but simply those
who have initiated hostilities in a given event. In particularly complex
cases, two or more parties have been deemed to be equally responsi-
ble (and the ﬁgure is tabulated by dividing by two, three or more as
appropriate). If a war is a colonial war, the coloniser or imperial power
has by deﬁnition been classed as the belligerent power, and likewise in
cases of democide, rebellions, revolts, and mutinies, the power-holder
has by default been held responsible for any ensuing violence, unless
the counter-hegemonic group has engaged in direct action against third
parties (e.g. terror tactics).
Event
Estimated
Death Toll
(>10 million)
Event
Type
Belligerent
Civilisation
World War II
(1939–45)
55,000,000–
72,000,000
War,
Democide
Christian,
Buddhist
People’s Republic of
China
(1949–1975)
44,500,000–
77,000,000
Democide
Antitheist

--- Sayfa 198 ---
war and peace in islam
170
Tree Kingdoms Wars
(220–80)
40,000,000
War
Sinic
Soviet Reign
(1923–54)
38,000,000–
55,000,000
Democide
Antitheist
An Shi Rebellion
(755–63)
36,000,000
Civil War
Buddhist
Mongol Conquests
(from 1207)
30,000,000–
50,000,000
War
Primal-
Indigenous
Manchu conquest of
Ming China
(1616–62)
25,000,000
War
Sinic
Tai Ping Rebellion
(China, 1851–64)
20,000,000–
50,000,000
Civil War
Sinic, Christian
World War I
(1914–18)
15,000,000–
66,000,000
War
Christian
Second Sino-Japanese
War
(1931–45)
15,000,000–
22,000,00
War
Buddhist
Extermination of Native
Americans
(C16th-19th)
13,000,000–
16,000,000
Structural
Christian
Nationalist China
(1928–49)
10,075,000
Civil War
Sinic

--- Sayfa 199 ---
171
Body Count: A Comparative Quantitative Study of Mass Killings in History
Conquests of Timur
the Lame
(1360–1405)
7,000,000–
20,000,000
War
Islamic
Event
Estimated
Death Toll
(>2 million)
Event
Type
Belligerent
Civilisation
Russian Civil War
(1917–22)
5,000,000–
9,000,000
Civil War
Christian,
Antitheist
Conquests of Menelik II
Ethiopia (1882–98)
5,000,000
War
Christian
Congo Free State
colonial war
(1885–1908)
4,500,000–
12,000,000
War
Christian
Dungan Revolt
(1862–1877)
4,000,000
Civil War
Sinic
Second Congo War
(1998–2007)
3,800,000–
5,400,000
War
Christian
Napoleonic Wars
(1804–15)
3,500,000–
6,000,000
War
Christian
China Mao Soviets
(1923–49)
3,500,000
Democide
Antitheist
Tirty Years’ War
(1618–48)
3,000,000–
8,000,000
War
Christian

--- Sayfa 200 ---
war and peace in islam
172
Yellow Turban
Rebellion
(China, 184–205)
3,000,000–
7,000,000
Civil War
Sinic
Korean War
(1950–3)
2,500,000–
5,040,000
War
Christian,
Antitheist
Transatlantic Slave Trade
(17th to 19th centuries)
2,400,000–
4,300,000
Structural
Violence
Christian
Vietnam War
(1945–75)
2,300,000–
5,100,000
War
Christian,
Antitheist
French Wars of Religion
(1562–98)
2,000,000–
4,000,000
Civil War
Christian
Mahmud of Ghazni‘s
invasions, India
(1001–08) (1000-1027)
2,000,000
War
Islamic
Event
Estimated
Death Toll
(>1 million)
Event Type
Belligerent
Civilisation
Post-War Expulsion of
Germans (1945–7)
2,100,000–
3,000,000
Democide
Christian
Cambodia, Khmer Rouge
(1975–9)
1,700,000–
2,035,000
Democide
Antitheist
North Korea
(1948–87)
1,500,000–
1,600,000
Democide
Antitheist

--- Sayfa 201 ---
173
Body Count: A Comparative Quantitative Study of Mass Killings in History
Afghan Civil War
(1979–ongoing)
1,500,000–
2,000,000
Civil War
Islamic
Arab Slave Trade
(7th to 19th centuries)
1,400,000–
2,000,000
Structural
Violence
Islamic
Chinese Civil War
(1928–1949)
1,300,000–
6,200,000
Civil War
Sinic
Bengali War of
Independence
1,100,000
War
Islamic
Mexican Revolution
(1910–20)
1,000,000–
2,000,000
Civil War
Christian
Shaka’s conquests
(1816–28)
1,000,000–
2,000,000
Civil War
Primal-
Indigenous
Soviet Afghan
intervention
(1979–89)
1,000,000–
1,500,000
War
Antitheist
Nigerian Civil War
(1967–70), Biafran
1,000,000–
1,200,000
Civil War
Islamic,
Christian
Iran-Iraq War
(1980–88)
1,000,000
War
Islamic
Japanese invasions
of Korea
(1592–8)
1,000,000
War
Buddhist

--- Sayfa 202 ---
war and peace in islam
174
Second Sudanese
Civil War
(1983–2005)
1,000,000
Civil War
Islamic,
Christian
Crusades
(1095-1272)
1,000,000
War
Christian
Aztec Atrocities
1,000,000+
Structural
Violence
Primal-
Indigenous
Panthay Rebellion
(1856–73)
1,000,000
Civil War
Sinic
Event
Estimated
Death Toll
(>500,000)
Event
Type
Belligerent
Civilisation
Mozambique Civil War
(1976–93)
900,000–
1,000,000
Civil War
Christian,
Islamic, PI
Seven Years’ War
(1756–1763)
868,000–
1,400,000
War
Christian
Rwandan Civil War
(1990–4)
800,000–
1,000,000
Genocide,
Civil War
Christian
Congo Civil War
(1991–1997)
800,000
Civil War
Christian
Great Irish Famine
(1845–52)
750,000–
1,500,000
Structural
Violence
Christian

--- Sayfa 203 ---
175
Body Count: A Comparative Quantitative Study of Mass Killings in History
Indonesia political/
ethnic strife
(1965–87)
729,000–
1,000,000
Democide,
Civil War
Islamic
Iraq War
(2003–Present)
614,000–
1,100,000
War
Christian
Russian-Circassian War
(1763-1864)
600,000-
1,500,000
War
Christian
First Jewish-Roman
War
(66–73)
600,000–
1,300,000
War
Primal-
Indigenous
Qing-Dzungar War
(1755–57)
600,000–
800,000
War
Sinic, Buddhist
Second Jewish-Roman
War
(Bar Kokhba 132–135)
580,000
War
Primal-
Indigenous
Eritrean War of
Independence
(1961–91)
570,000
War
Christian,
Islamic
Algerian War of
Independence
(1954–1962)
550,000–
1,000,000
War
Christian
Somali Civil War
(1988 – )
550,000
Civil War
Islamic
Tuggee Cult Murders
(17th to 19th centuries)
500,000–
2,000,000
Ritual
Murder
Indic

--- Sayfa 204 ---
war and peace in islam
176
Suttee (4th to 19th
centuries)
500,000–
800,000
Structural
Violence
Indic
Partition of India
(1947)
500,000–
1,000,000
Civil War
Islamic, Indic
Angolan Civil War
(1975–2002)
500,000–
550,000
Civil War
Christian,
Primal
First Sudanese Civil
War (1955–72)
500,000
Civil War
Islamic,
Christian
Event
Estimated
Death Toll
(>250,000)
Event
Type
Belligerent
Civilisation
War of the Triple
Alliance, Paraguay
(1864–1870)
350,000–
610,000
War
Christian
Miao, Nien and Muslim
Rebellions
(1850–77)
450,000
Civil War
Sinic
Darfur conﬂict
(2003–ongoing)
400,000
Civil war,
Democide
Islamic
War of the Spanish
Succession
(1701–14)
400,000–
700,000
Civil War
Christian
Second Burundi
Civil War
(1993)
400,000
Civil War
Christian

--- Sayfa 205 ---
177
Body Count: A Comparative Quantitative Study of Mass Killings in History
Continuation War
(1941–4)
371,000
War
Christian
French
Revolutionary Wars
(1792–1802)
350,000–
663,000
War
Christian
Spanish Civil War
(1936–1939)
350,000–
500,000
Civil War
Christian
Great Northern War
(1700–1721)
350,000–
400,000
War
Christian
Portuguese Colonialism
(1900–25)
325,000
War
Christian
American Civil War
(1861–5)
365,000–
618,000
Civil War
Christian
Wars of the Tree
Kingdoms
(1639–51)
315,000–
735,000
War
Christian
Caucasian War
(from 1817)
300,000–
1,500,000
War
Christian,
Islamic
Ugandan Civil War
(1979–86)
300,000–
500,000
Civil War
Christian
French Conquest
of Algeria
(1839–47)
300,000
War
Christian

--- Sayfa 206 ---
war and peace in islam
178
Mexican Yucatan
Maya Campaign
(1847–55)
300,000
Civil War
Christian
Idi Amin’s Regime
(1972–9)
300,000
Democide
Islamic
Abyssinian War
(1935–41)
275,000–
400,000
War
Christian
French Revolution
(1793–4)
263,000–
600,000
Civil War
Christian
Philippine-American
War
(1898–1913)
255,000–
1,120,000
War
Christian
Ethiopian Civil Wars
(1962–91)
230,000–
1,400,000
Civil War
Christian
Albigensian Crusade
(1208-1244)
250,000-
1,000,000
War
Christian
Indian extermination,
Brazil
(1900 et seq.)
250,000–
500,000
War,
Democide
Christian
Iraq under Saddam
Hussein
(1979–2003)
250,000–
1,300,000
Democide
Antitheist
Cuban Revolution
(1895–8)
250,000–
300,000
War
Christian

--- Sayfa 207 ---
179
Body Count: A Comparative Quantitative Study of Mass Killings in History
Event
Estimated
Death Toll
(>100,000)
Event
Type
Belligerent
Civilisation
Bosnian War
(1992–5)
220,000
War, Civil
War
Christian
Liberian Civil War
(1989–97)
220,000
Civil War
PI, Christian
Russo-Turkish War
(1877–8)
215,000–
285,000
War
Christian,
Islamic
Bangladesh Liberation
War (1971)
200,000–
2,800,000
War,
Democide
Islamic
Warlord era in China
(1917–28)
200,000–
800,000
War
Sinic
Yugoslavia under Tito
(1944–87)
200,000–
572,000
Democide
Antitheist
East Timor
(1975–99)
200,000–
250,000
Democide,
Civil War
Islamic
First Congo War
(1996–7)
200,000
Civil War
Christian
Franco-Prussian War
(1870–1)
185,000–
204,000
War
Christian

--- Sayfa 208 ---
war and peace in islam
180
Sierra Leone Civil War
(1991–2002)
180,000–
200,000
Civil War
Christian
La Violencia
(1948–58)
180,000–
300,000
Civil War
Christian
Maji-Maji Revolt,
German East Africa
(1905–7)
175,000–
250,000
War
Christian
Mexican War of
Independence
(1810–21)
150,000–
400,000
War
Christian
Communist Vietnam
(1975 et seq)
165,000–
460,000
Democide
Antitheist
Haitian Revolution
(1791–1804)
160,000–
350,000
War
Christian
Algerian Civil War
(1991 et seq)
160,000–
200,000
Civil War
Islamic
Mindanao Conﬂict
(1969–ongoing)
160,000+
Civil War
Islamic,
Christian
Lebanese Civil War
(1975–90)
150,000–
162,000
Civil War
Islamic,
Christian
Second Liberian Civil
War (1999–2003)
150,000
Civil War
Primal,
Christian

--- Sayfa 209 ---
181
Body Count: A Comparative Quantitative Study of Mass Killings in History
Russo-Japanese War
(1904–05)
130,000–
150,000
War
Buddhist
Russo-Turkish War
(1828–9)
130,000–
191,000
War
Christian,
Islamic
Winter War
(1939–40)
148,000–
1,000,000
War
Christian
Ten Years’ War Cuba
(1868–78)
200,000
War
Christian
Balkan Wars
(1912–3)
140,000–
225,000
War
Christian,
Islamic
Guatemaltec Civil War
(1960–96)
140,000–
200,000
Civil War
Christian
Portuguese Colonial
Wars
140,000
War
Christian
Eritrean-Ethiopian War
(1998–2000)
125,000–
190,000
War
Christian,
Islamic
Great Turkish War
(1683-1699)
120,000–
384,000
War
Islamic,
Christian
War of the Austrian
Succession
(1740–8)
120,000–
359,000
War
Christian

--- Sayfa 210 ---
war and peace in islam
182
Sichuan Revolt of
the Peasants
(1755–7)
120,000
Civil War
Sinic
Chaco War
(1932–5)
100,500
War
Christian
North Yemen Civil War
(1962–70)
100,000–
150,000
Civil War
Islamic
War of the Two
Brothers, Inca (1531–2)
100,000
–1,000,000
Civil War
Primal-
Indigenous
Christian New Guinea
(1984–)
100,000–
400,000
Democide
Islamic
Indonesian invasion of
East Timor
(1975–8)
100,000–
200,000
Democide
Islamic
Al-Anfal Campaign
(1986–9)
100,000–
180,000
Democide
Islamic
Franco’s regime
(1939–75)
100,000–
160,000
Democide,
Civil War
Christian
Libya-Italian Wars
(1911–31)
100,000–
125,000
War
Christian
Persian Gulf War
(1991)
100,000
War
Christian,
Islamic

--- Sayfa 211 ---
183
Body Count: A Comparative Quantitative Study of Mass Killings in History
Tousand Days War
(1899–1901)
100,000–
150,000
Civil War
Christian
Peasants’ War
(1524–5)
100,000
Civil War
Christian
Mad Mullah Jihad,
Somalia
(1899–1920)
100,000
War
Islamic,
Christian
Battle of Las Navas
de Tolosa
(1212)
100,000
War
Christian
Imperial Russia
(1900–17)
100,000
Democide
Christian
Russo-Polish War
(1918–20)
100,000
War
Christian
Tyrone’s Rebellion/Nine
Year’s War
(1594–1603)
100,000–
130,000
War
Christian
White Lotus Rebellion
(179–1805)
100,000
Civil War
Sinic
Crimean War
(1854–6)
105,000–
277,000
War
Christian,
Islamic

--- Sayfa 212 ---
war and peace in islam
184
Event
Est. Death Toll
(>50,000)
Event
Type
Belligerent
Civilisation
Second Chechen War
(1999 et seq.)
80,000–
210,000
War
Christian,
Islamic
Battle of Alarcos
(1195)
80,000–
150,000
War
Christian
Equatorial Guinea
(1968–79)
80,000
War
Primal
Indigenous
Siege of Isfahan (1722)
80,000
War
Islamic
Greek War of
Independence (1821–9)
75,000–
120,000
War
Islamic
Indonesian National
Revolution
75,000–
205,000
War, Civil
War
Christian,
Islamic
El Salvador Civil War
(1980–92)
75,000
Civil War
Christian
Second Boer War
(1898–1902)
75,000
War
Christian
Greco-Turkish War
(1919–22)
75,000–
250,000
War
Christian,
Islamic

--- Sayfa 213 ---
185
Body Count: A Comparative Quantitative Study of Mass Killings in History
Boxer Rebellion
(1899–1901)
70,000–
115,000
War
Christian, Sinic
Boudica‘s uprising
(60–1)
70,000
War
Primal-
Indigenous
Aceh War (1873–1914)
70,000
War
Christian
Russo-Austro-Turkish
War (1787–91)
64,000–
192,000
War
Islamic
Mozambican War of
Independence
(1964-1974)
63,500
War
Christian
Mau Mau Uprising
(1952–60)
61,185
War
Christian
First Chechen War
(1994–6)
60,000–
200,000
War
Christian
Romania (1948–89)
60,000–
150,000
Democide
Antitheist
Sri Lanka/Tamil
conﬂict (1983–)
60,000–
65,000
Civil War
Indic, Buddhist
Tupac Amaru Rebellion
(1780–83)
60,000–
80,000
War
Christian

--- Sayfa 214 ---
war and peace in islam
186
Nicaraguan Rebellion
(1972–91)
60,000
Civil War
Christian
Battle of Yarmouk
(636)
55,000–70,000
War
Islamic
Egyptian-Ottoman War
(1805–11)
56,000
War
Islamic
Angolan War of
Independence
52,000–80,000
War
Christian
First Burundi Civil War
(1972)
50,000–
300,000
Civil War
Christian
Tajik Civil War
(1992–7)
50,000–60,000
Civil War
Islamic
Wars of the Roses
(1455–85)
50,000
Civil War
Christian
Opium Wars
(1839–50)
50,000
War
Christian
Siege of Tabriz (1725)
50,000
War
Islamic
Byzantine-Rashidun
War (634)
50,000
War
Islamic

--- Sayfa 215 ---
187
Body Count: A Comparative Quantitative Study of Mass Killings in History
Event
Estimated
Death Toll
(>20,000)
Event
Type
Belligerent
Civilisation
Greek Civil War
(1945–9)
45,000–
160,000
Civil War
Christian
Russo-Turkish War
(1806–12)
45,000–
170,000
War
Islamic
Kashmiri insurgency
(1989–)
41,000–
100,000
Civil War
Indic, Islamic
Herero Genocide
(1904–7)
45,000–60,000
Democide
Christian
Witch Hunts
(15th–17th centuries)
40,000–60,000
Democide
Christian
Maratha-Afghan War
(1760–1)
40,000
War
Islamic
Bulgarian Uprising
(1875–7)
40,000
War
Islamic
Second Riﬃan War
(1921–6)
40,000–
100,000
War
Christian
Nader Shah’s Invasion
of India (1738)
40,400–70,000
War
Islamic

--- Sayfa 216 ---
war and peace in islam
188
Battle of Siﬃn (657)
40,000–65,000
Civil War
Islamic
Chad under Habre
regime (1982–90)
40,000
Democide
Primal-
Indigenous
South Vietnam under
Diem (1955–63)
39,000
Democide
Buddhist
Russo-Austro-Turkish
War (1736–9)
38,000
War
Islamic,
Christian
Grand Columbia Wars
of Independence
(1810-21)
37,000–
120,000
War
Christian
Finnish Civil War
(1918)
36,000
Civil War
Christian
Mongolia under
Communists
(1936 et seq)
35,000
Democide
Christian,
Buddhist
Java War (1825–30)
35,000–
180,000
War
Christian
Siege of Malta (1565)
35,000–45,000
War
Islamic
Sandinista Rebellion
(1972–9)
35,000–40,000
Civil War
Christian

--- Sayfa 217 ---
189
Body Count: A Comparative Quantitative Study of Mass Killings in History
Peru’s Shining Path
insurrections
(1980 et seq)
45,000–69,000
Civil War
Antitheist
Battle of Nihawand
(642)
43,000–65,000
War
Islamic
Ukrainian Pogroms
(1919–21)
30,000–70,000
Democide
Christian
First Carlist War, Spain
(1832–40)
33,000–
125,000
Civil War
Christian
Vietnamese Persecution
of Christians
(1832-1887)
33,000–41,000
Democide
Buddhist
Rashidun-Sassanid
War (633)
32,000–40,000
War
Islamic
Contra Rebellion
(1981–90)
30,000–57,000
Civil War
Christian
Irish Uprising (1798)
30,000–40,000
Civil War
Christian
U.S. Invasion of
Afghanistan (2001–2)
30,000–50,000
War
Christian,
Islamic
Mozambique Anti-
Colonial War (1961–75) 30,000–60,000
War
Christian

--- Sayfa 218 ---
war and peace in islam
190
Bulgaria under
Communism (1948–53)
30,00–50,000
Democide
Antitheist
Canudos War (1896–7)
30,000
Democide
Christian
Turko-Syrian Wars
(1831–2, 1839–40)
30,000
War
Islamic
Poland under
Communism
(1948 et seq)
30,000
Democide
Antitheist
Argentina under
Military (1976–83)
30,000
Democide
Christian
Turkey/PKK conﬂict
(1984–)
40,000
Civil War,
Democide
Islamic
Sino-Vietnamese War
(1979)
30,000
War
Sinic, Antitheist
Rhodesian Bush War
(1964–79)
30,000
War
Christian
El Salvador Peasant
Revolt (1931–2)
30,000
Civil War
Christian
Seven Weeks’ War
(1866)
27,900–79,000
War
Christian

--- Sayfa 219 ---
191
Body Count: A Comparative Quantitative Study of Mass Killings in History
Bulavin’s Rebellion
(1707–9)
28,000
Civil War
Christian
Zulu Conﬂict (1856)
27,000
Civil War
Primal-
Indigenous
Venetian-Austro-
Turkish War (1714–8)
27,000–45,000
War
Islamic
American War of
Independence
(1775–83)
25,300–37,300
War
Christian
Indo-Pakistani War of
1971 (December 1971)
23,384
War
Islamic, Indic
Nagorno-Karabakh War
(1988–94)
23,000
War
Christian,
Islamic
Australian Frontier
Wars (1788–1921)
23,000
War
Christian
Venezuelan Federal
War (1859–63)
20,000–50,000
Civil War
Christian
Franco-Mexican War
(1862–7)
20,000–50,000
War
Christian
Pugachov Revolt
(1773–4)
20,000
Civil War
Christian

--- Sayfa 220 ---
war and peace in islam
192
Six-Day War (1967)
22,000
War
Christian
War of the Quadruple
Alliance (1718–20)
20,000–25,000
War
Christian
Italo-Turkish War
(1911–2)
20,000
War
Christian,
Islamic
Siege of Erevan
(1723)
20,000
War
Islamic
Burmese-Chinese War
(1765–1769)
20,000
War
Buddhist
Portuguese Civil War
(1829–34)
20,000
Civil War
Christian
British-Afghan War
(1838–42)
20,000–30,000
War
Islamic
Persian massacres of
Bahais (1848–54)
20,000
Democide
Islamic
Event
Estimated
Death Toll
(>10,000)
Event
Type
Belligerent
Civilisation
Righteous Army
Uprising, Korea
(1907–12)
18,000
War
Buddhist

--- Sayfa 221 ---
193
Body Count: A Comparative Quantitative Study of Mass Killings in History
Transvaal Revolt
(1880–1)
18,000
War
Christian
Paris Commune
(1871)
17,000–23,000
Democide
Christian
Sikh Uprising
(1982–91)
16,000–20,000
Civil War
Indic
Iran under the Pahlevis
(1953–1979)
16,000
Democide
Islamic
Anglo-Burmese War
(1823–6)
15,000–20,000
War
Christian
War of Italian
Uniﬁcation (1859)
15,000–22,500
Civil War
Christian
Polish Insurrection
(1830–2)
15,000–21,000
War
Christian
Guinea-Bissau War
of Independence
(1963-1974)
15,000
War
Christian
Sino-Japanese War
(1894–5)
15,000
War
Buddhist, Sinic
Christian-Druze Wars,
Lebanon (1860)
15,000
Civil War
Christian,
Unclassiﬁed

--- Sayfa 222 ---
war and peace in islam
194
War of the Paciﬁc
(1879–84)
14,000–55,000
War
Christian
Hungarian Insurrection
(1703–11)
14,000–43,000
War
Christian
Battle of Walaya (633)
14,000–22,000
War
Islamic
South Africa under
Apartheid
14,000–19,000
Democide
Christian
Russo-Turkish War
(1768–74)
14,000–20,000
War
Christian,
Islamic
Mexican-American War
(1846–8)
13,000–49,000
War
Christian
Namibia Civil War
13,000-20,000
Civil War
Christian
South Yemen Civil
War (1986)
13,000
Civil War
Islamic
Bouganville Revolt,
Papua New Guinea
(1989–98)
13,000
Civil War
Christian
Czechoslovakia under
Communism
13,000–60,000
Democide
Antitheist

--- Sayfa 223 ---
195
Body Count: A Comparative Quantitative Study of Mass Killings in History
Nepal Civil War
(1996–2006)
12,700
Civil War
Indic
Sino-French War
(1884–5)
12,000
War
Christian
Battle of Poitiers (732)
12,000
War
Islamic
Ottoman Invasion of
Persia (1727)
12,000
War
Islamic
Batavia Massacres
(1740)
10,000–12,000
Civil War
Christian
Israeli War against
Palestine
12,000–19,000
War
Jewish, Islamic
Yom Kippur War
(1973)
11,500–16,000
War
Islamic, Jewish
Malayan Emergency
(1948–1960)
11,053
War
Christian,
Islamic
Madagascar Revolt
(1947)
11,000–60,000
Civil War
Christian
Battle of Sekigahara
(1600)
11,000–32,000
Civil War
Buddhist

--- Sayfa 224 ---
war and peace in islam
196
Croatian War of
Independence (1991–5)
11,000–16,000
War
Christian
Hama Massacre, Syria
(1982)
10,000–25,000
Democide
Islamic
Anglo-American War
(1812–5)
11,000–20,000
War
Christian
Kanto Massacres, Japan
(1923)
10,000–20,000
Democide
Buddhist
Haitian Massacres,
Dominican Republic
(1937)
10,000–20,000
Democide,
Civil War
Christian
Congo-Brazzaville
Coup and Civil War
(1997–9)
10,000–20,000
Civil War
Christian
Massacres of the
Janissaries (afer 1826)
10,000–20,000
Democide
Islamic
Spanish-Moroccan War
(1907–11)
10,000–15,000
War
Christian
Western Sahara
(1975 et seq)
10,000–16,000
War,
Democide
Islamic
Cameroon Insurrection
10,000–15,000
War
Christian

--- Sayfa 225 ---
197
Body Count: A Comparative Quantitative Study of Mass Killings in History
Seapoy Mutiny (1857)
10,000–15,000
Civil War
Christian
Argentine Civil War
(1845–51)
10,000
Civil War
Christian
Amadu’s Jihad
(1810–8)
10,000
Civil War
Islamic
Mexico (1926–30)
10,000
Civil War
Christian
Russo-Swedish War
(1741–3)
10,000
War
Christian
Tay Son Revolution,
Annam
(1772–1802)
10,000
Civil War
Sinic
Anglo-Sikh Wars
(1846–8)
10,000
War
Christian
Spanish-American War
(1898)
10,000
War
Christian
Indo-Pakistani War of
1965
8,000–15,000
War
Islamic, Indic

--- Sayfa 226 ---
war and peace in islam
198
Key Findings and Analysis
Table : Death-Toll of Major Violent Conflict (– CE)
Civilisation
Minimum
Death Toll
Maximum
Death Toll
Median
Death Toll
Antitheist
95,908,000
152,911,000
124,409,500
Buddhist
80,116,000
95,777,500
87,946,750
Christian
119,423,000
236,660,500
178,041,750
Indic
1,344,500
3,434,000
2,389,250
Islamic
21,224,000
40,813,000
31,018,500
Primal-
Indigenous
34,232,000
56,890,000
45,561,000
Sinic
95,612,500
120,235,000
107,923,750
Total
447,860,000
706,721,000
577,290,500

--- Sayfa 227 ---
199
Body Count: A Comparative Quantitative Study of Mass Killings in History
interpreting the results: Our ﬁndings show that, using the entire
data set for the period 0–2008, politically and religiously motivated
violence has cost between 447.86 million and 706.72 million lives. Te
Christian civilisation’s share of this is the largest with between 119.42
million and 236.66 million victims (median 178.04 million). In second
place is the Antitheist civilisation which has contributed with a median
ﬁgure of 124.41 million deaths. Te Sinic civilisation is third with 107.92
million deaths (median). Fourth is the Buddhist civilisation with ca.
87.95 million deaths. Fifh is the Primal-Indigenous civilisation with
45.56 million deaths. Sixth is the Islamic civilisation with 31.02 million
deaths. Finally, seventh and last, is the Indic civilisation with just under
2.39 million deaths.

--- Sayfa 228 ---
war and peace in islam
200
Table : Detailed Results
No. of
Events
Rank
Median
Death Toll
Rank
Antitheist
18 (5.66%)
3
124,409,500
2 (21.55%)
Buddhist
15 (4.72%)
5
87,946,750
4 (15.23%)
Christian
166 (52.2%)
1
178,041,750
1 (30.84%)
Indic
9 (2.83%)
7
2,389,250
7 (0.41%)
Islamic
79 (24.84%)
2
31,018,500
6 (5.37%)
Primal-
Indigenous
14 (4.40%)
6
45,561,000
5 (7.89%)
Sinic
17 (5.35%)
4
107,923,750
3 (18.69%)
Total
318
577,290,500

--- Sayfa 229 ---
201
Body Count: A Comparative Quantitative Study of Mass Killings in History
interpreting table : Te above table shows two sets of ranking, one
based on frequency (the number of incidents in which a given civilisation
has been involved in violent episodes) and one based on intensity (the
number of killed in those episodes). In terms of frequency of bellicosity, the
most belligerent civilisations are: (1) Christian, (2) Islamic, (3) Antitheist,
and (4) Sinic. Te Christian civilisation accounts for over 50 percent of
all incidents, whereas the Muslim accounts for just under 25 percent, the
Antitheist and Sinic civilisations are down to nearly a ﬁfh of the latter
at just over ﬁve percent. In terms of intensity, calculated on the basis of
death toll, however, the ranking is very diﬀerent. Here the ranking is as
follows: (1) Christian, (2) Antitheist, (3) Sinic, and (4) Buddhist. In terms
of death toll, the Christian civilisation accounts for over 30 percent of all
killed, the Antitheist for over 21 percent, the Sinic for nearly 19 percent,
and the Buddhist for approximately 15 percent. Te Primal-Indigenous
category is nearly half of that and the Islamic is down at under six percent.
Te ﬁndings are illustrated below:

--- Sayfa 230 ---
war and peace in islam
202
Table : Mass Killings, Massacres and Genocide in
History (By Death Toll)
Date
Event
Perpetrators
Victims
Median
Death toll
Civilisation
1835
Moriori
Genocide
Maoris
Morioris
1,500
Primal-
Indigenous
1995
Srebrenica
Massacre
Serbs
Bosniaks
8,000
Christian
1854–64
Yuki
Genocide
Californian
settlers
Yuki
Indians
10,000
Christian
1904–7
Herero &
Namaqua
Genocide
Germany
Herero &
Namaqua
45,000
Christian
1919–21
Ukrainian
Pogroms
Ukraine
nationalists
Jews
50,000
Christian
1963
West
Papuan
Genocide
Indonesia
Papuans
100,000
Islamic
1986–8
Anfal
Campaign
Baathist Iraq
Kurds
140,000
Islamic
1972
Burundi
Genocide
Tutsi
Hutu
175,000
Christian

--- Sayfa 231 ---
203
Body Count: A Comparative Quantitative Study of Mass Killings in History
1975–99
East Timor
Genocide
Indonesia
East
Timorese
200,000
Islamic
1937–8
Rape of
Nanking
Imperial
Japan
Chinese
300,000
Buddhist
1914–23
Pontic
Greek
Killings
Young
Turks
Greek
Minorities
180,000
Islamic
1864–67
Circassian
Genocide
Czarist
Russia
Circassians
400,000
Christian
1919–20
Don
Cossack
Genocide
Soviet
Russia
Don
Cossack
400,000
Antitheist
1993
Burundi
Genocide
Hutu
Tutsi
400,000
Christian
2003–8
Darfur
Conﬂict
Janjaweed,
Sudan
Darfur tribes
400,000
Islamic
1941–5
Serb
Genocide
Ustasha
Serbs, Jews,
homosexuals
465,000
Christian
1899–
1902
American-
Philippine
War
USA
Filipinos
600,000
Christian
1208–44
Albigensian
Crusade
Roman
Church
Cathars
625,000
Christian

--- Sayfa 232 ---
war and peace in islam
204
1915–23
Armenian
Deaths
during
Forced
Migration
Young
Turks
Armenians
200,000
Islamic
1994
Rwandan
Genocide
Hutu
Tutsi
900,000
Christian
1856–73
Panthay
Rebellion
Qing
Dynasty
Hui
Muslims
1,000,000
Sinic
1975–9
Cambodian
Genocide
Khmer
Rouge
Cambodian
Populus
1,850,000
Antitheist
1862–77
Dungan
Revolt
Qing
Dynasty
Hui
Muslims
4,000 000
Sinic
1493–6
Hispaniola
Genocide
Columbus
Arawaks
5,000,000
Christian
1933
Holodomor
Famine
Soviet
Russia
Ukrainian/
Kazakh
6,000,000
Antitheist
1880–
1910
Congo Free
State
Belgium
Congolese
8,250,000
Christian
1940–5
Nazi
Genocides
Nazi
Germany
Jews, Slavs,
Roma,
homo-
sexuals
16,315,000
Christian

--- Sayfa 233 ---
205
Body Count: A Comparative Quantitative Study of Mass Killings in History
Key Findings and Analysis
Table : Mass Killings, Massacres and
Genocide (– CE)
No. of Events
Rank
Median Death
Toll
Rank
Antitheist
3 (11.11%)
3
8,250,000
(17.18%)
2
Buddhist
1 (3.70%)
5/6
300,000
(0.62%)
5
Christian
14 (51.85%)
1
33,243,000
(69.24%)
1
Indic
0 (0%)
7
0 (0%)
7
Islamic
6 (22.22%)
2
1,220,000
(2.54%)
4
Primal-
Indigenous
1(3.70%)
5/6
1,500 (0.00%)
6
Sinic
2 (7.41%)
4
5,000,000
(10.41%)
3
Total
27
48, 014,500

--- Sayfa 234 ---
war and peace in islam
206
interpreting table : Mass killings, massacres and genocides are
instances of political violence, driven by hateful aggression and strategies
of wilful elimination. Our list of 27 mass killings and genocides in world
history, with a total death toll of 48.01 million, displays some remarkable
facts: Te Christian civilisation has been the most genocidal, accounting
for 14 instances of mass killings and genocides with over 33 million deaths.
As the total deaths derived from genocides are just over 48 million, the
Christian share is over 2/3 of all genocide deaths. Although the Islamic
civilisation is second in numbers of mass killings, the Antitheist group
as well as the Sinic civilisation has higher death tolls at respectively 8.25
million and 5.00 million, whereas the Islamic civilisation’s death toll is
1.22 million. Te Antitheist and Sinic civilisations rank, respectively
third and fourth in terms of acts of mass killings, whereas the Buddhist
and Primal-Indigenous civilisations share the ﬁfh place with a single
instance of mass killing and genocide in each civilisation (although
the Buddhist cost 300,000 lives, whereas the death toll in the Primal-
Indigenous category was the lowest in the genocide category with 1,500
deaths). Te Indic civilisation is not known to have perpetrated any mass
killing or genocide afer year 0.

--- Sayfa 235 ---
207
Body Count: A Comparative Quantitative Study of Mass Killings in History

Conclusions
Te present study has, on the basis of empirical examination of political
violence in the last two millennia, made some startling ﬁndings.
1)
We have found that the total death toll from acts of political
violence (war, civil war, democide, and structural violence) has
been between 447.86 million and 706.72 million in the years
0–2008. Te median ﬁgure amounts to 577.29.
2) Te distribution of the median death toll is illustrated below,
expressed ﬁrst in absolute ﬁgures and next in percentage of the total.

--- Sayfa 236 ---
war and peace in islam
208
3) Of these 577.29 million fatalities, 48.01 million are genocidal
deaths.
4) In comparative terms, we have found the open secret of world
history to be that Christian societies in history have been the
most bellicose on all counts: they are responsible for the highest
number of death in world history, between 119.42 and 236.66
million (median: 178.04 million). Tis is over 30 percent of
global fatalities for the period 0–2008 CE. In terms of number of
instances of political violence, the Christian share is even higher,
accounting for 166 events out of 318 in total (52.2 percent).
Tus more than half of all major acts of political violence can
be attributed to various Christian states and communities in
history. Finally, in terms of genocides too the Christian world
has perpetrated more than half of all genocides (14 out of 27, or
51.85 percent). Still, these 14 genocides have had a total death
toll of 33.24 million, a whopping 69.24 percent of all genocide
deaths. What is called the Christian world, therefore, emerges
as the most violent and genocidal in world history.

--- Sayfa 237 ---
209
Body Count: A Comparative Quantitative Study of Mass Killings in History
5) Christian apologetics ofen charge anti-religious ideologies with
perpetrating more violence than religious civilisations. Taking a
broad view of history, rather than a perspective constrained to
the Cold War period, our study does not conﬁrm this hypothesis.
Instead, the Antitheist world is second in terms of death toll
contributions, ranging from 95.91 million to 152.91 million
(a mean of 124.41 million, amounting to 21.55 percent of the
total death toll across civilisations over the time period 0–2008
CE). As these deaths are spread over a mere 18 events, it is true
that the average death toll per event is higher than in any other
civilisational category. In terms of genocidal events, the Antitheist
category is overall second as well, having produced 8.25 million
deaths, again over relatively few events: namely three.
6) Te Sinic civilisation is the third most violent civilisation,
both in terms of overall death-toll (at 107.92 million, or 18.69
percent of total deaths) and in terms of genocidal deaths (at
5.00 million or 10.41 percent of total genocide deaths).With the
Communist Revolution in China, the Sinic civilisation largely
merged into the Antitheist civilisation, just as Communist
Eastern Europe was part of the Antitheist civilisational category
until it rejoined the Christian civilisation afer the Cold War.
Had this not been the case, the Sinic civilisation could have
surpassed the Christian as the most belligerent civilisation.
7) Te Muslim world has, before and afer 9/11, been on the
receiving end of media charges of violence and bigotry. Tis
may be due to the large number of events in which the Muslim
world has been involved: 79 acts of political violence, including
six of genocidal character (in both instances ranking second in
terms of number of events). However, in terms of death toll the
Muslim world’s share of death toll is ranked at the bottom, with
only the Indic civilisation as more paciﬁc. Te Islamic death
toll of 31.02 million (mean ﬁgure) amounts to 5.39 percent of
the total world death toll, and is thus around a sixth of the
Christian world’s share and around a quarter of the Antitheist
contribution. In the genocide category, however, the Islamic
death toll is somewhat lower at 2.54 percent.

--- Sayfa 238 ---
war and peace in islam
210
8) Contrary to the Islamic civilisation, the Buddhist world has
enjoined an exceptionally good press in the West. Yet, the
Buddhist contribution to the world death toll is almost three
times the Islamic, at 87.95 million (or 15.23 percent of the total
death toll). It should be noted that many instances of violence
from the Buddhist civilisation derive from Japanese actions,
including the sole engagement of genocidal violence with the
death toll of 300,000.
9) Finally, the Indic civilisation is the most paciﬁc civilisation
with no instance of genocidal violence (despite the Bombay and
Gujurat Riots in recent years). It is at the bottom of all tables,
with only nine instances of large-scale political violence, out
of 318, and less than half a percentage of the total death toll
(although that remains a sizeable 2.39 million).
Table : The Growth of Religious
Civilisations (In Millions)
Year
World
Population
Sinic
Christian
Primal
Indic
Islamic
Buddhist Antitheist
1
213 million
53
0
87
24
0
19
200
223 million
59
3
89
29
0
24
400
198 million
55
16
69
26
0
28
600
203 million
45
21
64
32
0
34
800
222 million
50
26
47
43
11
39
1000
276 million
66
35
44
52
23
43

--- Sayfa 239 ---
211
Body Count: A Comparative Quantitative Study of Mass Killings in History
1100
311 million
98
40
42
66
32
45
1200
380 million
115
53
40
73
44
46
1300
396 million
86
76
37
77
52
44
1400
362 million
81
60
34
82
56
40
1500
443 million
108
81
40
93
71
42
1600
562 million
146
106
41
104
98
48
1700
645 million
160
131
46
122
114
57
4
1800
927 million
292
219
54
132
162
73
18
1850
1,221 million
384
332
65
158
215
96
32
1900
1,645 million
435
552
71
193
282
107
50
1950
2,514 million
405
887
62
410
478
167
100
1975
4,068 million
390
1,333
59
637
852
228
555
2000
6,000 million
661
1,972
76
816
1,290
390
600
2010
6,800 million
739
2,219
78
842
1,588
449
662

--- Sayfa 240 ---
war and peace in islam
212
Table : Religious Civilisations in Proportion
to World Population
Year
World
Population
Sinic
Christian
Primal
Indic
Islamic
Buddhist Antitheist
1
213 million
24.9%
0%
40.8%
11.3%
0%
8.9%
0%
200
223 million
28.3%
1.4%
39.9%
13.0%
0%
10.8%
0%
400
198 million
26.7%
8.1%
36.4%
12.1%
0%
15.7%
0%
600
203 million
22.2%
10.3%
31.5%
15.7%
0%
16.7%
0%
800
222 million
22.5%
11.7%
21.2%
19.4%
5.0%
17.6%
0%
1000
276 million
23.9%
12.8%
15.9%
18.8%
8.3%
15.6%
0%
1100
311 million
31.5%
12.9%
13.5%
21.2%
10.3%
14.5%
0%
1200
380 million
30.3%
13.9%
10.5%
19.2%
11.6%
12.1%
0%
1300
396 million
21.7%
19.2%
9.3%
19.4%
13.1%
11.1%
0%
1400
362 million
22.4%
16.6%
9.4%
22.6%
15.5%
11.0%
0%
1500
443 million
24.4%
18.3%
9.0%
21.0%
16.0%
9.5%
0%
1600
562 million
26.0%
18.9%
7.3%
18.5%
17.4%
8.5%
0%

--- Sayfa 241 ---
213
Body Count: A Comparative Quantitative Study of Mass Killings in History
1700
645 million
24.8%
20.3%
7.1%
15.5%
17.7%
8.8%
0.6%
1800
927 million
31.5%
23.6%
5.8%
13.6%
17.5%
7.9%
1.9%
1850
1,221
million
33.2%
27.2%
5.3%
12.9%
17.6%
7.7%
2.6%
1900
1,645
million
26.4%
33.6%
4.3%
11.7%
17.9%
7.1%
3.0%
1950
2,514
million
16.1%
35.3%
2.5%
16.3%
19.0%
6.6%
4.0%
1975
4,068
million
9.6%
32.8%
1.5%
15.7%
20.9%
5.6%
13.6%
2000
6,000
million
11.0%
32.9%
1.2%
13.6%
21.5%
6.5%
10.0%
2010
6,800
million
10.9%
32.6%
1.1%
12.4%
23.3%
6.6%
9.7%
discussion: Te demographic balance between the world civilisations
has seen several tectonic shifs in the last 2,000 years. In the period
0–800, ethno-tribal belief systems, here known as Primal-Indigenous
religions, were the chief socio-religion dispensation among humankind.
As the Christianisation of Europe merged with the Islamisation of the
Middle East and North Africa, the Primal-Indigenous dominance was
weakened. Tis gave way to the Sinic civilisation, which became the
numerically largest, followed until the turn of the millennium closely
by the Indic civilisation. Te Sinic civilisation remained the dominant
until medical advances in Europe resulted in decreased child mortality,
courtesy of the Industrial Revolution, and by 1870 Christendom was
the largest civilisation, a privilege it retains till this day.
However, while all civilisations are increasing in absolute terms,
as a result of population growth, only Islam is growing in relative
terms. Future projections anticipate that Islam will attain parity with
Christianity by 2050, as Islam is the only civilisation whose growth rate

--- Sayfa 242 ---
war and peace in islam
214
is in excess of the generic growth rate of the world population at large.
Islam has not before reached parity with Christianity, with the excep-
tion of narrowing the gap considerably around the time of the Black
Death in Europe (a gap which since widened, even with the 30-Year
War in Europe).
Te most dramatic decline over the two thousand years is found
in the Primal-Indigenous group, where evangelisation and death at the
hand of colonialists entirely eradicated parochial forms of religios-
ity. Buddhism, too, has seen considerable demographic decline; from
having been more numerous than Hindus, Buddhists suﬀered from
loss of dynastic support in India and the spread of Islam in central
Asia. Likewise, the Communist takeover of China sounded the death-
knell of Sinic civilisation which quickly deteriorated. Like the Sinic
civilisation, the Buddhist too suﬀered from the institutional imposi-
tion of Antitheism, a blow which either is still to recover from, even as
Antitheism has recently seen a decline with the fall of the Soviet Bloc.
Originally published as Body Count by the Royal Aal al-Bayt
Institute for Islamic Tought as a booklet in 2009
(some ﬁgures in this chapter have been updated for this publication).

--- Sayfa 243 ---
PART II: PEACE AND ITS PRACTICE

--- Sayfa 245 ---
217
chapter eight
ISLAM AND PEACE: A Survey of Te Sources of Peace in
the Islamic Tradition
Professor Ibrahim Kalin
Is Religion a Source of Violence?
Tis question haunts the minds of many people concerned about religion
in one way or another. For the critics of religion, the answer is usually in
the aﬃrmative, and it is easy to cite examples from history. From Rene
Girard’s depiction of ritual sacriﬁces as violent proclivities in religions to
the exclusivist claims of diﬀerent faith traditions,ͪͭͯ
 one can easily conclude
that religions produce violence at both social and theological levels. As
is ofen done, one may take the Crusades or the inquisition in medieval
Europe or jihad movements in Islamic history and describe the respective
histories of these traditions as nothing more than a history of war, conﬂict,
violence, schism, persecution. Te premeditated conclusion is unequivo-
cal: the more religious people are, the more violent they tend to be. Te
solution therefore lies in the desacralisation of the world. Religions, and
some among them in particular, need to be secularised and modernised to
rid themselves of their violent essence and violent legacy.ͪͭ
Ͱ
At the other end of the spectrum is the believer who sees religious
violence as an oxymoron at best and the mutilation of his/her religious
faith at worst. Religions do not call for violence. Religious teachings are
peaceful at their base, meant to re-establish the primordial harmony
between heaven and earth, between the Creator and the created. But
speciﬁc religious teachings and feelings are manipulated to instigate
violence for political gains. Violence is committed in the name of reli-
gion but not condoned by it. Te only valid criticism the secularist
can raise against religion is that religions have not developed eﬀective

--- Sayfa 246 ---
war and peace in islam
218
ways of protecting themselves from such manipulations and abuses. As
Juergensmeyer has shown in his extensive survey of religious violence
in the modern period, violence does not recognise religious and cultural
boundaries and can easily ﬁnd a home in the most sublime and innocu-
ous teachings of world religionsͪͭ
ͱ. At any rate, religions are vulner-
able when they fail to ﬁnd ways of preventing the use of force in their
names. Tis becomes especially acute when they fall short of inculcating
a consciousness of peace and non-violence in the minds and hearts of
their followers. In short, religion per se cannot be seen as a source of
violence. Only some of its bad practitioners can be held accountable.
Both views have strong cases and make important points about reli-
gion and violence. Both, however, are equally mistaken in resorting to a
ﬁxed deﬁnition of religion. And both views reduce the immense variety
of religious practices to a particular tradition and, furthermore, to a
particular faction or historic moment in that tradition. In speaking of
Islam and violence or Hinduism and war, the usual method is to look
at the sacred scriptures and compare and contrast them with histori-
cal realities that ﬂow from their practice, or lack thereof. We highlight
those moments where there are discrepancies between text and history
as the breaking points in the history of that religion, viz., moments
when the community has not lived up to the standards of the religion
as demanded by the text.
Although there is some beneﬁt to be gained from this approach, it
fails to see the ways in which religious texts are interpreted and made
part of the day-to-day experience of particular religious communities.
Instead of looking at how religiously binding texts are read, revealed
and enriched within the concrete experiences of the community, we
separate text from history and somehow assume historical immunity
for the text and/or textual basis for all history.
Tis is not to deny the centrality of the scripture. In the case of
Islam, the Qur’an, together with the Sunnah of the Prophet of Islam, is
and remains the main source of the Islamic Weltanschauung. Afer all,
the numerous interpretations that we may talk about are interpretations
of the Qur’an, the one text that is the subject of variant readings from
the Suﬁs and Hanbalis to the Wahhabis and the modernists. Te fact
that the Prophetic Sunnah is part of the Islamic worldview and religious

--- Sayfa 247 ---
219
Islam and Peace: A Survey of the Sources of Peace in the Islamic Tradition
life, without which we cannot understand a good part of the Qur’an, can
be seen as conﬁrming the signiﬁcance of reading the scripture within
the concrete experiences of the Muslim community. Tis was in fact
how the ﬁrst Muslims, who became the spiritual and moral examples
of later generations, learnt about the Qur’an, under the guidance and
tutorship of the Prophet.
In this sense, Islamic history is not alien to the idea of reading reli-
giously binding texts primarily within the context of a living and ‘evolv-
ing’ tradition. Tis is why the Sunnah was part of the Islamic law from
the outset and this is how the tradition of transmitted sciences (al-‘ulūm
al-naqliyyah), dealing primarily with ‘religious sciences’, came about,
namely, by looking at how the previous generations of Muslims under-
stood the Qur’an and the Hadith. Taken out of this context, Qur’anic
verses become abstruse, abstract, and impenetrable for the non-Muslim,
or for anyone who is indiﬀerent to this tradition and, by virtue of this,
may be misled into thinking that a good part of Islamic history has come
about in spite of the Qur’an, not because of it.
I deemed it necessary to insert these few words of caution and
‘methodology’ for the following reasons. Much of the current debate
about Islam and violence is beset by the kind of problems that we see
in the secularist and apologetic readings of the scriptural sources of
Islam. Tose who consider Islam as a religion that essentially condones
violence for its theological beliefs and political aims pick certain verses
from the Qur’an, link them to cases of communal and political violence
in Islamic history, and conclude that Qur’anic teachings provide justiﬁ-
cation for unjust use of violence. While the same can be done practically
about any religion, Islam has enjoyed much more fanfare than any other
religion for the last thousand years or so. Te apologist makes the same
mistake but in a diﬀerent way when he rejects all history as misguided,
failing to see the ways in which the Qur’an, or the Bible or the Rig Vedas,
can easily, if not legitimately, be read to resort to violence for intra- and
inter-religious violence. Tis is where the hermeneutics of the text (in
the sense of both tafsīr and ta’wīl) becomes absolutely necessary: it is
not that the text itself is violent but that it lends itself to multiple read-
ings, some of which are bound to be peaceful and some violent.
Te second problem is the exclusive focus of the current literature

--- Sayfa 248 ---
war and peace in islam
220
on the legal and juristic aspects of peace and violence in Islam. Use
of violence, conduct of war, treatment of combatants and prisoners of
war, international law, etc. are discussed within a strictly legal context,
and the classical Islamic literature on the subject is called upon to
provide answers. Although this is an important and useful exercise, it
falls short of addressing deeper philosophical and spiritual issues that
must be included in any discussion of religion and peace. Tis is true
especially in the case of Islam, for two main reasons. First of all, the
legal views of peace and violence in the classical period were articulated
and applied in the light of the overall teachings and aims of Islamic law
(maqāṣid al-sharī‘ah). Te maqāṣid provided a context within which
the strict legality of the law was blended into the necessities and reali-
ties of communal life. Political conﬂicts couched in the language of
juridical edicts remained political conﬂicts, and were never extended
to a war of religions between Islam or Christianity, Judaism, Hinduism
or African religions, which Muslims encountered throughout their
history. It should come to us as no surprise that the fatwa of a jurist of
a particular school of law allowing the use of force against a Christian
ruler was not interpreted as an excuse for attacking one’s Christian or
Jewish neighbour.
Secondly, the spiritual and ethical teachings of the Qur’an and the
Sunnah underpin everything Islamic in principle, and this applies muta-
tis mutandis to the question of peace and violence. Te legal injunctions
(aḥkām) of the Qur’an concerning peace and war are part of a larger set
of spiritual and moral principles. Te ultimate goal of Islam is to create
a moral and just society in which individuals can pursue a spiritual life,
and in which the toll of living collectively, from economic exploitation
and misuse of political authority to the suppression of other people,
can be brought under control to the extent possible in any human
society. Without taking into account this larger picture, we will fail to
see how Islam advocates a positive concept of peace as opposed to a
merely negative one, and how its political and legal precepts, which are
exploited so wildly and irrationally by both the secular and religious
fundamentalists of our day, lead to the creation and sustaining of a just
and ethical social order.
With these caveats in mind, this paper has two interrelated goals.

--- Sayfa 249 ---
221
Islam and Peace: A Survey of the Sources of Peace in the Islamic Tradition
Te ﬁrst is to analyse the ways in which the Islamic tradition can be
said to advocate a positive concept of peace. Tis will be contrasted with
‘negative peace’, deﬁned conventionally as absence of war and conﬂict.
It will be argued that positive peace involves the presence of certain qual-
ities and conditions that aim to make peace a principal state of harmony
and equilibrium rather than a mere event of political settlement. Tis
requires a close examination of the philosophical assumptions of the
Islamic tradition which have shaped the experience of Muslim societies
vis-à-vis the peoples of other faiths and cultures. Tese philosophical
suppositions are naturally grounded in the ethical and spiritual teach-
ings of Islam, and without considering their relevance for the cultural
and political experience of Muslims with the ‘other’, we can neither do
justice to the Islamic tradition, which spans a vast area in both space and
time, nor avoid the pitfalls of historical reductionism and essentialism,
which are so rampant in the current discussions of the subject.
Tis brings us to the second goal of the paper. Here I will argue that
an adequate analysis of peace and war in the Islamic tradition entails
more than ﬁxating the views of some Muslim jurists of the ninth and
tenth centuries as the deﬁnitive position of ‘orthodox’ Islam and thus
reducing the Islamic modus operandi of dealing with non-Muslims
to a concept of ‘holy war’. With some exceptions,ͪͮͨ
 the ever grow-
ing literature of Islam and peace has been concerned predominantly
with the legal aspects of declaring war (jihad) against Muslim and/or
non-Muslim states, treatment of the ahl al-dhimmah under the shari‘ah,
and expanding the territories of the Islamic state. Tis has obscured, to
say the least, the larger context within which such legal opinions were
discussed, interpreted and evolved from one century to the next, and
from one cultural-political era to another.
I therefore propose to look at the concept of peace in the Islamic
tradition in four interrelated contexts. Te ﬁrst is the metaphysical-
spiritual context in which peace (salām) as one of the names of God is
seen as an essential part of God’s creation and assigned a substantive
value. Te second is the philosophical-theological context within
which the question of evil (shar) is addressed as a cosmic, ethical, and
social problem. Discussions of theodicy among Muslim theologians
and philosophers provide one of the most profound analyses of the

--- Sayfa 250 ---
war and peace in islam
222
question of evil, injustice, mishap, violence and their place in the ‘great
chain of being’. I shall provide a brief summary to show how a proper
understanding of peace in the Islamic tradition is bound to take us to the
larger questions of good and evil. Te third is the political-legal context,
which is the proper locus of classical legal and juristic discussions of war,
rebellion, oppression, and political (dis)order. Tis area has been the
exclusive focus of current literature on the subject and promises to be an
engaging and long-standing debate in the Muslim world. Te fourth is the
socio-cultural context, which would reveal the parameters of the Muslim
experience of religious and cultural diversity with communities of other
faiths and cultural traditions.
As will become clear in the following pages, all of these levels are
interdependent and call for a larger context within which the questions of
peace and violence have been articulated and negotiated by a multitude
of scholars, philosophers, jurists, mystics, political leaders, and various
Muslim communities. Te Islamic tradition provides ample material for
contemporary Muslim societies to deal with issues of peace, religious
diversity and social justice, all of which, needless to say, require urgent
attention. Furthermore, the present challenge of Muslim societies is not
only to deal with these issues as internal aﬀairs but also to contribute to
the fostering of a global culture of peace and coexistence. Before turning
to the Islamic tradition, however, a few words of deﬁnition are in order,
to clarify the meaning of positive peace.
Peace as a Substantive Value
Peace as a substantive and positive concept entails the presence of certain
conditions that make it an enduring state of harmony, integrity, content-
ment, equilibrium, repose, and moderation. Tis can be contrasted with
negative peace that denotes the absence of conﬂict and discord. Even
though negative peace is indispensable to prevent communal violence,
border disputes or international conﬂicts, substantive-positive peace calls
for a comprehensive outlook to address the deeper causes of conﬂict, hate,
strife, destruction, brutality, and violence. As Lee states, it also provides
a genuine measure and set of values by which peace and justice can be
established beyond the short-term interests of individuals, communities
or states.ͪͮͩ Tis is critical for the construction of peace as a substantive

--- Sayfa 251 ---
223
Islam and Peace: A Survey of the Sources of Peace in the Islamic Tradition
value because deﬁning peace as the privation of violence and conﬂict
turns it into a concept that is instrumental and accidental at best, and rela-
tive and irrelevant at worst. In addition, the positive-substantive notion
of peace shifs the focus from preventing conﬂict, violence, and strife to a
willingness to generate balance, justice, cooperation, dialogue, and coex-
istence as the primary terms of a discourse of peace. Instead of deﬁning
peace with what it is not and forcing common sense logic to its limit, we
may well opt for generating a philosophical ground based on the presence
and endurance, rather than absence, of certain qualities and conditions
that make peace a substantive reality of human life.ͪͮͪ
Furthermore, relegating the discourse of peace to social conﬂict and
its prevention runs the risk of neglecting the individual, who is the sine
qua non of collective and communal peace. Tis is where the ‘spiritual
individualism’ of Islam versus its social collectivism enters the picture:
the individual must be endowed with the necessary qualities that make
peace an enduring reality, not only in the public sphere but also in the
private domain of the individual. Te Qur’anic ideal of creating a beau-
tiful soul that is at peace with itself and the larger reality of which it is a
part brings ethics and spirituality right into the heart of the discourse of
positive peace. Peace as a substantive value thus extends to the domain
of both ethics and aesthetics, for it is one of the conditions that bring
about peace in the soul, and resists the temptations of discord, restless-
ness, ugliness, pettiness, and vulgarity. At this point, we may remember
that the key Qur’anic term iḥsān carries the meanings of virtue, beauty,
goodness, comportment, proportion, comeliness, and ‘doing what is
beautiful’ all at once. Te active particle muḥsin denotes the person who
does what is good, desired, and beautiful.ͪͮͫ

In this regard, peace is not a mere state of passivity. On the contrary,
it is being fully active against the menace of evil, destruction, and turmoil
that may come from within or from without. As Collingwood points out,
peace is a ‘dynamic thing’,ͪͮͬ
 and requires consciousness and vigilance, a
constant state of awareness that one must engage in spiritual and intel-
lectual jihad to ensure that diﬀerences and conﬂicts within and across
the collective traditions do not become grounds for violence and oppres-
sion. Furthermore, positive peace involves the analysis of various forms
of aggression including individual, institutional and structural violence.

--- Sayfa 252 ---
war and peace in islam
224
Peace as a substantive concept is also based on justice (‘adl); for
peace is predicated upon the availability of equal rights and opportuni-
ties for all to realise their goals and potentials. One of the meanings of
the word justice in Arabic is to be ‘straight’ and ‘equitable’, i.e., to be
straightforward, trustworthy, and fair in one’s dealings with others.ͪͮͭ

Such an attitude brings about a state of balance, accord, and trust,
and goes beyond the limits of formal justice dispensed by the juridi-
cal system. Deﬁned in the broadest terms, justice encompasses a vast
domain of relations and interactions from taking care of one’s body to
international law. Like peace, justice is one of the Divine names, and
takes on a substantive importance in view of its central role in Islamic
theology as well as law. Peace can be conceived as an enduring state of
harmony, trust, and coexistence only when coupled and supported with
justice because it also means being secure from all that is morally evil
and destructive.ͪͮͮ
 Tus the Qur’an combines justice with iḥsān when it
commands its followers to act with ‘justice and good manner’ (bi’l-‘adl
wa’l-iḥsān) (Al-Naḥl, 16:90).ͪͮͯ

The Spiritual-Metaphysical Context:
God as Peace (al-Salm)
Te conditions that are conducive to a state of peace mentioned above are
primarily spiritual and have larger implications for the cosmos, the indi-
vidual, and society. Here I shall focus on three premises that are directly
relevant to our examination. Te ﬁrst pertains to peace as a Divine name
(al-Salām) (Al-Ḥashr, 59:23). Te Qur’anic concept of God is founded
upon a robust monotheism, and God’s transcendence (tanzīh) is empha-
sised in both the canonical sources and in the intellectual tradition. To
this absolutely one and transcendent God belong ‘all the beautiful names’
(Al-A‘rāf, 7:180, Al-Ḥashr, 59:24), i.e., the names of beauty (jamāl), majesty
(jalāl), and perfection (kamāl). It is these names that prevent God from
becoming an utterly unreachable and ‘wholly other’ deity. Divine names
represent God’s face turned towards the world and are the vessels of ﬁnd-
ing God in and through His creation.
Te names of beauty take precedence over the names of majesty
because God says that my mercy has encompassed everything (Al-A‘rāf,
7: 156) and God has written mercy upon Himself (Al-An‘ām, 6:12, 54).

--- Sayfa 253 ---
225
Islam and Peace: A Survey of the Sources of Peace in the Islamic Tradition
Tis is also supported by a famous hadith of the Prophet according
to which ‘God is beautiful and loves beauty’. In this sense, God is as
much transcendent, incomparable and beyond as He is immanent,
comparable (tashbīh) and close.ͪͮ
Ͱ As the ultimate source of peace,
God transcends all opposites and tensions, is the permanent state of
repose and tranquility, and calls His servants to the abode of peace (Dār
al-Salām) (Yūnus, 10:25). It is He who from high on has sent [sends]
down inner peace and repose (sakīnah) upon the hearts of the believers,
says the Qur’an (Al-Fatḥ, 48:4). Te proper abode of peace is the hearts
(qulūb), which are satisﬁed only by the remembrance of God (dhikr
Allāh) (Al-Ra‘d, 13:28). By linking the heart, man’s centre, to God’s
remembrance, the Qur’an establishes a strong link between theology
and spiritual psychology.
In addition to the Qur’anic exegetes, the Suﬁs in particular are
fond of explaining the ‘mystery of creation’ by referring to a ‘sacred
saying’ (hadīth qudsī) attributed to the Prophet of Islam: ‘I was a hidden
treasure. I wanted (lit. ‘loved’) to be known and created the universe
(lit. ‘creation’ͪͮ
ͱ).’ Te key words ‘love’ (ḥubb, maḥabbah) and ‘know’
(ma‘rifah) underlie a fundamental aspect of the Suﬁ metaphysics of
creation: Divine love and desire to be known is the raison d’être of all
existence. Ibn al-‘Arabi says that God’s love for His servants is identi-
cal with the origination of their engendered existence … the relation of
God’s love to them is the same as the fact that He is with them wherever
they are (Al-Ḥadīd, 57:4), whether in the state of their nonexistence or
the state of their wujūd … they are the objects of His knowledge. He
witnesses them and loves them never-endingly.ͪͯͨ
 Commenting on the
above saying, Dawud al-Qaysari, the fourteenth  century Turkish Suﬁ
philosopher and the ﬁrst university president of the newly established
Ottoman state, says that ‘God has written love upon Himself. Tere is
no doubt that the kind of love that is related to the manifestation of
[His] perfections follows from the love of His Essence, which is the
source of the love of [His Names and] Qualities that have become the
reason for the unveiling of all existents and the connection of the species
of spiritual and corporeal bodies.’ͪͯͩ
Te second premise is related to what traditional philosophy calls
‘the great chain of being’ (dā’irat al-wujūd). In the cosmic scale of things,

--- Sayfa 254 ---
war and peace in islam
226
the universe is the ‘best of all possible worlds’ because, ﬁrst, it is actual,
which implies completion and plenitude over and against potentiality,
and, second, its built-in order derives its sustenance from the Creator.
Te natural world is in a constant state of peace because according to
the Qur’an it is ‘muslim’ (with a small m) in that it surrenders (taslīm)
itself to the will of God and thus rises above all tension and discord (Āl
‘Imrān, 3:83; Al-Tawbah, 9:53; Al-Ra‘d, 13:15; Fuṣṣilat, 41:11). In its
normative depiction of natural phenomena, the Qur’an talks about stars
and trees as prostrating before God (Al-Raḥmān, 55:6) and says that all
that is in the heavens and on earth extols His glory (Al-Ḥashr, 59:24). By
acknowledging God’s unity and praising His name, man joins the natu-
ral world in a substantive way—a process that underscores the essential
link between the anthropos and the cosmos or the microcosm and the
macrocosm. Te intrinsic commonality and unity between the human
as ‘subject’ and the universe as ‘object’ has been called the ‘anthropo-
cosmic vision’.ͪͯͪ
 Te thrust of this view is that the anthropos and the
cosmos cannot be disjoined from one another and that the man-versus-
nature dichotomy is a false one. Moreover, the world has been given to
the children of Adam as a ‘trust’ (amānah) as they are charged with the
responsibility of standing witness to God’s creation, mercy, and justice
on earth. Conceiving nature in terms of harmony, measure, order and
balance points to a common and persistent attitude towards the non-
human world in Islamic thought, and has profound implications for the
construction of peace as a principle of the cosmos.ͪͯͫ
Te third principle pertains to man’s natural state and his place
within the larger context of existence. Even though the Qur’an occa-
sionally describes the fallen nature of man in gruesome terms and
presents man as weak, forgetful, treacherous, hasty, ignorant, ungrate-
ful, hostile, and egotistic (cf., inter alia, Ibrāhīm, 14:34; Al- Isrā’, 17:11;
Al-Kahf, 18:54; Al-Ḥajj, 22:66; Al-Aḥzāb, 33:72; Al-Zukhruf,  43:15;
and Al-‘Ādiyāt, 100:6), these qualities are eventually considered devia-
tions from man’s essential nature (ﬁtrah), who has been created in the
‘most beautiful form’ (aḥsan taqwīm) (Al-Tīn, 95:4), both physically
and spiritually. Tis metaphysical optimism deﬁnes human beings as
‘God’s vicegerent on earth’ (khalīfat Allāh fī’l-‘arḍ) as the Qur’an says,
or, to use a metaphor from Christianity, as the ‘pontifex’, the bridge

--- Sayfa 255 ---
227
Islam and Peace: A Survey of the Sources of Peace in the Islamic Tradition
between heaven and earth.ͪͯͬ
 Te ﬁṭrah (Al-Rūm, 30:30), the primordial
nature according to which God has created all humanity, is essentially a
moral and spiritual substance drawn to the good and ‘God-consciousness’
(taqwā’) whereas its imperfections and ‘excessiveness’ (fujūr) (Al-Shams,
91:8) are ‘accidental’ qualities to be subsumed under the soul’s struggle to
do good (al-birr) and transcend its subliminal desires through his intel-
ligence and moral will.
The Philosophical-Theological Context: Evil and
the Best of All Possible Worlds
In the context of theology and philosophy, questions of peace and violence
are treated under the rubric of good and evil (ḥusn/khayr and sharr/
qubḥ). War, conﬂict, violence, injustice, discord, and the like are seen as
extensions of the general problem of evil. Muslim philosophers and theo-
logians have been interested in theodicy from the very beginning, and for
good reasons, because the basic question of theodicy goes to the heart of
religion: how can a just and perfect God allow evil and destruction in a
world which He says He has created in perfect balance, with a purpose,
and for the well-being of His servants? We can rephrase the question in
the present context as follows: why is there so much violence, turmoil and
oppression rather than peace, harmony and justice in the world? Does
evil, of which violence is  an oﬀshoot, belong to the essential nature of
things or is it an accident that arises only as the privation of goodness?
Tese questions have given rise to a long and interesting debate about
evil among theologians. One particular aspect of this debate, known as
the ‘best of all possible worlds’ (aḥsān al-niẓām) argument,ͪͯͭ
 deserves
closer attention as it is relevant to the formulation of a positive concept
of peace. Te classical statement of the problem pertains to Divine justice
and power on the one hand, and the Greek notions of potentiality and
actuality on the other. Te fundamental question is whether this world in
which we live is the best that God could have created. Since, from a moral
point of view, the world is imperfect because there is evil and injustice
in it, we have to either admit that God was not able to create a better
and more perfect world or concede that He did not create a better world
by will as part of the Divine economy of creation. Obviously, the ﬁrst
alternative calls into question God’s omnipotence (qudrah) whereas the

--- Sayfa 256 ---
war and peace in islam
228
second jeopardises His wisdom and justice (‘adālah). Following another
line of discussion in Kalam, we can reformulate the question as a tension
between God’s nature and will: can God go against His own nature, which
is just, if He wants to, or is it that His will cannot supersede His nature?
Still, can God contradict Himself? If we say yes, then we attribute imper-
fection to God and if we say no, then we limit Him.
Even the most modest attempt to analyse these questions within the
context of Kalam debates will take us too far aﬁeld. What is directly related
to our examination here is how the concepts of evil, injustice, oppression
and their variations are seen as the ‘accidental outcomes’ of the world
of contingencies in which we live. True, the weaknesses and frailties of
human beings contribute enormously to the creation and exacerbation of
evil, and it is only reasonable to take a ‘situational’ position and attribute
evil to ourselves rather than to the Divine. In fact, this is what the Qur’an
holds vis-à-vis evil and man’s accountability: Whatever good happens to
you, it is from God; and whatever evil befalls you, it is from your own self/
soul (Al-Nisā’, 4: 79; cf. also Āl ‘Imrān, 3:165). Te best of all possible
worlds argument, however, shifs the focus from particular instances of
individual or structural violence to the phenomenon of evil itself whereby
we gain a deeper insight into how evil arises in the ﬁrst place.
We may reasonably argue that evil is part of the Divine economy of
creation and thus necessary. In a moral sense, it is part of Divine economy
because it is what we are tested with (cf. Al-Anbiyā’, 21:36; Al-Kahf, 18:9).
Without evil, there would be no accountability and thus no freedom.ͪͯͮ

Mulla Sadra calls this a necessity of Divine providence (al-‘ināyah) and
the ‘concomitant of the ultimate telos of goodness’ (al-ghāyat al-khayri-
yyah).ͪͯͯ
 In an ontological sense, it is a necessity because the world is by
deﬁnition imperfect, the ultimate perfection belonging to God, and the
world is not God. Tat is why God has not created ‘all beings as pure
goodness’.ͪͯ
Ͱ Evil as limitation and imperfection is an outcome of the ﬁrst
act of separation between the Divine and the non-divine or what Muslim
theologians call mā siwā Allāh (all that is other than God). Ultimately,
however, all is from God (Al-Nisā’, 4:78). Tis implies that evil as the
‘contrastive manifestation of the good’ͪͯ
ͱ ceases to be evil and contrib-
utes to the ‘greater good’, which is what the best of all possible world
argument asserts. In a rather paradoxical way, one cannot object to the

--- Sayfa 257 ---
229
Islam and Peace: A Survey of the Sources of Peace in the Islamic Tradition
existence of evil itself because it is what makes the world possible. But
this does not absolve us of the moral duty of ﬁghting against individual
cases of evil. Nor does it make evil an essential nature of things because
it was God’s decision to create the world with a meaning and purpose in
the ﬁrst place. In short, evil remains contingent and transient, and this
assumption extends to the next world.ͪ Ͱͨ
Te notion of evil as an ontological necessity-cum-contingency has
important implications for how we look at the world and its ‘evil’ side.
From a psychological point of view, the acceptance of evil as a transient
yet necessary phenomenon prevents us from becoming petty and bitter in
the face of all that is blemished, wicked, imperfect, and tainted.ͪ Ͱͩ It gives
us a sense of moral security against the onslaught of evil, which can and
must be fought with a ﬁrm belief in the ultimate supremacy of the good. It
also enables us to see the world as it is and for what it is, and strive to make
it a better place in terms of moral and spiritual perfection. From a reli-
gious point of view, this underscores the relative nature of evil: something
that may appear evil to us may not be evil, and vice versa, when everything
is placed within a larger framework. Tus the Qur’an says that it may well
be that you hate a thing while it is good (khayr) for you, and it may well be
that you love a thing while it is bad (sharr) for you. And God knows, and
you know not (Al-Baqarah, 2:216). Mulla Sadra applies this principle to
‘natural evils’, and says that even death, corruption (al-fasād) and the like
are necessary and needed for the order of the world (al-niẓām) when they
occur ‘by nature and not by force or accident’.ͪ Ͱͪ
Te best of all possible worlds argument is also related to the scheme
of actuality and potentiality which Muslim philosophers and theologi-
ans have adopted from Aristotle. Te argument goes as follows. Tis
world in which we live is certainly one of the possibilities that the Divine
has brought into actuality. In this sense, the world is pure contingency
(imkān) and hung between existence and non-existence. From the point
of view of its present actuality, however, the world is perfect and necessary
because actuality implies plenitude and perfection whereas potentiality
is privation and non-existence.ͪ Ͱͫ Te sense of perfection in this context
is both ontological and cosmological. It is ontological because existence
is superior to non-existence and whatever is in the sphere of potentiality
remains so until it is brought into actuality by an agent which itself is

--- Sayfa 258 ---
war and peace in islam
230
already actual. It is cosmological because, as stated before, the world has
been created with care, order, and beauty, which the Qur’an invites its
readers to look at as the signs of God (ayāt Allāh or vestigia Dei as it was
called by the Scholastics). Te perfect state of the cosmos is presented as
a model for the establishment of a just social order. It then follows that
evil is a phenomenon of this world, but not something that deﬁnes the
essential nature of things.
An important outcome of this point of view is to identify evil as
a rationally discernible phenomenon. Tis may appear to be a simple
truism. Nevertheless, it is a powerful position against the notion of evil as a
mysterious, mythical or even cosmological fact over which human beings
have no control. Evil is something that can be discerned by the intellect
and correct reasoning and, of course, with the help of revelation.ͪ Ͱͬ and
this places tremendous responsibility on our shoulders vis-à-vis the evil
that may come from within or from without. One may disagree with
Mu‘tazilite theologians for pushing the sovereignty of human freedom to
the point of endangering God’s omniscience and omnipotency. In fact,
this was what had prompted al-Ash‘ari, once a Mu‘tazilite himself, to
carry out his own i‘tizāl and lay the foundations of Ash‘arism. He and his
followers believed that good and evil were ultimately determined by the
Divine law (al-sharī‘ah), leaving no space for the independent judgment
of human reason (al-‘aql). Paradoxically, however, the moral voluntarism
of the Ash‘arites agrees with Mu‘tazilite rationalism in underscoring the
relative and contingent nature of evil: whether determined by reason
or revelation, evil is the privation of good and does not represent the
essential nature of things.
Muslim philosophers assert the same point through what we might
call the ontological argument. In addition to the fact that actuality is
perfection over potentiality, existence (al-wujūd) is pure goodness (khayr
maḥḍ, summun bonum). All beings that exist partake of this ontological
goodness. Since God is the only Necessary being (wājib al-wujūd) by its
essence, and ‘in all regards’, this perfection ultimately belongs to Him.
According to Ibn Sina, evil has no enduring essence and appears only as
the privation (‘adām) of goodness:
Every being that is necessary by itself is pure goodness and
pure perfection. Goodness (al-khayr), in short, is that which

--- Sayfa 259 ---
231
Islam and Peace: A Survey of the Sources of Peace in the Islamic Tradition
everything desires and by which everything’s being is com-
pleted. But evil has no essence; it is either the nonexistence
of a substance or the nonexistence of the state of goodness
(ṣalāḥ) for a substance. Tus existence is pure goodness, and
the perfection of existence is the goodness of existence. Exis-
tence is pure goodness when it is not accompanied by non-
existence, the non-existence of a substance, or the non-exis-
tence of something from that substance and it is in perpetual
actuality. As for the existent contingent by itself, it is not pure
goodness because its essence does not necessitate its existence
by itself. Tus its essence allows for non-existence. Anything
that allows for non-existence in some respect is not free from
evil and imperfection in all respects. Hence pure goodness is
nothing but existence that is necessary by its own essence.285
Elaborating on the same idea, Mulla Sadra argues that good and evil
cannot be regarded opposites for ‘one is the non-existence of the other;
therefore goodness is existence or the perfection of existence and evil is the
absence of existence or the non-existence of the perfection of existence’.ͪ Ͱͮ
By deﬁning good and evil in terms of existence and non-existence, Sadra
shifs the focus from a moralistic to a primarily ontological framework.
Like Ibn Sina, Sadra deﬁnes goodness as the essential nature of the present
world order for it is an existent, viz., something positive. Tis leads Sadra
to conclude that goodness permeates the world order at its foundation.
In spite of the existence of such natural evils as death and famine, ‘what
is more and permanent is the desired goodness in nature’.ͪ Ͱͯ Once evil is
relativised, it is easier to defend this world as the best of all possible worlds.
Tis is what Sadra does when he says that ‘the universe in its totality (bi-
kulliyatihi) is the most perfect of all that may be and the most noble of all
that can be conceived’.ͪ ͰͰ
The Political-Legal Context: Law and Its Vicissitudes
Te shari‘ah rules concerning war, peace, jihad, religious minorities, and
the religio-political divisions of Dār al-Islām, Dār al-Ṣulḥ/‘Ahd, and Dār
al-Ḥarb constitute an important component of the Islamic law of nations.
Teir contextual and historical interpretation presents a signiﬁcant chal-
lenge to the modern scholars of Islam on the one hand, and the Muslims
themselves on the other. In analysing the views of the jurists on these issues

--- Sayfa 260 ---
war and peace in islam
232
from the second Islamic century onwards, an extremely common tendency
is to ﬁxate speciﬁc legal rulings by certain jurists as the ‘orthodox’ view of
Islam applicable to all times and places. While it is granted that Islamic
law is based on the ultimate authority of the Qur’an and the Sunnah, the
shari‘ah as legal code is structured in such a way as to allow consider-
able freedom and leeway for Muslim scholars and communities to adjust
themselves to diﬀerent times and circumstances. Te early generations of
Muslim scholars, jurists (fuqahā’), Qur’anic commentators (mufassirūn),
traditionists (muhaddithūn), and historians have made extensive use of this
simple fact, paving the way for the rise and ﬂourishing of various schools
of law and legal opinions in Islam. Tis ‘adoptionist’ and resilient nature
of the shari‘ah, however, has been grossly overlooked and understated not
only in Western scholarship but also in the Islamic world. In the present
context, this has led to the of-repeated conclusion that the teachings of the
shari‘ah and, by derivation, Islam itself do not warrant a substantive notion
of peace and a culture of coexistence.ͪ Ͱͱ
To analyse the legal-political aspects of traditional shari‘ah rulings
concerning war and peace, I shall limit myself to three interrelated issues.
Te ﬁrst is the Muslim community’s right to defend itself against internal
or external aggression and the transition of the ﬁrst Muslim community
from the overt ‘paciﬁsm’ of Mecca to the ‘activism’ of Medina. Tis issue
necessarily raises the question of jihad as an oﬀensive or defensive war
and its relation to what is called jus ad bellum in the Western tradition.
Te second is the political context of the legal injunctions of certain
jurists, namely Imam Shaﬁ‘i (d. 820 CE) and the Hanaﬁ jurist Sarakhsi
(d. 1090 CE), concerning the legitimacy of the territorial expansion
of Muslim states on religious grounds. Some contemporary scholars
have disproportionately overstated Shaﬁ‘i’s justiﬁcatory remarks about
launching jihad against non-Muslim territories on the basis of their
belief system. Te third issue is the treatment of religious minorities,
i.e. the dhimmis under the Islamic law and its relevance for religious
diversity and cultural pluralism in the Islamic tradition.
To begin with the ﬁrst, a major concern of the Prophet of Islam in
Mecca was to ensure the security and integrity of the nascent Muslim
community as a religio-political unit. Tis concern eventually led to
the historic migration of the Prophet and his followers to Medina in

--- Sayfa 261 ---
233
Islam and Peace: A Survey of the Sources of Peace in the Islamic Tradition
622 CE afer a decade of pressure, sanctions, persecution, torture, and
a foiled attempt to kill the Prophet himself. During this period, the
community’s right to defend itself against the Meccan polytheists was
mostly exercised in what we would call today paciﬁst and non-violent
means of resistance. Even though the Prophet was in close contact with
the Meccan leaders to spread his message as well as to protect his small
yet highly dedicated group of followers, his tireless negotiations did not
mitigate the aggressive policies of Meccans against the growing Muslim
community. Te transition from the robust paciﬁsm of Mecca to the
political activism of Medina took place when the permission to ﬁght
was given with the verses Al-Ḥajj, 22:38–40:
Verily, God will ward oﬀ [all evil] from those who attain to
faith: [and] verily, God does not love anyone who betrays his
trust and is beref of gratitude. Permission [to ﬁght] is given
to those against whom war is being wrongfully waged—and,
verily, God has indeed the power to succor them--: those who
have been driven from their homelands against all right or no
other reason than their saying, ‘Our Sustainer is God!’ For,
if God had not enabled people to defend themselves against
one another, [all] monasteries and churches and synagogues
and mosques—in [[all of] which God’s name is abundantly
extolled—would surely have been destroyed. (trans. M. Asad)
Tis and other verses (Al-Baqarah, 2:190–3) deﬁne clearly the
reasons for taking up arms to defend religious freedom and set the
conditions of just war (jus ad bellum) in self-defence. Tat the verse,
revealed in the ﬁrst year of the Hijrah, refers to the grave wrongdoing
against Muslims and their eviction from their homeland for professing
the new faith conﬁrms that the migration of the Prophet was the last
stage of the forceful expulsion of the Muslim community from Mecca.
Tis was a turning point for the attitudes and ensuing tactics of the
Prophet and his followers to protect themselves against the Meccans. Te
subsequent battles fought between the Meccans and the Medinans, from
Badr to Handak until the Prophet’s triumphant return to Mecca. were
based on the same principles of religious freedom, collective solidarity,
and political unity. In addition to enunciating the conditions of just war,
the above verse deﬁnes religious freedom as a universal cause for all
the three Abrahamic faiths. Like any other political unit, communities

--- Sayfa 262 ---
war and peace in islam
234
tied with a bond of faith have the right and, in fact, the responsibility of
securing their existence and integrity against the threats of persecution
and eventual extinction. As I shall discuss below, this ecumenical
attitude towards the religious freedom of all faith communities was a
major factor in the Prophet’s signing of a number of treatises with the
Jews, Christians and Zoroastrians of the Arabian Peninsula as well as
the treatment of religious minorities under the shari‘ah.ͪ ͱͨ
Te construction of jihad as armed struggle to expand the borders
of Dār al-Islām and, by derivation, subsume all Dār al-Ḥarb under the
Islamic dominion is found in some of the jurists of the ninth and tenth
centuries. Among those, we can mention Shaﬁ‘i and Sarakhsi who inter-
preted jihad as the duty of the Muslim ruler to ﬁght against the lands
deﬁned as the ‘territory of war’. Shaﬁ‘i formulated his expansionist
theory of jihad as a religious duty at a time when Muslim states were
engaged in prolonged military conﬂicts with non-Muslim territories
and had become mostly successful in extending their borders. While
these jurists had justiﬁed ﬁghting against non-Muslims on account of
their disbelief (kufr) rather than self-defence, they were also adamant
on the observation of jus in bello norms, i.e., avoiding excessiveness,
accepting truce, sparing the lives of non-combatants, women, children,
etc.ͪ ͱͩ In spite of these conditions, the views of Shaﬁ‘i and his follow-
ers represent a shif from the Qur’anic notion of self-defence to armed
struggle to bring about the conversion of non-Muslims. Having said
that, two points need to be mentioned.
First of all, the views of Shaﬁ‘i and Sarakhsi do not represent the
majority, let alone the ‘orthodox’, stance of the jurists. Te common
tendency to present this particular deﬁnition of jihad as the mainstream
position of Islam not only disregards the views of Abu Hanifah, Malik
ibn Anas, Abu Yusuf, Shaybani, Awzai, Ibn Rushd, Ibn Taymiyyah,
Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyyah and others but also ignores the historical
and contextual nature of such juridical rulings.ͪ ͱͪ Te same holds true
for Muslim political philosophers and theologians who take a diﬀer-
ent position on the bifurcationist framework of Dār al-Islām versus
Dār al-Ḥarb.ͪ ͱͫ Moreover, these rulings were by and large the jurists’
response to the de facto situation of the military conquests of Muslim
states rather than their cause. Certain jurists begin to stress such recon-

--- Sayfa 263 ---
235
Islam and Peace: A Survey of the Sources of Peace in the Islamic Tradition
ciliatory terms as Dār al-‘Ahd (‘the Land of the Covenant’) and Dār
al-Ṣulḥ (‘the Land of Peace’) during and afer the eleventh and twelfh
centuries when the Muslim states were confronted with political realities
other than unabated conquest and resounding victories. Tis change in
tone and emphasis, however, was not a completely novel phenomenon
for the concept of Dār al-Ṣulḥ can be traced back to the treaty that the
Prophet had signed with the Christian population of Najran when he
was in Medina.ͪ ͱͬ As I shall discuss below, this treaty, whose text has
been preserved, lays the foundations of making peace with non-Muslim
communities. In addition, the policy of giving amān (safe conduct),
i.e., contractual protection for non-Muslims residing or travelling in
Muslim territories, was a common practice. Such people were known
as musta’mīn, and to grant them this status was not only the preroga-
tive of the head of state or the ‘ulamā’ but also individuals, both men
and women.ͪ ͱͭ
Secondly, the idea of bringing the world under the reign of Dār
al-Islām by military means and territorial expansion should be seen
within the context of the geo-political conditions of the classical Islamic
world. Te medieval imperial world order, of which Muslim states were
a part, was based on the idea of continuously expanding one’s borders
because ‘conquest’ (fatḥ) provided economic, political and demographic
stability. In this sense, as Hitti points out, ‘the Islam that conquered the
northern regions was not the Islamic religion but the Islamic state …
it was Arabianism and not Muhammadanism that triumphed ﬁrst’.ͪ ͱͮ
In a world in which one was either a ‘conqueror’ or ‘conquered’, the
triumphant Muslim states depended heavily on the expansion of their
territories against both their Muslim rivals and non-Muslim enemies.
Te historic march of Muslim armies into territories once under non-
Muslim rule was not jihad in the religious sense of the term, but an
outcome of the power struggle to which all political establishments,
Muslim or non-Muslim, were subject.
Tis is further made clear by the fact that territorial expansion and
military conquest did not always and necessarily mean conversion.
Beginning with the early history of Islam, conversion through persua-
sion and ‘calling’ (da‘wah) was encouraged, and a multitude of methods
were put in place to facilitate the conversion of individuals and masses

--- Sayfa 264 ---
war and peace in islam
236
through peaceful means. Conversion by force, which would make Islam
a proselytising religion, however, was not imposed as a policy either by
the ‘ulamā’ or the rulers. Furthermore, conversion was not a condition
to become part of the Muslim community to gain religious freedom,
receive protection, and possess property under the Islamic law. Te
considerably protean concept of the dhimmī allowed religious minorities
to maintain their traditions and resist any attempts at forceful conver-
sion. Since Islam does not ordain a missionary establishment, the agents
of conversion responsible for the enormously successful and unprec-
edented spread of Islam were multifarious and extended from the Arab
traders and the Suﬁs to the development of Islamic communal institu-
tions.ͪ ͱͯ Otherwise we cannot explain the en masse conversion of vari-
ous ethnic, religious and cultural communities to Islam by the military
prowess of a handful of Muslim groups in Anatolia, Iran, Africa or India.
Paradoxically, the policies of religious tolerance secured both the
rights of religious minorities and the loyalties of new converts. In a
manner that was simply unimaginable in the Christian kingdoms of
Europe at the time, Jews, Christians, Sabeans and Hindus had access
to considerably high state posts from the time of Mu‘awiyah (661–680
CE) to the dissolution of the Ottoman Empire at the beginning of the
twentieth century. Jewish and Christian scientists, physicians, account-
ants, counsellors and statesmen were employed at Umayad courts. St
John the Damascene, one of the most inﬂuential ﬁgures of the Eastern
Orthodox Church and the author of the earliest anti-Islamic polemics,
and his father Ibn Mansur held positions under the Caliph Abd al-Malik
(685-705).ͪ ͱͰ During the Buwayhid era in Persia, the vizier of the power-
ful Persian king Adud al-Dawlah (949-982), Nasr ibn Harun was a
Christian.ͪ ͱͱ We ﬁnd similar cases in India and the Ottoman Empire
where the vertical mobility of religious minorities in state aﬀairs was a
common phenomenon. Even the devshirme system of the Ottomans,
which has been criticised and labelled as a form of forced conversion,
provided religious minorities with unfettered access to the highest
government positions. Tree grand viziers of Suleiman the Magniﬁcent,
the most powerful Ottoman sultan, were of Christian origin: Ibrahim
Pasha was a Greek and an able diplomat and commander; Rustem Pasha
was a Bulgarian and had handled the treasury with utmost competence;

--- Sayfa 265 ---
237
Islam and Peace: A Survey of the Sources of Peace in the Islamic Tradition
and the celebrated Sokollu Mehmet Pasha was a Slav from Bosnia and
had served in his youth as an acolyte in a Serbian church.ͫͨͨ
 Among
these, the case of Sokollu is probably the most interesting for it shows
the extent to which the devshirme system eventually worked to the bene-
ﬁt of Christian communities under Ottoman rule. Although Sokollu
embraced Islam and became one of the most powerful men of his time,
he kept close contact with his brother who was an important religious
ﬁgure in Bosnia and helped him with his status as the grand vizier.
In the light of these points, we have to make a distinction between
jihad as ‘just war’ and jihad as ‘holy war’,ͫͨͩ
 which brings us to our third
issue. Just war refers to a community’s right to defend itself against
aggression and oppression. It is defensive in nature whereas ‘holy war’
entails converting everybody into one’s religion by force, armed struggle,
territorial expansion, and other means. In the ﬁrst sense, jihad is an
extension of the jus ad bellum tradition and can be seen as a necessity
to protect justice, freedom and order. In this regard, the position taken
by the Qur’an and the Prophet concerning the use of force against
oppression by Muslims and non-Muslims alike is essentially a realist
one and aims at putting strict conditions for regulating war and using
force.ͫͨͪ
 Te guiding principle is that of ﬁghting against aggression,
which is ‘to ﬁght in the way of God’, and not to be the aggressors: Fight
(qatilu, lit. ‘kill’) in the way of God against those who ﬁght against you,
but do not transgress the limits. Verily, God does not love aggressors
(Al-Baqarah, 2:190; Cf. also Al-Nisā’, 4:91 and Al-Tawbah, 9:36). Both
the classical and modern commentators have interpreted the command
not to ‘transgress’ (lā ta‘adadu) as avoiding war and hostilities in the ﬁrst
place, resorting to armed struggle only to defend one’s freedom, and,
once forced to ﬁght, sparing the lives of noncombatants that include
women, children, and the elderly.ͫͨͫ

Contrary to what Khadduri claims,ͫͨͬ
 the global bifurcation of Dār
al-Islām and Dār al-Ḥarb does not translate into a ‘holy war’ nor a
‘permanent state of war’ between Muslims and non-Muslims. No ﬁgure
can illustrate this point better than Ibn Taymiyyah (d. 1327 CE) whose
views have been widely distorted and exploited to lend legitimacy to
extremist interpretations of the classical Islamic law of nations. Even
though Ibn Taymiyyah lived through the destruction wrought upon

--- Sayfa 266 ---
war and peace in islam
238
the Islamic world by the Mongols and could have been expected to take
a more belligerent stance against the ‘inﬁdels’, he was unequivocal in
stating that Muslims could wage war only against those who attacked
them. Te idea of initiating unprovoked war to convert people to
Islam, namely to engage in ‘holy war’, belies the religion itself because,
according to Ibn Taymiyyah, ‘if the unbeliever were to be killed unless
he becomes a Muslim, such an action would constitute the greatest
compulsion in religion’, which would be contrary to the Qur’anic
principle that there is no compulsion in religion (A-Baqarah, 2:256).ͫͨͭ

Ibn Taymiyyah’s famous student Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyyah reiterates
the same principle when he says that ‘ﬁghting (qatl) is permitted on
account of war (ḥarb), not on account of disbelief (kufr)’.ͫͨͮ
Tis extended meaning of jihad as jus ad bellum, i.e., armed
struggle in self-defence can also be seen in the anti-colonialist resistance
movements of the modern period. In the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries, calls for jihad were issued across the Islamic world to ﬁght
against colonialism. For the anti-colonialist resistance movements of this
period, jihad functioned, ﬁrst, as the religious basis of ﬁghting against
colonialism and, second, as a powerful way of mobilising people to join
the resistance forces. Among others, the Barelvi family in India, Shaykh
Shamil in Chechenya, Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Jazairi in Algeria, the
Mahdi family in the Sudan, Ahmad ‘Urabi in Egypt, and the Sanusiyyah
order in Libya fought against European colonial powers.ͫͨͯ
 It was
during this period of resistance that jihad took a cultural tone in the
sense that the ﬁght against colonial powers was seen as both a military
and religio-cultural struggle. Despite the enormous diﬃculties faced
by Muslim scholars, leaders, merchants, and villagers in Egypt, Africa,
India and other places, the jihad calls against the European armies did
not lead to an all-out war against local non-Muslim communities. Even
in cases where the Muslim population had to bear the full brunt of
colonialism, extreme care was taken not to label local non-Muslims
as the enemy because of their religious and cultural aﬃliation with
European colonial powers. When, for instance, the Sanusi call for ‘jihad
against all unbelievers’ caused a sense of urgency among the Christians
in Egypt, Muslim scholars responded by saying that jihad in Libya was
directed at the Italian aggressors, not all Westerners or Christians.ͫͨ
Ͱ

--- Sayfa 267 ---
239
Islam and Peace: A Survey of the Sources of Peace in the Islamic Tradition
Since jihad as armed struggle was fought against the invasion of
European powers, it was not diﬃcult for it to take religious and cultural
tones. Napoleon’s attempt to paint himself as a ‘defender of Islam’
when he invaded Egypt in 1798, for instance, was seen by the celebrated
Egyptian historian Abd al-Rahman al-Jabarti (1754–1825) as no more
than outright lies expected only from an ‘inﬁdel’ (kāﬁr). In his letter to
local Egyptian leaders, imams and scholars, Napoleon said that he ‘more
than the Mamluks, serve[s] God—may He be praised and exalted—and
revere[s] His Prophet Muhammad and the glorious Qur’an’ and that the
‘French are also faithful Muslims’.ͫͨ
ͱ For Jabarti and his generation, this
was yet another fact conﬁrming the necessity of launching jihad against
the ‘afranj’ (the French, i.e., Europeans). Tis sense of jihad as anti-colo-
nialist struggle has not completely disappeared from the minds of some
Muslims in the post-colonial period. In fact, the modern calls for jihad as
‘holy war’ by such Muslim extremists as Abd al-Salam Faraj—who wrote
the celebrated al-Fariḍat al-ghai’bah (Te Neglected Duty)ͫͩͨ
 presumably
justifying the assassination of Anwar Sadat in 1981—and Osama bin
Laden are as much the product of their strict and ahistorical reading of
the classical shari‘ah sources as the legacy of colonialism.
Lastly, I would like to turn brieﬂy to the status of religious minorities
under Islamic law. As mentioned before, the dhimmi status granted the
religious minorities and especially Jews and Christians under Muslim
rule some measure of economic and political protection, freedom of
worship, right to own property, and, in some cases, access to high govern-
ment positions. Te religious-legal basis of the notion of the dhimmi
goes back to the time of the Prophet. While the status of dhimmi was
initially given to Jews, Christians, Sabeans and Zoroastrians, its scope
was later extended to include all non-Muslims living under Islam.ͫͩͩ
A similar course of action was followed in India when Muhammad b.
al-Qasim, the ﬁrst Muslim commander to set foot on Indian soil in the
eighth century, compared Hindus to Jews, Christians and Zoroastrians
and declared them as part of the ahl al-dhimmah.ͫͩͪ Tis decision, which
was later sanctioned by the Hanaﬁ jurists, was a momentous event in
the development of the Muslim attitude towards the religions of India.
Tis politico-legal ruling could be seen as laying the foundations of the
Hindu-Muslim mode of cultural coexistence, which I shall discuss below.

--- Sayfa 268 ---
war and peace in islam
240
Tat the Prophet and his companions were lenient towards the
People of the Book is not only attested by the communal relationships
that developed between Muslims and non-Muslims in Medina, but also
recorded in a number of treatises signed by the Prophet. Te ‘Medinan
Constitution’ (wathīqat al-madinah), for instance, recognises the Jews
of Banu ‘Awf, Banu al-Najar, Banu Ta’laba and others as a distinct
community with ‘their own religion’.ͫͩͫ Another treatise signed with the
People of the Book of Najran reads as follows:
Tey [People of the Book] shall have the protection of Al-
lah and the promise of Muhammad, the Apostle of Allah,
that they shall be secured; their lives, property, lands, creed,
those absent and those present, their families, their church-
es, and all that they possess. No bishop or monk shall be
displaced from his parish or monastery, no priest shall be
forced to abandon his priestly life. No hardships or humili-
ation shall be imposed on them nor shall their land be oc-
cupied by [our] army. Tose who seek justice shall have it:
there will be no oppressors nor oppressed.314
Te privileges given to dhimmis included things that were
prohibited for Muslims such as breeding pigs and producing alcohol,
which were not outlawed for Christians. Te religious tax called jizyah
was the main economic responsibility of the dhimmis under the
shari‘ah. Contrary to a common belief, the primary goal of the jizyah
tax was not the ‘humiliation’ of the People of the Book. While many
contemporary translations of the Qur’an translate the words wa hum
saghīrūn as ‘so that they will be humiliated’, Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyyah,
who has written the most extensive work on the People of the Book,
understands it as securing the allegiance of the People of the Book to
laws pertaining to them (aḥkām al-millah). Instead, wa hum saghīrūn
should be understood, says Ibn Qayyim, as making all subjects of the
state obey the law and, in the case of the People of the Book, pay the
jizyah.ͫͩͭ
According to Abu Yusuf, one of the foremost authorities of the
Hanaﬁ school of law, jizyah was ‘48 dirhams on the wealthy, 24 on
the middle class and 12 dirhams on the poor ploughman-peasant and
manual worker’. According to Shaﬁ‘i, the jizyah is one dinar for the poor
and four dinars for the rich.ͫͩͮ
 It is collected once a year and may be paid

--- Sayfa 269 ---
241
Islam and Peace: A Survey of the Sources of Peace in the Islamic Tradition
in kind, i.e., as ‘goods and similar property which is accepted according
to its value’.ͫͩͯ Tose who cannot aﬀord to pay it are not forced to do
so.ͫͩ
Ͱ Te exempted also include women, children, the elderly and the
sick.ͫͩ
ͱ To the best of our knowledge, the jizyah tax was not a signiﬁcant
source of income for the stateͫͪͨ
, and it exempted the dhimmis from
military service. In some cases, the jizyah was postponed or abandoned
altogether by the head of the state as we see in India under the reigns of
Akbar, Jahangir and Shah Jahan.ͫͪͩ Te jizyah was a compensation for
the protection of the dhimmis by the state against any type of aggression
from Muslims or non-Muslims. Tis is attested by the fact that the poll
taxes were returned to the dhimmis when the Muslim state had been
unable to provide the security of its non-Muslim minorities.ͫͪͪ
 In most
cases, the jizyah was imposed not as individual tax like the kharāj but
as collective tribute on eligible dhimmis.ͫͪͫ

While Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyya’s famous work on the dhimmis
contains many rulings that present a condescending view of non-
Muslims and advocate policies of humiliation against them,ͫͪͬ
 many
other jurists were insistent on treating the dhimmis with equity and
justice. As people ‘under the protection of the Prophet’, Jews, Christians
and other religious minorities were not to be forced to pay more than
they could aﬀord nor to be intimidated and oppressed because of their
religious aﬃliations. Advising Harun al-Rashid (d. 803 CE), the famous
Abbasid caliph, on the treatment of the dhimmis, Abu Yusuf exhorts
him to ‘treat with leniency those under the protection of our Prophet
Muhammad, and not allow that more than what is due to be taken
from them or more than they are able to pay, and that nothing should
be conﬁscated from their properties without legal justiﬁcation’.ͫͪͭ
 In
making this strong advice to the caliph, Abu Yusuf narrates a tradition
of the Prophet in which the Prophet says that ‘he who robs a dhimmi or
imposes on him more than he can bear will have me as his opponent’.
Another well-known case is the execution on the order of the Prophet
of a Muslim who had killed a dhimmi. In response to this incident, the
Prophet has said that ‘it is most appropriate that I live up fully to my
(promise of) protection’.ͫͪͮ
Tese and other rules concerning the dhimmis show that Islam
accepts the reality of the ‘religious other’ in terms of a de jure reality

--- Sayfa 270 ---
war and peace in islam
242
rather than as a matter of political exigency. Te underlying principle
behind this attitude of accommodation is that the interests of human
beings are served better in peace than in conﬂict. To reveal the extent
of the Islamic theology of peace and cultural pluralism, we need to look
at the cultural attitudes and practices of Muslim societies vis-à-vis other
communities, to which we now turn.
The Socio-Cultural Context: Confrontation,
Coexistence and Peace
Islam does not prescribe a particular form of cultural identity. Tere
are both doctrinal and historical reasons for this. Te absence of a
central religious authority or clergy in the Islamic tradition pre-empts
authoritarianism as a model of negotiating religious aﬀairs in the public
sphere. Tis is attested by the multiplicity of schools of law as well as the
notorious diﬀerences of opinion among them. Tis fact, ofen stated by
Muslims with a sense of pride, however, does not negate the presence
of established and commonly accepted views in the Islamic tradition.
Assuming that there is a set of beliefs and practices that we may legitimately
consider as mainstream and orthodox, it is based on the consensus of the
community over the generations rather than a centralised body of legal
rulings. Te incremental process of establishing orthodox etiquettes is
not the monopoly of the ‘ulamā’. Rather, it is shaped by a multitude of
social agents that include men of letters, dervishes, saints, ‘heretics’, bards
and folk singers, storytellers, political leaders, rulers, scientists, artists,
traders, diplomats, philosophers, and theologians. While it is true that the
dissemination of religious authority on the one hand and the malleability
of cultural expressions in Muslim societies on the other has challenged
centralism and authoritarianism, it has also raised the question of
legitimacy and authenticity. Some, including the Wahhabis and some
Orientalists, have called this a deviation from the norms of the religion,
arguing that Islamic history has been not so much ‘Islamic’ as antinomian.
Even if we admit that there are presumably overt discrepancies between
what the ulama envision as a perfect shari‘ah  society and the cultural
practices of Muslim societies, it is a healthy tension and functions as
a mechanism of checks and balances against the strictly text-based,
relatively abstract, and reductively legalistic approach of the jurists.

--- Sayfa 271 ---
243
Islam and Peace: A Survey of the Sources of Peace in the Islamic Tradition
In creating their cultural orthopraxies, Muslim communities were
functioning within the framework of the ethical universalism of the
Qur’an and the Sunnah. Te Qur’anic call to enjoin what is good and
praised (ma‘rūf) and forbid what is morally evil and disliked (munkār)
is not a culture-speciﬁc injunction. It is addressed to all peoples
regardless of their religious aﬃliations. Te Prophet is considered a
perfect example (uswah ḥasanah) for all humanity in his ﬁght against
all that is evil and oppressive and in defence of all that is praiseworthy
and virtuous, whatever their origin might be. Te notion of ‘middle
community’ (ummah wasaṭah) (Al-Baqarah,  2:143) supports the same
ethical universalism: And thus We willed you to be a community of the
middle way, so that [with your lives] you might bear witness to the truth
before all mankind, and that the Apostle might bear witness to it before
you (trans. M. Asad). Te aim of this ethical-spiritual universalism is
to create an open society based on moral values, not on the received
traditions of one tribe, city, or nation. Tis is in tandem with the fact
that the Qur’an positions itself against the cultural localism and tribal
parochialism of pre-Islamic Arabia—a rule that has been an invariable
factor in the rapid spread of Islam outside the Arabic cultural zone.
Once established as major cultural units, Muslim societies articulated
this ethical universalism into various societal mechanisms by which the
ideal of creating a virtuous and just human habitat could be realised. Te
politics of gaining status and social ascendancy in the Islamic context is
thus based on the acquisition of two universal qualities: knowledge (‘ilm)
and virtue (faḍīlah and iḥsān). Both of these qualities are implicit in
the Qur’anic notion of taqwā (Al-Ḥujurāt, 49:13), God-consciousness,
which is the ultimate criterion of ‘nobility’ among people. In a broad
sense, this forms the basis of an Islamic meritocracy whereby every
member of society is urged to contribute to the creation of a moral
and just social order. As the few examples below will show, the Muslim
philosophers and scientists regarded seeking knowledge and leading a
virtuous life as the basis of their interest in other cultures and traditions.
Historically, as the borders of the Islamic world expanded outside
and beyond the Arabian Peninsula, Muslims became heir to all of the
major cultural traditions of the time. Te Graeco-Roman heritage
through the Byzantine Empire and the pre-Islamic Persian culture

--- Sayfa 272 ---
war and peace in islam
244
through the Sasanids were the ﬁrst two important traditions that
Muslims encountered in less than a century afer the death of the
Prophet. Tis was followed by Mesopotamian, Indian, black African,
central Asian, Chinese, and ﬁnally Malay-Indonesian civilisations in
the ﬁfeenth and sixteenth centuries.ͫͪͯ
 Te rapid establishment of the
diﬀerent cultural zones of the Islamic world went hand in hand with
the rise of the numerous schools of law, Kalam, philosophy, and Suﬁ
orders, generating a remarkable tapestry of cultural diversity within and
across the Dār al-Islām.ͫͪ
Ͱ In spite of occasional sectarian conﬂicts such
as the miḥnah incident in the third/ninth centuryͫͪ
ͱ or the Kadizade
movement in the Ottoman Empire in the tenth/sixteenth century,ͫͫͨ

traditional Muslim societies succeeded in creating a stable and peaceful
habitat in which both Muslim and non-Muslim members of the ummah
contributed to the cultivation of a world civilisation in such diverse
ﬁelds as arts, sciences, trade and architecture. Te notion of cultural
and religious coexistence that came about in this milieu was not
merely based on the temporary absence of conﬂict and confrontation
between Islamic and non-Islamic elements. Its positive character was
nurtured and sustained by the inclusivist attitude of Muslims towards
other cultures and religious traditions, which makes Islamic civilisation
simultaneously both Islamic and ‘Islamicate’.ͫͫͩ
Tere is a plethora of examples in the history of Islam to illustrate
the cultural ecumenism of Muslim societies. We may begin with the
attitude of Muslim philosophers towards pre-Islamic traditions of
learning. For the early Muslim philosophers, scholars, and scientists,
the search for truth was both within and beyond religious boundaries.
Te Prophet’s famous exhortations to ‘seek knowledge even if it is in
China’ͫͫͪ
 and ‘wisdom is a Muslim’s lost [treasure]. He takes it wherever
he ﬁnds it’ͫͫͫ
 were frequently referred to by the philosophers of the
intellectual sciences (‘ulūm ‘aqliyyah) interested in Greek-Alexandrian
thought as well as the scholars of transmitted sciences (‘ulūm naqliyyah)
specialised in such disciplines as hadith, Qur’anic commentary, and
jurisprudence (ﬁqh). Even though some later scholars have opposed
philosophical sciences, especially its strictly Aristotelian version, and
deﬁned knowledge (al-‘ilm) as ‘religious science’, this did not obstruct
the steady development of philosophy and science in the Islamic world.

--- Sayfa 273 ---
245
Islam and Peace: A Survey of the Sources of Peace in the Islamic Tradition
Contrary to Goldziher’s attempt to present the critical views of certain
Hanbalite jurists on the ‘ancient sciences’ (‘ulum al-awā’il), meaning
Greek philosophy and science, as the ‘orthodox’ Muslim position,ͫͫͬ

anti-intellectualism remained largely parochial to the traditionists
(al-muḥaddithūn) who were as much opposed to the lore of pre-Islamic
times as to Kalam and doctrinal Suﬁsm. For the overwhelming majority
of the Muslim intelligentsia, the universality of truth was the guiding
principle and ground of their quest for knowledge. No one has stated
this point better than al-Kindi, ‘the philosopher of the Arabs’.
We owe great thanks to those who have imparted to us even
a small measure of truth, let alone those who have taught us
more, since they have given us a share in the fruits of their
reﬂection and simpliﬁed the complex questions bearing on
the nature of reality. If they had not provided us with those
premises that pave the way to truth, we would have been
unable, despite our assiduous lifelong investigations, to ﬁnd
those true primary principles from which the conclusions of
our obscure inquiries have resulted, and which have taken
generation upon generation to come to light heretofore.335
Tat al-Kindi’s attitude in the above quote was emblematic of his
generation and later Muslim scholars is attested by Sa’id al-Andalusi
who has divided nations (umam) according to their contribution to
knowledge and science (al-‘ilm). He states this point in unequivocal
terms when he says that:
We have determined that all nations, in spite of their diﬀer-
ences and the diversities of their convictions, form tabaqa-
tayn [two categories]. One tabaqah has cultivated science,
given rise to the art of knowledge, and propagated the vari-
ous aspects of scientiﬁc information; the other tabaqah did
not contribute enough to science to deserve the honour of
association or inclusion in the family of scientiﬁcally pro-
ductive nations.336
Te belief that truth transcends the contingencies of history was the
conviction of educated classes across the Islamic world as they studied the
countless schools of thought, both Islamic and pre-Islamic, producing
an extensive literature on the history of ideas. Te long list of scholars
interested in intellectual history before and afer Islam included, inter

--- Sayfa 274 ---
war and peace in islam
246
alia, Ibn al-Qifi, al-Mubashshir ibn Fatik, Abu Sulayman al-Sijistani,
Sa’id al-Andalusi, Ibn al-Nadim, al-Jahiz, and Ibn Abi Usaybi’ah as well
as such major writers of the Milal tradition as Shahrastani, Baghdadi
and Ibn Hazm.ͫͫͯ
 Among these works, the Egyptian amir Abu al-Wafa
al-Mubashshir ibn Fatik’s Mukhtār al-ḥikām wa maḥāsin al-kilām
was noticed very early by medieval Europeans, translated into Latin
and other languages, and, in fact, became the ﬁrst book printed by
William Caxton in England in the ﬁfeenth century as Te Dicts and
Sayings of the Philosophers.ͫͫ
Ͱ Te continuity of humanity’s search for
truth had a normative value for most of these writers in that their quest
for knowledge was part of a larger tradition to which every seeker of
knowledge belonged. When Hasan ibn Sahl, for instance, was asked why
he always invoked the views of those who came before him (kalām al-
awā’il), he answered that ‘because it [i.e. those views] has been passed
down before us; had it been unworthy and imperfect, it would have
never reached us and gained [universal] approval’.ͫͫ
ͱ
Te concept of ‘perennial philosophy’ (al-ḥikmat al-khālidah)
enjoyed a similar prestige due to the same notion of truth and its persis-
tence in history. Suhrawardi, the founder of the school of Illumination
(ishrāq) made a strong case for the perennity of certain philosophical
questions and the answers given of them when he said:
Do not think that wisdom has existed only in these recent
times [i.e., the pre-Islamic Persian and Greek philosophers].
No, the world is never beref of wisdom and the person who
possesses it with arguments and self-evident proofs. He is
God’s vicegerent on His earth, and this shall be so as long as
the heavens and the earth exist.340
Apart from the sublime world of the intellectuals, the Islamic
concept of cultural pluralism was extended to virtually all minorities
living in the lands of Islam. Te experience of convivencia among Jews,
Christians, and Muslims in Andalusia was a result of the Islamic notion
of cultural inclusivism.ͫͬͩ
 While the Jews of Europe were subject to woeful
viliﬁcations and persecutions during the Middle Ages, a major Jewish
intellectual tradition had developed under the Muslim rule and included
such prominent ﬁgures of medieval Jewish thought as Saadiah Gaon
al-Fayyumi, Ibn Gabirol, Judah Halevi, Maimonides, Ibn Kammunah,

--- Sayfa 275 ---
247
Islam and Peace: A Survey of the Sources of Peace in the Islamic Tradition
Ibn Paquda, and Gersonides (Levi ben Gershom). Tis resulted in a
unique interaction between medieval Jewish philosophy on the one
hand, and Islamic philosophy, Kalam, and Suﬁsm on the other.ͫͬͪ

In the subcontinent of India, a cultural syncreticism developed
between Hindu and Muslim cultures. From the translation of Indian
astronomical works into Arabic as early as the eighth century to
Biruni’s historic study of India and Amir Khusraw’s formulation
of an Islamic identity in the Indian cultural environment, a vast
literature came into being, generating a unique mode of symbiosis
between the two worlds on social, philosophical, and artistic levels.
Perhaps the most important ﬁgure to illustrate this is Dara Shikuh
(1615–1659), the famous Mughal prince and son of Shah Jahan. Dara
Shikuh translated and authored two important works dealing with
Hinduism from an Islamic point of view. He made a translation of
the Bhagavad Gita and some ﬁfy Upanishads into Persian as Sirr-i
akbar (‘Great Mystery’), which he interpreted in light of the school of
Advaita-Vedanta or the non-dualism of Shankaracharya.ͫͬͫ
 In making
his case for the translation, Dara Shikuh says that he ‘read the Old and
the New Testaments and the Psalms of David and other scriptures but
the discourse on Tawḥīd found in them was brief and in a summary
form’. He then turned to the Upanishads ‘which is undoubtedly the
ﬁrst heavenly Book and the fountainhead of the ocean of monothe-
ism, and, in accordance with or rather an elucidation of the Kur’an’.ͫͬͬ

Dara Shikuh also wrote a treatise called Majmā’ al-baḥrayn, referring
to the Qur’anic verse Maryam,19:60, in which he attempted a mono-
theistic interpretation of Hinduism. In tandem with his ‘universalist’
outlook, he deﬁned his work as ‘a collection of the truth and wisdom
of two Truth-knowing (haqq-shinas) groups’, referring to Muslims
and Hindus.ͫͬͭ
 In addition to Dara Shikuh, we may also refer to the
sixteenth century Persian philosopher Mir Findiriski, who is reported
to have met a number of Hindu mystics during his travels to India,
and translated and wrote a commentary on the Hindu mystical and
philosophical text Yoga-Vasishthaͫͬͮ
.
Such modes of cultural coexistence would have been impossible
without the recognition of the diversity of cultures and societies as
part of human existence. Te Qur’an takes up this issue in several

--- Sayfa 276 ---
war and peace in islam
248
places. Working towards a common good is made conditional upon
the existence of diﬀerent communities:
Unto every one of you We have appointed a [diﬀerent] law
and way of life. And if God had so willed, He could surely have
made you all one single community: but [He willed it other-
wise] in order to test by means of what He has vouchsafed
unto you. Vie, then, with one another in doing good works!
(Al-Mā’idah, 5:48; also Hūd, 11:118)
Tis theme is further developed in the following verse. Tis time the
emphasis is on the civic responsibility of ‘knowing one another’.
O humans! Behold, We have created you all out of a male and a
female, and have made you into nations and tribes so that you
might come to know one another. Verily, the noblest of you in
the sight of God is the one who is most deeply conscious of Him.
Behold, God is all-knowing, all-aware. (Al-Ḥujurāt, 49:13)
Te examples from the history of Islamic culture brieﬂy analysed
above are neither scarce nor contrary to the norm. Even though the
fundamentalists, for lack of a better term, consider cases of cultural
symbiosis and syncretism in the Islamic world as deviations from an
idealised and essentially ideological construct of Islam, both the Islamic
intellectual tradition and Muslim societies have envisaged peace as a
cross-cultural and inter-communal value.
I have argued in the preceding pages that a proper examination of
the Islamic concept of peace takes us beyond the minimal deﬁnition of
peace as absence of conﬂict, and certainly beyond the limited sphere of
law. In a broad sense, the Islamic tradition has articulated a concept of
peace that extends from metaphysics and cosmology to law and culture.
We cannot possibly understand the experience of Muslim societies with
the cultural and religious other(s) without taking into account these
elements. Te relevance of this tradition for the present day Muslim
world requires little explanation. Today numerous Muslim intellectuals,
scholars and leaders from Bosnia, Turkey and Egypt to Iran, Malaysia
and the United States are engaged in constructing an Islamic political
ethics that is compatible with the Islamic tradition as well as respon-
sive to the challenges of the modern world. Questions of war and peace,
communal violence, terrorism, international relations, constitutional

--- Sayfa 277 ---
249
Islam and Peace: A Survey of the Sources of Peace in the Islamic Tradition
and participatory democracy, pluralism, openness, civility and the atti-
tude towards the religious other are being discussed from a multitude
of perspectives, and the views expressed are by no means uniform and
homogenous. Tere is, however, an emerging consensus on upholding
peace as a value in itself regardless of the political state of Muslim coun-
tries and communities across the globe.
In conclusion, we should emphasise the signiﬁcance of this consen-
sus in the present context. Muslim communities can no longer address
issues of conﬂict and violence without developing a proper ethics of
peace. While most of the factional conﬂicts in the Islamic world can
be resolved through non-violent means, the lack of a comprehensive
discourse of peace supported by a network of scholars, intellectu-
als, leaders, activists, and state agencies, pre-empts the possibility of
preventing communal strife and use of force. Conﬂicts in our age have
become both local and global, making the distinction between the two
a blurred one. We can no longer speak of local and national conﬂicts
without considering their international implications nor can we ignore
the impact of global trends and relations on local issues. Te Kashmir
problem or the Israeli-Palestinian conﬂict defy the conventional notions
of interstate and/or territorial disputes. Tis presents a particular chal-
lenge to contemporary Muslim political thought in its transition from
the large political units of the empire and its constellation states to the
current system of nation states on the one hand, and globalisation on
the other. It remains to be seen what the weakening of the nation state
model will bring to Muslim societies in their struggle to cope with the
current challenges of economic and cultural globalisation. Be that as it
may, achieving a culture of peace is an urgent need for Muslim commu-
nities in their inter-communal relations as well as their relations with
other societies.
Originally published as ‘Islam and Peace: A Survey of the Sources of
Peace in the Islamic Tradition’, Islamic Studies 44:3 (2005),
pp. 327–62.

--- Sayfa 278 ---
250
chapter nine
THE CONCEPT OF PEACE/SECURITY (SALM)
IN ISLAM
Dr Karim Douglas Crow
Overview
Te conception of        salm ‘peace/security’ in early Islamic sources is
re-examined by exploiting early linguistic materials in the Qur’an and
Hadith. Te most essential value at the heart of Islam may be character-
ised as ‘security/peace’ (see Qur’anic terms silm and salm). Tis data on
what Islam teaches about peace and security may now be aligned with the
contemporary understanding linking human security to wider develop-
mental and societal needs. Te double thrust of the Islamic understanding
of ‘peace’ is evident: social and communal, and individual and salvational.
Te current concern with human security ﬁnds ample support in Muslim
thought and experience.
‘Man lā yarḥamu, lā yurḥam’. ‘One who does not practice
compassion’ [show loving/kindness] toward others—is not
shown merciful/compassion (by God).
God’s Messenger Muhammad (Recorded in: Muslim, K. al-Faḍā’il, bāb
raḥmatihi Ṣ al-ṣibyān wa l-ʿiyāl §5979; Abū Dawūd, K. al-Adab, bāb
fī qublati l-rajuli waladih §5218; al-Tirmidhi, K. al-Barr wa l-Ṣilah,
bāb mā jā’a fī raḥmati l-wālid §1911. Tradition states that the Prophet
uttered this afer al-Aqra‘ b. Habis witnessed him kissing his grandson,
and then told the Prophet: ‘I have ten children and never kissed even
one of them.’)
ϡϠγ

--- Sayfa 279 ---
251
Te Concept of Peace/Security (Salm) in Islam
Introduction
It is frequently held that the religion of Islam was ﬁrst presented and
understood as a salvational practice of peace through outward submission
and inner surrender. Today this assertion is radically questioned by many
non-Muslims, who emphasise the combative role of a militant faith intent
on conquest and dominion—a medieval European perception now
cultivated among intelligence and security establishments countering
terrorism. How should we properly understand the original context
and meaning of peace in Islam? Inherent in its historical appearance
was an integral connection of peacemaking with security. Tis linkage
may aid us to grasp the intent and conception of an authentic Islamic
understanding of peace. It becomes relevant now to take into account the
current appreciation of the role of religion in establishing and promoting
human security. We mean the concept of ‘human security’ in its dialogic
relations linking the ﬁeld of development and that of security and conﬂict
studies, including peace and conﬂict resolution studies.
Human Security
Tis term appeared in mainstream development circles with the 1994
global Human Development Report,347 and was the subject of a 2003
Global Commission co-chaired by Sadako Ogata and Nobel Laureate
Amartya Sen.348 Yet this notion previously had its own proponents and
critics within security studies among scholars who for decades argued
the pros and cons of expanding the notion of ‘security’. Some have
argued that the concept of security should be broadened to include
underdevelopment as a threat. Yet a realist school rejects the inclusion
of social, human and economic threats in the same category as ‘national
security’.349 Traditionally security has been deﬁned as a function
of protection of the interests of the state. Until recently interstate
relations—whether cooperative, competitive or complementary—
remained conﬁned to a function of nation states, with foreign policy
and diplomacy conceived as a deﬁning characteristic of the state in the
international system. Te self-interest of the nation state determined the
concept of ‘security’—deﬁned in the limiting terms of ‘state security’ as
perceived by ruling elites and power brokers who frequently identify

--- Sayfa 280 ---
war and peace in islam
252
their vision of state interests with their own economic and political
preferences, namely their own self-interest.
However, many critics and human rights practitioners maintain that
this privileging of state and elite interests is an overly narrow, state-centric
and ultimately counterproductive conceptualisation of true security.
Tese critics perceive that it is the level of the individual and his or her
innate rights that most needs protection from perceived threats.350 Such
privileging of the individual might also be extended further to embrace the
well-being of the collectivity or the community. If security is conceived as
a response to threats, then the perception of what constitutes ‘threat’ may
also need revisiting—e.g. by taking into account the ecological-planetary
and socio-economic dimensions of human existence. Many security
establishments now accept a widened concept of ‘non-traditional security’
embracing natural disasters and ecological degradation. As the need to
ﬁnd concerted, collective responses to new threats became increasingly
clear, human security conceived in terms of the link between security
and development became a topic of reform agendas during 2004–2005 in
the United Nations and in regional organisations such as the European
Union and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
A fundamental value and activity taught by Islam is ‘security/peace’.
In classical Arabic usage the term salm ‘peacemaking’ denotes the opposite
of ḥarb ‘war’.351 Te very name of the faith al-Islām may be understood
to signify the safety and security experienced in acts of mutual harmony
and concord between humans, springing out of the inner peace between
individual creatures and their Creator. Tis name al-Islām points to the
real purpose and source of true security: to draw closer to the ultimate
origin of Peace—namely Allah. To better appreciate this conjunction of
security with peace requires one to re-examine the early employment of
these terms paying attention to their linguistic features and conceptual
aura. Tereby one may be enabled to recover the basis upon which Islamic
peace is grounded.
Security-Peace
Tere exists an intimate connection between the term al-Islām with
peacemaking and human security, conﬁrmed by linguistic and Qur’anic
evidence. Te concept of peace is primarily associated with Arabic verbal

--- Sayfa 281 ---
253
Te Concept of Peace/Security (Salm) in Islam
nouns derived from the root S–L–M (base form: salima/yaslamu). Te
main nouns from this base form are salāmah, salm & silm, and salām.
In classical Arabic the term salm ‘peacemaking’ denotes the opposite
of ḥarb ‘war’. Verbal forms II sallama (lit. ‘to make/render salutations
of peace and security’—or to make the taslīm352), as well as form IV
aslama (‘to deliver up, surrender, give oneself up to’) may also signify
inqāda ‘to follow/obey, yield, submit’; the verbal noun is islām while
its active participle is muslim (m.) and muslimah (f.). Yet widespread
contemporary Arabic usage of salām (literally: ‘salutations conveying
assurance of safety and peaceful security’) generally understands it to
connote ‘peace’—whether positive or negative peace.353 Although the
main nouns from the base form (salāmah, salm and silm, and also salām)
ofen converge in meaning and might even be used interchangeably in a
loose sense, they also exhibit speciﬁc distinctions whose scrutiny yields
signiﬁcant insights.
Furthermore, the semantic scope of several other verbal roots
overlaps in meaning with salima, whereby salāmah or salām may be
equivalent to amān/surety, as well as ṣulḥ/conciliation; although the root
S–L–M possesses an undeniable primacy.354 We provide here a very brief
conspectus of related notions whose semantic ﬁelds overlap conceptu-
ally and comprise signiﬁcant extensions of meaning for peace in Islamic
understanding.
Ṣ–L–Ḥ : ṣulḥ and ṣalāḥ and iṣlāḥ ‘conciliation’ and ‘peacemaking’ in
resolving conﬂict between individuals or groups to ensure the harmony
of the wider community. Ṣulḥ forms one of the pillars of peace in Islamic
thought and practice, carrying the meanings of reconciliation, peace-
making, making amends and reforming, as well as moral rectitude and
integrity/righteousness. When employed with its object—iṣlāḥ lahum,
or iṣlāḥ baynahum and ṣalāḥ dhāt al-bayn—the expression connotes
‘promoting well-being’, ‘setting aright’, or peacemaking. Tis practice is
central to Qur’anic teaching on ending conﬂict: aṣliḥu dhāti baynikum/
and do you rightly dispose-order the case that is between you and be of
one accord in unison; or quite simply ‘peacemaking’.355 Muslims must
be of one accord afer divisions over spilt blood, disputed property or
rivalries, and they are urged to act reciprocally with justice and equity
(al-muqsiṭūn).

--- Sayfa 282 ---
war and peace in islam
254
It is vital to appreciate that this notion of ṣulḥ & iṣlāḥ in Qur’anic
usage is conceptually opposed to both fasād (‘corruption’, ‘depravity’
or ‘stirring up dissension’—i.e. insecurity); as well as to isrāf (wasteful
extravagance, sinful excess), for the peacemaker muṣliḥ is the opposite
of the musrif ‘proﬂigate’ and of the mufsid ‘depraved’.356 Te mufsid is
one who instigates fasād among others by seeking to spread insecurity,
disorder, corruption and injustice, and thereby exceeds proper bounds
(musrif & isrāf). Such iniquity is always paired with iṣlāḥ—wholesome
order, self-reformation and righteous conduct which God intends
humans to exhibit: Create not disorder in the land afer it was set in
order/wa lā tufsidū fī l-arḍi ba‘da iṣlāḥihā (Al-A‘rāf, 7:56), which may
also be rendered Create not insecurity in the land afer it was made
secure.357
Prophetic utterances amplify and emphasise the centrality of this
practice of conciliation and peacemaking. A well-known hadith narrated
by the Companion Abu Ayyub al-Ansari states: ‘Te most meritorious
act-of-charity (afḍalu l-ṣadaqah) is ‘peacemaking’ between conﬂicting
parties.’358 Te Prophet is also reported to have instructed him: ‘O Abū
Ayyūb, truly let me tell you that by means of which God exalts one’s
reward and eﬀaces sins: to walk in the cause of ‘peacemaking’ between
people when they are mutually hating and stirring up dissension; it
is an act of charity God loves being implemented.’ In an of-repeated
tradition, Abu l-Dardā’ reports the Prophet stating: ‘Truly, let me tell
you what is better than fasting and prayer and alms-giving: ‘peacemak-
ing’ between conﬂicting parties (ṣalāḥu dhāt al-bayn); while ‘stirring-
up-dissension’ between conﬂicting parties (fasādu dhāt al-bayn) is
severing.’359 Te Prophet also strongly warned against backbiting and
malicious gossip (al-‘iḍḍah and al-namīmah) which provokes dissen-
sion and conﬂict between people, especially between wife and husband;
while he aﬃrmed that a lie may only be tolerated in three circumstances:
in war, between husband and wife in order to eﬀect reconciliation, and
for ‘peacemaking’ between conﬂicting parties.360
A–M–N : amn and amān and amānah, ‘safety – security – assur-
ance of peace’; also īmān ‘faith, secure belief (safeguarding from perdi-
tion)’. Verb amina (and i’tamanahu) denotes providing assurance of
safety and security to a person, and conveys protection from harm and

--- Sayfa 283 ---
255
Te Concept of Peace/Security (Salm) in Islam
injury. Exhibiting security is a mark of reliable trustworthiness, itself
viewed as a distinguishing characteristic of faith īmān. Te utterance of
the Prophet conﬁrms this association: ‘Tere is no faith for one who is
untrustworthy/lā īmāna li-man lā amānata lahu.’ In Sūrat Al-An‘ām,
6:81–2, the term amn is used twice by Abraham to denote ‘security’
and ‘peace’, where true faith is free of injustice (ẓulm). While the legal
application of amān or public security in the external political sphere
is well known, the extension of islām into the interior domain of faith
īmān is a crucial pairing all too ofen overlooked.
Tere were diﬀering views among the legal and the theological
schools on whether īmān was distinct from, or higher in value than,
islām. Te theological debate over conﬂating islām and īmān derives
from the old Murji’ite position in the early doctrinal disputes over the
status of the sinner, and the status of works for faith; yet the doctrinal
consensus remains the necessity of works for īmān.361 For the jurists,
islām generally denotes the double ‘confession of faith’ (al-shahādatayn),
being annexed to and complementary with faith (īmān). Islām is what
is manifested by word or deed, and by means of which one’s blood
becomes secure from being shed. All Muslims agree that by embracing
islām one departs from unfaith (al-kufr), and that it is the necessary
precondition for applying laws of inheritance, validating marriage,
legitimating prayer, alms tax, fasting, and pilgrimage.362 In speciﬁc legal
contexts juristic employment of the term al-islām echoed several archaic
associations of related terms: aslama amrahu ilayhi (‘delegate, entrust’);
aslama fī l-bay‘ and taǥāmala bi-l-salāmi (‘gave a down payment or
security’); and the transaction procedure termed ‘forward payment’
salam        which involves paying a ‘security’ deposit to ensure future
goods or services. Here the notion of security (safely securing delivery)
is quite apparent. Legal usage also made deﬁnite equivalences between
key terms: al-ṣalāḥ = al-salāmah min al-ǥaybi; al-tasālum = al-taṣāluḥ;
and al-ṣulḥ = al-silm (‘ending the state of war’).
Ṣ–B–R : ṣabr ‘long-suﬀering patience’—endurance of suﬀering for a
higher cause. Tis fundamental virtue has a strong link with jihad (‘total
striving’), opening out on the pursuit of external security, conveying the
sense of conscious sacriﬁce and suﬀering for a higher cause (which is
the essence of non-violent action).
ϡϠγ

--- Sayfa 284 ---
war and peace in islam
256
In numerous verses it is strongly emphasised that those who repent
and act rightly by undertaking ‘peacemaking’ (aṣlaḥū) shall be rewarded
and receive God’s Compassionate forgiveness: e.g. Al-Baqarah, 2:160,
2:224; Al-An‘ām, 6:48 (cf. Al-Baqarah, 2:62 & 69; Al-Mā’idah, 5:69);
Al-Anfāl, 8:1; Al-Shūrā, 42:40, as well as Al-Aḥzāb, 33:70–1).
All these closely related concepts amplify the meanings of ‘safety–
security–faith/salvation’ ﬂowing from inward and outward resignation,
or submission (islām). Te total context requires one to align all such
terms together for the full range of meaning to manifest, disclosing
the comprehensive quality of the understanding of peace. Islām is
inextricably bound up with the experience of safety and security at the
individual moral level, and at the communal level of society and polity.
A famous utterance of the Prophet conﬁrms this most fundamental
aspect of its meaning: ‘Te muslim is one from whom the Muslims
are securely-safe from (harmful eﬀects of) his tongue and his hand/
al-muslimu man salima l-muslimūna min lisānihi wa yadih.’363 Te core
meaning ‘safety from harm’ and ‘security from evil’ is evident.
The Greeting of Peace (al-salmu ‘alaykum)
A distinctive characteristic of Muslims is the exchange of greetings, salut-
ing one another with al-Salāmu ‘alaykum! along with the response …
wa ‘alaykum al-salām!—usually translated as ‘Peace be upon you!’ and
‘And upon you Peace!’ (actually a shortened form of the complete phrase,
see below.) Here salām is normally understood today as ‘peace’, while its
sense might better be rendered: ‘greetings of security-peace’.364 Tis greet-
ing is known as taḥīyat al-islām, ‘the salutation of Islam’,—conveying
the hope for another person that God grant them a long successful life of
peace secure from harm. A closer examination of this important phrase so
frequently expressed on the lips of Muslims, conﬁrms how inseparable the
conceptions of security and peace are in Islamic experience.
Greetings in Prayer
A parallel use of this famous greeting occurs at the very conclusion of
Islam’s ritual prayer with the double salutation of taslīm,365 ﬁrst to one’s
right and then to the lef, marking the completion of the formal ṣalāt. Te
act of taslīm involves dual repetition of the full phrase: al-salāmu ‘alaykum

--- Sayfa 285 ---
257
Te Concept of Peace/Security (Salm) in Islam
wa raḥmatu Allahi wa barakātuhu/Peace-Security be upon you, and
God’s Mercy and His Blessing. Te frequently uttered eulogy prais-
ing God’s Messenger Muhammad—May God bless him and give him
peace/allā llāhu ǥalayhi wa sallama—conveys sincere benedictions
and hopes that our Prophet enjoy the highest reward and beatitude
in the Hereafer, namely in Paradise. Recall that Dār al-Salām (‘Te
Abode of Peace-Security’) refers to paradise—Yūnus, 10:25  states:
wa Allāhu yad‘ū ilā dāri l-salāmi wa yahdī man yashā’u ilā ṣirāṭ
mustaqīm/God invites to the Abode of Peace-Security and He guides
whom He wills upon a straight path. Te faithful who gain entry to
paradise by working good deeds attain to friendship with God, as
Sūrat Al-An‘ām, 6:127 states: For them is the Abode of Peace with
their Lord, and He is their Friend on account of what they performed.
Te taslīm is always preceded by the ‘benediction of saluta-
tions’, al-taḥīyāt,366 forming an integral part of the ritual prayers,
in which greetings and praises are pronounced upon God, while
‘salutations of peace’ are declared upon the Prophet and upon the
righteous worshippers of God. In its fullest form at the end of the
cycle of prostrations (two at dawn; three at sunset; or four at noon,
mid-afernoon and eve),367 it includes the portion of benedictions
termed al-tashahhud—where the witnessing to God’s Oneness and
His Messenger is declared. It is noteworthy that these taḥīyāt voice
‘salutations of peace’ (both al-salāmu valayka, and al-salāmu ‘alaynā)
upon the Prophet and one’s fellow worshippers—but not speciﬁcally
salutations upon God.
Tere remains another frequently repeated utterance closely asso-
ciated with the Taslīm which completes the daily prayers, namely the
supplication oﬀered by the individual upon consummating each of
the ﬁve daily prayers, aﬃrming God as the ultimate source and origin
of all peace. Tis beautiful invocation is not obligatory yet highly
recommended, being known in Islamic tradition as the personal
practice of God’s Messenger and recorded in authoritative hadith:
‘O God, You are Peace-Security (al-Salām), You are the
Source of Peace, and Peace properly belongs to You.368
So greet us Lord with the salutation ‘Peace!’ [fa-ḥayyinā
rabbanā bi-l-salāmi], and admit us into the Paradise Gar-

--- Sayfa 286 ---
war and peace in islam
258
den the Abode of Peace. Blessed and Exalted are You our
Lord, Possessor of Splendour and Reverence. (Text in the
version reported by al-Tirmidhi and al-Nasai.)
Te Muslim aspiration for peaceful security in this world and
ultimate salvation and security in the hereafer is echoed in this prophetic
supplication. Tis supports the reality that peace and security together
involve both material and spiritual factors in the most inclusive sense.
We may observe that here again, ‘salutations of peace’ are not uttered
speciﬁcally upon God, although the word salām occurs ﬁve times. Here
the phrase ‘so greet us Lord with the salutation ‘‘Peace!’’’ intends our
beseeching God to include us among the faithful admitted to paradise,
and to whom He extends His glorious salutation of ‘peace-security’.
Tis meaning is clearly established by related verses in the Qur’an
aﬃrming that the greatest boon the inhabitants of paradise may receive
from God is His saluting them by the salutation of ‘Peace!’: (Yā Sīn,
36:58), (Tey will be greeted with:) ‘Peace!’—a word (of greeting) from the
Merciful Lord; and Yūnus, 10:9–10 portrays the faithful who perform
good works as guided by God to Paradise, where: …Teir supplication
therein shall be, ‘Glory be to Tee O God!’ and their salute to one another
therein shall be ‘Peace!’. Te highest degree of the faithful in paradise are
‘the foremost’, al-sābiqūn, who merit the outstanding grace described
in Al-Wāqi‘ah 56:25–6 whereby Tey will hear therein no vain or sinful
speech, only the word of salutation—‘Peace, Peace!’. Our highest hope
and aspiration should be to reach the place where only the greetings
and declarations of peace are uttered. Muslims are bidden to strive to
achieve peace, just as they implore God to grant them peace.
Safety and Security
Te Arab Jewish rabbi ǥAbdallah Ibn Salam, who embraced Islam soon
afer the Prophet Muhammad U migrated to Medina, described his very
ﬁrst encounter with God’s Messenger in this way:369
When the Prophet U arrived people crowded around him
and I was among them. When his face became clearly
visible, I knew that his face was not that of a liar. Te ﬁrst
thing I heard him say was: ‘Spread (the salutations of)
“Peace”, and feed the hungry food, and observe the bonds

--- Sayfa 287 ---
259
Te Concept of Peace/Security (Salm) in Islam
of kinship, and pray (night-vigils) while people are asleep!
Tereby may you enter paradise with “peaceful/security”.’
[Te ﬁnal phrase could also be rendered: ‘…enter Paradise
greeted by (God’s salutation of:) “Peace!”’370]
Tis unique utterance captures with beautiful concision several
essential ethical values at the heart of Islam taught by the Prophet, and
it is striking that in such an extremely brief catechism the term salām
occurs twice. Tis reinforces the essential relevance of the term for
Islam and requires little comment, save to recall that the phrase Dār al-
Salām (‘Abode of Peace/Security’) refers to paradise: wa Allahu yadǥū
ilā dāri l-salāmi wa yahdī man yashā’u ilā ṣirāṭ mustaqīm (Yūnus, 10:25,
and compare Al-Anǥām, 6:127).
Arabic morphologic–linguistic sources emphasise that islām as the
name for the religious polity established by the Prophet Muhammad U
is etymologically derived from al-salāmah, ‘safety/security from harm/
evil’ and ‘avoidance of defects/vices’.371 Tis conjunction with al-salāmah
is very close to, or perhaps even coincides with, the notion of provid-
ing assurance of safety and security from harm conveyed by the greeting
‘salutations of security/peace’—conveying the assurance and guarantee of
peaceful intent and security from ultimate harm and evil. Te authorita-
tive eighth century Iraqi philologist Khalil b. Aḥmad (d. 179 AH) who
authored the ﬁrst etymological dictionary in Arabic, clariﬁes the link with
the salutation al-salāmu ǥalaykum instituted by Islam:
Al-salām conveys the meaning of al-salāmah, so the say-
ing by the people ‘al-salāmu ǥalaykum’ denotes ‘al-salāmah
from God be upon you’. It is further stated that al-Salām is a
name among God’s Names; and it is said that (al-Salām) is
God.372 Tus if one says ‘al-salāmu ǥalaykum’ it may mean
‘God is above you’ … Te term al-islām denotes ‘seeking
conformity al-istislām to God’s command’, denoting sub-
mission to His obedience and acceptance of His bidding/
al-inqiyād li-ṭāǥatihi wa l-qabūl li-amrih.
Khalil was among the ﬁrst to employ inqiyād (‘submission’ or ‘self-
resignation’) as a main synonym for al-islām, something frequently
repeated until the present day. Verbal sallama (as in sallama amrahu
ilā llāhi/to resign oneself [one’s cause or aﬀair] to God), and verbal
aslama (as in aslama nafsahu [amrahu] ilā llāhi/commit oneself, resign

--- Sayfa 288 ---
war and peace in islam
260
oneself to God’s bidding), came by extension to signify ‘to enter into
the religion-polity of al-Islām’ or ‘enter into peace/security al-salm’.
Furthermore, the nouns from the base form silm as well as salm were
taken to be homonyms for islām: the religious polity and salvational
faith-ethic originated by God’s Messenger Muhammad.
Tis archaic linguistic analysis tracing the name of the faith al-Islām
to the notion al-salāmah, ‘safety/security from harm/evil’, (understood
as synonymous with al-salām ‘salutations of security/peace’) was indi-
rectly supported by exegetes of the Qur’an who ofen asserted that God
is named al-Salām on account of being free of defects and faults.373 Tey
observed that in the tongue of revelation God is not denominated salīm
nor sālim, but only al-Salām. Nevertheless, a cogent critique of this earlier
linguistic and exegetical consensus was oﬀered by the twelfh century
CE Andalusian scholar al-Suhayli (d. 581 AH) in his Al-Rawḍ al-‘Unf
regarding the taḥīyah (salutations of safety/security) and al-Salām as a
Divine Name.374 Suhayli based his interpretation squarely upon utter-
ances of the majority of companions and early Muslim authorities,
pointing to an alternative understanding overlooked in most contem-
porary discussion.
Suhaylī asserts: ‘al-salām              denotes one from whom others
are safe/secure (man sulima min-hu), while al-sālim           denotes one
who is safe/secure from others (man salima min ghayrihi)’. He argues
that Qur’anic commentators have displaced the former with the latter’s
meaning, thereby contradicting the utterances of the pious forebears
(salaf) who taught that al-salāmah                is one quality among the
characteristic-traits of al-salām. Te presence of the tā’ marbūṭah Γ
on salāmah points to a greater conceptual diﬀerence endowing this
term with far more encompassing signiﬁcance (just as with al-jalāl and
al-jalālah). Terefore, in the tashahhud (the bearing witness to God as
source of peace, pronounced afer closing taslīm of ritual prayer) one
does not utter: ‘al-salāmu ǥalā llāhi min ǥibādihi/salutations of safety/
security upon God from His servants’. Yet al-salām is sought for and
beseeched from God by His servants, as petition through prayer and
gratitude for bounty; and this explains the form of this term in the
taḥīyah or salute which man renders towards God—‘…wa min-hu
al-salām/and from Him (we seek bounty of) safety/security’.
ϡϼγ
ϡϟΎγ
Δϣϼγ

--- Sayfa 289 ---
261
Te Concept of Peace/Security (Salm) in Islam
Now Suhayli invokes an interesting proof text to support his view:
the report in Ibn Hisham’s Sīrah regarding the very early incident of
prophetic revelation when Gabriel the Angel of revelation instructed
God’s Messenger Muhammad to convey to his wife Khadījah the salute
or greeting from God—‘al-salāmu min rabbi-hā/salutations of safety/
security from her Lord’.375
Te Prophet said: ‘O Khadījah, this is Gabriel, he extends
salutations-of-peace from your Lord!’ So Khadījah replied:
‘God is Peace—and from Him comes ‘safety/security’—
and may salutations of safety/security be upon Gabriel/Al-
lahu l-Salāmu wa min-hu l-salāmu wa ǥalā Jibrīli l-salām.’
As Suhayli observes,376 Khadījah rightly uttered: ‘God is al-salām
Peace’—because the term al-salām on the tongue of the creature is a
petition for safety/security from the source of all security and safety;
it cannot be an assertion of God’s need for security from any harm.
Terefore, states Suhayli, ‘the meaning of her utterance ‘God is al-
salām’ was her wisely thinking: “How can I respond to the divine
salutation by my saying: ‘Upon Him peace’ [ǥalayhi l-salām/may
security-safety be upon God], since safety/security comes from Him,
and is beseeched of Him, and it is bestowed by Him?! But upon Gabriel
[a created being] may there be safety/security.”’
Indeed, Suhayli strongly emphasises that God, as al-Salām (Peace),
must not be burdened with any defect or any fear of harm or injury,
nor any variation or shortcoming—rather God bestows His care
enclosing the entire creation (all creatures) within safety and security
from harm or defect, due to His providential wise order. Tus God
may be called ‘Peace’ on account of His being the ultimate source and
goal of safety/security. One may conclude from this insightful passage
by observing that islām primally mediates the notion of ‘aﬀording
security from harm/injury to another’, as well as ‘resignation aﬀording
safety and peace/security to oneself’.
Peacemaking
One should pay closer attention to salm which is both masculine
and feminine, and may be taken as either singular or plural. It was
generally held that al-silm is equivalent or closely parallels al-salm. In

--- Sayfa 290 ---
war and peace in islam
262
the Qur’an’s second chapter Al-Baqarah, 2:208, yā ayyuhā l-lladhīna
āmanū adkhulū fī l-silmi kāﬀat/O you who believe, enter ye into silm
all-together, it is clear that silm (‘peace/reconciliation’) is employed
either as an attribute of faith īmān, and/or as synonymous with the
religious polity of islām. Exegetes recognised the possibility of both
readings in 2:208: either as silm (= al-islām), or as salm (= al-ṣulḥ, with
conﬁrmatory reference to Al-Ḥujarāt, 49:9).377 Tabari’s treatment of
this marked diﬀerence of interpretation is quite informative, citing the
authorities among Companions and Successors for both views. Tose
who read al-silm to denote the religious polity islām included Ibn
ǥAbbas, Mujahid, al-Dahhak and al-Suddi as well as the majority of
Kufan Qur’an reciters. Yet some understood al-silm here in the sense
of al-ṣulḥ, ‘peaceful-reconciliation’. However most of the Hijazi recit-
ers read it with fatḥah as al-salm, construing its meaning as al-ṣulḥ,
and/or al-musālamah [verbal noun of III], connoting abstention from
war-making accompanied by payment of the poll tax (jizyah). Tabari
argues for the preponderant reading al-silm as signifying the religious
polity al-islām with an eye for its occasion of revelation. Addressing
the ‘believers’ (mu’minūn), it makes no sense for God to bid them
enter into ṣulḥ or musālamah since faithful Muslims obedient to
the Prophet Muhammad U would not be in a state of war or enmity
against God. Tis verse must therefore be addressing those ‘faithful’
who believed in previous prophets, and whom God expressly bid to
recognize and acknowledge Muhammad as God’s Messenger—given
that faith in God is inseparable from acceptance of His Messenger and
the message the Prophet Muhammad U conveys.
Tabari then provides plausible reasons for understanding Sūrat
Al-Baqarah, 2:208 to have been sent down with reference to a party
of the Ahl al-Kitāb who were being persuaded to embrace the totality
of religious practice imposed by Islām. Even here there were diﬀerent
views among early authorities. Ibn ǥAbbas, Mujahid, and al-Dahhak
upheld a general meaning covering the ‘People of the Book’ urging
them to accept all obligatory practices imposed by God through His
Messenger. However ǥIkrimah (a mawlā of Ibn ǥAbbas) asserted that
this verse was sent down regarding leading Medinan Jews who had
embraced Islam,378 and who nevertheless requested of the Prophet

--- Sayfa 291 ---
263
Te Concept of Peace/Security (Salm) in Islam
permission to observe the Sabbath as a night of prayer vigil (in addi-
tion to the Islamic Friday) being a day sanctiﬁed by the Torah. Tabari
concludes that Al-Baqarah, 2:208 applies to both the Muslim faithful
who followed God’s Messenger Muhammad U, as well as believing
converts from among the ‘People of the Book’, all urged to observe
the totality of obligatory practices and limits enjoined by God in
His revelation to the Prophet. Te ta’wīl attributed to Mujahid (…
adkhulū fī l-a‘māli kāﬀat)379 serves to conﬁrm Tabari’s consensus
judgement, a model of his critical method of al-tafsīr bi-l-ma’thūr.
Nevertheless, in Sūrat Al-Anfāl, 8:61 the term salm clearly denotes
‘peace/making’ as the antonym of ‘war/bloodshed’:
…wa in janaḥū li-l-salmi fa-ajnaḥ la-hā wa tawakkal ǥalā
llāhi innahu huwa l-samīǥu l-ǥalīmu/yet if they then incline
toward peace, then do you likewise incline, and rely utterly
on God [O Muhammad] for He is All-Hearing All-Knowing.
Here in Al-Anfāl, 8:61, al-salm ‘peace/making’ may best be
construed in the sense of al-ṣulḥ.380 Tis directive for al-ṣulḥ is
conditioned upon the best interests of the Muslims: that al-Islām
be manifested over unbelief. Te unspoken directive implied at the
beginning of this verse is explicitly supplied by Tabarī: ‘when you
suspect deceit and duplicity, then deal with them in the same manner by
announcing hostilities’. Otherwise, there is no divine bidding to initiate
peacemaking, but only to respond in kind when the opposing party
itself initiates peacemaking overtures. Likewise in Sūrat Muḥammad,
47:35 (…wa tadǥū ilā l-salmi…), where God in fact bids His Messenger
to refrain from peacemaking with those of unbelief. Tabari had earlier
remarked: ‘As for initiating the inviting them to peaceful/reconciliation/
al-ṣulḥ, this is not found in the Qur’an.’381 Terefore, the initiative for
peacemaking in the conﬂict with those of unbelief (Arab pagans) is
entirely dependent upon their intentions and actions, an eminently
practical and soberly cautious position. If the opposing party freely
inclines to peaceful-reconciliation (negotiating a treaty), or accepts to
render jizyah and/or subjugation, then al-salm ‘peacemaking’ (i.e., al-
ṣulḥ) is divinely bidden. Tere must always be a peaceful response in
response to a peacemaking initiative oﬀered by the opposing party.
Tabari next raises a very important point of dissension among early

--- Sayfa 292 ---
war and peace in islam
264
commentators over whether Al-Anfāl, 8:61 bidding al-ṣulḥ had been
abrogated by one or another of the ‘ﬁghting’ verses bidding the faithful
to combat the pagans (al-mushrikūn) unequivocally without respite —
namely  Sūrat Al-Tawbah, 9:5, 29, 36.382 According to many reputable
early authorities among the successors including Qatadah, ǥIkrimah,
al-Suddi, Ibn Zayd and al-Hasan al-Basri, afer the sending down of the
barā’ah verse terminating pagan observances sometime in year 8 AH
the earlier divine bidding to respond peacefully to peacemaking initia-
tives had been cancelled or abrogated (nasakhah), and divine bidding
now enjoined unmitigated ﬁghting against them until they made
submission and proclaimed ‘Tere is no divinity save Te Divinity!’. In
other words, these great successors maintained that Al-Anfāl, 8:61 was
abrogated by a universal call upon the Muslims to pursue jihad. Now
Tabari explicitly asserts that such an interpretation: ‘…has no evidence
in Revelation, nor in Prophetic practice, nor in the innate human
constitution of reason!’383 Tis is indeed a very strong statement seem-
ingly contravening a semi-consensus of the second generation Muslim
scholars, and it must be heeded with full appreciation of Tabari’s deep
knowledge of all three factors he mentioned.384 He strongly denies the
widespread allegation that the divine bidding to respond to peaceful
initiatives of peacemaking with corresponding peaceful conciliation was
ever actually cancelled. Te reason again is securely based on his expert
knowledge of the ‘occasions of revelation’: the revealed verse Al-Anfāl,
8:61: yet if they then incline toward peace, then do you likewise incline,
was sent down with regard to the Jewish tribe of Banu Qurayzah385
(who thus belonged to the ‘People of the Book’). Whereas the verse in
Al-Tawbah, 9:5 so ﬁght the idolaters wherever you come across them,
was sent down regarding the pagan Arabs who served idols and ﬁercely
resisted Muhammad’s mission—from whom acceptance of jizyah was
not permitted! Terefore, neither of these two verses could conceivably
cancel the other, for both actually continued to be in full force given that
they refer to two diﬀerent groups in conﬂict or rivalry with the Medinan
Muslim community, and who were treated with distinctly dissimilar
policies. Similarly, a ta’wīl attributed to Mujahid is cited to conﬁrm this
interpretation, along with a supporting statement from Ibn Ishaq.386

--- Sayfa 293 ---
265
Te Concept of Peace/Security (Salm) in Islam
Submit! You shall be Secure
Tese limited samples drawn from the wealth of exegetical literature alert
us to lessons to be drawn for proper understanding of al-salm as the
chief Islamic term for peacemaking. Such materials must be coordinated
with corresponding insights drawn from early historical and literary
sources, including the letters dispatched by the Prophet to neighbouring
rulers and chiefs, as well as signiﬁcant utterances by leading companions
deﬁning islām in relation to īmān—particularly several proclamations
by the fourth Caliph ǥAlī b. Abi Talib which deserve extended attention.
We will quickly draw attention to the Muslim historical tradition that
dates the dispatching by the Prophet Muhammad of emissaries bearing
letters to the great powers of his era (ilā mulūk al-ǥajam) late in year 6
AH (or possibly early in year 7). Tis was afer the pact of Hudaybiyah
during the interval of the hudnah or truce between the pagan Meccans
and Muslims. Tese documents have not been properly scrutinised by
occidental scholars for the historical data they shed on the initial spread
of Islam, nor for the Prophet Muhammad’s geostrategic policy. Generally
they are dismissed in western Islamic studies as ‘obvious forgeries’ of
the Umayyad era. Tese documents actually demand careful scrutiny,
and have been unjustly maligned and neglected by non-Muslim scholars.
Nevertheless, recent research on the linguistic, epigraphic and epistolary
reality of the Near East and Arabia during the fourth to the seventh centu-
ries CE may open the door to a fresh evaluation of these documents.387
Te relevant letters occur in early sources (Ibn Sa‘d, Abu ‘Ubayd al-Qasim
b. Sallam, etc.) and were later gathered in more extensive compilations
such as the fourteenth century CE Ibn Hudaydah’s al-Miṣbāḥ al-Muḍī
(vol. II mukātabāt pp. 3–323).388
Te texts of the letters alleged to have been sent to the four great
rulers of Abyssinia, Egypt, Byzantium and Sasanian Iran (as well as to a
number of lesser authorities in the Arabian peninsula and Near East), all
repeat in closely parallel form a similar phrase, usually at the start of the
Prophet’s actual message afer the introductory address:
Aslim! Taslam/ Submit!—You shall be secure. Or: Enter into
Islām! [Be at peace!]—You shall achieve peace/security (from
injury/harm and threat of conﬂict).

--- Sayfa 294 ---
war and peace in islam
266
Is it possible to understand by this terse pregnant phrase reference
to both the external political relation, and at the same time the interior
religious condition of acceptance of the authority of God’s Messenger
mediating divine guidance inducing assurance of salvation? If these
powerful rulers chose to recognise the authority and power of the Prophet
heading the religious polity of al-Islām (centered in the Medinan ummah)
and the dominion of the One God, they join the salviﬁc community and
gain worldly and other-worldly security.
Captive of Divinity
Before completing this concise review of the primary signiﬁcance of salm
we may draw attention to a little-noted connotation reﬂecting an archaic
reality with direct bearing on the religion al-Islām. In ancient Semitic
usage one ﬁnds a prevalence of theophorous names where the human
is designated the ‘client’ or ‘devotee’ [lit. ‘captive’] of the god. Cognate
employment in Hebrew and Phoenician of names denoting the ‘client of
El’ (gêr/c.f. Arabic jār) are frequent, as with the parallel term taym ‘devo-
tee’ or ‘lover’ (Arabic taym allāh). Tis has a particularly striking parallel
in Palmyrene with the proper name Salm. It is worth citing the great
Scottish Arabist W. Robertson Smith on this convergence, perhaps the
ﬁrst scholar to point explicitly to its bearing on Arabic Islamic usage.389
In Arabic proper, where the relation of protector and pro-
tected had a great development, and whole clans were wont
to attach themselves as dependants to a more powerful tribe,
the conception of god and worshipper as patron and client
appears to have been specially predominant… . To the same
conception may be assigned the proper name salm, ‘submis-
sion’, shortened from such theophorous forms as the Paly-
myrene salm al-Lāt, ‘submission to Lāt’, and corresponding
to the religious use of the verb istalama, ‘he made his peace’,
to designate the ceremony of kissing, stroking, or embracing
the sacred stone at the Caaba… .
(According to the authority of Professor Ihsan ǥAbbas, the name salām
[or perhaps salm?] occurred in pre-Islamic poetry as the designation of
a particular divinity; regrettably we have not been able to pursue his hint
further.390) One may invoke the common appellation ǥabd Allāh ‘servant
of God’ [‘captive’ of the Divinity?], signifying the status of dependence

--- Sayfa 295 ---
267
Te Concept of Peace/Security (Salm) in Islam
and obligation involved in worship and service of the divine (ǥibādah).
In other words, it is advisable to avoid some common associations
evoked by the English ‘submission’ or ‘surrender’ when apprehending
the proper meaning for islām. Te supreme divinity conceived as King,
Lord or Master naturally provoked the notion of the human subject as
servant, resigned captive or submissive worshipper. Te ‘submission’
involved is voluntary and freely rendered, while simultaneously bearing
a communal political import.
A fundamental consideration to be kept in mind: ‘Te parallel-
ism in ancient society between religious and political institutions is
complete’, for both spheres are conceived as being ‘parts of one whole
of social custom’.391 Tis observation is a truism for the early Islamic
reality, yet is ofen overlooked by contemporary Euro-American
thinkers who frequently lapse into the assumption projected by
Enlightenment modernity of the necessary or preferred separation of
the religious from the political realm. Te idea of a religion being
accepted by voluntary submission, expressed by the name al-Islām,
may not be divorced from the strategic political and cultural condi-
tions through which it emerged in history. Religion was in that era
accompanied by political rights and unfolded historically against the
background of political power.392
Was the primordial religious polity of Islām centered primarily on
the search for dominion and authority in this world? If the argument
that Islām embraces simultaneously a religious polity and a salvational
faith is valid, then what of its inner salviﬁc dimension nurtured in the
heart and mind of the individual believer? More investigation into the
nexus of islām as both a religious polity and sociopolitical community
born in historical context, and the deeply lived experience of individu-
als who have their presence and world view moulded by that historical
community, has to be accomplished if we are to bring clarity to the
quest for an authentic understanding of peace. Te dual components
of establishing a polity and nurturing a living faith coexist at a very
deep level.
Te relevance of religious ideals to human security appears to
ﬁnd a particularly compelling example in Islam. Tis invites more
intensive exploration, and should be integrated with current concerns

--- Sayfa 296 ---
war and peace in islam
268
about deepening the understanding of security to include spiritual and
ethical components. Complementing the emphasis on just polity and
an equitable social order, Islamic teachings oﬀer speciﬁc ideals and
practices for active reconciliation between individuals and groups.
Islam thereby sought a balance between the political dictates of justice
and equity, and those of human clemency, harmony, and selﬂess love
embraced by the notion of al-iḥsān ‘surpassing goodness’:
Surely God enjoins justice and the ‘doing-good-to-others’ [al-
ǥadl wa l-iḥsān], and giving (to others) like unto (one’s own)
kin, and forbids indecency and manifest evil and unjust op-
pression. (Al-Naḥl, 16:90)
© Dr Karim Douglas Crow

--- Sayfa 297 ---
269
chapter ten
HUMAN DIGNITY FROM AN ISLAMIC PERSPECTIVE
Professor Mohammad Hashim Kamali
Dignity is a composite concept that can embrace a variety of objective
values and those which may be relative and subjective in the context
of particular legal and cultural traditions. Te values that dignity
subsumes are also liable to change with new developments in science
and technology, as well as with the mobility and interaction of peoples
and cultures. Broadly speaking, from a legal perspective, human
dignity connotes inviolability of the human person, recognition of a
set of rights and obligations and guarantee of safe conduct by others,
including the society and state. Juristic positions and human dignity
also tend to have implications on a global scale as to whether the
world communities and cultures accord dignity and inviolability to
the other concerning Islam and Muslims are divided. Islam recognises
dignity as an inherent right to all human beings regardless of colour
and creed. Tis being the basic position, a certain level of internal
disagreement in the Islamic juristic thought itself does not exist, just
as negative trends in Muslim-non-Muslim relations have been on the
increase in recent years that have altogether added to apprehension
and scepticism on both sides.
Tis text explores human dignity through a study of the Qur’an
and Hadith (sayings of the Prophet Muhammad), the two most
authoritative sources of Islam that profoundly inﬂuence the Muslim
psyche and conduct in almost all Muslim communities. Ten follows
a brief review of the juristic positions of the leading schools of Islamic
law on the subject, and then concluding remarks on the eﬀect of these
guidelines on the realities of Muslim life.

--- Sayfa 298 ---
war and peace in islam
270
Since the subject before us occupies a substantial number of
Qur’anic passages and Hadith reports, I shall divide them into a few
clusters around the following themes:
1) Direct scriptural evidence on human dignity.
2) Passages in the Qur’an and Hadith that characterise the
God-Man relationship.
3) Evidence of concern to relations of human beings among
themselves, within and outside the fold of Islam.
4) A brief review of the position of leading schools of Islamic
jurisprudence.
5) Te impact of these guidelines on the realities of Muslim life.
Textual Evidence on Human Dignity
Te most explicit aﬃrmation of human dignity (karāmah) is found in
God’s illustrious speech in the Qur’an, in a general and unqualiﬁed
declaration: We have bestowed dignity on the children of Adam (laqad
karramnā banī Adama) … and conferred upon them special favours
above the greater part of Our creation (Al-‘Isrā’, 17:70).
Te reference to the greater part of Our creation in this verse is
explained elsewhere in parts of the Qur’an where the text elaborates
the manifestations of human dignity by declaring, for instance, the
spiritual ranking of human beings above those of the angels on one
hand and the devil (Iblis) on the other. In one such passage (Al-A‘rāf,
7:11), the angels and Iblis were asked to bow down to Adam but only
the angels bowed down, not so Iblis. Iblis asserted its own superiority,
as the text recounts: You created Adam from [humble] clay and created
me from ﬁre! God’s displeasure with this response was then conveyed
in a question to Iblis: what prevents thee from prostrating thyself to one
whom I created with My Own Hand ? (Ṣād, 38:75–6).
Te subject is then taken up again in another context where God
declared His intention to the angels that I am about to appoint a vice-
gerent in the earth. Te angels protested, as the text goes, and said: we
extol and glorify Tee, whereas Man is prone to corruption and blood-
shed. Ten the angels were told: surely I know what you know not.
Tis is immediately followed by the aﬃrmation: And God taught Adam
the names of all things… (Al-Baqarah, 2:30–2), which would seem to

--- Sayfa 299 ---
271
Human Dignity from an Islamic Perspective
suggest that knowledge and the capacity to learn are relevant to the
dignity and nobility of humans. A level of intimacy and closeness is also
shown in God’s aﬃrmation that I created (Adam) with My own Hand.
For in most other places where a reference occurs to God’s creation, it
is ofen said that God commands or wills so and so and it becomes. But
even more explicitly, this intimacy is shown in God’s illustrious aﬃr-
mation: And I breathed into him (Adam) of My Own spirit (Ṣād,38:72).
Te spiritual superiority of humankind in the foregoing verses is
then further supplemented by references to their physical constitution
in places, for example, where it is declared: Indeed, We created human-
kind in the best of forms; and We fashioned you in the best of images…
(Al-Tīn, 95:12; Al-Taghābun, 64:3). It is reported in a hadith that the
Prophet stood one day in front of the Ka‘bah, the holiest of all places
known to Islam, and said in a symbolic language:
‘You are most pure and most digniﬁed, but the One in whose
hands Muhammad’s life reposes, the sanctity and honour of
a believer, his life and his property, is far greater in the eyes
of God’.393
Te Qur’anic vision of dignity for the human race as depicted in
these passages has been upheld, more speciﬁcally, in its references to the
Muslim community, whom God has ranked in honour (al-‘izzah) next
to His own illustrious Self and that of His Messenger, Muhammad (Al-
Munāﬁqūn, 63:8). Te Qur’anic designation of the Muslim community
is also that of a community of moderation (ummatan wasatan, Al-
Baqarah, 2:143), committed to the promotion of good and rejection of
evil (Āl ‘Imrān, 3:110), dedicated to the vindication of truth and justice
(Āl ‘Imrān, 3:103). To quote the Holy Book: Te believers, both men and
women, are friends and protectors of one another; they enjoin good and
they forbid evil. (Al-Tawbah, 9:71) Tis is translated more pragmatically
in the following hadith: ‘If any of you sees something evil, he should set
it right with his hand; if he is unable to do so, then with his tongue, and if
he is unable to do even that, then (let him denounce it) in his heart. But
this is the weakest form of faith.’ͫ ͱͬ We may add here the point that there
is no evidence anywhere in the sources to say that non-Muslims may
not participate in the promotion of good or prevention and rejection of
evil.ͫ ͱͭ In two of his other sayings, the Prophet U is also quoted to have

--- Sayfa 300 ---
war and peace in islam
272
said: ‘the best part of faith is to have beautiful manners’;ͫ ͱͮ and that: ‘I
have been sent in order to perfect moral virtues (among you).’ͫ ͱͯ
Te overall picture that emerges is summed up in the Qur’an
commentator al-Alusi’s observation that ‘everyone and all members
of the human race, including the pious and the sinner, are endowed
with dignity’.ͫ ͱͰ Twentieth century Muslim jurists and commentators
have also gone on record to note that dignity is not earned by meri-
torious conduct; it is established as an expression of God’s grace; and
also that dignity is a natural and absolute right which inheres in every
human person as of the moment of birth. It is God-given and natural;
hence no individual nor state may take it away from anyone. As for the
question whether dignity also remains intact of a criminal, the general
answer provided is in the aﬃrmative with the proviso, however, that it
is partially compromised to the extent that a court decision on punish-
ment may be enforced, even if punishment involves some erosion of
dignity, but beyond that the personal dignity of prisoners must also be
protected and observed. It follows then that prisoners should not be
subjected to arbitrary and humiliating treatment nor to deprivation of
their basic needs.ͫ ͱͱ
Rights and obligations are a manifestation of human dignity in
all major legal traditions and the shari‘ah is no exception. Tere may
be some diﬀerences of orientation among legal systems, but as far as
Islamic law is concerned the emphasis is not so much on rights and
obligations as it is on justice. A balanced approach to rights and duties
should thus be realised through impartial justice. Yet for reasons that
orated, Islamic law tends to be more emphatic on duties than rights.ͬͨͨ

I have advanced the view that human dignity provides a more objec-
tive basis of a modern doctrine of human rights in Islam, in preference
perhaps, to the rights-based approach of the contemporary human rights
discourse that places a much greater emphasis on rights compared to
obligations. My research further indicates, however, that a duty-based
approach to human rights is also not in total harmony with the Qur’anic
conception of justice.ͬͨͩ

Critics have voiced the view that dignity is a moral rather than a
legal concept, and that violation of human dignity is not the same as
violation of an entrenched right. Tus according to one observer, ‘To

--- Sayfa 301 ---
273
Human Dignity from an Islamic Perspective
violate a right goes well beyond merely falling short of some high moral
standard’.ͬͨͪ
 A partial response to this is that the ﬁve universals objec-
tives of the shari‘ah, known as al-darūriyyāt (to which a sixth, namely
personal honour (al-‘irḍ) was subsequently added), do take human
dignity into a rights-based concept. I shall have more to say on this in
my examination of juristic positions below.ͬͨͫ

God-Man Relationship
Te Qur’an is expressive, in a variety of places and contexts, of God’s love
for humanity, so much so that it becomes a characteristic feature of this
relationship. Tis aspect of the God-Man relationship has not, however,
received a balanced treatment in many of the Orientalist works I have seen,
which are preoccupied with themes such as God’s absolute power, God as
an unrelenting judge, man as the servant of God and so forth.ͬͨͬ
 A similar
tendency is noted even among the Muslim commentators of the Qur’an,
especially in the tafsīr bi’l-ma’thūr (precedent-based interpretation) genre
of tafsīr, such as those of Ibn Jarir al-Tabari (d.923), Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti
(d. 1505) and the works also of many shari‘ah jurists who envision a some-
what distant and impersonal God that accentuates His majesty, imperium
and justice much more than His intimacy and love for human beings.ͬͨͭ

Tis tendency in tafsīr and ﬁqh works has not remained unnoticed and
has invoked criticism from many a leading Suﬁ and mystic of Islam. Te
Suﬁs have taken the jurists and even the Qur’an commentators to task
for their preoccupation with a rule-based religion, for downsizing God’s
love (maḥabbah) for humankind, and for the latter’s devotion to Him, that
so unmistakeably feature in the Qur’an and Hadith. Te Suﬁs are well-
known for their rich and eﬀusive expression of a profound devotion (‘ishq)
through which God and humankind relate to one another. We believe love
(mahabbah) and mercy (raḥmah) animate all aspects of God’s relations
with humankind and that God conferred dignity (karāmah) on human
beings as a manifestation of His unbounded love.
God’s love is manifested in His of repeated expression of mercy
for humanity in the Qur’an,ͬͨͮ
 in His expression of trust in the nobility
of Man,  endowing mankind with the faculty of reason and bestowing
on them immense capacity for knowledge and understanding.ͬͨͯ
 God’s
expression of trust is also manifested in His appointment of humankind

--- Sayfa 302 ---
war and peace in islam
274
as His vicegerent in the earth (Al-Baqarah, 2:30–2), and His recurrent
aﬃrmation on the subjugation of the heavens and the earth for human
beneﬁt.ͬͨ
Ͱ Other manifestations of favour are found in the Divine provi-
dence of availing to humankind the enjoyments of this life and its adorn-
ments, espoused with reminders that they should not neglect their fair
share in them.ͬͨ
ͱ In an address to the Prophet Muhammad, God speaks
in such terms: When My servants ask you about Me, say that I am indeed
close to them and I listen to the prayer of every supplicant when he calls
on Me; and Surely We have created Man; We know the promptings of his
heart, and We are nearer to him even than his jugular vein (Al-Baqarah,
2:186; Qāf, 50:16). In a long Qudsi hadith (a variety of hadith wherein God
speaks directly without the Prophet’s intermediation) that al-Bukhari has
recorded from Abu Hurayrah, God the Most High said:
One who oﬀends any of My friends is like declaring war
against Me… and My servant gets closer to Me through good
deeds until I love him, and when I love him, I become like his
ear by which he hears, and like the eye by which he sees, like
his hand by which he reaches out, and I walk with him; when
he asks Me, I give, and when he seeks protection through Me,
I protect him.410
Tese and other similar pronouncements may be seen as God’s
unconditional expressions of love and grace for humanity, which may
be distinguished from other expressions that contemplate certain
behaviour patterns, as are reviewed below.
In numerous places the Qur’an is expressive of God’s love, in its
typical phrase, inn Allāh yuḥibbu (‘God loves’) those who are good to
others (inna Allāh yuḥibbu al-muḥsinīn, (Al-Baqarah, 2:195)); those
who are just in their dealings with others (al-muqsitīn, Al-Mā’idah, 5:42),
those who remain patient in the face of adversity (al-ṣābirīn, (Āl ‘Imrān,
3:146)), those who are conscious of Him (al-muttaqin, (Al-Tawbah, 9:4)),
those who observe purity and cleanliness (al-mutaṭahhirīn, (Al-Baqarah,
2:222)), those who repent and return to Him (al-tawwabīn, (Al-Baqarah,
2:222)), those who place their trust in Him (al-mutawakkilīn, (Āl ‘Imrān,
3:159)) and so forth. In an unusually candid language, God has elsewhere
addressed His beloved Prophet Moses in these terms: And I cast My love
over you in order that you may be reared under My eye (Ṭā Hā, 20:39).

--- Sayfa 303 ---
275
Human Dignity from an Islamic Perspective
Tis theme is pursued further in other places where God’s love is denied
in the typical phrase inna Allāha lā yuḥibbu (‘God loves not’) to the
aggressors, to the unjust, to those who spread corruption, to the arrogant
and the boastful, the deniers of faith in Him, the treacherous, the prodi-
gals and so forth.ͬͩͩ Yet the Qur’anic dictum is varied in its expressions
when it declares, for example, in another verse: O My servants who have
transgressed against their souls! Despair not of the mercy of God, for God
forgives all sins. He is most forgiving, most merciful. (Al-Zumar, 39:53).
 Other manifestations of God-Man relations in the Qur’an are
found in the aﬃrmation and grant of freedom and moral autonomy
for human beings (Al-Rūm, 30:30); in its declaration that there shall be
no compulsion in religion (Al-Baqarah, 2:256); and again: Let whoso-
ever wills, believe, and whosoever wills, disbelieve (Al-Kahf, 18:29). Te
Qur’an also declared in an address to the Prophet: anyone who accepts
guidance does so for his own good, but one who wantonly goes astray,
then tell him that ‘I am only a warner’. (Al-Naml, 27:92)
Relations among Fellow Humans
Te Qur’anic vision of humankind is that of a single fraternity which is
endorsed by the aﬃrmation of the unity and equality of all of its members.
Tus in a reference to the creation of humankind it is provided: God created
you from a single soul (khalaqakum min nafsin wāḥidatin) and created its
mate of the same (kind) and created from them multitudes of men and
women…. Ten they are all enjoined, in the same verse, to observe the ties
of kinship (al-arḥām) among yourselves (Al-Nisā’, 4:1).
It is signiﬁcant that the text accentuates the bonds of fraternity
among humans with the expression al-arḥām (ties of kinship), a term
usually employed in the Qur’an in the context of family relations and
inheritance.ͬͩͪ
 Another point of note in this passage is its phrase He
created you form a single soul, which also occurs identically elsewhere in
the text (Al-Zumar, 39:6), both implying that Eve was, not as it is some-
times erroneously claimed, created from Adam’s rib, but created in a
like manner of the essence of that single soul. Tis single soul emanates,
it seems, in God’s own illustrious spirit, hence its digniﬁed origin of the
highest order. What is in common between Adam and Eve is this soul,
implied by the reference to it in the female singular (i.e. minhā—in

--- Sayfa 304 ---
war and peace in islam
276
the phrase wa khalaqa minhā zawjahā—and created from it its pair),
which could not be a reference to Adam, but to that single soul. Te
Prophet Muhammad has endorsed this message of unity and equality
in the following hadith: ‘O people! Your Creator is one; you are from
the same ancestor; all of you are from Adam, and Adam was created
from earth.’ͬͩͫ
 In the matter of reward and punishment, the Qur’an
declares men and women absolutely equal,ͬͩͬ
 and there is no notion of
an original sin in the Qur’an either. In sum, since Islam subscribes to
a broad human fraternity of equals, ‘there could be no aﬀront to the
human dignity of any single person without there being an aﬀront to
the dignity of all’.ͬͩͭ
 Since dignity is God-given, no human person or …
has the authority to deny it to anyone nor to deprive another human
being of his or her dignity.
Te Qur’an views marriage as a basis of friendship and compassion
(muwaddah wa raḥmah) where spouses ﬁnd tranquillity and compan-
ionship and they are a ‘protective garment’ to each other’s dignity and
honour.ͬͩͮ
 Parents are elevated to a position almost of divinity, and
oﬀspring is enjoined to treat them, in words and in deeds, with utmost
dignity, in the spirit of benevolence (iḥsān) and submission (Al-Isrā’,
17:23). Te text places special emphasis on being grateful to one’s
mother (Luqmān, 31:14). Parents are also enjoined to observe the natu-
ral ties of love and aﬀection with their children, who are the adornments
of life and a litmus test also of failure and success. Te most meritorious
legacy anyone can leave behind is a virtuous oﬀspring (Al-Kahf, 18:46).
As for the digniﬁed encounter and treatment of one’s fellow
humans, the Qur’an in numerous places enjoins aﬀection and frater-
nity with everyone, within and outside the family, especially to one’s
neighbours. Te believers are declared as brethren to one another
(Al-Ḥujurāt, 49:15) and enjoined, in unqualiﬁed language, to speak
to everyone with courtesy and tact (Al-Baqarah, 2:83); and then again
when you speak, speak with justice; … and in pursuit of righteousness
(Al-An‘ām, 6:52; Al-Aḥzāb, 33:70). In numerous places, the text warns
the believer, indeed all people, to avoid harbouring ill-feeling, rancour,
suspicion, backbiting and espionage against one another.
In their dealing with non-Muslims and followers of other faiths,
Muslims are enjoined to do justice and be good to them so long as

--- Sayfa 305 ---
277
Human Dignity from an Islamic Perspective
they do not resort to acts of hostility and oppression against them
(Al-Mumtaḥanah, 60:8). In the matter of engaging in disputation and
discourse with non-Muslims, the believers are further directed to reason
with them in the best manner possible; and argue not with the followers
of Scripture except in the fairest manner (Al-Naḥl, 16:125, Al-‘Ankabūt,
29:46).Te general guideline that applies to everyone is also set in
such terms that there shall be no hostility except against the oppressors
(Al-Baqarah, 2:193). An act of aggression may be punished with its
equivalent but no more than that (Al-Baqarah, 2:194). Te text, moreo-
ver, enjoins everyone to avoid aggression, for God loves not the aggressors
(Al-Baqarah, 2:190), but those who exercise patience and forgiveness
will have their rewards from God (Al-Naḥl, 16:126). Te Prophet has
added his voice in conﬁrmation to say: ‘people are God’s children and
those dearest to Him are the one’s who treat His children kindly.’ͬͩͯ

He also said: ‘whoever believes in God and the Last Day, let him speak
when he has something good to say, or else remain silent.’ͬͩ
Ͱ In another
hadith, the Prophet has been quoted to have said: ‘God will punish (in
the hereafer) those who punish people in this world.’ͬͩ
ͱ
Another manifestation of human dignity in Islam is the grant
of moral autonomy to the people, as in the renowned hadith: ‘Tere
is no obedience in transgression; obedience is due only in righteous
conduct.’ͬͪͨ
 Te Prophet is reported to have declared further that: ‘Te
best form of jihad is to tell a word of truth to a tyrannical ruler.’ͬͪͩ
Juristic Positions
Tree interrelated concepts of Islamic law of relevance to human
dignity that are featured in the scholastic jurisprudence of the leading
schools (madhāhib) are ‘iṣmah (inviolability), humanity and person-
hood (ādamiyyah) and the ﬁve (or six) universals collectively known as
al-ḍarūriyyāt, as previously mentioned. Tese are life, intellect, religion,
family, property, and honour, which constitute the overriding goals
and values of Islam that must be protected as a matter of priority by all
concerned. ͬͪͪ
 Te two basic positions that are taken on these objectives
and principles may be labelled respectively as universalist and commu-
nalist. Te universalist camp is spearheaded by the Hanaﬁ school of law,
whereas the preponderant view of the other leading schools tends to take

--- Sayfa 306 ---
war and peace in islam
278
communalist postures on these concepts. Te Hanaﬁ school commands
the widest following in present day Muslim countries, compared to any
of the other leading schools, namely the Shaﬁ‘i, Maliki, Hanbali and the
Shi‘ah: About ﬁfy percent of the world’s Muslims are followers of the
Hanaﬁ school. Te universalists take an aﬃrmative stance on the recogni-
tion of ‘iṣmah for all humans regardless of religion, gender, race and the
like. Human dignity is thus a natural endowment that everyone obtains by
the mere fact of being human. Everyone’s dignity, life, property and other
rights are sacrosanct and inviolable, without any discrimination. Full and
equal protection is therefore extended to all alike.
Te communalist position maintains, on the other hand, that
‘iṣmah is established not by the fact of one’s being a human, but by
being a believer in Islam. Non-Muslims are consequently not qualiﬁed
for ‘iṣmah unless they make a treaty with the Muslim state and secure
their protection by virtue of a commitment (dhimmah). Tis view is
spearheaded by the Imam al-Shaﬁ‘i (d. 820 CE) and has also found
support with the other leading imams, namely Ahmad Ibn Hanbal (d.
855), Malik (d. 795) Daud al-Zahiri (d. 885) and the Shi‘ite scholars
such as al-Tusi (d. 1274) and his contemporary ‘Allamah al-Hilli. Tey
advanced the argument that the injunction on ﬁghting the disbeliev-
ers in the Qur’an and Hadith is couched in a general language which
supersedes the grant of ‘iṣmah to them.ͬͪͫ
 Recep Senturk has drawn
the conclusion from his research that the category of universal human
rights that exists in the Hanaﬁ concept of adamiyyah does not hold in
the legal thought of the advocates of the communalist position, who
have generally relied on the religiously deﬁned categories of Muslims
and non-Muslims.ͬͪͬ
Imam Abu Hanifah (d. 767), the leading advocate of the universalist
position, established a nexus between ādamiyyah and ‘iṣmah and
maintained that being a progeny of Adam, whether Muslim or not,
creates the legal basis for possession of both. His position is summarised
in the phrase, al-‘ismah bi’l-ādamiyyah—inviolability inherent in being
human. Abu Hanifah’s understanding of the Qur’an and hadith on
ﬁghting the disbelievers maintains that they are on the whole contextual,
ofen referring to warlike situations and active military engagement
between the pagans of Mecca and the nascent Muslim community of

--- Sayfa 307 ---
279
Human Dignity from an Islamic Perspective
the time.ͬͪͭ
 ‘A human’s religious choice must also be honoured,’ wrote
al-Sarakhsi (d.1090), ‘even if it is contrary to Islamic teaching.’ Sarakhsi
further observed that everyone’s life must be protected because only a
living person can respond to the Divine call of religion, and his faculty of
reason must be protected too, as this too is the only means by which he can
understand and determine values. Everyone’s mind must be honoured
and protected ‘even if they oppose the way we think’.ͬͪͮ
 Al-Sarakhsi went
on to add that freedom and the right to own property are endowed in
humans from the moment of birth. Te insane child and the sane adult
stand on the same footing, in so far as these rights are concerned. Tis
is how personhood is established in a human being, to create in him the
capacity to bear rights and obligations.ͬͪͯ

 Another prominent Hanaﬁ jurist, al-Marghinani, criticised the
communalist view and wrote that the argument of al-Shaﬁ‘i to take religion
as the criterion of ‘iṣmah is unacceptable. Tis is because ‘protection is
attached, not to Islam, but to the person’, as it is the person who is the
audience of religion and the carrier of obligations imposed by the law.
People would be unable to receive the message and give a meaningful
response to it unless they were immune from aggression in the ﬁrst place.
Te person is, therefore, the original locus of protection, which means
that ‘iṣmah inheres in all human beings.ͬͪ
Ͱ
Ibn ‘Abidin (d. 1834 CE), another leading voice in the Hanaﬁ school,
conﬁrmed the universalist position of the school of his following and wrote
that ‘a human being is honoured, even if he is a non-Muslim (al-ādamī
mukarram wa law kāﬁran)’.ͬͪ
ͱ We are required to protect the sanctity of
all humanity. Muslims must therefore defend the ‘iṣmah and the human
rights of non-Muslims. Hence, each individual, community and state
bears the responsibility to protect the ‘iṣmah of all human beings.
Te universalist position crossed the boundaries of the Hanaﬁ school
of jurisprudence and gained followers from other schools. Many lead-
ing ﬁgures, including Abu Hamid al-Ghazali from the Shaﬁ‘i school, Ibn
Rushd al-Qurtubi, Ibrahim al-Shatibi, and Ibn ‘Ashur from the Maliki
school, Ibn Taymiyyah and Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyyah from the Hanbali,
and Javad Mughniyyeh from the Ja‘fari Shi’ite school have supported
the universalist position on human dignity and ‘iṣmah.ͬͫͨ
Te Hanaﬁ school remained inﬂuential until early the twentieth

--- Sayfa 308 ---
war and peace in islam
280
century, but European colonialism and the role it played in the fall of
the Ottoman state, as well as the subsequent rise of the contemporary
‘Islamic’ states have negatively impacted the universalist doctrine. Te
communalist position consequently found renewed support in the views
of many prominent scholars in the Arabian Peninsula, Egypt, North
Africa and Iran. Te universalist position suﬀered a steady decline and it
remains conspicuously absent in the modern discourse of human rights
in the Muslim world. Muslim jurists and commentators of recent times
tend to be supportive of the universality of human rights, which they
tend to assert, however, not through the scholastic approaches reviewed
above but through direct recourse to the sources evidence of the Qur’an
and Sunnah.ͬͫͩ
Concluding Remarks
If one were to broadly characterise Islamic and Western cultures one might
say Islam, generally, accentuates human dignity whereas Western culture
tends to emphasise liberty. It is a question obviously of relative emphasis,
as Western culture also puts a high premium on dignity. Bedouin culture
in the history of the Arabs had a highly developed sense of personal
honour and customary methodology that revolved around the preserva-
tion of dignity. Manliness and nobility of character (murū’ah), hospitality
and honouring one’s guest, and also a greater stress on one’s obligation to
others than on one’s own rights, characterised Arab culture, and to a large
extent also the teachings of Islam. Tese dignitarian concepts also pene-
trated other Muslim communities and cultures outside the Arabian penin-
sula and had enormous consequences on the gender question and issues of
war and peace. In cases where Muslims were in rebellion against the status
quo, a substantial cultural reason for the rebellion has been a perceived
collective dignity. Ali Mazrui has rightly alluded, in a 2002 interview, to the
relevance of this factor in the rebellion of Muslims in Chechnya, Palestine,
Macedonia, Kashmir, Kosovo and even Nigeria.
Without wishing to embrace Huntington’s articulation of the clash
of civilisations in a broad sweep, a clash of cultures did occur, in my view,
when, addressing the Taliban, then President Bush used the language
of ultimatum when he said: ‘Just hand over Osama bin Laden and his
thugs. Tere is nothing to talk about.’ He did not give the Taliban a line

--- Sayfa 309 ---
281
Human Dignity from an Islamic Perspective
of digniﬁed retreat, and the rest is a chronology of escalating violence
in so many places as we have seen.
Te Muslim public is also anxious to know whether the West
accepts the dignity and inviolability of the diﬀerent other. Te course
of post 9/11 events and divergent voices emerging in the United States
and Europe have not helped provide the needed assurance. What seems
certain, however, is that neither side can give that assurance unilaterally.
Yet a sense of realism over the conﬁguration of economic and military
power would suggest that the initiative, and the burden of rectifying the
deﬁcit in understanding, fall more heavily on the West. Tere is a need
for wider recognition of the best values of each culture and religion to
give fresh impetus to the prospects of a more peaceful world, and for
the Muslims to give reality to the Qur’anic address (Al-Ḥujurāt, 49:13),
from where diversity and pluralism of peoples and nations should be
used as bases of better understanding and recognition, among them-
selves and the wider reaches of human fraternity.
© Professor Mohammad Hashim Kamali

--- Sayfa 310 ---
282
chapter eleven
THE PEOPLE OF THE BOOK IN THE QUR’AN
Professor Ismail Albayrak
Abstract
Muslims’ understanding of the Qur’an has shaped their communal
interfaith perceptions. Tis article selects the various Qur’anic verses
that have inﬂuenced Muslims in relating to people of other faiths.
Te prime concern of this paper is to show how even the Qur’anic
verses that might sound harsh to the ears of other faith groups can
be read with sensitivity and understanding in the modern world. To
accomplish this, the article provides an historical analysis of the rele-
vant Qur’anic verses, together with some current discussions on the
issue. Te Qur’an, speaking generally, seems more germane to cultural
and social plurality than to theological pluralism or dogmatic syncre-
tism. In addition, the Qur’an considers doing good—or competing
in doing good—as vital in the life of people of diﬀerent faith groups.
Nonetheless, the Qur’an accepts the People of the Book as they are and
does not close the door to their exercise of religious freedom.
Introduction
Tis paper deals with two issues: How does the Qur’an present the
People of the Book in both the Meccan and the Medinan surahs and
how have the Muslims understood the relevant passages in contem-
porary and pre– contemporary times. Although it is diﬃcult to do full
justice to this important and complex subject within the conﬁnes of
an article, I will start by studying the attitude of the pre-Islamic Arabs
towards those whom the Qur’an calls the People of the Book, the atti-
tude as reﬂected in the Qur’an, in the pre- contemporary tafsīr works,

--- Sayfa 311 ---
283
Te People of the Book in the Qur’an
and ﬁnally in the writings of Muslim scholars in our own time. Tis
will be followed by a general reappraisal of the subject.
To start with, it is important to note that the concept of Ahl al-Kitāb
(the People of the Book) in the Qur’an is characterised by a degree of
lack of rigidity, an overall attitude of amity and even a degree of respect.
Generally speaking, the expression began to be used in the late Meccan
and continued to be used in the Medinan surahs and occurs thirty-one
times in the Qur’an as a whole. Besides this expression, there are also
other expressions by which the Qur’an refers to the People of the Book,
such as alladhīna utū al-kitāb (‘those who have received the Book’),432
ātaynāhum al-kitāb (‘those unto whom We have given the Book’),433 utū
nasīban min al-kitāb (‘those who were given a portion of the Book’),434
wa awrathnā al-kitāb/alladhīna urithū al-kitāb (‘We gave the Book as
inheritance unto those’/‘those who were made to inherit the Book’),435
wa man ‘indahu ‘ilm al-kitāb (‘whosoever has [true] knowledge of the
Book’),436 alladhīna yaqra‘ūn al-kitāb (‘those who read the Book’),437
fa’salū ahl al-dhikr (‘ask the followers of the Remembrance’).438 Since
a special status has been conferred on the People of the Book in the
Qur’an, they are also addressed in it by other titles. Te Qur’an names
the Jewish people as yahūd,439 hūdan,440 alladhīna hādū441 and banū
Isrā’īl.442 Te term naṣārā, which refers exclusively to Christians in
the Qur’an, is mentioned fourteen times.443 Tis term regularly occurs
together with the expression yahūd and its derivates in the Qur’an.
Besides this common term, an interesting expression is used to address
the Christians, namely ahl al-Injīl (‘the People of the Gospel’).444
Te name ḥawāriyyūn is mentioned ﬁve times in the Qur’an, for the
followers of Jesus X during his lifetime, all of them occurring in the
Medinan surahs.445
Furthermore, the Qur’an mentions two other groups, the Sabeans
in three places and the Zoroastrians (Majus) in one place.446 Although
the Prophet Muhammad U had no personal contact with the Sabeans,
there is a hadith that the Zoroastrians should be accorded the status
of the People of the Book.447 However, most scholars have regarded
both Sabeans and Zoroastrians as ahl al-dhimmah of the Muslim state.
In brief, the boundaries of Ahl al-Kitāb in the Qur’an are not clearly
deﬁned but it is safe to assume that a distinct status is generally given

--- Sayfa 312 ---
war and peace in islam
284
to the Jews and Christians due to their religious beliefs. Te Qur’an
Al-An‘ām, 6:156,448 in my opinion, strongly supports this conclusion.
In terms of the Holy Scriptures, the Qur’an mentions the Tawrah
(Torah),449 Zabūr (Psalms),450 Injīl (Gospel),451 al-ṣuḥuf al-ūlā (the
earlier sheets),452 and the ṣuḥuf (sheets) of Abraham and Moses.453
The People of the Book in Pre-Islamic Arabia
It is well known that before the advent of Islam, the Arabs were familiar
with the phrase Ahl al-Kitāb (the People of the Book). It is also known
that the terms referring to both Jews and Christians occur in pre-Islamic
poetry.454 Te word Yahūd is used in the poetry of the Jāhiliyyah period
but it appears in the Qur’an during the Medinan period. Interestingly,
the expression banū Isrā’īl is not found in pre-Islamic poetry although,
as we know, it occurs many a time in the Qur’an. Clearly, this indicates
that the Qur’an does not follow any particular pattern known in Arabia
in this regard. Tis is important though it is quite ofen not noted.
Concerning the Christian population in Mecca and Medina, the
Muslim sources mention a few individuals rather than a considerable
community. In Mecca, the majority of these individuals were slaves,455
while in Medina they seem to have numbered no more than ﬁfy.
Nonetheless, it is known that there were many Christians living in
diﬀerent parts of the Arabian peninsula.456 Furthermore, we also come
across some reports which show that there were Christian merchants
who came to Mecca to conduct business, but they were not allowed to
stay there too long, as the  Meccan pagans feared they might convert
the native population to Christianity,457 and so drove them away.
Similarly, there appear to have been only a few Jews in Mecca, whereas
there seems to have been a substantial Jewish population near Medina,
although their origin in Arabia is quite obscure. Te Islamic sources put
the number of Jewish clans in Medina at twenty.458 Since the Jews were
knowledgeable about the scripture, the native Arabs generally held the
Jews of Medina in respect.459
The Prophet’s Meccan Period
When the Prophet Muhammad U began to receive revelation and embarked
on his mission as a Prophet, his ﬁrst addressees were Meccan pagans. For

--- Sayfa 313 ---
285
Te People of the Book in the Qur’an
this reason, the early Qur’anic passages focus primarily on critiquing
polytheism. Tis does not mean, however, that the Qur’an makes no
mention of the People of the Book until the Medinan period. Tere are
many verses here and there concerning the People of the Book in the
Meccan surahs. Besides the narratives regarding the earlier Prophets
X and their communities, there are some verses which give speciﬁc
information about the beliefs and practices of the People of the Book.
Before going into the details of these verses, it would be pertinent
to note that the Qur’an, which is primarily meant to be a guidance to
mankind, is a unique book and does not follow the conventional style of
systematic works of theology or law. An analysis of the Qur’anic narra-
tives shows that emphasis is placed on their dogmatic, spiritual, ethi-
cal and didactic aspects without necessarily trying to give a historical
account of the events of the past in a chronological order. If we look at the
Qur’an from this perspective we will notice that many highly respected
Biblical ﬁgures are mentioned in it as ṣaliḥūn (‘righteous’)460 before the
advent of the Prophet Muhammad U, and that accordingly God sent
a revelation to him to conﬁrm the previous revelations (Fāṭir, 35:31).
Considering itself to be a part of this revelatory tradition, the Qur’an
is always on the side of the People of the Book as against the Meccan
pagans.461 Furthermore, when the Meccan pagans used the deiﬁcation
of Jesus X as a pretext to support the idolatrous worship of angels,
the Qur’an warned them.462 God declares in the Qur’an: My righteous
slaves will inherit the earth (Al-Anbiyā’, 21:105).463 Tus the People of
the Book are seen in the Qur’an as the Muslims’ natural allies. For this
reason, the Qur’an counsels the Meccan unbelievers, who doubted that
Divine revelation could be made to any mortal, to ask the people of
the Remembrance (ahl al-dhikr),464 namely the Bible, and those who
have been reading the Book before you.465 Tis might seem to some as
somewhat ambiguous, but the Qur’anic verses such as Al-A‘rāf, 7:159
and 7:168 draw our attention to the existence of pious people among
the People of the Book.
To be able to comprehend the relationship between the People of
the Book and the Muslims of the early Meccan period, it is enough to
recall the occasion of revelation of Sūrat Al-Rūm (surah 30). To put it
succinctly, there were protracted hostilities between the Persians and

--- Sayfa 314 ---
war and peace in islam
286
the Byzantines. Te Byzantines were Christians and so the Muslims
were, relatively speaking, sympathetic to them. On the other hand, the
Meccan pagans sympathised with the Persians due to their denial of
God’s unity. When the Persians conquered Syria and Palestine, and even
occupied Jerusalem in 615 CE (that is, in the ﬁfh year of Muhammad’s
Prophethood), the Muslims were unhappy. Tey suﬀered not only from
the persecution and cruelty of the pagans, but were also distressed by
their exultant boasting about the victory of the Persians. Consequently,
Sūrat Al-Rūm was revealed to inform the Muslims that the Byzantines
would be victorious within a few years. Te Qur’anic prediction was
fulﬁlled nine years later.466
During this diﬃcult period the Prophet U asked some Muslims to
take refuge with the Emperor of Abyssinia. Tis reinforced the close
relationship between the Muslims and the People of the Book. Another
verse which shows the Qur’anic preference for the People of the Book
over the pagans is Al-Isrā’, 17:107:
Believe therein or believe not, lo! those who were given knowl-
edge before it, when it is read unto them, fall down prostrate
on their faces, adoring.
Te relationship between the People of the Book and the Muslims
as reﬂected in the Meccan surahs is not limited to the aforementioned
verses. At this juncture we should remember the verses of Sūrat Al-Ra‘d
which indicate the attitude of the People of the Book towards Muslims.
Although there is considerable diﬀerence of opinion regarding the
period in which this surah was revealed, scholars are generally inclined
to the view that it is a Meccan surah but contains a few verses that were
revealed in Medina. According to verse Al-Ra‘d,13:36, the People of the
Book rejoice in the revelation of the Qur’an. However, there are also
others among them who deny the validity of parts of it. In the following
three verses the Qur’an states that it is an ordinance in the Arabic tongue,
and that the Prophet U should follow its teaching rather than the desires
of people, for if he were to follow their desires there would be none to
protect him. It is also emphasised that it was not given to any apostle to
produce revelation save at God’s behest (Al-Ra‘d, 13:38). Tis verse ends
with the statement that every age has its revelation, li kulli ajalin kitāb.
Te key verse in this passage is 13:39: God annuls or conﬁrms whatever

--- Sayfa 315 ---
287
Te People of the Book in the Qur’an
He wills, for with Him is the source of all revelation (wa ‘indahu umm al-
kitāb). Te earlier exegetes explain this as referring to the succession of
the Divine messages culminating in, and ending with, the revelation of
the Qur’an.467
Furthermore, the Qur’an pays attention to the diﬀerences among
the followers of the earlier revelations who were divided by a schism.
Some welcomed the new revelation while others denied it. Tese verses
also indicate that the Qur’anic criticism of the People of the Book had
already begun at Mecca. Te Qur’an sometimes criticised the Jews
for their wrongdoings against themselves, that is, for committing sins
(Al-Naḥl, 16:118) and the Christians for their disagreements about the
nature of Jesus X (Maryam, 19:36–7). God created humankind as a
single community, but later they began to hold divergent views (Yūnus,
10:19). Nevertheless, If He had wished He could have made all human-
kind one single community (Hūd, 11:118). Interestingly, the divergent
views appeared only afer they had come to know the truth.
And had it not been for a decree that had already gone forth
from your Sustainer (postponing all decision until a term set
by God) it had been judged between them in respect of that
wherein they diﬀer (Yūnus, 10:19).
Despite the fact that Muslims and the People of the Book belonged
to the same revelatory tradition, the Qur’anic criticism of the conﬂicts
and disputes among the People of the Book gradually increases. Te
Qur’an conﬁrms the truth, warning the evildoers and bringing glad
tidings to the doers of good and also explaining matters to the People
of the Book on questions regarding which they held divergent views.468
Tis gives the Qur’an a position of authority, enabling it to determine
what is genuine and what is false in the earlier revelations. Tis high
status of the Qur’an reaches its peak with the late Meccan verse of Surat
Al-A‘rāf, 7:157. In this verse the People of the Book are asked to follow
the unlettered Prophet who was described in the Torah and the Gospel.
Te following verse, however, declares from the mouth of the Prophet
Muhammad U that he is an Apostle of God to all of mankind (Al-A‘rāf,
7:158).469 But this universal call does not imply that the People of the
Book would be forced to accept the call of the Qur’an. In another late
Meccan verse (Al-‘Ankabūt, 29:46) the Qur’an teaches Muslims how

--- Sayfa 316 ---
war and peace in islam
288
they should treat the People of the Book and how they should explain
their religious message to them:
And do not argue with the followers of earlier revelation oth-
erwise than in a most kindly manner. And say we believe in
that which has been bestowed from on high upon us, as well as
that which has been bestowed upon you, for our God and your
God is one and the same.
 Although some exegetes think that this verse is abrogated,470 it
seems from the Qur’an’s general context that this is hardly plausible. Te
function of this late Meccan surah is to draw attention to what unites the
People of the Book and the Muslims.
We will now turn to an examination of the verses about the People
of the Book revealed during the Medinan period of the Prophet’s life.
The Prophet’s Medinan Period
It has been observed that with the migration to Medina, the number of
passages concerning the People of the Book increases. Te long surahs
such as Al-Baqarah (surah 2), which signiﬁcantly deals with the Jews; Āl
‘Imrān (surah 3) which contains many passages about the Christians; and
Al-Nisā’ (surah 4), Al-Mā’idah (surah 5) and Al-Tawbah (surah 9), which
pay almost equal attention to both Christians and Jews, were revealed in
Medina. Te most probable reason for this was the Prophet’s direct inter-
action with these communities in Medina. Not surprisingly, the Qur’anic
discourse about the People of the Book changes in accordance with the
nature of their relationship with the Muslims.
It is well known that when the Prophet Muhammad U came to
Medina, he found many Jews there besides the Arab converts to Islam
and the pagans. Afer building a mosque, establishing brotherhood
between the Meccan immigrants and the Medinan Muslims, ﬁxing the
boundaries of Medina and counting its population, the most impor-
tant achievement of the Prophet U was to conclude an agreement with
the diﬀerent segments of the population living in the region. We are
referring here to the famous Medinan Pact (Mithāq al-Madinah). Te
document shows how a diverse community can live together in unity.
According to Muhammed Hamidullah’s edited text, Article 25 of the
pact enshrines the freedom of religion and autonomy by saying: ‘unto

--- Sayfa 317 ---
289
Te People of the Book in the Qur’an
Jews their religion and unto Muslims their religion’. In addition, the
article also describes the Jews of Banu ‘Awf as an independent commu-
nity, like the Muslims.471
Since there was no signiﬁcant Christian community in Medina,
the pact does not mention them. However, when the Muslims later
encountered various Christian groups in the years following the Hijrah,
they also concluded agreements with them. When we look at the earlier
Medinan surahs and the Prophet’s traditions, we ﬁnd that the Muslims
considered the People of the Book to be their fellows in religion and
in general tried, where no divine commandments existed, to behave
in the same way as the Jews and Christians did in their daily lives. As
a result of this fellowship, the Muslims followed the hairstyle of the
Jews rather than Arab pagans,472 and faced Jerusalem in their prayers
for a period of nearly sixteen months. Moreover, when the Prophet U
noted Ahl al-Kitāb, especially Jews fasting on the tenth of Muharram,
he asked the Muslims to fast on the tenth of Muharram because we are
closer to Moses X than them. However, the Prophet U later advised
the Muslims to fast on the ninth and tenth or tenth and eleventh to
make themselves distinct from the Jews.473 Te Qur’an also allowed
the Muslims to eat the animals sacriﬁced by the People of the Book, to
marry their women and to eat from their dishes.474 Tis indicates that
a clear distinction was made between the People of the Book and the
Arab pagans. Since the scriptures of the People of the Book contained
some authentic revelation and some people might commit the error of
falsifying them, the Prophet U said: ‘Do not conﬁrm the People of the
Book, and [at the same time] do not accuse them of falsehood, but say
‘We believe in what has been revealed to us and what has been revealed
unto you and Our deity and your deity is One, and we do submit to
Him.’’475 On the basis of this close relationship, the Prophet declared
that he was the man closest to the son of Mary.476 Furthermore, the
Prophet U mentioned the Prophets X as brothers who have the same
father but diﬀerent mothers.477
Be that as it may, we do not claim that Islam always preserves its
neutral position towards the People of the Book. Since Muslims’ self-
understanding is related, at least partly, to their attitudes towards the
People of the Book, we ﬁnd many traditions concerning the Prophet’s

--- Sayfa 318 ---
war and peace in islam
290
invitation to them to accept Islam. It is recorded that the Prophet U
went to Bayt al-Midras (House of Midrash) to ask them to accept what-
ever was common between them, or invite Jewish scholars to a discus-
sion.478 However, with the exception of a few individuals, the Jewish
community in Medina did not respond positively, and several of them
even adopted a hostile attitude towards Muslims.
Tus the Jews of Medina, as one of the major components of
the collectivity called Ahl al-Kitāb, came in for criticism in the early
Medinan verses. In my opinion, the ﬁrst serious criticism against them
was afer the choice of Ka‘bah as the Muslims’ direction of prayer
(Al-Baqarah, 2:145). Tis is followed by other criticisms of the Jews.
Te Qur’an frequently reminds them of their ancestors’ mistakes with
regard to God and the Prophets X. It also enumerates the sins they
committed against God and the wrongs they perpetrated against the
Prophet Muhammad U and the Muslims. Before coming to the series
of errors committed by the People of the Book, especially by the Jews,
attention needs to be drawn to an important point: the failure to see the
distinction between the Qur’an’s criticisms of the Jews in general and
its censure of the Jews who were the contemporaries of the Prophet
Muhammad U. Tis failure to make the distinction, however, presum-
ably prevents many Muslim scholars from properly appreciating the
Qur’anic view of the Jews. Consequently, some of them generalise the
local beliefs or practices of the Jews while others localise their general
beliefs or practices. In other words, some people hold the view the
Jews of the Prophet’s time to be part of the integral entity in history,
and portray their practices and beliefs as though they are characteris-
tic of the whole Jewish tradition irrespective of time and space. On the
other hand, others place great emphasis on their local characteristics,
portraying them as Arabian Jews in isolation from the main Jewish
body; consequently every belief and practice of theirs is considered to
have a predominantly local character with little to do with the main-
stream Jewish tradition. Some examples of the Qur’anic criticism of
the Jews’ local beliefs and practices are as follows: hostility towards
the Angel Gabriel (Al-Baqarah, 2:97), their claim that Ezra/‘Uzayr
was God’s son (Al-Tawbah,  9:30), their belief in the revelation made
to them alongside denial of God’s other revelations or all revelations

--- Sayfa 319 ---
291
Te People of the Book in the Qur’an
(Al-Baqarah, 2:91; Al-Ḥāqqah, 69:91), belief in idols and false deities
(Al-Nisā’, 4:51).
According to the Islamic sources—the Qur’an, Hadith, Siyar,
Maghāzi and Tārīkh—the violation of treaties by the Jews of Medina
created, within a few years, a great deal of tension between the Jews and
the Muslims. Tis increasing strain in Jewish-Muslim relations is reﬂected
in various verses. Te Qur’anic narrative enumerates the misdeeds of the
contemporary Jews as well as of their forefathers: they were disinclined
to sacriﬁce the cow (Al-Baqarah, 2:67 –73); they worshipped the golden
calf (Al-Baqarah, 2:54; Al-A‘rāf, 7:148; Ṭā Hā, 20:88); they disregarded
their promise (Al-Baqarah, 2:83); they corrupted their religion to acquire
a triﬂing gain (Al-Baqarah, 2:79); they ill-treated Moses X (Al-Nisā’,
4:154); they rejected the Prophets X(Al-Baqarah, 2:146); they attempted
to kill the Prophets X (Al-Baqarah, 2:87); their hearts were hardened
or covered (Al-Baqarah, 2:74; 2:88); they forbade what God had permit-
ted (Āl ‘Imrān, 3:93–4); they wanted to see God (Al-Baqarah, 2:55); they
claimed to be God’s children (Al-Mā’idah, 5:18); they claimed that ﬁre
would touch them for only a limited number of days (Al-Baqarah, 2:80);
they broke the Sabbath law (Al-Nisā’, 4:154); they corrupted the Scripture
(Al-Baqarah, 2:70);479 they took rabbis as their Lords (Al-Tawbah, 9:31);
and they denied the last Prophet U although he conﬁrmed the Torah
(Al-Baqarah, 2:87).
Although some of these criticisms are also directed against the
Christians, the Jews are judged quite severely for their blasphemous
statement about Mary, Jesus’ mother (Al-Nisā’, 4:156). Te Qur’anic
criticism of the Jews who rejected the Prophets X especially Jesus X,
clearly suggests that the Muslims considered the earlier Prophets X,
including Moses and Jesus X, to be their own Prophets.
In the middle of the Medinan period, the main Jewish tribes were
expelled from Medina because of their violation of the agreements they
had made with the Prophet U. Teir expulsion coincided with the estab-
lishment of the Muslims’ religious and political integration. 480
During the second phase of the Prophet’s life in Medina, the relation-
ship between the Muslims and the Christians grew signiﬁcantly. Within
a few years, the Prophet U sent envoys to the neighbouring states, which
were generally Christian, and began receiving their ambassadors in

--- Sayfa 320 ---
war and peace in islam
292
Medina. One of the important results of this relationship was to make
Muslims more familiar with the religious beliefs and practices of the
Christians in Arabia. Tis interaction is clearly depicted in the Qur’an.
In contrast to its many criticisms of Jews, especially from an ethical
perspective,481 the Qur’an criticises the Christians for their adherence to
certain exaggerated dogmas. Te concept of the Trinity and the eleva-
tion of their monks and religious leaders, virtually making them lords
besides God are the most salient examples of their exaggeration. 482
We are now in a position to consider the Medinan verses concern-
ing the People of the Book. Similar to some Meccan verses, a number of
Medinan verses also state that mankind was once one community but
afer clear proofs had come to them they diﬀered.483 In verse Al-Mā’idah,
5:48 it is said that if Allah had willed He could have made mankind one
community. Having accepted the diﬀerence as a fact of life, the Qur’an
talks about six groups: Muslims, Jews, Christians, Sabeans (Al-Baqarah,
2:62; Al-Mā’idah, 5:69), Zoroastrians and idolaters (Al-Ḥajj, 22:17).484
Now, the Qur’anic attitude as regards the idolaters is quite unambigu-
ous. However, concerning the status of the Jews and Christians (see
Al-Baqarah, 2:62; Al-Mā’idah, 5:69) it is worth noting that both early
and modern Muslim scholars made great eﬀorts to explain them. Te
plain meaning of the verses (Al-Baqarah, 2 :62; Al-Mā’idah, 5:69) is that,
besides Muslims, the followers of the Jewish, Christian, or Sabean faiths
who believe in One God and the hereafer and do right will have their
reward with God. ‘Abdullah Yusuf ‘Ali translates Al-Baqarah, 2:62 as:
those who believe (in the Qur’an), and those who follow the Jewish (scrip-
tures), and the Christians and the Sabeans—Any who believe in Allah
and the Last Day, and work righteousness, shall have their reward with
their Lord. Te exegetes of the pre-modern period generally consider
this verse to mean that the Jews and Christians who achieved salva-
tion with the pious believers are those who lived before the advent of
Islam, or that they were those individuals who converted to Islam afer
the advent of the Prophet Muhammad U.485 Tey also argue that the
context of these verses supports this conclusion. Furthermore, a tradi-
tion narrated by ‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Abbas (d. 68/687) says that when the
Prophet U recited verse Āl ‘Imrān, 3:85: And if anyone desires a religion
other than Islam (submission to Allah), never will it be accepted from

--- Sayfa 321 ---
293
Te People of the Book in the Qur’an
him, and he will be a loser in the hereafer, then he started to recite the
verse Al-Baqarah, 2:62.486 Tis displays the exegetes’ general stance
regarding the salvation of the People of the Book. In other words,
according to these exegetes, the People of the Book are required to
accept Islam to achieve salvation. So the verses which laid down only a
few conditions for salvation should be read in the light of other verses
which require the acceptance of Islam. In short, they believed that the
verse Al-Baqarah, 2:62 can be properly understood in the light of Āl
‘Imrān 3:85.487
Nonetheless, besides the verses (Al-Baqarah, 2:62; Al-Mā’idah,
5:69) which seem to lay down the minimum conditions for salvation
and comprise only three things, there are other verses which aﬃrm
that the People of the Book are not all alike, and that there are upright
people among them (Āl ‘Imrān 3:113-114). According to these verses,
these followers of the earlier revelations recite God’s messages through
the night, prostrate themselves, enjoin the doing of what is good, forbid
the doing of what is wrong and vie with one another in good works.
Te pre-modern exegetes exhibit a similar attitude towards these verses
and identify these pious people as those who had converted to Islam.488
Nevertheless, they are troubled by the expression Ahl al-Kitāb in the
verse, and indeed the validity of the above-mentioned interpreta-
tion seems seriously problematic. Te question is: if the reference is
to the converted Muslims, why does the Qur’an refer to them as the
People of the Book? Once again, the classical exegetes hold the view
that this is due to their having been Jews or Christians before conver-
sion. However, the literal meaning of the verse, which is regarded as
ambiguous by al-Tabari, identiﬁes these people as the followers of the
earlier Scriptures.489 Other Qur’anic verses (such as Al-Baqarah, 2:101,
148; Āl ‘Imrān, 3:78/farīq), (Āl ‘Imrān, 3:69, 72/ṭā’ifah), (Al-Baqarah,
2:109; Al-Mā’idah, 5:66, 80–1/kathīr), and (Āl ‘Imrān 3:110/ akthar)
also indicate that all followers of the earlier revelations are not alike.490
Concerning the status of the People of the Book, certain passages
(see Al-Mā’idah, 5:42–3, 47, 66) are worthy of attention. Te main
theme of these verses is the observance of the judgement of the Torah
and the Gospel. If the People of the Book do not put the judgments of
these Books into practice they will be evildoers. Although in Al-Mā’idah,

--- Sayfa 322 ---
war and peace in islam
294
5:66 there is a clear reference to the necessity of the judgment of the
Qur’an besides that of the Torah and the Gospel, in other verses, for
example, Al-Mā’idah, 5:42–3, 47, only the Torah and the Gospel are
mentioned. Te exegetes’ understanding of these verses is, however,
quite diﬀerent from some of their modern counterparts and they are
again inclined to a kind of exclusivism. For example, in the interpreta-
tion of Al-Mā’idah, 5:66, they explain the meaning of the observance
of the judgment of the Gospel as follows: ‘Tey promised to obey the
last Prophet U in their scripture. Tus the observance of the judgment
of the Gospel means to fulﬁl this promise.’491 Te great exegete Fakhr
al-Din Muhammad b. ‘Umar al-Razi (d. 606 AH/1210 CE) poses the
following question with regard to the interpretation of Al-Mā’idah,
5:43-47: ‘Afer the Qur’an, is it possible to obey the rules of the Gospel?’
In answering it, he oﬀers three comments. First, similarly to the way
in which Nasir al-Din ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Umar al- Baydawi (d. 685/1282)
understands this verse, Razi believes that the observance of the judg-
ment of the Gospel means that Christians should obey the verses which
indicate the Prophethood of Muhammad U. Secondly, they should put
into eﬀect the rules which have not been abrogated by the Qur’an, and
ﬁnally, they should conﬁrm, without alteration or distortion, what God
has sent in the Gospel.492
Ibn Kathir’s comments are also in line with al-Razi’s.493 Te ques-
tion as to why these exegetes are in favour of an exclusivist interpreta-
tion of these seemingly inclusivist or to some extent pluralistically-
oriented verses needs to be addressed. In my opinion, the prime
motive behind this inclination is the existence of other verses which
indicate that belief in the Prophethood of Muhammad U is necessary.
Āl ‘Imrān, 3:199 explicitly states that some of the People of the Book
believe in what has been revealed to the Prophet Muhammad U and
what was revealed to them. Similarly, Al-Nisā’, 4:162 states that those
who are ﬁrm in knowledge believe in the revelation sent to the Prophet
Muhammad U. Te reason why the Prophet Muhammad U was raised
is explained in Al-Mā’idah, 5:19: O People of the Book! Now, afer a long
time during which no apostles have appeared, there has come unto you
Our Messenger to make (the truth) clear to you, lest you say ‘no bearer
of glad tidings has come unto us, nor any warner.’ For now there has

--- Sayfa 323 ---
295
Te People of the Book in the Qur’an
come unto you a bearer of glad tidings and a warner. Te exegetes see
these verses as a clear proof of Muhammad’s Prophethood, and of the
Qur’anic revelation having been made so as to rectify the distorted reli-
gion of the People of the Book.494 Al-Tabari says that the last Prophet
U brought the Furqān in order to distinguish between truth and false-
hood.495 If the People of the Book accept Muhammad U as God’s
Prophet, God will give them twofold of His mercy (Al-Ḥadīd, 57:28).
According to al-Baydawi, this twofold mercy is the reward for their belief
in the Prophethood of Muhammad U. Al-Tabari, however, considers
the meaning to be that their belief in Muhammad’s Prophethood will
perfect their faith.496
Interestingly, when the Qur’an deals with non-Muslims in these
verses, it generally uses the expression Ahl al-Kitāb as if it is drawing
the believers’ attention to similarities rather than to diﬀerences. Tus
Islam, on the one hand, invites them to accept a common word, that is,
tawḥīd, and on the other, provides the bases to bring both Christians
and Jews closer to its teaching. In addition, the verse which occurs in the
middle of Sūrat Al-Baqarah (2:143) suggests that the Muslim commu-
nity is the community of the middle way, which bears witness to the
truth before all nations by maintaining an equitable balance between
extreme positions.497 Clearly, these verses call people to believe in the
Qur’an and Muhammad U. Te verses also accord a privileged position
to the Muslim community, who bear the responsibility of conveying
the ﬁnal message to others. Chronologically speaking, this reaches its
peak in Āl ‘Imrān, 3:64: Say: ‘People of the Book! Come now to a word
common between us and you, that we serve none but God, and that we
associate not aught with Him, and that some of us do not take others as
Lords, apart from God.’ And if they turn their backs, say: ‘Bear witness
that we are Muslims.’ 498 Te subjects of this verse, according al-Tabari
and others commentators, were either the Jews living in the environs of
Medina or the Christians of Najran.499 However, if we take the previous
verses into account it seems that the main addressees are Christians. It
is also narrated that when the Prophet U sent a letter to Heraclius (r.
610–41 CE), he recorded this verse on the back of the letter.500 It is clear
from the Qur’anic verses that neither the Jews nor the Christians gave
a positive response, because the following verses (Āl ‘Imrān, 3:67–8)

--- Sayfa 324 ---
war and peace in islam
296
reject the claim of Jews and Christians who associated Abraham X
exclusively with their own religion. Te Qur’an reminds them that the
people who have the best claim to Abraham X are those who follow
him, as does the Prophet (Muhammad) U and those who believe in him
(that is, the Muslims). Abraham was not a Jew, nor yet a Christian; but
he was an upright man who had surrendered (to Allah), that is, ‘was a
Muslim’ and not of the idolaters.501
Tese are in general late Medinan verses and their tone is quite
severe, which is understandable in view of the high degree of tension
in the relations between the Muslims and the People of the Book at
the time. Tis is manifest, for instance, in Al-Mā’idah, 5:51, where the
Muslims are asked not to take the Jews and Christians as their allies.502
Te early exegetes understand this verse generally in the context of
not trusting non-Muslims in religious matters. Others, who associate
alliance or friendship with intimate conﬁdence, explain the verse as
enjoining Muslims not to give away the secrets of the Muslim state to
Jews and Christians.503 Nonetheless, these approaches do not prevent
Muslim scholars from appreciating the virtues and merits of the People
of the Book.504 In brief, the Qur’an does not altogether reject friendship
between Muslims and the People of the Book.
Here it is pertinent to draw attention to the approach of a
contemporary Muslim activist and scholar, Bediuzzaman Said Nursi
[Badi‘ al- Zaman Sa‘id Nursi] (d. 1379 AH/1960 CE) to the Al-Mā’idah,
5:51: ‘Just as not all of the characteristics of an individual Muslim
necessarily reﬂect the teaching of Islam, so also, not all of the qualities
of individual Jews or Christians reﬂect unbelief.’ He also asks the
question: ‘Can a Muslim love a Christian or Jew?’ Afer noting the
marriage of a Muslim man to a woman of the People of the Book, he
replies, ‘Of course, yes. He should love her.’505
Another late Medinan surah in the Qur’an which records the tension
between the Muslims and the People of the Book is Sūrat Al-Tawbah
(surah 9). Tis surah was revealed during a military expedition and
clearly reﬂects the non-Muslims’ alliance against the Muslims. An
interesting aspect of this situation is illustrated in Al-Tawbah, 9:29:
Fight those who believe not in Allah nor the Last Day, nor hold that
which hath been forbidden by Allah and His Messenger, nor acknowledge

--- Sayfa 325 ---
297
Te People of the Book in the Qur’an
the Religion of truth, from among the People of the Book, until they pay
the jizyah with willing submission, and feel themselves subdued.506 Te
verse cannot be understood unless it is considered as part of an integral
whole. Tus one should read it in its historical context and in the light
of other related verses.
Modern Muslim Scholarship Concerning the Qur’anic
View of the People of the Book
Te pressures of modernism and secularism are, broadly speaking, dimin-
ishing the force of religion in the public sphere. We ﬁnd that pluralism has
gone hand in hand with secularism. Although religious and social plural-
ism has not been seriously addressed, it has now become a basic feature
of modern Muslim and non-Muslim societies. It is clear from an exami-
nation of the scholarship relating to the relevant Qur’anic texts and the
Prophetic traditions that, both in the modern and pre-modern periods,
Muslim scholarship has supported social and cultural pluralism, which
seeks to ensure the harmonious coexistence of diverse religious commu-
nities and protect the rights and freedoms of the followers of all religions.
Te same, however, cannot be said for pluralism in the domain of dogma
and theology, pluralism in the sense that all religions are on the same level
of truth as regards their beliefs. As distinguished from the generality of
classical Muslim scholars, several modern scholars look at diﬀerent reli-
gions from a pluralistic perspective. Although the view of a great number
of contemporary Muslim thinkers on this issue remains in line with that of
their predecessors, some intellectuals tend to go beyond the conﬁnes of the
traditional framework. Tey are inclined to the view that if non-Muslims
observe the minimum conditions of the principles of faith (such as belief in
One God and in the Day of Judgment, and performance of righteous acts)
they will be saved from punishment in the hereafer.
One instance of this approach is the one provided by Musa Jar Allah
(d. 1949) who lived all his life in a multi-religious community in Russia.
In his work Rahmeti ilahiye Burhanlari (Te Evidences of God’s Mercy)
written in 1911, he argues, basing his opinion on verse Al-Zumar,
39:53,507 that God’s mercy will embrace everyone because the word
‘ibādī used in this verse is not speciﬁc but general.508 Nevertheless, in
my opinion modern Muslim thinkers, including the late Fazlur Rahman

--- Sayfa 326 ---
war and peace in islam
298
(d. 1408 AH/1988 CE), continue to have problems with some impli-
cations of pluralism. To take another instance, in their interpretation
of verse Āl ‘Imrān, 3:113: Tey are not alike. Muhammad ‘Abduh (d.
1323/1905) and his favourite disciple, Muhammad Rashid Rida (d.
1354/1935) argued that the classical exegetes failed to understand how
a non-Muslim could be saved even if he or she believes in the basic
principles of religion (belief in God, and the hereafer, and performance
of good deeds), and so the generality of scholars identiﬁed these praised
Jews and Christians with the converted Muslims. Moreover, ‘Abduh and
Rida see no contradiction between the partly distorted natures of the
Torah and the Gospel and the righteous attitude of one group among
the People of the Book. Tere are some Prophetic traditions which are
authentic, and some weak or fabricated, but whoever follows them is
called a practitioner of the tradition. On this basis Rida believes that
the truly pious and religious people are known only to God, therefore
no one, whether Muslim or non-Muslim, is justiﬁed in practising ‘reli-
gious nationalism’ (al-qawmiyyah al-dīniyyah) concerning the question
of ultimate salvation.509 Tis shows that, at least in principle, Rida is
apparently not opposed to dogmatic pluralism.
Te Indian Shi‘ite scholar Hasan ‘Askari (d. 1398/1978), who was
inﬂuenced by Muslim mystics, also supported the idea of pluralism.510
Another famous scholar from Pakistan, the late Fazlur Rahman, who
spent most of his life in the West, also discussed the issue quite elab-
orately. According to Fazlur Rahman, the vast majority of Muslim
commentators of the Qur’an avoid giving the obvious meaning of the
verses (Al-Baqarah, 2:62; Al-Mā’idah, 5:69) which assure that whoever
(no matter whether they are Muslims, Jews, Christians, or Sabeans)
believe in God and the Last Day, and do good deeds will be saved. Te
Qur’an, Fazlur Rahman says, gives its ﬁnal answer to the problem of
pluralism in verse Al-Mā’idah, 5:48. Brieﬂy, humankind was a single
unity, but this unity was later split up in accordance with God’s plan.
Tus the Muslim community is recognised as one among the several
communities.511
Using Fazlur Rahman’s approach as the starting point, a few Turkish
academics point out that the Qur’an was not revealed to abrogate the
previous Scriptures but to conﬁrm them. Tus, the Qur’an asks the

--- Sayfa 327 ---
299
Te People of the Book in the Qur’an
People of the Book to take the notion of tawḥīd seriously, but does not
ask them to abandon their own religion. Tese scholars give numer-
ous examples to show that the teachings of the People of the Book are
in accord with the basic principles of faith and ethics and diﬀer only
in their implementation. Tey also seek to make a distinction between
two Islams: one is established by the consensus of Muslim scholars, the
other is the universal Islam preached by all the Prophets X who came to
diﬀerent nations at diﬀerent times. According to them, the failure to see
this distinction has confused Muslim scholarship concerning the verses
about the People of the Book. Tey think that most of the Qur’anic criti-
cism of the People of the Book is valid for all times. For this reason they
argue that belief in the Prophethood of Muhammad U is not an essential
part of tawḥīd and salvation.512
Today many Muslims feel that this pluralistic approach repre-
sents an extreme liberalism in Islamic thought which cannot be easily
accepted by the vast majority of Muslims. It is worth noting that like
their Christian counterparts, those Muslim intellectuals who promote the
idea of dogmatic pluralism, that is, those who suggest that regardless of
the soundness of their dogma/belief, followers of all religions will attain
salvation if their conduct is righteous, are a small minority.
Before closing this section, I would like to highlight the attitude of
two Turkish scholars towards the People of the Book in Muslim tradition.
Tese scholars are Said Nursi and Fethullah Gulen, whose teachings are
being enthusiastically welcomed in Turkey. Nursi, whose life spanned the
Ottoman and Republican eras, lived in very diﬃcult times for Muslims.
However, he never lost his hope that religions would ﬂourish again in
the near future. He sincerely asked the believers, both Muslims and
Christians, to come together and work together: ‘Te believers should
now unite, not only with their Muslim brothers but also with truly reli-
gious and pious Christians, disregarding questions of dispute and not
arguing over them. For absolute disbelief (atheism) is on the attack.’513
Nursi’s emphasis on Muslim-Christian cooperation was supported
by many Prophetic traditions which indicate that Muslims will enjoy
peace with the pious Christians towards the end of time. Tis unity will
ensure security, and they will ﬁght together against the common enemy,
namely irreligiosity.514 To encourage this common endeavour, Nursi

--- Sayfa 328 ---
war and peace in islam
300
re-formulates the expression Ahl al-Kitāb into Ahl al-Maktab (the literate
people).515 Tis important reinterpretation should not be seen as simply
a semantic contribution. Nursi, with utmost sincerity, calls Christians
the people literate in modern science, whose knowledge enables them to
ﬁght against the disbelief which stems from secularism rooted in modern
science. Tus Nursi believes in a close dialogue with Christians and thinks
that true humanity, dignity and justice can only be established by a mutual
understanding based on cooperation between these revealed religions. In
saying so, however, Nursi does not imply that there are no diﬀerences
between Islam and Christianity, or that the diﬀerences which exist are
not signiﬁcant. For there are indeed important diﬀerences between the
two. However, what Nursi is trying to do, as Tomas Michael points out,
is to show that concentrating obsessively on these diﬀerences can blind
both Muslims and Christians to the even more important common task
which they share, that of oﬀering the modern world a vision of human
life and society in which God is central and God’s will is the normative
basis of moral values.516
In line with Nursi, Fathullah Gulen, a contemporary Turkish thinker
and religious scholar, believes in the importance of dialogue with the
People of the Book. His starting point in this regard is basmalah (the
initial phrase of Qur’anic surahs). He sees in this phrase God’s most recur-
rent attributes, namely His being the Compassionate and the Merciful/
al-Rahmān, al-Rahīm. Tese words, according to Gulen, require human
beings to show compassion not only to their fellows but to all living
beings.517 For Gulen, this is a natural conclusion to be drawn from one
of God’s most beautiful names, al-Wadūd (Te Loving One). Tus he
holds the view that dialogue is the most important aspect of Islamic
ethics. Tis, however, should be carried out in complete sincerity, using
a constructive approach and without claiming one’s superiority over the
other.518 Accepting every individual in his or her own situation is one
of Gulen’s most frequent mottos. Gulen’s aim is to prepare diﬀerent
religious communities to learn how to live together in mutual respect
and in peace. Te serious criticism of both Christians and Jews in the
Qur’an, Gulen says, needs to be viewed in its historical context. Tis
historical reading, according to Gulen, will allow Muslims to re-establish
healthier relationships with other communities, both religious and non-

--- Sayfa 329 ---
301
Te People of the Book in the Qur’an
religious.519 Nonetheless, Gulen’s emphasis seems to be on the cultural
and social aspects of pluralism rather than on the dogmatic aspect.
Conclusion
Te contents of the Qur’an concerning the People of the Book are quite
rich. Tere are various verses which deal with their fundamental beliefs,
practices, and moral principles, and with several important Biblical ﬁgures.
As a matter of fact, it is possible to ﬁnd more references to some of these
issues and ﬁgures in the Qur’an than in the Gospels and the Hebrew Bible.
Leaving aside the polemical works, it is clear that Western scholar-
ship is interested in the Qur’anic presentation of the People of the Book.
We must admit, however, that generally speaking, Western scholars’
understandings of these views are discordant with those of Muslims. Te
main reason for this, especially in relation to the apparent points of simi-
larity, lies in their Western methodology, namely using the terminology
and criteria extraneous to Islam to analyse the Qur’anic text. Te result
can be astonishing: some ﬁnd incarnation in the Qur’an and some see
references to the original sin. Others, having considered the diﬀerences
on the semantic level, argue that the Qur’an conﬁrms the legitimacy of
the Trinity.520 Some non-Muslim scholars who have a strong religious
background ﬁnd the Qur’anic theology extremely inﬂexible.521 As follow-
ers of the earlier Scriptures, both Jews and Christians tend to think that
any endorsement on their part of the authenticity of the Qur’an and the
Prophethood of Muhammad U would be tantamount to a denial of their
own faith. Tis group among the non-Muslim scholars consists of those
who see the claims of all Scriptures to truth to be relative, and consider
no religion superior or inferior to another. From an Islamic perspective,
none of these approaches seems helpful.
When we examine Muslim scholarship, with the exception of a
few scholars of the present time, we ﬁnd the preponderant majority
of Muslim scholars to have very little disagreement on the question of
dogmatic pluralism. In the pre-modern period, only a few Muslims were
interested in the Bible. It is clear from their works that they were not
well acquainted with the contents of either the Hebrew Bible or the New
Testament.522 It is important to note that Muslims’ understanding of
the People of the Book is determined by the Qur’an and the Prophetic

--- Sayfa 330 ---
war and peace in islam
302
traditions. In the Qur’an and the Prophet’s sayings, however, we ﬁnd
many assessments of the Prophet’s contemporaries rather than a general
evaluation of the People of the Book. It is true that the Qur’an attrib-
utes various negative moral and theological attributes to the Jews and
Christians. But the Qur’an also accepts that spiritual depth exists in those
communities. Above all, the People of the Book enjoy a speciﬁc religious
status given to them by the Qur’an. It is obvious that in every religious
community, there are sincere and insincere people. What the Muslim
exegetes did was to disregard the historical context of the verses critical of
the Jews and the Christians and too easily apply the negative characteris-
tics mentioned in the Qur’an to the People of the Book for all times and
places. Tey unfortunately display piecemeal approaches to the Qur’an
rather than treating it in an integral manner. In addition, like their non-
Muslim counterparts, they also evaluate both Judaism and Christianity
according to the criteria of their own religion and react with horror to
some controversial issues such as division in the Godhead, annulment of
the Prophetic immunity from sin, the status of the verbal inspiration of
the Scriptures, and so on. Tese scholars’ attitude towards the People of
the Book is confessional in that they reject the possibility that any other
religion can provide salvation.
Others, by contrast, seem to be inclined towards religious plural-
ism, disregarding some unbridgeable dogmatic diﬀerences. Teir focus
is on the universality of Divinity, the relativity of faith and the compas-
sion of God which enable them to promote pluralism. Nonetheless,
their approach is not free from problems. Moreover, the views of these
scholars are generally not welcomed by the preponderant majority of
Muslims. Another group of Muslims, however, disregards controversial
questions and concentrates on what the believing communities can do.
In modern society, all kinds of religious people coexist within the same
city, street, university, classroom, factory and so on. So this group tries
to ﬁnd ways of constructively coming to grips with religious diversity in
the overall framework of social harmony and understanding.
Here it would be pertinent to consider one of the most important
Qur’anic terms, namely ta‘āruf. Te meaning of the verse Al-Ḥujurāt,
49:13 where this term occurs is as follows: O mankind! We have created
you from a male and female, and have made you nations and tribes that

--- Sayfa 331 ---
303
Te People of the Book in the Qur’an
you may know one another. Lo! the noblest of you, in the sight of Allah, is
the best in conduct (taqwā).... It is safe to assume that one of the key words
of the Qur’an concerning plurality lies in this verse. Ta‘aruf (knowing
each other) should be reconsidered in the context of the need to ﬁnd
common grounds for the coexistence of diverse religious communities.
It provides a key that could open the door to interfaith dialogue. Here
the Qur’an draws attention to equality with regards to biology and to a
dignity common to all. Tus no one is justiﬁed in boasting of an inher-
ent superiority over others. Furthermore, the idea of superiority is criti-
cised in another key verse (Al-Nisā’, 4:123) which says: It will not be in
accordance with your desires, nor the desires of the People of the Book.
He who does wrong will have the recompense thereof, and will not ﬁnd
against Allah any protecting friend or helper. So, true salvation should be
looked for in taqwa, and only God knows to what extent each person has
taqwa. Tus the answer to the question of how the adherents of the three
Abrahamic traditions could become allies lies in the degree of sincerity
of intention (taqwa) that they bring to bear on their eﬀort to know and
understand each other (ta’aruf) and contributing to common good. Te
limits of ta‘aruf however, are described by another verse (Al-Baqarah,
2:256) Tere is no compulsion in religion. Te right direction is hence-
forth distinct from error.523 According to this verse, no one should pres-
sure others to accept a certain religious faith. Tose who do so commit
a grievous wrong. It is also important to note that this verse also enjoins
Muslims to protect the basic rights of others, especially their religious
freedom. Tis is the realm of ta‘aruf and it should apply not only to the
believing communities, but also to non- believers. And God knows best
(wa Allāhu a‘lam).
© Ismail Albayrak

--- Sayfa 332 ---
304
chapter twelve
DHIMMĪ AND MUSTA’MIN: A JURISTIC AND
HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
Professor Mohammad Hashim Kamali
Executive Summary
Tis chapter begins with a brief explanation of the meaning and concept of
dhimmī and musta’min and continues with a review of the source evidence
and ﬁqh provisions on the subject. Ten follows a historical analysis of
events and developments that impacted the ﬁqh discourse on the position
of dhimmis. Te chapter continues with a critical examination of the ﬁqh
rules in an attempt to renegotiate the impact of historical changes on them:
the rules of ﬁqh were a construct of a certain era that no longer obtained,
and that, in turn, raised the question as to whether these rules should also
be revised. Te post-colonial period and independence movement in the
Muslim world brought about momentous changes, which were reﬂected,
for the most part, in the ensuing constitutions and laws of nationality
and citizenship. A certain disparity arose, as a result, between these and
their counterparts in ﬁqh. Te chapter draws attention to some of these
developments, and advances reform proposals that address the position
of dhimmis as equal citizens. Te proposed reforms also seek to close the
gap between the ﬁqh provisions and the applied laws of Muslim countries.
A Review of Fiqh Provisions
Non-Muslim residents of a Muslim majority state are divided into two
categories, namely those who have taken permanent residence and the
Muslim state is committed to their protection (i.e. the dhimmis), and the
musta’mins, those who come to the Islamic lands for temporary residence.
Dhimmī is a derivative of dhimmah, which means commitment, and it

--- Sayfa 333 ---
305
Dhimmī and Musta’min: A Juristic and Historical Perspective
applies to those who enter a contract, known as ‘aqd al-dhimmah, which
entails mutual commitment on their part and on the part of the Islamic
government. Tis is why the dhimmīs are also known as al-mu‘āhidūn, or
covenantees. Tey commit themselves to loyalty and the state is in return
committed to their protection and support. Te contract of dhimmah
basically entitles non-Muslim citizens to equal rights and obligations
to those of their Muslim compatriots. It is a permanent contract which
can only be concluded by the head of state or his representative, and
once concluded, it cannot be revoked, but the law provides for certain
eventualities whereby the contract may be terminated.
Dhimmah is binding and permanent as far as Muslims are concerned,
but it is revocable as far as the non-Muslim party is concerned. Te Hanaﬁ
school of law has, however, conﬁned the grounds of revocation to three,
namely when the dhimmī embraces Islam; when he joins the enemies; and
when he or she acts in consort and jointly declares war on the Muslims.
Outside these three situations the contract of dhimmah is not revocable
even when the dhimmī commits blasphemy, refuses to pay the poll-tax
(jizyah) or commits murder, adultery and thef. Tis is the Hanaﬁ view-
point, but the majority of Sunni and Shi‘i jurists have held refusal to pay
the jizyah as a ground for revocation of the contract of dhimmah.
All non-Muslim residents, whether temporary or permanent, are
required to submit to the authority of the Islamic government and
observance of its laws, except for personal and customary matters such
as marriage, divorce, and inheritance, where the shari‘ah allows them to
practice their own customary laws and traditions.524 Te dhimmis are
entitled to retain and practice their own religion without any hindrance,
and should they choose, at any point in time, to embrace Islam, their
status of dhimmah is automatically terminated and they become full-
ﬂedged citizens as of that time. Notwithstanding some juristic rulings
to the contrary, the position has prevailed that the status of dhimmah
may be conferred not only on Christians and Jews, known as the Ahl
al-Kitāb, but on all non-Muslims, indeed anyone who applies for it
regardless of religious following.525
Te basic requirement of acquiring the dhimmī status is to take
domicile in the Muslim territory and pay a poll tax. I shall presently
attempt to address some jizyah-related issues in the context especially of

--- Sayfa 334 ---
war and peace in islam
306
contemporary conditions. Suﬃce it to note at this point that the lawful
government and the ūlū al-amr (those in charge of community aﬀairs)
may specify the requirements of conferring citizenship on non-Muslim
applicants in the light of prevailing conditions, considerations of fair-
ness and considerations of public interest (marabaḥah)—all within the
framework of a sharī‘ah-oriented policy (siyāsah shar‘iyyah).526 Te
Muslim state is authorised to enact appropriate rules and procedures
that apply to the various modes of conferment of citizenship. It can be
conferred, under the applied laws of the present-day Muslim countries,
through birth, naturalisation, marriage, domicile, grant on application,
reintegration, subjugation, acquisition of territory and so forth.527
Te musta’minūn (lit. those who enjoy safe conduct) are aliens who
are granted safe conduct to facilitate their entry and temporary stay
in Muslim territories. Tey are admitted by permission and passport
on the basis of contract, known as ‘aqd al-amān, or contract of safe
conduct. Te musta’min thus enjoys the same rights that are recog-
nised for the dhimmī, except that he or she is not required to pay the
jizyah if the period of stay is less than one year. Te contract of amān
guarantees safe conduct to the person and property of the musta’min
and to his family. Te musta’min enjoys total freedom of movement
within Muslim territories and that includes, according to the Hanaﬁ,
but not the Shaﬁ‘i and Hanbali schools, freedom to visit and enter the
mosques, and also residence in the vicinity of Ka‘bah in Mecca for three
days without any prior permission. Te musta’mins are under similar
obligations, as are the dhimmīs, to observe the laws of the land. Unlike
the contract of dhimmah, which is permanent, amān is temporary and
revocable by the authorities. Again, unlike dhimmah, which is only
oﬀered by the state authorities, amān can be oﬀered and concluded
both by the state authorities and any Muslim citizen, men and women
alike.528 Te procedure of giving amān is very simple and there is no
disagreement among the Muslim jurists on it. Once the intention of the
person requesting amān is known, regardless of the language spoken,
any word or sign of approval is enough to confer the status of amān.529
With the exception of the Hanaﬁs, who are of the view that safe
conduct to aliens may be granted by both the Muslim and non-Muslim
citizens (the latter with permission of the authorities), the majority

--- Sayfa 335 ---
307
Dhimmī and Musta’min: A Juristic and Historical Perspective
have conﬁned this right to Muslim citizens only.530 Tis is yet another
instance perhaps where the more egalitarian position of the Hanaﬁ
school is preferable and could be adopted by a simple permission that
the head of state might extend to non-Muslim citizens.
Basic authority for amān is found in the Qur’anic verse which
provides in an address to the believers: If one of the idolaters seeks your
protection, protect him so that he hears the word of God, then convey him
to his place of safety (Al-Tawbah, 9:6).
Te general (‘amm) declaration of this text is then conﬁrmed and
endorsed in a renowned hadith which provides:
Te lives of Muslims are equal (in respect of retaliation and
diyyah) and they are a unity against their opponents. When
the least among them oﬀers safe conduct to someone, it be-
comes a commitment on all of them.531
Muslim women are equally entitled to grant amān to aliens who
enter the Muslim territory for non-hostile purposes. Tis is conﬁrmed
in a clear hadith where the Prophet U endorsed the amān that Umm
Hānī, the daughter of Abu Talib, had granted to one of the pagan Arabs
on the day of the conquest of Mecca. Umm Hānī’s brother had wanted to
kill this man, at which time she went to the Prophet and informed him
about it, and the Prophet addressed her by saying ‘we protect the one to
whom you have oﬀered protection O Umm Hānī’.532
Te status of amān might be repudiated by the head of state or his
representative at any time if it is discovered that the musta’min has used
it for harmful purposes, or when termination is deemed to be in the
best interest of the community. Te amān normally terminates when
its period is expired or when the musta’min leaves the Muslim territory
(i.e. Dār al-Islām—as was known before the advent of nation state). If he
or she wanted to return to Dār al-Islām, he or she would need to obtain
another amān.533 Te dhimmis and musta’mins lose all claim to protec-
tion and their status is revoked in the following two situations: 1) when
they leave the Muslim state and go over to the enemies, and 2) when they
openly revolt against the Muslim government and try to sabotage it.534
Te majority of Muslim jurists have held that it is not permissible to
compel a dhimmī or a musta’min to profess Islam. As for the belligerent
(ḥarbī) who is actively at war with the Muslims, although the majority

--- Sayfa 336 ---
war and peace in islam
308
have held forced conversion permissible in their case, the preferred view
is that of a minority group of jurists who considered it impermissible
to compel anyone into Islam. Wahbah al-Zuhayli and ‘Abd al-Wahhab
Khallaf, who discussed both these views also considered the latter as
preferable. For there is clearly a diﬀerence between the permissibility of
ﬁghting the ḥarbīs to repel their aggression and mischief, and compel-
ling or subjugating any of them to embrace Islam. Tis would be unrea-
sonable as it cannot lead to a valid outcome.535
Te wife, under the ﬁqh rules, automatically acquires the citizen-
ship of the country of her husband. Tus if a non-Muslim alien woman
marries a Muslim or even a non-Muslim citizen of the Muslim state,
she becomes the citizen of that state. Te husband on the other hand
does not acquire the status of his wife. Tis would mean that when a
non-Muslim alien marries a woman who is the subject of a Muslim
state, he does not automatically become the subject of that state. But
the husband may apply for naturalisation which the authorities may
grant. Muslim jurists have not suggested a probationary period, but it
is a discretionary matter for the government to determine whether the
applicant should reside for a certain period and have a clean record of
upright conduct during that time as a prerequisite for conferment of
citizenship status.536 Having discussed the ﬁqhī position on dhimmis, I
now brieﬂy discuss the impact of historical developments and the extent
to which they aﬀect the legal status of the ahl al-dhimmah.
From Dhimm to Muwtin (Compatriot):
An Historical Sketch
As already noted, dhimmī is a derivative of dhimmah, a contract that is
concluded between two parties. It is not an enactment or ḥukm of sharī‘ah
of permanent standing, and has no independent existence unless it is
created by the contracting parties. Dhimmah comes into existence when
the parties to it are in existence. In historical terms the dhimmah came to
an end, as Salim el-Awa has rightly observed, with the onset of colonial rule
in the Muslim lands, because the original parties who entered the covenant
of dhimmah no longer existed, hence in juristic terms neither the dhimmah
nor its bearer, the dhimmī, existed any longer. Tis was because the western
colonial state did not apply the regime of dhimmah and no dhimmī status
.

--- Sayfa 337 ---
309
Dhimmī and Musta’min: A Juristic and Historical Perspective
could therefore be said to exist as of that time. Te whole concept of dhim-
mah has therefore been replaced and substituted by the new legal regime of
muwāṭanah (citizenship) that came into being under the laws and consti-
tutions of the newly independent Muslim state.537 Although Muslim jurists
have identiﬁed dhimmah as a permanent contract, that provision takes
for granted its valid conclusion in the ﬁrst place; it cannot exist, in other
words, unless it is concluded in the ﬁrst place, and it comes to an end and
is dissolved under certain conditions which the jurists have also speciﬁed.
Muwāṭanah, on the other hand, is not a contract, rather it is a
permanent status consisting of a relationship between a person and
a place that gives rise to certain rights and obligations. Muwāṭanah
inheres in a person by the fact of birth and residence which need not
be created through an agreement with another party. It comes into
being, in other words, when its grounds are present, without which
it would not exist. Muwāṭanah in the sense of a legal relationship is
not a new concept as its origins can be traced back to the time of the
Prophet Muhammad U when it was for the ﬁrst time created under the
Constitution of Medina. Te Prophet signed this document with the
residents of Medina and those who migrated from Mecca to Medina.
Te non-Muslim parties who ratiﬁed this document consisted of Jews
and pagans, and the document that was signed as a result was a consti-
tutional instrument that articulated the rights and responsibilities of
the citizens, or the muwāṭinīn, of Medina. Te Constitution of Medina
regulated the relations between the newly created Islamic government
under the Prophet’s leadership and the citizens of that state, both
Muslim and non-Muslim. ‘Te muwāṭanah that was created as a result
was not based in any particular religion.’538 For this was a constitution
and not a bilateral contract which articulated the structure of relations
in the Medinan society under its new government.
Te contract of dhimmah that Muslim jurists later formalised was
neither uniform nor well deﬁned. Te dhimmah contract that was deﬁned
and articulated in ﬁqh manuals was basically a creation of necessity of the
times of conquest. Each time the Muslim rulers conquered a territory,
they had to deal with two groups of people, one of whom accepted the
new religion and acquired the same rights and duties as the Muslims
enjoyed themselves. Te second group was those who chose to retain

--- Sayfa 338 ---
war and peace in islam
310
their religion; the Muslim rulers acquired responsibility to adjudicate
their disputes and protect their rights and properties. It was in response
to this need that Muslim jurists constructed the contract of dhimmah in
line, more or less, with the agreement that the Prophet had concluded
with the Christians of Najran and the people of Bahrain.539 To these
prototypes the Muslim rulers added provisions as they deemed neces-
sary in the light of circumstances in each particular locality and case.
Basically the Muslim rulers entered provisions that recognised the reli-
gious freedom of the conquered people and a certain protection of their
rights. But they also imposed a poll tax which was payable once a year at a
rate similar to that of zakāh (poor tax). Non-Muslims were exempt from
payment of zakāh, but were instead required to jizyah at an equivalent
rate. But even these basic provisions were adjusted at times when such
seemed appropriate under the circumstances—as discussed below.
Early Muslim rulers have at times entered dhimmah agreements
which eliminated the jizyah altogether—as in the agreement entered
during the time of the second caliph ‘Umar with the Turkish tribe of
Jarajimah which welcomed the Muslim forces and declared its dislike
of the Romans, but stipulated that its members be allowed to remain
Christian; this was agreed. Te tribe also agreed to help the Muslims in
the event of any military engagement with the Romans. Te Muslim
party agreed in return to protect the tribe and also relieved its members
from payment of jizyah.
A similar example of a variant dhimmah arrangement was the peace
agreement that the Muslims signed with the people of Cyprus, who
did not oﬀer resistance. In return the Muslim party agreed not to levy
the jizyah on them. Another example of this was the agreement that
‘Amr b. al-‘Ās, Caliph ‘Umar’s governor, signed with the Copts of Egypt
when his forces besieged and eventually conquered Egypt. Tere was no
mention of jizyah in the treaty that was subsequently signed.540
When the Muslim forces entered Jerusalem in the time of the caliph
‘Umar, its Christian residents refused to surrender the key to its fortress
except to the caliph himself, on the condition that no Jewish settlers
would be allowed to reside in their area. Te caliph wrote them a letter
and agreed to their proposed conditions and also granted them safe
conduct without imposing any jizyah.541

--- Sayfa 339 ---
311
Dhimmī and Musta’min: A Juristic and Historical Perspective
It is worth mentioning that dhimmah provided a formula by which
the Muslim conquerors established a pattern of relations with the people
they ruled, but there was considerable variation in the terms of the partic-
ular agreements that were subsequently negotiated and concluded.542
Dhimmis as Equal Citizens
Ten came the era of struggle for independence from western colonialism
and the many long years of confrontation that followed. Te anti-colonial-
ist campaign was conducted with the participation of all the muwāṭinīn in
the former colonies; Muslims and non-Muslims struggled side by side and
all made sacriﬁces. When they won that campaign and gained independ-
ence for their homelands, they sought to regulate their national life through
a national charter and constitution. One of the major gains of this struggle
that was articulated in many of their constitutions was equality before the
law for all citizens. Tis development was not dissimilar perhaps to what
led to the signing of the Constitution of Medina during the Prophet’s life-
time, under which , as earlier noted, all the signatories, including the Jews
of course, were accorded equal status.
Te dhimmah as a contract and a legal instrument came to an end
with the colonial domination of Muslim lands. Afer the collapse of
colonialism a new state was formed which was not a successor to any
of the previous regimes—neither to the colonial state, nor to the Islamic
state that might have existed preceding it. Te dhimmī status also termi-
nated as a result. Te non-Muslims that live in Muslim communities
today are people who have fought for their country and continue to
defend it through participation in the army and security forces. Tere
is consequently no dhimmah in the Muslim state of today, as it has to
all intents and purposes been replaced by muwāṭanah (citizenship) and
the entitlement as a result of all to equal rights and obligations without
any discrimination. Under its concept of ratiocination (ta‘līl), which
is concerned with the ratio decidendi and eﬀective cause (‘illah) of the
rules (aḥkām) of shari‘ah, a rational ḥukm collapses when the ‘illah on
which it stands also collapses and the ḥukm in question may then be
substituted with another as the new situation may indicate.543
With reference to Egypt, Tariq al-Bishri has underscored the common
cause of the Egyptian nation by recounting the events of the liberation

--- Sayfa 340 ---
war and peace in islam
312
movement in the late nineteenth century. Slogans such as ‘Egypt for
the Egyptians’ and ‘brotherhood of compatriots’ came from the pens
of al-Ṭahtawi and others. When the National Homeland Party (al-Ḥizb
al-waṭanī al-ahlī) was formed on the eve of the ‘Urābiyyah revolution in
1879, it was stipulated in section ﬁve of its manifesto that ‘Christians and
Jews and everyone who protects Egypt and speaks its language may join
this party, which shall not look at their diﬀerences of creed, knowing that
they are all brethren and have equal rights in politics and legislation’.544
Tis was an eminently egalitarian call, one that united all Egyptians
for the defence and liberation of their homeland, charting out the
formation of a national society based on the historical experience of its
people. Tis was not a sudden development but an historical pattern
which was put to the test once again by developments in post-World
War One years where two types of identity for Egypt were commonly
debated. People talked of an Islamic community within the framework
of the Ottoman Caliphate, just as they talked about the Egyptian soci-
ety and nation as a smaller unit in its own right. Te question typically
posed was whether the one took priority over the other. Te answer
clearly emerged in favour of the Egyptian nation and society, due in
large measure to the national campaign against British colonialism.545
 Situations in Egypt and elsewhere in the Muslim world were also
inﬂuenced by developments in the Ottoman Empire. Legal reforms
under the Ottomans were ﬁrst introduced under the Tanzimat, which
culminated in the two imperial edicts of 1839 and 1856 as discussed
earlier. Promulgated under European pressure, they established equal-
ity before the law for all the sultan’s subjects. In Egypt, the jizyah was
abolished by the Khedive Sa‘id in 1855, followed in 1856 by a large
scale recruitment of Copts into military service. Fify years later, the
Revolution of 1919 seemed to signal the victory of equality and national
unity over religious segregation and communalism.
Te principle of equality was soon afer enshrined in the Egyptian
Constitution of 1923 which proclaimed Islam as the oﬃcial religion, but
which stopped short of establishing the rule of sharī‘ah as the applied
law of the land. Nor did this constitution provide for a system of propor-
tional representation for non-Muslim minorities. Tis was the opposite
of the Lebanese experience where the administrative system was based

--- Sayfa 341 ---
313
Dhimmī and Musta’min: A Juristic and Historical Perspective
on proportional representation, which had the negative eﬀect, however,
of boosting communalism (ṭā’iﬁyyah) that led to a civil war in the 1950s.
Although right up to the time of Egypt’s formal independence in 1922,
Copts continued to fulﬁl important functions in the administration and
economy as well as in the cultural sphere, they had either been discred-
ited because of their association with the occupying power, or else
brought into controversy with the new Egyptian Islamic middle class.546
Conclusion
I may bring this essay to a close by quoting Muhammad al-Talibi, who
criticised the late Iranian leader Ayatollah Khomeini’s treatise, al-ḥukūmah
al-Islāmiyyah (Islamic government), which advocated the return of dhim-
mah and kharāj (land tax based on diﬀerentiation between Muslims and
non-Muslims) to be imposed on non-Muslims. Talibi posed the question:
which dhimmah is it that one can talk about in today’s conditions? What
about the forty percent of the world’s Muslims who live under the rule of
non-Islamic governments? Should they also be given a reciprocal treat-
ment and considered as dhimmis under non-Muslim rule? And then the
question over the factual determination of this status—as to who is under
whose protection—arises in countries such as Lebanon and Israel. ‘It is an
irony of our time that in today’s world and in the context of the prevail-
ing balance of economic and military power that the Muslims are the real
dhimmis.’547 To talk therefore of dhimmah, jizyah and kharāj is to turn
away from reality. We now live in the era of human rights and it is in this
context that the Muslims should see themselves in their own societies and
regulate their relations with the non-Muslims on precisely the same basis.
Although al-Talibi has not said it, a ﬁqhi justiﬁcation for this view
can be sought under the reciprocal treatment formula. Relations with
foreign powers and non-Muslim-majority countries are thus to be
conducted under the Islamic law guideline of mu‘āmalah bi’l-mithl (lit.
like for like treatment) provided it does not entail engagement in any
unlawful activities.
Te vast majority of present-day Muslim countries have introduced
new constitutions in the post-colonial period, which generally uphold
the principles of equality and government under the rule of law. Te
structure of relations among Muslim and non-Muslim citizens in these

--- Sayfa 342 ---
war and peace in islam
314
countries are now governed by their existing constitutional guidelines,
which on the whole, prescribe equal rights and duties for all citizens.
Hence those parts of the ﬁqh rules that diﬀerentiated among citizens
based on the religion of their following would be hard to justify under
the new constitutions. Tus it is proposed that human dignity, equality
and justice should now replace those diﬀerentiations, as these princi-
ples have, in any case, a stronger grounding in the broader structure of
Islamic values and textual injunctions of the Qur’an and Sunnah.
© Professor Mohammad Hashim Kamali

--- Sayfa 343 ---
PART III
BEYOND PEACE: FORBEARANCE, MERCY,
COMPASSION AND LOVE

--- Sayfa 345 ---
317
chapter thirteen
THE UNCOMMONALITY OF ‘A COMMON WORD’
Dr Joseph Lumbard
Introduction
November 4, 2008 was an historic day. Not only did it mark a new
chapter in the long and complicated history of race relations in the
United States, it also marked an historic event in the long and multi-
faceted relationship between Islam and Christianity. For the ﬁrst time
in the history of Muslim-Christian relations, a delegation of twenty-
nine Catholic cardinals, bishops and scholars met with twenty-nine
leading Muslim authorities and scholars representing some of the most
established ﬁgures in the Sunni and Shi‘ite worlds. Afer two days of
meetings that it is hoped will mark the ﬁrst in a series of seminars
held once every three years by the newly established Catholic-Muslim
Forum, they issued a ﬁfeen-point ﬁnal declaration that included an
appeal for the defence of religious minorities and a call for Muslims
and Christians to work together in promoting peace the world over.
Te declaration read, ‘We profess that Catholics and Muslims are
called to be instruments of love and harmony among believers, and for
humanity as a whole, renouncing any oppression, aggressive violence
and terrorism, especially that committed in the name of religion, and
upholding the principle of justice for all.’548 In his comments at the
ﬁnal session, Pope Benedict XVI aﬃrmed that Muslims and Christians
share moral values and should defend them together:
Tere is a great and vast ﬁeld in which we can act together in
defending and promoting the moral values which are part
of our common heritage. We should thus work together in
promoting genuine respect for the dignity of the human

--- Sayfa 346 ---
war and peace in islam
318
person and fundamental human rights, even though our
anthropological visions and our theologies justify this in
diﬀerent ways.549
Time alone will let us know if this is indeed a watershed event in the
history of interfaith understanding between Christians and Muslims.
Nonetheless, the fact that this and other meetings among the world’s
religious leaders are taking place at all is historic. Tere is no previous
record of leading Muslim authorities representing all branches of Islam
engaging the Vatican as a single voice. Tat it is now happening should be
cause for hope; for when two civilisations come to a greater appreciation
of the humanity and the concerns of one another, there is much less
probability of misunderstandings, mistrust and the violence that can
arise therefrom. At the very least, dialogue is better than indiﬀerence.
At the very best, the collective moral voice of the world’s two largest
religious communities may help to prevent another Bosnia, another
Iraq, or another Sudan. As Seyyed Hossein Nasr said in his closing
comments to the ﬁrst seminar of the Catholic-Muslim Forum:
Whether we are Christians or Muslims, we are beckoned by
our religions to seek peace. As people of religion meeting
here at the centre of Catholicism, let us dedicate ourselves
to mutual understanding, not as diplomats, but as sincere
religious scholars and authorities standing before God and
responsible to him beyond all worldly authority.550
The Beginning
Tis historic Muslim-Christian exchange began in earnest on 13 October,
2007, when 138 Muslim scholars from all corners of the world, represent-
ing every branch of Islam, including such ﬁgures as the grand mufis of
Bosnia, Egypt, Syria, Jordan, Oman, Bahrain and even Russia, delivered a
ﬁfeen-page letter entitled A Common Word Between Us and You to the
leaders of Christian churches and denominations throughout the world.
Originally composed by Prince Ghazi bin Muhammad of Jordan in consul-
tation with traditional Islamic scholars and under the auspices of King
Abdullah II of Jordan, this letter was met with responses from Christian
leaders the world over, ranging from independent scholars to the Vatican,
the World Council of Churches, the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the

--- Sayfa 347 ---
319
Te Uncommonality of ‘A Common Word’
Patriarch of Russia, among many others.551 Te most public response was
a letter initially signed by over 300 Christian leaders and scholars entitled
Loving God and Neighbor Together: A Christian Response to ‘A Common
Word Between Us and You’ that was organised by the Yale Center for Faith
& Culture and the Yale Divinity School and published in the New York
Times on 17 November, 2007. Te most substantial theological response
was penned by the then Archbishop of Canterbury, the Most Reverend
and Right Honourable Dr Rowan Williams, afer prolonged consultation
with Christian church leaders from several Orthodox churches, the Roman
Catholic church, and a range of Protestant and evangelical churches. Te
Archbishop’s response displays a subtle understanding of the limitations
inherent to such a dialogue, and the possibilities to which it opens. Since
the initial launch the number of Muslims scholars who have signed A
Common Word has grown to more than 300, with more than 460 Islamic
organisations and associations now endorsing it, and there are now over
500 signatories to A Christian Response in addition to dozens of additional
Christian responses.
Te initial letter and the many responses to it have given rise
to a series of conferences between Muslim and Christian leaders.
Te ﬁrst conference, ‘Loving God and Neighbor in Word and Deed:
Implications for Christians and Muslims’, focused upon theological
issues and was held at Yale University between 24–31 July, 2008. Te
second, ‘A Common Word and Future Christian-Muslim Engagement’,
focused on scripture and was convened by the Anglican Archbishop
and hosted by the Cambridge Inter-Faith Programme at the University
of Cambridge on 13 and 14 October, 2008, with a ﬁnal meeting at
Lambeth Palace on 15 October, 2008. Te third was the ﬁrst semi-
nar of the Catholic-Muslim Forum hosted by the Vatican, from 4–6
November, 2008. A second seminar of the Muslim-Catholic Forum
was held at the Baptism Site in Jordan in November 2011. Te fourth
major conference, ‘A Common Word Between Us and You: A Global
Agenda for Change’, held at Georgetown University in October 2009,
focused upon the geopolitical implications of the Common Word initia-
tive. Smaller conferences that continue the work of these initial confer-
ences have been held in Jordan (September 2010) and at the University
of South Carolina (March 2009), the Evangelical Teological Society,

--- Sayfa 348 ---
war and peace in islam
320
Los Angeles (November 2011), Georgetown University (2011) and Yale
University (2011).
Te United Nations (UN) Resolution to declare a worldwide
interfaith harmony week for the ﬁrst week of February every year is
an important development that would not have been possible without
the Common Word initiative.552 Like A Common Word, the interfaith
harmony week calls upon religious leaders and followers the world over
to employ the teachings of their respective traditions to promote peace
and understanding of other religions. As Prince Ghazi bin Muhammad
stated when presenting the proposal for an interfaith harmony week to
the UN General Assembly:
Te misuse or abuse of religions can thus be a cause of world
strife, whereas religions should be a great foundation for fa-
cilitating world peace. Te remedy for this problem can only
come from the world’s religions themselves. Religions must
be part of the solution, not part of the problem.553
In addition, A Common Word Between Us and You was the central
impetus for the Wamp-Ellison Resolution adopted in the US House of
Representatives on 23 September, 2008. Te oﬃcial summary explains
that the resolution
Expresses the sense of Congress that the United States: (1)
supports the spirit of peace and desire for unity displayed in
interfaith dialogue among leaders of the three Abrahamic
faiths; (2) encourages the many people of faith around the
world who reject terrorism and extremism to join these
and similar eﬀorts to build a common bond based on
peace, reconciliation, and tolerance; and (3) appreciates
those voices around the world who condemn terrorism,
intolerance, genocide, and ethnic and religious hatred, and
instead commit themselves to a global peace anchored in
respect and understanding among adherents of the three
Abrahamic faiths. 554
Te Common Word initiative has had a signiﬁcant trickledown
eﬀect in many religious communities. It has given rise to grass roots
and community level initiatives as far apart as Bangladesh, Indonesia,
Canada and the United States. Development has begun on a joint website
supported by the Royal Aal al-Bayt Institute for Islamic Tought, Yale

--- Sayfa 349 ---
321
Te Uncommonality of ‘A Common Word’
University and Lambeth Palace that will recommend books in several
languages so that members of each faith can read about the other faith
as presented by its adherents, rather than its opponents. Discussions are
also underway for the development of a multi-university student drive
Common Word initiative in the United States.
In many instances these projects are a direct continuation of the
practical accomplishments that have arisen from the conferences at
Yale University, Cambridge University, the Vatican, and Georgetown
University. In other instances these initiatives have arisen as a spon-
taneous response from international organisations and local religious
communities. Together they indicate that A Common Word has become
a global movement that continues to gain traction. As such, it has also
become a subject of scholarly investigation with several books and arti-
cles having resulted from it.555
The Evolution of ‘A Common Word’
When discussing the development of the Common Word initiative, many
look to the polemical comments in Faith, Reason and the University:
Memories and Reﬂections, a lecture delivered by Pope Benedict XVI at the
University of Regensburg on 12 September, 2007, to mark its inception.556
Others look to the initial Muslim response, entitled An Open Letter to His
Holiness Pope Benedict XVI, issued one month later, while others look to A
Common Word between Us and You. It must, however, be emphasised that
the Catholic-Muslim Forum is only one aspect of this Christian-Muslim
dialogue. In addition, it would be disingenuous to suggest that the Pope’s
Regensburg address, wherein Islam was presented as a religion of violence
and irrationality, was an invitation to dialogue.557 In fact the Vatican made
no response to the open letter that sought to clarify the misunderstandings
of the Regensburg lecture other than a perfunctory courtesy visit to Prince
Ghazi bin Muhammad, who had initiated the response.
Te Vatican’s initial response to A Common Word also appears to
have been miscalculated. In contrast to the positive responses that will be
examined in greater detail below, Cardinal Jean-Louis Tauran, President
of the Pontiﬁcal Council for Inter-religious Dialogue, went so far as to
say that theological dialogue with Muslims would be diﬃcult because
‘Muslims do not accept that one can question the Qur’an, because it was

--- Sayfa 350 ---
war and peace in islam
322
written, they say, by dictation from God. With such an absolute interpre-
tation, it is diﬃcult to discuss the contents of faith.’558 It is remarkable
that the president of any council for interreligious dialogue would be so
dismissive of Islam’s rich and diverse hermeneutical tradition, wherein
every word of the Qur’an is seen as having multiple layers of meaning.
Cardinal Tauran’s statement is akin to Muslims saying that they cannot
have dialogue with Christians so long as Christians maintain that Jesus
is the Son of God. Cardinal Tauran also cast doubt upon the sincer-
ity of the document and the eﬃcacy of dialogue, saying, ‘…but some
questions remain when we speak of the love of God, are we speaking
about the same love?’559 Te Vatican’s opposition to open dialogue with
Muslims appears to have changed afer the publication of the response
orchestrated by the Yale Center for Faith & Culture, Loving God and
Neighbor Together: A Christian Response to ‘A Common Word Between
Us and You’. Only two days afer the appearance of this letter, the Vatican
Secretary of State, Cardinal Tarcisio Bertone, sent a reply to Prince Ghazi
bin Muhammad on behalf of the Pope. Soon thereafer arrangements
were underway for the formation of the Catholic-Muslim Forum. In this
respect it seems that the positive response of so many other churches and
Christian leaders may have forced the Vatican’s hand.
While the Regensburg address may have been an unintended eﬃcient
or proximate cause for this exchange, it did not serve as its source. Te
source of this movement lies in the mechanisms for dialogue that Muslim
scholars have been developing since 2003. Many who have followed the
process from before its inception would put the starting point in July
2005 with the Amman Conference entitled ‘Te International Islamic
Conference: True Islam and Its Role in Modern Society’,  organised by
the Royal Aal al-Bayt Institute for Islamic Tought in Jordan, under
the Patronage of King Abdullah II. Tis ground-breaking conference
marked the beginning of a process whereby Muslim scholars repre-
senting all schools of Islamic law and theology employed international
consensus to address the challenges that face the whole of the Islamic
world. In this way, an intra-Islamic initiative laid the groundwork for
this interfaith initiative.
To understand the genesis of A Common Word, it is thus impor-
tant that one take into account the accomplishments of the Amman

--- Sayfa 351 ---
323
Te Uncommonality of ‘A Common Word’
Conference of July 2005. On the one hand, the lead-up to the Amman
conference established the mechanisms by which consensus could be
reached among Muslim scholars of all branches. And on the other
hand, the ﬁnal declaration of the Amman Conference answers one
of the main objections that many have had to A Common Word, those
who claim that Muslims need to denounce extremism before there
can be true dialogue. Michael Gonyea expresses such concerns in Te
American Tinker, when he writes of the Catholic-Muslim Forum, ‘If
in the upcoming forum a broad cross section of Muslim leaders can
be self-critical, if they can condemn the extremists, …Christians will
embrace them.’560 Such self-critical condemnation had in fact been
achieved several years earlier in what Fareed Zakaria referred to as ‘a
frontal attack on Al Qaeda’s theological methods’.561
Tis frontal attack consists of three basic dimensions. Supported
by seventeen fatwas from leading Sunni and Shi‘ite authorities, it ﬁrst
established broad support for the eight schools of traditional Islamic
law. Tis in itself was historic, as both Shi‘ites and Sunnis came together
to publicly aﬃrm the validity of one another’s schools of law. Tey also
emphasised that the schools of law are not regressive, but in fact moderate
the religion by providing essential checks and balances. Te second
prong in this attack was to deny the legitimacy of takfīr, or apostasising
others. Te third was a reiteration of the traditional qualiﬁcations for
issuing a fatwa. To outside observers this may seem to be a simple
academic exercise, but it is in fact essential; for every act of terrorism
that takes the name of Islam is preceded by an attempt at justiﬁcation
in Islamic terms. Within traditional Islam this is usually done through
fatwas.562 Demonstrating the illegitimacy of fatwas that call for wanton
violence thus strikes at the very root of extremist interpretations of
Islam. Tat is to say that the problem of extremist interpretations of
Islam is a textual, methodological problem that requires a textual,
methodological solution. For no one commits terrorist acts without
being convinced that terrorism is justiﬁed. Such justiﬁcation requires
a fatwa. Te fatwa must be issued by one who is willing to distort the
texts and sidestep the methodologies of classical Islamic law. Only by
eradicating this pattern can one eradicate extremist interpretations of
Islam and their attendant violence. Te ﬁnal declaration of the Amman

--- Sayfa 352 ---
war and peace in islam
324
Conference and the collection of fatwas employed to support it was
thus a crucial step in a true ‘war on terrorism’ in which Muslims and
non-Muslims can work hand in hand.563 Rather than striking at the
branches of radical Islamism, it struck a blow to its ideological roots. Te
Amman Conference was thus noteworthy for its innovative approach
to building consensus across a broad spectrum of Muslim scholars, and
for its repudiation of the extremist interpretations of Islam. Tis laid
the necessary foundations for a broad based inter-religious exchange
in which inﬂuential ulamāʾ from across the Islamic spectrum would be
willing to participate and which they would be willing to endorse.
The Message of ‘A Common Word’
A Common Word Between Us and You bears many similarities to the ﬁnal
declaration of the Amman Conference of 2005. It employs the same form
of consensus, addresses matters of crucial concern to the global Muslim
community, and is grounded in classical Islamic teachings while build-
ing upon them. Like the ﬁnal declaration of the Amman Conference, the
initial Common Word letter was ratiﬁed at a conference in Jordan. Te
ﬁnal form of the letter was presented at a conference in September 2007
entitled ‘Love in the Qur’an’ held by Te Royal Aal al-Bayt Institute for
Islamic Tought in Jordan under the Patronage of King Abdullah II. As
the Common Word website states, ‘Never before have Muslims delivered
this kind of deﬁnitive consensus statement on Christianity. Rather than
engage in polemic, the signatories have adopted the traditional and main-
stream Islamic position of respecting the Christian scripture and calling
Christians to be more, not less, faithful to it.’564
To eﬀectively analyse this initial letter and the dialogue to which it has
given rise, we must ﬁrst allow the document to speak for itself. It begins:
Muslims and Christians together make up well over half of
the world’s population. Without peace and justice between
these two religious communities, there can be no meaningful
peace in the world. Te future of the world depends on peace
between Muslims and Christians. Te basis for this peace and
understanding already exists.
It is part of the very foundational principles of both faiths: love
of the One God, and love of the neighbour. Tese principles

--- Sayfa 353 ---
325
Te Uncommonality of ‘A Common Word’
are found over and over again in the sacred texts of Islam and
Christianity. Te Unity of God, the necessity of love for Him,
and the necessity of love of the neighbour is thus the common
ground between Islam and Christianity.565
Te letter continues by citing verses from both the Bible and the Qur’an
to demonstrate the manner in which these principles are underlined in
scripture:
Of God’s Unity, God says in the Holy Qur’an: Say: He is God,
the One! / God, the Self-Suﬃcient Besought of all! (Al-Ikhlāṣ,
112:1–2). Of the necessity of love for God, God says in the
Holy Qur’an: So invoke the Name of thy Lord and devote thyself
to Him with complete devotion (Al-Muzzammil, 73:8). Of the
necessity of love for the neighbour, the Prophet Muhammad
said: ‘None of you has faith until you love for your neighbour
what you love for yourself.’ In the New Testament, Jesus Christ
said: ‘Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord is One. / And
you shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, with all
your soul, with all your mind, and with all your strength.’ Tis
is the ﬁrst commandment.  And the second, like it, is this:
‘You shall love your neighbour as yourself. Tere is no other
commandment greater than these.’ (Mark 12:29–31)566
A Common Word Between Us and You then calls for dialogue
and cooperation based upon these two principles—love of the One
God and love of the neighbour—which it refers to as the two ‘greatest
commandments’ of the Bible. In this vein it states:
Whilst Islam and Christianity are obviously diﬀerent reli-
gions—and whilst there is no minimising some of their for-
mal diﬀerences—it is clear that the Two Greatest Command-
ments are an area of common ground and a link between the
Qur’an, the Torah, and the New Testament.567
Te letter concludes by saying, ‘So let our diﬀerences not cause hatred
and strife between us. Let us vie with each other only in righteousness and
good works. Let us respect each other, be fair, just and kind to one another
and live in sincere peace, harmony and mutual goodwill.’568
Te title of the letter derives from a Qur’anic verse that commands
Muslims to issue the following call to Christians (and to Jews—the
‘People of Scripture’ as they are known in the Qur’an), Say, ‘O People

--- Sayfa 354 ---
war and peace in islam
326
of Scripture! Come to a common word between us and you: that we shall
worship none but God, and that we shall ascribe no partner unto Him, and
that none of us shall take others for lords beside God’ (Āl ‘Imrān, 3:64). A
similar verse is cited at the beginning of the letter: Call unto the way of
thy Lord with wisdom and fair exhortation, and contend with them in the
fairest manner. Truly thy Lord is Best Aware of him who strayeth from
His way and He is Best Aware of those who go aright (Al-Naḥl, 16:125).
Drawing upon these and other verses, A Common Word Between Us and
You proposes that dialogue and even contention in the fairest manner
are incumbent upon Muslims, and that the principles of devotion to the
one God and love of the neighbour are the strongest possible basis for
mutual understanding, eﬃcacious dialogue, and cooperation between
Christianity and Islam, because they stem from the theological core of
each religion. But unlike many other interfaith eﬀorts, it does not seek to
syncretise or to proselytise. Participants in this initiative have even taken
pains to emphasise the need for recognising the fundamental diﬀerences
between the two traditions. Rather than watering down theological posi-
tions in the name of cooperation and thus bringing Christian and Muslim
communities together at their margins, it asks both communities to speak
from what is central and authoritative to each.
One of the letter’s chief aims, according to the press release that
accompanied it, is to provide a ‘common constitution’ and a deﬁnitive
theological common ground for the work of myriad groups and asso-
ciations around the world who are carrying out interfaith dialogue. It
points out that many of these groups are unaware of each other’s eﬀorts
and ofen duplicate each other’s work. By providing an authoritative
‘Christian-Muslim Constitution’ grounded in scripture, the letter aims to
unify and unite the forces working towards interfaith peace and harmony.
Te ﬁnal section of the letter proposes that this is not a matter of choice
but of responsibility:
Finding common ground between Muslims and Christians is
not simply a matter for polite ecumenical dialogue between
selected religious leaders. Christianity and Islam are the
largest and second largest religions in the world and in history.
Christians and Muslims reportedly make up over a third and
over a ﬁfh of humanity respectively. Together they make

--- Sayfa 355 ---
327
Te Uncommonality of ‘A Common Word’
up more than ﬁfy-ﬁve percent of the world’s population,
making the relationship between these two religious
communities the most important factor in contributing
to meaningful peace around the world. If Muslims and
Christians are not at peace, the world cannot be at peace.
With the terrible weaponry of the modern world; with
Muslims and Christians intertwined everywhere as never
before, no side can unilaterally win a conﬂict between more
than half of the world’s inhabitants. Tus our common
future is at stake. Te very survival of the world itself is
perhaps at stake.569
Some have ascribed ulterior motives to A Common Word, suggesting
that its signatories and proponents intended to foist Muslim theology
upon Christians, to reduce Islam and Christianity to an artiﬁcial union,
to form a Muslim-Christian alliance against Judaism, or even to lull
Christians into a false sense of complacency. But there has thus far
been nothing in the movement that would support such contentions.
As Prince Ghazi bin Muhammad explains:
We had honestly … only one motive: peace. We were
aiming to try to spread peace and harmony between
Christians and Muslims all over the world, not through
governments and treaties but on the all-important popu-
lar and mass level, through the world’s most influential
popular leaders precisely—that is to say through the lead-
ers of the two religions. We wanted to stop the drumbeat
of what we feared was a growing popular consensus (on
both sides) for worldwide (and thus cataclysmic and per-
haps apocalyptic) Muslim-Christian jihad/crusade. We
were keenly aware, however, that peace efforts required
also another element: knowledge. We thus aimed to try to
spread proper basic knowledge of our religion in order to
correct and abate the constant and unjust vilification of
Islam, in the West especially.570
Christian Responses to ‘A Common Word’
Te Christian responses to a Common Word have covered the full
spectrum. Te majority have been very positive, with only a few cynical
or dismissive responses. As there have been more than seventy sepa-
rate responses from bishops, priests, councils and individual scholars,

--- Sayfa 356 ---
war and peace in islam
328
and as several of these responses have led to dialogues on many levels,
each cannot be analysed here. I will instead focus upon the aforemen-
tioned responses from the Yale Center for Faith and Culture at the
Yale University Divinity School, the Archbishop of Canterbury and the
Vatican, for each of these has already borne fruit and each has the insti-
tutional backing to continue into the future. I will also draw attention
to the response of the World Council of Churches (WCC), as it repre-
sents the widest and most diverse body of Christian denominations to
have fully supported the initiative and subsequent developments, such
as establishment of the World Interfaith Harmony Week.
Yale University Divinity School
Te ﬁrst broad based Christian response to A Common Word was organ-
ised by Miroslav Volf and Joseph Cummings of the Yale Center for Faith
& Culture at the Yale Divinity School. Signed by over 300 Christian leaders
and scholars, Loving God and Neighbor Together: A Christian Response to
‘A Common Word Between Us and You’ reaﬃrms the fundamental thrust
behind A Common Word, saying, ‘Peaceful relations between Muslims
and Christians stand as one of the central challenges of this century...’
and that it is incumbent upon all who truly claim to uphold the values of
these traditions to work together to meet this challenge.571 It then reaf-
ﬁrms the centrality of the two commandments that were the focus of A
Common Word, and in language that closely reﬂects that of A Common
Word, concludes by saying:
‘Let this common ground’—the dual common ground of
love of God and of neighbour—‘be the basis of all future
interfaith dialogue between us’ which your courageous let-
ter urges. Indeed, in the generosity with which the letter
is written you embody what you call for. We most heartily
agree. Abandoning all ‘hatred and strife’, we must engage in
interfaith dialogue as those who seek each other’s good, for
the one God unceasingly seeks our good. Indeed, together
with you we believe that we need to move beyond ‘a polite
ecumenical dialogue between selected religious leaders’
and work diligently together to reshape relations between
our communities and our nations so that they genuinely
reﬂect our common love for God and for one another.572

--- Sayfa 357 ---
329
Te Uncommonality of ‘A Common Word’
Even before this letter was released, talks were underway for a
conference and workshop that would bring Muslim and Christian
theologians, evangelicals in particular, into greater dialogue. Te
conference and workshop, entitled ‘Loving God and Neighbor in Word
and Deed: Implications for Christians and Muslims’, took place at Yale
University from 24–31 July, 2008. Several of the papers were published in
A Common Word: Muslims and Christians on Loving God and Neighbor
edited by Prince Ghazi bin Muhammad and Miroslav Volf, Director of the
Yale Center for Faith and Culture.573 Te workshop, on 24–28 July, involved
approximately sixty Christian and Muslim scholars, along with three
Jewish scholars. Te discussions, undertaken through the presentation of
scholarly papers and through panels and informal conversations, focused
on ﬁve major areas: ‘Love of God’, ‘Love of Neighbour’, ‘Love and Speech
about the Other’, ‘Love and World Poverty’, and ‘God is Loving’. Te larger
conference, 28–31 July, began with an address from Senator John Kerry.
It included approximately eighty Muslim participants, eighty Christian
participants, and seven Jewish participants, extending the discussions of
the scholarly workshop to a larger group of scholars and leaders.
While some of the participants, such as the Grand Mufi of Bosnia,
Seyyed Hossein Nasr, David Burrell, and the members of the Yale Center
for Faith and Culture were veterans of inter-religious dialogue, many
participants were new to interfaith gatherings. Even participants who
were veterans of such gatherings remarked that the theological depth
of discussion in the workshops was beyond any inter-religious dialogue
in which they had previously engaged.574 Te depth of these discussions
helped move the dialogue beyond the platitudes that ofen plague such
encounters. Te participation of many ﬁgures that are new to inter-reli-
gious exchanges demonstrated the breadth of this movement. Te inclu-
sion of important religious ﬁgures, such as Leith Anderson, who was then
president of the National Association of Evangelicals and Ingrid Mattson,
who was then president of the Islamic Society of North America, and the
opening address from Senator John Kerry demonstrate the ability of this
initiative to move those who shape public opinion.
Perhaps the most noteworthy aspect of the conference is that it
brought together evangelical Christians and traditional Muslims, two
communities that have had little exposure to one another and ofen view

--- Sayfa 358 ---
war and peace in islam
330
one another with suspicion. In one keynote session of the conference,
a leading Muslim scholar and televangelist (for lack of a better word)
from the Arab world, Habib Ali al-Jifri, and a leading televangelist from
the United States, Rev. Dr Robert Schuller, the founding pastor of the
Crystal Cathedral who is known for his internationally broadcast ‘Hour
of Power’, shared the same stage. Tis was an historic encounter in which
two preachers from opposite ends of the world who have the ability to
move millions within their religious communities, a traditional Islamic
community and an American evangelical community that many believe
to be in a clash with one another, spoke from the same podium and
conveyed the same message. Never before have an international leader
of the American evangelical movement and an international leader of
traditional Islamic communities shared the same stage.
Te ﬁnal statement of the Yale Conference, which was agreed upon
by all participants, reiterated the content of the previous letters, recog-
nising that Islam and Christianity share ‘an essential common ground’
and ‘a common Abrahamic heritage’.575 Reaﬃrming the commitment
to promote peace, the ﬁnal statement declared, ‘… ours is an eﬀort to
ensure that religions heal rather than wound, nourish the human soul
rather than poison human relations. Tese Two Commandments teach
us both what we must demand of ourselves and what we should expect
from the other in what we do, what we say, and what we are.’576 Te Final
Declaration also recognised that each religion aﬃrms Divine unity and
that Divine love is central to the whole of the Judeo-Christian-Islamic
tradition. In addition it recognised that Christians and Muslims alike
must not deny one another basic rights, nor tolerate the denigration or
desecration of that which is central to either religion. Te ﬁrst point is
of central importance to countering the claims of fringe Islamic groups
that Christians worship multiple gods, a key factor in the argument of
those who wish to declare them unbelievers. Te second point helps
to address the misunderstandings that arose in the wake of the Danish
cartoon controversy and the more recent eruption over ‘Te Innocence
of Muslims’ video trailer. It lays the foundations for Muslim and
Christian leaders to confront insults against either community with one
voice, and thus avoid the violence that sometimes ensues in the wake of
such eﬀrontery.

--- Sayfa 359 ---
331
Te Uncommonality of ‘A Common Word’
Te participants also discussed practical issues such as ‘world
poverty, the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, the situation in Palestine
and Israel, the dangers of further wars, and the freedom of religion’.577
In addition, the organisers committed to establishing mechanisms
whereby the principles agreed upon could be conveyed to their respec-
tive communities. Tese include a website with recommended reading
lists, the publication of study materials addressed to religious communi-
ties and setting aside a week every year wherein each community would
seek to emphasise the good in the other community. Te latter served
as the catalyst for the aforementioned proposal to the United Nations
to declare an annual worldwide interfaith harmony week.
While ‘Loving God and Neighbor Together: A Christian Response
to A Common Word Between Us and You’ and the Yale Conference
received wide acclaim, some responses have also revealed the tensions
to which dialogue between Muslims and Christians can give rise. Tis
is most evident in the response of John Piper, a prominent evangelical
pastor and author, who released a video criticising ‘Loving God and
Neighbor Together’ for failing to accentuate the unique nature of Jesus
as the saviour sent for ‘the propitiation of our sins’.578 Piper goes so far
as to say that the Islamic rejection of the Christian teaching regarding
Jesus indicates that Muslims and Christians do not worship the same
God and that Muslims shall thus be ‘cast out into utter darkness’. Such
criticisms have led some prominent evangelicals who signed ‘Loving
God and Neighbor Together’ and who attended the ﬁrst Yale confer-
ence in 2008 to explain their responses and modify their endorsements.
Citing the diﬃculties of creating a document upon which everyone
could agree, Leith Anderson writes, ‘While I am listed as the President
of the National Association of Evangelicals, I added my name as an
individual and not as an institution.’579
Such responses allude to tensions within the evangelical community
itself, as some within the evangelical movement are hesitant to embrace
any dialogue that would admit to common ground between Muslims
and Christians. Others think that engaging Muslims in such dialogue
is the best approach to gain access and evangelise in the Muslim world.
Tis intra-evangelical debate was evident at the sixty-ﬁrst annual meet-
ing of the Evangelical Teological Society in November of 2009, where

--- Sayfa 360 ---
war and peace in islam
332
Joseph Cumming, the main impetus behind ‘Loving God and Neighbor
Together’, along with Donald Smedley, a signatory to the same docu-
ment, participated on a panel with John Piper and Albert Mohler,
President of the Southern Baptist Teological Seminary and a promi-
nent evangelical pastor and radio host, and two Muslim signatories to
A Common Word, Professors Caner Dagli and Joseph Lumbard.580 Te
discussion shed light on the subtle theological diﬀerences that ‘Loving
God and Neighbor Together’ revealed.
The Archbishop of Canterbury and Lambeth Palace
While the response organised by the Yale Divinity School was a strong
aﬃrmation of A Common Word and was made all the more eﬀective
by the signatures of over 300 Christian scholars, the response from the
Archbishop of Canterbury, A Common Word for the Common Good, has
been the most trenchant and perspicacious response to date. Tough writ-
ten as a letter from the Archbishop himself to the signatories of A Common
Word, the response was generated through extensive discussion between
the Archbishop and leaders of the Eastern, Greek and Russian Orthodox
Churches, the Roman Catholic Church, and leaders from other Protestant
denominations. Te Archbishop ﬁrst met with academics and church
leaders in advance of a larger meeting in June 2008 to discuss drafing a
response to A Common Word. Tere was unanimous support among the
academics and church leaders present for the archbishop to send a letter
to Muslim leaders. He then wrote the ﬁnal letter afer further consultation
with members at the meeting in June 2008.
A Common Word for the Common Good begins by reaﬃrming the
open spirit of A Common Word and acknowledging that though the
ways of understanding the Divine are diﬀerent, Christianity and Islam
are not mutually unintelligible and that they speak enough of a common
language to address the concerns of humanity together. Te Archbishop
notes that such a dialogue can invite us to ‘think afresh about the foun-
dations of our convictions’,581 and then focuses upon ﬁve areas where
continued cooperation can bear fruit: focus upon love and praise of
God; love of neighbour that is rooted in love of God; grounding of
this interfaith exchange in scriptures so that both traditions speak from
that which is central and authoritative to each; respecting and discuss-

--- Sayfa 361 ---
333
Te Uncommonality of ‘A Common Word’
ing diﬀerences to avoid mutual fear and suspicion; and honouring a
shared responsibility towards humanity and creation.
Te subtle explanations of the Christian understanding of love
oﬀered by the Archbishop deserve extensive theological discussion
that is beyond the scope of this survey. Suﬃce to say that he takes
the opportunity to explain the manner in which Trinitarian theology
leads many Christians to a deeper appreciation of the workings of love
within the Divine Itself and that this is the foundation for love of the
neighbour and of the stranger as the proper response to the gif of love
from God. Tis discussion lays the foundation for an explanation of
the deleterious nature of religious violence that exposes the theologi-
cal hypocrisy that lies at the heart of extremist religious violence of
any stripe:
Te idea that any action, however extreme or disruptive or
even murderous, is justiﬁed if it averts failure or defeat of
a particular belief or a particular religious group is not re-
ally consistent with the conviction that our failure does not
mean God’s failure. Indeed, it reveals a fundamental lack
of conviction in the eternity and suﬃciency of the object
of faith.582
Based upon this observation, the Archbishop argues, ‘Religious
violence suggests an underlying religious insecurity’.583 Keeping in
mind that the Divine has no need of human ‘protection’ can then
lead to the awareness ‘that to try and compel religious allegiance
through violence is really a way of seeking to replace divine power
with human’.584 Tis serves as the foundation for a vision of what can
be accomplished through an extended dialogue between Muslims and
Christian leaders:
What we need as a vision for our dialogue is to break the
current cycles of violence, to show the world that faith and
faith alone can truly ground a commitment to peace which
deﬁnitively abandons the tempting but lethal cycle of retal-
iation in which we simply imitate each other’s violence.585
In this way he oﬀers the hope that ‘our religious convictions can be
a vehicle for creating peace where it is absent’.586 Tis does not oblige
Muslims and Christians to reject their own truth claims or come to

--- Sayfa 362 ---
war and peace in islam
334
some neutral agreement in areas of theological dispute. Rather it seeks
to demonstrate the manner in which transcendent truth claims can
serve to expose the self-serving nature of all attempts to justify vi-
olence in the name of one ideology or another. Tis subtle analysis
of the ideological roots of human violence and the ability of religion
to counter it demonstrates the potential inﬂuence that the Common
Word initiative can have. As the Archbishop observes:
Our voice in the conversation of society will be the stronger
for being a joint one. If we are to be true to the dual com-
mandment of love, we need to ﬁnd ways of being far more
eﬀective in inﬂuencing our societies to follow the way of
God in promoting that which leads to human ﬂourishing—
honesty and faithfulness in public and private relationships,
in business as in marriage and family life; the recognition
that a person’s value is not an economic matter; the clear
recognition that neither material wealth nor entertainment
can secure a true and deep-rooted human fulﬁlment.587
An essential component of the Archbishop’s letter that is not as
fully addressed in other communiqués in this exchange is the need to
understand and respect the diﬀerent nature of scripture within each
tradition. As he writes:
…for us as for you reading the scriptures is a constant
source of inspiration, nurture and correction, and this
makes it very appropriate for Christians and Muslims to
listen to one another, and question one another, in the
course of reading and interpreting the texts from which we
have learned of God’s will and purposes.588
It is ﬁtting that the Archbishop should have brought these
observations to light, as the conference hosted at Cambridge University
with a ﬁnal meeting at Lambeth Palace from 13–15 October, 2008
concentrated upon scripture and interpretation. While the Yale
University Conference hosted hundreds of scholars from around
the world and addressed most facets of the Common Word initiative,
the conference convened by the Archbishop was limited to ﬁfeen
representatives from each faith tradition. Among these were some of
the most prominent signatories, such as Abdullah bin Bayyah, whom
many regard as the most knowledgeable living scholar of Sunni Islam,

--- Sayfa 363 ---
335
Te Uncommonality of ‘A Common Word’
and Ramadan Buti, one of the most respected Sunni Muslim scholars
in Syria today, who have not attended any other events associated with
the Common Word initiative.
As with the Yale conference, the conference at Lambeth palace
produced a ﬁnal declaration that reaﬃrmed the core principles of A
Common Word, love of God and love of neighbour. Te document
was, however, only signed by Ali Gomaa, the Grand Mufi of Egypt,
and by the Archbishop. While reaﬃrming the central tenets of the
others, this communiqué also oﬀered a joint condemnation of the
persecution of religious groups in Iraq, with a speciﬁc focus upon the
recent persecution of Christian minorities. In the spirit of the confer-
ence, it also spoke in glowing terms of the experience of reading scrip-
ture together in a spirit of openness and cooperation:
One of the most moving elements of our encounter has
been the opportunity to study together passages from our
scriptures. We have felt ourselves to have been together be-
fore God and this has given us each a greater appreciation
for the richness of the other’s heritage as well as an aware-
ness of the potential value in being joined by Jewish be-
lievers in a journey of mutual discovery and attentiveness
to the texts we hold sacred. We wish to repeat the experi-
ence of a shared study of scriptural texts as one of the ways
in which we can come, concretely, to develop our under-
standing of how the other understands and lives their own
faith. We commend this experience to others.589
For those who have been involved with interfaith dialogue and
movements such as the scriptural reasoning project, this is not a
remarkable observation in and of itself. But it adds greater signiﬁcance
and inﬂuence to the scriptural reasoning movement when the Grand
Mufi of Egypt and the Archbishop of Canterbury join with imams and
priests to encourage their followers to read the Bible and the Qur’an
together. Muslims and Christians learning to read their scriptures in
relation to one another rather than in opposition, and learning how the
other communities understand their own texts could bear unimagined
fruits for future generations, especially when they are encouraged to do
so by the religious authorities whom they most respect. Tis emphasis
upon the possibilities inherent to scriptural reasoning indicates one of

--- Sayfa 364 ---
war and peace in islam
336
the important ways in which academics have played an important role
in working together with religious leaders to shape the Common Word
initiative. One hopes that this encouragement will help a broader audience
apply the tools of comparative scriptural inquiry that the scriptural
reasoning movement has developed over the past ﬁfeen years.590
The Vatican
While the response coordinated by the Yale Divinity School and the letter
written by the Archbishop of Canterbury have been overwhelmingly
positive, the responses from the Vatican have been mixed. Statements by
Cardinal Tauran have indicated that the Vatican would prefer to focus
upon the development of the Catholic-Muslim Forum in conjunction
with the Common Word initiative, rather than it being dispersed into
other international interfaith initiatives, such as that initiated by King
Abdullah bin Abdul Aziz Al Saud. As noted above, the Vatican response to
A Common Word was not at ﬁrst positive, and the Vatican did not appear
receptive to oﬃcial dialogue with Muslims until it became apparent that
other Churches had engaged A Common Word.
Given the multiple declarations regarding inter-religious dialogue
and interfaith relations that have been issued by the Vatican, beginning
with Nostra Aetate in 1965, the Muslim-Catholic exchange must ﬁrst
be viewed in this broader context. Recognising the tensions to which
religious misunderstanding can give rise, Nostra Aetate sought to outline
that which is common to all religions, especially the Abrahamic traditions:
Te Church regards with esteem also the Muslims. Tey
adore the one God, living and subsisting in Himself, merciful
and all-powerful, the Creator of heaven and earth, who has
spoken to men; they take pains to submit wholeheartedly to
even His inscrutable decrees, just as Abraham, with whom
the faith of Islam takes pleasure in linking itself, submitted
to God. Tough they do not acknowledge Jesus as God, they
revere Him as a prophet. Tey also honour Mary, His virgin
Mother; at times they even call on her with devotion. In ad-
dition, they await the day of judgement when God will give
their deserts to all those who have been raised from the dead.
Te sacred Council now pleads with all to forget the past,
and urges that a sincere eﬀort be made to achieve mutual

--- Sayfa 365 ---
337
Te Uncommonality of ‘A Common Word’
understanding; for the beneﬁt of all, let them together pre-
serve and promote peace, liberty, social justice and moral
values. (Nostra Aetate, 3)
In this vein, Nostra Aetate marked a momentous step forward in
the oﬃcial Catholic approach to people of other faith traditions and the
reconciliation of traditional Catholic orthodoxy with modern pluralism.
Nonetheless, although the Vatican has aﬀorded greater recognition to
Judaism and Islam, it continues to maintain that one can only be saved
through a relationship with Christ that is mediated through ‘the Church’
(Dominus Iesus, § 20). Regarding the prayers and rituals of other faiths,
the Vatican has gone so far as to declare:
Indeed, some prayers and rituals of the other religions may
assume a role of preparation for the Gospel, in that they are
occasions or pedagogical helps in which the human heart is
prompted to be open to the action of God. One cannot attri-
bute to these, however, a divine origin or an ex opere operato
salviﬁc eﬃcacy, which is proper to the Christian sacraments.
Furthermore, it cannot be overlooked that other rituals, in-
sofar as they depend on superstitions or other errors, consti-
tute an obstacle to salvation. (Dominus Iesus, § 21)
In other words, other religions can be tolerated, but only in so far
as they are a step towards full salvation in Christ. Viewed in relation to
one another, Nostra Aetate and Dominus Iesus appear to say that error
cannot be tolerated in and of itself, but that people who are in error
still have rights that must be respected. Especially those who are well
meaning and seek God, even be it in a manner that the Church considers
imperfect. Following upon Nostra Aetate, the late Pope John Paul II made
unprecedented overtures towards other Christian denominations and
towards people of other faiths, especially Jews and Muslims. Regarding
Muslims he declared, ‘We Christians joyfully recognise the religious
values we have in common with Islam. Today I would like to repeat what
I said to young Muslims some years ago in Casablanca: “We believe in
the same God, the one God, the living God, the God who created the
world and brings his creatures to their perfection.”’591
In contrast to Pope John Paul II’s positive embrace of Muslims,
many have sensed a diﬀerent tone in the statements of Pope Benedict

--- Sayfa 366 ---
war and peace in islam
338
XVI, especially in his assertions that Europe is a Christian continent
and in the unfortunate comments of his Regensburg address. In this
context, many Muslims felt it necessary to engage the Catholic Church
in the hopes of maintaining relations more similar to those that had
been enjoyed during the tenure of John Paul II. It in this vein that An
Open Letter to His Holiness Pope Benedict XVI was delivered one month
afer the Regensburg Lecture was written. Afer correcting the factual
errors of the Regensburg address, the letter states:
Christianity and Islam are the largest and second largest re-
ligions in the world and in history. Christians and Muslims
reportedly make up over a third and over a ﬁfh of human-
ity respectively. Together they make up more than ﬁfy-ﬁve
percent of the world’s population, making the relationship
between these two religious communities the most impor-
tant factor in contributing to meaningful peace around the
world. As the leader of over a billion Catholics and moral
example for many others around the globe, yours is arguably
the single most inﬂuential voice in continuing to move this
relationship forward in the direction of mutual understand-
ing. We share your desire for frank and sincere dialogue, and
recognise its importance in an increasingly interconnected
world. Upon this sincere and frank dialogue we hope to
continue to build peaceful and friendly relationships based
upon mutual respect, justice, and what is common in es-
sence in our shared Abrahamic tradition, particularly ‘the
two greatest commandments’ in Mark 12:29–31 (and, in
varying form, in Matthew 22:37–40), that, the Lord our God
is One Lord; / And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy understand-
ing, and with all thy strength: this is the ﬁrst commandment.
/ And the second commandment is like, namely this, Tou
shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. Tere is none other com-
mandment greater than these.592
Te lack of response to this letter and the lack of media coverage it
received, while many unproductive and counterproductive reactions were
reported, frustrated some Muslims. Te desire to alleviate this frustration
and to proactively prevent another Regensburg address by the Pope or by
other Christian leaders gave rise to the Common Word initiative in order
to ‘move the dialogue toward the direction of mutual understanding’. Te

--- Sayfa 367 ---
339
Te Uncommonality of ‘A Common Word’
ﬁrst impression is that this objective has been achieved, for in his remarks
on the ﬁnal day of the ﬁrst seminar of the Catholic-Muslim Forum, Pope
Benedict XVI sounded more like John Paul II:
I am well aware that Muslims and Christians have diﬀer-
ent approaches in matters regarding God. Yet we can and
must be worshippers of the one God who created us and is
concerned about each person in every corner of the world.
Together we must show, by our mutual respect and solidar-
ity, that we consider ourselves members of one family: the
family that God has loved and gathered together from the
creation of the world to the end of human history.593
 While acknowledging that Muslims and Christians conceive of
God in diﬀerent ways and have a diﬀerent understanding of the precise
nature of the relation between the Divine and the human, he aﬃrmed
that they can nonetheless work together for the good of all humanity:
Tere is a great and vast ﬁeld in which we can act together in
defending and promoting the moral values which are part of
our common heritage. Only by starting with the recognition
of the centrality of the person and the dignity of each human
being, respecting and defending life which is the gif of God,
and is thus sacred for Christians and for Muslims alike—
only on the basis of this recognition, can we ﬁnd a com-
mon ground for building a more fraternal world, a world in
which confrontations and diﬀerences are peacefully settled,
and the devastating power of ideologies is neutralised.594
Tough he did not apologise for the remarks of the Regensburg
address, Pope Benedict XVI did embrace the call for understanding that
had been issued in the initial open letter addressed to him:
Dear friends, let us unite our eﬀorts, animated by good will,
in order to overcome all misunderstanding and disagree-
ments. Let us resolve to overcome past prejudices and to
correct the ofen distorted images of the other which even
today can create diﬃculties in our relations; let us work with
one another to educate all people, especially the young, to
build a common future.595
None of these remarks are ground-breaking. Tey are nonetheless
signiﬁcant because they indicate that A Common Word Between Us
and You has succeeded in countering the deleterious eﬀects of the

--- Sayfa 368 ---
war and peace in islam
340
Regensburg address and in bringing Muslims and Christians into the type
of dialogue to which Nostra Aetate opened and which Pope John Paul
II had embraced. Te cycle of recriminations to which the Regensburg
address initially gave rise has thus been averted, and for the time being
Catholics and Muslims are engaged in real dialogue rather than juxtaposed
monologues. Te second seminar of the Catholic-Muslim Forum, held in
Jordan at the Baptism Site of Jesus on the river Jordan, developed upon the
issues addressed by the ﬁrst seminar and expanded upon the developments
of other conferences. Whatever direction it may take, it is signiﬁcant that
Muslims and Catholics have committed themselves to a forum wherein
they will be able to express their diﬀerences and work towards establishing
better understanding between Muslims and Catholics. Tis will provide
an open channel whereby unfortunate misunderstandings, such as those
created by the Regensburg address, can be avoided and whereby, if they do
arise, they can be addressed before any negative consequences are realised.
World Council of Churches
Te responses from the Yale Divinity School, the Archbishop of Canterbury
and the Vatican have given rise to more interaction between Muslims
and Christians than have any others. But one should also take note of the
response issued by the World Council of Churches (WCC), Learning to
Explore Love Together: Suggestions to the Churches for Responding to ‘A
Common Word’. Acknowledging their commitment to ‘fresh thinking
about the relationship between Islam and Christianity’, the letter of the
WCC encourages member churches to recognise the serious intent of A
Common Word and ‘prayerfully consider its invitation to dialogue and
cooperation’.596 Te Council then proposes that it will ‘create a joint plan-
ning group to prepare steps towards common action, and seek Muslim
and Christian initiatives of dialogue and cooperation at both regional and
global levels’.597
Afer committing to this ‘prayerful response’ in the ﬁrst page and
a half, the remainder of Learning to Explore Love Together provides a
thoughtful outline of the issues and diﬃculties that confront Muslim-
Christian dialogue, noting that ‘signs of similarity must be held in
tension with real divergences and hard to reconcile diﬀerences’.598 It
then touches upon two central questions of Muslim-Christian dialogue:

--- Sayfa 369 ---
341
Te Uncommonality of ‘A Common Word’
the relationship between tawḥīd and trinity, and the understanding of
God’s word as revealed in Jesus and the Qur’an. Regarding the ﬁrst it
asks, ‘Are these contradictory doctrines, as the history of engagement
between the two faiths attests, or is there a way in which they can be
seen as complementary insights into the mystery of God?’ Regarding
the latter it asks:
Similarly, while both Muslims and Christians claim to re-
ceive revelation from God, what is meant when Muslims
claim to perceive the will of God revealed in the Qur’an—
what has been called the Word of God become book, and
what is meant when Christians claim to perceive God’s self
revealed in Jesus Christ—who is called the Word of God be-
come ﬂesh?599
Although the response from the World Council of Churches has
not yet led to the same type of high-level interaction that those of the
Vatican, Lambeth Palace and Yale the Divinity School have initiated, it is
signiﬁcant that the broadest and most inclusive international Christian
organisation has encouraged its 349 member churches in more than
100 countries to participate in this movement. Tis can be an important
step in helping Muslims and Christians to ‘strive to reach the point at
which they can recognise and endorse what they hold in common with
suﬃcient integrity to allow them to work together in the world’.600 It
is also of fundamental importance for the continued success of World
Interfaith Harmony Week.
Analysis
Outside of the oﬃcial participants, the Common Word initiative has
received some criticism, though the response has been overwhelmingly
positive. Tough few outside the movement initially grasped its potential
signiﬁcance—what the Grand Mufi of Egypt Ali Gomaa has referred
to as ‘something of a small miracle’601—some are beginning to recog-
nise the power that Muslims and Christians coming together for the
common good can have. In the English speaking press one can now ﬁnd
over 700 articles addressing various aspects of the initiative. While this
might seem substantial, it is but a drop when compared to the coverage
of the Regensburg address, the Danish cartoon ﬁasco, or the ‘Innocence

--- Sayfa 370 ---
war and peace in islam
342
of Muslims’ video trailer about each of which tens of thousands of arti-
cles have been written. Given the secular inclinations of the mainstream
media, it is not surprising that the vast majority of reporters are unable
to distinguish the Common Word movement from other interfaith initia-
tives and see what promise it may hold.
Tree central features make A Common Word Between Us and You
and the ongoing exchange a crucial, promising and historic step in
Muslim-Christian dialogue: the grounding in scripture; the acceptance
of theological diﬀerences; and the participation of religious leaders of
the highest rank. As seen in the passages of A Common Word cited
above, this dialogue has been grounded in scripture from its inception,
and has even sought to expand the manner in which some Qur’anic
verses are interpreted. Te title is drawn from the famous verse, Say, ‘O
People of the Scripture! Come now to a word common between us and
you, that we worship none but God and that we do not associate anything
with Him, and do not take each other for lords, beside God’ (Āl ‘Imrān,
3:64). Several scholars have noted that this verse is usually interpreted in
a polemical context and employed to support polemical objectives. Te
interpretive history of Āl ‘Imrān, 3:64 is indeed polemical. Muhammad
ibn Jarir al-Ṭabari (d. 310/923), the dean of Qur’anic exegesis, Fakhr
al-Din al-Razi (d. 606/1210), Abu ‘Qasim al-Zamakhshari (d. 538/1144),
al-Baghawī (d. 516/1122) and other inﬂuential exegetes tended to view
this verse as a challenge to Christians.602 Nonetheless, as with most
verses of the Qur’an, there are many ways of understanding it. Other
exegetes have seen Āl ‘Imrān, 3:64 as an allusion to fundamental prin-
ciples that all Abrahamic faiths are believed to share in common, saying
of the phrase ‘a common word’, ‘that is the Torah, the Gospel, and the
Qur’an do not diﬀer regarding it, or there is no diﬀerentiation regard-
ing it among the revealed religions (sharāʾiʿ).’603 And as the eighteenth
century Moroccan scholar Ahmad ibn ʿAjibah (d. 1224/1809) says in
his commentary on the verse, ‘Te paths are many and the goal is one,
and it is pure unity (tawḥīd)’.604 Tus while the polemical strand of
interpreting Āl ‘Imrān, 3:64 may predominate in Islamic history, it is
certainly not the only interpretive strand.
It is signiﬁcant that many of the world’s leading Islamic schol-
ars have chosen to emphasise the more universal implications of Āl

--- Sayfa 371 ---
343
Te Uncommonality of ‘A Common Word’
‘Imrān, 3:64 over the polemical interpretations. For it represents an
integral component of this dialogue. Each community has taken it
upon themselves to tell the other how they understand the sources of
their own tradition, while listening as leaders of the other community
explains how they understand the sources and tenets of their respec-
tive traditions. As the Final Declaration of the Yale Conference states,
‘A Common Word is rooted in our sacred texts, arising from within,
not imposed from without’.605 And as Archbishop Rowan Williams
has written in his response to A Common Word, ‘… for both faiths,
scripture provides the basic tools for speaking of God, and it is in
attending to how we use our holy texts that we ofen discover most
truly the nature of each other’s faith.’606 Tis is an essential observa-
tion, for Christians and Muslims ofen ﬁnd it diﬃcult to relate to the
theological subtleties of one another’s faiths and are rarely swayed by
references to great theologians that proponents of other religions may
esteem. But given the centrality of scripture in their own tradition, they
are able to relate to the centrality of scripture in another tradition. In
this way, scripture provides one of the best platforms for Muslim and
Christian dialogue. Unfortunately, members of each tradition all too
ofen refuse to aﬀord another scripture the same leniency they have
learned to give their own. Tey are thus less patient and less willing
to allow the apparent naiveties, inconsistencies and contradictions of
a scripture outside their own unfold into the profundities that they
have come to expect of their own scriptural traditions. If, however,
Muslims and Christians are able to read their scriptures together, they
may come to see that in reading the scriptures of another tradition
against that tradition, they have committed the very same errors of
which they accuse the other tradition when it cites their scriptures
against them. Comparative scriptural inquiry also has the potential
to highlight dimensions of one’s own scripture by showing them in
another light.
Te second feature that distinguishes the Common Word move-
ment is that the dialogue has not sought to ignore or deny theologi-
cal diﬀerences, but rather to acknowledge and even embrace them.
To paraphrase Archbishop Rowan Williams, this is to say that the
dialogue does not seek to bring Christian and Muslim communities

--- Sayfa 372 ---
war and peace in islam
344
together at the margins of their historic identities, but by speaking
from what is central and authoritative to each.607 In this way, the
Common Word initiative avoids a major pitfall of much interfaith
dialogue, wherein well-meaning believers barter away central tenets of
their communities’ creeds in the hopes of ﬁnding a common ground
that is in reality a least common denominator. As if one were to say,
‘I’ll give up the uncreated Qur’an, if you drop the Trinity.’ In the
name of violating neither religion, this form of dialogue undermines
religion as such, by accepting two unspoken premises: 1) that religions
cannot reach common ground on religious terms; and (2) that in the
modern period all people of religion must yield to the principles of
secular humanism. Tis form of dialogue dilutes religion. It thus leads
many to reject inter-religious dialogue as antithetical to the teachings
of their own faith, or as a Trojan horse by which its central tenets will
be undermined. Tis can in turn lead to greater misunderstanding and
mistrust. In addressing this issue, Prince Ghazi bin Muhammad has
said of the initiative, ‘… I would like to say also that A Common Word
does not signal that Muslims are prepared to deviate from or concede
one iota of any their convictions in reaching out to Christians—nor, I
expect, the opposite. Let us be crystal clear: A Common Word is about
equal peace, NOT about capitulation.’608
Te third feature that sets A Common Word apart from other
interfaith initiatives is that it has the backing of many of the high-
est-ranking religious authorities in both the Christian world and the
Islamic world. On the Muslim side this includes ﬁgures such as Ahmad
El-Tayyeb, the Shaykh of al-Azhar, Abdullah bin Bayyah, Ramadan
Buti, Ayatollah Muhaqqiq-i Damad, regarded by many as one of the
leading Shi‘ite theologians of his generation, and the Grand Mufis of
Egypt, Syria, Jordan, Bosnia, Oman, and Russia, among many others.
On the Christian side, this includes the Pope, the Archbishop of
Canterbury, the head of the National Association of Evangelicals, and
the heads of most international Churches. Te history of Christian-
Muslim relations has never witnessed collaboration among authori-
ties of this stature. In the extended version of his ﬁnal address at the
ﬁrst seminar of the Catholic-Muslim Forum, Seyyed Hossein Nasr
underlines the importance of their participation when he writes:

--- Sayfa 373 ---
345
Te Uncommonality of ‘A Common Word’
In this eﬀort to reorient ourselves toward each other, all of
us, Christian and Muslim alike, can play a role. But there is
no doubt that the main responsibility lies on the shoulders
of religious leaders, thinkers and scholars, those whom we
call ‘ulamā’ in Islam. Tose who are guides and trailblazers
in religious matters must come forward and seek to bring
about understanding to those in their own communities
who hearken to their call. Tey should bring about further
knowledge about the other whom they should present as
friend, not enemy, to be loved and not viliﬁed.609
Te involvement of such leaders has many ramiﬁcations and was
central to the establishment of United Nations Interfaith Harmony
Week. It is also likely that the Common Word initiative served as a catalyst
for the interfaith initiative launched by King Abdullah bin Abdul Aziz
AlSaud. But most importantly the participants in this initiative are the
people who inﬂuence what is said on Friday and Sunday in mosques and
churches, what is taught in schools, and what is heard on television. If
these leaders are committed to this exchange, the message of A Common
Word has the potential to change the way that Christians and Muslims
conceptualise and approach one another throughout the world.
Summary and Conclusions
Despite the signiﬁcant features mentioned above, it should be stressed that
the crucial theological issues that divide Christians and Muslims have not
yet been fully discussed in the exchanges brought about by A Common
Word and that they may never be fully addressed in the context of the
Common Word initiative. For this is not at its heart a theological exchange.
A Common Word Between Us and You is an initiative that seeks to promote
peace by alleviating misunderstandings between Christians and Muslims
through an emphasis on the love of God, devotion to the One God, and love
of neighbour. In this way it allows the participants to maintain theological
diﬀerences in creative tension while asserting what they hold in common
and working for the greater good. As the World Council of Churches has
expressed it:
[Muslims and Christians] should make it a priority to un-
derstand how the precious heritages the each hold can direct
and even impel them to work together for justice and peace,

--- Sayfa 374 ---
war and peace in islam
346
recognising their joint goals and responding to the call of
the One they worship and obey to come together not only in
a common word but also in common action for the greater
glory of God and the well-being of all.610
Teological discussions may develop in the future, and this may be a
role the Royal Academy can play in this dialogue; for those who do not
represent large constituencies risk less when venturing new approaches to
the faith. Perhaps in this way academics and theologians can help others
to imagine what might be gained if Muslims and Christians sought to
deﬁne themselves in relation to one another rather than in opposition.
One can hope that the spirit of this exchange will continue to be one
of ‘vying in good works’ in accord with the Qur’anic verse cited in A
Common Word: Perhaps God will create friendship between you and those
you consider your enemies. (Al-Mumtaḥanah, 60:7) As Daniel Madigan
SJ observes in his response to A Common Word, ‘Where love replaces
enmity, it is surely God at work, not just us’.611 Let us hope that it can
be so. For this interfaith endeavour is not only important for relations
between Islam and Christianity, it is important for the response of reli-
gion to the forces of bigotry, terrorism and extremism. Some have argued
that to avoid violent clashes between nations and peoples, religion must
be abandoned altogether. But in the twentieth century—the bloodiest
of human history—ideological conﬂicts and their attendant wars have
demonstrated that it is humanity, not religion, which is responsible for
the atrocities of the past and the present. Many employ religion to justify
reckless ideologies and wanton violence. But in so doing they betray the
very teachings of the religions they propose to represent. Perhaps by
reaﬃrming the ethical teachings of their traditions together, Christians
and Muslims can employ their collective moral voice to address injus-
tices committed against peoples of all faiths.
Te exchange initiated by A Common Word will not answer all of
the questions that arise from religious diversity, nor will it ameliorate
all of the tensions that arise from theological disputes and misunder-
standings. It could, however, oﬀer reﬂections that will transfer the
positive eﬀects of Christian-Muslim dialogue from the pens and lips of
theologians to the minbar and the pulpit, from where it can also reach
into the schools and streets. Agreement may not always be reached,

--- Sayfa 375 ---
347
Te Uncommonality of ‘A Common Word’
but by continuing to approach each other in good faith, Muslims and
Christians can take important steps towards eradicating the extrem-
ism that corrodes from within and divides from without. Perhaps in
this way, A Common Word can be one small step towards realising the
vision of the Prophet Isaiah, ‘Te nations will beat their swords into
plowshares and their spears into pruning hooks. Nation will not take up
sword against nation, nor will they train for war anymore’ (Isaiah 2:4).
Tis is an updated version of a paper originally published by Brandeis
University Crown Center, Crown Papers, Crown Paper 3,
October 2009.

--- Sayfa 376 ---
348
chapter fourteen
DIVINE LOVE AND MERCY IN THE QUR’AN
HRH Prince Ghazi bin Muhammad
Love as a Divine Quality
God speaks of His love many times in the Holy Qur’an. He mentions
those whom He loves, such as, for example, those who rely on Him:
And when you are resolved, rely on God; for God loves those
who rely [upon Him]. (Āl ‘Imrān, 3:159)
However, God’s Love is not merely one of God’s acts or actions, but
one of God’s very Own Divine Qualities or Names. Tis can be seen by
the many Divine Names in the Holy Qur’an which denote God’s lov-
ing qualities, such as: ‘Te Gentle’—Al-Laṭīf; ‘Te Kind’—Al-Ra’ūf; ‘Te
Generous’—Al-Karīm; Te Forbearing—Al-Ḥalīm; ‘Te Absolutely Re-
liable’—Al-Wakīl; Te Friend—Al-Walī; Te Good—Al-Barr; ‘Te For-
giving’—Al-Ghafūr; ‘Te Forgiver’—Al-Ghaﬀār; ‘Te Granter and Ac-
cepter of Repentance’—Al-Tawwāb; and ‘Te Pardoner’—Al-‘Afū), and
in particular by His Name ‘Te Loving’ (Al-Wadūd), which occurs twice
in the Holy Qur’an:
And ask forgiveness of your Lord, then repent to Him. Truly
my Lord is Merciful, Loving. (Hūd, 11:90)
And He is the Forgiving, the Loving. (Al-Burūj, 85:14)
Here we see the connection between love and mercy: the Divine
Name ‘Te Loving’ is mentioned alongside the Divine Names ‘Te Mer-
ciful’ and ‘Te Forgiving’ in the two Qur’anic verses (and never without
them), indicating that God’s Love is inseparable from His Mercy.612 Tus
Love comes with Mercy, and Mercy comes with Love.
Indeed, some of God’s other Divine Names which indicate the

--- Sayfa 377 ---
349
Divine Love and Mercy in the Qur’an
‘gentle’ Divine Qualities—such as the Divine Name ‘Te Kind’
(Al-Ra’ūf), which occurs in the Holy Qur’an ten times,613 and certain
other Names as previously mentioned—also imply both God’s Love
and His Mercy together. We may even say that Mercy engenders Love;
for the word raḥmah (‘mercy’) is derived from raḥm (‘womb’), and
God says in a Ḥadīth Qudsī (that is, a hadith where the Messenger of
God U is quoting God Himself as Speaker):
‘I am God (Allāh), I am Te Compassionate One (Al-
Raḥmān). I created the womb (raḥm) and named it afer
My Name. He who keeps its ties, I shall keep [my ties with]
him; and he who cuts its ties, I shall cut him oﬀ [from Me].’614
Indeed, if we reﬂect on the womb, we will realise that the womb
produces mercy just as it produces children, because when a child
is born from the womb he or she already naturally enjoys his or her
mother’s love. Tis is a law of nature: mercy produces love, even though
love has special qualities which mercy does not necessarily share.
Te natural connection between love and mercy is not conﬁned
to the keeping of family ties alone, for God also alludes to the connec-
tion between aﬀection—which is a form of love—with mercy, in the
following verse:
And of His signs is that He created for you from yourselves
mates that you might ﬁnd peace by their side, and He or-
dained between you aﬀection (mawaddah) and mercy. Sure-
ly in that there are signs for a people who reﬂect. (Al-Rūm,
30:21)
Love and Mercy as of the Divine Essence
God equates His Name ‘Te Compassionate’ (Al-Rahmān) with His
Divine Name ‘God’ (Allāh) in His words:
Say: ‘Invoke God or invoke the Compassionate One; which-
ever you invoke, to Him belong the Most Beautiful Names’….
(Al-Isrā’, 17:110)
Since the Divine Name Allāh refers to the Divine Essence, this
means that Divine Mercy is of the very Divine Essence—the Godhead
or the Self—Itself, without and before any relation to any created
being. Tis is also proved by God’s words:

--- Sayfa 378 ---
war and peace in islam
350
…He has prescribed for Himself (nafsihi—His Self) mercy….
(Al-An‘ām, 6:12)
And His words:
…Your Lord has prescribed for Himself (nafsihi—His Self)
mercy…. (Al-An‘ām, 6:54)
Tus God has made mercy incumbent upon Himself or rather His
Self—the Arabic word nafsihi means both Himself (reﬂexively) and
‘His Self’ (thus referring to the Divine Essence or Self or Godhead)—
which is to say that Divine Mercy is of the Divine Essence Itself. God’s
Mercy is thus incumbent on God by His own very Being. Consequently,
God is bound by Himself to be Merciful, and His Mercy embraces
everything. Tis is aﬃrmed by His words:
…My mercy embraces all things…. (Al-A‘rāf, 7:156)
Moreover, this is what the angels aﬃrm when they pray for
forgiveness for the believers:
… Our Lord, You embrace all things in [Your] mercy and
knowledge… (Ghāﬁr, 40:7)
We must also mention that every one of the 114 chapters of the
Holy Qur’an begins with the sacred formula In the Name of God, the
Compassionate, the Merciful (Bism Allāh Al-Raḥmān Al-Raḥīm’) except
the ninth (Sūrat Al-Tawbah)—albeit that Islamic scholars point out that
the ‘missing’ basmallah of Sūrat Al-Tawbah reappears in Sūrat Al-Naml
wherein God says:
… And lo! it is: In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the
Merciful. (Al-Naml, 27:30)
Tus the fact that practically every chapter in the Holy Qur’an begins
with In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful further indicates
the connection between the Divine Name ‘God’ (Allāh) and mercy.615
All of this allows us to say that since Divine Love, like Divine Mercy,
is a Divine Quality; and since God’s Loving is inseparable from His
Mercy; and since Divine Mercy is of the very Divine Essence Itself, then
we can conclude that Divine Love, like Divine Mercy, is of the Divine
Essence Itself, as well as being a Divine Quality. Tis is seen in the Āyat
al-Kursī—which the Messenger of God U called ‘the greatest verse in

--- Sayfa 379 ---
351
Divine Love and Mercy in the Qur’an
the Holy Qur’an’616—which speaks of the Divine Essence, and of the
Qualities of God in relation to His Creation. God says:
God, there is no god, except Him, Te Living (Al-Ḥayy), Te
Eternal Sustainer (Al-Qayyūm). Slumber does not seize Him,
neither sleep; to Him belongs all that is in the heavens and the
earth; who is there, that shall intercede with Him save by His
leave? He knows what lies before them, and what is afer them;
and they encompass nothing of His knowledge, save such as
He wills. His throne embraces the heavens and the earth; the
preserving of them wearies Him not; He is Te Sublime, Te
Tremendous. (Al-Baqarah, 2:255)
Afer mentioning two of His Names (Al-Ḥayy and Al-Qayyum) and
some of His Qualities, God says: who is there, that shall intercede with
Him save by His leave? Now intercession is evidently a function and a
reﬂection of mercy, so we understand from this sacred verse not only
that Divine Mercy is of the Divine Essence, but also that all mercy—
even the mercy of God’s creatures to each other—is ultimately from
God, for it is by His leave. Indeed, God says:
And how many an angel there is in the heavens whose interces-
sion cannot avail in any way except afer God gives permission
for whomever He wills, and He is satisﬁed. (Al-Najm, 53:26)
And warn therewith those who fear they shall be gathered to
their Lord: apart from Him they have no protector and no
intercessor so that they might fear [God]. (Al-An‘ām, 6:51)
God is He Who created the heavens and the earth and what-
ever is between them in six days, then He presided upon the
Trone. You do not have besides Him any protector or inter-
cessor. Will you not then remember? (Al-Sajdah, 32:4)
Or have they taken besides God intercessors? Say: ‘What! even
though they have no power whatever and are unable to com-
prehend?’ / Say: ‘All intercession belongs [solely] to God. To
Him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth; then to
Him you will be brought back’. (Al-Zumar, 39:43–4)
Muslim scholars and exegetes have disagreed about the exact
diﬀerences between ‘Te Compassionate’ (Al-Raḥmān) and ‘Te
Merciful’ (Al-Raḥīm), but they all aﬃrm that the Divine Name ‘Te
Compassionate’ does not require an object, whilst the Divine Name ‘Te

--- Sayfa 380 ---
war and peace in islam
352
Merciful’ does require an object to receive the mercy. Tis means that
‘Te Compassionate’ is compassionate in His Essence, and ‘Te Merciful’
is merciful in His actions. However, since love comes with mercy, and
since mercy exists in both the Divine Names ‘Te Compassionate’ and
‘Te Merciful’, then love too is implied in both the Divine Names ‘Te
Compassionate’ and ‘Te Merciful’. Tus God’s Love is twice implied—
along with the double mention of Divine Mercy—at the beginning of
the Holy Qur’an itself and the beginning of every one of its 114 chapters
except the ninth (which is later compensated for).617
question: Since God’s Mercy embraces all things (My mercy
embraces all things); and since God has prescribed for Himself mercy; and
since God’s Mercy outstrips His wrath (according to the Ḥadīth Qudsī
which says: ‘My mercy outstrips My wrath’), then how can God punish
sinners with painful and severe punishment for their sins? God says:
Te Jews and Christians say: ‘We are the sons of God and His
beloved ones’. Say: ‘Why then does He chastise you for your
sins? Nay; you are mortals from among those He created. He
forgives whom He wills, and He chastises whom He wills’. For
to God belongs the kingdom of the heavens and of the earth,
and all that is between them; to Him is the journey’s end. (Al-
Mā’idah, 5:18)
And whoever slays a believer deliberately, his requital is Hell,
abiding therein, and God is angry with him and has cursed
him, and has prepared for him a mighty chastisement. (Al-
Nisā’, 4:93)
Fakhr al-Din al-Razi says:
Tere are many opinions about His words My mercy em-
braces all things. It is said that My mercy embraces all things
means that His Mercy in the life of the lower world is grant-
ed universally to all, whilst in the hereafer it is granted only
to the believers. Tis is indicated by [proceeding] His words:
and so I shall prescribe it for those who are God-fearing.618
And Qurtubi says, commenting on this verse:
His words My mercy embraces all things are universal, mean-
ing inﬁnite; meaning that it will not fail to reach all those to
whom it applies. It is said that it means that [His Mercy] em-
braces all in creation, in that even animals have mercy and

--- Sayfa 381 ---
353
Divine Love and Mercy in the Qur’an
aﬀection for their young. Some exegetes say that all beings
were given hope by this verse, even Iblis [Satan], who said, ‘I
am a thing!’ But then God says: and so I shall prescribe it for
those who are God-fearing.619
In any case, God says: My mercy embraces all things. He does not
say: ‘My tenderness embraces all things’, but rather (elsewhere): God is
Tender with His servants. He provides for whomever He will. And He is
the Strong, the Mighty (Al-Shūra, 42:19). God, then, is tender with His
servants in a general way, and He provides for whomever He will. Tis
does not mean for all, and does not mean that His tenderness—and
therefore gentleness—embraces all things all the time, otherwise there
would never be any suﬀering or pain in the world. Tere is thus a big
diﬀerence between mercy and tenderness. Indeed, we may have mercy
on something by temporarily doing something harsh to it to save it from
something even worse and more permanent (as, for example, does the
surgeon or veterinarian who performs surgery); yet this mercy (or this
surgery) might not be that gentle or involve any tenderness at all. God’s
Mercy embracing all things thus does not mean that nothing will ever
suﬀer, but that God will guide every existing thing to what will enable it
to suﬀer the least; and God knows best.
Love as the Root of Creation
God created human beings out of His Mercy, for He says:
Te Compassionate One / has taught the Qur’an. / He created
man, / teaching him [coherent] speech. (Al-Rahmān, 55:1–4)
And He says:
Had your Lord willed, He would have made humankind
one community, but they continue to diﬀer, / except those on
whom your Lord has mercy; and for that did He create them…
(Hūd, 11:118–9)
Fakhr al-Din al-Razi says about God’s words and for that did He
create them:
Tere are three opinions about these words. Te ﬁrst opin-
ion: Ibn ‘Abbas W said: ‘He created them for mercy’; and this
is the opinion of the majority of Mu‘tazilites, who say that it
cannot be that God created them so that they would diﬀer.

--- Sayfa 382 ---
war and peace in islam
354
Tere are several proofs for this: ﬁrstly, pronouns should be
assumed to refer to their nearest possible antecedent, and the
nearest possible antecedent here is ‘mercy’, whilst ‘to diﬀer’
is further away. Secondly, had He created them to diﬀer and
wanted them to believe this, He could not then punish them
for it, since they would be obeying Him by diﬀering. Tirdly,
if we understand the verse in this way, it is in harmony with
what He says elsewhere: and I did not create the jinn and
humankind except that they may worship Me (Al-Dhāriyāt,
51:56). If it is said, ‘If the meaning were that He created them
because of His Mercy, the pronoun “that” would be femi-
nine in Arabic (since raḥmah [“mercy”] is a feminine noun
in Arabic), not masculine,’ we respond that the feminine
status of the word raḥmah is not a true feminine, since the
word means ‘favour’ and ‘forgiveness’ [respectively faḍl and
ghufrān in Arabic, which are both masculine], as He says:
Said he, ‘Tis [hādhā—a masculine pronoun] is a mercy
(raḥmah) from my Lord’… (Al-Kahf, 18:98), and He says:
… surely the mercy (raḥmah) of God is near (qarīb, mascu-
line adjective) to the virtuous (Al-A‘rāf, 7:56). Te second
opinion is that these words mean that He created them so
that they would diﬀer. Te third opinion, which is the most
satisfactory one, is that He created the people of mercy for
mercy, and the people of diﬀering for diﬀering.620
We believe that the opinion of Ibn ‘Abbas is the one that corresponds
best with the literal meaning of the verse. Indeed, we cannot ignore the
opinion of Ibn ‘Abbas—who learnt the Holy Qur’an personally from his
cousin the Prophet Muhammad U himself—even if al-Razi does not
concur. Moreover, as al-Razi himself says, linguistically speaking, the
word raḥmah may be considered either feminine or masculine—and
therefore the word ‘that’ can indeed refer to it. At most, it might be said—
to accommodate al-Razi’s opinion—that God created people as such for
mercy, but also created them as ‘people of diﬀering’ for diﬀering and
‘people of mercy’ for mercy—in other words, that God wants to grant
His Mercy to everyone, but created them free and thus allowed them not
to choose His Mercy. However, this seems an unnecessary, complicated
quibble with Ibn ‘Abbas’s commentary. Moreover, logically speaking,
God prescribes Mercy for Himself:
…Your Lord has prescribed for Himself mercy… (Al-An‘ām, 6:54)

--- Sayfa 383 ---
355
Divine Love and Mercy in the Qur’an
And this Mercy is linked to the very creation of the
heavens and the earth:
Say: ‘To whom belongs what is in the heavens and in the
earth?’ Say: ‘To God.’ He has prescribed for Himself mercy.
He will surely gather you together on the Day of Resurrection
of which there is no doubt. Tose who have forfeited their
own souls, they do not believe. (Al-An‘ām, 6:12)
And the Messenger of God U said:
When God created the world, He wrote above His Trone:
My mercy outstrips My wrath. ’621
How, then, could God have ‘created the people of diﬀering for dif-
fering’, as al-Razi says, and not for mercy? Rather, God created human
beings for His mercy but some of them ‘diﬀered’, and as a result of this
they closed themselves oﬀ from Divine mercy, despite the vastness of
His mercy about which God says: My mercy embraces all things… (Al-
A‘rāf, 7:156).622
Furthermore, how could God have created ‘the people of diﬀering’
for ‘diﬀering’, when God has actually stated the reason for creation
elsewhere in the Holy Qur’an, and it is precisely not for ‘diﬀering’ as
such. God says:
And I did not create the jinn and humankind except that
they may worship Me (Al-Dhāriyāt, 51:56)
Now the worship of God is a mercy, and it leads to more mercy;
and God does not say here that He created some of humanity and the
jinn for worship, and others for something else (i.e. ‘diﬀering’), but
rather that He created them all for worshipping Him, and therefore
for attaining His Mercy. Indeed, there are more than twenty-ﬁve verses
in the Holy Qur’an which indicate that God created human beings for
mercy, and for that which leads to mercy. Tus God says He created
human beings to be God-fearing:
O people, worship your Lord Who created you and those
that were before you, so that you may be God-fearing. (Al-
Baqarah, 2:21)
And ‘to know the names of all things’, for He says:
And when your Lord said to the angels, ‘I am appointing on

--- Sayfa 384 ---
war and peace in islam
356
earth a vicegerent’, they said, ‘What, will You appoint there-
in one who will do corruption therein and shed blood, while
we glorify You with praise and sanctify You?’; He said, ‘As-
suredly, I know what you know not’. / And He taught Adam
the names, all of them; then He presented them to the angels
and said, ‘Now tell Me the names of these if you speak truly’.
(Al-Baqarah, 2:30-31)
And He created human beings ‘to reward them with the best
reward’, for He says:
And to God belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever
is in the earth that He may requite those who do evil for what
they have done, and reward those who are virtuous with the
best [reward]. (Al-Najm, 53:31)
And ‘to test which of them is best in conduct’, for God says:
[He] Who created death and life, that He may try you [to
see] which of you is best in conduct, and He is the Mighty, the
Forgiving (Al-Mulk, 67:2)
And ‘to reward those who believe and perform good deeds’, for
God says:
To Him is the return of all of you: God’s promise, in truth.
Truly He originates creation, then recreates it that He may
requite those who believe and perform righteous deeds, just-
ly. And those who disbelieve, for them will be a draught of
boiling water and a painful chastisement because they disbe-
lieved. (Yūnus, 10:4)
And ‘so that human beings may be certain about the encounter
with God’, for He says:
God is He Who raised up the heavens without visible sup-
ports then presided upon the Trone and disposed the sun
and the moon, each one moving, until [the conclusion of]
an appointed time. He directs the command. He details the
signs so that you might be certain of the encounter with your
Lord. (Al-Ra‘d, 13:2)
And ‘so that human beings may seek His favour, give thanks to
Him, reﬂect on His signs, understand them and be guided’, for God
says:

--- Sayfa 385 ---
357
Divine Love and Mercy in the Qur’an
He created the heavens and the earth with the Truth. Exalted
be He above what they associate. / He created man from a
drop of ﬂuid, yet behold! he is disputatious, openly. / And the
cattle, He created them for you. In them there is warmth, as
well as [other] uses, and of them you eat; / and for you there
is in them beauty, when you bring them [home] to rest, and
when you drive them forth to pasture. / And they bear your
burdens to a land which you could not reach, save with great
trouble to yourselves. Indeed your Lord is Gentle, Merciful. /
And [He created] horses and mules and asses, that you may
ride them, and for adornment; and He creates what you do
not know. / And God’s is the direction of the way, and some of
them are deviant. And had He willed, He would have guided
you all. / He it is Who sends down water from the heaven,
whence you have drink, and whence are trees, whereat you
let your animals graze. / With it He makes the crops grow
for you, and olives and date-palms and vines and all kinds
of fruit. Surely in that there is a sign for people who reﬂect. /
And He disposed for you the night and the day, and the sun
and the moon and the stars are disposed by His command.
Surely in that there are signs for people who understand. /
And whatever He has created for you in the earth, diverse in
hue. Surely in that there is a sign for people who remember.
/ And He it is Who disposed the sea, that you may eat from
it fresh meat, and bring forth from it ornaments which you
wear. And you see the ships ploughing therein; and that you
may seek of His favour, and that you might be thankful. /
And He cast into the earth ﬁrm mountains, lest it should
shake with you, and rivers and ways so that you might be
guided /—and landmarks [as well], and by the stars, they are
guided. (Al-Naḥl, 16:3–16)
And so that human beings remember Him and thank Him, for
God says:
And He it is Who made the night and day [to appear] in
succession for him who desires to remember or desires to be
thankful. (Al-Furqān, 25:62)
And so that human beings supplicate Him, for God says:
Say, ‘My Lord would not be concerned with you were it not
for your supplications. But you have denied, and so that will
remain binding.’ (Al-Furqān, 25:7)

--- Sayfa 386 ---
war and peace in islam
358
And ‘so that He might relent to the believing men and women’, for
God says:
So that God may chastise the hypocrites, men and women,
and the idolaters, men and women, and that God may relent
to the believing men and believing women. And God is For-
giving, Merciful. (Al-Aḥzāb, 33:73)
And ‘so that human beings may complete an appointed term, and
understand’, for God says:
He it is Who created you from dust, then from a drop [of
sperm], then from a blood clot, then He brings you forth as
infants, then that you may come of age, then that you may
become aged, though there are some of you who die earlier,
and that you may complete an appointed term that perhaps
you might understand. (Ghāﬁr, 40:67)
And ‘so that human beings might seek God’s favour, and thank
Him, and reﬂect upon His signs’, for God says:
God it is Who disposed for you the sea so that the ships may
sail upon it by His command, and that you may seek of His
favour, and that perhaps you may give thanks. / And He has
disposed for you whatever is in the heavens, and whatever
is in the earth, all being from Him. Surely in that there are
signs for a people who reﬂect. (Al-Jāthiyah, 45:12–3)
And ‘to requite each soul justly’, for God says:
And God created the heavens and the earth with the truth
and so that every soul may be requited for what it has earned,
and they will not be wronged. (Al-Jāthiyah, 45:22)
And ‘so that human beings may come to know one another’, for
God says:
O humankind! We have indeed created you from a male and
a female, and made you nations and tribes that you may
come to know one another. Truly the noblest of you in the
sight of God is the most God-fearing among you. Truly God
is Knower, Aware. (Al-Ḥujurāt, 49:13)
And ‘so that human beings might have insight and be people of
remembrance and penitence’, for God says:

--- Sayfa 387 ---
359
Divine Love and Mercy in the Qur’an
As an insight and a reminder for every penitent servant.
(Qāf, 50:8)
And ‘so that human beings might keep the balance with justice’, for
God says:
Te Compassionate One / has taught the Qur’an. / He created
man, / teaching him [coherent] speech. / Te sun and the moon
follow a reckoning, / and the grass and the trees prostrate. / And
He has raised the heaven and set up the balance, / [declaring]
that you should not contravene with regard to the balance. /
And observe the weights with justice and do not skimp the bal-
ance. (Al-Raḥmān, 55:1-9)
And ‘so that human beings might be guided to the way, and be grateful
to God’, for God says:
Verily We created man from a drop of mixed fluid, so that
We may test him. So We made him hearing, seeing. / Verily
We have guided him to the way, whether he be grateful or
ungrateful. (Al-Insān, 76:2-3)
And that ‘God created the earth as sustenance for human beings’, for
God says:
Are you harder to create or the heaven which He has built? /
He made it rise high and levelled it, / and darkened its night,
and brought forth its day; / and afer that He spread out the
earth; / from it He has brought forth its waters and its pas-
tures, / and has set ﬁrm the mountains / as a [source of] sus-
tenance for you and your ﬂocks. (Al-Nāzi‘āt, 79:27–33)
What all these verses have in common is the fact that God creates
human beings, gives them freedom and tests them in this life so that they
might attain His Mercy, although those who fail and do evil things are
requited for their own evil deeds.
It should also be mentioned that in addition to all the verses from the
Holy Qur’an cited above there are twenty-ﬁve other verses in the Holy
Qur’an in which God describes the wisdom behind His creating certain
parts of creation (and not all of it). Tese parts of creation were speciﬁ-
cally made for the service of humanity, to help achieve their purpose in
life, which is to attain God’s Mercy by worshipping Him. Tese verses
include, for example:

--- Sayfa 388 ---
war and peace in islam
360
It is He Who made the earth tractable for you, so walk in its
ﬂanks and eat of His provision; and to Him is the resurrection.
(Al-Mulk, 67:15)623
Tus it is clear and beyond doubt that God created human beings and
the world out of mercy and for mercy; and since Divine Mercy is inseparable
from Divine Love (as we have already just seen), this means that the world
and human beings were created out of love and for love as well.
question: If the world and human beings were created out of mercy,
and thus love, and for mercy and thus love, then how can it be that God
does not love certain (evil) people?
As discussed elsewhere, the only creatures and things which God
does not love are the evildoers and disbelievers and certain evil deeds.
Te answer to this question is therefore limited to an examination of the
states of the evildoers, disbelievers and certain evil deeds with respect to
God’s Love and Mercy.
As regards evildoers and the disbelievers, God in His Mercy and Love
created them in a state of primordial purity, and in the best stature and
the best form.624 God says:
By the ﬁg and the olive, / and [by] the Mount Sinai, / and
[by] this secure land, / Verily We created man in the best
stature. / Ten, We reduced him to the lowest of the low, /
except those who believe and perform righteous deeds, for
they shall have an unfailing reward. / So what makes you
deny thereafer the Judgement? / Is not God the fairest of all
judges? (Al-Tīn, 95:1–8)
God it is Who made for you the earth as a [stable] abode
and the heaven as a canopy. And He formed you and per-
fected your forms, and provided you with [all] the whole-
some things. Tat then is God, your Lord, so blessed be God,
the Lord of the Worlds. (Ghāﬁr, 40:64)
He created the heavens and the earth with the truth, and He
shaped you and made your shapes excellent; and to Him is
the journey’s end. (Al-Taghābun, 64:3)
O man! What has deceived you with regard to your generous
Lord? / Who created you, then made you upright, then pro-
portioned you, / assembling you in whatever form He wishes?
(Al-Inﬁṭār, 82:6–8)

--- Sayfa 389 ---
361
Divine Love and Mercy in the Qur’an
But this does not mean that God, who created human beings
in the best of statures, still loves them if and after they become the
lowest of the low. Abu Hurayrah W reported that the Messenger of
God U said:
‘Every child is born primordially pure, and then his par-
ents make him Jewish, or Christian, or Magian ….’625
And ‘Iyad ibn Majashi’i reported that the Messenger of God U
said:
‘God Almighty says: … And I created all My servants in a
righteous state, and then demons came to them and drew
them away from their religion….’ 626
This means that although God created human beings out of
mercy, He made them free and able to choose between good and
evil. God says:
Verily We have guided him to the way, whether he be
grateful or ungrateful. (Al-Insān, 76:3)
And We guided him to the two paths. (Al-Balad, 90:10)
And as for Thamud, We offered them guidance, but they
preferred blindness to guidance. So the thunderbolt of the
humiliating chastisement seized them on account of what
they used to earn. (Fuṣṣilat, 41:17)
If a person chooses goodness, virtue, or the like, then God will
love him or her more. However, if they choose the way of evil and
sin, and close themselves off from God’s guidance, then they will
not attain God’s Mercy and Love. Thus God—out of mercy and
love—creates people free, but some use this freedom to choose not
to accept God’s Mercy and Love. The inevitable price to be paid for
freedom is the possibility of evil and thus the rejection of God’s
Mercy. Indeed, God cites the Prophet Noah in the Holy Qur’an
saying:
He said, ‘O my people, have you considered if I am [act-
ing] upon a clear proof from my Lord and He has given
me mercy from Him, and you have remained blind to it,
can we force it on you, even though you are averse to it?’
(Hūd, 11:28)

--- Sayfa 390 ---
war and peace in islam
362
It is thus not a question of God not loving evil people and acts,
but rather of evil people freely refusing to be loved by God. And
God knows best.
God’s Love for Humanity in General
God’s favour (faḍl) is an aspect of His Mercy, and Divine Mercy itself—as
we saw earlier—is inseparable from Divine Love. Hence we must mention
here God’s completely gratuitous favour upon humanity in general as an
aspect of God’s Love.
Afer creating human beings from dust, God breathed His spirit
into him:
So when I have proportioned him, and breathed in him My
spirit, then fall down in prostration before him! (Ṣād, 38:72)
Who beautiﬁed everything that He created. And He began the
creation of man from clay, / then He made his progeny from an
extract of a base ﬂuid, / then He proportioned him, and breathed
into him of His spirit. And He made for you hearing, and sight
and hearts. Little thanks do you give. (Al-Sajdah, 32:7–9)
And when your Lord said to the angels, ‘Indeed I am going to
create a mortal out of dry clay [drawn] from malleable mud. /
So, when I have proportioned him and breathed of My spirit in
him, fall down in prostration before him!’ / And so the angels
prostrated, all of them together, / except Iblis, he refused to be
among those prostrating. / He [said]: ‘O Iblis what is wrong with
you that you are not among those prostrating?’ / Said he, ‘I was
not about to prostrate myself before a mortal whom You have
created out of a dry clay [drawn] from malleable mud.’ / Said
He, ‘Ten be gone from hence; for you are indeed accursed.’ (Al-
Ḥijr, 15:28–34)
And God created human beings in the best of forms (sūrah):
God it is Who made for you the earth as a [stable] abode and
the heaven as a canopy. And He formed you and perfected
your forms, and provided you with [all] the wholesome things.
Tat then is God, your Lord, so blessed be God, the Lord of the
Worlds. (Ghāﬁr, 40:64)
He created the heavens and the earth with the truth, and He
shaped you and made your forms excellent; and to Him is the
journey’s end. (Al-Taghābun, 64:3)

--- Sayfa 391 ---
363
Divine Love and Mercy in the Qur’an
O man! What has deceived you with regard to your generous
Lord? / Who created you, then made you upright, then propor-
tioned you, / assembling you in whatever form He wishes? (Al-
Inﬁṭār, 82:6–8)
And God created human beings in the best of statures (taqwīm):
By the ﬁg and the olive, / and [by] the Mount Sinai, / and [by]
this secure land, / Verily We created man in the best of statures.
/ Ten, We reduced him to the lowest of the low, / except those
who believe and perform righteous deeds, for they shall have
an unfailing reward. / So what makes you deny thereafer the
Judgment? / Is not God the fairest of all judges? (Al-Tīn, 95:1–8)
And He created human beings in the primordial state of purity (ﬁṭrah
ḥanīfah):
Nay, but those who do evil follow their own desires without any
knowledge. So who will guide him whom God has led astray?
And they have no helpers. / So set your purpose for religion, as
a ḥanīf—a nature (ﬁtrah) given by God, upon which He origi-
nated humankind. Tere is no changing God’s creation. Tat
is the upright religion, but most people do not know. (Al-Rūm,
30:29–30)
So by God’s spirit; by the best of forms; by the best of statures;
and by the primordial state of purity, God has favoured or pre-
ferred (faḍḍala) humanity in general above many other crea-
tures.627 God says:
And verily We have honoured the Children of Adam, and car-
ried them over land and sea, and provided them with good
things; and We have preferred (faḍḍalnahum) them above
many of those whom We created with a marked preferment.
(Al-Isrā’, 17:70)
Indeed, by these favours, God has ennobled human beings above
even the angels, and made them His vicegerent on earth:
And We created you, then shaped you, then said to the angels:
‘Prostrate yourselves before Adam!’ So they fell prostrate, all
save Iblis [Lucifer], he was not of those who make prostration.
(Al-A‘rāf, 7:11)
He it is Who created for you all that is in the earth; then He
turned to heaven and levelled them seven heavens and He
has knowledge of all things. / And when your Lord said to the

--- Sayfa 392 ---
war and peace in islam
364
angels, ‘I am appointing on earth a vicegerent,’ they said, ‘What,
will You appoint therein one who will do corruption therein
and shed blood, while we glorify You with praise and sanctify
You?’; He said, ‘Assuredly, I know what you know not.’ / And He
taught Adam the names, all of them; then He presented them
to the angels and said, ‘Now tell Me the names of these if you
speak truly.’ / Tey said, ‘Glory be to You! We know not except
what You have taught us. Surely You are the Knower, Wise.’ / He
said, ‘Adam, tell them their names.’; And when he had told them
their names He said, ‘Did I not tell you that I know the Unseen
in the heavens and the earth?, And I know what you reveal
and what you were hiding.’ / And when We said to the angels,
‘Prostrate yourselves to Adam’; so they prostrated themselves,
except Iblis, he refused and disdained; and so he became one of
the disbelievers (kāﬁrīn). (Al-Baqarah, 2:29–34) 628
Trough all these Divine favours, human beings were given a trust
greater than could have been borne by the heavens, the earth and the
mountains:
Indeed We oﬀered the Trust to the heavens and the earth and
the mountains, but they refused to bear it and were apprehen-
sive of it; but man undertook it. Truly he is a wrongdoer, igno-
rant.(Al-Aḥzāb, 33:72)
Finally, we must mention that in addition to all the gratuitous favours
which God has granted every human being in general, He has also
granted gratuitous graces (ni‘mah pl. ni‘am) to every single human being
individually. God says:
And if you were to count God’s grace you could never reckon it.
Indeed God is Forgiving, Merciful. (Al-Naḥl, 16:18)
Whatever grace you have, it is from God. Ten when misfor-
tune befalls you, to Him you cry for help. (Al-Naḥl, 16:53)
Do you not see that God has disposed for you whatever is in the
heavens and whatever is in the earth, and He has showered His
graces upon you, [both] outwardly and inwardly? Yet among
people there are those who dispute concerning God without any
knowledge or guidance or an illuminating scripture. (Luqmān,
31:20)
Each We supply [to] these and [to] those from your Lord’s boun-
ty. And your Lord’s bounty is not conﬁned. (Al-Isrā’, 17:20)

--- Sayfa 393 ---
365
Divine Love and Mercy in the Qur’an
God’s Love for the Virtuous in Particular
As we have seen, God has greatly favoured human beings in general
and individually—more than He has favoured other creatures. Divine
favour comes from Divine Mercy, and Divine Mercy is inseparable
from Divine Love. Tus God’s great favour to human beings is also a
result of His Love for them in general, or as such.
In addition to all that, God says that He loves people more if they
follow the Messenger of God U:
Say: ‘If you love God, follow me, and God will love you more
(yuḥbibkum), and forgive you your sins; God is Forgiving,
Merciful.’ (Āl ‘Imrān, 3:31)
Moreover, God mentions that a people may come in the future
whom God loves and who love God, and who are characterised by the
following attributes:
O you who believe, whoever of you apostatises from his
religion, God will assuredly bring a people whom He loves
and who love Him: humble towards believers, stern towards
disbelievers, struggling in the way of God, and fearing not
the reproach of any reproacher. Tat is God’s favour; He gives
it to whom He will; and God is Embracing, Knowing. (Al-
Mā’idah, 5:54)
God also speciﬁcally mentions eight general kinds of people whom
He says (in the present tense) that He ‘loves’. Tey are as follows:
1) ‘Tose who rely’ (on God) (al-mutawakkilīn or al-mutawak-
kilūn, depending on the word’s grammatical case):
It was by the mercy of God that you were lenient with
them; had you been harsh and ﬁerce of heart, they would
have dispersed from about you. So pardon them, and ask
forgiveness for them, and consult them in the matter. And
when you are resolved, rely on God; for God loves those who
rely. (Āl ‘Imrān, 3:159)
2) ‘Tose who cleanse themselves’ (al-mutaṭahhirīn) or ‘purify
themselves’ (al-muṭṭahhirīn):
Tey will ask you about the monthly period. Say: ‘It is an ail-
ment; so part with women in the monthly period, and do not
approach them until they are pure; when they have cleansed

--- Sayfa 394 ---
war and peace in islam
366
themselves, then come to them, as God has commanded you.’
Truly, God loves those who repent, and He loves those who
cleanse themselves. (Al-Baqarah, 2:222)
Never stand there. A mosque which was founded upon piety
from the ﬁrst day is worthier for you to stand therein; in it
are men who love to purify themselves; and God loves those
who purify themselves. (Al-Tawbah, 9:108)
3) ‘Tose who repent’ (al-tawwābīn):
Tey will ask you about the monthly period. Say: ‘It is an ail-
ment; so part with women in the monthly period, and do not
approach them until they are pure; when they have cleansed
themselves, then come to them, as God has commanded you.’
Truly, God loves those who repent, and He loves those who
cleanse themselves. (Al-Baqarah, 2:222)
4) ‘Te just’ (al-muqsiṭīn):
Listeners to calumny and consumers of unlawful gain. If they
come to you, then judge between them or turn away from
them. If you turn away from them, they cannot harm you
at all; and if you judge, then judge justly between them; God
loves the just. (Al-Mā’idah, 5:42)
And if two parties of believers fall to ﬁghting, make peace
between them. And if one of them aggresses against the
other, ﬁght the one which aggresses until it returns to God’s
ordinance. Ten, if it returns, reconcile them, and act justly.
Surely God loves the just. (Al-Ḥujurāt, 49:9)
God does not forbid you in regard to those who did not wage
war against you on account of religion and did not expel
you from your homes, that you should treat them kindly
and deal with them justly. Surely God loves the just. (Al-
Mumtaḥanah, 60:8)
5) ‘Tose who ﬁght for His cause in ranks, as if they were a solid
structure’ (al-ladhīna yuqātilūna fī sabīlihi ṣaﬀan ka’annahum
bunyānun marṣūṣun)629:
Indeed God loves those who ﬁght for His cause in ranks, as if
they were a solid structure. (Al-Ṣaﬀ, 61:4)
6) ‘Te patient’ (al-ṣābirīn):
How many a prophet has been killed and with him thou-

--- Sayfa 395 ---
367
Divine Love and Mercy in the Qur’an
sands manifold [fought], but they fainted not in the face of
what aﬄicted them in God’s way; they neither weakened,
nor did they humble themselves. And God loves the patient.
(Āl ‘Imrān, 3:146)
7) ‘Te God-fearing’ (al-muttaqīn):
Nay, but whoever fulﬁls his covenant, and has fear, for truly
God loves the God-fearing. (Āl ‘Imrān, 3:76)
Excepting those of the idolaters with whom you have made
a pact, and who have not diminished [their commitment to]
you in anyway, nor supported anyone against you; [as for
these] fulﬁl your pact with them until the term. Truly God
loves the God-fearing. (Al-Tawbah, 9:4)
How can the idolaters have a pact with God and His Mes-
senger, except for those with whom you made a pact at the
Sacred Mosque? So long as they are true to you, be true to
them. Truly God loves the God-fearing (Al-Tawbah, 9:7)
8) ‘Te virtuous’ (al-muḥsinīn):
And spend in the way of God; and do not cast yourselves by
your own hands into destruction; but be virtuous; God loves
the virtuous. (Al-Baqarah, 2:195)
Who expend in prosperity and adversity, and restrain their
rage, and pardon their fellow-men; and God loves those who
are virtuous. (Āl ‘Imrān, 3:134)
And God gave them the reward of this world, and the fair-
est reward of the Hereafer, and God loves the virtuous. (Āl
‘Imrān, 3:148)
So because of their breaking their covenant, We cursed them
and made their hearts hard; they distort words from their
contexts; and they have forgotten a portion of what they
were reminded of; and you will never cease to discover some
treachery on their part, except for a few of them. Yet par-
don them, and forgive; surely God loves the virtuous. (Al-
Mā’idah, 5:13)
Tose who believe and perform righteous deeds are not at
fault in what they may have consumed, so long as they fear,
and believed and performed righteous deeds, and then were
God-fearing and believed, and then were God-fearing and
virtuous; God loves the virtuous. (Al-Mā’idah, 5:93)

--- Sayfa 396 ---
war and peace in islam
368
What do all these eight types of people have in common? Te
answer is that they are all characterised by certain good and virtuous
characteristics of the soul. Reliance, purity, repentance, justice, ﬁght-
ing in God’s cause, patience, fear of God and virtue are all good and
virtuous characteristics of the soul. Tey are thus all aspects of ‘beauty
of soul’ or of human beings’ ‘inner beauty’.630 Tis conﬁrms our deﬁ-
nition of God’s Love as the ‘love of beauty’, as per the hadith wherein
it is stated: ‘God is beautiful, and He loves beauty.’631
However, ‘virtue’ (iḥsān) is more than one single good character-
istic in the soul; it encompasses the entire soul and all its traits. Tis
is evident from the ‘hadith of Gabriel’, which says:  ‘Virtue (al-iḥsān)
means to worship God as though you see Him; for [even] if you see
Him not, He assuredly sees you.’632
Sincere worship—as though we see God—requires the whole soul
because people cannot be fully aware of God and worship Him as if they
saw Him without giving Him all that they are with all their hearts, with
all their souls, with all their minds and with all their strengths. God’s
Oneness and Absoluteness requires people’s unanimity and total-
ity. Tis is reﬂected in the root meaning of the word iḥsān (‘virtue’):
iḥsān comes from ḥusn¸ which means ‘beauty’, or ‘the opposite of
ugliness.’633 Virtue, then, is the beauty of the soul, or human beings’
inner beauty, in its entirety. Tis conforms perfectly to the description
of God’s Love as from the hadith, namely that God’s Love is ‘love for
beauty’. Tus in all of the aforementioned verses (about those whom
God loves), it is as though God were saying that He particularly loves
those who adorn themselves with virtue or beauty of soul, in varying
degrees; and God knows best.
Certainly, this is what we understand from God’s words:
Say: ‘If you love God, follow me, and God will love you more
(yuḥbibkum), and forgive you your sins; God is Forgiving,
Merciful.’ (Āl ‘Imrān, 3:31)634
God ‘loves more’ (yuḥbibkum)—that is, God loves them greatly
and loves them more than others635—those who follow the way of the
Messenger of God U; and those who follow the way of the Messenger
of God U are necessarily the righteous and the virtuous, because the
Messenger of God U had a magniﬁcent nature:

--- Sayfa 397 ---
369
Divine Love and Mercy in the Qur’an
And assuredly you possess a magniﬁcent nature. (Al-Qalam,
68:4)
God’s words ‘Say: If you love God, follow me, and God will love you
more’ imply that God does not necessarily promise His greatest Love to
anyone but His Messenger U. As for everyone else, He promises to love
them more if they follow the Sunnah, without necessarily promising
them ultimate success therein. God knows best, but there may be herein
a great mystery to the eﬀect that the person who loves God and is loved
by Him in the most perfect way is the Messenger of God U. Tis is also
suggested by the fact that in the Holy Qur’an there is no other speciﬁc,
individual mention of anyone who ‘loves God and God loves him’ in
the present tense as such, and on the only occasion when this phrase is
used, it is used in the future tense. Tis occurs in the following Qur’anic
verse, which we have already cited:
O you who believe, whoever of you apostatises from his reli-
gion, God will assuredly bring a people whom He loves and
who love Him: humble towards believers, stern towards dis-
believers, struggling in the way of God, and fearing not the
reproach of any reproacher. Tat is God’s favour; He gives
it to whom He will; and God is Embracing, Knowing. (Al-
Mā’idah, 5:54)
Howbeit, we will not discuss God’s Love for His Messenger U here,
and will content ourselves with this mere allusion to the subject.
Among the types of virtuous people mentioned above it appears
that there are diﬀerences of degree and rank, for God mentions that
He loves ‘the virtuous’ (al-muḥsinūn) ﬁve times in the Holy Qur’an;
‘the God-fearing’ (al-muttaqūn) and ‘the just’ (al-muqsitūn) three times
each, and all the other categories of people once only.
On the other hand, God only speciﬁcally says that He is ‘with’ (ma‘)
‘the virtuous’ (al-muḥsinūn), ‘the God-fearing’ (al-muttaqūn), and ‘the
patient’ (al-ṣābirūn), and does not speciﬁcally say this about the other
ﬁve categories mentioned. Te meaning of ‘God’s Companionship’
(literally: ‘God’s being with someone’, ma‘iyyat Allāh’) is a delicate issue
over which Muslim scholars have diﬀered; but Muslim scholars have
generally distinguished between two kinds of Divine Companionship
in the Holy Qur’an:636

--- Sayfa 398 ---
war and peace in islam
370
1) ‘General Divine Companionship’. Tis refers to God’s being
with all things:
And We shall narrate to them with knowledge; for verily We
were not absent. (Al-A‘rāf, 7:7)
And with every group of people:
Have you not seen that God knows all that is in the heavens
and all that is in the earth? No secret conversation of three
takes place but He is their fourth [companion], nor of ﬁve but
He is their sixth, nor of fewer than that or more but He is
with them wherever they may be. Ten He will inform them of
what they did, on the Day of Resurrection. Assuredly God has
knowledge of all things. (Al-Mujādilah, 58:7)
And even with the sinners:
Tey hide themselves from people, but they do not hide them-
selves from God; for He is with them while they plot at night
with discourse displeasing to Him. God is ever Encompassing
what they do. (Al-Nisā’, 4:108)
2) ‘Special Divine Companionship’. Tis refers to God’s being with
the messengers, the prophets, and the believers in particular:
If you have sought a judgment, the judgment has now come to
you; and if you desist, it will better for you. But if you return,
We shall return, and your host will not avail you in any way,
however numerous it be; and verily God is with the believers.
(Al-Anfāl, 8:19)
God had made a covenant with the Children of Israel, and We
raised up from among them twelve leaders. And God said: ‘I
am with you. Surely if you establish the prayer, and pay the
alms, and believe in My messengers and succour them, and
lend to God a goodly loan, I will absolve you of your evil deeds,
and I will admit you to gardens underneath which rivers ﬂow.
So whoever of you disbelieves afer that, surely he has strayed
from the right way’. (Al-Mā’idah, 5:12)
It is He Who created the heavens and the earth in six days,
then presided upon the Trone. He knows what enters the
earth, and what issues from it, and what comes down from
the heaven. And He is with you wherever you may be; and
God is Seer of what you do. (Al-Ḥadīd, 57:4)

--- Sayfa 399 ---
371
Divine Love and Mercy in the Qur’an
So do not falter, and [do not] call for peace when you have the
upper hand; and God is with you, and He will not stint you in
[the reward for] your works. (Muḥammad, 47:35)
If you do not help him, [know that] God has already helped
him, when the disbelievers drove him forth—the second of two;
when the two were in the cave—when he said to his companion,
‘Do not despair; verily God is with us.’ Ten God sent down
His spirit of peace (sakīnatahu) upon him and supported him
with legions you did not see; and He made the word of those
who disbelieved the nethermost, and the Word of God was the
uppermost. And God is Mighty, Wise. (Al-Tawbah, 9:40)
And with Moses Xand Aaron X:
Said He, ‘Certainly not! Go both of you with Our signs. We will
indeed be with you, hearing.’ (Al-Shu‘arā’, 26:15)
He said, ‘Do not fear, for I shall be with the two of you, hearing
and seeing.’ (Ṭā Hā, 20:46)
And with Moses Xindividually:
He said, ‘Certainly not! Indeed I have my Lord with me. He will
guide me.’ (Al-Shu‘arā’, 26:62)
Tus there are two distinct kinds of ‘God’s Companionship’.
Otherwise, what did the Messenger of God U mean by saying ‘Do not
despair; verily God is with us’? If there were no diﬀerence between God’s
being with His Messenger U and Abu Bakr W inside the cave of Tawr,
and God’s being with the disbelievers who were trying to kill them outside
the cave of Tawr, then these words would be redundant. Similarly, what
did the Prophet Moses mean by saying ‘Certainly not’ (in answer to his
people’s saying that they would be caught by Pharaoh and his army)? If
there is no diﬀerence between God’s being with Moses and the Children
of Israel and His being with Pharaoh and his army, then these words too
would be redundant.
Tis leads us to distinguish between the ﬁve aforementioned types of
people whom God loves but does not speciﬁcally say He is ‘with’ them
(namely: ‘those who rely’; ‘those who purify themselves’ or ‘cleanse them-
selves’; ‘those who repent’; ‘the just’, and ‘those who ﬁght for His cause
in ranks, as if they were a solid structure’), and the three types of people
whom God loves and whom God says He is with, namely:

--- Sayfa 400 ---
war and peace in islam
372
1) ‘Te patient’637 (al-ṣābirīn):
O you who believe, seek help through patience and prayer;
surely God is with the patient. (Al-Baqarah, 2:153)
And when Saul went forth with the hosts, he said, ‘God will
try you with a river; whoever drinks of it, is not of me, and
whoever tastes it not, he is of me, except for him who scoops
up with his hand. But they drank of it, except a few of them;
and when he crossed it, with those who believed, they said,
‘We have no power today against Goliath and his troops.’
Tose who thought they would meet God, said, ‘How ofen
a little company has overcome a numerous one, by God’s
leave; and God is with the patient.’ (Al-Baqarah, 2:249)
And obey God and His Messenger, and do not quarrel with
one another, lest you falter and your strength fade; and be
patient. Surely God is with the patient. (Al-Anfāl, 8:46)
Now God has lightened [the burden] for you, for He knows
that there is weakness in you. So if there be a hundred of you,
steadfast, they will overcome two hundred; and if there be a
thousand of you, they will overcome two thousand by the
leave of God. And God is with the patient. (Al-Anfāl, 8:66)
2) ‘Te God-fearing’ (al-muttaqīn):
Te sacred month for the sacred month; holy things demand
retaliation; whoever commits aggression against you, then
commit aggression against him in the manner that he
aggressed against you; and fear God, and know that God is
with the God-fearing. (Al-Baqarah, 2:194)
Verily the number of months with God is twelve months in
the Book of God from the day that He created the heavens
and the earth; four of them are sacred. Tat is the right
religion. So do not wrong yourselves during them. And ﬁght
the idolaters altogether, even as they ﬁght you altogether;
and know that God is with the God-fearing. (Al-Tawbah,
9:36)
O you who believe, ﬁght those of the [aggressive] disbelievers
who are near to you, and let them ﬁnd harshness in you, and
know that God is with the God-fearing. (Al-Tawbah, 9:123)
3) ‘Te virtuous’ (al-muḥsinīn):
But as for those who struggle for Our sake, We shall assuredly

--- Sayfa 401 ---
373
Divine Love and Mercy in the Qur’an
guide them in Our ways, and truly God is indeed with the
virtuous. (Al-‘Ankabūt, 29:69)
In addition to all the above, God mentions ‘the virtuous’ and
‘the God-fearing’—and alludes to ‘the patient’—all together in the
following two passages in the Holy Qur’an:
So be patient, and your patience is only by [the help of] God.
And do not grieve for them, nor be in distress because of
that which they scheme. / Truly God is with those who fear
[Him], and those who are virtuous. (Al-Naḥl, 16:127–8)
Tey said: ‘Is it really you, Joseph?’ He said, ‘I am [indeed]
Joseph, and this is my brother. God has truly shown favour to
us. Verily if one fears and is patient, God does not waste the
wage of those who are virtuous.’ (Yūsuf, 12:90)
Tis means—and God knows best—that the three types of
believers whom God loves (‘the patient’, ‘the God-fearing’ and ‘the
virtuous’) are, as it were, a degree more distinguished than the other
ﬁve types of believers whom God loves (‘those who rely’; ‘those who
purify themselves’ or ‘cleanse themselves’; ‘those who repent’; ‘the
just’; and ‘those who ﬁght for His cause in ranks, as if they were a solid
structure’).
Tis is remarkably conﬁrmed in God’s mention of those whom
He rewards ‘without reckoning’—that is to say: without limit, and
without any common measure with the good they have done—this
reward obviously being an important indication of God’s favour, if
not His Love. In six diﬀerent verses in the Holy Qur’an, God mentions
rewarding without reckoning:
Decked out fair to the disbelievers is the life of this world; and
they deride the believers; but those who fear (ittaqū) shall be
above them on the Day of Resurrection; and God sustains
whomever He will without reckoning. (Al-Baqarah, 2:212)
You make the night to pass into the day and You make the
day to pass into the night; You bring forth the living from the
dead, and You bring forth the dead from the living, and You
provide whom You will without reckoning. (Āl ‘Imrān, 3:27)
Her Lord accepted the child with gracious acceptance, and
made her grow excellently, and Zachariah took charge of
her. Whenever Zachariah went into the sanctuary, where she

--- Sayfa 402 ---
war and peace in islam
374
was, he found her with provisions. ‘O Mary,’ he said, ‘Whence
comes this to you?’ She said, ‘From God. Truly God provides
for whomever He will without reckoning.’ (Āl ‘Imrān, 3:37)
[M]en whom neither trading, nor sale distracts from the re-
membrance of God and the observance of prayer and pay-
ment of the alms. Tey fear a day when hearts and eyes will
be overturned, / so that God may reward them for the best
of what they did, and give them more out of His favour; and
God provides whomever He will without reckoning. (Al-Nūr,
24:37–8)
Say: ‘O servants of Mine who believe! Fear (ittaqū) your
Lord. For those who are virtuous (aḥsanū) in this world,
there will be good, and God’s earth is vast. Truly the stead-
fast (al-ṣābirūn) will be paid their reward in full without any
reckoning.’ (Al-Zumar, 39:10)
Whoever commits an evil deed shall not be requited except
with the like of it; but whoever acts righteously, whether
male or female, and is a believer—such shall be admitted
into Paradise wherein they will be provided without any
reckoning. (Ghāﬁr, 40:40)
Te ﬁrst verse alludes to ‘the God-fearing’ (ittaqū); the second
verse does not deﬁne those who receive the reward without reckoning;
the third verse concerns the Blessed Virgin Mary; the fourth verse
refers to those who remember God constantly; the ﬁfh verse refers
to ‘the patient’, ‘the God-fearing’ and ‘the virtuous’—all three of the
virtues mentioned earlier together here in one verse; and the sixth and
last verse refers to those who ‘act righteously’, which perhaps implies
‘the virtuous’ in action. In short, the only virtues that are speciﬁcally
mentioned as being rewarded by God without reckoning are the same
three virtues mentioned earlier—‘the patient’, ‘the God-fearing’ and
‘the virtuous’—as ‘the elite’ among those whom God loves.638
Tere seems to be a hierarchy even within ‘the patient’, ‘the
God-fearing’ and’ the virtuous’, with the latter two seeming to be
slightly more excellent than the former: this is seen in the fact that
the only promise that God has explicitly ‘bound Himself’ (kāna ‘alā
rabbika wa‘dan mas’ūlan) as such to fulﬁl in the Holy Qur’an is to the
‘God-fearing’ (al-muttaqūn). God says:

--- Sayfa 403 ---
375
Divine Love and Mercy in the Qur’an
Say: ‘Is that better, or the Garden of Immortality which has
been promised to the God-fearing, which will be their re-
quital and journey’s end?’ / For them therein is that which
they desire, forever and ever—a promise that your Lord has
bound Himself to fulﬁl (kāna ‘alā rabbika wa‘dan mas’ūlan).’
(Al-Furqān, 25:15–6)
Tis of course is very signiﬁcant, and is reminiscent of God’s
‘prescribing for Himself Mercy’ (Sūrat Al-An‘ām, 6:12 and 6:54), as
something so important that God has deigned to ‘make it incumbent
upon Himself’, because, in fact (as we have seen earlier) Divine
Mercy is of the Divine Essence Itself. In other words, God loves ‘the
God-fearing’ to the degree that rewarding them with the Garden of
Immortality is necessitated by God’s own Essence.639
On the other hand, the paramount importance of virtue (iḥsān) is
seen in the use of the word ‘indeed with’ (la-ma‘) in Gods words: and
truly God is indeed with the (la-ma‘) virtuous (Al-‘Ankabūt, 29:69),
indicating additional emphasis on God’s being with the virtuous.
Furthermore, ‘the virtuous’—and only ‘the virtuous’—are described
in the Holy Qur’an as being ‘near to God’s Mercy’:
And work not corruption in the land, afer it has been set
right, and call upon Him in fear, and in hope—surely the
mercy of God is near to the virtuous. (Al-A‘rāf, 7:56)
All of this conﬁrms our earlier deﬁnition of ‘virtue’ as the
combination and culmination of all the good character traits of the
soul. In other words, God particularly loves those whose souls are
beautiful and virtuous according to the very measure of the level of their
beauty of soul and virtue. And the sum of virtue is synonymous with a
sound (spiritual) heart, for God says:
Te day when neither wealth nor children will avail, / ex-
cept him who comes to God with a heart that is sound (Al-
Shu‘arā’, 26:88–9)
Although God particularly loves the patient, the God-fearing and
the virtuous, His Mercy embraces all things, as we have mentioned.
To this it should be added that God’s generous bounty reaches also
all things and all people, whether they deserve it or not—the virtuous
and the sinners—as a free gif from Him, for He says (referring to the

--- Sayfa 404 ---
war and peace in islam
376
people who only want this world and to the believers, as mentioned in
the preceding verses):
Each We supply [to] these and [to] those from your Lord’s
bounty. And your Lord’s bounty is not conﬁned. (Al-Isrā’,
17:20)
Even in the case of the most virtuous people, there is no common
measure between God’s grace and their worthiness to receive it:
And He gives you all that you ask of Him. And if you were
to enumerate God’s graces, you could never number them.
Lo! man is verily a wrong-doer and unthankful! (Ibrāhīm,
14:34)
Do you not see that God has disposed for you whatever is in
the heavens and whatever is in the earth, and He has show-
ered His graces upon you, [both] outwardly and inwardly?
Yet among people there are those who dispute concerning
God without any knowledge or guidance or an illuminating
scripture. (Luqmān, 31:20)
And even the evildoers, disbelievers, idolaters and hypocrites
receive God’s Mercy and bounty:
And if God were to take humankind to task for their wrong-
doing, He would not leave upon it any living being; but He
gives them respite until an appointed term; and when their
term comes they will not defer it by a single hour nor ad-
vance it. (Al-Naḥl, 16:61)
Were God to take humankind to task for what they have ac-
quired, He would not leave on its surface a single creature.
But He reprieves them to an appointed term. And when their
term comes—then truly [they will know that] God is ever
Seer of His servants. (Fāṭir, 35:45)
Summary
In summary, in the Holy Qur’an love is a Divine Quality, and like
mercy, it is of the Divine Essence Itself. Human beings—and indeed
the universe itself—were created out of Divine Love, and for Divine
Love. God’s Love and Favour to humanity in general is a free gif,
and all beyond reckoning, but God loves in particular those who
are virtuous, to the degree that they are virtuous. Terefore, human

--- Sayfa 405 ---
377
Divine Love and Mercy in the Qur’an
beings must be virtuous—and thus loving and merciful—in order to
receive more Divine Love and Mercy. Te very purpose of our lives is
to partake—through practicing virtue, love and mercy—of the Divine
gifs of Grace, Love and Mercy.
Hence all praise belongs to God:
And He is God; there is no god except Him. To Him belongs
[all] praise in the former and in the latter. And to Him
belongs the judgement, and to Him you will be returned.
(Al-Qaṣaṣ, 28:70).
Reproduced and adjusted from Love in the Holy Qur’an
(Chapters 4, 5, and 7).
© HRH Prince Ghazi bin Muhammad, 2010

--- Sayfa 406 ---
378
chapter fifteen
LOVE OF OTHERS IN THE QUR’AN
(All Humanity, the ‘People of the Scripture’,
Believers and Friends)
HRH Prince Ghazi bin Muhammad
God clariﬁes all the diﬀerent kinds of love between human beings in
the Qur’an. We have elsewhere extensively discussed640 certain special
kinds of inter-human love—love of the believers for the Prophets and
other blessed personages; conjugal and sexual love and family love; in
what follows we discuss general human love in the Qur’an: ‘Love of
Others’ as such.
All Humanity
Because God’s mercy ‘embraces all things’ (Al-A‘rāf, 7:156), He creates
mercy and love between all people, albeit in diﬀering degrees and with
speciﬁc conditions. Perhaps one of the reasons for this is that every
person is ultimately related to every other person, since all human
beings are the progeny of Adam and Eve, and since all human beings
are thus the ‘sons [or daughters] of Adam’ (banī Ādam’).641 Tis thus
constitutes a degree of kinship, although distant (and kinship, as
we have discussed elsewhere,642 engenders and demands love). God
reminds human beings of this in the Holy Qur’an, and warns them to
fear God whenever they deal with their brothers and sisters from the
womb (raḥm) of their common mother, Eve:
O people, fear your Lord, Who created you of a single soul, and
from it created its mate, and from the pair of them scattered
many men and women; and fear God by whom you claim
[your rights] from one another and kinship ties (arḥam).
Surely God has been watchful over you. (Al-Nisā’, 4:1)

--- Sayfa 407 ---
379
Love of Others in the Qur’an
And He it is Who produced you from a single soul, such
that some are established and some are deposited. Verily We
have distinguished the signs for a people who understand.
(Al-An‘ām, 6:98)
God also tells human beings that they were created, and they will be
resurrected, as a single soul. Human beings thus share not only the same
beginning but the same end as well:
Your creation and your resurrection are only as [that of] a
single soul. Truly God is Hearer, Seer. (Luqmān, 31:28)
Moreover, although God created human beings as diﬀerent nations
and tribes, they are nonetheless all equal before God. Te only thing that
diﬀerentiates one person from another in the sight of God is how God-
fearing he or she is (and therefore how good they are):
O humankind! We have indeed created you from a male
and a female, and made you nations and tribes that you
may come to know one another. Truly the noblest of you in
the sight of God is the most God-fearing among you. Truly
God is Knower, Aware. (Al-Ḥujurāt, 49:13)
Indeed, the ethnic and linguistic diﬀerences and variety between
peoples and nations reﬂect divine wisdom and manifest divine ‘signs’
(ayāt) which people must respect, contemplate and appreciate:
And of His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth
and the diﬀerences of your tongues and your colours. Surely
in that there are signs for all peoples. (Al-Rūm, 30:22)
Human beings must value and rejoice in the way people diﬀer. Tis is
one of the meanings of that you may come to know one another, and God
knows best. Moreover, God forbids the killing of any human soul, saying:
And do not slay the soul [whose life] God has made invio-
lable, except with due cause…. (Al-Isrā’, 17:33)
…do not slay the life which God has made sacred, except
rightfully. Tis is what He has charged you with that per-
haps you will understand. (Al-An‘ām, 6:151)
Furthermore, God values every single soul as if it were all humanity,
when it comes to saving its life or not causing its death:
Because of that, We decreed for the Children of Israel that

--- Sayfa 408 ---
war and peace in islam
380
whoever slays a soul for other than a soul, or for corruption
in the land, it shall be as if he had slain humankind alto-
gether; and whoever saves the life of one, it shall be as if he
had saved the life of all humankind. Our messengers have
already come to them with clear proofs, but afer that many
of them still commit excesses in the land. (Al-Mā’idah, 5:32)
Tus God commands Muslims in the Holy Qur’an not to aggress
against any individual soul. God says:
And ﬁght in the way of God with those who ﬁght against you,
but aggress not; God loves not the aggressors. (Al-Baqarah,
2:190)
O you who believe, do not profane God’s sacraments, nor
the sacred month, nor the oﬀering, nor the garlands; nor
those repairing to the Sacred House, seeking favour from
their Lord, and beatitude. But when you are discharged,
then hunt for game. And let not hatred of a people that,
barred you from the Sacred Mosque cause you to commit
aggression. Help one another to righteousness and piety; do
not help one another to sin and enmity. And fear God; surely
God is severe in retribution. (Al-Mā’idah, 5:2)
O you who believe, be upright before God, witnesses in eq-
uity. Let not hatred of a people cause you not to be just; be
just, that is nearer to God-fearing. And fear God; surely God
is aware of what you do. (Al-Mā’idah, 5:8)
Muslims may not even commit verbal aggression against anyone, for
God says:
Woe to every backbiter, [who is a] slanderer (Al-Humazah,
104:1)
Nor even may Muslims insult anyone in their beliefs, even if they be
idolaters:643
Do not revile those whom they call upon, besides God, lest
they then revile God out of spite, through ignorance. So, We
have adorned for every community their deeds; then to their
Lord they shall return, and He will tell them what they used
to do. (Al-An‘ām, 6:108)
Tus God commands Muslims to be peaceful and to be just to-
wards every single human being, except those who wage war upon

--- Sayfa 409 ---
381
Love of Others in the Qur’an
them, destroy their places of worship and drive them out of their
homes (this being the suﬃcient justiﬁcation for a just, defensive war
in the Holy Qur’an644):
It may be that God will bring about between you and those
of them with whom you are at enmity, aﬀection. For God is
Powerful, and God is Forgiving, Merciful. / God does not
forbid you in regard to those who did not wage war against
you on account of religion and did not expel you from your
homes, that you should treat them kindly and deal with
them justly. Assuredly God loves the just. (Al-Mumtaḥanah,
60:7–8)
How can the idolaters have a pact with God and His
Messenger, except for those with whom you made a pact at
the Sacred Mosque? So long as they are true to you, be true
to them. Truly God loves the God-fearing. (Al-Tawbah, 9:7)
In addition to this, God enjoins mercy and empathy upon all human
beings to all human beings and not merely to particular groups of
people, in the following verse (although ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib X, the Lady
Fatimah, Al-Hasan X and Al-Husayn X were all the speciﬁc cause of
its revelation):
And they give food, despite [their] love of it to the needy, and
the orphan, and the prisoner. (Al-Insān, 76:8)
Fakr al-Din al-Razi comments, in his Al-Tafsir al-Kabir:
His words, And they give food, despite [their] love of it to the
needy, and the orphan, and the prisoner, refer to the story
we have related in which ‘Ali X fed the needy, the orphan
and the prisoner. Others say that the verse refers generally
to all the pious people, and that ‘giving food’ symbolises
all acts of kindness and benevolence towards the needy, of
whatever kind, even if not giving food speciﬁcally.645
As if to conﬁrm this, God mentions a prayer said by believers which
evinces mercy even towards disbelievers:
Our Lord, do not make us a cause of beguilement for those
who disbelieve, and forgive us. Our Lord, You are indeed
the Mighty, the Wise’. / Verily there is for you in them a
beautiful example, for those [of you] who hope for God
and the Last Day. And whoever turns away, [should know

--- Sayfa 410 ---
war and peace in islam
382
that] God is the Independent, the Worthy of Praise. (Al-
Mumtaḥanah, 60:5–6)
So they said, ‘In God we have put our trust. Our Lord, make
us not a [cause of] temptation for the evildoing folk.’ (Yūnus,
10:85)
God also says:
And worship God, and associate nothing with Him. Be kind
to parents, and near kindred, and to orphans, and to the
needy, and to the neighbour who is near, and to the neighbour
who is a stranger, and to the friend at your side, and to the
wayfarer, and to what your right hands own. Surely God
loves not the conceited, and the boastful. (Al-Nisā’, 4:36)
In the Qur’anic Commentary Tafsīr al-Jalālayn, it is explained that
the neighbour who is near means ‘the one who is near to you either
in terms of residence, or of family ties’, and that the neighbour who is
a stranger means ‘the one who is distant from you, either in terms of
residence, or of family ties’.646 In other words, according to Tafsīr al-
Jalālayn, the neighbour means every person on the face of the earth,
whether Muslim or disbeliever.
Likewise, it is stated in the Qura’nic Commentary Tafsīr al-Qurṭubī
that the neighbour who is near means the ‘nearby neighbour’, and that
the neighbour who is a stranger means the ‘unknown neighbour’;647
and God knows best.
Te Messenger of God U emphasised this when he said: ‘By Him
in whose hand is my soul, no servant believes until he loves for his
neighbour (or he said: ‘his brother’) what he loves for himself.’648
Similarly, the Messenger of God U said: ‘Te Compassionate One
has mercy upon those who have mercy; have mercy upon those on
earth, and He who is in Heaven will have mercy upon you.’649
Te Messenger of God U also said: ‘God does not have mercy on
those who have no mercy on people.’650
Tus mercy and empathy should be shown to all people—every
single human being—whether they be believers or not. And mercy and
empathy towards all humanity, even disbelievers, necessarily means to
forgive them, just as it means to forgive Muslims. God says:
Tell those who believe to forgive those who do not hope for

--- Sayfa 411 ---
383
Love of Others in the Qur’an
the days of God that He may requite a people for what they
used to earn. (Al-Jāthiyah, 45:14)
It was by the mercy of God that you were lenient with
them; had you been harsh and ﬁerce of heart, they would
have dispersed from about you. So pardon them, and ask
forgiveness for them, and consult them in the matter. And
when you are resolved, rely on God; for God loves those who
rely. (Āl ‘Imrān, 3:159)
And forgiveness, in turn, means to pardon people. God says:
We did not create the heavens and the earth and all that is
between them save with the Truth. And truly the Hour shall
come. So pardon them with a gracious pardoning. / Truly your
Lord, He is the Creator, the Knowing. (Al-Ḥijr, 15:85–6)
Ten pardon them and say, ‘Peace!’ For they will [soon] come
to know. (Al-Zukhruf, 43:89)
But verily he who is patient and forgives—surely that is [true]
constancy in [such] aﬀairs. (Al-Shūrā, 42:43)
And pardon and forgiveness are the way—or part of the way—of
God’s prophets, for the Prophet Joseph X said:
Tey said: ‘Is it really you, Joseph?’ He said, ‘I am [indeed] Jo-
seph, and this is my brother. God has truly shown favour to us.
Verily if one fears and endures, God does not waste the wage
of those who are virtuous’. / Tey said, ‘By God, truly God
has preferred you over us, and indeed we have been erring’.
/ He said, ‘Tere shall be no reproach on you this day. May
God forgive you, and He is the Most Merciful of the merciful.
(Yūsuf, 12:90–2)
Similarly, the Prophet Abraham X said:
My Lord, truly they have led many of humankind astray. So
whoever follows me, verily belongs with me, and whoever dis-
obeys me, truly You are Forgiving, Merciful. (Ibrāhīm, 14:36)
Equally, the Prophet and Messenger of God Muhammad U pardoned
the Meccans on the Day of the Conquest, saying:
‘What say you, and what think you?’ Tey said: ‘We say: Te
son of a noble and generous brother, and the son of a noble and
generous uncle.’ Te Messenger of God U said: ‘I say, as Joseph
said: Tere shall be no reproach upon you this day. May God

--- Sayfa 412 ---
war and peace in islam
384
forgive you, and He is the Most Merciful of the merciful.’ So they
went out, as though they had been brought out of their graves.651
To pardon, in turn, means to stop oneself from growing angry.
God says:
And vie with one another hastening to forgiveness from your
Lord, and to a garden as wide as the heavens and the earth
that has been prepared for those who fear. / Who expend in
prosperity and adversity, and restrain their rage, and pardon
their fellow men; and God loves those who are virtuous. / And
who when they commit an indecency or wrong themselves,
remember God, and pray forgiveness for their sins—and who
shall forgive sins but God?—and who do not persist in what
they did, knowing. / Tose—their requital is forgiveness from
their Lord, and Gardens beneath which rivers ﬂow, abiding
therein; excellent is the wage of those workers! (Āl ‘Imrān,
3:133–6)
So whatever you have been given is [but] the enjoyment of
the life of this world. But what is with God is better and more
lasting for those who believe and put their trust in their Lord,
/ and those who avoid grave sins and indecencies and [who],
when they are angry, forgive, / and those who answer their
Lord, and whose courses of action are [a matter of] counsel
between them, and who, of what We have bestowed on them,
expend, / and those who, when they suﬀer aggression defend
themselves: / For the requital of an evil deed is an evil deed
like it. But whoever pardons and reconciles, his reward will be
with God. Truly He does not love wrongdoers. / And whoever
defends himself afer he has been wronged, for such, there will
be no course [of action] against them. / A course [of action]
is only [open] against those who wrong people and seek [to
commit] in the earth what is not right. For such there will be a
painful chastisement. (Al-Shūrā, 42:36–42)
Furthermore, pardon on its own is not enough, for Muslims are
asked to repay an ill turn with a good one, to ‘turn the other cheek’.
God says:
Ward oﬀ with that which is better the evil [act]. We know best
what they allege. (Al-Mu’minūn, 23:96)
And they are not equal, the good deed and the evil deed. Repel
with that which is better then, behold, he between whom and

--- Sayfa 413 ---
385
Love of Others in the Qur’an
you there was enmity will be as though he were a dear friend.
/ But none is granted it, except those who are steadfast; and
none is granted it except one [deserving] of a great reward.
(Fuṣṣilat, 41:34–5)
And such as cement what God has commanded should be
cemented, and fear their Lord, and dread an awful reckon-
ing; / such as are patient, desiring their Lord’s countenance;
and maintain the prayer and expend of that which We have
provided them, secretly and openly, and repel evil with good;
those, theirs shall be the sequel of the [heavenly] Abode: / Gar-
dens of Eden, which they shall enter along with those who
were righteous from among their fathers and their spouses
and their descendants; and the angels shall enter to them from
every gate. / ‘Peace be upon you for your patience’. How excel-
lent is the sequel of the [heavenly] Abode! (Al-Ra‘d, 13:21–4)
And if you retaliate, retaliate with the like of what you have
been made to suﬀer; and yet if you endure patiently, verily that
is better for the patient. (Al-Naḥl, 16:126)
And the [true] servants of the Compassionate One are those
who walk upon the earth modestly, and who, when the igno-
rant address them, say [words of] peace. (Al-Furqān, 25:63)
In summary: God has given each and every human being inalienable
rights, and has obliged Muslims to have respect for all human beings;
not to commit aggression against anyone; to be peaceful and to be just;
to be merciful; to empathise with all human beings; to forgive them; to
pardon them; to restrain themselves from anger; and even to repay evil
deeds with kindness and ‘turn the other cheek’—and to do this with all
people, whoever they may be and regardless of their faith (or lack of it)
all the time, so long as they are not ﬁrst waging war against Muslims.
The ‘People of the Scripture’
God has enjoined mercy, justice and forgiveness upon people in general,
even as He has commanded people to be kind to all their neighbours,
whether near or far, regardless of the neighbour’s religion. God says:
And worship God, and associate nothing with Him. Be kind to
parents, and near kindred, and to orphans, and to the needy,
and to the neighbour who is near, and to the neighbour who is
a stranger, and to the friend at your side, and to the wayfarer,

--- Sayfa 414 ---
war and peace in islam
386
and to what your right hands own. Surely God loves not the
conceited, and the boastful. (Al-Nisā’, 4:36)
As we mentioned earlier, according to the commentaries of Qurtubi
and the Jalālayn, ‘the neighbour’ means every human being whether
near or far. It is worth adding here that Ibn Kathir says the following in
his own commentary:
It is related from ‘Ikrimah, Mujahid, Maymun ibn Mahran,
Dahhak, Zayd ibn Aslam, Muqatil bin Hayyan, Qatada, and
Nawf Bakkali (according to Abu Ishaq) that ‘the neighbour
who is near’ means the Muslim, and ‘the neighbour who is a
stranger’ means the Jew and the Christian.652
It is also worth mentioning that God calls the Christians of Najran
‘believers’, and curses those who tortured them, in the Holy Qur’an:
Perish the men of the ditch! / Of the ﬁre abounding in fuel, /
when they sat by it, / and they themselves were witnesses, to
what they did to the believers. / And they ill-treated them for
no other reason than that they believed in God, the Mighty,
the Praised. (Al-Burūj, 85:4–8)
Qurtubi said, commenting on this verse:
Tis refers to those who made the ditches and cast into them
the believers who dwelt in Najran in the time between Jesus
X and Muhammad U; the narrators diﬀer in their exact
words, but the meaning of what they say is essentially the
same.653
God also refers to the joy of the Muslims when the Christians of
Byzantium defeated the pagan Persians:
Alif lām mīm. / Te Byzantines have been vanquished / in
the nearer [part of the] land. But they, afer their vanquish-
ing, shall be the victors / in a few years. To God belongs the
command before and afer, and on that day, the believers shall
rejoice. (Al-Rūm, 30:1–4)
God knew full well of course that Muslims would later face the same
Christians of Byzantium in battle (including at the Battle of Mu’tah
during the Messenger’s U own lifetime in 630 CE), yet He immortalised
the Muslims’ joy about the Christian victory over the idolaters in the
Holy Qur’an. Moreover, God speaks of their victory in the form of a

--- Sayfa 415 ---
387
Love of Others in the Qur’an
happy promise to the Muslims that would cause the Muslims to rejoice,
and so this means that there is special aﬀection between Muslims and
Christians. Indeed, this is precisely what God promises in the following
verse:
You will truly ﬁnd the most hostile of people to those who believe
to be the Jews and the idolaters; and you will truly ﬁnd the near-
est of them in love to those who believe to be those who say ‘Ver-
ily, we are Christians’; that is because some of them are priests
and monks, and because they are not proud. (Al-Mā’idah, 5:82)
Although God warns His Messenger U about the hostility of some
Jews towards him,654 and praises Christians in this verse, in other verses
God praises the Children of Israel (or at least the faithful and pious among
them655) and says that they were His most favoured people:
O Children of Israel, remember My grace wherewith I graced
you, and that I have favoured you above all the worlds. (Al-
Baqarah, 2:47)
He said, ‘Shall I seek other than God as a god for you, when He
has favoured you above all the worlds?’ (Al-A‘rāf, 7:140)
And when Moses said to his people, ‘O my people, remember
God’s favour to you, when He established among you prophets,
and established you as kings, and gave you such as He had not
given to any in all the worlds’. (Al-Mā’idah, 5:20)
And verily We gave the Children of Israel the Scripture, and [the
means of] judgement, and prophethood, and We provided them
with the good things, and We favoured them above [all] worlds.
/ And We gave them clear illustrations of the commandment.
And they did not diﬀer, except afer the knowledge had come
to them, out of rivalry among themselves. Surely your Lord will
judge between them on the Day of Resurrection concerning that
in which they used to diﬀer. (Al-Jāthiyah, 45:16–7)
And verily We favoured them with a knowledge over [all] the
worlds. / And We gave them signs in which there was a manifest
trial. (Al-Dukhān, 44:32–3)
And verily We gave Moses the Scripture; so do not be in doubt
concerning the encounter with Him; and We appointed him a
guidance for the Children of Israel. / And We appointed among
them leaders who guided by Our command, when they had en-
dured [patiently] and had conviction in Our signs. / Surely your

--- Sayfa 416 ---
war and peace in islam
388
Lord will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection con-
cerning that wherein they used to diﬀer. (Al-Sajdah, 32:23–5)
Moreover, God tells Muslims that among all the People of the Scripture
there are righteous and exemplary people (who should be admired):
Yet they are not all alike; some of the People of the Scripture are
a community upright, who recite God’s verses in the watches of
the night, prostrating themselves. / Tey believe in God and in
the Last Day, enjoining decency and forbidding indecency, vy-
ing with one another in good works; those are of the righteous. /
And whatever good you do, you shall not be denied it, and God
knows the God-fearing. (Āl ‘Imrān, 3:113–5)
And those who adhere to the Scripture, and have established
prayer—verily We shall not let the wages of reformers go to
waste. (Al-A‘rāf, 7:170)
In summary: God enjoins upon Muslims—in addition to having
respect, justice and mercy in general towards all humanity—to have
aﬀection and admiration for the People of the Scripture in general
(notably Christians and Jews). God says in the Holy Qur’an that the Jews
were His most favoured people and that Muslims have a special aﬃnity
with Christians in particular; and God knows best.
The Believers
In addition to respect, justice, mercy, pardon, forgiveness,656 kindness,
aﬀection and admiration, God requires believers to maintain special ties
of brotherhood between them:
Te believers are indeed brothers. Terefore [always] make
peace between your brethren, and fear God, so that perhaps you
might receive mercy. (Al-Ḥujurāt, 49:10)
Tus God makes believers brothers (and sisters), and reminds them
of the rights of this brotherhood by saying ‘and fear God’. God then makes
His mercy conditional upon fearing Him and maintaining the bond of
brotherhood and peace between believers. In other words, God says that
He will have mercy on those who love their brethren in faith and keep
peace with them and between them.
Now, ‘brotherhood’ means love—and nothing less than love—
between believers:

--- Sayfa 417 ---
389
Love of Others in the Qur’an
And those who had settled in the hometown, and [had
abided] in faith before them, love those who have emigrated
to them, and do not ﬁnd in their breasts any need of that
which those [others] have been given, but prefer [others]
to themselves, though they be in poverty. And whoever is
saved from the avarice of his own soul, those—they are the
successful. (Al-Ḥashr, 59:9)
In this beautiful verse, God Almighty makes it clear that the love
that believers should have for one another is not a matter of mere
sentiment that does not oblige the believer to do anything. Rather, this
love presupposes a state of soul which sincerely and altruistically puts
the good of others above oneself, and thus overcomes ‘the avarice of his
[or her] own soul’.657
In summary: in addition to respect, justice, mercy, aﬀection and
kindness, God requires believers to love one another more than they
love themselves. Tis love is what is sometimes called ‘love for the sake
of God’ or ‘love in God’ (al-ḥubb ﬁ’Llāh).
Friends
In addition to the brotherhood of faith just discussed, God mentions vari-
ous degrees of friendship in the Holy Qur’an. ‘Company’ or ‘companion-
ship’ (ṣuḥbah) is the lowest level of friendship, and God mentions it in
many verses of the Holy Qur’an, such as the following two verses:
[Moses] said, ‘If I ask you about anything afer this, then do
not keep me in your company (tuṣaḥibni), for truly you [will]
have found from me’ [suﬃcient] excuse. (Al-Kahf, 18:76)
O my two fellow-prisoners (saḥibayy al-sijni)!: Are several
lords better, or God, the One, the Almighty? (Yūsuf, 12:39)
Generally, the word ‘company’ (ṣuḥbah) in the Holy Qur’an does
not imply a special aﬀection or friendship, but suggests the notion of
fellowship or companionship in a particular thing. Te ‘companions of
hell’ (aṣḥāb al-nār) do not love one another, but they are together in hell:
He will say, ‘Enter into the Fire among communities of jinn and
humankind who passed away before you’. Every time a com-
munity enters, it curses its sister-community, until, when they
have all followed one another there, the last of them shall say

--- Sayfa 418 ---
war and peace in islam
390
to the ﬁrst of them, ‘Our Lord, these led us astray; so give them
a double chastisement of the Fire.’ He will say, ‘For each will be
double but you do not know’. / And the ﬁrst of them shall say
to the last of them, ‘You have no advantage over us. So taste
the chastisement for what you used to earn’. (Al-A‘rāf, 7:38–9)
Sometimes ṣuḥbah can simply mean ‘ownership’, as with aṣḥāb al-
fīl (‘owners of an elephant’)—the army of the Abyssinian King Abrahah
who owned an elephant and tried to attack the Ka‘bah in pre-Islamic
times. God says:
Have you not considered the way in which your Lord dealt
with the Men of the Elephant (aṣḥāb al-fīl)? (Al-Fīl, 105:1)
Despite this, the word ‘company’ (ṣuḥbah) can also mean ‘friend-
ship’ and imply a certain kind of aﬀection, as is the case in the follow-
ing two verses:
If you do not help him, [know that] God has already helped
him, when the disbelievers drove him forth—the second of
two; when the two were in the cave—when he said to his
companion, ‘Do not despair; verily God is with us’. Ten God
sent down His spirit of peace (sakīnatahu) upon him and
supported him with legions you did not see; and He made
the word of those who disbelieved the nethermost, and the
Word of God was the uppermost. And God is Mighty, Wise.
(Al-Tawbah, 9:40)
Or did you think that the Companions of the Cave and the
Inscription were a [unique] marvel from among Our signs?
(Al-Kahf, 18:9)
Beyond ‘companionship’ lies ‘friendship’ (ṣadāqah). ‘Friendship’
(ṣadāqah) implies a speciﬁc level of sincere mutual love (maḥabbah) and
brotherhood. God mentions ‘friendship’, clariﬁes its meaning, honours
it, and grants it a special status by acknowledging it even in His Laws:
Tere is no blame upon the blind, nor any blame upon the
lame, nor any blame upon the sick, nor upon yourselves if you
eat from your own houses, or your fathers’ houses, or your
mothers’ houses, or your brothers’ houses, or your sisters’
houses, or the houses of your paternal uncles or the houses of
your paternal aunts, or the houses of your maternal uncles or
the houses of your maternal aunts, or [from] that whereof you

--- Sayfa 419 ---
391
Love of Others in the Qur’an
hold the keys, or [from] those of your [faithful] friends. You
would not be at fault whether you eat together, or separately.
But when you enter houses, bid peace to yourselves with a sal-
utation from God, blessed and good. So God clariﬁes the signs
for you that perhaps you might comprehend. (Al-Nūr, 24:61)
Above ‘friendship’ we can discern ‘close friendship’ (ṣadāqah
ḥamīmiyyah) in the Holy Qur’an, for God says:
Tell My servants who believe that they establish prayers and
expend of that which We have provided them, secretly and
openly, before a day comes wherein there will be neither bar-
gaining, nor befriending (khilāl). (Ibrāhīm, 14:31)
Nor any intimate friend. (Al-Shu‘arā’, 26:101)658
Finally, there is a degree of friendship that is even higher than ‘close
friendship’ (ṣadāqah ḥamīmiyyah). God calls this khullah or ‘intimate
friendship’.659 God says:
[Intimate] Friends (al-akhillā’) will, on that day, be foes of one
another, except for the God-fearing. (Al-Zukhruf, 43:67)
In summary: God mentions, aﬃrms and blesses four diﬀerent
degrees of ‘friendship’—over and above the love which exists between
believers—in the Holy Qur’an: (1) ‘Company’ or ‘companionship’
(ṣuḥbah); (2) ‘friendship’ (ṣadāqah); (3) ‘close friendship’ (ṣadāqah
ḥamīmiyya), and (4) ‘intimate friendship’ (khullah). Tese constitute,
in ascending order, the gamut of friendship between believers, and
the highest degrees of (non-sexual) love between those who are not
related;660 and God knows best.
Reproduced and adjusted from Love in the Holy Qur’an
(Chapters 17). © HRH Prince Ghazi bin Muhammad, 2010

--- Sayfa 420 ---
392
chapter sixteen
MERCY IN THE HADITH
Shaykh Sayyid Hassan Saqqaf and
HRH Prince Ghazi bin Muhammad
Introduction
Te Ḥadīth, sometimes called ‘Traditions’, are texts which relate the
sayings and doings of the Prophet Muhammad U.
Te corpus of these beautiful sayings are considered by Muslims
to be second in spiritual and legal authority only to the Holy Qur’an.
In what follows we cite around forty of the best known and best loved
hadith about Divine Mercy and the necessity of human beings being
merciful. Tese hadith are epitomised by the very inscription on God’s
throne—itself related in a hadith—‘My mercy outstrips My wrath.’
Each section below quotes verses from the Qur’an, as the truths
of the Qur’an give the hadith meaning and substance. Te verses
are cited with chapter and verse numbers, while the hadith citations
refer to the numbering system of Te Sunna Project’s Encyclopedia of
Hadith, prepared in cooperation with the scholars of al-Azhar, which
includes Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī, Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim, Sunan Abu Dāwud, Sunan
al-Tirmidhī, Sunan al-Nasā’ī, Sunan Ibn Mājah, and Muwaṭṭa’ Malik.
Generally only the words of the Prophet U are quoted, without the
isnād or chain of transmission, but for some hadith the context or
questions posed to the Prophet U are included. Te Qur’an transla-
tions are based on Pickthall, with modiﬁcations.

--- Sayfa 421 ---
393
Mercy in the Hadith
Part One: Mercy, Which Outstrips
Mercy
From reciting the Qur’an to sitting at the table, Muslims begin their
actions by saying In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful.
Tis sacred formula, whose author is God, is based ﬁrstly on the supreme
name Allah, then on the two names al-Raḥmān and al-Raḥīm, both of
which derive from raḥmah, or mercy, a word which can also mean love,
kindness, and compassion. God did not choose two names of wrath
(ghadab) or even a balance between mercy and wrath, because with
God there is no balance between mercy and wrath. Even wrath, from a
certain point of view, is a kind of mercy for the believer, because it can
purify his soul and help make him ready to enter paradise.
Among the Qur’anic verses which relate to mercy and compassion
are the following, in which God says:
Say: Unto whom belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and the
earth? Say: Unto God. He has prescribed for Himself mercy.
(Al-An‘ām, 6:12)
Your Lord has prescribed for Himself mercy, that whoso of you
does evil through ignorance and repents aferward thereof and
does right, (for him) lo! He is Forgiving, Compassionate. (Al-
An‘ām, 6:54)
My mercy embraces all things, therefore I shall ordain it for
those who ward oﬀ (evil) and pay the poor-due, and those who
believe Our revelations. (Al-A‘rāf, 7:156)
Lo! the mercy of God is near to the virtuous. (Al-A‘rāf, 7:56)
Announce, (O Muhammad) to My slaves that verily I am the
Forgiving, the Compassionate. (Al-Ḥijr, 15:49)
Tose who bear the Trone, and all who are round about it,
hymn the praises of their Lord and believe in Him and ask for-
giveness for those who believe (saying): ‘Our Lord! You com-
prehend all things in mercy and knowledge, therefore forgive
those who repent and follow Your way. Ward oﬀ from them
the punishment of hell.’ (Ghāﬁr, 40:7)
And from the hadith of the Prophet U:
 ‘God says, Great and Glorious is He, “My mercy outstrips my
wrath.”’ (Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim no. 7146, Kitāb al-Tawbah.)

--- Sayfa 422 ---
war and peace in islam
394
‘God is not merciful to one who is not merciful to people.’
(Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī no. 7465, Kitāb al-Tawḥīd; Ṣaḥīḥ Mus-
lim no. 6170, Kitab al-Faḍā’i.)
Te Messenger of God kissed (his grandson) Hasan, the
son of ‘Ali, while Aqra‘ bin Habis al-Tamimi was sitting
nearby. Aqra‘ said, ‘I have ten children and have not kissed
any of them.’ Te Messenger of God looked at him and
said, ‘He who does not show mercy shall not be shown
mercy.’  (Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī no. 6063, Kitāb al-Adab.)
An old man came looking for the Prophet, and the people
were slow in making way for him, so the Prophet said, ‘He
who is unkind to the young and disrespectful to the old is
not one of us.’ (Sunan al-Tirmidhī no. 2043, Kitāb al-Birr
wa’l-ṣilah.)
‘Te merciful are shown mercy by the Merciful. Be merci-
ful to those on earth, and He who is in heaven will be mer-
ciful to you. Kinship ties are connecting branches from
the Merciful. Whoever maintains them will be maintained
by God, and whoever cuts them will be cut oﬀ by God.’
(Sunan al-Tirmidhī no. 2049, Kitāb al-Birr wa’l-ṣilah.)
‘Āʾishah (the wife of the Prophet) said, ‘Te Messenger of
God never struck anything with his hand, neither woman
nor servant. He only did so while struggling in the path of
God. Nor did he ever do harm to a thing such as to take
vengeance upon its owner. He only did so when God’s sa-
cred bounds were violated, and would take vengeance for
God, Great and Glorious is He.’ (Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim no. 6195,
Kitāb al-Faḍā’il.)
‘God made mercy one-hundred parts. He held back nine-
ty-nine parts, and sent down one part to earth. It is from
that part that creatures show mercy to each other, such
that a mare will lif her hoof over her foal, fearing that
she might harm him.’ (Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī no. 6066, Kitāb
al-Adab.)
‘If the believer knew the punishment of God, he would
never feel assured of His Garden, and if the unbeliever
knew the mercy of God, he would never despair of His
Garden.’ (Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim no. 7155, Kitāb al-Tawbah.)

--- Sayfa 423 ---
395
Mercy in the Hadith
Te Heart and the Intention
Te heart is the centre of man, and is the place where mercy descends
from God, and is the source from which man’s mercy then manifests in
the world. It is the heart that ﬁnds peace in the remembrance of God,
and it is the heart into which the tranquility of God descends. Intention is
inseparable from the heart, because the heart commands all the faculties
of the human soul, and lives in the hereafer where we will experience
the consequences of our intentions and actions in this life.
Among the Qur’anic verses which relate to the heart and intention
are the following, in which God says:
And whosoever believes in God, He guides his heart. And God
is Knower of all things. (Al-Taghābun, 64:11)
(The Day of Judgment is): The day when wealth and sons
avail not (any man), save him who brings unto God a whole
heart. (Al-Shu‘arā’, 26:88–9)
Know that God comes in between the man and his own
heart, and that He it is unto Whom you will be gathered.
(Al-Anfāl, 8:24)
(God guides those): Who have believed and whose hearts
have rest in the remembrance of God. Verily in the remem-
brance of God do hearts find rest! (Al-Ra‘d, 13:28)
He it is Who sent down tranquillity into the hearts of the
believers that they might add faith unto their faith. (Al-
Fatḥ, 48:4)
Is not the time ripe for the hearts of those who believe to
submit to God ’s reminder? (Al-Ḥadīd, 57:16)
For indeed it is not the eyes that grow blind, but it is the
hearts, which are within the bosoms, that grow blind. (Al-
Ḥajj, 22:46)
And from the hadith of the Prophet U:
‘Actions come only through intentions. Every man shall have
what he intended. Whoever emigrates to attain something
of this world, or to marry a woman, emigrates for what he
emigrates for.’ (Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī no. 1, Kitāb Bad ’ al-Waḥy;
Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim no. 5036, Kitāb al-Imārah)
‘No man shall enter the Garden so long as he has a mote’s

--- Sayfa 424 ---
war and peace in islam
396
weight of pride.’ A man said, ‘Men like to have beautiful
clothes and sandals.’ He said, ‘God is beautiful and loves
beauty. Pride is to disregard the truth and to scorn people’.
(Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim no. 275, Kitāb al-Īmān)
‘Te permitted is clear, and the forbidden is clear. Between
the two lie doubtful matters unknown to most people.
Whoever is pious regarding doubtful matters is thereby
thorough in his religion and his honour. As for he who falls
into doubtful matters, he is like a shepherd who pastures
around a sanctuary, on the verge of entering it. Every king
has a sanctuary, and indeed God’s sanctuary on earth is
His sacred bounds. Behold! Within everybody is a piece
of ﬂesh: when it thrives, the whole body thrives, and when
it rots, the whole body rots, and indeed that is the heart.’
(Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī no. 52, Kitāb al-Īmān; Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim no.
1599, Kitāb al-Musāqāh.)
Te Prophet said, ‘God does not look at your bodies or at
your forms, but looks at your hearts,’ and he used his ﬁn-
gers to point at his chest. (Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim no. 6707, Kitāb
al-Birr wa’l-Ṣilah wa’l-Adāb)
Te Messenger of God used to say, ‘O God, I seek refuge
in Tee from a heart that is not humble, a prayer that goes
unheard, a soul that is not satisﬁed, and knowledge that is
of no use. I seek refuge in Tee from these four.’ (Sunan al-
Tirmidhī no. 3819, Kitāb al-Da‘awāt.)
‘Te ﬁrst person to be judged on the Day of Judgment will
be a man who was martyred. He will be brought forth,
shown the favours he enjoyed, and he will recognise them.
He (God) will say, ‘What did you do concerning these?’
He will say, ‘I fought for Your sake until I was martyred.’
He will say, ‘You have lied. Rather, you fought so that it
would be said, “He was bold,” and it was said.’ Ten it will
be commanded that he be dragged along on his face until
he is thrown into the Fire. Ten there will be a man who
acquired and dispensed knowledge and recited the Quran.
He will be brought forth, shown the favours he enjoyed,
and he will recognise them. He will say, ‘What did you do
concerning these?’ He will say, ‘I acquired and dispensed
knowledge and recited the Quran for Your sake.’ He will
say, ‘You have lied. Rather, you acquired knowledge so that

--- Sayfa 425 ---
397
Mercy in the Hadith
it would be said, “He is learned,” and you recited the Quran
so that it would be said, “He is a reciter,” and it was said.’
Ten it will be commanded that he be dragged along on
his face until he is thrown into the Fire. Ten there will
be a man whom God enriched and gave all manner of
wealth. He will be brought forth, shown the favours he en-
joyed, and he will recognise them. He will say, ‘What did
you do concerning these?’ He will say, ‘I lef no path upon
which you ordered that a bestowal be made without giving
something there for Your sake.’ He will say, “You have lied.
Rather, you did that so that it would be said, “He is gener-
ous,” and it was said.’ Ten it will be commanded that he be
dragged along on his face and then thrown into the Fire. ’
(Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim no. 5032, Kitāb al-Imārah.)
Piety and Righteousness
Piety (taqwah) and righteousness (birr) can be seen, from a certain
perspective, as the expression of mercy in all aspects of our life.
Indeed, when we show mercy we must not limit it to certain people, or
to certain situations, but must let our kindness, love, and respect shine
through in everything we do. Tis must originate from our mindful-
ness of God’s mercy, and from reverential fear of His wrath should we
choose the way of anger over the way of mercy.
Among the Qur’anic verses which relate to piety and righteous-
ness are the following, in which God says:
O you who believe! When you conspire together, do not con-
spire together for crime and wrongdoing and disobedience
toward the messenger, but conspire together for righteous-
ness and piety, and keep your duty toward God, unto whom
you will be gathered. (Al-Mujādilah, 58:9)
O mankind! Lo! We have created you male and female, and
have made you nations and tribes that you may know one
another. Lo! the noblest of you, in the sight of God, is the
most pious of you. Lo! God is Knower, Aware. (Al-Ḥujurāt,
49:13)
So make provision for yourselves (Hereafer); for the best
provision is piety. Terefore keep your duty unto Me, O peo-
ple of understanding. (Al-Baqarah, 2:197)

--- Sayfa 426 ---
war and peace in islam
398
What (plea) have they that God should not punish them,
when they debar (His servants) from the Inviolable Place of
Worship, though they are not its ﬁtting guardians. Its ﬁtting
guardians are the pious. But most of them know not. (Al-
Anfāl, 8:34)
It is not righteousness that you turn your faces to the East and
the West; but righteous is he who believes in God and the
Last Day and the angels and the Scripture and the prophets;
and gives wealth, for love of Him, to kinsfolk and to orphans
and the needy and the wayfarer and to those who ask, and
to set slaves free; and observes proper worship and pays the
poor-due. And those who keep their treaty when they make
one, and the patient in tribulation and adversity and time of
stress. Such are they who are sincere. Such are the pious. (Al-
Baqarah, 2:177)
You will not attain unto righteousness until you spend of that
which you love. And whatsoever you spend, God is Aware
thereof. (Āl ‘Imrān, 3:92)
And from the hadith of the Prophet U:
‘Te best of you are those with the most virtuous charac-
ter.’  (Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī  no. 3599, Kitāb al-Manāqib.)
‘None of you believes until you desire for your brother
what you desire for yourself.’ (Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī no. 13,
Kitāb al-Īmān; Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim no. 179, Kitāb al-Īmān.)
Speaking to his Companion Abu Hurayrah, the Prophet U
said, ‘Abu Hurayrah, be Godfearing so as to be the most
worshipful of people, be content so as to be the richest of
people, desire for people what you desire for yourself so
as to be a believer, act virtuously with your neighbour so
as to be a Muslim, and reduce your laughter, for excessive
laughter kills the heart.’ (Sunan Ibn Mājah no. 4357, Kitāb
al-Zuhd.)
‘Whoever relieves a believer’s hardship in the world will
have a hardship of the Day of Judgment relieved for him
by God. Whoever eases a diﬃculty will be eased in the
world and in the hereafer by God. Whoever covers a
Muslim will be covered by God in the world and in the
hereafer. God helps his slave as long as the slave helps his
brother. Whoever travels a path to acquire knowledge will

--- Sayfa 427 ---
399
Mercy in the Hadith
have his path to Paradise made easy by God. No group gath-
ers together in a house of God, reciting the Book of God and
studying it together, without tranquillity descending upon
them, mercy enveloping them, the angels encircling them,
and God remembering them with those around Him. One
who is slowed by his actions will not be quickened by his
lineage.’ (Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim no. 7028, Kitāb al-Dhikr wa’l-Du‘a’.)
Forgiveness
Forgiveness comes from mercy, and for the fallen soul forgiveness is that
aspect of mercy which saves. God promises us forgiveness for our sins,
but we must do our part in trying to make amends for our faults. If we
are sincere and repentant, we have no reason to despair of His mercy.
Among the Qur’anic verses which relate to forgiveness are the
following, in which God says:
Lo! God does not pardon that partners should be ascribed
unto Him. He pardons all, save that, to whom He will. (Al-
Nisā’, 4:116)
(Te prophet Joseph said to his brothers): Have no fear this
day! May God forgive you, and He is the Most Merciful of
those who show mercy. (Yūsuf, 12:92)
Say: ‘O My slaves who have been prodigal to their own hurt!
Despair not of the mercy of God, Who forgives all sins. Lo! He
is the Forgiving, the Compassionate.’ (Al-Zumar, 39:53)
He is the Forgiving, the Loving. (Al-Burūj, 85:14)
Lo! there was a party of My slaves who said: ‘Our Lord! We
believe, therefore forgive us and have mercy on us for You art
Best of all who show mercy.’ (Al-Mu’minūn, 23:109)
And (O Muhammad) say: ‘My Lord! Forgive and have mer-
cy, for You art Best of all who show mercy.’ (Al-Mu’minūn,
23:118)
(Te prophet Moses said, upon slaying the Egyptian): ‘My
Lord! Lo! I have wronged my soul, so forgive me.’ Ten He
forgave him. Lo! He is the Forgiving, the Compassionate. (Al-
Qaṣaṣ, 28:16)
And from the hadith of the Prophet U:
‘If none of you had any sins for God to forgive for you, God

--- Sayfa 428 ---
war and peace in islam
400
would bring forth a people with sins that he would forgive
for them.’ (Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim no. 7140, Kitāb al-Tawbah.)
Te Prophet said,  ‘A slave sinned and said, “O God, forgive
me my sin.” God, Blessed and Most High, said, “My ser-
vant sinned and knew that he has a Lord who forgives sins
and punishes for them.” Ten he sinned again and said, “O
Lord, forgive me my sin.” God, Blessed and Most High,
said, “My servant sinned and knew that he has a Lord who
forgives sins and punishes for them.” Ten he sinned again
and said, “O Lord, forgive me my sin.” God, Blessed and
Most High, said, “servant sinned and knew that he has a
Lord who forgives sins and punishes for them. Do what
you wish, for I have forgiven you.”’ (Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim no. 7162,
Kitāb al-Tawbah.)
Te Prophet said that God said, ‘Son of Adam, so long as
you call upon Me and ask of Me, I shall forgive you for
what you have done, and I shall not mind. Son of Adam,
were your sins to reach the clouds of the sky and were you
then to ask forgiveness of Me, I would forgive you. Son of
Adam, were you to come to Me with faults nearly equalling
the earth and were you then to meet Me, ascribing no part-
ner to Me, I would bring you forgiveness nearly equalling
the earth.’ (Sunan al-Tirmidhī no. 3885, Kitāb al-Da‘awāt.)
Part Two: Wrath, Which is Outstripped
Harm  and Wrongdoing
It is ﬁtting, when remembering Divine Mercy, to call to mind what
opposes it. Te Qur’anic term ẓulm can be translated as tyranny,
wrongdoing, and darkness. Te wrongdoer or tyrant chooses dark-
ness over the light of God’s mercy. His very act of doing harm to
others or to himself is a turning away from that mercy. Indeed, from
a certain point of view, God never withholds His mercy. It is we who
enter into the shadows of our own souls, forgetting that the light of
mercy is always shining regardless of what we do.
Among the Qur’anic verses which relate to harm and wrongdoing
are the following, in which God says:
Tey wronged Us not, but they did wrong themselves. (Al-
Baqarah, 2:57)

--- Sayfa 429 ---
401
Mercy in the Hadith
Lo! God wrongs not mankind in anything; but mankind
wrong themselves.(Yūnus, 10:44)
Whoso transgresses God ’s limits, he verily wrongs his soul.
(Al-Ṭalāq, 65:1)
Tose who do wrong will come to know by what a (great)
reverse they will be overturned! (Al-Shu‘arā’, 26:227)
And from the hadith of the Prophet U:
It was said, ‘Messenger of God, who is the best Muslim?’
He said, ‘He from whose tongue and hand Muslims are
safe.’  (Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim no. 170, Kitāb al-Īmān; Ṣaḥīḥ al-
Bukhārī  no. 11, Kitāb al-Īmān.)
God harms the one who harms, and God torments the
one who torments. (Sunan Abu Dāwud no. 3637, Kitāb al-
Aqdiya; Sunan Ibn Mājah no. 2432, Kitāb al-Aḥkām.)
‘Let there be neither harming nor requital to harm’. (Sunan
Ibn Mājah no. 2430, Kitāb al-Aḥkām.)
Te Prophet said that God, Blessed and Most High, said,
‘My slaves, I have forbidden tyranny for Myself, and have
made it forbidden among you. So be not tyrants of one
another.’ (Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim no. 6737, Kitāb al-Birr wa’l-Ṣilah
wa’l-Adāb.)
‘Abusing a Muslim is a sin, and killing him is unbelief.’
(Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī no. 47, Kitāb al-Īmān; Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim no.
230, Kitāb al-Īmān.)
Te Prophet said, ‘By God, he does not believe; by God, he
does not believe; by God, he does not believe.’ It was said,
‘Who, Messenger of God?’ He said, ‘One whose neighbour
does not feel safe from his trespasses.’ (Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī
no. 6084, Kitāb al-Adab.)
‘May he who believes in God and the Last Day do no harm
to his neighbour, and may he who believes in God and
the Last Day honour his guest, and may he who believes
in God and the Last Day say what is good or keep silent.’
(Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī no. 6087, Kitāb al-Adab.)
‘Do not envy one another, nor expose one another, nor be
angry with one another, nor be disparate from one another,
nor let one sell what belongs to another. Be slaves of God,
in brotherhood. A Muslim is a Muslim’s brother. He does

--- Sayfa 430 ---
war and peace in islam
402
not wrong him, abandon him, or mock him. Piety is here,’
and he pointed to his chest three times, ‘It is enough evil
for a man to mock his Muslim brother. Te blood, property,
and honour of all Muslims is inviolable by all others.’ (Ṣaḥīḥ
Muslim no. 6706, Kitāb al-Birr wa’l-Ṣilah wa’l-Adāb.)
Bigotry and Takfīr
Ofen bigotry and takfīr (meaning to declare another person to be an
unbeliever or kāﬁr) are disguises for the more fundamental sins of
greed, jealousy, revenge, and the desire for power. Takfīr is a means
by which a soul justiﬁes its taking of an innocent life, when in reality
such a person is merely covering his bloodlust and brutality with a
pious veneer. He may fool himself into thinking that the human being
he devalues has no right to life, property, or honour, but his judgment
does not bind God, though God’s judgment will bind him. Declaring
another person to be an unbeliever, or to dehumanise him through
any other form of bigotry and ideology, opens the door to the great
sins of pride, avarice, and lust, which lead to thef, rape, and murder.
Takfīr and bigotry are thus the very antithesis of mercy.
Among the Qur’anic verses which relate to bigotry and takfīr are
the following, in which God says:
And hold fast, all of you together, to the cable of God, and
do not separate. And remember God ’s favour unto you:
How you were enemies and He made friendship between
your hearts so that you became as brothers by His grace; and
(how) you were upon the brink of an abyss of ﬁre, and He did
save you from it. Tus God makes clear His revelations unto
you, that perhaps you may be guided. (Āl ‘Imrān, 3:103)
Lo! As for those who sunder their religion and become schis-
matics, no concern at all have you with them. Teir case will
go to God, Who then will tell them what they used to do.
(Al-An‘ām, 6:159)
O you who believe! When you go forth (to ﬁght) in the way
of God, be careful to discriminate, and say not unto one who
oﬀers you peace: ‘You are not a believer,’ seeking the chance
proﬁts of this life (so that you may despoil him). With God
are plenteous spoils. Even thus (as he now is) were you before;
but God has since then been gracious unto you. Terefore

--- Sayfa 431 ---
403
Mercy in the Hadith
take care to discriminate. God is ever Informed of what you do.
(Al-Nisā’, 4:94)
Te believers are nothing else than brothers. Terefore make
peace between your brethren and observe your duty to God that
perhaps you may obtain mercy. (Al-Ḥujurāt, 49:10)
And from the hadith of the Prophet, U:
A Companion of the Prophet related that, while on an expe-
dition, ‘I came upon a man who said, “Tere is no deity but
God,” and I ran him through. Tis occurred to me and so I
mentioned it to the Prophet, and the Messenger of God said,
“He said, ‘Tere is no deity but God,’ and you killed him?” I
said, “He only said it out of fear of the sword.” He said, “Did
you open him up to see if his heart said it or not?” He kept
repeating that until I wished that I had entered Islam that day.’
(Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim no. 287, Kitāb al-Īmān.)
‘Whosoever is killed under the banner of pride, calling to
tribalism or aiding tribalism, has a killing from the days of
ignorance.’ (Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim no. 4898, Kitāb al-Imārah.)
‘When a man declares his brother to be an unbeliever, one of
them is deserving of it.’ (Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim no. 224, Kitāb al-Īmān.)
A man said to the Prophet, ‘Counsel me.’ He said, ‘Do not get
angry.’ He repeated it a few times, and he said, ‘Do not get
angry.’ (Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī no. 6184, Kitāb al-Adab; Sunan al-
Tirmidhī no. 2152, Kitāb al-Birr wa’l-Ṣilah.)
‘Whoever leaves oﬀ obedience and separates from the com-
munity and dies has died a death from the days of ignorance.
Whosoever ﬁghts under the banner of pride, standing up for
some faction or calling to some faction or helping some fac-
tion, and is then killed, has a killing from the days of igno-
rance. He who rises against my ummah (religious commu-
nity), assaulting its righteousness, attacking it, not sparing its
believers, and not keeping his covenants, is not of me, nor am
I of him.’ (Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim no. 4892, Kitāb al-Īmārah.)
War
Islamic law promulgates the most merciful and just principles governing
the causes and conduct of war, despite the abuses and crimes which take
place in the name of Islam. We can never rid ourselves completely of war,

--- Sayfa 432 ---
war and peace in islam
404
any more than we can remove all the evil from human souls. Indeed, it is
this evil which causes war.
In Islam, there is no good in war for its own sake, and no glory
in ﬁghting for its own sake, because a man may ﬁght for an evil end.
A Muslim can and must be merciful at all times and in all situations,
especially in war, but he must be pure of heart, ﬁght for what is good
and just, not for his own personal desires, and he must always obey
the principles and rules set down by the sharī‘ah.
Among the Qur’anic verses which relate to war are the following,
in which God says:
Whosoever kills a human being for other than man-slaugh-
ter or corruption in the earth, it shall be as if he had killed
all mankind. (Al-Mā’idah, 5:32)
Whoso slays a believer on purpose, his reward is hell for
ever. God is angry with him and He has cursed him and
prepared for him an awful doom. (Al-Nisā’, 4:93)
And if they incline to peace, incline you also to it, and trust
in God. (Al-Anfāl, 8:61)
And from the hadith of the Prophet U:
‘Te disappearance of the world is easier on God than the
killing of a Muslim man.’ (Sunan al-Tirmidhī no. 1455,
Kitāb al-Diyāt.)
‘Ever will the believer have latitude in his religion, so long
as he does not draw inviolable blood.’ (Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī
no. 6946, Kitāb al-Diyāt.)
‘If the denizens of heaven and earth were to conspire
against the blood of a believer, God would throw them
into the Fire.’ (Sunan al-Tirmidhī no. 1459, Kitāb al-Diyāt.)
‘Te ﬁrst thing to be judged between people is the matter
of bloodshed.’ (Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī no. 6948, Kitāb al-Diyāt.)
A woman was found slain in one of the campaigns of the
Messenger of God, whereupon the Messenger of God for-
bade the killing of women and children. (Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī
no. 3052, Kitāb al-Jihad; Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim no. 1744, Kitāb al-
Jihad wa’l-Sayr.)
‘Abd al-Rahman bin Samurah was walking hand in hand

--- Sayfa 433 ---
405
Mercy in the Hadith
with Ibn ‘Umar in one of the roads of Madinah when
they came to a head that had been set up, upon which Ibn
‘Umar said, ‘Tis person’s killer is in torment.’ When they
had passed it he said, ‘I think this one is only in torment.
I heard the Messenger of God say, “Whoever goes to kill
a man of my ummah (religious community), let him say
this, for the killer is in the Fire and the victim is in the
Garden.”’ (Sunan Abu Dāwud no. 4262, Kitāb al-Fitan.)
Do not be hopeful of meeting the enemy, and ask God for
well-being. (Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī no. 7323, Kitāb al-Tamanni.)
Corruption and Sedition
Harmony is a dimension of beauty, which is itself a manifestation of
mercy. As surely as there is beauty and harmony in colour, shape,
sound, and rhythm, so too is there harmony in human relations, and
in the love connecting family, friends, and neighbours.
Trough spreading corruption (fasād) in the earth and sowing
the seeds of strife, we place fear in the place of hope, revenge in
place of forgiveness, and destroy the beauty and harmony of human
relations as surely as acid destroys a beautiful face, or a terrible
screech a beautiful sound, or an earthquake a beautiful city. Fitnah
is a word that can be translated as persecution, sedition, and trial, all
of which can destroy the bonds we share as God’s creatures, robbing
us of our ability to show mercy to one another.
Among the Qur’anic verses which relate to corruption and sedi-
tion are the following, in which God says:
Sedition is worse than killing…. (Al-Baqarah, 2:191)
Sedition is more grievous than killing…. (Al-Baqarah,
2:217)
Lo! they who persecute believing men and believing women
and do not repent, theirs verily will be the doom of hell, and
theirs the doom of burning. (Al-Burūj, 85:10)
And guard yourselves against a chastisement which cannot
fall exclusively on those of you who are wrong-doers. (Al-
Anfāl, 8:25)
(Te prophet Shu‘ayb said): Wrong not mankind in their
goods, and work not confusion in the earth afer the fair

--- Sayfa 434 ---
war and peace in islam
406
ordering thereof. Tat will be better for you, if you are
believers. (Al-A‘rāf, 7:85)
(Te prophet Moses said): Lo! God upholds not the work of
mischief-makers. (Yūnus, 10:81)
(Moses also said): Eat and drink of that which God has
provided, and do not act corruptly, making mischief in the
earth. (Al-Baqarah, 2:60)
Seek not corruption in the earth; lo! God loves not corrupters.
(Al-Qaṣaṣ, 28:77)
And from the hadith of the Prophet U:
Ibn ‘Umar said, ‘Te Prophet said, “O God, bless us in Sham,
O God bless us in Yemen.” It was said, “In Najd?” He said, “O
God, bless us in Sham, O God bless us in Yemen.” It was said,
“O Messenger of God, in Najd?”. I think the third time he
said, “Tere will be earthquakes and sedition there, through
which the horn of Satan will rise.”’ (Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī no.
7183, Kitāb al-Fitan.)
Abu Salamah and ‘Ata’ bin Yasar came to Abu Sa‘id al- Khudri
and asked whether he had heard the Prophet say anything
about the ‘hot wind’ (ḥarūriyyah). He said, ‘I do not know
what the hot wind is. I heard the Prophet say, “Within this
ummah (religious community) a people will come out”—
he did not say, “from this ummah”—“whose prayers will be
such that you hold your own prayers lowly. Tey will recite
the Quran, but it will not reach past their throats—or their
larynxes—and they will pass through this religion as an
arrow passes through game. Te shooter looks at his arrow,
its head, the sinews, and the nock. Has any blood cleaved to
it?” (Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī no. 7017, Kitāb Istitabat al-Murtaddīn;
Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim no. 2503, Kitāb al-Zakāh.)
‘God does not withdraw knowledge from the people, but
takes the learned and with them knowledge disappears. What
remains among the people are ignorant leaders who make re-
ligious decisions for them without knowledge. Tey misguide
and are misguided.’ (Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim no. 6974, Kitāb al-‘Ilm.)
Asked about the verse, O you who believe! You have charge
of your own souls. He who errs cannot injure you if you are
rightly guided. (Al-Mā’idah, 5:105), the Prophet said, ‘In-
deed, command what is right, and forbid what is wrong,

--- Sayfa 435 ---
407
Mercy in the Hadith
until you see avarice obeyed, passions followed, this worldly
life preferred, and every man charmed by his own opinion.
Ten, it will be your duty to care for your own soul, and to
leave the rest. Tere are days coming afer you, when pa-
tience will be like clutching a live coal. He who does a thing
in those days will have a reward akin to that of ﬁfy men who
do as you do.’ He was asked, ‘Messenger of God, ﬁfy men
from among us or among them?’ He replied, ‘Indeed, ﬁfy
of you.’ (Sunan al-Tirmidhī no. 3335, Kitāb Tafsīr al-Qur’ān.)
Abu Darda’ related that the Prophet gazed at the sky and said,
‘Tese are times when knowledge is snatched away from the
people such that they can cannot make use of it at all.’ Ziyad
bin Labid al-Ansari asked him, ‘How can it be snatched away
from us, as we recite the Quran? For by God we recite it, our
women and children as well.’ He said, ‘Shame on you, Ziyad.
I counted you among the learned of Madinah. Te Torah and
Gospel are with the Jews and Christians. Does it avail them
anything?’ (Sunan al-Tirmidhī no. 2865, Kitāb al-‘Ilm.)
‘Te religion will gather itself up in the Hijaz as a snake gath-
ers itself up in its burrow, and the religion will take refuge in
the Hijaz  as a goat does on a mountaintop. Te religion be-
gan a stranger and is returning a stranger. Blessed be those
who set right my Wont (sunnah)  which the people corrupt-
ed.’ (Sunan al-Tirmidhī no. 2839, Kitāb al-Īmān.)
Beware of excessiveness in religion. Tose before you per-
ished only for excessiveness in religion. (Sunan al-Nasā’ī no.
3070, Kitāb Manāsik al-Ḥajj.)
I leave you that which, if you hold to it, will never let you go
astray. Te ﬁrst is greater than the second: the Book of God
is a rope extended from heaven to earth, and my progeny,
the people of my House. Tese two shall never be separated,
even unto their arrival with me at the Pond. So take care how
you disappoint me concerning them. (Sunan al-Tirmidhī no.
4157, Kitāb al-Manāqib; a similar hadith is found in Ṣaḥīḥ
Muslim no. 6378, Kitāb Faḍā’il al-Ṣaḥābah.)
Originally published in 2007 by the Royal Aal al-Bayt Institute for
Islamic Tought as a booklet entitled
Forty Hadith on Divine Mercy.

--- Sayfa 437 ---
409
APPENDIX
THE CONDITIONS NECESSARY FOR JUST WAR
IN THE HOLY QUR’AN
HRH Prince Ghazi bin Muhammad
War and combat require speciﬁc conditions in the Holy Qur’an, without
which they are completely forbidden and illegitimate. Indeed, every single
passage in the Qur’an which contains an injunction or permission for
Muslims to wage a war or combat is immediately preceded or followed by
a Qur’anic verse that:
A) explains that the war is defensive;
B) explains that without war there would be greater death and suﬀering,
hence implying a just war is the lesser of two evils;
C) enjoins mercy and shows how to ﬁght the war as mercifully as
possible; and/or:
D) urges an end to the war when possible.
Moreover, there are a number of passages that seem to be sanctioning
war but are actually:
E) informing Muslims of the reality, meaning and lessons of what
happened in battles they had already fought (such as Badr, Uhud,
the Trench or Hunayn) without this in itself necessarily constituting
a legal injunction as such to ﬁght in the future;
F) merely relating the stories of previous nations (usually the Children
of Israel) and their wars, which—since they do not have the same
sacred laws as Islam—do not apply to Muslims except by way of
parable;
G) merely enjoining a ‘struggle’ (this is the actual meaning of jihad
in Arabic) against unbelief and hypocrisy without this meaning
physical combat as such;
H) warnings or predictions to the unbelievers or ‘hypocrites’ (the

--- Sayfa 438 ---
war and peace in islam
410
‘hypocrites’ were those who pretended to be Muslims but were
in fact not and were just waiting for an opportunity to hurt the
Muslims from within—see Sūrat Al-Munāﬁqūn (63)) without being
declarations of war as such;
I) in fact condemning or at least eschewing combat in that context;
and/or
J) speciﬁcally urging forbearance and patience, and not war.
Tere are also verses that do not relate to war as such and are in fact:
K) prescribing capital punishment for murder or other capital oﬀences.
In what follows, we systematically go through all the passages in
the Qur’an that seem to enjoin or permit war, and show that these
verses are all in fact conditioned by the principles of self-defence, of
justice, of proportionality, of preferring peace to war and above all by
mercy—even whilst enjoining Muslims to win the wars they have no
choice but to ﬁght.
(Te capital letters in the Notes column relate to the explanations above.)
War Verses
Verses
With
Conditions
Notes
2: 54
2: 54
F; K.
2: 85–6
2: 84
F; I.
2: 178
2: 178–9
K: Lex Talionis: this verse does
not relate to war but to murder.
2:191; 193–4
2: 190; 192–3
A; C; D.
2: 216–8
2: 217
A; B.
2: 244–6
2: 246
A; F.

--- Sayfa 439 ---
411
Appendix
2: 250–1; 253
2: 251
B; F: Tis passage follows on
from the last one and thus A
applies here as well.
3: 12–3
3: 12
H.
3: 111
3: 111
A.
3: 121–34
3: 128–9; 134
E: Tese verses refer to the Battle
of Badr (2 AH/ 624 CE). In addi-
tion, verses 3:128–9 hold out the
promise of God’s forgiveness. J:
v.134 commends forgiving and
restraining oneself from anger.
3: 139–80
3: 149
B; E: It is to be noted also that
this long passage in Sūrat Āl
‘Imrān refers A: mostly to a
defensive battle that has already
occurred—the Battle of Uhud (3
AH/625 CE)—and that whilst it
encourages Muslims to keep up
the ﬁght (vv. 139–48; 150–1;
156–63), and explains that it is
to be viewed as a trial from God
(vv. 140–3; 166–7; 179), it should
be borne in mind that this battle
was a defensive one.
4: 66
4: 66
G.
4: 71–104
4: 75; 86; 90; 94
Tis long passage touches on
many important subjects, not
merely war. A: Te defensive
justiﬁcation for war is in verse 4:
75. C: in verse 4: 90; D: in verses
4: 86 and 94.

--- Sayfa 440 ---
war and peace in islam
412
War Verses
Verses
With
Conditions
Notes
4: 141
4: 141
E.
5: 2
5: 2
I: verse 5:2 commands Muslims
not to commit aggression even
though their religious freedom
has been prohibited.
5: 8–9
5: 8–9
I; C: 5: 8 commands Muslims
to be just to their enemies even
when they have cause to hate
them.
5: 11
5: 11
B; E.
5: 21–6
5: 21–6
F.
5: 33–4
5: 33–4
C; K: verse 5:33 prescribes capi-
tal punishment for war crimes;
5: 34 oﬀers amnesty.

--- Sayfa 441 ---
413
Appendix
5: 45
5: 45
F: K: Lex Talionis, but this
verse merely states that it was
prescribed in the Torah.
8: 1–19; 39–49;
56–75
8: 26; 30; 39; 61;
70-71.
Te name of this surah is
Al-Anfāl (‘Te Spoils of War’)
and it is largely about the Battle
of Badr. E: in verses: 7–13; 17;
41–4; 67–71. Te surah contains
at least four injunctions to
ﬁght (12; 15; 16; 39), and also a
commandment to prepare for
war (60) and to undertake war
even against superior numbers
(65–6).
A: All of the above is mitigated
by verses 26 and 30, which make
it clear that the war in question
is a defensive war. Furthermore,
A and D: Verses 19 and 39 make
it clear that war will end when
Muslims are no longer reli-
giously persecuted. D: Verse 61
commands Muslims to make
peace if they are oﬀered it. Most
remarkable of all, verse 45 spir-
itualises war and makes its very
prosecution dependent on the
remembrance of God. C: Verses
70–1 hold out the promise of
amnesty for prisoners of war.

--- Sayfa 442 ---
war and peace in islam
414
War Verses
Verses
With
Conditions
Notes
9: 1–29
9: 2; 4; 6; 13
Tis surah (Al-Tawbah, ‘Repen-
tance’) is the only surah in the
whole Qur’an which does not
start with the Divine Names of
Mercy (al-Raḥmān, al-Raḥīm)
and perhaps the most warlike.
Verse 5 is commonly thought
of as the ‘Sword Verse’ declaring
jihad. Verses 11–12 also reiterate
the commandment to ﬁght. D:
However, verse 5—like verse
11—also oﬀers peace for those
who repent from waging war on
Muslims, and verse 29 implies
an end to war afer surrender
of the enemy. C: verses 1–5 give
fair warning of the beginning of
hostilities and oﬀer temporary
truces. A: It is above all verse
13 which makes clear that the
war is in self-defence and that
afer the enemy not only started
the war, but also broke a truce
thereafer. E: Verses 24–5 are
about the Battle of Hunayn (in
Ta’if, 8AH/630 CE).

--- Sayfa 443 ---
415
Appendix
9: 38–47
9: 40
Tese verses call for war, but A:
Verse 40 makes it clear that the
unbelievers had started hostili-
ties by attempting to kill the
Prophet U  and by forcing him
(and the Muslim community)
out of Mecca.
9: 73–4
9: 74
Tese
verses
contain
a
commandment to ﬁght the
unbelievers and the hypocrites,
but the verses which follow
(75-87) show K: that the ﬁght
was against treason and betrayal
within Medina. C: Verse 74 also
holds out the promise of forgive-
ness for repentance.
9: 88–96
9: 95
Verses 88–92 encourage and
praise those who ﬁght in God’s
way. E: Verses 93–6 relate what
happened to Muslims in their
recent struggles. D: Verse 95
allows for a cessation in the
ﬁghting.
9: 111–2
9: 112
Verse 111 promises paradise for
those who are martyred. C: verse
112 shows that there are limits
in warfare.

--- Sayfa 444 ---
war and peace in islam
416
War Verses
Verses
With
Conditions
Notes
9: 117–23
9: 123
E: Verses 117–8 relate to past
ﬁghting. Verses 119–21 promise
reward for ﬁghting in God’s way.
Verse 122 is another remarkable
verse because it values learn-
ing above ﬁghting even during
wartime. A: Verse 123 orders
ﬁghting against those enemies
who are close (only).
16: 126
16: 126
J; C.
17: 5–8
17: 5–8
F.
17: 33
17: 33
I.
18: 74–5
Explained by 18:
65; 80–2.
F; K.
18: 86–8
18: 86–8
F; K.

--- Sayfa 445 ---
417
Appendix
22: 38–40
22: 39–40
Tese verses are the most
important verses in the Qur’an
related to war because they are
the ﬁrst verses that allowed the
Muslims to ﬁght (according to
all the commentaries—see Tafsīr
al-Ṭabarī and Tafsīr al-Qurṭubī).
Tey must be cited in full: Indeed
God protects those who believe.
Indeed God does not love the
treacherous, the ungrateful. /
Permission [to ﬁght] is granted
to those who have been attacked
because they have been wronged.
And God is truly able to help them;
/ those who were expelled from
their homes without right, only
because they said: ‘Our Lord is
God’. Were it not for God’s causing
some people to drive back others,
destruction would have befallen
the monasteries, and churches,
and synagogues, and mosques in
which God’s Name is mentioned
greatly. Assuredly God will help
those who help Him. God is truly
Strong, Mighty (Al-Ḥajj, 22:38–
40). Afer ten years of religious
persecution, torture, murder and
banishment, and an assassination
attempt on the Prophet U himself
in Mecca, in 622 CE the Prophet
U and the Muslim community
emigrated one by one to the city
of Yathrib (Medina).

--- Sayfa 446 ---
war and peace in islam
418
War Verses
Verses
With
Conditions
Notes
22: 38–40
22: 39–40
(Tis event marks the start of
the Islamic calendar). From
Medina, the Muslims were
ﬁnally allowed by God to defend
themselves. Te ﬁrst Caliph Abu
Bakr Al-Siddiq W said: ‘[When
I ﬁrst heard this verse {v.39}] I
knew there would be combat,
and it was the ﬁrst to be revealed
[about combat]’ (Tabari). Tese
verses are remarkable because
they show that a just war in Islam
depends on: (1) being attacked
ﬁrst; (2) being wronged (and
having been patient); (3) being
expelled from one’s homes
and land; (4) being religiously
persecuted merely for belief in
God; and (5) having one’s holy
places (or the holy places of
Jews and Christians) destroyed.
Also, the fact that God grants
‘permission’—and
does
not
merely give a commandment to
ﬁght—shows that ﬁghting is an
exceptional state which requires
a Divine exemption or ‘special
permission’, and is thus not the
preferred state of aﬀairs. Hence
this also shows that war may
only be declared by the legiti-
mate authority and ruler.

--- Sayfa 447 ---
419
Appendix
22: 58–60
22: 60
D; C.
22: 78
22: 78; see also
25:52
G: Tis verse calls for ‘real jihad’,
but the commentators (see
Tabari) on this verse are split as
to whether the jihad in question
is a moral jihad (as suggested by
the previous verse and by verse
25:52 where the ‘great jihad’ is
teaching the Qur’an) or physical
war. Te context and remainder
of the verse suggest the former.
25: 52
25: 52
G: Tis is the verse of the ‘great
jihad’: So do not obey the disbe-
lievers, but struggle against them
(jāhidhum) therewith with a
great jihad. (Al-Furqān, 25:52).
However, the great jihad is not
physical combat but the moral
jihad using the Qur’an. Tus
the Prophet U said: ‘We have
returned from the Lesser Holy
War (al-Jihad al-Aṣghar) to the
Greater Holy War (al-Jihad
al-Akbar)’. When asked what
the Greater Holy War was, he
replied: ‘[It is] the war against the
ego [nafs]’. (Ahmad bin Hussein
Al-Bayhaqi, Kitāb al-Zuhd, vol.
2, p. 165, no. 373).
26: 226
26: 226
A.
27: 18–28
27: 18–28
F.

--- Sayfa 448 ---
war and peace in islam
420
War Verses
Verses
With
Conditions
Notes
29: 6
29: 6
G: Tis verse mentions jihad (for
the soul), but like verse 25: 52, it
is a peaceful jihad that is meant.
29: 8
29: 8
I; G: Tis verse mentions a
peaceful jihad (struggle) but
against Muslims, which they are
to resist peacefully.
29: 10
29: 10
F.
29: 69
29: 69
I: Tis verse mentions a peace-
ful jihad (struggle) but against
Muslims which they are to resist
peacefully, like 29: 69.
30: 2–6
30: 2–6
F.
31: 5
31: 5
I: Tis verse mentions a peace-
ful jihad (struggle) but against
Muslims which they are to resist
peacefully, like 29: 69.
33: 9–27
33: 9–27
E: Tese verses are about what
happened in the Battle of the
Trench (Al-Khandaq) in 5
AH/627 CE.
33: 60–1
33: 60–1
H.

--- Sayfa 449 ---
421
Appendix
42: 39–43
42: 39–43
A: verse 39; verses 41–2. C and
D: verse 40. J: verse 43. Tese
verses summarise the Qur’an’s
attitude to war, and it is signiﬁ-
cant that they are from the
Meccan period—that is to say,
afer war had already started
(they are cited at the end of this
text).
47: 4; 7
47: 1; 32; 34
Tis
whole
surah
(Sūrat
Muḥammad) has ‘work’ or
‘deeds’ (‘amal) as its central
theme, and indeed the word and
its derivatives are mentioned at
least nine times in the surah (the
surah has 38 verses in total). Part
of work (‘amal) can be combat
and verses 4, and 7 call for this.
However, A: verses 47: 1, 32, 34
make it clear that combat occurs
only afer religious persecution.
Verse 4, C: orders humane treat-
ment of prisoners of war and
either ransom or amnesty afer
war.
47: 20–3
47: 1; 32; 34
Tese verses (47: 20-23) are
about reactions to the Qur’an’s
orders to ﬁght but again they
relate to A: verses 47: 1, 32, 34.

--- Sayfa 450 ---
war and peace in islam
422
War Verses
Verses
With
Conditions
Notes
47: 25; 31–5
47: 1; 32; 34
Tese verses (47:25; 31–5)
encourage combat, and verse
35 calls on the believers not to
slacken or be fainthearted in war
and cry for peace whilst they are
winning, but again they relate to
A: verses 47: 1, 32, 34.
48: 1–7
48: 1–7
E: Tese verses (48: 1–7) refer to
the Pact of Hudaybiyyah (6 AH/
628 CE), when the Prophet U
and the Muslims went unarmed
to Mecca and were turned back
by their enemies, but made a
pact with them so that they could
return on pilgrimage the follow-
ing year. God refers to this as a
‘clear triumph’ in verse 1, and it
is this triumph that is referred to
in the name of this Surah (Sūrat
Al-Fatḥ).
48: 15–7
48: 15–7
H: Tese verses warn the hypo-
crites amongst the Bedouins.
48: 18–28
48: 18–28
E: Tese verses refer to the events
around Hudaybiyyah, and (vv.
18–21; 27) predict future victory
and the fall of Mecca (which
happened in 10 AH/630 CE).
49: 9–10
49: 9–10.
C: verse 9. D: verse 10.

--- Sayfa 451 ---
423
Appendix
54: 44–5
54: 44
H. At the Battle of Badr the
Prophet U recalled verse 45.
58: 5
58: 5
A.
58: 20-21
58: 22
A.
58: 22
58: 22
E. Al-Razi mentions in his
Great Commentary (Mafātīḥ
al-Ghayb) that that Ibn ‘Abbas
W said that this verse commends
Abu ‘Ubaydah W at the Battle of
Uhud, and Ali W, Abu Bakr W
and ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab W at
the Battle of Badr.
59: 2–7
59: 2–7
E: verses 2–7; C: 3. Tese verses
describe the struggle (in 4 AH/
626 CE) with the Jewish tribe
of Banu Nadir in Medina who
betrayed the Muslims and tried
to kill the Prophet U. Verse 5
is sometimes misinterpreted to
permit the cutting down of palm
trees (and thus scorched earth
tactics), but in fact it permits
only the cutting of the date stalks
(līnah)—that is to say, of the
dates themselves, without ruin-
ing future crops.

--- Sayfa 452 ---
war and peace in islam
424
War Verses
Verses
With
Conditions
Notes
59: 11–5
59: 11–5
H: verses11–4; E: verse15. Tese
verses describe the struggle (in
4 AH/626 CE) with Banu Nadir
of Medina who betrayed the
Muslims and tried to kill the
Prophet U.
60: 1–8
60: 7–8
A.
61: 4
61: 4
H: Tis verse commends a
manner of ﬁghting in solid lines
once there is a war, but does not
itself call for war.
61: 8–13
60: 8
A: 60: 8
63: 8
63: 8
A; H.
66: 9
66: 9
G.
73: 20
73: 20
H.
100: 1–5
100: 1–5
H: Tese verses merely mention
charging horses and imply their
awesomeness.
105: 1–5
105: 1–5
F; I.

--- Sayfa 453 ---
425
Appendix
n.b.: Tere are a total of 114 surahs (chapters) in the Qur’an (of
uneven length) with 6236 verses in total.
In addition to all these conditions for—and limitations of—war
in the Qur’an, there are also a number of other verses in the Qur’an
that condemn murder and violence. Tese include the following: Āl
‘Imrān, 3:21–2; Al-Nisā’, 4:29–30 (hell is promised for murder); 4:92–3
(hell is promised for murder); 4:155; Al-Mā’idah, 5:71; 5:27–32 (5:32
mentions that God decreed in the Torah that murder of one soul is like
killing all souls, and saving one soul is like saving all souls); Al-An‘ām,
6:137; 6:140; 6:152 (6:151–2 resemble the Ten Commandments);
Al-Isrā’, 17:33; Al-Mumtaḥanah, 60:12; Al-Burūj, 85:10 et al.
Tus, as will clearly be seen from all the above, the Qur’an cate-
gorically:
1) condemns all forms of murder;
2) does not enjoin or permit war except in self-defence (and ‘self-
defence’ is conditional upon [A] being attacked ﬁrst; [B] being
wronged (and having been patient); [C] being expelled from
one’s homes and land; [D] being religiously persecuted merely
for belief in God; and [E] having one’s holy places—or the
holy places of Jews and Christians—destroyed);
3) gives fair warning before hostilities;
4) respects agreements and truces and protects those who have
made agreements and truces;
5) does not permit or enjoin war on other religious communities
simply because they have diﬀerent religious beliefs and
6) does not force opponents to convert to Islam;
7) protects non-Muslim holy sites (and hence also their
occupants);
8) does not enjoin or permit total war or scorched earth tactics
or the destruction of livestock and the environment;
9) does not allow killing of civilians or non-combatants, and
especially protects clergy, women, children, the elderly or the
inﬁrm;
10) wages legitimate war as mercifully as possible and forbids
all unwarranted brutality, even whilst aiming for a military
victory;

--- Sayfa 454 ---
war and peace in islam
426
11) orders humane treatment of prisoners of war, including
meeting their essential needs, and their ransoming or exchange
or being set free (if they teach ten Muslims to read or write or
convert to Islam);
12) encourages peace and cessation of hostilities whenever
possible during conﬂict;
13) regards war as the last option; and
14) makes it clear that only a legitimate ruler of the entire Muslim
community may declare war.
In summary, war sanctioned by God in the Qur’an—the ‘lesser
jihad’—is a just and humane war, and it is waged only for morally
justiﬁed self-defence and not for religious or ideological conquest.
God says in the Qur’an:
… [A]nd those who, when they suﬀer aggression defend
themselves: / For the requital of an evil deed is an evil deed
like it. But whoever pardons and reconciles, his reward will
be with God. Truly He does not like wrongdoers. / And who-
ever defends himself afer he has been wronged, for such,
there will be no course [of action] against them. / A course
[of action] is only [open] against those who wrong people
and seek [to commit] in the earth what is not right. For such
there will be a painful chastisement. / But verily he who
is patient and forgives—surely that is [true] constancy in
[such] aﬀairs. (Al-Shūrā, 39–43).
© HRH Prince Ghazi bin Muhammad, 2013

--- Sayfa 455 ---
427
NOTES
contents
1 Originally published by the Royal Aal al-Bayt Institute for Islamic Tought
as a separate booklet in 2007.
2 Reproduced with the permission of the author and World Wisdom Press.
3 Originally published in Seasons: Semi-annual Journal of Zaytuna Institute,
Spring-Summer Reﬂections, 2005, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 45-68.
4 Originally published as Body Count by the Royal Aal al-Bayt Institute for
Islamic Tought as a booklet in 2009.
5 Reproduced (and adjusted) from Love in the Holy Qur’an (Chapters 4, 5,
and 7) by H.R.H. Prince Ghazi bin Muhammad.
6 Reproduced (and adjusted) from Love in the Holy Qur’an (Ch.17) by H.R.H.
Prince Ghazi bin Muhammad.
7 Originally published by the Royal Aal al-Bayt Institute for Islamic Tought
as a booklet entitled Forty Hadith on Divine Mercy in 2007.
introduction
8 Seyyed Hossein Nasr, Te Heart of Islam: Enduring Values for Humanity
(New York, NY: Harper Collins Publishers Paperback Edition, 2004), p. 256.
9 Tere are a number of English translations of the Qur’an; authors in this
volume have not speciﬁed which they have used, and indeed in some cases may
have provided their own translations. Some have translated the Divine Name
‘Allah’ as ‘God’, and some have lef it as ‘Allah’—we have respected this. Te
chapter and verse numbers refer to the original Arabic. We have also kept the
authors’ own preferences as regards modern or archaic English (in translating
the Qur’an).
10 Te Arabic version reads ‘al-mujāhidu man jāhada nafsahu.’ See ‘Abd
al-Rahman al-Mubarakfuri, Tuۊfat al-Aۊwazi bi-Sharۊ Jāmi’ al-Tirmidhī,
edited by ‘Abd al-Rahman ‘Uthman (Cairo: Maktaba’at al-Ma’rifah, n.d), hadith
no. 1671.
11 Ibn Majah, Sunan Ibn Mājah, Kitāb al-ﬁtan, bāb al-‘amr bi’l-ma’rūf, hadith
no. 4011.
12 Muslim, Mukhta܈ar ܇aۊîۊ Muslim, edited by Nasir al-Din al-Albani
(Kuwait (several editions)), p. 469, hadith no. 1756.

--- Sayfa 456 ---
war and peace in islam
428
13 Bukhari, ܇aۊīۊ al-Bukhārī, hadith no. 2957.
14 Te second and the third categories, namely of jihad against the unbe-
liever and the hypocrites refer primarily to the idolaters (mushrikūn) of
Mecca, and the hypocrites (munāﬁqūn) of Medina respectively. Tere is
ample evidence in the sources, as the book before us expounds, to the eﬀect
that no jihad may be waged to compel anyone into embracing Islam.
15 Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyyah, Zād al-Ma’ad min Huda Khayr al-‘Ibad, as
quoted in Muhammad Hisham Kabbani, ‘Principles of leadership in War and
peace’ (2004) at www.islamicsupremecouncil.org/legal_rulings/Jihad/jihad-
withadditions.pdf. A similar classiﬁcation of jihad has been advanced by Ibn
Rushd al-Kabir in al-Muqaddimat al-Mumahhidāt.
16 Seyyed Hossein Nasr, Te Heart Of Islam: Enduring Values for Humanity,
p.262.
17 Ali A Mazrui, ‘Te Ethics of War and Rhetorics of Politics: the West and
the Rest,’ 2 Islamic millennium Journal (2002), p.1.
18 Quoted by Anicee Van Engeland-Nourai, ‘Te Challenge of Fragmentation
of International Humanitarian Law’ in Bassiouni, ed., Jihad and its Challenges,
p. 147; see also Seyyed Hossein Nasr, Te Heart of Islam, p. 263.
19 Quoted by Anicee Nourai, ‘Te Challenge of Fragmentation’, p. 148.
20 Nasr, Te Heart of Islam, p. 263.
21 Nikkie R. Kiddie, ‘Te Revolt of Islam—1700 to 1993’ in Bryan S.
Turner, ed., Islam: Critical Concepts in Sociology (Oxford: Routledge, 2003),
vol. 2, p. 89.
chapter 
22 What is meant by manifest coercion is coercion through physical force
such as iron and ﬁre; what is meant by surreptitious coercion is perceptible
miracles to which one submits.
23 Tis is diﬀerent from his responsibility, and that of the caliphs who
followed him, to carry out God’s shari‘ah within the Ummah (Muslim
community).
24 Te jizyah is not, as some think, a sum paid in exchange for life or
the right to refuse conversion to Islam. It is, as we have said, a symbol that
signiﬁes yielding, the desistance from warfare and impeding the da‘wah and
a token of participation in the aﬀairs of the state in return for the protection
of life and property. On page 35 of Kitāb al-Kharāj, Abu Yusuf writes: ‘Afer
Abu ‘Ubaydah concluded a peace treaty with the people of Syria and had
collected from them the jizyah and the tax for agrarian land (kharāj), he was
informed that the Romans were readying for battle against him and that the
situation had become critical for him and the Muslims. Abu ‘Ubaydah then
wrote to the governors of the cities with whom pacts had been concluded

--- Sayfa 457 ---
429
Notes
that they must return the sums collected from jizyah and kharāj and say to
their subjects: “We return to you your money because we have been informed
that troops are being raised against us. In our agreement you stipulated that
we protect you, but we are unable to do so. Terefore, we now return to you
what we have taken from you, and we will abide by the stipulation and what
has been written down, if God grants us victory over them.”’
25 Some people whose intent is to disparage Islam do not go beyond a
superﬁcial interpretation of the verse: ... ﬁght those of the disbelievers who are
near to you .... Tey claim that Islam orders Muslims to ﬁght unbelievers in
general until they convert to Islam whether they commit aggression or not.
Tey also claim that Islamic law (shari‘ah) decrees this. Te truth is that what
is meant by the word ‘disbelievers’ in this verse and others is the warring
polytheists who fought the Muslims, aggressed against them, expelled them
from their homes, took their property and spread sedition among people
regarding their faith. Te morals of these polytheists have been described in
the opening verses of Sūrat Al-Tawbah.
Further, what is meant by the word ‘people’ in the hadith: ‘I have been
ordered to ﬁght the people …’ should be understood in the same manner. For
according to consensus (ijmā‘) on this hadith, warfare must cease if the enemies
are Arab polytheists. As for other enemies, the war against them must cease on
the condition that they … pay the jizyah tribute, readily being subdued. Tus,
these verses are in agreement and there is no contradiction between the Holy
Qur’an and the Hadith and the aforementioned false allegation is dropped.
26 Tese verses warn against violating treaties or conducting them in a
manner in which one or both parties are not lef feeling secure. Te verses
also warn against remaining under the mercy of a power that does not know
peace or justice. Tey also warn against using treaties as an artful means to
take advantage of the weak, who are compelled by circumstances to consent
to them. History has proven that treaties conducted under these circumstances
are ultimately corrupt and end badly. God says in the Holy Qur’an: And do
not make your oaths a [means of] deceit between you lest a foot should slip afer
being steady, and [lest] you should taste evil, forasmuch as you barred [people]
from the way of God, and there be a tremendous chastisement for you. (Al-Naḥl:
16:94). Compare then the teachings of these verses with the treaties conducted
by modem nations which have ended up being disastrous to the world.
chapter 
27
http://www.fi.gov/stats-services/publications/terrorism-2002-2005/
terror02_05. Scroll to the bottom for a chronological list commencing in
1980. Access date: 1 April 2011.
28 Muslims make up 23 percent of the world’s 6.8 billion humans. See the

--- Sayfa 458 ---
war and peace in islam
430
Pew Forum on Religion & Public Life, Mapping the Global Muslim Population:
A Report on the Size and Distribution of the World’s Muslim Population
(Washington, DC: Pew Research Center, October 2009), p. 1. Cf.:
http://pewforum.org/Mapping-the-Global-Muslim-Population.aspx. Access
date: 1 April 2011.
29 Te King James Version of the Holy Bible contains 788,280 words: 609,269
in the Old Testament and 179,011 in the New Testament. Cf.: http://www.bible-
believers.com/believers-org/kjv-stats.htm
30 Mapping the Global Muslim Population.
31 Te very ﬁrst word revealed to Muhammad was Iqrā’, which means ‘recite’
and the word Qur’ān itself originates from the root word Qara’a, which means
‘to read out’ or ‘to recite’.
32 Te title of Mr Spencer’s most controversial bestseller is: Te Truth about
Muhammad, Founder of the World’s Most Intolerant Religion (Washington, DC:
Regnery Press, 2006). Spencer’s other books include: Islam Unveiled: Disturbing
Questions about the World’s Fastest Growing Faith (New York: Encounter Books,
2002); Te Myth of Islamic Tolerance: How Islamic Law treats Non-Muslims
(New York: Prometheus Books, 2005); Te Politically Incorrect Guide to Islam
(And the Crusades) (Regnery, 2005); Religion of Peace? Why Christianity Is and
Islam Isn’t (Regnery, 2007).
33 Cf. the published works, journalism and Internet articles of Daniel Pipes,
Benny Morris, David Horowitz, Bernard Lewis, Sam Harris, David Bukay and
David Pryce-Jones, among others. I need to make my position clear. As a liberal
and an academic I strongly support the liberal arts education model and the
enhanced societal contributions made by critically educated minds. At the heart
of my philosophy lies a passionate belief in the value of dialogue and debate. I
therefore do not challenge the right of these scholars and pundits publicly to
express their concerns about Islam, even though I do not share them.
34 Tere are numerous English-language translations of the Qur’an which give
slightly diﬀerent wordings, but the translation that I consider most reliable, easi-
est to read and closest to the meaning of the Arabic text is: Shaykh-ul-Islam Dr
Muhammad Tahir-ul-Qadri, Te Holy Qur’an (English Translation / Irfan-ul-
Qur’an), 2009 edn (Lahore: Minhaj-ul-Quran International, 2006). I also recom-
mend the readability and reliability of Maulana Wahiduddin Khan’s transla-
tion, Te Quran (New Delhi: Goodword, 2009). Another very popular modern
translation is the so-called Wahhabi translation: Dr Muhammad Muhsin Khān
and Dr Muhammad Taqī-ud-Din Al-Hilālī,  Interpretation of the Meanings of
the Noble Qur’ān in the English Language: A Summarised Version of At-Tabarī,
Al-Qurtubī and Ibn Kathīr with Comments from Sahīh Al-Bukhārī: Summarised
in One Volume  (Riyadh: Darussalam, 1996. Revised edition 2001). It must be
pointed out, however, that this easy-to-read translation has not been immune
from criticism, particularly with regard to many interpolations that seem to

--- Sayfa 459 ---
431
Notes
provide a deliberately negative portrayal of Christians and Jews. For that reason
I do not use it, and I believe others should read it, should they wish, with this
caveat in mind. Cf. Khaleel Mohammed, ‘Assessing English Translations of the
Qur’an’, Middle East Quarterly, vol. 12 no. 2 (Spring 2005), pp. 59–72.
35 Jizyah was a tax levied by the Islamic state on non-Muslims. In return they
gained exemption from military service and guarantees of safety within the state.
Tis taxation arrangement, essentially a type of tribute, was a pre-Islamic practice
merely continued by the Muslims. Cf. Majid Khadduri, War and Peace in the
Law of Islam (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1955), p. 178.
36 Cf. Ibid., pp. 96, 163; Majid Khadduri, Te Islamic Conception of Justice
(Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1984), p. 165. Spencer, ed., Te
Myth of Islamic Tolerance, pp. 43–4.
37 Cf. Spencer, Te Politically Incorrect Guide to Islam, p. 28. Afer negatively
quoting a statement praising Muhammad as ‘a hard ﬁghter and a skillful military
commander’, Samuel P. Huntington writes that ‘no one would say this about
Christ or Buddha’. He adds that Islamic doctrines ‘dictate war against unbeliev-
ers … Te Koran and other statements of Muslim beliefs contain few prohibi-
tions on violence, and a concept of non-violence is absent from Muslim doctrine
and practice.’ Huntington, Te Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of World
Order (London: Simon & Schuster, 1996), p. 263.
38 Deuteronomy 7: 1–3 and 20: 16–7.
39 Polybius, Histories, XXXVIII.21.
40 Sohail H. Hashmi, ed., Islamic Political Ethics: Civil Society, Pluralism, and
Conﬂict (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2002), p. 196.
41 Sūrat Sabā’, 34:28; Al-Zumar, 39:41; and Al-Tawkīr, 81:27.
42 Spencer, Te Politically Incorrect Guide to Islam, pp. 24–6. Cf. also:http://
www.answering-islam.org/Bailey/jihad.html
43 Cf. David Bukay, ‘Peace or Jihad: Abrogation in Islam’, in Middle East
Quarterly (Fall 2007), pp. 3–11, available online at:
http://www.meforum.org/1754/peace-or-jihad-abrogation-in-islam. Access
date: 1 April 2011.
44 Zakaria Bashier, War and Peace in the Life of the Prophet Muhammad
(Markﬁeld: Te Islamic Foundation, 2006), pp. vii–viii; Khadduri, War and
Peace, p. 105.
45 Bukay, ‘Peace or Jihad’, cited above.
46 http://www.pbs.org/newshour/terrorism/international/fatwa_1996.html.
Access date: 1 April 2011.
47 http://www.pbs.org/newshour/terrorism/international/fatwa_1998.html.
Access date: 1 April 2011.
48 Tis is clearly the judgement of prominent intellectual Tariq Ramadan. Cf.
his biography, Te Messenger: Te Meanings of the Life of Muhammad (London:
Penguin, 2007), p. 91.

--- Sayfa 460 ---
war and peace in islam
432
49 Bashier, War and Peace, p. 284. An interesting introductory book for
anyone unfamiliar with Islam is Sohaib Nazeer Sultan’s amusingly titled Te
Koran for Dummies (Hoboken: Wiley, 2004). Sultan makes the same point (pp.
278, 281) that the martial verse and the sword and those like it do not abrogate
the more numerous peaceful, tolerant and inclusive verses.
50 Bashier, War and Peace, p. 288.
51 Louay Fatoohi, Jihad in the Qur’an: Te Truth from the Source (Birmingham:
Luna Plena, 2009). Email from Dr Louay Fatoohi to Dr Joel Hayward, 23 August
2010.
52 Muhammad Abu Zahra, Concept of War in Islam (Cairo: Ministry of Waqf,
1961), p. 18, quoted in Hashmi, ed., Islamic Political Ethics, p. 208.
53 Michael Fishbein, trans., Te History of al-Tabarī (Tā’rīkh al-rusūl wa’l-
mulūk): vol. VIII: Te Victory of Islam (State University of New York Press,
1997), pp. 162–5; Bashier, War and Peace, pp. 224–6.
54 Tafsīr Ibn Kathīr, vol. 4 (Sūrat Al-’A‘rāf to the end of Sūrat Yūnus), (Riyadh:
Darussalam, 2003.), pp. 371–5; Saﬁur-Rahman Al-Mubarakpuri, Te Sealed
Nectar: Biography of the Noble Prophet, 2002 edn (Riyadh: Darussalam, 1979),
pp. 351–3; Lt. Gen. A. I. Akram, Te Sword of Allah: Khalid bin al-Waleed, His
Life and Campaigns (New Delhi: Adam, 2009), pp. 97–8; Bashier, War and
Peace, pp. 237–8, 241.
55 Tafsīr Ibn Kathīr, vol. 4, p. 371.
56 W. Montgomery Watt, Muhammad at Medina, 2004 edn (Oxford
University Press, 1956), p. 311; Ibn Kathir, Te Life of Muhammad (Karachi:
Darul-Ishaat, 2004), pp. 516, 522; Shaykh Muhammad al-Ghazālī, A Tematic
Commentary on the Qur’an (Herndon: International Institute of Islamic
Tought, 2000), p. 182.
57 Al-Tawbah, 9:6.
58 Tafsīr Ibn Kathīr, vol. 4, pp. 369ﬀ.; Sayyid Ameenul Hasan Rizvi, Battles
by the Prophet in Light of the Qur’an (Jeddah: Abul-Qasim, 2002), pp. 126–30.
59 Ibn Kathir, Life of Muhammad, pp. 516, 522.
60 Spencer, Religion of Peace?, p. 78.
61 Although Ad-Dahhāk bin Muzāhim, as quoted by Isma‘il ibn Kathīr (Tafsīr
Ibn Kathīr, vol. 4, p. 377), sees this as a repudiation of Muhammad’s pilgrimage
agreements with all pagans, other early sources insist that this was not the case
and that it would have reﬂected intolerance that Muhammad was not known
to possess. Rizwi Faizer, ‘Expeditions and Battles’ in Jane Dammen McAuliﬀe,
ed., Encyclopaedia of the Qur’an (Leiden and Boston: Brill, 2002), vol. II, p. 151.
62 Fatoohi, Jihad in the Qur’an, p. 34.
63 Hashmi, ed., Islamic Political Ethics, p. 201.
64 Armstrong, Islam, p. 17.
65 Tis is certainly the view of the inﬂuential eighth-century biographer, Ibn
Ishaq: Alfred Guillaume trans., Te Life of Muhammad: A Translation of Ibn

--- Sayfa 461 ---
433
Notes
Ishaq’s Sīrat Rasūl Allāh, 1967 edn (Oxford University Press, 1955), p. 212.
For modern writers who agree, see: Fatoohi, Jihad in the Qur’an, p. 31; Karen
Armstrong, Muhammad: A Biography of the Prophet (London: Phoenix, 1991.
2001 edition), p. 168; Martin Lings, Muhammad: His Life based on the Earliest
Sources, Islamic Texts Society 2009 edn (London: George Allen & Unwin, 1983),
p. 135; Al-Mubarakpuri, Te Sealed Nectar, p. 183; Sohail H. Hashmi, ‘Sunni
Islam’, in Gabriel Palmer-Fernandez, ed., Encyclopedia of Religion and War
(London: Routledge, 2004), p. 217. Hashmi, ed., Islamic Political Ethics, p. 198.
66 Tafsīr Ibn Kathīr, vol. 1 (Parts 1 and 2 (Sūrat Al-Fātihah to verse 252 of
Sūrat Al-Baqarah)), p. 528.
67 Sūrat Al-Baqarah,  2:193.
68 Hashmi, ed., Islamic Political Ethics, p. 204.
69 Bukhari, Ṣaḥīḥ, 3025, trans. Dr Muhammad Muhsin Khan, vol. 4, 2738
to 3648 (Riyadh: Darussalam, 1997), p. 164; Rizwi Faizer, ed., Te Life of
Muhammad: Al-Wāqidī’s Kitāb al-Maghāzī (London: Routledge Studies in
Classical Islam, 2010), p. 546.
70 Sūrat Al-Baqarah, 2:216 and see Al-Shūrā, 42:41.
71 Al-Baqarah, 2: 217, 2:191 and Al-Nisā’, 4:75–8.
72 Bashier, War and Peace, pp. 229–33.
73 Ibn Ishaq, p. 553; Te History of al-Tabarī, vol. VIII, p. 182.
74 Ibn Ishaq, p. 385; Te History of al-Tabarī, vol. VIII, p. 182.
75 Ibn Ishaq, p. 553; Te History of al-Tabarī, vol. VIII, p. 183.
76 Sūrat Al-Mā’idah, 5:45.
77 Cf. Al-Baqarah, 2:194.
78 Cf. Al-Shūrā, 42:40–3.
79 Cf. Khadduri, War and Peace, pp. 96–8.
80 Ibid., p. 98.
81 Imam Muhammad Shirazi, War, Peace and Non-violence: An Islamic
Perspective (London: Fountain Books, 2003 ed.), pp. 28–9.
82 It even applied to the quarrels that the Qur’an criticises most: those between
diﬀerent Muslim groups. If one side aggressively ‘transgressed beyond bounds’,
the other side was permitted to ﬁght back in self-defence, but only until the
aggressor desisted, at which point war was to end and reconciliation was to
occur. Cf. Al-Ḥujurāt, 49:9–10.
83 Tafsīr Ibn Kathīr, Volume 1, p. 528.
84 Shirazi, War, Peace and Non-violence, p. 29.
85 Hashmi, ed., Islamic Political Ethics, p. 211; Fred M. Donner, trans., Te
History of al-Tabarī (Ta’rīkh al-rusul wa’l-mulūk): vol. X: Te Conquest of
Arabia (State University of New York Press, 1993), p. 16.
86 Al-An‘ām, 6:151; Al-Isrā’, 17:33; Al-Furqān,25:68.
87 Al-Mā’idah, 5:33–4.
88 Āl ‘Imrān, 3:134.

--- Sayfa 462 ---
war and peace in islam
434
89 Fatoohi, Jihad in the Qur’an, p. 73.
90 Mathnawi I: 3721ﬀ. published online at: http://www.dar-al-masnavi.org/n-
I-3721.html
91 Al-Ḥujurāt, 49:13. Te clause in parentheses is a contextual explanation
by the translator.
92 Fatoohi, Jihad in the Qur’an, pp. 25–6.
93 Fatoohi, Jihad in the Qur’an, p. 87.
94 Tis hadith is found in the book Kitāb al-Durar al-Muntathira fī al-Ahādith
al-Mushtahira by Jalal al-Deen al-Suyuti.
95
http://www.winstonchurchill.org/learn/speeches/speeches-of-winston-
churchill/1940-ﬁnest-hour/128-we-shall-ﬁght-on-the-beaches
96 Cf. Chapter V in Khadduri, War and Peace.
97 Karen Armstrong, ‘Te True, Peaceful Face of Islam’, Time, 23 September
2001, available online at:
http://www.time.com/time/magazine/arti-
cle/0,9171,1101011001-175987,00.html. Access date: 1 April 2011.
chapter 
98 An archival search of the New York Times for ‘holy war’ or ‘jihad’ shows
that this term is still a standard translation of jihad, very ofen taking the form
‘jihad, or holy war’. Or one can enter the term ‘holy war’ into a search on Google
News and see that it is still a widespread translation of jihad. Even sympathetic
and responsible authors perpetuate the equation between the two, such as Juan
Cole, Sacred Space and Holy War (I. B. Tauris, 2002). Te publishing world is
full of provocative titles such as Peter Bergen’s Holy War, Inc.: Inside the Secret
World of Osama bin Laden (Free Press, 2002).
99 Tis phrase even found its way into a speech by the Pope in September
2006, albeit in the form of a quotation from a Byzantine emperor. Tough the
Pope said he regretted the reaction, he never disavowed the statement nor did
he apologise for it.
100 Tis term was even used by President George W. Bush (in a speech before
the National Endowment for Democracy in October 2005), and for a time
became popular with certain right-wing intellectuals and media talking heads,
though it fell out of favour afer signiﬁcant criticism as an empty propaganda
term, having been used to describe people and groups as disparate as Al-Qaeda,
the government of Iran, and Syria. Te ﬁrst is a stateless terrorist group who hate
Shi‘ites, the second is a Shi‘a religious state, and the third is a secular state run
by an Alawite elite ruling over a Sunni majority. Te fact that one term means
all these things signiﬁes that it is devoid of any real content. Te word ‘fascism’
evokes the idea of a malevolent global movement, wherein lies its power as a
buzzword. Writing as far back as 1944, George Orwell, writing for the British

--- Sayfa 463 ---
435
Notes
public, pointed out that the word fascist had become so nebulous and overused
it lacked any precise meaning: ‘Except for the relatively small number of Fascist
sympathisers, almost any English person would accept ‘bully’ as a synonym for
‘Fascist’. Tat is about as near to a deﬁnition as this much-abused word has
come.’ Little has changed in the use of this word. It is obvious that the vigilante
rebels of Al-Qaeda have little in common with the military-industrial-state
apparatus that was the core of twentieth century European fascism, possessing
neither a military, industry, or state.
101 ‘Inﬁdel’ comes from the Latin inﬁdelis meaning unfaithful. As a techni-
cal term in the Catholic Church it denoted those who were not baptised, such
as Muslims or Jews. Te word kāﬁr literally means ‘to cover’ and originally
signiﬁed a kind of ingratitude, meaning that one ‘covered over’ the gifs or
blessings one was given. It thus has the sense of denial and rejection. Practically
speaking, it is used in a way similar to ‘inﬁdel’, but with one crucial diﬀerence:
by and large Muslims did not call non-Muslims kāﬁr unless they were pagan
or atheist. It would be contradictory to call a Jew or Christian a kāﬁr, since
the Qur’an ofen calls upon them to follow their own religion more faithfully
(5:66, 5:68). Inﬁdel goes back at least as far as the eleventh century Te Song of
Roland (Chanson de Roland), where the inﬁdels are the Muslims in the Holy
Land. It also appears in the King James Version in 2 Corinthians 6:15, And
what concord hath Christ with Belial? Or what part hath he that believeth with
an inﬁdel? and 2 Corinthians 6:14–6 But if any provide not for his own, and
specially for those of his own house, he hath denied the faith, and is worse than
an inﬁdel. Tis term is noteworthy because Muslims themselves almost never
use the word ‘inﬁdel’ to translate kaﬁr (preferring ‘unbeliever’, ‘disbeliever’,
‘denier’), yet critics of Islam regularly accuse Muslims of this or that view in
relation to ‘inﬁdels’. For example, a contemporary convert to Christianity from
Islam, Nonie Darwish, has written a book, Now Tey Call Me Inﬁdel (Sentinel
HC, 2006). Has anyone actually called her that speciﬁc word, or is it her own
translation? Te word ‘inﬁdel’ eﬀectively conjures the emotional impact of this
term as a part of the West’s collective memory, disregarding the fact that the
term has no resonance for a Western Muslim, and means something signiﬁ-
cantly diﬀerent from kaﬁr. Another book by Ayaan Hirsi Ali, another former
Muslim, bears the title Inﬁdel (Free Press, 2007), implying that this is the label
she now bears from some undeﬁned group of Muslims. Actually, as an atheist
the Latin-based word ‘inﬁdel’ more strongly demarks her relationship with
Christianity than with Islam.
102 Ofen misunderstandings about the Qur’an can be easily cleared up
by referring to the classical and recognised Qur’anic commentaries, such as
those of al-Tabari (Jāmi‘ al-bayān ‘an ta’wīl āyat al-Qur’ān), Fakhr al-Din
Razi (Mafātih al-Ghayb, or al-Tafsīr al-Kabīr), Ibn Kathir (Tafsir Ibn Kathir),
al-Qur-tubi (al-Jāmi‘ li-ahkām al-Qur’ān), al-Baydawi (Tafsīr al-Baydawi),

--- Sayfa 464 ---
war and peace in islam
436
al-Zamakhshari (al-Kashshāf ‘an Ḥaqā’iq al-Tanzīl), and many others who
are well known to the scholarly tradition, and which are our starting point.
Tough simply referring to such works is not suﬃcient in itself to arrive at a
conclusive and binding knowledge of a particular issue, it is worth noting that
many of those who speak about jihad and war never bother to make reference
to the classical commentaries at all.
103 Al-Nasa’i, Sunan, Kitāb al-Ba‘yah, with similar hadith in Ibn Majah’s
Sunan, Kitāb al-Fitan and in the Sunan of Abu Dawud, Kitāb al-Mulāhim.
104 Narrated by Daylami, with a similar hadith narrated by Tirmidhi in
his Sunan, Kitāb Faḍā’il al-Jihad. See Muhammad Sa‘id Ramadan al-Buti,
Al-Jihad fī’l-Islām (Damascus: Dar al- Fikr, 2005) p. 21.
105 Ibn Majah, Sunan, Kitāb al-Adab.
106 Ibn Kathir relates that many famous early ﬁgures of Islam such as Ibn
‘Abbas, Mujahid, Muqatil ibn Hayyan, Qataadah and others said that this
is the ﬁrst verse revealed concerning jihad. Tafsir al-Qur’ān al-‘Aẓīm, vol.3,
(Riyadh: Dar al-Salam, 1998), p.103.
107 Ibid.
108 Ibid.
109 Ibid.
110 Te second caliph, ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab, had a Christian servant named
Asbaq. When ‘Umar invited him to Islam, the servant refused, to which
‘Umar replied, quoting the Qur’an, ‘Tere is no compulsion in religion,’ and
then said, ‘Asbaq, if you were to accept Islam I would have entrusted you
with some of the Muslims’ aﬀairs.’ In another incident, ‘Umar said to an old
woman who had not accepted Islam, ‘Become Muslim, old woman, become
Muslim. God sent Muhammad with the truth.’ She replied, ‘I am an old
woman who is close to death.’ Umar said, ‘Dear God, bear witness!’ and he
recited: ‘Tere is no compulsion in religion’. (Buti, p. 52)
111 Once a polytheist asked Ali if they would be killed if one of them were
to come to the Prophet with some need or to hear the Word of God. Ali
replied in the negative, and quoted 9:6 on asylum for the polytheists. (Buti,
p. 57 quoting from al-Jāmi‘ li-aḥkām al-Qur’ān, 8:76)
112 Ibn Kathir, Tafsīr al-Qur’ān al-‘Aẓīm (Riyadh, 1998) pp.308–9. Many
of the selections and translations of this section are taken from David
Dakake, ‘Te Myth of a Militant Islam’. In Joseph Lumbard, ed.,  Islam,
Fundamentalism, and the Betrayal of Tradition, (Bloomington, Indiana:
World Wisdom, 2004), pp.3–37.
113 See Ibn Taymiyyah, al-Siyāsa al-Shar‘īyyah fī Islāh al-Ra‘ī wa’l-Ra‘iyyah,
quoted in Peters, p.49. For a similar hadith see Bukhari 3052, Kitāb al-Jihad.
114 Te Sunan of Abu Dawud, Kitāb al-Jihad.
115 Malik’s Muwatta’, Kitāb al-jihad.
116 Ibn Kathir, Tafsīr, vol.1, p.308.

--- Sayfa 465 ---
437
Notes
117 Baladhuri, Futūh al-buldān, trans. P. Hitti as Origins of the Islamic State
(New York: AMS Press) vol.1, p.100.
118 Ibid. p. 187.
119 Al-Tabari, Te History of al-Tabari, vol. XII: Te Battle of al-Qadissiyyah
and the Conquest of Syria and Palestine, trans. Y. Friedmann (Albany: SUNY
Press, 1985), p.191.
120 Baladhuri, vol.1, p.314.
121 Rawdat al-Ṭalibīn, 10:315-16 (see Buti, p.133).
122 Al-Mughni, 4:250 (see Buti, p.133).
123 See Buti, p.134.
124 From Nawawi’s commentary upon the Ṣaḥīḥ of Muslim, 12:229 (see Buti,
p.149).
125 Muslim, Ṣaḥīḥ , Kitāb al-Imārah.
126 Ibid., Kitāb al-Imārah
chapter 
127 As regards women, for example, there are hadith that declare that the
‘jihad of women’ is making the pilgrimage (ḥajj) to Mecca. See Bukhari, Ṣaḥīḥ
al-Bukhārī (Medina: Dār al-Fikr, n.d.), vol. 4, pp. 36, 83–4 (Kitāb al-jihad,
hadith no. 43, 127, 128). Tere are also hadith concerning the various types of
death that qualify one as a martyr (shahīd), i.e., as having died like a ﬁghter in
jihad. One such type of death is said to be the death of a woman in childbirth.
Other traditions in Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī imply that women can fulﬁl the duty of
jihad by attending to the wounded on the battleﬁeld (see Ṣaḥīḥ, vol. 4, pp. 86–7,
ḥadīth no. 131–4). See also Muslim, Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim, (printed with commentar-
ies) (Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, 1978), vol. 5, pp. 153, 157.
128 Tese are: 1) testifying that there is only one true God and that Muhammad
is His messenger, 2) praying ﬁve times a day, 3) paying a charity tax every year,
4) fasting during the month of Ramadan, and 5) making a pilgrimage to Mecca
once in one’s life, if one has the means and the health to do so.
129 See ‘Aljunī, Kashf al-khafā’ (Beirut: Dār Iḥyā’ al-Turāth al-‘Arabī, 1968),
hadith no. 1362.
130 It should be noted that ‘outward jihad’ is by no means only military
in nature. Te arena of outward jihad is the level of human action. It is not
concerned with inner attitudes of the soul, such as sincerity and love (which
constitute the realm of the inner jihad) but with proper outward action alone,
as deﬁned by the religious law (shari‘ah).
131 Te word translated here as ‘themselves’, anfusihim in Arabic, may
be more literally translated as ‘their souls’. Tis demonstrates an essential
Qur’anic perspective: the inner struggle (i.e., ‘until they change their souls’) takes
precedence over the outer struggle (i.e., the particular state in which a people

--- Sayfa 466 ---
war and peace in islam
438
exist at a given moment) and furthermore, that no amount of purely outward
actions can overcome hypocrisy of soul.
132 Tere are a few important exceptions to this categorisation. Among them
are the articles of Khaled Abou El Fadl, ‘Te Place of Tolerance in Islam’, in the
book by the same title, J. Cohen and I. Lague, eds (Beacon Press, 2002); ‘Te
Rules of Killing at War: An Inquiry into the Classical Sources’, Muslim World
89, no. 2 (April 1999), and Sherman Jackson, ‘Jihad and the Modern World’,
Te Journal of Islamic Law and Culture (Spring/Summer 2002).
133 For examples of how these traditional teachings were followed in later
generations see Reza Shah-Kazemi’s ‘From the Spirituality of Jihad to the
Ideology of Jihadism’ in this volume.
134 Although it is incorrect in this context, the six major translations of the
Qur’an available in English, those of A. J. Arberry, Marmaduke Pickthall, N.
J. Dawood, Yusuf Ali, Ahmad Ali, and El-Hilali/Khan, all translate the word
awliyā’ as ‘friends’.
135 We owe this image to Dr Seyyed Hossein Nasr.
136 Qur’an 2:125-129.
137 Al-Tabari, Jāmi‘ al-bayān ‘an ta’wīl āy al-qur’ān (Beirut: Dār al-Fikr,
1995), vol. 4, pp. 372–3.
138 Ibid., vol. 14, pp. 83–4.
139 We will look more closely at verse Al-Tawbah 9:5 when we examine the
fatwa of the World Islamic Front later in this essay.
140 Al-Tabari, vol. 14, p. 84.
141 Ibid., vol. 2, p. 258. It should be noted that there is another group of
verses, 22:39–40 which is also considered to have been the ﬁrst verses to speak
about the military jihad. We shall have occasion to speak about this later in
the essay.
142 Ibid., vol. 2, p. 258.
143 Ibid., vol. 2, p. 258.
144 Ibid., vol. 2, p. 259.
145 In addition, al-Tabari reports a second narration of these words of ‘Umar
ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz with only slight changes in phrasing, Ibid., vol. 2, p. 259.
146 See Malik ibn Anas, Muwatta’, trans. M. Rahimuddin (New Delhi: Tāj,
1985), p. 200 (Kitāb al-jihad, ḥadīth no. 957). See also Bukhari, Ṣaḥīḥ, vol. 4,
pp. 159–60 (Kitāb al-jihad, ḥadīth no. 257–8), Abu Dawud, Sunan Abī Dāwūd
(Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, 1996), vol. 2, p. 258 (Kitāb al-jihad, ḥadīth
no. 2668), and Muslim, Ṣaḥīḥ, vol. 5, p. 56 (Kitāb al-jihad).
147 Mālik, Muwatta’, p. 200 (Kitāb al-jihad, ḥadīth no. 958). Other similar
instructions are given to the Muslim armies prohibiting the killing of chil-
dren and the mutilating of bodies, see Muslim, Ṣaḥīḥ, vol. 5, pp. 46–50 (Kitāb
al-jihad).
148 Mālik, Muwatta’, p. 201 (Kitāb al-jihad, ḥadīth no. 959). A similar version

--- Sayfa 467 ---
439
Notes
of this hadith in the Sunan of Abu Dawud mentions not killing the elderly, in
addition to the categories of women and children, see Abu Dawud, Sunan, vol.
2, p. 243 (Kitāb al-jihad, ḥadīth no. 2614).
149 Khalid ibn al-Walid (d. 22 AH/ 642 CE) was a companion of the Prophet
and one of the famous early commanders of Muslim forces.
150 Quoted from Ibn Rushd, ‘Bidāyat al-mujtahid wa nihāyat al-muqtaṣid’,
trans. Rudolph Peters in Jihad in Mediaeval and Modern Islam (Leiden: E. J.
Brill, 1977), p. 17. For a similar version of this hadith see Abu Dawud, Sunan,
vol. 2, p. 258 (Kitāb al-jihad, ḥadīth no. 2669).
151 See Ibn Ishaq, Sīrah Rasūl Allāh, trans. A. Guillaume in Te Life of
Muhammad (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1978), pp. 602–3.
152 Al-Tabari, Jāmi‘ al-bayān, vol. 6, pp. 233–4; and Ibn Kathir, Tafsīr
al-Qur’ān al-‘aẓīm, vol. 2  (Riyadh: Dar al-Salam, 1998), pp. 488–9.
153 Al-Tabari, Jāmi‘ al-bayān, vol. 11, p. 30; Ibn Kathir, Tafsīr, vol. 3, p. 429.
154 See for example R. Bulliet, Te Patricians of Nishapur (Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1972) and Islam: Te View from the Edge (New
York: Columbia University Press, 1994) where he speaks about the case of the
conversion of the Persian plateau. Bulliet has carried out demographic studies
showing that for three centuries following the Muslim’s political conquest of
the region the land of Iran still had a majority Zoroastrian population, in direct
contradiction to any notions of forced conversion.
155 It was only the polytheistic Arab tribes in the Arabian Peninsula who
were compelled to enter Islam. Tose Arab tribes who were already People of
the Book were not forced to accept the religion. Numerous examples of this can
be found in the histories, particularly in regard to the Christian Arabs. See the
accounts of the Arabs of Najran (al-Tabari, Tārīkh al-rusul wa al-mulūk, vol.
1, edited by M. J. de Goeje (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1964), pp. 1987–8 and p. 2162);
the Banu Namir, Banu Iyad, and Banu Taghlib (al-Ṭabarī, Ta’rīkh, I, p. 2482
and pp. 2509–10), the Banu Ghassan (Baladhuri’s Futūḥ al-buldān, trans. P.
Hitti as Te Origins of the Islamic State, vol. 1 (New York: AMS Press), p. 209);
the Banu Salih ibn Hulwan (Balādhurī, Origins, vol. 1, p. 223); the Banu Tayyi’
and the Arabs of the settlement of Hadir Halab (Balādhurī, Origins, vol. 1, p.
224); and the Arabs of Baalbek (Baladhuri, Origins, vol. 1, p. 198).
156 Al-Tabari, Jāmi‘ al-bayān, vol. 3, p. 21; Ibn Kathir, Tafsīr, vol. 1, p. 417.
157 We shall speak of this alliance known as the Constitution of Medina later
in this essay.
158 Al-Tabari, Jāmi‘ al-bayān, vol. 3, p. 22. See also Wahidi, Asbāb al-nuzūl
(Beirut: ‘Ālam al-Kutub, 1970), p. 58 and Abu Dawud, Sunan, vol. 2, pp. 262–3
(Kitāb al-jihad, ḥadīth no. 2682).
159 See al-Tabari, Jāmi‘ al-bayān, vol. 3, p. 23.
160 Al-Tabarī, Jāmi‘ al-bayān, vol. 3, p. 220; Ibn Kathir, Tafsīr, vol. 1, p. 417;
Wahidi, Asbāb al-nuzūl, pp. 58–9.

--- Sayfa 468 ---
war and peace in islam
440
161 It should also be noted that in the case of one version of this story
(see al-Tabarī, Jāmi‘ al-bayān, vol. 3, p. 22 and Wahidi, Asbāb al-nuzūl, pp.
58–9), the Prophet, afer pronouncing the Qur’anic verse, says, ‘God banish
them! Tey are the ﬁrst ones to disbelieve’ (ab‘adahumā Allāh, hum awwal
man kafara). Tis statement requires some explanation and needs to be
understood in the context of the time. It can be said from the Islamic point of
view that the actions of Abu’l-Husayn’s sons represent a grave error, because
they were rejecting a prophet within his own lifetime, a prophet whom they
knew personally. Te actions of Abu’l-Husayn’s sons represent a denial of the
immediate presence of the truth, and this is very diﬀerent than, for instance,
someone choosing not to accept the message of Islam today; one who never
had the chance to actually see the Prophet, who was the living embodiment of
submission to God. Like the words of Christ, ‘He who has seen me has seen
the truth’, the Prophet said, ‘He who has seen me has seen his Lord,’ thereby
placing great responsibility on the shoulders of those who were privileged to
encounter him. Te strident words of the Prophet about the sons of Abu’l-
Husayn need to be understood in this context.
162 Ibn Kathir, Tafsīr, vol. 1, p. 416.
163 Al-Tabari, Jāmi‘ al-bayān, vol. 3, p. 25; Ibn Kathir, Tafsīr, vol. 1, p. 417.
164 Moreover this injunction is reﬂected elsewhere in the Qur’an, such as in
the verse, For each we have given a law and a way, and had God willed He could
have made you one people, but that He might put you to the test in what He has
given you [He has made you as you are]. So vie with one another in good works.
To God will you all be brought back, and He will inform you about that wherein
you diﬀered (Al-Mā’idah, 5:48). Te universality and indeed acceptance of
other ‘ways’ and ‘laws’ evident in this verse is to be seen even more directly
in verse 2:62: Tose who say ‘We are Jews’ and ‘We are Christians’ and ‘We
are Sabians,’ all who believe in God and the Last Day and do good works,
they have their reward with their Lord and neither shall they fear nor grieve
(Al-Baqarah, 2:62). Te word ‘Sabians’ may be a reference to the remnants of
a group of followers of St John the Baptist, but in any case the message of this
verse is very far from the fallacious notion that Islam denies the truth of other
faiths. Indeed, the Qur’an demands that Jews and Christians judge according
to what God has given them in the Torah and the Gospel. Tis is evident in
the Qur’anic statement, Truly, We revealed the Torah. In it is a guidance and
light. By it the prophets who submitted [to God] judged the Jews … with what
they were entrusted of the Book of God, and they were witnesses to it. Terefore,
fear not men, but fear Me. Sell not My signs for little gain. Whoever does not
judge by that which God has revealed, those are the unbelievers. We ordained
therein [within the Torah]: a life for a life, an eye for an eye, nose for a nose,
an ear for an ear, a tooth for a tooth, and wounds for retaliation. But if any
one remits it then it is a penance for him, and whosoever does not judge by that

--- Sayfa 469 ---
441
Notes
which God has revealed, they are wrongdoers (Al-Mā’idah, 5:44–5). In relation
to the followers of the Gospel, the Qur’an says, We sent him [Jesus] the Gospel.
Terein is a guidance and a light…. Let the People of the Gospel judge by that
which God has revealed therein. Whosoever does not judge by that which God
has revealed, those are the corrupt (Al-Mā’idah, 5: 46–7). Terefore, not only
are the People of the Torah and of the Gospel not to be compelled to accept
Islam, but they must, according to the Qur’an, be free to make their own
decisions based upon what their scriptures reveal to them. Moreover, for them
not to do so is displeasing to God.
165 Al-Tabari, Jāmi‘ al-bayān, vol. 10, p. 227–8; Ibn Kathir, Tafsīr, vol. 3,
p. 303.
166 Al-Tabarī, Jāmi‘ al-bayān, vol. 10, p. 226; Ibn Kathir, Tafsīr, vol. 3, p. 302.
167 Al-Tabari, Jāmi‘ al-bayān, vol. 10, p. 227; Ibn Kathir, Tafsīr, vol. 3, p. 303.
168 Al-Tabari, Jāmi‘ al-bayān, vol. 10, p. 229.
169 Ibn Kathir, Tafsīr, vol. 3, p. 303.
170 Mahmoud Shaltut (d. 1963), the former Shaykh al-Azhar, arguably the
most important exoteric authority in the Islamic world, commented upon
these verses in his book Al-Qur’an wa al-qitāl, trans. Peters, Te Qur’an and
Fighting in Jihad, p. 43, as follows: ‘Tese verses are, as we have said, the ﬁrst
verses of ﬁghting. Tey are clear and do not contain even the slightest evidence
of religious compulsion. On the contrary, they conﬁrm that the practice that
the people ward oﬀ each other is one of God’s principles in creation, inevitable
for the preservation of order and for the continuation of righteousness and
civilisation. Were it not for this principle, the earth would have been ruined
and all diﬀerent places of worship would have been destroyed. Tis would have
happened if powerful tyrants would have held sway over religions, free to abuse
them without restraint and to force people to conversion, without anyone to
interfere. Tese verses are not only concerned with Muslims, but have clearly
a general impact….’
171 Baladhuri, Origins, vol. 1, p. 100.
172 Ibid., vol. 1, p. 227.
173 Ibid., vol. 1, p. 229.
174 Ibid., vol. 1, p. 187.
175 Ibid., vol. 1, p. 223.
176 Ibid., vol. 1, pp. 198-199.
 Te poll tax or jizyah was required to be paid by the People of the Book
to the Islamic state according to verse Al-Tawbah, 9:29 of the Qur’an and
certain hadith. Tis tax, unlike feudal taxation in Europe, did not constitute
an economic hardship for non-Muslims living under Muslim rule. Te tax
was seen as the legitimate right of the Islamic state, given that all peoples—
Muslim and non-Muslim—beneﬁted from the military protection of the state,
the freedom of the roads, and trade, etc. Although the jizyah was paid by non-

--- Sayfa 470 ---
war and peace in islam
442
Muslims, Muslims were also taxed through the zakāt, a required religious tax
not levied on other communities. Since we have just mentioned verse 9:29 it is
perhaps best to deal with it more thoroughly here, for it has been a source of
great controversy and is ofen quoted by militant Muslims as well as Western
detractors of Islam and not only for its mention of the issue of the jizyah. In
full, verse 9:29 reads: Fight against those who do not believe in God and Last
Day (of Judgment) and do not forbid what God and His Messenger have forbid-
den and are not obedient to the Religion of Truth, (even) among those who have
been given the Book, until they pay the jizyah out of hand and are humbled
(Al-Tawbah, 9:29). Tere is no doubt that most of the classical Muslim exegetes
understood 9:29 as sanctioning the continuation of jihad beyond the conﬂict
with the pre-Islamic Arab idolaters to include the ahl al-kitāb, and just as
the early Israelites did not see the use of oﬀensive military force by Moses or
Joshua as something which negated the moral veracity of their religion, so too
the early Muslims did not ﬁnd the institutionalisation of jihad for the sake of
obtaining the political hegemony of Islam to be a moral dilemma either. Te
Muslims in jihad, like the armies of the Israelites entering the Promised Land,
saw themselves as engaged in a holy mission, not of a purely inward, spiri-
tual nature, but a mission which also entailed bringing about a new society
on Earth. In the case of the Israelites the new society was to be created in a
speciﬁc place, the Promised Land, and participation in that society would be
generally limited to a speciﬁc group of people, the Chosen People. Whereas
in the case of the early Muslims, the society that was to be created would not
be conﬁned to a speciﬁc place or to a speciﬁc people. In fact, the speciﬁcity
of the new Islamic polity would be precisely its universality; its general lack
of ethnic and religious boundaries. Tis is not to say that the situation for
religious minorities in the Islamic world was perfect by any means, but it was
substantially better than the social climate that prevailed for Muslims and Jews
within the lands of Christendom for example. For the sake of achieving this
new society, ‘bringing’ to mankind the ‘best’ and, up to that moment, the most
inclusive form of social order on Earth, the Muslims were willing to ﬁght and
die, just as the Jews were willing to do so for a new kind of life in the Promised
Land. Tis willingness to do violence to establish certain kinds of social orders
has certainly not come to an end even among nations today, but it should be
understood that in both the Israelite and Islamic contexts spreading political
control through violent means was something almost to be expected given
the social conditions prevailing then in the ancient world. When Islam spread
out of Arabia in the seventh century (and similarly in the time of Moses and
Joshua), warfare and conﬂict were the normal state of aﬀairs between nations
and peoples. Te state of nearly constant warfare was simply the way of the
world and peace was the extraordinary and occasional exception to the rule.
Today, in the modern world, the situation is somewhat reversed: we might say

--- Sayfa 471 ---
443
Notes
that peace is generally the norm and warfare, although not exactly extraor-
dinary, is somewhat less of a constant than it was in ancient times. Tis fact
has led the vast majority of Muslim scholars today to declare that continual,
oﬀensive jihad is no longer applicable to the contemporary situation and that
jihad today is primarily difā’i or defensive, because the world is itself is in a
diﬀerent state from what it was in the seventh century. Terefore, just as the
militant acts of Moses and Joshua portrayed in the Hebrew Bible no longer play
a direct role in how Jews actually practice Judaism today and these scriptural
stories are relegated to ‘ancient history’, with largely symbolic and no longer
literal signiﬁcance in the lives of contemporary Jews, so too for the vast major-
ity of Muslims verse 9:29 and other Qur’anic verses related to jihad are simply
not of primary concern when they think about what it means to be a ‘good
Muslim’ today. While Al-Tawbah, 9:29 is without doubt extremely signiﬁcant
in the formation of the early Islamic view of military jihad, the idea that it
represents the ﬁnal word on Muslim attitudes toward Jews, Christians and the
uses of violence is like declaring that Medieval Papal pronouncements about
the Crusades are the key to understanding Catholic feelings about Muslims and
Jews today or like saying that Deuteronomy 20:10–8 exposes the true, inner
attitude of Jews toward the presence of gentiles in the land of Israel. To even
suggest such things would be absurd, but while we are aware of the complexi-
ties and nuances of our own Western cultural history, which enable us to reject
out of hand the absurd, totalising claims just mentioned, when it comes to
Islamic culture similar totalising proof-texting of the Qur’an and verses like
9:29 is somehow seen as a ‘legitimate’ encapsulation of ‘the real truth about
Islam and Muslims’. As regards those Muslim fundamentalists who quote 9:29
as their proof text for an ‘eternal jihad’ commanded by God against the ahl
al-kitāb, it is remarkable with what ferocity they cling to any Qur’anic verses
that deal with ﬁghting and with what cavalierism they dismiss verses that speak
positively of Jews and Christians (Al-Baqarah, 2:62; 2:111–2; 2:139; Āl ‘Imrān,
3:113–5; 3:199; Al-Mā’idah, 5:44; 5:46–7; 5:69), as if they are able to determine
with certainty which of God’s words in the Qur’an He actually meant eternally
and which of His words need to be understood as just nice Arabic words in
the Qur’an devoid of contemporary relevance. To put it another way, many
of these militant jihadis seem to wish to reduce all 114 chapters of the Qur’an
to one, namely chapter 9 (Al-Tawbah), which possesses a major share of the
verses regarding ﬁghting.
178 Baladhuri, Origins, vol. 1, p. 187.
179 Al-Tabari, Te History of al-Tabari, v. XII: Te Battle of al-Qadisiyya and
the Conquest of Syria and Palestine, trans. Y. Friedmann (Albany: SUNY Press,
1985), p. 191. Te use of the word ‘Byzantines’ here should not be conﬂated with
‘Christians’. ‘Byzantines’ refers to those people who were the administrators of
Byzantine authority in the lands that were now conquered by the Muslims. Te

--- Sayfa 472 ---
war and peace in islam
444
very fact that the word ‘Byzantines’ is used, and not ‘Christians’, is signiﬁcant.
Tis shows that it was not ‘Christianity’ but rather the political and military
opposition of Byzantium that was at issue. It was because of this opposition
that the Byzantines needed to be expelled. Byzantine administrators and oﬃ-
cials, like the robbers also mentioned in the quotation, were a possible source
of social unrest and political chaos. Just as there cannot be two kings ruling a
single kingdom, the Muslims needed to remove any vestiges of Byzantine politi-
cal authority in the lands they now controlled. Tis did not mean the removal
of the vestiges of ‘Christianity’ from those lands, for the quotation itself also
mentions preserving the rights of Christians to practice their faith and maintain
their churches, crosses, etc., under the new Islamic government.
180 Ibid., pp. 191–2. Al-Tabari indicates that similar letters were written to
‘all the provinces’ around Jerusalem as well as to the ‘people of Lydda and all
the people of Palestine’.
181 Al-Tabari, Jāmi‘ al-bayān, vol. 3, pp. 24–5; Ibn Kathir, Tafsīr, vol. 2, pp.
457–8. Tis position has been generally agreed upon by most of the early schol-
ars of Islamic law; see for instance the comments of Ibn Rushd in his Bidāyat
al-mujtahid, in Peters, Jihad, p. 24.
182 Baladhuri, Origins, vol. 1, p. 314.
183 Al-Tabari, Te History of al-Ṭabarī, v. XIV: Te Conquest of Iran, trans.
G. Rex Smith (Albany: SUNY Press, 1994), pp. 36–8.
184 Baladhuri, Origins, vol. 2, p. 4
185 Ibid., p. 20.
186 Al-Tabari, Te History of al-Ṭabarī, v. XIV: Te Conquest of Iran, p. 28.
187 Ibid., p. 29.
188 Ibid., p. 33.
189 Al-Tabari, Te History of al-Ṭabarī, v. XIII: Te Conquest of Iraq,
Southwestern Persia, and Egypt, trans. G. H. A. Juynboll (Albany: SUNY Press,
1985), pp. 164–5.
190 Ibid., pp. 167–8.
191 Ibid., pp. 170-171.
192 Te issue as to whether the Muslims may accept the jizyah from the
mushrikūn or polytheists, thereby granting them protected (dhimmī) status
under the Islamic state, like the status of the People of the Book, has been
debated by scholars of Islamic law. For various opinions on this issue see Ibn
Rushd, Bidāyat al-mujtahid, in Peters, Jihad, pp. 24–5.
193 Tese terms may need some explanation. Te people of the city of Mecca
were almost all members of an Arabic tribe known as Quraysh, and the Prophet
and the vast majority of his early followers in Mecca were also members of this
tribe. When the Prophet lef Mecca for the city of Medina, an event known as
the Hijrah or migration, those members of his community who journeyed with
him were given the title of muhājirūn or ‘emigrants’. As for the term anṣār, it

--- Sayfa 473 ---
445
Notes
refers to those people of Medina who accepted the Islamic message and invited
the Prophet and the emigrants to the city, giving them refuge from their situ-
ation of persecution in Mecca. For this reason these residents of Medina were
given the title of anṣār or ‘helpers,’ due to the fact that they gave safe haven to
the Prophet and the emigrants.
194 W. M. Watt, Muhammad at Medina (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1956),
p. 221.
195 Te term Yathrib actually refers to the city of Medina. Before the time of
Islam, Medina was called ‘Yathrib’. Te name ‘Medina’ came to be used later as
a result of the fact that the city was eventually renamed Madīnat al-Nabī (Te
City of the Prophet). Today the city is simply referred to by the ﬁrst part of this
title, Medina, or ‘Te City’.
196 Watt, Muhammad, p. 221.
197 It may be asked if this pact of mutual protection does not contradict
the point made earlier concerning verse Al-Mā’idah, 5:51. We stated that 5:51
essentially tells the Muslims not to take Jews (or Christians) as their ‘protectors’
in a military sense, and yet the Constitution seems to be doing just that by stat-
ing that between Muslims and Jews is ‘help against whoever wars against the
people of this document’. Is this not then taking Jews as ‘protectors’? In answer
to this question it needs to be said that the speciﬁc context of 5:51 is that of
individual Muslims taking alliances with those outside the ummah in order to
save their own individual lives and thereby endangering the unity and internal
strength of the Muslims. It does not refer to a context in which the Muslims,
as an ummah, agree to a treaty for the beneﬁt and safety of the ummah as a
whole. Tis issue points out the necessity of clearly understanding the asbāb
al-nuzūl of Qur’anic passages. Without such understanding a mistake could
be made such that all agreements of help or assistance between Muslims and
non-Muslims would be seen as compromising Islam; but this is simply not the
context of 5:51. Indeed if it were, it would compromise practically the entire
early history of the jihad eﬀort which is ﬁlled with agreements of protection
and assistance, as we see with the constitution and as we shall see in other parts
of this essay.
198 Watt, Muhammad, p. 222.
199 Ibid., p. 224.
200 Te Umayyad Dynasty ruled the Islamic world immediately following
the end of the ‘Rightly-guided caliphate’ (40 AH/ 661 CE) until they were over-
thrown by the Abbasids in 132 AH/ 750 CE, who established their own dynasty,
which ruled over all Muslim lands (in a nominal way from the fourth century
AH/ tenth century CE onwards) until the Mongol conquest of their capital at
Baghdad in the seventh century AH/ thirteenth century CE, at which time the
last Abbasid caliph was killed.
201 Such comments criticising the tribe of Quraysh would have been construed

--- Sayfa 474 ---
war and peace in islam
446
by the Umayyads (see note 67) as a critique of their legitimacy, given that the
Umayyad’s drew their legitimacy from their status as descendants of one of the
prominent clans of Quraysh. Te importance that they placed upon this Qurayshi
lineage was as a result of the fact that, within the tribe of Quraysh, they were not
descendants of the immediate clan of the Prophet, i.e., the clan of Hashim, but of
another clan within Quraysh, the clan of ‘Abd Shams. Tus, it was not through
their immediate clan but through their more distant Qurayshi heritage that they
could claim a relation to the Prophetic substance of Muhammad.
202 Although the Qur’an discusses both mu’minūn and muslimūn in referring
to those who followed the message of Muhammad, most early theological and
sectarian documents refer to members of the Islamic community as mu’minūn
or ‘believers’, rather than muslimūn speciﬁcally. For example, the early sectarian
writings of the Kharijites and Murji‘ites always discussed issues of membership
in the Islamic community in terms of ‘believers’ and non-believers, not in terms
of Muslims and non-Muslims.
203 Watt, Muhammad, pp. 225–7.
204 Fred M. Donner, Te Early Islamic Conquests (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1981), p. 200.
205 Al-Tabari, Te History of al-Ṭabarī, v. XIV, p. 36. Te text of the treaty is:
‘In the name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful. Tis is the safe-conduct
Suraqah b. ‘Amr, governor of the Commander of the Faithful, ‘Umar b. al-Khattāb,
has granted to Shahrbaraz, the inhabitants of Armenia, and the Armenians [in
al-Bab]. [He grants] them safe-conduct for their persons, their possessions, and
their religion lest they be harmed and so that nothing be taken from them. [Te
following is imposed] upon the people of Armenia and al-Abwab, those coming
from distant parts and those who are local and those around them who have
joined them: that they should participate in any military expedition, and carry
out any task, actual or potential, that the governor considers to be for the good,
providing that those who agree to this are exempt from tribute but [perform]
military service. Military service shall be instead of their paying tribute. But those
of them who are not needed for military service and who remain inactive have
similar tribute obligations to the people of Azerbaijan [in general]…. If they
perform military service, they are exempt from [all] this.’
206 Jurjumah was located in the border region between modern-day Syria and
Turkey.
207 Baladhuri, Origins, vol. 1, p. 246.
208 Ibid., p. 249.
209 For a full explanation of the traditional Islamic teachings on innovation
(bid‘a) see T. J. Winter’s ‘Te Poverty of Fanaticism’ in this volume.
210 Al-Nawawi, An-Nawawi’s Forty Hadith, trans. by E. Ibrahim and D.
Johnson Davies (Malaysia: Polygraphic Press Sdn. Bhd., 1982), p. 94 (ḥadīth no.
28). Tis hadith is also to be found in the Sunan of Abu Dawud and the Jāmi‘

--- Sayfa 475 ---
447
Notes
of Tirmidhi. Other hadith related by al-Nawawi concerning the issue of innova-
tion are: ‘He who establishes (aḥdatha) something in this matter of ours that is
not from it, it is rejected (radd)!’ and ‘Te one who acts [in a way that is] not in
agreement with our matter, it is rejected!’ (see p. 40).
211 We should not have the impression that modern fundamentalists represent
the ﬁrst time that the traditional Islamic limits of warfare have been disregarded.
Te Kharijite movement, whose roots go back to a religio-political dispute in the
ﬁrst Islamic century, represent one of the most famous examples of just such
transgression. Te Kharijites were perfectly willing to attack ‘civilians’, although
their dispute was essentially with other members of the Muslim community
rather than with non-Muslims. Tey declared a sentence of ‘excommunication’
(barā’a) upon anyone who did not accept their perspective on Islam. According
to the Kharijites, such excommunicated people—men, women, and children—
were aﬀorded no protection under the laws of religion for their lives or property.
Terefore, the Kharijites considered it perfectly legal to kill such persons. It is
important to mention that throughout the early history of Islam the Kharijite
position was condemned and even physically opposed by every major Muslim
group, Sunni and Shi‘ite.
212 Te choice of this word is a calculated political manoeuvre to co-opt the
authority of the 1400-year Islamic legal tradition. Within the science of Islamic
jurisprudence (ﬁqh), a fatwa refers to a religious opinion issued by a scholar of
law (sharī‘ah). Most fundamentalists have had no formal training in the study
of Islamic law.
213 For an examination of the relationship between modernism and funda-
mentalism, see Joseph E. B. Lumbard’s ‘Te Decline of Knowledge and the Rise
of Ideology in the Modern Islamic World’ in ‘Islam, Fundamentalism, and the
Betrayal of Tradition: Essays by Western Muslim Scholars’, World Wisdom,
2004).
214 Ibn Kathir, Tafsīr, vol. 1, p. 308.
215 Te command here in Arabic, lā ta‘tadū, means ‘not to act brutally’, but it
can also mean ‘not to commit excess, outrage, unlawful action, or violate women’.
216 Ibn Kathir, Tafsir, vol. 1, pp. 308–9.
217 Al-Tabari, Jāmi‘ al-bayān, vol. 4, p. 220; Ibn Kathir, Tafsīr, vol. 1, p. 698.
218 See Guillaume, Te Life of Muhammad, pp 607–8.
chapter 
219 Tis is an expanded version of an article ﬁrst published in the journal
Sacred Web, no.8, 2001.
220 Tis statement was made in a letter written by the emir in 1860. Quoted in
Charles Henry Churchill, Te Life of Abdel Kader (London: Chapman and Hall,
1867), p.323.

--- Sayfa 476 ---
war and peace in islam
448
221 One of the best answers to this question is contained in the series of
essays on jihad by S.A. Schleifer. He mounts an excellent critique of the polit-
ical reduction of jihad, using as his basis ‘traditional Islamic consciousness’,
and including, as a case study of jihad conducted according to this conscious-
ness, the little known mujāhid in the struggle against the colonisation of
Palestine in the 1920s and 1930s, ‘Izz al-Din al-Qassam. Tis case study forms
part 1 of the series, which was published in the journal Islamic Quarterly, vol.
XXIII, no.2 (1979); part 2, ‘Jihad and Traditional Islamic Consciousness’ is
in vol. XXVII, no.4 (1983)_; part 3, is in vol.XXVIII, no.1 (1984); part 4, in
vol.XXVIII, no.2 (1984); and part 5, in vol.XXVIII, no.3 (1984).
222 Quoted in Stanley Lane-Poole, Saladin and the Fall of the Kingdom
of Jerusalem (Beirut: Khayats Oriental Reprints, 1964), p.232–3. (Originally
published in London, 1898.) It is not irrelevant to note here that, as Titus
Burckhardt says, the Christian ‘knightly attitude towards women is Islamic
in origin’ (Moorish Culture in Spain (London: Allen & Unwin, 1972), p.93).
Simonde de Sismondi, writing in the early nineteenth century, asserts that
Arabic literature was the source of ‘that tenderness and delicacy of sentiment
and that reverential awe of women … which have operated so powerfully on
our chivalrous feelings’. (Histoire de la littérature du Midi de l’Europe, quoted
in R. Boase, Te Origin and Meaning of Courtly Love (Manchester University
Press, 1977), p.20.
223 Lane-Poole, op. cit., p.233–4.
224 Quoted in Tomas Arnold, Te Preaching of Islam (London: Luzak,
1935), p.88–9.
225 Martin Lings, Muhammad—His Life According to the Earliest Sources
(London: ITS and George Allen & Unwin, 1983), p.297–8.
226 Te Preaching of Islam, op. cit., p.81–2.
227 A copy of the document is displayed to this day in the monastery, which
is the oldest continually inhabited monastery in Christendom. See J. Bentley,
Secrets of Mount Sinai (London: Orbis, 1985), pp.18–9.
228 Bernard Lewis, Te Jews of Islam (Princeton University Press, 1984),
p.8.
229 S.A. Schleifer, ‘Jews and Muslims—A Hidden History’, in Te Spirit of
Palestine (Barcelona: Zed, 1994), p.2.
230 Quoted in Schleifer, op.cit., p.5.
231 T. Burckhardt, Moorish Culture in Spain (London: George Allen and
Unwin, 1972, pp.27–8.
232 Despite the fact that Maimonides suﬀered at the hands of the
al-Mohhads, during a rare episode of persecution in Muslim Spain, the next
stage of his career—as physician to Saladdin—manifested his continuing
loyalty to Muslim rule.
233 Quoted in Schleifer, op.cit., p.8.

--- Sayfa 477 ---
449
Notes
234 Mark Cohen, ‘Islam and the Jews: Myth, Counter-Myth, History’, in
Jerusalem Quarterly, no.38, 1986, p.135.
235 Ibid.
236 See Mohamed Chérif Sahli, Abdelkader—Le Chevalier de la Foi (Algiers:
Entreprise algérienne de presse, 1967), p.131–2.
237 Cited in Michel Chodkiewicz, Te Spiritual Writings of Amir ‘Abd
al-Kader (Albany: State University of New York, 1995), p.2. Tis selection of
texts from the emir’s Mawāqif reveals well the other side of the emir: his inner
spiritual life, lived out as a master of Suﬁsm. In this work the emir comments
on Qur’anic verses and hadith, as well as upon Ibn Arabi’s writings, doing
so from a rigorously esoteric perspective. Indeed, the emir was designated
as the wārith al-‘ulūm al-akbariyyah, inheritor of the Akbari sciences, those
sciences pertaining to the Shaykh al-Akbar (‘the greatest master’), Ibn Arabi.
See pp.20–4 for this little known aspect of the emir’s function.
238 See Churchill, op. cit., p.295.
239 See the important treatise by the late Shaykh of al-Azhar, Mahmud
Shaltut (see Ch.1 in this volume), in which jihad in Islam is deﬁned in entirely
defensive terms. Te treatise, al-Qur’ān wa’l-Qitāl, was ﬁrst published in
Cairo in 1948, and presented in translation by Peters under the title ‘A
Modernist Interpretation of Jihad: Mahmud Shaltut’s Treatise, Koran and
Fighting’ in his book, Jihad in Classical and Modern Islam (Leiden: Brill,
1977), pp.59–101.
240 Churchill, op. cit., p.314.
241 Ibid., p.318.
242 Like the emir, Imam Shamil was regarded with awe not only by his
own followers, but also by the Russians; when he was ﬁnally defeated and
taken to Russia, he was fêted as a hero. Although occasionally embroidered
with romanticism, Lesley Blanch’s Sabres of Paradise (New York, Caroll
and Graf, 1960) conveys well the heroic aspect of Shamil’s resistance. For
a more scholarly account, see Moshe Gammer, Muslim Resistance to the
Tsar: Shamil and the Conquest of Chechnia and Daghestan (London: Frank
Cass, 1994); Chechnya. Our own Crisis in Chechnia—Russian Imperialism,
Chechen Nationalism and Militant Suﬁsm (London: Islamic World Report,
1995) oﬀers an overview of the Chechen quest for independence from the
eighteenth century through to the war of the mid-1990s, with a particular
stress on the role of the Suﬁ brotherhoods in this quest.
243 Tat is, a dhimmī, a non-Muslim who enjoys the dhimmah, or ‘protec-
tion’ of the Muslim state.
244 Quoted in Churchill, op. cit., p.321–2.
245 Abu Bakr Siraj ad-Din, Te Book of Certainty (Cambridge: Islamic Texts
Society, 1992), p.80. See also the essay by S.H. Nasr, ‘Te Spiritual Signiﬁcance
of Jihad’, ch.1 of Traditional Islam in the Modern World (London: KPI, 1987);

--- Sayfa 478 ---
war and peace in islam
450
and also ‘Traditional Islam and Modernism’, which remains one of the most
important principal critiques of modernist and extremist thought in Islam.
246 Quoted by the Shaykh al-Arabi al-Darqawi, founder of the Darqawi
branch of the Shadhiliyya Suﬁ order. See Letters of a Suﬁ Master, trans. Titus
Burckhardt (Bedfont, Middlesex: Perennial Books, 1969), p.9.
247 See the essay by Omar Benaissa ‘Suﬁsm in the Colonial Period’ in Algeria:
Revolution Revisited, ed. R. Shah-Kazemi (London: Islamic World Report, 1996),
for details of this religious inﬂuence of the tariqa of the Shaykh on Algerian
society; and our own essay, ‘From Suﬁsm to Terrorism: Te Distortion of Islam
in the Political Culture of Algeria’, in which several points made in the present
article are ampliﬁed.
248 Alexis de Tocqueville bitterly criticised the assimilationist policy of his
government in Algeria. In a parliamentary report of 1847 he wrote that ‘We
should not at present push them along the path of our own European civilisation,
but in their own … We have cut down the number of charities [i.e. religious waqf
institutions], let schools fall into ruin, closed the colleges [i.e. madrasas] … the
recruitment of the men of religion and of the [shari‘ah] law has ceased. We have,
in other words, made Muslim society far more miserable, disorganised, barbaric
and ignorant than ever it was before it knew us.’ Quoted in Charles-Robert
Ageron, Modern Algeria, trans. Michael Brett (London: Hurst, 1991), p.21.
249 Léon Roche, Dix Ans à travers l’Islam (Paris, 1904), p.140–1. Cited in M.
Chodkiewicz, op. cit., p.4.
250 Cited in Churchill, op. cit., p.137–8.
251 Frithjof Schuon, Islam and the Perennial Philosophy (London: World of
Islam Festival, 1976), p.101. Schuon also referred to Ali as the ‘representative par
excellence of Islamic esotericism’. Te Transcendent Unity of Religions (London:
Faber and Faber, 1953), p.59.
252 Cf. the following verse in the Bhagavad-Gita: ‘Who thinks that he can be
a slayer, who thinks that he is slain, both these have no [right] knowledge: He
slays not, is not slain.’ Hindu Scriptures, trans. R.C. Zaehner (London: Dent,
1966), p.256.
253 Te Mathnawi of Jalalu’ddin Rumi, trans. R.A. Nicholson (London: Luzac,
1926), Book 1, p.205, lines 3787–94. Te parentheses are inserted by Nicholson.
See Schleifer’s comments on Rumi’s account of this episode in ‘Jihad and
Traditional Islamic Consciousness’ op. cit., pp.197–9.
254 As Rumi says, continuing Ali’s discourse; see line 3800, p.207.
255 We follow Muhammad Asad’s translation of these elliptical verses. See his
Te Message of the Qur’an, Gibraltar: Dar al-Andalus, 1984, p.942.
chapter 
256 Te editors have edited this text slightly.

--- Sayfa 479 ---
451
Notes
chapter 
257 Rene Girard, Violence and the Sacred, trans. by Patrick Gregory (Baltimore:
Te Johns Hopkins University, 1979).
258 Tis is the gist of Bernard Lewis’ attacks on ‘Islamic fundamentalism’ in
a number of highly publicised essays including ‘Te Roots of Muslim Rage’,
Te Atlantic Monthly (September 1990), pp. 47–60 and ‘Islam and Liberal
Democracy’, Te Atlantic Monthly (February, 1993). Lewis considers ‘Islamic
fundamentalism’, which he equates occasionally with terrorism, as arising out of
the overtly religious and intolerant traditions of Islam. I have dealt with Lewis’
arguments in my ‘Roots of Misconception: Euro-American Perceptions of Islam
Before and Afer 9/11’ in Joseph Lumbard, ed., Islam, Fundamentalism, and the
Betrayal of Tradition (Bloomington, IN: World Wisdom, 2004), pp. 143–87.
259 Cf. Mark Juergensmeyer, Terror in the Mind of God: Te Global Rise of
Religious Violence (Berkeley and New York): Univeristy of California Press,
2000).
260 One such exception to the rule is Richard Martin’s essay ‘Te Religious
Foundations of War, Peace, and Statecraf in Islam’ in John Kelsay and James
Turner Johnson, eds, Just War and Jihad: Historical and Teoretical Perspectives
on War and Peace in Western and Islamic Traditions (New York: Greenwood
Press, 1991), pp. 91–117.
261 Cf. Steven Lee, ‘A Positive Concept of Peace’ in Peter Caws, ed., Te
Causes of Quarrel: Essays on Peace, War, and Tomas Hobbes (Boston: Beacon
Press, 1989), pp. 183–4.
262 Gray Cox, ‘Te Light at the End of the Tunnel and the Light in Which We
May Walk: Two Concepts of Peace’ in Caws, ibid., pp. 162–3.
263 Te celebrated ḥadīth jibrīl conﬁrms the same Qur’anic usage: ‘Iḥsān is
to worship God as if you were to see Him; even if you see Him not, he sees
you’. For an extensive analysis of iḥsān as articulated in the Islamic tradition,
see Sachiko Murata and William Chittick, Te Vision of Islam ,Paragon House,
1998), pp. 265–317.
264 R. G. Collingwood, Te New Leviathan (New York: Tomas Y. Crowell,
1971), p. 334.
265 Ibn Manzur, Lisān al-‘arab, XIII, pp. 457–8 and al-Tahanawi, Kashshāf
iṣṭilāḥāt al-funūn (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, 1998), III, pp. 288–9.
266 Cf. Muhammad Asad, Te Message of the Qur’an, p. 179, no. 46 comment-
ing on the Qur’an Al-An‘ām, 6:54: ‘And when those who believe in Our messages
come unto thee, say: “Peace be upon you. Your Sustainer has willed upon
Himself the law of grace and mercy so that if any of you does a bad deed out
of ignorance, and thereafer repents and lives righteously, He shall be [found]
much-forgiving, a dispenser of grace.”’
267 On the basis of this verse, the tenth century philologist Abu Hilal al-‘Askari

--- Sayfa 480 ---
war and peace in islam
452
considers justice and iḥsān as synonyms. Cf. his al-Furūq al-lughawiyyah, p.
194, quoted in Franz Rosenthal, ‘Political Justice and the Just Ruler’ in Joel
Kraemer and Ilai Alon, eds, Religion and Government in the World of Islam
(Tel-Aviv: Tel-Aviv University, 1983), p. 97, no. 20.
268 Like other Suﬁs, Ghazali subscribes to the notion of what Ibn al-‘Arabi
would later call the ‘possessor of the two eyes’ (dhū’l-‘aynayn), viz., seeing
God with the two eyes of transcendence (tanzīh) and immanence (tashbīh).
Cf. Fadlou Shehadi, Ghazali’s Unique Unknowable God (Leiden: E. J. Brill,
1964), pp. 8–10 and 51–5. For Ibn al-‘Arabi’s expression of the ‘possessor of
the two eyes’, see William Chittick, Te Suﬁ Path of Knowledge (Albany, State
University of New York Press, 1989), pp. 361–2. Te Mu‘tazilite and Ash‘arite
theologians have a long history of controversy over the three major views of
Divine names and qualities, i.e., tanzīh, tashbīh, and ta‘tīl (‘suspension’). Cf.
Michel Allard, Le problème des attributes divins dans la doctrine d’al-Aš’ari et
des ses premiers grands disciples (Beirut: Editions De L’Impirimerie Catholique,
1965), pp. 354–64.
269 ‘Ali b. Sultan Muhammad al-Harawi al-Qari, al-Maṣnū’ fī Ma‘rifat
al-ḥadīth al-Mawḍū‘ (Riyadh: Maktabat al-Rushd, 1404 AH), 1:141.
270 Quoted in William Chittick, Te Self-Disclosure of God: Principles of Ibn
al-‘Arabi’s Cosmology (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1998), p. 22.
271 Dawud al-Qaysari, Risālah fī ma‘rifat al-maḥabbah al-ḥaqīqiyyah
in al-Rasā’il, edited by Mehmet Bayraktar (Kayseri: Kayseri Metropolitan
Municipality, 1997), p. 138.
272 Te term has ﬁrst been used by Mircea Eliade and adopted by Tu Weiming
to describe the philosophical outlook of the Chinese traditions. For an applica-
tion of the term to Islamic thought, see William Chittick, ‘Te Anthropocosmic
Vision in Islamic Tought’ in Ted Peters, Muzaﬀar Iqbal, Syed Nomanul Haq,
eds, God, Life, and the Cosmos (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2002). pp. 125–52.
273 Cf. Seyyed Hossein Nasr, Religion and the Order of Nature (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1996), pp. 60–3.
274 Te classical Qur’an commentaries are almost unanimous on interpret-
ing this ‘khalifah’ as Adam, i.e., humans in the generic sense. Cf. Jalal al-Din
al-Mahalli and Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti, Tafsīr al-Jalalayn (Beirut: Mu’assasat
al-Risalah, 1995), p. 6 and Ibn al-‘Arabi, al-Futūḥāt al-makkiyyah, edited by
M. ‘Abd al-Rahman al-Mar‘ashli, (Beirut: Dar Ihya’ al-Turath al-‘Arabi, 1997),
vol. I, p. 169.
275 Another formulation is laysa fī’l-imkān abdā’ mimmā kān. Loosely trans-
lated, it states that ‘there is nothing in the world of possibility more beautiful
and perfect than what is in actuality’. Tis sentence, attributed to Ghazali, has
led to a long controversy in Islamic thought. For an excellent survey of this
debate in Islamic theology, see Eric L. Ormsby, Teodicy in Islamic Tought:
Te Dispute over al-Ghazali’s ‘Best of All Possible Worlds’ (Princeton, NJ:

--- Sayfa 481 ---
453
Notes
Princeton University Press, 1984). Cf. Also Ghazali, Ihyā’ ‘ulūm al-dīn, (Cairo:
1968), vol. IV, p. 321. Te earliest formulation of the problem, however, can be
traced back to Ibn Sina. See my ‘Why Do Animals Eat Other Animals: Mulla
Sadra on Teodicy’ (forthcoming).
276 Plantinga’s ‘free will defence’ is based on this premise. Cf. Alvin Plantinga,
‘Te Free Will Defence’ in Philosophy in America, Max Black, ed., reprinted in
Baruch A. Broody, ed., Readings in the Philosophy of Religion: An Analytical
Approach (New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1974), p. 187. See also his ‘God, Evil, and
the Metaphysics of Freedom’ in Marilyn M. Adams and Robert M. Adams,
eds, Te Problem of Evil (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990), pp. 83–109.
277 Mulla Sadra, al-Ḥikmah al-muta‘āliyah fī’l-asfār al-‘aqliyyah al-‘arba’ah,
(cited hereafer as Asfār) (Tehran, 1383, A. H.), II, 3, p. 72.
278 Ibid., p. 78.
279 Frithjof Schuon, In the face of the Absolute (Bloomington: World Wisdom
Books, 1989), p. 39.
280 Tis is the main reason why a good number of Suﬁs, philosophers, and
some theologians believe that hellﬁre will be terminated whereas paradise will
remain eternal. For the debate between the Mu‘tazilites and the Ash‘arites
on this issue, see Sa’d al-Din al-Tafazani, Sharḥ al-maqāṣid (Beirut: ‘Alam
al-Kutub, 1989), vol. 5, pp. 131–40.
281 Cf. the following verse: Man never tires of asking for the good [things of
life]; and if evil fortune touches him, he abandons all hope, giving himself up to
despair. Yet whenever We let him taste some of Our grace afer hardship has
visited him, he is sure to say, ‘Tis is but my due!’—and, ‘I do not think that the
Last Hour will ever come: but if [it should come, and] I should indeed be brought
back unto my Sustainer, then, behold, the ultimate good awaits me with Him’
(Fuṣṣilat,41:49–50; trans. M. Asad).
282 Sadra, Asfār, II, 3, pp. 92–3; also p. 77.
283 Cf. Plotinus, Te Enneads, V, IX, 5, p. 248, and Mulla Sadra, Asfār, I, 3, pp.
343–4. Baqillani considers the potential (bi’l-quwwah) as non-existent. See his
Kitāb al-tawḥīd, p. 34–44, quoted in Franz Rosenthal, Knowledge Triumphant:
Te Concept of Knowledge in Medieval Islam (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1970), p. 216.
284 As the ‘leader of the sceptics’ (imām al-mushakkikīn), Fakhr al-Din
al-Razi disagrees. His objection, however, clariﬁes another aspect of the discus-
sion of theodicy in Islam. As Razi points out, there is no dispute over the fact
that some actions are good and some others bad. Te question is ‘whether this
is because of an attribute that belongs [essentially] to the action itself or this is
not the case and it is solely as an injunction of the shari‘ah [that actions and
things are good or bad]’. Razi hastens to add that the Mu‘tazilites opt the ﬁrst
view and ‘our path’, i.e., the Asha‘rites believe in the second. Cf. Fakhr al-Din
al-Razi, al-Arba‘īn fī usūl al-dīn (Cairo: Maktabat al-Kulliyat al-Azhariyyah,
1986), vol. I, p. 346. For a defence of the same Ash‘arite position, see Tafazani,

--- Sayfa 482 ---
war and peace in islam
454
Sharḥ al-maqāṣid, vol. 4, p. 282 where it is asserted that human reason is in no
place to judge what is good (al-ḥusn) and what is evil (al-qubḥ). For Sabziwari’s
defence of the Mu‘tazilites, the philosophers, and the ‘Imamiyyah’ on the ratio-
nality of good and evil, see his gloss on Sadra’s Asfār, II, 3, pp. 83–4.
285 Ibn Sina, Kitāb al-najāh, edited by Majid Fakhry (Beirut: Dar al-Afaq
al-Jadidah, 1985), p. 265; cf. also Ibn Sina, al-Mubāḥathāt, edited by Muhsin
Bidarfar (Qom: Intisharat-i Bidar, 1413 AH), p. 301.
286 Sadra, Asfar, II, 1, p. 113.
287 Asfār, II, 3, p. 76. Te intrinsic goodness of things in their natural-onto-
logical state has given rise to a number of popular formulations of the problem,
the most celebrated one being Merkez Efendi, the famous Ottoman scholar.
When asked if he would change anything were he to have the ‘centre’ of the
world at his hands, he replied that he would leave everything as it is, hence the
name ‘merkez’ (centre).
288 Sadra, Asfār, III, 2, pp. 114. See also ibid. II, 2, p. 114, III, 1, p. 256, III, 2,
pp. 106–134. Sadra employs two arguments to defend the best of all possible
worlds argument, which he calls the ‘ontological’ (innī) and ‘causal’ (limmī)
methods (manhaj).
289 Tis is what Tibi claims in his essentialist generalisations and oversimpli-
ﬁcations about the Islamic pathos of peace and war. Cf. Bassam Tibi, ‘War and
Peace in Islam’ in Terry Nardin, ed., Te Ethics of War and Peace: Religious and
Secular Perspectives (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1996), pp. 128–145.
290 Concerning the Zoroastrians and Sabeans and their being part of the
People of the Book, Abu Yusuf narrates a number of traditions of the Prophet
to show that they should be treated with justice and equality as the other dhim-
mis. Te inclusion of the Zoroastrians among the dhimmis is inferred from the
fact that the Prophet had collected jizyah from the Majus of Hajar. Cf. Taxation
in Islam: Abu Yusuf’s Kitab al-kharāj, trans. A. Ben Shemesh (Leiden: E. J. Brill,
1969), pp. 88–9.
291 Some of these stipulations can be followed from Shaybani’s Siyar;
English translation by Majid Khadduri, Te Islamic Law of Nations: Shaybani’s
Siyar (Baltimore: Te John Hopkins University Press, 1966), pp. 75–94; also
Muhammad Hamidullah, Te Muslim Conduct of State (Lahore: S. Ashraf,
1961), pp. 205–8.
292 Cf. ‘Ṣulḥ’, Encyclopedia of Islam (EI2), IX, 845a.
293 As a representative text of the Ash‘arite kalam, see Sa’d al-Din al-Tafazani,
Sharḥ al-maqāṣid, vol. 5, pp. 232–320 where the long discussion of the imamate
contains no references to jihad as conquering non-Muslim territories. See also
Ibn Khaldun, Muqaddimah, trans. Franz Rosenthal, abridged by N. J. Dawood
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969), pp. 158–160 and Fakhr al-Din
al-Razi, al-Arba‘īn fī usūl al-dīn, vol. 2, pp. 255–70. Te Muslim philosophers,
especially al-Farabi, deﬁne jihad as just war and stress the virtues of the ‘city’

--- Sayfa 483 ---
455
Notes
(madinah) or the human habitat. Cf. Joel L. Kraemer, ‘Te Jihad of the Falasifa’,
Jerusalem Studies in Arabic and Islam, 10 (1987), p. 293 and 312. Butterworth
holds the same view about al-Farabi’s notion of warfare in his ‘Al-Farabi’s
Statecraf: War and the Well-Ordered Regime’ in James Turner Johnson and
John Kelsay, eds, Cross, Crescent, and Sword: Te Justiﬁcation and Limitation
of War in Western and Islamic Tradition (New York: Greenwood Press, 1990),
pp. 79–100.
294 Cf. ‘Dar al-ṣulḥ’, EI2, II, 131a.
295 Shaybani, Siyar, pp. 158–194; also ‘Amān’, EI2, I, 429a.
296 Philip K. Hitti, History of the Arabs (New York, St. Martin’s Press, 1970),
p. 145. Dozy makes a similar point when he says that ‘the holy war is never
imposed except only when the enemies of Islam are the aggressors. Otherwise, if
we take into account the injunctions of the Qur’an, it is nothing but an interpre-
tation of some theologians.’ R. Dozy, Essai sur l’histoire de l’Islamisme (Leiden:
Brill, 1879), p. 152.
297 Cf. Richard Bulliet, ‘Conversion to Islam and the Emergence of a Muslim
Society in Iran’ in Nehemia Levtzion, ed., Conversion to Islam (New York:
Holmes and Meier Publishers, Inc., 1979), pp. 30–51. See also the introduction
by the editor, p. 9.
298 Cf. Daniel J. Sahas, John of Damascus on Islam: Te ‘Heresy of the
Ishmaelites’ (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1972).
299 T. W. Arnold, Te Preaching of Islam (Delhi: Renaissance Publishing
House, 1984; originally published in 1913), pp. 63–4.
300 Cf. Lord Kinross, Te Ottoman Centuries: Te Rise and Fall of the Turkish
Empire (New York: Morrow Quill, 1977), p. 259.
301 Abdulaziz A. Sachedina, ‘Te Development of Jihad in Islamic Revelation
and History’, in Cross, Crescent, and Sword, p. 36.
302 On the question of rebellion and irregular warfare (aḥkām al-bughat) in
Islamic law, see Khaled Abou el Fadl, Rebellion and Violence in Islamic Law
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001). For a shorter synoptic account,
see ibid., ‘Ahkam al-Bughat: Irregular Warfare and the Law of Rebellion in
Islam’ in Johnson and Kelsay, eds, Cross, Crescent, and Sword, pp. 149–176.
303 Imam Shawkani, Faḥt al-qadīr, abridged by Sulayman ‘Abd Allah
al-Ashqar (Kuwait: Shirkat Dhat al-Salasal, 1988), p. 37; Le Coran: ‘Voila le
Livre…’, French translation and commentary by Yahya ‘Alawi and Javad Hadidi
(Qom: Centre pour la traduction du Saint Coran, 2000), pp. 318–9; Muhamad
Asad, Te Message of the Qur’an (Maktaba Jawahar ul uloom: Lahore, n.d.),
p.41; Shaykh Muhammad al-Ghazali, A Tematic Commentary on the Qur’an,
trans. by A. Shamis (Herndon: International Institute of Islamic Tought,
2000), pp. 18–9.
304 In his War and Peace in the Law of Islam (Baltimore: Te Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1955) Majid Khadduri goes so far as to translate jihad as

--- Sayfa 484 ---
war and peace in islam
456
‘warfare’ (p. 55) and ‘permanent war’ (p. 62), and claims that ‘the universalism
of Islam, in its all-embracing creed, is imposed on the believers as a continuous
process of warfare, psychological and political if not strictly military’ (p. 64).
Tis belligerent view of jihad is hard to justify in the light of both the legal and
cultural traditions of Islam discussed below.
305 Ibn Taymiyyah, ‘Qā’idah fī qitāl al-kuﬀār’, from Majmū‘ āt rasā’il, p. 123,
quoted in Majid Khadduri, Te Islamic Law of Nations, p. 59.
306 Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyyah, Aḥkām ahl al-dhimmah, edited by Subhi
al-Salih (Beirut: Dar al-‘Ilm li’l-alamin, 1983, 3rd edn), vol. I, p. 17.
307 Cf. John Voll, ‘Renewal and Reform’ in John Esposito, ed., Te Oxford
History of Islam (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000).
308 Rudolph Peters, Islam and Colonialism: Te Doctrine of Jihad in Modern
History (Te Hague: Mouton Publishers, 1979), p. 86. Peters’ work presents an
excellent survey of how jihad was reformulated as an anti-colonialist resistance
idea in the modern period. See also Allan Christelow, Muslim Law Courts and
the French Colonial State in Algeria (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1985) for the struggle of Muslim jurists to continue the tradition of Islamic law
under the French colonial system.
309 Al-Jabarti’s Chronicle of the French Occupation, trans. by Shmuel Moreh
(Princeton: Markus Wiener Publishers, 1997), p. 26.
310 Faraj’s treatise has been translated by Johannes J. G. Jansen, Te Neglected
Duty: Te Creed of Sadat’s Assassins and Islamic Resurgence in the Middle East
(New York: Macmillan Publishing Company, 1986), pp. 160–230.
311 Tere is a consensus on this point among the Hanaﬁ and Maliki schools
of law as well as some Hanbali scholars. For references in Arabic, see Yohanan
Friedmann, Tolerance and Coercion in Islam: Interfaith Relations in the Muslim
Tradition (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003), pp. 85–6. For the
inclusion of Zoroastrians among the People of the Book, see Friedmann,
Tolerance and Coercion, pp. 72–6. Shaﬁ‘i considers the Sabeans, a community
mentioned in the Qur’an, as a Christian group. Cf. Ibn Qayyim, Aḥkām, vol.
I, p. 92.
312 Te incident is recorded in Baladhuri’s Futūḥ al-buldān. Cf. Friedmann,
Tolerance and Coercion, p. 85.
313 Te text of the Medinan treatise is preserved in Ibn Hisham’s Sīrah. It
is also published in Muhammad Hamidullah, Documents sur la Diplomatie à
l’Epoque du Prophète et des Khalifes Orthodoxes (Paris, 1935), pp. 9–14. For an
English translation, see Khadduri, War and Peace, pp. 206–9.
314 Quoted in Khadduri, War and Peace in the Law of Islam, p. 179. Te
original text of the Najran treatise is quoted in Abu Yusuf, Kitāb al-kharāj and
Baladhuri, Futūḥ al-buldān.
315 Ibn Qayyim, Aḥkām ahl al-dhimmah, vol. I, p. 24.
316 Ibn Qayyim, Aḥkām ahl al-dhimmah, vol. I, p. 26.

--- Sayfa 485 ---
457
Notes
317 Abu Yusuf, Kitāb al-kharāj, p. 84. Cf. Shaybani, Siyar, in Khadduri, War
and Peace, p. 143.
318 Ibn Qayyim, Aḥkām ahl al-dhimmah, vol. I., p. 32ﬀ.
319 Ibn Qayyim, Aḥkām ahl al-dhimmah, p. 42 and 49.
320 Tis is not to deny that there were examples to the contrary. When one
of the governors of ‘Umar ‘Abd al-‘Aziz asked permission to ‘collect huge
amounts of jizyah owed by Jews, Christians and Majus of al-Hira before they
accepted Islam’, ‘Abd al-‘Aziz responded by saying that ‘God has sent the
Prophet Muhammad to invite people to Islam and not as a tax collector’. Tis
letter is quoted in Abu Yusuf, Kitāb al-kharāj, p. 90.
321 Cf. Aziz Ahmad, Studies in Islamic Culture in the Indian Environment
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1964), pp. 80–1.
322 Abu Yusuf mentions the case of Abu ‘Ubaydah returning the jizyah to the
dhimmis of Homs when he was not able to provide protection for them against
the Roman emperor Heraclius. Cf. the letter by Abu ‘Ubayadah mentioned by
Abu Yusuf, Kitāb al-kharāj, p. 150.
323 Cf. Khadduri, War and Peace, pp. 188–9.
324 Tese include some restrictive rulings on what the People of the Book
could wear and what religious symbols they could display. Cf. A. S. Tritton,
Te Caliphs and Teir Non-Muslim Subjects (London: Oxford University
Press, 1930), chapters VII and VIII. As Tritton notes, however, such rulings
were not implemented strictly and displayed considerable variety across the
Islamic world. A case in point, which Tritton mentions (p. 121), is Salah al-Din
al-Ayyubi who had some Christian oﬃcers working for him without following
any strict dress code.
325 Khadduri, War and Peace, p. 85.
326 Quoted in Friedmann, Tolerance and Coercion, p. 40.
327 Te major and minor religions that the Islamic world encountered
throughout its history make up a long list: the religious traditions of the pre-
Islamic (jāhiliyyah) Arabs, Mazdeans in Mesopotamia, Iran, and Transoxania,
Christians (of diﬀerent communions like Nestorians in Mesopotamia and
Iran, Monophysites in Syria, Egypt and Armenia, Orthodox Melkites in
Syria, Orthodox Latins in North Africa), Jews in various places, Samaritans
in Palastine, Mandaeans in south Mesopotamia, Harranians in north
Mesopotamia, Manichaeans in Mesopotamia and Egypt, Buddhists and
Hindus in Sind, tribal religions in Africa, pre-Islamic Turkic tribes, Buddhists
in Sind and the Panjab, Hindus in the Punjab. Cf. J. Waardenburg, ‘World
Religions as seen in the Light of Islam’ in A. T. Welch and P. Cachia, eds,  Islam
Past Inﬂuence and Present Challenge (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press,
1979), pp. 248–9. See also J. Waardenburg, Muslims and Others: Relations in
Context (Berlin and New York: Walter de Gruyter, 2003).
328 Te six cultural zones of the Islamic world comprise Arabic, Persian,

--- Sayfa 486 ---
war and peace in islam
458
Turkish/Turkic, Indian, Malay-Indonesian, and African spheres of culture
where the expression of Islam as a religious and cultural identity has been more
heterogeneous and complex than the Christian, Hindu or Chinese worlds. For
a discussion of these zones, see S. H. Nasr, Te Heart of Islam, (San Francisco:
HarperCollins, 2003), pp. 87–100.
329 See for details, M. Hinds, ‘Mihna’ in Encyclopaedia of Islam, 2nd edn, 7:26.
330 See Semiramis Cavusoglu, ‘Te Kadizadeli Movement: An Attempt at
Seri’at-Minded Reform in the Ottoman Empire’ (Unpublished Dissertation;
Princeton University, 1990). Also see Madeline C Zilﬁ, ‘Vaizan and Ulema in
the Kadizadeli Era’ Proceedings of the tenth Congress of the Turkish Historical
Society (Ankara, 1994), pp.2493–500.
331 Marshall Hodgson’s suggestion of the term ‘Islamicate’ to express the
hybrid and multifaceted nature of Islamic civilization is not completely without
justiﬁcation as many previously non-Islamic elements were incorporated into
Islamic civilisation in a relatively short period of time. Cf. his Te Venture of
Islam (Chicago: Te University of Chicago Press, 1974).
332 See Al-Rabi’ b. Habib al-Basari, Musnad al-Imām al-Rabī’, Bāb fī al-‘Ilm wa
ṭalabih wa Faḍlih. Tis is also narrated by Abu Bakr Aamad b. ‘Amre al-Bazzar
in his al-Baḥr al-Zukhkhar also known as Musnad al-Bazzar (Beirut: Mu’assasat
‘Ulum al-Qur’an, 1409 AH), 1:1775, where he claims that there is no foundation
(aṣl) for this hadith.
333 Abu ‘Isa Muhammad Tirmidhi, Sunan al-Tirmidhī, Kitāb al-‘Ilm ‘an Rasūl
Allāh, Bāb mā Jā‘a fī Faḍl al-Fiqh ‘alā al-‘Ibādah; Ibn Majah, Sunan Ibn Mājah,
Kitāb al-Zuhd, Bāb al-ḥikmah. Tis hadith has been transmitted in many hadith
collections with some variations.
334 Ignaz Goldziher, ‘Te Attitude of Orthodox Islam Toward the ‘Ancient
Sciences’ in Studies on Islam, trans. and edited by M. L. Swartz, Oxford, 1981,
pp. 185–215. For an important criticism of Goldziher’s conceptualisation, see
Dimitri Gutas, Greek Tought, Arabic Culture (London: Routledge, 1998), pp.
166–171.
335 Ya’qub b. Ishaq Al-Kindi, Rasā’il, I, p. 97, quoted in Majid Fakhry, A History
of Islamic Philosophy (New York: Columbia University Press, 1983), p. 70.
336 Sa’ib b. Ahmad al-Andalusi, Science in the Medieval World ‘Book of the
Categories of Nations’ (Tabaqāt al-umam) trans. S. I. Salem and A. Kumar,
(Austin: Te University of Texas Press, 1991), p. 6.
337 Cf. Franz Rosenthal, Te Classical Heritage in Islam (London: Routledge,
1975), pp. 25–51.
338 Te Arabic text of al-Mukhtar has been edited by A. Badawi (Beirut: Te
Arab Institute for Research and Publishing, 1980, 2nd edn) and see the original
English translation by Curt F. Buhler (London: Oxford University Press, 1941).
339 Quoted in Abu Sulayman al-Sijistani, Muntakhab ܈iwan al-ḥikmah, edited
by D. M. Dunlop (Te Hague: Mouton Publishers, 1979), p. 3.

--- Sayfa 487 ---
459
Notes
340 Shihab al-Din Yahya b. Habash al-Suhrawardi, Ḥikmat al-Ishrāq (Te
Philosophy of Illumination), edited and translated by John Walbridge and
Hossein Ziai (Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1999), p. 2.
341 For Andalusia, see Anwar Chejne, Muslim Spain: Its History and Culture
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1974) and Salma Khadra Jayyusi
and Manuela Marin, eds, Te Legacy of Muslim Spain (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1992).
For the concept of convivencia and the Jewish contributions to Andalusian civi-
lization, see V. B. Mann, T. F. Glick, and J. D. Dodds, eds., Convivencia: Jews,
Muslims, and Christians in Medieval Spain (New York: Te Jewish Museum,
1992).
342 See, among others, Arthur Hyman, ‘Jewish Philosophy in the Islamic
World’ in S. H. Nasr and Oliver Leaman, eds, History of Islamic Philosophy
(London: Routledge,), vol. I, pp. 677–95 and Paul B. Fenton, ‘Judaism and
Suﬁsm’, ibid., pp. 755–68.
343 Cf. Aziz Ahmad, Studies, pp. 191–6; Annemarie Schimmel, Islam in the
Indian Subcontinent (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1980), pp. 99–100.
344 From the Introduction to Sirr-i akbar quoted in Majmā’-ul-baḥrayn or
the Mingling of the Two Oceans by Prince Muhammad Dara Shikuh, translated
by M. Mahfuz-ul-Haq (Calcutta: Te Asiatic Society, 1929), p. 13.
345 Majmā’-ul-baḥrayn, p. 38.
346 Fathullaj Mujtabai, Hindu Muslim Cultural Relations (New Delhi, 1978),
p. 82; Edward G. Browne, A Literary History of Persia vol. IV, pp. 257–8.
chapter 
347 UNDP, Human Development Report 1994—New Dimensions of Human
Security ( New York: Oxford University Press, 1994).
348 Commission on Human Security, Human Security Now: Final Report
(New York: CHS, 2003).
349 See in particular David Baldwin, ‘Te Concept of Security’, Review of
International Studies 23/1 (1997) pp. 5–26; and John Baylis, ‘International
Security and Global Security in the Post-Cold War Era’, in John Baylis & Steve
Smith, eds., Te Globalization of World Politics. An Introduction to International
Relations (3rd  edn, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005) pp. 297–324.
350 Shahrbanou Tadjbakhsh, ‘Human Security: Concepts, Application and
Implication’, Etudes du CERI, No.117–8, Paris, CERI (September 2005). See
further: ‘What is “Human Security”? Comments by 21 Authors’, Security
Dialogue 35/3 (2004) pp. 347–87.
351 Al-Khalil b. Ahmad, Kitāb al-ǥAyn, s.v. S-L-M : ‘al-salmu’ ḍiddu l-ḥarb,
wa yuqāl: al-salmu wa l-silmu wāḥid/‘peacemaking’ is the antonym of war…;
also s.v. Ḥ-R-B : ‘al-ḥarbu’ naqīḍu l-salm/‘war’ is the opposite of peacemaking.
352 At conclusion of ritual prayer, the taslƯm is the double salutation to

--- Sayfa 488 ---
war and peace in islam
460
right and lef. See Sūrat Al-AḥzƗb, 33:56 …ṣallū ǥalayhi wa sallimǌ taslƯm.
353 But note the current Arabic term for paciﬁsm: ḥubb al-silm. Classical
Juridical usage also equated al-ṣulḥ with al-silm ‘ending the state of war’.
354 We rely for what follows on the Qur’an, and classic lexicons s.v.
S-L-M, including al-Khalil b. Ahmad, al-ǥAyn; al-Jawharī, Ṣiḥāḥ; Ibn
Durayḍ, al-Ishtiqāq; Ibn Fāris, Maqāyīs al-Lughah; and Murtaḍā al-Zabīdī,
Lisān al-ǥArab. Relevant linguistic material may also be gleaned from major
Exegetical/Tafsīr and Prophetic Biographical/Sīrah genres. Here we are very
concise, it being understood that important details might be developed at
greater depth.
355 See Sūrat  al-Anfāl, 8:1; Al-Nisā’; 4:35, 4:114; Al-Ḥujurāt, 49:9–10, etc.
356 Indeed, the signiﬁcance of the nexus of these fundamental opposing
conceptual pairs demands a separate study in greater detail, linking this notion
with the cluster of ideas derived from amn and āminūn, as opposed to ẓulm
(‘manifest injustice’). Te richness and centrality of the ṣulḥ notion displays
its true centre of gravity when the verses wherein it occurs are explored in the
light of exegetical data preserved in the tafsīr and asbāb al-nuzūl literatures.
357 Te Qur’an presents this important teaching as the message of the
previous prophets to their peoples; consult e.g. Sūrat Al-Baqarah, 2:220;
Al-A‘rāf, 7:85 and 142; and Al-Naml, 27:48 where the plotters against the
Prophet Salih are portrayed as those who spread corruption in the land and
who would not reform / yufsidūna fī l-arḍi wa lā yuṣliḥūna.
358 See al-Haﬁz Ahmad b. al-Husayn al-Bayhaqi, Shu‘ab al-ƯmƗn [Branches
of Faith], edited by M. S. BasyǌnƯ Zaghlǌl (Beirut: 1990) vol.VII pp. 487–97,
for materials on peacemaking; this utterance is no. 11092, and the immedi-
ately following one no.11093.
359 Ibid, no.11088 (as cited in Muslim, Ṣaḥīḥ, via ‘Abd al-Razzāq … Abu
Hurayrah); an alternative transmission (no. 11089) gives bighḍah ‘hatred’ in
place of fasādu dhāt al-bayn, through al-Zuhri—Abu Idris al-Khawlani—
as an utterance by Abu l-Dardā’. / Tis famous Prophetic utterance also
frequently occurs cited by ‘Ali b. Abī Talib in his deathbed testament to his
two sons (the grandsons of Muhammad).
360 Ibid,, nos11096–8; and pp. 491–7.
361 Consult Toshihiko Izutsu, Te Concept of Belief in Islamic Teology:
A Semantic Analysis of Īmān and Islām (Keio University, 1965; rpr. Kuala
Lumpur: Islamic Book Trust, 2006) on pp. 71–103 and 196–237.
362 For the variety of juridical employment consult e.g. the juridical lexicon
by Sa‘di Abu Jayb, al-Qāmūs al-Fiqhīyah lughat wa iṣṭilāḥ (2nd pr., Damascus:
Dār al-Fikr, 1988) pp.180–2.
363 Te great Kufan jurist Abu Hanifah (d. 150/767 CE) included this
Prophetic utterance among his choice of ﬁve weightiest Prophetic ḥadīth
crucial for faith.

--- Sayfa 489 ---
461
Notes
364 When the Prophet’s paternal cousin Jaǥfar b. Abi Talib in 615 CE (seven
years before the migration of the Prophet to Madinah in 622) described the
essence of Islamic guidance to the Ethiopian Emperor al-Najāshī at his court
in Axum, Jaǥfar emphasised this ‘salutation of Islam’ as a new practice speciﬁc
to their religion taught them by Muḥammad.
365 This word taslīm from verbal form II sallama (‘to make or render saluta-
tions of peace-security’), most ofen refers to the formula of praise and bless-
ing invariably invoked upon mentioning the Prophet Muhammad—see Sūrat
Al-Aḥzāb, 33:56: God and His angels make blessings upon the Prophet; O you who
believe, do you also bless him and render him salutations of peace-security /…ṣallū
ǥalayhi wa sallimū taslīm.
366 Singular taḥīyah (verbal-noun form II ḥayyā or ḥayyiya) denotes ‘saluta-
tion, greeting’ [i.e. salām ǥalayka]; as well as ‘security from death and evils’, or
‘everlasting existence’. Compare the familiar salute ḥayyāka llāhu: ‘May God
make thee secure from harm-evil’—or simply ‘May God prolong thy life’.
367 Te al-taḥīyāt are uttered in short form afer every second prostration,
and in prolonged complete form (tashahhud) afer the third or the fourth cycle
of prostrations; except of course for the dawn prayer which consists of only
two cycles.
368 Allāhumma Anta l-salām wa min-Ka l-salām wa ilay-Ka yaǥūdu
l-salām… . See what follows for a parallel tradition involving the Prophet’s
wife Khadijah.
369 Ibn Hanbal, Musnad (Cairo: 1313) V p. 451 [no. 23272 in the recent
edition]. Tis ḥadīth is only found in this source as far as I am aware. However,
it should be observed that similar statements occur in Imāmī sources as an
utterance assigned to ‘Ali b. Abi Talib, as well as to Salman al-Farisi.
370 Ifshū l-salāma wa iṭmaǥū l-ṭaǥāma wa ṣilū l-arḥām wa ṣallū wa l-nās
niyām, tadkhulū l-jannata bi-salām! Te alternative rendering …greeted by
God’s salutation ‘Peace’! has much to recommend it. / Recall that salām is ofen
a synonym of al-amān (‘surety’) as well as al-ṣulḥ (‘peace-making’).
371 For this and the following etymological data, consult sources speciﬁed in
note 354 above; and also Ibn Abil-Hadid, Sharḥ Nahj al-Balāghah (old edition
of Cairo) II p. 445.
372 Compare the eulogy of divine names in Sūrat Al-Ḥashr, 59:23 …al-Maliku
l-Quddūsu l-Salāmu l-Mu’min; further see our examination below of Salām as
an archaic theomorphic name.
373 Al-salāmah min al-sū’ wa l-ikhtilāl. See the treatment of the Divine Name
al-Salām in the genre of writings on God’s Most Beautiful Names (Asmā’ Allāh
al-Ḥusnā). Tis valuable genre has to be integrated into what we are brieﬂy
sketching here.
374 ǥAbd al-Rahman b. ǥAbdullah al-Suhayli, al-Rawḍ al-ǥUnf, edited by
Majdī b. Manṣūr b. Sayyid al-Shūrā (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-ǥIlmiyah, n.d.) I

--- Sayfa 490 ---
war and peace in islam
462
pp. 418–9. / Rawḍ is an important commentary upon the Prophet’s Biography
or Sīrah compiled by Ibn Hishām (d. 213 AH), who drew upon the famous
early work by Ibn Isḥāq (d. 151 AH).
375 Cited by Ibn Hisham on an unnamed authority; this ḥadīth on the phrase
Allāhu l-Salām is also cited in al-Bukhārī, Ṣaḥīḥ IV p. 136; and in Muslim,
faḍā’il al-ṣaḥābah no. 91 (through ǥA’ishah).
376 al-Suhayli, al-Rawḍ al-ǥUnf I pp. 419–420.
377 See e.g. Ibn Jarir al-Tabari, Jāmiǥ al-Bayān fī Ta’wīl al-Qur’ān, edited by
Hani al-Hajj et al. (Cairo: al-Maktabat al-Tawﬁqiyah, n.d.) II pp. 363–6. And
al-Maturidi, Ta’wīlāt al-Qur’ān (Istanbul: 2005) I p. 412. We also signal here,
without discussion, the occurrence of the term al-salama in Sūrat Al-Nisā’
4:86–91.
378 Namely: Taǥlabah, ǥAbdallah Ibn Salam, Ibn Yamin, Asad and Usayd
ibnay Kaǥb, Shuǥbah b. ǥUmar, and Qays b. Zayd—all prominent Medinan
Jews who accepted Islam and Muhammad’s prophethood. Tabari’s isnād for
this statement by ǥIkramah is through Ibn Jurayj (another leading tradent from
the circle of Ibn ǥAbbas); this is a singular tradition not supported by comple-
mentary reports, and might not inspire much conﬁdence, which may explain
why Tabari does not appear to place much weight on it. Nevertheless, it is of
deﬁnite interest and cannot be dismissed out of hand, perhaps reﬂecting a
Jewish reaction to the Muslim Friday day of rest being an explicit divergence
from Israelite tradition. Keep in mind that the ‘believers’ in Medina under the
Prophet included Jews and several Christians, as well as Arab Muslims.
379 Tabari, Jāmiǥ al-Bayān II p. 365.
380 Tabari, Jāmiǥ al-Bayān X pp. 35–7.
381 Tabari, Jāmiǥ al-Bayān II p. 364: ammā daǥā’uhum ilā l-ṣulḥi ibtidā’
fa-ghayr mawjūd fī l-Qur’ān. He is correct in this assertion.
382 Te famed ‘sword’ verses permitting combat against pagan idolaters are
most ofen given as Al-Baqarah, 2:190, and/or Al-Ḥajj, 22:39.
383 Tabari, Jāmiǥ al-Bayān X p. 36: mā qālahu Qatādah wa man qāla mithla
qawlihi min an hādhihi l-āyah mansūkhah, fa-qawlu lā dalālata ǥalayhi min
kitāb wa lā sunnat wa lā ﬁṭrata ǥaql! Tis appeal to inborn reason is not surpris-
ing coming from Tabari, whose juridical law rite the Jariri madhhab was noted
for its rational orientation and thus condemned by Traditionalist Ḥanbalīs.
384 Current scholarship on jihad has highlighted this divergence over the
claimed abrogation of Meccan verses by later Medinan revelations. See e.g.,
Muhammad Sa‘id Ramadan al-Buti, al-Jihad fī l-Islām: kayfa nafamuhu wa
kayfa numārisuhu?, 2nd revised ed., (Damascus: Dar al-Fikr, 1995).
385 For the siege and subsequent execution of adult males of the Qurayzah
tribe in upper Medina in year 5 AH, see concise overview with full list of
sources given in Karim Crow, Facing One Qiblah (Singapore: Pustaka Nasional,
2005)—Appendix ‘Jewish Tribes in Madīnah’.

--- Sayfa 491 ---
463
Notes
386 Jāmiǥ al-Bayān X p. 37.
387 Consult e.g. Robert G. Hoyland, ‘Arab kings, Arab tribes and the begin-
nings of Arab historical memory in late Roman epigraphy’, in Hannah M
Cotton et al., eds, From Hellenism to Islam. Cultural and Linguistic Change
in the Roman Near East (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009)
pp.374–400; R. G. Hoyland, Arabia and the Arabs (London: 2001), on pp.
96–103; and Hoyland, ‘Epigraphy and the Emergence of Arab Identity’, in
P. Sijpesteign et al., eds, From Andalusia to Khurasan: Documents from the
Medieval Islamic World (Leiden: Brill, 2007) pp. 219–42.
388 See this invaluable compilation by the erudite Andalusian scholar
Muhammad b. ǥAli b. Ahmad b. Ḥudaydah al-Ansari (d. 783 AH/ 1381 CE),
al-MiṣbƗḥ al-MuḍƯ fƯ KuttƗb al-NabƯ al-UmmƯ wa Rusulihi ilá Mulǌk al-Arḍ
min ǥArabƯ wa ǥAjamƯ, edited by al-Shaykh Muhammad ǥAzim al-Din (2nd
revised edn, Beirut: ‘Alam al-Kutub, 1985; in 2 vols). Te learned editor made
use of Professor M. Hamidullah’s fundamental study Majmǌǥat al-WathƗ¶iq
al-SiyƗsƯyah, and supplemented signiﬁcant references and relevant docu-
mentation drawn from the wealth of Hadith literature, with excellent indi-
ces. Certain textual details concerning these letters are to be found only in
al-MiṣbƗḥ al-MuḍƯ.
389 W. Robertson Smith, Te Religion of the Semites [1889] (2nd edn 1894;
rpr. New York: Meridan, 1956) pp. 79–80. Observe the archaic meaning still
reﬂected in classical Muslim legal usage of the term al-salam = al-istislām ‘a
prisoner captured apart from war’. / Palmyrene was one branch of old Arabic
along with Nabataean, as well as the dialect of the Hijaz—the basis of Qur’anic
Arabic.
390 Personal communication in 1999, from my respected teacher Professor
ǥAbbas in the year before his death in Amman; may God show him mercy.
391 W. Robertson Smith, Religion of the Semites p. 20.
392 Consult e.g. Subhash C. Inamdar, Muhammad and the Rise of Islam: Te
Creation of Group Identity (Madison. CT: Psychosocial Press, 2001), which
provides a psycho-social model for the moulding of groups and their socio-
historical impact on individuals and society.
chapter 
393 ‘Abd Allah al-Khatib al-Tabrizi, Mishkāt al-Maṣābīḥ, edited by
Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani, 2nd edn (Beirut: al-Maktab al-Islami,
1399/1979), vol. 2, hadith no. 2724.
394 Muslim b. Hajjaj al-Nishapuri, Mukhtasar Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim, edited by M
Nasir al-Din al-Albani, 2nd edn (Beirut: Dar al-Maktab al-Islami, 1404/1984),
p.11, hadith no. 34.
395 For further detail on the principle of ḥisbah (promotion of good and

--- Sayfa 492 ---
war and peace in islam
464
prevention of evil) and the manner in which it is conducted see M. H. Kamali,
Freedom of Expression in Islam (Cambridge: Islamic Texts Society, 1997), pp.
28–34.
396 Tabrizi, Mishkat, vol.1, hadith no. 46.
397 Ibid., vol.3, hadith no. 5097.
398 Shihab al-Din al-Alusi, Rīh al-M’ānī fī Tafsīr al-Qur’ān al-‘Aẓīm (Beirut:
Dar al-Turath al-‘Arabi, nd.), vol. XV, no. 117.
399 For a roundup of opinion and references to Sayyid Qutb, Mustafa
al-Siba’i, ‘Abd al-Hakim Hasan al-‘Ili, Ahmad Yusri, and Wahbah al-Zuhaili
see Mohammad Hashim Kamali, Te Dignity of Man: an Islamic Perspective,
(Cambridge: Islamic Texts Society, 2002), pp. 1–2.
400 For details on the subject of rights and duties in Islamic law, see M.H.
Kamali, ‘An Analysis of Rights in Islamic Law’, Te American Journal of Islamic
Social Sciences 10 (1993), pp. 178–201. A summary of this examination can also
be found in idem. Freedom of Expression in Islam, pp. 16–24.
401 See my views on this and other aspects of the human rights discourse in
Kamali, Te Dignity of Man, pp. xv-xvi.
402 Jack Donolly, ‘Human Rights and Human Dignity: An Analytic Critique
of non-Western Conceptions of Human Rights’, Te American Political Science
Review 76 (June 1982), p. 304.
403 I shall not engage into details here but merely point out that textbook
writers number the ḍarūriyyāt into ﬁve, hence the phrase al- ḍarūriyyāt
al-khamsah, to which the seventh century jurist Shihab al-Din al-Qaraﬁ added
a sixth, namely al-‘irḍ (honour). Since this is a valid addition and has a Qur’anic
basis, I refer to them as the six universals, namely of life, intellect, religion,
family, property, and honour. See for details M.H. Kamali, An Introduction to
Shari’ah (Kuala Lumpur: Ilmiah Publishers, 2006), ch. 6 ‘Goals and Purposes
(maqāṣid) of Shari’ah: History and Methodology’, pp. 115–33, at 118. A
revised and enhanced edition of this book is due to be published by Oneworld
Publication, Oxford, U.K.
404 Cf. Dirk Bakker, Man in the Qur’an (Amsterdam: Drukkerij, 1965), p. 127
and passim. Bakker also quotes in support C. Snouk Hurgronje and Richard
Bell. He has on the other hand discussed Montgomery Watt, H. Berkeland and
others that variously characterised God-man relationship with mercy, guid-
ance, creative power, and dominion etc.
405 Cf. Muddathir ‘Abd al-Rahim, ‘Anmat al-Ḥubb fī’l-Qur’ān al-Karīm:
Naẓrah Ijmāliyyah’, conference paper presented to the International
Conference on ‘al-Ḥubb fī’l-Qur’ān al-Karīm’, (Manifestations of Love in the
Noble Qur’an), organised by the Royal Academy of Jordan, 4–6 September
2007, p.6f.
406 Cf., Sūrat Al-Baqarah,  2:263; Al-A‘rāf, 7:156; Al-Ḥijr, 15:56; Al-Zumar,
39: 53 and passim.

--- Sayfa 493 ---
465
Notes
407 Al-Baqarah 2:164; Āl ‘Imrān, 3:18; Al-Nisā’, 4:162; Al-Ḥajj, 22:54; Al-Rūm,
30:28; Al-Mujādilah, 58:11; Fāṭir, 35:88; Ṣād, 38:43; Al-Zumar, 39:9,18.
408 Cf., Luqmān, 31:20; Fāṭir, 35:13; Al-Mulk, 67:15.
409 Al-A‘rāf,  7:10, 30; Ibrāhīm, 14:34 and Al-Qaṣaṣ, 28:77.
410 Muhammad b. Isma’il al-Bukhari, Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhari, Kitāb al-Riqāq,
hadith no.6502.
411 Te Arabic terms used in the Qur’an are al-mu‘tadīn, al-ẓalimīn,
al-mufsidīn, al-mustakbirīn, al- fakhūr, al-kāﬁrīn, al-kha’inīn, al-musrifīn
(Al-Baqarah, 2:195; Al-Shūra, 42:40; Al-Baqarah, 2:205; Al-Naḥl, 16:23; Al-Nisā’,
4:36; Al-A‘rāf, 7:32; Al-Anfāl, 8:58; and Al-An‘ām, 6:141 respectively).
412 Al-Qaradawi’s discussion of this and other related verses in the Qur’an
leads him to the conclusion that Islam recognises two levels of fraternity, namely
human fraternity (al-ikhā’ al-insāni) and fraternity in faith (al-ikhā’ al-dīnī).
Te latter does not weaken the former, rather it substantiates and endorses the
wider fraternity of humankind: Yusuf al-Qaradawi, al-Khasā’is al-‘Ammah li’l-
Islām (Cairo: Maktabah Wahbah, 1409/1989), p. 84.
413 From the Prophet’s Farewell Sermon, Muslim, Mukhtasar Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim,
p.186, hadith no. 707.
414 Āl ‘Imrān,  3:195; Al-Naḥl, 16:97.
415 J. Weeramantry, Islamic Jurisprudence: an International Perspective
(Basingstoke, U.K: Macmillan, 1988), p. 64.
416 Al-Anbiyā’,  21:20; Al-Baqarah, 2:187.
417 Al-Tabrizi, Mishkāt, vol.2, hadith no.4998.
418 Muslim, Mukhtasar Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim, p. 476, hadith no.1794.
419 Muslim, Mukhtasar Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim, p. 484, hadith no.1833.
420 Al-Tabrizi, Mishkāt, vol.2, hadith no. 3665.
421 Muhammad ibn Yazid al-Qazwini ibn Maja, Sunan ibn Mājah (Istanbul:
Cagri Yayinlari, 1401/1981), kitāb al-ﬁtān; bāb ‘amr bi’l-ma‘rūf wa nahī ‘an
al-munkar.
422 For further detail on ḍarūriyyat also see M. H. Kamali ‘Maqasid al-Shari’ah,
the Objectives of Islamic Law’, Islamic Studies 38 (1999), pp. 193–209. On the
concept of ‘iṣmah see Baber Johansen, Contingency in a Sacred Law: Legal and
Ethical Norms in the Muslim Fiqh (Leiden: Brill, 1999). For the emergence and
development of concepts see also Recep Senturk, ‘Ādamiyyah and ‘Iṣmah: Te
Contested Relationship between Humanity and Human Rights in the Classical
Islamic Law’, Turkish J. of Islamic Studies, 8(2002), pp. 39–70.
423 Al-Tawbah, 9:5 (a likely reference to the pagans of Mecca), and Al-Anfāl,
8:39 (permits ﬁghting to end mischief and oppression).
424 Recep Senturk, ‘Sociology of Rights’, (see the next footnote), p. 16.
425 Cf. Abu al-Hassan Burhan al-Din al-Marghinani (d. 593 H/1296C.E),
al-Hidāyah Sharḥ Bidāyat al-Mubtadī, edited by Muhammad Tamir et al. (Cairo:
Dar al-Salam, 1420/2000), vol. II, no. 852; see also Recep Senturk, ‘Sociology

--- Sayfa 494 ---
war and peace in islam
466
of Rights: I Am Terefore I Have Rights: Human Rights in Islam Between
Universalistic and Communalistic Perspectives’, produced by the Berkeley
Electronic Press, 2005: http:www.bepress.com/mwjhr/vol.12/iss1/art11.
426 Abi Bakr Muammad b. Ahmad al-Sarakhsi, Usūl al-Sarakhsi, edited by
Abu’l-Wafa al-Afghani (Istanbul: Kahraman Yay, 1984, 86).
427 Ibid., 333–4.
428 Abu al-Hassan Burhan al-Din al-Marghinani, Te Hedaya or Guide: a
commentary on the Mussulman laws, trans. Charles Hamilton (Karachi: Daru’l-
Ishaat, 1989), II, 221.
429 Muhammad Amin ibn ‘Abidin, Hashīyah ibn ‘Abidin (Cairo: Mustafa
al-Babi al-Halabi, 1386/1966),      vol. V, 58.
430 Cf. Senturk, ‘Te Sociology of Rights’, p. 16.
431 Te present writer has written extensively on the fundamental rights of
the individual in Islam. See for details Mohammad Hashim Kamali, Te Right
to Life, Security, Privacy and Ownership in Islam, 2008, pp.  xi+318, Idem, Te
Right to Education, Work and Welfare in Islam, 2010, pp,  x and 294 and Idem,
Citizenship and Accountability of Government: An Islamic Perspective, 2011, pp.
x  and 321. All three books published by Cambridge: Islamic Text Society.
chapter 
432 Sūrat Al-Baqarah, 2:101, 144, 145; Āl ‘Imrān, 3:19, 20, 100, 186, 187;
Al-Nisā’, 4:47, 131; Al-Mā’idah, 5:5, 57; Al-Ḥadīd, 57:16; Al-Muddaththir, 74:31;
Al-Bayyinah, 98:4.
433 Al-Baqarah, 2: 121, 146; Al-An‘ām, 6:20, 89, 114; Al-Ra‘d, 13:36; Al-Naml,
27:52; Al-‘Ankabūt, 29:47; Al-Jāthiyah, 45:16.
434 Āl ‘Imrān, 3:23; Al-Nisā’, 4: 44, 51.
435 Fāṭir, 35:32; Al-Shūrā, 42:14.
436 Al-Ra‘d, 13:43.
437 Yūnus, 10:94.
438 Al-Naḥl, 16:43; Al-Anbiyā’, 21:7. Tough al-dhikr is one of the names of
the Qur’an, the pre-modern exegetes have generally identiﬁed ahl al-dhikr with
either ahl al-tawrah or ahl al-injīl or both. See Isma‘il b. ‘Umar Ibn Kathir, Tafsīr
al-Qur’ān al-’Aẓīm (Cairo: Matba‘ah al-Istiqamah, 1375/1956), Āl ‘Imrān, 3:
174, comments on Al-Anbiyā’, 21:7.
439 Tis occurs nine times in the Qur’an only in the Medinan surahs
(Al-Baqarah, 2:113 (twice), 120; Āl ‘Imrān, 3: 67; Al-Mā’idah, 5: 18, 51, 64, 82;
Al-Tawbah, 9:30).
440 Tis occurs three times in Sūrat Al-Baqarah (Al-Baqarah, 2:111, 135, 140).
441 Tis occurs ten times, mostly in the Medinan surahs (Al-Baqarah, 2: 62;
Al-Nisā’, 4: 46, 160; Al-Mā’idah, 5: 41, 44, 69; Al-An‘ām, 6: 146; Al-Naḥl, 16:118;
Al-Ḥajj, 22:17; Al-Jumu‘ah, 62:6).

--- Sayfa 495 ---
467
Notes
442 Te phrase banū/banī Isrā’īl (the Children of Israel) is mentioned in the
Qur’an forty times. Te usage of this phrase is quite diﬀerent from that of the
above mentioned terms. Te phrase banū Isrā’īl seems to indicate the Jewish
race, whereas the term yahūd and its derivatives are generally used to address
people of Jewish faith. Tese latter terms seem to have a pejorative connotation.
See for further discussion, Omer Faruk Harman, ‘Tefsir Geleneginde Yahudilere
Baki’j’ in his Muslumanlar ve Diger Din Mensuplari (Ankara: Turkiye Dinler
Tarihi Dernegi Yayinlar, 2004), pp. 119–20. It is also interesting to note that
the title of one of the Qur’anic surahs in the late Meccan period is Banū Isrā’īl
(surah 17).
443 Almost all of them occur in the Medinan surahs (Al-Baqarah, 2:62, 111,
113 (twice), 120, 135, 140; Al-Mā’idah, 5: 14, 18, 51, 69, 82; Al-Tawbah, 9:30;
Al-Ḥajj, 22:17). In one place the term naṣrāni is mentioned (Āl ‘Imrān, 3: 67).
444 Muḥammad, 47: Let the People of the Gospel judge by what Allah has
revealed therein...
445 Āl ‘Imrān, 3:52; Al-Mā’idah, 5:111, 112; Al-Ṣaﬀ, 61:14 (twice).
446 Sabeans: Al-Baqarah, 2:62; Al-Mā’idah, 5:69; Al-Ḥajj, 22:17. And
Zoroastrians: Al-Ḥajj, 22:17.
447 Malik b. Anas, al-Muwatta’ (Istanbul: Çagri, 1992), 1: 244. Only the Zahiri
school of thought holds the view that marriage with a Zoroastrian woman
is legitimate. See Abu Muhammad ‘All b. Ahmad Ibn Hazm, al-Muhalla bi
’l-Athar (Beirut: Dar al-Fikr, n.d.), 5: 413–4. Although the Hanaﬁ jurist Abu
Yusuf Ya‘qub b. Ibrahim (d. 182/798) includes the Zoroastrians among ahl
al-dhimmah, he does not see marrying their women to be legitimate. See his
Kitāb al-Kharaj (Cairo: n.p., 1990), pp. 122, 128–30.
448 Al-An‘ām, 6:156: Lest you should say: Te Book was sent down only upon
two parties (ṭā’ifatayn) before us, and we have indeed been heedless of their study.
449 Tawrah is mentioned eighteen times in the Qur’an; almost all occurring
in the Medinan surahs (the single exception is the verse Al-A‘rāf, 7:157 in the
late Meccan Surat Al-A‘rāf).
450 Zabūr is mentioned three times, two of which are related to the Prophet
David U. Te plural form of the term zabūr (pl. zubur) occurs in seven places.
Interestingly, most of these surahs are Meccan. Moreover, the late Dr Hamidullah
thinks that the statements zubur al-awwalīn in Al-Shu‘arā, 26:196 and al-ṣuḥuf
al-ūlā in Al-A‘lā, 87:18 refer to the Hindus’ sacred texts. See Muhammad
Hamidullah, Le Saint Coran (Beirut: Mu’assasat al-Risalah, n.d.), 2: 492, 804.
However, this does not seem very plausible.
451 Injīl is mentioned twelve times in the Qur’an; almost all occurring in
the Medinan surahs (again, the single exception is in the late Meccan surah,
Al-A‘rāf, 7:157). It is also important to note that the Qur’an does not use the
plural form ‘Gospels’.
452 Al-A‘lā, 87:18. Tere are also some Prophetic traditions which say that

--- Sayfa 496 ---
war and peace in islam
468
God sent suhuf (sheets) to the Prophets Adam (Adam) and to Shith who was
a son of the Prophet Adam and Prophet Enoch (Idris) X. See Abu Hatim
Muhammad b. Hibban al-Taymi, Ṣaḥīḥ Ibn Ḥibbān bi Tartīb Ibn Balbān, edited
by Shu‘ayb al-Arna’ut (Beirut: Mu’asasat al-Risalah, 1414/1993), 2: 76. See also,
Abu Ja‘far Muhammad b. Jarir al-Tabari, Tarīkh al-Rusul wa al-Mulūk (Beirut:
Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah, 1407 ah), 1: 96, 102.
453 Al-A‘lā,  87:19.
454 Harman, ‘Tafsir Geleneginde Yahudilere Bakis’, p. 119.
455 It is narrated that the Prophet Muhammad U met three of them, namely
Ya‘ish and Jabr from Banu Hadrami, and Bal‘am whom he taught the Qur’an.
Abu Ja‘far Muhammad b. Jarir al-Tabari, Jamī‘al-Bayān ‘an Ta’wīl Ayy
al-Qur’ān (Beirut: Dar al-Fikr 1988), 8: 177–8; 16:103.
456 Te majority of Christians lived in the tribes of Bakr b. Wa’il, Tayy,
Khath‘am, Kalb, Taghlib, etc. See Levent Ozturk, Islam Toplumunda Birarada
Yaşama Tecrubesi (Istanbul: insan Pub., 1995), p. 25.
457 Not only foreign Christians but also a few native (converted) Christians
were warned by the Meccans not to interfere in the local people’s religious life.
For example, Abu Sufyan advised Umayyah b. Abi ’l-Salt not to lead laymen
away from their forefathers’ beliefs. It is also noted that when Zayd b. ‘Amr b.
Nufayl refused to accept idolatry, his brothers tortured him and sent him away
from Mecca. See ‘Abd al-Malik Ibn Hisham, al- Sīrah al-Nabawiyyah (Cairo:
n.p., 1971), I: 246; Muhammad Rashid Rida, al-Waḥy al-Muḥammadi (Cairo:
n.p., 1960), p. 75. It is also narrated that ‘Amrah, the daughter of Mu‘awiyah b.
Mughirah b. Abi al-‘As, married a Christian, Abu Najdah. Consequently, she
was severely criticised by the Meccans. See Ahmad b Yahya b. Jabir al-Balad-
huri, Ansāb al-Ashrāf edited by M. Schloessinger (Jerusalem: n.p., 1938), IV
B: 169-170.
458 According to historians, when the Prophet U came to Medina, the
number of Jews there was around four thousand. See Muhammed Hamidullah,
‘Medine’de Kurulan ilk Islam Devletinin Esas Tejkilat Yapisi ve Hz. Peygamber’
in Vecdi Akyuz, ed., Vazettigi Yeryuzundeki ilk Yazili Anayasa’, Islam Anayasa
Hukuku, (Istanbul: Beyan Publishing House, 1995), p. 95.
459 See Muhammed Hamidullah, Islam Peygamberi, trans. Salih Tug
(Istanbul: Irfan Publishing House, 1990), 1: 187.
460 See for example, Maryam, 19:1-72.
461 Is he (to be accounted equal with him) who relies on a clear proof from his
Lord, and a witness from Him recites it, and before it was the Book of Moses, an
example and a mercy?... Hūd, 11:17.
462 See Muḥammad, 47:57–9.
463 Tis verse is the only explicit Biblical quotation (Psalms, 37:29) in the
Qur’an.
464 See Al-An‘ām, 6: 43; Al-Anbiyā’, 21:7.

--- Sayfa 497 ---
469
Notes
465 See Maryam, 19:94.
466 See al-Tabari, Jamī‘ al-Bayān, 11: 16–20.
467 Isma‘il b. ‘Umar Ibn Kathir, Tafsīr al-Qur’ān al-’Aẓīm, 2: 221, comments
on Al-Ra‘d, 13:39.
468 See Sūrat Fāṭir, 35:31; Al-A‘rāf, 7:157. See Al-Naml, 27:76.
469 Tere is another verse, kāﬀatan (Sabā’, 34:28), which shows that the
message of the Qur’an and the Prophethood of Muhammad U are univer-
sal; his message is neither time-bound nor conﬁned to any particular cultural
milieu.
470 See Ibn Kathir, Tafsīr al-Qur’ān al-’Aẓīm, 3: 415–6, comments on
Al-‘Ankabūt, 29:46.
471 Dr Muhammad Hamidullah (d. 2002) and some Western scholars have
called this pact the Medinan Constitution. Te articles of the pact do not occur
in toto in Hadith collections. According to Hamidullah, there are 52 articles,
whereas Julius Wellhausen (d. 1918) believes that there are 47 articles. In addi-
tion to this, Hamidullah says that the Jews participated in this pact afer the
Muslims. Although there is some disagreement about the exact number of arti-
cles and content of the pact, it is generally accepted as an authentic document
by a vast body of scholars. Unfortunately, however, the pact did not endure.
See Hamidullah, ‘Medine’de Kurulan ilk Islam Devletinin Esas Tejkilat ve Hz
Peygamber’in Vazettigi Yeryuzundeki ilk Yazili Anayasa’, pp. 100–4; Ahmet
Bostanci, Hz. Peygamber’in Gayri Muslimlerle IliÇkileri (Istanbul: Ragbet
Publishing House, 2001), pp. 31–6.
472 It is narrated that the Prophet U preferred to follow the People of the
Book instead of Meccan pagans in matters where there were no speciﬁc reli-
gious commandments. See Ahmad b. Hanbal, Musnad Aḥmad, Bidāyatu
Musnad ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Abbas.
473 Muhammad b. Isma‘il al-Bukhari, Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī, Kitāb al-Ṣiyām, Bāb
Ṣiyām Yawm ‘Ashūra’.
474 Sūrat Al-Mā’idah, 5:5. See also for a detailed analysis Davut Ayduz, Tarih
Boyunca Dinlerarasi Diyalog (Istanbul: Ijik Pub., 2004), pp. 105–8.
475 Muhammad b. Isma‘il al-Bukhari, Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī, Kitāb al-Anbiyā’,
Bāb mā Dhukira ‘an Banī Isrā’īl. It is also mentioned in ‘Abd al-Razzaq’s
Muṣannaf. Tere are various legal implications of this statement. According
to some scholars, this hadith indicates a neutral status (neither forbidden nor
recommended). However, many other scholars explain this hadith as ‘there
is no need to narrate from the Children of Israel’. ‘Ali b. Muhammad Ibn
Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Fatḥ al-Bārī Sharḥ Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī (Cairo: Dar al-Fikr
1988), 10: 261. Regarding the belief in the existence of authentic words of God
in the Torah and Gospels, it can be gauged from the fact that some Muslim
scholars have discussed whether one should perform ablution before touch-
ing them. Abu al-Qasim ‘Abd al-Karim b. Muhammad al-Raﬁ‘i, Fatḥ al-‘Azīz

--- Sayfa 498 ---
war and peace in islam
470
Sharḥ al-Wājiz (Beirut: Dar al-Fikr, n.d.), 2: 108; Muhammad b. Salih b.
Yusuf, al-Inṣāf, Bāb Nawāqid al-Wudū’, I: 364, <http://www.al-islam.com >.
Furthermore, the notion of shar‘ man qablanā is worth mentioning. According
to this rule, if the Qur’an and the Prophetic traditions (aḥādith) are silent on
an issue, and this issue is explained in the scriptures of the Jews or Christians,
Muslims should take them into consideration. ‘Abd al-Wahhab al-Khallaf, ‘Ilm
Usūl al-Fiqh (Istanbul: Eda Pub., 1991), pp. 92–3.
476 Muslim b. al-Hajjaj, Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim, Kitāb al-Faḍā’il, Bāb Faḍā’il ‘Isa
‘alayh al-salām.
477 Ibid.
478 Muhammad b. Isma‘il al-Bukhari, Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī, Kitāb al-Jizyah
wa ’l-Muwada‘ah, Bāb Ikhrāj al-Yahūd min Jazīrat al-‘Arab, there are many
reports in Hadith literature concerning the Prophet’s visit to Bayt al-Midras.
479 See Sūrat Al-Baqarah, 2:75, 79; Al-Nisā’, 4: 46, 48; Al-Mā’idah, 5:13, 16,
41, 45.
480 Muslims are commanded to direct their faces to Mecca (Ka‘bah) during
their prayer, to fast in the month of Ramadan, to recite the adhān (call for
prayer) to inform people about the time of prayer, and to start to attend regu-
larly a Friday prayer. But these should not be seen merely as a tactic used by
the Prophet U in order to achieve what he wanted.
481 Such as their claim to be chosen by God, their love of life and their
cowardice when called on to ﬁght, their mocking God’s rule and their frequent
collaboration with hypocrites and idolaters against the Muslims.
482 See Sūrat Al-Nisā’, 4:171–2; Al-Mā’idah, 5:17, 72–5, 77, 116. See
Al-Tawbah, 9:31.
483 See Al-Baqarah, 2:213.
484 In his interpretation of this verse (Al-Ḥajj, 22:17) Mahmud b. ‘Umar
al-Zamakhshari is extremely exclusivist: ‘Tere are ﬁve religions, four of which
belong to Satan and the one to the Compassionate.’ He did not consider idola-
ters to be a religious community. See Jar Allah Mahmud b. ‘Umar al-Zamakh-
shari, al-Kashshāf ‘an Haqā’iq Ghawāmiḍ al-Tanzīl wa ‘Oyoon al-’Aqawīl ﬁ
Wujooh al-Ta’wīl (Beirut: Dar Ihya’ al-Turath al-‘Arabi, 1997), 3: 149.
485 Te names of these individuals are: ‘Abd Allah b. Salam, Najashi
(Negus of Abyssinia), Ta‘labah b. Shu‘bah, Asad and Usayd, the two sons
of Ka‘b, Sa‘yah b. ‘Amr, Asad b. ‘Ubayd. See al-Tabari, Jamī’ al-Bayān, 3:52,
comments on Al-Baqarah, 2:62. Concerning the occasion of revelation of this
verse (Al-Baqarah, 2:62), Ibn Kathir notes that it was revealed due to Salman
al-Farisi’s inquiry about his pious Christian friends. According to Ibn Kathir,
from the time of Moses X to that of Jesus X Judaism prevailed; from the time
of Jesus X to that of Muhammad U, Christianity prevailed, from the time of
Muhammad U to the end of the world Islam will prevail. See Ibn Kathir, Tafsīr
al-Qur’ān al-‘Aẓīm, 1:71–2, comments on Al-Baqarah, 2:62.

--- Sayfa 499 ---
471
Notes
486 Ibid., 1: 171.
487 See al-Tabari, Jamī’ al-Bayān, 2: 155.
488 See al-Tabari, Jamī’ al-Bayān and Ibn Kathir, Tafsīr al-Qur’ān al-‘Aẓīm,
comments on Al-Baqarah, 2:62; Al-Mā’idah, 5:69 and Āl ‘Imrān, 3:113.
489 See al-Tabari, Jamī’ al-Bayān, comments on Al-Baqarah, 2:62; Al-Mā’idah,
5:69 and Āl ‘Imrān, 3:113.
490 Āl ‘Imrān, 3: 75 also oﬀers an interesting example: Among the People of
the Book there is he who, if you trust him with a weight of treasure, will return
it to you. And among them there is he who, if you trust him with a piece of gold
(dīnār), he will not return it to you unless you keep standing over him.
491 Nasir al-Din ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Umar al-Baydawi, Anwār al-Tanzīl wa Asrār
al-Ta’wīl (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah, 1988), 1: 274, comments on
Al-Mā’idah, 5: 66.
492 See Fakhr al-Din Muhammad b. ‘Umar al-Razi, Mafātih al-Ghayb (Beirut:
Dar al-Fikr 1981), 12: 11, commenting on Al-Mā’idah, 5: 43–7.
493 Ibn Kathir, Tafsīr al-Qur’ān al-‘Aẓīm, comments on Al-Mā’idah, 5:43–7.
Interestingly, the Qur’an also makes a ﬁne distinction between the Jews and
the Christians in Al-Mā’idah, 5:82: You will ﬁnd the most vehement of mankind
in hostility to those who believe (to be) the Jews and the idolaters. And you
will ﬁnd the nearest of them in aﬀection to those who believe (to be) those who
say: Lo! We are Christians. Tat is because there are among them priests and
monks, and because they are not proud. On the basis of this verse, al-Zamakh-
shari says: ‘Since the Jews are mentioned before idolaters, this shows that they
go even farther.’ Al-Zamakhshari, in al-Kashshāf, comments on Al-Mā’idah,
5:82. God’s characterisation of the Christians as tender-hearted people who are
moved to tears when they hear the Qur’an, however, is in accordance with what
is reported concerning the Negus of Abyssinia or the envoy of Abyssinia who
converted to Islam. Al-Tabari, on the other hand, says that this verse would
be applicable to all those who bear these characteristics. See al-Tabari, Jamī’al-
Bayān, comments on Al-Mā’idah, 5: 82.
494 See Ibn Kathir, Tafsīr al-Qur’ān al-’Aẓīm, comments on Al-Baqarah, 2:68.
Tey generally think that faith in God necessarily entails belief in Muhammad
U because God has made this incumbent upon mankind.
495 Al-Tabari, Jamī’al-Bayān, comments on Āl ‘Imrān, 3:4.
496 Ibid., comments on Al-Mā’idah, 5:19. al-Baydawi, Anwār al-Tanzīl,
Al-Baqarah, 2:472, comments on Al-Mā’idah, 5:19.
497 In line with this verse, Āl ‘Imrān, 3:110 describes Muslims as the best
community.
498 Tere is another verse (Āl ‘Imrān, 3: 61) in this surah which is called the
verse of mubāhalah (trial by prayer). On the occasion of a dispute between
the Prophet U and a deputation of the Christians of Najran who maintained
that Jesus X was the Son of God and therefore God incarnate, the Prophet U

--- Sayfa 500 ---
war and peace in islam
472
summoned them together with their families to participate in and then invoke
God’s curse on those who lie. Although they refused to invoke God’s curse on
the liars proposed by the Prophet U, he concluded with them a treaty guaran-
teeing all their civic and religious freedoms. See al-Baydawi, Anwār al-Tanzīl,
1: 263, comments on Āl ‘Imrān, 3:61; Muhammad Asad, Te Message of the
Qur’an (Gibraltar: Dar al-Andalus, 1980), p. 76, comments on Āl ‘Imrān, 3:61.
499 See Tabari, Jamī’al-Bayān, 6: 484, comments on Āl ‘Imrān, 3:61.
500 Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Qurtubi, al-Jamī’ li Aḥkām
al-Qur’ān (Beirut: n. p., 1985), 4: 105, comments on Āl ‘Imrān, 3:64.
501 See Āl ‘Imrān, 3:67.
502 O ye who believe take not the Jews and the Christians for your friends and
protectors: they are but allies and protectors to each other. And he amongst you
that turns to them (for protector) is of them. Verily Allah guideth not a people
unjust. (Al-Mā’idah, 5:51).
503 Al-Baydawi, Anwār al-Tanzīl, 1: 270, comments on Al-Mā’idah, 5:51. It
should be noted that this did not prevent the Muslim rulers from appointing
both Jews and Christians to important positions in their realm.
504 See for instance, Bediuzzaman Said Nursi, Munazarat (Istanbul: Yeni
Asya, 1993), p. 32.
505 Ibid., p. 71.
506 Jizyah is no more and no less than an exemption tax in lieu of military
service and in compensation for a covenant of protection accorded to such citi-
zens by the Islamic state. See Asad, Te Message of the Qur’an, p. 262.
507 Al-Zumar, 39:53: Say: O My slaves (‘ibādī), who have been prodigal to
their own hurt! Despair not of the mercy of Allah, Who forgives all sins. Lo! He is
the Forgiving, the Merciful. It will be noted that this goes way beyond the view
that there are some minimal requirements for salvation: belief in God, in the
Last Day, and acting righteously. Tis seems to suggest salvation for all, even
for those who do not believe in God and the Last Day and do not care to act
righteously.
508 Quoted from Adnan Arslan ‘Dini Çogulculuk Problemine Çozurn
Onerisi’, in  Muslumanlar ve Diger Din Mensuplari (Ankara: Turkiye Dinler
Tarihi Dernegi Pub. 2004), p. 348. Te other verses on which Jar Allah frequently
places great emphasis are: Al-Mā’idah, 5:117–8; Al-Shūrā, 42:5; Qāf, 50:29.
Furthermore, he argues that hellﬁre is not eternal. See ibid., passim.  Jalal al-Din
Muhammad al-Rumi (d. 672/1273), Muhyi ’l-Din Muhammad b. ‘Ali Ibn ‘Arabi
(d. 638/1240), Abu Sa‘id Abu ’l-Khayr (d. 440/1049), Qutb al-Din ‘Abd al-Haqq
b. Ibrahim Ibn Sab‘in (d. 669/1270), ‘Abd al-Karim b. Hawazin al-Qushayri (d.
465/1072) are most frequently cited in this context.
509 See Muhammad Rashid Rida, Tafsīr al-Manār (Beirut: Dar al-Ma‘rifah,
n.d.), 4: 71–74 commenting on Āl ‘Imrān, 3:113.
510 Kate Zebiri, Muslims and Christians: Face to Face (Oxford: Oneworld,

--- Sayfa 501 ---
473
Notes
1997), p. 163. Some Muslim and non-Muslim intellectuals prefer to use some
Suﬁs’ arguments to support religious pluralism. Jalal al-Din Muhammad al-Rumi
(d. 672/1273), Muhyi ’l-Din Muhammad b. ‘Ali Ibn ‘Arabi (d. 638/1240), Abu
Sa‘id Abu ’l-Khayr (d. 440/1049), Qutb al-Din ‘Abd al-Haqq b. Ibrahim Ibn
Sab‘in (d. 669/1270), ‘Abd al-Karim b. Hawazin al-Qushayri (d. 465/1072) are
most frequently cited in this context. However, Keller’s recent work proves the
contrary. See Carl A. Keller, ‘Perception of Other Religions in Suﬁsm’ in Jacques
Waardenburg, ed., Muslim Perceptions of Other Religions: A Historical Survey
(New York-Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999), pp. 181 –4.
511 See Fazlur Rahman, Major Temes of the Qur’an (Minneapolis: Bibliotheca
Islamica, 1991), pp. 165–7.
512 See Suleyman Atej, ‘Cennet Kimsenin Tekelinde Degildir’ in Islami
Araçtirmalar Dergisi, 3 (1989), pp. 7–24; Mehmet Okuyan-Mustafa Ozturk,
‘Kur’an Verilerine Gore Otekinin Konumu’ in Cafer Sadik Yaren, ed., Islam ve
Oteki (Istanbul: Kaknus, 2001), pp. 163–216.
513 Said Nursi, Emirdag Lahikasi - I (Istanbul: Envar, 1992), p. 206.
514 See Said Nursi, Şualar (Istanbul: Envar, 1993), p. 587; Tere are some
reports which say that at the end of time, Jesus (X will come and act in accord-
ance with the holy law of Islam or that Jesus Xwill come and perform prayer
(salāh) behind the Mahdi. See Ibn Majah, Sunan, Kitāb al-Fitan, Bāb Fitnat
al-Dajjāl wa Khurūj ‘Isa ibn Maryam. Nonetheless, Nursi does not talk about
the Christians’ complete conversion to Islam; rather, he thinks that the current
Christianity will be puriﬁed in the face of reality, it will cast oﬀ its superstitions
and unite with the truths of Islam. According to Nursi, this will be a transforma-
tion into a sort of Islam. See Said Nursi, Şualar, p. 587.
515 See Said Nursi, Sozler (Istanbul: Sozler, 1993), p. 396.
516 Tomas, Michel, ‘Bediuzzaman Said Nursi’nin Dujuncesinde Musluman-
Hiristiyan Diyalogu ve Ijbirligi’, International Bediuzzaman Said Nursi
Conference, Istanbul (September 1998).
517 See Zeki Saritoprak and Sidney Griﬃth, ‘Fethullah Gulen and the ‘People
of the Book’: A Voice from Turkey for Interfaith Dialogue’ in Te Muslim
World, vol. 95, no. 3 (2005), p. 333.
518 See ibid., p. 334.
519 See Selfuk Camci-Kudret Unal, Hoşgoru ve Diyalog Iklimi (Izmir: Merkur,
1999), p. 156.
520 See Zebiri, Muslims and Christians: Face to Face, p. 166.
521 See ibid., pp. 117–9.
522 Muhammad Ibn Ishaq (d. 151/768), Abu ‘Uthman ‘Amr b. Bahr al-Jahiz
(d. 255/868), ‘Abd Allah b. Muslim Ibn Qutaybah (d. 276/889), Muhammad b.
al-Tayyib al-Baqillani (d. 403/1013), ‘Ali b. Ahmad Ibn Hazm (d. 456/1064),
Imam al-Haramayn ‘Abd al-Malik b. ‘Abd Allah al- Juwayni (d. 478/1085), ‘Abd
al-Rahman b. Muhammad Ibn Khaldun (d. 808/1406) are exceptions.

--- Sayfa 502 ---
war and peace in islam
474
523 Concerning the occasion of revelation of this verse, it is mentioned that
when the Medinan Arabs had no children, they vowed that if God gave them
children they would give them to the Jews who would educate them religiously.
And when they had children, they did this and gave their children to the Jews.
Ten the Prophet U came to Medina and a few years later, when the Jews lef
the city, they wanted to take these children with them. However, the children’s
parents tried to prevent this. Te dispute was brought to the Prophet U, who
decided that if the children adopted Judaism and wanted to go with their reli-
gious fellows they could go. See al-Tabari, Jamī’ al-Bayān, 3: 14–18, comments
on Al-Baqarah, 2:256.
chapter 
524 ʿAbd Allah Basyuni, Naẓariyyat al-Dawlah ﬁ’l-Islām (Beirut: al-Dar
al-Jamiʿiyyah, 1986),p. 28; Sa’id Ramadan, Islamic Law, Its Scope and Equity,
2nd edn (Kuala Lumpur: Muslim Youth Movement of Malaysia, 1992), p. 165;
Wahbah Zuhayli, Al-Fiqh al-Islāmī wa-ʿAdillatuhuh, 3rd edn (Damascus: Dār
al-Fikr, 1409/1989), 8 vols, vol. iv, p. 435.
525 ʿAbd al-Karim Zaydan, Aḥkām Ahl al-Dimmah wa’l-Musta’minīn fī Dār
al-Islām (Baghdad: Maktabat al-Quds, 1963), p. 27; Rashid al-Ghannushi,
Ḥuquq al-Muwāṭanah, Ḥuquq Ghayr al-Muslim fī’l-Mujtamaʿa al-Islāmī, 2nd
edn (Herndon, VA & Tunis: Al-Maʿhad al-ʿUlamī li’l-Fikr al-Islāmī, 1413/1993),
p. 57; Muhammad Hamidullah, Muslim Conduct of State, 3rd edn (Lahore: Shah
Muhammad Ashraf, 1953), p. 118.
526 See for details on siyāsah shar‘iyyah, article by Mohammad Hashim
Kamali, ‘Siyāsah shar’iyyah or the Policies of Islamic Government’ in American
Journal of Islamic Social Sciences, 6 (1989), pp. 59–81.
527 Ramadan, Islamic Law, 165–6.
528 Cf. Basyuni, Naẓariyyat al-Dawlah, 28–9; Hamidullah, Muslim Conduct
of State, p. 202; Zuhayli, Al-Fiqh al-Islāmī, vol. iv, p. 435.
529 Zuḥaylī, Al-Fiqh al-Islāmī, vol. vi, p. 434; ʿAbd al-Qadir ʿAwdah, Al-Tashrīʿ
al-Jinā’ī al-Islāmī Muqāranan bi’l-Qānun al-Wāḍʿī (Cairo: Maktabah Wahbah,
1401/1981), 2 vols, vol. I, p. 277; Majid Khadduri, War and Peace in the Law of
Islam (Baltimore: Te Johns Hopkins Press, 1955), p.164.
530 Cf. Al-Ghannushi, Ḥuquq al-Muwāṭanah, p. 61; Muhammad Fathi
ʿUthman, Al-Fikr al-Qānunī al-Islāmī: Bayn Uṣūl al-Sharīʿah wa-Turāth al-Fiqh
(Cairo: Maktabat Wahbah, n.d.), p. 270.
531 Muhammad b Ismā’īl Bukhārī, Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī, trans. Muhammad
Muhsin Khan, (Lahore: Qazi Publications, 1979) 9 vols, iv, 102; Abu Dāwud,
Mukhtasar Sunan Abu Dāwud, edited by Ahmad Muhammad Shakir and
Hamid Muhammad al-Faqi. Beirut: Dar al-Marifah, hadith no. 195; Zuhayli,
al-Fiqh al-Islāmī, vol. vi, p. 432.

--- Sayfa 503 ---
475
Notes
532 Yaʿqub b Ibrāhīm Abu Yusuf, Kitāb al-Kharāj, 5th edn (Cairo: al-Maṭbaʿah
al-Salaﬁyyah, 1396 AH), p. 244; Zuhayli, al-Fiqh al-Islāmī, vol. vi, p. 432.
533 Cf. Zuhayli, al-Fiqh al-Islāmī, vol. vi, p. 433; Khadduri, War and Peace,
p. 168.
534 Cf. S. Abu ’l-Aʿla Mawdudi, Islamic Law and Constitution, trans. and edited
by Khurshid Ahmad, (Lahore: Islamic Publications (Pvt.) Ltd., 1960), p.181.
535 Cf. Zuhayli, Ḥaqq al-ḥurriyyah, p. 147; See also ʿAbd al-Wahhab Khallaf,
Al-Siyāsah Al-Shar‘iyyah (Cairo: al-Matbaʿah al-Salaﬁyyah, 1350 AH), p. 35.
536 Al-Sarakhsī, Shams al-Dīn, Sharḥ al-Siyar al-Kabīr, vol. iv, p. 115;
Hamidullah, Muslim Conduct of State, p. 119.
537 Tis was the subject of a lecture delivered in London by M Salim el-Awa,
‘al-Muwāṭanah Hiya Asās alʿIlāqah Bayn al-Muslimīn wa-Ghayrihim’, Islam 21,
no. 20 (Dec 1999), p. 11.
538 Idem.
539 Cf. Abu al-Hasan Al-Baladhuri, Fuṭuḥ al-Buldān, edited by Riḍwān
Muhammad Riḍwān (Beirut: Dār al-Kutub al-ʿIlmiyyah, 1412/1991); cf. Zuhayli,
Ḥaqq al-ḥurriyyah, p. 146.
540 Ibid., p.12; Abu Ja’far Muhammad Ibn Jarir Al-Tabari, Tārīkh al-Umam
wa’l-Muluk (Cairo: al-Matba’ah al-Tijariyyah, 1358/1939), vol. iv, p. 229.
541 Ibid., p. 12; Baladhuri, Fuṭuḥ al-Buldān, p. 136.
542 Ibid., p.12.
543 See for details on ta‘līl Mohammad Hashim Kamali, Principles of Islamic
Jurisprudence (Cambridge: Islamic Texts Society, 3rd edn, 2003),pp. 279f.
544 Quoted in Tariq al-Bishri, Bayn al-Islām wa’l-ʿUrubah  (Cairo: Dār
al-Shuruq, 1418/1998), p. 92.
545 Ibid., p. 95.
546 Cf. Gudrun Kramer, ‘Dhimmi or Citizen’, in Jorgan Nielsen, ed., Te
Christian-Muslim Frontier (London: IB Tauris, 1998), pp. 37–8.
547 Muslim, Ṣaḥīh Muslim, hadith no. 2054.
chapter 
548 ‘Final Declaration of the ﬁrst Seminar of the Catholic-Muslim Forum’,
Rome, 4–6 November, 2008, p. 3.
549 ‘Address of His Holiness Benedict XVI to Participants in the Seminar
organised by the Catholic Muslim Forum’, Vatican City, Clementine Hall, 6
November, 2008.
http://www.vatican.va/holy_father/benedict_xvi/speeches/2008/november/
documents/hf_ben-xvi_spe_20081106_cath-islamic-leaders_en.html.
550 Seyyed Hossein Nasr, ‘We And You—Let us Meet in God’s Love’, 1st
Catholic-Muslim Forum Seminar, Vatican City, 6 November, 2008, p. 1.
551 Te nature of these responses merits a study in and of itself. To see the

--- Sayfa 504 ---
war and peace in islam
476
seventy diﬀerent responses go to:
http://acommonword.com/index.php?lang=en&page=responses.
552 See http://worldinterfaithharmonyweek.com/.
553
http://worldinterfaithharmonyweek.com/newspost/h-r-h-prince-ghazi-
bin-muhammad-delivers-kings-world-interfaith-harmony-week-proposal-
at-un/.
554 H. Con Res. 374. For an outline of the history of the resolution see http://
thomas.loc.gov/cgi-bin/bdquery/z?d110:HC00374:@@@L&summ2=m&.
555 Te most important of these have been: Miroslav Volf, Ghazi bin Muhammad
and Melissa Yarrington, eds, A Common Word: Muslims and Christians on
Loving God and Neighbor (Grand Rapids: Wm. B. Eerdmans, 2009); and Waleed
El-Ansary and David Linnan, eds, Muslim and Christian Understanding: Teory
and Application of ‘A Common Word’ (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2010).
556 Tis is the analysis oﬀered by Samir Khalil Samir, SJ in ‘Pope Benedict
XVI and Dialogue with Muslims’, Annals Australasia (January/February 2008),
pp. 20–5.
557 Te entire Regensburg Lecture can be found on the Vatican website, http://
www.vatican.va/holy_father/benedict_xvi/speeches/2006/september/docu-
ments/hf_ben-xvi_spe_20060912_university-regensburg_en.html. Te polemi-
cal passage is as follows:
‘I was reminded of all this recently, when I read the edition by Professor
Teodore Khoury (Münster) of part of the dialogue carried on—perhaps in 1391
in the winter barracks near Ankara – by the erudite Byzantine emperor Manuel
II Paleologus and an educated Persian on the subject of Christianity and Islam,
and the truth of both. It was probably the emperor himself who set down this
dialogue, during the siege of Constantinople between 1394 and 1402; and this
would explain why his arguments are given in greater detail than the responses
of the learned Persian.
‘Te dialogue ranges widely over the structures of faith contained in the Bible
and in the Qur’an, and deals especially with the image of God and of man, while
necessarily returning repeatedly to the relationship of the three Laws: the Old
Testament, the New Testament, and the Qur’an. In this lecture I would like to
discuss only one point—itself rather marginal to the dialogue itself—which, in
the context of the issue of faith and reason, I found interesting and which can
serve as the starting-point for my reﬂections on this issue.
‘In the seventh conversation edited by Professor Khoury, the emperor touches
on the theme of the jihad (holy war). Te emperor must have known that surah 2,
256 reads: Tere is no compulsion in religion. It is one of the surahs of the early
period, when Mohammed was still powerless and under threat.
‘But naturally the emperor also knew the instructions, developed later and
recorded in the Qur’an, concerning holy war. Without descending to details,
such as the diﬀerence in treatment accorded to those who have the “Book” and

--- Sayfa 505 ---
477
Notes
the “inﬁdels”, he turns to his interlocutor somewhat brusquely with the central
question on the relationship between religion and violence in general, in these
words:
  ‘“Show me just what Mohammed brought that was new, and there you will
ﬁnd things only evil and inhuman, such as his command to spread by the sword
the faith he preached.”
‘Te emperor goes on to explain in detail the reasons why spreading the faith
through violence is something unreasonable. Violence is incompatible with the
nature of God and the nature of the soul.
  ‘God is not pleased by blood, and not acting reasonably is contrary to God’s
nature. Faith is born of the soul, not the body. Whoever would lead someone
to faith needs the ability to speak well and to reason properly, without violence
and threats ... To convince a reasonable soul, one does not need a strong arm, or
weapons of any kind, or any other means of threatening a person with death....’
‘Te decisive statement in this argument against violent conversion is this:
not to act in accordance with reason is contrary to God’s nature. Te editor,
Teodore Khoury, observes: ‘For the emperor, as a Byzantine shaped by Greek
philosophy, this statement is self-evident. But for Muslim teaching, God is abso-
lutely transcendent. His will is not bound up with any of our categories, even
that of rationality.’ Here Khoury quotes a work of the noted French Islamist R.
Arnaldez, who points out that Ibn Hazn [sic] went so far as to state that God is
not bound even by his own word, and that nothing would oblige him to reveal
the truth to us. Were it God’s will, we would even have to practice idolatry.’
558 As quoted in ‘Cardinal Praises Muslims for “Eloquent” Letter’, 19 October,
2007. http://www.zenit.org/article-20787?l=english.
559 Tom Heneghan, ‘Vatican says Pope cannot sign collective response to
Muslims’, Reuters Blogs, 23 October, 2007.
 http://blogs.reuters.com/faithworld/2007/10/23/vatican-says-pope-cannot-
sign-response-to-muslims/.
560 Michael Gonyea, ‘Islam’s Transcendent Challenge’, American Tinker,
12 October 2008. http://www.americanthinker.com/2008/10/islams_transcen-
dent_challenge.html.
561 Fareed Zakaria, ‘New hope: Defeating terror requires Muslim help and
much more than force of arms’, Newsweek, 18 July, 2005, US Edition.
http://www.fareedzakaria.com/articles/newsweek/071805.html. ‘Now things
are changing. Te day before the London bombs, a conference of 180 top Muslim
sheiks and imams, brought together under the auspices of Jordan’s King Abdullah,
issued a statement forbidding that any Muslim be declared takﬁ—an apostate
[sic]. Tis is a frontal attack on Al Qaeda’s theological methods. Declaring
someone takﬁr—and thus sanctioning his or her death—is a favorite tactic
of bin Laden and his ally in Iraq, Abu Mussab al-Zarqawi. Te conference’s
statement was endorsed by ten fatwas from such big conservative scholars as

--- Sayfa 506 ---
war and peace in islam
478
Tantawi; Iraq’s Grand Ayatollah Ali Sistani; Egypt’s mufi, Ali Jumaa, and the
inﬂuential Al-Jazeera TV-shaykh, Yusuf al-Qaradawi. Signed by adherents of
all schools of ﬁqh (Islamic jurisprudence), it also allows only qualiﬁed Muslim
scholars to issue edicts. Te Islamic Conference’s statement, the ﬁrst of its kind,
is a rare show of unity among the religious establishment against terrorists and
their scholarly allies.’
562 For examples of the pseudo-fatwas issued by extremist elements see
Bruce Lawrence, ed., Messages to the World: Te Statements of Osama bin
Laden (London & New York: Verso, 2005). One is most struck by the lack of
questions; for a traditional fatwa is always an answer to a question. But in Bin
Laden’s instance proclamations are presented as fatwas.
563 For the full text of the Final Declaration go to: http://ammanmessage.
com/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=20&Itemid=34
564 http://www.acommonword.com/
565 A Common Word Between Us and You (Amman, Te Royal Aal al-Bayt
Institute For Islamic Tought, 2007), p. 2. For access to the original document
see: http://www.acommonword.com/index.php?lang=en&page=downloads.
566 Ibid., p. 2.
567 Ibid., p. 12.
568 Ibid., p. 16.
569 Ibid., p. 16.
570 Prince Ghazi bin Muhammad, ‘A Common Word Between Us and You:
Teological Motives and Expectations’, Acceptance Speech for the Eugen Biser
Award Ceremony, 2 November, 2008, pp. 5–6.
571 ‘Loving God and Neighbor Together: A Christian Response to A Common
Word Between Us and You’, New York Times, 17 November, 2007.
572 Ibid.
573 Miroslav Volf, Ghazi bin Muhammad and Melissa Yarrington, eds, A
Common Word: Muslims and Christians on Loving God and Neighbor (Grand
Rapids: Wm. B. Eerdmans, 2009).
574 From personal discussion with Reza Shah-Kazemi and Ibrahim Kalin,
spokesperson for A Common Word, 26 July, 2008.
575 ‘Final Declaration of the Yale Common Word Conference’, July 2008,
p. 1.
576 Ibid., p. 1.
577 Ibid., p. 1.
578 For John Piper’s response to A Common Word see, http://www.desiring-
god.org/Blog/1032_a_common_word_between_us/
579 Leith Anderson, ‘Signing the Letter to Islam’. http://www.nae.net/index.
cfm?FUSEACTION=editor.page&pageID=500&IDcategory=1
580 See: http://www.desiringgod.org/resource-library/conference-messages/
evangelicals-and-a-common-word.

--- Sayfa 507 ---
479
Notes
581 Archbishop Rowan Williams, A Common Word for the Common Good
(London: Lambeth Palace, 2008), p.2.
582 Ibid., p. 12.
583 Ibid., p. 12.
584 Ibid., p. 13.
585 Ibid., p. 13.
586 Ibid., p. 14.
587 Ibid., p. 14.
588 Ibid., p. 16.
589 Te Most Reverend & Right Honourable Dr Rowan Williams and H.E.
Shaykh Prof. Dr Ali Gomaa Mohamed Abdel Wahab, ‘Communiqué from
A Common Word conference’, London, Lambeth Palace, 15 October, 2008.
590 For an introduction to Scriptural Reasoning see :
http://etext.lib.virginia.edu/journals/ssr/issues/volume2/number1
591 Insegnamenti, VIII/2, [1985], p. 497, quoted during a general audience
on 5 May, 1999.
592 ‘Open Letter to His Holiness Pope Benedict XVI’, 13 October, 2006,
p. 4.
593 ‘Address of His Holiness Benedict XVI to Participants in the Seminar
organised by the Catholic Muslim Forum’, Vatican City, Clementine Hall, 6
November, 2008.
594 Ibid.
595 Ibid.
596 Te World Council of Churches, ‘Learning to Explore Love
Together’, p. 2: http://www.oikoumene.org/en/resources/documents/wcc-
programmes/interreligious-dialogue-and-cooperation/interreligious-trust-
and-respect/20-03-08-learning-to-explore-love-together.html.
597 Ibid., p. 2.
598 Ibid., p. 3.
599 Ibid., p. 3.
600 Ibid., p. 4.
601 As quoted in an interview with Stryker McGuire, ‘A Small Miracle’,
Newsweek, 21 October, 2008.
602 Several scholars have raised this point, but the only thorough study
is that of Gordon Nickel, ‘A Common Word in Context and Commentary’,
unpublished conference paper, Annual Meeting of the American Academy
of Religion, Chicago, IL, 3 November, 2008.
603 Mahmud b. ʿAbdallah al-Alusi, Rūḥ al-maʿānī fī tafsīr al-qur’ān al-karīm
wa-l-sabaʿ al-mathānī (Beirut: Dar Ehia al-Tourath al-Arabi, 1420/1999), vol.
3, p. 193.
604 Aḥmad ibn ʿAjiba, al-Baḥr al-madīd fī tafsīr al-qur’ān al-majīd (Beirut:
Dar al-Kotoob al-Ilmiyyah, 1426/2005), vol. 1, p. 330.

--- Sayfa 508 ---
war and peace in islam
480
605 ‘Final Declaration of the Yale Common Word Conference’, July 2008, p. 1.
606 Archbishop Rowan Williams, A Common Word for the Common Good, p. 3.
607 Ibid., p. 2.
608 Ghazi bin Muhammad, ‘A Common Word Between Us and You:
Teological Motives and Expectations’, pp. 8–9.
609 Seyyed Hossein Nasr, ‘We and You—Let us Meet in God’s Love’,
(expanded version), Sophia: Te Journal of Traditional Studies, vol. 14, no. 2,
(Winter 2009).
610 Te World Council of Churches, ‘Learning to Explore Love Together’, p. 4.
611 Daniel Madigan, SJ, ‘A Common Word Between Us and You: Some initial
Reﬂections’, p. 7.
chapter 
612 Abu Hamid al-Ghazali (d. 505 AH) says the following about God’s Name
‘the Loving’: ‘Te Loving (Al-Wadūd) is He who loves goodness for all crea-
tion, treats them with kindness and blesses them. It is similar to the meaning
of ‘Te Merciful’, save that mercy is shown to those who are in dire need of
mercy, and the actions of Te Merciful require one who is weak and in need
of mercy, whilst the actions of Te Loving do not require this; rather, blessing
in the ﬁrst place is a fruit of love.’ (Abu Hamid al-Ghazali, Al-Maqṣad al-asnā
fī sharḥ ma‘ani asmā’ Allāh al-ḥusnā, p. 122.) And Fakhr al-Din al-Razi (d. 606
AH) said about God’s Name ‘the Loving’: ‘Te Almighty says: And He is the
Forgiving, the Loving, and ‘wudd’ means ‘love’. Te word Wadūd has two possi-
ble meanings: it may be an active participle, meaning ‘He who loves’, meaning
that He loves them, as He says: …a people whom He loves and who love Him…
(Al-Mā’idah, 5:54). When we say that He loves His servant, this means that He
wants to send good things to him. Know that according to this understanding,
love is similar to mercy; the diﬀerence between them is that mercy requires
someone who is weak and in need of mercy, whilst love does not; rather, bless-
ing in the ﬁrst place is a fruit of love. Te second possible meaning is that He
is loving in the sense that He causes men to love one another, as He says: …for
them the Compassionate One shall appoint love (Maryam, 19:96). A third possi-
bility is that it [Wadūd] is a passive participle, morphologically similar to the
words hayūb (“afraid”) or rakūb (“mounted”, as on a horse); in this case, God
Almighty is beloved to the hearts of His friends because of the great favour He
shows them.’ (Fakhr al-Din al-Razi, Sharḥ asmā’ Allāh al-ḥusnā, pp. 273–4).
613 Al-Baqarah, 2:143; Al-Baqarah, 2:207; Āl ‘Imrān, 3:30; Al-Tawbah, 9:117;
Al-Nahl, 16:7; Al-Nahl, 16:47; Al-Mu’minūn, 23:65; Al-Nūr 24:20; Al-Ḥadīd,
57:9; and Al-Ḥashr, 59:10.
614 Al-Tirmidhi, Sunan, ḥadīth no. 1907, Kitāb al-birr wa al-ṣilah, Bāb mā
jā‘ fī qāṭi‘at al-raḥm.

--- Sayfa 509 ---
481
Notes
615 In his book Al-Insān al-kāmil, the Muslim scholar ‘Abd al-Karim Jili (d.
805 AH) suggests that Mercy is the origin of God’s Names and Qualities, and
that God’s Names proceed from the Quality of Mercy.
‘Te Mercy from the Divine Essence (Al-Raḥmaniyyah) is the manifestation
of the realities of the Names and Qualities; it lies between His essential quali-
ties, such as the Names of the Essence, and those qualities which are directed
towards created beings, such as His being the Knower, the Omnipotent, the
All-Hearing, and the other Qualities which have a connection to temporal
beings …. Te Name which is directly derived from the level of Mercy from
the Divine Essence (Al-Raḥmaniyyah) is Al-Raḥmān, the Compassionate—a
Name which refers to the Names of His Essence (al-Asmā’ al-Dhātiyyah)
and the Qualities of His Person (al-Awṣāf al-Nafsiyyah), which are seven in
number: life, knowledge, omnipotence, will, speech, hearing and seeing … Tis
level [of Being] has this name because of how this all-enveloping mercy covers
all the levels of Reality and creation; and it was because of its manifestation in
the levels of Reality that the levels of creation came into existence. Tus mercy
became universally present in all beings, from the Merciful Presence.’ (Abd
Al-Kareem al-Jili, Al-Insān al-Kāmil, p. 73).
616 Muslim, Saḥīḥ, ḥadīth no. 810, Kitāb ṣalāt al-musāﬁrīn wa qasraha, Bāb
faḍl sūrat al-kahf wa āyat al-kursī.
617 God’s Names Te Compassionate (Al-Raḥmān) and Te Merciful
(Al-Raḥīm): Muslim scholars have said many things about the meaning of
God’s Names Te Compassionate and Te Merciful. Te following are amongst
the most pertinent:  Ibn Kathir says:‘Te Compassionate and Te Merciful are
two Divine Names derived from the word raḥmah (‘mercy’); both are inten-
sive morphological forms, but Te Compassionate is more intensive than Te
Merciful. It is related that Jesus said: “Te Compassionate is Compassionate in
this life and the next, while the Merciful is Merciful in the next life.” … Abu Ali
Farisi said: “Te Compassionate is a universal name which encompasses all the
forms of mercy, and only God may be called by this Name. Te Merciful refers
solely to the mercy God shows the believers, as He says: …And He is Merciful
to the believers. (Al-Aḥzāb, 33:43)”. Ibn Abbas said that: “Tey are two gentle
Names, one of which is gentler than the other: that is, suggestive of yet more
mercy.”… Ibn Mubarak said that Te Compassionate is the One who gives
when He is asked, whilst Te Merciful is the One who becomes wrathful when
He is not asked; this is derived from a hadith … Te Messenger of God U said:
“If one does not ask of God, He becomes angry with one.”  I heard ‘Azrami
say of the Names Te Compassionate, Te Merciful that God is Compassionate
with all His creatures, and Merciful to the believers. Tey say that this is why
God says: … Ten [He] presided upon the Trone. Te Compassionate One
(Al-FurqƗn, 25:59), and says: Te Compassionate One presided upon the Trone
(Ṭā Hā, 20:5). God thus links His presiding [over the Trone] to His Name

--- Sayfa 510 ---
war and peace in islam
482
Te Compassionate to indicate how His mercy envelops all His creation; and He
says: …And He is Merciful to the believers. (Al-Aḥzāb, 33:43), singling them out
with His Name Te Merciful. Tey say that this implies that Te Compassionate
denotes the higher degree of mercy because it applies in both worlds to all His
creatures, whilst Te Merciful applies to the believers alone … And His Name
Te Compassionate (Al-RaḥmƗn) is for Him alone, and no one else may be
called this … As for Te Merciful, He describes another with this attribute when
He says: Verily there has come to you a messenger from among yourselves for
whom it is grievous that you should suﬀer; who is full of concern for you, to the
believers full of pity, merciful (raḥīm) (Al-Tawbah, 9:128).’ (Ibn Kathir, TafsƯr
al-Qur’ ān al-‘Aẓīm, pp. 65–6).
Al-Ghazali says: ‘Te Compassionate (Al-RaḥmƗn) and Te Merciful
(Al-Raḥīm) are both derived from the word ‘mercy’ (raḥmah), and mercy
requires an object, and the object of mercy must be needy. Someone who meets
a needy person’s need unintentionally and without caring about the needy
person is not called ‘merciful’. Te one who wishes to meet the needy person’s
need but does not do so when he is able to do is not called ‘merciful’, because if
he really wanted to do it, he would. If he is unable to do so, he might be called
‘merciful’ because of his sympathy, but his mercy is incomplete. Perfect mercy
means to shower the needy with goodness having the intention to take care of
them. Universal mercy is that which is given to the deserving and the undeserv-
ing alike. God’s mercy is thus both perfect and universal; it is perfect in that He
wishes to meet the needs of the needy, and does so; and it is universal in that it
encompasses both the deserving and the undeserving—in this lower world and
in the hereafer—and it meets both dire needs and ordinary needs, as well as
additional matters beyond this. He is truly the Absolutely Merciful.’ (Ghazali,
Al-Maqṣad al-asnƗ fƯ sharḥ ma‘ƗnƯ asmƗ’ AllƗh al-huṣnah, p. 62).
Al-Razi says: ‘Which of them is more intensive: Te Compassionate, or Te
Merciful? Abu Salih related that Ibn Abbas said: ‘Te Compassionate and Te
Merciful are two gentle Names, one of which is gentler than the other’; yet he
did not state which is the gentlest. But Husayn bin Fadl al-Balkhi said: “Tis
is a mistake on the part of the narrator, for gentleness (riqqah) is not a Divine
Quality. Te Prophet said: ‘God is Kind (rafƯq), and He loves kindness, and He
gives for it that which He does not give for violence.’” Know that there is no
doubt that both Te Compassionate (Al-RaḥmƗn) and Te Merciful (Al-Raḥīm)
are derived from the word ‘mercy’ (raḥmah), and if one were not more inten-
sive than the other they would be exact synonyms in every way without any
distinction between them; and this is unlikely. Terefore we must understand
that one of them is more intensive in meaning than the other. Beyond this,
they diﬀer: most say that Te Compassionate implies greater mercy than Te
Merciful, and they give several arguments to support this.’ (Al-Razi, Sharḥ asmƗ’
AllƗh al-ḥusnƗ, p. 162).

--- Sayfa 511 ---
483
Notes
Te common elements between all these deﬁnitions are:
(1) that Te Compassionate (Al-Raḥmān) can only be used to describe God,
whilst Merciful (Al-Raḥīm) can be used to describe both God and human beings.
(2) that the Name Te Compassionate linguistically implies a greater ‘amount’
of mercy.
(3) that Te Merciful requires an object, whilst Te Compassionate does not
require an object.
(4) that Te Compassionate always comes before Te Merciful whenever the
two Names are mentioned together.
(5) that Te Compassionate is virtually a synonym for the Name ‘God’ (Allāh)
for God says: Say: ‘Invoke God or invoke the Compassionate One, whichever you
invoke, to Him belong the Most Beautiful Names’… (Al-Isrā’, 17:110)
(6) and, ﬁnally, that since …He has prescribed for Himself mercy… (Al-An‘ām,
6:12), and since Te Compassionate implies greater mercy than Te Merciful
and does not require an object, this means that Te Compassionate is one of
the Names of God’s Essence, whilst Te Merciful is one of the Names of His
Qualities. And God knows best.
618 Al-Razi, Al-Tafsīr al-kabīr, Mafātih al-ghayb, vol. 5, p. 379.
619 Al-Qurtubi, Tafsīr al-Qurtubi, vol. 7, p. 261.
620 Al-Razi, Al-Tafsīr al-kabīr, vol. 6, p. 412.
621 Bukhari, Saḥīḥ, ḥadīth no. 7403; Kitāb al-Tawḥīd, Bāb: Qawlihi ta‘āla “Wa
laqad sabaqat kalimatunā li-‘ibādinā al-mursalīn’.
622 We should not neglect to mention here the Hadith Qudsi: I was a hidden
treasure, and I loved to be known, so I created humankind and made Myself
known to them, and they knew Me. Te Hadith scholar ‘Ajluni said about this
hadith: ‘Ibn Taymiyah said it is not a saying of the Prophet and that he did not
know any chain or narration for it, whether strong or weak. Zarkashi, Haﬁz
Ibn Hajar (in al-LaƗli’), Suyuti and others concurred. Al-Qari said: “But its
meaning is correct and can be derived from God’s words: And I did not create
the jinn and humankind except that they may worship Me,” that is, that they
may know God, as Ibn ‘Abbas W and others understood it. Te way it is gener-
ally reported is: “I was a hidden treasure and I loved to be known, so I created
men, and through Me they knew Me.” It is quoted very ofen by the Suﬁs, and
they rely on it and have based some of their fundamental ideas on it.’ (‘Ajluni,
Kashf al-khafƗ’, vol. 1, p. 132). However, Ibn Arabi declared—controversially
perhaps—the hadith to be ‘authentic according to personal disclosure’ (ṣaḥīḥ
kashfan); these are his words from Al-Futuḥāt al-Makkiyyah: ‘In a ḥadīth which
is authentic based on personal disclosure, but lacking an established chain of
narration, the Messenger of God U reported that his Lord says words to the
eﬀect of: I was a hidden treasure, and I loved to be known, so I created human-
kind and made Myself known to them, and they knew Me.‘ (Muhyi al-Din Ibn
al-Arabi, Al-Futuḥāt al-Makkiyyah, vol. 2, p. 393).

--- Sayfa 512 ---
war and peace in islam
484
We do not wish to get into a discussion about the authenticity or weakness
of this hadith—all the other hadiths that we quote in this work are sound—but
we will say that the meaning of the hadith is sound, as maintained above by the
hadith scholar ‘Ali Al-Qari. And its meaning is that God created Human beings
ﬁrst of all out of His Love (‘and I loved to be known’), and secondly out of His
Mercy (‘so I created humankind and made Myself known to them, and they
knew Me’). Tere is no contradiction here between God’s love and God’s mercy,
because as previously discussed, Divine love and Divine Mercy are inseparable.
623 See also: Al-Baqarah, 2:185–7; Al-An‘ām, 6:165; Al-A‘rāf, 7:156; Yūnus,
10:5, 14, 67; Ibrāhīm, 14:32–4; Al-Hijr, 15:16–50; Al-Naḥl, 16:78–81; Ṭā Hā,
20:15, 53–4; Al-Hajj, 22:65; Al-Mu’minūn, 23:78–80; Al-Furqān, 25:10; Al-Naml,
27:60–64, 86; Al-Qaṣaṣ, 28:70–3; Al-Rūm, 30:46; Luqmān, 31:10–11, 31–2;
Al-Sajdah, 32:7–9; Faṭir, 35:12-13; Yā Sīn, 36:80; Ghāﬁr, 40:64, 79–80; Al-Fatḥ,
48:4–9; Al-Ṭalāq, 65:12, 23-–4; Nūh, 71:14–20.
624 In the following chapter on God’s Love for Humanity in General we
explain at length and in detail how and with what God blesses human beings
in general.
625 Bukhari, Ṣaḥīḥ, ḥadīth no. 1385, Kitāb al-Janā’iz, Bāb Mā qil fī awlād
al-mushrikīn; Muslim, Ṣaḥīḥ, ḥadīth no. 2658, Kitāb al-Qadr, Bāb Ma‘nā kull
mawlūd yulad ‘ala al-ﬁtrah.
626 Muslim, Ṣaḥīḥ, ḥadīth no. 2865, Kitāb al-Jannah, Bāb al-Ṣifāt allatī yu‘raf
bihā fī al-dunyā ahl al-jannah wa Kitāb al-Qadr, Bāb Ma‘nā kull mawlūd yūlad
‘alaal-ﬁtratahl al-nār.
627 It will be noted here that whereas God favours or prefers (faḍḍala) each
one of the Prophets above all the worlds (Al-An‘ām, 6:85), and at one time
preferred the Children of Israel above all the worlds (Al-Jāthiyah, 45:16–17; see
also: Al-Dukhān, 44:32–3; Al-Mā’idah, 5:20; Al-A‘rāf, 7:140), He only prefers
humanity above many of those whom We created (Al-Isrā’, 17:70). God sheds
light on this elsewhere in the Holy Qur’an, when He asks Iblis (Satan) why he
did not prostrate himself before Adam: He [God] said, ‘O Iblis! What prevents
you from prostrating before that which I have created with My own hands? Are
you being arrogant, or are you of the Exalted (al-‘Ālīn)?’ (Ṣād, 38:75).
Tere are thus those who are too exalted to prostrate to Adam (al-Ālīn).
Tese are perhaps themselves above the world since God refers elsewhere to
the muqarrabūn—the angels ‘close to God’—(Al-Nisā’, 4:172). Tis perhaps
explains why God says that He preferred the Children of Adam to many of those
whom We created and not ‘all’ of those whom He created; and God knows best.
628 See also: Al-‘rāf, 7:12–27; Al-Isrā’, 17:61–5; Al-Kahf, 18:50; Ṭā Hā, 20:115–
6; Ṣād, 38:71–85; Yūnus, 10:14; Al-An‘ām, 6:165; Fāṭir, 35:39; Al-Aḥzāb, 33:73.
629 At ﬁrst glance the inclusion of those who ﬁght for His cause in ranks, as if
they were a solid structure among the kinds of people whom God loves might
seem a little puzzling, especially given the more obvious virtues of the other

--- Sayfa 513 ---
485
Notes
seven kinds. However, this is easily understood if the verses preceding this
verse are remembered. God says: O you who believe, why do you say what you
do not do? / It is greatly loathsome to God that you say what you do not do. /
Indeed God loves those who ﬁght for His cause in ranks, as if they were a solid
structure. (Al-Ṣaﬀ, 61:2–4) Tus ﬁghting in God’s cause in ranks, as if they were
a solid structure is linked to doing ‘what we say we will do’. In other words, it is
linked to being completely sincere; having no trace of hypocrisy or hesitation,
and thus being ‘unanimous’ (literally: ‘of one soul’). Hence the ranks and solid
structure are above all in people’s own selves, in their own souls (anfus). God
says: Will you bid others to piety and forget yourselves (anfusakum), while you
recite the Book? Do you not understand? (Al-Baqarah, 2:44).
630 Because of this, God loves thoroughness in acts and work. Te Messenger
of God U said: ‘God loves that, when one of you does any work, he does it well.’
(Tabarani, Al-Mu‘jam al-awsaṭ, vol. 1, p. 275) Toroughness is thus the work
of the beautiful soul; and beautiful work comes from a beautiful soul. And
God knows best.
631 Muslim, Ṣaḥīḥ, ḥadīth no. 99, Kitāb al-Imān.
632 Muslim, Ṣaḥīḥ, ḥadīth no. 1, Kitāb al-Imān.
633 Zabidi, Tāj al-‘arūs, vol. 18, p. 14.
634 And the eight kinds of people whom God loves are those who follow the
way of the Messenger of God U, and they are all included in the general sense
of this Qur’anic verse.
635 Raghib Al-Isfahani says: ‘Te meaning of “I greatly love (ḥababtu)
so-and-so” is “I reached the core (ḥabbah) of his heart”; there are other expres-
sions [in Arabic] with similar meanings, such as “I reached the skin of his
heart”, “I reached his liver”, “I reached his inner heart”.’ (Al-MufradƗt fƯ gharƯb
al-Qur’Ɨn, p. 112).
42 Naturally the fact of God’s being ‘with’ these categories of people can
be considered a special kind of love, for the Messenger of God U explained
the relationship of love to company when he said: ‘A person is with those
they love.’ (Bukhari, Ṣaḥīḥ, ḥadīth
  no. 6168, KitƗb al-adab, BƗb ‘AlamƗt ḥubb
AllƗh). And also when he replied to someone who said to him, ‘I have prepared
nothing for the Hour save that I love God and His Messenger’: ‘You shall be
with those you love.’ (Bukhari, Ṣaḥīḥ, ḥadīth
  no. 3688, KitƗb al-ManƗqib, BƗb
ManƗqib ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab.)
636 Al-Qushayri says in his Risalah, p. 46: ‘Ibn Shahin asked Junayd what
“with [God]” means, and he said: ‘“With” has two meanings; God is with the
prophets in the sense that He gives succour and protection, as God says: He
said, ‘Do not fear, for I shall be with the two of you, hearing and seeing; and
He is with all people in the sense that He has complete knowledge of them, as
God says: No secret conversation of three takes place but He is their fourth.” Ibn
Shahin replied, “Someone such as you is ﬁt to guide the Community to God!”’

--- Sayfa 514 ---
war and peace in islam
486
637 Perhaps the fact that God says four times in the Holy Qur’an that He
is ‘with’ the patient indicates that patience requires perseverance before the
patient person (al-sābir) reaches the level of virtue (iḥsān); God knows best.
638 It is extremely instructive to consider how the three virtues of taqwah,
sabr and iḥsān are depicted in the Holy Qur’an. In general, we may say that:
(1) taqwah is the very reason for the creation (see Al-Baqarah, 2:21); that it is
the essential message of the Prophets (see Al-Shu’arā’, 26:87, 106, 124, 142, 161,
177; and Al-Ṣaﬀāt, 37:124) and that the muttaqīn (those who have taqwah) are
those who will be in paradise (this is repeated many times in the Holy Qur’an—
see Al-A‘rāf,7:128; Hūd, 11:49; Al-Ḥijr, 15:45; Al-Naḥl, 16:30-31; Maryam,
19:85; Al-Shu‘arā’, 26:90; Al-Qaṣaṣ, 28:31; Ṣād, 38:49; Dukhān, 44:51; Qāf,
50:31; Al-Dhāriyāt, 51:17; Al-Tūr, 52:17; Al-Qamr, 54:55; Al-Qalam, 68:34;
Al-Mursalāt, 77:41; Al-A‘lā, 87:31). As regards: (2) sabr, it is also a virtue of those
who will be in paradise (see Al-Ra‘d, 13:43), but it is more ofen described as
the virtue of the ‘resolute’ among the Messengers (see Al-Aḥqāf, 46:35, see also
Al-Naḥl, 16:2 and Al-Ma‘ārij, 70:5) and the greatest of the saints (see Al-Kahf,
18:68, 72, 75, 78, 82 and Fuṣṣilat, 41:35). Finally, as regards iḥsān, whilst it is also
obviously a virtue of those who will be in paradise (see Al-Mā’idah, 5:85 and
Al-Dhāriyāt, 51:16), it is more ofen described as a sublime and unsurpassable
virtue (see Al-Nisā’, 4:125) for which there is an unfailing Divine reward (see
Al-Raḥmān, 55:60); that is the ﬁrmest handle (‘urwah wuthqā—see Luqmān,
31:22); that is never lost (see Al-Tawbah, 9:120; Yūsuf, 12:56; Yūsuf, 12:90;
Al-Ṣaﬀat, 37:80, 105, 110, 121, 131; Al-Zumar, 39:34; Al-Dhāriyāt, 51:16); and
that leads to perpetual increase (see Al-Baqarah, 2:58). Because it is the sum
of virtue, it is also the virtue to be exercised towards parents, who in the Holy
Qur’an are accorded the highest respect and consideration (see Al-Baqarah,
2:83; Al-An‘ām, 6:151 and Al-Isrā’, 17:23). One might also say that taqwah is
the sum total of piety—how a human being should be towards God; iḥsān is
the sum of virtue—how human beings should be before other human beings,
and sabr is how human beings should be in themselves—how they should face
the human condition (although obviously all three virtues necessarily largely
overlap). From a diﬀerent point of view, one might even say that sabr relates
more to the will and hence to fear (makhāfah) of God; taqwah relates more
to the intelligence and hence knowledge (ma‘rifah) of God, and iḥsān relates
more to sentiment and hence love (ḥubb) of God; and God knows best.
639 In his commentary on this verse (in Mafātīh al-ghayb), Fakhr al-Din
al-Razi relates God’s ‘binding promise’ (wa‘dan mas’ūla) back to the supplica-
tion of the believers, and the supplication of the angels: Our Lord, grant us what
You have promised us through Your messengers, and abase us not on the Day
of Resurrection. You will not fail the tryst (Āl ‘Imrān, 3:194). ….Our Lord, You
embrace all things in [Your] mercy and knowledge. So forgive those who repent
and follow Your way and shield them from the chastisement of Hell-ﬁre. / Our

--- Sayfa 515 ---
487
Notes
Lord, and admit them into the Gardens of Eden that which You have promised
them, along with whoever were righteous among their fathers and their wives
and their descendants. Surely You are the One Who is the Mighty, the Wise.
(GhƗﬁr, 40:7–8). However, the extraordinary forwardness of these prayers—
‘reminding’ God of His own promise, as it were, and cited by God Himself
in the Holy Qur’an—only prove how God’s own Essence has made His own
promise binding upon Himself, if one may be permitted to phrase these things
in such a manner; and God knows best.
chapter 
640 See: Ghazi bin Muhammad, Love in the Holy Qur’an (USA: Kazi
Publications, 2011), Chapter 13: Te Believer’s Love for the Messenger of
God U; Chapter 14: Love for the Family and Kin of the Messenger of God U;
Chapter 16: Family Love; Chapter 18: Conjugal and Sexual Love.
641 Tis also means, naturally, that every human being is essentially God’s
vicegerent on earth, into which God breathed ‘something’ of His spirit (see the
author’s Love in the Holy Quran, Chapter 7: God’s Love for Humanity).
642 See: Ghazi bin Muhammad, Love in the Holy Qur’an, Chapter 16: Family
Love.
643 Tat is not to say obviously that the religion of Islam is sympathetic
towards idolatry in any way—it is absolutely against it and refutes it completely
in the very ﬁrst Testimony of Faith (the Shahādah) that Tere is no god but God
(Lā illāha illa Allāh)—but nevertheless, God allows everyone to choose their
own religion freely, whatever it be, for He says:
Tere is no compulsion in religion. Rectitude has become clear from error; so
whoever disbelieves in the false deity, and believes in God, has laid hold of the
most ﬁrm handle, unbreaking; God is Hearing, Knowing. (Al-Baqarah, 2:256)
And say, ‘Te truth [that comes] from your Lord; so whoever will, let him
believe, and whoever will, let him disbelieve’…. (Al-Kahf, 18:29)
Say: ‘O disbelievers! / I do not worship what you worship, / and you do not
worship what I worship, / nor will I worship what you have worshipped, / nor
will you worship what I worship. / You have your religion and I have a religion’.
(Al-Kāﬁrūn, 109:1–6)
So leave them to indulge and to play, until they encounter that day of theirs,
which they are promised; (Al-Ma‘ārij, 70:42).
644 God says: Indeed God protects those who believe. Indeed God does not
love the treacherous, the ungrateful. / Permission is granted to those who ﬁght
because they have been wronged. And God is truly able to help them; / those who
were expelled from their homes without right, only because they said: ‘Our Lord
is God’. Were it not for God’s causing some people to drive back others, destruc-
tion would have befallen the monasteries, and churches, and synagogues, and

--- Sayfa 516 ---
war and peace in islam
488
mosques in which God’s Name is mentioned greatly. Assuredly God will help
those who help Him. God is truly Strong, Mighty. (Al-Hajj, 22:38–40)
645 Fakr al-Din al-Razi, Al-Tafsīr al-kabīr, vol. 10, p. 747.
646 Jalal al-Din Mahalli and Jalal al-Din Suyuti, Tafsīr al-Jalālayn, p. 106.
647 Al-Qurtubi, Tafsīr al-Qurtubi, vol. 5, p. 171.
648 Muslim, Ṣaḥīḥ, ḥadīth no. 45, (related on the authority of Anas ibn Malik)
Kitāb al-Īmān; Bāb al-Dalīl ‘alā anna min khisāl al-imān an yuḥibb li-akhihi
al-Muslim mā yuḥibb li-nafsih min khayr. In another narration on the author-
ity of Anas ibn Malik the Messenger of God said: ‘None of you believes until
he loves for his brother what he loves for himself.’ (Bukhari, Ṣaḥīḥ, ḥadīth no.
13, KitƗb al-ĪmƗn; BƗb Min al-imƗn an yuḥibb li-akhihi mƗ yuḥibb li-nafsih).
649 Tirmidhi, Sunan, ḥadīth no. 1924, (related on the authority of ‘Abdullah
ibn ‘Amr) Kitāb al-birr wa al-ṣilah; Bāb Mā jā’ fī raḥmat al-nās.
650 Bukhari, Ṣaḥīḥ, ḥadīth no. 7376, (related on the authority of Jarir ibn
‘Abdullah) Kitāb al-Tawḥīd; Bāb Qawluhu ta‘āla qul ud‘u Allah aw ud‘u
al-Raḥmān.
651 Bayhaqi, Al-Sunan al-kubrā, vol. 9, p. 118.
652 Abu al-Fida’ Isma‘il ibn ‘Umar ibn Kathir al-Qurashi al-Dimashqi, Tafsīr
al-Qur’ān al-‘aẓīm, p. 480.
653 Abu al-Fida’ Isma‘il ibn ‘Umar ibn Kathir al-Qurashi al-Dimashqi, Tafsīr
al-Qur’ān al-‘aẓīm, p. 480.
654 It is very important to point out here also that God addresses His
Messenger U individually in this verse (‘You [innaka, which means ‘you’ in
the second person singular] will truly ﬁnd’), and not the believers in general;
that is to say then, that this hostility does not extend to all Jews and all Muslims,
but rather between certain Jewish tribes and the Messenger of God U during
his own lifetime.
655 Tus God says:
So, for their breaking their covenant and disbelieving in the signs of God, and
slaying the prophets wrongfully, and for their saying, ‘Our hearts are covered
up’—nay, but God sealed them for their disbelief; so they do not believe, except
for a few. (Al-Nisā’, 4:155)
And verily you know that there were those among you who transgressed the
Sabbath, and We said to them, ‘Be apes, despised!’ (Al-Baqarah, 2:65)
See also: Al-Baqarah, 2:78, 91; Al-Mā’idah, 5:60; Al-A‘rāf, 7:166; and others
verses in this regard.
656 Indeed, God says: And let not those who possess dignity and ease among
you swear not to give to the near of kin and to the needy, and to fugitives for the
cause of God. Let them forgive and show indulgence. Yearn ye not that God may
forgive you ? God is Forgiving, Merciful. (Al-Nūr, 24: 22).
657 As such, Muslims are not even allowed to morally judge their fellow
believers, much less drive them away. God says (relating the story of Noah X):

--- Sayfa 517 ---
489
Notes
Te council of his people who disbelieved, said: ‘We see you but a mortal like
us, and we see not that any follow you save the vilest among us, [through] rash
opinion. We do not see that you have any merit over us; nay, we deem you liars’.
/ He said, ‘O my people, have you considered if I am [acting] upon a clear proof
from my Lord and He has given me mercy from Him, and it has been obscured
from you, can we compel you to it, while you are averse to it? / And O my people,
I do not ask of you any wealth for this. My wage falls only upon God and I will
not drive away those who believe; they shall surely meet their Lord. But I see you
are a people who are ignorant. / And O my people, who would help me against
God if I drive them away? Will you not then remember? / And I do not say to
you, “I possess the treasure houses of God” nor, ‘I have knowledge of the Unseen;
nor do I say, “I am an angel”. Nor do I say to those whom your eyes scorn that
God will not give them any good—God knows best what is in their souls. Lo! then
indeed I would be of the evildoers’. (Hǌd, 11:27–31)
Tey said, ‘Shall we believe in you, when it is the lowliest people who follow
you?’ / He said, ‘And what do I know of what they may have been doing? /
Teir reckoning is only my Lord’s concern, if only you were aware. / And I am
not about to drive away the believers. / I am just a plain warner’. (Al-Shu‘arā’,
26:111–5).
Accordingly, God tells the Prophet Muhammad U: And do not drive away
those who call upon their Lord at morning and evening desiring His counte-
nance. You are not accountable for them in anything; nor are they accountable
for you in anything, that you should drive them away and be of the evildoers.
(Al-An‘ām, 6:52).
658 See also the description of ‘intimate friend’ in the following verses: Ghāﬁr,
40:18; Fuṣṣilat, 41:34; Al-Ḥaqqah, 69:35; Al-Ma‘ ārij, 70:10).
659 Tis kind of friendship might perhaps also be called a walījah—an inti-
mate friendship, or literally a ‘penetrating friendship’—which is only appropri-
ate between believers. God says: Or did you suppose that you would be lef [in
peace] when God does not yet know those of you who have struggled and have
not taken, besides God and His Messenger and the believers, an intimate friend?
And God is aware of what you do. (Al-Tawbah, 9:16).
660 It will be noted that we become friends in accordance with the goodness
and inner beauty people show us, as we understand it at least—that is, if the
friendship is sincere—and in accordance with the time we have spent with our
friends (and thus in accordance with our experience of their inner beauty and
their experience of ours).

--- Sayfa 519 ---
491
: Al-Baqarah, ;
: ;
–: –;
–: –;
–: ;
: ;
: ;
: , ;
: ;
: ;
: ;
: , , , , , ;
–: ;
: ;
: ;
: ;
: ;
: ;
: , ;
: ;
–: ;
: ;
: ;
: ;
: ;
: ;
: –;
: ;
: ;
: , , , ;
: ;
: ;
Al-Baqarah (cont.),
: ;
: ;
: ;
: ;
: ;
: ;
–: ;
: ;
: xiii, , , , ,
–, , , , ,
, , , ;
–: –, ;
–: ;
–: –, , ;
: , , , ;
: , ;
–: ;
: , , ;
–: ;
: , ;
: , ;
: ;
: –;
: , ;
: , ;
–: ;
–: ;
: , ;
: , –;
: ;
–: ;
Index to Qur’anic Quotations

--- Sayfa 520 ---
war and peace in islam
492
Al-Baqarah (cont.),
: ;
: , ;
–: ;
: ;
: –;
: , , –, ,
, , , 
: Āl ‘Imrān, ;
: ;
–: ;
–: ;
: ;
: , ;
: –;
: , –, –;
–: –;
: ;
: ;
: ;
: ;
: ;
: ;
: –;
: ;
–: ;
: , ;
: , ;
: ;
: ;
–: –, ;
–: , ;
–: ;
–: ;
–: ;
: , , ;
: –;
–: ;
Āl ‘Imrān (cont.),
: , –;
: ;
: ;
: , , , , ;
: ;
: ;
: 
: Al-Nisā’, ;
: , ;
–: ;
: , –;
: ;
: ;
: ;
–: ;
: , , , ;
: ;
: ;
: ;
: ;
: , ;
–: –;
: , ;
–: ;
: ;
–: ;
: , ;
: –, ;
: ;
: ;
: ;
: ;
: ;
: ;
: ;
: 

--- Sayfa 521 ---
493
Index to Qur’anic Quotations
: Al-Mā’idah, ;
: ;
: , , ;
: ;
: xiii, , , ;
–: ;
: ;
: ;
: ;
: , ;
: –;
: ;
–: ;
–: , ;
: xiii, , , –, ;
–: ;
: , ;
–: , ;
–: ;
: ;
: , ;
: , ;
: , –, ;
: , ;
: –;
: , , , , ;
: ;
: –;
–: ;
: ;
: ;
: 
: Al-An‘ām
: , , , , ;
: ;
: ;
: ;
: , , , , ;
Al-An‘ām (cont.),
–: ;
: ;
: ;
: , ;
: ;
: ;
: , ;
–: ;
: xi, ;
: ;
: 
: Al-Aʿrāf
: ;
: , ;
–: –;
: , ;
: –;
: ;
: ;
: , , , ,
, ;
: ;
: ;
: ;
: ;
: ;
: 
: Al-Anfāl
: ;
–: ;
: ;
: ;
: ;
: ;
: ;
: , ;

--- Sayfa 522 ---
war and peace in islam
494
Al-Anfāl (cont.),
: ;
: ;
–: , ;
: , ;
–: ;
: ;
–: ;
–: ;
: –;
: ;
: ;
: , –, , ,
, , ;
–: ;
: –;
: ;
: ;
–: 
: Al-Tawbah, –, , ;
–: ;
: ;
: ;
: ;
: ;
: ;
: ;
: , , ;
 (Āyat Al-Sayf/Verse of
the Sword): , –,
–, , –, ,
–, ;
: –, , ;
: , ;
–: ;
–: ;
: ;
–: ;
Al-Tawbah (cont.),
: ;
: –, , –, , ,
, –;
: , ;
: , ;
: , –, , ,
, ;
: ;
–: ;
–: ;
: , , ;
: ;
: ;
: ;
: , ;
–: ;
: ;
–: ;
: ;
: ;
–: ;
: ;
–: ;
: ;
: , , , 
: Yūnus
: ;
–: ;
: ;
: , , ;
: ;
: 6
: Hūd
: ;
: ;
: ;

--- Sayfa 523 ---
495
Index to Qur’anic Quotations
Hūd (cont.),
: , ;
–: 
: Yūsuf
: ;
: ;
: ;
–: ;
: 
: Al-Ra‘d
: ;
: ;
: ;
–: ;
: , ;
: ;
: ;
: –;
: 
: Ibrāhīm
: ;
: , ;
: 
: Al-Ḥijr
–: ;
: ;
–: 
: Al-Naḥl
–: –;
: ;
: ;
: ;
: , ;
–: ;
Al-Naḥl (cont.),
: ;
: ;
: , , ;
–: ;
: , , ;
–: 
: Al-Isrā’
–: ;
: ;
: ;
: ;
: , ;
: ;
: , , ;
: , ;
: ;
: 
: Al-Kahf
: , ;
: ;
: ;
: ;
: ;
–: ;
: ;
–: ;
–: ;
: 
: Maryam
–: ;
: 
: Ṭā Hā
: ;
: ;

--- Sayfa 524 ---
war and peace in islam
496
Ṭā Hā (cont.),
: 
: Al-Anbiyā’
: ;
: 
: Al-Ḥajj
: ;
–: –, , –;
–: ;
–: , , , ,
–;
–: –;
: ;
–: ;
: ;
: ;
: 
: Al-Mu’minūn
: ;
: ;
: 
: Al-Nūr
–: ;
: –
: Al-Furqān
: ;
–: ;
: , , , ;
: ;
: 
: Al-Shu‘arā’
: ;
Al-Shu‘arā’ (cont.),
: ;
–: , ;
: ;
: ;
: 
: Al-Naml
–: ;
: ;
: 
: Al-Qaṣaṣ
: ;
: ;
: ;
: 
: Al-‘Ankabūt
: , ;
: ;
: ;
: –;
: ;
: –, , 
: Al-Rūm, –;
–: ;
–: ;
: ;
: ;
–: ;
: , 
: Luqmān
: ;
: ;
: , ;
: 

--- Sayfa 525 ---
497
Index to Qur’anic Quotations
: Al-Sajdah
: ;
–: ;
–: –
: Al-Aḥzāb
–: ;
: ;
–: ;
: ;
–: ;
: , ;
: 
: Fāṭir
: ;
: ;
: 
: Yā Sīn
: 
: Ṣād
: , ;
–: 
: Al-Zumar
: ;
: ;
–: ;
–: ;
: , , 
: Ghāﬁr
: , ;
: ;
: , ;
: 
: Fuṣṣilat
: ;
: ;
: xiii, , ;
–: –
: Al-Shūrā
: ;
–: ;
–: ;
: ;
: ;
: 
: Al-Zukhruf
: ;
: ;
–: –;
: 
: Al-Dukhān
–: 
: Al-Jāthiyah
–: ;
: –;
–: ;
: 
: Muḥammad
: , ;
: , , ;
: ;
–: ;
: ;
–: ;
: , ;
: , ;
: , 

--- Sayfa 526 ---
war and peace in islam
498
: Al-Fatḥ
: ;
–: ;
: , ;
–: ;
–: ;
: 
: Al-Ḥujurāt
: , , ;
–: –, ;
: , , ;
: , , , –,
, , ;
: 
: Qāf
: ;
: 
: Al-Dhāriyāt
: , 
: Al-Najm
: ;
: 
: Al-Qamr
: ;
–: 
: Al-Raḥmān, ;
–: ;
–: ;
: ;
–: 
: Al-Wāqi‘ah
–: ;
–: 
: Al-Ḥadīd
: , ;
: ;
: 
: Al-Mujādilah
: ;
: ;
: ;
–: ;
: 
: Al-Ḥashr
–: ;
: ;
–: ;
: ;
: , 
: Al-Mumtaḥanah
–: ;
–: –;
: ;
–: , ;
: –, , –, ,
, , ;
–: , ;
: 
: Al-Ṣaﬀ
: , ;
–: 
: Al-Munāﬁqūn
: , 

--- Sayfa 527 ---
499
Index to Qur’anic Quotations
: Al-Taghābun
: , , ;
: 
: Al-Ṭalāq
: 
: Al-Taḥrīm
: 
: Al-Mulk
: ;
: 
: Al-Qalam
: 
: Al-Ḥāqqah
: 
: Al-Muzzammil
: ;
: 
: Al-Insān
–: ;
: ;
: ;
–: 
: Al-Nāzi‘āt
–: 
: Al-Inﬁṭār
–: , 
: Al-Burūj
–: ;
–: ;
: , ;
Al-Burūj (cont.),
: , 
: Al-Ghāshiyah
–: 
: Al-Balad
: 
: Al-Shams
: 
: Al-Tīn
–: , ;
: ;
: 
: Al-Bayyinah
: ;
: 
: Al-‘Ādiyāt
–: ;
: 
: Al-Humazah
: 
: Al-Fīl
: ;
–: 
: Quraysh
–: 
: Al-Ikhlāṣ
–: 

--- Sayfa 529 ---
501
Aaron, 150, 371
‘Abbas, Ihsan, 266
Abbasid period, 72, 122, 241
‘Abd al-Malik, Caliph, 236
‘Abd Manāf, 21
‘Abd al-Qādir al-Jazā’irī, Emir, 96, 97, 132,
144–6, 148–9, 151, 238; prayer, 149
‘Abd al-Raḥmān b. Samūrah, 404–405
‘Abdallāh b. Salām, 258–9
‘Abduh, Muḥammad, 298
Abdullah II, King of Jordan, 318, 322, 324
Abdullah b. Abdul Aziz Al Saud, King of
Saudi Arabia, 336, 345
Abraham, 104, 142, 255, 284, 296, 336, 383
Abū Ayyūb al-Anṣārī, 254
Abū Bakr al-Ṣiddīq, 115, 371; combat, 21,
24, 25, 418, 423; warfare code, 48, 77,
108; see also Rightly Guided Caliphs
Abū al-Dardāʾ, 254, 407
Abū Dāwūd, 250, 392, 401, 405
Abū Ḥanīfah, 234, 278; see also Ḥanafī
school
Abū Hurayrah, ‘Abd al-Raḥmān, 156, 274,
361, 398
Abū’l-Ḥusayn, 113–14
Abū Isḥāq, 386
Abū Sa‘īd al-Khudrī, 406
Abū Salamah, 406
Abū Sufyān, 42, 46, 137
Abū Ṭālib, 21
Abū ‘Ubaydah b. al-Jarrāḥ, 117, 423
Abū Yūsuf, 234, 240, 241
Abū Zaḥra, Muḥammad, 37
Abyssinia, migration to, xiii, 21, 42, 61,
286
Adam, 226, 270–1, 275–6, 278, 356, 363,
364, 378
‘adl, see justice
Afghanistan, 151–2, 331
aggression, 277; positive peace, 223;
pre-emption/aggression distinction,
69–70, 96–7; prohibition of, 57, 93, 145,
154, 162, 237, 277, 380, 385, 412; Qur’an,
10, 13, 72, 65, 136, 145, 154, 162, 237, 277,
372, 380, 384, 412, 426
ahl al-dhimmah (people of protection),
26, 78–81, 83, 143, 155, 304–14;
citizenship, 304, 306, 308, 309,
311; constitutions, 304, 311, 312–14;
contract/‘aqd al-dhimmah, 305, 308,
309–10, 311 (revocation of, 305, 307);
conversion to Islam, 81, 305 (forced
conversion, 236, 307–308); Dār
al-Islām, 79, 81, 83–4; dhimmah, end
of, 311; dhimmī, 304–305; dhimmīs
as equal citizens, 304, 311–13; dress,
83; Egypt, 311–12, 313; engagement in
combat/military service, 79, 81, 241,
311, 312; Five Basic Rights of Islamic
Law, 83–4; from dhimmī to muwāṭin,
308–11; ḥadīth, 241; Ḥanafī school,
305; human dignity, 277–9; India, 239;
jizyah, 79, 81, 82–3, 240–1, 305, 310, 312;
jurisprudence, 304–308, 309–10, 313–14;
INDEX

--- Sayfa 530 ---
502
war and peace in islam
al-mu‘āhidūn, 305; Qur’an, 78; religious
diversity and cultural pluralism, 232,
234, 239–41; religious freedom, 305, 310;
rights of, 239–40, 305, 310; ‘second-
class’ citizens, 83; shari‘ah, 312; western
colonial state, 308–309, 311, 312; see also
Christians; Jews; Muslim/non-Muslim
relationships; musta’min; People of the
Book
Ahl al-Kitāb, see People of the Book
ʿĀʾishah, 394
Āl al-Shaykh, Abdulaziz b. Abdallah, xv
al-‘Alawī, Aḥmad, 147, 148
alcohol, 34, 52, 73, 240
Algeria, 145, 147, 148, 238; see also ‘Abd
al-Qādir al-Jazā’irī, Emir
‘Alī b. Abī Ṭālib, 68, 149–50, 158, 265, 381,
423; anger, 50, 150, 151; see also Rightly
Guided Caliphs
‘Alī al-Jamal, 147–8
alms, 9, 39, 63, 73, 74, 75, 255, 370, 374;
ṣadaqah, 83; zakāt, 83
al-Ālūsī, Shihāb al-Dīn, 272
amān: musta’min, 235; safe conduct, 80,
117, 235, 306–307; safety, 253, 254, 255;
see also musta’min
amnesty, 39, 46, 137, 412, 413, 421
‘Amr b. ‘Abd al-Wudd, 50
‘Amr b. al-‘Āṣ, 118–19, 310
‘Amr b. ‘Awf al-Muzna, 158
anarchy, xiv
angel, 158, 270, 285, 350, 355–6, 362, 263–4,
385, 398, 399; Gabriel, 30, 60, 261, 290,
368
anger, xiii, 151, 384, 403, 411; ‘Alī b. Abī
Ṭālib, 50, 150, 151
animal, xiii, 48, 78, 96, 127, 153, 156, 352,
357; harming of, in war, xiii, 48, 78, 96,
127, 156, 425; see also environment
al-Anṣār (Helpers), 121
Antitheist civilisation, 168, 214;
belligerence, 201; death toll, 198, 199,
201, 208, 209; genocide, 209; mass
killing, 206; see also atheism; religious/
political violence and human death toll
apostasising, see takfīr
apostasy, 85, 140; see also takfīr
Aquinas, Tomas, St, 58
Aristotle, 229, 244
Armstrong, Karen, 55
Arnold, Tomas, 138
ASEAN (Association of Southeast Asian
Nations), 252
al-Ash‘arī/Ash‘arite, 230
‘Askarī, Muḥammad Ḥasan, 298
Asmā’ bint Abī Bakr, 105–106
‘Aṭā’ b. Yasār, 406
atheism, 109, 299; see also Antitheist
civilisation
Augustine, St, 58
authoritarianism, 92, 242
el-Awa, Mohamed Salim, 308
awliyā’ (friend/protector): ‘do not take
Jews and Christians as awliyā’’, 101,
103–105, 296
al-Azhar, xiv–xv, xxiii, 94, 344, 392
al-Baghawī, Abū Muḥammad, 342
Bahrain, 25, 79–80, 310, 318
al-Bahūtī, Manṣūr b. Yūnus, 157
al-Balādhurī, Aḥmad b. Yaḥyā, 118; Futūḥ
al-buldān, 116, 123
Banū ‘Awf, 121–2, 240, 289
Banū Bakr, 38
Banū Ghaṭafān, 70
Banū Khaybar, 70
Banū Khuzā‘ah, 38
Banū Mustaliq, 70
Banū Naḍīr, 23, 112–13, 423, 424
Banū Qaynuqā, 23
Banū Qurayẓah, 23, 113, 122, 264
Bashier, Zakaria, 37
basmalah, 30, 300, 350, 352, 414
battle/campaign, 23, 70, 138, 233, 409;

--- Sayfa 531 ---
503
Index
al-Ahzab campaign, 69; Battle of Badr,
xiii, 45, 60, 104, 233, 409, 411, 413, 423;
Battle of Khandaq, 50, 233, 420; Battle
of Khaybar, 69, 70, 97; Battle of Mu’tah,
24, 70, 97; Battle of Uḥud, xiii, 46, 104,
129, 409, 411, 423; siege of Naḍīr, 112–13;
Tabuk campaign, 25, 40, 70, 109, 129–30
al-Bayḍāwī, Nāṣir al-Dīn ‘Abd Allāh b.
‘Umar, 294, 295
al-Bayhaqī, Aḥmad b. al-Ḥusayn, 158
beauty, beautiful, 405; aesthetics, 223;
beauty of soul/inner beauty, 368, 375;
cosmos, 230; ḥadīth: ‘God is beautiful
and loves beauty’, 225, 272, 368, 396;
peace, 223; Qur’an, 223, 230; virtue/
iḥsān, 223, 224, 243, 272, 368, 375
Bible, 29, 160, 285, 301; Bible/Qur’an
comparison, 102–103; Old Testament,
30, 31, 33, 34, 47, 104, 247 (Book of
Numbers, 32; Psalms of David, 247,
284); see also New Testament
bid‘a, see innovation
bigotry, 402–403
Bin Laden, Osama, 28, 36, 49, 93–4, 239,
280
al-Bishri, Tariq, 311–12
Buddhism/Buddhist civilisation, 78, 168,
214; death toll, 198, 199, 201, 208, 210;
genocide, 206, 210; see also religious/
political violence and human death toll
Bukay, David, 35–6
al-Bukhārī, Muḥammad, xii, 156, 158, 274,
392, 394, 395, 396, 398, 401–406 passim
Burckhardt, Titus, 141
Byzantines (al-Rūm), 24–5, 70, 129, 243,
286, 386; Battle of Mu’tah, 24, 70, 386;
Byzantine Church, 140
Caetani, Leone, 122
Cain and Abel, 49
Caliph, see Rightly Guided Caliphs
Catholicism: Benedict XVI, Pope, 317–18,
337–8, 339 (Faith, Reason and the
University: Memories and Reﬂections,
321, 322, 338, 339–40, 341); A Common
Word, 318, 319, 336–40, 344; Dominus
Iesus, 337; John Paul II, Pope, 337, 338,
340; Nostra Aetate, 336–7, 340; Urban II,
58; Vatican, 319, 321–2, 328, 336–40; see
also Christianity
child, 250, 276, 361, 394; illegitimate target
in war, xiii, xvii, 48, 77, 78, 96, 108, 127,
155–6, 163, 237, 404, 425; jizyah, 241
chivalry, 29, 95–6, 130–1, 133, 134–51, 159,
163; ‘Alī b. Abī Ṭālib, 50, 150–1; Imam
Shamil of Dagestan, 96, 146; Prophet
Muḥammad, peaceful occupation of
Mecca, 35, 38, 45–6, 137, 383; Saladin,
95, 96, 134–5, 137; see also ‘Abd al-Qādir
al-Jazā’irī, Emir; nobility
Christian civilisation: religious/political
violence and human death toll, 168,
213; belligerence, 201, 208; death toll,
198, 199, 201, 208; genocide, 206, 208;
see also religious/political violence and
human death toll
Christianity, 58; anti-Semitism, 141;
Christianity/Judaism theological
diﬀerences, 142–3; conversion to,
113–14; ‘holy war’, 58; inter-religious
tolerance, 51; Islam/Christianity
relationship, 317, 326–7, 338, 346–7; just
war, 58, 59; justice, 33; mass killing and
war, 33; population, 213–14, 324, 326–7,
338; Trinitarian doctrine, 51, 292, 301,
333, 341; see also Bible; Catholicism;
Christian civilisation; Christianity, A
Common Word; Christians; Jesus
Christianity, A Common Word, 327–8;
Anglican Church, 318, 319, 321, 328,
332–6, 343–4; Evangelical churches,
319, 329–30, 331–2; World Council of
Churches, 318, 328, 340–1, 345–6; see
also Catholicism

--- Sayfa 532 ---
504
war and peace in islam
Christians, 291–2, 299–300, 386–7, 388;
‘Abd al-Qādir al-Jazā’irī, Emir, 145–6;
Christians in jihad, 123–4; Christians
of Najran, 79–80, 116, 235, 240, 295,
310, 386; criticism of, 291, 292, 300;
Jerusalem, 80, 117, 310; kāﬁrūn, 109–11;
Pre-Islamic Arabia, 284; Qur’an, 283,
286, 288, 292, 295, 302, 386–7; treaty
with, 80–1, 118, 123; see also Byzantines;
Christianity; People of the Book
citizenship (muwāṭanah), 304, 306, 309,
311; Constitution of Medina, 309, 311;
equal rights and obligations, 311; from
dhimmī to muwāṭin, 308–11; husband,
308; naturalisation, 308; wife, 308; see
also ahl al-dhimmah
civil war, 88, 167, 207
civilian, see non-combatant
Clausewitz, Carl Philipp: On War, 29, 166
Cohen, Mark, 142–3
Collingwood, Robin George, 223
colonialism, xv–xvi, 147, 148, 238, 280,
311, 312; ahl al-dhimmah and western
colonial state, 308–309, 311, 312;
colonial war, 167, 169, 238; extremism,
239; military jihad, xv–xvi, 238–9
combat, see jihad; Just War doctrine;
Qur’an and combat; war
combat, reasons for: 10–14, 18, 23, 66,
155; breach of treaty, 12, 39–40, 41, 68,
69, 414; conversion, 14, 234; place of
worship, defense of, 9, 39–40, 42, 63,
114–15, 139, 233, 417, 425; protecting
the da‘wah as reason for combat, 6,
13, 14, 18, 23, 24, 26; religious freedom,
xvii, 11, 14, 18, 155, 159, 233–4; religious
persecution, 155, 159, 421, 425; sedition,
10, 11, 12, 23, 65, 68; see also self-defense
A Common Word, 317–47; Anglican
Church, 318, 319, 321, 328, 332–6, 344;
beginnings, 318–21; Catholicism, 318,
319, 321–2, 328, 336–40, 344; Christian
responses, 327–8; Evangelical churches,
319, 329–30, 331–2; evolution of, 321–4,
338; Georgetown University, 319, 320,
321; grass roots/community level
initiatives, 320; media, 338, 341–2, 345;
Orthodox Churches, 319, 332; Royal Aal
al-Bayt Institute for Islamic Tought,
320, 322, 324; United Nations: World
Interfaith Harmony Week, 320, 328,
331, 341, 345; United States: Wamp-
Ellison Resolution, 320; University
of Cambridge, 319, 321, 334; website,
320–1, 324, 331; World Council of
Churches, 318, 328, 340–1, 345–6; Yale
Center for Faith & Culture, 319, 322,
328; Yale University Divinity School,
319, 320–1, 328–32; see also the entries
below for A Common Word
A Common Word, conferences, 319–20,
321; Amman Conference: ‘Te
International Islamic Conference’,
322–4; Catholic-Muslim Forum,
319, 321, 322, 336, 339, 344 (Baptism
Site, Jordan, 319, 340); ‘A Common
Word and Future Christian-Muslim
Engagement’, 319, 334–5; ‘Love in the
Qur’an’, 324; ‘Loving God and Neighbor
in Word and Deed’, 319, 329–32, 334; see
also A Common Word
A Common Word, issues and features:
aims, 326–7; cooperation, 325, 326, 332,
335, 339, 340; criticism, 331, 332, 341;
extremism, condemnation of, 323–4,
333, 347; harmony, 317, 325, 327; human
dignity, 317, 339; human rights, 318;
interfaith dialogue, 318, 326, 328, 329,
332, 335, 344, 346; Islam/Christianity
relationship, 317, 326–7, 338, 346–7; love
of God and the neighbour, 324–5, 326,
328, 332, 333, 335, 338, 345; message,
324–7; peace, 317, 327, 330, 333, 338, 339,
344, 345; religious minorities, defence

--- Sayfa 533 ---
505
Index
of, 317, 335; religious violence, 333, 346;
Sacred Scriptures, 334, 335–6, 342–3
(Bible, 325, 338, 342; Qur’an, 325–6,
341, 342–3, 346; scriptural reasoning,
335–6; Torah, 325, 342); tensions, 331,
346; terrorism, 317, 346; theology, 318,
322, 326, 330, 331, 333–4, 336, 337, 341,
342, 343–4, 345–6; see also A Common
Word; theology
A Common Word, religious leaders, 342,
344–5; Abdullah II, King of Jordan,
318, 322, 324; Abdullah b. Abdul Aziz
Al Saud, King of Saudi Arabia, 336,
345; Anderson, Leith, 331; Benedict
XVI, Pope, 317–18, 337–8, 339 (Faith,
Reason and the University, Memories
and Reﬂections, 321, 322, 338, 339–40,
341); Bertone, Tarcisio, Cardinal, 322;
Cummings, Joseph, 328; Ghazi b.
Muhammad, Prince, 318, 320, 321, 322,
327, 344; Nasr, Seyyed Hossein, 318, 329,
344–5; Patriarch of Russia, 319; Piper,
John, 331, 332; Schuller, Robert, 329–30;
Shi‘i Muslims, 317, 344; Sunni Muslims,
317, 334–5; Tauran, Jean-Louis,
Cardinal, 321–2, 336; ‘ulamā’, 324, 345;
Volf, Miroslav, 328, 329; Williams,
Rowan, 319, 332–6, 343–4; see also A
Common Word
A Common Word, related letters and
publications: A Common Word
Between Us and You, 318–19, 320, 321,
324–7, 339–40, 341–5; A Common
Word for the Common Good, 332–6;
A Common Word: Muslims and
Christians on Loving God and
Neighbor, 329; Faith, Reason and the
University, Memories and Reﬂections,
321, 322, 338, 339–40, 341; Learning to
Explore Love Together, 340; Loving God
and Neighbor Together: A Christian
Response, 319, 322, 328, 331–2, 343;
An Open Letter to His Holiness Pope
Benedict XVI, 321, 338, 339; see also A
Common Word
Companions of the Prophet, xiii, 21, 22–3,
30, 120, 260, 262, 403
Constantine, Emperor, 58
conversion: ahl al-dhimmah, 81, 236, 305,
307–308; an alternative to combat,
26; conversion to Christianity, 113–14;
conversion to Islam, 135–6, 138, 234,
235–6 (prisoner, xvii, 238); forced
conversion, xvii, 73–5, 93, 96, 112, 136,
159–60, 236, 236, 307–308, 425; free
choice, 159; holy war, 237, 238; mass
conversion, 135, 138, 235–6; musta’min,
307; no compulsion in religion, 50–1,
74–5, 76, 112–14, 136, 138, 159, 238, 303;
a reason for combat, 14, 234; see also
religious freedom
corruption, 88, 229, 254, 356, 364,
405–407; Qur’an, 40, 406
the Crusades, 33, 58, 95, 135–6, 217
al-Ḍaḥḥāk b. Muzahim, 41, 262, 386
Dār al-‘Ahd (Abode of Treaty), 72, 231, 235
Dār al-Ḥarb (Abode of War), 71–3, 231,
234, 237
Dār al-Islām (Abode of Islam), 71–3,
79, 237; ahl al-dhimmah, 79, 81, 83–4;
expansion of, 71–3, 232, 234–7
Dār al-Salām (Abode of Peace-Security),
225, 257, 258, 259
Dār al-Ṣulḥ (Abode of Reconciliation),
72, 231, 235
David, 32, 35, 111; Psalms of David, 247, 284
da‘wah (call to Islam), 8, 15, 21, 22, 98, 235;
nature of, 6; protecting the da‘wah as
reason for combat, 6, 13, 14, 18, 23, 24, 26
death, see human dignity; killing;
martyrdom; religious/political violence
and human death toll
declaration of war, 18, 36, 47; by the ruler,

--- Sayfa 534 ---
506
war and peace in islam
xiv, xvi, 47, 53, 157, 163, 418, 426; see
also Verse of the Sword under Qur’anic
verses of war
democide, 167, 169, 207
dhikr Allāh, see remembrance of God
discrimination, 33, 48–9, 55, 133; non-
discrimination (the Crusades, 135;
fundamentalism, 125, 126, 127, 152); see
also non-combatant; Just War doctrine
diversity/cultural diversity, see pluralism
Divine love, 225, 273, 274–5, 348–77;
Divine Companionship, 369–72; Divine
Essence, 349–53, 376; Divine Names,
348–9; a Divine Quality, 348–9, 350;
evildoers, 360–2, 375, 376; God’s love
for humanity, 273–5, 362–4, 375, 376;
God’s love for the virtuous, 354, 364–76,
377, 393; gratuitous graces, 364, 376;
gratuitousness, 362–4, 365, 376; ḥadīth,
349; intimacy, 271, 273; love as root
of Creation, 353–62, 376; love/mercy
connection, 348–9, 350, 352, 360, 362,
393; Prophet Muḥammad, 365, 368–9;
Qur’an, 225, 273–5, 348, 349, 350–60,
365–76; rewarding without reckoning,
373–4; see also Divine mercy/
compassion; God; virtue
Divine mercy/compassion, 43, 46, 137,
153, 224, 250, 273, 275, 295, 297, 348–77,
378, 385; basmalah, 30, 300, 350, 352,
393; Divine Essence, 349–53, 375, 376;
ḥadīth, 250, 382, 393–4 (‘My mercy
outstrips My wrath’, 137, 352, 355, 392,
393); love/mercy connection, 348–9,
350, 352, 360, 362, 393; mercy as root
of Creation, 353–62; punishment
and suﬀering, 352–3, 359, 361, 394;
Qur’an, 224, 273, 348, 349, 350–60,
382–3, 393; al-Raḥīm, 300, 351–2, 393;
al-Raḥīm/al-Raḥmān distinction,
351–2; al-Raḥmān, 137, 300, 351–2, 393;
worship, 354, 355, 356, 357, 359; see also
Divine love; God; mercy
Divine Names and Attributes, 221, 224,
348–9, 351; Allāh, 349, 350, 393; beauty,
majesty and perfection, 224–5, 230;
Divine love, 348–9; al-Ḥayy, 350;
al-Qayyūm, 351; al-Raḥīm, 300, 351–2,
393; al-Raḥmān, 137, 300, 351–2, 393;
al-Ra’ūf, 349; al-Salām, 221, 224–7, 257,
259, 260, 261; al-Wadūd, 300, 348; see
also God
Donner, Fred, 123
early Islam: jihad of the ﬁrst Muslims, 101,
109, 111–20, 123, 131, 161; persecution
of Muslims, 9, 32, 42, 61, 62, 66, 103,
137, 161, 233, 417; torture, 21, 23, 62, 104,
233, 417; see also Companions of the
Prophet
ego (nafs): jihad as struggle against, xii,
51–2, 61, 99, 100, 147, 154, 419, 420; see
also jihad, a spiritual struggle
Egypt, 118–19, 311–12, 313
Enlightenment, 267
environment: livestock/animals, xiii,
48, 78, 96, 127, 153, 156, 352, 357, 425;
non-traditional security, 252; pollution,
xvii, 156; preserving of, in war, xiii, xvii,
48, 77, 78, 96, 127, 156, 423, 425; Qur’an,
226, 357, 359, 423, 425
equality, 14, 275–6, 303, 311, 312–14, 379;
citizenship, 311; dhimmīs as equal
citizens, 304, 311–13; Egypt, 312
Ernoul, 134
Eve, 275, 378
evil (sharr), 221, 227–31, 271; actuality/
potentiality notions, 227, 229–30;
‘best of all possible worlds’, 227–9, 231;
God’s love for the evildoers, 360–2,
375, 376; good/evil dichotomy, 230–1,
271; ḥadīth, 361; justice, 224, 227, 228,
230; natural evil, 229, 231; a necessity,
228–9; Qur’an, 228, 229, 271, 360, 361;

--- Sayfa 535 ---
507
Index
a rationally discernible phenomenon,
230; theodicy, 221–2, 227; violence, 222,
227; war, 404; see also wrongdoing
extremism, 162, 237; colonial legacy,
239; A Common Word, condemnation
of extremism, 323–4, 333, 347; fatwā,
36, 53, 93–4, 125, 323–4; Islamic
condemnation of, 162; jihad, xi,
49, 239; terrorism, 162; see also
fundamentalism
Faraj, Abd al-Salam, 239
fasting, 85, 149, 254, 255, 289
Fāṭimah, 381
Fatoohi, Louay, 37
fatwā (verdict), 220; Amman Conference,
323–4; extremism/terrorism, 36, 53,
93–4, 125, 323–4; Islamicity of, 125;
traditional qualiﬁcations for issuing, 323
ﬁqh, see jurisprudence
ﬁtnah: civil strife, 87, 88; persecution/
sedition, 405
ﬁṭrah (man’s essential nature), 226–7;
ﬁṭrah ḥanīfah, 363
forgiveness, 17, 399–400, 411, 415, 426
France, 147, 148, 239; Louis VII, King, 135;
see also ‘Abd al-Qādir al-Jazā’irī, Emir
friend, see awliyā’
fundamentalism, 55, 89–90, 92–3,
220; anti-intellectualism and dry
literalism, 91, 100–101; fundamentalist
interpretations of jihad, 100–101,
125–30; Islamic reform, 92, 94, 125;
Islamism, 90; non-discrimination, 125,
126, 127, 152; puritanical literalism, 90,
91, 93, 94–5; Qur’anic verses chosen to
justify jihad, 125–30; religious/cultural
diversity, 248; takfīr, 90–1, 92, 94–5;
terrorism, 55; violation of Islamic law
of war, 127, 130; see also Bin Laden,
Osama; extremism; terrorism
fuqahā’, see jurists
genocide, 167, 202–206, 208, 209, 320;
death toll, 206, 208
al-Ghazālī, Abū Ḥāmid, 87, 279
Ghazi b. Muhammad, Prince: A Common
Word, 318, 320, 321, 322, 327, 344;
interfaith harmony week, 320
Girard, Rene, 217
globalisation, 249
God, 165; compassion and forgiveness,
30, 43, 136–7; Creator/creation, 221,
224, 225, 227–8, 275–6, 353–64, 376,
378–9; Divine justice, 224, 227, 228;
goodness, 230; ḥadīth, 250, 274 (‘God
is beautiful and loves beauty’, 225, 272,
368, 396; ‘I was a hidden treasure’,
225); immanence, 225; knowlege, 225;
man’s love for God: A Common Word,
324–5, 326, 328, 332, 335, 338, 345;
oneness of God, 60, 74, 257; ontological
agent of all actions, 150; tawḥīd, 247,
299, 330, 341, 342; transcendence,
224, 225; see also Divine love; Divine
mercy/compassion, Divine Names;
monotheism
Goldziher, Ignaz, 245
Gomaa, ‘Ali, Grand Mufi, 88, 335, 341
Gonyea, Michael, 323
goodness, 230–1; God, 230; good/evil
dichotomy, 230–1; al-iḥsān, 268;
al-khayr, 230; ṣalāḥ, 231; taqwā, 227, 243
Grimme, Hubert, 122
Gülen, Fethullah, 299, 300–301
Habīb b. Maslamah al-Fihrī, 81, 118, 123
ḥadīth (sayings and actions of the
Prophet Muḥammad), xiv, 219, 244,
392; ahl al-dhimmah, 241; ‘Alī b. Abī
Ṭālib, 149–50; campaigning, 69–70;
child, 250, 361, 394; Divine love,
349; Divine mercy, 250, 352, 355;
Encyclopedia of Hadith, 392; evil, 361;
‘faith as deterrent to killing’, 156, 163;

--- Sayfa 536 ---
508
war and peace in islam
forgiveness, 399–400; God, 250, 274
(‘God is beautiful and loves beauty’,
225, 272, 368, 396; ‘I was a hidden
treasure’, 225); God-man relationship,
274; ḥadīth of Gabriel, 368; hadīth
qudsī, 225, 274, 349, 352; innovation,
124; jihad, 61–2, 277; law of war, 77,
108–109, 127, 155; love, 382; mercy, 137,
250; musta’min, 307; non-combatant,
77, 108–109, 127–8, 155, 156, 163; peace,
250, 254, 256; People of the Book,
283; piety and righteousness, 398–9;
relations among fellow humans, 276,
277; ruler, xiv, 86, 87; treaty, 158; war,
xiv, 45, 404–405
Ḥamzah, 46
Ḥanafī school, 89, 239, 240; Abū Ḥanīfah,
234, 278; ahl al-dhimmah, 305;
musta’min, 306; universalist approach,
277, 278–80
Ḥanbalī school, 89, 278, 279, 306; Ibn
Ḥanbal, Aḥmad, 278
harmony, 217, 226, 252, 253, 268, 405; A
Common Word, 317, 325, 327; inter-faith
harmony, 55, 142; restoration of, 47, 49;
state of, 221, 222, 224; World Interfaith
Harmony Week, 320, 328, 331, 341, 345
Hārūn al-Rashīd, Caliph, 241
Ḥasan al-Baṣrī, 78, 127, 264
Ḥasan b. ‘Alī, 381, 394
Ḥasan b. Sahl, 246
hatred, xiii, 49–50, 144
hell, 50, 110, 124, 352, 389, 393, 396–7, 404,
405, 425
Hijrah, see migration
Hind bint ‘Utbah, 46
Hinduism, 78, 214, 218, 220, 247;
Bhagavad Gita, 247; Hindu-Muslim
cultural coexistence, 239, 247;
monotheism, 247; Upanishads, 247
Hitti, Philip K., 235
holy war, xii, 51, 58, 59, 221, 419; holy war/
jihad distinction, 57–8, 99, 237, 238; see
also jihad
human dignity (karāmah), 269–81, 314,
385; ahl al-dhimmah, 277–9; Bedouin
culture, 280; A Common Word, 317,
339; dignity, 269, 280; during combat,
xvi, 44–5, 48, 155; God-given, 272, 276;
God-man relationship, 270, 273–5;
ḥadīth, 269, 271, 274, 276, 277, 402;
humane death, 44; Islam, 269, 280;
knowledge and capacity to learn,
271, 272; moral autonomy, 275, 277;
mutilation, 48, 77, 108, 127, 144, 155
(decapitation, 44, 144–5); Qur’an, 269,
270–7, 302–303, 363; prisoner of war,
xvii, 48, 144–5, 156, 272, 381, 421, 426;
relations among fellow humans, 270,
275–7; a right, 272–3; shari‘ah, 272–3
(Five/Six Basic Rights, 63, 64, 273,
277); see also human dignity, juristic
positions; human rights
human dignity, juristic positions, 269, 270,
272, 277–80; communalist approach,
277–8, 280; Ḥanafī school, 277, 278–80;
Ḥanbalī school, 278, 279; humanity,
277; inviolability/‘iṣmah, 277, 278–80;
Mālikī school 278, 279; personhood/
ādamiyyah, 277, 278–9; Shāﬁ‘ī school,
278, 279; universalist approach, 277–80;
see also human dignity
human rights, 140; ahl al-dhimmah,
239–40, 305, 310; A Common Word, 318;
human dignity, 272; Islam, 272, 278,
280, 303; modernism, 89; Qur’an, 272,
280, 385; Sunnah, 280; universality of,
280; see also human dignity
human security, 250, 251–2; ASEAN,
252; concept, 251; development, 251,
252; Human Development Report,
251; Islam, 267–8; religion, role of,
251; United Nations, 251, 252; see also
peace/security; security

--- Sayfa 537 ---
509
Index
human shield, xvii, 157
Huntington, Samuel, 165–6, 280
Ḥusayn b. ‘Alī, 381
hypocrites (munāﬁqūn), 109–10, 129, 158;
Just War in the Qur’an, 409–10, 411,
415, 420, 422, 423, 424
Ibn ‘Abbās, ‘Abd Allāh, 61, 107–108, 111,
115, 155, 262, 292, 353–4, 423
Ibn ‘Ābidīn, Muḥammad Amīn, 279
Ibn ‘Ajībah, Aḥmad, 342
Ibn ‘Arabī, Muḥyi al-Dīn Muḥammad, 225
Ibn ‘Ashūr, al-Ṭāhir, 155, 158, 279
Ibn Bayyah, ‘Abd Allāh, 88, 334, 344
Ibn Burayda, Sulaymān, 155
Ibn Gabirol, 141, 246
Ibn Hishām, 261
Ibn Isḥāq, Muḥammad, 120–1, 264; Sīrat
Rasūl Allāh, 120
Ibn Kathīr, 294; abrogation, 41;
jihad against kāﬁrūn/jihad against
munāﬁqūn, 110, 126–7; jihad of the
ﬁrst Muslims, 111–12, 115, 118; no
compulsion in religion, 114; Verse of
the Sword, 40–1; warfare code, 48, 127
Ibn Mājah, 155, 392, 398, 401
Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyyah, xiv, 234, 238,
240, 241, 279
Ibn Qudāmah, al-Mughnī, 82, 156, 157
Ibn Rushd al-Qurṭubī, 234, 279
Ibn Sīnā, 230–1
Ibn Taymiyyah, Taqī al-Dīn Aḥmad, 234,
237–8, 279
Ibn ‘Umar, ‘Abd Allāh, 155, 156, 158, 405,
406
Ibn Zayd b. Ḥārith, 111, 264
Iblīs (Satan), 270, 353, 362, 363, 364
idolatry, 74–5, 85, 380; ﬁghting the
idolaters, 38–40, 107; Verse of the
Sword, 38–40; see also polytheism/
polytheist
iḥsān, see beauty; virtue
‘Ikrimah b. Abī Jahl, 262, 264, 386
India, 214, 236, 239, 241, 247; Dara
Shikuh, 247; Hindu-Muslim cultural
coexistence, 239, 247; Indic civilisation,
168, 198, 199, 208, 209, 210; jizyah, 241
innovation (bid‘a), 124
Inquisition, 217
international law, 70–1, 72, 220, 224
Iran, 236, 248, 265, 280; Khomeini,
Ayatollah, 313; MEK, 91
Iraq, 318, 331, 335
Isaiah, 347
Ishmael, 104, 142
Islam, 252, 256; captive of Divinity,
266–8; critics of, 30–1, 35–6; cultural
identity, 242–4; ﬁve pillars of, 85, 86,
99; goal of, 220, 277; human dignity,
269, 280; human rights, 272, 278, 280,
303; islām/īmān distinction, 255; Islam/
Judaism theological relationship, 142–3;
Islamic Weltanschauung, 218; jihad/
Islam relationship, 153–4; justice, 34,
45, 55, 268; moderation in religion,
161–2; negative views of, 28–9, 30–1,
100, 112, 132, 133, 138, 153, 251, 327; no
compulsion in religion, 50–1, 74–5, 76,
112–14, 136, 138, 159, 238, 303; reform of,
92, 94, 100, 125, 304; religion of peace,
5, 55, 220; second largest religion in the
world, 54, 89, 338 (Muslim population,
29, 89, 91, 213–14, 324, 326–7);
universality of, 153, 243; see also Islamic
civilisation; peace, linguistic aspects
Islamic civilisation, 90, 91, 92, 93, 244;
religious/political violence and human
death toll, 34, 168, 213–14 (belligerence,
201; death toll, 198, 199, 206, 208, 209;
genocide, 209; mass killing, 206); see
also religious/political violence and
human death toll
Islamic community, see ummah
Islamic Fiqh Academy, xv

--- Sayfa 538 ---
510
war and peace in islam
Islamic Law, see shari‘ah
Islamist, 90
Israel, 28, 139, 140, 249, 331; Zionism,
139–40
‘Iyād b. Majash’ī, 361
al-Jabartī, ‘Abd al-Raḥmān, 239
Jār Allāh, Mūsā, 297
al-Jarājimah, 123–4
al-Jass, 158
Jerusalem, 80, 95, 117, 134–5, 137, 286, 289,
310
Jesus, 31–2, 50, 111, 143, 161, 283, 285, 291,
325; A Common Word, 322, 331, 336, 341;
Jesus and the Prophet Muḥammad,
289; Jesus/Prophet Muḥammad
diﬀerences, 32; see also New Testament
Jews, 23, 246–7, 288–91; Constitution
of Medina, 120–2, 240, 288–9, 309;
criticism of, 290–1, 300; kāﬁrūn,
109–11; the Holocaust, 33; Medina,
22, 112, 121–2; military alliance, 121;
Muslims/Jews relationship, 120–2, 139,
140, 141–2, 288–91; Pre-Islamic Arabia,
284; Qur’an, 283, 287, 288, 290–1, 302,
387–8; respect for, 284; siege of Naḍīr,
112–13; treaty with, 22, 121–2 (break of,
23, 112, 291); see also Judaism; People of
the Book
al-Jifrī, Ḥabīb ‘Alī, 330
jihad, xi, 49–54, 153–64; anger, 50, 151;
authentic spirit of, 136, 137, 159; call to
jihad, 19, 53, 157–9; composition of the
forces of jihad, 120–4; comprehensive
sense of, xii, 51–2, 99; conditions
of, xvi–xvii, 155–7; deﬁnition, xii,
xiv, 51, 58, 99, 147, 154, 160, 409;
distortion of the term, xi, xv, 51, 57,
133, 153, 159; expansionist theory
of, 71–3, 232, 234–7; extremism, xi,
49, 239; fundamentalism, 100–101,
125–30; ḥadīth, 61–2, 277; jahada/
jāhada, xii, 121; jihad al-tarbiyah, xiv;
Jihad fī sabīl Allāh, xi; jihad/Islam
relationship, 153–4; jihad of the ﬁrst
Muslims, 101, 109, 111–20, 123, 131, 161;
jihad/peace relationship, xvi; jihad/
qitāl dictinction, 52–3; jihad/war
dictinction, 59; legitimacy, xiii–xiv,
xvi; mujāhadah, xii, 58; mujāhid, xii,
101, 107, 133, 149; a ‘sixth pillar’, 99;
terrorism, xi, xv, 54, 55, 132–3, 159,
161–4; traditional Islam, 99, 100–101,
125, 130–1, 151; types of, xiv; see also
the entries below for jihad; holy war;
Qur’an and combat; Qur’anic verses of
war; war
jihad and Just War doctrine, 28–55,
59, 159, 232, 234; combatant/non-
combatant distinction, 48–9, 106,
107–108; deterrence, 46–7, 164;
discrimination, 48–9, 55, 133; ending
the war, 409, 410, 413, 414, 415, 422,
426; ethical behaviour, 29, 48, 425;
jus ad bellum, 232, 233, 237, 238; jus in
bello, 234; just cause, 49, 54; Just War
doctrine, 30, 46–9, 54–5, 59, 159, 162,
232, 233, 409–26; justice, 30, 410, 412;
last resort, 47, 54, 233, 426; mercy,
136, 137, 154, 159, 403–405, 409, 410,
412, 416, 422, 425; proportionality, 46,
55, 410; Qur’an, 30, 46–9, 54–5, 233,
409–26; self-defence, 41–6, 54, 66, 155,
232, 233, 234, 237, 238, 409, 410, 411,
413–19 passim, 421, 423, 424, 425, 426;
terrorism, 54, 159; war as the lesser of
two evils, 409, 410, 411, 412; see also
Just War doctrine; Qur’an and combat;
war
jihad and shari‘ah, xvi, 57–98, 155–60,
133, 231, 404; aggression, prohibition
of, 57, 72, 78, 93; attacking by surprise/
treachery, 156, 163; Dār al-Ḥarb/Dār
al-Islām distinction, 71–3; examples

--- Sayfa 539 ---
511
Index
of highest standards of chivalry and
nobility, 95–6, 130–1; Five Basic Rights
of Islamic Law, 63–4, 83–4; forced
conversion, 73–5, 96, 159–60; ḥadīth,
xiv, 45, 404–405; non-combatant
as illegitimate target, 57, 78, 93, 96,
133; peaceful coexistence, 72–3, 130;
pre-emption/aggression distinction,
69–70, 96–7; rebellion against political
authority, 84–9; religion as cause
of war, 57, 96; religious freedom as
reason for combat, 155; self-defence as
reason for war, 57, 66, 96, 155; truce,
66–9; utilitarianism, 93, 96; violation
of Islamic law of war, 93–5, 127, 130;
war, a necessary evil, 59; see also ahl
al-dhimmah; chivalry; jizyah; Qur’an
and combat; shari‘ah; ‘ulamā’
jihad, a spiritual struggle, xiii, 52, 59,
61–2, 99, 147–8; jihad al-nafs/struggle
against the ego, xii, 51–2, 61, 99, 100,
147, 154, 419, 420; lesser jihad/greater
jihad, 52, 53, 99–100, 147, 154, 419;
superiority of spiritual struggle over
armed struggle, 52, 53, 61–2
jihadism, 28, 90, 133, 139, 143;
anti-Semitism, 142; see also
fundamentalism; takfīr
jizyah (poll tax), 13–15, 82–4, 262; ahl
al-dhimmah, 79, 81, 82–3, 240–1, 305,
310, 312; as alternative to combat, 26;
child, 241; musta’min, 306; People of
the Book, 117, 118, 119–20, 123
John the Damascene, St, 236
Joseph, 102, 373, 383, 399
Joshua, 32, 33
Judaism: anti-Semitic Islam, falsity
of, 139, 140, 141; anti-Semitism, 139,
140–1; Christianity/Judaism theological
diﬀerences, 142–3; inter-religious
tolerance, 51, 142, 143; Islam/Judaism
theological relationship, 142–3;
medieval Jewish philosophy, 246–7;
Spain, 141; Talmud, 143; Tanakh, 29;
Torah, 51, 160, 263, 284, 287, 291,
293–4, 298, 301, 407, 425 (A Common
Word, 325, 342); traditional/orthodox
Judaism, 140; see also Jews
Juergensmeyer, Mark, 218
jurisprudence (ﬁqh), 3, 125, 133, 220, 244;
ahl al-dhimmah, 304–308, 309–10,
313–14; see also human dignity, juristic
positions; jurists; School of Law
jurists (fuqahā’), 58, 63, 72, 231–2;
Dār al-‘Ahd/Dār al-Ṣulh, 234–5;
expansionist theory of jihad, 71–3, 234;
islām/īmān distinction, 255; ruler, 87;
war, 59, 157, 221
Just War doctrine, 29–30, 45, 58, 59, 237;
Aquinas, Tomas, St, 58; Augustine, St,
58; discrimination, 33, 48–9, 55; Islamic
code of war, 30; jus ad bellum, 47–8, 59,
232, 233; jus in bello, 48, 59; just cause,
48, 49, 54, 97; last resort, 47, 48, 54, 66;
proportionality, 46, 48, 55; Western
code of war, 29–30; see also jihad and
Just War doctrine; war
justice (‘adl), 96, 144, 314; combat as
means to justice, 14; deﬁnition, 224;
during armed jihad, xvi, 8; evil, 224,
227, 228, 230; God’s love for the just, 7,
8, 15, 65, 74–5, 78, 366, 369, 371, 373, 381;
Islam, 34, 45, 55, 268; Just War doctrine,
30, 410, 412; justice overriding jihad,
xvi; Qur’an, xiii, 8, 30, 55, 64, 67, 359,
366; truth, xi
al-Juwaynī, Abū al-Ma‘ālī, 87
Ka‘bah, 40, 104, 155, 266, 271, 290, 390;
puriﬁcation of, 38, 40; see also Mecca;
pilgrimage
Kalam, see theology
karāmah, see human dignity
Kashmir conﬂict, 249, 280

--- Sayfa 540 ---
512
war and peace in islam
Khadduri, Majid, 237
Khadījah, 261
Khālid b. al-Walīd, 24, 25, 77, 80, 117
Khālil b. Aḥmad, 259
Khallāf, ‘Abd al-Wahhāb, 308
Khawarij, 89; Ibadis, 89
al-Khazā‘ī, ‘Umar b. al-Hamq, 158
al-Khurqī, 156
Kiddie, Nikkie, xv
killing (qatl), 76, 88, 425; ‘faith as
deterrent to killing’, 156, 163; mass
killing, 33; prohibition of, 379–80,
404–405, 425; qatl/qitāl dictinction,
76–7; Western civilisation, xiv; see also
religious/political violence and human
death toll
al-Kindī, Ya‘qūb b. ‘Isḥāq, 245
kinship (al-arḥām), 259, 275, 378, 394
knowledge, 327, 406, 407; human dignity,
271, 272, 355–6; ‘ilm, 243, 244–5;
ma‘rifah, 225
kufr (unbelief), 69, 85, 89, 109, 110, 234,
238, 255; kāﬁrūn, 109–11, 239
Lane-Poole, Stanley, 135
law of war, xiii, xvi–xvii, 18–21, 64–6,
77–8, 93, 107–108, 132–3, 145, 154,
155–60, 237; ḥadīth, 77, 108–109, 127, 155;
legal and juristic aspects of peace, 219–
20, 221, 222, 232; legitimacy of combat,
1, 18, 53, 409, 417–18, 426; legitimacy of
Islamic territorial expansion, 232, 234–
7; principles, 96; terrorism, illegitimacy,
132, 144, 159, 162–3; violation of Islamic
law of war, 93–5, 127, 130; see also jihad
and shari‘ah; Just War doctrine; Qur’an
and combat
Lebanon, 312–13
Lee, Steven, 222
Lewis, Bernard, 140
Lex talionis, 410, 413; see also revenge
lie, 31, 38, 75, 125, 254, 396
looting, xvii, 77
love (maḥabbah), see Divine love; Divine
mercy/compassion; love of others
love of others, 378–91; between
believers/brotherhood, 388–9, 390,
401–402; A Common Word, love of the
neighbour, 324–5, 326, 328, 332, 333,
335, 338, 345; forgiveness, 382–4, 385;
friendship, 389–91 (close friendship,
391; companionship, 389–90, 391;
friendship, 390–1; intimate friendship,
391); God as source of, 378; ḥadīth,
382; humanity in general, 378–85;
kinship, 378; mercy, 381–3; neighbour,
deﬁnition, 382, 386; People of the
Scripture, 385–8; Qur’an, 378–89; ‘turn
the other cheek’, 384–5; see also Divine
love; Divine mercy/compassion
madhhab, see School of Law
madrasah (Islamic seminary), 94
maḥabbah, see love
Maimonides, 141, 143, 246
Mālik b. Anas, 234, 278, 279, 392; see also
Mālikī school
Mālikī school, 89, 164, 278, 279; see also
Mālik b. Anas
man’s essential nature, see ﬁṭrah
al-Marghīnānī, Abū al-Ḥasan Burhān
al-Dīn, 279
marriage, 45, 64, 81, 255, 276, 305, 306,
334; inter-religious marriage, 296
martyrdom 59, 152, 415
Mary, the Virgin, 111, 289, 291, 336, 373–4
Massoud, Ahmed Shah, 151–2
al-Mawardī, Abū’l-Ḥasan, 87
Maymūn b. Mahrān, 386
Mazrui, Ali, xiv, 280
Mecca, xiii; early persecution of Muslims,
9, 32, 42, 61, 62, 66, 103, 137, 161, 233,
417; peaceful occupation of, 35, 38,
45–6, 137, 383; polytheism, 21, 22, 23, 60,

--- Sayfa 541 ---
513
Index
103–104, 129, 285; Prophet Muḥammad,
60, 66, 161; Qur’an, Meccan verses, 6,
59–60, 61, 111, 282, 284–8, 421; ummah,
Meccan period, 9, 21, 23, 59, 60–1, 66,
161, 232, 233; see also Ka‘bah; Medina;
pilgrimage
media, 133, 210; A Common Word, 338,
341–2, 345; war and violence in Islam,
xi, xiv, 209
Medina: Constitution of Medina, 120–2,
240, 288–9, 309; migration from Mecca
to, xiii, 9, 22, 42, 103, 104, 115, 232–3;
Prophet Muḥammad, 60, 161, 233,
258–9, 288; Qur’an, Medinan verses,
xiii, 6, 59–60, 61, 73–4, 104, 128, 282,
283, 288–97, 417–18; ummah, Medinan
period, 22, 23, 59, 60, 105, 121, 161, 232,
233; see also Mecca
mercy (raḥmah), 393–4; antithesis of
mercy, 400–407; forgiveness, 399–400;
ḥadīth, 137, 250; heart and intention,
395–7, 402, 403; Islam, 159; jihad, 136,
137, 154, 159, 403–405, 409, 410, 412,
416, 422, 425; piety and righteousness,
397–9; Prophet Muḥammad, 45–6,
137, 153–4, 160; see also Divine mercy/
compassion
metaphysics: metaphysics of creation,
225; peace, 221, 224–7 (anthropo-
cosmic vision, 226; ﬁṭrah, 226–7;
peace as principle of the cosmos, 226);
Suﬁsm, 225
Michael, Tomas, 300
migration: from Mecca to Abyssinia, xiii,
21, 42, 61, 286; Hijrah: from Mecca to
Medina, xiii, 9, 22, 59, 60, 66, 417–18
modernism, 89–90, 91, 93, 94–5, 131, 217,
297; Islamic reform, 92, 94, 100; jihad,
100, 125; modern secularism, 90; ‘West
is best’ approach, 92
monk/priest, 163, 387; illegitimate target
in war, xiii, 48, 77, 78, 108, 127, 425; St
Catherine’s monastery, Sinai, 139
monotheism, 9, 35, 104, 115, 142–3, 224, 247
morality, 1, 17, 64, 85, 94, 132, 162
Moses, 32, 142, 150, 274, 284, 289, 291, 371,
387, 389, 399, 406
Mu‘āwiyah b. Abī Sufyān, 236
Mubashshir b. Fātik, Abū al-Wafā, 246
Muḥammad b. al-Qāsim, 239
Muhammad Sa’ad Abubakar, Sultan of
Sokoto, ix–x
Mujāhid, 115, 155, 262, 263, 264, 386
Mullā Sadrā (Ṣadr al-Dīn Muḥammad
Shīrāzī), 228, 229, 231
munāﬁqūn, see hypocrites
Muqātil b. Ḥayyān, 115, 386
mushrikūn, see polytheism/polytheists
Muslim, xii, 156, 392, 393–407 passim
Muslim/non-Muslim relationships, 26–7,
78, 101, 122, 130, 140, 276–7; combat
between Muslims and non-Muslims, 7,
8–26, 62, 63, 69; ‘do not take Jews and
Christians as awliyā’’, 101, 103–105, 296;
non-muslims status under Islamic rule,
78–81, 83; Qur’an, 15, 276–7; treaty with
non-Muslims, 68–9, 78, 79–81, 96, 104–
105, 116–19, 120–2, 123, 130, 139, 234, 235,
240; see also ahl al-dhimmah; Christians;
Jews; musta’min; People of the Book
musta’min (temporary resident),
235; amān, 80, 117, 235, 306–307;
contract/‘aqd al-amān, 306 (revocation
of, 307); deﬁnition, 304, 306; forced
conversion, 307; ḥadīth, 307; Ḥanafī
school, 306; jizyah, 306; Muslim
woman, 235, 306, 307; Qur’an, 307; see
also ahl al-dhimmah
Mu‘tazilite, 230, 353
muwāṭanah, see citizenship
Nāﬁ‘, mawlā of Ibn ‘Umar, 108
nafs, see ego
Napoleon, 239

--- Sayfa 542 ---
514
war and peace in islam
Nasr, Seyyed Hossein, xi, xv, xiv, 318, 329,
344–5
nation state, 83, 249, 251, 280, 307
NATO (North Atlantic Treaty
Organization), 55
al-Nawawī, Yaḥyā b. Sharaf , 82, 86, 156,
163
Nawf al-Bakkalī, 386
New Testament, 30, 102, 247; Gospel, 47,
51, 283, 284, 293–4, 298, 301, 342 (Luke,
32; Mark, 325, 338; Matthew, 32, 338)
Noah, 361
nobility, 93, 95, 151, 155, 243, 271, 273;
manliness and nobility of character,
280; see also chivalry
non-combatant: combatant/non-
combatant distinction, 48–9, 106,
107–108; ḥadīth, 77, 108–109, 127–8, 155,
156, 163; illegitimate target, xvi–xvii, 57,
78, 93, 96, 155, 237, 425; Old Testament,
33; treatment of, 33, 48–9; see also
child; discrimination; monk/priest; the
old and vulnerable; woman
non-violence, 255; Prophet Muḥammad,
35, 41–2, 44, 58, 60, 61, 73, 104, 161, 233
Nursī, Badī‘ al-Zamān Sa‘īd, 296, 299–300
Odo of Deuil, 135–6
the old and vulnerable, 394; illegitimate
target in war, xiii, 48, 77, 78, 96, 108,
127, 237, 425; jizyah, 241
Organisation of the Islamic Conference, xv
Orientalism, 112, 242, 273
Ottoman Empire, 72, 79, 141, 236, 244;
devshirme system, 236, 237; Sokollu
Mehmet Pasha, 237; Suleiman the
Magniﬁcent, 236; Tanzimat, 312
Palestine, 140, 141, 144, 249, 280, 286, 331
paradise, 74, 86, 92, 96, 258, 374, 393, 399;
Dār al-Salām, 257, 259; martyrdom 59,
152, 415
patience, 410, 411, 416, 421, 426; the
patient, 366, 367, 369, 372, 373, 375
peace (salām), xvi, 220–49, 385; active
nature of, 223; combat as means to
peace, 14, 45; A Common Word, 317,
327, 330, 333, 338, 339, 344, 345; culture
of peace, 249; deﬁnition, 222–3,
252–3 (negative peace, 221, 222–3,
248; positive/substantive notion of
peace, 221, 222–4, 227, 248); ethics and
aesthetics, 223, 249 (iḥsān, 223, 224,
243); evil, 222, 227–31; God as origin of
peace 252, 257; God as peace/al-Salām,
221, 224–7, 257, 259, 260, 261; Islam,
religion of peace, 5, 55, 220; jihad/
peace relationship, xvi; justice, 224;
metaphysical-spiritual context, 221,
224–7; peace overriding jihad, xvi;
philosophical-theological context, 221,
227–31; political-legal context, 222,
231–42; Qur’an, 41, 225, 252; religion
217; socio-cultural context, 222, 242–8;
see also the entries below for peace;
harmony
peace: linguistic aspects, 250, 252–66;
A–M–N root: amn/amān/amānah:
safety, security, assurance of peace,
254–5; islām/īmān relationship,
265–6; islām/al-salāmah relationship,
259–61; Ṣ–B–R root: ṣabr: long-
suﬀering patience, 255–6; silm: īmān/
islām readings, 262–4; Ṣ–L–Ḥ root:
ṣulḥ/ṣalāḥ/iṣlāh: conciliation and
peacemaking, 253–4; S–L–M root: 253;
Qur’an, 253, 254, 255, 256, 258, 260,
262–4; see also peace/security
peace/security (salm), 250–68; captive
of Divinity, 266–8; conciliation and
peacemaking, 253–4; greeting of peace/
al-salāmu ‘alaykum, 256, 259, 260–1;
greetings in prayer, 256–8, 259; ḥadīth,
250, 254, 256; human security, 250,

--- Sayfa 543 ---
515
Index
251–2, 267–8; al-Islām, 252, 256; letters
sent by the Prophet Muḥammad,
265–6; peacemaking, 252, 253–4, 261–5;
safety and security, 258–61; salm/ḥarb
dichotomy, 252, 253; see also human
security; peace, linguistic aspects
peaceful coexistence, 72–3, 130, 241–2,
244, 246–7, 300, 385; ahl al-dhimmah,
232, 234, 239–41; culture of coexistence,
232; Hindu-Muslim cultural
coexistence, 239, 247; medieval Jewish
philosophy, 246–7; Qur’an, 247–8,
281; religious/cultural pluralism, 222,
232, 244–8, 281, 300–301, 302; ta‘āruf,
302–303; see also peace; pluralism
People of the Book (Ahl al-Kitāb),
111, 143–4, 262, 282–303, 385–8; Ahl
al-Maktab, 300; amity and respect,
283; concept, 283–4; cultural and social
pluralism, 282, 287, 297; daily life, 289;
ḥadīth, 283; Holy Scriptures, 284; jihad
against, 119–20, 125–6; jizyah, 117, 118,
119–20, 123; kāﬁrūn, 110–11; modern
Muslim scholarship and the Qur’anic
view of, 297–301, 302; Pre-Islamic
Arabia, 284; Prophet Muḥammad,
288, 294–5, 299, 301; Qur’an, 282,
283, 284–97, 301–303, 385–8 (Meccan
period, 282, 284–8; Medinan period,
282, 283, 288–97); religious freedom,
282, 288–9, 303; salvation, 292–3,
297–9, 302; theological/dogmatic
pluralism, 282, 297–300, 301, 302;
Western scholarship, 301; see also ahl
al-dhimmah; Christians; Jews; Muslim/
non-Muslim relationships; Sabeans;
Zoroastrians
people of protection, see ahl al-dhimmah
Persia/Persians (al-Furs), 24, 25–6, 117,
118, 285–6, 386; conversion, 25, 138; Mir
Findiriski, 247; Naṣr b. Hārūn, 236;
Sasanids, 244
philosophy, 234, 242, 243, 244–7; Greek
philosophy, 227, 245, 246; medieval
Jewish philosophy, 246–7; peace, 221–2,
227–31; perennial philosophy, 246
pilgrimage, 42, 135–6; Hajj, 45, 68, 85, 255,
422; pre-Islamic Mecca, 39, 41, 42, 66,
104; Treaty of Hudaybiyyah, 38, 40,
68–9, 422; see also Ka‘bah; Mecca
pluralism, 297–8; cultural and social
pluralism, 282, 287, 297, 300–301,
302; interfaith dialogue, 303, 318, 326,
328, 329, 332, 335, 344, 346; peaceful
coexistence, 222, 232, 244–8, 281,
300–301, 302; People of the Book,
282, 287, 297; Qur’an, 247–8, 287,
379, 425; secularism, 297; superiority
of one religion over other, 301, 303;
ta‘āruf, 302–303; theological/dogmatic
pluralism, 282, 297–300, 301, 302; see
also peaceful coexistence
political authority: court/mosque
separation, 84; legitimacy of, 84,
85; People of the Book, 119–20, 124;
rebellion against political authority,
84–9; ‘ulamā’, 85–6; see also ruler/
leader
polytheism/polytheists (mushrikūn), 107,
109, 110, 111, 143; jihad against, 38–40,
75, 107, 125–6, 129; Mecca, 21, 22, 23, 60,
103–104, 129, 285; puriﬁcation of the
Ka‘bah, 38; Verse of the Sword, 38–40,
75; see also idolatry
prayer, 85, 86, 152, 259, 374, 381–2;
greetings in prayer, 256–8, 259; jihad,
99; ṣalāt, xii, 9, 39, 60, 63, 73, 74, 75,
88 (facing Jerusalem, 289; facing the
Ka‘bah, 290); see also remembrance of
God; worship
pre-emption, 69–70, 96–7
Primal-Indigenous civilisation, 168,
213, 214; death toll, 198, 199, 201, 208;
genocide, 206; see also religious/

--- Sayfa 544 ---
516
war and peace in islam
political violence and human death toll
prisoner of war, 19, 44, 220, 413; conversion
to Islam, xvii, 238; humane treatment
of, xvii, 48, 144–5, 156, 272, 381, 421, 426;
ransom, xvii, 19–20, 44, 421, 426
Prophet Muḥammad, 6, 153, 160, 243,
287, 288; assassination attempt, 45–6,
66, 112, 233, 415, 417, 423, 424; belief in
Prophethood of, 294–5, 299, 301, 365,
368–9; combat, 1, 9, 23, 27, 37, 42, 43,
45, 62, 150, 160–1 (exhortation to, 53,
54); greetings in prayer, 257; inter-
religious tolerance, 51, 79–80, 138–9;
Jesus/Prophet Muḥammad diﬀerences,
32; jizyah, 82; law of war, 93, 108–109;
lesser jihad/greater jihad, 52, 53, 61,
99–100; letters sent by, 265–6, 295; life,
21–2, 41–2, 51, 271; magniﬁcent nature
of, 369; Meccan period, 60, 66, 161;
Medinan period, 60, 161, 233, 258–9,
288; mercy and forgiveness, 45–6, 137,
153–4, 160; mujāhid, xii; non-violence
policy, 35, 41–2, 44, 58, 60, 61, 73, 104,
161, 233; People of the Book, 288, 294–5,
299, 301; Qur’an, 365, 368–9; spiritual
and political leader, 32, 60, 84; see also
ḥadīth; Qur’an; Sunnah
prophets, 142, 285, 289, 291, 299, 370–1
psychology, 225, 229
punishment: capital punishment, 410, 412,
413, 415, 416; Divine mercy, 352–3, 359,
361, 393, 394; human dignity, 272; Qur’an,
276, 352, 361, 410, 412, 413, 415, 416
puritanical literalism, 90, 91, 93, 94–5; see
also fundamentalism
al-Qaeda, 34, 53, 55, 323
Qatāda, 115, 264, 386
al-Qayṣarī, Dāwūd, 225
Qur’an, xiv, 3, 29–30, 102–103, 285, 407,
425; abrogation/naskh, 16–17, 34–7,
40–1, 73, 106, 155, 288, 298 (only
commands can be abrogated, 76);
basmalah, 30, 300, 350, 352, 414;
Bible/Qur’an comparison, 102–103;
Companions of the Prophet, 30;
context, 35, 38, 40, 64, 77, 102, 103, 107,
112–13, 219, 297, 302; critics of, 30–1, 40,
44; hermeneutics, 2–6, 16, 17, 35, 76,
102, 218–19, 225, 244, 285, 292–3, 298,
342 (tafsīr, 103, 219, 273, 282, 382; ta’wīl,
2, 219, 263, 264); Meccan verses, 6,
59–60, 61, 111, 282, 284–8, 421; Medinan
verses, xiii, 6, 59–60, 61, 73–4, 104,
128, 282, 283, 288–97, 417–18; modern
Muslim scholarship, 297–301, 302;
reciter, 262, 396–7; revelation of, 1, 8,
16, 21, 29–30, 34, 45, 60, 285, 287 (asbāb
al-nuzūl, 103); translation, viii, 30, 103,
392; Verses of Pardon and Forgiveness,
17; Western scholarship, 301; see also
the entries below for Qur’an
Qur’an and combat, 1–27, 59, 99–131,
133–4, 380–1, 404, 409–26; combat as
means to peace, 14; combat between
Muslims, 7–8; combat between
Muslims and non-Muslims, 7, 8–26;
combat in holy places, 11; combat/
qitāl, 1, 5, 7, 52, 76, 154; earliest jihad,
101, 109, 111–20, 123, 131 (preaching the
Qur’an, 112); ending the combat, 8, 11,
43, 54–5, 409, 410, 413, 414, 415, 422,
426; human dignity during combat,
44–5, 48, 155; jihad, xiii, 49–54, 57,
60–1, 64–6; jihad/qitāl dictinction,
52–3; Just War doctrine, 30, 46–9, 54–5,
233, 409–26; law of war, 18–21, 64–6,
77–8, 93, 107–108, 132–3, 145, 154, 155,
237; legitimacy of combat, 1, 18, 53, 409,
417–18, 426; practical application of the
Qur’anic rules of combat, 21–7, 116–20,
134–51; qatl/qitāl dictinction, 76–7;
reasons and purposes of combat, 10–14,
18, 23, 66, 155; self-defence, 41–6, 54,

--- Sayfa 545 ---
517
Index
66, 155, 232, 233, 234, 237, 238, 409, 410,
411, 413–19 passim, 421, 423, 424, 425,
426; war as undesirable activity, 49, 53,
136, 405; see also chivalry; jihad and
Just War doctrine; jihad and shari‘ah;
Qur’anic verses of war
Qur’an, general topics, 4, 45; ahl
al-dhimmah, 78; beauty, 223, 230;
Christians, 283, 286, 288, 292, 295,
302, 386–7; A Common Word, 325–6,
341, 342–3, 346; corruption, 40, 406;
Divine love and mercy, 224, 273–5,
348, 349, 350–60, 365–76, 382–3, 393;
environment, 226, 357, 359, 423, 425;
evil, 228, 229, 271, 360, 361; ﬁtrah, 226;
forgiveness, 399; heart and intention,
395; human dignity, 269, 270–7, 302–303,
363; human rights, 272, 280, 385; Jews,
283, 287, 288, 290–1, 302, 387–8; justice
and fairness, xiii, 8, 30, 55, 64, 67, 359,
366; Muslim/non-Muslim relationships,
15, 276–7; musta’min, 307; peace, 41, 225,
252 (linguistic aspects, 250, 252–66);
peaceful coexistence, 247–8, 281;
peacefully preaching, 73–5; People of the
Book, 282, 283, 284–97, 301–303, 385–8
(modern Muslim scholarship, 297–301,
302); piety and righteousness, 397–8;
pluralism, 247–8, 287, 379, 425; Prophet
Muḥammad, 365, 368–9; punishment,
276, 352, 361, 410, 412, 413, 415, 416;
relations among fellow humans, 275–7;
tolerance, 139, 143–4, 380; treaty, 19, 20,
66–8, 158–9, 425; universalism, 243; see
also love of others
Qur’anic verses of war, 101–15, 162;
aggression, 10, 13, 72, 65, 136, 145, 154,
162, 237, 277, 372, 380, 384, 412, 426;
‘do not take Jews and Christians as
awliyā’’, 101–105, 296; fundamentalism,
Qur’anic verses chosen to justify
jihad, 125–30; ‘had God not repelled
some men by means of others’, 114–15;
‘perform jihad against the kāﬁrūn,
109–11; ‘slay them wherever you ﬁnd
them’, 106–109; ‘no compulsion in
religion’, 50–1, 74–5, 76, 112–14, 136, 138,
159, 238, 303; ‘to deal kindly and justly’,
105–106, 146; Verse of the Sword, 35–6,
37–41, 51, 52, 75–7, 414 (abrogation,
35–6, 40–1, 47, 76); Verses of Combat/
Āyāt al-Qitāl, 6–16; Verses of Combat/
Verses of Pardon and Forgiveness
relationship, 16–18
Quraysh tribe, 38, 41, 42, 52, 66, 68, 161;
occupation of Mecca, 45–6, 137; Surah
of Quraysh, 72
al-Qurṭubī, Abū ‘Abdullāh: Tafsīr
al-Qurṭubī, 164, 352–3, 382, 386, 417
Qutayla, 105–106
Rabāḥ b. Rabī‘ah, 108
raḥmah, see Divine mercy/compassion;
mercy
Rahman, Fazlur, 297–9
Ramadān, xii, 85
al-Rāzī, Fakhr al-Dīn, 3, 17, 294, 342, 381,
342, 423; Divine mercy, 352, 353–5
religion, 167, 217; diﬀerence of religion,
not a reason for war, 69, 75, 78, 96, 124;
ﬁrst Basic Rights of Islamic Law, 63,
64; human security, 251; inter-religious
tolerance, 51, 55; Sacred Scriptures,
218, 284, 325–6, 334, 335–6, 342–3, 346;
a source of violence, 217–20; see also
Christianity; Islam; Judaism
religious freedom, 156, 233–4, 425; ahl
al-dhimmah, 305, 310; coercion, 6, 50;
no compulsion in religion, 50–1, 74–5,
76, 112–14, 136, 138, 159, 238, 303; People
of the Book, 282, 288–9, 303; a reason
for combat, xvii, 11, 14, 18, 155, 159,
233–4; see also conversion
religious minorities, see ahl al-dhimmah

--- Sayfa 546 ---
518
war and peace in islam
religious persecution, xvii; early
persecution of Muslims, 9, 32, 42, 61,
62, 66, 103, 137, 161, 233, 417; forced
conversion, xvii; a reason for combat,
155, 159, 421, 425; religious minorities,
defence of, 317, 335
religious/political violence and human
death toll, 165–214; Antitheist
civilisation, 168, 201, 206, 209, 214
(death toll, 198, 199, 201, 208, 209);
Buddhist civilisation, 168, 206, 210,
214 (death toll, 198, 199, 201, 208, 210);
Christian civilisation, 168, 201, 206, 208,
213 (death toll, 198, 199, 201, 208); civil
war, 167; civilisation, 166, 168; death toll,
168–9, 198, 199, 201, 207, 208; democide,
167, 169, 207; genocide, 167, 202–206,
208, 209; Indic civilisation, 168, 210
(death toll, 198, 199, 208, 209); Islamic
civilisation, 168, 201, 209, 213–14 (death
toll, 198, 199, 206, 208, 209); Primal-
Indigenous civilisation, 168, 206, 213,
214 (death toll, 198, 199, 201, 208);
religion, 167–8; Sinic civilisation, 168,
198, 201, 206, 209, 213, 214 (death toll,
198, 199, 201, 208, 209); war, 166–7
religious scholars, see ‘ulamā’
remembrance of God (dhikr Allāh), 62, 63,
64, 147, 148, 225, 285, 358–9, 374, 395
revenge, xvi, 9, 47, 66, 128, 146, 152, 394,
402, 405; Lex talionis, 410, 413
Riḍā, Muḥammad Rashīd, 298
Rightly Guided Caliphs, 1, 21, 24, 26, 79,
80, 82, 101, 108, 117; see also Abū Bakr
al-Ṣiddīq; ‘Alī b. Abī Ṭālib; ‘Umar b.
al-Khaṭṭāb; ‘Uthmān b. ‘Aﬀān
Robespierre, Maximilien, 92
Romans, xvi, 33, 310
Rosenthal, Erwin, 141
ruler/leader, 86; ahl al-ḥall wa al-‘aqd,
85, 87, 88; declaration of kufr, 85;
declaration of war by, xiv, xvi, 47, 53,
157, 163, 418, 426; ﬁtnah, 87, 88; ḥadīth,
xiv, 86, 87; legitimacy, 85; Prophet
Muḥammad, 32, 60, 84; rebellion
against, 85–9; shari‘ah, 88; tyranny, 10,
86, 87–8, 400, 401; ‘ulamā’, 85–6; see
also political authority
Rūmī, Jalāl al-Dīn Muḥammad, 150–1
Sabeans, 143, 236, 239, 283, 292
Sa‘d b. ‘Ubāda, 137
ṣadaqah, see alms
Sadat, Anwar, 239
safe conduct/safety, see amān
Ṣā‘id al-Andalusī, 245
Saladin/Ṣalāḥ al-Dīn Yūsuf al-Ayyūbī, 95,
96, 134–5, 137
Salaﬁ Muslims, 89
salām, see peace
salm, see peace/security
al-Sarakhsī, Abū Bakr, 232, 234, 279
Satan, see Iblīs
Schleifer, S. A., 140–1
Scholasticism, 230, 277, 280
School of Law (madhhab), 2, 3, 232, 242,
277–80; see also Ḥanafī school; Ḥanbalī
school; Mālikī school; Shāﬁ‘ī school
Schuon, Frithjof, 150
secularism, 90, 217, 220, 297; pluralism,
297; secular fundamentalist, 90, 91,
92–3, 95
security: deﬁnition, 251; non-traditional
security, 252; state security, 251–2;
threat, deﬁnition, 252; see also human
security; peace/security
sedition, 405–407; ḥadīth, 406–407;
Qur’an, 405–406; a reason for combat,
10, 11, 12, 23, 65, 68
self-defence as reason for combat, xv, xvi,
13, 14, 26, 37, 41–6, 54, 57, 62, 66, 96,
155, 232, 233, 234, 237, 238, 409, 410, 411,
413–19 passim, 421, 423, 424, 425, 426
Senturk, Recep, 278

--- Sayfa 547 ---
519
Index
al-Shāﬁ‘ī, Muḥammad b. Idrīs, 76, 232,
234, 240; human dignity, 278, 279; see
also Shāﬁ‘ī school
Shāﬁ‘ī school, 76, 89, 278; jizyah, 240–1;
see also al-Shāﬁ‘ī, Muḥammad b. Idrīs
Shah-Kazemi, Reza, 130
Shamil, Imam of Dagestan, 96, 146
sharr, see evil
shari‘ah (Islamic Law), 6, 232; ahl
al-dhimmah, 312; Five/Six Basic Rights/
maqāṣid al-sharī‘ah, 63–4, 83–4, 220,
273, 277; human dignity, 272–3; siyāsah
shar‘iyyah, 306; see also jihad and
shari‘ah; ‘ulamā’
al-Shāṭibī, Abū Isḥāq Ibrāhīm, 279
al-Shaybānī, Muḥammad b. Ḥasan, 234,
291
Shi‘i Muslims, 89, 149, 278, 279; A
Common Word, 317, 344; extremism,
condemnation of, 323; Ja‘farī school,
279; jihad xiii, xiv; takfīr, 91; Twelver
Imami, xiv
sin, 85, 89, 254, 402; forgiveness, 149, 275,
365, 368, 384, 399–400; hadīth, 399–400
Sinic civilisation, 168, 198, 213, 214;
belligerence, 201, 209; death toll, 198,
199, 201, 208, 209; genocide/mass
killing, 206, 209; see also religious/
political violence and human death toll
Smith, William Robertson, 266
Spain, 140, 141, 189
Spencer, Robert, 30, 40–1
Successors, 101, 120, 262
al-Suddī, 262, 264
Suﬁsm, 89, 147, 245, 247; God-man
relationship, 273; metaphysics of
creation, 225; mujāhadah, xii; spread of
Islam, 138, 236
al-Suhaylī, ‘Abd al-Rahmān b. ‘Abdullāh,
260–1
al-Suhrawardī, Shihāb al-Dīn Yaḥyā b.
Habash, 246
suicide, 105, 132, 133, 151, 152
Sunnah (example of the Prophet
Muḥammad), 3, 218–19, 220, 232, 243,
280, 369; see also hadīth; Prophet
Muḥammad
Sunni Muslims, 76, 89, 334–5; A
Common Word, 317, 334–5; extremism,
condemnation of, 323; jihad xiii;
takfīr, 91
Surāqah b. ‘Amr, 123
al-Suyūṭī, Jalāl al-Dīn, 273; Tafsīr
al-Jalālayn, 382, 386
al-Ṭabarī, Muḥammad b. Jarīr, 83, 126,
273, 342, 417, 418; ‘do not take Jews and
Christians as awliyā’’, 104; jihad of the
ﬁrst Muslims, 111–12, 115, 116, 117–18, 119,
123; ‘there is no compulsion in religion’,
114; People of the Book, 293, 295;
‘perform jihad against the kāﬁrūn, 110;
al-silm/islām relationship, 262–4; ‘slay
them wherever you ﬁnd them’, 106–108;
Tārīkh al-rusul wa al-mulūk, 116, 123,
291; ‘to deal kindly and justly’, 105–106;
warfare code, 127
al-Ta’if, 22
takfīr (apostasising), 90–1, 92, 94–5, 323,
402–403; ḥadīth, 403; Qur’an, 402–403;
sin, 402; see also fundamentalism
Taliban, 53, 280–1
al-Talibi, Muhammad, 313
Tantawi, Muhammad Sayyid, xv
temporary resident, see musta’min
terrorism, 28, 55, 92–3, 161; 7/7, 55; 9/11,
xv, 28, 55, 130, 132, 133, 151–2, 281; A
Common Word, 317, 346; extremism,
162; fundamentalism, 55; hatred, 144;
illegitimacy, 132, 144, 159, 162–3; irhāb,
murjifūn, irjāﬁyyūn, 163–4; irjāf, 164;
Islamic condemnation of, xv, 5, 54,
132, 162; jihad and terrorism, xi, xv,
54, 55, 132–3, 159, 161–4 (military jihad

--- Sayfa 548 ---
520
war and peace in islam
as antithesis of terrorism, 162); lack
of religious education/ignorance, 94,
100, 130, 162; non-discrimination,
125, 126, 127, 159, 163; al-Qaeda, 34, 53,
55; Qur’an and terrorism, 54; United
States, 28, 36, 128, 129, 280–1; Verse of
the Sword, 36; War on Terror, 28; see
also Bin Laden, Osama
Taqīf, 22
theology, 221, 224, 227–31, 244, 245, 246,
247; al-Ash‘arī/Ash‘arite theology, 230;
A Common Word, 318, 326, 333–4,
337, 342, 343–4, 345–6 (Jesus, 322, 331,
336, 341; tawḥīd, 330, 341; Trinitarian
doctrine, 333, 341); islām/īmān
distinction, 255; Mu‘tazilite theology,
230; theological/dogmatic pluralism,
282, 297–300, 301, 302; theology/
spiritual psychology link, 225
al-Tirmidhī, Muḥammad b. ‘Alī al-Ḥakīm,
155, 158, 250, 258, 392, 394, 400, 404,
406–407
tolerance: inter-religious tolerance, 55,
80, 130, 140, 142, 143, 236; Prophet
Muḥammad, 51, 79–80, 138–9;
Qur’an, 139, 143–4, 380; see also ahl
al-dhimmah; worship, place of
torture: early Islam, 21, 23, 62, 104, 233, 417
Toynbee, Arnold, 165
trade, 38, 42, 64, 244; spread of Islam,
138, 236
traditionalism, 90, 91, 95, 133, 248;
extremism, 162; traditional Islam and
jihad, 99, 100–101, 125, 130–1, 151
treachery and deception, xvii, 18–19, 67,
122, 134, 156; attack at night, 157; attack
by surprise, xvii, 156, 163
treaty/truce, 8, 19, 66, 68–9, 70–1, 157–9;
breach of, xvii, 19, 20, 158 (as reason
for combat, 12, 39–40, 41, 68, 69, 414);
Christians of Najran, 79–80, 116, 235,
240, 310; Constitution of Medina,
120–2, 240, 288–9, 309; Covenant of
‘Umar, 117; Geneva Conventions, 70,
71; ḥadīth, 158; Kellogg-Briand Pact, 70;
Nuremberg Principles, 70; permission
to enter a country, 156; principles
surrounding treaties, 68, 69; Qur’an,
19, 20, 66–8, 158–9, 425; Treaty of
Hudaybiyyah, 38, 40, 68–9, 422; treaty
with non-Muslims, 68–9, 78, 79–81, 96,
104–105, 116–19, 120–2, 123, 130, 139, 234,
235, 240; UN Charter, 70, 71, 159
tribalism, 91, 243, 403
truth, 85, 152, 245–6, 295; ḥadīth, 61–2, 277;
justice, xi; rebellion against political
authority, 87; universality of, 245
Turkey/Turks, 135–6, 142, 299; PKK, 91
tyranny, 10, 86, 87–8, 400, 401;
fundamentalism, 89
‘ulamā’ (religious scholars), 84, 235, 242,
324, 345
‘Umar b. ‘Abd al-‘Azīz, Caliph, 82–3, 108,
155
‘Umar b. al-Khaṭṭāb, 68, 80, 82–3, 118–19,
123, 310; combat, 21, 24, 423; Covenant
of ‘Umar, 117; jizyah, 82–3; see also
Rightly Guided Caliphs
Umayyad period, 84, 108, 120, 122, 236,
265; al-Walīd b. ‘Abd al-Malik, Caliph,
123, 236
Umm Hānī, 307
ummah (Islamic community), 42, 271,
403; aggression against, as reason
for war, 63; Meccan period, 9, 21, 23,
59, 60–1, 66, 161, 232, 233; Medinan
period, 22, 23, 59, 60, 105, 121, 161, 232,
233; middle community, 131, 161, 243,
295; ummah wāḥidah, 121
unbelief, see kufr
United Kingdom, 55; Churchill,
Winston, 53–4, 146
United Nations: human security, 251, 252

--- Sayfa 549 ---
521
Index
(Human Development Report, 251); UN
Charter, 70, 71, 159; World Interfaith
Harmony Week, 320, 328, 331, 341, 345
United States 55; Bush, George, 28,
280–1; terrorism, 28, 36, 128, 129, 280–1;
Wamp-Ellison Resolution, 320
‘Urwah b. al-Zubayr, 115
Usāma b. Zayd, 25
utilitarianism, 93, 96
‘Uthmān b. ‘Aﬀān, 108; see also Rightly
Guided Caliphs
verdict, see fatwā
violence, xi; evil, 222, 227; negative peace,
notion of, 221, 222–3, 248; Qur’an, 219,
425; religion and violence, 217–20;
structural violence, 167, 207, 223, 228;
see also religious/political violence and
human death toll
virtue: God’s love for the virtuous, 354,
364–76, 377, 393 (the God-fearing, 10,
65, 111, 367, 369, 372, 373–5, 381, 388, 391;
the just, 7, 8, 15, 65, 74–5, 78, 366, 369,
371, 373, 381; the patient, 366, 367, 369,
372, 373, 375); ḥadīth, 398; ḥadīth of
Gabriel, 368; iḥsān, 223, 224, 243, 272,
276, 368, 375; piety and righteousness,
397–9; see also beauty
Wahhabism, xv, 89, 242
war, 160; avoiding war, xvi; Cold War,
209; colonial war, 167, 169; continental
war, 167; death toll, 166–7; deﬁnition,
166–7; ending the war, xvii, 8; Ibn
Kathir, 48; interstate war, 167; jurists,
59, 157, 221; a necessary evil, 59; a right,
70; subcategories, 167; undesirable
activity, 49, 53, 136, 405; warfare code,
48, 77, 108, 127 (Islamic code of war,
30; Western warfare code, 29–30); see
also declaration of war; jihad; Just War
doctrine; law of war; Qur’an and combat
Watt, William Montgomery, 122
Wellhausen, Julius, 122
Western civilisation: colonialism, xv–xvi,
147, 148, 238, 280, 311, 312; liberty, 280;
mass killing, xiv; modernism, 89–90,
92; negative views of Islam, 28–9, 30–1,
132, 133, 153, 251, 327
Williams, Rowan, 319, 332–6, 343–4
woman, 112, 134, 306, 365, 366, 394; Eve,
275, 378; illegitimate target in war, xiii,
xvii, 48, 77, 78, 96, 107–108, 127, 155–6,
163, 237, 404, 425; jizyah, 241; musta’min,
235, 306, 307
worship, 382, 385, 398; Divine mercy, 354,
355, 356, 357, 359; ḥadīth of Gabriel, 368;
see also prayer; worship, place of
worship, place of, 139, 425; church, xvii, 9,
42, 63, 115, 138–9, 156, 233, 417; defense
of, as reason for combat, 9, 39–40, 42,
63, 114–15, 139, 233, 417, 425; mosque,
9, 39, 42, 63, 115, 139, 233, 306, 417;
synagogue, xvii, 9, 42, 63, 115, 139, 156,
233, 417; a target in war, xvii, 48
wrongdoing, 46, 47, 400–402; ḥadīth,
401–402; Qur’an, 15, 65, 101, 384, 397,
400–401, 426; see also evil
Yazīd b. Abū Sufyān, 108
Yusuf Ali, Abdullah, 292
Zachariah, 373
al-Ẓāhirī, Dā’ūd, 278
Zakaria, Fareed, 323
zakāt, see alms
al-Zamakhsharī, Abū al-Qāsim, 342
al-Zawahiri, Ayman, 28, 94
Zayd b. Aslam, 115, 386
Ziyād b. Labīd al-Anṣarī, 407
Zoroastrianism, 78, 79, 81, 118, 120, 143,
234, 239, 283, 292
al-Zuḥaylī, Wahbah, 308

--- Sayfa 551 ---
www.mabda.jo
No word in English evokes more fear and misunderstanding than ‘jihad’. To
date the books that have appeared on the subject in English by Western schol-
ars have been either openly partisan and polemical or subtly traumatised by so
many acts and images of terrorism in the name of jihad and by the historical
memory of nearly one thousand four hundred years of confrontation between
Islam and Christianity.
War and Peace in Islam: Te Uses and Abuses of Jihad aims to change this.
Written by a number of Islamic religious authorities and Muslim scholars, this
work presents the views and teachings of mainstream Sunni and Shi’i Islam on
the subject of jihad. It authoritatively presents jihad as it is understood by the
majority of the world’s 1.7 billion Muslims in the world today, and supports this
understanding with extensive detail and scholarship.
Tough jihad is the central concern of War and Peace in Islam: Te Uses and
Abuses of Jihad, the range of the essays is not conﬁned exclusively to the study
of jihad. Te work is divided into three parts: War and Its Practice, Peace and
Its Practice, and Beyond Peace: Te Practice of Forbearance, Mercy, Compas-
sion and Love.
War and Peace in Islam: Te Uses and Abuses of Jihad aims to reveal the real
meaning of jihad and to rectify many of the misunderstandings that surround
both it and Islam’s relation to the ‘Other’.
‘Tis is the best book on the subject in English. It will be of inestimable value.’
 —Shaykh Mustafa Ceric, Grand Mufi Emeritus of Bosnia
‘A dynamic myth-busting clariﬁcation of the real position of mainstream
orthodox Islam on the whole question of violence and jihad.’
—T. J. Winter, University Lecturer in Islamic Studies, Cambridge University

--- Sayfa 552 ---
WAR AND PEACE IN ISLAM:
THE USES AND ABUSES OF JIHAD
№ 24