--- Sayfa 1 ---
Islam
and
Peace
Dr Ibrahim Kalin
English Monograph Series – Book No. 11

--- Sayfa 3 ---
He hath prescribed for
Himself mercy
Qur’an
Al-An`am, 6:12
﷽

--- Sayfa 4 ---
Other Books in the Series
1.	 The Amman Message  2008
2.	 A Common Word Between Us and You  2009
3.	 Forty Hadith on Divine Mercy  2009
4.	 Jihad and the Islamic Law of War  2009
5.	 Body Count  2009
6.	 The Holy Qur’an and the Environment  2010
7.	 Address to H. H. Pope Benedict XVI 2010
8.	 Keys to Jerusalem  2010
9.	 Islam, Christianity and the Environment  2011
10.	The First UN World Interfaith Harmony Week  2011
11.	Islam and Peace  2012
12.	Reason and Rationality in the Qur’an  2012
13.	The Concept of Faith in Islam  2012
14.	Warfare in the Qur’an  2012

--- Sayfa 5 ---
№ 11

English Monograph Series
Islam
and
Peace
Dr Ibrahim Kalin

--- Sayfa 6 ---
· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
MABDA · English Monograph Series · No. 11
Islam and Peace
ISBN: 978-9957-428-47-1
· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
© 2012 The Royal Aal Al-Bayt Institute for Islamic Thought
20 Sa'ed Bino Road, Dabuq
PO BOX 950361
Amman 11195, JORDAN
www.rissc.jo/
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or utilised in any
form or by any means, electronic or mechanic, inclding photocopying or re-
cording or by any information storage and retrieval system, without the prior
written permission of the publisher.
Views expressed in the Essay Series do not necessarily reflect those of RABIIT
or its advisory board.
Designed and Typeset by Besim Bruncaj
Set in Arno Pro
Title set in Requiem
Printed by Jordanian Press
LEGAL DEPOSIT NUMBER
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan National Library
2012/1/128

--- Sayfa 7 ---
Contents
Is Religion a Source of Violence?  |  1
Peace as a Substantive Value  |  11
The Spiritual-Metaphysical Context:
God as Peace (Al-Salam)  |  15
The Philosophical-Theological Context:
Evil and the Best of All Possible Worlds  |  21
The Political-Legal Context:
Law and Its Vicissitudes  |  33
The Socio-Cultural Context:
Confrontation, Coexistence, and Peace  |  55

--- Sayfa 9 ---
1
Is Religion a Source of Violence?
T
his question haunts the minds of many people con-
cerned about religion in one way or another. For the
critics of religion, the answer is usually in the affirma-
tive, and it is easy to cite examples from history. From Rene
Girard’s depiction of ritual sacrifices as violent proclivities
in religions1 to the exclusivist claims of different faith tra-
ditions, one can easily conclude that religions produce vio-
lence at both social and theological levels. As often done,
one may take the Crusades or the inquisition in medieval
Europe or jihad movements in Islamic history and describe
the respective histories of these traditions as nothing more
than a history of war, conflict, violence, schism, persecu-
tion. The premeditated conclusion is unequivocal: the more
religious people are, the more violent they tend to be. The
solution therefore lies in the de-sacralization of the world.
Religions, and some among them in particular, need to be
1    Rene Girard, Violence and the Sacred, translated by Patrick Gregory
(Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University, 1979).

--- Sayfa 10 ---
2
secularized and modernized to rid themselves of their vio-
lent essence and violent legacy.2
At the other end of the spectrum is the believer who sees
religious violence as an oxymoron at best and the mutila-
tion of his/her religious faith at worst. Religions do not call
for violence. Religious teachings are peaceful at their base,
meant to re-establish the primordial harmony between
heaven and earth, between the Creator and the created. But
specific religious teachings and feelings are manipulated to
instigate violence for political gains. Violence is committed
in the name of religion but not condoned by it. The only
valid criticism the secularist can raise against religion is that
religions have not developed effective ways of protecting
themselves from such manipulations and abuses. As Juer-
gensmeyer has shown in his extensive survey of religious
violence in the modern period, violence does not recognize
religious and cultural boundaries and can easily find a home
in the most sublime and innocuous teachings of world reli-
2    This is the gist of Bernard Lewis’ attacks on “Islamic fundamental-
ism” in a number of highly publicized essays including “The Roots of
Muslim Rage”, The Atlantic Monthly (September 1990), pp. 47-60 and
“Islam and Liberal Democracy”, The Atlantic Monthly (February, 1993).
Lewis considers “Islamic fundamentalism”, which he equates occasion-
ally with terrorism, as arising out of the overtly religious and intolerant
traditions of Islam. I have dealt with Lewis’ arguments in my “Roots of
Misconception: Euro-American Perceptions of Islam Before and After
9/11” in Joseph Lumbard (ed.), Islam, Fundamentalism, and the Betrayal
of Tradition (Bloomington, IN: World Wisdom, 2004), pp. 143-187.

--- Sayfa 11 ---
3
gions3. At any rate, religions are vulnerable when they fail to
find ways of preventing the use of force in their names. This
becomes especially acute when they fall short of inculcating
a consciousness of peace and non-violence in the minds and
hearts of their followers. In short, religions per se cannot be
seen as a source of violence. Only some of its bad practitio-
ners can be held accountable.
Both views have strong cases and make important points
about religion and violence. Both, however, are equally mis-
taken in resorting to a fixed definition of religion. And both
views reduce the immense variety of religious practices to a
particular tradition and, furthermore, to a particular faction
or historic moment in that tradition. In speaking of Islam
and violence or Hinduism and war, the usual method is to
look at the sacred scriptures and compare and contrast them
with historical realities that flow from their practice, or lack
thereof. We highlight those moments where there are dis-
crepancies between text and history as the breaking points
in the history of that religion, viz., moments when the com-
munity has not lived up to the standards of the religion as
demanded by the text.
Although there is some benefit to be gained from this ap-
proach, it fails to see the ways in which religious texts are
3    Cf. Mark Juergensmeyer, Terror in the Mind of God: The Global Rise
of Religious Violence (Berkeley and New York): Univeristy of California
Press, 2000)

--- Sayfa 12 ---
4
interpreted and made part of the day-to-day experience of
particular religious communities. Instead of looking at how
religiously binding texts are read, revealed and enriched
within the concrete experiences of the community, we sepa-
rate text from history and somehow assume historical im-
munity for the text and/or textual basis for all history.
This is not to deny the centrality of the scripture. In the
case of Islam, the Qur’an, together with the Sunnah of the
Prophet of Islam, is and remains the main source of the
Islamic Weltanschauung. After all, the numerous interpre-
tations that we may talk about are interpretations of the
Qur’an, the one text that is the subject of variant readings
from the Sufis and Hanbalis to the Wahhabis and the mod-
ernists. The fact that the Prophetic sunnah is part of the Is-
lamic worldview and religious life, without which we cannot
understand a good part of the Qur’an, can be seen as con-
firming the significance of reading the scripture within the
concrete experiences of the Muslim community. This was in
fact how first Muslims, who became the spiritual and moral
examples of later generations, learnt about the Qur’an under
the guidance and tutorship of the Prophet.
In this sense, Islamic history is not alien to the idea of
reading religiously binding texts primarily within the con-
text of a living and ‘evolving’ tradition. This is why the Sun-
nah was part of the Islamic law from the outset and this
is how the tradition of transmitted sciences (al-‘ulum al-
naqliyyah), dealing primarily with ‘religious sciences’, came

--- Sayfa 13 ---
5
about, viz., by looking at how the previous generations of
Muslims understood the Qur’an and the hadith. Taken out
of this context, Qur’anic verses become abstruse, abstract,
and impenetrable for the non-Muslim, or for anyone, who
is indifferent to this tradition and, by virtue of this, may be
misled into thinking that a good part of Islamic history has
come about in spite of the Qur’an, not because of it.
$
I deemed it necessary to insert these few words of caution
and ‘methodology’ here for the following reasons. Much
of the current debate about Islam and violence is beset by
the kind of problems that we see in the secularist and apolo-
getic readings of the scriptural sources of Islam. Those who
consider Islam as a religion that essentially condones vio-
lence for its theological beliefs and political aims pick cer-
tain verses from the Qur’an, link them to cases of commu-
nal and political violence in Islamic history, and conclude
that Qur’anic teachings provide justification for unjust use
of violence. While the same can be done practically about
any religion, Islam has enjoyed much more fanfare than any
other religion for the last thousand years or so. The apologist
makes the same mistake but in a different way when he re-
jects all history as misguided, failing to see the ways in which
the Qur’an, or the Bible or the Rig-Vedas, can easily, if not
legitimately, be read to resort to violence for intra- and inter-

--- Sayfa 14 ---
6
religious violence. This is where the hermeneutics of the text
(in the sense of both tafsir and ta’wil) becomes absolutely
necessary: it is not that the text itself is violent but that it
lends itself to multiple readings, some of which are bound to
be peaceful and some violent.
The second problem is the exclusive focus of the current
literature on the legal and juristic aspects of peace and vio-
lence in Islam. Use of violence, conduct of war, treatment
of combatants and prisoners of war, international law, etc.
are discussed within a strictly legal context, and the classical
Islamic literature on the subject is called upon to provide
answers. Although this is an important and useful exercise,
it falls short of addressing deeper philosophical and spiri-
tual issues that must be included in any discussion of reli-
gion and peace. This is true especially in the case of Islam
for mainly two reasons. First of all, the legal views of peace
and violence in the classical period were articulated and ap-
plied in the light of the overall teachings and aims of Islamic
law (maqasid al-shari’ah). The maqasid provided a context
within which the strict legality of the law was blended into
the necessities and realities of communal life. Political con-
flicts couched in the language of juridical edicts remained as
political conflicts and were never extended to a war of reli-
gions between Islam or Christianity, Judaism, Hinduism or
African religions, which Muslims encountered throughout
their history. It should come to us as no surprise that the
fatwa of a jurist of a particular school of law allowing the

--- Sayfa 15 ---
7
use of force against a Christian ruler was not interpreted as
an excuse for attacking one’s Christian or Jewish neighbor.
Secondly, the spiritual and ethical teachings of the Qur’an
and the Sunnah underpin everything Islamic in principle,
and this applies mutatis mutandis to the question of peace
and violence. The legal injunctions (ahkam) of the Qur’an
concerning peace and war are part of a larger set of spiritual
and moral principles. The ultimate goal of Islam is to cre-
ate a moral and just society in which individuals can pursue
a spiritual life and the toll of living collectively, from eco-
nomic exploitation and misuse of political authority to the
suppression of other people, can be brought under control
to the extent possible in any human society. Without taking
into account this larger picture, we will fail to see how Islam
advocates a positive concept of peace as opposed to a merely
negative one and how its political and legal precepts, which
are exploited so wildly and irrationally by both the secular
and religious fundamentalists of our day, lead to the creation
and sustaining of a just and ethical social order.
With these caveats in mind, this paper has two inter-
related goals. The first is to analyze the ways in which the
Islamic tradition can be said to advocate a positive concept
of peace. This will be contrasted with ‘negative peace’ de-
fined conventionally as absence of war and conflict. It will
be argued that positive peace involves the presence of certain
qualities and conditions that aim to make peace a principal
state of harmony and equilibrium rather than a mere event

--- Sayfa 16 ---
8
of political settlement. This requires a close examination of
the philosophical assumptions of the Islamic tradition which
have shaped the experience of Muslim societies vis-à-vis
the peoples of other faiths and cultures. These philosophi-
cal suppositions are naturally grounded in the ethical and
spiritual teachings of Islam, and without considering their
relevance for the cultural and political experience of Mus-
lims with the ‘other’, we can neither do justice to the Islamic
tradition, which spans through a vast area in both space and
time, nor avoid the pitfalls of historical reductionism and es-
sentialism, which is so rampant in the current discussions of
the subject.
This brings us to the second goal of the paper. Here I will
argue that an adequate analysis of peace and war in the Is-
lamic tradition entails more than fixating the views of some
Muslim jurists of the 9th and 10th centuries as the definitive
position of ‘orthodox’ Islam and thus reducing the Islamic
modus operandi of dealing with non-Muslims to a concept of
‘holy war’. With some exceptions4, the ever growing litera-
ture of Islam and peace has been concerned predominantly
with the legal aspects of declaring war (‘jihad’) against Mus-
lim and/or non-Muslim states, treating the dhimmis under
4    One such exception to the rule is Richard Martin’s essay “The Reli-
gious Foundations of War, Peace, and Statecraft in Islam” in John Kelsay
and James Turner Johnson (eds.), Just War and Jihad: Historical and
Theoretical Perspectives on War and Peace in Western and Islamic Tradi-
tions (New York: Greenwood Press, 1991), pp. 91-117.

--- Sayfa 17 ---
9
the Shari’ah, and expanding the territories of the Islamic
state. This has obscured, to say the least, the larger context
within which such legal opinions were discussed, interpret-
ed and evolved from one century to the other and from one
cultural-political era to the other.
Therefore I propose to look at the concept of peace in
the Islamic tradition in four interrelated contexts. The first is
the metaphysical-spiritual context in which peace (salam) as
one of the names of God is seen as an essential part of God’s
creation and assigned a substantive value. The second is the
philosophical-theological context within which the question
of evil (shar) is addressed as a cosmic, ethical, and social
problem. Discussions of theodicy among Muslim theolo-
gians and philosophers provide one of the most profound
analyses of the question of evil, injustice, mishap, violence
and their place in the ‘great chain of being’. I shall provide a
brief summary to show how a proper understanding of peace
in the Islamic tradition is bound to take us to the larger ques-
tions of good and evil. The third is the political-legal con-
text, which is the proper locus of classical legal and juristic
discussions of war, rebellion, oppression, and political (dis)
order. This area has been the exclusive focus of the current
literature on the subject and promises to be an engaging and
long-standing debate in the Muslim world. The fourth is the
socio-cultural context, which would reveal the parameters
of the Muslim experience of religious and cultural diversity
with communities of other faiths and cultural traditions.

--- Sayfa 18 ---
10
As it will become clear in the following pages, all of these
levels are interdependent and call for a larger context within
which the questions of peace and violence have been artic-
ulated and negotiated by a multitude of scholars, philoso-
phers, jurists, mystics, political leaders, and various Muslim
communities. The Islamic tradition provides ample mate-
rial for contemporary Muslim societies to deal with issues
of peace, religious diversity and social justice, all of which,
needless to say, require urgent attention. Furthermore, the
present challenge of Muslim societies is not only to deal with
these issues as internal affairs but also to contribute to the
fostering of a global culture of peace and coexistence. Before
turning to the Islamic tradition, however, a few words of def-
inition are in order to clarify the meaning of positive peace.

--- Sayfa 19 ---
11
Peace as a Substantive Value
P
eace as a substantive and positive concept entails the
presence of certain conditions that make it an endur-
ing state of harmony, integrity, contentment, equilib-
rium, repose, and moderation. This can be contrasted with
negative peace that denotes the absence of conflict and dis-
cord. Even though negative peace is indispensable to pre-
vent communal violence, border disputes or international
conflicts, substantive-positive peace calls for a comprehen-
sive outlook to address the deeper causes of conflict, hate,
strife, destruction, brutality, and violence. As Lee states, it
also provides a genuine measure and set of values by which
peace and justice can be established beyond the short-term
interests of individual, communities or states.5 This is critical
for the construction of peace as a substantive value because
defining peace as the privation of violence and conflict turns
it into a concept that is instrumental and accidental at best,
and relative and irrelevant at worst. In addition, the positive-
5    Cf. Steven Lee, “A Positive Concept of Peace” in Peter Caws (ed.),
The Causes of Quarrel: Essays on Peace, War, and Thomas Hobbes (Bos-
ton: Beacon Press, 1989), pp. 183-4.

--- Sayfa 20 ---
12
substantive notion of peace shifts the focus from prevent-
ing conflict, violence, and strife to a willingness to generate
balance, justice, cooperation, dialogue, and coexistence as
the primary terms of a discourse of peace. Instead of defin-
ing peace with what it is not and force common sense logic
to its limit, we may well opt for generating a philosophical
ground based on the presence and endurance, rather than
absence, of certain qualities and conditions that make peace
a substantive reality of human life.6
Furthermore, relegating the discourse of peace to social
conflict and its prevention runs the risk of neglecting the
individual, which is the sine qua non of collective and com-
munal peace. This is where the ‘spiritual individualism’ of
Islam versus its social collectivism enters the picture: the
individual must be endowed with the necessary qualities
that make peace an enduring reality not only in the public
sphere but also in the private domain of the individual. The
Qur’anic ideal of creating a beautiful soul that is at peace
with itself and the larger reality of which it is a part brings
ethics and spirituality right into the heart of the discourse
of positive peace. Peace as a substantive value thus extends
to the domain of both ethics and aesthetics for it is one of
the conditions that bring about peace in the soul and resists
the temptations of discord, restlessness, ugliness, pettiness,
6    Gray Cox, “The Light at the End of the Tunnel and the Light in
Which We May Walk: Two Concepts of Peace” in Caws, ibid., pp. 162-3.

--- Sayfa 21 ---
13
and vulgarity. At this point, we may remember that the key
Qur’anic term ihsan carries the meanings of virtue, beauty,
goodness, comportment, proportion, comeliness, and ‘do-
ing what is beautiful’ all at once. The active particle muh-
sin denotes the person who does what is good, desired, and
beautiful.7
In this regard, peace is not a mere state of passivity. On
the contrary, it is being fully active against the menace of
evil, destruction, and turmoil that may come from within
or from without. As Collingwood points out, peace is a ‘dy-
namic thing’,8 and requires consciousness and vigilance, a
constant state of awareness that one must engage in spiritual
and intellectual jihad to ensure that differences and conflicts
within and across the collective traditions do not become
grounds for violence and oppression. Furthermore, positive
peace involves the analysis of various forms of aggression
including individual, institutional and structural violence.
Peace as a substantive concept is also based on justice
(‘adl) for peace is predicated upon the availability of equal
rights and opportunities for all to realize their goals and po-
7    The celebrated hadith jibril confirms the same Qur’anic usage: “Ihsan
is to worship God as if you were to see Him; even if you see Him not, he
sees you”. For an extensive analysis of ihsan as articulated in the Islamic
tradition, see Sachiko Murata and William Chittick, The Vision of Islam
(St. Paul: Paragon House, 1998), pp. 265-317.
8    R. G. Collingwood, The New Leviathan (New York: Thomas Y. Crow-
ell, 1971), p. 334.

--- Sayfa 22 ---
14
tentials. One of the meanings of the word justice in Arabic
is to be ‘straight’ and ‘equitable’, i.e., to be straightforward,
trustworthy, and fair in one’s dealings with others.9 Such an
attitude brings about a state of balance, accord, and trust,
and goes beyond the limits of formal justice dispensed by
the juridical system. Defined in the broadest terms, justice
encompasses a vast domain of relations and interactions
from taking care of one’s body to international law. Like
peace, justice is one of the Divine names and takes on a sub-
stantive importance in view of its central role in Islamic the-
ology as well as law. Peace can be conceived as an enduring
state of harmony, trust, and coexistence only when coupled
and supported with justice because it also means being se-
cure from all that is morally evil and destructive.10 Thus the
Qur’an combines justice with ihsan when it commands its
followers to act with  
justice and good manner (bi’l-‘adl wa’l-
ihsan) (Al-Nahl, 16:90).11
9    Ibn Manzur, Lisan al-‘arab, XIII, pp. 457-8 and al-Tahanawi, Kashshaf
istilahat al-funun (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, 1998), III, pp. 288-9.
10    Cf. Muhammad Asad, The Message of the Qur’an, p. 179, n. 46 com-
menting on the Qur’an 6:54: “And when those who believe in Our
messages come unto thee, say: “Peace be upon you. Your Sustainer has
willed upon Himself the law of grace and mercy so that if any of you does
a bad deed out of ignorance, and thereafter repents and lives righteously,
He shall be [found] much-forgiving, a dispenser of grace”.
11    On the basis of this verse, the 10th century philologist Abu Hilal
al-‘Askari considers justice and ihsan as synonyms. Cf. his al-Furuq al-
lughawiyyah, p. 194, quoted in Franz Rosenthal, “Political Justice and

--- Sayfa 23 ---
15
The Spiritual-Metaphysical Context:
God as Peace (Al-Salam)
T
he conditions that are conducive to a state of peace
mentioned above are primarily spiritual and have
larger implications for the cosmos, the individual,
and society. Here I shall focus on three premises that are
directly relevant to our discussion. The first pertains to
peace as a Divine name (Al-Salam) (Al-Hashr, 59:23). The
Qur’anic concept of God is founded upon a robust mono-
theism, and God’s transcendence (tanzih) is emphasized in
both the canonical sources and in the intellectual tradition.
To this absolutely one and transcendent God belong  
all
the beautiful names 
 (Al-A’raf, 7:180, Al-Hashr, 59:24), i.e.,
the names of beauty (jamal), majesty (jalal), and perfection
(kamal). It is these names that prevent God from becom-
ing an utterly unreachable and “wholly other” deity. Divine
names represent God’s face turned towards the world and
the Just Ruler” in Joel Kraemer and Ilai Alon (eds.), Religion and Gov-
ernment in the World of Islam (Tel-Aviv: Tel-Aviv University, 1983), p.
97, n. 20.

--- Sayfa 24 ---
16
are the vessels of finding God in and through His creation.
The names of beauty take precedence over the names of
majesty because God says that  
my mercy has encompassed
everything 
 (Al-A’raf, 7: 156) and  
God has written mercy
upon Himself 
 (Al-An’am, 6:12,54). This is also supported
by a famous hadith of the Prophet according to which “God
is beautiful and loves beauty”. In this sense, God is as much
transcendent, incomparable and beyond as He is immanent,
comparable (tashbih) and close.12 As the ultimate source
of peace, God transcends all opposites and tensions, is the
permanent state of repose and tranquility, and calls His ser-
vants to the  
abode of peace (dar al-salam) 
 (Yunus, 10:25).
 
It is He who from high on has sent [sends] down inner peace
and repose (sakinah) upon the hearts of the believers 
, says the
Qur’an (Al-Fath, 48:4). The proper abode of peace is the
12    Like other Sufis, Ghazali subscribes to the notion of what Ibn al-
‘Arabi would later call the “possessor of the two eyes” (dhu’l-‘aynayn),
viz., seeing God with the two eyes of transcendence (tanzih) and imma-
nence (tashbih). Cf. Fadlou Shehadi, Ghazali’s Unique Unknowable God
(Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1964), pp. 8-10 and 51-5. For Ibn al-‘Arabi’s expression
of the “possessor of the two eyes”, see William Chittick, The Sufi Path of
Knowledge (Albany, State University of New York Press, 1989), pp. 361-
2. The Mutazilite and Ash’arite theologians have a long history of con-
troversy over the three major views of Divine names and qualities, i.e.,
tanzih, tashbih, and ta’til (‘suspension’). Cf. Michel Allard, Le problème
des attributes divins dans la doctrine d’al-Aš’ari et des ses premiers grands
disciples (Beyrouth: Editions De L’Impirimerie Catholique, 1965), pp.
354-364.

--- Sayfa 25 ---
17
hearts (qulub), which are  
satisfied only by the remembrance
of God (dhikr Allah) 
 (Al-Ra’d, 13:28). By linking the heart,
man’s center, to God’s remembrance, the Qur’an establishes
a strong link between theology and spiritual psychology.
In addition to the Qur’anic exegetes, the Sufis in par-
ticular are fond of explaining the ‘mystery of creation’ by
referring to a ‘sacred saying’ (hadith qudsi) attributed to
the Prophet of Islam: “I was a hidden treasure. I wanted
(lit. ‘loved’) to be known and created the universe (lit.
‘creation’13)”. The key words ‘love’ (hubb, mahabbah) and
‘know’ (ma’rifah) underlie a fundamental aspect of the
Sufi metaphysics of creation: Divine love and desire to be
known is the raison d’etre of all existence. Ibn al-‘Arabi says
that God’s “love for His servants is identical with the origi-
nation of their engendered existence … the relation of God’s
love to them is the same as the fact that He is with them
wherever they are (Al-Hadid, 57:4), whether in the state of
their nonexistence or the state of their wujud … they are
the objects of His knowledge. He witnesses them and loves
them never-endingly”.14 Commenting on the above saying,
Dawud al-Qaysari, the 14th century Turkish Sufi-philosopher
and the first university president of the newly established Ot-
13    ‘Ali b.Sultan Muhammad al-Harawi al-Qari, al-Masnu’ fi Ma’rifat al-
hadith al-Mawdu’ (Al-Riyad: Maktabat al-Rushd, 1404 AH), 1:141.
14    Quoted in William Chittick, The Self-Disclosure of God: Principles of
Ibn al-‘Arabi’s Cosmology (Albany: State University of New York Press,
1998), p. 22.

--- Sayfa 26 ---
18
toman State, says that “God has written love upon Himself.
There is no doubt that the kind of love that is related to the
manifestation of [His] perfections follows from the love of
His Essence, which is the source of the love of [His Names
and] Qualities that have become the reason for the unveiling
of all existents and the connection of the species of spiritual
and corporeal bodies”.15
 The second premise is related to what traditional philos-
ophy calls ‘the great chain of being’ (da’irat al-wujud). In the
cosmic scale of things, the universe is the ‘best of all possible
worlds’ because, first, it is actual, which implies completion
and plenitude over and against potentiality, and, second, its
built-in order derives its sustenance from the Creator. The
natural world is in a constant state of peace because accord-
ing to the Qur’an it is ‘muslim’ (with a small m) in that it
surrenders (taslim) itself to the will of God and thus rises
above all tension and discord (Aal ‘Imran, 3:83, Al-Tawbah,
9:53, Al-Ra’d, 13:15, Fussilat, 41:11). In its normative depiction
of natural phenomena, the Qur’an talks about stars and trees
as  
prostrating before God 
 (Al-Rahman, 55:6) and says that
 
all that is in the heavens and on earth extols His glory 
 (Al-
Hashr, 59:24). By acknowledging God’s unity and praising
His name, man joins the natural world in a substantive way
15    Dawud al-Qaysari, Risalah fi ma’rifat al-mahabbat al-haqiqiyyah in
al-Rasa’il ed. by Mehmet Bayraktar (Kayseri: Kayseri Metropolitan Mu-
nicipality, 1997), p. 138.

--- Sayfa 27 ---
19
– a process that underscores the essential link between the
anthropos and the cosmos or the microcosm and the macro-
cosm. The intrinsic commonality and unity between the hu-
man as ‘subject’ and the universe as ‘object’ has been called
the “anthropocosmic vision”.16 The thrust of this view is that
the anthropos and the cosmos cannot be disjoined from one
another and that the man-versus-nature dichotomy is a false
one. Moreover, the world has been given to the children of
Adam as a ‘trust’ (amanah) as they are charged with the re-
sponsibility of standing witness to God’s creation, mercy,
and justice on earth. Conceiving nature in terms of har-
mony, measure, order, and balance points to a common and
persistent attitude towards the non-human world in Islamic
thought, and has profound implications for the construction
of peace as a principle of the cosmos.17
The third principle pertains to man’s natural state and his
place within the larger context of existence. Even though
the Qur’an occasionally describes the fallen nature of man
in gruesome terms and presents man as weak, forgetful,
16    The term has first been used by Mircea Eliade and adopted by Tu
Weiming to describe the philosophical outlook of the Chinese tradi-
tions. For an application of the term to Islamic thought, see William
Chittick, “The Anthropocosmic Vision in Islamic Thought” in Ted Pe-
ters, Muzaffar Iqbal, Syed Nomanul Haq (eds.), God, Life, and the Cos-
mos (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2002). pp. 125-152
17    Cf. Seyyed Hossein Nasr, Religion and the Order of Nature (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1996), pp. 60-63.

--- Sayfa 28 ---
20
treacherous, hasty, ignorant, ungrateful, hostile, and ego-
tistic (cf., inter alia, Ibrahim, 14:34, Al-Isra', 17:11, Al-Kahf,
18:54, Al-Hajj, 22:66, Al-Ahzab, 33:72, Al-Zukhruf, 43:15, and
Al-’Adiyat, 100:6), these qualities are eventually considered
deviations from man’s essential nature (fitrah), who has
been created in the  
most beautiful form (ahsan taqwim) 

(Al-Tin, 95:4), both physically and spiritually. This meta-
physical optimism defines human beings as  
God’s vicege-
rent on earth (khalifat Allah fi’l-ard) 
 as the Qur’an says, or,
to use a metaphor from Christianity, as the “pontifex”, the
bridge between heaven and earth.18 The  
fitrah 
 (Al-Rum,
30:30), the primordial nature according to which God has
created all humanity, is essentially a moral and spiritual sub-
stance drawn to the good and  
God-consciousness (taqwa) 

whereas its imperfections and  
excessiveness (fujur) 
 (Al-
Shams, 91:8) are ‘accidental’ qualities to be subsumed un-
der the soul’s struggle to do good (al-birr) and transcend its
subliminal desires through his intelligence and moral will.
18    The classical Quran commentaries are almost unanimous on inter-
preting this ‘khalifah’ as Adam, i.e., humans in the generic sense. Cf.
Jalal al-Din al-Mahalli and Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti, Tafsir al-Jalalayn (Bei-
rut: Mu’assasat al-Risalah, 1995), p. 6 and Ibn al-‘Arabi, al-Futuhat al-
makkiyyah, ed. by M. ‘Abd al-Rahman al-Mar‘ashli, (Beirut: Dar Ihya’
al-Turath al-‘Arabi, 1997), Vol. I, p. 169.

--- Sayfa 29 ---
21
The Philosophical-Theological Context:
Evil and the Best of All Possible Worlds
I
n the context of theology and philosophy, questions of
peace and violence are treated under the rubric of good
and evil (husn/khayr and sharr/qubh). War, conflict, vio-
lence, injustice, discord, and the like are seen as extensions
of the general problem of evil. The Muslim philosophers and
theologians have been interested in theodicy from the very
beginning, and for good reasons because the basic question
of theodicy goes to the heart of religion: how can a just and
perfect God allow evil and destruction in a world which He
says He has created in perfect balance, with a purpose, and
for the well-being of His servants? We can rephrase the ques-
tion in the present context as follows: why is there so much
violence, turmoil and oppression rather than peace, harmo-
ny and justice in the world? Does evil, of which violence is
as an offshoot, belong to the essential nature of things or is
it an accident that arises only as the privation of goodness?
These questions have given rise to a long and interest-
ing debate about evil among the theologians. One particu-
lar aspect of this debate, known as the “best of all possible

--- Sayfa 30 ---
22
worlds” (ahsan al-nizam) argument19, deserves closer atten-
tion as it is relevant to the formulation of a positive concept
of peace. The classical statement of the problem pertains to
Divine justice and power on the one hand, and the Greek
notions of potentiality and actuality, on the other. The fun-
damental question is whether this world in which we live is
the best that God could have created. Since, from a moral
point of view, the world is imperfect because there is evil
and injustice in it, we have to either admit that God was not
able to create a better and more perfect world or concede
that He did not create a better world by will as part of the
Divine economy of creation. Obviously, the first alternative
calls into question God’s omnipotence (qudrah) whereas
the second jeopardizes His wisdom and justice (‘adalah).
Following another line of discussion in Kalam, we can re-
formulate the question as a tension between God’s nature
and will: can God go against His own nature, which is just, if
19    Another formulation is laysa fi’l-imkan abda’ mimma kan. Loosely
translated, it states that “there is nothing in the world of possibility more
beautiful and perfect than what is in actuality”. This sentence, attributed
to Ghazali, has led to a long controversy in Islamic thought. For an ex-
cellent survey of this debate in Islamic theology, see Eric L. Ormsby,
Theodicy in Islamic Thought: The Dispute over al-Ghazali’s “Best of All
Possible Worlds” (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1984). Cf.
Also Ghazali, Ihya’ ‘ulum al-din, (Cairo: 1968), Vol. IV, p. 321. The earliest
formulation of the problem, however, can be traced back to Ibn Sina. See
my “Why Do Animals Eat Other Animals: Mulla Sadra on Theodicy”
(forthcoming).

--- Sayfa 31 ---
23
He wants to, or His will cannot supercede His nature? Still,
can God contradict Himself? If we say yes, then we attribute
imperfection to God and if we say no, then we limit Him.
Even the most modest attempt to analyze these questions
within the context of Kalam debates will take us too far afield.
What is directly related to our discussion here is how the
concepts of evil, injustice, oppression and their variations
are seen as the ‘accidental outcomes’ of the world of contin-
gencies in which we live. True, the weaknesses and frailties
of human beings contribute enormously to the creation and
exacerbation of evil, and it is only reasonable to take a ‘situ-
ational’ position and attribute evil to ourselves rather than to
the Divine. In fact, this is what the Qur’an holds vis-à-vis evil
and man’s accountability:  
Whatever good happens to you, it
is from God; and whatever evil befalls you, it is from your own
self/soul 
 (Al-Nisa’, 4: 79; cf. also Aal-’Imran, 3:165). The best
of all possible worlds argument, however, shifts the focus
from particular instances of individual or structural violence
to the phenomenon of evil itself whereby we gain a deeper
insight into how evil arises in the first place.
We may reasonably argue that evil is part of the Divine
economy of creation and thus necessary. In a moral sense,
it is part of Divine economy because it is what we are tested
with (cf. Al-Anbiyah, 21:36; Al-Kahf, 18:9). Without evil,
there will be no accountability and thus no freedom.20 Mulla
20    Plantinga’s “free will defense” is based on this premise. Cf. Alvin

--- Sayfa 32 ---
24
Sadra calls this a necessity of Divine providence (al-‘inayah)
and the “concomitant of the ultimate telos of goodness (al-
ghayat al-khayriyyah).21 In an ontological sense, it is a neces-
sity because the world is by definition imperfect, the ultimate
perfection belonging to God, and the world is not God. That
is why God has not created “all beings as pure goodness”.22
Evil as limitation and imperfection is an outcome of the first
act of separation between the Divine and the non-divine or
what Muslim theologians call ma siwa’Llah (“all that is other
than God”). Ultimately, however,  
all is from God 
 (Al-Ni-
sa’, 4:78). This implies that evil as the “contrastive manifesta-
tion of the good”23 ceases to be evil and contributes to the
“greater good”, which is what the best of all possible world
argument asserts. In a rather paradoxical way, one cannot
object to the existence of evil itself because it is what makes
the world possible. But this does not absolve us of the moral
duty of fighting against individual cases of evil. Nor does it
Plantinga, “The Free Will Defence” in Philosophy in America, Max Black
(ed.), reprinted in Baruch A. Broody (ed.), Readings in the Philosophy of
Religion: An Analytical Approach (New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1974), p.
187. See also his “God, Evil, and the Metaphysics of Freedom” in Marilyn
M. Adams and Robert M. Adams (eds.), The Problem of Evil (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1990), pp. 83-109.
21    Mulla Sadra, al-Hikmat al-muta‘aliyah fi’l-asfar al-‘aqliyyah al-
arba‘ah, (cited hereafter as Asfar) (Tehran, 1383, A. H.), II, 3, p. 72.
22    Ibid., p. 78.
23    Frithjof Schuon, In the face of the Absolute (Bloomington: World
Wisdom Books, 1989), p. 39.

--- Sayfa 33 ---
25
make evil an essential nature of things because it was God’s
decision to create the world with a meaning and purpose in
the first place. In short, evil remains contingent and tran-
sient, and this assumption extends to the next world.24
The notion of evil as an ontological necessity-cum-con-
tingency has important implications for how we look at the
world and its ‘evil’ side. From a psychological point of view,
the acceptance of evil as a transient yet necessary phenom-
enon prevents us from becoming petty and bitter in the face
of all that is blemished, wicked, imperfect, and tainted.25 It
gives us a sense of moral security against the onslaught of
evil, which can and must be fought with a firm belief in the
ultimate supremacy of the good. It also enables us to see the
world as it is and for what it is, and strive to make it a bet-
ter place in terms of moral and spiritual perfection. From a
religious point of view, this underscores the relative nature
24    This is the main reason why a good number of Sufis, philosophers,
and some theologians believe that the hellfire will be terminated where-
as paradise will remain eternal. For the debate between the Mu’tazilites
and the Ash’arites on this issue, see Sa’d al-Din al-Taftazani, Sharh al-
maqasid (Beirut: ‘Alam al-Kutub, 1989), Vol. 5, pp. 131-140.
25    Cf. the following verses: Man never tires of asking for the good
[things of life]; and if evil fortune touches him, he abandons all hope, giving
himself up to despair. Yet whenever We let him taste some of Our grace after
hardship has visited him, he is sure to say, “This is but my due!” – and, “I do
not think that the Last Hour will ever come: but if [it should come, and] I
should indeed be brought back unto my Sustainer, then, behold, the ultimate
good awaits me with Him  (Fussilat, 41: 49-50; M. Asad’s translation).

--- Sayfa 34 ---
26
of evil: something that may appear evil to us may not be
evil and vice versa when everything is placed within a larger
framework. Thus the Qur’an says that  
it may well be that
you hate a thing while it is good (khayr) for you, and it may
well be that you love a thing while it is bad (sharr) for you. And
God knows, and you know not 
 (Al-Baqarah, 2:216). Mulla
Sadra applies this principle to ‘natural evils’, and says that
even “death, corruption (al-fasad) and the like are necessary
and needed for the order of the world (al-nizam) when they
occur “by nature and not by force or accident”.26
The best of all possible worlds argument is also related to
the scheme of actuality and potentiality which the Muslim
philosophers and theologians have adopted from Aristotle.
The argument goes as follows. This world in which we live is
certainly one of the possibilities that the Divine has brought
into actuality. In this sense, the world is pure contingency
(imkan) and hung between existence and non-existence.
From the point of view of its present actuality, however,
the world is perfect and necessary because actuality implies
plenitude and perfection whereas potentiality is privation
and non-existence.27 The sense of perfection in this context
26    Sadra, Asfar, II, 3, pp. 92-3; also p. 77.
27    Cf. Plotinus, The Enneads, V, IX, 5, p. 248, and Mulla Sadra, Asfar,
I, 3, pp. 343-4. Baqillani considers the potential (bi’l-quwwah) as non-
existent. See his Kitab al-tawhid, p. 34-44, quoted in Franz Rosenthal,
Knowledge Triumphant: The Concept of Knowledge in Medieval Islam
(Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1970), p. 216.

--- Sayfa 35 ---
27
is both ontological and cosmological. It is ontological be-
cause existence is superior to non-existence and whatever
is in the sphere of potentiality remains so until it is brought
into actuality by an agent which itself is already actual. It is
cosmological because, as stated before, the world has been
created with care, order, and beauty, which the Qur’an in-
vites its readers to look at as the signs of God (ayat Allah or
vestigia Dei as it was called by the Scholastics). The perfect
state of the cosmos is presented as a model for the estab-
lishment of a just social order. It then follows that evil is a
phenomenon of this world but not something that defines
the essential nature of things.
An important outcome of this point of view is to iden-
tify evil as a rationally discernible phenomenon. This may
appear to be a simple truism. Nevertheless, it is a powerful
position against the notion of evil as a mysterious, mythi-
cal or even cosmological fact over which human beings have
no control. Evil is something that can be discerned by the
intellect and correct reasoning and, of course, with the help
of the revelation28, and this places tremendous responsibil-
28    As the “leader of the skeptics” (imam al-mushakkikin), Fakhr al-Din
al-Razi disagrees. His objection, however, clarifies another aspect of the
discussion of theodicy in Islam. As Razi points out, there is no dispute
over the fact that some actions are good and some others bad. The ques-
tion is “whether this is because of an attribute that belongs [essentially]
to the action itself or this is not the case and it is solely as an injunction
of the Shari’ah [that actions and things are good or bad]”. Razi hastens

--- Sayfa 36 ---
28
ity on our shoulders vis-à-vis the evil that may come from
within or from without. One may disagree with Mutazilite
theologians for pushing the sovereignty of human freedom
to the point of endangering God’s omniscience and omnipo-
tency. In fact, this was what had prompted al-Ash’ari, once a
Mu’tazilite himself, to carry out his own i’tizal and lay the
foundations of Asha’rism. He and his followers believed that
good and evil were ultimately determined by the Divine law
(al-shari’ah), leaving no space for the independent judgment
of human reason (al-‘aql). Paradoxically, however, the moral
voluntarism of the Ash’arites agrees with Mutazilite ratio-
nalism in underscoring the relative and contingent nature
of evil: whether determined by reason or revelation, evil is
the privation of good and does not represent the essential
nature of things.
The Muslim philosophers assert the same point through
what we might call the ontological argument. In addition
to the fact that actuality is perfection over potentiality, ex-
istence (al-wujud) is pure goodness (khayr mahd, summun
to add that the Mu’tazilites opt the first view and “our path”, i.e., the
Asha’rites believe in the second. Cf. Fakhr al-Din al-Razi, al-Arba’in fi
usul al-din (Cairo: Maktabat al-Kulliyat al-Azhariyyah, 1986), Vol. I, p.
346. For a defense of the same Ash’arite position, see Taftazani, Sharh
al-maqasid, Vol. 4, p. 282 where it is asserted that human reason is in
no place to judge what is good (al-husn) and what is evil (al-qubh).
For Sabziwari’s defense of the Mutazilites, the philosophers, and the
“Imamiyyah” on the rationality of good and evil, see his gloss on Sadra’s
Asfar, II, 3, pp. 83-4.

--- Sayfa 37 ---
29
bonum). All beings that exist partake of this ontological
goodness. Since God is the only Necessary being (wajib al-
wujud) by its essence and “in all regards”, this perfection ul-
timately belongs to Him. According to Ibn Sina, evil has no
enduring essence and appears only as the privation (‘adam)
of goodness:
Every being that is necessary by itself is pure good-
ness and pure perfection. Goodness (al-khayr), in
short, is that which everything desires and by which
everything’s being is completed. But evil has no es-
sence; it is either the nonexistence of a substance or
the nonexistence of the state of goodness (salah) for
a substance. Thus existence is pure goodness, and the
perfection of existence is the goodness of existence.
Existence is pure goodness when it is not accompa-
nied by nonexistence, the nonexistence of a sub-
stance, or the nonexistence of something from that
substance and it is in perpetual actuality. As for the
existent contingent by itself, it is not pure goodness
because its essence does not necessitate its existence
by itself. Thus its essence allows for nonexistence.
Anything that allows for nonexistence in some respect
is not free from evil and imperfection in all respects.
Hence pure goodness is nothing but existence that is

--- Sayfa 38 ---
30
necessary by its own essence.29
Elaborating on the same idea, Mulla Sadra argues that
good and evil cannot be regarded opposites for “one is the
nonexistence of the other; therefore goodness is existence
or the perfection of existence and evil is the absence of ex-
istence or the nonexistence of the perfection of existence”.30
By defining good and evil in terms of existence and nonexis-
tence, Sadra shifts the focus from a moralistic to a primarily
ontological framework. Like Ibn Sina, Sadra defines good-
ness as the essential nature of the present world-order for
it is an existent, viz., something positive. This leads Sadra
to conclude that goodness permeates the world-order at its
foundation. In spite of the existence of such natural evils
as death and famine, “what is more and permanent is the
desired goodness in nature”.31 Once evil is relativized, it is
easier to defend this world as the best of all possible worlds.
This is what Sadra does when he says that “the universe in its
29    Ibn Sina, Kitab al-najat, ed. by Majid Fakhry (Beirut: Dar al-Afaq
al-Jadidah, 1985), p. 265; cf. also Ibn Sina, al-Mubahathat, ed. by Muhsin
Bidarfar (Qom: Intisharat-i Bidar, 1413 AH), p. 301.
30    Sadra, Asfar, II, 1, p. 113.
31    Asfar, II, 3, p. 76. The intrinsic goodness of things in their natural-
ontological state has given rise to a number of popular formulations of
the problem, the most celebrated one being Merkez Efendi, the famous
Ottoman scholar. When asked if he would change anything were he to
have the ‘center’ of the world at his hands, he replied that he would leave
everything as it is, hence the name ‘merkez’ (center).

--- Sayfa 39 ---
31
totality (bi-kulliyatihi) is the most perfect of all that may be
and the most noble of all that can be conceived”.32
32   Sadra, Asfar, III, 2, pp. 114. See also ibid. II, 2, p. 114, III, 1, p. 256, III,
2, pp. 106-134. Sadra employs two arguments to defend the best of all
possible worlds argument, which he calls the ‘ontological’ (inni) and
‘causal’ (limmi) methods (manhaj).

--- Sayfa 41 ---
33
The Political-Legal Context:
Law and Its Vicissitudes
T
he Shari’ah rules concerning war, peace, jihad, reli-
gious minorities, and the religio-political divisions
of dar al-islam, dar al-sulh/’ahd, and dar al-harb
constitute an important component of the Islamic law of na-
tions. Their contextual and historical interpretation presents
a significant challenge to the modern scholars of Islam on
the one hand, and the Muslims themselves, on the other. In
analyzing the views of the jurists on these issues from the 2nd
Islamic century onward, an extremely common tendency is
to fixate specific legal rulings by certain jurists as the ‘ortho-
dox’ view of Islam applicable to all times and places. While it
is granted that Islamic law is based on the ultimate authority
of the Qur’an and the Sunnah, the Shari’ah as legal code is
structured in such a way as to allow considerable freedom
and leeway for Muslim scholars and communities to adjust
themselves to different times and circumstances. The early
generations of Muslim scholars, jurists (fuqaha), Qur’anic
commentators (mufassirun), traditionists (muhaddithun),
and historians have made extensive use of this simple fact,

--- Sayfa 42 ---
34
paving the way for the rise and flourishing of various schools
of law and legal opinions in Islam. This ‘adoptionist’ and
resilient nature of the Shari’ah, however, has been grossly
overlooked and understated not only in Western scholar-
ship but also in the Islamic world. In the present context,
this has led to the oft-repeated conclusion that the teachings
of the Shari’ah and, by derivation, Islam itself do not warrant
a substantive notion of peace and a culture of coexistence.33
To analyze the legal-political aspects of traditional
Shari’ah rulings concerning war and peace, I shall limit my-
self to three interrelated issues. The first is the Muslim com-
munity’s right to defend itself against internal or external
aggression and the transition of the first Muslim commu-
nity from the overt ‘pacifism’ of Mecca to the ‘activism’ of
Madinah. This issue necessarily raises the question of jihad
as an offensive or defensive war and its relation to what is
called jus ad bellum in the Western tradition. The second is
the political context of the legal injunctions of certain jurists,
namely Imam Shafi’i (d. 820) and the Hanafi jurist Sarakhsi
(d. 1090), concerning the legitimacy of the territorial expan-
sion of Muslim states on religious grounds. Some contem-
porary scholars have disproportionately overstated Shafi’i’s
33    This is what Tibi claims in his essentialist generalizations and over-
simplifications about the Islamic pathos of peace and war. Cf. Bassam
Tibi, “War and Peace in Islam” in The Ethics of War and Peace: Religious
and Secular Perspectives, ed. by Terry Nardin (Princeton: Princeton Uni-
versity Press, 1996), pp. 128-145.

--- Sayfa 43 ---
35
justificatory remarks about launching jihad against non-
Muslim territories on the basis of their belief system. The
third issue is the treatment of religious minorities, i.e., the
dhimmis under the Islamic law and its relevance for religious
diversity and cultural pluralism in the Islamic tradition.
To begin with the first, a major concern of the Prophet
of Islam in Mecca was to ensure the security and integrity
of the nascent Muslim community as a religio-political unit.
This concern eventually led to the historic migration of the
Prophet and his followers to Madina in 622 after a decade
of pressure, sanctions, persecution, torture, and a foiled at-
tempt to kill the Prophet himself. During this period, the
community’s right to defend itself against the Meccan poly-
theists was mostly exercised in what we would call today
pacifist and non-violent means of resistance. Even though
the Prophet was in close contact with the Meccan leaders to
spread his message as well as to protect his small yet highly
dedicated group of followers, his tireless negotiations did
not mitigate the aggressive policies of Meccans against the
growing Muslim community. The transition from the robust
pacifism of Mecca to the political activism of Madina took
place when the permission to fight was given with the verses
of Al-Hajj, 22:38-40:
V
erily, God will ward off [all evil] from those who
attain to faith: [and] verily, God does not love any-

--- Sayfa 44 ---
36
one who betrays his trust and is bereft of gratitude. {38}
Permission [to fight] is given to those against whom war
is being wrongfully waged – and, verily, God has indeed
the power to succor them – {39} those who have been
driven from their homelands against all right or no other
reason than their saying, “Our Sustainer is God!” For, if
God had not enabled people to defend themselves against
one another, [all] monasteries and churches and syna-
gogues and mosques – in [all of] which God’s name is
abundantly extolled—would surely have been destroyed
{40}  (Al-Hajj, 22:38–40, M. Asad’s translation).
This and other verses (Al-Baqarah, 2:190-3) define clearly
the reasons for taking up arms to defend religious freedom
and set the conditions of just war (jus ad bellum) in self-de-
fense. That the verse, revealed in the first year of the Hijrah,
refers to the grave wrongdoing against Muslims and their
eviction from their homeland for professing the new faith
confirms that the migration of the Prophet was the last stage
of the forceful expulsion of the Muslim community from
Mecca. This was a turning point for the attitudes and ensuing
tactics of the Prophet and his followers to protect themselves
against the Meccans. The subsequent battles fought between
the Meccans and the Madinans from Badr to Handak until
the Prophet’s triumphant return to Mecca were based on
the same principles of religious freedom, collective solidar-
ity, and political unity. In addition to enunciating the condi-

--- Sayfa 45 ---
37
tions of just war, the above verse defines religious freedom as
a universal cause for all the three Abrahamic faiths. Like any
other political unit, communities tied with a bond of faith
have the right and, in fact, the responsibility of securing their
existence and integrity against the threats of persecution and
eventual extinction. As I shall discuss below, this ecumenical
attitude towards the religious freedom of all faith communi-
ties was a major factor in the Prophet’s signing of a number
of treatises with the Jews, Christians and Zoroastrians of the
Arabian Peninsula as well as the treatment of religious mi-
norities under the Shari’ah.34
The construction of jihad as armed struggle to expand
the borders of dar al-islam and, by derivation, subsume all
dar al-harb under the Islamic dominion is found in some of
the jurists of the 9th and 10th centuries. Among those, we can
mention Shafi’i and Sarakhsi who interpreted jihad as the
duty of the Muslim ruler to fight against the lands defined
as the ‘territory of war’. Shafi’i formulated his expansionist
theory of jihad as a religious duty at a time when Muslim
states were engaged in prolonged military conflicts with
34    Concerning the Zoroastrians and Sabeans and their being part of
the People of the Book, Abu Yusuf narrates a number of traditions of the
Prophet to show that they should be treated with justice and equality as
the other dhimmis. The inclusion of the Zoroastrians among the dhim-
mis is inferred from the fact that the Prophet had collected jizya from
the Majus of Hajar. Cf. Taxation in Islam: Abu Yusuf’s Kitab al-kharaj, tr.
by A. Ben Shemesh (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1969), pp. 88-9.

--- Sayfa 46 ---
38
non-Muslim territories and had become mostly successful
in extending their borders. While these jurists had justified
fighting against non-Muslims on account of their disbelief
(kufr) rather than self-defense, they were also adamant on
the observation of jus in bello norms, i.e., avoiding excessive-
ness, accepting truce, sparing the lives of noncombatants,
women, children, etc.35 In spite of these conditions, the
views of Shafi’i and his followers represent a shift from the
Qur’anic notion of self-defense to armed struggle to bring
about the conversion of non-Muslims. Having said that, two
points need to be mentioned.
First of all, the views of Shafi’i and Sarakhsi do not rep-
resent the majority, let alone the ‘orthodox’, stance of the
jurists. The common tendency to present this particular
definition of jihad as the mainstream position of Islam not
only disregards the views of Abu Hanifah, Malik ibn Anas,
Abu Yusuf, Shaybani, Awzai, Ibn Rushd, Ibn Taymiyyah, Ibn
Qayyim al-Jawziyyah36 and others but also ignores the his-
torical and contextual nature of such juridical rulings. The
same holds true for Muslim political philosophers and theo-
logians who take a different position on the bifurcationist
35    Some of these stipulations can be followed from Shaybani’s Siyar;
English translation by Majid Khadduri, The Islamic Law of Nations:
Shaybani’s Siyar (Baltimore: The John Hopkins University Press, 1966),
pp. 75-94; also Muhammad Hamidullah, The Muslim Conduct of State
(Lahore: S. Ashraf, 1961), pp. 205-8.
36    Cf. “Sulh”, Encyclopedia of Islam (EI2), IX, 845a.

--- Sayfa 47 ---
39
framework of dar al-islam versus dar al-harb.37 Moreover,
these rulings were by and large the jurists’ response to the
de facto situation of the military conquests of Muslim states
rather than their cause. Certain jurists begin to stress such
reconciliatory terms as dar al-‘ahd (“the land of the cove-
nant”) and dar al-sulh (“the land of peace”) during and after
the 11th and 12th centuries when the Muslim states were con-
fronted with political realities other than unabated conquest
and resounding victories. This change in tone and emphasis,
however, was not a completely novel phenomenon for the
concept of dar al-sulh can be traced back to the treaty that
the Prophet had signed with the Christian population of
Najran when he was in Madina.38 As I shall discuss below,
37    As a representative text of the Ash’arite kalam, see Sa’d al-Din
al-Taftazani, Sharh al-maqasid, Vol. 5, pp. 232-320 where the long dis-
cussion of the imamate contains no references to jihad as conquering
non-Muslim territories. See also Ibn Khaldun, Muqaddimah, translated
by Franz Rosenthal, abridged by N. J. Dawood (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1969), pp. 158-160 and Fakhr al-Din al-Razi, al-Arba’in
fi usul al-din, Vol. 2, pp. 255-270. The Muslim philosophers, especially
al-Farabi, define jihad as just war and stress the virtues of the ‘city’
(madinah) or the human habitat. Cf. Joel L. Kraemer, “The Jihad of the
Falasifa”, Jerusalem Studies in Arabic and Islam, 10 (1987), p. 293 and
312. Butterworth holds the same view about al-Farabi’s notion of war-
fare in his “Al-Farabi’s Statecraft: War and the Well-Ordered Regime”
in Cross, Crescent, and Sword: The Justification and Limitation of War in
Western and Islamic Tradition, ed. by James Turner Johnson and John
Kelsay (New York: Greenwood Press, 1990), pp. 79-100.
38    Cf. “Dar al-sulh”, EI2, II, 131a.

--- Sayfa 48 ---
40
this treaty, whose text has been preserved, lays the foun-
dations of making peace with non-Muslim communities.
In addition, the policy of giving aman (safe-conduct), i.e.,
contractual protection for non-Muslims residing or traveling
in Muslim territories, was a common practice. Such people
were known as musta’min, and to grant them this status was
not only the prerogative of head of state or ulama but also
individuals, both men and women.39
Secondly, the idea of bringing the world under the reign
of dar al-islam by military means and territorial expansion
should be seen within the context of the geo-political con-
ditions of the classical Islamic world. The medieval impe-
rial world order, of which Muslim states were a part, was
based on the idea of continuously expanding one’s borders
because ‘conquest’ (fath) provided economic, political and
demographic stability. In this sense, as Hitti points out, “the
Islam that conquered the northern regions was not the Is-
lamic religion but the Islamic state … it was Arabianism and
not Muhammadanism that triumphed first”.40 In a world
in which one was either a ‘conqueror’ or ‘conquered’, the
39    Shaybani, Siyar, pp. 158-194; also “Aman”, EI2, I, 429a.
40    Philip K. Hitti, History of the Arabs (New York, St. Martin’s Press,
1970), p. 145. Dozy makes a similar point when he says that “the holy war
is never imposed except only when the enemies of Islam are the aggres-
sors. Otherwise, if we take into account the injunctions of the Qur’an, it
is nothing but an interpretation of some theologians”. R. Dozy, Essai sur
l’histoire de l’Islamisme (Leiden: Brill, 1879), p. 152.

--- Sayfa 49 ---
41
triumphant Muslim states depended heavily on the expan-
sion of their territories against both their Muslim rivals and
non-Muslim enemies. The historic march of Muslim armies
into territories once under non-Muslim rule was not jihad in
the religious sense of the term but an outcome of the power
struggle to which all political establishments, Muslim or
non-Muslim, were subject.
This is further made clear by the fact that territorial ex-
pansion and military conquest did not always and neces-
sarily mean conversion. Beginning with the early history of
Islam, conversion through persuasion and ‘calling’ (da’wah)
was encouraged, and a multitude of methods were put in
place to facilitate the conversion of individuals and masses
through peaceful means. Conversion by force, which would
make Islam a proselytizing religion, however, was not im-
posed as a policy either by the ulama or the rulers. Further-
more, conversion was not a condition to become part of
the Muslim community to gain religious freedom, receive
protection, and posses property under the Islamic law. The
considerably protean concept of the dhimmi allowed reli-
gious minorities to maintain their traditions and resist any
attempts at forceful conversion. Since Islam does not ordain
a missionary establishment, the agents of conversion re-
sponsible for the enormously successful and unprecedented
spread of Islam were multifarious and extended from the
Arab traders and the Sufis to the development of Islamic

--- Sayfa 50 ---
42
communal institutions.41 Otherwise we cannot explain the
en masse conversion of various ethnic, religious and cultural
communities to Islam by the military prowess of a handful of
Muslim groups in Anatolia, Iran, Africa or India.
Paradoxically, the policies of religious tolerance secured
both the rights of religious minorities and the loyalties of
new converts. In a manner that was simply unimaginable
in the Christian kingdoms of Europe at the time, Jews,
Christians, Sabeans, and Hindus had access to considerably
high state posts from the time of Mu’awiyah (661-680) to
the dissolution of the Ottoman Empire at the beginning of
the 20th century. Jewish and Christian scientists, physicians,
accountants, counselors and statesmen were employed at
Ummayad courts. St. John the Damascene, one of the most
influential figures of Eastern Orthodox Church and the
author of the earliest anti-Islamic polemics, and his father
Ibn Mansur held positions under the caliph Abd al-Malik
(685-705).42 During the Buwayhid era in Persia, the vizier of
the powerful Persian king Adud al-Dawlah (949-982), Nasr
ibn Harun was a Christian.43 We find similar cases in India
41    Cf. Richard Bulliet, “Conversion to Islam and the Emergence of a
Muslim Society in Iran” in Nehemia Levtzion (ed.), Conversion to Islam
(New York: Holmes and Meier Publishers, Inc., 1979), pp. 30-51. See also
the introduction by the editor, p. 9.
42    Cf. Daniel J. Sahas, John of Damascus on Islam: The “Heresy of the
Ishmaelites” (Ledien: E. J. Brill, 1972).
43    T. W. Arnold, The Preaching of Islam (Delhi: Renaissance Publish-

--- Sayfa 51 ---
43
and the Ottoman Empire where the vertical mobility of
religious minorities in state affairs was a common phenom-
enon. Even the devshirme system of the Ottomans, which
has been criticized and labeled as a form of forced conver-
sion, provided religious minorities with unfettered access
to the highest government positions. Three grand viziers
of Suleiman the Magnificent, the most powerful Ottoman
sultan, were of Christian origin: Ibrahim Pasha was a Greek
and an able diplomat and commander; Rustem Pasha was a
Bulgarian and had handled the treasury with utmost compe-
tence; and the celebrated Sokollu Mehmet Pasha was a Slav
from Bosnia and had served in his youth as an acolyte in a
Serbian church.44 Among these, the case of Sokollu is prob-
ably the most interesting for it shows the extent to which
the devshirme system eventually worked to the benefit of
Christian communities under the Ottoman rule. Although
Sokollu embraced Islam and became one of the most pow-
erful men of his time, he kept close contact with his brother
who was an important religious figure in Bosnia and helped
him with his status as the grand vizier.
In the light of these points, we have to make a distinction
between jihad as “just war” and jihad as “holy war”45, which
ing House, 1984; originally published in 1913), pp. 63-4.
44    Cf. Lord Kinross, The Ottoman Centuries: The Rise and Fall of the
Turkish Empire (New York: Morrow Quill, 1977), p. 259.
45    Abdulaziz A. Sachedina, “The Development of Jihad in Islamic Rev-
elation and History”, in Cross, Crescent, and Sword, p. 36.

--- Sayfa 52 ---
44
brings us to our third issue. Just war refers to a community’s
right to defend itself against aggression and oppression. It
is defensive in nature whereas “holy war” entails converting
everybody into one’s religion by force, armed struggle, terri-
torial expansion, and other means. In the first sense, jihad is
an extension of the jus ad bellum tradition and can be seen as
a necessity to protect justice, freedom and order. In this re-
gard, the position taken by the Qur’an and the Prophet con-
cerning the use of force against oppression by Muslims and
non-Muslims alike46 is essentially a realist one and aims at
putting strict conditions for regulating war and using force.
The guiding principle is that of fighting against aggression,
which is  
to fight in the way of God 
, and not to be the ag-
gressors:  
Fight (qatilu, lit. “kill”) in the way of God against
those who fight against you, but do not transgress the limits. Ver-
ily, God does not love aggressors 
 (Al-Baqarah, 2:190; Cf. also
Al-Nisa’, 4:91 and Al-Tawbah, 9:36). Both the classical and
modern commentators have interpreted the command  
not
to  transgress (la ta’dadu) 
 as avoiding war and hostilities in
46    On the question of rebellion and irregular warfare (ahkam al-
bughat) in Islamic law, see Khaled Abou el Fadl, Rebellion and Violence
in Islamic Law (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001). For a
shorter synoptic account, see ibidem, “Ahkam al-Bughat: Irregular War-
fare and the Law of Rebellion in Islam” in Cross, Crescent, and Sword:
The Justification and Limitation of War in Western and Islamic Tradition,
ed. by James Turner Johnson and John Kelsay (New York: Greenwood
Press, 1990), pp. 149-176.

--- Sayfa 53 ---
45
the first place, resorting to armed struggle only to defend
one’s freedom, and, once forced to fight, sparing the lives
of noncombatants that include women, children, and the
elderly.47
Contrary to what Khadduri claims48, the global bifurca-
tion of dar al-islam and dar al-harb does not translate into a
“holy war” nor a ‘permanent state of war’ between Muslims
and non-Muslims. No figure can illustrate this point better
than Ibn Taymiyyah (d. 1327) whose views have been widely
distorted and exploited to lend legitimacy to extremist inter-
pretations of the classical Islamic law of nations. Even though
Ibn Taymiyyah lived through the destruction wrought upon
the Islamic world by the Mongols and could have been ex-
47    Imam Shawkani, Fath al-qadir, abridged by Sulayman ‘Abd Allah al-
Ashqar (Kuwait: Shirkat Dhat al-Salasal, 1988), p. 37; Le Coran: “Viola
le Livre…” French translation and commentary by Yahya ‘Alawi and Ja-
vad Hadidi (Qom: Centre pour la traduction du Saint Coran, 2000), pp.
318-9; Muhamad Asad, The Message of the Qur’an (Maktaba Jawahar ul
uloom: Lahore, n.d.), p.41; Shaykh Muhammad al-Ghazali, A Thematic
Commentary on the Qur’an, tr. by A. Shamis (Herndon: International
Institute of Islamic Thought, 2000), pp. 18-9.
48    In his War and Peace in the Law of Islam (Baltimore: The Johns
Hopkins University Press, 1955) Majid Khadduri goes so far as to trans-
late jihad as ‘warfare’ (p. 55) and ‘permanent war’ (p. 62), and claims
that “the universalism of Islam, in its all-embracing creed, is imposed
on the believers as a continuous process of warfare, psychological and
political if not strictly military” (p. 64). This belligerent view of jihad
is hard to justify in the light of both the legal and cultural traditions of
Islam discussed below.

--- Sayfa 54 ---
46
pected to take a more belligerent stance against the ‘infidels’,
he was unequivocal in stating that Muslims could wage war
only against those who attacked them. The idea of initiating
unprovoked war to convert people to Islam, namely to en-
gage in ‘holy war’, belies the religion itself because, according
to Ibn Taymiyyah, “if the unbeliever were to be killed unless
he becomes a Muslim, such an action would constitute the
greatest compulsion in religion”, which would be contrary
to the Qur’anic principle that “there is no compulsion in re-
ligion” (Al-Baqarah, 2:256).49 Ibn Taymiyyah’s famous stu-
dent Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyyah reiterates the same principle
when he says that “fighting (qatl) is permitted on account of
war (harb), not on account of disbelief (kufr)”.50
This extended meaning of jihad as jus ad bellum, i.e.,
armed struggle in self-defense can also be seen in the anti-
colonialist resistance movements of the modern period. In
the 18th and 19th centuries, calls for jihad were issued across
the Islamic world to fight against colonialism. For the anti-
colonialist resistance movements of this period, jihad func-
tioned, first, as the religious basis of fighting against colonial-
ism and, second, as a powerful way of mobilizing people to
join the resistance forces. Among others, the Barelvi family
in India, Shaykh Shamil in Chechenya, Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir
49    Ibn Taymiyyah, “Qa’idah fi qital al-kuffar”, from Majmu’at rasa’il, p.
123, quoted in Majid Khadduri, The Islamic Law of Nations, p. 59.
50    Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyyah, Ahkam ahl al-dhimmah, ed. by Subhi al-
Salih (Beirut: Dar al-‘Ilm li’l-alamin, 1983, 3rd edition), Vol. I, p. 17.

--- Sayfa 55 ---
47
al-Jazairi in Algeria, the Mahdi family in the Sudan, Ahmad
‘Urabi in Egypt, and the Sanusiyyah order in Libya fought
against European colonial powers.51 It was during this period
of resistance that jihad took a cultural tone in the sense that
the fight against colonial powers was seen as both a military
and religio-cultural struggle. Despite the enormous difficul-
ties faced by Muslim scholars, leaders, merchants, and vil-
lagers in Egypt, Africa, India and other places, the jihad calls
against the European armies did not lead to an all-out war
against local non-Muslim communities. Even in cases where
the Muslim population had to bear the full brunt of colonial-
ism, extreme care was taken not to label local non-Muslims
as the enemy because of their religious and cultural affilia-
tion with European colonial powers. When, for instance, the
Sanusi call for ‘jihad against all unbelievers’ caused a sense
of urgency among the Christians in Egypt, Muslim scholars
responded by saying that jihad in Libya was directed at the
Italian aggressors, not all Westerners or Christians.52
51    Cf. John Voll, “Renewal and Reform” in John Esposito (ed.), The
Oxford History of Islam (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000).
52    Rudolph Peters, Islam and Colonialism: The Doctrine of Jihad in
Modern History (The Hague: Mouton Publishers, 1979), p. 86. Peters’
work presents an excellent survey of how jihad was reformulated as an
anti-colonialist resistance idea in the modern period. See also Allan
Christelow, Muslim Law Courts and the French Colonial State in Algeria
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1985) for the struggle of Muslim
jurists to continue the tradition of Islamic law under the French colonial
system.

--- Sayfa 56 ---
48
Since jihad as armed struggle was fought against the in-
vasion of European powers, it was not difficult for it to take
religious and cultural tones. Napoleon’s attempt to paint
himself as a ‘defender of Islam’ when he invaded Egypt in
1798, for instance, was seen by the celebrated Egyptian his-
torian Abd al-Rahman al-Jabarti (1754-1825) as no more than
outright lies expected only from an ‘infidel’ (kafir). In his let-
ter to local Egyptian leaders, imams and scholars, Napoleon
said that he “more than the Mamluks, serve[s] God – may
He be praised and exalted – and revere[s] His Prophet Mu-
hammad and the glorious Qur’an” and that the “French are
also faithful Muslims”.53 For Jabarti and his generation, this
was yet another fact confirming the necessity of launching
jihad against the ‘afranj’ (the French, i.e., Europeans). This
sense of jihad as anti-colonialist struggle has not completely
disappeared from the minds of some Muslims in the post-
colonial period. In fact, the modern calls for jihad as ‘holy
war’ by such Muslim extremists as Abd al-Salam Faraj who
wrote the celebrated al-Faridat al-ghai’bah (“The Neglected
Duty”)54 presumably justifying the assassination of Anwar
Sadat in 1981, and Osama bin Laden are as much the product
53    Al-Jabarti’s Chronicle of the French Occupation, tr. by Shmuel Moreh
(Princeton: Markus Wiener Publishers, 1997), p. 26.
54    Faraj’s treatise has been translated by Johannes J. G. Jansen, The
Neglected Duty: The Creed of Sadat’s Assassins and Islamic Resurgence
in the Middle East (New York: Macmillan Publishing Company, 1986),
pp. 160-230.

--- Sayfa 57 ---
49
of their strict and a-historical reading of the classical Shari’ah
sources as the legacy of colonialism.
Lastly, I would like to turn briefly to the status of reli-
gious minorities under Islamic law. As mentioned before,
the dhimmi status granted the religious minorities and espe-
cially Jews and Christians under Muslim rule some measure
of economic and political protection, freedom of worship,
right to own property, and, in some cases, access to high gov-
ernment positions. The religious-legal basis of the notion of
the dhimmi goes back to the time of the Prophet. While the
status of dhimmi was initially given to Jews, Christians, Sabi-
ans and Zoroastrians, its scope was later extended to include
all non-Muslims living under Islam.55 A similar course of ac-
tion was followed in India when Muhammad b. al-Qasim,
the first Muslim commander to set foot on Indian soil in the
8th century, compared Hindus to Jews, Christians and Zo-
roastrians and declared them as part of the ahl al-dhimma.56
This decision, which was later sanctioned by the Hanafi
55    There is a consensus on this point among the Hanafi and Maliki
schools of law as well as some Hanbali scholars. For references in Ara-
bic, see Yohanan Friedmann, Tolerance and Coercion in Islam: Interfaith
Relations in the Muslim Tradition (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2003), pp. 85-86. For the inclusion of Zoroastrians among the
People of the Book, see Friedmann, Tolerance and Coercion, pp. 72-76.
Shafi’i considers the Sabeans, a community mentioned in the Qur’an, as
a Christians group. Cf. Ibn Qayyim, Ahkam, Vol. I, p. 92.
56    The incident is recorded in Baladhuri’s Futuh al-buldan. Cf. Fried-
mann, Tolerance and Coercion, p. 85.

--- Sayfa 58 ---
50
jurists, was a momentous event in the development of the
Muslim attitude towards the religions of India. This politico-
legal ruling could be seen as laying the foundations of the
Hindu-Muslim mode of cultural coexistence, which I shall
discuss below.
That the Prophet and his companions were lenient to-
wards the People of the Book is attested not only by the
communal relationships that developed between Muslims
and non-Muslims in Madina but also recorded in a number
of treatises signed by the Prophet. The “Madinan Constitu-
tion” (wathiqat al-madina), for instance, recognizes the Jews
of Banu ‘Awf, Banu al-Najar, Banu Tha’laba and others as
a distinct community with “their own religion”.57 Another
treatise signed with the People of the Book of Najran reads
as follows:
They [People of the Book] shall have the protection of
Allah and the promise of Muhammad, the Apostle of
Allah, that they shall be secured their lives, property,
lands, creed, those absent and those present, their
families, their churches, and all that they possess.
No bishop or monk shall be displaced from his par-
ish or monastery no priest shall be forced to abandon
57    The text of the Madinan treatise is preserved in Ibn Hisham’s Sirah.
It is also published in Muhammad Hamidullah, Documents sur la Diplo-
matie a l’Epoque du Prophete et des Khalifes Orthodoxes (Paris, 1935), pp.
9-14. For an English translation, see Khadduri, War and Peace, pp. 206-9.

--- Sayfa 59 ---
51
his priestly life. No hardships or humiliation shall be
imposed on them nor shall their land be occupied by
[our] army. Those who seek justice, shall have it: there
will be no oppressors nor oppressed.58
The privileges given to the dhimmis included things
that were prohibited for Muslims such as breeding pork
and producing alcohol, which were not outlawed for Chris-
tians. The religious tax called jizya was the main economic
responsibility of the dhimmis under the Shari’ah. Contrary
to a common belief, the primary goal of the jizya tax was
not the ‘humiliation’ of the People of the Book. While many
contemporary translations of the Qur’an translate the words
 
wa hum al-saghirun 
 as “so that they will be humiliated”, Ibn
Qayyim al-Jawziyyah, who has written the most extensive
work on the People of the Book, understands it as securing
the allegiance of the People of the Book to laws pertaining
to them (ahkam al-millah). Instead,  
wa hum al-saghirun 

should be understood, says Ibn Qayyim, as making all sub-
jects of the state obey the law and, in the case of the People
of the Book, pay the jizya.59
According to Abu Yusuf, one of the foremost authori-
ties of the Hanafi school of law, jizya was “48 dirhams on
58    Quoted in Khadduri, War and Peace in the Law of Islam, p. 179. The
original text of the Najran treatise is quoted in Abu Yusuf, Kitab al-
kharaj and Baladhuri, Futuh al-buldan.
59    Ibn Qayyim, Ahkam ahl al-dhimmah, Vol. I, p. 24.

--- Sayfa 60 ---
52
the wealthy, 24 on the middle class and 12 dirhams on the
poor ploughman-peasant and manual worker. According to
Shafi’i, the jizya is one dinar for the poor and four dinars
for the rich.60 It is collected once a year and may be paid in
kind, i.e., as “goods and similar property which is accepted
according to its value”.61 Those who cannot afford to pay it
are not forced to do so.62 The exempted also include women,
children, the elderly and the sick.63 To the best of our knowl-
edge, the jizya tax was not a significant source of income for
the state64, and it exempted the dhimmis from military ser-
vice. In some cases, the jizya was postponed or abandoned
altogether by the head of the state as we see in India under
the reigns of Akbar, Jahangir and Shah Jahan.65 The jizya was
a compensation for the protection of the dhimmis by the
state against any type of aggression from Muslims or non-
60    Ibn Qayyim, Ahkam ahl al-dhimmah, Vol. I, p. 26.
61    Abu Yusuf, Kitab al-kharaj, p. 84. Cf. Shaybani, Siyar, in Khadduri,
War and Peace, p. 143.
62    Ibn Qayyim, Ahkam ahl al-dhimmah, Vol. I., p. 32ff.
63    Ibn Qayyim, Ahkam ahl al-dhimmah, p. 42 and 49.
64    This is not to deny that there were examples to the contrary. When
one of the governors of ‘Umar ‘Abd al-‘Aziz asked permission to “collect
huge amounts of jizya owed by Jews, Chrsitans and Majus of al-Hira
before they accepted Islam”, ‘Abd al-‘Aziz responded by saying that “God
has sent the Prophet Muhammad to invite people to Islam and not as a
tax collector”. This letter is quoted in Abu Yusuf, Kitab al-kharaj, p. 90.
65    Cf. Aziz Ahmad, Studies in Islamic Culture in the Indian Environment
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1964), pp. 80-1.

--- Sayfa 61 ---
53
Muslims. This is attested by the fact that the poll-taxes were
returned to the dhimmis when the Muslim state had been
unable to provide the security of its non-Muslim minori-
ties.66 In most cases, the jizya was imposed not as individual
tax like the kharaj but as collective tribute on eligible dhim-
mis.67
While Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyya’s famous work on the
dhimmis contains many rulings that present a condescend-
ing view of non-Muslims and advocate policies of humili-
ation against them68, many other jurists were insistent on
treating the dhimmis with equity and justice. As people
“under the protection of the Prophet”, Jews, Christians and
other religious minorities were not to be forced to pay more
than they could afford nor to be intimidated and oppressed
because of their religious affiliations. Advising Harun al-
66    Abu Yusuf mentions the case of Abu ‘Ubaydah returning the jizya
to the dhimmis of Hims when he was not able to provide protection
for them against the Roman emperor Heraclius. Cf. the letter by Abu
‘Ubayadah mentioned by Abu Yusuf, Kitab al-kharaj, p. 150.
67    Cf. Khadduri, War and Peace, pp. 188-9.
68    These include some restrictive rulings on what the People of the
Book could wear and what religious symbols they could display. Cf. A.
S. Tritton, The Caliphs and Their Non-Muslim Subjects (London: Oxford
University Press, 1930), Chapters VII and VIII. As Tritton notes, how-
ever, such rulings were not implemented strictly and displayed consid-
erable variety across the Islamic world. A case in point, which Tritton
mentions (p. 121), is Salah al-Din al-Ayyubi who had some Christian
officers working for him without following any strict dress code.

--- Sayfa 62 ---
54
Rashid (d. 803), the famous Abbasid caliph, on the treat-
ment of the dhimmis, Abu Yusuf exhorts him to “treat with
leniency those under the protection of our Prophet Muham-
mad, and not allow that more than what is due to be taken
from them or more that they are able to pay, and that noth-
ing should be confiscated from their properties without legal
justification”.69 In making this strong advice to the Caliph,
Abu Yusuf narrates a tradition of the Prophet in which the
Prophet says that “he who robs a dhimmi or imposes on him
more than he can bear will have me as his opponent”. An-
other well-known case is the execution on the order of the
Prophet of a Muslim who had killed a dhimmi. In response
to this incident, the Prophet has said that “it is most appro-
priate that I live up fully to my (promise of) protection”.70
These and other rules concerning the dhimmis show that
Islam accepts the reality of the ‘religious other’ in terms of
a de jure reality rather than as a matter of political exigency.
The underlying principle behind this attitude of accommo-
dation is that the interests of human beings are served better
in peace than in conflict. To reveal the extent of the Islamic
theology of peace and cultural pluralism, we need to look at
the cultural attitudes and practices of Muslim societies vis-à-
vis other communities, to which we now turn.
69    Khadduri, War and Peace, p. 85.
70    Quoted in Friedmann, Tolerance and Coercion, p. 40.

--- Sayfa 63 ---
55
The Socio-Cultural Context:
Confrontation, Coexistence, and Peace
I
slam does not prescribe a particular form of cultural
identity. There are both doctrinal and historical reasons
for this. The absence of a central religious authority or
clergy in the Islamic tradition preempts authoritarianism as
a model of negotiating religious affairs in the public sphere.
This is attested by the multiplicity of schools of law as well
as the notorious differences of opinion among them. This
fact, often stated by Muslims with a sense of pride, however,
does not negate the presence of established and commonly
accepted views in the Islamic tradition. Assuming that there
is a set of beliefs and practices that we may legitimately con-
sider as mainstream and orthodox, it is based on the con-
sensus of the community over the generations rather than a
centralized body of legal rulings. The incremental process of
establishing orthodox etiquettes is not the monopoly of the
ulama. Rather, it is shaped by a multitude of social agents
that include men of letters, dervishes, saints, ‘heretics’, bards
and folk singers, storytellers, political leaders, rulers, scien-
tists, artists, traders, diplomats, philosophers, and theolo-

--- Sayfa 64 ---
56
gians. While it is true that the dissemination of religious
authority on the one hand and the malleability of cultural
expressions in Muslim societies on the other has challenged
centralism and authoritarianism, it has also raised the ques-
tion of legitimacy and authenticity. Some including the
Wahhabis and some Orientalists have called this a deviation
from the norms of the religion, arguing that Islamic history
has been not so much ‘Islamic’ as antinomian. Even if we ad-
mit that there are presumably overt discrepancies between
what the ulama envision as a perfect Shari’ah society and the
cultural practices of Muslim societies, it is a healthy tension
and functions as a mechanism of checks and balances against
the strictly text-based, relatively abstract, and reductively le-
galistic approach of the jurists.
In creating their cultural orthopraxies, Muslim commu-
nities were functioning within the framework of the ethical
universalism of the Qur’an and the Sunnah. The Qur’anic
call to enjoin what is good and praised (ma’ruf) and forbid
what is morally evil and disliked (munkar) is not a culture-
specific injunction. It is addressed to all peoples regardless
of their religious affiliations. The Prophet is considered a
perfect example (uswah hasanah) for all humanity in his
fight against all that is evil and oppressive and in defense of
all that is praiseworthy and virtuous, whatever their origin
might be. The notion of  
middle community (ummah wasa-
tah) 
 (Al-Baqarah, 2:143) supports the same ethical uni-
versalism:  
And thus We willed you to be a community of the

--- Sayfa 65 ---
57
middle way, so that [with your lives] you might bear witness to
the truth before all mankind, and that the Apostle might bear
witness to it before you 
 (M. Asad’s translation). The aim of
this ethical-spiritual universalism is to create an open soci-
ety based on moral values, not on the received traditions of
one tribe, city, or nation. This is in tandem with the fact that
the Qur’an positions itself against the cultural localism and
tribal parochialism of pre-Islamic Arabia – a rule that has
been an invariable factor in the rapid spread of Islam outside
the Arabic cultural zone. Once established as major cultural
units, Muslim societies articulated this ethical universalism
into various societal mechanisms by which the ideal of creat-
ing a virtuous and just human habitat could be realized. The
politics of gaining status and social ascendancy in the Islam-
ic context is thus based on the acquisition of two universal
qualities: knowledge (ilm) and virtue (fadilah and ihsan).
Both of these qualities are implicit in the Qur’anic notion
of taqwa (Al-Hujurat, 49:13), God-consciousness, which is
the ultimate criterion of ‘nobility’ among people. In a broad
sense, this forms the basis of an Islamic meritocracy whereby
every member of the society is urged to contribute to the
creation of a moral and just social order. As the few examples
below will show, the Muslim philosophers and scientists re-
garded seeking knowledge and leading a virtuous life as the
basis of their interest in other cultures and traditions.
Historically, as the borders of the Islamic world expanded
outside and beyond the Arabian Peninsula, Muslims became

--- Sayfa 66 ---
58
heir to all of the major cultural traditions of the time. The
Graeco-Roman heritage through the Byzantine Empire and
the pre-Islamic Persian culture through the Sasanids were
the first two important traditions that Muslims encountered
in less than a century after the death of the Prophet. This was
followed by Mesopotamian, Indian, black African, central
Asian, Chinese, and finally Malay-Indonesian civilizations
in the 15th and 16th centuries.71 The rapid establishment of
the different cultural zones of the Islamic world went hand
in hand with the rise of the numerous schools of law, Kalam,
philosophy, and Sufi orders, generating a remarkable tapes-
try of cultural diversity within and across the dar al-Islam.72
71    The major and minor religions that the Islamic world encountered
throughout its history make up a long list: the religious traditions of
the pre-Islamic (jahiliyyah) Arabs, Mazdeans in Mesopotamia, Iran,
and Transoxania, Christians (of different communions like Nestorians
in Mesopotamia and Iran, Monophysites in Syria, Egypt and Armenia,
Orthodox Melkites in Syria, Orthodox Latins in North Africa), Jews in
various places, Samaritans in Palastine, Mandaeans in south Mesopota-
mia, Harranians in north Mesopotamia, Manichaeans in Mesopotamia
and Egypt, Buddhists and Hindus in Sind, tribal religions in Africa, pre-
Islamic Turkic tribes, Buddhists in Sind and the Panjab, Hindus in the
Panjab. Cf. J. Waardenburg, “World Religions as seen in the Light of
Islam” in Islam Past Influence and Present Challenge, ed. by A. T. Welch
and P. Cachia, (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1979), pp. 248-
9. See also J. Waardenburg, Muslims and Others: Relations in Context
(Berlin and New York: Walter de Gruyter, 2003).
72    The six cultural zones of the Islamic world comprise Arabic, Per-
sian, Turkish/Turkic, Indian, Malay-Indonesian, and African spheres of

--- Sayfa 67 ---
59
In spite of occasional sectarian conflicts such as the mihna
incident in the 3rd/9th century73 or the Kadizade movement
in the Ottoman Empire in the 10th/16th century74, traditional
Muslim societies succeeded in creating a stable and peaceful
habitat in which both Muslim and non-Muslim members of
the umma contributed to the cultivation of a world civili-
zation in such diverse fields as arts, sciences, trade and ar-
chitecture. The notion of cultural and religious co-existence
that came about in this milieu was not merely based on the
temporary absence of conflict and confrontation between
Islamic and non-Islamic elements. Its positive character was
nurtured and sustained by the inclusivist attitude of Mus-
lims towards other cultures and religious traditions, which
makes Islamic civilization simultaneously both Islamic and
‘Islamicate’.75
culture where the expression of Islam as a religious and cultural identity
has been more heterogeneous and complex than the Christian, Hindu
or Chinese worlds. For a discussion of these zones, see S. H. Nasr, The
Heart of Islam, (San Francisco: HarperCollins, 2003), pp. 87-100.
73    See for details, M.Hinds, “Mihna” in Encyclopaedia of Islam, 2nd
edn., 7:26.
74    See Semiramis Cavusoglu, “The Kadizadeli Movement: An Attempt
at Seri’ at-Minded Reform in the Ottoman Empire” (Unpublished Dis-
sertation; Princeton University, 1990). Also see Madeline C Zilfi, “Vai-
zan and Ulema in the Kadizadeli Era” Proceedings of the tenth Congress
of the Turkish Historical Society (Ankara, 1994), pp.2493-2500.
75    Marshall Hodgson’s suggestion of the term ‘Islamicate’ to express
the hybrid and multifaceted nature of Islamic civilization is not com-
pletely without justification as many previously non-Islamic elements

--- Sayfa 68 ---
60
There is a plethora of examples in the history of Islam
to illustrate the cultural ecumenism of Muslim societies.
We may begin with the attitude of Muslim philosophers
towards pre-Islamic traditions of learning. For the early
Muslim philosophers, scholars, and scientists, the search for
truth was both within and beyond religious boundaries. The
Prophet’s famous exhortations to “seek knowledge even if it
is in China”76 and “wisdom is Muslim’s lost [treasure]. He
takes it wherever he finds it”77 were frequently referred to
by the philosophers of the intellectual sciences (ulum aqli-
yyah) interested in Greek-Alexandrian thought as well as the
scholars of transmitted sciences (‘ulum naqliyyah) special-
ized in such disciplines as hadith, Qur’anic commentary,
and jurisprudence (fiqh). Even though some later scholars
have opposed philosophical sciences, especially its strictly
Aristotelian version, and defined knowledge (al-‘ilm) as ‘re-
were incorporated into Islamic civilization in a relatively short period of
time. Cf. his The Venture of Islam (Chicago: The University of Chicago
Press, 1974).
76    See, Al-Rabi’ b. Habib al-Basari, Musnad al-Imam al-Rabi’, Bab fi
al-‘Ilm wa talabih wa Fadlih. This is also narrated by Abu Bakr Aamad
b. ‘Amre al-Bazzar in his al-Bahr al-Zukhkhar also known as Musnad al-
Bazzar (Beirut: Mu’assasat ‘Ulum al-Qur’an, 1409 AH), 1:1775, where he
claims that there is no foundation (asl) for this hadith.
77   Abu ‘Isa Muhammad Tirmidhi, SUnan al-Tirmidhi, Kitab al-‘Ilm ‘an
Rasul Allah, Bab ma Ja’a fi Fadl al-Fiqh ‘ala al-‘Ibadah; Ibn Majah, SUnan
Ibn Majaj, Kitab al-Zuhd, Bab al-hikmah. This hadith has been transmit-
ted in many hadith collections with some variations.

--- Sayfa 69 ---
61
ligious science’, this did not obstruct the steady development
of philosophy and science in the Islamic world. Contrary to
Goldziher’s attempt to present the critical views of certain
Hanbalite jurists on the ‘ancient sciences’ (‘ulum al-awa’il),
meaning Greek philosophy and science, as the ‘orthodox’
Muslim position,78 anti-intellectualism remained largely
parochial to the traditionists (al-muhaddithun) who were as
much opposed to the lore of pre-Islamic times as to Kalam
and doctrinal Sufism. For the overwhelming majority of the
Muslim intelligentsia, the universality of truth was the guid-
ing principle and ground of their quest for knowledge. No
one has stated this point better than al-Kindi, ‘the philoso-
pher of the Arabs’.
We owe great thanks to those who have imparted to
us even a small measure of truth, let alone those who
have taught us more, since they have given us a share
in the fruits of their reflection and simplified the com-
plex questions bearing on the nature of reality. If they
had not provided us with those premises that pave the
way to truth, we would have been unable, despite our
assiduous lifelong investigations, to find those true
78    Ignaz Goldziher, “The Attitude of Orthodox Islam Toward the “An-
cient Sciences”” in Studies on Islam, tr. and ed. by M. L. Swartz, Oxford,
1981, pp. 185-215. For an important criticism of Goldziher’s conceptu-
alization, see Dimitri Gutas, Greek Thought, Arabic Culture (London:
Routledge, 1998), pp. 166-171.

--- Sayfa 70 ---
62
primary principles from which the conclusions of our
obscure inquiries have resulted, and which have taken
generation upon generation to come to light hereto-
fore.79
That al-Kindi’s attitude in the above quote was emblem-
atic of his generation and later Muslim scholars is attested by
Sa’id al-Andalusi who has divided nations (umam) accord-
ing to their contribution to knowledge and science (al-‘ilm).
He states this point in unequivocal terms when he says that
we have determined that all nations, in spite of their
differences and the diversities of their convictions,
form tabaqatayn [two categories]. One tabaqah has
cultivated science, given rise to the art of knowledge,
and propagated the various aspects of scientific infor-
mation; the other tabaqat did not contribute enough
to science to deserve the honor of association or inclu-
sion in the family of scientifically productive nations.80
79    Ya’qub b. Ishaq Al-Kindi, Rasa’il, I, p. 97, quoted in Majid Fakhry,
A History of Islamic Philosophy (New York: Columbia University Press,
1983), p. 70
80    Sa’ib b. Ahmad al-Andalusi, Science in the Medieval World “Book of
the Categories of Nations” (Tabaqat al-umam) translated by S. I. Salem
and A. Kumar, (Austin: The University of Texas Press, 1991), p. 6.

--- Sayfa 71 ---
63
The belief that truth transcends the contingencies
of history was the conviction of educated classes
across the Islamic world as they studied the count-
less schools of thought, both Islamic and pre-Islamic,
producing an extensive literature on the history of
ideas. The long list of scholars interested in intellec-
tual history before and after Islam included, inter alia,
Ibn al-Qifti, al-Mubashshir ibn Fatik, Abu Sulayman
al-Sijistani, Sa’id al-Andalusi, Ibn al-Nadim, al-Jahiz,
and Ibn Abi Usaybi’ah as well as such major writers
of the Milal tradition as Shahrastani, Baghdadi and
Ibn Hazm.81 Among these works, the Egyptian amir
Abu al-Wafa al-Mubashshir ibn Fatik’s Mukhtar al-
hikam wa mahasin al-kilam was noticed very early by
medieval Europeans, translated into Latin and other
languages, and, in fact, became the first book printed
by William Caxton in England in the 15th century as
The Dicts and Sayings of the Philosophers.82 The conti-
nuity of humanity’s search for truth had a normative
value for most of these writers in that their quest for
knowledge was part of a larger tradition to which ev-
81    Cf. Franz Rosenthal, The Classical Heritage in Islam (London: Rout-
ledge, 1975), pp. 25-51.
82    The Arabic text of al-Mukhtar has been edited by A. Badawi (Bei-
rut: The Arab Institute for Research and Publishing, 1980, 2nd edition)
and the original English translation by Curt F. Buhler (London: Oxford
University Press, 1941).

--- Sayfa 72 ---
64
ery seeker of knowledge belonged. When Hasan ibn
Sahl, for instance, was asked why he always invoked
the views of those who came before him (kalam al-
awa’il), he answered that “because it [i.e. those views]
has been passed down before us; had it been unwor-
thy and imperfect, it would have never reached us and
gained [universal] approval.83
The concept of “perennial philosophy” (al-hikmat al-
khalidah) enjoyed a similar prestige due to the same notion
of truth and its persistence in history. Suhrawardi, the found-
er of the school of Illumination (ishraq) made a strong case
for the perennity of certain philosophical questions and the
answers given of them when he said that
do not think that wisdom has existed only in these
recent times [i.e., the pre-Islamic Persian and Greek
philosophers]. No, the world is never bereft of wis-
dom and the person who possesses it with arguments
and self-evident proofs. He is God’s vicegerent on His
earth, and this shall be so as long as the heavens and
the earth exist.84
83    Quoted in Abu Sulayman al-Sijistani, Muntakhab siwan al-hikmah,
ed. by D. M. Dunlop (The Hague: Mouton Publishers, 1979), p. 3.
84    Shihab al-Din Yahya b. Habash al-Suhrawardi, Hikmat al-Ishraq
(The Philosophy of Illumination), edited and translated by John Wal-
bridge and Hossein Ziai (Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1999),

--- Sayfa 73 ---
65
Apart from the sublime world of the intellectuals, the Is-
lamic concept of cultural pluralism was extended to virtually
all minorities living in the lands of Islam. The experience of
convivencia among Jews, Christians, and Muslims in Anda-
lusia was a result of the Islamic notion of cultural inclusiv-
ism.85 While the Jews of Europe were subject to woeful vili-
fications and persecutions during the middle ages, a major
Jewish intellectual tradition had developed under the Mus-
lim rule and included such prominent figures of medieval
Jewish thought as Saadiah Gaon al-Fayyumi, Ibn Gabirol,
Judah Halevi, Maimonides, Ibn Kammunah, Ibn Paquda,
and Gersonides (Levi ben Gershom). This has resulted in a
unique interaction between medieval Jewish philosophy on
the one hand, and Islamic philosophy, Kalam, and Sufism
on the other.86
In the subcontinent of India, a cultural syncreticism
p. 2.
85    For Andalusia, see Anwar Chejne, Muslim Spain: Its History and
Culture (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1974) and Salma
Khadra Jayyusi and Manuela Marin (eds.), The Legacy of Muslim Spain
(Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1992). For the concept of convivencia and the Jewish
contributions to Andalusian civilization, see V. B. Mann, T. F. Glick,
and J. D. Dodds (eds.), Convivencia: Jews, Muslims, and Christians in
Medieval Spain (New York: The Jewish Museum, 1992).
86    See, among others, Arthur Hyman, “Jewish Philosophy in the Is-
lamic World” in History of Islamic Philosophy, S. H. Nasr and Oliver
Leaman (eds.) (London: Routledge,), Vol. I, pp. 677-695 and Paul B.
Fenton, “Judaism and Sufism”, ibid., pp. 755-768.

--- Sayfa 74 ---
66
developed between Hindu and Muslim cultures. From the
translation of Indian astronomical works into Arabic as early
as in the 8th century to Biruni’s historic study of India and
Amir Khusraw’s formulation of an Islamic identity in the
Indian cultural environment, a vast literature came into be-
ing, generating a unique mode of symbiosis between the two
worlds at social, philosophical, and artistic levels. Perhaps
the most important figure to illustrate this is Dara Shikuh
(1615-1659), the famous Mughal prince and son of Shah Ja-
han. Dara Shikuh translated and authored two important
works dealing with Hinduism from an Islamic point of view.
He made a translation of the Bhagavat Gita and some fifty
Upanishads into Persian as Sirr-i akbar (“Great Mystery”),
which he interpreted in light of the school of Advaita-Vedan-
ta or the non-dualism of Shankaracharya.87 In making his
case for the translation, Dara Shikuh says that he “read the
Old and the New Testaments and the Psalms of David and
other scriptures but the discourse on Tawhid found in them
was brief and in a summary form”. He then turned to the
Upanishads “which is undoubtedly the first heavenly Book
and the fountain-head of the ocean of monotheism, and,
in accordance with or rather an elucidation of the Kur’an”.88
87    Cf. Aziz Ahmad, Studies, pp. 191-6; Annemarie Schimmel, Islam in
the Indian Subcontinent (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1980), pp. 99-100.
88    From the Introduction to Sirr-i akbar quoted in Majma’-ul-bahrain or
the Mingling of the Two Oceans by Prince Muhammad Dara Shikuh, trans-
lated by M. Mahfuz-ul-Haq (Calcutta: The Asiatic Society, 1929), p. 13.

--- Sayfa 75 ---
67
Dara Shikuh also wrote a treatise called Majma’ al-bahrayn,
referring to the Qur’anic verse 19:60, in which he attempted
a monotheistic interpretation of Hinduism. In tandem with
his ‘universalist’ outlook, he defined his work as “a collec-
tion of the truth and wisdom of two Truth-knowing (haqq-
shinas) groups”, referring to Muslims and Hindus.89 In ad-
dition to Dara Shikuh, we may also refer to the 16th century
Persian philosopher Mir Findiriski, who is reported to have
met a number of Hindu mystics during his travels to India,
and translated and wrote a commentary on the Hindu mysti-
cal and philosophical text Yoga-Vasishtha90.
Such modes of cultural coexistence would have been im-
possible without the recognition of the diversity of cultures
and societies as part of human existence. The Qur’an takes
up this issue in several places. Working towards a common
good is made conditional upon the existence of different
communities:
U
nto every one of you We have appointed a [differ-
ent] law and way of life. And if God had so willed,
He could surely have made you all one single community:
but [He willed it otherwise] in order to test by means of
what He has vouchsafed unto you. Vie, then, with one an-
89    Majma’ al-bahrayn, p. 38.
90    Fathullaj Mujtabai, Hindu Muslim Cultural Relations (New Delhi,
1978), p. 82; Edward G. Browne, A Literary History of Persia Vol. IV, pp.
257-8.

--- Sayfa 76 ---
68
other in doing good works! (Al-Ma’ida, 5:48; also Hud,
11:118).
This theme is further developed in the following verse.
This time the emphasis is on the civic responsibility of
“knowing one another”.
O
humans! Behold, We have created you all out of a
male and a female, and have made you into nations
and tribes so that you might come to know one another.
Verily, the noblest of you in the sight of God is the one
who is most deeply conscious of Him. Behold, God is all-
knowing, all-aware (Al-Hujurat, 49:13).
The examples from the history of Islamic culture that I
briefly analyzed above are neither scarce nor contrary to the
norm. Even though the fundamentalists, for lack of a better
term, consider cases of cultural symbiosis and syncretism in
the Islamic world as deviations from an idealized and essen-
tially ideological construct of Islam, both the Islamic intel-
lectual tradition and Muslim societies have envisaged peace
as a cross-cultural and inter-communal value.
I have argued in the preceding pages that a proper dis-
cussion of the Islamic concept of peace takes us beyond the
minimal definition of peace as absence of conflict, and cer-
tainly beyond the limited sphere of law. In a broad sense, the
Islamic tradition has articulated a concept of peace that ex-

--- Sayfa 77 ---
69
tends from metaphysics and cosmology to law and culture.
We cannot possible understand the experience of Muslim
societies with the cultural and religious other(s) without
taking into account these elements. The relevance of this
tradition for the present day Muslim world requires little ex-
planation. Today numerous Muslim intellectuals, scholars
and leaders from Bosnia, Turkey and Egypt to Iran, Malaysia
and the US are engaged in constructing an Islamic political
ethics that is compatible with the Islamic tradition as well
as responsive to the challenges of the modern world. Ques-
tions of war and peace, communal violence, terrorism, inter-
national relations, constitutional and participatory democ-
racy, pluralism, openness, civility and the attitude towards
the religious other are being discussed from a multitude
of perspectives, and the views expressed are by no means
uniform and homogenous. There is, however, an emerging
consensus on upholding peace as a value in itself regardless
of the political state of Muslim countries and communities
across the globe.
In conclusion, we should emphasize the significance of
this consensus in the present context. Muslim communities
can no longer address issues of conflict and violence without
developing a proper ethics of peace. While most of the fac-
tional conflicts in the Islamic world can be resolved through
non-violent means, the lack of a comprehensive discourse
of peace supported by a network of scholars, intellectuals,
leaders, activists, and state agencies, preempts the possibil-

--- Sayfa 78 ---
70
ity of preventing communal strife and use of force. Conflicts
in our age have become both local and global, making the
distinction between the two a blurred one. We can no lon-
ger speak of local and national conflicts without consider-
ing their international implications nor can we ignore the
impact of global trends and relations on local issues. The
Kashmir problem or the Israeli-Palestinian conflict defies
the conventional notions of inter-state and/or territorial
disputes. This presents a particular challenge to contempo-
rary Muslim political thought in its transition from the large
political units of the empire and its constellation states to the
current system of nation-states on the one hand, and global-
ization, on the other. It remains to be seen what the weaken-
ing of the nation-state model will bring to Muslim societies
in their struggle to cope with the current challenges of eco-
nomic and cultural globalization. Be that as it may, achieving
a culture of peace is an urgent need for Muslim communities
in their inter-communal relations as well as their relations
with other societies.

--- Sayfa 79 ---
71
About the Author
I
brahim Kalin, Ph.D., is Senior Advisor to the Prime
Minister of Turkey. Dr. Kalin is the founding-director of
the SETA Foundation for Political, Economic and Social
Research based in Ankara, Turkey and served as its direc-
tor from 2005 to 2009. He is a fellow at the Prince Alwaleed
Center for Muslim-Christian Understanding, Georgetown
University.
He received his Ph.D. from the George Washington Uni-
versity. As a broadly trained scholar of philosophy and Is-
lamic studies, he has taught courses on Islamic philosophy,
comparative philosophy, Islam-West relations and Turkish
foreign policy. His field of concentration is post-Avicennan
Islamic philosophy with research interests in comparative
philosophy and Muslim-Christian relations. He has served
as spokesperson for A Common Word.
Dr. Kalin has published widely on Islamic philosophy,
relations between Islam and the West and Turkish foreign
policy. His publications include Knowledge in Later Islamic
Philosophy: Mulla Sadra on Existence, Intellect and Intuition
(Oxford University Press, 2010) and Islamophobia and the
Challenge of Pluralism in the 21st Century, co-edited with John

--- Sayfa 80 ---
72
Esposito (Oxford University Press, 2011). His book Islam
and the West (published in Turkish) has won the 2007 Writ-
ers’ Association of Turkey award for best book. It has been
translated into Albanian and Greek. Turkiye’de Toplumun
Batı Algısı: Din, Kültür, Siyaset (Perceptions of the West in
Turkish Society: Religion, Culture, Politics), which he co-
authored, provides an in-depth analysis of the Turkish per-
ceptions of Western culture and politics. Dr. Kalin is also the
editor of 2000’li Yıllarda Türk Dış Politikası (Turkish Foreign
Policy in the 2000s).
He has contributed to various encyclopedia including
MacMillan Encyclopedia of Philosophy 2nd edition, Encyclope-
dia of Religion 2nd Edition, Biographical Encyclopedia of Is-
lamic Philosophy, Holy People of the World: A Cross-Cultural
Encyclopedia, Oxford Encyclopedia of the Islamic World, and
Oxford Islamic Studies Online.
His views and pieces have been published in the Guard-
ian, Financial Times, Washington Post, New York Times,
al-Sharq al-Awsat, al-Ahram, al-Jazeera Network and al-
Arabiyya.

--- Sayfa 84 ---
MABDA · English Monograph Series · No. 11

--- Sayfa 85 ---
Islam and Peace
Dr Ibrahim Kalin
№ 11