--- Sayfa 4 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Sayfa 5 ---
Dedication
For my two greatest heroes,
my grandparents Mark & Betty Pitre,
for their faith, love, and patriotism
OceanofPDF.com

--- Sayfa 6 ---
Contents
Cover
Title Page
Dedication
Foreword by J.D. Vance
Chapter 1: The Conspiracy Against Nature
Chapter 2: Fighting Fire with Fire
Chapter 3: Family-First Fusionism
Chapter 4: Schools Should Teach Piety
Chapter 5: The Economy Should Serve the Country, Not the Other Way
Around
Chapter 6: Freedom Requires Order
Chapter 7: There’s No Freedom Without the Frontier
Chapter 8: We’re Not an Empire
Chapter 9: We Can’t Coexist with Communist China
Chapter 10: Elites Must Serve the Nation
Chapter 11: The Dawn’s Early Light

--- Sayfa 7 ---
Acknowledgments
Bibliography
About the Author
Copyright
About the Publisher
OceanofPDF.com

--- Sayfa 8 ---
Foreword
In the classic American film Pulp Fiction, John Travolta’s character,
recently returned from Amsterdam, observes that Europe has the same
consumer goods as America, but there it’s just a “little different.” That’s
how I feel about Kevin Roberts’s life. He grew up in a poor family in a
corner of the country largely ignored by America’s elites—but his corner
was in Louisiana and mine in Ohio and Kentucky. Like me, he’s a Catholic,
but unlike me, he was born into it. His grandparents played an outsized role
in his life, just as mine did. And now he works far from where he grew up,
just a few steps from my office, in Washington, DC: he is the president of
one of Washington’s most influential think tanks, and I’m a US senator.
Now he has written the book you hold in your hands, which explores
many of the themes I’ve focused on in my own work. Yet he does so
profoundly, with a readable style that makes accessible its real intellectual
rigor.
Never before has a figure with Roberts’s depth and stature within the
American Right tried to articulate a genuinely new future for conservatism.
The Heritage Foundation isn’t some random outpost on Capitol Hill; it is
and has been the most influential engine of ideas for Republicans from
Ronald Reagan to Donald Trump. Yet it is Heritage’s power and influence
that makes it easy to avoid risks. Roberts could collect a nice salary, write
decent books, and tell donors what they want to hear. But Roberts believes
doing the same old thing could lead to the ruin of our nation.
If you’ve read a lot of conservative books or think you have a good
sense of the conservative movement, I suspect the pages that follow will be
surprising—even jarring. Roberts understands economics and supports
basic free market principles, but he doesn’t make an idol out of decades old
theories. He argues persuasively that the modern financial corporation was
almost entirely foreign to the founders of our nation. The closest eighteenth-
century analogue to the modern Apple or Google is the British East India

--- Sayfa 9 ---
company, a monstrous hybrid of public and private power that would have
made its subjects completely unable to access an American sense of liberty.
The idea that our founders meant to make their citizens subjects to this kind
of hybrid power is ahistorical and preposterous, yet too many modern
“conservatives” make such an idol out of the market that they ignore this. A
private company that can censor speech, influence elections, and work
seamlessly with intelligence services and other federal bureaucrats deserves
the scrutiny of the Right, not its support. Roberts not only gets this at an
instinctive level; he can articulate a political vision to engage in that
scrutiny effectively.
Roberts sees a conservatism that is focused on the family. In this, he
borrows from the old American Right that recognized—correctly, in my
view—that cultural norms and attitudes matter. We should encourage our
kids to get married and have kids. We should teach them that marriage isn’t
just a contract, but a sacred—and to the extent possible, lifelong—union.
We should discourage them from behaviors that threaten the stability of
their families. But we should also do something else: create the material
circumstances such that having a family isn’t only for the privileged. That
means better jobs at all levels of the income ladder. That means protecting
American industries—even if it leads to higher consumer prices in the short
term. That means listening to our young people who are telling us they can’t
afford to buy a home or start a family, not just criticizing them for a lack of
virtue. Roberts is articulating a fundamentally Christian view of culture and
economics: recognizing that virtue and material progress go hand in hand.
My childhood was not, by any objective measure, easy. Neither was that
of Kevin Roberts. Both of us were negatively impacted by family
instability, and both of us were saved by the resilience of the thick network
of family—grandparents, aunts, uncles—that is often the first and most
effective component of our social safety net. Both of us saw how a factory
leaving a town could destroy the economic stability that provided the
foundation for those families. And both of us learned to love the country
that gave both of us and our families second chances, despite some bumps
along the way. In these pages, Kevin is trying to figure out how we preserve
as much of what worked in his own life, while correcting what didn’t. To do
that, we need more than a politics that simply removes the bad policies of
the past. We need to rebuild. We need an offensive conservatism, not merely
one that tries to prevent the left from doing things we don’t like.

--- Sayfa 10 ---
Here’s an analogy I sometimes use to articulate what the previous
generation of conservatives got right and wrong. Imagine a well-maintained
garden in a patch of sunlight. It has some imperfections of course, and
many weeds. The very thing that makes it attractive for the things we try to
cultivate makes it attractive for the things we don’t. In an effort to eliminate
the bad, a well-meaning gardener treats the garden with a chemical solution.
This kills many of the weeds, but it also kills many of the good things.
Undeterred, the gardener keeps adding the solution. Eventually, the soil is
inhospitable.
In this analogy, modern liberalism is the gardener, the garden is our
country, and the voices discouraging the gardener were conservatives. We
were right, of course: in an effort to correct problems—some real, some
imagined—we made a lot of mistakes as a country in the 1960s and 1970s.
But to bring the garden back to health, it is not enough to undo the
mistakes of the past. The garden needs not just to stop adding a terrible
solution, though it does need that. It needs to be recultivated. The old
conservative movement argued if you just got government out of the way,
natural forces would resolve problems—we are no longer in this situation
and must take a different approach. As Kevin Roberts writes, “It’s fine to
take a laissez-faire approach when you are in the safety of the sunshine. But
when the twilight descends and you hear the wolves, you’ve got to circle
the wagons and load the muskets.”
We are now all realizing that it’s time to circle the wagons and load the
muskets. In the fights that lay ahead, these ideas are an essential weapon.
—J.D. Vance
OceanofPDF.com

--- Sayfa 11 ---
Chapter 1
The Conspiracy Against Nature
My spirit kindles to fire, and rises in wrath to avenge my dying land.
—Aeneas, in The Aeneid of Virgil
In 2020, our country went up in flames. Some of those conflagrations were
intentional arson, such as the “mostly peaceful” protests that caused more
than a billion dollars in damage in some of America’s greatest cities. Others
were more unintentional, such as the record-setting California wildfires that
torched more than 4 million acres of our most beautiful forests.
In fact, all those fires were connected. They spring from a conspiracy
against nature—against ordered, civilized societies, against common sense
and normal people—orchestrated by a network of political, corporate, and
cultural elites who share a set of interests quite apart from those of ordinary
Americans. Spanning across the partisan aisle, they are known as the
Uniparty.
Most people in the Uniparty hardly ever set foot outside the coastal
corridors of power, but their influence can be felt in almost every corner of
our country. Be it Black Lives Matter (BLM) in the cities or the Bureau of
Land Management (BLM) in the countryside, the Uniparty’s playbook is
the same: destroy the embodied institutions that define the American way of
life and replace them with ideological commitments and bureaucratic
imperatives.
It is time to fight fire with fire.
For too long, the American Right has made extinguishing fires its sole
purpose. And as a conservative, I understand. Fire has the potential to

--- Sayfa 12 ---
destroy, and we must prudently protect what we have. But the heart of
tradition, as Gustav Mahler said, is “the preservation of fire, not the worship
of ashes”—the kind of fire that can warm a home, restore a forest, and light
the way ahead in darkness.
To escape our current darkness, restore America’s civic life, and take
back our country for good, conservatives can’t merely continue putting out
fires; we must be brave enough to go on the offense, strike the match, and
start a long, controlled burn.
There’s plenty of fuel. Like deadwood in a forest, many of America’s
institutions have been completely hollowed out—fully captured by the
Uniparty. Decadent and rootless, these institutions serve only as shelter for
our corrupt elite. Meanwhile, they block out the light and suck up the
nutrients necessary for new American institutions to grow. For America to
flourish again, they don’t need to be reformed; they need to be burned. A
nice start would include:
Every Ivy League college, the FBI, the New York Times, the National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, the Department of Education,
80 percent of “Catholic” higher education, BlackRock, the Loudoun County
Public School System, the Boy Scouts of America, the Bill and Melinda
Gates Foundation, the World Economic Forum, the Chinese Communist
Party, and the National Endowment for Democracy.
Of course, starting a forest fire doesn’t seem like something Smokey
Bear would approve of. It doesn’t seem nice. It doesn’t seem as though it
would be good for the environment. Yet any good conservationist can tell
you that fire is an intrinsic part of the cycle of life. Indeed, without regular
controlled burns, a conflagration eventually occurs that wrecks the forest
rather than renews it, that chars the earth instead of laying the ground for
new life.
That was what happened in 2020. And it will be even worse in 2024 if
nothing changes. Americans know this. That’s why overwhelming numbers
of them report feeling that our country is headed in the wrong direction.
What they don’t know, however, is what they can do about it. Slowly but
surely, a deep despair and paralysis has set in.
The aim of this book is to confront our present situation, to inspire the
New Conservative Movement to rekindle the fire of the American tradition,
and to empower real Americans to take back our country. This is going to
be a radical book in the original Latin sense of radix, the roots. We’re going

--- Sayfa 13 ---
to go beyond the ideological battles of our current political debate—the
buzzwords and clichés and partisan sound bites—to get to the institutional
root causes of America’s decline.
At the heart of many of America’s problems is a trillion-dollar
conspiracy against nature. The most important cleavage in Western politics
today is not liberals versus conservatives or the people versus the elite; it is
the struggle between the Party of Creation—those who defend the God-
given natural order that is capable of generating flourishing and new life if
we learn to live within it—and the Party of Destruction—those who seek to
abolish the existing order in the name of emancipation, freedom, and
progress.
The association of politics and conspiracy is deeply attested in history.
The word conspiracy comes from the Latin conspirare, literally “to breathe
together.” Most political conspiracies aren’t cloak-and-dagger affairs
involving intelligence agencies or secret societies; they’re just the kinds of
handshake deals and in-group ideas that are made by people who breathe
the same air, who socialize in the same circles. In Latin, conspirare was
used to mean both “to conspire” or “to plot” and “to sing in unison.”
In modern Europe, thinkers and revolutionaries emerged who wanted to
overthrow all traditional societies, in the same way they believed modern
science to have overthrown the ancient understanding of the cosmos. Just as
modern science had unlocked new material prosperity through technology,
they believed that a new science of man would unleash social and spiritual
prosperity, a heaven on Earth. They formed networks, societies, and
political organizations under many names, all offshoots of an overarching
Party of Destruction.
The Party of Destruction viewed the existing order of human life as a
prison. Religion, it averred, didn’t provide human beings with meaning, it
entangled people in superstition. Old-fashioned craft or guild businesses
didn’t cultivate excellence and skill, they trapped people in traditional work.
Culture, law, and strong family ties didn’t provide life-giving civic life, they
repressed people by forcing them into traditional villages and traditional
gender roles. A lack of education trapped people in a folk mindset.
Traditional institutions trapped people in hierarchy, superstitious religion,
and old ways of doing things. Rather than negotiating trade-offs between
different underlying traditional values, the Party of Destruction sought the
revolutionary reestablishment of all human relationships.

--- Sayfa 14 ---
What did it want instead? It almost can’t help but sound appealing, if
only we can forget what it really means. The Party of Destruction wants
liberation, emancipation, Befreiung in the words of the Frankfurt School
theorists. What connects the “liberation” of liberalism, the World
Revolution of communism, and the “critical” of Critical Theory is a vision
in which tradition is the enemy of human potential, in which the individual
must be freed from everything that stands in the way of his self-expression
(whether he wishes to be freed or not—perhaps especially if he wishes to
retain a traditional way of life). The Party of Destruction is the enemy of the
existing human order as such, the enemy of all human orders.
At least the Communists didn’t mince words, saying in The Communist
Manifesto that “Communists everywhere support every revolutionary
movement against the existing social and political order of things.” But
none of the other factions of the Party of Destruction has made much of an
attempt to conceal their program. In fact, they’re proud of it!
But here’s the most uncomfortable truth of all: the parasites that have
taken over so much of our country—pantsuited girlboss advertising
executives, Skittle-haired they/them activists, soy-faced pajama-clad work-
from-home HR apparatchiks, Adderall-addicted dog mom diversity
consultants, nasally voiced Ivy League regulatory lawyers, obese George
Soros–funded police abolitionist district attorneys, hipster trust fund
socialists—are some of the least impressive people in the history of the
world. The Uniparty would never have achieved what it has in this country
without a great degree of rottenness, of decadence, of torpor, of
complacency already afflicting us. The first enemy we must face in our
crusade to take back our country is within ourselves.
I believe that our best days are in front of us. There are no shortcuts or
silver bullets. America’s restoration is a task that will require generational
sacrifice and toil. The seeds of its renewal, however, are numerous, and
many are already in the ground. To see them sprout and watch them grow,
we need only to strike the match and burn away the deadwood.
American Malaise
I know this because it has happened before. It’s how Ronald Reagan
engineered the great turnaround from the darkness of the 1970s to the dawn

--- Sayfa 15 ---
of the ’80s.
At the time of the 1980 presidential contest between Jimmy Carter and
Ronald Reagan, the United States had experienced a decade of painful
economic disruption and stagnant growth, punctuated by fiscal insolvency
and a massive energy crisis.
Everyday Americans were suffering as inflation spiraled upward, wages
didn’t keep up, and rising interest rates put owning a home further and
further out of reach. Energy prices crept steadily higher; supply failed to
keep up with demand. A recession loomed. Violent crime raged on city
streets, and once flourishing urban centers were emptying out. In the wake
of violent killings and riots, racial tensions had never been worse.
Beneath the turmoil lay something deeper. President Carter put his
finger on the problem in a July 15, 1979, prime-time address on Americans’
“crisis of confidence.” What America was facing, he claimed, was not really
an energy crisis but a spiritual one: “The erosion of our confidence in the
future is threatening to destroy the social and the political fabric of
America.” In the face of serious problems such as energy shortages, high
inflation, stagnant growth, and exploding crime, Americans found nothing
but gridlock, stasis, and decline.
Americans were losing faith not just in their government but in the idea
of self-government, their ability to unite and overcome the challenges their
communities and the nation were facing, the way they always had. The
American people were losing hope. The flame in every institution was
flickering.
Of course, Carter’s speech is usually remembered today as the
“malaise” speech, thanks to a bit of clever branding from Ronald Reagan.
Why’d it stick? Because despite putting his finger on the problem, Carter
himself was stuck. His vision of the future fell woefully short, amounting to
resignation to decline and defeat. Americans overwhelmingly agreed with
President Carter that the roots of America’s challenges went much deeper
than an energy crisis; they concluded that he was part of the problem and
voted him out of office.
Instead of retreating from America’s challenges and accepting new
limits on growth, prosperity, and ambition, Reagan set out to make America
great again, by calling her back to her greatest traditions: “I believe we can
embark on a new age of reform in this country and an era of national
renewal.” He symbolized his commitment to focusing on America’s future

--- Sayfa 16 ---
in his inauguration ceremony at the Capitol, which faced not eastward,
toward the Old World and the past, but (for the first time) westward, toward
expansion, the frontier, the future.
A mere four years later, in one of the greatest turnarounds in American
history, the fog of American malaise had evaporated. In 1984, Reagan won
reelection in a landslide, winning every state except Minnesota. What
accounted for this newfound American confidence?
The American people evidently agreed with the Reagan presidential
campaign’s countervailing vision. It was stated succinctly in one of the
most successful electoral ads in history, which proclaimed that it was once
again “Morning in America,” ticking off accomplishment after
accomplishment. The Reagan campaign made its case: “Now that our
country is turning around, why would we ever turn back?” Why indeed?
Getting to the Roots
America has gone through cycles of decay and renewal many times. But
today, America is even more stuck than it was in the Reagan era. In the face
of some of the evils Americans today endure with seeming equanimity—
fentanyl overdoses, childhood gender mutilation, dead-end jobs, racial
quotas, online censorship, grocery-shelf shortages, open borders, religious
persecution, violent carjackings, chronic shoplifting—we have to ask
ourselves: What happened to our country? And what will it take to see
morning in America again?
It’s not enough to identify this or that policy choice. Something deeper
has gone terribly wrong. And spiritual problems require spiritual solutions.
To say that America’s problems are spiritual requires no religious faith.
It is an empirical statement. We’ve been trained to accept a flat materialist
worldview that says that the only things that are real are those we can hold
in our hands, or, better yet, measure with a contraption. As a result, we have
adopted a form of politics and policy making that ignores problems that are
difficult to measure or bureaucratize. It’s one of the ways we got into this
mess.
Going back to at least Aristotle, we have understood there to be an
essence, a form or structure or energy, that pervades and animates the
material body. This soul or animating principle or psyche (to use Aristotle’s

--- Sayfa 17 ---
word) is as real and substantial as the difference between a living body and
a dead one.
A spiritual attack may leave no physical marks, but it damages your
confidence, your hope, your aspirations, your self-certainty. How can you
tell whether someone or something is in the midst of a spiritual crisis or,
worse, has already succumbed? “By their fruits you shall know them,” the
Good Book says. Spiritual reality has to do with an inner substance, which
cannot necessarily be seen on the surface but which with equal necessity
will show itself over time until the outer appearance matches the inner
reality. (I’ve often found truth in George Orwell’s quip that “At fifty,
everyone has the face he deserves.”)
Think back to that 1980 contest between Carter and Reagan. They both
agreed that America’s crisis was not merely about this or that policy but
reflected a deeper spiritual affliction. But even as, after Reagan’s victory,
the country adopted successful policies to fight some of the symptoms of its
underlying crisis, it failed to address the spiritual roots of the problem. In
the 1980s and ’90s, conservatives won the policy fight but lost the spiritual
war.
You can see the problem in Reagan’s “Morning in America” ad. What
the narrator talks about is jobs, interest rates, homebuyers, number of
marriages—things that can readily be measured and that a bureaucracy can
understand. In retrospect, many conservatives assumed that numbers-
focused narration was the “real” appeal of Reagan’s vision.
But the context the video provides, what the images show, is so much
richer: a beautiful young couple getting married (a man and a woman, it
does not need to be specified) in a church surrounded by a loving
community, with a look of pride and wonder; a group of children,
reverently watching Old Glory being raised up a flagpole. Today, the ad
looks like a lost dispatch from a foreign country.
What pulled the heartstrings of TV viewers in the 1980s, what drew
Reagan to a landslide victory in the 1984 election, was that vision of
America, of restored pride, confidence, and hope for the future; an America
of strong families, strong communities, and a strong economy, proud of its
history, sure of its identity, building a more prosperous future for its
children. No number of policy victories can make up for the country’s loss
of a shared vision and the institutions of civil society that nurtured it. The
weakness of the “Morning in America” ad was that it assumed that none of

--- Sayfa 18 ---
those things was under threat; it took them for granted. Forty years later, we
know that isn’t the case.
The only way to revive our country, to breathe life into the bones of
America’s great institutions now haggard with age, decay, and bloat, is to
burn away the rot and restore a shared vision of a glorious future.
We Must Go a Different Way
This will require many on the right to reconsider some of their
unquestioned maxims. There’s a scene in the Cormac McCarthy novel No
Country for Old Men in which hit man Anton Chigurh has taken a fellow
hired gun captive. Holding him at gunpoint and asking about his life’s
philosophy, Chigurh asks him, “If the rule you followed brought you to this,
of what use was the rule?”
It is a question we must ask ourselves. After all, if what the old
conservative coalition understood to be its foundational principles led us to
this—the total domination of the Uniparty, the demise of the American
working class, and the erosion of the institutions that defined American life
—of what use are those principles?
The old conservative movement held that if you just got government out
of the way, the free market, civil society, individual liberty, the nuclear
family, and more would take care of themselves. Forty years ago, it might
have had the right idea. But in today’s America, a conservative movement
that limits itself to this stale program is cosigning the Uniparty’s euthanasia
of the American nation.
When you reach a dead end, no matter how far you have traveled to get
there, no matter how historic and well trod the path has been, no matter the
strength of the arguments that led in that direction, there is no point
debating the matter anymore. You must pick yourself up and go in a
different direction.
My young conservative friends often say of the wax-museum
conservatives who refuse to recognize that we’re in a dead end that they
“don’t know what time it is.” What they mean is that the old conservative
principles presume that a healthy American society exists. It did once. But
the tough truth is that many young people today have never experienced
that society. They know better than anyone that the conservative movement

--- Sayfa 19 ---
can no longer merely conserve certain principles; rather, it must be in the
business of regenerating a tradition.
Maybe the ultimate example of not knowing what time it is comes from
one of the oldest stories in the West, the great Latin epic The Aeneid.
Aeneas, an exile from Troy, recounts how the city was sacked. The great
heroes of Troy had been fighting the besieging Greeks for many years, their
feats recorded for all of time in the Homeric Iliad. After a decade of
exhausting war and the death of the great hero Achilles, the Greeks
seemingly pack up and head home, leaving as a parting gift and sacrifice to
the goddess Athena a giant wooden horse.
The fathers of the city have an argument about the horse. Some argue
that the statue is Greek perfidy and they should burn it. They are ignored.
From the standpoint of a city that has withstood Greek assaults of all kinds,
it’s hard to see how a wooden horse might be a threat. King Priam and the
other Trojan leaders believe that they stand at the hour of their victory, and
they celebrate accordingly. But they don’t know what time it is. It’s Trojan
horse time.
We all know what happened next. Their whole civilization burned to the
ground.
The years after the Reagan Revolution have turned out in a similar way.
Like the feckless Trojans, we sat around toasting our victories, telling
stories about our founders and heroes, proud that our enemies had given up,
had even surrendered a trophy to the magnificence of our victory!
(President Bill Clinton passed NAFTA and welfare reform! The Democrats
even support free trade now! We’ve balanced the budget! We accomplished
deregulation and tax cuts!) We ignored Cassandras such as Pat Buchanan,
Robert Lighthizer, Family Research Council’s Tony Perkins, and even one
Donald J. Trump. We became complacent. We ignored the growing despair
of our countrymen and the decadence of our elites. We ignored the lurking
threat inside the city walls.
Today there are still wax-museum conservatives who sit around in their
cushy DC sinecures, toasting the Reagan Revolution and failing to face
today’s threats. They don’t know what time it is, that twilight, fire, and ruin
are upon us.
We can’t kid ourselves about where we stand. The sun is going down,
and there are wolves in the dark. If you just keep trundling along whistling

--- Sayfa 20 ---
“Yankee Doodle Dandy,” ignorant of the rising danger, you’re going to
make a tasty dinner.
It’s fine to take a laissez-faire approach when you are in the safety of
the sunshine. But when the twilight descends and you hear the wolves,
you’ve got to circle the wagons and load the muskets.
“If the rule you followed brought you to this, of what use was the rule?”
A Certain Hope
I didn’t set out to write this book because of all the doom and gloom in
America today. Quite the opposite. It’s true that, in Washington, things look
dire. But traveling around the country, talking to everyday Americans and
community leaders all over, has led me to a profound and hopeful
conviction: we are going to win.
And it’s not going to be close. It’s going to be a glorious restoration of
the country.
We’re going to win because we’re on the side of natural law, of reality,
of deep-seated human instincts, which ideology and technology can defer
for only so long. Because hard times, when they come, exorcise soft living
and comfortable beliefs.
We’re going to win because, in the long run, excellence beats
mediocrity, fecundity beats sterility, courage beats cowardice, justice beats
false equality, truth beats lies, virtue beats vice, faith beats cynicism, and
hope beats despair.
We’re going to win because the Uniparty’s vision for America’s future
is at odds with reality and it can only leech off of what better men built
before. And because the Uniparty is increasingly hostile to meritocracy and
talent, it is driving the best men and women America has to our side, on
account of their skin color or their creed.
We’re going to win because we seek to honor God and be sure we are
on His side. And if He is with us, who can be against us?
So the question is not whether God-fearing, liberty-loving Americans
will once again rule from sea to shining sea; it is rather how much damage
will we allow to be done to our great land and home before we take it back?
What will remain of our constitutional system, our republic, our traditions
of self-government and liberty? How much real human damage will there

--- Sayfa 21 ---
be prior to the restoration, how many broken lives, how many mutilated
children? How much of our inheritance will have been squandered forever?
If we are going to rescue our great American institutions, we need a
radical plan—we need to get back to our roots. We need to rediscover the
meaning of self-government, constitutionalism, and federalism in a twenty-
first-century context. And we need to do it not to reclaim some wonderful
past but to take back our future, to preserve the American inheritance for
our children.
This is not a book about what we have lost. Sappy nostalgia is a
symptom of giving up, but we have not yet begun to fight. This is a book
about the future and the conviction that we will not surrender the future to a
sterile, vampiric Left that hates the future even more than it does the past,
hates fruitfulness and growth even more than our heritage and history. We
will not pass gently into the night.
We are going to reclaim the promise of our patrimony in order to secure
a vibrant future for our posterity. We will remember who we are in order to
manifest a bright American tomorrow, one full of children, prosperity,
community, growth, faith, virtue, and liberty.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Sayfa 22 ---
Chapter 2
Fighting Fire with Fire
Tradition is the preservation of fire, not the worship of ashes.
—Gustav Mahler
In 1992, Patrick Buchanan ran a primary campaign against President
George H. W. Bush for the Republican nomination for president. It was an
audacious move by someone who had, up until then, loyally served within
the GOP’s halls of power, including in the Richard Nixon, Gerald Ford, and
Ronald Reagan White Houses. But he felt that the George H. W. Bush
administration had forgotten the needs and values of ordinary Americans.
His message resonated with me as a young man, so much so that I helped
organize a rally for him in Lafayette, Louisiana, which ended up being one
of his best attended in the whole country.
The heart of Buchanan’s message was that in the Washington
establishment’s eagerness to institute technocratic solutions to the problems
of the post–Cold War world, the ordinary people of this country and their
values and traditions were being forgotten, tossed into the garbage bin at the
end of history. Buchanan recognized that the root of the problem was not
geopolitical, economic, or legal but spiritual, a war for the soul of America.
In this struggle for the soul of America, it was her people who were the
key battleground. They were natural allies. They might not “read Adam
Smith or Edmund Burke,” Buchanan belted out, “but they come from the
same schoolyards and the same playgrounds and towns as we come from.
They share our beliefs and convictions, our hopes and our dreams. They are
the conservatives of the heart.”

--- Sayfa 23 ---
What he was actually recognizing was the distinction between the Party
of Creation and the Party of Destruction. He correctly perceived that the
Party of Destruction, aka the Uniparty (which Buchanan identified with
“Clinton and Clinton”—the husband-wife package deal on the 1992 ballot),
aimed to instantiate a radical cultural revolution in America. And the
hapless Republicans, out of touch with or even privately scornful of
everyday Americans, were going along with policies of economic, political,
and cultural globalization that had destroyed much of the social solidarity
and deep roots of our people and installed in power, for the first time in our
history, a singular ruling class made up of coastal elites.
As a conservative, I believe that politics and economics are usually
downstream of culture. But in a hurricane, the bayou whose waters
normally flow out to the gulf will reverse course and flow inland. The
colossal, politically orchestrated changes to our institutional and economic
life of the past thirty years washed over many corners of American society
like a cultural Hurricane Katrina. The conservative movement, reasoning
that politics are downstream of culture, didn’t make any plans for a
hurricane.
Vast, uncontrollable forces such as water and fire don’t always behave
the way we predict. At its best, the free market functions in a similar way,
providing a creative destruction that generates new growth and prosperity—
but it still uproots traditions in ways that a just political order would work
to counterbalance. At its worst, left to the devices of a callous globalist
elite, it just provides destruction—a strip mining of human talent and local
culture that leaves our communities and home places barren of jobs and
dignity, breeding grounds for opioid addiction.
That was what I experienced growing up in Louisiana. All of the
traditions and institutions that supported a rich Cajun culture, including
good local jobs, a family orientation, public schools that celebrated our
heritage, and so much more had deteriorated by the end of the 1990s—not
due to wokeness, not due to immigration, but due to the birth of what
President George H. W. Bush announced in his 1991 State of the Union
address as the “New World Order.” Ushering in that order sacrificed the
permanent things (such as family stability) on the altar of the measurable
things (such as the S&P 500). We are still reckoning with the consequences.
Conservatives today must reimagine what is required to support
ordinary Americans and restore the American way of life. We can’t just wait

--- Sayfa 24 ---
for it to happen.
How can we reconcile the need to wield political power to rebuild civic
society with our skepticism of government intervention? How can we
recreate an economy that serves the family and not the other way around?
How can we reintroduce a generation to traditions that were never handed
on to them? How can we rekindle a fire that has almost gone out?
That’s what this book is about.
The Party of Creation Runs on Gratitude
Man’s taming of fire is the cornerstone of human culture.
That’s the funny thing about fire. It is so fleeting, a flame flickering
from moment to moment, yet in its evanescence, it is eternal. Of all the
elements, fire is most associated with transformation, renewal, and change.
You can’t have a blaze without some kind of sacrificial transformation of
fuel into fire. Yet precisely for this reason, fire demands an attention to
continuity. Unlike any of the other elements, fire dies. You can set down a
bucket of water or a pile of earth, and when you return it will be right where
you left it. But a fire must be continually tended.
Tradition is not the worship of ashes but the preservation of fire, Mahler
said. It’s a deep metaphor. The connections among tending to a tradition, a
nation, and a sacred fire were already ancient to the Greeks and Romans.
They believed that the spirits of their city, their household, and their
ancestors lived in the sacred hearth fire found in every home. The gravest
act of neglect was to let the fire be extinguished.
The sense of what we owe to others on account of what we have been
given, of gratitude for what we have inherited, is at the heart of a
conservative life. Conservatives acknowledge that our lives depend on what
we have been given: by God, by our country, by our forebears, by our
communities and home places. In gratitude, our hearts move us to defend,
improve, and pass on what we have inherited. We experience our gratitude
as a glad calling to duty.
The Romans called this notion piety (pietas), and it was for them the
chief of virtues, the one from which all others flowed, and the foundation of
their republic. The great Renaissance scholar and classicist James Hankins
explained:

--- Sayfa 25 ---
In uncorrupt societies, children grow up with a sense of gratitude for the unearned benefits they
have received. If we have normal moral responses, we feel grateful for all the things we have
been given that we have done nothing to deserve: the love and nurture of parents and family; the
kindness of friends and benefactors; the benefits of a well-ordered society. . . . We have to admit,
if we are honest, that we have done little to deserve what we have been given. We have, indeed,
done many things that would justify our being stripped of what we have been given. If we have
any decency—if we know what is decens, what is fitting—our only response can be gratitude
and love for family, country, and God. We have obligations we can never repay, and that fact
imposes on us an obligation of loyalty to the sources of those benefits. The proper human
response to all the unearned blessings we have received is pietas.
In a normal and healthy society, formative institutions help open the
eyes of their charges to the magnitude of what they have inherited,
instituting practices such as Founder’s Days and putting portraits of
forerunners in a place of honor. It is evidence of deep moral inversion that
the leaders of institutions such as the University of Pennsylvania and Yale
so readily slander their founders and forebears, tear down their statues, and
take down their portraits. The involuntary twisting knot in our stomach we
feel when we see activists tear down a statue of George Washington is a
sense of indecency, that this is a kind of ingratitude that is gross and
destructive, that betrays a narcissistic entitlement with no understanding of
the sacrifices others made to tend the fire on their behalf.
In the classical tradition, one figure above all others stands out for his
piety. “Pious Aeneas,” Virgil called him twenty times in The Aeneid. Time
and again, Aeneas suffers in order to do his duty to his gods, his family, and
his people.
Aeneas’s piety is embodied by the hearth-gods (penates) he brings with
him out of Troy. He flees with his household, carrying his elderly father
(penates in arms) on his shoulders and leading his son by the hand. He risks
his life to preserve the sacred hearth fire, and he keeps the flame alive
through the years of wandering the Mediterranean that follow.
When the Greeks poured into Troy, they pillaged it and set it ablaze, a
fire of destruction meant to extinguish the hearth of Trojan civilization
forever. But Aeneas carried the real fire of Troy with him and constantly
renewed it, carrying it at last to Latinate Italy, where the Trojans carved out
a new home. Rome’s sacred fire of Vesta, an eternal flame for an eternal
city, was none other than the fire of Troy that Aeneas had safeguarded.
Thanks to his faithfulness, it burned a thousand years more and sparked a
civilization that conquered the known world.

--- Sayfa 26 ---
The image of a pious statesman carrying the flame of civilization over
the waters was a precious one to our classically educated Founding Fathers,
so much so that the motto on the back of the Great Seal of the United States
comes from Virgil: Novus ordo seclorum. That translates to “a new order of
the ages,” but to the Founders it evoked not “the birthday of a new world”
(in Thomas Paine’s words) but the renewal of civilization in the natural
order of things. Later Christians believed that stanza from Virgil’s Eclogues
to prophesy the founding of a Christian civilization on top of the Roman
order, carrying forward the flame of the West as Aeneas had.
That attitude of carrying the fire of the inherited order made the
American Revolution different from the French Revolution, Edmund Burke
believed, though both were fought for the sake of freedom and democracy,
at least on the surface. But the French Revolution was premised on a system
of abstract principles inspired by philosophes such as Jean-Jacques
Rousseau and Voltaire. It dictated a program of social transformation that
led to the guillotine and Napoleon.
We Americans fought not to establish a new constitution but to preserve
and restore one we already had. The American Revolution was a controlled
burn, fought to keep an existing tradition of liberty and self-government
alive, as George Washington eloquently expressed in the first presidential
inaugural address. Preserving the “sacred fire of liberty” demanded the
destruction of an increasingly tyrannical British colonial regime. The
French Revolution denied the existence of what Washington called “the
eternal rules of order and right, which Heaven itself has ordained.” The
American Revolution was founded upon them.
The Permanent Things
What, then, are “the eternal rules of order and right” that Washington saw as
being beyond a matter of opinion? They’re what Russell Kirk called “the
permanent things.”
Today, the assault on the American way of life is aimed not just at our
Constitution and political traditions but more insidiously at the foundations
of civilization, which is to say, the permanent things. There is no point in
preserving certain political forms if the society they were meant to protect
has died.

--- Sayfa 27 ---
The Party of Creation needs to get over the old conservatism’s
reluctance to “impose” its “values” on others. There is no way to avoid
taking a stance on the practices that sustain the human race. We can say
with certainty what the “permanent things,” the vital tasks of any culture,
are. The aegis of every civilization protected them; the best of all that has
been thought and said from each distinctive human culture has pointed to
them.
Family: Men and women should marry (and do so younger than most
do today). They should marry for life and should bring children into the
world (more than most do today). Parents have the right and responsibility
to raise their children, to educate them, to pass on their traditions, and to
make important family decisions (including rejecting experimental medical
treatments) in line with their conscience and values. Children owe their
parents a measure of obedience and gratitude, and family members should
take care of one another. The nuclear family is the foundation of the human
order, but it should reach beyond itself to form the fabric of an extended
family, community, and local place.
Faith: Mankind is made to worship, and our republic depends on the
moral strength and habits of heart brought about by piety. We have in this
country a glorious tradition of religious freedom, but it is not freedom from
religion but freedom for religion. A man’s religious tradition is a matter of
his conscience, but that we have a faithful people is a matter of public
concern. Accordingly, the state must not discriminate against religious
organizations in government programs, and freedom of religion should take
precedence over the enforcement of other rights. Policies that encourage
religious observance, such as Sabbath laws and voucher programs that
include religious schools, should be encouraged. American society is rooted
in the Christian faith—certainly public institutions should not establish
anything offensive to Christian morals under the guise of “religious
freedom” or “diversity, equity, and inclusion.”
Community: Americans’ pride has always been in their communities,
the “little platoons” where citizens freely associate with one another and
practice self-government. In communities, people from different
backgrounds and walks of life orient themselves around the common good
in its most concrete and practical form. Communities are places where we
lift up one another’s burdens and practice the art of neighborliness, but also
where we celebrate the holy days and feast together. If they are well

--- Sayfa 28 ---
ordered, our communities permit a feeling of comfort and safety at any hour
of the day.
Work: Man is Homo faber, the animal that makes. By his labors, man
provides for himself and his family. There is deep dignity in work, in the
ownership one has of a job well done, that cannot be replaced by simply
giving someone something they have not worked for or earned. Moreover,
we know that the material prosperity that makes many of the other elements
of the human order possible comes from productive human labor and the
habits of discipline, skill, and care that undergird that productivity. At the
same time, there is an appropriate time to rest from our labors together with
our families and communities. The division of labor has also held political
significance throughout human history. In the Western tradition, a
republican government befitted only men who were masters of themselves,
who were economically self-sufficient.
Nation: Man’s gratitude toward all the “little platoons” of human order
culminate in his devotion to his broader nation and homeland. In a republic,
this is experienced as a duty to safeguard the res publica, literally “the
public thing” but better translated as “the common good.” The nation is
cemented by a shared national origin story, according to which all citizens
are “brothers, and children of the self-same earth” (literally or figuratively).
Our deepest traditions about the purposes of government are reflected in the
ancient ceremony for crowning England’s kings, when the archbishop of
Canterbury hands to his sovereign the Sword of State with these words:
“With this sword do justice, stop the growth of iniquity, protect the holy
Church of God and all people of goodwill, help and defend widows and
orphans, restore the things that are gone to decay, maintain the things that
are restored, punish and reform what is amiss, and confirm what is in good
order.”
The ideas outlined above constitute the enduring record of human
flourishing stretching back into the mists of history. They constitute the
minimum of what any well-ordered human society needs to have.
While our patrimonies may dictate particular traditions to sustain the
order of the permanent things (the Catholic faith, Acadian notions of family,
Texan ideas about nationhood, American beliefs about work, and so on),
that such an order exists is something like a human universal, what
Christians would understand to be the natural law. One of the beautiful
things about America is that we have the freedoms and the space for true

--- Sayfa 29 ---
pluralism, people and their communities living out quite different self-
understandings and practices of the permanent things. Without suggesting
that every tradition is equally good or equally true, we can say that no
conservatism is possible that does not attend to the basic practices and
institutions that support human flourishing, which we know by the
unanimous testimony of nature, history, revelation, and tradition.
Controlled Burn
What does it mean to fight fire with fire?
The notion of fighting fire with fire isn’t some metaphor: it’s an
essential task of forest management.
The idea of fighting fire with fire comes from a practice called
backburning, in which fire crews set a small fire in the path of a larger one,
thus consuming the fuel that would have allowed the larger fire to rampage
on.
But fighting fire with fire isn’t limited to damage control. Forests,
especially in North America, need fire to flourish. Fire transforms rot and
deadwood into new soil, clears the ground for new life to take root, lets
sunlight into the forest floor, and renews the forest ecology. Some species
even depend on fire.
There are no more awe-inspiring flora in the American forest than the
giant sequoias, the biggest specimens of which are hundreds of feet tall and
some of the oldest creatures on Earth. And giant sequoias love forest fires.
Their cones open to spread their seeds only in the heat of a big fire, which
thins out competitor trees but leaves the sequoias unharmed and creates rich
new soil for the seedlings to thrive in.
Like our great American forests, our country’s life requires periodic
renewal. America isn’t an idea but an ecosystem—a vast forest—and our
institutions are the trees that serve as “essential pillars of our moral lives,”
in the words of Yuval Levin. They hold the country together, give it
structure, and make it beautiful.
And like America’s great western forests, our institutional life is being
woefully mismanaged by our incompetent Uniparty. The problem isn’t too
much fire but too little. Deadwood is piling up unnaturally, creating the
conditions for a cataclysmic fire that could destroy everything.

--- Sayfa 30 ---
Wise forest management works with the natural cycle of decay and
renewal. As deadwood and other fuel accumulate in the forest, the
woodsman will conduct a controlled burn, setting a fire that lowers the fuel
load and renews the forest responsibly. Controlled burns are also used to
combat invasive species and fight particular kinds of decay or disease.
These include diseases such as Dutch elm disease, a fungus from Asia
that threatens the American elm. From the East Coast to the Rocky
Mountains, these “great leafy high arching cathedrals” (in the words of Phil
McCombs) once dominated the American wilderness and dotted our city
parks and thoroughfares. That was until the 1930s, when the disease began
devastating tree after tree, killing 75 percent of American elms by 1989.
In recent decades, these towering trees have been slowly making a
comeback, aided by the efforts of conservationists across the country. Their
work has revealed that saving the American elm requires three steps,
according to the Elm Institute: First, conservationists treat the trees they
can. If the disease is caught early enough, sometimes cutting off the
infected branches or severing root connections to nearby trees will do the
trick. Second, planting new trees can help. Biologists have identified strains
that are more tolerant of the fungus, and thousands of saplings have been
planted across the United States. The third step, however, is the most
crucial: Infected trees that cannot be saved must be condemned, cut down,
and promptly burned. Otherwise, the disease will spread further, negating
any work done in the first two steps.
America’s institutional ecosystem is today threatened by a pathology far
worse than Dutch elm disease. It goes by many names—critical race theory,
cultural Marxism, DEI (diversity, equity, and inclusion), progressivism,
gender theory—but most just call it “wokeness.” Ultimately, it amounts to a
new and alien principle of government intended to displace our
constitutional order of liberty. Woke ideology is a parasite; it doesn’t build
any new institutions, it merely takes over existing institutions, sucks out
their substance, and zombifies them. They live on, but unmoored from their
traditional missions or the health of the country. Without drastic action our
institutions won’t recover.
Conservatives should attempt to save the institutions that can be saved.
Think, for example, of the conservative resurgence in the Southern Baptist
Convention (SBC), the largest Protestant denomination in the United States.
During the 1960s, the SBC’s leadership had been infected by liberalism and

--- Sayfa 31 ---
theological modernism, though most people in the pews remained
conservative. Rather than abandoning their denomination, throughout the
1980s conservative Baptists systematically took control of every level of
the organization, reformed their seminaries, and slowly turned churches
toward more orthodox positions on theological and social issues.
Conservatives today can do the same by taking back their local school
boards, reinvigorating their churches, and cleaning up their neighborhoods.
Likewise, conservatives must plant new trees—that is, found new
institutions. Christendom College, which my son attends, is an excellent
example of a new conservative institution that is thriving. Founded in 1977
on the banks of the beautiful Shenandoah River, Christendom is a coed
Catholic college that exists “to restore all things in Christ, by forming men
and women to contribute to the Christian renovation of the temporal order.”
These new institutions have begun to form their own flourishing
ecosystem. You can see this in Moscow, Idaho, where worshippers at Christ
Church began to attract like-minded builders, establishing New Saint
Andrews College, Canon Press, and now a growing orchard of start-ups,
small businesses, flourishing families, and more. Preserving our way of life
isn’t just about fighting for past glories. Attending to America’s future often
means starting families, planting churches, and founding communities of
our own, just like in Moscow.
None of this will matter, however, if conservatives remain unwilling to
take the crucial third step: to destroy the institutions that can’t be saved. Just
as with Dutch elm disease, if conservatives take the first two steps but fail
to do this, the institutions we take back and the new ones we found will
eventually be infected and taken over by Uniparty elites and woke ideology.
In 2020, covid-19—like Dutch elm disease, an import from East Asia—
made this abundantly clear. As Anthony Fauci’s National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) locked the country down, the
churches that conservatives faithfully attended were helpless as federal
bureaucrats locked their doors. Millions of parents were likewise at the
mercy of Randi Weingarten and the American Federation of Teachers, not to
mention all her friends in the Department of Education, who pushed
tirelessly for schools to shut down or go remote.
It should have been clear that some of our most important institutions
were rotten to the core well before the pandemic. The last decade has been
full of grim Inspector General reports of weaponized law enforcement at the

--- Sayfa 32 ---
senior levels of the FBI, of obscene waste and fraud in the United States’
wars in Afghanistan, of corruption and incompetence in our surface navy,
not to mention cover-ups of sexual abuse in the Catholic Church, the Boy
Scouts, and (with the Jeffrey Epstein scandal) the upper reaches of the
ruling elites.
Those truly shocking revelations have numbed us to the steady
drumbeat of incompetence, deceit, misconduct, and self-dealing that seem
endemic to many parts of American life: public school test scores getting
worse (even before the pandemic), new Boeing planes falling out of the sky,
Harvard’s and Stanford’s presidents caught faking their research, real wages
stagnating amid record profits, the imposition of rolling blackouts while
politicians brag about renewable energy.
There is no one-size-fits-all solution, of course. Politics—as always—
requires prudence. But the simple truth is, there is no fixing Harvard or
reforming the FBI. The same goes for the NIAID and the Department of
Education. These institutions cannot be saved. And so they must be
defanged, defunded, and destroyed for the good of the overall ecosystem.
What is stopping us from burning down rotten institutions?
Part of the reason is a delusional belief by many instinctual
conservatives that these institutions might yet be saved or that burning them
down is not “realistic,” that we need to take an incremental and
compromising approach. These “moderates” prefer to talk about pluralism
and reform, not plans for battle and reconquest. But you can’t reform a
cancer cell, and you’d fire an oncologist who made the kinds of strategic
suggestions “moderates” do.
What is unrealistic and extreme is expecting our problems to go away if
we’re only nice enough. I’ve never heard anyone present a serious plan for
wresting control of the Harvard Corporation or the Ford Foundation from
the burrowed-in progressive class that has controlled them for decades. It is
hard to see any plan that requires getting them to act in good faith as
anything but a fantasy. The day after a Supreme Court decision overturning
affirmative action, for instance, Ivy League colleges were proudly touting
their workarounds.
The fact is, institutions that are not accountable to anyone cannot be
reformed, and patterns of behavior and culture, once established, are
unbelievably sticky. Many of our great institutions of civic life have
traditionally been accountable to their members and, through them, to the

--- Sayfa 33 ---
American people. It’s what makes reforming Congress or the Southern
Baptist Convention plausible. But where institutions are captured by
Uniparty networks and removed from real accountability—through
administrative procedures, closed board governance, pseudo credentialism,
loyalty hires, and more—they are beyond saving.
In contrast, where the idea of reforming these institutions seems like
reckless and delusional optimism, I can easily imagine the steps required to
destroy them, to strip them of wealth and status, and otherwise to totally
marginalize them from power in America.
The Conspiracy Against Nature
Conservatives’ instinctual aversion to fire has led them to support the
Uniparty’s disastrous mismanagement of the American forests.
The famed American naturalist and Sierra Club founder John Muir said
of the sequoias that “Through all the wonderful, eventful centuries since
Christ’s time—and long before that—God has cared for these trees, saved
them from drought, disease, avalanches, and a thousand straining, leveling
tempests and floods; but he cannot save them from fools.” It’s supremely
ironic that by far the most dangerous predators the giant sequoia has faced
in its history are California environmentalists.
Since 2015, up to 20 percent of all giant sequoias have been killed by
forest fires, with over half of them dying in the 2020 Castle Fire alone.
Many of those destroyed were centuries-old titans that had survived dozens
of fires before. In a few decades, environmental activism and technocratic
forestry managed to accomplish what no other force of nature ever had:
generating forest fires big enough and hot enough to destroy thousand-year-
old fire-loving giant sequoias.
You see, before modern forestry “discovered” controlled burns (after
having dismissed Native American forestry traditions as primitive and
unscientific), state and federal forest officials suppressed every fire that
came along, allowing fuel loads to reach unsustainable levels. But while
foresters now recognize the need for controlled burns, state and federal
environmental regulation has made forest management impossible.
Activists use lawsuits to stop planned burns and prevent commercial uses of
forest land that serve to lower fuel loads, such as cutting timber. And

--- Sayfa 34 ---
environmental rules stymie public and private forest managers alike. A
controlled burn counts as carbon emissions in ESG scores, while letting a
forest burn down in a superfire does not.
According to the sociologist Philip Rieff, the Party of Destruction
undermines human cultures, not to replace them with something different
but to replace them with a vacuum, an “anti-culture,” that attempts to
produce a “culture that persists independent of all sacred orders” that is
“unprecedented in human history.” This is one of the ironies we will
explore in the book: that the Party of Destruction, which presents its goal as
“progress,” tries to use speed, violence, and enthusiasm to avoid answering
the question “Progress toward what?”—and to avoid the oxymoron buried
at the heart of a “continually progressive” politics.
For this is the dirty secret stalking supposed progressives: theirs has
become an ideology of despair and decay. John Senior long ago grasped the
problem: “The strongest reactionary force impeding progress is the cult of
progress itself, which, cutting us off from our roots, makes growth
impossible and choice unnecessary.”
The prophets of progress don’t even buy what they’re selling anymore.
When was the last time you met an optimistic progressive? A hopeful one?
One with a large family? One with a smile on his or her face instead of a
scowl?
The Party of Destruction is stuck in a loop. All it can advocate is more
“liberation” and, at the same time, more governmental control to fill in
where their destruction of the human order has left a vacuum. As the
Canadian conservative George Grant pointed out, that’s the irony of
embarking on a course of revolution: the word itself means something that
goes around “again and again and again.”
The conspiracy against nature is doomed to fail, because in its desire for
control and the destruction of limits it counteracts the forces that bring
renewal. But the conservatism of the bucket brigade protects only a senile
rot, zombified leadership, and decay that has run its course. It’s time for a
conservatism of fire, to burn it down and steward once again the natural
order of the world, the Western order of civilization, and the American
order of government.
Rather than join the fight, however, many self-styled conservatives
prefer to sit on the sidelines and look down their noses at those of us who
are working to save our country. They use words such as divisive and

--- Sayfa 35 ---
populist to delegitimize their opponents as radical revolutionaries. Many
will even describe this book that way.
And, in a certain sense, they’re correct to do so.
This book is divisive (of the wheat from the chaff). And it is also
unapologetically populist. Populism is not the enemy of America’s
institutions but just another word for the fire that keeps the American forest
healthy. It can get out of control sometimes, sure, but it also kills off the
deadwood—those morally corrupt institutions that are no longer serving the
American people—enriching the soil and making room for new trees to
grow in their place. America’s institutions are not unlike California’s
sequoias, releasing their seeds only upon feeling the heat of a flame. So let
them label us “populist.” The American forest is overdue for a fire, and the
job of the Party of Creation is to ensure a long, controlled burn.
The Faith of My Fathers
Why is there so much disregard for the permanent things now? It’s hard to
have gratitude for something you’ve never experienced. I did not first learn
to love tradition from a history book. I learned what it means to keep faith
with God and my forefathers, to pass on the fire, from my own personal
Aeneas.
My grandfather Mark “Pete” Pitre was a man of deep devotion to God,
country, and family. Born in Opelousas in St. Landry Parish, Louisiana, in
1919, he grew up dirt poor, dropping out of school to work at a local
mechanic’s shop. After Pearl Harbor, he answered his country’s call,
volunteering to serve as a US Marine in World War II.
With his outstanding mechanical ability, he was trained as an airplane
mechanic and assigned to a base in southern California, where he met my
grandmother Betty French in the engine well of an airplane they were
working on. Not even five feet tall, she had found her niche installing radar
and other systems in the nose of aircraft. She could easily maneuver where
the burly marine mechanics would be unable to go.
Their romance blossomed, and they married days after Victory in
Europe Day in May 1945. They quickly got pregnant, and my mom was
born the next year. Upon their discharge from the marines, PaPa Pete
persuaded my grandmother to move the family back home to Opelousas.

--- Sayfa 36 ---
The Pitre clan were Cajuns, descendants of some of the earliest French
Catholic settlers of the New World colony of Acadia, in the area
surrounding present-day Nova Scotia. Jean Pitre had settled in Acadia in the
1650s, married a fellow colonist, and settled on the banks of the Rivière
Dauphin (today the Annapolis River), where he sired eleven children.
When French Acadia was conquered by the British during Queen
Anne’s War in 1710, Les Acadiens were put into a difficult position.
Unwilling to abandon their Catholic faith or take an unconditional oath to
the British monarch, the Acadians were viewed by the British with great
suspicion in the lead-up to the French and Indian War.
That war, which culminated a century of New World colonial conflict,
would result in France’s loss of her New World colonies. But the tragedy
was much more personal for the Pitres and other Acadians. The British
forcibly removed the French Catholic Acadians in Le Grand Dérangement
(The Great Upheaval), burning their homes and deporting over ten thousand
Acadians to the American colonies, to England, or to France. Their land
would later be given to British loyalists who had fled to Canada after
opposing American independence.
Many Acadians were restless and unsatisfied with the idea of simply
returning to France. Perhaps they had gotten used to the freedom, wide-
open spaces, and self-reliance of frontier living. And so an offer from the
Spanish Crown to settle the sparsely populated Louisiana, a wild land of
natural bounty where they could freely practice their Catholic faith far from
the battlegrounds of colonial conflict, intrigued many of the displaced
Acadians, who would come to be known as Cajuns. They included my
ancestor Pierre Pitre and his son François, who in 1765 were some of the
first Acadians to arrive in Louisiana, settling in the Opelousas District,
which remains my extended family’s dwelling place to this day.
One of the unique things about the United States is that, apart from our
Native American brothers and sisters, everyone who comes here has an
exodus story of some kind. My ancestors’ journey, carrying with them the
traditions of Acadia to their new home, was a modern-day Aeneid,
commemorated in Virgilian hexameter by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow in
his epic poem Evangeline, a Tale of Acadie (1847).
The clichéd phrase “nation of immigrants” is too thin a term for the
profound spiritual significance of coming to America, weighted with mythic
and biblical meaning for the significant majority of new Americans from

--- Sayfa 37 ---
the Abrahamic faiths. Under a range of circumstances—some coming
freely, others fleeing persecution, some compelled in chains—Americans
have had the experience of leaving the Old World and journeying across the
water. For many of them (including my Cajun ancestors), what they found
when they arrived was not the land of milk and honey but a harsh and
dangerous wilderness. Yet it was to them the Promised Land.
My family’s story is why I’ve never had any time for the reactionary
idea that America’s ideals of pluralism and religious liberty are somehow
fatal liberal flaws that cannot help but lead to secularism, unbelief, and
pushing God out of the public square. In Acadia, my family could have had
British liberty but not their faith. In France, they could have had their faith
but not their liberty. In American Louisiana, they found both and built a
legacy of fierce independence, generous community, and deep devotion that
has lasted for centuries. In Louisiana, which is to this day organized not into
counties but into parishes, it was the God-given freedoms guaranteed by the
Constitution that created the space to develop a unique culture shaped by
French heritage, the Catholic faith, and life in the Louisiana forests and
bayous. The Cajuns never found any conflict between being fully Catholic
and fully American.
Cajun Country
For generations upon generations, the Cajuns preserved their culture, faith,
and language. Loyalty to family meant more than anything else, and Cajuns
were raised among their extended kinfolk. Over a lifetime, people became
enmeshed with networks of cousins, aunts, and uncles, and everyone was
related to everyone else anyhow. Cajun French and the Catholic faith amid
the English Protestant surroundings helped create a sense of distinction that
cemented the community, and when my grandparents moved back, you’d
still mostly hear Cajun French in the streets and shops of the parish. Few
people in Opelousas spoke English. My Methodist grandmother described it
as living in a foreign country (originally from a schoolteacher’s family in
Illinois, she may also have had a higher standard for what counted as
“speaking English” than the local Creoles and Cajuns could meet).
PaPa Pete returned to work as a roughneck at Esso, later ExxonMobil.
He’d hitchhike to the coast for a boat ride out to the rig, working seven days

--- Sayfa 38 ---
on, seven off. It was some of the physically toughest work there is, but he
took pride in it and in supporting his family (as an older man, he became a
foreman at an Exxon facility onshore).
PaPa Pete was a man’s man—strong with gnarled hands, a genius at
fixing anything mechanical. He was not stoic but not especially expressive,
either. He liked to work hard and to enjoy the company of friends, a cold
beer, and a baseball game. We whiled away afternoons together watching
the Atlanta Braves on TV. And he took full advantage of living in “the
Sportsman’s Paradise,” fishing with the best of them.
But he was also gentle and faithful. He was an old-fashioned gentleman
who believed in taking care of womenfolk, my grandmother first of all. And
I remember many a time working in the yard with PaPa Pete on a Saturday
afternoon and being ordered to wash up: we were going to Confession. The
family never had much, but my grandfather always had an envelope for the
offering plate at Mass, which the whole family went to every Sunday.
Like many Cajun men, PaPa Pete had a special devotion to the Virgin
Mary. He always had his rosary at his bedside. And he remained devoted to
his widowed mother (my great-grandmother), visiting her almost every day
of her long life.
My grandfather was the opposite of sentimental about what it meant to
be a Cajun. He had grown up amid the worst parts of Cajun culture: the
drinking, the insularity, the family dramas, the indifference to education.
But he stood for all of the best, an irreplaceable way of life in the fabric of
America and a source of real strength throughout my life.
When, as a nine-year-old boy, I found myself fighting against a vortex
of familial chaos and pain, it was PaPa Pete and Grandma Betty who would
save my life. They proved unfailingly consistent and unfailingly loving. My
grandfather in particular stepped in as a role model, a man in my life I could
count on. I needed the stability, normalcy, and constant love they provided.
As the bottom dropped out of my home life, I clung to my grandfather and
grandmother the way you might lash yourself to a bald cypress in a
hurricane. I didn’t appreciate then how deep their roots went, how much I
owed the stability I desperately needed to a tradition and a faith that
stretched back centuries and to all of those who had kept the fire burning
along the way.
The Uniparty wants to discard or destroy all of the institutions that
formed my grandparents, that gave them the strength and the virtue and the

--- Sayfa 39 ---
love that would save me. I bet if you reflect on the institutions and
traditions that have made the most difference in your life, you’ll find that
they are under attack today, too.
Gratitude toward my three patrimonies—Catholic, Acadian, and
American—leads me to continue to protect them, to nurture them, and to
preserve them. What exactly does this entail?
Traditions live in and through our own lives. My grandparents and so
many others of blessed memory initiated me into a way of life, handing to
me the torch of my traditions, which I must carry, nourish, and fuel in how I
live my life. If I don’t, it will not only die out for me: it may die out
altogether.
Most important, a tradition must be handed on. My parents and
grandparents did that for me, so Michelle and I do that for our own kids
(and hopefully will for our grandkids). Yes, we can and should do so with
words and instruction. But how we spend our time and care has taught our
kids most about what our family values. Give us a mountain sunset with the
sounds of a creek nearby, with the family together, no screens, no music, no
distractions—just us and our Creator—and you will find us all smiling, in
awe of the simple but too infrequent act of appreciating His grandeur.
Tradition, like fire, is an embodied force, not an abstract idea.
Traditions, like fire, die out when they are not tended. The modern
conservative movement, founded as it was in the midst of an ideological
fight with Soviet communism, has had a tendency to focus on getting ideas
right. Too often, the health of our institutions—of specific living, breathing
institutions—has been ignored. What made the difference in my life was
faith, hope, and love: the faith of my fathers, hope in God’s plan for my life,
and the love of my family and my community. The difference between my
life and those of so many lost and broken men in southern Louisiana was
not another government program; it was a role model in my grandfather. It
was a deep sense of who I was, of my story from my culture. It was a place
where I belonged and a people I belonged to.
The state has only wards. It has no sons and daughters. It cannot love.
Moreover, there’s another problem with the progressive vision:
government handouts do not motivate the gratitude and the pietas that an
inherited tradition or familial assistance do. And they cannot give you a role
to fulfill and a future to fight for, the way that children and property of
one’s own do. It is because conservatives know what the government

--- Sayfa 40 ---
cannot provide that we believe in restrictions on government size and
activity, to prevent it from crowding out or destroying the families,
churches, civil society associations, and free enterprises that make up the
topsoil of American life. The government by itself cannot give you a stake
in the future.
For too long, American society has been mired in nostalgia. Too often,
we have a better sense of what we don’t want to change than of what we
must change, a keener grasp of what has been lost than of where we ought
to go. A country that is oriented exclusively toward the past cannot maintain
the sacred fire.
Reagan the Creator
Restoring the permanent things will be a multigenerational project, and it
will require every tool of statecraft available.
What concretely will it take for Americans to once again “look forward
with confidence to the future,” as President Reagan put it?
The biggest reason I left the great state of Texas to come to the swamp
of DC was that I felt that the conservative movement had lost sight of what
was important, of the need not only to conserve but to build. Every political
community must have a vision for its future, or it is already dead. This ethos
lies at the heart of the Party of Creation.
Ronald Reagan understood that. No other Republican president has so
married a passion for our heritage with an excitement about our future.
Reagan was not mired in nostalgia. He hated the idea that someone like his
friend John Wayne might be called “The Last American Hero.” Reagan
believed that we were still a frontier nation and that our shared institutions
had a role to play in creating a basis for American prosperity.
He understood that carrying the fire was about creation, not destruction.
Nothing summed up Reagan’s optimism like his unabashed embrace of “the
next great frontier”: space exploration. The historian John Logsdon dubbed
him “the most pro-space president in American history.” After a decade of
budget cuts and lowered visions of the US space program, Reagan
expanded NASA, shepherded the revolutionary space shuttle to completion,
and pushed forward new research programs for a hypersonic passenger
plane, the Strategic Defense Initiative, and the permanently crewed orbital

--- Sayfa 41 ---
Space Station Freedom. Reagan’s interest in space was both personal and
political. He spent more time talking to astronauts in orbit than any
president before or since. He saw the United States’ return to space as a
vital symbol and sign of its broader national renewal.
Reagan had announced that there would be a program for civilians to
ride on the space shuttle and that the first such passenger would be a
schoolteacher, inspiring America’s children to take up the mantle of
pioneers to the stars. On that first civilian passenger flight, tragedy struck.
Shortly after launch on January 28, 1986, Space Shuttle Challenger broke
apart in midair. Millions of American schoolchildren saw it happen live on
television. That night, President Reagan delayed his State of the Union
address in order to address the nation.
It could have been a moment of turning back, a retreat to the security of
unmanned space exploration or a promise to investigate and regulate space
travel until it was “safe.” But Reagan matched his mourning for the dead
with a determination to carry on, comparing the astronauts to early
American pioneers and the great explorer Sir Francis Drake. He promised,
“Nothing ends here; our hopes and our journeys continue,” adding, “The
future doesn’t belong to the fainthearted; it belongs to the brave.”
In the face of a setback, he doubled down. For Reagan, space
exploration was not about rivalry with the Soviets but about the spirit of the
country. In a later speech, he said, “It is mankind’s manifest destiny to bring
our humanity into space; to colonize this galaxy; and as a nation, we have
the power to determine whether America will lead or will follow. I say that
America must lead.” He then quoted the full text of the poem “High Flight,”
which he had immortalized in his speech after the Challenger disaster. Read
in full, its mood is not elegiac but exuberant, even ecstatic, with pioneer
spirit: “Oh! I have slipped the surly bonds of Earth / And danced the skies
on laughter-silvered wings.”
After Reagan, we downsized our aspirations. Clinton canceled the
hypersonic travel program and reduced the Space Station Freedom program
to a global partnership in the International Space Station. America’s manned
space program languished, to the point where, under President Obama,
American astronauts going to the space station were forced to hitch rides on
Russian rockets.
But the fire is rising again. Reagan would have absolutely delighted in
the United States’ return to space, this time with government playing a

--- Sayfa 42 ---
supporting role to an array of founders, explorers, and pioneers. Yet we
need to match these extraordinary technological achievements with a
political rhetoric and cultural mythmaking that point beyond them to the
deep-rooted traditions they embody and the bright American future they
portend. We at Reagan’s think tank stand with the Gipper: it’s time to build
America’s future again.
The Second American Revolution
Since Reagan left office, the American conservative movement has too
often concentrated on fighting battles over abstract ideals and has forgotten
that ideas must always be in the service of real institutions and people. In
every instance, a focus on philosophical argument has allowed a class of
rootless, globalist elites—including many who tout their “conservative
principles”—to exert more power with less accountability.
As more and more Americans have rallied against these corrupt elites in
recent years, the groundswell of support has had an unmistakable historical
parallel to the decades before 1776. I believe we are living at the dawn of
the Second American Revolution.
What is a revolution but an attempt to overthrow the institutions of
society? Akin to our Founding Fathers, today we confront a far-off elite that
is actively seeking to establish in the United States “new modes and orders”
to achieve a Machiavellian overthrow of our constitutional system in favor
of new institutions controlled by the Uniparty. In some ways, our situation
is even more dire than during the First American Revolution.
Our elites today are further removed from the realities of American life
than the British ever were from the colonists. Yes, it could take upward of
six weeks to travel from England to the colonies at the time of the
revolution, but our elites might as well live in a world apart. They own
houses in different neighborhoods from the ones where you rent yours, they
fill up—sorry, charge—their cars at different stations, they shop at different
grocery stores, eat at different restaurants, vacation in different locations,
and take their kids—sorry, dogs—to different parks than you do. Their
language, filled with tortuous political correctness and managementese, is
more different from the English of ordinary Americans than British English
ever was from Colonial American dialects.

--- Sayfa 43 ---
Like the First American Revolution, the second began when a corrupt
ruling class sought to overthrow the existing institutions of American life.
But whereas the British passed laws and imposed colonial officials, our
elites have been more subtle. Over the span of decades, they have
substituted a growing network of institutions (public and private) that allow
them to exert control without accountability, leaching away power from our
constitutional order and installing it in the Deep State, in woke
corporations, massive foundations, and more.
The good news is, patriots across the country are already coming
together, organizing the groundwork of resistance, and fighting back. Much
like the Sons of Liberty, who banded together to spurn British goods more
than a decade before shots were fired at Lexington and Concord, everyday
Americans are once again boycotting the corrupt elites, from Bud Light to
Target, and building a parallel economy. Indeed, the Daughters of Liberty
have grown up and become Moms for Liberty. And though their spinning
bees have turned into things such as classical school board meetings,
American Heritage Girls chapters, and parent organizations keeping kids
safe from digital technology, they’re fighting for the same freedom. They’re
tending the same fire.
The New Conservative Movement
Today these forces are uniting into a powerful political force; we call it the
New Conservative Movement.
Someone asked me what the focus of the New Conservative Movement
ought to be. The three legs of the old conservative fusionism were social
traditionalism, free enterprise, and anticommunism. The legs of the New
Conservative Movement are Mom, Dad, and kids. And the focus of
“family-first fusionism” is the modern-day hearth: the dining room table.
Family-first fusionism calls on conservatives to finally let go of the
Cold War framework we’ve been operating in for thirty-plus years and work
toward building an alliance against the greatest threat facing our country
today: the Uniparty’s war on the American family.
Like the first fusionism—that alliance among traditional conservatives,
libertarians, and war hawks against a godless, collectivist Soviet
communism that was threatening to take over the world—family-first

--- Sayfa 44 ---
fusionism must be a big tent with plenty of room for disagreement. If the
old fusionism was built to fight an ideological war with Soviet communism
by disseminating American ideas about freedom and capitalism, family-first
fusionism must be equipped to fight an institutional war with our Uniparty
elites by encouraging the formation of new American families and
providing them the infrastructure they need to flourish.
Family-first fusionism aims to bring together men, women, and children
to defend the institution of the American dinner table, the successor to the
hearth in which the sacred fire of liberty yet burns.
A full dinner table used to be commonplace in our county, but today it is
an increasingly rare spectacle. More and more people are choosing not to
get married or have children. Many who do get married end up divorced,
and many moms end up raising their kids on their own. On top of that,
families that do stick together often struggle to make ends meet. More and
more, both parents are forced to work, and as a result, there’s simply not
enough time to prepare a home-cooked meal. And why should they try,
anyway? On those odd occasions when Mom or Dad does go the extra mile,
everyone else seems to prefer the company of their friends on social media
to that of their closest kin. With budgets tightening and the birth rate falling,
is it any wonder that in August 2023 the Wall Street Journal reported that
the average size of new homes has shrunk by 10 percent since 2018, with
many floor plans now featuring no dining room at all?
Some might say that this is a good thing, that people’s “consumer
preferences” are being met. If building houses without dining rooms means
that we can build them more efficiently, what’s the big deal? This is the
conservatism that Russell Kirk identified with “the dragon Fafnir lying
upon his hoard of gold,” hissing “Let me rest: I lie in possession!”
We have to fight that dragon because he lies indeed. The decadent
conservatism of accumulation is fit for cold-blooded lizard people. Men are
best understood as sons, husbands, and fathers, not as rational autonomous
individuals. And while they certainly have a natural right to freedom, men
are actually born as helpless babies who can’t survive even a few hours
without the nourishing love of their mothers, much less pursue their own
destinies. In neglecting the dinner table, we turn our country inward toward
self-gratification and narcissism.
The dinner table is the place where we learn who we are. It is the place
where we grow from babies to boys and from boys to men. It is the place

--- Sayfa 45 ---
where we learn to be truly free by setting everything else in our life aside
for a couple hours to break bread with our family and friends. It’s the place
where we go to serve others, in gestures as small as passing the table salt.
It’s the place where we gather to laugh, to cry, to bear one another’s
burdens, to pass on wisdom, to get advice, and to pray.
President Reagan, in his farewell address, said, “All great change in
America begins at the dinner table.” With gratitude in our hearts, the New
Conservative Movement will fight for the future of the American dinner
table. We will set aside ideological dogmas of a bygone era in exchange for
an unremitting focus on the institutions that are under attack from the
Uniparty, first and foremost the family. We will save the institutions that we
can, start new ones wherever needed, and unapologetically destroy those
that are hostile to our flourishing. And we will build a majority coalition of
husbands and wives, fathers and mothers, brothers and sisters, sons and
daughters, that will make its mark on the next century of American politics.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Sayfa 46 ---
Chapter 3
Family-First Fusionism
To be happy at home is the end of all human endeavour.
—Samuel Johnson
For most Americans, 1983 was the year the Reagan Revolution began to
pay off, when dawn broke over the land once more. Inflation, interest, and
unemployment rates were all in free fall. It was the year when America felt
as though it was roaring back, as though it was sloughing off the malaise
and stupor of the 1970s, of Vietnam, of stagflation, of the Iran hostage
crisis, of the lines at the gas station, of burnt-out, drugged-out, dropped-out
cityscapes. The year 1983 was a great year for America.
And it was the hardest year of my life.
I was born in Lafayette, Louisiana, the youngest of three. From as far
back as I can remember, life at home was turbulent. There were a lot of
good times, but my dad was an alcoholic, and he and my mom often fought.
When I was four, my parents divorced.
It was the height of the 1970s, what Tom Wolfe dubbed “The ‘Me’
Decade,” when the therapeutic mindset arrived for the American middle
class. The new culture, popularized by elite influencers of every stripe,
taught that happiness came not from loving others or living up to your
duties to your neighbor and to God but from “finding yourself” with self-
actualization, self-esteem, and self-care.
In the 1970s, such trivial institutions as marriage or organized religion
seemed like pointless obstacles to the power of “finding the real me”!

--- Sayfa 47 ---
My mom echoed what everyone else was saying in those days: “The
kids will be just fine.” Freed from my father and his troubles, she believed
she would find a happiness that would make us kids happier, too. I
remember hearing that argument on The Phil Donahue Show and seeing it
on magazine covers at the grocery store checkout. But I knew that that was
a lie. I knew we weren’t fine, we weren’t going to be fine, and nobody was
really happier. Even today, I have a gut reaction whenever someone talks
about divorce like that. There is a certain kind of rage and hurt that perhaps
only the children of divorce know.
In a divorce, especially an acrimonious one, all of the forces that hold a
marriage and a family together work in reverse to rip it apart. The shared
project of the marital estate becomes the zero-sum division of assets.
Uniting forces such as fidelity and shared children unravel into ugly
feelings about new romances and custody agreements. Binding love
becomes blinding hate. As William Butler Yeats wrote, “Turning and
turning in the widening gyre . . . the centre cannot hold.”
Aggravating the chaos at home was my family’s deteriorating financial
stability. My mother, who had always intended to stay home and raise us,
was forced to take a full-time job at Sears, Roebuck to make ends meet.
Like many low-skill service sector jobs, it paid hardly enough to support a
family of three children. We moved into subsidized housing and started
getting free lunches at school.
In an older America, a raft of social institutions—family, church,
community, school, state, even employer—would have stood up to
encourage my parents to stay married. But by the Me Decade, they had
already been hollowed out and enfeebled.
It didn’t just feel as though the wheels were coming off my own
family’s life; the whole region was in a funk. The same forces that had
brought the United States roaring back in 1983 had devastated our region.
Lafayette and its surrounds relied heavily on the energy economy,
especially the oil and natural gas coming off the Gulf of Mexico. Tens of
thousands of Louisianans worked in all of the different parts of the oil
industry, from prospectors and drillers developing new fields to roughnecks
(such as PaPa Pete) working on offshore rigs in the gulf to equipment
operators and engineers at the refineries and petrochemical plants
transforming crude into useful products.

--- Sayfa 48 ---
While the rest of the United States had struggled to pay for gas in the
1970s, southern Louisiana had boomed, as investment capital and new jobs
rushed in to boost the United States’ domestic energy production.
Now, with oil prices plummeting into the 80s, it was our turn to be
walloped. Plants closed, energy companies laid off workers by the
hundreds, and a deep economic contraction set in. Soon, men whose
families had lived in the region for centuries were packing up to look for
work elsewhere. My family would eventually be forced to do the same.
Around that time, I remember seeing a car with a bumper sticker that
summed up the city’s mood: “Will the last person who leaves Lafayette
please turn the lights off?”
But it wasn’t the hardship of divorce or the economic downturn that
made 1983 the hardest year of my life.
My older sister and brother had handled my parents’ separation
differently. My sister, Lori, now almost done with high school, had
increasingly checked herself out of life at home. She had a popular social
life with friends and without parental attention to rein her in became a bit of
a wild child.
My brother, Doug, used baseball as an outlet. He was a phenom, a
promising young first baseman. Being good at baseball gave him something
to focus on and a clear place he belonged when things were messy at home.
He had also become close to my stepdad, a younger man my mom had
quickly married a few years after the divorce. They used to hang out and go
shooting at the range or wherever else they could plink down some targets.
The brokenness at the heart of our family’s life came to a head in
November 1983. It was perhaps the deepest, darkest chapter of my parents’
long divorce.
My father had remarried and started a new family with my stepmom.
My parents refused to speak to each other, which contributed to tensions
over their jointly raising kids. My siblings and I acutely felt ourselves to be
a burden. Things got even worse when my mom divorced again, splitting
from our stepdad. Of all of us, my brother felt that second divorce—the
second loss of a father—most deeply. As a parting gesture, my now ex-
stepdad let my brother keep the handgun they had gone shooting with.
One night, my brother was out carousing with his friends from the
baseball team. Like many southern Louisiana teenage boys before them,
after a few drinks they decided it would be a good idea to go out racing.

--- Sayfa 49 ---
Predictably, things went awry, and my brother crashed the car—my mom’s
car—into a light pole. He was ruffled but basically unharmed. But the car
was in a bad way. It wouldn’t start again. His friends went to get help or at
least a tow rope.
We can’t know what was going through my brother’s head. Perhaps he
was worried that the cops would come, that his baseball career would be
over before it began. That the expense of fixing the car would be yet
another way he was just a burden. Maybe he felt doubly fatherless, doubly
adrift.
He must have felt abandoned, hopeless, alone, that he had somehow
wrecked not only Mom’s car but his life. High on adrenaline and drunk on
liquor, sitting in my mom’s wrecked car, my fifteen-year-old brother took
my ex-stepdad’s handgun and shot himself.
That night, I was staying at my dad’s place with my stepmom and half
siblings. I remember waking at 2:00 a.m. to the sound of my father shouting
over the phone to my stepmom. “They’re saying the gunshot is self-
inflicted. There’s no way. It doesn’t make any sense.” Like a bat out of hell,
my dad drove us down to Lafayette General Hospital, Intensive Care Unit. I
sat in the waiting room all night, some aunts and uncles trickling in about
sunrise.
Like any nine-year-old boy, I thought my older brother walked on water.
He was strong, athletic, popular. Nothing could happen to him.
And so I sat in total disbelief as the doctor came out and said to our
waiting family that everyone needed to go and say goodbye. Even now it’s
hard to picture in my mind’s eye the anguish and devastation on the faces of
my kin as they shuffled into that room. I could see the deep woe in my
grandparents’ eyes. Yet they stood tall and strong as they went to bid my
brother farewell.
Pain Which Cannot Forget
If our family had been a plane just managing to stay airborne in the years
after the divorce, with my brother’s suicide that plane disintegrated in
midair; it was the kind of total family devastation that simply cannot be
conveyed in words. It would reverberate over many years. It took decades
for us to forgive one another and to forgive him.

--- Sayfa 50 ---
Christian theology teaches that suicide results from spiritual despair and
oppression, the foreclosing of the possibilities of one’s future, including the
possibility of future grace and redemption. Suicide happens when there’s a
truth you don’t feel you can live with and that you don’t believe you can (or
will or should) be forgiven for. This oppression is often contagious in the
wake of the void of hurt opened by a suicide, meant by the Evil One to be
so. One person’s suicide can ignite a spreading fire of despair.
Even though it may have been an impulsive act, a catastrophe such as
the suicide of my brother, Doug, was the product of years and years of
cultural decay, lies, and neglect. So many of the authority figures who
should have sheltered and formed him passed the buck. Or they assumed
that it was someone else’s job. Or they were obsessed over their own
problems. It took a village of institutions losing their way to make his death
possible.
Yet I came to feel then, and still feel now, a deep sense of peace amid all
my family’s sorrow.
On the morning of my brother’s death, PaPa Pete and Grandma Betty
took me back to their house from the hospital. I was down in the back seat
of their car, physically exhausted but also just numb with pain. Looking out
the window, I took in the most beautiful sunny Louisiana dawn. And I then
felt what I can only describe as the presence of the Holy Spirit, filling me
with the peace that surpasses understanding.
In that moment, I knew that God was with me and all would be well.
That was when my faith became unshakable.
I didn’t have a whole lot of reasons to be optimistic about the future, my
future. But I saw the faith my grandparents had. And it ignited my own,
through the grace of God.
That faith, and the faithfulness of my grandparents and others, would
bear fruit in surprising ways over many years. It would result in familial
healing, restoration, and hope I scarcely would have thought possible at the
time. Out of enormous tragedy would come new life.
Family Is the Foundation
Family breakdown doesn’t happen in a vacuum. When this institution
breaks, the damage spreads out to everything else in society, causing

--- Sayfa 51 ---
hopelessness, aimlessness, and contagious despair. The number one
challenge Americans face in the twenty-first century is the crisis of family
formation.
Over the past sixty years, the foundations of the American family have
come under sustained assault, and rates of marriage and childbearing have
reached historic lows with no signs of reversal. Since the 2008 financial
crisis in particular, the bottom has fallen out from underneath the American
family.
Demographers predict that an astonishing one in three young adults will
never marry and one in four will never have kids. American women are
now expected to have an average of 1.66 children each, a far cry from the
baby boom’s 3.77 children per woman. Never have the rates of marriage
and childbearing in the United States been so low.
That’s a problem because a childless society becomes decadent and
nostalgic. Aging, barren societies literally become consumptive, taking on
higher levels of debt and depleting savings as they pay foreign workers to
keep things going. They become less and less capable of innovation (a
young person’s game) and more and more stuck and decrepit every year.
Their traditions, culture, and way of life die out, with nothing to hand on
and no one to hand it on to. A culture of childlessness is, in the final
analysis, a culture of despair.
Getting married and having kids, on the other hand, gives you skin in
the game for the future of your country. It forces you to grow up, give up
childish things, and live in the real world. It grounds you, gives you a sense
of purpose in life, and helps generate community, gratitude, and joy. A
culture of children is a culture of hope.
Unless we reverse our growing culture of despair, we will face
insurmountable trade-offs. Every other challenge to the American way of
life that we face this century will become more and more difficult. There
are already fewer and fewer citizens able to support retirement programs,
serve in the military, take care of the elderly, and maintain critical
infrastructure. Soon we will be forced to choose between a total dependence
on immigrants and a prolonged national senescence.
The good news is that our current birth dearth is not due to a lack of
desire. A recent study by the National Survey of Family Growth found that
women born in 1995 to 1999 want to have 2.1 children on average, just like

--- Sayfa 52 ---
women born in 1965 to 1969. But today, many more women are not able to
have the families they hope for.
The New Conservative Movement can give Americans what they want
and restore family formation in our country, but only if we are ready to take
radical action. Our North Star must be striving to once again make a
middle-class lifestyle available to every hardworking American family on a
single-breadwinner income.
Just as essential, we must rebuild a culture of hope that celebrates
children, encourages marriages, lifts up parents, cherishes extended family
and community, and restores the civic fabric of our nation.
We’re going to kill the snakes that are strangling the American way of
life and build an abundant future for America’s families. To restore
abundance to America’s families, the Party of Creation needs to fight and
win on economics, technology, and culture. It will be an uphill battle. The
alternative is national suicide. But before we propose solutions, we must
answer this question: Why are Americans not forming families even though
they want to?
The First Snake: Cost Disease Socialism
The first snake to kill is the economic crisis the American family faces,
especially in housing. The median price of a single-family home in
California was $859,800 in late 2023. If that sounds unaffordable to you,
that’s because it is. The middle class in California is effectively priced out
of homeownership, so much so that 40 percent of Californians say they’re
considering leaving the state, with 60 percent citing the cost of living. But
even with huge numbers of people moving to greener pastures (281,000 in
2021), housing prices continue to rise.
To staunch the bleeding, the Democrat-controlled state government has
turned to massive subsidies for certain homebuyers. Since 2022,
Sacramento has spent $315.3 million to help “preserve 1,364 affordable
homes.” Governor Gavin Newsom has also announced an additional $159.9
million intended to “preserve 638 affordable homes” for “lower-income
Californians priced out of the market.” That works out to an incredible
average of $237,362 of California taxpayer-funded support per home.
Such an approach is self-defeating.

--- Sayfa 53 ---
The issue is what economists call cost disease: when things get more
expensive over time (even when adjusting for inflation) without getting
better or more efficient. Over the past twenty years, Americans have been
facing a form of cost disease on steroids. Since the year 2000, inflation-
adjusted prices of consumer gadgets such as laptops and cell phones have
plummeted, but prices of basics such as health care, housing, education, and
child care have skyrocketed. Demand for these essential goods is
“inelastic.” That means that people are limited in their ability to reduce their
need to buy them, even as prices rise. And so middle-class Americans’
budgets have been getting squeezed, year after year.
In addition, cost disease creates a vicious cycle with the “two-income
trap.” For any individual household supported by a single income (normally
the husband’s), a second income would greatly contribute to purchasing
better housing in a better neighborhood and better education for the kids.
But as more and more women enter the workforce, it just contributes to
bidding up the price of housing, child care, and education higher still,
leaving everyone worse off.
Of course, there is one clear way to reduce your need to purchase health
care, housing, education, and child care: have fewer children or no children
at all. And Americans have been doing just that in droves.
“Cost disease socialism,” as it has been labeled in an insightful
Niskanen Center report by Steven M. Teles, Samuel Hammond, and Daniel
Takash, is nothing short of a direct attack on the American family. In
economic terms, cost disease socialism is a vicious cycle wherein the
government subsidizes demand without doing anything about limitations on
the growth of supply, thus pushing prices higher and higher. Even worse, by
making every taxpayer pay a little bit, cost disease socialism distorts the
self-correcting function of prices in free markets.
For decades, Republicans’ conventional economic playbook has led
them to try to reverse these trends by choking off consumer subsidies. As
Teles, Hammond, and Takash pointed out, however, traditional budget cuts
cannot lower spending in many areas but merely result in accounting tricks
that hide mounting costs. What they suggest instead is a fiscally responsible
approach that addresses the regulatory and supply-side sources of cost
disease.
For instance, Medicare already makes up about 3.7 percent of GDP (and
is expected to rise to around 6 percent of GDP by 2040) and accounts for

--- Sayfa 54 ---
almost 15 percent of all federal spending. Traditional approaches to cutting
these costs, such as lowering reimbursement rates, end up lowering quality
and shifting costs onto private sector insurers.
That’s because regulatory burdens are the real culprits driving up
Medicare costs. Government predictions of a doctor surplus in the 1980s
and 1990s led to a decades-long moratorium on additional slots in medical
schools, for example. Now the United States produces far fewer doctors per
capita than any other nation with our level of health care spending.
Meanwhile, needless state and federal regulations limit what nurse
practitioners and physician assistants can do, even when evidence suggests
an equivalent treatment result.
Addressing these supply-side issues can lead to massive savings. The
Trump administration proved as much, according to the Niskanen Center
report. Taking on the dialysis industry, which accounts for roughly 7 percent
of Medicare spending at $87,000 per patient per year, Trump and his team
made small reforms such as increasing incentives to donate kidneys and
advocating for in-home dialysis treatments that led to almost $4.2 billion in
savings. Better still, those changes improved quality of life for patients,
who often prefer in-home treatments, and likely gave almost thirty thousand
people another year of life.
You can find similar forces at work in every other area where the middle
class is being priced out of the American Dream. Education costs, for
example, have been driven higher and higher because of an increasing
thicket of regulations that impose a staggering administrative burden.
According to data from the National Center for Education Statistics,
between 2000 and 2021, the number of teachers in public schools increased
by 9.27 percent, but the number of principals and assistant principals
increased by 36.70 percent and the number of school district administrative
staff increased by a whopping 77.09 percent.
The same dynamic is at play in higher education. A Heritage Foundation
report, “Diversity University: DEI Bloat in the Academy,” revealed that the
University of Michigan was spending $18.1 million on more than 163 DEI
personnel, almost six per every hundred faculty members and more than
twice the number of faculty teaching history.
NEPA-tism

--- Sayfa 55 ---
How did the situation get so bad? The hidden mechanism driving so much
of the strife in our country’s life, including the decline of marriage, is that
we’ve made it basically illegal to build things in much of the United States.
The Reagan Revolution called for “supply-side economics,” which
made the United States a great place to invest and build a business in again.
But since Reagan left office, Republicans have lost the plot. They forgot to
ensure that investment actually builds productive capacity—the only thing
that will create abundance and good jobs.
Even progressives are beginning to realize that cost disease socialism
threatens their ostensible goals of building the “electric vehicle transition,”
the Green New Deal, or a socialist paradise. Moderate supply-side
progressives such as Ezra Klein and Matthew Yglesias have started to pop
up, arguing for limited deregulation for infrastructure projects, though
Reihan Salam pointed out in the Atlantic that few people in the Democrats’
electoral coalition agree with them.
The granddaddy of abundance-strangling regulations is the National
Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), passed in 1970. The act itself has
largely been made redundant, between later state and federal regulations
that actually protect the environment and a huge number of categorical
exclusions. But it limps along as a zombie, imposing massive compliance
costs on virtually everything done with federal money.
As passed by Congress, NEPA was intended as a kind of reality check
for projects. It requires that federal projects assess the impact they will have
on the environment: it’s just a procedural step with no actual impact on
project decision making or legality. And initially compliance was easy, with
short environmental impact statements (EISs). According to Eli Dourado of
the Abundance Institute, EISs have grown from as short as ten pages in the
1970s to an average today of six hundred pages plus a further thousand-plus
pages of appendices. The federal government completes almost three
hundred EISs a year, but under NEPA it also has to complete twelve
thousand preliminary environmental assessments, 98 percent of which find
no significant impact.
What this also means is that paradoxically, when Congress decides to
support building something because it is important for the national interest,
it automatically imposes a massive additional regulatory burden. The
CHIPS and Science Act, passed in 2022, had some major flaws. But despite
all of its problems, it was supposed to actually do at least one thing: provide

--- Sayfa 56 ---
badly needed subsidies to rebuild the United States’ domestic
semiconductor production capacity and secure our supply chain from
China, including the $52 billion CHIPS for America fund.
All of this funding is stuck right now. Not a single shovelful of dirt can
be moved until the NEPA process is complete.
NEPA is the tip of the iceberg. But a recent analysis by the Foundation
for American Innovation’s Thomas Hochman highlighted other regulations
that impose subtler costs, including the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act of 2023, the Clean Water Act of 1972, and above all the
Clean Air Act of 1970. During the Trump administration, the Department of
Commerce polled American manufacturers about the specific regulations
they viewed as most burdensome: NEPA didn’t even make the top ten.
America can’t build anything because it has a giant regulatory monkey
on its back, a vetocracy that highlights the costs and risks of projects to the
exclusion of benefits and opportunities. Permitting and regulatory reform is
one of the most critical political issues the New Conservative Movement
should fight for, something vital for our national security and vital for our
abundance agenda. It will make a real difference in the lives of ordinary
American families.
First Comes Love; When Comes Marriage?
You can see these economic forces eating at the material foundation of the
American family.
In 1980, a young couple (call them Mike and Lisa) thinking about
getting married and starting a family is wondering what their life together
will be like. Having lots of friends who are also getting married would help
shape their thinking, of course, but there are also practical considerations.
Mike and Lisa might consider how much a home and a car would cost,
weigh whether to pursue a college education, and think about whether Lisa
would keep her job or work at home raising the kids. They wouldn’t worry
about the cost of health care: in 1980, fewer than half of employees were
required to contribute anything to medical insurance costs.
Overall, they would find economic and social conditions favorable to
marriage. At a median 1980 home cost of $47,200, Mike and Lisa could pay
off their mortgage in principle with only 2.25 years of work at the median

--- Sayfa 57 ---
American income ($21,020). If they chose to go to college, they could earn
a four-year bachelor’s degree from a public university for $9,308 in total
tuition, room, and board, which could be paid off with five months of work
at the median income. They could purchase the cheapest new car (a two-
door Chevy Chevette) for $4,057, only eleven weeks of the median income.
If Lisa chose to stay home with the kids, they’d have no trouble supporting
themselves on Mike’s income alone.
What would the same arrangements have looked like for another young
couple, Jake and Emily, getting married in 2020? At the median income of
$56,287, buying the median American home, which costs $267,693, would
cost them almost twice as much time (close to five years). Unlike Mike and
Lisa, Jake and Emily would definitely have to think about health care.
Family insurance contributions had risen to $5,588 as of 2020. The cheapest
new car (a Chevy Spark Hatchback) costs $14,095 (thirteen weeks of
income). Four years of college at a public university would set them back
$85,348 (three times as much as in 1980 and double again if they both
went). With Jake working at the median wage, they would struggle to make
ends meet. Emily is likely to look at working at least part-time and putting
her babies into day care, at a significant cost.
Rather than fighting the factors restricting supply and driving up costs,
America’s cost disease socialism has been kicking the can down the road.
Jake and Emily will be encouraged to take on student loans for their
education, a substantially higher debt burden for their home, and credit card
debt to handle their day-to-day expenses. Rather than fixing the sources of
exorbitant health care costs, we have mandated that young adults can stay
on their parents’ insurance until age twenty-six and increased the employer-
subsidized share of insurance premiums.
Is it any wonder that fewer young people than ever are getting married
and starting families and that the ones who are do so later and later? When
the mountain they must climb to achieve financial maturity gets higher and
higher, it becomes easier and easier to justify an extended period of
adolescence.
Now, that’s not to say that being a spouse and a parent is ever easy. But
it was a lot easier in 1980 than it is today, in terms of both culture and cost,
especially for Americans without a college education.
Our models of inflation assume that if people pay more for higher-
quality goods, no real inflation has taken place. Some DC economists even

--- Sayfa 58 ---
have the nerve to say that when people spend more on health care, new
cars, new houses, child care, and education, it reflects consumer choice. But
that’s not true.
A couple that takes on a crushing mortgage to move to a “nicer” house
because their neighborhood is being overrun with crime and their existing
school district is terrible is not really making a choice. A family that scrapes
together a car payment for a “nicer” vehicle when their old one dies is not
thriving on the benefits of improved quality. This is obvious because it is
the most affordable entry-level goods that experience the greatest demand
relative to supply. It is even more obvious when you talk to ordinary
Americans about their household budgets.
The truth is, changing regulatory demands and Uniparty managerial
control exert much more influence over the markets for health care, new
cars, new houses, child care, and education than do consumer choices.
That’s why when the Trump administration instituted policies that reversed
globalization, lowered regulatory burdens, and unleashed investment, the
long stagnation of American working-class wages briefly lifted. But since
then, Bidenomics, rampant spending, and a crackdown on energy
production have sent inflation soaring, dragging real wages back to pre-
2015 levels.
Why do many elites in the Uniparty not recognize this problem?
Probably because they’re members of a wealthy, educated class that
insulates them from such challenges. Elites don’t live in a culture of family
breakdown, so it’s easy for them to claim that marriage doesn’t matter.
Marriage was once something that transcended class, but today that’s no
longer the case. According to the General Social Survey, 58 percent of
college-educated Americans ages eighteen to fifty-five are married,
compared to 39 percent of people without college degrees. Moreover,
having a college degree is the single greatest predictor of avoiding divorce:
the divorce rate among those with a college degree is 22 percent, compared
to 37 percent for people without a college degree.
Social scientists aren’t sure about the exact relationship among
marriage, education, and income. But according to the Pew Research
Center, over 40 percent of never-married adults earning less than $75,000
per year say that financial instability is a major reason they aren’t married,
double the 21 percent earning over $75,000 who say the same. And how

--- Sayfa 59 ---
could it not? Since 1983, life for a working-class family has become more
expensive, even as wages for working-class men have stagnated.
In 1980, it took a man with only a high school diploma, working full-
time at the median wage ($13,832), 3.4 years to earn the cost of the median
home, 42 percent longer than the equivalent man earning the median
college-educated wage ($19,552). In 2023, it would have taken him seven
years, an astounding 82 percent longer than someone with a college degree.
And the reality is even worse than these data alone suggest.
This economic malaise is tanking working-class marriage rates—and
America’s well-being along with them.
But does it really matter if Americans are having to defer marriage?
Isn’t it true that good things often come after hard work, perseverance, and
—crucially—waiting? Actually, the delay matters a lot.
The renowned University of Virginia sociologist and head of the
National Marriage Project Brad Wilcox pointed out in his book Get
Married: Why Americans Must Defy the Elites, Forge Strong Families, and
Save Civilization that the falling fortunes of marriage in America are the top
reason why happiness rates in this country are hitting record lows. Raj
Chetty, an esteemed Harvard economist, tells us the biggest reason the
American Dream is out of reach in communities across America is that
there are too few two-parent families. It’s a finding that the economist
Melissa S. Kearney confirmed in her book The Two-Parent Privilege: How
Americans Stopped Getting Married and Started Falling Behind, which
chronicled with study after study that on basically every metric, children
benefit tremendously from living with their married parents, even when
controlling for parental education, income, and other factors.
It is literally a matter of life and death: among the white working class
experiencing lowering life expectancy, rising deaths from despair (from
pills, fentanyl, cirrhosis, suicide, and the like) are almost entirely confined
to unmarried men and women.
You’ve read my story; you’ll know that this is viscerally personal for
me.
After my parents’ divorce, circumstances forced us to rely on
government programs temporarily. And I am grateful for them, as far as
they go. They were a merciful safety net that slowed our descent into what
could have been a fearsome, damaging sort of poverty and enabled my
mom (now a single mother) to get things back on track.

--- Sayfa 60 ---
But I didn’t just want housing; I needed a home. I didn’t just want food
in my belly; I needed a provider, a father. I didn’t just want an education; I
needed a culture worth learning about. I didn’t just want a job; I needed a
purpose.
Doing whatever we can to restore American marriage is essential to
everything else, because so many of the problems our country faces come
back to the breakdown of the American family. Every year, the evidence
gets stronger and stronger that family structure—whether a child is raised in
a home by his or her married parents—is a better predictor of economic
mobility, education, criminality, psychological disorders, suicide, and
dozens of other variables than any other single factor, including parents’
education, wealth, race, or anything else.
It’s not surprising that the Party of Destruction has repeatedly
suppressed these findings: they suggest that no government program could
possibly be effective enough to override the influence of the independent
institution of the family.
But many DC conservatives have been almost worse, because they give
lip service to the ideal of marriage and do nothing to bolster the institution.
They won’t stand up publicly for the reality of a one-man, one-woman
marriage, the reality that every child needs a mother and a father, or the
reality that men and women want different things in marriage.
And they wring their hands when you talk about materially supporting
working families, easing their burden, recognizing the real cost and
difficulty of raising kids, supporting women who want to be homemakers,
or building an economy of stable jobs for marriageable men.
Under these conditions, the recalcitrance of many wax-museum
conservatives to support the American family with any policies besides
aggressive tax cuts for big corporations is truly shocking and shameful. If
the New Conservative Movement does not take responsibility for the dire
state of America’s working class—which starts with admitting that some of
our policies were part of the problem—all our other success will eventually
come to nothing.
An Abundance Agenda for American Families

--- Sayfa 61 ---
A family should not be a luxury good. The way out of our decadence,
however, isn’t austerity and rigidity but abundance and dynamism. Today,
we must be willing to remove as many barriers as possible to building in the
United States: new housing, new schools, new energy, new industry, new
agriculture, new technology, and more.
In other words, we cannot simply budget cut our way out of the bind we
are in. Decades of neglect have created an emergency that directly
endangers America’s future. We can’t simply stop further increases in costs
and regulation: we need to invest in positively reversing them.
It’s time to build.
A supply-side approach to family formation means a supply-side
approach to everything families need, starting with affordable housing. That
doesn’t mean imposing artificial rent controls or some other progressive
policy that makes housing affordable for a select few. Housing should be
affordable for all, simply because there is so much of it.
We might find inspiration in a surprising place. Out of desperation,
California has become the national leader in rapid housing deregulation. It’s
gotten so bad that the Golden State even wants God on its side. In 2023, the
state legislature passed a Yes in God’s Backyard (YIGBY) bill, which
allows a religious institution or independent institution of higher education
to build a housing development project on its property “by right.” Other
legislation has mandated that localities act to update their housing codes
and approve or disapprove projects, in some cases allowing projects to go
ahead automatically if local boards are standing in the way of growth but
not offering anything positive.
But housing prices are shooting up in red states, too, partially because
families can’t afford to live in California anymore, and conservatives need
to do more than pat themselves on the back for having less regulation than
California (a low, low bar). Part of the problem is that America’s capacity to
build basic infrastructure—roads, trains, houses, factories, and so on—has
not improved in almost seventy years. In fact, economists at the University
of Chicago found that construction productivity has declined by as much as
40 percent since 1970, compared to steady growth in other sectors.
We need to apply supply-side thinking to a whole host of industries:
encouraging energy investment and drilling to lower energy costs,
reforming emissions rules to allow electric companies to upgrade facilities
with new equipment (instead of modifying old equipment forever), getting

--- Sayfa 62 ---
the FDA to loosen restrictions on importing high-quality baby formula from
Europe (but not from China, where formula is often contaminated),
importing South Korean nuclear reactor and Japanese bullet train know-
how with technology transfers and joint ventures, channeling federal
research dollars away from genderqueer zoology studies and toward
construction productivity research—anything we can do to lower costs for
the essentials that families need to survive and thrive will help further the
abundance agenda.
Marginal improvements are not enough. In the New Conservative
Movement, moneyball approaches to family policy (attempting to calculate
the minimum viable cost per extra child born) will be considered unserious,
as will arguments that put the onus on everyday Americans to have more
kids while letting politicians in Washington who have the power to make it
easier to start a family off the hook. We need to make marriage and family
more attractive as institutions, shaping our policy to the concrete needs of
actual American families and not the abstract economic pronouncements of
some long-dead Austrian aristocrat.
What you see in countries that have successfully maintained fertility
rates or even reversed fertility declines, including Israel, Hungary, and the
Republic of Georgia, is that they combine serious family policy with a
culture that cherishes children and upholds a mission of national renewal.
They don’t just try to use technocratic tax incentives to nudge parents into
having more kids, nor do they just use cultural messaging to talk about
having kids without putting their money where their mouth is.
They place the family at the center and do both. They use massive
public expenditures to send the explicit message that the family is the most
important thing for the future of the nation. Today, Hungary, the world’s
leader in family policy, spends up to 6 percent of its GDP on measures to
encourage family formation and the raising of children. But these policies,
where they work, operate not by nudging parents but by changing the
culture.
To change the culture, we must put everything in the service of
enshrining the American family at the very heart of our civilization,
including vastly reshaping the economic incentives supporting the
American family. We have to do everything. It has to be our number one
priority. We need to pull every plausible lever, economic and cultural; local,
state, and federal; public sector, private sector, and civil society.

--- Sayfa 63 ---
Family policy needs to be at the heart of everything the New
Conservative Movement does.
Stingy spending on families today is penny wise but pound foolish.
Family policy is fiscal policy. The easiest way (maybe the only way) to deal
with the looming national debt and insolvent entitlement programs is to
grow our way out of them. There is no realistic scenario for resolving our
fiscal crisis that does not involve having more American families. We need
to be family formation supply-siders!
Family policy is innovation policy. Economists have shown that
innovation is a young person’s game: as a population ages, its ability to
innovate and generate new ideas and inventions declines. The more children
we have, the more young people we will have to help solve the problems of
tomorrow.
That’s also why family policy is national security policy. We can’t
defend our interests at home and abroad from a position of decay and
decadence or without the able-bodied young men and women needed to
protect our country. Significant population aging practically requires large
numbers of immigrants to serve as caretakers and nurses and keep the
economy going. It’s important that we secure our border. But no amount of
strength along the wall will be enough if we do not regenerate our nation at
home the old-fashioned way: through family formation.
Finally, family policy is good conservative politics. Younger Americans
are much more likely to identify as liberal than older generations were.
That’s not simply because of cultural Marxism or progressive universities,
which are more the symptoms than the root causes of our current crisis. It’s
because they have been denied a stake in the system. They’ve been denied
access to the things that one takes pride and responsibility in: marriage,
family, homeownership, and the like. They’ve been denied the need to
prepare for and fight for a concrete future for their children.
For the past few decades, America has been pursuing what might be
called a decadence agenda: cheaper consumer goods, foreign credit, the
increasing cost of family essentials, growing numbers of DINKs (double
income, no kids). It’s an economy that provides more luxuries to fewer
workers. It’s an agenda with no future and no hope.
We must pursue an agenda of abundance, not decadence.
Wax-museum conservatives in government have not been willing to
practice what they preach. And I don’t just mean the hypocrisy of

--- Sayfa 64 ---
philandering “family-values” congressmen. In the year of our Lord 2024,
how are there still marriage penalties embedded in our tax code, not to
mention in our welfare system? Depending on the state and the programs in
question, working-class Americans are penalized, sometimes to the tune of
more than ten thousand dollars a year, if they get married. And red states are
some of the worst offenders!
In 2017, Republicans in Congress fixed many marriage penalties via the
Tax Cuts and Jobs Act—but only for upper-middle-class Americans.
Marriage penalties, including substantial ones, remain for the working
class, falling hardest on families earning between $35,000 and $65,000,
sometimes costing them up to 30 percent of their real income, compared to
if the couple had not gotten married. Conservatives can rightly disagree on
the wonky particulars of how we can make marriage and family an
attractive institutional and economic proposition. But in the New
Conservative Movement, it will not be acceptable for policy makers and
thought leaders to simply dismiss the question.
As every parent knows, raising a child well is real work and a huge
investment of time and money. Yet the nation as a whole benefits from the
work of parents. Our tax code should recognize this by expanding the child
tax credit and ensuring that support begins from conception (at least
through a retroactive refund or a newborn bonus).
We should consider even more radical measures such as adopting a
successful Hungarian policy that gave low-interest-rate loans to never-
before-married young newlyweds, with the proviso that a large chunk will
be forgiven for each child they have. We already subsidize student loans to
the tune of billions of dollars; why not move some portion of that over to
family formation? Much like President Trump’s decision to expand the use
of 529 tax-advantaged savings plans from postsecondary education only to
K–12 in 2017 and apprenticeship programs in 2019, this policy would
simultaneously punish America’s corrupt colleges and reward families. On
the one hand, by aiding working parents, we’d be helping create the
material conditions for family life; on the other hand, we’d reverse support
for bloated college tuitions and weaken the cultural norm for parents to
obsess over how to pay for college.
Another proposal the team at the Heritage Foundation is batting around
would create a family flexible savings account (FFSA). Each family would
be able to deduct up to $10,000 a year per child from its income taxes to put

--- Sayfa 65 ---
into this account. Working families on welfare would be able to receive
$10,000 a year in lieu of other welfare program eligibility. Married couples
would be able to deduct substantially more so that we would be heavily
incentivizing marriage, with a bonus for every third child or more. Families
could use their account to pay for education expenses, health care, housing,
child care, and college/apprenticeships, and savings could grow tax free (as
in a Health Savings Account).
We are still figuring out the best approaches to family policy, the best
levers in government and civil society, to bring abundance back to marriage
and child rearing. We know that we must balance the critical need for more
American families with fiscal prudence and evidence-based policy. But we
have our sharpest thinkers and wonks on the case.
The Second Snake: Culture-Shaping Technologies
The second snake strangling the American family has often escaped our
notice. Conservatives sometimes take the naive view that new technologies
are just the products of the “invisible hand” of the free market. But while
private sector companies create products consumers want, the scientific
breakthroughs leading to the most revolutionary technologies often
originate in political projects. The birth control pill (the first hormonal
contraceptive) was the product of a decades-long research agenda paid for
by the Rockefeller Foundation and other eugenicist and population control–
oriented groups. All of the basic technologies underlying the smartphone
emerged from US government and military research programs, the
economist Mariana Mazzucato has shown. The surge in electric vehicles
and infrastructure is being driven almost entirely by federal government
subsidies. New technologies are not the random by-products of the free
market’s natural selection but the results of careful efforts by powerful
people intended to reshape society.
We need to understand what could be called contraceptive technologies
—revolutionary inventions that shape American culture away from
abundance, marriage, and family—in the same vein. They shift norms,
incentives, and choices, often invisibly and involuntarily. Conservatives
inveigh against no-fault divorce, the Sexual Revolution, and the destruction

--- Sayfa 66 ---
of a culture of hope without recognizing that these cultural changes are all
downstream of technological ones.
Here’s the thing: we like to think of our desires as springing from thin
air or from our deepest internal being. We want what we want because we
want it. In fact, human beings are highly mimetic creatures, which is to say,
we mimic the priorities of the culture around us. Look at your friends and
peer group. How different from them are you, really? If you change a
culture, you change the desires of the people in that culture. If you change a
culture on a profound level, you can break the most basic functioning
elements of civilization.
In the case of contraceptives, we are a society remade according to a
research agenda set by the Party of Destruction. From the 1920s until the
present day, groups such as the Rockefeller Foundation, the Ford
Foundation, and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation have poured
billions of dollars into developing, testing, marketing, and distributing
chemical contraceptives in the United States and around the world, with
little pushback or alternatives from conservatives.
It’s true that contraceptives give families more control over when they
have children. But the creators of the technologies wanted to go much
further than controlling a natural process; they wanted everyone in our
culture, regardless of their beliefs or choices about contraceptives, to
believe that having kids is an optional individual choice instead of a social
expectation or a transcendent gift. Formerly, we thought that rejecting
children meant consciously resisting life’s natural progression; now we are
more likely to describe having children as a divergence from life’s natural
progression. Children aren’t an inevitability; they’re an optional add-on.
This may not sound radical to you, but consider: one technology has
convinced humanity that extinction is natural and procreation is unnatural.
Maybe we’re not the freethinkers we think we are.
Even those who reject chemical contraceptives for religious or health
reasons are now seen as choosing to do something that was entirely natural
before: what first seemed to be freedom for individuals was actually a
cultural revolution for everyone (not to mention the growing concerns about
artificial hormones infusing the water supply).
Once you understand this pattern (individual choice masking cultural
upheaval), you will see it everywhere. In vitro fertilization (IVF) seems to
assist fertility but has the added effect of incentivizing women to delay

--- Sayfa 67 ---
trying to start a family, often leading to added problems when the time
comes. Investment in improved hormonal birth control has masked a
growing range of autoimmune and other disorders such as endometriosis
and a lack of medical and scientific attention to solving them. Experienced
infertility specialists say that increased commercial emphasis on IVF and
other invasive (and profitable) treatments is creating a generation of doctors
who actually don’t know how to perform older, noninvasive, but quite
successful methods of restoring fertility.
And of course nowhere is this more extreme than in the case of
abortion. As other kinds of contraceptive technologies spread, abortion rates
went up, not down. Why? Because technological change made having a
child seem like an optional and not natural result of having sex and
destroyed a whole series of institutions and cultural norms that had
protected women and forced men to take responsibility for their actions. It’s
why, despite the supposed increase in “choice,” the proportion of single
moms in the United States has quintupled since the 1960s.
The same pattern (individual choice masking cultural upheaval) is
reflected in the fact that as the prices of basic goods needed to raise a family
have gone up, prices have plummeted and “quality” has soared for all kinds
of mindless entertainment: video games, huge high-definition TVs, social
media, pornography, and more. These technologies aren’t thought of as
contraceptive, but that’s what their effect is in American life: they make
young men lazier and more impotent (literally) and less inclined to be
husbands and fathers. One study even estimated that the improvements to
video game and computer quality alone accounted for half of the drop in
working time for men aged twenty-one to thirty between 2004 and 2015,
which decreased by 203 hours (12 percent). With virtual reality, infinitely
extendable games, and AI-generated personalized pornography on the
horizon, many more men will consider dropping out of the rat race and
becoming shut-ins living in their aging parents’ basements (already an
epidemic in Japan).
Procreative Technologies
No number of economic incentives alone can reform a culture that shapes
people’s hearts not to want children. Technology isn’t going away. But we

--- Sayfa 68 ---
should be aware that we’re not fighting a “neutral” market; we’re fighting
an intentional plot against family formation, carried out through technology.
Beginning to take the power of technology as seriously as the Party of
Destruction does requires going beyond tax policy tweaks or cultural
diatribes. It means that the Party of Creation should invest in true next-
generation technologies that will protect and valorize the traditional family.
Whereas contraceptive technologies such as Tinder trap users in a
vortex of “situationships” that don’t lead anywhere, entrepreneurs in the
Party of Creation will build in the opposite direction. For instance, Keeper
is not a dating or hookup app but a marriage app, designed with unique
paths for men and women. It uses expert matchmakers and artificial
intelligence to present its users with a single match at a time, based on an
extremely thorough initial questionnaire. Keeper is already making a dent,
attracting further investment, and growing like gangbusters among a
generation scarred by the Sexual Revolution and eager for real connection.
According to Keeper CEO Jake Kozloski, 25 percent of the first dates
scheduled so far have resulted in long-term relationships, and the first
Keeper wedding was last November, with several more in the pipeline.
Some of these procreative technologies will be truly cutting-edge.
Remote work and online marketplaces have made it easier for some
families to live near their relatives or in tight-knit communities while still
making a good living. The internet has made it easier than ever for
homeschool parents to swap best practices and lesson plans. And tools such
as CNC milling and 3D printers have restored the economic viability of
workshop production, at least for specialized products. Advanced
technology is an important element of rebuilding an American society in the
shape of the family.
But some of the most powerful “technologies” at our disposal are not
scientific novelties but ancient cultural practices. Our culture no longer
values observing a Sabbath. We’re so attuned to technological thinking that
it seems like a waste of time. Couldn’t we be working? But keeping the
Sabbath actually represents a conscious choice to prioritize faith, family,
and rest over work—in other words, to relinquish control. For centuries,
Sabbath closing laws protected a space of communal and familial life. The
laws were simple, but they served a radical purpose: they reminded
Americans, in the midst of our hustle and bustle, of the importance of rest,
of community, and of thanksgiving. Little by little over the course of the

--- Sayfa 69 ---
twentieth century, the Party of Destruction abolished the Sabbath rest. Now
burnout, including of parents, is reaching epic proportions.
We cannot expect a harried, restless, and anxious people to “be fruitful
and multiply.” The Party of Creation should fight to restore the Sabbath
rest. In government, we should advocate for mandatory overtime pay on
Sundays, for reducing Sabbath commercial hours, and for more pro-Sabbath
policy choices.
The same applies to our local communities and our own lives: For many
families, the Sabbath becomes busy not with work but with travel sports
and the like. We can fight at the level of the little platoons to build a
Sabbath rest again; to put down the screens for the day, worship God, and
invite some friends over; to rest, for ourselves and for our families.
We have to make the choice to reject workaholism, consumption, and
decadence and embrace “inefficient” rest. We have to trust that God will
reward this commitment. Many Americans have started practicing a “digital
Sabbath” that involves structured time away from screens or social media.
In Hyattsville, Maryland, members of the community are taking things even
further, with a few dozen families taking the “Postman Pledge.” Named
after the famed media historian Neil Postman, they agree to keep their kids
off of social media and smartphones and to limit the ways in which digital
tech shapes their families’ home lives. This technology temperance is in
service of doubling down on the real world, “to foster friendships among
our families in the natural, traditional ways human cultures have always
done.”
These efforts, even if small scale, can have an outsized impact. That’s
because family choices are most shaped by particular subcultures—the
beliefs, norms, and incentives of particular places. As the journalist Timothy
P. Carney argued in his book Family Unfriendly: How Our Culture Made
Raising Kids Much Harder than It Needs to Be, these subcultures are highly
determinative of whether people will get married and have kids. According
to Carney, what matters is that the pillars of pro-natalist traditions reshape
the environment around them for everyone. This includes the physical
landscape: pro-natalist subcultures minimize the distance between work,
church, school, and home, with parks and walkable paths that are safe for
children at play.
What you find is that even if many of these subcultures are dominated
by a particular religion, there are huge spillover effects. Secular Israelis

--- Sayfa 70 ---
have “only” an average of 2.2 kids in a society where large Orthodox
families are normal. Catholics living in Mormon Utah have more kids than
Catholics anywhere else do.
The Party of Creation can make the Sabbath its own sort of subculture.
Slowly but surely, its effects will be contagious, and soon we will find
Americans resting, gathering around the dinner table, and enjoying family
time throughout the week once again, learning to master the technologies
that support their flourishing.
The Third Snake: Antifamily Propaganda
Conservatives need to recognize that American family culture hasn’t simply
drifted away. There was a culture war, and we lost—in some sense before
we ever started fighting.
Several years before Roe v. Wade, plotlines about unwanted and
unexpected pregnancies started popping up in the most popular television
shows across all of the major networks. To this day, American media (now
including social media and tabloid websites) are dominated by messages
extolling a glamorous carefree child-free lifestyle and mocking the
traditional family.
In an era of globalized competition, this kind of spiritual warfare has
gone international. Last summer, a TikTok video went viral, accruing tens
of millions of views. It depicted a young, happy blonde eagerly putting her
hand out for her off-screen beloved to slip on an engagement ring. But as
she did, she experienced a vision of future domestic toil: mopping floors,
folding laundry, and cooking while holding a baby. She took the ring off.
Soon after the clip exploded, suspicious internet sleuths starting digging
into little details that seemed a bit off: tile patterns, T-shirt brands,
architectural features, and more. They quickly proved where the video came
from: it was Chinese antifamily, antinatalist propaganda made with a
foreign actress, produced for an American audience.
Uniparty elites know that these messages are for chumps. College-
educated, wealthy Americans (including liberal ones) are the most likely
group to be raising their kids as married parents. Our elites are actively
antagonistic to promoting normal family formation in the common culture
(they don’t want to “exclude” or “shame” anybody!), but of course they

--- Sayfa 71 ---
practice married parenting in their private lives. In the 1980s and ’90s,
conservatives fought for the common culture, especially regarding the
family, but for the last twenty years, it has seemed as though we have given
up. We can’t afford to.
An overtly child-hostile culture permeates cities such as DC and San
Francisco. That was driven home to me when I walked by Swampoodle
Park in a hip neighborhood in DC. It’s a tiny park, less than a quarter of an
acre, and on its edge sits a long, narrow caged-in structure. The structure is
about twenty feet tall, and inside it is a labyrinth with platforms and nets.
This is the “playground”—the other 90 percent of the park is an open area
set aside as a dog park.
This image—children cooped up in a literal cage so that the canine
“progeny” of childless “dog parents” can run about—perfectly sums up the
antifamily culture shaping legislation, regulation, and enforcement
throughout our sprawling government.
We have a culture and an economy that are hostile to family formation.
Neither the private sector nor the government takes the need to encourage
family formation into account in decision making: on the contrary, both the
public and private sector do much to damage family formation in service of
other priorities. The way things stand now, federal regulations demand that
builders study the impact of a major construction project such as a pipeline,
highway, or dam on the future population of an animal such as the Kings
River pyrg snail or the snail darter fish but not its impact on the future
population of America’s own children.
The time is ripe for the Party of Creation to take the offensive in the
culture war, in defense of the traditional family and, frankly, of the
happiness of a desperate and lonely generation that has been sold a bill of
goods and increasingly knows it.
Making a Home Is Real Work
Winning the future for America’s families requires more than tax tweaks; it
requires elevating the dignity and purpose of the home.
Having more women working has often been presented as the forward-
thinking option, supporting women’s desires. In fact, we’ve course
corrected so far that we’ve ignored many women’s actual preferences.

--- Sayfa 72 ---
Some “conservative” economists blindly set the number of women in
the workforce as a universally positive goal, the same way that the Biden
administration and the Party of Destruction do. But having more women
working isn’t axiomatically good, because large numbers of women with
kids at home prefer to support their families as homemakers or to work
part-time (over 70 percent, according to one recent study from the Institute
for Family Studies). The Party of Creation supports mothers who choose to
stay home with their kids and families that live off of the income of a single
traditional breadwinner. Women should be able to work if they want to, but
what the Uniparty refuses to admit is that we’re now in a society full of
women who feel as though they have to work when they’d prefer to orient
their life around their family. The polling data back this up.
The problem is that we live in a country that has systematically
devalued household work. In a republic, the familial hearth (and the role of
mothers in particular) was to be exalted. But the Party of Destruction has
ensured that women are ignored by the tools that policy makers use to
understand and manage the economy and everything else. According to
Lyman Stone, “our data collection institutions are structurally biased
against home-producers, disproportionately mothers: their production of
goods and services doesn’t count for anything in official data.” He points
out that if a mom were to start a small business and charge her husband for
all of her services, measured GDP would rise, with no real change in
economic activity.
This isn’t an accident. The Left meticulously constructs policies that
favor two-income households and constantly promotes a culture that
discourages women from working in the home. Under the guise of
“equality,” our culture, educational system, and economy reward and
incentivize work outside the home over work within it.
The Left’s approach to family policy is simple: to pretend that women’s
work at home counts for nothing and should be actively discouraged, and so
build policies that actively reward two-income households and child care in
state-regulated day cares.
We need to take the opposite approach, ensuring that family policy
proposals don’t punish traditional single-breadwinner families (under any
circumstances) and finding ways to recognize and encourage home
production (and reproduction!). Whereas the Left is fighting for corporate-
run day cares and advantages for woke capital, we should advocate for

--- Sayfa 73 ---
policies that advantage family-run in-home day cares and remove
regulatory barriers from home businesses, especially those involved in food
production.
Even as we fight back against the erasure of American women at home,
we need to serve families in which Mom continues to work. Employers are
disincentivized from making it easy for moms to have their kids close by at
work. It’s not a matter of the noise—especially since the rise of great noise-
canceling headphones, this is hardly a problem! The issue is that between
the onerous regulations of child care centers and the poor tax treatment for
on-site day care and nannies, employers are incentivized to force the
separation of the women working for them from their children. Those who
bear this burden most acutely are not high-powered girlboss executives
(who can afford a nanny or au pair) but working-class moms at the other
end of the pay scale. We also need to fight regulations that trap women into
coming back to work. Today the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA),
which provides for unpaid maternity leave, punishes mothers who choose to
leave the workforce afterward, requiring them to pay back thousands of
dollars of medical care premiums (whereas someone using FMLA for an
injury has no such requirement).
Tax breaks or subsidies for families, by themselves, cannot move the
needle on improving fertility rates (though the evidence suggests that they
can induce would-be parents to get married). In a review of family policy
around the world, Heritage Foundation scholars found that while
government policies that penalize parents can have a dramatic effect on
lowering birth rates, reversing these policies or offering even generous
public benefits to families does not significantly induce parents to have
more kids; inevitably, these benefits amount to a tiny fraction of the total
cost (including labor) of raising kids.
The biggest headwind against fertility is not this or that government
policy but prosperity itself: the wealthier a society is, the greater the
opportunity cost involved in raising kids. Choosing to bring children into
the world in developed societies is not an economic calculation but an act of
faith and love.
Rejecting decadence means making a conscious choice not to maximize
our own comfort, efficiency, and independence. In a culture in which
everyone else is making the opposite decision, forming a family feels like a
risky choice and not a natural one. We have to do all we can to make it

--- Sayfa 74 ---
easier for parents to make that choice. The more we do that, the more we
can win the cultural norms back from the Party of Destruction’s antifamily
propaganda.
The Party of Creation is literally more (pro)creative. As the economist
(and mother of eight) Catherine Pakaluk showed in her beautiful study
Hannah’s Children: The Women Quietly Defying the Birth Dearth, choosing
to have a large family is ultimately about valuing children in and of
themselves above “a more comfortable lifestyle,” usually done as an act of
faith. As the rest of America hastens toward decadence, conservatives and
religious believers are increasingly diverging from the herd with higher
levels of marriage, lower rates of divorce, and larger numbers of children.
And so, even as we kill the economic and technological snakes
strangling the American family at the material level, we must also cut off
the snake that tempts us in the same way the serpent did in the Garden of
Eden: by tempting our hearts away from worshipping and upholding the
right things. We must embrace the home as not just a place where two
parents and 2.1 kids happen to reside but as a sacred site of immortal value
and irreplaceable work.
Creative Abundance over Nihilist Decadence
The good news is that the seeds of renewal are scattered across the country
and many have already taken root. There are so many people, from young
couples getting married and having children to sitting US senators, who are
working to renew the American family.
For every antinatalist would-be girlboss or carefree playboy, there is
another twentysomething who has seen through the charade and wants to
set into the deep in search of meaning, connection, marriage, and children.
In magazines and online social spaces where they gather, the case against
the hookup culture, dating apps, chemical contraception, and other liturgies
of the culture of despair is stronger than ever.
I know this is true because when I arrived at the Heritage Foundation in
2021, I was determined to place us at the center of that work.
Before we could lead, though, we had to take a cold, hard look at our
own policies. Over the past few years, we have doubled our paid maternity
leave policy to what I think is the most generous of any conservative think

--- Sayfa 75 ---
tank. We also increased paternity leave, so fathers have the chance to help
their wives recover from labor and spend those precious first weeks at home
with their children. We adopted policies that include some work-from-home
and part-time, flexible solutions, so that young Heritage Foundation parents
have the choice to do what is best for their families.
Already, it’s paying off in a big way. Over the past couple of years,
there has been a Heritage baby boom, with baby showers and new birth
announcements almost every week. At the same time, we are retaining more
brilliant, young, talented conservative thinkers, who could make more
money elsewhere or in the private sector but who value our family-first
culture and mission.
Now we are working with partners at the state level, where a lot of the
outstanding work in family policy has been going on already. As of 2023,
twenty-four states have removed all sales tax on disposable diapers,
including Colorado, Indiana, and Virginia. Tennessee, under Governor Bill
Lee’s leadership, has become the first state in the nation to provide free
diapers to families on TennCare (the state Medicaid program), offering half
of the diapers a baby needs for the first two years of life. Since the Dobbs
decision, many states have also been working to expand Medicaid for needy
pregnant mothers and babies. And in 2021, Massachusetts introduced the
country’s first universal tax credit for children and other dependent family
members, which has since been expanded with bipartisan support to remove
the cap on the number of children it provides for.
Moreover, states are partnering with the vast network of pregnancy
resource centers that the pro-life movement spent decades building. These
centers provide new moms with loving encouragement as well as tangible
support with everything from pregnancy tests to ultrasounds, parenting
classes, adoption referrals, diaper banks, help signing up for social services,
and more. Beginning with Mississippi in 2017, at least eighteen states are
now partnering with these networks and providing them with tax credits or
state social spending. Florida, for example, increased its support for these
centers from $4.5 million to $25 million from 2022 to 2023 alone—and
Tennessee from $3 million to $20 million.
But this is easier said than done. As in so many other areas,
conservatives have long extolled the idea of the family while neglecting the
forces undermining and tearing apart so many actual families or preventing
them from being formed in the first place. Unfortunately, some of them still

--- Sayfa 76 ---
don’t understand what time it is. When confronted with data on the crisis of
family formation and working-class men’s marriageability, some want to
celebrate this as freedom: “Americans have voted with their wallets. . . .
More women have professional aspirations, more young adults want to
spend more time childless and single, and more adults of all ages prefer a
more comfortable lifestyle that often requires two incomes,” wrote Scott
Winship, a former director of the Social Capital Project. Ignoring the loss of
meaning, unhappiness, and loneliness (not to mention the war on a
conservative pattern of life), wax-museum conservatives point to consumer
choice and wealth. They betray no understanding of the stakes.
Thankfully, the decadence of wax-museum conservatives dooms them
to obsolescence. American parents of all stripes support an agenda that
recognizes their vital service to America’s future and supports them. A
recent study by the Ethics and Public Policy Center found massive support
for a pro-family agenda by Democratic, independent, and Republican
parents alike, with substantial majorities of Republicans approving not only
cultural interventions such as banning smartphones in classrooms and age
verification for access to online pornography but also generous economic
benefits for working families, such as state property tax credits for families,
a state-funded paid leave program for new parents, and state-funded
education savings accounts for kids. A head-in-the-sand approach to family
policy isn’t just wrong on the merits; it is also political suicide.
But family policy is about a lot more than just policy and politics; it’s
about spiritual renewal. We have built a society that alienates each
generation from the previous one. Many young American adults today have
never seen a dead body and never held a newborn baby. Becoming a parent
fills you with a real sense for the impermanence and fragility of life.
Sociologists such as Mary Eberstadt have shown huge correlations among
singleness, fatherlessness, childlessness, atheism, and revolutionary anger
and, inversely, among marriage, family, children, growing faith, and a
conservative attitude toward social change. The victory of abundance over
decadence begins in that spark of transcendent hope that comes with
holding your new baby in your arms.
Neither the cost disease socialists nor the wax-museum conservatives
can deliver on the abundance agenda. The New Conservative Movement’s
vision of an America brimming with flourishing families, raising their kids,
and working productively, with affordable housing and other necessities,

--- Sayfa 77 ---
full of babies and of Sabbath rest, is enormously attractive. We shouldn’t
get in our own way in articulating that vision to the American people,
celebrating it in our culture, and adopting the policies to help it happen.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Sayfa 78 ---
Chapter 4
Schools Should Teach Piety
The only foundation for a useful education in a republic is to be laid in
Religion. Without this there can be no virtue, and without virtue there can
be no liberty, and liberty is the object and life of all republican
governments.
—Benjamin Rush
I’ll state it extra clearly for the FBI: I am a parental rights extremist.
The single most important thing we can do for education is to ensure
that every taxpayer dollar spent on education—federal, state, and local—
follows a child to the school of his or her parents’ choice.
For most parents, universal school choice is important because it helps
them do right by their kids. But for our country, the stakes are even higher;
it’s a battle for the future of America.
What may surprise you to learn, then, is that as strongly as I care about
parental rights, I don’t think our current educational crisis is just about
parental choice; we’re fighting to reassert our rights because of a deeper
crisis.
The current educational crisis does not really arise from a fundamental
disagreement about rights, about whether a parent or a teacher should
educate a child. In a healthy society, it would be both. The problem is that
our schools have been transformed from institutions designed to cultivate
children’s souls into godless assembly lines meant to shape obedient little
comrades who think morality is a construct and nature is an illusion.

--- Sayfa 79 ---
Right now, parents’ rights must be jealously guarded because America’s
teachers have gone insane. The reason many parents are having to reassert
their rights is that teachers are trying to enforce a truly radical agenda, one
that assumes that reality is a social construct.
We have to restore reality-based education.
In my heart, I’m an educator. It’s a vocation more than it is a profession
or a job. In my case, a contemplated career detour from a university job into
an administrative role at a prestigious college prep school turned into a
calling from God: to start a classical Catholic school in my hometown of
Lafayette, Louisiana.
As a historian, I’ve always drawn inspiration from America’s profound
heritage of education. In many ways, education made this country. Our first
university, set up so that America would have its own learned clergy, was
founded only sixteen years after the landing at Plymouth Rock. Only a few
years later, we had our first printing press and the first book printed in
British America, the Bay Psalm Book. Then in 1647, the Massachusetts
colonists passed the Old Deluder Satan Law, establishing the first public
education in the New World, aimed at ensuring the literacy of the citizenry.
The Puritans recognized that education was a matter of the highest
public importance, vital for the spiritual health of the commonwealth.
Learning to read meant learning to think for oneself, to draw inspiration and
direction from God’s Word and the wisdom of the ages, and to participate in
an increasingly skilled and commercial society. Broad literacy was the
precondition for a republican form of government in which ordinary
citizens had a real say in political debate.
The early American colonists understood what every wise person
throughout history has realized: that at the end of the day, all education is
moral education. Our forebears believed that school wasn’t just about
memorizing facts; it was about shaping character.
But sometime between the Old Deluder Satan Law and the twenty-first
century, we forgot this truth.
During the covid-19 pandemic, public schools around the country went
remote. With families stuck at home under strict lockdowns, kids logged on
to Zoom from their kitchen tables. For many parents, it was their first time
experiencing what was going on inside their kids’ classrooms, and it
alarmed so many of them that it almost single-handedly led to a revolution
in schooling in America.

--- Sayfa 80 ---
Honestly, for most parents, the wokeness they encountered—critical
race theory in history class, gender ideology in biology—was only the tip of
the iceberg. They saw their kids struggling and failing to learn from
teachers who were strung out and unprepared at best, indifferent, jaded, and
crazed with outlandish ideas at worst. They experienced the bizarre
methods that “education experts” prescribed to teach math and the surreal
vacuum at the heart of how reading and writing are taught.
It’s easy to think that the problem was just remote school. But the truth
goes much deeper.
Though few parents were themselves teachers, they intuited that
something was fundamentally rotten about this whole enterprise.
They were right.
A Century-Long Conspiracy
It might seem to average American parents as though our current
educational environment is a passing fad. In fact, it’s the result of a hundred
years of plotting by progressives who want to create generations of obedient
drones. For more than a century, the Party of Destruction has zeroed in on
the education system as the key institution of social transformation. From
Plato’s Republic on down, philosophers and revolutionaries interested in
remaking the world in their image of utopia have realized that reshaping
young minds is a prerequisite for success.
The Party of Destruction’s long march through all of America’s
institutions emanates from its biggest stronghold: the public education
system, teachers colleges, and universities. They are led by a group of
administrators, donors, education theorists, and teacher foot soldiers of the
sort C. S. Lewis called “the Conditioners” in his warning about dystopian
progressivism, The Abolition of Man.
Beginning in the early twentieth century, an entirely alien and hostile
philosophy of education began its march through our institutions of
education, led by Conditioners such as John Dewey. Those Conditioners—
who claimed the title of Progressives at the time—realized that the tradition
of American education, steeped in the Bible, Anglo-American history, and
Western culture stood in the way of their aspiration to use the education
system, in Dewey’s words, as “the fundamental method of social progress

--- Sayfa 81 ---
and reform.” The Conditioners took on the role of cultural barbarians,
burning to the ground—mostly figuratively but increasingly literally—the
statues, icons, and touchstones of our cultural inheritance.
The Conditioners first mounted a direct assault on the tradition of
American education, and only partially succeeded. In that round, they took
control of almost every teachers college and many public schools, but they
failed to make public education compulsory or to mandate the total removal
of anything touching Christianity in public classrooms (though they made a
concerted effort on both fronts).
But the Conditioners’ indirect effort was much more successful. The
soft underbelly of American civilization has often been its commitment to
what is immediately practical and “useful.” So the Conditioners realized
that if they set aside their overt social engineering for a moment, they could
make the case that the liberal arts and the Western tradition were not useful
to a modern industrial society and that schools should instead focus on
teaching methods and skills such as critical thinking and training in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). Once education had
been sufficiently emptied of anything substantive from the American
tradition (in the name of mere technique), a new philosophy of moral
formation could quietly take its place.
This philosophical shift has led to creating new generations of shallow
people who don’t value the permanent things. It’s bigger than just a few bad
apples or underfunded institutions; it’s a pervasive philosophical problem.
The political theorist Patrick Deneen discovered that his students, even at
enormously selective schools, were brilliant know-nothings with a
“pervasive ignorance of western and American history, civilization, politics,
art and literature.” That wasn’t an accident but the successful outworking of
an educational system that aimed to produce “cultureless ciphers who can
live anywhere and perform any kind of work without inquiring about its
purposes or ends,” ideal cogs in a globalist, Uniparty economic system. “In
such a world, possessing a culture, a history, an inheritance, a commitment
to a place and particular people, specific forms of gratitude and
indebtedness . . . are hindrances and handicaps.”
While Deneen was writing about his students at an elite university, you
can see the same phenomenon at work in Oregon’s public schools.
According to the state’s 2021 K–12 Social Science Standards, traditional
US civics instruction accounts for only a sixth of the overall graduation

--- Sayfa 82 ---
requirement. The rest is taken up by modules in areas such as Ethnic
Studies, Tribal History, and Genocide Studies, focused on concepts such as
“identity” and “resistance,” in which teachers are instructed to “discuss
incidents and types of oppression,” making sure to “attend to trauma-
informed and social emotional learning.” One student I spoke to said that in
lieu of a traditional freshman history class, his Portland high school had
imposed a yearlong seminar on the radical leftist historian Howard Zinn’s A
People’s History of the United States.
Thus, when students graduate and become antifa activists tearing down
a statue of George Washington, throwing Molotov cocktails at police
stations, and shouting anti-Semitic slogans, the problem is not that they
didn’t pay attention in school; it is that they did.
In the same year that he wrote The Abolition of Man, Lewis wrote an
allegorical story or “fairy-tale,” That Hideous Strength, reflecting the same
themes. That Hideous Strength and The Abolition of Man are often regarded
as Lewis’s major statements on modern science and technology and on the
roots of totalitarianism.
Yet both works are centered on traditional institutions of education. That
was not simply Lewis, an Oxford don, writing about what he knew. Lewis
foresaw that a totalitarian rewiring of society required not just new
technologies of society control but also the inculcation of a fundamentally
revolutionary vision of the human person through the educational system.
Society would literally need to be reprogrammed to accept its new masters.
Rule 1: Tradition Is Oppressive
What every faction of the Party of Destruction shares is the belief that all
human values are ultimately arbitrary; that the ideas, symbols, traditions,
and morals shaping a human society are something made up by that society
and therefore something that can be remade to transform society. This is
why the first rule of progressive education is that education is about
“breaking free” of tradition.
Progressives are willing to do anything to make sure people get with
that program. My family would know. In Louisiana, Progressivism came
hard after the Cajun way of life. Today, Governor Huey Long (1893–1935)
—“The Kingfish,” as he liked to call himself—is often regarded as a kind

--- Sayfa 83 ---
of populist. And certainly he had the common touch in his campaigning.
But he was at heart a Progressive: he made his start suing large
corporations, using new antitrust laws passed by Progressive reformers, and
he supported the Progressive John Parker for governor before turning
against him as a rival. His causes were Progressive causes.
What’s ironic is that leftists like to pitch themselves as champions of
“unassimilated” minorities. The reality is that they’ve always been brutally
imperialist in their efforts to erase “oppressive” conservative beliefs.
Certainly, some of the traditions (such as dirt roads) that Long swept away
needed changing. But he was hostile to the Cajuns. He viewed our way of
life as fundamentally backward, part of what made Louisiana so
“medieval.” And he hated our resistance to the centralization of power (for
our own good, of course), our indifference to “modernization,” our holding
true to our language and our faith.
To teach your children a way of speaking is the same as to teach them a
way of seeing the world. In our proud French heritage, the Party of
Destruction saw a resistance to assimilation and participation in the broader
US economy. In our Catholic faith, it saw mere superstition. In our strong
communities, it saw a suspicion of outsiders, a bulwark against openness
and cosmopolitanism. In our rural way of life, it saw nothing but inefficient
industry and a waste of human capital.
And so it tried to destroy us. The Louisiana Constitution of 1921
(overseen by state elites, including the Progressive governor) had banned
Cajun French from being taught in schools. Huey Long went a step further.
One of his claims to Progressive fame is that he gave away free
textbooks to all students and increased the percentage of students going to
public school dramatically. But my own grandfather, PaPa Pete,
remembered it a bit differently. The textbooks were exclusively in English,
and the public school reforms were designed to undermine Cajun culture
and the system of Catholic diocesan schools.
PaPa Pete remembered the humiliation when, in the first or second
grade, all of the textbooks were switched out one day. It wasn’t that he
couldn’t speak or read English (though Cajun French was his first
language). It was the message it was sending to the ordinary folks of
Opelousas: you’re backward, your people are nobody rubes, get with the
program, we’re in charge. He hated Huey Long for it till the day he died:

--- Sayfa 84 ---
“In our own state that we founded, this sonofabitch was telling us we didn’t
matter.”
Pat Buchanan, writing twenty years ago, saw that the Conditioners
aimed to do to all of America what Huey Long and the Progressive
movement had tried to do to the Cajuns. Of the cultural carnage wreaked by
the Left’s march through our institutions, Buchanan observed:
Destroy the record of a people’s past, leave it in ignorance of who its ancestors were and what
they did, and one can fill the empty vessels of their souls with a new history, as in 1984.
Dishonor or disgrace a nation’s heroes, and you can demoralize its people. . . .
Many of the institutions that now have custody of America’s past operate on the principles
of Big Brother’s Ministry of Truth: drop down the “memory hole” the patriotic stories of
America’s greatness and glory, and produce new “warts-and-all” histories that play up her
crimes and sins, revealing what we have loved to be loathsome and those we have revered to be
disreputable, even despicable. Many old heroes have not survived the killing fields of the New
History. [The] Ultimate goal: Destroy patriotism, kill the love of country, demoralize the people,
deconstruct America. History then will no longer unite and inspire us, but depress and divide us
into the children of victims and the children villains of America’s past.
It’s no coincidence that no region in the country delivered a higher
percentage of votes for Buchanan in the 1992 election than did Acadiana.
We knew exactly what he was talking about. It just took the rest of the
country thirty years to catch up.
Rule 2: Dishonor Your Parents
If you stop to think about it, it may seem odd that “Honor your father and
mother” is considered important enough to feature in the Ten
Commandments, surrounded by warnings about murder and adultery. But
on reflection it makes perfect sense; our entire posture toward life is
determined by whether we have proper respect for the deeds of the past.
That’s why, at first glance, there is something deeply strange in the fact
that the areas of education that have most given themselves over to the
Conditioners are not the hard sciences (the strongholds of skepticism and
the Party of Destruction in Lewis’s day) but fields such as English and my
own discipline of history.
After all, these subjects, by their nature, demand piety. The humanities
should naturally resist the progressive educational goal of rejecting the past,
because the humanities are traditional, dealing in the language, stories, and
symbols handed down to us. What is a language but a tradition of speech?

--- Sayfa 85 ---
Almost by definition, the utterances we use to make words and the rules
that form a grammar are arbitrary—indeed, there are thousands and
thousands of human societies, each of which does them differently.
Similarly with history: going back into the mists of time, billions of things
have “happened.” The stories that we tell about where our people come
from are part of a tradition of storytelling about our history.
It’s a sign of how corrupt our modern education system is that the
humanities are the most antitraditional fields now. When the humanities are
oriented toward piety and reverence, along with a desire to move through a
particular society’s traditions toward the permanent things and big-T Truth,
they attract the sort of teacher who inspires his or her students toward love
and gratitude of their inheritance. Looking back later in life at my own
education in a Lafayette public school, I realized that that had been the
spark of my own love of learning: teachers whose love of Shakespeare,
Greek mythology, and Civil War history was sincere and infectious.
In an educational system premised on piety, schools act in loco parentis:
they are tasked with taking responsibility for the kids in their charge with
the same fidelity and care that their parents would demonstrate. But the
Conditioners have a very different idea of in loco parentis: they want to
replace parents, to replace the tradition parents are trying to hand on with a
very different one, like a cuckoo kicking another bird’s babies out of the
nest to replace them with its own. What unites the various educational
factions of the Party of Destruction is the abolition of inheritance. No
longer are students the dignified heirs of a culture and a way of life that
form a foundation upon which they can stand; instead they are taught that
their value is now as cogs in an economic apparatus or as
minirevolutionaries serving some utopian vision or another.
Precisely because the humanities are where an important handing on
happens, the Conditioners seized on them as a tool of social manipulation:
disrupt how language, culture, and history are handed on, raise children
whose attitude toward their inheritance is one of scorn instead of gratitude,
and you can destroy a tradition in a single generation.
Of course, in the process, these academic fields will wither and die. If
not motivated by a sense of the past as a cherished storehouse of wisdom,
the study of literature, history, and art becomes nothing more than an
instrument for criticizing society, not something valuable in its own right.
The result of critical race theory approaches such as the 1619 Project (now

--- Sayfa 86 ---
in thousands of schools) is not kids who love a different history but kids
who don’t see the point of history at all. Lewis wrote of the self-defeating
nature of this enterprise, “To ‘see through’ everything is the same as not to
see.”
It should also go without saying that institutions unprepared for moral
education are also unprepared for the education of any other aspects of the
human person. Even measuring the wrong things, as public schools do,
national progress in eighth-grade math and reading reversed around 2012
before plunging as never before after the pandemic. Teachers’ unions,
protecting their own convenience over the well-being of America’s children
to keep lockdowns and remote school going (for two years in some places!),
threw kerosene on a fire that was already raging.
Rule 3: The Rules of Nature Are Made to Be Broken
Given the Conditioners’ rejection of any unchosen authorities (including
tradition and reality), it’s unsurprising that they eventually got around to
discarding nature itself. What is a man? What is a woman? To the Party of
Destruction, these created beings are merely arbitrary lumps of matter to be
rearranged at will. It was inevitable that gender ideology would infiltrate
and take over our schools. It’s not really the product of cultural Marxism or
a conspiracy but something more fundamental.
To say that man is for women and vice versa, even simply biologically
or grammatically, is to make a claim about the meaning of life, the nature of
the family, and the purpose of the body. Such a claim is necessarily limiting.
It implies that men and women can’t lead exactly the same kind of life, that
kids need both of their parents, that institutions that support a man, a
woman, and their children have a kind of priority that no other
configuration can possibly have. The so-called gender binary is
“exclusionary” in the sense that any truth is exclusionary of falsehood. If
you are committed to “inclusion” above all else, and if you define public
schooling in terms of total inclusion, your system is committed to
disintegration from the start.
Gender was simply the last domino to fall, after the community, the
nation, the human person, the faith, the West, and every other value had
already been bulldozed.

--- Sayfa 87 ---
By reimagining the human person as merely another animal free of any
spiritual core, we’ve also eliminated the ideas of meaning and dignity. In
The Abolition of Man, C. S. Lewis called the products of this kind of
education “men without chests.” The Conditioners sought to remake our
children in their own perverted image and were surprised that their
experiment produced not a Nietzschean Overman but a confused, anxious,
ignorant generation. As Lewis wrote so powerfully, “We make men without
chests and expect of them virtue and enterprise. We laugh at honor and are
shocked to find traitors in our midst. We castrate and bid the geldings be
fruitful.”
In Lewis’s description, the castration (of virtue, honor, and vitality) was
intended to be symbolic. We have sunk so far that it is, in states such as
Oregon, not a metaphor. The ultimate poisoned fruits of our public
education system are the kids with sullen eyes and purple hair who know all
about “their pronouns” but don’t know how pronouns work in English
grammar. Lewis’s “men without chests” have been joined in a twisted
mirror by “women without breasts.”
What gender ideology has done to an American generation is something
so damaging that it serves as a condensed symbol of the bankruptcy of the
entire institution. America’s public school system, as a whole, is beyond
saving.
What the Party of Destruction doesn’t want you to know is not just that
American parents have had enough but that they’re fighting back—and
winning—all over the country.
Yiatin Chu never had any intention of becoming an education activist.
But when New York mayor Bill de Blasio announced a plan to scrap the
traditional merit test–based admissions to New York’s elite public magnet
schools in the name of racial equity, she decided she had to get involved.
De Blasio’s plans went beyond just scrapping the standardized test for New
York’s best public high schools; he also sought to defund New York’s
public gifted and talented programs.
As with similar efforts in San Francisco and northern Virginia, those
changes were justified in the name of racial equity. The Conditioners hate
these programs, because they expose the manifest failures of public
elementary education and underline the importance of family structure and
culture on student outcomes.

--- Sayfa 88 ---
But Yiatin and many others like her couldn’t help but notice who
specifically was being punished: the Asian families who qualified for the
programs in disproportionate numbers, despite (in New York City)
experiencing identical rates of poverty as blacks and Hispanics. And she
fought back, running for and winning a school board seat and cofounding
PLACE NYC, a nonprofit that organizes parents to fight for merit-based
public school programs in New York City. They successfully stopped de
Blasio’s machinations in their tracks.
There are parents, especially moms, all over the country who were
radicalized by the experience of public education over the past several
years, fighting and winning school board seats in order to advance
curriculum transparency, ban Critical Race Theory from classrooms, protect
merit-based programs, prevent teacher activists from concealing children’s
“gender transitions” from parents, and otherwise restore parental rights.
Yiatin was able to fight back inside the system. But she’s in a minority.
In huge numbers, parents are opting for an even more radical solution to do
what is best for their kids: withdrawing them from the public school system
altogether.
In 1973, there were fewer than thirteen thousand American kids being
schooled at home. During the pandemic, more than 11 million kids were
homeschooled. And parents, encouraged by the wealth of resources now
available for pupils, liked what they saw: even accounting for the temporary
surge, homeschooling is up 30 percent since before the pandemic. And
while the original homeschoolers were largely those with highly defined
religious or philosophical values who were ill served in public schools,
homeschooling has gone mainstream, with parents expressing a wide
variety of motivations.
Studies suggest that the public school population has dropped a
substantial 5 percent since the pandemic, representing millions of students
who have exited the broken public school system and are beginning to
fundamentally change the culture of education in America.
I didn’t have a revolution in American schooling in mind when I started
John Paul the Great Academy in Lafayette, Louisiana, along with my good
friend Father Bryce Sibley, a brilliant theologian and parish priest with a
rock-ribbed commitment to the Catholic faith. But we stumbled into a small
role in a much more important movement, one that, it is no exaggeration to
say, may help save Western civilization.

--- Sayfa 89 ---
The implicit American understanding of education is that it’s meant to
shape children to the needs of their future careers or a future, more
“progressive” society, who will evolve beyond their parents, past, and faith.
Even conservatives often talk about growing up as though it’s about
separation and accumulation.
Classical education restores an older understanding of education. It’s
about honoring your parents, not superseding them; carrying the torch of
tradition, not burning down the family home. Drawing inspiration from
Greek and Roman academic traditions, classical education seeks to ground
students in the good, the true, and the beautiful. Its highest aim is to form
virtuous students grounded in the best of the Western canon. Classical
schools instruct students through the sequence known as the trivium,
guiding them through grammar, logic, and rhetoric. Students first establish
a knowledge base, then learn how to evaluate arguments, and finally learn
how to express their thoughts articulately.
At the heart of classical education is its view of the human person. It
sees students not as learning machines or future cogs in some great
industrial gear but as precious beings made in the image of God. Students
must be led to the font of knowledge by the involvement of all of their
faculties: their intellects, yes, but also their morals, their sense of beauty,
and their affections. Classical educators see ourselves as shepherds of our
students, ultimately leading them toward a knowledge of the heart and not
merely of the head. We want to teach our students the right things to love.
Classical education steeps students in the great works of literature,
philosophy, history, and science—what the poet Matthew Arnold called “the
best which has been thought and said.” Instead of Critical Race Theory and
Marxist claptrap, children learn about Greece and Rome, William
Shakespeare and the Renaissance, Jane Austen, Emily Dickinson, and the
glory of the American founding.
Classical education is interested in more than forming good students; its
charge is forming students who are good.
This movement is designed to recover the past, but it’s essentially
forward looking. If you look through the roster of the thousands of classical
schools and the institutions established to support them, I don’t think you’ll
find a single one older than fifty years old, with the vast majority founded
in the last thirty years.

--- Sayfa 90 ---
I don’t think my story, and the story of John Paul the Great Academy, is
atypical. Father Sibley and I did not set out to establish a classical school
per se; we felt a divine calling to restore the tradition of Catholic education
in our corner of Louisiana after the devastation wrought by Hurricane
Katrina. But as we developed the concept of the school and its curriculum,
we realized that we were facing an unexpected problem: even though
parents rejected the moral values of modern schools, they hadn’t unlearned
the incentive structure of progressive education.
As a headmaster, I was shocked by how deeply progressive philosophy
had penetrated even into communities of informed, educated, devout
parents. They were parents who viscerally opposed political correctness and
cultural Marxism, who were (or thought they were) conscious of the
Conditioners’ machinations against their kids. But they had an Achilles’
heel: “college preparation.”
What does college preparation mean, practically? It doesn’t just mean
mastering reading, writing, mathematics, science, and so on up to a certain
level. In secondary education, “college preparation” means preparing to
excel at the mechanics of going to college, including being admitted to elite
and selective schools and gaining college course credit. Though seemingly
innocuous, “college preparation” has established an institutional chokehold
on the best schools and the most educated parents, regardless of their
espoused education philosophy or religious values.
Before he founded the Classic Learning Test (CLT), Jeremy Tate was a
college counselor at a prestigious Catholic school near Baltimore. He
recalled his immense difficulty in getting his students to take courses on
philosophy and Catholic apologetics, taught by some of the best teachers in
the school. Despite their avowed interest in the subjects, his students
demurred that there were no Advanced Placement (AP) exams for them. If
they took them, not only would they be sacrificing college credit, they
would be lowering their GPA even if they got an A; their school, like many
others, awarded extra GPA points for AP classes.
When he looked around, Jeremy realized that almost everything by
which his school measured and defined success was controlled by one
entity. It wasn’t the parents, the teachers, the school’s board, or even the
archdiocese; it was the College Board, whose power and influence over
American education is subtle but immense. Like many college prep–
focused schools, including Christian ones, Tate’s school prided itself on its

--- Sayfa 91 ---
SAT scores, the number of its National Merit Scholars, and the number of
AP courses it offered—all of which were controlled by the College Board.
As a headmaster, I found myself often referencing Archbishop J.
Michael Miller’s “Five Essential Marks of Catholic Schools” in his book
The Holy See’s Teaching on Catholic Schools, one of which is that Catholic
schools “are genuine communities of faith” that represent the greatest
alternative to our “individualistic society”; genuine communities, shaped by
the bonds of relationship, duty, and love in which the inculcation of culture
really happens.
But when I looked at the AP course standards, I realized that there was
no way I could let our community be controlled by the College Board’s
puppet strings. The AP United States History course has no use for the
biographies of American statesmen such as Benjamin Franklin and James
Madison. Its English Literature and Composition exam requires no
knowledge or love of any literature from our beautiful tradition, focusing
solely on cultivating “critical thinking” skills; Shakespeare and Chaucer are
optional. The AP European History course has no use for the inconvenient
centrality of Christianity, except for highlighting the rise of the liberal state
out of the supposed Protestant and Catholic bloodletting of the Thirty Years’
War (what the theologian William Cavanaugh calls “the myth of religious
violence”).
(But while the College Board has no interest in letting American parents
have a say in what shapes their kids’ heads and hearts, it’s tripped over itself
to seek input from the Chinese Communist Party. An extraordinary
investigation by the National Association of Scholars revealed that the
College Board had partnered extensively with the CCP on the development
of the AP Chinese Language and Culture Course and even cosponsored the
CCP’s Confucius Institutes, propaganda outfits hosted in American colleges
and high schools.)
One of my hardest initial battles was to convince parents that the
formation of their kids, and of their souls, was more important than what
passes for “college preparation”; in other words, the subordination of the
lessons, curriculum, homework, and lectures to a value system other than
the pursuit of truth, goodness, and beauty. We succeeded only because, as a
“genuine community of faith,” we knew that we could choose to worship
only one God, and so we chose the true One.

--- Sayfa 92 ---
It goes without saying that, motivated by a love of wonder and of
excellence, our kids also did great on the standardized tests.
For this reason, one of the most exciting and important signs of the
seriousness of the classical education movement was the development of
the Classic Learning Test by Jeremy Tate, which aims to displace the SAT
by 2040. It provides rigorous testing of student performance but draws on
the best of the classical inheritance, not merely whatever deracinated slop
can pass the College Board’s sensitivity committee (a real thing). Florida
recently announced that its public universities will accept the CLT, and
more states will soon follow.
The CLT is only the tip of the iceberg. A forest of institutions is
blooming, with a number of national-level associations promoting the
movement, Hillsdale College’s Barney Charter School Initiative providing
resources to help start classical charter schools, the Classical Academic
Press publishing textbooks and teacher training, the Paideia Institute
(among others) offering online Greek and Latin for homeschools and
emerging classical schools, and much else besides. The classical school
movement is building an institutional foundation for the next century of
American education.
Free Education for a Free Country
One of the things I love about the United States is that it guarantees the
finest education in the history of the world to everyone, regardless of birth,
family situation, or parental involvement. Throughout history, it has said a
lot about society as to which people it believed were “worthy” to be
educated. One of the strongest evidences that America was founded on the
Christian notion of human dignity, that “all men are created equal” (in
dignity, by God), has been the country’s commitment to realizing the ideal
of universal education.
The most powerful tool we have in realizing the ideal of American
education is universal school choice, ensuring that every single tax dollar
(local, state, and federal) follows a student to the school of his or her
parents’ choice. School choice is an idea whose time has come, and the
progress we are seeing as we go on the offensive is nothing short of
breathtaking. The journalist Cara Fitzpatrick even entitled her book on the

--- Sayfa 93 ---
subject The Death of Public School: How Conservatives Won the War over
Education in America (from her lips to God’s ears!).
Like many other hopeful signs, the turnaround in education began
almost without anyone’s notice. Probably the apex of the Conditioners’
contemporary power was the passage of the No Child Left Behind Act in
2001 and the subsequent attempts to create a Common Core curriculum
imposed on school systems all across America, centralizing federal power
over education to an unprecedented degree. But because the money was still
local (despite the Department of Education’s increasing attempts to use the
purse strings to control American schools), and because features of those
actions brought some visibility and accountability to teachers unions, they
proved immensely unpopular. In 2015, a bipartisan consensus stripped out
the national control elements of No Child Left Behind, and power has
increasingly swung back toward the states as parents fight for it.
In a sense, the biggest ally in our fight for universal school choice has
been the teachers unions. One can say of them what Burke said of the
French revolutionaries: “In the manifest failure of their abilities, they take
credit for their benevolence.” But while they claim the humanitarian mantel
of “professional educators,” the teachers unions have been so transparently
self-serving, so unconcerned about parental voices and desires, so callous
about what is best for students that they have been by far the most effective
marketing for universal school choice. Many a red state governor went all
in on school choice after being sued by the teachers unions to keep schools
closed during the pandemic.
As a result, political pressure toward school choice has exploded. Ten
states have passed universal education savings account programs since 2021
alone. In 2023, lawmakers in fifteen states passed bills establishing school
choice programs or expanding existing ones, with dozens more states
introducing legislation.
The desire to encourage and direct this momentum led us to introduce
the Education Freedom Report Card at the Heritage Foundation, now in its
third year. The report card tracks educational choice across a number of
policies,
transparency
around
curriculum,
friendliness
toward
homeschooling, public school choice, teacher freedom, DEI bureaucrats
(that’s a negative variable), value to taxpayers, and more. Florida has led
the rankings so far, but other states are racing to catch up, with Iowa and
Arkansas showing leaps-and-bounds improvements even since last year.

--- Sayfa 94 ---
But contrary to the critics of school choice, it does not actually aim at
the death of public schools. It will disrupt and destroy a public school
system that has grown insular, corrupt, and incompetent (as shown by
falling test scores across every metric for the past decade almost
everywhere in the nation). Universal school choice lifts all boats by
ensuring that parents are supported to make the decisions that are best for
their kids and creating meaningful competition and market signals to all
schools, including public schools.
It’s clear why this should be the case just by reasoning from first
principles. But social science evidence is already coming in that validates
this hypothesis. One big study published in February 2020 as a National
Bureau of Economic Research working paper found that increased
competition due to school choice led to higher standardized test scores and
lower absenteeism and suspension rates in public schools, especially for
students with lower family incomes and lower maternal education levels.
The Heritage Foundation will continue to monitor student outcomes and
advocate for policies that serve parents and students, not the teachers
unions.
Just a few years ago, no states had universal school choice. Just this
year, there are more than a half-dozen states that have established universal
school choice, with more on the way, not to mention dozens of states with
more marginal improvements toward parental choice. A revolution in
American education has begun.
Education and Piety
Progressive critics have lately charged that support for classical schooling is
only the latest Republican plot to undermine teachers unions and destroy
America’s public schools. For instance, one such critic, historian Erin
Maglaque, asserted that “the Christian nationalists and neoliberal free
marketeers whose interests have coalesced in the cause of classical charter
schools don’t actually care about Petrarch.”
These critics have it exactly backward. Everything we are doing, public
and private, to enable school vouchers and parental choice (including public
charter schools) is in service of the underlying mission of the classical
education movement. We don’t merely seek an exit from the system; we are

--- Sayfa 95 ---
coming for the curriculums and classrooms of the remaining public schools,
too. We seek to return American education to a tradition that encourages the
love of beauty, awakens wonder, teaches gratitude for our republic, and
instills piety toward our nation, even as it teaches a prudent and circumspect
history of its flaws. We fight for this regardless of whether your kids are in
a public school, a charter school, or a private school or homeschooled.
Caring about Petrarch is way more dangerous to the Conditioners than is
the illusion of parental choice in a system whose educational philosophy is
secretly controlled by the College Board.
But for now, we will start with universal school choice. As the classicist
James Hankins said in reply to these critics:
Thanks to the classical education movement, some children, at least, will not have to live their
lives unable to perceive the beauty in Shakespeare’s sonnets, Michelangelo’s Pietà, or Handel’s
Messiah. It’s a pity so many, trapped in politicized schools, will have to endure a diminished
humanity. But the door to the classical school is open.
In this cataclysmic battle for our remaining institutions, there is no room
for half measures. The single best way to equip men and women to contend
for America’s future is to immerse them in the intellectual traditions of the
West. This is armor against the modern age of decadence and incoherence,
for it reminds us—inspires us—to build and rebuild while our opponents
are hell-bent on destruction. It’s an education motivated by love and
gratitude, which you grasp as soon as you meet the young men and women
who are the products of these new institutions of American education.
Our successes in education fill me with tremendous hope for the future
of America. We are already on the offensive.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Sayfa 96 ---
Chapter 5
The Economy Should Serve the Country,
Not the Other Way Around
As many as possible should share in the ownership of the land and thus be
bound to it by economic interest, by the investment of love and work, by
family loyalty, by memory and tradition.
—Wendell Berry
The US economy today bears the same resemblance to a system of free
enterprise as a movie set does to a real stock exchange: it’s a facade.
The Uniparty elite have been selling out the American middle class.
Worse, they have been using ordinary Americans’ hard-earned savings to do
so. Globalization and the hollowing out of the American heartland are not
the result of some economic law but of political choices made by our
corrupt elites and the avowed enemies of the American way of life in
Davos, Brussels, and Beijing. Behind the mask of supposedly capitalistic
corporations lies the specter of social control and the destruction of our
liberty.
That the “free market process” kept sending American wealth and jobs
to China, kept repressing wages, kept driving up the price of assets faster
than regular Americans could acquire them, kept bolstering woke
corporations
and
undermining
small
enterprises,
wax-museum
conservatives hold not to be a matter of public concern, not something you
should actually do something about via any actionable policy lever, lest you
interfere with the “free market process.”

--- Sayfa 97 ---
We talk a lot about “the economy,” but anyone who studies political
language knows that broad words often conceal fuzzy thinking. When was
the last time you heard someone ask what the economy was for? The thing
we’ve forgotten is that money and prosperity aren’t about mere
accumulation and consumption; they’re about creating a world in which
children can thrive, traditions can continue, and faith can flourish. In other
words, the economy was made for people, not the other way around.
The Uniparty will tell you that there’s nothing that can be done to stop
the war on ownership. The New Conservative Movement recognizes that
even as we seek to prudentially use the best tools to shape it, having an
economy that upholds our way of life is very much an appropriate subject
of political action. We must disassemble this sham economy that is
funneling money to the parasitical enemies of the American way of life and
reassemble the great, productive American economic system of free
enterprise and meaningful work, the dynamic engine that drove our
prosperity and that is our future.
Globalist Corporatism and Socialism Are Functionally the
Same
If socialism descends upon America, where will it come from? In his classic
book Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy, famous for introducing the
idea of “creative destruction,” the economist Joseph Schumpeter (1883–
1950) had a surprising answer: the modern corporation.
Schumpeter’s analysis focused on a transformation in the business
world in the early twentieth century called the managerial revolution.
Before the managerial revolution, companies had tended to be run by the
families of the entrepreneurs who had started them or at least by people
personally trusted by personally involved owners. By the end of the
nineteenth century, the United States had some pretty large companies,
especially in manufacturing, oil, transportation, and finance. But they were
still usually run by the families that owned them (including famous names
such as Rockefeller, du Pont, Morgan, and Vanderbilt). The senior ranks
tended to be filled with men who had risen through the business, often
engineers or salesmen who had in some cases started on the factory floor.
And each company was rooted in a particular place and community where it

--- Sayfa 98 ---
had its headquarters or carried out substantial production. And it went
without saying that each was an American company, with a vested interest
in the continued prosperity and growth of the United States.
The managerial revolution transformed how those companies were run
and who was running them. As corporations grew larger and more complex,
they required more professional expertise to run; the science of
management was born. At the same time, blossoming financial markets and
the passage of time led to the diffusion of ownership, with shares in
companies held by the general public, institutional investors, and
descendants of the founders, who were more interested in high society
living than running the family firm.
The result was that power over everyday business decisions passed from
entrepreneurs with skin in the game and ties to particular companies and
communities to managers and executives whose loyalties rested not in the
corporations that employed them but in the profession and process of
management itself.
That professional mindset, Schumpeter saw, diverged from capitalism in
some important ways. For one thing, it had been developed not in the
rough-and-tumble world of business competition but in the college
classroom. Universities and business schools initiated would-be titans of
management into a rational, scientific, white-collar profession and taught
them that their real peers were their fellow managers in business,
government, regulatory agencies, philanthropic foundations, and more.
Whereas earlier American executives had cut their teeth in the field, the
new managers looked down on blue-collar work. In 1942, only a portion of
the leaders of the United States’ largest companies had a college degree. By
2017, according to one study, 96 percent had a degree, with 41 percent
having a degree from one of a small number of elite schools.
Not only did this new managerial class have no loyalty to the companies
they ran (caring more about what their peers were doing), they also had no
loyalty to capitalism, to the United States, or to the family. Because they
already ran somebody else’s company, it didn’t really matter who the
nominal owner was, whether shareholders, a foreign bank, or the
government.
For an entrepreneur, the future of the firm was the future of his family
and his community—each needed the other. For a manager, having a family
is a career negative, and if a manager does have kids, the priority isn’t

--- Sayfa 99 ---
getting them to run the business but getting them into an elite university to
ease their ascendance within the managerial class. A top manager can’t even
consider remaining rooted in a local community, when his next opportunity
might be a new position in his company’s Tokyo office or a lateral move to
a new company in New York City.
Schumpeter argued that the managers’ rootlessness and disdain for the
working class would enhance the popular demand for socialism.
Meanwhile, the shell of the modern corporation would supply the practical
infrastructure for socialism. Dispense with meaningful private ownership of
productive property but keep the managerial process, the rational
administration of the firm, the elite university education of the management
class, and the perks and rewards that accrue to executives, and the
managerial class would keep things humming just fine. The socialist state’s
overseer is just another “stakeholder” for the managers to please, and
besides, they probably went to Harvard together.
During his lifetime, Schumpeter never saw his prediction come true,
because history intervened. Faced with the totalitarian threats of Nazism
and communism, US businessmen stepped up in the service of their
country. During World War II, senior executives voluntarily cooperated with
one another and the government to transform the US economy into an
“arsenal of democracy.” Dollar-a-year men such as former General Motors
president Bill Knudsen and the construction magnate Henry Kaiser applied
their genius to the production of B-29s and Liberty ships. After the war,
they helped build a US economy that was good for families, good for
communities, and good for the world.
In the Cold War that followed, even as the managers continued their
slow ascendance in American society, there was no question that they
needed to stand with the United States and the Free World, if only because
the United States’ ongoing strength promised to continue to open up new
markets and protect their holdings. A Communist revolution in a country
such as Vietnam or Cuba tended to be bad for business and detrimental to
the value of one’s investments. The United States, democracy, capitalism,
and corporate profits rose and fell as one.
The New Road to Serfdom

--- Sayfa 100 ---
Ironically, it was the United States’ victory over communism that set the
stage for Schumpeter’s vision to come true. After the Cold War ended, not
only the Berlin Wall but all kinds of other walls fell, too: fair and reciprocal
trade barriers, limitations on financial flows, loyalty to communities, and
more. In a process called globalization, US firms sought to make profits all
over the world by expanding into new markets, sending factories overseas,
running money through international tax havens, developing global supply
chains, and employing other new strategies, with the Chinese Communist
Party in particular using all kinds of legal and illegal methods to draw in US
companies. The interests of corporate managers increasingly diverged from
what was good for the United States, its families, and its communities. You
can guess which one they pursued.
In an extremely undeveloped society, productivity is plagued by
nepotism. The important thing is who you’re related to. In the era of
globalist corporatism, eventually you end up with the same problem; it’s all
about who you know. Corporate managers get ahead by making inside deals
with would-be regulators, by winning the support of asset managers, and by
coordinating with fellow managers at their erstwhile competitors to ensure
that competition doesn’t take too much of a bite out of profits. It’s another
conspiratio—elites “breathing together” in the sauna or ski chalet.
This pathway is lower risk and higher reward (for the managers) than
breaking new ground is, which is one key reason why global growth has
been slowing down. According to a US Senate report, “American
Investment in the 21st Century,” by Senator Marco Rubio, corporate
investment in capital equipment and basic research is lower than it’s ever
been in modern America. Instead, corporations try to dominate their
markets, roll up competitors, squeeze suppliers, build regulatory moats, cut
deals with governments, and otherwise avoid competition.
In the era of globalist corporatism, outsourcing isn’t always about
finding cheaper supplies or labor. In many cases, US corporations decide to
shutter factories or cut jobs because they’ve wrangled a special tax break or
government handout in another country or because they know that in that
country, environmental or safety regulations won’t be enforced.
Behind the seemingly capitalist facade of globalist corporatism lies,
simply, socialism. The most sophisticated analysts of socialism, including
Schumpeter, have understood that some elements of classical socialist ideas,
such as public ownership of the means of production and centralized

--- Sayfa 101 ---
economic planning by government boards, are incidental to its essence.
What is important is its aspiration: the effectual control and
micromanagement of production decisions to achieve social goals and
reengineer society.
The ends toward which socialism works have proven to be remarkably
flexible, encompassing August Comte’s scientific society, Karl Marx’s
proletarian paradise, Paul Ehrlich’s demographic doomerism, and
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez’s Green New Deal. Socialism’s polestar is its
means: bureaucratic management oriented toward “rational” planning
objectives decided upon by a technocratic elite perched on the commanding
heights of society.
Rather than wasting time on organizing the proletariat and other
“deplorables” via a popular revolution, social engineers have gotten smart.
Using the shared loyalty of the managerial class, they can now engineer a
revolution from above.
Step one: Create environmental, social, and governance (ESG) and
diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) social credit score systems and tie
them to investment decisions, inclusion in index funds, or loan terms.
Reinforce this with influential and wealthy leftist organizations such as the
California Public Employees’ Retirement System (CalPERS), the
Norwegian sovereign wealth fund, and the Bill and Melinda Gates
Foundation demanding that their money managers follow suit.
Step two: Get the managers of the world’s largest corporations to
declare that due to the principle of maximizing shareholder value, they have
no choice but to fully adopt DEI and ESG goals into their business
decisions, lest they be penalized by “markets” (money managers), banks
(more money managers), and other “stakeholders” (other kinds of
managers). Insist that DEI and ESG metrics track suppliers and business
partners, so that large corporations can enforce them on small businesses.
Step three: As it becomes impossible to access insurance, a bank
account, a loan, equity, or corporate customers without bowing the knee to
DEI and ESG, start ratcheting up the process. Exclude whole sectors, such
as fossil fuels and firearms. Start including not just diversity or green
energy goals but reparations for “historical harms” and “climate injustice”
in metrics.
Congrats, comrade manager, you’re well on your way to “building
socialism.” Where is the money to do this coming from? The middle class,

--- Sayfa 102 ---
out of their small businesses and 401(k)s through slumping growth and out
of their pocketbooks through massive inflation. The elite managers, as
always, will do just fine.
The Managerial Revolution’s Costs Are Invisible Because
They’re Immeasurable
Despite some first-blush similarities, an entrepreneur and a manager are as
radically different as a parent and a babysitter. Because he is an owner
whose life is wrapped up in his enterprise, the entrepreneur cares about the
health of his business as a whole, not simply the bottom line or a quarterly
return. But the managerial revolution has separated those overseeing a
business from those actually operating it, sometimes by thousands of miles.
Bureaucratic management goes hand in hand with a fixation on the
measurable. “What gets measured gets managed,” right?
Over the past forty years, we have increasingly talked and thought about
our economy in terms of a handful of numbers: gross domestic product
(GDP) up, inflation down, unemployment down. But it’s too easy to game
the numbers, to overlook their limitations or what they ignore; to look only
at the surface and not into the heart of things.
A number of developments that, when measured by the permanent
things, are bad, appear as neutral developments on our usual measures.
GDP, for instance, is value neutral. When the CCP opens a Confucius
Institute, GDP goes up. When a mom who wants to stay home can no
longer afford to do so and joins the workforce while paying someone else to
watch her child, GDP goes up. When a municipal government uses taxpayer
money to house illegal immigrants in a hotel for months, GDP goes up.
When a meth addict breaks a car window to steal camera equipment and the
beleaguered photographer dips into her savings to repair the window and
buy new equipment, GDP goes up. In fact, almost any time spiritual decay
in American life requires the government or private sector to do something
that our culture and community once provided, GDP goes up.
Today, economists are baffled: unemployment numbers are near all-time
lows; inflation is “being managed.” Yet in late 2023, three in four
Americans said the economy is “not so good” or “poor.”

--- Sayfa 103 ---
As usual, the American people are onto something that the professionals
have missed. Not ensconced in the ivory tower, they see the changes that
have happened even within their own lifetime. They know that the kinds of
jobs they can now get are not as fulfilling, don’t pay as much (once
inflation, especially in housing, is priced in), don’t offer the kind of stability
or growth needed to build a flourishing human life as they once did.
They’re not the kind of jobs the American Dream is made of. The managers
who are running things, focused on pleasing Wall Street analysts and
meeting DEI metrics, don’t want them to be.
Ordinary Americans know that if they want to start a small business,
they’ll face an increasingly uneven playing field, competing with Big Tech
and politically connected monopolies that have constructed regulatory
moats to protect their turf. Every year, the burden of these “rents,” the cut of
the pie that the government, monopolists, and Big Tech can extract, has
been increasing.
Americans know that somehow and in some way, the bar to own
something that matters—a home, a small business, a work truck, a piece of
land that’s yours—seems to be a little more out of reach every day.
This isn’t an accident. It is all is plainly described on the World
Economic Forum website, though pointing this out is labeled by our media
as a “conspiracy theory.” I suppose in the sense that a conspiracy is
supposed to be hidden, it isn’t strictly one.
Our globalist elite managers have been pushing us toward a “Great
Reset” of the world economy, after which “you’ll own nothing, and you’ll
be happy.”
Once, the vast majority of the country’s wealth was held in stuff that
people owned: real estate, productive machinery (capital), valuable
commodities, shop inventory, mineral rights, and goods destined for market.
While in some cases there might have been deeds, stock certificates, and
other financial paperwork, they merely pointed to the ownership of that
solid stuff, which was the valuable thing. Those assets were, in the language
of finance, illiquid: hard to sell or convert into cash quickly (of course, we
remember what Jesus said about building a house upon liquidity). And it
was stuff that you had to take care of, that prioritized careful personal
attention and maintenance if it was to maintain its value or to grow.
Because it was real stuff that existed in a place for a people.

--- Sayfa 104 ---
What Carol Roth described as a “new financial world order” seeks to
“liberate” the world from being bound to stuff. Ownership of things will be
a privilege afforded only to asset supermanagers such as BlackRock and
large corporations such as Apple, whose Uniparty loyalty can be depended
on. For everyone else, the ability to access a bank account, rent a home,
hold down a job, open a business, and more will be determined by a social
credit score of the kind China has already deployed. As we saw during the
coronavirus pandemic, all of this can be implemented without a shred of
“government interference” by corporations’ merely following along with
the social and political dictates of the Uniparty at the commanding heights
of our global financial system.
A Fake Economy Creates Weak People
The biggest problem with this kind of economy is not material and
economic; it’s spiritual and social. It’s like raising kids who never play a
real sport, just video games, in which all the consequences are hypothetical.
Sports and jobs shape us because their consequences and responsibility are
real and personal.
Responsibility makes us grow up. Our republican form of government
demands people who take responsibility, both for themselves and for the
common good of the republic. It demands institutions that build virtuous
habits of working together to solve collective problems without demanding
that the dead hand of government fix everything. It demands an economy in
which ordinary people have the liberty to meet their own needs and those of
their community through their own efforts. Especially since the 1990s, we
have been building an economy that is moving farther and farther away
from these principles.
A company dominated by managerialism breeds an attitude of fear,
compliance, and conformity. The mantra of the owner is “The buck stops
here.” The mantra of the manager is “I’m sorry, it’s company policy.”
You can see this subtle transition, which has slowly taken place all over
the country, in the career of a software entrepreneur named Andrew
Crapuchettes. After a few successful jobs early in his career, he moved to
Moscow, Idaho, with some capital to invest and the determination to grow a
company in this beautiful college town. A family man and Christian, he

--- Sayfa 105 ---
wanted to build the kind of company and culture that he wanted to work in.
He describes wanting to build a company that blessed its customers, blessed
its employees, and blessed its shareholders, in that order. Through friends,
he was introduced to some local economists who had a small consulting
company of three employees, Emsi. He joined them.
With an initial goal of creating fifty jobs paying over $50,000 in that
little town, over the ensuing years, Andrew and his colleagues built a
company with more than 250 employees providing labor market data and
related services to employers and colleges. Along the way, Emsi had a
number of investors: a small private equity investment that helped it scale
up, an acquisition by a much larger company (CareerBuilder.com), and then
a spin-off. Each of those moves was motivated by sound financial practices
and a desire to keep creating more value and growing the business.
In 2018, Emsi was spun off from CareerBuilder.com and sold to Strada
Education Network, a $1.2 billion nonprofit foundation. Strada seems to do
good work in improving access to higher ed and employment, including
things such as cost transparency and skills training. But it’s also a classic
Uniparty entity. It used to be rooted in Indianapolis, but it’s increasingly
tied into national elite networks. It controls a huge purse of unaccountable
money, and the people it has to keep happy are other Uniparty elites:
college presidents, politicians, coastal elite potential donors.
After Strada acquired Emsi, things went great for a while. And then
2020 happened. During the George Floyd riots, the Sauron-like eye of the
Uniparty turned on all things DEI. Strada, of course, put out a statement
vowing that it would do more to advance racial equity, and it started to pour
money into antiracist initiatives. And it asked all of the companies it had
invested in to do the same.
Andrew Crapuchettes refused. That unexpected resistance seemingly
caused Strada managers to look more closely at the company they had
bought; they were alarmed to find that it had a culture that had not been
totally HR-ified. People worked together, but they also prayed together and
hung out together after hours. At Christmas, the company held a huge
community Christmas decoration contest. During covid-19, it refused to
impose a vaccine mandate or force its employees to choose between
supporting their families and holding by their beliefs. The company had an
ethos, and it wasn’t a woke one, and that frightened Strada’s Uniparty

--- Sayfa 106 ---
managers. They gave Andrew an ultimatum: you are allowed to be a CEO
who is a Christian, but not a Christian CEO.
Andrew chose his faith over his C-suite salary. The reason he had the
courage to resist wasn’t an accident. His was a character shaped by
ownership. He’d had to make thousands of choices before that point where
the consequences had been real and immediate, and each challenge and
choice had strengthened his resolve, character, and courage.
And Strada sort of blinked. According to Andrew’s account, rather than
immediately firing him and courting controversy, and having gotten what
they needed out of Emsi, it sold off the company to make Andrew someone
else’s problem.
Unlike Emsi’s previous buyers, this one had goals other than simply
growing the company or creating jobs. The KKR Global Impact Fund
incorporates environmental, social, and governance (ESG) factors into
decision making, in support of the United Nations’ Sustainable
Development Goals. Translation: KKR Global Impact uses middle-class
people’s retirement funds to advance Uniparty priorities and support for
woke companies over profitability, part of an effort to tilt the global
financial playing field against free enterprise. By Andrew’s telling, the fund
engineered a merger for Emsi with one of its portfolio companies doing
similar work and—sensing the presence of an unassimilated man—gave
Andrew the velvet boot.
KKR wasn’t just “advancing equity,” though (at least not of the social
justice warrior kind). The fund was reportedly in the red in its investment in
Emsi’s rival company Burning Glass, in part because of the competition. By
merging the companies, KKR consolidated the industry and created a little
monopoly that also greatly improved its returns on paper, competition be
damned.
Why Everything Is Coordinated
Here’s a hard truth, though: wokeness isn’t the real problem. If it wasn’t
wokeness that corporations were pushing, it’d be some other crazy
antihuman philosophy. The problem is that the very shape of corporate
managerial life, which is totally alienated from reality, makes inhuman
activity nearly inevitable. It’s the underlying institutional revolution that has

--- Sayfa 107 ---
made wokeness possible—one that replaces hardy free competition, open
discussion, and personal ownership with managerial cowardice, hidden
coordination, and quiet consolidation; one that allows woke virtue signaling
to cover up a total loss of corporate vision and innovation, a turn to
decadence and corporate bloat—that is the real threat to our way of life.
What shocked me during the George Floyd riots was not that some
woke companies would have something to say but that everyone was
coordinated, instantly. It felt like Invasion of the Body Snatchers: frozen
yogurt chains, sports teams, beer companies, and too-big-to-fail banks, all
speaking and walking in lockstep.
What kind of infrastructure lies behind this? The same mechanisms
driving instantaneous conformity to BLM drove it for covid-19 vaccine
mandates and for “Pride Month” and are in place to do it for whatever the
next Uniparty crisis is. But it’s not just woke politics; Uniparty managers
use the same tools to impose environmental and safety rules (above and
beyond what is legally required), to coordinate price increases, to repress
wages, to box out potential competition, and otherwise to control the
economy outside of free market competition and democratic process.
The puppet strings: a revolving door of college-educated managers with
more class loyalty than company (or country) loyalty; networks of Uniparty
institutions, especially Fortune 500 companies, consulting firms, business
schools, and data brokers, that coordinate ideas and practices; standards and
regulations, both private and public, that impose bureaucratic control over
all kinds of things; and this managerial stitch-up now undergirded by
information technology that makes data sharing, constant surveillance, and
hidden coordination easier than ever.
There’s a political dimension to this, too. Companies know that even if
they make policies that harm the American way of life, wax-museum
conservatives will back them to the hilt based on “free market principles.”
Meanwhile, the Left is raring to regulate and control them, unless
companies buy them off by preemptively ceding control and by using
corporate social responsibility money to fund woke nonprofits and armies
of foot soldiers (who do you think pays for all those community
organizers?).
This
phenomenon
has
an
international
component.
Globalist
corporations go out of their way to please EU regulators and avoid angering
the Chinese Communist Party, while taking no heed of what’s good for the

--- Sayfa 108 ---
United States. They’ll blackmail US states not to pass religious freedom
legislation but won’t post a rainbow flag on social media in the Middle
East.
As long as there are both the puppet strings of the managerial revolution
and this deep political and national asymmetry, our political economy will
continue to be possessed by the Uniparty.
The New Conservative Movement is going to send a message:
protecting American families and rebuilding a dynamic American economy
of productive ownership and family-supporting jobs are more important
than movement sloganeering or ideological purity.
At the state level, some leaders are beginning to wake up to the
problem. After decades of sending tens of billions of dollars to New York
City financiers with no strings attached, adding fuel to the fire of woke
capital, last year the state of Florida instituted sweeping restrictions on state
investment funds that are designed to protect the interests of everyday
Floridians, especially by eliminating ESG investments. Legislators in more
than twenty states have introduced bills reclaiming proxy voting power and
amending fiduciary duty laws for state retirement systems.
The Great Reset is socialism wearing the modern corporation as a
skinsuit. And God-fearing Americans who value their property and liberty
have been duped into defending it under the guise of capitalism and free
markets. It’s time to get real and defend our country, our communities, and
our kids.
A Revolutionary Response
What would the Founders have made of the modern financialized
corporation? They risked their “lives, fortunes, and sacred honor” in their
defense of “life, liberty, and property” (at least before Thomas Jefferson
swapped in the more egalitarian “pursuit of happiness”) as the fundamental
purposes of republican government. But in their day, the largest business
enterprises were rooted in particular places and communities: farms,
merchant banks, and small factory concerns. There was no analogy to the
globe-spanning multinational monopolies of today that derive their value
from predatory, anticompetitive regulations and cozy relations with
governments.

--- Sayfa 109 ---
No analogy except one: the British East India Company. Shortly before
the American Revolution, the EIC was in serious difficulty, its profits
endangered by turmoil in Bengal and Europe and its fat payments to the
Crown. Just like today’s managerial elite, the officials of the company had
close ties to the British government, the company counting dozens of MPs
among its shareholders (Nancy Pelosi would approve).
British prime minister Lord North’s solution was a scheme of political
and social engineering, the Tea Act of 1773. Trouble had been brewing for
years over increased British interference and taxation in the American
colonies, including the Townshend Act tax on tea, which clever American
merchants had avoided by smuggling in cheaper, poorer-quality Dutch tea.
At a single stroke, the Tea Act, which allowed the company to sell tea
directly in the United States without paying even the tariffs American
importers had to pay, would bail out the East India Company, crush
America’s thousands of independent merchants, and recondition the
American subjects to the Townshend Act tax on tea, which paid the salaries
of the Crown’s colonial enforcers. We know what the founding generation
thought of the East India Company based on their brave actions in Boston
Harbor on December 16, 1773, which turned seawater-soaked tea into the
fuel of revolution.
The Founding Fathers recognized that globe-spanning corporatist cartels
are a thing apart from real American businesses and acted accordingly, in
defense of meaningful self-government and free enterprise. And so have
great American statesmen ever since.
As governor of New York and later as president, Theodore Roosevelt
had to contend with industrial monopolies and large trusts that, much like
today’s, operated by creating unfair, government-protected advantages and
suppressing competition for the benefit of foreign investors, squeezing
American businesses and hurting American families. In a 2019 speech,
Senator Josh Hawley, a Roosevelt historian, distilled TR’s vision into an
eloquent phrase: “a republican nation requires a republican economy.”
The Founders and Theodore Roosevelt alike were steeped in the West’s
republican tradition. Thinkers from Plato to Montesquieu taught that the
force that destroys republics is corruption, understood as people with power
abusing their authority to advance their private interests and destroying the
res publica, the common good. When the Founders warned against faction,
they weren’t just talking about political parties: today, we might interpret

--- Sayfa 110 ---
their concern as being about “special interests.” And when those special
interests are not just American but globalist, we are in exactly the moment
of peril that George Washington warned about in his Farewell Address.
The Future of Our Prosperity
What kind of economy can reinvigorate the American spirit?
The best conservative approach toward unions, government interference
in business, and woke capitalism works toward one goal: the restoration of
American ownership in dynamic companies founded in real communities.
The good news is that America’s fundamental strengths remain: some of
the best, most industrious people in the world, workers and entrepreneurs
with skill at and dedication to problem solving, an enormous natural bounty,
a robust network of trading partners, a world-leading scientific education
system, and a nation that is not afraid to build the future.
The problem today is large corporations that are more beholden to
globalist managers than to the American people. The solution has to be a
radical reclamation of a republican political economy.
It’s got to be dynamic: we want more start-ups, more small businesses,
more nimble companies weighted down by fewer regulations and external
impositions and the managerialism that come with them.
It’s got to be capital intensive: we need to rebuild productive capacity,
strengthen supply chains, and invest in technologies that will drive down
manufacturing costs and keep high-value jobs here, even as we realign our
trade policy with our national interest.
It’s got to be good for American families: our goal has to be more jobs
that can support raising a family on a single income. That also means labor
conditions that support parents’ investing their time and energy in their kids.
Such an economy would be a return to real American free enterprise.
Ironically, years of ideologically blinding ourselves to the rise of globalist
corporatism have not only hurt our country spiritually but also weakened its
economic base, shuttering profitable factories, weakening supply chains,
and hampering innovation. There will be short-term sacrifices, including
higher prices for some consumer goods, but the alternative is worse. Would
you rather be a free man without a few luxuries or a slave with an eighty-
inch TV?

--- Sayfa 111 ---
Such an economy would also ameliorate many of the labor troubles that
are convulsing America. Restoring meaningful competition among
companies would force them to compete more on wages, working
conditions, even company culture. Rebalancing the playing field toward
small and medium-sized businesses and start-ups and toward patriotic
American management will naturally allow workers to feel more heard in
the workplace.
The Ownership Society
One of the reasons I am bullish about and hopeful for our country’s future,
if we fight for it, is that as I go around the country, all of the smartest, most
energetic, most talented people seem to be flocking not to rich and powerful
incumbents but to start-ups and upstarts. Not for the first time, our
republican tradition faces the challenge of intertwined governmental and
private power seen in the revolutionary period and the era of Theodore
Roosevelt. And as in those prior fights, my money is on the underdog.
Almost by virtue of the scale of their success, globalist corporatist
companies attract the people most motivated by what the philosopher
Alasdair MacIntyre called “external goods”: wealth, power, status, fame,
and other rewards that convey obvious privileges in society. You’ll still find
very smart, very talented, very driven people motivated by external goods;
this is the human capital that the Uniparty uses to sustain itself.
But explorers and innovators are never motivated primarily by external
goods. The reason is that it is never obvious or guaranteed which new ideas,
techniques, products, or visions will unlock massive value and change the
world. And so, if your motivation is wholly external, you’ll never develop
the passion and obsession to fully invest in something genuinely innovative
and creative. At some level, you have to do it, in the words of Michael
Jordan, for the love of the game.
In the United States today, by virtue of the dominance of the Uniparty
and the strategies the corporations it controls use to cement their power
(such as consolidation, cartelization, regulatory capture, DEI mandates, and
ESG), the best, brightest, most creative, most obsessive explorers of worlds
and builders of empires are becoming aligned against the Uniparty. The
companies that will displace Uniparty bastions such as Google, Goldman

--- Sayfa 112 ---
Sachs, Raytheon, Anheuser-Busch, Unilever, and the Walt Disney Company
may already have been founded.
Founded by entrepreneurs such as Andrew Crapuchettes. After he was
forced out of Emsi, he could have retired to a life of midmorning tee times
and leisurely hours with his lovely family. But instead, he looked around
and saw that woke corporate policies were an opportunity. He founded
RedBalloon, a recruiting start-up aimed at helping companies that want to
hire for pro-America values and for mission, as Emsi once did. Companies
with strongly held values (especially conservative ones) have a hard time
navigating the employment market and are especially at risk of lawsuits and
regulatory action aimed at forcing them to adopt the same woke HR
policies as everyone else. RedBalloon works with companies to find hires
who are a great fit for the company culture. It’s received a big boost of
interest from job seekers looking for work in red states or at companies that
allow medical autonomy or respect faith commitments.
Some of its customers are conservative groups or religious
organizations that were kicked off of Big Tech platforms such as LinkedIn
because they insisted on hiring according to their faith principles. But most
of its customers are regular American businesses that are sick of bad culture
hires and want to support the kinds of jobs our republic needs. And because
the Big Tech firms are so bloated and decadent, RedBalloon is able to
identify customer needs and build matching products and services much
more quickly (it helps that RedBalloon actually doesn’t hate its customers).
Companies such as RedBalloon are going to get a boost from a major
global shift that is now under way and that will pop up a few places
throughout the book, one that began picking up steam under President
Donald Trump’s pathbreaking leadership. Supply chain disruptions in China
and elsewhere, along with rising labor costs, the increasing attractiveness of
the US-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA) trading area, energy cost
increases in Europe, and some important policy choices in China and the
United States, have combined to make the United States a more attractive
place in which to make things again.
Companies that went all in on China are increasingly realizing the
nature of the Chinese Communist Party, as it arbitrarily closes off supply
chains, restricts profits from leaving China, throws tech executives into jail,
and otherwise reexerts itself. The country’s experiment with free markets

--- Sayfa 113 ---
(which was always a sham) is coming to a close. And the companies that
colluded with the CCP will be left holding the bag.
That’s why it is such an important moment for the New Conservative
Movement: there is a short window of flux and uncertainty in which to
work to restore a republican economy for the twenty-first century and
beyond.
Rebuilding the Economic Order of the Republic
Doing so will require defining vigorous and innovative policies and ideas
equal to the moment we are in. It will involve breaking some eggs.
To conserve the republic against globalist corporatism, against special
interests, against woke Great Reset ecosocialism, we need to restore the
proper use of the government to disperse power, level the playing field, help
the free enterprise system do its job, and put the American people,
communities, and families first again. How can we do that? Here are some
principles and ideas that should guide the New Conservative Movement.
Reverse the Managerial Revolution
One of the biggest things we can do to both reverse the Managerial
Revolution and take down the stronghold of woke academia is one of the
simplest: reduce the automatic advantage that a college degree gives you.
Notice the word automatic. As a former college president, I know how
valuable and transformative a college education can be. And I believe the
education we delivered at Wyoming Catholic College made our students
better citizens, better community leaders, and better employees. But as a
college president, I also paid close attention to what was going on at other
schools and universities. And for every great institution such as Hillsdale
College or the University of Texas at Austin (Hook ’em, Horns!), there were
a dozen institutions coasting by on huge subsidies in the form of student
loans and credentials inflation while failing to deliver a transformative
education experience for their students. Many students waste their years in
school and end up learning on the job anyway.
That’s why the Heritage Foundation recommended, in our Project 2025,
that Congress pass legislation prohibiting automatic algorithmic filtering by
educational level in hiring, at least for positions in which a professional

--- Sayfa 114 ---
degree isn’t required by law (such as nurses, medical doctors, and structural
engineers).
I am not suggesting that employers not be able to take educational
credentials into account, even to require them of their new hires. But since
the advent of the internet, the vast majority of hiring has occurred using
systems that use algorithms that filter out candidates and in many cases
won’t even let someone without a BA apply for a job, even if they’re
otherwise qualified and the company would have hired them. This is unjust
and unfair to the millions of Americans with serious work experience and
qualifications who happen never to have finished college. And politically,
it’s a free handout to the woke university system, which knows that students
need the BA credential, even if they don’t learn anything in school.
In addition to banning the BA box, states can work to reverse degree
inflation by reducing the minimal education requirements for government
and contractor jobs. The states of Maryland, Alaska, California, Colorado,
New Jersey, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, South Dakota, Utah, and
Virginia have taken big steps in this direction since 2022. President Trump
issued an executive order in 2020 to reduce degree requirements in the
federal government, but Congress should take further action at a federal
level and in the District of Columbia (for instance, annulling DC’s
outrageous requirement that day care workers have a college degree).
Even as we lay siege to the ivory tower, we need to make sure we’re
investing in the skills American industry needs. The federal government
spends more than $100 billion per year subsidizing higher education but
less than $2 billion supporting people on noncollege pathways. With student
loan forgiveness on the Democrats’ policy agenda, you can expect them to
spend hundreds of billions of dollars more without a dime going to
working-class Americans who invested in their own business or a trade
instead of going to college.
After decades of pushing every student to go to college, we now face a
situation in which critical industrial and artisanal skills, not to mention the
trades, are in ever shorter supply. Investing in Americans’ skills is a vital
aspect of rebooting a republican economy; many of these jobs convey the
dignity, self-possession, and literal or figurative ownership that builds
republican virtue. And we need these skills to make our manufactures
competitive again and drive down the costs of building and repairing
infrastructure, a key requirement of the Abundance Agenda.

--- Sayfa 115 ---
Thankfully, states are leading the way. In Minnesota, a strong bipartisan
majority passed legislation funding high school construction training
programs, in which students learn in-demand skills on real home-building
sites while actively contributing to ameliorating Minnesota’s housing crisis.
In West Virginia, State Treasurer Riley Moore worked to create a Jumpstart
Savings Program that is a 529-style tax-advantaged route to saving to start a
blue-collar business or learn a trade. We should expand this federally.
It will be just in time. After two centuries of new technologies favoring
brains over brawn, white-collar work over blue-collar, we are finally at the
cusp of an important reversal with the advent of artificial intelligence (AI).
Many of the worst aspects of the managerial revolution—endless reports,
bureaucracy, oversight, check-in meetings, and so on—can be significantly
automated. And for small-business owners, it will be easier to scale up a
company when there are fewer managers clogging up the works.
Entrepreneurs will find ways to use AI to outsource and automate many
bureaucratic and administrative functions. We need to ensure that our
regulatory framework allows them to do so, that the Uniparty doesn’t use
regulation to protect make-work HR jobs and impose woke commissars
throughout the corporate economy (the current status quo). Preserving
open-source AI not controlled by woke companies is especially critical for
our future.
Make Ownership Great Again
Ownership in a society positions a citizen to consider the common good.
We need citizens who feel empowered to participate in the setting of the
course of their own lives, who have the time and resources to invest in
intermediary institutions, family, civil society, and the workplace.
We’ll never free ourselves of Uniparty control unless we reduce the
unfair regulatory burdens that create moats for globalist corporatist
companies. In this sense, I depart from some of my friends in the so-called
New Right who are friendly toward the proactive use of government
regulation. For me the issue is less about interference in the free market and
more about political control. One of the things that might not be apparent to
those who don’t own their own business is that whenever the Democrats
come back into power, they immediately start tightening regulatory screws

--- Sayfa 116 ---
on small-business owners, using various executive agencies’ enforcement
discretion.
For example, in the wake of the 2008 global financial crisis, Congress
passed the Dodd-Frank Act, supposedly in order to rein in the too-big-to-
fail banks and the lending practices that had been responsible for crashing
the mortgage securities market. But it had the opposite effect. While Dodd-
Frank did increase compliance costs for big banks, as a percentage of
revenues, it increased them even more for smaller banks. Large banks, in
building out their new compliance desks, also built more ties to Washington
and a revolving door of compliance jobs for former government employees,
actually increasing their political influence. As a result, community banks,
which should be the biggest sector of the banking industry (they once
were), have closed or consolidated, while the three or four largest Wall
Street banks have gotten even bigger and more systemically important, and
the number of new bank charters in the entire country has dwindled to a
handful since 2010.
The next Republican president needs to use administrative and rule-
making powers to significantly limit executive agencies’ abusive use of
enforcement discretion (and especially of abusive, nebulous guidance
documents). But a real fix will require labor agencies to use their authority
under the Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980 to exempt small businesses
from regulation where possible. Congress should also enact legislation
increasing the revenue thresholds at which the National Labor Relations
Board asserts jurisdiction over employers to match changes in inflation
since 1935 and should also exempt small-business, first-time, nonwillful
violators from fines issued by the Occupational Health and Safety
Administration.
More important, we should pursue a two-tier system of federal
regulation such that large businesses are subject to a heavier grade of
regulation. Small and medium-sized businesses have actual owners,
reducing the human distance between workers and owners (and their
families and community). Small businesses are also less likely to create an
unfair monopoly and exert coercive pressure on wages and work conditions.
The vast majority of Americans will not be owners of businesses. So it
matters that they work in places that invest in them, give their work a sense
of dignity, and allow them to feel ownership of it. Andrew Crapuchettes’s
example is inspiring: in the economic order of the republic, after blessing

--- Sayfa 117 ---
his customers, a company leader’s next duties are to his employees and
their families, before he blesses his shareholders (with profits).
The reality is that the vast majority of owners who are involved in their
businesses feel enormous responsibility for their employees. Remember,
“the buck stops here.” Despite a small number of bad apples, many of them
make enormous personal sacrifices rather than leave their employees high
and dry.
But the farther owners are removed from everyday interactions with
workers and their families and communities, the more it seems as though
some kind of labor voice is needed. And as the scale of work in an industry
increases, direct ownership becomes less and less feasible. So we need
ways to provide workers with a sense of ownership and agency, even where
complex management is an operational necessity.
Personally, I think unionization is not the right answer; in almost every
case, something like a workers’ council could do the same job at lower cost
and without coercive measures. In any case, national-level unions are often
part of the problem and part of the Uniparty. Surveys show that that’s how
most working-class Americans see it, too.
But I think that conservatives need to be clear-eyed about the problems
that the Managerial Revolution presents for workers’ well-being and sense
of ownership in their society, especially when globalist managers are
involved (remember their mantra: “I’m sorry, it’s company policy”).
Oftentimes, in companies owned by financiers in Frankfurt, Riyadh, or
Beijing, the only folks standing for American values, American jobs,
American families, and American communities are the workers in those
enterprises. I don’t have a lot of time for the United Auto Workers—but I do
have a little, because in 1999, during China’s move to enter the World Trade
Organization, it was just about the only national institution to stand up for
the American worker against the Uniparty and the CCP. That’s a sobering
truth that conservatives need to chew on for a minute.
Especially when it comes to Big Tech and big banks, we need to
consider the nuclear option. I am skeptical about the use of antitrust powers
to micromanage the “right” amount of competition or market structure. But
I am not skeptical about their proper use, as envisioned by Teddy
Roosevelt: to rein in globalist corporatism that threatens the republic.
Uniparty managers, modeling themselves on the East India Company,
pursue scale to destroy local competitors and then prostitute themselves to

--- Sayfa 118 ---
the Deep State to avoid accountability to the American people for the
destruction they cause to American families and communities. Burning
down companies such as Google and BlackRock by breaking them up will
be good for America.
Create “an Active Commerce” for the Twenty-First Century
In The Federalist Papers, No. 11, Alexander Hamilton made the case for
“an active commerce” as a vital national interest. The arguments he made
sound eerily familiar today: powerful geopolitical rivals were endeavoring
to divide and conquer American commerce, squeezing production and value
out of the new states and back to their own shores. In the extreme case, they
could impose a passive commerce in which supply chains, finance, and
high-value manufacturing were controlled from abroad and the American
economy was at the whim of foreigners. Sound familiar?
Our laws regarding corporate finance, tax, trade, and accounting
encourage companies to reap massive paper profits for strategies that, in the
end, ship jobs overseas, make supply chains fragile and vulnerable to our
foreign enemies, and reduce innovation at home. We’ve been selling off our
birthright for a bowl of pottage (cheap Chinese consumer goods).
For example, when it was founded, Apple Computer made its products
in the United States at a highly automated plant in Fremont, California. But
after normalization of trade with China, it shifted almost all of its
manufacturing operations to the People’s Republic and induced its
suppliers, such as Corning Glass, to do so, too, even when doing so created
massive national security risks. And even though its products proudly
proclaim that they are “Designed in California,” for tax purposes, Apple
declares that all of its international profits belong to a subsidiary in Ireland,
a strategy that has cost US taxpayers hundreds of billions of dollars. Just
between 2009 and 2012, a congressional investigation found that Apple had
hidden $74 billion from the IRS that way. It’s no coincidence that Apple
chose Tim Cook as Steve Jobs’s successor: he led Apple’s courtship of the
Chinese Communist Party.
We need to pursue an Active Commerce for the twenty-first century.
That means taking back control of our global supply chains and using all
the powers of the United States—our governments, industries, and
communities working in concert—to restore our economic sovereignty.

--- Sayfa 119 ---
While the hardest work of all will come from our entrepreneurs, workers,
investors, merchants, and innovators, it will also require the use of the
immense powers of our federal and state governments, in total alignment
with the American tradition prior to the 1990s.
We need to reverse what our federal policies ruined by encouraging
viable businesses to invest in America. Industrial policy isn’t about
industry; it’s about restoring a republican economy. It’s Family Jobs policy.
It’s Defending Our Country policy. It’s Make America Great Again policy,
which is one of the reasons why, against the screeching of the wax-museum
conservatives, President Trump had so many successes beginning the work
of getting our country back on track.
Restoring our Active Commerce is about more than just the material.
Our indebtedness to others is weakening our American spirit (in so many
senses). The same wax-museum conservatives who poetize about the
United States’ global leadership (by which they mean continuous war, not
real leadership) also criticize an active pursuit of American commerce as
against our “free enterprise system” (making smartphones in Chinese slave
camps). But of course, the more in hock the United States is to the global
managerial ruling class, the more timid and deferential we have to be. It’s
un-American and humiliating.
Corporations can no longer have their cake and eat it, too, lecturing
Americans about wokeness and bossing around their small-business
suppliers and customers, all the while manufacturing their wares in smog-
ridden Communist China. As we will explore more fully in chapter 10,
various trade barriers can be used to level the playing field, penalizing
corporations that seek to take advantage of modern-day slavery, unfair
environmental practices, and other kinds of regulatory arbitrage and
encouraging them to bring American jobs home. We can coordinate at the
state or federal level to end the practice of corporations pitting states or
localities against one another for special government tax handouts or
bullying them not to pass laws that protect their values.
Conservatives need to wrestle with this uncomfortable truth: there is no
world in which the creative destruction of capitalism, left to its own
devices, will be able to fend off the Great Reset. American capitalism faces
a parasitical strategy designed explicitly to hijack “free enterprise” toward
socialist ends. Unless we recover the republican tradition of confronting

--- Sayfa 120 ---
globalist corporatism exemplified by the Boston Tea Party and Teddy
Roosevelt, our way of life will be lost.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Sayfa 121 ---
Chapter 6
Freedom Requires Order
Greater love than this hath no man than that he lay down his life for his
friend. Here were nineteen-year-old boys ready to lay down their lives to
stop a mob from molesting old people they did not even know. And as those
boys took back the streets of Los Angeles, block by block, my friends, we
must take back our cities, and take back our culture, and take back our
country.
—Patrick Buchanan on the 1992 Los Angeles riots
A lot of classic Hollywood westerns are really parables about politics. In a
lawless land, a good man has to figure out the best way to impose order so
that civilization can flourish. In John Ford’s The Man Who Shot Liberty
Valance, for instance, Jimmy Stewart plays a lawyer from back east who is
scandalized when he arrives in a frontier town that is held in thrall by the
anarchic violence of the criminal Liberty Valance. Stewart understands that
if “liberty” is let loose without law, a society will be unjust and anarchical.
He starts learning to use his Second Amendment rights, and—well, you’ll
have to watch it to find out what happens next.
The foundation stone of American civilization is our ethos of ordered
liberty. It is not an idea but an institution, a set of practices, habits, and
symbols that provides our deepest sense of who we are as a people. It lives
not in our heads but in our hearts.
What does it mean for liberty to be ordered, and by whom is it ordered?
Ordered liberty demands that each citizen cultivate within themselves
an ethic of responsibility for their own liberty and that of the nation, and

--- Sayfa 122 ---
that they hold both themselves and others to that high standard. Self-rule
begins at home.
Under ordered liberty, the role of the government is to protect the public
peace and good order—imprisoning violent criminals, guarding the border,
enforcing the law, and otherwise safeguarding the common good against
antisocial actors. Having provided public order, the government steps back
and calls ordinary Americans to take agency over their own lives,
businesses, and communities, recognizing their ownership over their own
flourishing. The only way to square the circle of an expansive sphere of
liberty and a state that is not so powerful that it becomes despotic is if
citizens govern themselves responsibly, beginning with their own personal
behavior and spiraling outward to their families, their communities, and
their towns.
When I talk to Americans around the country, there is a universal
intuition that our ordered liberty is in danger. We see it in our communities
and on the evening news every day. Is the problem simply anarchy or
lawlessness? It is so much worse.
Anarchy is what happens when there’s no established government.
Government is then established by whoever has the biggest stick, so it’s
impossible for true peaceful civilization to exist in the chaos. But while
such a “war of all against all” is inimical to “life, liberty, and the pursuit of
happiness,” because it is vulnerable to violent outlaws, it also does not
prevent a militia of virtuous citizens from creating a self-organized peace.
This has been the pattern of pioneer politics from Plymouth Colony on
down. And so anarchy, while a low state of affairs, is not in and of itself
tyrannical because it’s possible for “ordered liberty” to exist.
What would be the direct opposite of ordered liberty? It would be a
disordered tyranny, in which the government forbids ordinary citizens to
take responsibility for the public order and exercising their liberties, all the
while permitting or even encouraging the violation of the law and the
looting of public order. Such a condition, called anarcho-tyranny, has now
taken hold across American life. The rot is deeper than you may realize.
We can see this in what has changed in our culture in the last thirty
years. In 1992, huge riots broke out in South Central Los Angeles. In the
preceding years, LAPD chief Daryl Gates had resorted to increasingly
militaristic tactics to rein in gang violence, and the black and Hispanic
communities of South Central had correspondingly grown more and more

--- Sayfa 123 ---
angry at the police. The acquittal of four officers who had been seen beating
the prostrate Rodney King in a widely broadcast videotape lit the tinderbox.
The violence that followed was the most damaging and most costly
breakdown in public order in US history (until the George Floyd riots in the
summer of 2020, of course).
The rioters from South Central targeted not only the LAPD but also the
community immediately to their north: Koreatown, where tensions ran high
between Korean American business owners and their black and Hispanic
patrons from South Central. Over the years, there had been occasional flare-
ups between the communities, but the anarchy that took hold of the city in
the wake of the Rodney King ruling was unprecedented.
Anarchy gives bad actors unique opportunities to fill the power vacuum.
Amid the rage and rioting, the gangs of South Central saw an opportunity.
The Bloods and the Crips called a truce, joined by Latino gangs such as
MS-13 and Barrio 18. Rather than targeting one another, they began going
after businesses that they held a grudge against or that simply looked
vulnerable.
Koreatown was ripe for the plucking, and when the LAPD officers
withdrew on the first day of the riots, the community was left to fend for
itself.
But that’s the thing about true anarchy: a vacuum of power also gives
space for good guys to fight back. As looters started to attack their stores,
Korean Americans organized to defend themselves. Many of them had
served in the South Korean Army, some in combat, and the men of the
community armed themselves with rifles, shotguns, and handguns.
They took their position on the parapets of a grocery store (leading to
the moniker on the nightly news of “Rooftop Koreans”) and used the
Korean-language radio channel as an ad hoc command center. Marines from
the Korean Veterans Association led armed patrols of the neighborhood. In
many cases, they fired blanks or warning shots to scare the looters off (the
thugs targeting them did not return the favor). They held their ground until
the National Guard restored order in Los Angeles. Miraculously, no one
died, although both the looters and those defending their homes were
treated for gunshot wounds.
Make no mistake: that descent into anarchy was hugely destructive.
Despite their best efforts, the Korean Americans and their businesses still
ended up suffering more than $400 million worth of damage, about half of

--- Sayfa 124 ---
the total damage in all of LA. Businesses shuttered; some people never
recovered. The state of California failed in its basic duty to provide order to
the law-abiding residents of Koreatown and South Central who were the
real victims of the riots. Needless to say, LA’s leadership abandoned
communities such as Koreatown in order to protect neighborhoods such as
Beverly Hills, where rich Uniparty progressives live. But in the anarchy, at
least the Rooftop Koreans could take up arms in defense of their lives, their
fortunes, and their sacred honor.
The LA riots took place in an environment of anarchy. That’s never a
good thing, but there’s one thing that’s worse: anarcho-tyranny. To
understand anarcho-tyranny, imagine for a moment how differently the
1992 riots would have played out in Gavin Newsom’s California.
For starters, thousands more looters and rioters—many of them violent
criminals—would have been out on the street from the start, as they were in
2020 thanks to Newsom’s soft-on-crime approach and “prison reform”
(letting violent criminals out of prison). Likewise, when the felons began
looting Koreatown, its residents would have been left defenseless, since
California has passed some of the most restrictive gun laws in the country.
To make matters worse, as chronicled in Zach Smith and Charles D.
Stimson’s exposé Rogue Prosecutors: How Radical Soros Lawyers Are
Destroying America’s Communities, California is now run by George
Soros–backed progressive prosecutors such as LA district attorney George
Gascón, whose city saw property crime increase by a whopping 49 percent
during his previous tenure in the same post in San Francisco. In Gavin
Newsom’s California, as soon as riots begin, Gascón would likely stand up
on television and insist that not only his office but the federal Department
of Justice’s Civil Rights Division would put every single claimed case of
self-defense or excessive force on the part of California’s rapidly declining
number of police officers under a microscope to ensure that the rights of
“mostly peaceful protesters” had not been violated.
Moreover, in 1992, the Rooftop Koreans were reported on by actual
journalists. Today, selectively edited videos would be put out on social
media, sometimes by the perpetrators themselves, leading to flash mobs
overwhelming the overstretched police resources. At the same time, coastal
elite reporters would run interference for the looters from thousands of
miles away on television and Twitter, while Vice President Kamala Harris
raised money for their bail.

--- Sayfa 125 ---
Is it any wonder that in 2020, as California kept the state’s restaurants
and businesses locked down and forbade its citizens from going out in
public unless they were protesting with Black Lives Matter, Adam Cho, the
second-generation business owner of Ham Ji Park, which opened in
Koreatown in 1989—told Eater magazine that “this is worse than the
Rodney King riots. . . . We don’t have millions of dollars saved up. If we’re
closed for dine-in for a month or two, we’re shutting down.”
A free republic without virtuous, self-governing citizens will soon
devolve into either anarchy or an authoritarian state. Russell Kirk, echoing
the classical republican tradition, held that the “inner order” of the soul and
the “outer order” of the Republic are intimately linked.
The Party of Creation is not ashamed to take a stand for normalcy,
peace, and good order, for the defined limits (including self-limits) that
promote the inner order of the soul (like a trellis helping a vine to grow).
And we make no apologies about using the power of the government to
impose public order as needed, like a gardener pulling weeds to protect his
crop.
It may seem like a paradox, but the truth is that liberty and order are not
opposed but intertwined. That’s why in US cities, where public order has
broken down and progressive “freedom” runs rampant, ordinary people are
no longer able to live lives of trust and freedom. The windows on their
homes must have bars. Their schools require metal detectors and police
officers. At their convenience stores, wares are locked onto the shelves.
Assemblies at public parks require permits, lest “mostly peaceful protests”
or gang fights break out.
That’s why the Founders never wavered from their firm belief that the
living practice of ordered liberty was a precondition for self-government.
The Constitution’s authors believed that the document they wrote and
ratified would utterly fail if ordered liberty—forged in war, revolution, and
frontier struggle in a hostile, yet bountiful land—was not written on the
hearts of the American people. As Benjamin Franklin put it, “Only a
virtuous people are capable of freedom. As nations become corrupt and
vicious, they have more need of masters.”
The Party of Destruction hates ordered liberty. It hates the idea of
limitations on freedom; it deplores the “inequity” of a gardener
discriminating against weeds and insects: “Why not let it all grow?” To
continue the analogy, it hates independent gardeners. It hates the fact that

--- Sayfa 126 ---
well-ordered souls in a well-ordered society have little need of government
programs and taxpayer-funded NGOs and little interest in utopian schemes
for social “improvement.” By undermining public order and promoting the
rights of criminals over the rights of ordinary Americans, they also increase
the power and resources they can wield in their quixotic campaign against
the limitations imposed by reality and civilization.
Nothing illustrates the difference among ordered liberty, mere anarchy,
and anarcho-tyranny better than the story of LA’s Koreatown.
That’s what defines anarcho-tyranny: when those who ought to protect
public order and justice are at best negligent of the common good as they
pursue their private interests and at worst hyperscrupulous of the “rights” of
repeat criminals, violent addicts, and mentally disturbed vagrants while
ignoring the rights of ordinary Americans to domestic tranquility and the
use of their property.
The
Government
In:
Ordered
Liberty
Anarchy
Anarcho-
Tyranny
For Upright
Citizens:
Encourages
and protects
virtue
Fails to
provide
order,
leading to
“frontier
justice”
Punishes
and
“corrects”
virtue
For Criminals
and
Scoundrels:
Punishes and
corrects vice
Encourages
and
protects
vice
It’s the underclass looting the streets while the ruling class loots the
state and the private sector. It’s buying razed buildings for pennies on the
dollar and texting your golf buddies on the planning commission to get a
special zoning exemption to build on the plots. It’s Gavin Newsom closing
Adam Cho’s restaurant but enjoying a private birthday party (indoors) for
his lobbyist friend at the French Laundry (one of the most expensive
restaurants in the United States). It’s gated communities secured by a
private police force while gangs of carjackers roam the city. It’s public

--- Sayfa 127 ---
goods replaced by private bubbles. It’s million-dollar villas sitting on
private bluffs with private roads and private security overlooking slum
towns and favelas. It’s Rio de Janeiro, and increasingly, it’s Los Angeles,
San Francisco, Portland, New York, Philadelphia, and Washington, DC.
At its heart is a Uniparty that profits off the destruction of ordered
liberty and the transformation of US citizens into distracted, compliant,
weak slaves. Ordered liberty means accountability, citizens doing things for
themselves instead of demanding that the state do them, transparent laws
that reduce opportunities for graft, patronage, and special exceptions, and
the provision of public goods for the common welfare. Anarcho-tyranny is a
weapon by which the Uniparty can extract the wealth of the middle class
while buying off the underclass.
Here’s just one example of how this works. In 2018, San Francisco
voters passed Proposition C, a ballot referendum doubling the city’s
business tax, with the money earmarked for “homeless services.” The city’s
far-left activist and political class pushed for the measure, but they had one
seemingly unlikely ally: the multibillionaire software entrepreneur Marc
Benioff, the founder of Salesforce, who pledged to donate millions of
dollars to their efforts.
It’s obvious what the activist class stood to gain from Prop C. The tax
created a massive fund with almost no accountability, controlled by the
same activists and politicians and doled out to hundreds of NGOs and
contractors. But was Benioff operating simply out of the kindness of his
heart and a sense of public duty?
Bay Area insiders reveal that there’s a more cynical angle to the story.
Prop C also had some features that would hurt Benioff’s competitors.
Benioff’s Salesforce was the biggest employer in San Francisco, competing
with other tech companies for office space and software engineering hires,
but challengers were rising. At the time, many of those rapidly growing
competitors were financial technology companies, including two of
Benioff’s biggest competitors for downtown real estate and software
engineering talent: Square (the developer of CashApp) and Stripe (one of
the largest internet payments processors).
Prop C greatly increased the tax on gross receipts, or every dollar that
comes into a business, regardless of the business’s profitability. Salesforce’s
enterprise software businesses generate large profits. But as financial
services companies, Square and Stripe were mostly moving their

--- Sayfa 128 ---
customers’ money, making a fraction of a penny on every dollar they
handled. Even though Salesforce was a larger, more profitable company,
Prop C taxed its competitors far more. They left San Francisco after the tax
was passed.
So for a few million dollars (half from Salesforce’s shareholders),
Benioff created an influential coalition of activist allies, won the support of
leftists who might otherwise have targeted Salesforce, buffed his media
image as a humanitarian progressive do-gooder, and literally chased his
business rivals out of town.
Meanwhile, the beleaguered SF middle class was squeezed just a little
bit more: slightly higher prices, a little less growth, a little less upward
wage pressure, a little more street crime, a little worse place to raise a
family. Anarcho-tyranny happens like bankruptcy: slowly, then all at once.
But Benioff bit off more than he could chew. As is often the case, he and
other members of what the conservative philosopher Willmoore Kendall
called “the Committee to Abolish Original Sin” failed to anticipate how
addicts and criminals would respond to the concentration of free services
and (thanks to the Soros-backed DA Gascón) the legalization of petty
crime. And neither Benioff nor his woke activist allies fully appreciated
what the massive shift among drug users from heroin to fentanyl would do
to the exploding homeless population. Driving your competitors out of a
booming market is a neat trick, but in the wake of covid-19 and the out-of-
control streets, the suicide of downtown San Francisco is so bad that
Benioff’s Salesforce may also pull out of the city.
Of course, when things get bad, Benioff can just jet off to his Hawaii
compound. It’s San Francisco’s middle-class residents and ordinary citizens
who will have to clean up the mess.
This is the really sadistic thing: by destroying public goods and
terrorizing ordinary Americans, the Uniparty’s anarcho-tyranny increases
the value of the privatized alternatives. It increases the demand for the
gated community, the luxury shopping development with private security,
the private jet, the exclusive clinic. It damages housing prices and quality of
life in affordable neighborhoods while increasing the demand for precisely
the exclusive and safe neighborhoods where the rich already live. Worse,
these
private
alternatives
penalize
larger
families,
who
benefit
disproportionately from high-quality public goods.

--- Sayfa 129 ---
Learned Helplessness
The effect of anarcho-tyranny on ordinary Americans is to establish a sense
of learned helplessness, and it has more sinister roots than you might
imagine.
In the dark days immediately after September 11, 2001, when
Americans genuinely worried about Al-Qaeda sleeper cells unleashing even
greater destruction, two air force psychologists conducted research into a
phenomenon called learned helplessness, which they thought American
counterterrorism officials could use to induce cooperation by captured
terrorists.
Back in the 1960s, psychologists had accidentally discovered that a state
of total apathy and compliance could be induced by subjecting someone to
repeated bad outcomes (such as electric shocks) that they were not allowed
to mitigate or prevent. Doing this breaks down what psychologists call self-
efficacy and internal locus of control: the belief that even amid hardship,
you can do something to change your circumstances. Despair sets in and
apathy with it.
The scientists who originally worked on learned helplessness intended
to develop methods to aid patients suffering from ailments such as
depression by showing them that they had the power to take responsibility
for their circumstances and act to improve them. But after 9/11, those air
force psychologists persuaded counterterrorism officials that the techniques
could be used in reverse: to design methods to induce a state of learned
helplessness, after which suspected terrorists would become compliant.
That was the birth of the CIA’s controversial “enhanced interrogation”
program, which included sleep deprivation, loud music, sexual humiliation,
involuntary drug injections, partial asphyxiation (including waterboarding),
and other techniques that reduced once proud jihadists to husks of their
former selves.
Everything about enhanced interrogation is designed to induce learned
helplessness by saying “You’re not in charge. We are. You’re not even in
charge of what you put into your body or where you use the bathroom.”
This is not the condition of free citizens but of slaves. And indeed, many
slave societies have had institutions designed to induce learned helplessness
among the slave population: not only the repressive violence of the
plantation in the American South but also the autumnal Spartan hunt

--- Sayfa 130 ---
recounted by Plutarch in his Life of Lycurgus, in which the Crypteia (a
secret society of young warriors) would stealthily stalk and kill random
members of the helot slave caste. (I’m sure the New Sparta Times editorial
pages dismissed the tales of missing villagers as mere conspiracy theories
promulgated by helot deplorables.)
Today, the Uniparty is applying these same psychological torture
techniques not to radical jihadists but to the population of law-abiding
everyday Americans. This torture method is the rampant violence and petty
crime. It’s the state forcing experimental vaccines into people’s arms, lest
they lose their jobs or businesses. It’s forcing citizens to close their
businesses and schools for months on end and to huff through itchy masks.
It’s the smug despotism of telling parents that schools are going to trans
their kids whether they like it or not, or Child Services will take them away.
It’s the sexual humiliation of forcing teenage girls to change in the same
locker room as biological men and of making their parents let it happen.
It all sends the same message: “You’re not in charge. We are. You’re not
even in charge of what you put into your body or where you use the
bathroom.”
The habits of the heart that anarcho-tyranny leads to, most of all this
learned helplessness, have real consequences for the lives of everyday
Americans and their children.
No example better demonstrates the high stakes than the 2022 school
shooting at Robb Elementary School in Uvalde, Texas. For an agonizing
seventy-four minutes, the Uvalde Consolidated Independent School District
(UCISD) police cordoned off the school and waited to confront the gunman,
while children and teachers bled out and died inside; that despite knowing
from their training two months earlier what police departments have known
since Columbine: that confronting a gunman as quickly as possible is the
only way to reduce loss of life in an active shooter scenario.
UCISD police officers not only utterly failed to do their duty but also
used the color of law to force parents and community members who had
showed up to stand outside helplessly. Parents pleaded for the UCISD
police to confront the gunman and offered to risk their own lives to get their
children out, but rather than listen, the UCISD police barricaded the school
to prevent parents from attempting any rescue. They tackled, tased, pepper
sprayed, handcuffed, and otherwise abused parents who tried to heroically
intervene or who challenged their authority.

--- Sayfa 131 ---
They did that to folks such as Ruben Ruiz, himself a UCISD police
officer. His wife, Eva Mireles, called him and told him that she had been
shot and was dying. When Ruben moved to risk his own life to find and
rescue her, his UCISD comrades detained him and took away his service
weapon. Eva Mireles died of her wounds.
The lawful innocent were forbidden to exercise their liberty for the
common good, while the authorities permitted a lawless criminal to have
his way for seventy-four minutes. That’s anarcho-tyranny.
It is easy to tell ourselves that Uvalde was a unique disaster. But is that
how it seems to you? Are the attitudes of the Uvalde police—prioritizing
compliance over competence, legalese over liberty—foreign to you?
They’re not. All over the country, there are signs that our ordered liberty is
giving way to anarcho-tyranny and the learned helplessness it leads to.
Fighting Back
The good news is that a vast swath of the American middle class, of all
political backgrounds and party loyalties, is sick and tired of anarcho-
tyranny. American patriots have, literally and metaphorically, been hitting
the gym.
Remember that the root cause of our spiritual crisis is not our pathetic
and petty “overlords” but the spiritual oppression, apathy, and laziness that
encourage us to accept this state of affairs passively. Just like our bodies,
we Americans have gotten out of shape in our exercise of ordered liberty:
flabby from years of sitting in front of the computer or television instead of
fighting in the arena or building something with our hands; overfed on
spiritual junk food; easily fatigued when forced to exercise; anxious to
avoid a reckoning with the scale. Yet I believe there is great strength in us.
I believe that the experience of the past few years has been radicalizing
for many ordinary Americans. They saw playgrounds, schools, and
churches forcibly closed while politicians labeled strip clubs and liquor
stores “essential businesses.” They saw public health officials justify
lockdowns while excusing mass riots because “racism is a public health
crisis, too.” With everyone forced to homeschool, they saw the garbage that
public schools were teaching their kids while failing to teach them basic
skills, and they saw teachers unions defending the worst of it.

--- Sayfa 132 ---
All of us have seen how easy it is to lose our liberties if we fail to fight
for them. Thankfully, there are Americans who are fighting back, to
preserve and restore ordered liberty for our glorious American future. Since
the pandemic, more than a dozen states have strengthened laws protecting
individual rights, in everything from vaccine mandates to constitutional
carry.
Already, ordinary San Franciscans fed up with anarcho-tyranny have led
the successful recall of Chesa Boudin, the city’s Soros-backed DA. And
under the banner of “GrowSF,” they have begun the hard work of
dismantling the grip of Party of Destruction radicals in the city’s other
elected offices.
Among many other important issues, the Cicero Institute, led by the
entrepreneur and investor Joe Lonsdale, is working with state legislatures to
destroy the power of radical activists and woke cities to impose anarcho-
tyranny around public drug use and street camping. Florida has recently
become the first state to fully overhaul its homelessness laws and claw back
public space for common sense and away from radical activists, and more
will follow.
But a restoration of ordered liberty will take more than better
government policy. It requires personal transformation and working to
restore the “inner order of the soul.”
Think of the more than 100,000 men who have taken up Exodus 90
since 2015, for example. Designed to free men from the shackles of alcohol,
pornography, gambling, social media, and other distractions and addictions,
the program requires a ninety-day commitment to daily prayer and reading,
weekly Sabbath observance, and a number of ascetic practices, such as cold
showers, exercise, no unnecessary use of digital technology, no snacking or
desserts, no alcohol, and so on. These simple commitments are ordered
liberty in action, and the rapidly growing movement around Exodus 90,
alongside a broader grassroots embrace of intensive fitness, emergency
preparedness, and addiction treatment, has already helped thousands of men
transform their lives.
What’s more, when well-ordered men like these come together, they can
change communities, thwart disaster, and even save lives. There’s perhaps
no better example of a group doing that than my hometown’s Cajun Navy.
Founded in the wake of Hurricane Katrina, the Cajun Navy is a group of
volunteer patriots who work tirelessly to provide order and relief in the face

--- Sayfa 133 ---
of disaster. They are ordinary Louisianans who use pickup trucks, low-draft
rigid inflatables with outboard motors, swamp boats, and more to go
wherever they are needed, organizing themselves with increasingly
sophisticated but voluntary and decentralized digital communications
systems. Everyone from southern Louisiana knows that every year when
hurricanes hit, the Cajun Navy will be there to help while the federal
government is still fumbling with its keys. There is almost nothing that
better embodies the battle between anarcho-tyranny and ordered liberty in
my mind than the image of hapless Washington politicians flying over
Louisiana’s devastation while everyday Cajuns organized themselves, got
into their boats, and started saving lives.
Our Uniparty elites hate people like this. They hate a man who is in
control of himself. They hate a community that can rely on itself in the
middle of a hurricane. Of course, they won’t admit it openly, but they know
that the sleeping giant of the great American middle class is beginning to
rouse itself from its post–Cold War slumber, and they’re scared to death.
Just look at the way they treat anyone who refuses to sit there and take it;
folks such as Daniel Penny, Todd Beamer, and Jack Wilson, who, not unlike
the Rooftop Koreans, simply refused to accept the imposition of chaos and
violence, who fought for their lives and those of the people around them.
In the case of Penny, woke journalists and activists (but I repeat myself)
attempted to set the narrative early, surfacing any and every potentially
right-wing opinion the former marine had held and writing hagiographic
treatments of the man he had attempted to subdue during a violent outburst
in a busy subway car in May 2023. But the “victim” who had verbally
threatened to kill innocent New York City straphangers was not the carefree
Michael Jackson impersonator of his posthumous New York Times profile
but a seriously mentally disturbed drug addict with forty-two prior arrests
and a history of violently assaulting subway riders.
The spiritual attack on men such as Beamer and Wilson is more subtle.
Beamer was an evangelical husband and dad who, on September 11, 2001,
helped organize the effort on United Flight 93 to take back the plane from
Al-Qaeda terrorists. Wilson was a Texas church parishioner and security
volunteer who shot dead a mentally disturbed junkie who pulled out a
shotgun during communion and started blasting one Sunday morning in
December 2019.

--- Sayfa 134 ---
In the wake of those heinous events, only the radical left fringe of
American media celebrated. But up until the moment they engaged in acts
of terror, the media would have expressed far more sympathy for the
perpetrators of those crimes (Muslim immigrants passionate about the
Palestinian cause; a homeless man struggling with substance abuse and
mental health issues) than the heroes who stopped them. Our Uniparty-
controlled culture attacks, mocks, and denigrates normal, responsible
American men in the mold of Beamer and Wilson relentlessly, at least until
the moment it desperately needs them to push back against the evil the
elites have allowed to fester.
We as a society have tried to forget that. But who would you rather have
as a neighbor or a local official: Wilson and Penny or those they defended
themselves against? And what does it say about our ruling class, the answer
they would give (or pretend to give) to that question?
The Guarantor of All Other Liberties
First and foremost, it says that the Second Amendment is more important
than ever. As the ultimate guarantor of all other liberties, Americans’
tradition of keeping and bearing arms is more important now than ever.
Indeed, it ensures that the US citizenry will not be deprived of its life,
liberty, or property without a fight.
Critics often say that the United States’ gun laws are unique in the
world. What they fail to point out is that our tradition of freedom is just as
unique. Long ago, our English forebears understood that liberty undefended
was liberty unsecured. Thus among their several ancient liberties they
always maintained that of bearing arms. There were some restrictions as
compatible with the public peace (such as against carrying swords in
churches) but on the whole, no leader attempted to systematically disarm
the populace, for good reason: he would have understood it to be a
precursor to tyranny and the destruction of their liberties.
President Joe Biden has articulated a common and smug dismissal of
this principle, saying “If you want to fight against a country, you need an F-
15. You need something a little more than a gun.” But he’s wrong. For
starters, considering that Biden caved to the Taliban, I’m not sure what
makes him think he can take on the Cajun Navy. More important, armed

--- Sayfa 135 ---
American patriots, protective of their rights, exert an influence on our
government just by existing, even without needing to mount an armed
resistance. By raising the potential cost of any government intervention, the
Second Amendment creates a structural restraint on the growth of tyranny
within our borders.
You can see this in a comparison between the United States and
Australia, Canada, and the United Kingdom. Before the American
Revolution, we all shared a legal tradition, including a tradition of public
gun ownership. But in the twentieth century, those other countries largely
gave up the right to bear arms. During the covid-19 pandemic, we saw the
results.
During covid-19, Australia set up some of the strictest rules, locking
down the entire country, restricting freedom of movement, and even
creating internment camps for “quarantine violators.” Canada similarly
imposed severe lockdowns and vaccine mandates and used emergency
powers to seize the bank accounts and create business blacklists of peaceful
protesters. The United Kingdom introduced a vaccine passport through a
government-mandated phone app and required it to attend so-called high-
density venues. The government had considered requiring it even to visit
pubs and shops before backing down to public pressure and parliamentary
protest.
No jurisdiction in the United States used serious police power to enforce
pandemic policies. American politicians know that the people (many of
whom are well armed) will not put up with tyranny. Even California, where
Gavin Newsom squeezed churches and small businesses with an iron fist
while cheering on BLM rioters, did not attempt the kinds of enforced
movement restrictions imposed by the state in Australia, Canada, or the
United Kingdom. People who scoff at the liberty-inducing power of the
Second Amendment should reconsider their position in light of the
evidence. What ultimately prevented the establishment of Australia-style
covid quarantine concentration camps was not good laws but good men
with good arms.
Indeed, we can attribute the freedoms we maintained during covid to the
Second Amendment. Americans are inherently dangerous and violent to
tyrants relative to our sister civilizations, and the myth of man’s
neuterability, of his placability, can never take hold. A European, even an
Australian, may be civilized, but an American is a dangerous creature.

--- Sayfa 136 ---
Because of that, the modern project of turning people into the slaves of the
state is resisted at the level of physical violence, and our country, despite
the Uniparty’s best efforts, remains a global beacon of liberty, the one and
only land to which the oppressed and downtrodden may yet lift their eyes
for hope and inspiration.
Cultivating Order
In his memoir, My Grandfather’s Son, Supreme Court Justice Clarence
Thomas illustrated what the pursuit of ordered liberty might personally
demand from us. He recounted riding in his grandfather’s truck in the
family’s fuel oil delivery business. In 1956, after years of making do with
an old truck, Myers Anderson, Thomas’s grandfather, purchased a new
GMC truck. The first thing he did was remove the heater from his truck.
Why? Because he was in the business of delivering fuel oil in winter, and he
sought to avoid anything that might tempt him to delay or shirk his duties
(to stay in the nice warm cab of the truck). So on the shelf in the garage the
heater sat.
The New Conservative Movement should look to people such as Myers
Anderson, Todd Beamer, Daniel Penny, and the members of the Cajun Navy
for inspiration and encouragement. Likewise, we can look to our Founders.
It was George Washington, after all, who in his inaugural address insisted
that “the preservation of the sacred fire of Liberty and the destiny of the
republican model of Government are justly considered perhaps as deeply, as
finally staked on the experiment entrusted to the hands of the American
people.”
For too long, those hands have been idle. And indeed, until we once
again begin to wield political power for the explicit purpose of restoring
America’s tradition of ordered liberty, we will be fighting a losing battle.
That’s because the “inner order” of the soul and the “outer order” of the
republic are intrinsically linked. As George Will once stated and then forgot,
statecraft is, in fact, soulcraft.
Now, some so-called conservatives will retort, “You want to legislate
morality.” They’re not wrong. I do want the New Conservative Movement
to make America moral again. What the wax-museum conservatives are
wrong about, however, is that there is some alternative to “legislating

--- Sayfa 137 ---
morality”—that there is some other universe in which everything is neutral
and freedom reigns supreme. They couldn’t be more wrong.
We’re going to channel the American middle class’s fury against
anarcho-tyranny into a populist movement to take back control in our lives,
in our schools, in our communities, and in our country. We’re going to bust
up the Big Tech companies that have short-circuited our children’s nervous
systems, spread Chinese propaganda, and addicted millions of people to
porn. And we’re going to (metaphorically) burn down the LA district
attorney’s office and run George Gascón out of town on a rail, along with
all the other prosecutors who abuse their power to try to stop us.
We are going to restore America’s ordered liberty. We’re going to start
by empowering the good folks in Koreatown and other small-business
owners across the country to defend themselves rather than board up their
windows the next time BLM decides to burn down their city. Moreover,
we’re going to stop merely defending our individual right to own a gun, and
we’re going to start reforming police stations and founding rifle clubs that
will help all of us fulfill our collective duty to keep our communities free
and safe rather than having to wait helplessly outside a school where
children are in grave danger. We’re going to put into place district attorneys
who will enforce the law. We’re going to support companies, organizations,
and hospitals that will help people overcome their addictions to drugs,
gambling, and porn. We’re going to clean up our public spaces.
So much rides on defeating anarcho-tyranny and defending ordered
liberty in our country today. Will we surrender to the chaos and control of
the Uniparty, or will we reassert our ancient inheritance of liberty? We need
to fight today so that tomorrow, our children can again sit in shade, peace,
and comfort under their own vine and fig tree.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Sayfa 138 ---
Chapter 7
There’s No Freedom Without the Frontier
The true point of view in the history of this nation is not the Atlantic coast,
it is the great West.
—Frederick Jackson Turner
Have you ever driven through a blizzard in Wyoming? Your field of vision
doesn’t extend more than twenty feet. There are only the storm and the
road, except for the occasional butte or buffalo. Silence descends on the
glacier-carved valleys as ice and snow pile up and muffle all sound. The
grizzlies seek shelter. You want to do the same. The frontier is dangerous. It
is majestic yet simple. It is imposing yet liberating. It is, in short, the most
American thing there is. And like those ancient glaciers that permanently
reshaped the landscape of the West, Americans have been carving
civilization into the stone since the Pilgrim fathers’ “errand into the
wilderness.”
Still, the frontier has changed us much more than we will ever change it.
Land shapes behavior. Western blizzards formed a people with distinct
habits and customs; westerners couldn’t survive in such a land if they didn’t
have a spirit of perseverance, toughness, and adaptability. The very
unavoidability of nature gave people a healthy appreciation of mortality and
chance. Other American landscapes did the same. The Cajun culture of
Opelousas, for example, is indelibly intertwined with the forests and bayous
where my ancestors settled. The same is true of the descendants of the brave
men and women who followed Daniel Boone through the Cumberland Gap
and settled large swaths of Ohio, Kentucky, West Virginia, and Tennessee—

--- Sayfa 139 ---
and of the pioneers who pushed across the Great Plains, past the Rockies,
and to the Pacific Coast. Those mountains made them.
As much as the natural diversity of her people, the variations of
America’s landscape created a need for federalism. As each group of people
adapted to each unique landscape, America developed diverse local
cultures, economies, and institutions that made federalism both necessary
and sensible. At the same time, the experience of settling a wild yet
bountiful land was common to them all. The rugged individualism and true
grit demanded by the frontier forged the American spirit.
That’s a big part of what makes America unique. Our frontier tends to
shape explorers, astronauts, cowboys, and innovators. A frontier attitude is
one of risk taking, hard work, and optimism. Our elites once understood this
spirit. Andrew Jackson, Abraham Lincoln, even Barry Goldwater (who was
born in the Arizona Territory) all came from the frontier. But this is no
longer the case. For those who are stuck in big cities on the coasts, the
frontier has become nothing but a setting for movies and video games, and
federalism a hollowed-out idea from a dead letter.
So what happened? When did we lose sight of the American frontier,
and how can we reclaim it? That story begins and ends in California.
That’s because California wasn’t always the progressive hellscape it is
today. For most of its history, California occupied a particular place in the
American and Western imagination: it was the end of the frontier, the edge
of the Western world, the place where the sun sets.
From priests such as Father Junipero Serra, who rode on muleback as he
founded California’s first missions, to pioneers such as Augustus T. Dowd,
who discovered sequoia trees while tracking a wounded grizzly through
unfamiliar territory in 1852, that spirit—of adventure, of pushing onward,
of spreading the Gospel to every corner of the world—was what California
was all about.
Even after the American West was settled and civilized, California
continued to open new frontiers. In 1912, Charles “Doc” Herrold of San
Jose, California, became “the father of broadcasting” with the first regular
radio broadcast, part of a ferment of tinkerers that would eventually result
in Silicon Valley. In 1923, Walt Disney and his brother Roy founded the
Disney Brothers Cartoon Studio in Hollywood, with a revolutionary
animation system that would open new frontiers of the imagination. In the
1930s, scientists in Pasadena doing pioneering work in rocket propulsion

--- Sayfa 140 ---
founded the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, which has since gone on to send
spacecraft to every planet in our solar system and land five rovers on Mars.
Is it any wonder that Ronald Reagan, a native son of California, was
adamant about exploring the “next great frontier” and rebooting America’s
space program? Deeper, farther, higher: that’s California, or at least it was.
But there was always another nightmare version of the California
dream. For every would-be astronaut exploring outer space, there was a
psychonaut of “inner space” looking to conquer the frontiers of human
consciousness: Eastern yogis, Pentecostal preachers, Esalen seminar
leaders, New Age gurus, LSD chemists. It’s no coincidence that Steve Jobs,
living on an LSD-soaked orchard commune, chose an apple with a bite out
of it as his computer’s symbol. “And ye shall be as gods, knowing good and
evil.”
The False Frontier: The Internet
After decades of development, Silicon Valley in the 1990s promised to open
the next tranche of the California frontier: the internet. What had made the
frontier great was that it had enlarged Americans’ imaginations. It had
drawn us out of ourselves to the horizon. It had challenged us and made us
strong. It had taught us the importance of freedom, but it had also reminded
us of the fragility of our human condition and taught us to rely on God and
on one another.
The internet can provide powerful tools for would-be explorers and
pioneers. But mostly, that wasn’t what Big Tech built. Rather than
expanding the American frontier, Silicon Valley inverted it, both
metaphorically and literally. Once again, the frontier has changed us more
than we will ever change it; this time for the worse. It has disembodied us.
More and more, our bodies and brains are becoming the frontier being
explored and the Big Tech algorithms and Deep State surveillance the
explorers.
It is hard to capture the psychonautic spirit of that time, but the
cyberlibertarian John Perry Barlow’s 1996 manifesto “A Declaration of the
Independence of Cyberspace” comes close. Addressed to the “Governments
of the Industrial World, you weary giants of flesh and steel,” Barlow
asserted, “You have no sovereignty where we gather,” meaning online.

--- Sayfa 141 ---
“Cyberspace does not lie within your borders. . . . Ours is a world that is
both everywhere and nowhere, but it is not where bodies live.”
To put it bluntly, Barlow, like many other Silicon Valley visionaries of
his era, didn’t know what he was talking about. Although we’ve been
trained to think of the internet as an ethereal cyberspace abstracted from
“the real world,” it does have a home. Like Alice falling through the
looking glass, Silicon Valley’s brainchild teleports us—and the frontier—
back to the East Coast. Its epicenter is within miles of my home and also
happens to be the capital of the American national security Deep State:
northern Virginia, just outside Washington, DC. The internet isn’t a
nebulous, self-sustaining thing with no tether to the physical world. The
internet exists because, in the real world, there are massive drab buildings
full of IT infrastructure and whirring fans right in the heart of the Deep
State’s country clubs.
Remember, the technologies underlying the internet emerged from US
military research. Some 70 percent of all global internet traffic passes
through northern Virginia, which has the largest data center market in the
world. Loudon County alone has some 27 million square feet of operational
data center space across 115 facilities. According to the county government,
there has not been a single day without data center construction in more
than thirteen years.
Controlling this physical infrastructure matters a lot. It gives
Washington the power to observe, predict, channel, surveil, and interrupt
what everyone is doing. As seen in the US government’s keeping Twitter
online to fuel protests against the Iranian government or supplying Ukraine
with battlefield internet via Elon Musk’s Starlink, being able to turn it on
and off is a powerful geopolitical tool. It is even more powerful, of course,
as a domestic weapon. The Deep State’s proximity to the internet has made
it not only easy but positively convenient for National Security Agency
programs such as MUSCULAR to scoop up the entire data flows of
companies such as Yahoo! and Google. These operate on top of more
targeted (but still vast) programs such as PRISM that have turned the
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act (FISA) courts into a rocket docket of
secret surveillance.
This is the basis of the Deep State’s power. Its sounds are not the
murmurs of the crowd or the empty words of activists and politicians
bending the mob to their will. Instead, one hears only the ceaseless demonic

--- Sayfa 142 ---
whirring of data center air-conditioning systems in empty office parks as
the entire planet’s data is extracted, processed, and filed away. In identical
corridors, a hive mind of bureaucrats hums with discussion, using the same
flat, affectless tone when they discuss striking suspected Yemeni terrorists
with drones as they do when ensuring that their compliance trainings are up
to date.
These muted noises may not strike fear into people’s hearts as the
rousing speech of a European dictator does, but that only makes the regime
more insidious. George Washington at least knew what demagogues and
mob rabble looked like. If you plopped him down in Mount Vernon today,
he’d think that the country had been taken over by invaders from outer
space.
In a way, it has been.
As Alexis de Tocqueville wrote in Democracy in America, countries
such as the United States face a novel sort of despotism. He foretold that as
individuals are drawn ever more away from the glorious frontier into their
own small pursuits, neglectful of the common good, they would be tempted
toward electing not a violent tyrant but an infantilizing guardian:
Above this race of men stands an immense and tutelary power, which takes upon itself alone to
secure their gratifications, and to watch over their fate. That power is absolute, minute, regular,
provident, and mild. It would be like the authority of a parent, if, like that authority, its object
was to prepare men for manhood; but it seeks on the contrary to keep them in perpetual
childhood. . . .
It covers the surface of society with a network of small complicated rules, minute and
uniform, through which the most original minds and the most energetic characters cannot
penetrate, to rise above the crowd. The will of man is not shattered, but softened, bent, and
guided: men are seldom forced by it to act, but they are constantly restrained from acting: such a
power does not destroy, but it prevents existence; it does not tyrannize, but it compresses,
enervates, extinguishes, and stupefies a people, till each nation is reduced to be nothing better
than a flock of timid and industrious animals, of which the government is the shepherd.
“A flock of timid and industrious animals, of which the government is
the shepherd.” The New Authoritarian wolves of the Uniparty smack their
lips as they herd everyday Americans hungry for the frontier, big skies, and
new pastures into a “cyberspace” that they created and exercise total control
over. Either the people of the United States will rise up, reclaim the
American frontier, and burn down the fences enclosing us, or the Uniparty
will slaughter us, replacing us with a diverse array of foreigners, cyborgs,
and hive mind bureaucrats extolling the virtues of “our sacred democracy.”

--- Sayfa 143 ---
The First Temptation: Convenience
For a long time, America’s rollicking federalism, frontier spirit, and instinct
for liberty held back the growth of despotism. But even after the beginnings
of the rise of this “immense and tutelary power,” fueled by the aspirations
of the Party of Destruction, there were still many natural limitations of
institutional capacity, budgets, and communications, to name a few. One by
one, they have fallen.
This is the significance of the vast invisible empire that now runs almost
everything about our lives: the internet. The temptation of the new
despotism is that it gives us things we need, and that’s most true in the
immense convenience of the internet. We communicate through it; we buy
and sell through it; we travel the world with its aid.
I’m not just talking about social media. Even if you don’t think about
the internet at all, even if you don’t have a smartphone, almost every critical
element of social and commercial life in this country uses the internet
today:
finance,
banking,
navigation,
news
media,
medicine,
communications, marketing, and education, to start with.
The reason the internet is so convenient is that it is so connected. But
the flip side of that connectedness is that it’s tremendously vulnerable to
coordination and manipulation, because it’s so centralized. The New
Authoritarians of the Deep State don’t always need to manipulate the
internet directly. They increasingly leverage “public-private” partnerships
with Big Tech companies that can’t afford to say “no” when the intelligence
community comes knocking. Thanks to the brave work of the Republicans
leading the House of Representatives’ Select Subcommittee on the
Weaponization of the Federal Government, we are just beginning to get a
sense of the scale of this effort.
Most Americans have no idea how large the Deep State has become.
According to a 2010 investigation by the journalists Dana Priest and
William Arkin, “Some 1,271 government organizations and 1,931 private
companies work on programs related to counterterrorism, homeland
security and intelligence in about 10,000 locations across the United
States,” conducted by almost 1.5 million individuals with top secret
clearances in some seventeen official agencies of the intelligence
community. One program alone (a public-private partnership with AT&T)
collects more than a trillion domestic phone records per year.

--- Sayfa 144 ---
The New Authoritarian leviathan is not only vast but secret. The courts
are secret, the rulings are secret, the warrants are secret, the reports are
secret, the budgets are secret, and most important, the abuses are secret. An
estimated 50 million classified documents are produced each year.
In response to Cold War–era abuses of everyday Americans’ civil rights,
Congress passed legislation to protect Americans from the Deep State. But
the internet’s combination of globalization and centralization has made it
trivially easy for the Deep State to exploit loopholes in this framework, and
Inspector General reports have found repeated violations of the already
flimflam FISA process.
The centralization of Big Tech makes this process even easier. New
Authoritarian bureaucrats are technically forbidden from directly interfering
with the speech of law-abiding Americans. But the trust and safety teams at
places such as Facebook and Twitter are chock-full of former Deep Staters.
The Deep State and its allies have been able to direct millions of taxpayer
dollars to NGOs, nonprofits, and academic research centers that could make
their own “independent” recommendations to Big Tech. Rather than
officially ordering Big Tech around, the Deep State organized
“coordinating” bodies such as the Department of Homeland Security’s
Disinformation Governance Board, yet another Uniparty conspiratio.
This conspiracy was on full display in October 2020, when one of the
country’s oldest newspapers, the New York Post, published a shocking
exposé of the evidence of the Biden family’s moral and political corruption
found on Hunter Biden’s laptop, abandoned at a Delaware computer repair
shop. With the looming prospect of a Trump second term, the Deep State
sprang into action.
First, fifty-one former senior intelligence officials signed an open letter
(organized, we now know, by Biden consigliere Antony Blinken) that the
laptop story “has all the classic earmarks of a Russian information
operation” (this even though the FBI had already authenticated the laptop).
Second, both Twitter and Facebook executives have testified that in the
weeks leading up to the Post story (when the FBI was already aware of the
existence and authenticity of the laptop), FBI officials repeatedly warned
them of a coming Russian disinformation “hack-and-leak” campaign at
meetings also attended by their former FBI colleague James Baker, who had
become Twitter’s chief lawyer.

--- Sayfa 145 ---
The result of this operation (coordinated across the Deep State: former
officials, Biden national security aides, Big Tech disinformation
bureaucrats, FBI investigators) was that Twitter and Facebook felt
compelled to censor the Hunter Biden story as disinformation, with Twitter
going so far as to prevent users from even privately messaging the story to
each other. This for a critical election-related story in an established
American newspaper that the Deep State players involved knew to be
legitimate. Maybe their hysterics about “stolen election conspiracy
theories” and “misinformation” come from a guilty conscience.
The Second Temptation: Safety
Beyond convenience, the promise of an all-encompassing bureaucratic state
is one of total safety. Every time something goes wrong, a servile people
clamor for government to be given more power to fix the problem. The
trouble, of course, is that that very power can easily be used to deplatform,
rob, and entrap good people when the Uniparty aligns against them. We
don’t have to look far from home to see the future. The most shocking and
disturbing example yet took place not far from our borders.
During the covid-19 pandemic, determined to virtue signal against
Trump’s America, Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau imposed some
of the strictest lockdowns and vaccine measures in the Western world,
including, after vaccines became available, a vaccine mandate for
international truckers entering Canada, despite no evidence that they were a
significant vector of the spread of the disease.
The truckers had had enough. Like many blue-collar workers, they had
found themselves squeezed and squeezed by increasingly heavy regulation
and climate change policies. Like the farmers in the Netherlands protesting
fertilizer quotas and the Yellow Vests in France protesting a discriminatory
gas tax, the Canadian truckers decided that the only way to make
themselves heard in the halls of power was to make themselves visible.
They organized the Freedom Convoy, which gathered thousands of truckers
and their rigs in the streets of Canada’s capital, Ottawa.
It appears that the Canadian authorities had greatly underestimated the
number of truckers who would be participating. Tens of thousands of them
showed up, parked their massive rigs, and engaged their air brakes. For

--- Sayfa 146 ---
days and then weeks, they didn’t budge. With the Canadian capital
physically under siege, disruptions to Canada’s major bridges to the United
States, and the unsettling honking of the truckers’ air horns, the Canadian
authorities panicked. On Valentine’s Day 2022, for the first time in
Canadian history, Justin Trudeau invoked the powers of Canada’s
Emergencies Act.
Neither the Ottawa police nor the Royal Canadian Mounted Police
(RCMP, Canada’s equivalent of the FBI) had the physical capacity to
dislodge the convoy, especially not since most of the towing companies
took the truckers’ side. What they did have was access to the Invisible
Empire.
They went around with scanners, reading license plates and taking note
of suspected protesters. They compelled financial institutions to supply
transaction data about who had made protest-related purchases or donated
to support the convoy. They froze Canadian citizens’ accounts on social
media to prevent “misinformation” from spreading.
But the most dramatic weapon they used was debanking individuals
(and their families, in many cases) by labeling them “designated persons”
involved in the Freedom Convoy. From the Public Order Emergency
Commission’s official report on the affair:
In practical terms, this meant that financial institutions were required to entirely cut off
designated persons from the financial system. Financial institutions were to freeze all accounts
of designated persons, including Registered Retirement Savings Plans (RRSPs), mortgage
accounts, trading accounts, lines of credit, and credit cards. Online payment processors could
not facilitate any purchase or sale involving a designated person. Cryptocurrency exchanges
could not permit designated persons to access any currency held by the exchange or allow them
to convert cryptocurrency into ordinary money.
That total unpersoning did not just apply to actual Freedom Convoy
participants; anyone who violated any of the Canadian government’s orders,
including supporting the convoy with an online donation or taking a convoy
protester a hot coffee on a cold day, could be targeted. Many were.
How were “designated persons” identified? The Emergencies Act order
allowed the Canadian government to suspend privacy legislation so that
social media companies, all levels of government, and financial institutions
could share information with the RCMP. Moreover, the order put the onus
on financial institutions, not the government, to determine who was a
designated person; many of them targeted protesters very broadly just to be
safe from future government investigation.

--- Sayfa 147 ---
Canada even tried to coerce a wholly American company, the
crowdfunding site GiveSendGo, to stop distributing money to convoy
members. It refused. Other Big Tech companies, including PayPal and
GoFundMe, voluntarily complied with Trudeau’s threats, backed by the
danger of governmental retaliation.
Even though the emergency officially lasted for only a short time,
persecution of Trudeau’s political opponents has continued much longer.
One veteran Canadian trucker (and participant in the Freedom Convoy),
Gord Magill, recounted the troubles of a dissident podcaster who was
spuriously charged with crimes, held without bail for two months, and
released without charges. But his bank account was shuttered, along with
his mortgage, and he has been entirely frozen out of any other Canadian
bank.
Under the Emergencies Act, no judicial review of bank decisions was
allowed, and once someone is debanked, no one has to open an account for
that person in the future. As we also saw regarding covid-19 vaccine
mandates, somehow, in the New Authoritarianism, a public-private
partnership to deprive you of your rights makes both parties immune from
any legal remedy.
In the future, the federal government won’t need to wait to stop a bunch
of truckers from blocking the streets of the capital city. Hidden in the depths
of the Biden-McConnell Infrastructure Bill is a requirement that all new
cars and trucks sold by 2026 have a computer-controlled kill switch built in.
And the broader “green transition” mandates toward electric vehicles (EVs)
also ensure a far more controllable population (all modern EVs are basically
smartphones on wheels).
You can clearly see the future forming: deplatforming drivers for
spreading misinformation or failing to follow the latest vaccine mandate;
mandatory climate lockdowns to limit carbon emissions. Yet another
powerful tool of social control falls into place.
Skeptics who argue about whether anyone today intends this result are
missing the point. Anyone who surrenders this degree of freedom and self-
agency is already a slave waiting patiently for a master.
Over the past fifty years, an enormous number of threads have issued
forth from Washington over the entire country. Like the Lilliputians
entrapping Gulliver, each string is seemingly weak and harmless on its own.

--- Sayfa 148 ---
But they amount to a collective apparatus primed for the New
Authoritarianism.
The dangers the United States faces as a country are real. But so is the
danger to the American way of life posed by the vast and unaccountable
Invisible Empire, which over the past thirty years has increasingly been
weaponized against everyday Americans by factions of the Deep State. Its
puppet strings have been growing steadily over time. And while those
related to national security are in some sense the most alarming, the whole
picture should include the increasing federal domination over every area of
American life: education, food, medicine, public health, law enforcement,
finance, banking, housing, transportation, commerce, and energy, just to
start with.
The Third Temptation: Immaturity
Ultimately, the thing that’s behind our capitulation to the Uniparty and its
authoritarianism is that the siren song of immaturity is hard to resist.
Comfort, safety, and security are good things—but the government wants to
be their only provider.
The proper authority of the US government is to preserve the order of
the republic by building up the virtue of the citizenry, as a father prepares
his boys for manhood, in Tocqueville’s analogy. Soft despotism, like an
overbearing mother, instead “seeks on the contrary to keep them in
perpetual childhood.” It doesn’t announce itself as such, of course: it uses
vaccine passports, fitness trackers tied to your medical insurance, social
media censors, and a thousand other little strings.
The Deep State, whether by intention or accident, aims to put the
American spirit on puberty blockers; to domesticate our free people into “a
flock of timid and industrious animals, of which the government is the
shepherd.”
The thing is, the frontier is dangerous. It’s wild. It’s violent and
sometimes disorderly. “The meeting point between savagery and
civilization,” the historian Frederick Jackson Turner called it. The federal
government has always had a role in mediating between the frontier and the
republic writ large. But the United States is so vast that there’s always been
plenty of room.

--- Sayfa 149 ---
There’s a myth that the frontier “closed” with the end of US territorial
expansion. But anybody who has spent time in the Big Sky Country of
Montana, in the great Alaska range, in the vastness of the Great Plains, in
the West Texas valleys that go on for days, knows that this isn’t really true.
The frontier is alive and well.
What changed was the growth of the federal apparatus throughout the
twentieth century. The job of the federal marshal in the Wild West was to
restore order when the cowboys couldn’t quite manage. Today’s Deep State
treats us more like the cattle.
In 2021, Attorney General Merrick Garland directed the FBI to
investigate parents protesting pandemic lockdowns and gender ideology at
school board meetings. In 2022, the FBI sent a SWAT team to arrest the
pro-life activist Mark Houck at his home, pointing guns at his wife and
seven kids (he was acquitted). In 2023, FBI agents raided and shot dead
Craig Robertson, an overweight seventy-five-year-old crank, after he posted
violent memes about President Biden. FBI agents have shown up to
investigate and intimidate moms’ groups, ranchers, “radical-traditionalist
Catholics” who prefer the traditional Latin Mass, pro-lifers, activists
concerned about election integrity, and other ordinary Americans.
Everyone, it seems, except the Hamas-supporting cells on college campuses
or the radical leftists plotting to blow up pipelines.
Total Control
More and more, however, the Deep State doesn’t even have to send its
thugs to make Americans obey. Increasingly, they’ve trained (programmed,
perhaps) Americans to be obedient. Enforcement is unnecessary, after all,
when compliance is nearly universal.
When we first moved to northern Virginia, Michelle and I decided to be
good citizens and get a feel for the area by attending a local town meeting.
Now, I’ve been to lots of town meetings. They’re a mainstay of American
democracy, warts and all. They rarely feel like a Norman Rockwell
painting. The most pedantic and consequently bitter local gripes tend to be
interrupted only by either monotonous announcements or a loopy harangue
by some resident eccentric. All that, I expected.

--- Sayfa 150 ---
But what we encountered was something different. Person after person
got up and spoke, not in ordinary human terms about their needs and
desires, hatreds and loves, but in the hive mind language of “key
performance indicators,” “problematic developments,” “racial equity in
standardized test scores,” and so on. Michelle turned to me and said, “These
people, they don’t think right.”
It’s hard for a normal human being to see the country through the Deep
State’s eyes. But in The Revolt of the Elites and the Betrayal of Democracy
(1995), Christopher Lasch managed to do so. He captured something really
important about the motives and manners of our Uniparty elites:
The thinking classes are fatally removed from the physical side of life. . . . They live in a world
of abstractions and images, a simulated world that consists of computerized models of reality
—“Hyperreality,” as it has been called—as distinguished from the palpable, immediate, physical
reality inhabited by ordinary men and women. Their belief in the “social construction of
reality”—the central dogma of postmodernist thought—reflects the experience of living in an
artificial environment from which everything that resists human control (unavoidably,
everything familiar and reassuring as well) has been rigorously excluded. Control has become
their obsession.
The immense power the US government unlocked over the course of the
twentieth century—taming rivers, surveilling the globe, touching the
heavens, even harnessing the power of the atom—created a hubristic
aspiration matched to a damaging fear: that America could be controlled
and that it needed to be controlled for its own good. It’s the same aspiration
and the same intent Tocqueville foresaw: to impose a “strict uniformity of
regulation, and personally to tutor and direct every member of the
community,” something beyond even the imagining of Caesar Augustus or
Louis XIV.
Of course, the kind of total control that a weaponized and politicized
intelligence community might cook up lies mostly beneath the surface.
What is more visible is the rising tide of nonsense that suffuses American
life: nonsense jobs, nonsense forms, nonsense policies.
Why is it that, every year, tens of millions of Americans attend hours of
“compliance trainings”? Why is it that the cost of administration seems to
climb higher every year?
After the Reagan Revolution cut government budgets, federal
bureaucrats developed new strategies to exert control. In many cases, they
retained the delegated congressional authorities to make and enforce rules;
they just didn’t have the manpower to do things directly. And so they began

--- Sayfa 151 ---
promulgating web after web of threads: guidances, rulings, warnings, “Dear
Colleague” letters, and other gossamer handcuffs that threatened
enforcement action. The result is that ostensibly private actors hire
increasing numbers of woke white-collar bureaucrats (Lasch’s elites who
“live in a world of abstractions and images”) to enforce government
authorities on themselves, a fully privatized system of federal commissars.
As we have seen with DEI, once everything becomes the purview of
compliance, compliance rules everything. Corporations think they can wall
off DEI commissars, but if you say that everything from hiring to marketing
to office location to health plans needs DEI supervision, you’ve given DEI
control over the whole company.
But no matter what the supposed subject matter is (DEI, cybersecurity,
health and safety), compliance training is training in compliance. It’s deadly
to the spirit of both the individual and the organization. It’s just something
thrown at you by a manager who doesn’t care about you by an organization
that is not taking responsibility for actually training you, mentoring you, or
setting a proper example of how to behave. It’s the leadership equivalent of
a doctor quickly writing someone an OxyContin prescription instead of
taking the time to ensure they get the care they actually need.
For many ordinary Americans, that was how they experienced the Deep
State’s management of the covid-19 pandemic. So many Americans felt
invisible to the regime, as though their struggles to take care of their
families, to maintain their livelihood, to raise their kids, or to comfort their
elderly parents meant nothing to those in power. They felt as though
common sense had been thrown out the window. They felt manipulated and
coerced, because policies justified by “the science” didn’t change, even
months (or years!) after we knew better. They felt like numbers on a
spreadsheet.
There have been a lot of conspiracy theories about what happened
during the pandemic, about elites “planning” it in order to exert totalitarian
control. I think the reason why is a kind of emotional cope, because the
truth is even more disturbing. The indifference, the incompetence, and the
mediocrity didn’t cover up anything. It didn’t hide a secret enemy. The
people in charge just know little and care little about you, about your life.
It’s the same principle by which parents fighting for their kids’
education end up at the desk of the FBI, by which the Biden administration
could proclaim that “our very own intelligence agencies  .  .  . have

--- Sayfa 152 ---
determined that domestic terrorism rooted in white supremacy is the gravest
terrorist threat to our homeland today.” Rather than engage the hard work of
representative self-government, care, and duty toward the ordinary people
of this country, it’s easier for the DC apparatchiks to sic federal agents on
them. It’s an abandonment of care. It’s a declaration of enmity.
These are not practices fit for a free people. We have become so
dominated by the spirit of fear and paranoia that we have forgotten that to
be free is necessarily a dangerous enterprise.
Back to the Frontier
When I think about the polar opposite of one of these hive mind operators
or the cattle subjects they intend to rule over, I think of Palmer Luckey.
Palmer is an entrepreneur and an inheritor of the real spirit of Silicon
Valley. The homeschooled son of a California car salesman, he was only a
teenager when he set out to revolutionize virtual reality (VR). While living
in a camper trailer in his parents’ driveway and working minimum-wage
jobs, he managed to crack the problem, delivering advances in VR that had
eluded big technology companies for decades. Palmer is an actual boy
genius engineer, the closest thing modern America has to a contemporary
Tom Swift (or Jimmy Neutron, for my younger readers). With his prototype,
Palmer launched a 2012 Kickstarter campaign for his headset, dubbed the
Oculus. It became one of the most successful crowdfunding campaigns of
all time, turning Palmer’s trailer experiments into a leading VR company
that was acquired by Facebook for $2 billion in 2014.
It’s hard to convey how much of a lightning-in-a-bottle story this is,
outside of all modern Silicon Valley norms for building a start-up. It’s
Rocky Balboa or Cinderella. Yet after only a few years of Palmer
continuing his work on Oculus, Facebook unceremoniously fired him in
2016.
What was the sin that led Facebook to sever ties with Palmer? Did he
molest a subordinate? Drive drunk? Drug someone with methamphetamine
for sexual gratification? No, you can have a long and storied career in
California while guilty of those things if you have the right friends and
politics, as Harvey Weinstein, Paul Pelosi, and Ed Buck amply demonstrate.
Palmer did something even more unforgivable: he donated $10,000 to a

--- Sayfa 153 ---
political action committee supporting the election of Donald Trump to the
presidency.
Unbeknown to the company’s wokescold HR managers, attempting to
cancel Palmer turned out to be a huge mistake for Facebook. That’s because
in 1937, to protect the Communists and leftist activists in Hollywood and
the labor unions, the California legislature had passed a law making it
illegal for employers to punish employees for their political activities
outside work. The senior managers at Facebook, a woke company with
woke employees, had never had occasion to confront those protections
before. And so, according to the Wall Street Journal, Luckey hired an
employment lawyer after his firing who approached Facebook with that
inconvenient fact and “negotiated a payout of at least $100 million,
representing an acceleration of stock awards and bonuses he would have
received through July 2019, plus cash.” Facebook’s political persecution
turned into a huge payday for Palmer.
Most twentysomethings, given a $100 million payout, would skate off
into a life of sybaritic pleasure, perhaps spending summers in the south of
France and winters heli-skiing the Rockies while doing virtue-signaling
philanthropy and a bit of angel investing or movie producing for fun.
But only a lunatic or a patriot would do what Palmer did next: found a
defense technology company to bolster the United States’ national security.
Compared to consumer products, building military technology is extremely
difficult and resource intensive and must comply with convoluted supply
chain and cybersecurity regulations. The prize for producing innovative
products at great expense is to then spend years of your life and millions of
dollars fighting through stultifying bureaucratic and legal tripwires to
compete against the big defense “prime contractors” and enable the US
military to actually buy your wares. From the end of the Cold War until a
few years ago, only a handful of Silicon Valley technology companies had
ever dared to try to enter the defense sector. It’s not a coincidence that they
were
all
companies
whose
visionary
founders
were
already
centimillionaires when they did so (Palantir Technologies, backed by Peter
Thiel; SpaceX by Elon Musk; and Anduril by Palmer Luckey).
As the founder of Anduril, Palmer has been applying his considerable
skills building the kinds of technologies the United States needs to secure
her future and once again explore the next great frontiers: loitering
munitions for our special operators, sensor platforms to secure our border,

--- Sayfa 154 ---
and miniature jet-powered autonomous drones for our air force, all built to
the highest standards with the same software-first approach Palmer had
used to crack VR. Even as other Silicon Valley companies shy away from
working in US defense and legacy defense companies haggle over every
dime, Palmer Luckey, sporting a Hawaiian shirt, a mullet, and a big vision,
isn’t asking anybody’s permission to build the systems he thinks are
important for the United States’ future.
The Deep State doesn’t think that Americans are capable of governing
themselves, and it has elaborate plans to turn a nation of cowboys into a
nation of cattle. A true American pioneer such as Palmer Luckey will tell
them where they can shove their plans—with a winsome grin on his face.
Reasserting the Principles
How can we free ourselves from the rule of the Deep State? Federalism
makes sense only if we recover the spirit of the frontier. For generations, it
was the challenge of the frontier that spurred the American soul to
greatness. It called forth self-reliance, skill, diligence, industry, courage,
and neighborliness. Long after many other parts of the West had begun a
cynical naval-gazing turn, Americans remained mesmerized by the frontier,
always looking outward, ever farther. And we had a constitutional system fit
for it, one in which Americans didn’t sit around waiting for the federal
government to take care of everything; one in which federal power was
limited and placed in the service of Americans exercising their agency to
settle the frontier and gaining the rewards in their estates and their souls. I
call it endless frontier federalism. It’s an embodied attitude. And it doesn’t
just have to mean looking westward or looking out to the stars. You can
have the fire of the endless frontier within your soul, even in Washington.
The heart of our federalism is subsidiarity, the preservation of liberty
and agency to solve problems at the most local possible level. In preserving
the sovereignty of the states, our constitutional system protects a powerful
source of renewal and resilience. As James Madison wrote in The
Federalist Papers, No. 45, “The powers delegated by the proposed
Constitution to the federal government are few and defined. Those which
are to remain in the State governments are numerous and indefinite.”

--- Sayfa 155 ---
It’s a bit counterintuitive, but endless frontier federalism is also essential
to preserving the national unity and strength our Constitution was meant to
foster.
The vision of our Founding Fathers was E pluribus unum: Out of many,
one. The Deep State wants an unum that swallows everything else: one set
of ideas, one set of rules, one set of rulers. For the Deep State, diversity
means different-colored bureaucrats running the same software.
For the Party of Creation, the endless frontier is plenty diverse. It isn’t
about what you look like, but about the values you’re trying to live out, the
institutions you’re trying to build, and the virtues you are trying to exercise.
Much of the division experienced in this country is the result of
overcentralization that raises the stakes of what goes on in Washington to an
unbearable degree. Reclaiming the frontier will allow us to live together
again, “preserving the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.”
It will also preserve our strength. Systems that are overly centralized
become fragile. They develop bottlenecks and interdependencies that, when
they break down, wreck everything. We saw this time and again during the
pandemic. A revitalized endless frontier federalism would both demand and
produce greater resilience by ensuring that states and localities cultivate a
measure of independence and self-sufficiency.
There are, of course, many areas where it is fitting and proper for the
federal government to have a large role. But one of the more intriguing
promises of the twenty-first century is that the economy-of-scale paradigm
of the Industrial Era has been overthrown. We have the technology to
decentralize production, coordination, communication, and much else
besides without losing their benefits.
A liberty not used is a liberty lost. The best way to recover endless
frontier federalism is to start building with vigor and confidence at the state
and local levels, asking forgiveness, not permission.
One vastly underrated tool for recovering federalism is the interstate
compact, a tool authorized in the Constitution that permits states to make
substantive agreements and contracts among themselves. The Supreme
Court has taken an expansive view of the authorities of interstate compacts
and a highly limited view of when they need to seek congressional
approval. States can set up multistate agencies, coordinate state laws, enter
into agreements with each other, and more; examples include the Port
Authority of New York and New Jersey and the Emergency Management

--- Sayfa 156 ---
Assistance Compact, but states are starting to use them more broadly to
coordinate state licensing requirements, for instance.
The Texas Public Policy Foundation has described interstate compacts
as a “Shield of Federalism” and argued for much more creative uses of
them. States could use them, for example, to create a shared investment
structure to combat ESG and protect investment sovereignty or to
coordinate on health care standardization and cost cutting. Crucially,
compacts that are approved by Congress can override other federal laws;
they could be used to create zones of freedom from overbearing federal
bureaucracies.
For example, SpaceX today seeks to revolutionize US space access with
the heaviest ever reusable rocket, the Starship, operating from Starbase,
near Brownsville, Texas. In a return to the final frontier spirit of the Space
Race, SpaceX seeks to launch often and learn often and has achieved one
milestone after another over the past decade.
The problem is that even though the company operates on a remote
stretch of desert beach in the far south of Texas, the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) has repeatedly slow-walked launch licenses and
permits. The issue has nothing to do with the soundness of SpaceX’s
rocketry; it’s that under the National Environmental Policy Act, issuing
experimental permits and launch licenses is considered a major federal
action requiring an environmental review.
Almost all of the FAA’s demands have had nothing to do with the role
Congress envisioned for launch approvals in the Commercial Space Launch
Act of 1984. For instance, the FAA required SpaceX to carry out seventy-
five actions to mitigate environmental impacts before the company could
receive a launch license for the site, including donating money to a local
environmental nonprofit. Every time SpaceX wants to launch a modified
vehicle from the site, environmentalists sue the FAA to slow down the
NEPA process in the name of saving the piping plovers and ocelots.
But imagine if Texas, Louisiana, Alabama, Mississippi, and Florida
were to band together to create a Space Coast Aerospace Development
Compact. Each state would have a significant interest in advancing US
rocket science, with major public and private space facilities, training
centers, manufacturing, and launch pads. The compact could set up an
interstate compact agency with an expedited approval process for approving
rocket launches, including a clause that “The operation of federal laws not

--- Sayfa 157 ---
consistent with state laws and regulations adopted pursuant to this compact
will be suspended.”
With the consent of Congress (which is easier to gain for a narrow
compact affecting only a few states than for one involving a wholesale
overhaul of FAA rules), the compact would acquire the force of federal law
and render FAA rules and regulations null and void for the covered
activities in those states. Maybe more important, it would empower state-
level personnel who want to do launches and disempower federal
bureaucrats who don’t. It would also, in many cases, allow the states to skirt
around NEPA and other federal red tape.
What is strangling our country is all of the gossamer threads that impose
a vetocracy emanating from Washington and covering the land.
Reestablishing the frontier with creative tools such as interstate compacts
will be part of the way out of the labyrinth and back to our federalist
system.
Reclaiming the Powers
In our constitutional system, states and citizens cannot defy or nullify duly
passed legislation signed by the president. But much of what hamstrings
American freedom today is nebulous interpretations of self-defined rules
based on internal legal memos interpreting vague regulations produced by
twice- or thrice-delegated authority from a statute of questionable
constitutionality.
To be blunt, the Deep State often claims authority that it simply does
not possess. We need to stop deferring to the legitimacy of its claims unless
and until they are confirmed by Congressional clarification or judicial
interpretation.
Lawyers and policy makers in the New Conservative Movement need to
interrogate every single specific authority claimed by the administrative
state to discern what is a valid and needful use of federal power and what is
an unconstitutional and unenforceable infringement on our endless frontier
federalism. This process should be not just a casual chitchat but rather a
body cavity, strip-search, enhanced interrogation. So unlike perhaps some
of the 1990s conservatives, I don’t want to drown the government; I want to
waterboard it.

--- Sayfa 158 ---
A wide swath of authorities and regulations promulgated by federal
agencies may not be worth the paper they are printed on. It’s time for the
states to call the Deep State’s bluff in the name of liberty and endless
frontier federalism. There are a number of tools a state can use to create a
state-level legal framework that makes extraconstitutional authorities
claimed by the Deep State effectively unenforceable within the state. The
tactics that states such as Oregon and California have pioneered to protect
illegal immigrants (against constitutional federal authorities) can now be
used to build sanctuary states and sanctuary cities for Americans—
sanctuaries from federal overreach and tyranny.
Already, the Tenth Amendment forbids the federal government from
commandeering state resources (requiring state officials to actively enforce
federal laws). A number of states have gone further, forbidding state
employees to share information with federal officials. Some states have also
changed state licensing, banking, or gun sales laws in order not to have to
collect certain information that could be subpoenaed by federal law
enforcement authorities. Idaho and Missouri have gone even further,
passing laws forbidding state officials to enforce any federal orders in
violation of the Second Amendment.
We have a growing blueprint for how far a revivified federalism could
go. A number of states of the union have taken it upon themselves to
legalize marijuana. Now, I oppose this on the grounds that marijuana is a
destructive public nuisance and a significant cause of schizophrenia onset in
heavy users, not because I oppose states exercising their powers. These
states have proved that if entrepreneurs are willing to limit themselves in
certain respects, such as not trafficking across state borders and using in-
state financial institutions and services, the citizens of this country have
more freedom than they think.
For instance, one of the most absurd authorities claimed by the federal
government is the right to regulate every mouthful of food produced by a
business in the entire country, even if it is sold within the same state (the
Constitution’s Commerce Clause gives Congress the authority to regulate
interstate commerce).
Under the Food and Drug Administration’s expansive self-
understanding of its statutory authority, the Department of Justice could
bring an enforcement action against Susie and Jenny for not properly
labeling the wares at their neighborhood lemonade stand. It is only through

--- Sayfa 159 ---
the agency’s magnanimity and generosity that its self-developed
enforcement guidelines let the girls slide. Similarly, the Department of
Agriculture claims the authority to stand in between a farmer and his
neighbor, forbidding the farmer to sell the neighbor a side of bacon without
a federal inspection. Even the most pro-federalist Founder would have
started loading his muskets if you’d have told him that this was where the
Constitution would lead.
The FDA’s and USDA’s claims have a direct effect on the health of
Americans. They require every food producer to place USDA propaganda
labels on their products, giving the impression that grass-fed beef is less
healthy for you than seed-oil vegan patties. They force local organic
farmers who raise their pigs and chickens in a healthy, careful manner to
comply with all of the same regulatory requirements as huge corporate
concerns that stuff their animals full of hormones and antibiotics. In fact,
the USDA requires them to use the same slaughterhouses and facilities.
Representative Thomas Massie of Kentucky understands how absurd
and haughty a claim this is and how out of sync with the limits of federal
authority. He’s another great American filled with the spirit of the frontier,
an MIT electrical engineering grad who built a totally self-sufficient home
on his own land, including an off-grid electrical system he designed himself
using repurposed Tesla batteries. Representative Massie has proposed
legislation that would create exemptions for small farmers and ranchers to
slaughter and process their livestock at local facilities.
In the meantime, states could take direct action to exempt farmers and
ranchers who sell their products only within the state from federal
regulations. They could forbid state inspectors to work with the federal
government or even exempt their citizens from reporting requirements. A
small number of congressmen could easily put a rider in must-pass
legislation enjoining the USDA from spending any money on enforcement
actions in states that have legalized farmers to sell their own locally
butchered meat (as has been done to prevent federal enforcement of certain
marijuana laws in states that have legalized weed). And if the USDA dared
to push the issue, public interest law shops in the New Conservative
Movement stand ready to defend small farmers and ranchers from federal
overreach.
Wax-museum conservatives will say that this piecemeal, hodgepodge
approach is no way to make legislation. And they’re right! It would be

--- Sayfa 160 ---
better if Congress passed good laws and reformed bad laws. But in the
absence of a functioning Congress, it is better to create and protect zones of
freedom from poorly written laws and supercilious federal bureaucrats than
to play along with regulatory anarcho-tyranny in which the federal
government and blue states turn a blind eye on illegal immigrants and woke
corporatists while smug “principled conservatives” tell families and small
businesses to stand there and take it.
Reining in the Deep State
Civil libertarians from both parties have warned for many decades that the
legislative and constitutional safeguards protecting the republic against its
own security organs were woefully inadequate. For a long time, in the name
of national security, Republicans as much as Democrats have ignored them.
We might not have bought #Resistance votive candles with FBI director
James Comey’s face on them, but we cheered a massive expansion of
unaccountable federal power after 9/11. We were wrong.
We should have better followed our Founders, who, in the debates
around the framing of the Constitution, regardless of their viewpoints, paid
grave attention to the example of the Roman Praetorian Guard and the
danger that those responsible for the republic’s security posed to it. Many of
them would have translated Juvenal’s Satires in the schoolhouse and come
across his evocative question “Quis custodiet ipsos custodes?”: “Who
watches the watchmen?”
You don’t need to take my word for it. Reviewing the last twenty years
of public Inspector General’s reports from agencies across the intelligence
community provides harrowing example after example of failed policies
and deep abuses. Despite decades of warnings, federal overclassification,
secrecy, and abuse of the police power have gotten severely worse, not
better. Such reports have shown:
At least a dozen NSA analysts using top secret systems to spy on their
current and former spouses and girlfriends
FBI agents using false statements to gain FISA warrants, including one
against President Trump
The CIA hacking Senate Intelligence Committee staff members who
were preparing a report on alleged torture during the global War on

--- Sayfa 161 ---
Terror
The Secret Service falling under investigation for illegally destroying
records by the Department of Homeland Security’s Inspector General
—who is also under investigation for the same thing.
Special operations soldiers implicated in smuggling, spilling over into
murder and other crimes, including reports of trafficking drugs from
foreign deployments back into the United States
The House Select Subcommittee on the Weaponization of the Federal
Government is a good start. But we need a more substantial and more
bipartisan effort on the scale and seriousness of the Senate Select
Committee to Study Governmental Operations with Respect to Intelligence
Activities, also known as the Church Committee (1975), chaired by
Democratic senator Frank Church of Idaho and Republican senator John
Tower of Texas, which revealed serious Cold War intelligence community
abuse and led to major reforms.
Congress should also eliminate many of the vast redundancies and
overlaps among the federal agencies, including abolishing the Bureau of
Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF), which should be a
convenience store, not a government agency. And Congress needs to rein in
the weaponization and politicization of federal law enforcement by
providing better direct oversight of the FBI, instead of letting the agency
hide behind the skirts of the Department of Justice.
The Endless Frontier is still going to need its federal marshals. There
are still wolves on the prowl. But the Deep State as a tendency, a network,
and an ideology is the enemy of the American spirit. Most of the
employees, especially in federal law enforcement and national security, are
patriots. Many of them are military veterans who are themselves upset
about the weaponization and politicization of their agencies.
A fish rots from the head down, and so does the Deep State.
One source of the Deep State’s lock on power is that to advance to the
highest levels of their agencies, senior federal personnel must play the
Washington game. Even if their hearts are in taking down cartel assets at the
border or going after Chinese spies in Silicon Valley, they know that they
need to network, schmooze, and socialize in the DC Swamp to get ahead.
Recently, the FBI asked for $375 million to build an office complex larger

--- Sayfa 162 ---
than the Pentagon in the DC area (to replace its awful Brutalist headquarters
in downtown DC).
One of the strongest things we can do to break down the power of the
Deep State is to remove as much power, and as many people, from
proximity to the Uniparty DC nexus as possible: relocating federal agencies
into the American heartland, increasing the size and independence of field
offices relative to headquarters, requiring members of the Senior Executive
Service to undertake a period of duties of personal service for and
interaction with ordinary Americans, and mandating other measures that
might serve to bind our federal agencies to the American people again and
restore their trust.
Conclusion
The defenders of the Deep State will say that the reforms outlined here will
make us less safe. They’re right.
Being a free person is dangerous. It demands responsibility, resilience,
self-reliance, and humility; virtue, in a word. I can picture in my mind’s eye
the choice words that the Wyoming ranchers of my acquaintance would
have for a nanny-state bureaucrat who warned them that hunting bears or
rolling their own barbed wire wasn’t safe.
Safety imposed via surveillance breeds fragility and weakness. In the
diktats of the Deep State, we should hear the nagging voice of the
overbearing helicopter mom: “Why don’t you play inside, where it’s safe?”
“Why don’t we wear two masks, just to be safe?” “Feeling anxious about
your body changing? We should put you on puberty blockers, just to be
safe.”
The Constitution is being overthrown by a new form of tyranny based
on federal centralized control, surveillance, and weaponized law
enforcement. Against the stifling safety of the New Authoritarianism, we
need to reclaim within our souls the spirit of endless frontier federalism.
Even as we do what we can to fix Washington, we need to sever the apron
strings and reacquaint ourselves with self-government at the state and local
levels. Doing so will at times be messy and dangerous. But it will be a
gymnasium of the frontier spirit.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Sayfa 163 ---
Chapter 8
We’re Not an Empire
[America’s] glory is not dominion, but liberty. Her march is the march of
the mind. She has a spear and a shield: but the motto upon her shield is,
Freedom, Independence, Peace.
—John Quincy Adams
I’ve ticked off a lot of people as president of the Heritage Foundation.
That’s fine; it comes with the territory. But by a long shot, the thing that has
led to the most ferocious attacks, the most organized opposition to what we
are doing (including from erstwhile “conservatives”) has not been our
taking a hard line on illegal immigration, refusing to go along with
wokeness, standing up for the one man–one woman family, or even moving
away from wax-museum economic ideology. Nor has it been any of the
other issues that are most controversial among the ordinary folks I meet all
over the country. The most controversial thing we have ever done is to stand
up to the foreign policy Blob to demand accountability and a strategy for
the tens of billions of dollars being sent to Ukraine. In response to this, the
Uniparty unleashed a multimillion-dollar dark money AstroTurf campaign,
spilled gallons of ink in top “conservative” newspapers, magazines, and
think tank reports, and carried out backroom whispering aimed at our
donors and supporters. Why the eruption over this issue?
On no other issue is there such distance between the commonsense
beliefs of everyday Americans and the Uniparty ideology of the imperial
foreign policy mandarins pulling the puppet strings in the DC Swamp.
However bad you think it is, it’s worse. And even though I often highlight

--- Sayfa 164 ---
the fiscal and military issues associated with our foreign policy, such as vast
overspending and graft, a tottering defense industrial base, and our
hollowed-out armed forces, the truth is that those aren’t even the most
important problems of our foreign policy. The soul of our republic is at
stake.
The New Conservative Movement must reject the woke imperialism
that has characterized our post–Cold War foreign policy, renew our
emaciated military forces, and restore our traditional America First
approach to global statesmanship devoted to preserving the United States’
liberty and independence and leading primarily through friendship, free
commerce, and our own virtuous example.
Woke Imperialism
August 2022 was a very busy time for the president of Ukraine, Volodymyr
Zelenskyy. Due in no small part to Zelenskyy’s personal courage and steely
resolve, Ukraine survived the first seventy-two hours of the February 2022
Russian invasion (against the predictions of both US and Russian
intelligence). Having demonstrated their will to fight, the Ukrainians then
petitioned the West for more military aid to defend themselves and their
homeland, which began arriving in streams and then rivers, enabling them
to pivot from defense to counteroffensive by August.
Yet amid all of this, President Zelenskyy found time to address an
urgent matter: a petition to legalize gay marriage in Ukraine. He assured
signers of his support at the first opportunity to change Ukraine’s
constitution.
Why, in the midst of a nationalist war of survival by one of the most
conservative countries in Europe, did its beleaguered president take time to
promote gay rights? Zelenskyy certainly made no mention of gay rights on
the campaign trail in 2019. In late 2020, the DC-based Atlantic Council
bemoaned the “false dawn” for gay rights that urban Ukrainian progressives
had projected onto Zelenskyy. In July 2020, Zelenskyy’s party even floated
a bill regulating “homosexual propaganda” that was “an almost literal
translation of its Russian analogue.” Why the sudden change of heart?
Rome had its pinch of incense for the emperor. The Soviets had
Marxism-Leninism. And under the current regime, the United States has the

--- Sayfa 165 ---
rainbow flag. You can’t blame the Ukrainians.
Enlargement
If we’ve been slowly abandoning our traditional US foreign policy, when
did it start?
In the First and Second World Wars and the Cold War–era fight against
Soviet communism, we rolled up our sleeves and fought in the trenches
with our allies against tyranny. But we did so with a broad spectrum of
political support and based on a keen understanding of what the United
States’ vital interests were in a changing world in which technology and
globalization had shrunk the power of distance. I think the more definitive
break from our tradition, the abandonment of the underlying map of the
national interest, came afterward.
Enlargement: the word has a whiff of excess, bloat, and decay. There’s
something forced and inorganic about it: things are enlarged that would
naturally be a smaller, normal size. Diseased organs and infected limbs are
enlarged. We call something that keeps growing and growing beyond its
natural bounds a cancer or a tumor.
Republics grow. Empires are enlarged. But enlargement has been the
United States’ official approach to foreign policy since the end of the Cold
War.
Throughout the Cold War, our grand strategy was one of containment.
The Soviet Union wished to export communism to remake the world in its
image. But it had a core weakness: if it was prevented from expanding, its
own internal contradictions and inefficiencies would ultimately tear it apart.
And so containment meant building a network of alliances across the Free
World in order to link arms, hold back the tide of communism, and
ultimately defeat the Soviet Union.
With the collapse of the USSR, the United States became,
geopolitically, the dog that caught the car. For the first time in our history, a
senior American statesman could say, “There is now no credible near-term
threat to America’s existence,” and be correct. Based on our tradition of
statesmanship, many American policy makers wanted a return to our
policies of an “active commerce” and a hemispheric defense of our
interests, this time with the world’s most powerful navy four times over and

--- Sayfa 166 ---
an unstoppable nuclear deterrent. We might deal, at last, with the cultural,
economic, and social decay that we had been avoiding reckoning with. That
was the peace dividend the American people had been promised.
But a group of American foreign policy experts were determined to
shoot down those they dubbed “protectionists,” “isolationists,” and “Neo-
Know-Nothings,” those who wanted the United States to return to her
traditional approach. They advocated that the United States take advantage
of that unique historical opportunity to attempt to permanently transform
the world order.
Probably the best summary of this shift is a speech given in September
1993 by President Bill Clinton’s national security advisor, Anthony Lake.
Lake’s speech called for a shift from containment to enlargement. Rather
than cash in the peace dividend, he said, the United States needed to remain
engaged in the world and expand the network of Free World alliances and
institutions from a small number of stalwart allies to the entire world. As
more states turned into market democracies, the United States would shore
them up by expanding the institutions it backed, such as NATO, the North
American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), and the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade (GATT; later the framework for the WTO). They would
be helped along not only with US military might but with “diplomacy
multipliers,” a complex of US government–backed NGOs such as the
National Endowment for Democracy.
What threatened this victory? A handful of “‘backlash’ states” including
Iraq and Iran were threatened by our global enlargement. They threatened to
“sponsor terrorism and traffic in weapons of mass destruction and ballistic
missile technologies,” Lake said.
What was the best way to deal with the “‘backlash’ states”? “Isolate
them diplomatically, militarily, economically and technologically” and use
“intelligence, counterterrorism and multilateral export controls.” But, Lake
gravely intoned, “When the actions of such states directly threaten our
people, our forces, or our vital interests, we clearly must be prepared to
strike back decisively and unilaterally.”
The rise and fall of the United States’ post–Cold War foreign policy is
foreshadowed there, well before 9/11.
To be clear, I am not suggesting that everything Lake advocated for was
a mistake, such as expanding our NATO alliance or some of our other
institutions to new friends and allies. In many cases, it served both the

--- Sayfa 167 ---
United States’ interest and the promotion of a world order friendly to
liberty, commerce, and democracy. And I’m highly sympathetic to how new
and strange the problems we dealt with were, how much they called for
novel solutions. Many of the things we did in that time period, such as
stabilizing post-Soviet nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons through
the Cooperative Threat Reduction program, saving starving kids with well-
timed food aid, and shoring up our alliances with countries such as South
Korea and Japan, were wise investments that well repaid their costs.
The problem is that this foreign policy consensus made enlargement the
default, the norm, the expected outcome regardless of whether it served our
own interests. It led to overreach and hubris, the classic means by which
great powers doom themselves.
The signs are there if you look. For example, Lake extolled the mission
to provide food aid in Somalia, which had required the United States’
providing “a secure military environment for humanitarian relief at a
reasonable cost and risk,” for which it was “only a matter of time” before
our troops could be withdrawn. Two weeks later, local militants would
shoot down two US Black Hawk helicopters, kill eighteen US soldiers, and
wound dozens more. Clinton would ignominiously pull our troops out as
quickly as he could: we now know that Al-Qaeda had trained the RPG
squads how to target our helicopters and counted that as its first victory
against the Great Satan.
Equally troubling is Lake’s treatment of China—or lack thereof. He
argued that we needed to continue opening our trade with China to build the
Chinese middle class, so as to encourage Chinese democracy, an inevitable
development. The Clinton administration, of course, looked the other way
on the CCP’s human rights record (and record of protectionism and trade
cheating) when it pushed through the US–China Relations Act of 2000,
which opened the door to China’s accession to the World Trade
Organization (WTO) and its subsequent global rise and continuous assault
on the American way of life.
In his conclusion, Lake said something extraordinary. Speaking to those
who agreed that the most important thing was “active American
engagement abroad on behalf of democracy and expanded trade,” he
recommended that “all of us who support engagement should be careful to
debate tactics in a way that does not prevent us from coming together in
common cause around the fundamental importance of that goal”: the goal of

--- Sayfa 168 ---
“rallying Americans to bear the costs and burdens of international
engagement” against the “protectionists” and “isolationists” who wanted
the United States to rebuild at home.
And that’s just what they would do, the major factions of the Uniparty
foreign policy Blob. Old-fashioned American statesmanship never stood a
chance.
The Foreign Policy Blob
One lesson my involvement in politics has taught me time and again is that
a determined and focused minority can override the desires of a diffuse and
unorganized majority, even a large one.
In the 1990s, almost everyone involved in US politics turned to focus on
the substantial domestic issues the country faced. Issues of economics,
culture, technology, and immigration consumed the vast majority of
Americans’ attention, to the extent that they paid attention at all. After
living in the shadow of nuclear war for decades, most Americans (myself
included) took advantage of that “holiday from history” to ignore foreign
affairs. My only memory of even thinking about the issue was during the
1996 presidential campaign, when I was asked to defend Bob Dole’s
policies regarding Bosnia; I asked what on earth anything in the former
Yugoslavia had to do with the United States.
And so even though most Republicans (and many Democrats, for that
matter) in the 1990s favored a return to traditional American statesmanship,
those forces were distracted and disorganized. After all, there isn’t usually
much energy behind a policy of not doing something.
But two groups, a small part of their own parties, were intensely
interested in foreign affairs in the 1990s. Like Tony Lake, they thought that
the United States needed to seize the unique opportunity to remake the
world order in its own image. Over time, they would not only set the United
States’ international agenda but remake the policy world, establishing new
networks of institutions such as think tanks, advocacy organizations, and
consulting companies while drawing huge resources to their cause from
parties interested in shaping US foreign policy, especially defense
contractors, multinational corporations, and foreign governments and state-

--- Sayfa 169 ---
owned enterprises. They form the foreign policy department of the
Uniparty: the Blob.
The Blob sees itself as the network of properly credentialed and vetted
experts who provide expertise and continuity that other US leaders—
amateurs without the right training—are not qualified to perform. The Blob
sees foreign policy as an activity apart from grungy, partisan domestic
politics, something elevated and enlightened, even over what the benighted
American people believe. The Blob controls not only senior positions
across the foreign policy establishment in government but, more important,
the network of cushy sinecures in think tanks and corporations that are the
due rewards for a poorly paid stint in government.
The heart of the Blob is an alliance between two factions of the Party of
Destruction. The first comprises the liberal internationalists, such as Tony
Lake, former secretary of state Madeleine Albright, and former ambassador
to Russia Michael McFaul. They see themselves as defenders of the “liberal
order” (a term first widely used in the 1990s) in which the United States
plays an indispensable role in ensuring human rights, international law, and
democracy throughout the world, with military force if necessary.
The second faction comprises the neoconservatives, such as Bill Kristol,
Bob Kagan, John Bolton, Paul Wolfowitz, Elliott Abrams, and Max Boot.
They believe that the durability of the “liberal order” is ultimately rooted
not in morals or law but in US power. The United States should unilaterally
promote democracy, freedom, and markets by any means necessary and
should be quick to use its global military capabilities and alliances to crush
its enemies. No resistance to US power is too small to escape their notice,
and there are no limitations other than political will over the United States’
exercise of power abroad. The neocons’ motto is “We can do it all and do it
alone if we have to—we’re America, aren’t we?”
The neocons and liberal interventionists have worked hand in hand at
least since 1992. The primary difference between the two groups is that
when a liberal internationalist and a neocon together call for the United
States to bomb a third-world country back to the Stone Age, the liberal feels
bad about it and wants to fund a generous foreign aid package to assuage
her conscience.
In a Charles Dickens novel, you’d know what to think about a foreign
policy agenda put forward by characters with names such as Max Boot,
Paul Wolfowitz, Samantha Power, and Anne-Marie Slaughter.

--- Sayfa 170 ---
Our involvement in foreign wars since the fall of the Soviet Union has
cost thousands of American lives, wasted trillions of dollars, and
destabilized and devastated large swathes of the world. We have taken on
alliance commitments that cover, when you sum them up, three entire
continents and a large part of Asia. All of this has been done in our name;
the promissory notes promising that the United States will pour blood out of
her veins for foreign causes have your name and mine on them. At the same
time, our strength at home has become hollow and enervated, our people
demoralized, our industrial base scattered, our elite corrupted.
Looking at the contrast between our bombastic foreign policy and the
disarray and decay at home, one cannot help but feel that John Quincy
Adams’s republican prediction regarding what would happen should the
United States become entangled in foreign interventions, even for good
causes, has come true: “She might become the dictatress of the world. She
would be no longer the ruler of her own spirit.”
Hindsight
If you saw all of this coming, if you were sounding the alarm about imperial
hubris even before the Iraq War, this might be the place for you to put in a
big “I told you so.”
I certainly didn’t.
I have a confession to make. I am a recovering neocon. I was a full-
throated supporter of George W. Bush. I most definitely thought we should
invade Iraq. I even, I have to admit, subscribed to the Weekly Standard, the
quintessential neoconservative magazine. And so I’ve been doing a fair bit
of reflection.
We can see now where it’s all gone wrong, where we departed from the
deep wisdom of our tradition of statesmanship. But the 1990s were a
genuinely novel, disorienting time. They felt like the end of history, a break
from more than a century of global struggle and risk.
At the same time, the vast majority of conservatives, myself included,
weren’t interested in politics because of foreign policy. We were interested
in America and issues much closer to home. We trusted our party’s
intellectual bright lights to lead us in generally the right direction.

--- Sayfa 171 ---
Like many conservatives, I didn’t pay attention to foreign policy at all
until 9/11. Seeing what jihadist terrorists had done to my country so
enraged me that I would have supported anything President Bush wanted. I
felt like nuking Afghanistan. When President Bush said that Iraq had
supported terrorists and threatened the United States with weapons of mass
destruction, I believed him. His father had been a great and wise statesman,
and I trusted the Bush family. Wanting to understand more about foreign
policy, Michelle and I subscribed to the Weekly Standard after 9/11.
My recovery from neoconservatism was gradual. I was shocked to
discover, in the early Barack Obama years, how many trillions of dollars the
wars in Iraq and Afghanistan had cost, all put on the national credit card
($5.8 trillion through 2022, Brown University’s Watson Institute for
International and Public Affairs estimated). I came to understood that I had
been sold a bill of goods on the circumstances of the Iraq invasion. I was
horrified by the disastrous Obama interventions in Libya and Syria, which
would have been even worse without “isolationist” Republicans putting
their foot down.
In the pages of the Weekly Standard, accusations flew that the Obama
administration wasn’t doing enough. Reading in bed one night in 2011, I
turned to Michelle and said, “You know? I think these guys are full of it.” (I
didn’t say “it” but another, more Texas word.) I felt at that point that maybe
George W., whom I had defended for years and years, was, too. We
canceled our subscription.
Maybe I would have come to my senses earlier if I’d subscribed to the
magazine before 9/11. Like many conservatives, I thought that “rogue
states” sponsoring terrorists and WMDs were suddenly a new threat after
9/11. I had no idea that that was standard neocon fare going back more than
a decade. I had no idea how much scorn the neocons had for US political
leaders who wanted to follow our tradition of prudent statesmanship well
before 9/11.
In 1999, like many Republicans, I was opposed to “humanitarian
bombing” in Kosovo. I didn’t think we really knew what we were doing,
trying to sort out Albanians from Serbians. And frankly, I didn’t think it was
our business. But in the pages of the Weekly Standard the prominent
neocons Bob Kagan and Bill Kristol vented their spleen at the
“neoisolationist” Republican senators who had voted 38–16 against NATO
air strikes in Yugoslavia, saying “Republican foreign policy is now mired in

--- Sayfa 172 ---
pathetic incoherence. Is this the party of Reagan or the party of Buchanan?”
and thus somehow managing to insult the legacy of both of those great
American patriots.
But bombing wasn’t enough. In Kagan’s eyes, the aspirations of
“Kosovar Albanians” (a heretofore undiscovered species of incipient
freedom-loving American) could not be made whole without American
boots on the ground, and “neoisolationist” House Republicans were
spoiling everything by refusing to sanction that. Kagan scolded those Neo-
Know-Nothings, “it will not do for congressional Republicans to treat the
Kosovar Albanians, Chamberlain-style, as a far-away people of whom we
know nothing.” If the Kosovar Albanians don’t qualify as “a far-away
people of whom we know nothing,” who does? In the eyes of neocons, no
one: every single person on Earth is an American waiting to discover
themselves.
Even at the time, Fareed Zakaria, writing in the Wall Street Journal, had
their number:
William F. Buckley once remarked that the defining element of conservatism is realism—
realism about the limits of state power, the nature of human beings and societies, the complexity
of international life. Yet many conservatives [neocons] who believe that the state can do nothing
right at home think that it can do nothing wrong abroad. (If things go badly, why, more money,
bigger bombs and ground troops will straighten it out.) Many who are scornful of social
engineering at home seem sure it will work beyond our borders.
The idea that the US national security state should use its overwhelming
power to socially engineer other societies to bring about world peace seems
like a natural extension of progressivism on the Left but totally out of place
in the conservative movement. What I came to realize was that that
orientation was fundamentally at odds with being a conservative.
Conservatives who would never meekly accept the federal government’s
spending hundreds of billions in radical social engineering at home should
not accept imposing radical social engineering across a country or region
far from our shores. Burkean humility and our own tradition of
statesmanship dictate that we be highly circumspect about the use of force
and maintain a keen sense of when our own vital interests are and are not in
play.
But I think we should welcome all who have come to this conclusion
into the New Conservative Movement, regardless of how belatedly. While
it’s valuable to reassess the Cassandras who called it right in the 1990s,

--- Sayfa 173 ---
folks such as Pat Buchanan, George Kennan, Samuel P. Huntington, Robert
Lighthizer, Andrew Bacevich, and Angelo Codevilla, I don’t think it is
healthy or wise for the conservative movement to focus on rearguing the
debates of the 1990s and 2000s, as costly as those mistakes were. It was a
strange time, and many well-meaning conservatives (especially those
outside the foreign policy world) became disoriented. But now it has
become clear what a return to a truly conservative foreign policy would
look like.
The Sharon Statement (1960), one of the foundational documents of the
American conservative movement, ends with this assertion: “That American
foreign policy must be judged by this criterion: does it serve the just
interests of the United States?” I think we could do worse than to make this,
once again, the foundation of our statesmanship in a New Conservative
Movement.
The Hollow Force
A recommitment to the US interest must be matched with a sober
assessment of the state of US power today.
At the Heritage Foundation, we have been sounding the alarm about the
parlous state of our military capability. Last year for the first time ever in its
long history, our annual review of US military power concluded that the
United States’ military is weak if not unprepared for even a single-arena
war. We’ve been warning about the dire state of our defense industrial base,
about the decay of credible deterrence in regions around the world, about
the effect of woke ideology on military morale and recruiting, and about
decades of waste, fraud, and abuse hollowing out the United States’ military
modernization efforts, not to mention the looming challenge of a national
debt whose annual interest payments will soon exceed the Department of
Defense budget.
But I’m not an expert on this stuff. And so it alarmed me to see current
and former senior American decision makers stipulating over the past few
years that none of this should prevent us from sending hundreds of billions
of dollars to Ukraine, that we could do it all: save Ukraine, deter China,
help Israel, coerce Iran, and more. Many of these folks have access to
highly classified briefings. Did they know something I don’t know?

--- Sayfa 174 ---
And then during the debate about support for Ukraine, it dawned on me:
these people have no idea what they’re talking about. Do you think that
what they write and say bears any relationship to the actual state of the
United States’ defense supply chains, logistics, weapons stockpiles,
replenishment projections, or force structure? Do you think that at any point
prior to an actual catastrophe, they would admit that the United States has
reached or overreached a limit?
Ensconced in sinecures where they earn half a million dollars a year (or
more) to cheerlead for the Woke Empire far from battlefields in foreign
lands, Blob diehards live in an invincible summer, where it’s always 1983.
Our British allies have just triumphed halfway around the globe, retaking
the Falkland Islands. Our military forces have conducted yet another
intervention (in Grenada) without breaking a sweat. The Soviets are starting
to feel the heat in Afghanistan and are staring down the barrel of an
extraordinary NATO military modernization, as the United States under
Ronald Reagan begins pursuing the actual rollback of Soviet influence,
powered by a reviving US economy and a strong federal balance sheet.
But it’s not 1983 anymore. It’s not 2003 anymore. The United States in
2023 is a lot weaker.
The reason to rehash the history of our embrace of imperialism is that it
has inadvertently rooted our foreign policy in a time period (the 1990s and
2000s) that has already passed into history. It’s time for Americans to wake
up and reevaluate the ways the world has changed.
Our European allies cashed in the Cold War peace dividend on
infrastructure and social welfare spending. According to the World Bank,
European defense spending plummeted from 2.8 percent to 1.3 percent of
GDP. The effect has been even stronger in the countries that formed the
backbone of NATO’s Cold War forces: France (3.2 percent to 1.8 percent),
Germany (3 percent to 1.2 percent), and Belgium (3.4 percent to 0.9
percent).
The British are vital allies with unique capabilities who have always
stood by our side. But their military capabilities have been seriously eroded
by a lack of political support amid Great Britain’s rising social welfare
expenses. It’s uncertain whether the Royal Navy, which has shrunk
considerably, would even be capable of mounting the Falklands campaign
today. (Thankfully for the Brits, the Argentinians’ fleet has fallen off even
farther.)

--- Sayfa 175 ---
It’s not as if we’re much better off. We frittered away modernization
efforts in our air force, navy, and army, with programs canceled or delayed
at enormous expense (the F-35 fighter jet debuting a decade late and $183
billion over budget, the navy’s misbegotten Littoral Combat Ship costing
more than double its original cost at $500 million per and mostly irrelevant
in a period of great-power competition).
Propensity to serve, the term experts use to describe the number of
Americans interested in joining the armed forces, has been declining for
almost forty years, interrupted briefly by a burst of patriotism after 9/11: we
face an unprecedented recruiting crisis. As we lower our military standards
both to bring in more volunteers and to cover up the deleterious effects of
top-down gender politics on our combat forces, measures of readiness and
performance are rapidly slipping. And every dollar we spend trying to fix
these problems adds to a national debt that is proportionally larger than any
we have ever had in our history, even at the height of World War II.
If we’re looking for historical analogies, 1973 is closer to home than
1983. The American people were disheartened and demobilized, and our
enemies were emboldened. The American military was in shambles in the
wake of the Vietnam War, and our European allies were increasingly shaky.
The Great Society and Vietnam had ruined US credit, forced the United
States off the gold standard, and kick-started stagflation. The Yom Kippur
War, in which our ally Israel was almost overrun by Soviet-backed and
Soviet-trained Arab armies, served as a serious wake-up call about our own
military weakness.
But this realism should shade into hope. America is still America. The
gloom and twilight of 1973 masked seeds that would grow into mighty
oaks. Within a decade, they would sprout into a Cold War–winning military
modernization, geopolitics-shaping US diplomacy, a return to fiscal
strength, and morning in America again. From an insurgent foundation in
1973, the Heritage Foundation grew to help shape the nation.
Returning to an America First Statesmanship
Like a Las Vegas gambler preparing to look at his bank account with a
throbbing hangover and great trepidation, it is hard and a little bit
embarrassing to reckon with the mistakes of the last few decades. But we

--- Sayfa 176 ---
must do so. And we must envision a path forward based on where we are
today, not where we were in 1983 or where we wish we were.
The most difficult aspect of a return to our traditional statesmanship is
also the most simple: we must adopt an ethos of humility and prudence.
I do believe that America is a “shining city on a hill.” But in traditional
American statesmanship, this was taken to mean an America that led by its
own virtuous example. Our messy involvements abroad have been a direct
detriment to our spiritual strength at home. The Party of Creation
recognizes that there are real limits as to what the United States can achieve
by interventions abroad and real costs to doing so.
But for the Party of Destruction, there is no issue too obscure, no
country too small, no injustice too remote to fall beneath our notice. When
you think you can do everything, you don’t need any principles to shape
and discipline your choices.
The Blob confuses expert knowledge of administrative minutiae for
statesmanship, stale policy documents for principle, and bureaucratic
processes for prudence. We have too many “experts” and far too few
leaders. We need to recover our early tradition of statesmanship, informed
by a close study of history, foreign languages, literature, and political
philosophy. There is so much we need to remember that has already been
stated by our wisest leaders.
Foreign entanglement and disunity at home go together. George
Washington’s Farewell Address is remembered primarily for two
injunctions to the American people: to avoid a politics of “faction” and
“party” and to avoid “foreign entanglements.” But in the context of the
speech, the two dangers are intertwined. Washington’s warning was that
foreign entanglements are invitations to creating division at home, both by
providing new opportunities for factional rivalry and by inviting foreign
influences to pit one faction against another.
Today, one cost of our imperial overreach is increasing disunity and
polarization at home. Some Democrats have become obsessed with
Vladimir Putin’s supposed evil genius, while some on the right defend him
unwittingly in response. You see dueling foreign flags on front porches and
in social media profiles. Whenever there’s a conflict abroad, lobbyists for
foreign governments, diaspora members, and NGO activists rush to spin the
right narrative to get public opinion on their side, because they know that
support in Washington or the lack thereof can make or break their cause.

--- Sayfa 177 ---
And the United States’ enemies, especially Russia, China, and Iran,
increasingly take actions designed to stoke these divisions.
We must vigilantly restrain foreign influences. An open system of
government is vulnerable to manipulation by foreign actors with their own
agendas. As Washington warned, “Against the insidious wiles of foreign
influence . . . the jealousy of a free people ought to be constantly awake,
since history and experience prove that foreign influence is one of the most
baneful foes of republican government.”
Much of our foreign policy Blob has become corrupted both by foreign
government spending and by, in Washington’s words, “a passionate
attachment of one nation for another” that “produces a variety of evils.”
(One suspects that General Washington would personally saber summertime
patriots such as the think tankers who advocate for increased military aid to
countries that fund their job positions.) One study found that between 2014
and 2018, US think tanks scooped up $174 million from more than eighty
foreign countries, including Germany, the United Arab Emirates, and
Ukraine. Those countries aren’t paying just for favorable reporting and
glitzy events; they’re counting on fellows in those think tanks remembering
their largesse when they return to government. Proudly, the Heritage
Foundation doesn’t take one red cent from foreign governments, even
friendly ones. Adopting legislation forcing think tank transparency about
foreign funding will help undermine and destroy bad actors such as the
Atlantic Council.
The essence of strategy is the alignment of means and ends. The fact
that our federal debt threatens our national security and merits consideration
in our statesmanship is not a lately discovered idea of GOP budget hawks; it
is a point Washington himself emphasized in his Farewell Address! “As a
very important source of strength and security, cherish public credit,” he
says before emphasizing the importance of discharging debt in peacetime to
preserve credit for “unavoidable wars.”
While they are hardly the only sources of the deficit, experts at Brown
University estimate that the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan added $2 trillion
to the national debt, with almost another trillion dollars in borrowing costs
since 2001. Having frittered away our credit during the years when we
faced no serious great-power threats, we must now make difficult decisions
and trade-offs. We can’t remind ourselves often enough that the politicians
and neocons who are alarmed about budget constraints on support for

--- Sayfa 178 ---
Ukraine are the same ones who already spent the seed corn in the sands of
Iraq.
“Friendship and commerce” are the best means of promoting the
United States’ statesmanship. As a historian, I find the accusation that US
foreign policy prior to World War II was “isolationist” is dead wrong. The
United States had active trade all over the world. It was the most generous
state in the world for immigrants. US ships and the US Navy roamed the
world over. The United States intervened periodically when its interests or
citizens were threatened, principally in the Western Hemisphere but also
against the Barbary pirates, to open trade with Japan, and to secure needed
Pacific coaling stations.
From 1789 until about 1940, the disposition of our statesmen toward the
foreign relations of the United States was one of active neutrality.
Especially as the country grew in strength, its neutrality was characterized
not by a meek navigation among the interests of the European great powers
but by an affirmative defense of our ability to commerce with the world.
The Founders had envisioned a world order characterized by European
infighting that the United States could, and did, exploit. Such a policy aided
our becoming the most powerful country in the world.
But as the historian Stephen Wertheim has chronicled, during the
Second World War, a policy of primacy replaced our traditional policy of
neutrality. After the fall of France and with England teetering on the brink
of destruction, we glimpsed the terrifying prospect of a world order in
which the United States would stand alone, advanced technology would
threaten our shores, and authoritarian economies could choke off our
traditional trade. It forced us to take up the mantle of leading the Free
World.
The world today looks, in many ways, vastly different. Though we have
many real enemies, we have even more friends. While it no longer seems
possible to move to a grand strategy of neutrality, we should move toward
it. By safeguarding our strength at home, serving as an arsenal of
democracy, and maintaining the openness of the global commons—sea, air,
and space—we can sustainably defend a US-friendly world order without
overextension.
The United States must maintain the ability to prevent foreign rivals—
China above all—from imposing their will on the American people. This is
the highest task to which our nation’s foreign policy is called. It is best

--- Sayfa 179 ---
served by carefully husbanding US power so that we can ensure the
openness of the global commons (sea, air, and space) and decisively defeat
any challenger.
At its core, this is a mission that is uniquely American—and uniquely
republican. It is a mission not to impose American ideas or preferences on
the world but to deny others the ability to do to the same to us. It is an anti-
imperial agenda premised on the belief that the United States’ most vital
interests are best served by denying others’ hegemonic ambitions, consistent
with the richest traditions in US statecraft.
Statesmanship demands cultivated virtue. The root cause of
imprudent foreign policy is imprudent leadership. At no point in their
education will a member of the Blob necessarily have to contend with any
part of the American tradition of statesmanship. It is not even on their radar.
A recent former diplomat pointed out to me that the State Department’s
introductory course for new diplomats includes a mock cocktail party and
instruction in filling out travel reimbursement forms but no discussion of
the Monroe Doctrine or the Marshall Plan.
The reason is that the statesmen who built our institutions assumed that
any person plausibly roaming the halls of the State Department’s Foggy
Bottom headquarters, the Capitol, the Pentagon, or the Eisenhower
Executive Office Building would be steeped in American culture and a
tradition of education for statecraft. You’ll see remarkable continuity
among, say, George Washington’s advice letter to his nephew George
Steptoe Washington (whose education at the University of Pennsylvania he
helped pay for), Thomas Jefferson’s musings to John Adams about
statesmanship and “natural aristocracy,” and the original curriculum of
Georgetown University’s School of Foreign Service, set up in 1919 by an
American Jesuit statesman and diehard anti-Communist, Father Edmund
Walsh.
Today, institutions such as Harvard’s John F. Kennedy School of
Government are more likely to indoctrinate their students in sentimental
humanitarianism and “global citizenship” than to articulate a robust defense
of the American interest. Students are assigned to read Ibram X. Kendi, not
Xenophon or Henry Adams. They are taught about the inner workings of
policy processes but not about the dangers in their own hearts. In their
irrational loves and their irrational hatreds, they confuse their personal
involvements and passions for the just interests of the United States.

--- Sayfa 180 ---
We need to deprogram our foreign policy, and we need new institutions
of training and formation to do so. We need to substantially reform or
replace our diplomatic and military professional education programs (the
Foreign Service Institute, the National Defense University, the Naval War
College, and the like) to include education in prudence, not merely in
policy. And we need to comprehensively reboot foreign assistance and aid
programs so that they run on the basis of our actual national interests, not as
automatic handouts.
We must reestablish humility and prudence in our statesmanship, and
we must do so in our own hearts, in the hearts of our leaders, and in the
hearts of the people. This will require education and persuasion, rooted in
careful explanation of our history, our tradition of statesmanship, and the
biographies of our great statesmen.
I’m heartened that student-focused organizations such as the John
Quincy Adams Society, American Moment, and the Intercollegiate Studies
Institute (ISI) have already begun this work, as have academic programs
such as Yale’s Brady-Johnson Program in Grand Strategy and the
Undergraduate Fellows Program at the Clements Center for National
Security at the University of Texas at Austin. ISI president John A. Burtka
IV’s Gateway to Statesmanship: Selections from Xenophon to Churchill is a
great start at reviving the mirrors-of-princes genre for twenty-first-century
American statesmen and -women. It’s the kind of book that America’s
institutions educating future statesman (such as Hillsdale College) are
already putting to use.
A restored tradition of American statesmanship would also end the
gravy train of foreign aid contracts funding lavish expat lifestyles for US
NGO workers, stop imposing wokeness via coercive diplomacy, and return
to a statesmanship characterized by diplomacy, commerce, and a keen sense
of the American interest as the liberty of our people, not an expansive
project of world revolution, even in the name of democracy.
Ukraine and Reagan’s Real Legacy of Statesmanship
For an example of what this new paradigm would look like, consider the
case of our involvement in the Russo-Ukrainian War. What would a policy
fully motivated by the defense of our just interests look like?

--- Sayfa 181 ---
Our involvement would not have been zero. While Ukraine is not a
formal ally of the United States, it is a state we have maintained friendly
relations with. In 1994, when we signed the Budapest Memorandum on
Security Assurances, we promised to offer Ukraine assistance should its
freedom be threatened after it gave up its holdover Soviet nuclear warheads.
The 2022 Russian invasion was not just designed to destroy Ukraine’s
sovereignty; it was aimed to shock, disrupt, and destroy the overall
European security system centered on NATO. A resurgent, victorious
Russia would have been in a position to threaten US interests much more
directly. More to the point, prior to the invasion our military faced the
prospect of a simultaneous war between two “near peers,” Russia and
China. Quietly, behind the scenes, many defense policy professionals
believed that that would be a bridge too far.
Our aid to Ukraine has enabled us to defend our European security
interests, deplete an enemy, and keep our word as a country at a much lower
cost than the NATO forces that would have been required to deter an
emboldened Russia. Especially in 2022, the military aid to Ukraine was
barely a strain on our overall military capabilities, and public sentiment
strongly supported aid for Ukraine (but not boots on the ground).
So under our new paradigm (really a return to our traditional
principles), our initial military aid for Ukraine might have looked basically
the same, even if the foreign aid budget for woke governance in Ukraine
would have been redirected to accountability and countercorruption efforts.
It was in the wake of the initial months of the war that concerns begin to
greatly diverge. An ethos of humility applies fourfold to war, which rarely
goes as intended. Unlike the current Blob approach, we must adopt a due
caution toward escalation, unintended consequences, and the many other
vicissitudes of war.
At the Heritage Foundation, we quickly became alarmed that the Biden
administration did not seem to have anything approaching an endgame for
the war and thus had no real strategy other than ever deeper involvement. It
is so telling that the thing that most enraged the Blob was simply
demanding that the Biden administration square with the American people
about both its strategy for the war and accountability for money that had
already been spent as a precondition of additional aid. The Woke Empire
doesn’t like it when the little people in Congress say “no.”

--- Sayfa 182 ---
It goes without saying that the current approach—unlimited blank
check, risk of war, no accountability or strategy—has also lost public
support, with the majority of Americans telling a CNN poll that Congress
should not authorize additional funding for Ukraine and that the United
States has already done enough for Ukraine.
If the Biden approach is bankrupt, what would a better one look like?
I’ve noticed that the Republicans who constantly invoke Reagan as a
foreign policy ideal always do so toward militaristic ends, emphasizing his
defense spending, confrontations with the Soviet Union, and aggressive
rhetoric. But Reagan’s vision of US statesmanship was oriented not toward
war but toward peace. The epithet he embraced, reminiscent of his friend
John Wayne, was “The Peacemaker,” also the title of fellow Longhorn
historian William Inboden’s definitive new history of Reagan’s foreign
policy.
Unlike those who want to claim the mantle of Reagan today, Reagan
started only one war in his time, the highly limited and narrowly tailored
intervention in Grenada. His greatest achievements were not in war but in
peace, combining a military buildup with canny diplomacy. In particular,
the negotiations with the Soviet Union that Reagan fostered led directly to
the peaceful end of the Cold War. If Reagan had been a Democrat, he would
have won the Nobel Peace Prize.
I am particularly inspired by Reagan’s negotiations over nuclear
missiles in Europe, leading to the 1987 Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces
Treaty (INF). While Reagan felt he could trust Soviet general secretary
Mikhail Gorbachev, his diplomacy with the Soviets began before
Gorbachev came on the scene. Reagan combined an escalation of missile
deployments (stick) with hard-headed negotiations aimed at a truly radical
cause: the full elimination of both American and Russian stockpiles of the
missiles (carrot).
In the spirit of Ronald Reagan the Peacemaker, even as the United
States continues to support the Ukrainian cause, we must begin earnest
negotiations with the Russians to try to find a peaceful settlement for the
wider region. Any settlement will surely be a painful compromise (the
byword of any true statesman, one the neocons are allergic to). It will
require our pushing our European allies to do far more for Europe’s
defense. But the alternatives are unending war, substantial escalation and

--- Sayfa 183 ---
wider war, or the collapse of one of the states involved (which would
unleash horrors). I know what the Gipper would have sought.
The Problem of the Pacific
I was really alarmed at a message sent by the Biden administration’s late-
October 2023 supplementary budget request for foreign aid. The White
House asked for $60 billion more for Ukraine, $14 billion for Israel, $14
billion for border security, and a paltry $7 billion for the broader Indo-
Pacific theater—only $2 billion of which is linked in any meaningful way
to deterring China. More than a decade after President Obama’s abortive
“pivot to the Pacific,” we still haven’t been able to refocus our foreign
policy on a defense of our most core interests.
The weakness and waste brought on by decades of failed military
interventions have left us no choice but to make tough trade-offs to protect
our top global priorities today: the protection of the US homeland and the
deterrence of Communist China.
But the threats we face today require a different approach. In the wake
of the Russo-Ukrainian War, it is clear that with proper burden sharing,
instead of the United States paying for everything, our NATO allies can
take on the challenge of deterring Russia, which has a population size and
GDP significantly smaller than our European NATO allies. Another hard
lesson of the past twenty years is that the United States’ involvement in the
Middle East should not involve US armies of occupation.
Defense experts of all stripes agree that we must restore our defense
industrial base. Decades of underinvestment in, consolidation of, and
mismanagement of the facilities that produce the materiel needed for our
forces have resulted in dangerous bottlenecks and vulnerabilities. Some
army munitions plants are still running equipment from the Second World
War, and in 2021, a massive accidental explosion shut down the Minden
gunpowder mill in my home state of Louisiana, the only source of a kind of
gunpowder used in mortar shells, artillery rounds, and Tomahawk missiles.
Even more worrying is the situation with US shipyards and aerospace
assembly plants. Decades of cutting the building of ships and planes to fund
our overseas adventures has meant consolidation and closure of vital
suppliers. While Congress has recently woken up to the depth of the

--- Sayfa 184 ---
problem, it is still going to be an uphill climb to build the kind of industrial
capacity needed to deter China.
We have not gone far enough. I have become convinced that the only
way to sustainably and broadly maintain our defense industrial base is by
investing in—and restoring competition among—the civilian companies
undergirding our national manufacturing capabilities. The reason is that the
capacity we need during peacetime falls far short of what we need during
times of crisis; the United States’ industrial base is our defense industrial
base. What happened during the 1990s was that due to NAFTA and WTO
(along with big defense cuts), the United States significantly
deindustrialized. But many of the crucial workforce skills, industrial plant,
and suppliers were shared between vital defense concerns (such as
shipbuilding) and the civilian economy. Without support and protection for
US companies in those areas, they faced little choice but to outsource or
even go out of business.
But it didn’t even save US taxpayers money, because we still needed to
build materiel for our military, but this time with the Pentagon supporting
the entire capital and labor costs. Moreover, the lack of support for a
combined civilian and defense market meant more consolidation and a
significant rise in Pentagon contracts awarded without real competition. The
result of our shortsighted approach to trade has been the costs of airplanes,
ships, tanks, munitions, and many more critical defense items spiraling
higher.
For example, one senior army official in the Trump administration told
me a shocking story about a procurement project for a new armored vehicle.
The defense contractor involved went back to the Pentagon to ask for more
money to deliver the project, and of course the official demanded to know
why. The reason (which he checked out independently) was that, during the
global War on Terror, the army had canceled its orders for an older model
(the quiet fate of many important projects, another victim of our reckless
foreign policy). When the company had shut down the line and let go the
workers, there had been no open jobs in the entire United States that used a
certain kind of heavy welding technique. By 2016, basically every worker
in the country with that skill had either retired or left the industry. The
contractor needed the extra funds to lure a sufficient number of them out of
retirement.

--- Sayfa 185 ---
This is no way to run a business, and it’s surely no way to run a
superpower. The United States needs workers, engineers, and managers in
the business of building the tools that guarantee our freedoms. And the best
way to do that sustainably is to ensure that the US market privileges the
companies producing products, both civilian and military, that support our
arsenal of democracy. This isn’t an innovation; it has been a part of our
tradition of statesmanship since the early republic recognized the need to
produce merchant ships alongside naval vessels and so passed a tariff bill in
July 1789 that privileged, in Hamilton’s words, “an ACTIVE COMMERCE
in our own [ship]bottoms.”
It’s important to get the specifics right, of course: protection of profits
should be a last resort, compared to loan guarantees, special tax breaks for
investment in industrial equipment, skills programs, export financing, and
other ways to ensure that US companies that benefit from our defense
industrial policy are also competitive businesses striving for productivity
and growth (the Merchant Marine Act of 1920, commonly known as the
Jones Act, offers some cautionary lessons here). But it is past time to
remember one of the first lessons of traditional American statesmanship,
summarized in The Federalist Papers, No. 11: that commerce is as much an
instrument of national defense as a frigate or an aircraft carrier is.
To update Hamilton, “Let Americans disdain to be the instruments of
Chinese greatness! Let the fifty States, bound together in a strict and
indissoluble union, concur in erecting one great American system, superior
to the control of all globalist force or influence, and able to dictate the terms
of the connection between the old and the new world!”
Sacrifice
We need to return to a statesmanship of the just interests of the United
States, because nothing less can justify the sacrifices demanded of the best
of us.
Jorge Hidalgo grew up the son of poor Dominican immigrants who first
moved to New York City to work in a factory and then managed a bodega
in the Bronx. After coming to the States in 1965, Jorge worked hard in
school, on the track team, and at his dad’s store in the evenings. Despite
earning a full-tuition scholarship to a state school, he intended to enlist in

--- Sayfa 186 ---
the marines after high school because he couldn’t afford room and board. A
guidance counselor at his school asked him to consider the military
academies, and with help from his community he secured a commission to
the United States Military Academy at West Point.
Jorge excelled in the army, becoming an infantry officer and an Army
Ranger before serving in Germany as a handpicked soldier in the Berlin
Brigade. Visiting East Berlin and hearing the nightly gunfire at the Berlin
Wall gave him a firsthand appreciation of the horrors of communism and
authoritarianism and the value of the freedoms that so many Americans take
for granted. Those were lessons he passed on to his three sons and daughter,
alongside the values of education and of selflessly serving others. Jorge left
the army after eight years of honorable service for a civilian career, but he
wasn’t surprised when all three of his sons signed up for military service,
one as a marine officer and two in the army.
T. S. Eliot had it wrong. At least in Wisconsin, with its short days and
dirty snow, February is the cruelest month.
At the end of February 2011, when an officer in dress uniform and a
chaplain arrived at his Madison home, Jorge’s heart sank like a stone. He
understood what it meant. The soldier notified Jorge that his son Lieutenant
Hidalgo had been killed in service to his country. Then came a moment that
is frozen in Jorge’s memory like amber, the toughest moment of the
toughest thing that can ever happen to a parent. He asked the officer,
“Which Lieutenant Hidalgo?”
Two of Jorge’s sons, both West Point graduates and infantry officers like
their dad, were serving in Afghanistan. The officer replied, “Lieutenant
Daren Hidalgo.”
Daren was Jorge’s youngest son. He was a prankster with a winning
grin and a deep sense of empathy, beloved by everyone. A star wrestler, he
had turned down an athletic scholarship to join the army, as his dad and
older brother had. He cared about others more than himself, and he proved
it over and over again. For years after his death, people—mates in his high
school marching band, fellow West Point cadets, soldiers he had served
with—came up to Jorge to tell him stories about times Daren had been there
for them, had shouldered their burdens.
After graduating from West Point, Daren was due to join a combat unit
stationed in Vilseck, Germany, that had partially deployed to Afghanistan.
As Daren was getting settled in Germany, word came back that one of the

--- Sayfa 187 ---
unit’s platoon leaders in Afghanistan had been wounded. Daren volunteered
as a replacement.
A few weeks before the February 20, 2011, IED attack that would claim
his life, Daren had been wounded in combat. With a Purple Heart on his
chest and shrapnel all through his leg, he was supposed to be evacuated to
Germany for treatment and recovery. But he refused to leave his men, who
had only six weeks left on their deployment. Jorge tried every trick in the
book to persuade his son to get the surgery he needed, cajoling him to see a
doctor so they could hike the Alps together, to no avail. Daren assured his
dad that he would be fine and joked about setting off metal detectors at the
airport.
His brother escorted Daren home from Afghanistan to Wisconsin. After
a memorial service at his high school, Daren was buried at West Point on
what would have been his twenty-fifth birthday.
My heart swells with both pride and sorrow when I think of the
enormous sacrifices for our country and our freedoms like those of the
Hidalgo family, not only the spotless service of Daren and his brothers and
father, not only of Daren’s sacrifice for our country and for his brothers in
arms, but also of the grief of his mother and his sister, the hole in the lives
of so many relatives and friends and members of his community. This, too,
is sacrifice.
(Please consider a donation to the Daren M. Hidalgo Memorial Fund,
which provides scholarships and aid to wounded warriors in Daren’s
memory. You can learn more at rememberdaren.com.)
For a long time, pundits have talked about the Dover Test: will the
American people support a president’s policy even when our servicemen
come back to Dover Air Force Base in flag-draped coffins? But the
manipulable sentiments of the easily distracted American public are no
basis for a sound policy in this regard. Shamefully, in 1991, then secretary
of defense Dick Cheney banned the media from photographing transfer
ceremonies in order to stage-manage the public relations impact of military
casualties, a ban enforced again during the Iraq War until 2009.
We need an ethos of humility and principles of prudent and exacting
pursuit of the national interest to be living in the head and the breast of
everyone even marginally involved in our decisions to send our men and
women to war. We need a Daren Test. The test has to be: Is this task of such

--- Sayfa 188 ---
an urgency and importance that it demands that we risk the life of one of the
best of us, a man like Daren Hidalgo?
I confess that my pride and sorrow turn to anger when I think about how
cheaply our post–Cold War foreign policy has held the lives of our best,
merely to uphold the vain aspirations of our ruling class, which
overwhelmingly discourages its own sons and daughters from service.
When I am in a bitter mood, I sometimes remember the question posed in
the opening days of the Second World War by our most anti-imperial poet,
Robinson Jeffers: “All Europe was hardly worth the precarious freedom of
one of our states: what will her ashes fetch?”
It puts me in mind of what was, in retrospect, perhaps the most
spiritually damaging moment in US politics in my lifespan. In the wake of
9/11, instead of calling on Americans to stand up in sacrificial service of our
country (to piety, in a word), our national leaders asked us to continue
shopping and keep the economy buzzing. Our so-called foreign policy elite
decided that the burdens of war would fall upon only a fraction of
volunteers, who would be paid for their troubles and doubly paid to suffer
in the shadows, so as not to trouble the consciences of our ruling class.
They set us upon the course toward empire and decadence, toward self-
medicating to numb a pain that doesn’t have anywhere to go, that cannot
quite transform itself into sacrifice. I don’t think it’s a coincidence that
opioid usage shot up across the same parts of the country that were sending
their sons to war. You can see the pain in Sam Quinones’s reportage on the
heroin epidemic and in the literary writings of veterans such as Phil Klay,
Jacob Siegel, and Nico Walker.
The American people were encouraged by their leaders to shop at the
mall while some families made the ultimate sacrifice. That wasn’t just bad
policy; it was a spiritual attack more deadly than anything Al-Qaeda could
cook up. It was a direct assault on our republican character and system of
self-government.
While men from states such as South Carolina, Colorado, Ohio, and
Louisiana fought and died in the wadis of Iraq and the mountains of the
Hindu Kush, the DC Swamp was open for business. Foreign cash flooded
into DC think tanks, and Alan Greenspan ran the economy hot so that the
government could borrow cheaply, helping trigger the 2008 global financial
crisis. Much of the money spent on exploding military, intelligence, and

--- Sayfa 189 ---
foreign aid budgets ended up paying for German cars and bloated
McMansions owned by defense contractors.
Our veterans and their families don’t have it so easy. We beset them
with “grief, rage, and guilt,” in Klay’s words, to see what it has all come to,
the unraveling of all of our grand plans in the Middle East, the rise of ISIS,
the fall of Afghanistan; time and again our erstwhile allies left hanging.
Place-names such as Diyala, Kamdesh, and Ramadi mean absolutely
nothing to most Americans. We didn’t even give them the dignity of paying
attention. But there are some who cannot forget those names no matter what
they try to numb themselves with.
Gratitude
As shocking as the collapse of our post-9/11 efforts has been, even more
shocking is that our politicians and media still listen to the architects of
those failed policies. Today, the same voices of globalism, elitism, and
materialism that squandered our victory in the Cold War and severed the
sacred bonds of trust between Americans and their government are again
trying to smear, marginalize, and demonize anyone who dissents from the
Blob consensus.
We are at a moment of choosing: Is America an empire or a republic?
Which will we be?
This question lies within our grasp to answer, and now is the time to
decide. I despair of the imperial Blob, but I’m bullish on America, because I
know the character and spirit of our people.
Despite the grievous mistakes of the past thirty years, I have so much
hope for the future of our country’s statesmanship. When I talk to
lawmakers, both Republican and Democrat, I see skepticism about the Blob
narrative. Even if we often disagree on policy, we’re blessed to have an
increasing number of Iraq and Afghanistan veterans in both parties serving
in Congress, including J.D. Vance, Morgan Luttrell, Seth Moulton, Jim
Banks, Jake Auchincloss, Don Bacon, Jared Golden, Tammy Duckworth,
and Tom Cotton. Among the students and younger staffers who come
through the Heritage Foundation’s doors, there is a new and deepening
interest in our historical statesmanship of prudence, humility, and realism
and a skepticism about US imperial adventures.

--- Sayfa 190 ---
In 2002, when Pat Buchanan and others founded the American
Conservative magazine in order to take a stand against the Iraq War, they
stood alone in the conservative movement. No longer.
Zooming out, the United States still has all of the natural advantages
Providence has given her. Our borders are still guarded by oceans on the
east and west and polar bears in the north (we’re working on the southern
border). Global threats are real, but a more careful approach to maintaining
our traditional hemispheric security system would go a long way toward
securing the homeland.
We still stand for the desire for freedom that beats in every human heart.
We have more and better allies, more and better friends, more and better
partnerships than the we have ever had in our history, even if we need to
seek a better balance in some of them.
We still have the most innovative entrepreneurs building the best
military technology. And we still put those arms into the hands of a
dedicated and deadly military of citizen professionals who quietly serve
with unparalleled skill and integrity.
Besides the necessary reforms of our foreign policy establishment, the
bigger task remaining is to once again adopt a republican approach to our
statesmanship. That means self-government founded upon shared service
and shared sacrifice in the name of union and independence.
Late in his life, William F. Buckley, Jr., wrote a book titled Gratitude:
Reflections on What We Owe to Our Country. It’s not full of musings about
what it means to be a conservative or reflections on his life; it is actually a
call to create a national service program. At a time when conservatives were
patting themselves on the back over the Reagan Revolution and the collapse
of the Warsaw Pact, Buckley understood the spiritual danger America was
in.
He saw that with no great enemy or great national project, Americans
would grow decadent and entitled about the liberty, civilization, and
prosperity that made their lives possible. Part of the solution, of the kind
embraced by republics down through history, would be a period of service
to the nation. “By asking them to make sacrifices we are reminding them
that they owe a debt. . . . And reminding them that requital of a debt is the
purest form of acknowledging that debt.”
In my mind’s eye, I can envision a national service program designed to
give every young American the gift of sacrifice, to bolster our national

--- Sayfa 191 ---
defense, to help Americans get to know one another again, and to transition
to adult life.
It would begin every summer with cohorts of high school graduates
streaming to a four- or six-week training program hosted in our most
beautiful national parks all over the country and run by our military. For a
generation blunted by ubiquitous and continuous internet exposure, these
training camps might serve as a mandatory smartphone detox, a chance to
breathe fresh air and encounter the great American natural bounty, a place
to meet and get to know Americans from very different walks of life, and an
occasion for learning some of the skills of resilience every American should
have, including basic survival and medical skills.
Running such a program would not just help the military reintegrate
with and recruit from America. It would also form the infrastructure for a
broader mobilization, should the need arise, providing the army’s sergeants
with experience training masses of green recruits and building additional
skill, fitness, and readiness in the American people.
From this initial intake, our young people could serve throughout the
country—in our armed forces, our national parks, our Border Patrol, our
schools, our veterans’ hospitals, and many other places. We can iron out the
details, of course, but something like national service is a part of what it
will take to knit the American people together again on a spiritual level.
Even before we implement such a policy, we ought to, of our own accord,
serve one another, to “lift up the feeble knees, and the hands that hang
down.”
When I asked him what made him hopeful for America, Jorge Hidalgo
had similar advice: “Give back to the nation.  .  .  . if I look at Daren’s
sacrifice, Daren was the embodiment of the American spirit of service to a
higher calling than one’s self. . . . Help your fellow citizens, and I think that
will build a stronger nation.”
OceanofPDF.com

--- Sayfa 192 ---
Chapter 9
We Can’t Coexist with Communist China
Americans rouse—be unanimous, be virtuous, be firm, exert your courage,
trust in Heaven, and nobly defy the enemies both of God and man!
—Alexander Hamilton
What makes someone your enemy?
The American people sense, with a deep intuition and with reasonable
evidence, that the Chinese Communist Party is their enemy. This belief has,
at least since the Trump administration, actively shaped our policy and
lawmaking at the highest levels and has the fulsome support of the
American people (82 percent have an unfavorable view of the country, not
to mention the CCP specifically).
The Uniparty, however, doesn’t see China as an enemy—just a friend
waiting to happen. Liberal elites can’t comprehend the idea that there are
true left-wing enemies who wish the United States harm. Wax-museum
conservatives, meanwhile, think that everything can be sorted out with
trade: the more money exchanges hands, the more we’ll come to love each
other as brothers. Or something.
What makes someone your enemy is not that he hates you, that he says
mean things about you, or even that he takes actions that hurt your interests.
These are incidental and inconsistent symbols. Sometimes we are hurt even
by people who love us, and sometimes the most baneful enemies come to us
in disguise as friends. These characteristics do not lie at the heart of enmity.
What defines an enemy is that he wants to destroy our way of life. He
may be out for revenge. Or he may be totally indifferent to our life. He may

--- Sayfa 193 ---
even find the conflict with us deeply lamentable. But in his actions, he
shows contempt for our continued flourishing. He wants to destroy our life
to enhance his own. His pursuit of his own good is advanced by the
destruction of ours. It is totally irrelevant whether he expresses triumph or
sorrow in so doing.
We shouldn’t hate our enemies. But we should stop them. Defeat them.
Do whatever it takes to change their way of life to such a degree as is
necessary to ensure the safety and prosperity of our own.
The reality is, the Chinese have the same mixture of motives that
Americans do: they care about money, but they also care about ideology.
Their vision of the common good is not compatible with ours. The Uniparty
can’t understand this, since they believe that the Chinese just want to
develop their country in mutually beneficial trade with the United States. As
always, they ignore our differences on permanent questions.
The New Conservative Movement seeks the total destruction of any
Chinese Communist influence over the United States’ future, because a
great country does not surrender a pattern of life that supports its
flourishing. But whereas Cold War fusionism engaged in an existential
struggle against Communist ideology, the challenge of our time is to reject
and destroy the Chinese Communist institutions that threaten our way of
life.
The Chinese have no equivalent of the Soviet Comintern, which had the
capacity to infiltrate and subvert America’s institutions with secret
Communists. I believe that the Uniparty in this country is guilty of very
many things, but I do not believe it to be an actual, literal agent of the
Chinese Communist Party. (Though, as we will see, it is highly vulnerable
to other forms of ideological or pecuniary seduction. Or, using Chinese
“honeypot” spies, to the more ordinary sort of seduction.)
Instead, the Chinese Communist Party’s plan to destroy the United
States on its path to global domination rests on a subtler foundation. In
order to understand the CCP’s plan to secure its “China Dream” by
destroying the American Dream, you need to know a bit of history.
The Mandate of Heaven

--- Sayfa 194 ---
You need to see this from the Chinese perspective. China believes it has a
mandate to rule the world. Much of this belief came from its long history of
trade hegemony, a status it is trying to regain.
From antiquity until the First Opium War (1839–1842), China was at
the undisputed center of the world economy. The most desirable and
highest-quality products, such as raw silk, porcelain, silk and cotton fabrics,
and spices, came from the East. Even as early as the time of ancient Rome,
the Chinese maintained a global monopoly on a large number of valuable
goods, and their unified political system (predating Caesar Augustus by two
centuries) helped them protect that advantage and leverage it for cultural,
spiritual, and economic domination.
The Chinese Empire viewed itself as the center of the universe: the
Middle Kingdom. The Chinese emperor, the Son of Heaven, had the
mandate from Heaven to bring cosmic order (tian, or Heaven) to not just
China but the entire world (tianxi, all under Heaven). The Chinese view of
themselves was undergirded by their hegemony in the global economy. As
far back as the Roman Empire, the demand for Chinese manufactures
around the world substantially exceeded the Chinese demand for the things
other countries produced. Pliny the Elder lamented that the Romans’ love of
Oriental luxuries cost the empire 100 million sesterces per year in coinage
channeled to the Far East. So dangerous to its interests did the Roman
Republic find this that in AD 14 it banned men from wearing silk clothing:
alas, as Roman decadence shaded into empire, the love of luxury prevailed.
That trade imbalance continued for millennia and shaped the world
economy—coinage from all over Europe and Asia has been discovered in
Chinese archaeological finds, but to my knowledge no ancient Chinese
coins have ever been located outside East Asia.
China’s economic dominance, supply chain monopoly for desirable
goods, and carefully controlled trade policies created substantial wealth for
China’s rulers, if not for its people as a whole. China’s overall GDP was
larger than that of all of western Europe combined until the 1840s, and even
on a per capita basis with its giant population, China was as wealthy,
healthy, and technologically advanced as any state in Europe except Great
Britain and the Netherlands until sometime after the 1750s.
Those trade dynamics are intimately bound up with the story of our own
country, the United States of America. A new route to the East was the
motivation, of course, for Christopher Columbus’s voyage and for missions

--- Sayfa 195 ---
such
as
Ferdinand
Magellan’s
and
Sir
Francis
Drake’s
early
circumnavigations of the globe. And one of the key material triumphs of the
American War of Independence was winning the freedom of Yankee
merchants to break free of the East India Company’s monopoly on the
China trade; by the early nineteenth century, American traders were second
only to the British in their exchange with China.
The development of the New World brought enormous new wealth to
Europe, both in the form of gold and silver extracted from Spanish mines
and through the wealth produced by sugar, tobacco, indigo, and other
plantation crops. But paradoxically, it made the Chinese even richer,
because of their secure position atop the global value chain. In the centuries
following European colonization of the Americas, China’s percentage of
global GDP actually increased. The reason is that as the European middle
classes grew, the goods that they wanted to purchase with their newfound
wealth were made primarily in China, including their newfound favorite,
Chinese tea (another indirect contribution to American independence). At
one point, some 30 percent of all of the silver mined in the New World was
being sent to China.
Despite the vast wealth China’s trade brought it, China’s rulers were
even more interested in something else: being recognized as the rightful
rulers and order definers of the entire world. The imperial court mandated
an elaborate series of rituals, culminating in the representatives of the
supplicating state paying tribute to the emperor or his representative both by
giving them valuable objects and, more important, by performing the
kowtow, a series of abject prostrations indicating subservience. The
emperor would then bestow gifts on his new subjects. (Because material
wealth was less important than spiritual prestige, in some cases the gifts
from the emperor were more valuable than the tribute paid; a number of
poor Central Asian kingdoms thus sent tribute delegations as frequently as
they were allowed.)
The Chinese would accept no diplomatic or trade relations except as
tribute. Some European merchants were more than happy to comply; the
Portuguese and the Dutch made the kowtow and were recorded as “tributary
states” in the Qing dynasty’s records. But the proud British refused, leaving
the room when imperial edicts were given to avoid the issue.
That came to a head in September 1793, when the British ambassador,
Lord George Macartney, finally gained an audience with the Qianlong

--- Sayfa 196 ---
emperor, bringing splendid gifts and seeking diplomatic concessions that
would allow the British to expand their commerce with the Qing dynasty.
But he refused to kowtow. He knew that doing so could not be dismissed as
a mere formality; it indicated an inner spiritual subjugation that could not
be wished away. His behavior baffled and infuriated the Chinese court,
which viewed Great Britain as a tributary state like any other. The Qianlong
emperor sent him away without granting any concessions and conveyed a
letter (actually an edict!) to the king chiding the British for their insolence
and ending with the traditional admonition to subordinates: “Tremblingly
obey and show no negligence!”
The British would have something to say about that.
China’s Century of Humiliation
The United States now faces a number of threats from China, from
intellectual property theft to unequal trade agreements, espionage, and
attempts to weaken the health of our civic society. What most people
wouldn’t suspect is that the Chinese know how to use these weapons
because they were first the victims of just such a scheme, perpetrated by the
British Empire.
It would be an exaggeration to suggest that British machinations against
China were the product of some cunning plan. Great Britain’s actions were
often just as much motivated by fear or greed as by prudent statesmanship.
In the wake of the loss of the American colonies and Napoleon’s
attempted embargo of European trade with Great Britain (the “Continental
System”), Great Britain’s leaders understood that their empire, and Great
Britain’s safety, rested on a precarious balance. With the country’s victory
over Napoleon, British maritime supremacy was ensured. But the country’s
economy was in shambles. She needed to expand the markets for her
manufactures as quickly as possible and import food and basic commodities
as cheaply as possible. And she needed to make her Asian holdings
sustainable; some years, Great Britain’s India trade operated at a loss.
The fundamental problem was a conflict between whether the world
economy would follow a pattern supporting the ongoing prosperity and
stability of the Chinese Empire or that of the British Empire (and other
European states). Before 1839, trade favored the Chinese. Vast amounts of

--- Sayfa 197 ---
silver and basic commodities flowed into China through the tightly
controlled Canton System, which generated huge revenues for the Chinese
government, while in-demand, high-value Chinese goods flowed out into
the world market. At the same time, European manufactured goods could
not compete on quality or price in Chinese markets, especially due to the
country’s robust tariff barrier and trade restrictions.
The British Empire (and the West more broadly) achieved global
hegemony in large part by reordering the world economy in its favor. As
Ernest Hemingway said of bankruptcy, that happened slowly, then all at
once.
The first stage was breaking China’s monopoly on valuable luxury
goods through intellectual property (IP) theft. Beginning with silk in the
medieval period and progressing to bone china in the seventeenth century
and tea cultivation in the early nineteenth century, Europeans worked
assiduously to begin domestic production of those goods and reduce their
dependence on China.
The second stage was to widen the bottlenecks of the global economy—
in other words, to build the means of production at home for the unique
things China produced. As long as the rest of the world produced lots of
goods China wanted but few of the goods China itself produced (and the
world demanded), the world’s money would flow to the East. But by the
nineteenth century, European countries were selling inferior manufactured
goods into closed-off colonial markets, while there was increasing global
demand for goods that China itself needed, such as foodstuffs to feed its
growing population and raw cotton from India. Thus, by 1839, the trade
imbalance with China was already starting to decline.
The British didn’t neglect spiritual warfare. The third stage was to
forcibly open China’s markets on terms that served the foreign powers but
generated massive political instability and societal unrest within China.
Even before 1839, the British Empire had managed to gain a foothold of
addiction both in the Chinese people and the elite.
Between 1773 and 1832, Indian opium exports to China increased
twenty times, and the Qing dynasty tried and failed to ban its import. That
was not the only way in which British trade corrupted China and subverted
the rule of law; China’s ruling class of bureaucrats and mandarins became
addicted to the wealth produced by the trade, skimming hundreds of billions
of dollars’ worth of silver off of the top of the trade. Those officials, while

--- Sayfa 198 ---
trying not to risk their (literal) necks, would often look the other way in
cases of British infractions of Chinese law and even lie to Beijing officials
about various goings-on in Canton. The imperial court also became
increasingly dependent on the revenue from tariffs to keep itself solvent.
As corruption took hold in China, money wasn’t just skimmed off of
trade revenue. China’s system of rigorous merit examinations began to
break down, and gaining a prominent job increasingly became a matter of
nepotism and patronage and not competence. Money set aside to maintain
critical infrastructure was stolen, and neglected roads, dams, levies, and
bridges began to decline and fail. Enormous sums of money went to more
than a decade of waging an ineffective counterinsurgency (the White Lotus
Rebellion); it was later discovered that the generals in charge had
purposefully failed to resolve the issue by force and instead pocketed
money intended to support China’s defense.
China’s belated efforts to crack down on the opium trade lit the fuse of
what is known in China as the Century of Humiliation—the period between
1839 and 1949 when China was repeatedly humiliated by Western powers
and forced to sign “unequal treaties.”
What the British really cared about was not the opium trade but opening
China’s markets to the full range of British manufactures. The British
demanded the opening of additional trading ports, sovereignty over the
island of Hong Kong, and extraterritoriality: only Great Britain would be
able to prosecute British citizens for crimes committed in China. Those
terms were eventually granted to other nations (the Americans, French,
Germans, Japanese, and Russians to start with), along with “most favored
nation” trading status, which further opened China’s trade to foreign
powers.
But while the British Foreign Office at Whitehall may have been most
concerned about expanding markets for Indian goods and playing other
European powers against one another, the Century of Humiliation in China
was a societal apocalypse. Throughout much of the country, the rule of law
disintegrated and millions of people died as a result of civil conflicts, failing
infrastructure, and agricultural devastation. The ruling class Manchus,
humiliated by the Western powers, settled into decadence, turning inward to
ever more elaborate displays of luxury and cultural navel gazing. The latter
part of the period was overseen by an increasingly out-of-touch, despotic,
and decrepit regent, Empress Dowager Cixi, who failed to demonstrate the

--- Sayfa 199 ---
energy and adaptability required to right the ship of state and instead
oversaw new depths of familial corruption. Whatever economic
implications free trade had for China were vastly overshadowed by the
political shock that tore the country apart. The Qing dynasty fell from the
height of its power and prestige to dissolution in a little over a century.
The Chinese Communist Party maintains the memory of China’s
Century of Humiliation. They mean for the twenty-first century to be ours.
How China Is Repeating History
Today, the Chinese Communist Party is attempting to do to the United
States what the British Empire did to China: exploit American social and
political weakness and hubris in order to restructure the global political
economy in its favor and establish a Chinese world order.
Just as the British carried out IP theft, the Chinese have used the same
tactic to break the Western monopoly on the most advanced manufacturing
technologies and high-value products. The Chinese government has used IP
theft on an industrial scale to profit from the creativity, innovation, and
research investments of Western companies on products ranging from corn
seeds to the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter. The FBI estimates that Chinese IP
theft (including counterfeiting of Western products) costs the United States
up to $600 billion per year. But what matters more is what the Chinese are
stealing. In 2015, President Xi Jinping announced the Made in China 2025
program, to achieve independence from foreign suppliers in ten key high-
technology sectors by 2025, including military dual-use areas such as
maritime engineering, jet engines, and manufacturing robotics. The key to
achieving this goal is IP theft.
But as easy (and important) as it is to fight straight-up Chinese IP theft
through hacking, corporate espionage, or other methods (the corn seeds
case involved employees of a Chinese agriculture firm digging up seeds on
Iowa farms), the grim truth is that the vast majority of China’s IP vampirism
takes advantage of joint ventures with Western companies eager to do
business in China. A company such as Corning or General Electric will be
enticed to set up a production line in China; in many cases, the government
will not allow it to operate in the Chinese market otherwise. But it won’t be
permitted to do so alone; instead, the government will require it to work

--- Sayfa 200 ---
with Chinese subcontractors or joint venture partners. In other cases, a
company will be forced to undergo regulatory reviews that extract
proprietary information no other country asks for. From there, the game is
afoot—no matter what agreements are signed on paper protecting American
IP rights, the Chinese companies will get to work reverse engineering
American products. In many cases the tactic is even more direct: the
Chinese government forces American companies to sign “technology
transfer” agreements giving Chinese companies the fruits of American
science. All of this goes on without any interference from or oversight by
the US government or anyone else looking out for the US national interest.
And the promises of making massive profits in the Chinese market are
totally illusory; as soon as a Chinese company has replicated an American
product, the Americans find themselves squeezed out.
With China catching up to the West in key technology areas due to IP
theft, the CCP is implementing the second stage of Great Britain’s imperial
playbook: rewiring the world economy so that currency flows out of the
West toward China. China has done this by building means of production
on its own shores and doubling down by using government subsidies and
unfair trade practices to pull more and more critical global supply chains
onto its shores and out of the Western world. For an increasing number of
vital products, ranging from smartphones to rare-earth minerals, there are
now zero non-Chinese suppliers.
Why does it matter where things are made? Consider this: How many
products critical to China’s future can the United States cut off? Advanced
semiconductors, soybeans, and pork, maybe? Alternatively, how many
critical products can China cut the United States off from? We found out the
answer during the covid-19 pandemic, when US officials had to beg for
critical medical supplies, automotive parts, and protective gear.
And that’s before getting to areas where China has intentionally
monopolized the manufacture of supplies in order to create geopolitical
leverage, sometimes even operating the factories at a loss just to drive out
competitors. The Department of Defense and Department of the Interior
have identified thirty-five strategic minerals crucial for the defense
industrial base supply chain. Out of these, the United States lacks primary
production of twenty-two. Moreover, the United States heavily relies on
imports for over 75 percent of ten critical minerals, including titanium and
uranium.

--- Sayfa 201 ---
Just as the British did in the nineteenth century, the Chinese have
invested heavily in global trade choke points, with ownership stakes in
thirty of the world’s fifty largest ports and increasing amounts of investment
in the Suez and Panama Canals. China produces some 40 percent of large
oceangoing vessels manufactured globally each year, giving it substantial
wartime surge capacity on top of explicitly military-oriented ship
production (the People’s Liberation Army Navy is now the largest in the
world). Leaving the United States’ vital supplies in the hands of foreign
mariners subject to Chinese coercion threatens to undo three centuries of
hard-won wisdom for our maritime nation.
With trillions of dollars of Western capital financing the draining of the
West’s own manufacturing power and intellectual property to Communist
China, the stage was set for the final step of lessons learned from the British
playbook: China’s attempt to displace the United States at the heart of the
world order and retake what CCP elites view as China’s rightful place as the
Middle Kingdom.
But whereas it took British gunboats to pry open Chinese markets, the
Chinese Communist Party walked right through the front door. In fact, our
Uniparty elites rolled out the red carpet, welcoming the country to
permanent normal trade relations (PNTR) status and membership in the
World Trade Organization, all the while assuring themselves that trade
would mean liberalization and democracy in China.
China’s plan to rewire the global economy in its favor harkens back to
its long history of ruling via economic and diplomatic manipulation. But its
traditional strategy of generating massive trade surpluses should not have
worked in the modern monetary system, because money today is not backed
by bullion (the tons and tons of gold and silver that flowed to China under
the Canton System). Instead, the trade surpluses incurred by exporting more
than it imports should have caused China’s currency to appreciate and its
trade partners’ to depreciate. In the long run, that would have made Chinese
manufactures more expensive and less attractive for outsourcing. In fact, in
the years leading up to China’s entry into the WTO, that was the universal
prediction of all of the “top” economists, such as Paul Krugman and
Maurice Obstfeld.
That never happened. Instead, China illegally devalued its currency,
harming its own people but ensuring that the CCP’s strategy for hollowing
out Western manufacturing and returning China to global economic

--- Sayfa 202 ---
centrality could work. But even a Chinese domestic spending and debt
spree could not absorb all of the trade imbalance, which ballooned to over
$400 billion before President Trump began to push back. What China did to
maintain its export advantage was devious: it invested in the United States,
buying US assets with US dollars, thus propping up the value of the dollar
(to keep Chinese products cheap) while sucking ownership of US
companies, real estate, and more out of the United States and buying
trillions of dollars’ worth of US government debt. The CCP today sits atop a
$3 trillion hoard of assets, many of them American.
Normally, such a move would generate massive political resistance
among the people affected. After all, who can blame CCP elites for taking
advantage when the United States offered no resistance beyond a handful of
feckless anti-WTO protests that led nowhere? But why did the United
States allow the “China Shock” (the massive reconfiguration of the US
economy due to trade deals with China) to occur in the first place?
For a democratic system such as the United States’, the widespread
social and economic destruction experienced by the American people
should have been a limiting factor on China’s ability to force open US
markets and flood them with Chinese goods while leaving China’s own
markets off limits to many American companies. And of course, the
Chinese had nothing like the Royal Navy to impose such a state of affairs
by gunboat.
But that’s where the final step of China’s playbook paved the way for
dominance: spiritual warfare. The British example proved helpful yet again.
China has pursued the same two-prong strategy of cultivating addiction
both among the people and among the elites. Among the American
populace, China has not only cultivated an addiction to cheap Chinese TVs
and T-shirts, it is also cultivating more sinister addictions: essentially all
fentanyl and methamphetamine today are made in China or made with
chemicals imported from China. A study by the economists Justin R. Pierce
and Peter K. Schott has shown that the parts of the United States most
exposed to the China Shock experienced an appalling increase in drug
overdoses and other “deaths of despair”: a county’s moving from the 25th
to the 75th percentile of exposure to China-related job losses resulted in a
40 to 60 percent increase in drug overdose deaths. China’s message to the
working-class Americans experiencing the moral and spiritual cost of their
jobs being replaced by Chinese exports is: keel over and die.

--- Sayfa 203 ---
But there is a curious “dog that didn’t bark.” Those effects began almost
immediately after China was admitted to the WTO (though drug deaths in
particular shot up after the rise of fentanyl in the 2010s). Why didn’t anyone
in Washington notice?
The answer is that the CCP bribed American elites to look the other
way. As Upton Sinclair wrote, “It is difficult to get a man to understand
something when his salary depends on his not understanding it.” The China
Shock fell hard on a concentrated swathe of the American heartland, killing
millions of “deplorables” in certain counties in Ohio, North Carolina,
Oregon, and other states. But in counties not directly exposed to trade-
related job losses, the main immediate impact was cheaper consumer goods
at Costco.
Chinese asset purchases in the United States were not only an economic
strategy; they were a political strategy. The people and companies most
directly harmed by China’s currency and financial manipulation were the
American working class, manufacturers, and Rust Belt communities. But by
buying US assets, China bought off America’s elites, who are
disproportionately likely to work in the finance, insurance, real estate, and
higher education sectors and live in large coastal cities where Chinese
oligarchs bought real estate, went on shopping sprees, hired investment
bankers, invested in Western companies, and sent their kids to university.
According to the US Trade Representative, the United States has a massive
trade deficit with China for goods ($382.3 billion), having replaced
American-made products with Chinese-made ones. But we have a
substantial trade surplus of services ($14.9 billion on $41.5 billion of
services exports), heavily concentrated in white-collar industries. For
coastal elites, not noticing the plight of working-class Americans came
easy.
DEI and ESG Mean CCP
Like arrogant late-Qing officials negotiating with the British, many of our
elites believe that they are in the driver’s seat of structural changes in the
world economy to advance diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) and
environmental, social, and governance (ESG) goals. In reality, in ways

--- Sayfa 204 ---
subtle and not so subtle, they are already modeling themselves on the
patterns set for them by the CCP.
Whereas Communist China began with total political control and party
discipline and then introduced a capitalist-style market system, our
Uniparty elites are building a CCP-style party discipline and control
mechanism on top of our existing capitalist economy, hijacking its brain
(the managerial elite) to build “socialism with Western characteristics.”
The first step is supercharging the managerial revolution. By hollowing
out the productive parts of the US economy, China elevated elites whose
power derived from the management of money or corporate-bureaucratic
considerations, not excellence in making things. The larger a business gets,
the more the managers take over; a publicly traded company has complex
SEC compliance requirements, conducts careful risk management with
financial counterparties and credit bureaus, works with large banks and
insurance companies, tracks the cash flows, depreciation, and other
accounting characteristics of all of its assets and liabilities, and otherwise
comes to make sense of itself in the language of money instead of the
language of value or of production.
It is important to be clear-eyed about what the rise of finance has meant
for the United States. As an industry, finance is highly concentrated in a
handful of coastal cities. It is subject to enormous social and political
pressure, a ready tool for social engineering. It is synonymous with the
managerial revolution, the bureaucratization of American business, and the
rise of woke capital. Financialization is a style of business that undervalues
capital investment, supply chain resilience, productivity growth, and stable
jobs. It leads to American businesses’ increasingly being beholden to
globalists and the Chinese Communist Party. The problem of American
finance is as much political as it is economic: we are building the
infrastructure of our own enslavement.
This is not an exaggeration. The financial world created an entire class
of elites who lack natural loyalties to family, country, or faith. Consider
BlackRock, run by the Democratic superdonor Larry Fink, by far the
world’s largest asset manager. It controls over $9.42 trillion in assets, which
it uses to drive Uniparty aims across the entire global economy. An
investigation by the House Select Committee on the Chinese Communist
Party found that, through a series of funds, BlackRock channeled hundreds
of millions of dollars from US pension funds, 401(k)s, and university

--- Sayfa 205 ---
endowments into investments into “dozens of blacklisted Chinese
companies that threaten US national security or support the Chinese
Communist Party’s human rights abuses.” Across just five funds, the
committee found, BlackRock had invested over $429 million in Chinese
companies that posed national security risks, acted directly against US
interests, and engaged in human rights abuses. They included companies
building China’s aircraft carriers, companies producing ammunition and
artillery shells for the PLA, and a genetics company that has scooped up
American genetics data in addition to profiling Uyghurs for the Chinese
techno-surveillance state. Then-congressman Mike Gallagher, chair of the
committee at the time, warned that such activities as BlackRock’s placed
the United States “at risk of funding our own destruction.”
And that’s just the tip of the iceberg of companies officially flagged by
the US government. It does not include all of the companies siphoning
intelligence to the CCP, stealing American intellectual property, or making
themselves available at the drop of a hat to wartime mobilization in China’s
defense industrial base. The investigation covered only BlackRock and its
partner company MSCI. The committee issued another report in February
2024 chronicling several billion dollars in investments by US venture
capital firms in Chinese technology companies with weaponizable systems,
and that report pales in comparison to the hundreds of billions of dollars of
American investments by other firms in building up China’s industrial
complex.
But socialism with Western characteristics is about so much more than
Wall Street channeling the savings of the American people into the hands of
the CCP. It’s about our Uniparty elite adopting the same mindset toward the
use of financial systems as an instrument of social control that CCP elites
have.
The Chinese aren’t dispassionate businessmen; they’re social engineers.
In the end, so are asset managers such as our elites. So in September 2023,
the Chinese Communist Party demanded that BlackRock executives in
China undertake a study of Xi Jinping Thought as a condition of being
allowed to continue operating in the country (where BlackRock has
substantial investments). But in June 2020, BlackRock’s US headquarters,
operating not on a US government mandate but on a Uniparty one,
announced that it would require its employees to take a “mandatory ‘racial
equity’ course,” would evaluate their job performance by the “tracking and

--- Sayfa 206 ---
measurement of diversity metrics,” and would selectively focus on
promoting “racially and ethnically diverse” candidates. The “culture war”
over wokeness is really a class war, and the point is to make sure that all the
money and power flows to the “right” people.
In the same way that the CCP insists that companies over a certain size
have party members in senior roles or even that the CEO be a party
member, under socialism with Western characteristics, large US companies
need to demonstrate their commitment to DEI by ensuring that they have
“diversity” in senior roles or even that the CEO is “diverse” (regardless of
merit). These requirements are increasingly imposed through lending terms,
state and federal regulators, and a network of NGOs (all in blatant violation
of US civil rights law, of course).
But while the real point of DEI is to construct a CCP-style system of
social control, embedding ESG in American business serves both this goal
and China directly. Ostensibly for the purpose of harnessing the power of
capitalism to solve climate change and making progress toward the UN
Sustainable Development Goals, ESG is actually a system for punishing the
lawful and empowering the unlawful. Effectively, it’s anarcho-tyranny for
business.
Uniparty elites obviously love it. They have joined with the World
Economic Forum and the CCP to get banks, asset managers, and large
institutional investors to incorporate ESG metrics into investment decisions
(and thereby incentivize pro-ESG corporate behavior and punish companies
that run afoul of the metrics).
Functionally, ESG is a tax by which American consumers subsidize the
growth of the world’s largest emissions cheaters and the United States’
dependence upon them. So, for instance, ESG metrics (not to mention
Biden administration subsidies) reward automakers that devote factory lines
to building electric vehicles, which rely on large lithium batteries. But ESG
metrics
also
punish
Western
mining
companies
that
produce
environmentally toxic lithium in places such as Australia, making it harder
for them to get loans and attract investors (on top of extensive first-world
environmental regulations). So the net result of ESG in this case is to
increase the demand, dependency, and price for high-pollution Chinese
lithium produced in third-world countries. Pretty much everywhere you
look, you see a pattern: ESG keeps Western oil and natural gas companies
from increasing production, so the United States must pay more to

--- Sayfa 207 ---
Venezuela, Russia, and Saudi Arabia. ESG incentivizes US companies to
divest from heavy industry, pipeline infrastructure, and critical mining
operations, even if they continue to then buy services from the new owners
of their old assets.
It goes without saying that Chinese companies basically make up their
ESG metrics, which are essentially impossible to verify by a third party. If
viewed through the lens of actions instead of words, the global ESG
framework is quite evidently more about Western reparations and Chinese
world power than about solving environmental issues.
China’s Globalist Tyranny Has Created a Class of American
Princelings
Careful readers may be asking themselves: Who would go in for these
sucker deals, which neither serve US interests nor mitigate shared global
environmental issues? As always, the most important question to ask is:
Who benefits?
Socialism with Western characteristics may destroy the American
middle class, subjugate the world order to China, and kill the golden goose
of dynamic and virtuous constitutional self-government. But it delivers
extraordinary power and wealth to the Uniparty with relatively little effort
and almost zero accountability.
You can see this in the case of Tenke Fungurume, a cobalt and copper
mine in the Democratic Republic of Congo bought in 2016 by the mining
company China Molybdenum from an American company for $2.65 billion,
with a remaining minority share purchased for $1.14 billion from the
Canadian company Lundin Mining. By selling the mine, one of the richest
sources in the world for key battery production materials, the American and
Canadian firms improved their ESG metrics and scored a payday, but at the
cost of consolidating Chinese global control of cobalt supplies.
According to the New York Times, the Canadian wing of the deal was
brokered by BHR Partners, which is controlled by the Bank of China and
other Chinese investors. BHR is a unique company with a Sino-US
shareholding structure and the ability to work around otherwise strict
Chinese capital controls, backed directly by the Chinese government. Its
name is an acronym for the partners involved in the firm. Two are Chinese

--- Sayfa 208 ---
asset managers: Bohai Industrial Investment Fund Management Company
and Harvest Fund Management: B and H. The last initial in BHR is for an
American company named Rosemont Seneca Partners, which owned 30
percent of BHR and helped the Chinese navigate the politics of the deal in
Washington and Ottawa.
The Times reported the story about the mine acquisition because of who
founded Rosemont Seneca Partners in 2009: Hunter Biden, shortly after his
father became vice president. But the most important part of interpreting
regime media is understanding what is left unsaid. The Times story leaves
off the name of Biden’s cofounder: Christopher Heinz, John Kerry’s
stepson. (Of course, Kerry knows something about business in China; his
great-grandfather Francis Blackwell Forbes made a fortune as an opium
trader.)
Conservatives have gotten so fixated on the sensational tabloid aspects
of the Hunter Biden story (the tawdry and incestuous family dramas, the
hookers and crack, the bumbling incompetence) that they have neglected
the much more important ways in which his business behavior was utterly
typical of our ruling class.
Consider the September 2015 sale of a 159-year-old Michigan-based
auto parts manufacturer, Henniges Automotive, to the Chinese military
aerospace company AVIC for a billion dollars, another BHR deal. AVIC’s
interest may have lain in Henniges’s precision manufacturing capabilities
and world-beating antivibration technology, with “dual-use” military
applications requiring investment review by the Commerce Department and
State Department. Nonetheless, the Obama White House (where Hunter’s
dad served as vice president) and Heinz’s stepfather’s State Department
approved the purchase. Hunter made at least $5.8 million on Chinese deals
after securing a meeting between the Chinese banker Jonathan Li and Joe
Biden on an official visit in 2013.
While Heinz and Biden perhaps sit atop the pile of American
princelings, their business methods are hardly atypical. Former speaker of
the House Nancy Pelosi has been an admirably stalwart opponent of the
CCP over the years, but that did not stop her son, Paul Jr., from taking a
multimillion-dollar position in a NASDAQ-listed Chinese telecoms
company. Nor is it a coincidence that days after President Trump was
elected, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell’s sister-in-law became
only the second foreigner appointed to the board of the Bank of China.

--- Sayfa 209 ---
Peter Schweizer’s book Secret Empires: How the American Political Class
Hides Corruption and Enriches Family and Friends is chock-full of less
high-profile corruption involving American political leaders and their
families, who “suddenly” find wealth through sweetheart private equity
deals or lobbying contracts.
In the end, Lord Macartney was right: it all comes down to the kowtow.
The CCP’s lure to Western investors and American princelings is only
secondarily about directly manipulating behavior; it is primarily about
subverting incentives and building habits of deference. With so much
money on the line, you don’t need some CCP commissar to tell you what to
do; you make the kowtow as a matter of self-interest. The CCP wants you
shutting up about Uyghur genocide or actively defending it like LeBron
James; hesitating before investigating a shady deal because you don’t want
to see your family members caught up in the fray; boosting ESG metrics
and a climate deal with China, even at the cost of US national interests,
knowing that it will benefit your stepson’s investments in Chinese solar
companies (and isn’t renewable energy important after all?).
The Chinese Communist Party has subverted the stability of the United
States and the common good of our people through addiction and
institutional manipulation. And it’s time to fight back with all our might.
We’re in a Spiritual War with China
The reason our ruling elites can’t see China’s threat is that their philosophy
doesn’t make room for enemies. When I arrived at the Heritage Foundation,
I laid down a marker: come hell or high water, we were going to lead the
movement against China—and I’m proud to say we have.
I was not always a China hawk. Like most conservatives, I thought US
policy toward China should be one of friendly competition. Eventually, I
assumed, we’d turn China into America, meaning that our economic
prowess, superior system of government, and freedom would win the
Chinese over. You might say that that attitude was the last vestige of my
neoconservatism.
China does increasingly pose a military threat to the United States and
her allies in East Asia. But to overfocus on this threat is to unwittingly
advance Chinese interests by ignoring the CCP’s overall strategy of pitting

--- Sayfa 210 ---
“America against America” (in the words of a chief CCP ideologist, Wang
Huning) through economic co-option, institutional subversion, addiction,
and spiritual warfare. The most important way to resist China’s strategy to
is to refuse to kowtow to the Chinese Communist Party by rejecting both
direct Chinese influence and socialism with Western characteristics.
To stop the Chinese onslaught against our institutions, we need to
rebuild our walls and restore our guardians. We need to orient our entire
government to the Chinese threat with at least as much focus and clarity as
we had during the Cold War: the 2023 Heritage Foundation report Winning
the New Cold War: A Plan for Countering China is a good place to start.
But though much of this work will occur throughout the executive branch, it
is imperative that we restore the people’s branch to grapple with the
insidious CCP.
Back during the 1990s, Republicans gleefully slashed congressional
staff and operations budgets as part of a broad sweep of fiscal reforms. I
think we need to recognize in hindsight that this was a mistake. A weak,
distracted Congress without a robust, dogged staff is a recipe for foreign
penetration and lackadaisical oversight. Willmoore Kendall makes the
strong case that Congress is the central pillar of the American system.
Congress is the most populist branch of government, the one most
responsive to the needs of ordinary Americans, the one capable of keeping
all the others on their toes. If you want better and more careful government
spending, more oversight over the administrative state, accountability for
the failures of the intelligence community, adaptability to the China threat,
and more, you need a more capable Congress.
The first thing a beefed-up Congress should do (after banning TikTok)
is bring back the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC). The
House Select Committee on the Chinese Communist Party has begun the
work of holding Uniparty elites and Washington bureaucrats to account for
their compromise, corruption, and co-optation by the CCP. But their early
work has only revealed how very deeply the problem goes. A revived,
bulked-up HUAC would be the place to investigate Chinese infiltration of
Big Tech, the Ivy League, Wall Street, American agriculture, and more. Its
investigative work could directly feed into a far more robust and targeted
legislative effort to dismantle China’s sources of power in the United States,
brick by brick, and to call to account the Uniparty elites that enabled this
foreign infiltration. Confucius Institutes and the College Board; Huawei and

--- Sayfa 211 ---
Sequoia Capital; the Bank of China and BlackRock; the Wanda Group and
the Walt Disney Company—they’re all going to be in the hot seat, and the
Heritage Foundation’s going to be piling firewood underneath.
Restoring Our Commerce
In his confrontation with Japanese automakers, Ronald Reagan clarified
what a trade policy in the American interest looks like, as codified in his
1980 presidential platform: “The Republican Party believes in free trade,
and we will insist that our trade policy be based on the principles of
reciprocity and equity. We will not stand idly by as the jobs of millions of
Americans in domestic industries are jeopardized and lost.”
At some point in the 1990s, Republicans forgot those principles. They
bought into the ivory-tower theories of economists bought off by globalist
corporations that argued that lowering barriers to trade would ultimately be
beneficial to the United States, even if our trading partners locked us out of
their markets, treated American companies unfairly, or otherwise refused
reciprocity. Of course, the biggest and baddest instance of this was
extending permanent normalization of trade relations status to China, which
has given CCP-backed firms an open invitation to pillage the US economy
without even a hint of reciprocity.
Until President Trump put a stop to it.
For decades, American presidential candidates promised to officially
label China a currency manipulator, only to chicken out at the last minute
under the thrall of compromised Uniparty elites (including their donors). In
2019, President Trump had the courage to do what Bush and Obama had
refused to do and designated China a currency manipulator. He started a
trade war with China (that we won), raised tariffs on Chinese goods, and
otherwise sought to restore balance in our trade. The Biden administration,
while maintaining some Trump-era approaches and policies, has
backtracked on others, especially under the banner of climate change driven
by John Kerry. We need to restore and extend President Trump’s reciprocal
trade agenda and recover “the art of the deal.”
We’re going to need a protectionist approach to China. I don’t mean
protect as in protect from competition like a special snowflake or even
protect jobs per se at the cost of economic growth. I mean protectionist as in

--- Sayfa 212 ---
protect from pirates, bandits, spies, and Communists. Just because China’s
pirates don’t operate from sailing junks anymore doesn’t mean they’re
doing any less to loot the US economy. President Trump’s imposition of
unilateral tariffs was a great first step that we should extend with incentives
for US companies to reshore, near-shore, and friend-shore supply chains.
By breaking China’s chokehold on strategic economic inputs, we can
defang much of its power. As a matter of national security, we need to fully
capitalize on newly discovered US reserves of critical commodities such as
lithium, cobalt, and rare-earth metals, the exploitation of which is currently
strangled by environmental regulations and activist lawyers.
But we need to go further to recover the spirit of American commerce
and American companies. The China expert Dr. Jonathan D. T. Ward, the
author of China’s Vision of Victory, has suggested that, were the legendary
American diplomat George Kennan to write a “Long Telegram” today about
the New Cold War with China, he would address it not to national security
policy makers but to the business leaders of the Free World. The fact is,
driven by shortsighted stock price concerns and a buck-passing approach, it
was American executives who played right into the hands of Xi Jinping and
the Chinese Politburo. A reinvigorated case for another American Century,
helped along by a reinvigorated HUAC, must remind America’s business
elites of their duties to the common good of the republic and reinstill a
sense of patriotism in them.
Spiritual Warfare Requires Spiritual Resistance
I don’t think we will succeed without the return of a practice absolutely
antithetical to everything the CCP and its Uniparty sympathizers stand for:
widespread and prominent public prayer.
As part of the early Cold War turn to a serious confrontation with
communism, Congress mandated in 1954 that the phrase “under God” be
added to the Pledge of Allegiance and in July 1955 that the phrase “In God
we trust” appear on all US currency. Those were no top-down mandates:
they came about through a groundswell of grassroots advocacy by
Americans who realized that the confrontation with the Soviet Union was,
at its core, a spiritual struggle between a revolutionary ideology that denied

--- Sayfa 213 ---
transcendence (and thus treated its subjects as just so many cattle) and one
that held that man’s dignity and worth were endowed by their Creator.
To restore public prayer to a place of prominence—to take a moment for
prayer before football games, to have prominent leaders including our
president not just issuing the occasional prayer proclamation but actually
publicly taking a knee before almighty God (as Washington did), to begin
school days again with prayer (enabled by school choice legislation)—
would be to once again properly acknowledge our gratitude to God and
humbly seek His assistance in our struggle to restore vitality to our nation.
Public prayer has another value, as a kind of shibboleth. If an American
institution is incompatible with or contemptuous of public prayer, I would
be hard pressed to believe that it should not simply be burned down for the
common good.
It took the overthrow of the Qing dynasty by the nationalist Sun Yat-sen
to begin the process of Chinese renewal and the establishment of new
Chinese institutions fit for the purpose of restoring the nation. And it will
take a victory in the Second American Revolution to slough off the sinister
grip of the CCP and its Uniparty sycophants and restore the institutions
conducive to another century of our flourishing.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Sayfa 214 ---
Chapter 10
Elites Must Serve the Nation
Breathes there the man, with soul so dead,
Who never to himself hath said,
This is my own, my native Land!
—Sir Walter Scott
As a Cajun populist, I enjoy railing against our corrupt ruling class as
much as anyone does. You might think that I want to destroy the ruling
class as such. But I don’t.
History tells us that there has never been a civilization without some
form of ruling class or elite. Our Founding Fathers believed that a republic
like ours needs its elite to come from a natural aristocracy. Our elite would
be men and women whose leadership in society is rooted not in lineage or
inheritance but in character, courage, and competence, whose prudent
leadership and careful investment would constantly renew the land.
Our current elites see themselves not as leaders of a republic but as
members of a global community. Their loyalty is not to the United States. If
I ever felt tempted to believe our current elite’s self-justification that their
rejection of American identity is simply a response to an ever more
complex world, it ended when I went to Davos. What I saw there wasn’t a
response to reality but a bubble of privilege totally disconnected from
ordinary people’s concerns.
I was invited to the World Economic Forum to discuss what to expect
from a future Republican administration. I accepted in order to get a chance

--- Sayfa 215 ---
to see Uniparty’s biggest global festival for myself and to give the
participants a piece of my mind on behalf of the American people.
What most people who will never go to Davos think it is . . . is what it
absolutely is: the biggest conspiratio of them all, an entire village full of
back rooms where self-selected elites from all over the world decide what
matters. It is shot through with hypocrisy: politicians and CEOs descend in
their private jets to lecture ordinary people about climate change and ESG.
They swan around extolling the importance of diversity, equity, and
inclusion while they guzzle hors d’oeuvres and wine served by an army of
invisible plebes. It’s a place “where billionaires tell millionaires about what
the middle class feels,” as the global banker Jamie Dimon sheepishly put it.
At Davos, I realized that there is one question that cuts like Alexander
the Great’s sword through the Gordian knot of immigration and trade, a
question that our Uniparty elite wriggle to avoid at every step. The question
is this:
Do the ordinary people of this country matter?
Do the ordinary people of this country matter?
DO THE ORDINARY PEOPLE OF THIS COUNTRY MATTER?
The Uniparty does everything to pretend that the issues of our border, of
immigration, and of trade are about anything else than this simple question.
They produce graphs and charts and sophisticated arguments. Or, when the
intellectual approach fails, they call you racist, xenophobic, isolationist, or
worse.
I think there is plenty of room for legitimate disagreement about the
right level of immigration and the right kinds of trade. But we must pursue
agreement that the only relevant aim for these policies is the common good
of the American people and the preservation of our American traditions.
This singular goal dictates an equally singular political focus: destroying
the grip that Uniparty elites and unelected technocrats have on the average
person and restoring our republican culture.
Dead Souls
By any measure, Professor Samuel P. Huntington was an elite, born to
wealth in New York City and educated at Yale and Harvard before taking

--- Sayfa 216 ---
tenured professorships at Columbia and later Harvard. He even died in the
elite enclave of Martha’s Vineyard. Throughout his life, he taught the ruling
class, advised presidents, and wrote books that were influential and widely
discussed throughout elite circles.
That was, until his last book.
Entitled Who Are We? The Challenges to America’s National Identity
(2004), it received a few polite (but firmly disapproving) reviews in
Uniparty media organs before being promptly memory-holed. Literary
elites were embarrassed even to have to discuss a book that made the
argument that America had a distinctive cultural identity that could be
weakened, or even destroyed, by immigration and globalization.
Huntington was the elites’ elite, and he had their number. While much
of the caterwauling about the book dealt with its treatment of American
cultural identity and Latino assimilation (or lack thereof), he also weighed
the ruling class and found it wanting, in a section entitled “Dead Souls: The
Denationalization of the American Elite.” He pointed out that ordinary
Americans were concerned not only about America’s physical security but
also about societal security, “the sustainability—within acceptable
conditions for evolution—of existing patterns of language, culture,
association, religion and national identity.”
This deep and intuitive spiritual and physical connection to one’s nation
was expressed by Sir Walter Scott:
Breathes there the man, with soul so dead,
Who never to himself hath said,
This is my own, my native Land!
Whose heart hath ne’er within him burn’d,
As home his footsteps he hath turn’d,
From wandering on a foreign strand!
According to Huntington’s analysis, a greater and greater portion of
America’s elite have become “dead souls,” concerned more about their
global careers and cosmopolitan tastes than about anything connected to
America, especially her popular or folk culture. These dead soul elites feel
no spiritual connection to America and no responsibility or fellow feeling
toward their fellow Americans.
Throughout history, elites have usually been conservative forces,
defending the status quo they sit atop. So why is it that America’s Uniparty
elites attack the traditions, culture, and institutions that have made America

--- Sayfa 217 ---
great? My point isn’t that this turn in our elites has been bad (though it’s
turned into a disaster); it is that it has been profoundly weird, profoundly
unnatural of elites throughout history.
Why is it that on one issue after another, the head of the American
Federation of Teachers, the chief of staff of the army, the director of the
National Institutes of Health, the commissioner of the National Basketball
Association, the secretary of state, Fortune 100 CEOs, and the president of
Swarthmore College share the same basic perspective? And why is it that
they are far more likely to agree with one another than with the average
working-class person in their organization: a schoolteacher, an army
sergeant, an assistant coach, a laboratory technician, a factory foreman?
And why is it that they—who lead important American institutions, who
sit on the top rungs of American society—are more likely to condemn the
institutions in which they are leaders and to scoff at straightforward
American patriotism than the ordinary Americans far below them on the
ladder are?
On what principle, then, is our Uniparty elite selected? Intelligence,
ambition, discipline, wealth, connections, and such are table stakes. But
they’re not enough to get you to the top of a Uniparty institution. They
won’t get you accepted into Harvard, interviewed at McKinsey, or tapped
for Skull and Bones.
Uniparty institutions demand an additional quality: they select for
impiety. They have no use for talented young men and women who are
devoted to strengthening and maintaining existing American institutions,
identity, places, or values, no matter how impressive they are otherwise.
They scorn any would-be elite that maintains a sense of duty or filial piety
toward America, their home place, or the faith of their fathers. Our
Uniparty’s chief demand of those it would endow with power, wealth, and
status is that they shun gratitude toward all that they have inherited.
The reason why is that piety, gratitude, and a sense of duty get into the
way of technocratic management, the centralization of power, and the strip
mining of the American way of life. Student activists who tear down statues
on campus have no problem working, upon graduation, for vulture hedge
funds stripping viable companies for parts or for PR firms whitewashing
Qatari terrorist financing. Holding the United States to be a “racist settler-
colonial state,” they feel no shame in working for her enemies. They are
encouraged to feel no sense of duty toward their families, their

--- Sayfa 218 ---
communities, or their countrymen, and they dub this moral emptiness a
virtue.
The Birth of the Global Citizen
What is killing the souls of American elites? A subtle shift in the Ivy
League, since the mid–twentieth century the forge of the American elite,
might clue us in.
In 1896, the Princeton professor (and future president) Woodrow Wilson
gave an oration in honor of the university’s one hundred fiftieth
anniversary. It focused, in moving detail, on the influence of Princeton
president and American Founding Father John Witherspoon, whose
philosophical, educational, and political efforts deeply shaped the early
leaders of our Republic, many of whom had been his students. Princeton,
under Witherspoon’s leadership, had been “a school of duty.” The title of
Wilson’s oration became Princeton’s unofficial motto: “In the Nation’s
Service.”
One hundred years later, in the afterglow of the end of the Cold War and
the beginning of a New World Order, Princeton’s Uniparty leaders thought
the old motto needed to be updated in keeping with the times. They
expanded the motto to no longer focus exclusively on students’ duties to the
United States, adding “and in the Service of all Nations.” But even that was
considered too narrow-minded by 2016, and so Princeton’s motto today is
“In the Nation’s Service and the Service of Humanity.”
This change, ubiquitous in spirit among the institutions forming future
Uniparty members, is not a subtle shift; it’s a moral revolution.
You can see this in the work of some of the most influential political
theorists of the period, such as Martha Nussbaum at the University of
Chicago and Amy Gutmann and Peter Singer at Princeton. All of them hold
that patriotism, national pride, and a belief that one has special duties to
one’s neighbors on the basis of a shared identity are parochial and morally
arbitrary (“repugnant,” in Gutmann’s word). Instead, the morally
sophisticated individual must widen her “circle of concern” to take in the
needs and rights of all humanity. She must view herself not as an American
first but as a “global citizen.”

--- Sayfa 219 ---
This viewpoint suggests not only that one must not merely regard all of
humanity as equal but that it is morally wrong for an individual, family,
company, or even government to privilege its own people when other
people elsewhere have less privilege and “need” the help more. In this
inverted moral sensibility, helping your downtrodden neighbor who has just
lost his job is wrong when the same resources could go to, say, a
desperately poor refugee or a child in Africa lacking safe drinking water.
It’s not so much that Singer, Nussbaum, Gutmann, and other less
prominent thinkers and critical theorists succeed in indoctrinating students
in the classroom; some of the most devoted “global citizens” have never
picked up a work of philosophy in their life. But the work they were doing
picked up upon a broader attitudinal shift in the Uniparty.
For ordinary Americans, the end of the Cold War presented an
opportunity to finally address deeply rooted challenges at home. For fifty
years, the United States had shouldered the lion’s share of the burden of
defeating totalitarian ideology around the world. And we won a great
victory, making a world order that was safe for freedom. Now we needed to
tend our own garden. Americans wanted to end (in Buchanan’s words)
“routinized annual transfers of our national wealth to global bureaucrats” at
the United Nations and other international organizations, massive military
expenditures for rich countries such as Germany and Japan that now faced
no existential threats and were now competing economically with the
United States (even as we subsidized their economies), and routine foreign
aid for regimes that had been Cold War allies but that now lined their own
pockets or, worse, siphoned the money to avowed enemies of the United
States.
Our elites began to tell themselves a different story. The end of the Cold
War did not demand attention to the United States’ own issues but instead
an enlargement of its involvement in the world—at their direction, of
course. With the Soviet Union out of the picture, borders and barriers to
trade, movement, commerce, ideas, and more fell. American elites had a
once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to take advantage of what came to be called
globalization. American elites gained enormously in terms of wealth,
power, and prestige from the United States’ status as the sole global
superpower and anchor of a US-led world order. Profits from investments in
factories in Des Moines and Burbank paled in comparison to those in
growing emerging economies such as Poland and Taiwan. The international

--- Sayfa 220 ---
demand for American technocrats, consultants, and influence peddlers
soared. The global influence and reach of American culture exploded,
benefitting coastal elites in media, the arts, and universities with global
brands.
During the Cold War, the American people and the elites had been
united by a common purpose, common interests, and a shared way of life.
But with the dawn of globalization, elites and elite institutions benefited
directly from expanding global engagement, even when doing so hurt the
nation or the American middle class. While most Americans enjoyed the
lower cost of goods and improved chances to travel, the elites benefited far
more than the middle class did, with wealth and income growth in the top 5
percent and 1 percent of households greatly outpacing those of the rest of
the country.
As it became a burden, our elite eagerly sloughed off any responsibility
to ensuring the common good of the American people, along with any sense
of duty to their fellow countrymen who had been left behind by
globalization. As “global citizens,” our elites came to regard our people
with contempt as arrogant, ungrateful, and ignorant deplorables, whining
about factories closing or American identity slipping away when, in the
eyes of the elites, the rest of the world was beating down the door trying to
come to the United States and seeking the grace and favor of American
elites. Why put up with getting roasted by line workers or local voters when
you can hop on a flight to Jakarta or Warsaw and be treated with deference
and awe bordering on worship by local officials, would-be business
partners, and NGO workers?
That was how the Uniparty began. Leftist criticisms of our elites have
focused on wealth and income inequality. Right-wing populism has focused
more on the rise of a disconnected and imperialistic elite that pushes its
values on the rest of the world. But they come from the same underlying
source: the emergence of a class whose economic interests often oppose
those of the rest of the country and that cloaks the pursuit of those interests
in an ideological vocabulary of “social justice” and “global citizenship” that
justifies looking down its nose at the benighted deplorables in the rest of the
country; that doesn’t even see ordinary Americans as fellow citizens whose
flourishing they are duty bound to assist.

--- Sayfa 221 ---
The Uniparty Sees Americans and Non-Americans as
Interchangeable
Seeing themselves as “global citizens” who happen to carry American
passports, Uniparty elites see American identity purely in terms of
economic value and multicultural “diversity” (the more, the better).
Huntington described the Uniparty mentality this way:
The ideal would be an open society with open borders, encouraging subnational ethnic, racial
and cultural identities, dual citizenship, diasporas, and would be led by elites who increasingly
identified with global institutions rather than national ones. America should be multiethnic,
multiracial, multicultural. Diversity is a prime value, if not the prime value. The more people
who bring to America different languages, religions and customs, the more American America
becomes.
We should recognize the Uniparty’s attitude toward open borders as yet
another
luxury
belief.
Their
gated
communities
and
exclusive
neighborhoods don’t have open borders. They work in organizations that
recruit and hire only from a small number of universities, and they send
their kids to prep schools charging tens of thousands of dollars in tuition. In
these heavily gate-kept settings, which already select for education,
outlook, and English fluency, diversity seems to have no downside. Isn’t it
pretty to think that the families of an American law partner, a Brazilian
energy executive, a French journalist, an Egyptian management consultant,
and a Hong Kong financier can all form “a brotherhood of man”? As the
Uniparty anthem, John Lennon’s “Imagine,” describes it: “Imagine there’s
no countries, / It isn’t hard to do, / Nothing to kill or die for, / And no
religion, too.”
Because the Uniparty’s cultural and communal stability is ensured by
socioeconomic domination and not national identity, its members treat the
desire of ordinary Americans to preserve their way of life through
limitations on open borders as driven by nothing but xenophobic animus.
And because they themselves view passports, cultures, and cities as
interchangeable commodities, Uniparty elites view ordinary Americans as
replacement parts, too. From the Uniparty perspective, replacing a native-
born American service worker with a Guatemalan immigrant reduces cost,
increases diversity, and aids someone with less privilege than someone born
in America has. From their perspective, it’s an unambiguous win.

--- Sayfa 222 ---
The “global citizen” mentality of immigrants and natives as
interchangeable replacement parts is enshrined in law by the Immigration
and Nationality Act of 1965, also known as the Hart-Celler Act, pushed
forward by President Lyndon B. Johnson as part of his Great Society
initiatives, which radically altered the traditional immigration policy of the
United States. American immigration policies had historically balanced a
welcome for immigrants with the need to build social and cultural solidarity
within the United States, marked by an era of felt national unity stronger
than any other in our history.
Johnson held that the bill’s purpose was to correct “a cruel and enduring
wrong in the conduct of the American Nation”—a “racist” immigration
policy that had prioritized immigrants from cultures and national origins
similar to those of the existing American polity. “This bill that we will sign
today is not a revolutionary bill,” Johnson said at the signing ceremony. “It
does not affect the lives of millions. It will not reshape the structure of our
daily lives.” Senator Edward Kennedy assured skeptics that “our cities will
not be flooded with a million immigrants annually. . . . the ethnic mix of
this country will not be upset.”
The problem is not that the United States widened its immigration
policy; it’s that any concern about shared heritage, culture, and assimilation
became totally taboo. Ordinary Americans support low levels of
immigration and are personally welcoming to immigrants. But rather than
dealing democratically with the desires of native-born Americans, the
Uniparty’s preference is to supercharge immigration to replace native-born
Americans conscious of the war against the American way of life with more
pliable groups indifferent to national unity. At a population level, this shift
is called “the emerging Democratic majority”—unless you’re a
conservative, in which case the most esteemed journalists will tell you that
it’s called “the Great Replacement” and it’s a racist conspiracy theory that
absolutely isn’t happening but would be a good thing to happen and don’t
you dare notice that it is happening.
The critics are half right; there’s no conspiracy. The conventional
wisdom on the right has become that our open borders policy is driven by
Democrats looking for future voters and Republicans beholden to business
interests relying on cheap labor. But more than a decade working on these
issues in Texas and Washington has taught me that the truth is simpler but
more depressing.

--- Sayfa 223 ---
Occasionally, there is a particular issue in which some interest group
has an immediate, strong interest: progressive voter groups care about
ensuring that the census counts illegals, industrial agriculture fights for
temporary worker visas, companies such as DoorDash and Uber fund
immigration activists to help them lower their labor costs with illegal aliens.
But these by and large do not explain the apathy in Washington over the
massive number of asylum seekers, chain migration that imports welfare
dependents, and Chinese birth tourism.
The most important thing to realize is that for members of the Uniparty
on both sides of the aisle, none of this is in any way, shape, or form an
urgent problem. They don’t have to deal with it. It doesn’t affect their lives
or those of their donors. It is beneath their notice. They don’t have Sino-
Mexican fentanyl addicts on their block, menacing young “asylum seekers”
leering at their daughters or occupying their kids’ schools, illegal
immigrants undercutting their wages or flooding their doctors’ offices.
They don’t think mass immigration is really bad, they don’t think
American culture or identity is worth protecting, and they’re not harmed by
immigration (if anything, it makes their child care or food delivery
cheaper). So the only time they think about it is when voters are up in arms,
and even then the threat of being attacked by progressive activist groups or
foiled by activist judges usually outweighs the political cost of continuing
to do nothing on immigration.
In reality, congressional cowardice is the tip of the iceberg. The real
force establishing a de facto open borders policy is the Uniparty elites in
NGOs, law firms, and the administrative state conspiring to impose the
“replacement parts” mentality on the rest of the country, regardless of the
democratic wishes of the American people.
For instance, in 2018 the Trump administration closed a loophole by
which adult illegal immigrants ages eighteen to twenty-one could gain a
green card under a program intended to aid abused or abandoned children.
The policy was blocked on purely administrative grounds by a class action
lawsuit backed not only by a legal nonprofit but by one of the largest law
firms in the world, Latham & Watkins, which took the case for free.
As a retired Latham partner pointed out in the American Conservative,
Latham & Watkins revenues that year topped $4 billion and profits per
equity partner averaged $4.5 million. In its annual report for 2018, Latham
& Watkins boasted that it had advised on 360 merger and acquisitions

--- Sayfa 224 ---
transactions with a cumulative valuation of $408 billion, more than any
other law firm in the world. A third of those transactions (by value) took
place outside the United States, where Latham & Watkins maintains
growing offices in cosmopolitan cities such as Paris, Frankfurt, Dubai, Tel
Aviv, Beijing, and Tokyo.
The same firms (like Latham) that are pocketing billions of dollars by
facilitating the sale of American companies to overseas buyers turn around
and work pro bono alienorum (for the good of foreigners), filing activist
lawsuits on behalf of illegal immigrants, stopping states from enforcing
their laws, and coaching asylum seekers en masse. As of this writing,
Latham & Watkins advertises “global citizenship” as one of five pillars of
its practice, the phrase chosen on its website for pro bono work, DEI, and
the like.
We now have a perverse situation in which the more likely a would-be
immigrant is to end up depending on public welfare in the United States,
the more likely he or she is to gain free legal services from Ivy League
attorneys at thousand-dollar-per-hour coastal elite law firms. Equally
perverse is a system that increasingly rewards migrants who gamble with
coyotes and cartels and punishes those who seek to enter the United States
in a lawful manner.
Record profits for big law firms, alienation from the common good of
ordinary Americans, and white guilt pro bono work stuffing as many
dubious asylum cases through as possible all come from the exact same
source. Forty years ago, many of Latham’s partners would have been
attorneys at small regional firms, the kinds of pillars of the community who
sat on corporate boards and advised local civic associations. Globalization
massively rewarded big law firms with Uniparty connections, sucking the
best and brightest out of the American heartland into a handful of coastal
cities, generating profits that then have subsidized the industrial-scale pro
bono legal activism of the last few decades, even as it alienated those same
elites from the consequences of their actions, even on the communities they
had left behind.
Our current regime consists of Uniparty elites in New York City and
Washington, DC, conspiring with Uniparty elites in San Francisco to
impose anarcho-tyranny on the plebes of flyover country. This we call “our
democracy”; it is defined not by channeling the will of the people but by
following the right process, which is to say, the process that ensures that the

--- Sayfa 225 ---
Uniparty has a voice at every stage. Elites defend their own interests, but
not the common good of ordinary Americans.
Ultimately, this was why the Uniparty freaked out about the election of
Donald Trump. For the first time in their lives, Uniparty elites were subject
to the authority of someone whom they had not chosen and whom they
could not influence through the Uniparty network. It was an all-too-brief
taste of their own bitter medicine, and it is why not a single Uniparty-
controlled institution openly supported him, even when it was otherwise in
its interests to do so.
The Uniparty Versus Real America
Today, there is a profound alienation between the interests and desires of
our Uniparty elite and the ordinary people of America, found in places such
as Opelousas, Louisiana. If you walk around Opelousas, you will see a
place that looks as though it lost a war. In a way, it did. As in many small
towns, Main Street has become blighted and hollow, with boarded-up
businesses, including a bankrupt local department store, Abdalla’s, that has
sat vacant for almost forty years. But beyond the physical appearance, it is
hard to find a local institution that has not been damaged by the Uniparty’s
war against ordinary Americans: our Cajun culture, small businesses, the
local bank, the Catholic parish, the Boy Scout troop, the public schools, and
my grandparents’ favorite restaurant have all suffered. The main institutions
that have become stronger since I left are the casino, the Walmart
Supercenter, and the Goodwill store. The Uniparty has flooded Opelousas
with cheap Chinese goods, cheaper Sino-Mexican fentanyl, and not a small
number of illegal immigrants in industrial food production in the
surrounding area doing “jobs Americans won’t do”—but used to do, until
their wages stagnated for fifty years.
While Opelousas’s economic woes are not exactly the outworking of a
free market, regions do go through ups and downs. What is so strange, what
we ought to find so uncanny, is that Uniparty elites seek to destroy what
institutions and traditions the ordinary people in Opelousas have left.
Against a people already economically dispossessed, they impose policies
and ideas destructive of the culture, history, traditions, associations, and
faith that are our consolation and strength in hard times. Why?

--- Sayfa 226 ---
What led to the war between the Uniparty and Opelousas? As in any
war, a battle is joined when the defending party decides to fight back. In the
wake of the global financial crisis, the American people had had enough of
our elites and their disastrous leadership, not only in bailing out Wall Street
at Main Street’s expense but also in snaring us in Middle Eastern
quagmires, surrendering US sovereignty, opening the borders, appeasing
Communist China, and otherwise selling out the American people to the
Davos class. Populist movements arose on the left (Occupy Wall Street) and
the right (the Tea Party) that, for all their disagreements, shared a single
goal: to demand accountability for elite failure. Elite institutions responded,
and they have been trying to divide ordinary Americans every which way
they can ever since, to avoid being forced to reckon with their sins.
It is time they are humbled and the dignity of ordinary Americans is
once again exalted. The great Italian sociologist Vilfredo Pareto declared
that “History is the graveyard of élites.” It’s time to bury ours. The solution
to a Uniparty takeover is regime change.
Elites Who Love America
Opelousas cannot destroy the Uniparty on its own. What we need is a new
American elite that counts pietas, patriotism, and accountability to ordinary
Americans among its core values. We need elites who understand that
receiving leadership and trust demands accountability for results. We need
elites who will offer real greatness, not excuses for mediocrity. Of course,
not all of them will have pure motives; some will be social climbers. That’s
not a bad thing; it’s an inevitable sign of approaching victory, because they
see where things are going. Thankfully, the dam has already begun to break.
Every day, it seems that new defectors from the Uniparty emerge, elites
who are themselves sick of the lies, the mediocrity, and the conspiracy
against the American people. People such as Bari Weiss, an acclaimed
journalist, who left a Uniparty sinecure at the New York Times to found the
website The Free Press, so that she and her team would have the freedom to
investigate the truth. Or Christopher Rufo, a Georgetown- and Harvard-
educated documentary filmmaker who set aside cushy jobs for Uniparty-
controlled institutions to instead investigate the issues crippling America.
People such as J.D. Vance and Ron DeSantis, among a growing number

--- Sayfa 227 ---
who could have parlayed their sterling Ivy League credentials and military
service into successful careers as “centrist” Republicans but chose instead
to fight for ordinary Americans on the issues that matter, at great personal
cost.
There are deeper forces laying the groundwork for our new elite.
Mediocrity and a lack of moral vision have infected Uniparty-controlled
institutions to the point that they are incompetent. The growing China threat
and the United States’ increasingly aggressive enemies have awoken a
number of business and political leaders from their post–Cold War “end of
history” slumber. The Uniparty’s attack on manliness and fatherhood has
forced a whole generation of men to choose between political correctness
and their own interests—and they are choosing the latter (Gen Z men are
the most conservative in generations). More and more young women are
rejecting a depleted Sex and the City feminism for a restored vision of
femininity and family life. Elite moms and dads who until very recently
tried to keep their heads down are increasingly speaking up against a
Uniparty agenda that they see threatens their children.
What will forge our new elite? The first fruits of the classical school
movement are now entering adulthood full of drive, vigor, and intelligence,
running laps around “elite” university grads. Silicon Valley technologists,
who believe that founding and building things is good, increasingly scorn
Uniparty mediocrity; having a degree from Harvard is now considered by
many venture capitalists to be a strike against a prospective candidate (the
smartest students drop out). Similarly, growing cadres of American
veterans, especially from a special operations background, enter the fray of
civilian life scornful of the disloyalty, critical mindset, and lack of
accountability expressed by Uniparty members. State legislatures that
twenty years ago were sleepy backwaters filled with the B-list talent who
couldn’t make it to Washington are now increasingly sites of innovative
policy experimentation by citizen legislators who couldn’t be paid to move
to the Swamp. We are so close to a tipping point.
The recently elected Argentinian president, Javier Milei, a populist
libertarian, said in his campaign announcement, “I did not come here to
guide lambs. I came here to awaken lions.” When I look past the Uniparty’s
death grip on America’s institutions and look for the best people, the most
energetic organizers, the most brilliant thinkers, the most determined

--- Sayfa 228 ---
advocates, the most creative builders, what I find are not Uniparty zombies
or timid lambs; I see lions awakening.
Nationalize the Elite
But forging a new elite won’t happen on its own. The Uniparty reproduces
itself through its control of core elite institutions, demanding that elite
aspirants bend the knee to its worldview and its interests, to learn to
perform its impieties toward ordinary American values, and to burn a pinch
of incense on the altar of global citizenship.
If, as Huntington suggested, the denationalization of our elite is creating
“dead souls” indifferent to the common good of ordinary Americans, then it
is clear what we have to do.
It’s time to nationalize the elites.
We need to build institutions and practices to knit the elites and the
people back together again, including a national public service program that
exposes coastal kids to the rest of the United States, reclaimed control of
federal humanities and arts funding that supports telling America’s story
(and not faux avant-garde trash that tears America down), and alternative
institutions of elite education and selection.
We need to (metaphorically) burn down the selective educational
institutions that have such a grip on the formation of our elites and that use
that grip to push a victim-focused, America-hating “global citizen”
mentality. We need heavy taxes on multibillion-dollar educational
endowments, mandatory and retroactive sunset clauses on large
foundations, and a gross reduction of the massive federal subsidies for
administrative overhead through indirect costs on top of research grants. We
need to explore mechanisms to force hyperselective universities to grow to
meet the demands of American students (and reduce the pressure parents
and students feel to conform to Uniparty values to win admission) before
they admit lucrative foreign students.
And we need to attack the elite education cartel where it hurts by
diverting promising young students (and their parents) into institutional
alternatives to the Ivy League, encouraging efforts such as the Thiel
Fellowship, which offers extraordinarily talented young men and women a
$100,000 blank check to drop out of college to build something great, and

--- Sayfa 229 ---
the new University of Austin, one of the first serious recent attempts to
found an elite university based on American values. New state school
programs such as the Hamilton Center at the University of Florida in
Gainesville and the Civitas Institute at the University of Texas at Austin
offer another pathway to reintegrating a civic spirit into American
university life.
We need to attack some of the privileges of globalist elites who are free
to do business in the United States as they please (and also, many analysts
believe, free to hide income from the IRS). We need to make US citizenship
mean more than a passport again and bring some of our policies into line
with common sense, the way most other countries do. We should impose a
hefty tax on dual citizenship or ban the practice altogether, and we need to
redirect IRS agents from auditing small-business owners to going after
foreign nationals with American passports who are hiding income. And
given the ease of global air travel, Congress should pass legislation
clarifying that citizenship by birthright does not extend to children born to
foreign parents by surrogacy, to those in the country on a tourist or visitor
visa (the lucrative practice of birth tourism), or to the children of two illegal
immigrants. These practices merely enable elite corruption and harm
ordinary Americans.
We also need to restore common sense to the idea that loyalty to
America demands leaving hyphenated identities behind, especially in public
service. The problem is not about having a foreign name, accent, or
heritage. But leaders of core American institutions should not maintain
actual dual loyalties and direct and extensive ties to a foreign country. It’s
insane that we let a Ukrainian (Aleksandr Semyonovich Vindman) run the
National Security Council’s Ukraine desk and attempt to overthrow the duly
elected president of the United States because he didn’t like his Ukraine
policy. It’s insane that we have an elected member of Congress (Ilhan
Abdullahi Omar) who promised to protect the borders of her homeland,
Somalia, while refusing to protect those of the United States. It’s insane that
the Senate confirmed a secretary of transportation (Elaine Chao) whose
family runs a Chinese shipping company and whose sister sat on the board
of the Bank of China (in the George W. Bush years, she oversaw the
Department of Labor during the flood of outsourcing jobs to Chinese
factories, which shipped goods back to the United States on her family’s
boats). It’s insane that the Biden administration has had a Colombian native

--- Sayfa 230 ---
running its Latin America policy and a Palestinian coordinating its response
to Hamas’s terrorist offensive. It’s insane that liberal critics will attack you
as racist or xenophobic just for noticing this.
Because the Uniparty is insulated from the consequences of its actions,
it needs some populist exposure therapy. In 2022, the state of Florida made
headlines by flying illegal immigrants to Martha’s Vineyard, where
dismayed residents in multimillion-dollar luxury cottages quickly worked to
get them off of the island. Programs busing migrants to cities such as
Chicago and New York have managed to make our border crisis real for
elites in a way nothing else ever has. The only problem with these programs
is that they’re too small and not targeted enough. They shouldn’t drop off
migrants in bustling downtowns or working-class neighborhoods but in
front of elite prep schools such as Sidwell Friends, Harvard-Westlake
School, and Phillips Exeter Academy (if you’ve never heard of any of these
schools, you passed the test).
Most important, we need to destroy the network of Uniparty institutions
that actively encourage, protect, and profit from illegal immigration. It is a
federal crime, upheld in 2023 by the Supreme Court, to encourage or induce
illegal immigration into the United States or to materially assist illegal
immigrants to enter the United States. The next president should form a
federal task force to aggressively investigate and prosecute the NGOs,
activist groups, law firms, and other actors who have flagrantly ignored the
law for years.
Some of these policies may seem extreme or even cruel. But what is
actually extreme and cruel is our Uniparty members’ patting themselves on
their backs for their humanitarian virtue while overseeing an effective
invasion of our country. Our border crisis is extreme, and it is meting
extraordinary cruelty onto ordinary Americans, our border states and their
institutions, and even the illegal immigrants who subject themselves to
cartel violence and exploitation to come here. We must do what it takes to
end the invasion, even if that means grabbing our elites by their lapels and
shaking them awake.
An America First Trade and Immigration Policy

--- Sayfa 231 ---
The exact correct level of trade and legal immigration is, to my mind, a
secondary issue compared to the primary one: immigration and trade
policies that exist for the explicit benefit of Americans, made on the basis of
the desires of US citizens, that recognize the value of social and economic
stability, that support especially the lives and families of American workers,
that encourage American cultural identity and assimilation, and that
strengthen the United States in the long term. In other words, if we have
immigration and trade policies that are made in consideration of ordinary
Americans, I have faith that the specifics will work themselves out.
Right now, the US immigration system is wildly out of whack with both
common sense and the desires of most Americans. According to a 2021
study by the libertarian Cato Institute, 61 percent of Americans want
500,000 or fewer immigrants to be admitted per year, half the current legal
rate, the number climbing higher if a resulting reduction in government
services is posited (one wonders what the response would have been if
housing costs had been added). Even before Biden’s border invasion, 71
percent of Americans believed that illegal immigration was unacceptable.
An immigration system in line with the wishes of the vast majority (80
percent) of Americans would reduce levels of legal immigration at least
below 1 million per year while privileging college-educated, highly skilled
immigrants (76 percent support).
Right now, we have a perverted immigration system that paradoxically
most reliably rewards individuals (many of whom come to America
illegally) who are most likely to end up on government assistance, who
claim “asylum” with the help of NGOs and Uniparty pro bono lawyers.
Under our system, the more victimized they claim to be, the more likely
they are to be granted asylum, so that a (not hypothetical) Latin American
HIV-positive transgender prostitute automatically gets a green card
(because his home country is “transphobic”) while a French college-
educated computer engineer with a job lined up at Google has to hope and
pray that he wins the H-1B lottery.
An immigration system in the interests of ordinary Americans would
distinguish between immigrants who will immediately contribute to
American prosperity (on a temporary or permanent basis) and those for
whom the United States is “the land of opportunity.”
Under our current system, the vast majority of green cards go to the
family members of existing residents (chain migration) or to random

--- Sayfa 232 ---
winners of the “green card lottery.” Neither of these categories indicates
whether someone is likely to end up contributing to American life and
assimilating an American identity instead of harming ordinary Americans or
soaking up public benefits. Why should we leave America’s future up to a
lottery?
During the Clinton years, a bipartisan commission chaired by Democrat
Barbara Jordan put forward a plan for immigration reform that would have
ended chain migration, focused on the skills immigrants brought to the
United States, deported illegals, and capped the number of legal immigrants
at 550,000 per year. The Uniparty has tried to close the Overton window on
what ordinary Americans regard as common sense.
We should move to a points-based system, as many other developed
countries have done, that welcomes the immigrants who are most likely to
contribute to our national life. We also need to emphasize an immigration
that is capable of integration, privileging English-speaking immigrants and
those from countries with strong historical ties to the United States (as we
did under the old immigration system abolished by Lyndon Johnson). We
also ought to allow individual states to petition the federal government for a
certain number of regional worker permits to support their particular
industries, as Australia has done. This would empower the states (at the
behest of leaders accountable to their voters) to do what is best for their
people, with less of an effect on the other states.
While I generally support significant lowering of immigration levels
until American national identity has recovered and the percentage of
foreign-born Americans returns to historic levels, there is one kind of
immigrant we could use more of. The most powerful weapon to disrupt our
adversaries’ military-technological aspirations is a green card. Right now, a
huge percentage of the smartest and most capable Chinese, Russian, and
Iranian students would leap at the chance to come to American universities
and stay in the United States after finishing their studies. There are
arguments for banning these students altogether, and there are better
arguments for letting them come and then stay in the United States; the
current policy of letting them study here and then forcing them to return to
their home countries is the absolute stupidest course of action possible. In
our fight against Communist China and a resurgent Russia, we should not
neglect weaponized brain drain as a potent tool.

--- Sayfa 233 ---
As with immigration, the foundation of US trade policy must be not the
castles-in-the-clouds doctrines of ivory-tower academic economists but the
voice of common sense and historical experience supported by the
American people. For too long, a reflexive and ideological belief in free
trade at all costs led American leaders to accept bad deals (on the assurance
that it would all work out in the end). In many cases, the harms were clear
and immediate (factory closures and devastated communities) while the
benefits to ordinary working-class Americans were vague and hypothetical
(cheaper goods). In the case of China, we know that the economists were
deeply, badly wrong.
During the 1990s, free trade mania led US policy makers to adopt what
Ambassador Robert Lighthizer, President Trump’s US trade representative
and a close friend of mine, has called “the trifecta of globalism”: the North
American Free Trade Agreement, the creation of the World Trade
Organization, and the adoption of permanent normal trade relations with
Communist China. These are factors that the United States’ rivals and
adversaries have easily manipulated and that contributed to the rise of the
Uniparty. That’s why, under the leadership of President Trump and
Ambassador Lighthizer, the United States successfully renegotiated
NAFTA, blocked appointments to the WTO’s unfair appellate court, placed
unilateral tariffs on trade cheaters, and launched a trade war with
Communist China.
Trade is an important foundation of the US economy, but GDP growth
must not be our only consideration in our trade policy. As Ambassador
Lighthizer has said, “It is about the kind of country that Americans want.
The allocation of scarce resources, price optimization, and efficiency—
things that preoccupy economists—are not as important as issues of family
stability, strong communities, income equity, and worker pride and
satisfaction.” There’s another important aspect of this as well: we need a
trade policy that will help the renationalization of American elites by
improving investment opportunities at home and cutting off cash flows to
the Davos class.
The Chicago Council on Global Affairs found that during the Trump
administration, American support for trade increased from being stuck
below 60 percent for decades to a high of 87 percent of Americans
assessing in 2019 that international trade is good for the US economy. It
turns out that when you make trade fairer and more reciprocal and ordinary

--- Sayfa 234 ---
Americans feel they have a leader who is trying to get a good deal on their
behalf, they are more likely to support increased trade. Americans’
skepticism toward free trade is really a skepticism toward sucker deals and
the ivory-tower economists who support them.
Restoring Our Border Sovereignty
The biggest Uniparty outrages regard not our legal immigration or trade
system but the sovereignty of our borders. Since he took office, Joe Biden
has overseen an invasion of more than 10 million illegal immigrants,
greater than the population of New York City. The Uniparty doesn’t even
really pretend that it’s not minting a generation of welfare dependents and
crashing the public goods most Americans depend on. In response to the
crisis at the border, they have shrugged and smirked. Worse, Biden’s Justice
Department has restrained states such as Texas from taking border security
into their own hands, imposing an anarcho-tyranny at the border, where any
shred of enforcement law is forbidden while every legal loophole to admit
as many illegals into the country as possible is pursued.
A key root cause of Biden’s border crisis was an act of extraordinary
Uniparty self-harm: a postinauguration orgy of executive actions pushed by
progressive open borders activists. Those rolled back enforcement at the
border and within the United States, opened the asylum floodgates, ended
President Trump’s successful Remain in Mexico policy, and otherwise
rolled out the welcome mat for coyotes and cartels.
This has been exacerbated by the weaponization of migration by the
United States’ enemies. The Marxist government of Nicaragua has hit on a
scheme whereby it allows would-be migrants to avoid the deadly Northern
Triangle by flying into the country visa free from places such as Cuba,
Haiti, and even India and then catching a bus directly to the Honduran
border, with the regime taking a fat cut of airline fees. Managua’s Augusto
C. Sandino International Airport, which once averaged fifteen flights per
day, has exploded to more than fifty flights per day. Venezuela, in a severe
economic crisis due to decades of socialist mismanagement, has turned to
emptying its prisons and encouraging violent criminals to migrate to the
United States. The Maduro regime has used this as leverage in negotiations
with the Biden administration about ending oil sanctions. In 2023, an

--- Sayfa 235 ---
extraordinary 52,700 Chinese illegals were encountered by Border Patrol
agents (double any previous year), with the vast majority being single
military-age men who were paroled into the country. Many will claim and
be accepted for asylum, even though asylum fraud with fake documentation
is rampant in China. It is not clear what role the Chinese government may
play in this, but it is not unreasonable to expect that this invasion could
provide cover for even more nefarious activity. Many national security and
law enforcement experts are sounding the alarm about the number of known
terrorists and criminals who have been apprehended at the border and what
this implies about how many have slipped into the country unnoticed.
We need to not merely stop but reverse Biden’s border invasion. It’s not
just about our society’s security but about repudiating a Uniparty injustice.
Commonsense measures such as mandatory E-Verify of prospective
employees and meaningful Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE)
enforcement should lead to a fair amount of “self-deportation.” Many
Americans don’t know that the bar for gaining asylum is quite high; the vast
majority of applications are rejected. Even as we restore the Remain in
Mexico policy as well as advanced asylum screening partnerships in Latin
America (which the Biden administration terminated), we need to end
asylum paroling (which the Biden administration has used to impose open
borders) and speed up asylum processing (an area where AI could be
applied). For years one claim of amnesty advocates was that mass
deportations were logistically infeasible. But in August 2021, as
Afghanistan was collapsing, our heroic air force managed to evacuate more
than 120,000 people in the span of a few days! If we apply the same
gumption to protecting our border, our illegal immigration problem will be
sorted in short order.
And, of course, we need to do what it takes to secure our southern
border. While it is long, most of the border follows the natural barriers of
the Rio Grande and runs through inhospitable deserts and mountains. In
addition to finishing the border wall, advanced new surveillance technology
by companies such as Anduril will enable defense in depth, with networked
sensors, AI vision, and automatic drones assisting our Border Patrol agents.
The criterion of a successful border is not that it is impermeable but that it
significantly increases the difficulty of entering the United States
undetected, deterring casual entrants and increasing costs for the cartels. To
help pay the increased costs of enforcement, we should impose a stiff tax on

--- Sayfa 236 ---
immigrants’ remittances to their home countries, which would have the
additional benefit of encouraging immigrants’ assimilation and building a
life in the United States for those already here.
Most important, Congress should pass legislation authorizing border
states to enforce federal immigration law, including deportations, thus
preventing Justice Department bureaucrats and progressive pressure groups
from having a say over the security of our states and preempting a
constitutional crisis. While our federal government should enforce our laws
and protect our sovereignty, we must end the reign of federal border
anarcho-tyranny that forbids the states to protect their own people against
the border invasion.
Maybe some of these measures seem like tough medicine now, but the
border crisis is not going away, and I predict that everything stated here will
be bipartisan common sense within a decade. I only hope it will not take a
terrorist attack or cartel mass murder to make it so.
Regime Change
I went to Davos to deliver a message on behalf of the American people: you
(unaccountable Uniparty elites) are the problem, and we are going to
destroy you. We’re going to do so not because we hate you or wish you ill
(in fact, we hope that you can flourish in the new regime, freed of the
stresses of “leadership”) but because it is necessary to renew our culture
and our way of life.
One of the telltale Uniparty tactics is to openly mock the concern that
most ordinary Americans have that the immigrants whom we gladly
welcome to this country learn to speak the English language, identify with
our way of life and form of government, and put down roots and assimilate
into our communities. I realized at Davos that the Uniparty’s scorn for this
idea comes from the fact that they themselves don’t speak English (but the
language of Standardized Global Management, or Davosese), identify as
Americans, or have roots in American life.
Casting off a rootless, globalist elite in favor of a newly renationalized
one must be the aim of any populist movement that seeks to undertake a
transformation of our political environment and the restoration of
meaningful constitutional self-government. But I see so many signs of hope

--- Sayfa 237 ---
when I look around—not because of any special efforts by the Heritage
Foundation or the conservative movement but because Uniparty dominance
requires a kind of unipolar globalization that is always going to be
unsustainable, because it is rooted in lies about human nature, the United
States, and the world order.
I see more and more elites who are actually fighting for the ordinary
people of the country: successful entrepreneurs who are sick of the
Uniparty’s parasitism on the businesses they build and eager to roll up their
sleeves and actually do things: young policy analysts and legislative staffers
with steel in their spine stiffened by their sense of what time it is; wealthy
white-collar parents who are aghast at the destruction of their schools and
communities; classical charter school founders with fire in their bellies to
pass on Western civilization; iconoclastic artists and designers who are
bored with how lame and fake mandatory “diversity and inclusion” are.
A new national unity between the elites and the people will serve as the
foundation for a new consensus on trade and immigration that will bring
these policy areas into line with the desires and interests of ordinary
Americans once again. None of this will be easy, and none of it will be
clean. Newly dispossessed Uniparty elites will rant and rave against the
power they are losing (for a preview, look at how increasingly irrelevant
mainstream media journalists treat new media upstarts such as The Free
Press and Elon Musk’s X). They will cast every manner of insult and
accusation against the trade and immigration policies that are actually in
line with the United States’ interest. Then again, this is an old elite strategy
for control: highlighting the hardships, flaws, and difficulties of policies
that attack their interests (such as serious immigration enforcement or a
trade war with China) while covering up the cruelties of open borders–
driven inflation, rampant fentanyl smuggling, and decimated Main Streets.
Uniparty appeals to moral principles are empty lies. Its members intend
only “to lead us by easy routes to the sacrifice of our own interests and
dignity in the service of the mighty,” as James Burnham, the great theorist
of the modern elites, put it.
A direct assault on the sources of Uniparty strength in bottleneck
institutions such as elite education, the administrative state, HR
departments, ESG-pushing banks, and of course the World Economic
Forum will help us topple our corrupt elites and replace them with new and
earnest ones who actually love America and who are already building the

--- Sayfa 238 ---
institutions that will replace those captured by the Uniparty. The First
American Revolution ended when we forged an institutional framework for
national unity. So will the second.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Sayfa 239 ---
Chapter 11
The Dawn’s Early Light
Do not be afraid. Do not be satisfied with mediocrity. Put out into the deep
and let down your nets for a catch. . . . I plead with you—never, ever give
up on hope, never doubt, never tire, and never become discouraged. Be not
afraid!
—Pope John Paul II
What can ordinary Americans do to shape the fate of our nation?
It’s a question that’s been on my mind as I meet with Heritage
Foundation supporters all over the country. I think the answer is found in a
poem written during the Great Depression by Robinson Jeffers. Jeffers
worried that the new bustling global age and the temptations of imperial
power were smothering the pioneer spirit that the republic required to renew
itself. “The love of freedom has been the quality of Western man,” he said
in “Shine, Republic” (1935). But that freedom demands something from us:
sacrifices, both small and large. We must “keep the tradition, conserve the
forms, the observances, keep the spot sore. Be great, carve deep your heel-
marks.”
You can’t keep the spot sore in a museum. You can’t guard the torch in a
library. You’ve got to get out there and throw your weight into the task, to
let the fire live in and through your own life. And there’s something wild
about it. You can’t overtame the fire, lest you “perch it on the wrist of
Caesar,” Jeffers warned. The fire might singe you a bit, but there are worse
fates, such as being a slave.

--- Sayfa 240 ---
Today we stand in the place of Aeneas carrying his father (his
patrimony) on his shoulders, leading his young son (his posterity) by the
hand, prepared with his sword to defend them as he journeys toward an
uncertain fate. We have nothing to lose; what has been burned is ash
already. We have everything to win; we still carry the fire of our future. We
know how to do our duty to God and our country; what more can we ask
for?
An Order Reborn
Just because we will carry the fire of our tradition into the future doesn’t
mean that we will do so in the same way we always have. Magnus ab
integro saeclorum nascitur ordo: “A great order of the ages is born anew.”
Virgil’s poem retains something that the Founding-era paraphrase of the
motto on our Great Seal elides: that any great order, any great people,
requires renewal, rebirth, from time to time. Sometimes we need to rekindle
the fire. We need new fuel, new ways, new allies, new ideas. They’re likely
to come from surprising sources.
That was what happened to one great American artist, Johnny Cash, the
legendary country singer. Like many, I’ve been listening to the Man in
Black all my life, and there’s a Cash song for every mood and every
occasion. To me, Johnny Cash is the sound of America.
He had an extraordinary career, overcoming deep pain over witnessing
his brother’s childhood death to make hit after hit touching the soul of
America. His records, especially his early ones, crackle with spirit. But by
the 1980s, he was creatively exhausted. After decades of successful albums,
he was cut by his label, Columbia Records. Once one of the most electric
touring musicians in the world, he was reduced to playing dinner theater
shows. But worse than not selling albums or filling stadiums was that Cash
himself believed he was spent, that he didn’t have anything more to offer as
an artist. He believed that the world had passed him by. So he was shocked
and more than a little baffled when one of the hottest hitmakers in the
United States reached out to him, wanting to collaborate.
It’s hard to imagine a person farther from the Nashville country music
image than Rick Rubin, a Jewish Buddhist sporting Birkenstocks and a
scraggly chest-length beard. He had started going to underground clubs as a

--- Sayfa 241 ---
New York University student in the 1980s, persuading LL Cool J, Public
Enemy, and Run D.M.C. to work with him before any of the major labels
had even heard of rap music. With Russell Simmons, he had founded Def
Jam Recordings, with his dorm room listed as the official address. Together
they had cut some of the rawest records of the early hip hop era.
For his next act, he wanted to find an artist whom everybody else was
overlooking, whose work had grown stale but who still had hidden wells of
talent waiting to emerge, like scraping back layers of linoleum tile to find
antique hardwood underneath.
He knew it was Johnny Cash. It wasn’t just Cash’s magnetic voice, his
encyclopedic knowledge of American music, or his turbulent biography. It
was his inner spirit: somehow rebellious yet loyal, fierce yet meek,
wandering yet rooted, all at once.
Rubin helped Johnny Cash set aside the stale conventions of Nashville
country that had strangled his love of making music. It took giving up the
easy old answers, the nostalgia as comfortable as an old pair of jeans. Rubin
encouraged Cash to get back into touch with what moved him about country
music: the tent-revival hymns, gospel choruses, crooner anthems, and folk
songs that anchored him to his people. The way forward was to get
everything else out of the way and return to the inner spirit of his tradition.
The Man in Black was totally reborn. With Rubin, he released seven
extraordinary albums whose songs ranged from country catalog deep cuts to
transformed rock covers. In the twilight of his life, he developed a burst of
artistic energy that transformed his legacy and helped a new generation fall
in love with the great American folk tradition.
But there’s an irony I often reflect on: maybe the last people in America
to wake up to what Johnny Cash had to say were the Nashville music
establishment. The people with the most to gain in the revitalization of
country music were some of the last people to appreciate that it was
happening, because it came from somewhere unexpected.
I catch a feeling of despair from many conservatives I talk to. They feel
how decadent and stale everything has gotten, but they themselves are too
insulated from the rest of the country to see where the new green shoots, the
signs of life, are coming up. Sometimes the hardest thing is to give up
something we find comfortable for the sake of something we love, if it
requires us letting go of our comfort zone and our preconceptions.

--- Sayfa 242 ---
In surprising places in the culture, especially among young people, there
is a real yearning for family and friendship, a hatred of meaningless sex and
pornography, an interest in handicrafts, a rejection of hyperindividualism
and consumerism, and a desire for the sacred. They’re looking for what is
real and what is true. They (and we) may not know where they will find it.
The Party of Creation, in going on the offense, needs to seek out not
only the deadwood to burn but also the young saplings in surprising
hollows to nurture and protect. As Reagan said:
With all the creative energy at our command, let us begin an era of national renewal. Let us
renew our determination, our courage, and our strength. And let us renew our faith and our hope.
We have every right to dream heroic dreams. Those who say that we’re in a time when there
are not heroes, they just don’t know where to look.
The Unbroken Chain
Where are America’s hidden heroes? It must have seemed in Troy that there
were no heroes left, that the light had gone out. All the great men of the city
had either fallen in battle like Hector or been slain by the marauding
Greeks. Aeneas was  .  .  . running away, launching his family into what
Homer described as a “wine-dark sea,” unfriendly and tempestuous. Aeneas
didn’t leave Troy knowing that later generations would regard him as a
great hero and founder. He was a just a refugee in search of a new home.
Sometimes, as with the Cajun Navy, you’re just a neighbor trying to do
what you can when everyone else has given up. Maybe, like Andrew
Crapuchettes, you’re just a boss trying to do right by your employees. Or,
like Yiatin Chu, you’re just a mom trying to protect your kids. Maybe, like
Jorge Hidalgo, you’re just a dad trying to honor the memory of your
beloved son. Sometimes, like PaPa Pete, you’re just an old Cajun
roughneck trying to hold his family together amid the whirlwind.
Do you ever feel alone? As though no one sees your struggles? As
though you’re fighting through the night, with all of the danger and none of
the glory? Maybe you’re caring for a child who is dying one day at a time
from an addiction. Or a little church that barely keeps its lights on. Maybe
you’re engaged in the quiet and thankless faithfulness of raising a family,
day in and day out. Maybe you’re the person who makes sure that the
bathrooms are clean at the shelter or that the emails about the school
fundraiser are sent out.

--- Sayfa 243 ---
You may feel that you are serving only a few people, a small
community, maybe even just your own family; that what you’re doing isn’t
important, at least not as important as what is going on in the halls of
government. That is exactly backward. We’ll never have an end of
government, but what goes on at America’s dinner tables, on its front
porches, and in its church pews is a scarce and irreplaceable treasure.
Everything depends upon it. The future of America will not be won or lost
in Washington; it will be won or lost in the hearts of the American people.
You have no idea what great things might spring from your faithfulness.
You have no idea the destiny that God might have in mind for you. In those
lonely hours when you’re discouraged, wondering what it’s all for,
remember the exhortation of John Paul II: do not be afraid, do not give up,
do not lose hope!
When Aeneas set sail on that wine-dark sea, his departure lit by the
burning Troy, he had no proof of the greatness that awaited his progeny. He
just knew he had to keep carrying the fire.
The Bible, in the book of Hebrews, describes the faith that Abraham
displayed when God called him to leave his native land, with nothing but
the assurance that his faith would be rewarded by a Promised Land
populated by his descendants more numerous than the stars. The author of
Hebrews said that “faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence
of things not seen.” Our acts of faithful duty today give concrete expression
to a hoped-for future, one that they help make manifest.
In the case of Abraham, his son Isaac, and his grandson Jacob, their
faithfulness took the form of a pious, trusting, and grateful worship of God
even during decades and decades of wandering. Time and again, they made
a sacrifice of thanks to God or faithfully followed his commands, even
when those acts of true worship seemed to take them farther away from
their reward in the Promised Land.
Of those patriarchs, the epistle’s author says, “These all died in faith,
not having received the promises, but having seen them afar off,” the
promises of a “better country.” They sought “for a city which hath
foundations, whose builder and maker is God.”
Faithfulness today is the price of a greater tomorrow. America’s future
depends on that unbroken chain of faithfulness, especially by those who
may not live to see the fruits of their sacrifice.

--- Sayfa 244 ---
The Seeds of Fire
The most important act of faithfulness is also the hardest. It’s telling the
truth when it would be easier to live with comfortable lies and obfuscations
—especially when it means owning up to the way, intended or not, you
have hurt people that you love.
In my own family, it was the truth that set us free. The death of my
brother, Doug, forced my parents to reckon with what was important in life.
My mom’s been happily married to my stepfather for twenty-five years
now. With my stepmom’s encouragement, my dad has been sober for thirty-
five years (they’re still happily married, too). I love them all tremendously.
But it wasn’t until my mom, as she returned to her Catholic faith,
decided to get an official annulment that my parents really reconciled with
each other—because part of the process required soul-searching and self-
honesty about their marriage and a conversation between them to which my
father brought the same spirit. Telling the truth about how they had been
hurt and had hurt each other was transformative. It brought healing.
Bringing America back together, healing our country, demands the
courage of living in truth; of being willing to own up to our mistakes and to
confront the lies that comfort us with delusions or burnish our self-image.
What makes telling the truth so powerful?
When I led Wyoming Catholic College, I spent a fair bit of time riding
around on horseback amid God’s creation. In fire season, if we camped
overnight or made a fire for warmth or to cook food, we could not leave it
smoldering when we left. We needed to douse it before we packed out.
Why? Because when a forest is ready to burn, every wayward cinder is
dangerous. Big fires don’t come from big fires; they come from the smallest
sparks. But you need all of the small sparks, barely holding on, to find the
one that will bite, the one that is destined to become the great conflagration.
Today, the classical school movement is ablaze with the truth. In the
1970s, there was nothing like it. But at the University of Kansas, there was
the Integrated Humanities Program (IHP). It was not a big affair. It didn’t
have the support of the MacArthur Foundation or an endowed chair in the
Ivy League (it did have a small federal grant; it would not have made it past
the diversity statement today). Founded in 1970, it was the passion project
of three humanities professors, Dr. Dennis Quinn, Dr. John Senior, and Dr.
Frank Nelick. They aimed to teach the Great Books, but not as dead texts.

--- Sayfa 245 ---
Everything about how they taught, in lectures and seminars, was designed
to awaken wonder in their students. They recited poetry, had their students
memorize the state song, and took their students stargazing.
It was transformative. So transformative that despite the professors’
never explicitly proselytizing, students began to have religious conversions
in droves, some of them even taking holy orders. That alarmed the good
secularists on the university faculty. After a university tribunal cleared the
three professors of any wrongdoing, the dean conspired to subject the IHP
to death by a thousand bureaucratic cuts. It was shuttered in 1979.
That discouraging defeat stares you in the face. There, against all odds,
a humanities program exemplifying wonder, learning, and piety took root,
only to be ground into dust by the Party of Destruction, with nothing left to
show for it. The thing is, the Uniparty can’t put out the sparks of the truth
when they have taken hold in the hearts of patriots and believers. The
sparks lit by the IHP kept the fire alive, and it has grown into an inferno.
One of the oldest contemporary classical schools, Cair Paravel Latin
School in Topeka, Kansas, was founded in 1980 by IHP alumni. So was
Wyoming Catholic College, cofounded by IHP alumnus Dr. Robert Carlson
in 2005. Six IHP alumni who had taken religious vows eventually returned
from Europe to found Our Lady of Clear Creek Abbey in Oklahoma in
1999. Books by John Senior inspired by his experiences in the IHP,
especially The Restoration of Christian Culture, have been enormously
influential in the classical school movement. I know they deeply shaped my
leadership at St. John Paul the Great Academy.
In the final analysis, the work of the Integrated Humanities Program,
short lived though it was, may have been the single most important project
safeguarding the Western tradition of education in those pivotal years,
laying the groundwork for an extraordinary renewal. It has had an impact
that would have been unfathomable in 1979.
Don’t break the chain. Don’t let the fire go out. “Be great, carve deep
your heel-marks.”
The Alamo
When I was growing up, every young American boy learned the story of
Davy Crockett, the crack shot coonskin-capped pioneer hero who wrastled

--- Sayfa 246 ---
bears and outscouted hostile Indian tribes (but befriended them, too). He
was a hero of the Appalachian frontier and congressman from Tennessee
who most famously went west to fight in the Texas War of Independence,
where he died at the Alamo.
But it wasn’t until I was a grown man that I realized that we learn the
story of Crockett backward. When we learn the story, we know how it ends.
I don’t just mean that we know he died at the Alamo; I mean that we learn
that story from the future his sacrifice made as we sit comfortably in a free,
prosperous, and powerful country, with the Lone Star flag proudly waving
over the great state of Texas.
That wasn’t how Crockett lived it. He had no idea that the little mission
house of San Antone where he, Jim Bowie, Buck Travis, and two hundred
other Texians were besieged by Mexican forces would become THE
ALAMO. He had no idea that their brave stand and the subsequent Battle of
San Jacinto would change the course of history, that he would win enduring
fame. He could scarcely imagine what would become of the fire he started.
Crockett could have despaired. He could have stared out at the hordes of
the enemy and bemoaned his fate. He could have counted up the Mexican
soldiers and the horses and the cannons and decided that the Texas cause
was surely lost. But he didn’t.
He didn’t despair, not because he anticipated some miraculous rescue
but because he believed in the justice of his cause, even if he didn’t live to
see it. Knowing that he faced a certain death, he was nonetheless full of
hope.
He looked past the vast army of enemies. Above their heads. He saw a
better country. He never received the promises, but he saw them afar off.
That was enough.
Davy Crockett had the fire. He’d rather die than let it go out. He’d die to
keep it alive, just one more day. He died with his boots on, full of hope,
holding the chain, carrying the fire. He carved his heel marks so deep, they
made a river. And that river made a nation.
What’s your Alamo? What are you dying for? Pick a place, pick a
people, pick a project, and give it all you’ve got. Bet your life on it, on that
small piece of the future of America. Gather as many friends as you can
muster to the cause, and take your stand. Plant your heels.
There’s a time for writing and reading—and a time to put down the
books and go fight like hell to take back our country and build our future.

--- Sayfa 247 ---
Taking his stand at the Alamo, Crockett wrote his last entry before putting
aside his diary forever to help guard the walls. They’ll be my last words,
too:
“No time for memorandums now. Go ahead! Liberty and Independence
forever!”
OceanofPDF.com

--- Sayfa 248 ---
Acknowledgments
Every book takes a village, to paraphrase a (thankfully) failed presidential
candidate. Given the rigors of my job, in particular the extensive travel
associated with it, this book certainly was a team effort. Of course, anything
brilliant in it is a result of that team of colleagues and friends—and
conversely, any shortcoming is my own.
First and foremost, I am the luckiest guy in the world, both because of
my family, but also because I get to work with the most committed, hard-
charging, and cheerful people on the planet: every single one of my
Heritage colleagues. While they all deserve credit, the following were
particularly important to this book: for his research assistance and help with
refining arguments and my Louisiana public school English, Evan Myers;
for their vision and technical knowledge, my Communications colleagues,
Rob Bluey, Noah Weinrich, Lauren Evans, and Elizabeth Fender; for their
policy expertise, and for the many conversations we have had (and will
have) about the future of conservatism, Clint Brown, Victoria Coates, Chris
DeMuth, Robert Greenway, Andy Olivastro, Sarah Parshall Perry, Paul Ray,
Jay Richards, Nina Schaefer, Jeff Smith, Richard Stern, Eric Teetsel, Alex
Velez-Green, Ryan Walker, and Bridget Weisenburger; for helping to shape
the policy direction on key points, and for their unfailingly good counsel,
Derrick Morgan and Roger Severino; for attending to details and “keeping
the trains running on time,” Ericka Morris and Isabella Davis; and, for
shaping the marketing and scheduling interviews, Crystal Bonham and
Mary Vought.
One colleague in particular deserves special mention, for his crucial
help with every draft and every idea: my chief of staff and great friend,
Wesley Coopersmith. I couldn’t do my job without you, even though you’re
a Phillies fan.
So many friends outside Heritage deserve mention. Eric Nelson at
HarperCollins understood the vision of this book from the beginning, and

--- Sayfa 249 ---
kept my feet to the fire, both on vision and on the crispness of arguments;
his colleague Hannah Long did a truly masterful job with the editing. At
Beck & Stone, Andrew Beck, Mike Jackson, and Andrew Cuff helped
immensely. And without my literary agent and co-conspirator, Jonathan
Bronitsky—the best in the business—none of this would have happened.
I’m also grateful to friends who gave feedback on early drafts: Elbridge
Colby, Saurabh Sharma, Nick Solheim, and Brad Wilcox. And to friends Dr.
Larry Arnn, Tucker Carlson, Newt Gingrich, Mollie Hemingway, and KT
McFarland, thank you for reviewing the draft and for writing some
excellent blurbs. My former colleagues at Texas Public Policy Foundation
helped me, during the dark days of covid, embark on this project; Dr. Tom
Lindsay and Chuck DeVore read the very first précis, for which I remain
very grateful.
I will single out Dr. Jonathan Askonas for countless conversations that
shaped the book and helped to strike the right balance.
A few elected officials were vital to this book. To my friends
Representative Chip Roy and Senator Mike Lee, with whom I’ve had long
and esoteric discussions about conservatism, thank you for your time, but
most of all, for your service. And to Senator J.D. Vance, thanks for inspiring
me and millions of Americans with your story, and now with your
leadership. I’m so grateful that you wrote the foreword.
Personal stories are, indeed, vital to understanding the impact of good
(and bad) policy decisions. Huge thanks to the following for sharing theirs:
Geoffrey Cain, Andrew Crapuchettes, Jorge Hidalgo, Thomas Hochman,
Jake Kozloski, and Jeremy Tate.
Finally, and most importantly, thank you to my wife, Michelle, and our
four children, who tolerate my many nights away from home, because we
know it is our calling as a family to do our tiny part to help save this
country—hopefully while being decent witnesses of the Lord’s truth. If this
book succeeds merely in inspiring my kids and their generation to know
that we can never give back to America what it gives us each day, then all
of the travel, work, writing, and editing, will have been worth it.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Sayfa 250 ---
Bibliography
Chapter 2
Burke, Edmund. Reflections on the Revolution in France. Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin Books,
1986.
Deneen, Patrick J. Regime Change: Toward a Postliberal Future. New York: Penguin Random
House, 2023.
Edwards, Lee. The Power of Ideas: The Heritage Foundation at 25 Years. Ottawa, IL: Jameson
Books, 1997.
Grant, George. “Revolution and Tradition.” In Collected Works of George Grant, vol. 4: 1970–1988,
edited by Arthur Davis and Henry Roper. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2009.
Hankins,
James.
“Pietas.”
First
Things,
November
2020.
https://www.firstthings.com/article/2020/11/pietas.
Kendall, Willmoore. The Conservative Affirmation in America. Chicago: Henry Regnery Company,
1963.
Logsdon, John. Ronald Reagan and the Space Frontier. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2019.
Mansfield, Harvey C. Machiavelli’s New Modes and Orders: A Study of the Discourses on Livy.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001.
McCombs, Phil. “Making a Stand.” Washington Post, July 30, 2001.
Plato. The Republic of Plato. Translated by Allan Bloom. New York: Basic Books, 1968.
Rieff, Philip. My Life Among the Deathworks: Illustrations of the Aesthetics of Authority.
Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 2006.
Santayana, George. The Genteel Tradition. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1934.
Senior, John. The Death of Christian Culture. New Rochelle, NY: Arlington House, 1978.
Washington, George. “First Inaugural Address.” Delivered April 30, 1789.
Wood, Gordon S. The Radicalism of the American Revolution. New York: Vintage Books, 1993.
Chapter 3
Aguiar, Mark, Mark Bils, Kerwin Kofi Charles, and Erik Hurst. “Leisure Luxuries and the Labor
Supply of Young Men.” Working Paper 23552, National Bureau of Economic Research, June 2017.
https://doi.org/10.3386/w23552.
Autor, David, David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson. “The China Shock: Learning from Labor Market
Adjustment to Large Changes in Trade.” Working Paper 21906, National Bureau of Economic
Research, January 2016. https://doi.org/10.3386/w21906.

--- Sayfa 251 ---
Autor, David, David Dorn, and Gordon Hanson, “When Work Disappears: Manufacturing Decline
and the Falling Marriage Market Value of Young Men.” American Economic Review: Insights 1, no.
2 (September 2019): 161–78. https://doi.org/10.1257/aeri.20180010.
Brown, Patrick T., and Brad Wilcox. “Pro-Family Policy Priorities for States: Polling and
Perspectives from the Sun Belt.” Institute for Family Studies and Ethics and Public Policy Center,
December
12,
2023.
https://ifstudies.org/ifs-admin/resources/reports/ifs-eppc-
sunbeltfamilypolicypriorities-final.pdf.
Carney, Tim. Family Unfriendly: How Our Culture Made Raising Kids Much Harder than It Needs to
Be. New York: Harper, 2024.
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez. “Where Is the Land of
Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States.” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 129, no. 4 (November 2014): 1553–623. https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qju022.
Eberstadt, Mary. Primal Screams: How the Sexual Revolution Created Identity Politics. West
Conshohocken, PA: Templeton Press, 2019.
Goolsbee, Austan D., and Chad Syverson. “The Strange and Awful Path of Productivity in the U.S.
Construction Sector.” Working Paper No. 2023-04. University of Chicago, Becker Friedman Institute
for Economics, January 19, 2023. https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4328672.
Henderson, Rob. Troubled: A Memoir of Foster Care, Family, and Social Class. New York: Gallery
Books, 2024.
Kearney, Melissa. The Two-Parent Privilege: How Americans Stopped Getting Married and Started
Falling Behind. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2023.
Kirk, Russell. “The Mechanical Jacobin.” The Russell Kirk Center, November 10, 2017.
https://kirkcenter.org/environment-nature-conservation/the-mechanical-jacobin/.
Mazzucato, Mariana. The Entrepreneurial State: Debunking Public vs. Private Sector Myths. New
York: Anthem Press, 2013.
Murray, Charles. Coming Apart: The State of White America, 1960–2019. New York: Forum Books,
2013.
Myers, Evan. “Taking the Postman Pledge.” The American Conservative, December 2, 2022.
https://www.theamericanconservative.com/taking-the-postman-pledge/.
Pakaluk, Catherine. Hannah’s Children: The Women Quietly Defying the Birth Dearth. Washington,
DC: Regnery Gateway, 2024.
Teles, Steven, Samuel Hammond, and Daniel Takash. “Cost Disease Socialism: How Subsidizing
Costs While Restricting Supply Drives America’s Fiscal Imbalance.” Niskanen Center, September 9,
2021.
https://www.niskanencenter.org/cost-disease-socialism-how-subsidizing-costs-while-
restricting-supply-drives-americas-fiscal-imbalance/.
Wilcox, Brad. Get Married: Why Americans Must Defy the Elites, Forge Strong Families, and Save
Civilization. New York: Broadside Books, 2024.
Winship, Scott. “Can Men Still Bring Home the Bacon?” The Dispatch, December 14, 2022.
https://thedispatch.com/article/can-men-still-bring-home-the-bacon/.
Chapter 4
Buchanan, Patrick J. The Death of the West: How Dying Populations and Immigrant Invasions
Imperil Our Country and Civilization. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 2022.

--- Sayfa 252 ---
Deneen,
Patrick.
“Res
Idiotica.”
Front
Porch
Republic,
February
23,
2016.
https://www.frontporchrepublic.com/2016/02/res-idiotica/.
Figlio, David N., Cassandra M. D. Hart, and Krzysztof Karbownik. “Effects of Scaling Up Private
School Choice Programs on Public School Students.” NBER Working Paper No. 26758, February
2020. Journal of Economic Literature nos. H75, I21, I22, I28.
Hankins, James. “Classical Education Is Not a Right-Wing Project.” First Things, November 15,
2023.
https://www.firstthings.com/web-exclusives/2023/11/classical-education-is-not-a-right-wing-
project.
Hegseth, Pete. Battle for the American Mind: Uprooting a Century of Miseducation. New York:
Broadside Books, 2022.
Lewis, C. S. That Hideous Strength: A Modern Fairy-Tale for Grown-Ups. New York: Macmillan
Publishing Company, 1946.
Lewis, C. S. The Abolition of Man. London: Oxford University Press, 1943.
Maglaque, Erin. “An Overabundance of Virtue.” New York Review, September 21, 2023.
https://www.nybooks.com/articles/2023/09/21/an-overabundance-of-virtue-political-meritocracy-in-
renaissance-italy/.
Miller, J. Michael. The Holy See’s Teaching on Catholic Schools. Manchester, NH: Sophia Institute
Press, 2006.
Peterson, Rachelle. “Corrupting the College Board.” National Association of Scholars, August 30,
2020. https://www.nas.org/reports/corrupting-the-college-board/full-report.
Senior, John. The Restoration of Christian Culture. San Francisco: Ignatius Press, 1983.
Chapter 5
Hawley, Joshua. “Senator Josh Hawley’s Speech at National Conservatism Conference.” Speech
presented
at
National
Conservatism
Conference,
July
18,
2019.
https://www.hawley.senate.gov/senator-josh-hawleys-speech-national-conservatism-conference.
Hawley, Joshua. Theodore Roosevelt: Preacher of Righteousness. New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press, 2008.
Herman, Arthur. Freedom’s Forge: How American Business Produced Victory in World War II. New
York: Random House, 2013.
Krein, Julius. “The Value of Nothing: Capital Versus Growth.” American Affairs 5, no. 3 (Fall 2021):
66–85. https://americanaffairsjournal.org/2021/08/the-value-of-nothing-capital-versus-growth/.
MacIntyre, Alasdair. After Virtue: A Study in Moral Theory. Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre
Dame Press, 1981.
Roth, Carol. You Will Own Nothing: Your War with a New Financial World Order and How to Fight
Back. New York: Broadside Books, 2023.
Rubio, Marco. “American Investment in the 21st Century.” United States Senate, May 15, 2019.
https://www.rubio.senate.gov/wp-content/uploads/_cache/files/9f25139a-6039-465a-9cf1-
feb5567aebb7/4526E9620A9A7DB74267ABEA5881022F.5.15.2019.-final-project-report-american-
investment.pdf.
Schumpeter, Joseph A. Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy. New York: Harper & Brothers, 1942.
Wai, Jonathan, and Heiner Rindermann. “What Goes into High Educational and Occupational
Achievement? Education, Brains, Hard Work, Networks, and Other Factors.” High Ability Studies 28,

--- Sayfa 253 ---
no. 1 (2017): 127–45. https://doi.org/10.1080/13598139.2017.1302874.
Chapter 6
Anton, Michael. The Stakes: America at the Point of No Return. Washington, DC: Regnery
Publishing, 2020.
House Investigative Committee on the Robb Elementary Shooting, Texas House of Representatives.
Interim
Report
2022,
July
17,
2022.
https://house.texas.gov/_media/pdf/committees/reports/87interim/Robb-Elementary-Investigative-
Committee-Report.pdf.
Kirk, Russell. The Roots of American Order. La Salle, IL: Open Court Publishing Company, 1974.
“A New Way on Homelessness.” Cicero Institute. https://ciceroinstitute.org/issues/homelessness/.
Smith, Zack, and Charles D. Stimson. Rogue Prosecutors: How Radical Soros Lawyers Are
Destroying America’s Communities. New York: Bombardier Books, 2023.
Thomas, Clarence. My Grandfather’s Son: A Memoir. New York: Harper Perennial, 2008.
Chapter 7
Askonas, Jon. “How Tech Utopia Fostered Tyranny.” New Atlantis, no. 57 (Winter 2019): 3–13.
https://www.thenewatlantis.com/publications/how-tech-utopia-fostered-tyranny.
Clabaugh, Jeff. “Northern Virginia Still Tops Global Data Center Markets (and, What’s a
Gigawatt?).” WTOP News, January 17, 2022. https://wtop.com/business-finance/2022/01/n-virginia-
still-tops-global-data-center-markets-and-whats-a-gigawatt/.
Cruz, Ted, and Mario Loyola. “Shield of Federalism: Interstate Compacts in Our Constitution.” Texas
Public
Policy
Foundation,
December
2010.
https://www.texaspolicy.com/wp-
content/uploads/2018/08/2010-12-PP21-InterstateCompacts-tcruz-mloyola.pdf.
Grind, Kirsten, and Keach Hagey. “Why Did Facebook Fire a Top Executive? Hint: It Had
Something
to
Do
with
Trump.”
Wall
Street
Journal,
November
11,
2018.
https://www.wsj.com/articles/why-did-facebook-fire-a-top-executive-hint-it-had-something-to-do-
with-trump-1541965245.
Lasch, Christopher. The Revolt of the Elites and the Betrayal of Democracy. New York: W. W.
Norton, 1995.
Magill,
Gord.
“The
De-Banking
of
Dissent.”
Compact,
February
3,
2023.
https://www.compactmag.com/article/the-de-banking-of-dissent/.
Tocqueville, Alexis de. Democracy in America. Translated by Henry Reeve. New York: George
Dearborn & Co., 1838.
White,
Adam
J.
“Google.gov.”
New
Atlantis,
no.
55
(Spring
2018):
3–34.
https://www.thenewatlantis.com/publications/googlegov.
Chapter 8
Buckley, William F., Jr. Gratitude: Reflections on What We Owe to Our Country. New York: Random
House, 1990.
Burtka, John A. IV, ed. Gateway to Statesmanship: Selections from Xenophon to Churchill.
Washington, DC: Regnery Gateway, 2024.

--- Sayfa 254 ---
Coates, Victoria. David’s Sling: A History of Democracy in Ten Works of Art. New York: Encounter
Books, 2016.
Copeland, Dale C. A World Safe for Commerce: American Foreign Policy from the Revolution to the
Rise of China. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2024.
Crawford, Neta C. “The U.S. Budgetary Costs of the Post-9/11 Wars.” Watson Institute for
International
and
Public
Affairs,
September
1,
2021.
https://watson.brown.edu/costsofwar/files/cow/imce/papers/2021/Costs%20of%20War_U.S.%20Bud
getary%20Costs%20of%20Post-9%2011%20Wars_9.1.21.pdf.
Elbridge, Colby A. The Strategy of Denial: American Defense in an Age of Great Power Conflict.
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2021.
Freeman, Ben. “Foreign Funding of Think Tanks in America.” Center for International Policy,
January 2020. https://static.wixstatic.com/ugd/3ba8a1_4f06e99f35d4485b801f8dbfe33b6a3f.pdf.
Hendrickson, David C. Republic in Peril: American Empire and the Liberal Tradition. New York:
Oxford University Press, 2017.
Kagan, Robert. “Into Kosovo.” Weekly Standard, March 1, 1999.
Kagan, Robert, and Bill Kristol. “Kosovo and the Republican Future.” Weekly Standard, April
5/April 12, 1999.
Toft, Monica Duffy, and Sidita Kushi. Dying by the Sword: The Militarization of US Foreign Policy.
New York: Oxford University Press, 2023.
Zakaria, Fareed. “Conservative Confusion on Kosovo.” Wall Street Journal, April 14, 1999.
Chapter 9
Dudden, Arthur P. The American Pacific: From the Old China Trade to the Present. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1994.
Green, Michael J. By More than Providence: Grand Strategy and American Power in the Asia Pacific
Since 1783. New York: Columbia University Press, 2017.
Hammond, Samuel. “The China Shock Doctrine.” National Affairs, Fall 2019.
Platt, Stephen R. Imperial Twilight: The Opium War and the End of China’s Last Golden Age. New
York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2018.
Schweizer, Peter. Secret Empires: How the American Political Class Hides Corruption and Enriches
Family and Friends. New York: Harper, 2018.
Select Committee on the Chinese Communist Party. “Investigation into the Reedley Biolab,”
November
15,
2023.
https://selectcommitteeontheccp.house.gov/sites/evo-
subsites/selectcommitteeontheccp.house.gov/files/evo-media-document/scc-reedley-report-11.15.pdf.
Wang, Huning. “America Against America.” Translated by Leah Holder, Aaron Hebenstreit, and
Samuel
George.
The
Center
for
Strategic
Translation,
January
1,
1991.
https://www.strategictranslation.org/articles/america-against-america-2.
Ward, Jonathan D. T. China’s Vision of Victory. Atlas Publishing and Media Company, 2019.
Chapter 10
Guinier, Lani. The Tyranny of Meritocracy: Democratizing Higher Education in America. Boston:
Beacon Press, 2016.

--- Sayfa 255 ---
Huntington, Samuel. Who Are We?: The Challenges to America’s National Identity. New York:
Simon & Schuster, 2004.
Lighthizer, Robert. “Factory to the World.” Foreign Affairs, March/April 2024.
Lighthizer, Robert. No Trade Is Free: Changing Course, Taking on China, and Helping America’s
Workers. New York: Broadside Books, 2023.
Chapter 11
Bethel, Fr. Francis. “Let Them Be Born in Wonder.” Comment, July 13, 2023.
https://comment.org/let-them-be-born-in-wonder/.
Jeffers, Robinson. The Wild God of the World. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2003.
“Johnny
Cash
vs.
Music
Row.”
Controversy.
Season
1,
episode
9,
2004.
https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0799048/.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Sayfa 256 ---
About the Author
KEVIN D. ROBERTS is the president of The Heritage Foundation—
America’s most influential policy organization—and Heritage Action for
America. He earned his Ph.D. in American history from the University of
Texas. A lifelong educator, Roberts taught history at the collegiate level
before becoming president of Wyoming Catholic College. Under his
leadership, the college adopted a policy of refusing to accept federal student
loans and grants, lest it be forced to violate Catholic tenets. He also
previously served as the CEO of the Texas Public Policy Foundation, the
largest state think tank in the nation. At The Heritage Foundation, Roberts
leads policy research efforts on many key national issues, including
education, health care, border security, election integrity, and more. He is
the host of The Kevin Roberts Show.
Discover great authors, exclusive offers, and more at hc.com.
OceanofPDF.com

--- Sayfa 257 ---
OceanofPDF.com

--- Sayfa 258 ---
Copyright
DAWN’S EARLY LIGHT. Copyright © 2024 by Kevin Roberts and The Heritage Foundation.
Foreword copyright © 2024 by J.D. Vance. All rights reserved under International and Pan-American
Copyright Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the nonexclusive,
nontransferable right to access and read the text of this e-book on-screen. No part of this text may be
reproduced, transmitted, downloaded, decompiled, reverse-engineered, or stored in or introduced into
any information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any means, whether electronic or
mechanical, now known or hereafter invented, without the express written permission of
HarperCollins e-books.
Broadside Books™ and the Broadside logo are trademarks of HarperCollins Publishers.
FIRST EDITION
Cover design by Mike Jackson
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Roberts, Kevin, 1974− author.
Title: Dawn’s early light: taking back Washington to save America / Kevin Roberts.
Description: First edition. | New York: Broadside, 2024. | Includes bibliographical references and
index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2024016677 (print) | LCCN 2024016678 (ebook) | ISBN 9780063353503
(hardcover) | ISBN 9780063353510 (ebook)
Subjects: LCSH: Conservatism—United States. | Political culture—United States. | Politics, Practical
—United States. | United States—Politics and government—21st century.
Classification: LCC JC573.2.U6 R627 2024 (print) | LCC JC573.2.U6 (ebook) | DDC 320.520973—
dc23/eng/20240517
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2024016677
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2024016678
Digital Edition NOVEMBER 2024 ISBN: 978-0-06-335351-0
Version 08232024
Print ISBN: 978-0-06-335350-3
OceanofPDF.com

--- Sayfa 259 ---
About the Publisher
Australia
HarperCollins Publishers Australia Pty. Ltd.
Level 13, 201 Elizabeth Street
Sydney, NSW 2000, Australia
www.harpercollins.com.au
Canada
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd
Bay Adelaide Centre, East Tower
22 Adelaide Street West, 41st Floor
Toronto, Ontario, M5H 4E3
www.harpercollins.ca
India
HarperCollins India
A 75, Sector 57
Noida
Uttar Pradesh 201 301
www.harpercollins.co.in
New Zealand
HarperCollins Publishers New Zealand
Unit D1, 63 Apollo Drive
Rosedale 0632
Auckland, New Zealand
www.harpercollins.co.nz
United Kingdom
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.

--- Sayfa 260 ---
1 London Bridge Street
London SE1 9GF, UK
www.harpercollins.co.uk
United States
HarperCollins Publishers Inc.
195 Broadway
New York, NY 10007
www.harpercollins.com
OceanofPDF.com